

CONSTITUTIONAL DEED:
DECLARATORY OF THE OBJECTS
AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
Welsh Calvinistic Methodist
CONNEXION
IN VICTORIA.
Ballarat:
JAMES CURTIS, PRINTER, ARMSTRONG STREET,
1883.




CONSTITUTIONAL DEED:
DECLARATORY OF THE OBJECTS AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
Wesls Calvinistic Methodist Connexion
IN VICTORIA.
Dated 22nd April, 1878.
IS.CCCtbc'H into the office of the Registrar-General of the
Colony of Yictoria, Melbourne, the twenty-eighth day of March,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eighty-
two, at the hour of fifteen minutes to three o’clock in the
afternoon, a Memorial of the within Deed, numbered seven
hundred and twenty-seven (No. 727), Book 300; and verified
by Joseph Wolf, of number ninety, Chancery Lane, in the City
of Melbourne, in the Colony of Yictoria, articled Clerk to
William Henry Roberts, of the same place, Solicitor.
HENRY L. KRONE,
Deputy Registrar-General.
Duty
o a^ e W. M. EYANS, Minister.
THEOS. WILLIAMS, J.P.
The following is certified to be a true and correct copy of the
above Deed; having, after being copied, been carefully read
and compared with the original.
Pentland and Roberts, Solicitors,
90, Chancery Lane, Melbourne.




CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.
to whom thw f Xtmi» ohaU come, We the
Twenty-one seyeeal Peesons whose hands and seals
are hereunto subscribed and set, with the parishes
and counties in Victoria, one of Her Majesty’s colonies
ih Australia, in which we severally reside, and the
offices of Minister, Preacher, Elder, or Trustee which
we bear in the Religions Connexion commonly known
or called by the name of The Welsh Calvinistic
Methodists ; and being Ministers, Preachers, Elders,
or Trustees, part of whom were nominated and
appointed to execute these presents, at a General
Association of the said Connexion held at Melbourne,
in the county Bourke, Victoria, aforesaid, on the third
and fourth days of April, in the year of our Lord °* ie
thousand eight hundred and seventy-four; and the
remainder of whom were nominated and appointed at
another General Association of the said Connexion
held at Sebastopol, in the county of Grenville, Vic-
toria, aforesaid, on the twenty-first and twenty-second
days of November, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-four, and at each
of which meetings these presents were previously read
and approved, — send geeeting.
for many years, a Religious Connection,
or Body, called the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Con-
nexion, has existed, and been regularly formed and
constituted in North and South Wales and some parts
of England ; and for the purpose of recording, ex-
plaining, and declaring the name, objects, tenets,
orconfession of faith, general rules and fundamental
regulations of the said Connexion, and for other pur-
poses, a Deed, dated the 1 Oth day of A ugust, a d. 182 b,
Persons
appointed
to execute
herein
Deed.
Where
appointed.
The Connexion
as constituted
in North and
South Wales.


and styled the “ Constitutional Deed, declaratory of
the objects and regulations of the Welsh Calvinistic
Connexion, was made and entered into, and was duly
enrolled in the High Court of Chancery of England,
on the Bth day of December, a.d. 1826.
SUd Whew, in or about the year a.d. 1853, divers
persons in the Colony of Yictoeta, in that part of
Her Majesty’s dominions called Australia, who had
been, whilst in England and Wales, Ministers,
Preachers, Elders, or Members of the said Welsh
Calvinistic Methodist Connexion, formed themselves
into Societies for the purpose of teaching and
practising those tenets of the Christian Beligion as
taught by the said Connexion, and called themselves
The Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Connexion in
Victoria.
itnd TOmaj* it was found necessary for the
Ministers, Preachers, and Elders of the said last-
mentioned Societies to assemble together for the
purpose of establishing and consolidating into one
body the Societies so formed, and for the formation
of a United Connexion, or General Association
of the said denomination in Victoria aforesaid;
and, to effect these purposes, in or about the year
1863, the Ministers, Preachers, and Elders in Victoria,
professing and teaching the tenets of the said Con-
nexion, did, by the unanimous wishes of each and all
of the said Societies, who also sent delegates or
representatives for that purpose, assemble together
in a place called Sebastopol, near Ballarat, in the
county of Grenville, in the said Colony of Victoria,
and formed themselves into an Association, or General
Assembly of the Connexion in Victoria; and confirmed
the establishment of the several Societies, and the
subjection of the same to the doctrines and rules of
the Connexion, as promulgated at its first establish-
ment, and the union of the said Societies into one
body of the said Connexion in Victoria; the said
Association being, at the time, composed of duly
elected representatives of the Societies then existing
Commence-
ment of the
Denomination
in Victoria.
Formation of
a United
Connexion
or General
Association
in Victoria.
First General
Association
in Victoria.
6
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


in Victoria, adhering to the tenets and rules of the
said Connexion,
§ltul divers lands situate in various parts
of Victoria aforesaid, have by divers deeds of Govern-
ment grants, or conveyances, or otherwise, with or
without declarations of trust, been granted, conveyed,
and settled to, and upon certain persons, appointed
by the said Societies, and confirmed by the said
General Association, approved by His Excellency the
Governor in Council, and published in the Victorian
“Government Gazette” to be Trustees thereof; and
and divers buildings, commonly called chapels, with
or without dwelling-houses, and dwelling-houses, with
or without chapels, with the several appurtenances
thereto belonging, have been erected on the said lands,
by and with money being the produce of voluntary con-
tributions, collections, and donations ; and have been
and are held by the said Trustees for, on behalf, and
with the intention to secure the several pieces of land
or ground, chapels, dwelling-houses, and all the appur-
tenances thereof, for the sole use and benefit of the
Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Connexion in Vic-
toria, aforesaid, and which are severally enumerated,
and set forth in the Schedule hereunto annexed.
the said body may hereafter become
possessed of other sums of money, being subscriptions,
collections, donations, bequests, rents of houses or of
lands, or otherwise, intended for the purposes and for the
use of the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Connexion
in Victoria aforesaid, and divers other lands, in fee
simple, or in lesser estate, may also hereafter be
conveyed and assured to, and for the purposes of the
said Connexion.
for rendering more effectual the
several deeds, Crown grants, and conveyances which
have heretofore been made and executed, and the
donations and rents that have been heretofore given
and accruing; and the enjoyment of the several
properties already acquired, and intended to be for
the benefit and purposes of the said Connexion in
Lands. Chapels,
and Houses
belonging to
the Connexion
in Victoria.
Properties
hereafter
becoming the
possessions of
the Connexion
in Victoria.
Objects
secure d by
the herein
Deed.
7
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


Victoria; and for the exposition of the trusts thereof;
and for guiding and explaining the objects of future
donations, bequests, Crown grants, leases, and convey-
ances that may be hereafter given, made, granted, or
executed to and for the use and benefit of the said
Connexion in Victoria ; and that no doubt or litigation
may arise with respect to the existence, objects, Mem-
bers, or Officers of the said Connexion in Victoria
aforesaid ; and for the better and permanent exposi-
tionand record of theobjectsof the W elsh Calvinfstic
Methodist Connexion inVictoria aforesaid; of their
confession of faith, and of their rules and regulations ;
and of their discipline ; and of the qualifications and
duties of all the different Members, Elders, Preachers,
Ministers, and other Officers in tiie Connexion in
Victoria aforesaid. |lt was determined at an Associa-
tion of the said Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, that
a Deed of Declaration should be prepared, being
the same as the “Constitutional Deed of the
Welsh Calyinistic Methodist Connexion” in
Wales and England, hereinbefore mentioned, dated
the tenth day of August, a.d. 1526, and enrolled in
the High Court of Chancery of England ; with such
alterations only as should be necessary to adapt the
same to the requirements and circumstances of the
said Connexion in Victoria aforesaid ; and that the
Connexion in Victoria aforesaid should adopt the
said oeed, and constitute itself thereunder; and that
the control, management, and direction of the pro-
perties of the said Connexion in Victoria aforesaid,
should be vested in, and under the authority of, the
General Association aforesaid; and that the said
Deed of Declaration, prepared as aforesaid for
the Connexion in Victoria, should be submitted to
the consideration, and for the acknowledgment of
the General Association of the Connexion in Wales
and England, prior to its being executed by the
twenty-one persons aforesaid
the heads, or a syllabus, of these
presents was accordingly prepared, being the
Determination
to prepare
herein Deed.
Syllabus of
herein Deed
8
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


Constitutional Deed of the Connexion in Wales]
and England hereinbefore referred to, adapted for the i
constitution thereunder of the Connexion in Victoria
aforesaid, was read, considered, and approved at
an Association of the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist
Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, held in the city of
Melbourne, in the county of Bourke, on the third
and fourth days of April, one thousand eight hundred
and seventy-four; and were also read, considered,
and approved, at an Association of the Welsh
Calvinistic Methodist Connexion in Victoria aforesaid,
held at Sebastopol, near Ballarat, in the county of
Grenville, on the twenty-first and twenty-second days
of November, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-four; and that these presents have also been
read and approved at the two several Associations of
the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Connexion in Vic-
toria aforesaid, assembled and held at the several
times and places hereinbefore mentioned, and the
same hath been appointed to be executed by the
twenty-one persons unanimously chosen and approved
by the several persons composing such Associations,
at which the persons executing these presents were
severally present; and to the intent that they should
by their several execution of these presents and
duplicate thereof, record, explain, and declare the
name, objects, tenets or confession of faith, general
rules, and fundamental regulations of the said
Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, to the intent and
purpose that the same may not, at any time or times,
hereafter be unknown or controverted: and that the
donations, bequests, or moneys which have been, or
which may be given and bequeathed ; and the lands,
in fee simple or in lesser estate, chapels, houses, and
all other properties which have been, or may hereafter
be granted, assigned, taken, or conveyed to, or by any
trustees or other persons to and for the purposes of
the said Connexion in Victoria aforesaid; or of any
of the Societies forming the same; or which were
declared to be held subject to the rules and regulations
P™P r *^ d and
and approved
9
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


of the said Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, may not
be unrecovered, unappropriated, or misapplied.
§M*tl WhCWll$ the provisions of these presents were
submitted to the consideration of the General Associ-
ation of the Connexion in Wales and England, and
duly approved and acknowledged at an assembly of
the body held at Portmadoc, in the county of Carnar-
von, North Wales,on the twenty-second, twenty-third,
and twenty-fourth days of June, one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-five.
tlwjw that, for the accom-
plishing the purposes aforesaid, we, the said twenty-
one persons, members of the said Connexion in
Victoria aforesaid, and appointed as aforesaid, for the
purposes aforesaid, do hereby, jointly and severally
declare :
Firstly. —That the aforesaid Associated Societies
in Victoria aforesaid, have been, and shall continue
to be for ever hereafter, considered as members of One
General Connexion, without any distinction what-
soever ; altogether forming one entire body ; and the
name and designation of the said Associated Societies
in Victoria aforesaid, hath been, and shall for ever
hereafter be, The Welsh Calyinistic Methodist
Connexion.
Secondly.— That the object of the said Connexion
hath been, and shall he, to promulgate the Gospel of
Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, as set forth in the
Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, and the
book called “ Shorter Catechism of the Assembly
of Divines who met at Westminster;” according to
the meaning now ascribed to the said Doctrinal
Articles and to the said Catechism, by Caltinists
and Pjedobaptists ; and as more particularly stated
and set forth in the book intituled “ Cyeees Eeydd,”
&c. (Confession of Faith, &c,), mentioned and referred
to in the said Constitutional Deed, dated the
tenth day of August, a.d. 1826, and in the first Schedule
thereto ; and which doth contain and set forth the
religious tenets, or doctrines and principles of the
Approved at
General Asso-
ciation of the
Connexion in
Wales and
England.
Witnesseth
and declares.
i.
Societies
body ;°and
name thereof,
11.
The objects
to promulgate
the Gospel.
Doctrinal
Articles
defined.
10
CONSTITtJTIOIVAL DEED.


said Connexion, that such promulgation, which
is hereby declared to be the primary object of the
said Connexion, is intended to lead to the collection
and establishment of Christian Societies, by opening
and supporting Sunday Schools ; by the erection or
providing of places for religious worship ; by Christian
fellowship; by appointing Elders, Preachers, and
Ministers ; and by itinerant preaching ; and by such
other suitable means as have been thought expedient,
and as the said Connexion shall hereafter approve.
Thirdly. —That the religious tenets, or doctrines
and principles of the said Connexion are as set forth
in the Statement, or Confession of Faith aforesaid,
referred to in- the first Schedule to the said Deed,
dated the tenth day of August, a.d. 1826.
Fourthly. —That the cities, towns, and places in
Victoria aforesaid, mentioned in the Schedule herein,
are included in the said Connexion; and the names
of the chapels, houses, and religious Societies in each
city, town, and place now belonging, and united to,
and forming part of the said Welsh Calvinistic
Methodist Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, are
also mentioned in the said Schedule to these presents;
and any chapel, house, or Society unintentionally
omitted being alone excepted.
Fifthly. —That the following rules shall at all
times for ever hereafter be observed as to the
qualifications required in those persons who are
candidates for admission ; and as to their admission
into the said Connexion, or any of the Societies
forming the same.
1. That a list of the names of all present and future
Members shall be kept in a Congregational Book for
that purpose.
2. That all persons who may hereafter be desirous
of becoming Members of the said Connexion, shall be
approved of by a majority of the Members of the said
Connexion in full communion, in each Society where
such Members shall be proposed.
111.
Confession of
Faith.
IV.
Chapels, &c,
in the
Connexion
particularized.
V.
Four Rules as
to admission
of Members.
1.
Names to be
' in a book.
2.
Persons
desirous of
becoming
Members to
be approved.
11
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


3.
Power of ex-
amination, &c.
in the majority
of Members of
Society,
3. That the power of examination, reproof, sus-
.pension, and exclusion of all Members shall be vested
lin the Members of the Church or the Society to which
the Member to be examined, reproved, suspended, or
excluded, shall belong; and that the majority of such
Members shall decide on ail such matters, and shall
direct the exercise of such power.
4. That in case of dispute as to the decision of the
Members of such Society, the party or parties
dissatisfied may appeal to the District Meeting herein-
after described; and such appeal shall be made
agreeably to the usage hitherto pursued by the said
Connexion.
Sixthly.— That the Church Meetings or private
Societies of the said Connexion shall be governed by
the following regulations, that is to say :
1. That they are to consist only of such persons as
evidence some hopeful signs that they are in some
degree convinced of sin, and of their lost state by
nature; and that they are in Godly sorrow for sin,
and earnestly desire to be saved from it. That they
are, in a measure, convinced of their need of Christ
to be to them an all-sufficient Saviour. That they
hold no doctrine contrary to the fundamental truths
of Christianity contained in the Holy Scriptures, and
the Confession of Faith, referred to in the said Deed,
dated the tenth day August, a.d. 1826. That they
be willing and determined, with the assistance of
Almighty God, to forsake every evil way, and to take
the Word of God to be a perfect rule of conduct in
all things; and to agree to the rules by which the
said Connexion is regulated, and to the said 11 Con-
fession of Faith,” together with the children of such
pefsons; and that the said Church Meetings or
private Societies are to assemble once in every week.
2. That every such Society where practicable, shall
be presided over by a duly ordained Minister, or a
duly installed Preacher, or otherwise be under the
superintendence of two or more Leaders or Elders
4.
Appeal to
District
Meeting.
VI.
Seven Rules
as to govern-
ment of
Church
Meetings
or Private
Societies.
1.
Of whom to
to consist;
and to meet
weekly.
a.
To be presided
over, or super-
intended.
12
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


chosen by such Society, and approved by the District
Meeting, as herein provided.
3. Every such Society shall conduct the private
Meetings to receive persons as Members, and to
exercise discipline towards them according to the
rules of the said Connexion, no person sus-
pended or excluded from one of the said Societies
shall be received into any other Society of the said
Connexion, but on the ground of repentance for that
which was the cause of suspension or exclusion.
4. That every Society hath, and shall have, a right
to regulate its own affairs in a profitable and edifying
manner, in accordance with the views and judgment
which the said Connexion have of the truth in
reference to doctrine and discipline, and every thing
belonging to the cause of God among them; but if
any matter of consequence cannot be determined or
agreed upon in such Society, it shall be referred to
the District Meeting of the representatives of all the
Societies within the district in which such Society is
formed, and where final determination is to be made,
or proper persons to be sent by the District Meeting
to assist such private Society to decide any disputed
matter in a satisfactory and just manner, according
to the rules of the said Connexion.
5. Although no particular private Society, nor any
individual member thereof, shall be kept under
unnecessary bondage by the Connexion, yet every
member shall act in subordination, and in conformity
to the judgment of the majority of the Society of
which he is a member; and the Society itself shall be
in subordination to the District Meeting of its own
district, in its management of the whole of its religious
concerns with regard to doctrine, discipline, and all
affairs of the Society.
6. Every Society shall represent its circumstances
to the District Meeting of its own district before it
shall proceed to choose a Leader or Elder; and if it
shall be judged that any such Society stand in need
of an additional Leader, the District Meeting shall
3.
The Rules of
the Connexion
to be observed
at the Meetings.
4.
Every Society
to regulate its
own affairs,
subject to the
General Rules.
5.
Members to
act in subor-
dination to
majority of
the Society.
6.
Directions as
to choosing
Eiders, or
Leaders.
13
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


send a deputation of two or three proper persons to
advise and assist such Society in its choice.
7. If any member of any such Society shall discover
’an inclination to the work of the ministry; and such
Society shall perceive in him some degree of ability
or fitness for work, then, that circumstance
shall be signified to the District Meeting of the district
in which such Society be situate; and proper persons
shall be sent from the District Meeting to assist the
Society in judging of his qualifications with respect to
knowledge, experience, moral character, godliness,
and general religious requisites. the deputation
shall make their report of the person so inclined for
the ministry to the next District Meeting of their
district, so that the members of such meeting may
come to a determination respecting him ; and that, if
the deputation approve of him in regard to the
beforementioned particulars, then, in such case, he
shall be permitted to engage in the work of the
ministry as a probationer, no member of the
said Connexion shall engage in the work of preaching
the Gospel, in the said Connexion, unless he shall
have been examined, reported, and permitted as
aforesaid ; nor shall any one who has been suspended
from preaching on account of errors in doctrine, or
conduct, be restored, but after such an examination
report, and permission as above described.
Seventhly. —That all Societies within such bound-
aries as have been, or may from time to time be
fixed by the General Association of the said Connexion
in Victoria aforesaid, shall form, and be comprised in
a District ; and that District Meetings of the different
Societies in the said Connexion in each district, to be
held in each district, shall be regulated and governed
by the following rules, that is to say:
1. That they shall consist of such persons as fill
Church Offices, namely, Ministers, Preachers, and
Leaders, or Elders, within the district; together with
such persons, within the district, as have been elected
Foundation Members of the General Association
7.
Directions as
to Members of
a Society who
maybe deemed
fit for the Min-
istry.
VII.
Eight Rules
regulating
the District
Meetings.
1.
Of whom to be
composed.
14
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


hereinafter described; and shall meet once in each
quarter of a year, in their own district, in the place,
and at the time which the previous District Meeting
shall appoint.
2. That each District Meeting, besides having public
preaching of the Gospel thereat, shaH hold particular
Meetings, to enquire into the state of religion in the
district or place where the meeting may be; and also to
converse with those that are in the ministry, and with
the Leaders of each Society, respecting their experience
of things appertaining to salvation; their spiritual
frame of mind ; find their increase or declension in
grace ; the propriety of their conduct; with their
mode of presiding at and superintending the Societies
over which they have charge; to give them every
eaution, encouragement, and instruction that may be
necessary for conducting themselves properly in the
house of God, and dealing profitably with the souls
of men.
3. That the District Meeting of every district shall ■
take particular care of, and shall supervise all the;
Societies within its limits ; suppress everything likely i
to create strife; and decide and terminate matters of 1
dissention or dispute in such Societies ; and shall also
appoint Auditors to audit the accounts of each
Society, and to submit a report of the same to the
District Meeting at least once in every year.
it shall be competent to bring forward at a District
Meeting and discuss any matter having reference to
the Connexion in general, with a view to submitting
the same to the consideration and determination of
the General Association.
4. That the District Meeting of every district shall
have the charge of sending proper persons to assist i
the Societies in each district that stand in need of !
additional Leaders; and also to form a proper judg-i
ment of the qualifications of such persons as are
proposed for the work of the public ministry.
moreover the District Meeting shall examine those
who have already entered into the work of the
2.
Meetings to
enquire into
state of
religion in
that district.
3.
To have the
supervision
of all the
Societies in
the district.
4.
Persons sent
to advise as
to Members
proposed as
Leaders or for
the Ministry.
15
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


Ministry, respecting their experience, their religious
principles, and their inducements for engaging in the
work, together with present views of it; and also shall
determine the extent of the sphere of their ministry ;
and when each several district in which they reside
and teach shall have had satisfactory proof of their
fitness for the work of the Ministry, so as to be able
to signify their approbation of them in their District
Meetings , then their qualifications shall next be sub-
mitted to the consideration of the General Association
of the whole Connexion in Victoria aforesaid.
5. The District Meeting shall see that there be
nothing in doctrine entertained by the Societies over
whom they watch contrary to the Holy Scriptures,
and the Confession of Faith ; and also that discipline
according to the Woed of God, and consistent with
the rules of the Connexion, be administered in every
Society throughout the districts in Victoria aforesaid.
6. That the District Meeting of every district shall
act according to the judgment of the majority of each
such Meeting, and in subordination to the General
Association in all their proceedings, with respect to
the Societies amongst them ; and shall see that the
observations and resolutions of the General Associa-
tions (so far as they may appertain to the whole
Connexion) be adopted, and put in operation for the
benefit and edification of all the several Societies.
7. That the District Meeting of every district may
admit any new or additional Society, to be hereafter
formed within such district, into the said Connexion.
8. That all the transactions and regulations of the
District Meetings shall be in accordance with the
said Confession of Faith, and agreeably to the rules
of the said Connexion contained therein, and subject
to the approval or otherwise of the General Associa-
tion of the said Connection.
Eighthly.—That the Geneeal Association of
the said Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Connexion
5.
To watch over
the doctrines
and discipline
of Societies.
6.
Majority pre-
sent to deter-
mine matters;
but in subor-
dination to
General
Association.
7.
May admit in-
to Connexion
new Societies.
8.
All proceed-
ings to be in
accordance
with the
Confession of
Faith, and
subject to
General
Association.
VIII.
Eleven Regu-
lations as to
16
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


in "Victoria aforesaid shall be under the following
rules and regulations, that is to say :
1. That they shall consist of such persons as fill
Church Offices in the said Connexion, namely,
Ministers, Preachers, and Elders, or Leaders of
Societies which belong to the said Connexion, from
the several districts in Victoria aforesaid, together
with those persons who were, in the year 1864, elected
Foundation Members of the Association.
2. The General Association of the said Connexion in
Victoria aforesaid shall meet once in every year, and
the time and place of meeting shall be fixed at the
preceding General Association ; but if there be any
business of a special and urgent nature to be attended
to, then the General Association shall have power to
vest an adjourned meeting of the Association, with its
own authority to all intents and purposes ; and in the
appointment of the time and place for the meeting of
the General Association, respect shall be had to the
wishes of the individuals composing the District
Meetings before-mentioned.
3. That in every General Association, the whole body
or Connexion of the Welsh Calyinistic Metho-
dists in Victoria aforesaid, shall be considered as being
present, by their officers or representatives who may
be present thereat. that the powers and
authority of the said General Associations are and
shall be sufficient to order and regulate all matters
and proceedings appertaining to the said Connexion,
in all places in Victoria aforesaid. that the said
Association shall superintend the secular concerns of
the said Connexion, such as the building of chapels ; 1
the providing means for defraying the expense of their
erection ; choosing and appointing Trustees to whom
the same shall be granted, conveyed, or leased, or by
whom they shall be held for the benefit of the said
Connexion. the obtaining and securing the deeds
relating to the title thereto, and having new deeds
prepared, and Trustees appointed when necessary.
also for keeping the said chapels exclusively for
the General
Associations.
1.
Of whom to
consist.
2.
To meet once
a year.
3.
The whole
Connexion to
be considered
as present at
the General
Association.
(a.)
To superintend
and manage the
property of the
Connexion.
17
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


the use of Preachers, Societies, and congregations
belonging to and forming part of the said Welsh
Caltinistic Methodist Connexion in Victoria
aforesaid. that the said General Association have
and shall have authority to arrange the ministry in
such manner that every Society or Church of the
said Connexion may have the G-ospel regularly
preached, and a regular administration of the ordi-
nances of Baptism and the Loed’s Suppee, as far
as practicable, that the said Association have
and shall have authority to superintend the cause of
religion among the Welsh Caltinistic Methodists,
and all the properties thereof throughout the colony
of Victoria aforesaid, where any Societies of Welsh
Caltinistic Methodists, forming part of the Con-
nexion, are collected; and all the regulations and
determinations of the several Societies ; and of the
District Meetings may be taken into consideration
by the said General Association, and approved, altered,
annulled, or amended thereat.
4. That, according to the nature and form of the
said General Associations, it is proper that every person
present thereat should consider himself as belonging
to the whole Connexion in the same degree in every
place, and divest himself of his mere local prejudices;
lest such prejudices might influence the determination
of the body to occasion any partiality in favor of any
particular place, to the injury of the general good
cause of God, and to the hindrance of the general
religious prosperity of the whole Connexion.
5. That the said General Association shall elect from
among its own fliembers, a Modeeatoe, who shall
preside over the proceedings of the Association, and
act as the representative head of the Connexion in
business matters relating to the said Connexion during
his term of office. shall also, in like manner, elect
a Secretary, to take minutes of the proceedings of
the Association ; and a Treasurer, to keep moneys
and accounts belonging to the Association. the
said Modeeatoe, Seceetaet, and Teeasueee, shall
(h.)
To arrange
the Ministry,
and cause in
general.
4.
Persons pre-
sent to act
for the general
interests of
the whole
Connexion.
5.
Moderator,
Secretary, and
Treasurer to
be appointed.
18
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


exercise their respective offices for the term of one
year, or until such time as their successors be installed.
6. That at every General Association (besides the
public preaching of the Gospel according to the
established practice on such occasions), there shall be
held two or more special meetings; consisting of
Ministers, Preachers, and Elders, or Leaders.
in the special meetings of the first day the external
affairs of the Connexion shall be treated of; and, in
the special meetings of the second day, the spiritual
affairs of the Connexion, appertaining to doctrine,
experience, and discipline, shall be discussed.
7. That in every General Association, the affairs of
the Connexion in the district where the Association
shall be held, shall come first under the consideration
of the Meeting (unless it be found necessary to
depart from this regulation on particular occasions) ;
after which, the affairs of the Connexion in general
shall be considered; and all preachers who have
lately engaged in the work of the ministry, shall be
examined in one of such Associations respecting their
religious experience and principles, and their induce-
ments for engaging in the work of the ministry, before
they are allowed to extend the sphere of their labours
beyond the limits of their own respective districts.
8. That, in one of the Special Meetings of the
General Association, those who have been chosen to
administer the ordinances of Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper, shall be approved of and ordained; and shall
be authorized to perform those offices according to
the rules of the said Connexion respecting them.
9. That the General Associations , shall have a
religious view in all their resolutions; and all
resolutions shall be consistent with those regulations
of the Connexion which are declared by these presents,
or are already acted upon ; and if at any time it shall
be deemed necessary to set aside, or vary from, any
rule adopted by the Connexion ; then, such omission
or variation shall be proposed, and shall be discussed
seriously and considerately, in two General Associations
6.
Besides reli-
gious worship,
special meetings
to be held for
.business.
7.
Order in which
business shall
be transacted.
8.
Ministers
chosen to
administer
Sacraments
to be ordained
at one of the
Special
Meetings.
9.
All proceedings
to be consistent
with declaration
of Deed ; and no
alterations to be
made until ap-
proved by two
Associations.
19
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


at least; if approved by such Associations, then
it shall he again proposed at a General Association •
and, if the members composing that Association be
unanimous, or there he a majority of three-fourths at
least for such omission or variation , then such rule
shall be amended, altered, or cancelled, or a new rule
substituted in its stead, as the case may require,
no alteration in the “ Confession oe Faith,” or
the Tenets, or Doctrines to be taught and main-
tained by the said Connexion, shall be at any time
allowed, or even discussed.
10. That every subject proposed for consideration
in any General A ssocAation shall he laid before the
same clearly and perspicuously, that it may be
determined in a proper manner, according to the
sense of the majority present at the meeting. JSsttt
with respect to any matter of weight, in the exposition
of Doctrine or Discipline-, if there should be consider-
able difference in the judgment of the Association
respecting it, then the decision of such matter shall
be postponed until the next or future Associations,
and until a majority of three-fourths at the least
shall concur in the matter proposed; and that other-
wise such disputed matter shall be totally or partly
dismissed from the consideration of the said Associa-
tion.
11. That as the said Connexion, being considered
one body, has not been formed by uniting several
Societies or Churches together, but has had its
existence with those Societies in it (as the natural
body is formed with its members in it), it cannot, by
the law of its nature, suffer any separation from it,
by permitting any of the Societies belonging to it, to
form themselves into separate, independent Churches,
nor any Minister of the Connexion to minister unto
such Separatists.
£Atul it Pmhy Dtctottl that it shall and may be
lawful for the said General Associations, and they are
hereby accordingly empowered from time to time, to
nominate and appoint from among themselves,
10.
Majority to
decide; and
special mat-
ters to be
adjourned,
and decided by
a majority of
three-fourths
at a future
Association.
11.
to°be e co°n“
sidered as
indissoluble.
(a.)
Committees
appointed,
20
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


Committees, including the Moderator or President,
and the Secretary to each Association, and such
other persons as the said General Association may
appoint, who shall be Committees to advise on
unexpected and important matters, in the intervals
of such General Association ; and such Committees
shall report any proceedings had by them to the
next General Association ; and the said Associations
shall have a similar superintendence over the said
Committees in regard to allowing or disallowing
their proceedings, as the Associations have over the
District Meetings.
Ninthly. —That the Elders or Leaders of the
several Societies forming the said Connexion shall be
appointed by such Societies (deputations from District
Meetings to which such Societies belong, being present
at the choosing of such elders) ; and the persons so
chosen shall be approved of at such District Meetings,
before the appointments are confirmed. the
duties of Elders or Leaders of Societies shall consist
in assisting their Ministers and Preachers (if any, or
either happen to be in such Society), in the spiritual
concerns of their respective Churches, and in the
management of the secular concerns of their respective
Societies, subject to the control of the Church and
the District Meetings, the Elders of the said
Connexion may from time to time be removed from
their situations in the Societies for misconduct by the
District Meeting with which they are connected, on
•complaint of the Members of the Society to which
•they may belong ; or for any reason, thought suffi-
cient by the Dictrict Meeting ; and such suspended or
removed Elders shall have power to appeal to the
General Associations as hereinbefore provided.
Tenthly. —That the Preachers of the said Con-
nexion shall be chosen from among such as are
Members in full communion with some of the Societies,
who shall from time to time worship God in any of
the places for eeligious woeship belonging to the
said Connexion; and by the Members of the Church to
IX.
As to appoint-
ment of Elders
or Leaders ;
and their duties.
X.
As to choice of
Preachers; and
their duties.
21
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


which they belong; and deputations from the District
Meetings superintending such Churches shall visit
the same, and enquire into the fitness of such persons
for the office of Preachers ; and their appointment
shall be confirmed by the General Associations as
before provided. the duties of such Preachers
shall be to preach the Gospel; to catechise adults
and children ; to attend District Meetings and
General Associations of the Connexion as far as the
calls of Providence will permit; and to use every
other means of edification, according to the directions
and instructions of the District Meetings and General
Associations; and such Preachers shall be suspended
or discontinued for misconduct, error in doctrine or
practice, by the District Meetings or General As-
sociations.
Eleventhly. —That the Ministers of the said
Connexion shall be chosen from among the Preachers
of five years’ standing ; and shall be nominated by a
deputation of two Elders from each District Meeting
in a committee at a General Association; and the
deputations, before proceeding to the General Asso-
ciation, shall consult their respective District Meetings,
and ascertain the opinion of such District Meetings
as to the necessity of having any increased number
of Ministers ; and, after such nomination at the said
General Association assembled, the said committee,
or deputations, shall report the names of the said
Preachers nominated, and their approval of them, to
the District Meetings of each district. Slltftt every
person so nominated shall attend at the next General
Association, to be holden at the appointed time, as
hereinbefore provided ; and the nomination of such
person or persons shall be then signified to all the
Ministers, Preachers, and Elders composing such
General Association ; and if the appointment of such
person or persons shall be ratified by the majority of
such Association, he or they shall be ordained, or set
apart for the work of the ministry in that Association ;
but such ordination, or setting apart, shall not be tor
XI.
As to choice
of Ministers;
and their
ordination.
22
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


the purpose of attaching him or them to any particular
Church or Society, but to all the Churches or Societies
in the Connexion, as he or they may have opportunity
to attend the calls of the several Societies in the
whole Connexion ; but every Minister is expected to
take more particular care of the Church of which he
is an immediate Member, the ordination of
Ministers in the General Association shall be con-
ducted with the greatest solemnity ; and one of the
Ministers thereat shall read the I. Tim. hi., or Titus i.,
or another suitable portion of Scriptures ; and shall
engage in solemn prayer suitable to the occasion ;
and then questions shall be put to the person nomi-
nated for the ministry, respecting his adhesion to the
Confession op Faith, Tenets and Doctrines, and
religious principles, and discipline of the Connexion ;
and, after satisfactory replies, the Ministers, Preachers,
Elders, and all persons who shall there be present,
shall ordain, or set apart, the person or persons to
the full work of the Ministry by show of hands ; and
a charge shall be given by a Minister to the person or
persons ordained ; and the service shall be concluded
by another Minister with solemn prayer.
Twelfthly. —That any person who is a Preacher
or Minister of the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist
Connexion, in Wales or England, may be at once
admitted as a Preacher or Minister, as the case may
be, of the said Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Connexion
in Victoria aforesaid, by a General Association of the
said Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, or by any
District Meeting of the district in which such Preacher
or Minister may happen to reside ; such admission
by a District Meeting to be subject, however, to
confirmation by the next following General xissociation.
Thirteenthly. —That no chapel, or place of
religious worship, or land for the erection of a
chapel or place of religious worship, shall be hereafter
purchased, taken, or built, without the consent and
approbation of the General Association where such
chapel or place of religious worship may be proposed
XII.
As to admission
of Preachers
and Ministers
from Wales and
England.
• XIII.
{«•)
No chapels or
land purchased
without the
consent of
General
Association.
23
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


to be purchased, taken, or built; and no such chapels
or places of religious worship, or land, shall be
purchased, taken, or built, unless Trust Deeds thereof
shall be prepared and executed; and the same chapels,
or places of religious worship, or land, or otherwise
be conveyed to Trustees elected and approved by the
General Association; and conformably to a plan, or
form, to be approved of by some General Association
of the said Connexion; and whereby the chapels, or
places of religious worship, or land, or otherwise of
the said Connexion, shall be secured to the Connexion
in the hands, and under the sole control of the
General Association representing the whole body, as
and for places of worship for its members, and for
the use of the Preachers and Ministers from time to
time appointed and approved by the District Meetings
and General Associations of the said Connexion.
gUumjJlS that no persons shall at any time
or times hereafter be eligible to be appointed as
trustees of any chapels or properties of, or for the
said Connexion, unless they shall profess to concur in
the said “ Confession of Faith and to believe the
said Tenets or Doctrines, held and taught by the said
Connexion ; and shall, at the time of such election to,
and during their continuance as trustees, be members
in full communion with the said Connexion; and
duly subscribe and execute the trust deeds of such
chapels or properties of the said Connexion; and
such Trustees shall cease to be such if they secede
from the said Connexion, or be excluded therefrom
for misconduct, or remove from the colony of Victoria
aforesaid permanently; and that in all trust deeds
sufficient provisions be inserted to effect that purpose;
and also a declaration be contained that such Trustees
will duly convey his trust estate to another Trustee
or Trustees, whom the General Association shall
nominate, elect, appoint, and approve.
Fourteenthlt. —That the acts, resolutions, orders,
and directions of the majorities of the Congrega-
tional, District, and other Meetings, and General
Trust Deeds to
be executed,
pels &c g to the
connexion.
(o.)
As to qualifi-
cations of
Trustees.
Proceedings
in a e book, red
24
constitutional deed.


Associations of the said Welsh Calvinistic Metito-
dtst Connexion in Victoria aforesaid, present at such
Meetings and Associations, shall be entered in a Book
oe Minutes of the proceedings of the same, and
signed by the Chairman or Secretary to such
Meetings for the time being, or such person as the
Meeting may from time to appoint, that every
such entry, so signed as aforesaid, shall be effectual
evidence of such acts, resolutions, orders, and direc-
tions to the Trustees of the chapels, and other
properties of the said Connexion, and to all persons
whomsoever; and such Minute Books shall be kept
and carefully preserved by the Chairman, Moderator,
or Secretary of each Meeting, as the Meeting -may
direct, and shall be delivered up by him to the Chair-
man, or Moderator, or Secretary of the next succeeding
Meeting ; or be produced or transmitted by him to the
District Meeting or General Association, if thereunto
ho be duly required for the information of the District
Meeting or General Association, as the case may be,
of the matters therein contained.
§Vml it x$ pmhy Agreed and Declared that the
time and place of every Meeting of each Society
i , . \ ~ . , & „ . . , J
belonging to the said Connexion, after having been
agreed upon by the majority of such Society, shall be
notified and published to the congregation composing
such Society, on the Lord’s Day, when assembled
for the purposes of religious worship. §Vnd that
at all District Meetings of the said Connexion, the
time and place of the next District Meeting shall be
fixed and determined ; and such appointment of the
following District Meeting, made in the presence of
the Elders and Leaders of the different Societies
present thereat, shall be considered sufficient notice
to all the Societies within that District, of the time
and place of the next District Meeting, that
at every General Association, the time and place of
the next General Association shall be publicly
appointed, and such public appointment thereat shall
be and be considered sufficient notice thereof; and
or secretary;
goodevidence
as to notice oi
“ e ® tm Fs hovf
to be given,
25
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


all persons whose privilege or duty it shall he to
attend any Congregational or District Meetings, or
General Associations, shall be respectively hound
and concluded by the respective appointments, and
notices given according to the declaration aforesaid.
it *0 Pmhy Jittttltw jDtfLtttd that at any of
the before-mentioned Meetings, or at the Associations
of the said Connexion as aforesaid, where a Chairman
or a Moderator shall be appointed as hereinbefore
provided, he shall have the privilege of voting upon
the question proposed ; and in any case of an equality
of votes, he shall give another or casting vote. And
that the acts, resolutions, orders, or directions of the
majority of persons present, being entitled to be then
and there present, and to vote at such Meeting or
Association, and being present at the time when any
question shall be put from the chair, shall be deemed
and taken to be the act, resolution, order, and declara-
tion of the said Meeting or Association ; and shall be
accordingly entered in the minutes, and signed by the
Chairman, Moderator, or Secretary, or such person
as the Meeting or Association may appoint; and shall
have full force and authority ; and be accordingly
carried into effect, except in the several cases herein-
before mentioned, in which a definite or prescribed
majority shall be required.
ftt Witney Whewof, we the said Twentt-one
persons, at the respective places, and in manner firstly
hereinbefore mentioned, have respectfully subscribed
and set our hands and seals to these presents, and to
a duplicate thereof, both dated the twenty-second
day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight.
referred to in the before-written Deed,
being a list and description of the properties mentioned
herein, and which are as follows: —
1. One acre, or thereabouts, in the city of Mel-
bourne ; being part of Crown allotment thirty-nme
(«.)
Chairman
of District
Meetings and
Moderator
of General
Associations
to have cast-
ing votes.
M.)
Witnesseth
and date.
description
of Properties,
In Latrobe
street, in
26
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


in the parish of North Melbourne, in the county of 1
Bourke; extending from Latrobe Street to A’Becket i
Street; along with a chapel, Minister’s house, out-,
buildings, and appurtenances thereon ; and held under
a Crown grant, in trust for the Connexion, said grant
being dated the nineteenth of January, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-two, and made to the
following Trustees: —William M. Evans, of Latrobe
Street, in the city of Melbourne, in the county of
Bourke, minister ; Theophilus Williams, of Ballarat,
in the county of Grenville, farmer; Edward Jones,
of Ballarat aforesaid, engineer ; James Hughes, of
Sebastopol, near Ballarat aforesaid, carpenter; Thomas
Evans, of Bourke Street, in the city of Melbourne
aforesaid, tent maker ; and Josiah James, of King
William Street, in the borough of Fitzroy, in the said,
country of Bourke, mason.
2. One rood of land at Carlton, in the parish of
Jika Jika, in the county of Bourke ; being allotment
nineteen, section thirty-four; conveyed to the following;
persons, in trust for the Connexion, and whose names
appear on the Certificate of Title, dated the twelfth
day of May, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-
four,' namely : —John Meirion Eoberts, of William
Street, in the city of Melbourne, in the county of
Bourke, draper ; and Griffith Jones, of Little Hanover
Street, in the town of Fitzroy, in the county of Bourke,
carpenter; along with dwelling-houses, built on the
said land, and appurtenances thereto belonging, now
under the management of the said Trustees, for and
on behalf of the Connexion.
3. One rood and thirty-five perches of land in the
township of Williamstown, in the parish of Cut-Paw-
Paw, in the county of Bourke ; conveyed, in trust for.
the Connexion, to John Courtis, of Nelson Place,
auctioneer ; Eobert Williams, of Cole Street, stone
cutter ; Griffith Owen, of Dover Eoad, carrier ; and
Thomas Edmunds, of Illewarre Street, boatman; all
of Williamstown, in the county of Bourke; along
the City of
Melbourne,
chapel,
buildings,
and land.
2.
In Carlton,
parish of Jika
Jika, land and
dwelling-
houses.
3.
In the town-
ship of
Williamstown,
chapel and
land.
27
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


with a chapel, built on the said land, and all appurte-
nances thereto belonging.
4. Two acres, or thereabouts, of land in Sebastopol,
in the parish of Ballarat, in the county of Grenville ;
along with a chapel built thereon, and all the appurte-
nances thereto belonging, held in trust for the Welsh
Calvinistic Methodist Connexion in Victoria, by the
following persons, being the persons named on the
Crown grant of the said land, and denominated on
the said deed, dated the seventh day of November,
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, “Trustees
of the Welsh Presbyterian Chapel, Sebastopol” (a
name by which the said Connexion is often called),
namely ; —William Meirion Evans, Eobert Thomas
Eoberts, Ellis Eichards, James Hughes, William
James, Evan Eoberts, Eobert Miles, David Morgan,
and Eees Davies ; the said land, and site of the said
chapel being allotment twelve A, section nine, of the
said parish.
5. Eight perches and five-tenths of a perch of land,
or thereabouts, along with a chapel thereon, being
part of Crown allotment one, section twenty-one in
the township of Eaglehawk, in the parish of Sandhurst,
in (county unnamed) ; conveyed, in trust for the
said Cpnnexion, unto William M. Evans, of Latrobe
Street West, in the city of Melbourne, in the county
of Bourke, Moderator of the Welsh Calvinistic
Methodist Church, whose name appears on the
Certificate of Title of the said land, dated the
eighteenth day of October, one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-two.
6. One rood, or thereabouts, of land, being Crowm
allotment eight, of section seven, in the township of
Ballarat, in the county of Grenville, along with
chapel thereon, and all appurtenances thereto belong-
ing ; conveyed, in trust for the Connexion, unto the
following persons as Trustees for the same; and
whose names are on the Certificate of Title, dated the
twenty-ninth day of August, one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, namely:—David Morris,
4.
In Sebastopol,
parish of Bal-
farat, chapel
and land.
6.
In the town-
ship of Eagle-
hawk, parish
of Sandhurst,
chapel and
land.
e.
In the town-
ship of Balla-
rat, chapel
and land.
28
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


Name.
Residence.
Profession
or Office.
William Meirion Evans
Latrobe Street, Melbourne
Minister
f Seal.
William Thomas
Ballarat
Minister
ff
William Davies Rees
Kensington, Melbourne
Preacher
ff
Thomas Loveluck
Eaglehawk, Sandhurst
Elder
ff
Robert Williams
Williamstown
Elder
ft
Robert Parry
Williamstown
Elder
ff
Rees Owen
Williamstown
Elder
19
Griffith Jones
Fitzroy
Elder
ff
Griffith Ow r en
Williamstown
Elder
ff
of Ballarat, in the county of Grenville, carpenter;
Brands David, of the same place, miner; Thomas
Evans, of the same place, tailor; Griffith Owen, of
the same place, miner; and William Thomas, of
the same place, Calvinistic Methodist minister.
7. Twenty-nine perches and six-tenths of a perch ■
of land, or thereabouts, along with a house thereon, !
and all appurtenances thereto belonging ; being part I
of allotment seventeen, section seventy-eight, in city
and parish of Ballarat; conveyed, in trust for the
said. Connexion, unto Theophilus Williams, of Ballarat,
mining manager, and David Morris, of Ballarat,
carpenter; and whose names appear on the Certificate
of Title, dated the thirty-first of May, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-seven.
8. Allotments sixty-two and sixty-three G, in
Duke Street, in the township of Forest Creek, in the
parish of Castlemaine, with chapel thereon, and
appurtenances thereto belonging, held in trust for the
Connexion by Evan Davies, Thomas Morgan, Lewis
Jones, David Williams, and Jenkin Davies, all of
Forest Creek ; and whose names appear on the
Crown Grant issued on the twenty-fourth day of
October, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-one.
(7.)
In the town-
ship of Ballarat,
dwelling-house
and land.
8.
29
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


Name.
Residence.
Profession
or Office.
/'“'X
John Meirion Roberts
Melbourne
Elder
f Sesl.
Joseph Davies
Sebastopol
Elder
„
James Hughes
Sebastopol
Elder
31
Rees Davies
Sebastopol
Elder
„
David Morris
Ballarat
Preacher
„
Theophilus Williams
Ballarat
Elder
,,
John Aberalaw Jones
Ballarat
Elder
„
Ellis Richards
Ballarat
Elder
31
Lewis Richards
Hiscocks
Elder
91
Robert Thomas Roberts
Williamstown
Minister
Lewis Jones
Forest Creek
Elder
”
jliflttttt, pealed and QtliVtXtA by the above twenty
persons, in the presence of Egbert Bevan
Williams, Secretary of the General Association
of the Denomination, named in the herein Deed.
EOBEET BEYAN WILLIAMS,
Kooroocheang, Elder.
and by the above Eobert
Bevan Williams, in the presence of William
M. Evans, Moderator of the General Association
of the Denomination, named in the herein Deed.
30
CONSTITUTIONAL DEED.


RULES OF ORDER AND DEBATE
TO BE OBSERVED IN THE
GENERAL ASSOCIATIONS
AND
DISTRICT MEETINGS
OF THE
Welsh Calvinistic Methodists.
Presiding Officer.
I. It shall be the duty of the Presiding Officer to
call the members to order at the proper time, and after
the meeting has been opened by reading a portion of
the Scriptures, prayer, and praise, to announce the
business in its order; to receive and submit all
motions presented by the members ; put to the vote
all matters regularly moved, and announce the results;
to enforce the observance of order in the debate,
and decorum among the members; to receive and
announce communications; to authenticate by his
signature, when necessary, the acts and proceedings
of the meeting ; to decide, when necessary, or when
referred to, on a point of order or practice ; to name
a committee, if so directed, in any case ; and in general


to represent and stand for the Association or District
Meeting, declaring its will, and in all things, implicitly
obeying its commands. In case of the absence of
such Presiding Officer, or of his withdrawing from the
chair, for the purpose of participating in the business,
the Secretary shall announce the fact, and the meeting
forthwith shall proceed to elect a Chairman pro tern.
Secretary.
11. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to preserve
the records of what is done and passed; to keep a
correct account of proceedings ; to call the roll of the
members when a call is ordered ; read papers required
to be read ; notify committees of their appointment;
conduct all correspondence; authenticate all the
proceedings by his signature, and preserve the books
and papers belonging to the Association or District
Meeting.
Members.
111. (a) All members have an equal privilege of
submitting, explaining, and advocating propositions.
(b) No member in the course of debate shall be
allowed to indulge in personal reflections.
(c) If more than one member rise to speak at the
same time, the member that is most distant from the
chair shall speak first; and no member shall speak
until his name is announced by the Chairman.
(d) If any member consider himself aggrieved by
a decision of the Chairman or Moderator, it shall be
his privilege to appeal to the Meeting or Association,
and the question on such appeal shall be taken with-
out debate.
(e) No member shall be allowed to decline voting
on any question unless excused by the meeting ; and
silent members shall be considered as acquiescing
with the majority, unless excused from voting.
32
RULES OF ORDER AND DEBATE.


Order in Debate.
IV. (a) No discussion shall take place except upon
a motion or amendment moved and seconded.
(b) Only one amendment can be entertained at
one time. If the amendment be carried, it shall take
the place of the original motion, and there will be no
necessity to put the original motion to the meeting.
It is competent, whether the amendment is carried or
not, to receive other amendments, one at a time, to
be disposed of in like manner, and decided on until
the subject is finally disposed of.
(c) No member shall propose more than one
amendment upon a motion, and no member sifall
speak more than once upon either a motion or
amendment, except the mover of the motion first
proposed, who shall be entitled to reply. The
seconder of a motion or amendment shall not be held
to have spoken thereon if he has only seconded the
same without a remark. In the case of proposed
amendments being lost, the Presiding Officer shall
there and then put the original motion to the vote.
(d) Any member may, by consent of the Presiding
Officer, offer an explanation of any particular expres-
sion used by him, but must confine himself strictly to
such explanation.
(e) On all questions, and during discussions, the
member speaking shall address the meeting through
the Presiding Officer, and shall do so standing.
(f) The consideration of applications to the General
Association for monetary payments, shall, if so
demanded by three members, be postponed for the
consideration of the Association next ensuing.
(g) In all cases when a vote is to be taken, it shall
be decided as provided for in the Constitutional Deed.
(h) The Presiding Officer shall have a casting vote
only.
33
RULES OF ORDER AND DEBATE,


(i) Any subject that may be once settled by vote,
cannot be again entertained at the same meeting,
unless at the request of two members who voted with
the majority, and when there are as many present as
when the resolution passed.
(j) In all cases where a point of order is raised,
the member raising the same shall state his point of
order clearly and distinctly; and if a member be
speaking, such member shall take his seat until the
point of order is decided ; the Presiding Officer to de-
cide the matter promptly and not allow a discussion.
(k) The maximum time each member shall occupy
in addressing the chair shall be fifteen minutes, except
by permission, under which the time may be extended
five minutes more.
(l) Nothwithstanding any thing herein contained,
the provisions made in the Constitutional Deed for
special voting, shall not be interfered with nor
violated.
James Curtis, Printer, Armstrong Street, Ballarat.
34
EXILES OE OEDEE AND DEBATE.


