





F 10Z64-
Contributicms totoarirs a |Ubtclxi
or THE
HEBREW and CHRISTIAN LAWS
UPON
FORBIDDEN MARRIAGES
With some Special Reference to the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria
By the REV. JAMES HENDERSON
ZBYYTjUVUOIE^YYXj
George Eofcertson
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE




CONTRIBUTIONS TOWARDS A REVIEW
OF THE HEBREW AND CHRISTIAN
LAWS UPON FORBIDDEN MARRIAGES.
Part I.—EXEGETICAL.
Human language is a poor and inadequate vehicle to convey the will or
thoughts of God; and human thought is itself so weak and infantile
that it never can grasp the whole truth that is in any one divine utter-
ance ; yet God has employed human speech; and has committed to the
custody of our reason and conscience, a real and positive revelation of
His will. He selected two remarkable languages, used their most
appropriate words, and through them, expressed to us His divine
thoughts. Each and all of these particular idioms, and words, and
thoughts are preserved to us in the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures; and
retain a peculiar excellence of their own, because they have been
specially chosen and used by God to convey to coming ages the
archives of our human family, and of its relationships with heaven.
If we consider theology as a general science, exegetics, or sacred
criticism is that special branch of it, which has primarily to deal with
these three objects, so as to ascertain and explain the original sense of
Scripture. Its high function is, first, to find out the historical meaning
of all the original words and phrases, used in the revealing of divine
truth, and then to exhibit clearly the true and full meaning of every
sentence, in the Word of God. It is the most important branch of
theology, as all the other departments must in general rest on the
foundation of sure and solid exegesis. This is especially true in regard
to dogmatics. Whether the systematic divine is endeavouring to con-
struct a church symbolism or a doctrinal system, he must begin where
the labours of the exegete end : “ he must presume the processes and
accept the assured results of interpretation.” He himself uses a scien-
tific, logical process, and formulates into distinct dogmas, or harmonizes
into a systematic body of divinity, all the separate truths or facts which
the former had already verified and announced. And when his work is
done—when he has constructed his symbolism, or his system of theology


—it is of such a nature that it begins from that moment to fall into
decadence; for a new exegesis is ere long produced, and the old
formulas loose their foundation, and must be built anew. Since the
periods at which the standards, and formularies of our Presbyterian
Church of Victoria were compiled, the Scriptures have gradually been
coming to be apprehended with greater fulness and accuracy, so that
our religious stock of truth is now enriched by an appreciable and
important increment; whilst the dogmas of our church symbolism have
remained fixed and unrevised. In 1578, when the “ Second Book of
Discipline” was compiled, and in 1643, when the “Westminster
Confession of Faith,” and its attendant subsidiary documents were
constructed, exegesis was necessarily in a very defective state; and
consequently, all the standards and formulas built on it must, to a corres-
ponding degree, be defective. During all the subsequent interval till
now, exegetes have been at work, opening up new truths and giving
forth new views of truth. In practical effect they have been adding to
the divine revelation. Their work has been proving the Word of God to
be manifold and progressive, vital and dynamic in all its meanings—a
light pervading the religious world, and shining more and more unto the
perfect day. Meanwhile human confessions, and formulas are proving
themselves to be rigid, unchanging, and dead. They are giving
evidence that their original light is getting dim, and is of less use than
might have been expected, in the denser and increasing fogs of our day;
and it is evident that every advance which the intelligent or religious
world is making towards truth is progress, not in direct knowledge of
formulas or confessions, but in knowledge of Scripture; or rather of the
one great personal history contained in Scripture. Such progress at first
naturally inclines to sheer off from the dogmas of human symbolisms,
and to cling to the simplicity of the gospel history.
As exegesis makes progress, there must necessarily be an increasing
discrepancy between the supreme, and subordinate standards of our
church; between the ascertained will of God, and the old Confession
with its attendant formularies. This disharmony or contradiction must
ultimately become so great that the one must give concessions to the
other. The Word of God can never yield; the human formulas, there-
fore, must go to the wall. Already there is a lack of harmony between
the two in our Victorian church. The one is going into contradiction
to the other. Whilst exegesis is working away with all due loyalty to
divine authority, confessional theology having no room for doctrinal
development is suspicious, and is showing some want of tolerance with
departures from its authoritative dicta. While our English Bible is
being revised with the hearty approval and co-operation of nearly all
the Protestant denominations which use our language, there is a conser-
vative unwillingness among Presbyterians to touch the Confession.
And whilst the Scriptures submit, and even crave, to be subjected to
the ordeal of critical examination, neither churches, nor theologians,
characteristically dogmatical, find it an easy task to submit their dogmas
to exegetical tests. Whilst the language and dress in which the omnis-
cient prophet speaks to us are being amended, surely the dress and
language of our human symbols are not to be held as perfect and


infallible. The strongest arguments for a revised translation of the
English Bible are still stronger for a revision of the Westminster Con-
fession. It is both reasonable and necessary that every church should
move forward her formularies with every decided advance in knowledge
of God’s will, and bring her dogmas into harmony with the Word as
ascertained. I recognize the greatness of the difficulty, for a Confession
is a Constitution, and needs a revolution to overturn it, but it must be
done sooner or later, and there must meantime be an increasing
province of compromised or open questions.


NOTES INTRODUCTORY TO THE
HEBREW STATUTE.
The eighteenth chapter of Leviticus is generally admitted to have been
at the foundation of all Christian legislation, both civil and ecclesiastical,
upon the subject of incest. It is undeniably the basis on which the
Westminster formula on “the prohibited degrees,” or “incest,” rests.
(Conf. 24, 4.) The statutes in this chapter were originally spoken by
Moses, at the dictation of God, to the Israelites when at Sinai, on their
wonderful journey to the Canaan promised to their fathers. And they
come to us in the form of a theocratic edict, or code of laws, directly
prohibiting incontinence in men, and indirectly, its reciprocated un-
chastity in women, in every possible social form. They appear as an
exhaustive list of such sensual abominations as are shown to have
prevailed, among the heathen Egyptians and Canaanites : and in their
condemnation and prohibition, Moses is at one and the same time,
developing the seventh Commandment in all its completeness, and
variety of application, and is establishing a complete series of bulwarks,
thrown out for defence and strengthening, around the primeval citadel
and divine institution of marriage. This law recognises it as a fact, that
all people have a sexual nature grafted on their human nature, and that
both man, and woman craves for, and needs a suitable helpmeet; and
it assumes entire authority, and control over the whole province of the
sexual. It shows how this natural appetite is to be kept pure, and free
from disorder and profanation, and it expressly designates certain
objects from which this appetite ought either permanently or temporarily
to be debarred. In short it prohibits the man from seeking his help-
meet in wrong modes, and from finding her in wrong objects. It does
this first in one generalized rule which gives the keynote to all the rest,
and then in about nineteen particular cases. All these unitedly form a
unique statute, which may properly be described as “ The Sinaitic
Eicalogue,” or Law, which forbids all reciprocated lewdness, and fully
establishes and protects the original divine institution of marriage. It
is not a code on incest merely. It is a code that sways its authority
over universal human sexualhood.
To understand this statute fully we must duly weigh two things.
First—lts nature, as an application in detail of the seventh command-
ment, and a renaissance, and protection of the original pure institution of
marriage. Second—The actual state of facts, as to marriage and sexual
relations, both among the Israelites to whom it was addressed, and
among the heathen nations around them.
I. As man was originally created in God’s image we can never fully
understand any particular law or duty until we have traced it back to
its original source, and to its earliest revelation. It will invariably be


found to have received its birth from the primitive Sabbath, or from the
primitive Marriage institution ■ and so, all sin and all crime may also be
resolved into transgression of these two. When Christ decided the law
as to divorce, or as to the sabbath, He first went back to their original
source. We may notice the same course followed generally in all the
moral legislation of Moses. It was for the most part an attempt to
revive, protect, and apply in all variety of detail the principles of the
Edenic Marriage, and of the Edenic Sabbath. These are two supreme
and primitive institutions, with some elements of a higher world than
this in them still. “ They both alike proceed upon positive divine
institutions —not as it seems to me discoverable by the light of nature,
nor capable of being enforced by any natural law.”* They are fountains
from which have ever flowed all the streams of religious, and social
welfare among men. The Sabbath is a field whose assured products,
when fitly cultured, are godlike virtues and religious characters. It
lies to the Godward side of our nature, and has suitable space only for
the exercise of homage and sacred duties to the Creator and Redeemer,
and it becomes the means of all religious reformation. It tends to unite
men permanently to God, and puts them on a high vantage ground for
all pure and Christ-like living.
But for God’s express institution of marriage, I presume, it would never
have been established in its permanence and sanctity, between one man
and one woman, as a custom among men. And but for God’s institution
of the Sabbath, I presume, no hebdomadal holyday, nor even holiday,
would ever have become a permanent or universal custom.
Now if we are under the Sabbath law—not purely in its literal
Sinaitic form as given to Israel, but rather as given at the beginning,
and as lighted up by Christ in the Christian dispensation, so I think are
we under this eicalogue, or statute of forbidden sexual unions. We are
not under it in its purely literal form as given at Sinai, but under it as
lightened up by the primeval marriage ordinance, and by the law of
Christ: with the merely local and temporary removed from its Hebrew
form.
Marriage is river-like. It secures the ever-increasing stream of human
existence, and floats along with, and into all the reticulations of society;
and it of right bears with it the rectification of all human relations and
duties within our earthly family. It is specially God’s ordinance for
securing our purity, and it tends through family relationship and love, to
unite all men to one another in sacred bonds of brotherhood, over the
whole world.
These twin Promethean parents are still rearing harvests of men for
earth, and for heaven. They are slowly but surely making progress in
all good human and divine cultus. They are radically the only factors
at work in the divine education of the human race; through the one
ordinance, all earth’s elements are engaged to sweeten and ennoble
life for its intelligent creatures ; through the other, perfection of existence
is secured for them, by their being made partakers of the life and glory
of the eternal God. Every thoughtful person must see, that if only these
* Dr. Candlish on “The Sabbath,” p. 26.


two institutions were carried out among us suitably in a high degree,
earth would soon become a very heaven of purity and love.
The essence of every right marriage, as well as its necessity, is shown
to us in Gen. ii. 18-24. This passage represents marriage as a real
conjugium or union between one man and one woman, who are mutually
joined in pure attachment, in pious love, in simple fidelity to one
another; and who thus become the foundation of a new family. It
suggests that the sexual nature, with its correlate marriage, formed a sub-
sequent and subordinate creation within the province of human nature,
and was not by itself an essential element in the creature made in God’s
image. It expressly states that the Creator took a portion from near
the heart of the man, and therewith builded woman. She was thus
created, not from dust of the earth, but from a rib from the Adam—
“because she was formed for an inseparable unity and fellowship of life
with the man; and the mode of her creation was to lay the actual
foundation for the moral ordinance of marriage.” -v And the man, as
the conciousness of this relationship towards some individual dawns
upon him, leaves his father and mother and cleaves to her, who thus
becomes his wife, and they twain become one flesh.
In launching our race on existence, God divided its members into
two sexes, and constituted them so, that each should mutually fill up and
complement what was defective in the other ; so that in each human pair
the virtues of manliness —fortitude, justice, &c., should be united to the
graces of womanliness, gentleness, self-sacrifice, and chaste modesty,
and an approach made to the ideal of perfect humanity. Women as
well as men are homines. “ Generic man is both male and female.
Each sex has been organized according to the moral functions
it was destined to fulfil, and therefore the union between the two is
organic.” (“ Vinet’s Out. Phil,” p. 452.)
It is plain that the sexual is one of the noblest parts of our human
nature, and one of the greatest factors in civilization. In form it has its
analogy among the plants and lower animals, but in essence it has its
likeness in the divine. Suppose that the human race has lost the
whole of what is known as the sexual, and that men and women have
received a nature supposedly like to eunuchs, monks, or nuns : it has
assuredly fallen to a lower level: grosser earthly animalism, deeper
selfishness and demonic malevolence have betrayed themselves ; and it
has lost one of the greatest motive powers for elevating society.
God gave the one sex to the other, and called her the other’s Help-
meet {'"]]' y ezer, his counterpart or reflection, help of his kind, and
strengthener in his destined vocation). But the Adam called her, first,
Woman (n m isha , man-ess , the filling up of the vacuity or want that
had arisen in man’s breast) ; then he called her Chavva or Heva (rm
lifespring, mother, and hope of the eternal survival of the race).
The full meaning of any real marriage union must still be got from
these earliest revelations. It must, at least, extend as far as these three
designations. Thus, the man leaves all others, and cleaves by a right
* See Keil, in loco.


divine to this God-provided one, and she becomes his helpmeet—a
girdle of support to him in his cares and labours as he earns his bread,
and guards all the great heart and home interests of his life. She
becomes emphatically his woman or wife; and they two are so lovingly
attached to each other that the union, is represented in the Hebrew as
that of two boards agglutinated together (davak), and made inseparable
except by death. They become “ one flesh,” not in the sense merely
of affinity and sexual connection, “ but of something lying beyond all
that. It expresses the essential unity and higher wholeness of man in
man and wife.”* And she becomes his Eve. The Adam, as his name
implies, is of the dust, earthly, and sentence of death rests on him ;
but Eve, as her name imports, is of life, and revives his hopes. She is
of a higher mould and existence. She approaches nearer to the angelic
than he. Her very name approaches the nearest, in form and meaning,
to the ineffable name. She is not made merely to perfect the existence
of the man. She has received a pre-eminence over him in her origin—
in her relations —and in the destinies that rest on her head. She is the
“mother of all living”—life-spring to streams of human existence, and she
alone concentrates in herself the very hope that the Messiah, the Supreme
Life-giver, shall yet, as her seed, and through her offspring, accomplish
His work of crushing Death and all the deadly serpent’s brood; and secure
the triumph of our race, and of God’s universe over sin, Satan, and all
evils, and cause life and love to reign eternally as the fulness of all in all.
It is not easy to identify the present ideas of marriage as consecrated
by a civil, or ecclesiastical ceremony, with its perfect model as shown by
Moses. The ideal real marriage is not an act completed at the
moment of any external ceremony. According to Israelitish ideas it is
a gradual process with beginning, growth, and consummation. It is not
till the woman has occupied these three departments that the wife and
husband can, in its precise and complete sense, be called “ one flesh.” t
It is not till matrimony has gone into maternity, that she is in a
physical sense “ flesh of her husband’s flesh.” Only then is her vitality
in a high degree modified by his—the life currents coursing through her
system are only then in a real and physical sense, in the possessive case
to him.
Keil shows, that the ideal marriage union is doubtless a conjunction
and unity in spirit and soul, as well as in body. But the bodily union
of the sexes is the peculiar and chief characteristic. This lowest form
of communion has its analogies in the animal world ; but the peculiar
source from which, and the manner in which this human helpmeet was
created, make it, if not the foundation, at least the crown of all the
rest, and constitute it the condition to our race of its continued exist-
ence, and therefore also of its eternal salvation.|
In the Sinaitic laws the man is always recognized as the moving
cause in marriage, and in all forbidden connections ; and the woman as
subordinate. Owing to the primitive household or patriarchal system,
* Lange, “ Introduction to Pentateuch.”
+ Grace Aguilar, in her “Women of Israel,” powerfully shows that a holy seed
was a proper and integral part of every pure idea of marriage, v. 1., p. 175, &c.
J See Keil upon Leviticus xviii.


she was still treated as inferior in personality and general status. But
woman, as we showed, is man’s contrast or reflection. As the tenon is
the contrast and complement to the mortice—as the hinge is to the
socket, so is woman essentially related to man. And thus she receives
this law from God, not at first hand or directly, but at second hand
and reflexly. This eicalogue is in every particular addressed directly to
the man, but it is also addressed reflexly to the woman. If we once
reach a right understanding of it in its bearing on man, we at the same
moment, and almost intuitively, see its bearing on woman.
Like the present laws of England, the old laws of Moses to a high
degree, looked on marriage in the light of a contract, and applied to it
the ordinary principles of a contract. In a lay or secular point of view,
it is just a mutual consent and agreement between a man and a woman
to live together for life as husband and wife. This is the whole of it;
but every right-thinking man and woman will seek to secure the
approval of all legitimate authority that is over them, whether that is in
heaven, in their own homes, or in the country in which they reside. It
is a contract made legal, by loyalty to God, to the king, and to parents.
Such is the contract or agreement of marriage. But this is not marriage
itself. Marriage is so essentially a perfect union between one man and
one woman that they become “ one flesh.”
ll.—We must bear in mind the actual state of fact, in reference to the
marriage institution, at the time when this law was delivered —in the
heathen world on the one hand, and among the Israelites on the other.
tst. Among the heathen nations, nearly all sense of the sacredness of
the marriage institution seems to have been a wanting; and the indulgence
of sensual appetites was held to be as blameless as eating and drinking.
As matter of fact, there was a general disorder running through all
marriage relations. Egypt, Canaan, and at a later date, even polished
Greece, furnished deplorable pictures of the state of heathenism. Even
in the very centres of their most civilized society, they seem through
sexual pollutions to have become incapable of conjugal affection, of
parental love, or of filial reverence. Among all classes there was such
a state of shamelessness and indecency that we cannot examine their
history without disgust and loathing. Fornication, adultery, lewdness,
licentiousness, even unnatural and revolting crimes prevailed. Under
the sacred name, and forms of religion, open prostitution and whoredom,
and all these other abominations, were not only practised, but also
required in honour of their deities. “ Because they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which were not convenient, being filled with
all unrighteousness, fornication. . .
The crime of Sodom was more or less common among all the
heathen, that of bestiality was common in Egypt; and both of these
crimes, and above all whoredom, were practised in their idolatrous
worship. In Canaan, women of the highest ranks frequently hired
themselves out in the temples of their idols, and by prostitution con-
tributed to the worship and treasures of their gods ; and it is matter of
* Romans i. 25.


more recent history that the temple of Venus, at Corinth, kept 1,000
hierodules or sacred girls, who were really harlots practising their
abominable vice in order to add to the worship, the honour, and the
riches of their goddess. The only reverse to this awfully sad picture
that we can find in the whole world in its earlier stages, is in the
patriarchal system, which still survived among the Israelites. That was
God’s great antidote or cure, for the prevailing sensual pollutions of the
time. Our Sacred History shows that it was directly for this cause that
Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, and that a fearful ruin seized
upon the nations of Canaan. “The land itself vomited out its
inhabitants.” Homes and cities were then, as, alas! they are still,
spewing out their inhabitants with abhorrence, “ because of the corrup-
tions that are in them through lust.” But on these devoted centres,
when the iniquity had reached its fulness, the judgment of Almighty
God descended in terrible destruction, as a direct and manifest punish-
ment of sensual wickedness.
2nd. Among the Israelites everything was peculiar. They had
already begun to present a very remarkable constitution of government,
the kind or degree of which has never been matched in the history of
any nation. They presented a real and actual theocracy, and were a
covenanted people under their heavenly King. They were directly
under the government of God; and their laws, both civil and religious,
were judgments and statutes immediately given them by God. All
their secular, and sacred institutions and ordinances separated them
completely from the heathen nations which were round about them.
God had been watching over and educating them, from the days of their
father Abraham. They had been subjected to a severe discipline of
slavery in Egypt, where, under force of circumstances, they must have
sunk for a time under degradation and darkness of mind. Physical
oppression and destitution must have stifled much of the good that had
come to them from their fathers. “ They hearkened not to Moses for
anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.”* But these preparatory ages
had passed away; and now at Sinai they are allowed an opportunity, for
recovering their heirloom of Jehovah as Israel’s God, with all its
hallowed accompaniments. The patriarchal, or primitive household
system, rebounded into authority again, and into the exercise of great
influence in forming the habits and customs of the people. It had its
defects. It especially became a disturbing element throughout the
whole province of the marriage ordinance. It raised the father or head
of the family to legal power and authority within his own circle, which
were unlimited, except for the supremacy of God; and it lowered woman
to an unnatural and undue inferiority to man; and naturally it cherished
and strengthened the growth of polygamy, concubinage, and divorce.
It was a feudal system. The people .clustered in family groups around
their revered parent or patriarchal head, and he for the time being was
a petty king, with full authority over all within his circle. His subject
family included his wife or wives, his children and grandchildren, with
all their family members and slaves. The married daughters alone were
* Exodus vi. 9.


excepted, for they had gone with their own husbands, to join other*
family groups. As women lived in great seclusion, the youthful male of r
one family had his acquaintance with the opposite sex almost wholly
confined to the female members of his father's tents ; that is, he was
continually meeting familiarly with those who are specified in the first
portions of this code, and as a rule with no others. Hence the obvious
great necessity for the most stringent family laws, against sensual desire
and incontinence among near relatives, and those living in closest
intimacy; and hence the far greater minuteness of the first part of this
code than of the rest.
This Levitical code did not directly condemn or proscribe, all that
was faulty in the patriarchal system. Though it did not approve of, it
recognized polygamy, took it into account, and put it under regulation.
Among its prohibited unions it incorporated several which belong
specially to polygamy. It set up principles which tend to break its
power, to counteract it, and ultimately to replace it with the primitive
monogamy. But it was Jesus Christ alone, who restored to the Divine
law of marriage, the purity and authority, which Moses did not enjoin on
the Hebrews, and made the sanctity of marriage a fundamental law of
Christian religion, and society.
From the circumstances of the peculiar people, legislation on marriage
naturally took an outward form of opposition to, and condemnation of
the corruptions of it in all the surrounding nations. It aimed at the
re-establishment of the original perfect marriage, by giving a proscribed
list of common heathen defilements. Throughout this whole eicalogue
there is a prevailing principle of antithesis to their sexual lawlessness on
the one hand, and to their infrequent instances of monkish contempt of
marriage, or sexual relations, on the other. It grimly vindicates the
justice of its theocratic demands by attaching the extreme penalty of
death to all the gravest of its transgressions, and it sternly refuses to let
any connection throughout the whole province of the sexual nature —
any union or intercourse whatever between the sexes, be other than
marriage unions, and marriage connections. It lays an arbitrary restraint
on the natural appetite and establishes and defends with a deep
entrenchment, this principle, that “ It is the express ordinance of God
which makes sexual love within the marriage bond a lawful and pure
thing, and outside the marriage bond a sinful and defiling thing.”*
Its immediate objects seem to be, to stamp all whoredom and
lewdness out of existence, and to raise the marriage institution to its
ideal truth and reality as set up in Eden, to lift it above the horrible
corruption and vileness to which it had been prostituted among the
Egyptians and Canaanites, and to begin the lustrations and cleansings
from all lasciviousness, within the homes and family groups of Israel.
The drift of all its lessons reaches the same position as Paul insisted on
in his day. “ Wherefore because of prevailing fornication, let every
man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband ”t
“The spirit of the Old Testament,” says Lange, “places the natural
* Dr. J. O. Dyke’s “ Laws of the Kingdom,” p. 46.
t 1 Corinthians vii. 2.


sexual desire in opposition to the unnatural —the object of the sexual
desire, procreation, in opposition to the passion for its own sake—the
true marriage based on the mind’s choice, to the common or even
barely external union of the sexes —the consecrated holy birth, in
opposition to the birth or conception after the will of the flesh. In
other words, it seeks the true sacred marriage, perfected indeed through
its destination, the conception of the consecrated child of promise. It
sanctifies the traditional marriage through the true sacred character of
the higher union of soul, and the sexual desire through spiritual and
conjugal consecration.”*
The Mosaic legislation effected this most wonderful and wholly
exceptional thing in the history of nations. It made true marriage
most easy, and advantageous in every respect to all parties, and it made
fornication, whoredom, and adultery most difficult, and most destructive
to a people’s or an individual’s welfare. The only hope we have, of
modern communities rising above prevailing unchastity and revolting
sensuality is connected with these old institutes of morality. Every
municipal appliance that is being used among us is as yet a failure.
A cure for our social evils seems a moral impossibility on our present
basis of society. The old Hebrew model of society was simple. It
made allegiance to God the root of all national prosperity. It always
chose to employ prevention rather than cure —its small estate system,
its family system, and its home school system made the existence, to any
outstanding degree, of “ dangerous classes ” “ of the social vice ” and of
whoredom an impossibility. If Victorian legislation could wisely
gather up and apply in suitably adapted form, the spirit and principles
of these old theocratic institutions, no thoughtful person could doubt
that this country would soon rise in intelligence, morality, and loyalty
to the Creator. As President Grant in sending a message to the youth
of the United States, at their recent season of joy—their great
Centennial—is reported to have said, “To the influence of this Book
(the Bible) we are indebted for all the progress made in true civilization,
and to this we must look as our guide in the future. ‘ Righteousness
exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.”’!
ANALYSIS.
The Hebrew law on forbidden marriages is contained within the
eighteenth chapter of Leviticus. The passage exhibits a code of laws
against all sexual incontinence, and its reciprocated unchastity; and is
not so much a congeries, or mass of laws, as a vital unity or organism
inspired by the spirit of truth and life. It contains what may be called
the Sinaitic eicalogue, for it includes twenty distinct prohibitions.
Every one of these is two-fold, expressly forbidding the subjects
* Lange’s “Introduction to O. T.,” p. 80. T. and T. Clark’s Edition,
f Weekly Review, July, 1876.


specified from sensual approach, and uncovering; and prohibiting or
withholding all the reciprocal objects specified as being the reverse of
suitable or lawful helpsmeet.
The first (v. 6) is the parent or generic law, and all the rest are
species under it. It is itself the generalized law, in concrete form, of all
the commandments which forbid sexual licentiousness. That which it
expressly forbids is sensual approach with intent, to any flesh, as specified
below.
The next twelve laws (7-17) form a distinct class. They are prohibi-
tions of what is called incest, or bloodshame. They limit and fix down
the directly forbidden family relations to twelve individual cases. That
which is expressly forbidden in this group is uncovering the nakedness
of certain specified relatives.
The next three prohibitions (18-20) also form a subordinate class.
The grounds on which they rest are not “ nearness of kin ; ” they are
temporary only, and may in the providence of God be removed, and
when removed there is absolutely no prohibition left. That which is
expressly forbidden is—lst “taking a wife to her sister,” with malicious
jealousy-making intent, and with sensual intent. 2nd. The approach to
any woman, even one’s own wife, who is under sickness, and because of
sickness. 3rd. Adultery ; or, indirectly, polyandry.
The last four (21-23) form a list of proscribed defilements which
were more specially connected with the degrading practices of idolatry
and superstition. The former part of this eicalogue is explicative of
the general law, this latter is its augmentive development. In external
form it is of the nature of antithesis to the rest of it, but all its parts are
really and essentially species, and details of the one general law. They
forbid wrong modes, and wrong objects in a man’s natural craving for a
suitable earthly helpmeet; and the whole code is heaven’s law book for
the entire sphere of human sexuality. Everything unnatural and im-
proper for that, is here authoritatively forbidden.
EXEGESIS AND CRITICISM.
I. — The General Law against Sexuality. “Man man tq-all-flesh
of his flesh, ye shall not approach, to uncover nakedness. I (am) the
Lord.” —Lev. xviii. 6,
The true and accurate meaning of the whole code depends on the
original sense of this verse, especially on the expression —^s
A common mode of interpreting it, is, first to affirm that it means “near
of kin,” in the sense which takes in only parents, sisters, and a few of
the nearest blood relations, and then to extend it to a wife’s relatives.
Thus making affinity by marriage the same as consanguinity by birth,
and consequently doubling the relations which existed under the flesh-
kindred of Moses.


lam inclined to accept it in this sense—“ Each to all his flesh-
kindred, you shall not approach, &c.” — i.e., no man is to approach
sexually to any object whatever that may be “ flesh of his flesh.”
The marriage union is either an exception, or —to be more correct—it
is removed to another province where this language does not properly
apply to it; and thus it leaves this_ general law to be in reality a
universal law. But if the words mean the “ flesh,” or
the “near of kin” of the individuals addressed— i.e., “your flesh,” or
“your near of kin,” whilst the meaning of “flesh” or “near of kin”
is limited down to a few family relatives, by birth or by marriage ; then
the passage from verse sixth down to the twenty-third (6-23) is not
one statute forming an organic whole, it is dismembered and treated as
a mere statute on incest, and all that does not apply to that is thrown
aside as thoroughly useless.
This code is contained within a well-defined vinculum enclosing the
6th verse, the 23rd, and all which lie between. It has an introduction,
in which God warns the Israelites against adopting the licentious
customs of the Egyptians and Canaanites —exhorts them to keep His
judgments and ordinances, and gives them a covenant promise that if a
man keeps all these perfectly it will be eternal life to him. And it has
a conclusion, in which God shows that the nations which He was driving
out before them had in all these things —in all these specific abomina-
tions —-defiled themselves, and that their very land, loathing such foul
sins, was “spewing out” its inhabitants. And He warns them not to
pollute themselves in any of these things, lest their land should vomit
them out also in the same way.
Thus environed, this code assumes supreme control over the whole
sphere of human sexuality, and is distinctly and emphatically a statute
upon sexualhood. In its applied character it is domestic; for it strictly
prohibits and secures against all breaches of family chastity; it is
national , for it directly designates and prohibits all forms of sexual
pollution that had elsewhere reached a national character; and it is
universal. , for its provisions extend and apply to all flesh. It seems to
be a law of Hebrew locution that the expression “ flesh of his flesh ”
is invariably indefinite. Its precise meaning is always to be. determined
by the context. Here it seems to include both DIKH— 73 “all the'
human kind,” as in Gen. vii. 21; and also “all the bestial
kind,” as in verse 23. Thus the general objective elements which are
included in this expression, or are postulated in these prohibitory
statutes seem to be relatio7iships —either relations originated by birth or
by conjugal union, or relations modified by sickness or by a previous
marriage, or relations abnormally raised by a sensual fetishism, or
worship of false gods, of men, or of beasts; and with a tneretricious, and
unnatural devotion to their respective objects or instruments. The two
nouns which have been translated “ near of kin ” without doubt mean
“flesh kindred,” but they have no precision, nor fixity of meaning. In a
long line of battle one soldier near one extremity may behold all the
rest in perspective. They are all joined to him in the general relations
and interests of fellow-soldiers, under one nationality; but the further off


they are, the less sensibly are these felt. They are all united to him as
one flesh and blood. Every unit in that array is as really related to
him, and as truly on the same general footing of relationship as his rank
and file mates. So is it here. Humanity is one. All its members are
one flesh and blood —joined lineally to Adam and collaterally or lineally
to all human kind. “ God has made of one blood all nations of men
for to dwell on all the face of the earth/’* And this illustration also
applies to the other branches of the war service. All the interests of that
individual soldier are in close connection with, and dependence on the
war horse. The cavalry and artillery are also in some remote sense his
flesh and blood for the time being. And there is no impropriety in
holding, that in this passage “all flesh of his flesh,” or “any near of kin,”
may take in all living flesh of every kind, that is legitimately included in
the following clauses.
Blood relationship among the Israelites, especially near blood relation-
ship, gave rise to certain peculiar obligations ; first, of a positive kind—
of marrying a deceased kinsman’s widow, of redeeming a kinsman’s
property, and of revenging a kinsman’s death ; and second, of a negative
kind —of avoiding sexual, or marriage unions with some of the nearest
relations, whose quantity of relationship, or degree of proximity in blood,
was loose and indefinite, but whose number by express individual
designation, or specification was most clear and definite.
The Hebrew word Ql' literally meant “ husband’s brother,” levir.
flesh,” had a derived meaning, “near kinsman”; and
“redeemer,” had also an artificially-derived meaning, “near relative.”
These three words, therefore, were all used similarly, in a general loose
sense of “ near kindred,” and but for the exceptional definiteness of the
first (yet even that is doubtful), they all meant, “ any nearest living
relative.” But the nearness of relationship was not a fixed quantity—
in many cases it rather meant remoteness of kin, as we see in the case
of Boaz, who could have had no very near propinquity of blood even to
Elimelech, the deceased father-in-law of Ruth.
The chief difficulty with this code lies in the word Let us for
a moment strike out this word altogether. Then it reads “to any flesh
you shall not approach,” &c. It is flesh in general, in its general con-
cept of flesh-hood as below, i.e., “all humankind,” and “all bestial
kind,” that is to be sacred, and fenced off from sexual “ approach.” It
seems to me that ‘INK* has its meaning determined by all that follows
within this vinculum” and that which it governs in the genitive
case, only intensifies, or gives a partitive effect to it in its construct
state ; and the general effect is to make it mean “ any flesh of the living
body whatever, or specially any flesh of its own, or of each distinctive
kind of flesh, as specified below.”
The thing forbidden to the subjects addressed has three stages. The
ultimate and consummated breach of the law is that which is meant by
“ uncovering nakedness,” but the first voluntary outcome or expression
of criminal desire is “approaching”—the approaching with unlawful
* Acts xvii. 26.


intent. Yet before that approach, and implied in it, there was the
inward indulgence of a prohibited passion. Reason and conscience had
already lost control over a lustful appetite. In the general law of the
6th verse it is only the approach with intent that is expressly forbidden ;
but in the subsequent specific statutes generally, it is no inferior grade
but the full-blown transgression that is forbidden. Each and all of these
three associated grades of unchastity are sinful, and from their touch
this code seeks to remove certain specified objects, and to make them
sacred—etaupoo. From connection with these, it imposes the principle
of total abstinence on all the subjects addressed, viz.
i. Certain women in near relations, absolutely; others in more
remote relations, conditionally.
2. Certain objects sexually connected with Moloch or idol-worship.
3. Certain instruments used in the unnatural crimes of Sodom and
Egypt.
Man made in his Creator’s likeness, bears in him among other
excellences, the image of God’s love. Love in the creature, is a reflection
of love in the Creator. In all kinds of legitimate human affection there
is some exhibition of Divine love.
1. Family love in the earthly home, has free outcome and expression
in parental, filial, and brotherly love. The mutual affection of parents
and children, and of brothers and sisters, illustrates the love of the
Eternal Father, and Son in the heavenly home, and specially of Him,
who, as Elder Brother, has passed through all earth’s pathways, and gone
in to the heavenly places for us.
2. Sexual Love appears as mutual attachment between husband and
wife. Man created in the image of God, was yet made male and female r
that is, this human image of the Divine love was shown in two forms.
It needed the strong brave love of the man; as well as the gentle and
tender love of the woman, to give an adequate human representation of
God’s love.
3. Philanthropy, or benevolence towards all men in general is a human
affection derived from the Divine.
4. Philoktisis, or kindly complacent regard for all the creatures made
by our one common Maker is a suggestion or image of the loving
interest, which the great Author takes in His own creation.
One clear law or principle, pervading the whole world of human love,
separates its various phases into totally different, and even incongruous
kinds. Each has a province of its own, and cannot poach upon its
neighbour’s property. Each has its own special object, or objects, with
its appropriate duties attached, which all have their fixed and specified
laws. They are all under very stringent regulations. It is most
particularly so with sexual love. To it all objects are either absolutely
or conditionally forbidden. It is only within the limited and guarded
bond of wedlock, between one man and one woman, that it has any
freedom, or in the eyes of the law, any existence. Outside of true
marriage there may be lawless crime, but legally there can be no sexual
love or intercourse, and even within this vinculum these are permitted
as lawful and pure, only through what may be called —God’s arbitrary
ordinance of marriage. Here they are controlled or forbidden in


seasons of sickness, of worship, or for other causes.* Hence “to
approach,” and “to uncover nakedness,” are always used in a bad
sense —the thing meant is universally prohibited—it is never to happen.
Consequently it is only when one man and one woman are in the con-
dition of being by wedlock, “ one flesh” that such love and union are
legal and pure. Whilst on the other hand, within the sphere of “flesh
of his flesh,” lie all the prohibited “congressus.” The gist or substance
of the code seems to be this ;—That which is directly forbidden is
sexual intercourse. Outside the pale of true marriage this is absolutely
and universally prohibited. But its essence lies in a central point. On
one side, the subject or man, is so conditioned Godward that it is sin
and outrage for him to indulge the guilty desire, the approach, or the
uncovering ; and on the other side, the woman or object, who is the
reciprocal, is so conditioned manward, under the polar extremes of blood-
relationship, or of marriage, of sickness, or of (behema) irrational flesh,
that it is sin and sacrilege for her, if she does not mentally and bodily
flee such fornication.
The ground of the prohibition cannot be narrowed down to “nearness
of kin.” The code assumes control and extends its authority over the
whole province or sphere of sexuality in its connection with humanity,
and cannot confine itself to the few relatives—parental, sisterly, or filial,
who are in the closest blood relationship to the subject. If it did so,
ist, either relations by marriage would have to be excluded, or the usual
meaning given to affinity would have to be altered. 2nd. The passage
included within verses 18-23 would have to be excluded as forming
no part of this unique statute ; for it has nothing to do with “ nearness
of kin,” if that expression is to be accepted in its usual meaning. There
is not one, but several causes or grounds for these various prohibitions.
One chief cause may be found in the nature of true marriage. It
should not be formed in the immaturity of youth, or between blood
relatives reared in one and the same house, but between matured men
and women, and between those especially who within certain limits are
more remote of kin. As Ewald says, “ Only in the riper years of
life should marriage unite those who have been separated, but have
been ultimately created for one another, so that they may come together
in the firmest bond, and form the commencement of a new house. . .
This partnership gives something new in addition to what has already
existed, a love distinct from what is already bestowed among blood
relations. . . . The more distinct and remote therefore the graft
which is inserted into the stock, the freer and fresher may be the inter-
action, and the new unfolding of good on both sides and the less propa-
gation of what is one-sided and therefore weak.”t
Michaelis says, “ The true cause of the prohibition is, that without it,
whoredom, and early corruption in families, could not be prevented.”!
There is an apparent, though not real, disharmony between the 6th
verse, and verses 18-23, but the whole locution is in thoroughly good
* See Lev. xviii. 20, also Lev. xii. 7.
f Ewald’s “ Antiquities,” p. 192.
r j “ Commentary on Laws of Moses,” by Michaelis (Smith’s Translation), Article
108.


Hebrew style. It first gives a general or universal prohibition, and then
a detailed enumeration of all the cases prohibited. The bare outline of a
general law, with the details left to be filled in by human inference is
not given here ; and probably is not in any part of Scripture given ; but
the details are really in full abundance. To our usual modes of thinking
and feeling, they are in offensive and unseemly quantity. “In graphic
brevity and comeliness this ancient section far surpasses all later
passages of similar import; more delicately, and at the same time more
seriously, such matters cannot be spoken about.”* It dams up all the
channels in which sexual lusts can in reciprocal connection break out,
and constrains the natural affections mutually to flow forth in the one
divinely appointed course.
11. The next twelve commandments are prohibitions of what is gene-
rally understood as incestuous connections, and incestuous marriages.
They are included in Lev. xviii. 7-17. Here the unvarying formula that
is in every instance used is K 7 • • • fifty. “ The nakedness of
(thy mother, sister, &c.) thou shalt not uncover.” Marriage or sexual
union is here forbidden with—
1. Parental. 2. Auntly. 3. Sororal. 4. Filial.
One’s mother. Father’s sister. Sister. Wife’s daughter (a)
stepmother. Mother’s sister. Half-sister. Wife’s granddaughter^ a)
Father’s brother’s Brother’s wife. Son’s, or daughter’s daughter,
wife. Son’s wife.
(a) May also be one’s own.
No man, therefore, can marry, or have sexual intimacy with a mother,
sister, daughter, &c. If he had, there would be a double sin or crime
committed. There would be the mutual lust and lewdness, which form
the essential vileness of incontinence and unchastity; and there would be
the sacred province of close relationship by blood, outraged by unlawful
invasion. Every one of the objects mentioned above are related to the
subject in a twofold degree. They are all “flesh of his flesh,” as children
of Adam, i.e., they are related to him by the consanguinity common to
all members of the one human family ; and they are all in the closer
family relations grouped around him —the mother and the daughter
touching him, and the others retiring gradually at intervals to a more
distant consanguinity. Some are related by another kind of nexus which
may indeed be considered only a modification of flesh-kindred, i.e ., by
the affinity which is formed by marriage. But if Hebrew ideas are to
guide us, marriage is the source, and norm of all consanguinity. It
brings the husband and wife into such a unique connection that they
become even in a physical sense “ one flesh.” In marriage, illustrated
by physiology, the wife, in a new form, yet quite consistently with the
Edenic ordinance, and with later ideas, gradually changes into one flesh
and blood with her husband. There comes to be a oneness, or one-
fleshness between them; but the chief physical change is in her, not in
him; and therefore she becomes a blood relation to her husband’s
friends, in some degree like himself, whilst he does not in the same way,
or to the same degree, become a blood relation to her friends. Marriage
* Ewald’s “Antiquities of Israel,” p. 198.


thus amoves a wife by one stage away from blood relatives by birth,
and brings her by one stage, nearer to her husband and his blood
relations.
If this theory be correct, it may account for the father’s brother’s wife
being prohibited, whilst the mother’s brother’s wife is not; and it may
throw light on the levirate law, as it was only the wife, who was also a
mother, that was forbidden when widowed, to her deceased husband’s
brother.
While leaving the theory of degrees to be discussed below, we here
take notice, that in these prohibitions against incest, there is nothing that
expressly condemns what is known as the six consequential marriages,
viz. :
Marriage with a brother’s, or sister’s daughter.
„ a brother’s son’s, or sister’s son’s widow.
~ a maternal uncle’s widow.
~ a sister of a deceased wife.
The supporters of the Westminster formula contend that these six
marriages are just as near in degree as those expressly prohibited, and,
therefore, really forbidden by God. But advocates of the opposite
opinion urge that, according to the Hebrew customs, there is so great a
distinction between these, and those from which their prohibition is
inferred, that any conclusion drawn from the one to the other is entirely
nugatory.*
Verse 16. There are various things, peculiar to this precept concerning
a brother’s wife. It is matter of history, that marriage to a deceased
brother’s wife under certain circumstances, had existed from very early
times, as a custom of severe and unbending obligation; and though the
publication of this precept might appear to abrogate the old law, in reality,
it did not. The levirate marriage was about the same time expressly con-
firmed by Divine authority. Should a brother refuse to marry his widowed
sister-in-law, it was held by strong and pure public opinion that he thus
poured contempt on her, and on his brother’s memory, and that he was
devoid of love for his dead brother. The permanent existence of this
law in early times, as a traditional custom, and in later, as a divine
precept, prove that such marriage unions generally could not be
in themselves sinful. They could form no part of the abominations
for which the Canaanites were rejected. The brother’s wife was put
on the same footing in the family as a sister; she usually dwelt in
the same home with her father and brothers-in-law. As a wife with
a living husband, or as a widow with living children, she was sacred
and under prohibition to her brothers-in-law ; but not as a childless
widow.
This precept seems to be put on a special footing, and different from
the others, for there is no civil punishment to be inflicted for its trans-
gression.! Whether it means incestuous adultery,! or fornication and
marriage with the widow, the penalty seems comparatively light, viz. :
* Michaelis’ “Commentary,” Article 117.
+ Leviticus xx. 21.
J See Rev. J. Nish’s Pamphlet on Marriage, p. 11.


ist, the expression I'IT D'T'iy “They shall be solitary,” probably
means only that their children could never be received on the family
registers of Israel. 2nd. The levir who legally married his sister-in-
law could not claim the child, first-born of their union, as his own. He
could only deem him the child of his deceased brother. In one or
other of these two things alone, consisted their penalty.
As polygamy and concubinage existed among the Israelites, and had
never been expressly forbidden, it is reasonable to suppose that, if this
commandment had not been given, polyandry of a most debasing sort
would have crept into practice; and divorce, which already existed,
would have become very frequent. Among the Hindus, in India,
where polygamy exists, and where woman is even more degraded than
she ever was among the Israelites, polyandry has existed for upwards of
twenty centuries, and lingers to-day in some localities to such an extent
as to call for the legislative action of the English Government.*
Marriage with a deceased brother’s widow may, in many cases, be
inexpedient; but it will not be easy to prove it in all cases sinful—as a
transgression of the supreme standard to us of God’s will. The
levirate marriage had its existence long before this Mosaic law. By this
law it received a divine approval and authority, and it cannot be proved
that this kind of marriage has ever been abrogated. Looking at this
particular prohibition carefully, we hence see that the brother’s wife was
not wholly, but only in part forbidden. Practically, there was only the
half —the fraction of a prohibition on this point, and it is not incon-
sistent with the authority of Scripture to affirm, that the unprohibited
half still remains as it was during all the thousands of years before the
Christian era, and that marriage with a deceased brother’s widow, in
certain cases, is still not merely lawful, but even commanded by the
sacred Scriptures.t
Verse 17. The authorized version has, in my opinion, a defective
translation of this verse, nrpl appears as “ a woman and
her daughter.” There seems to be no good reason for not translating
“isha” as “wife” here, as well as in most other places where it
occurs. In fact, she cannot be anything else than wife, or concubine,
and her daughter may either be her husband’s stepdaughter, or his own
daughter. It cannot be denied that this meaning is borne in, and
cannot be separated from these words. The man here is forbidden to
marry, &c., the daughter of his wife, whether she is his own daughter or
stepdaughter, and this prohibition applies also to the wife’s grand-
daughter. She may be his step-granddaughter, or his own grand-
daughter. Kin riDt nan are translated, “for they are her
near kinswomen—it is wickedness.” Literally they read, “ flesh
(or flesh-kindred) they—wickedness it.” These words convey the
meaning, either that the wife, daughter, and granddaughter are flesh-
kindred to one another, or to the subject himself. In every case, they
must be his flesh and blood. The woman must be his wife, or con-
* See McClintoch and Strong’s Encyc. Art. Mar.
f That is, if the too usual mode of interpreting this verse as the “ regulative
specimen” of a degree is followed.


cubine, and her daughter and granddaughter may be his own daughter
and granddaughter. They are thus his own kinswomen, and it is
wickedness.* . ...
In this verse there is a distinct and definite prohibition, forbidding a
man to marry his own daughter. Though verbally indirect, it is clearly
borne in these words. It is there not in a rudimentary state, to be
brought out only by inferential reasoning, but in the plain meaning of
the terms used.
111. The next three commandments (Lev, xviii. 18-20) form also a
distinct class. They are prohibitions whose raison detre is something
temporary —something which God, in His providence, may remove; and,
when it is removed, the prohibition, in every case, has ceased to have
any existence to the individuals to which it refers. The formula is
altogether altered from that which was used in all the previous cases of
incest.
In the 18th verse the peculiar expression is used, which was the com-
mon equivalent among theTlebrews for expressing our idea of marrying,
or taking a wife u A wife to her sister thou shalt not take,
to vex, to uncover her nakedness, along with her during her lifetime.”
The sister shall not be taken in marriage along with the still living wife,
and be bound through a common husband in a carnal relation unfit for
sisters, iif? in order to rouse jealousy.
Almost all commentators are agreed in considering this verse, as pro-
hibiting the subject from marrying the sister of his living wife. If more
wives than one are permitted, they should in no case be sisters. Ihe
case of Jacob is monumental. Such a marriage as that, to two sisters
ought to be avoided. There is no punishment attached to this kind of
marriage, and, amongst early polygamists, there could be no bar, after
the death of a wife, to a man marrying the sister of his deceased wife.
It is very commonly said that this verse has no reference or no
direct reference—to marriage with a deceased wife’s sister. I think it
has ; for the chief ground of prohibition is expressly shown to be the life
of the wife, and the raising jealousy to her while living. “ But if the
wife be dead, (to transpose Paul’s words) he is loosed from the law of
wife.” No law can be shown that now prohibits his marriage to the
sister-in-law.
But it is generally affirmed that it is not the 18th, but the 16th verse,
that forbids the marriage referred to. In my opinion, all reasoning that
supports such an affirmation is radically defective ; for if the 18th has no-
reference to marriage with a deceased wife’s sister, by parity of reasoning
the 16th cannot refer to marriage with a deceased brother’s widow. If
the theory that identifies affinity with consanguinity be correct —-if the
doctrine of degrees be sound —so long as a man may take two wives, a
woman also may take two husbands at one and the same time. And if
* In several parts of this code there is, no doubt, something still doubtful; for
the Hebrew words themselves have changed their meanings, and now represent in the
more recent vocabularies something quite different from what they did in the older,.
t.g. —&c., nsi “W


the 18th verse is a regulation of polygamy— i.e. , of its species bigamy,
and forbids a man to have two sisters as wives at one time —the i6th
verse must be a regulation of polyandry, and forbids a woman to have
two brothers as husbands at one time; and if the theory that selects out
of this chapter, a code of incest, be sound, there can be no good reason
for excluding the neighbour’s wife and all the following cases, down to
the 23rd verse, from the category of incest.
Dr. Hodge in his “ Systematic Theology,” after using quotations from
five commentators of the highest class in Christendom, which expressly
affirm the lawfulness of marriage with the sister of a deceased wife,
says in effect, that the inference made by these writers—that said
marriage after the death of the wife is allowed “is very precarious;” and
then declares that “ this verse ha.s no direct bearing on that subject; ”*
and this is the position commonly held by theologians of his school.
Well, if the 18th verse has no reference to, or “ no direct bearing” on
the marriage referred to; but only to wedlock with two sisters at one
and the same time, the 18th verse is utterly useless now, seeing that
Jesus Christ has established monogamy; and it would be better deleted
from the pages of Scripture. I think, that this verse is God’s provision
for man’s and woman’s purity in certain temporary and peculiar condi-
tions. The barrier which He in this verse erected in olden times was
in order to secure the chastity of brother and sister-in-law in the life
time of the wife. It has still the same function among ourselves. The
greatest objection, and almost the only argument urged by our Church
in 1873, in her petition to Her Majesty Queen Victoria against the
passing of the law which made this marriage legal in Victoria, was that
this marriage would pollute the moral purity of family life. Yet in this
verse, God is here actually meeting, and answering that very argument. He
is providing for the objection. In the event of the wife’s death, this clear
and lofty barrier is wholly removed, and there seems to rise in its place
a positive suggestion, or invitation towards marriage between these two
parties. If God in His written law approved of, and encouraged (under
limitations) marriage with a deceased brother’s wife, it is fair to say that
in His unwritten guidances he does not always disapprove of marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister. Granting that God approves of said
marriage, none other can generally be so suitable, or so capable of
securing the welfare, of all parties who are interested.
Dr. A. Bonar, an eminent Hebrew scholar, remarks on this passage,
“ This verse seems plainly to forbid the marriage of a woman to the
husband of her sister,” and then affirms that affinity and consanguinity
are identified throughout this chapter.f
I remark, First: God’s Word does not here, nor anywhere else,
expressly forbid the marriage of a woman to the husband of her
deceased sister. There is no direct prohibition of such a marriage.
This fact ought to be powerful in the settlement of the question, for
every direct prohibition must now be man’s—not God’s.
Second : The theory of degrees, or the theory which declares the
* Hodge’s “Systematic Theology,” vol. iii., p. 416,
t Dr. JBonar’s Com. on Levit, in loco.


identification of affinity and consanguinity, may be adopted by Chris-
tians in our day, but it cannot be shown that the Israelites ever believed
in it. So long as the primitive household or patriarchal system existed,
so long as the fathers or heads of families were so superior to all others
in authority and power, and so long as the consequences of this system
remained among them, in the inferiority of women, and in prevalent
concubinage and divorce, it was impossible that women could obtain
equal marriage rights with men. As matter of fact, these consequences
did remain among them till the Christian era. It was impossible, there-
fore, for the Israelites ever to hold or believe that affinity was the same
thing in their marriage laws as consanguinity, or that a certain degree of
the one was the same degree of the other. They never could believe
that, in the measuring of a degree, a niece was identified with an aunt,
or that a wife’s sister was identified with a brother’s wife. Before they
could have held this doctrine, they must have parted with every element
of the primitive family system, and they must have interpreted this
Levitical statute, not literally, but with an unaccountable prejudice and
pre-occupation. The efforts which have long and persistently been
made to import purely Western ideas and modern dogmas into
patriarchal institutions, and Oriental customs and modes of thought,
ought to cease. Their very grotesqueness condemns them.
Verse 19. The word n m occurs eight times within this code, and
it is invariably translated in our Authorized Version as “ wife,” except
in this, and in the 17th verse. In both these cases “wife” would be
the better translation. Here “ wife ” for obvious reasons must wholly,
or in chief part be the meaning. But whether it means “wife” or
“ woman ” the prohibition equally rests on a cause that is removable.
She in her sickness is sacredly to be barred off from sexual approach.
When the sickness has left her, the ground on which the prohibition
rested has also gone, and consequently the commandment no longer
applies. This verse opens up another wide field where God is mani-
festing his great care for human welfare. It regulates sexualness, even
in married life. It expressly lays down one precise limit, and if we
connect this limit with those of ceremonial uncleanness in Lev. xii., of
the whole season of human youth, of childbearing, of infirmity, of old
age, and death, which seem all more or less directly included in this
code, and above all, with the great law established generally by the
passage, that sexual love and congressus are only lawful and pure, within
the narrow vinculum of God’s arbitrary marriage ordinance, we get some
remarkable results, e. g. —This law of God evolves itself in two
directions. It tends to elevate the marriage ordinance into universal
suetude among matured men and women; and on the other hand it tends
to limit the free elicitations, and intercourses of sexuality within the
narrowest boundaries, and towards the very opposite of license, and in
fine to subject this whole appetite at every moment, and in all circum-
stances, to the severest, and immediate control of enlightened reason
and conscience.
Verse 20. This verse prohibits connection with a neighbour’s wife.
It is absolutely, though indirectly, a condemnation of polyandry. It
shows that the rule, which would give the woman equal rights, and equal


limitations, with the man in all the sexual or marriage relations, dealt
with in this law, is not good or true here at least. She must solely be
the wife of one man. Should the neighbour himself die, then there is
no longer any prohibition forbidding the union of the parties specified.
“If the husband be dead she is loosed from the law of husband. . .
So that she is no adulteress though she be married to another man.”*
IV. Finally, there are four commandments which belong as species to
this general law of sexuality, and form an integral or component part of
it. They are, in some respects, of the nature of antithesis to the rest of
the law, and it is justifiable to treat them as an appendage or an augmen-
tive development to the rest. They are really prohibitions against
human nature, in its department of sexuality, seeking its help-meet, or
reciprocal, in wrong modes and in wrong objects— i.e., in the old heathen
fashion, from among the idol, and beast-worshippers.
The first, apparently, is a prohibition of some spiritual whoredom;
but we cannot help believing that it was not wholly spiritual. The
sexual nature of man was, directly or indirectly, engaged in this kind of
idolatry. The rendering in our authorized version, makes it a prohibition
against offering children in sacrifice to the idol; another, which cannot
easily be shown to be wrong, makes it a prohibition against committing
whoredom as part of such idolatrous worship, as was common among the
heathen.
The Phoenician gods—Baal and Ashtaroth—are believed by sound
scholars to have been substantially the same as the Moloch worshipped
by other tribes around the Israelites. Their worship became the most
impure and revolting that can possibly be imagined. “It was celebrated,”
says Eadie, “ in shady groves proverbial as scenes of the most degrading
lust and debaucheryt and when the Israelites fell into idolatry at
Baalpeor (Num. xxv. 3-5), it was through license given to impure
appetite by the direct sanctions of false religion. Prostitution and other
sexual abuses seem never to have been separated from the old idolatry,
and were, doubtless, parts of this worship referred to. There were often
large numbers of consecrated devotees —both men and women —who
served their idol with gross and lascivious rites. On certain days it is
said that women of the higher ranks hired themselves out in honour of
the gods, and gave the wages of their prostitution to their idol. We think
this is wholly, or in part, the kind of abomination that is here prohibited.
There was some spurious spirit of worship in it, and some meretricious
enticements of whoredom. As if men were to find in fellowship with
the idols, or imagined supernatural beings —such as gods, angels, or
demons —an object substituted to meet that want or craving which, as in
Adam’s case, can only be supplied by the true wife. Between the rights,
and limitations fixed by God for the sacred department of sexuality,
there is no place for homage to Moloch, or for any unchastity with his
slaves consecrated to lust.
The following three prohibitions forbid unnatural, and revolting dis-
orders of the sexual nature—seeking the gratification of appetite among
* Paul to Rom. vii. 2, 3.
t Dr. Eadie’s Biblical Cyclopaedia, Art. Ashtaroth.


men, as in the horrible crime of Sodom; or among the lower animals, as
had been common in Egypt, and is still reported to be not unknown
there, in our own time.
This part of the code opens up a wide field for human thought. It
is only in recent times that science has paid due attention to it. The
speculations of Darwin, and others, with such elements of truth as are
in them, will doubtless help ultimately to elucidate God’s truth. Man
seems to be the link, or nexus, that joins this world to heaven —the lower
creation, to the Great Creator. In his reason and conscience there are
sparks or elements of Deity; and in his new birth, as shown in and by
Jesus Christ, he becomes a sharer of the very life and love—the righte-
ousness and glory of God., Yet in his animal frame, and nature, he is
closely allied to n£pns “ all the dumb beasts.” In the posses-
sion of a body of flesh—of bodily appetites, and, specially, of sexuality —
he is on their level, and closely allied to them. They are his “ near of
kin.” The differentia, that separate him from them are the diviner
elements in him—of reason and conscience—or, of the Spirit of the
living God ; and it does not appear improbable, that the chief differentia
that separate him from the great Creator, consist in these lower elements,
which he has in common with kol-behema.
Thus this great law, or eicalogue, seeks to establish and perpetuate
entire and reciprocal continence and chastity, throughout the whole
province of the sexual nature. It recognizes universal sexuality as a
sacred realm, or kingdom, where God alone is Supreme Ruler, and where
it is itself —along with a few subordinate and auxiliary provisions—the
sole statute book, or law of order. The thing which fills up every portion
of the province is “flesh” —all flesh. To each subject it is all
“'flesh of his flesh;” and when he cleaves to a wife, and when he and she
are not twain, but “ one flesh ,” the commandment has all but entirely
ceased to apply as between him and her; though it is still strong as
between him and her on one side, and “ all flesh of his flesh” on the
other. In the unition of marriage, the laws of this kingdom make
sexualness both lawful and pure; but, outside this bond, everything
sexual —the indulged appetite, the approach, or the uncovering of any-
thing whatever —is sternly prohibited. Apart from true and legitimate
wedlock, in which one man and one woman are not twain, but “ one
flesh,” no man and no woman in this whole territory is allowed to
approach or touch another. Let them flee from the corruptions that
are in the world through lust, but let them also, become partakers of the
higher and diviner nature.


Part lI.—DOCTRINAL AND THEORETICAL.
This Mosaic law on forbidden marriage—or sexual unions, has been at
the foundation of all the laws on incest, which are in authority throughout
Christendom ; but the numerous dogmas, and theories that have been
raised on it are so varied and conflicting, that agreement of opinion and
practice on this subject, is not now to be found in any community.
Some of these dogmas have found their way as regulae fidei into the
symbolical standards of our churches ; and whilst large numbers of
Christians hold rigidly to the confessional formula, others quite as firmly
hold to interpretations of the sacred text, which are contradictory to it.
The question of revising or relaxing the standards, so far as they relate
to this matter, has thus been raised, and it cannot now be laid aside. The
whole subject must speedily undergo a thorough and radical examina-
tion.
The writer of this paper is here, in his own way, making his effort to
contribute towards more enlightened opinions, sounder convictions, and
more friendly unanimity, within our Christian community.
All the various opinions and theories that have been based on this
passage may, in his opinion, be legitimately reduced to the following
three:—
THE FIRST THEORY.
This Mosaic code is to be understood as “ specifying the degrees of
relation, whether of consanguinity or affinity, within which intermarriage
is forbidden.”
This theory, or doctrine of degrees, is that which has been adopted
by the Westminster divines and their followers generally. The Con-
fession says : —“ Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of consan-
guinity or affinity forbidden in the Word.”* A fair interpretation of this
proposition implies that, in this Mosiac law, it is merely and alone
degrees that are to determine marriages. And the term degrees, is
explained in the subsequent words which enounce the principle, that
marriages forbidden to parties related by birth, are equally forbidden to
parties analogously related by marriage.
The theory of degrees is thus naturally founded on, and borne up by,
a second theory, which identifies affinity with consanguinity ; and these
two abstract terms appear, and are used, as substantially the equivalents
of “ flesh of his flesh.” These two equivalents are held
to be more than co-extensive with all the expressly prohibited cases that
follow in the chapter referred to ; and the whole passage is generally
accepted on the footing, or theory, that it is a specific statute on incest.
* Westminster Confession, xxiv. 4.


As Moses does not exactly express, nor define any degrees of relation,
but only gives “regulative specimens” of unlawful unions, an involved
process of deduction and reasoning “by necessary inference” is used, and
the degrees themselves are calculated and determined, by measuring the
distances which lie between certain specified men and women expressly
prohibited from intermarrying, who stand in near relation to one another,
and which determine their proximity by blood or marriage. These dis-
tances, or degrees, are then applied to other men and women not marked
off by Moses, but supposed to be analogously related, and the numerous
cases of incest which are arrived at by human and inferential reasoning
are added to the rest, and are raised to an equal function of condemning
prohibition with those which God expressly uttered by the lips and pen
of Moses.
REMARKS.
Lord Bacon, in his “ Advancement of Learning,” says : —“ The use
of human reason in matters of religion is of two kinds—the one consisting
in the explanation of mysteries ; the other, in deductions from them.
. . . . And as the use of human reason in things divine is of two
kinds, so it is attended with two excesses : —i. The one, when it too
curiously inquires into the manner of a mystery. 2. The other, when
it attributes an equal authority to the inference as to the principles.” *
The latter is the excess into which the supporters of the Westminster
formula have gone. They have deduced a number of prohibitions merely
by inferential reasoning, and raised them to an equal authority with
those which stand in the express words of God. I think it is not pos-
sible to believe, that these statutes and judgments of God, when first
given, were so ravelled, and imprisoned in the darkness of human
reasoning that they could not be fully known till revealed by a series
of logical deductions. In no part of Scripture does God give a similar
great prohibition with this in Lev. xviii. 6, and leave the details to be
filled in by inference. This would also be contrary to the genius of the
Hebrew language. In these earliest documents especially, everything is
most plain, and needs little culture or mental effort to understand it.
Moreover, these poor Israelites had just emerged from a degrading and
embruting slavery in Egypt. Their character, intellectually, must have
been on the lower grades. It cannot be believed that many among
them could read or write, or, even if they could, had access to the sacred
documents; and such elaborate generalization and involved deductions
as are in our confessional formula, are only possible to written laws, and
to a cultured people. They could not possibly have understood these
prohibitions of Moses under the scientific form in which they appear in
the Westminster Standards. No one who has studied the subject will
• Lord Bacon’s “Advancement,” book ix.


hazard the affirmation, that the system which the Israelites heard from
the lips of Moses was the same as is our confessional system on incest.
In strict criticism, the term degrees is a misnomer. The name is not
used in the original statutes, and the thing meant by the name is not
even necessary to their being understood. They are not “ degrees of
relationship ” that are forbidden in the Word. They are mutual, sexual
congressus, in which there is incontinence on the one side, and recipro-
cated unchastity on the other. Moses merely wrote down in detail a
few distinct prohibitory statutes, and from these, in after ages, our
western scholastics artificially built up the name, and the system of
degrees, the whole of which is entirely foreign, and out of all harmony,
with old Hebrew, and oriental ideas.
And how is nearness, or propinquity of degree, to be determined ?
There is one mode furnished by the old Roman law, another by the
canon law. According to the latter, each generation stands as a degree;
and the degree in which any two individuals stand to one another is the
degree in which the most remote one stands to their common ancestor.
According to the former—the civil law—which in this point, has been
adopted in the laws of England, one degree is allowed for each person
in a line of descent; and the degree in which any two individuals stand
to one another is computed by adding the number of degrees from one
of them to their common ancestor, to the number of degrees from the
common ancestor to the other. Thus Titus and his sister are related to
one another in the second degree, because it is one degree from Titus
to their common father, and one from the father to his sister ; and thus
Titus and his niece are in the third degree, for from Titus to their
common ancestor there is one, and from the common ancestor to the
niece there are two degrees. According to the laws of England, no
marriage can be contracted within, or nearer than the fourth degree, or
between persons in the ascending or descending lines in infinitum ; and
the same rule is made to apply, as far as possible, to relations by
marriage as well as to relations by blood.*
Let us apply this theory to a particular case. Before the confessional
formula can be shown to be correct in condemning or prohibiting
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister, there are several catenas of
dogmatic reasoning, each of which needs separately to be established.
It is necessary to prove—
ist. That the prohibitory statutes in Lev. xviii. form nothing more nor
less, than a general statute on incest.
2nd. That they are a real and direct specification of degrees of forbidden
family relations.
3rd. That affinity is the same thing as consanguinity, according to the
Word of God.
4th, That marriage with a wife’s sister is proscribed in the prohibition of
a brother’s wife.
sth. That as marriage with a brother’s wife is not in all cases prohibited,
but in some commanded, marriage with a wife’s sister is in all cases
prohibited.
* See National Cyclopaedia on Affinity, and Consanguinity.


6th. That prohibitions constructed and established by inferential
reasoning, which are therefore human prohibitions, do legitimately
possess the same weight of supreme authority as those directly and
expressly uttered by God.
If one link in this chain cannot bear stress, or breaks down, the
whole thing loses form and consistency.
It is very obvious that the Mosaic mode of reasoning, and this
Western mode, are totally different. In the Mosaic documents, it is
from the universal to the particular. In the formula on degrees, it is
first, from the detailed cases up to a general law. In the former, the
general law is— approach sexually to no “flesh of his flesh fl and an
enumeration of instances is given, from out of which rise the marriage
ordinance and union which they do not forbid, but rather command,
protect, and foster. In the latter, the general law is —approach sexually
to no near relatives. Then, from given specimens a multitude of relations
are inferred, and through extending them to affinity, the particulars
really become more extensive than the general law. The whole Western
system on incest, is so unoriental and modern, so intricate and involved,
has so many superfluous links of reasoning, and such roundabout
journeying before reaching results —whilst its results are not quite the
same as we find in the sacred text —that it is not free from the danger
“ of making Scripture of none effect ” by overmuch reasoning.
The whole of Scripture is against the theory which identifies affinity
with consanguinity. If they had been identified, woman would have had
equal rights and equal limitations with man, but as matter of fact, this
never was so. Concubinage and divorce had lowered woman far
beneath her proper place. Even the New Testament parallel or
analogy, which likens Christ and his church, to a husband and wife,
contradicts it. He gives to his bride, a Father, an inheritance, a king-
dom, and a righteousness. She only gives him a human nature, and a
burden of guilt.
The modern ideas of affinity and consanguinity are not derived from
the Word of God, nor from the Hebrew church, nor from the early
Christian church, nor even from scholastic theology in the first instance,
but from the Roman law. According to it the kinsfolk, cognati , of the
husband and wife, became respectively the adfines, of the wife and
husband. Yet the Romans never reckoned degrees of adfinitas, as they
did of consanguinity, but they had terms to express the various kinds of
affinity, as socer, socrus, &c.*
THE SECOND THEORY.
The passage (Lev. xviii. 6-23) “is to be viewed as an enumeration
of particular cases, so that no case not specifically mentioned is to be
included in the prohibition.”
* See National Cyc., Art. “Affinity.”


All who hold, that the original sense of Scripture is for us the true
interpretation, naturally cling to this theory. If they accept of this
passage as they accept generally of all other parts of Scripture, and take
the words or commandments as they stand, without reading any hidden
or second meaning into them, they need no auxiliary theory to guide
them in their faith or practice.
There may be other marriage unions than those here directly for-
bidden, of which God disapproves, but He has not tabulated them in His
law. e. g. —Marriage between full cousins is undoubtedly discountenanced
by the law which is written on our physical constitution, but as God has
not expressly forbidden it, it is well that men have not proscribed it by
any formula, in our civil or ecclesiastical codes, but have left it to the
reason and conscience of individuals to decide in every instance.
The Israelites seem to have persistently held to this view of their own
law. The writer on “ Marriage ” in “ McClintoch and Strong’s Cyclo-
paedia,” says : —“The Palestinian doctors regarded the proscribed
degrees (unions) as a positive law, the cause of which cannot be divined
by human reason We thus see that up to the time of the
Ptolemies, when the Greek loose barriers of consanguinity threatened
to fall among the Jewish families, the ancient Hebrews were bound only
by the specific proscriptions in the Mosaic law, and that even after the
prohibitions were extended by the Scribes, the proscription of a male
relative by blood, did not imply the wife’s relatives of a like degree,
because of the strong distinction made by them between consanguinity
and affinity by marriage—the former being permanent and sacred, the
latter uncertain and vague, as a man might at any moment divorce his
wife and take as many as he pleased.”*
They still cling to the literal acceptance of their law. Rabbi Philipp-
son has recently elaborated an erudite and valuable theory, which in
its practical effect is exactly similar to the one above. It is nothing
more than a distinct affirmation of each and all the prohibitions in their
textual literalness. He shows that son, daughter, and grandchild are
identified with the father. While brothers and sisters are identified with
one another, because they have one and the same source of life. The
former group forms one line , the latter one issue. Hence the law.—
ist. Two members of the same issue, or two members of the same line,
cannot intermarry ; because they have the same source of life. But as
the ascending is the primary to each descending, and the descending
the derived, the primary may press forward out of the straight line or
step down into the following, but the derived cannot go back to the
primary; and as man is the moving cause in all carnal intercourse.—
2nd. A male member of the succeeding issue cannot marry a female of
the preceding, but a male of the preceding issue may marry a female of
the succeeding, if they are not both in one line. As husband and wife
become identified, half-blood and step-relations are deemed full rela-
tions, and the wife assumes a blood relationship to her husband and his
friends. Hence a brother’s wife is proscribed, whilst a wife’s sister is
allowed, f
* McClintoch and Strong’s Cyclopaedia, Article “Marriage.”
t Ditto.


THE THIRD THEORY.
“There is a distinction to be made among the various prohibitions, for
some of them are moral, and therefore of permanent obligation ; and
some of them are merely civil or expedient, and therefore dispensable.”
This view rests on the opinion that Moses did not reckon all the
marriages which he prohibited, among the abominations for which God
was punishing the nations, but only those entered into with the very
nearest relatives, such as parents and children, sisters, &c.* It seems
that this was the system of Baumgarten; and it is remarkable that
Michaelas, who must still, I think, be counted the greatest of modern
teachers on this subject, most distinctly declares that in his opinion the
principle on which this theory rests is the true one.t Von Gerlach, the
Matthew Henry of German commentators, and a strict conservative,
says: “In these commandments also (Lev. 18) we must distinguish
between the essential and non-essential. It cannot be proved that their
literal acceptance is binding on lt is still more remark-
able that the Westminster school of divines generally adopt to some
considerable degree the essential part of this theory— eg., they generally
deal with verse 18, as if it were solely a civil statute, or old regulation of
polygamy, and therefore so useless now that it is only a cumbrance to
the sacred text. Dr. Ch. Hodge refers to the fact that strong repug-
nance is often felt against the Levitical law, because it is regarded as
placing all the marriages specified on the same level, as equally offensive
to God, and equally invalid ; and he shows, in thorough disharmony
with the Confession, that the law regards some as utterly abominable,
and others as merely inexpedient, “ as conflicting with some ethical or
prudential principle.”§
It is easily seen from his pages on this subject that Dr. Hodge puts
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister, and some other unions, in spite
of the Confession of Faith, among the adiaphora—among the things
neither expressly prohibited nor commanded in the moral law.
Few will deny that there are cases fairly included within our con-
fessional symbol that are, with less or more distinctness, among the
adiaphora—the things indifferent—the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
which is left, not to a Church, but to each individual disciple to deter-
mine for himself. Many among us feel that the question of marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister has never fairly got away from the category
of casuistry. There is no explicit or undoubted rule in Scripture to
settle it, and it ought, therefore, to be left largely to the conscience of
each individual Christian to decide it for himself. It does not differ in
this respect from the questions of abstinence from wine, from flesh,
from blood, or from marriage. The rigid prohibition of instrumental
music in public worship, by some of our best theologians, was but
yesterday, quite as vehemently and authoritatively urged as that of the
* Michaelis’ Com. Law of Moses, Art. iox and 112. + Michaelis do.
t V. Gerlach on the Pentateuch, in loco.
§ Dr. Hodge, Sys. Theol., viii., p. 417.


marriage referred to. It is a remarkable fact, that this prejudice has
died out in Victoria; and this is not because of any decrease of vital
Christianity. Not one of these questions is expressly settled by the
Word; and surely not one of them ought to be made a term of com-
munion, or a condition of office, in the Christian Church.
Professor Bush, an American, of profound learning and acquaintance
with Hebrew, says—•“ We acknowledge we are not confident on which
side the truth lies. . . . The just decision of the question (marriage
with deceased wife’s sister) necessarily involves the establishment of
several great preliminary principles of interpretation, besides a display
of the idiomatic usages of the Hebrew philologically exhibited. . . ,
The truth is, perhaps, to be reached only by the gradual accumulation
of evidence. . . . Our leanings are to the side of the unlawfulness
of the connection, but recent discussions have brought forth so strong
an array of arguments in support of the opposite theory that we should
at present hold our judgment in suspense.”*
Of these three theories, the second seems less encumbered with diffi-
culties than the other two. The first goes to the extreme of redundant
and intricate inferential reasonings. Its system of degrees presents God
laying aside His usual plainness of speech and giving only half-utterings
to His statutes and judgments. The third is still somewhat dim and
undefined. It has a partial support from all other systems of interpre-
tation, but there is still much to be done before it can be formularized
into clear and sharp-cut dogma, or accepted as a satisfactory symbol.
It is most proper and desirable that all the prohibitory statutes should
be accepted as nearly in their original and direct literal sense as possible.
Yet all these Christian interpreters—so far as I am acquainted with them
—recognize some distinction between the essential and non-essential in
them. So far as I know, it has never been attempted to prove that their
absolutely literal acceptance is binding on Christians. The supporters
of the Westminster formula cannot do so, for some of the prohibitions
which they seek to impose are removed from the text by two, or three,
or more stages of deductive reasoning, and the deduced prohibitions
forbid certain sets of marriage that the Mosaic law has not literally nor
directly forbidden.
The truth probably lies between the second and third of the above
theories. In my opinion, the eicalogue of Lev. xviii. ought to be accepted
on the same footing and principles, as those on which we accept the
decalogue of Exodus xx. We never attempt to multiply, by necessary
inference, any one of the ten commandments, or treat— eg., the eighth or
tenth commandment —as laying down “ forbidden degrees” of property;
and we do not accept the decalogue on the legal theocratic footing on
which the Israelites accepted it. We choose what we believe to be the
moral and permanent elements in it, and leave the rest alone. It is not
the literal Sinaitic Sabbath law that we accept, but it is that law resting
on its primitive Edenic institution, modified by Christ’s teaching, and that
of His disciples. Christians are at present claiming a large personal, and
religious freedom in reference to Marriage, Sabbath, and all other Mosaic
Prof. Bush’s Notes on Lev., quoted in Dr. Cumming’s ditto.


laws. The genuine principles of Protestantism are only developing
themselves, in their more emphatically claiming the right to appeal in
religion to God alone, and in their refusing a symbolical obedience to
any churchly authority, by a servile acceptation of truths, which may or
may not be received in the heart. This, no doubt, is the secret of the
present re-action and protest against the authoritative prohibition, by
the governing authority in our church, of marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister. The duty of that power is not to crush or oppose
this rising spirit, but to enlighten and guide it. “ Wherever,” says
Vinet, “it has been found possible, by holding back revelation from
the eyes of a people, to make it adopt a creed wrapped up and
entirely concealed in the dogma of the authority of the church—
wherever faith is thus put in ward, there is either death or rebellion.
A regulated, moderated, yet active life, can only exist when the
power of inquiry provokes divergencies and animated discussions.
Let not these conflicts excite any alarm. They are salutary, and only
dangerous when some other force than the moral and intellectual
intervenes.”*
PART lII.—HISTORICAL.
Ever since the Reformation, the Presbyterian Church has been remark-
able for the high culture which she has given to her systematical or
doctrinal theology. Calvin struck the keynote in his “Institutions” and
in his “Commentaries,” which last gave in a high degree, “the logic of
commentary; ” and the prevailing tones of the Church of Scotland
have, ever since, been hard-headed dogma. Pure exegesis has hardly yet
become a native product; and it seems a grave and perilous state of things
when a Protestant Church gathers to herself, and rests upon, a multiplicity
of human formulas. Articles of belief, when practically carried to
extremes, are like “ the traditions of the elders” and “ the reasonings
of the scholastics they are in danger of superseding the Word of
God.
Our little church in Victoria, in the eyes of many, is too much charac-
terized to-day by a tenacious and rigid dogmatism. The symbolism
which she has adopted is most certainly excessive. She is Atlas, with
the world on her shoulders. She has placed herself under such moun-
tain loads and forms of formulae, that the living brain and heart can
hardly find freedom for full and healthy action. She has adopted six
symbolical books —all accepted on an equal level of authority—which,
by a rough calculation, I have found to contain about one thousand
propositions. And here is one little prescribed form—the one more
than the 999th which is bringing unrest and dispeace over our whole
church. This formula on incest (“ Confession,” xxiv. 4) is not one of
Vinet’s “ Outlines of Theology,” p. no.


the highest importance in a confession of faith. Parts of it at least lie
at the remote circumference —not at the centre —of Christian truth.
They are not among the essential doctrines or truths of Christianity,
which alone are the truths that ought to be formulated into an
authoritative symbolism—not among those truths “ through which
we are Christians, and outside of which we are not.” And one
of the many questions which lie within the province of this formula
is “marriage with a deceased wife’s sister.” The Westminster divines,
and many of their followers, hold, according to this formula, that said
marriage is not lawful. Many others, who are thoroughly loyal to the
Presbyterian Church affirm that it is clearly lawful, according to
the Word of God, and object to the formula referred to as a defective
norma doctrinae.
In Victoria, at the present date, almost the whole interest that is given
to the subject is concentrated on the one question of “Marriage with a
deceased wife’s sister.” In 1873, the supreme legislature, by a formal
act, legalized the marriage referred to within this colony; and there is no
doubt that a large amount of the religious opinion and feeling through-
out the country approves of this act. The Presbyterian church has
shown herself as the most conservative of all the Protestant denomi-
nations. An imposing body of her ministers and elders adhere with
persistent tenacity to the very letter of her confessional law. Yet
within her pale, there is a large and increasing number who do not hold
rigidly to the Westminster formula on incest, as that has usually been
interpreted ; who are giving indications of a strong reaction from the
hard and fast dogmatism of former times, and who believe and affirm
that said marriage is perfectly lawful according to the supreme standard
of their church. The former refuse to let this be an open question, and
are seeking to restore uniformity authoritatively; and by decisions of a
majority, to restrain the freedom of opinion and conduct which the others
claim ; and to compel them into a supposed harmony with the subordi-
nate standards. If this attempt were to succeed, it could not be for the
welfare of the church. It could only bring a deadening influence over
her spiritual vitality. The voting in the General Assembly of 1873,
showed that there were upwards of one-third of the representatives of
our church, who then held that the marriage referred to, ought to be an
open question ; and there are reasons for believing that opinion on this
side, has largely increased since then.
Rigid supporters of the Westminster formula contend, that marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister is prohibited by God. They admit indeed,
that God has not expressly or directly forbidden it in his Word ; and this
is an immense concession, which if due weight were given to it, ought
we think, to end all controversy ; for if it is only human opinion and
dogma which enounce the prohibition, any Christian may resist these, and
in resisting, be armed even with the Word of God. But they build their
affirmation upon what has been called “ The doctrine of proscribed
degrees.” They find the analogous parties—a man and his deceased
brother’s wife, and as the latter among the Israelites were forbidden (not
wholly, but in part, forbidden) to marry, therefore, the former among
Christians are wholly forbidden to marry.


i st. I remark, in the first place, that there is no proof that the
Israelites themselves ever adopted, or yielded obedience to such a law.
Those to whom the oracles of God were at first committed, and who
had to administer the law in practical life, knew nothing about the
ethical cause of the prohibited marriages. It has been shown, that their
rabbis regarded the proscribed marriage unions as a positive law, the
cause of which cannot be divined by human reason.* The ancient
Hebrews seem to have been bound by the specific prohibitions in the
Mosaic law, and to have rigidly adhered to them alone. About 320
years before the Christian era their scribes extended the written law by
twenty additional prohibitions ; but these they always held and treated
as secondary and subordinate to those of the Bible. There is not the
slightest evidence, so far as I am aware, to prove that they ever adopted
the principle of our “ Confession,” which affirms that, when the prohi-
bition forbids union or marriage with one relation, it ought to be
extended to the corresponding relationship on the male or female side;
and this would be so wholly contrary to oriental customs and sentiments
that it cannot be believed. No relations by affinity could possibly be
raised to a level of permanency, or of sacredness, with those constituted
by birth : polygamy and the primitive household system had effectually
secured against that among them. The law expressly forbids, with strong
emphasis, a nephew from marrying an aunt; but it does not forbid an
uncle from marrying a niece ; and there is undoubted evidence to prove
that, from time immemorial uncles, among the Hebrews, have married
their nieces ; and that it has been deemed as something specially meri-
torious for them to do so. The law expressly forbids a man to marry his
brother’s wife. It also forbids him to marry his wife’s sister ; but it
expressly repeals the first prohibition under certain circumstances, and
it implies a repeal of the second under other circumstances. As matter
of fact, we know that the Hebrews acted on the repeal of the first; and
it has never been attempted to prove, so far as I am aware, that they
did not act on the implied repeal of the second. It thus appears histori-
cally that marriage with a deceased wife’s sister has never been
disapproved of among the Israelites.
2nd. In the early Christian ages, both in the Western, and Eastern
churches, the prohibitions of Moses were multiplied exceedingly. Most
extensive and elaborate systems of degrees were formulated and authori-
tatively imposed. In the Latin Church, at one time, marriage was
prohibited even to the seventh degree— i.e., between the sixth cousins ;
and stringent rules were promulgated prohibiting marriage on the ground
of affinity, which went to the same degree with the rules affecting blood
relations.t A reduced and mitigated system of degrees was afterwards
adopted, and became part of the Canon Law; and as this formed the
basis of much of the Protestant Church law, it is still commingling its
elements within the formulas of our own church. But one great and
material distinction between the system of the canonists, and that of the
Westminster divines is this : the former always makes a distinction
* M'Clintock and Strong’s Cyclopaedia, Art. “Marriage.”
t Ditto.


between what is incestus divini juris, and what is only incesius humani
juris; whereas the latter makes no distinction. According to the former,
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister is incest by man’s law, and stands
on the same level as marriage between first cousins with us. According
to the latter, it has been handled as incest by God’s law, and has been
put on an equal footing with marriage with a deceased brother’s wife.
3rd. At the Reformation the whole subject of marriage seems to have
been too hastily disposed of by the Continental Reformers. They seem
to have recognized no necessity for Church and State having concurrent
authority over marriage laws. From the very first they left the civil
authorities to legislate upon them, and to take entire and essential control
over them. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, new regula-
tions were gradually brought into power; but, unhappily, they were
based, as might have been expected, not merely on Scripture, but also
on the symbolic books, and canon law.*
The great principle which Luther, Calvin, and the other reformers were
attempting to establish was, that human, or church laws, and ordinances
are not binding on the conscience, except in so far as they are Christ’s
laws. Theirs was not a system of opinion, but an attempt to make the
will of God as revealed in the Bible, an authoritative guide for social,
domestic, and personal direction. Yet something of the old theory of
prohibited degrees received admission into, and ultimately gave its own
character, to the civil laws, in most Protestant countries. Every branch
of the Protestant Church —Lutheran, Presbyterian, and Episcopalian,
seems at an early date to have adopted some symbol on incest, not
unlike to that which is in our own Confession. But the startling fact
now is, that in not one of these, is there uniformity or unanimity to-day.
Our own formula was drawn up by a large body of English and Scotch
divines, and it, too, partakes of the old system of degrees. It is an
elaborate and genuine piece of Protestant scholasticism. The ideas in
it, of degrees of affinity, and consanguinity, and of incest, are not, in
my opinion, derived purely from the Word of God, nor from the
Hebrew Church ; not from the early Christian Church —nor, in the first
instance, or simply, from scholastic theology; but in part from the old
Roman law, and in part from Mediaeval formalism. The Latin Church
supplied the theory of degrees, and the Civilians, with their rule —
“ that the kinsfolk, cognati, of the husband and wife, became respectively
the adfines of the wife and husband” —supplied the rest. It must, at
least, be admitted on all hands that it is not the pure synthesis of
Moses, and that it was formularized, not in the warmest, most vital age of
the reformation, when religion was vindicating itself as a great moral
force, but when earnest convictions had begun to stiffen into opinions
and dogma, and when the first warm love of the Reformation was
growing cold in the frigid haze of symbolism.
The Church of Scotland in its earliest ages knew of no doctrine of
forbidden degrees. It adopted no doctrine that identified affinity with
consanguinity. It accepted no prohibitions piled up by man’s infer-
ence, as equal with God’s uttered prohibitions. Its earliest reformers
* See M ‘Clintock and Strong’s Cyclopaedia, Art. “Marriage.”


never attempted to formulate the statutes of Lev. xviii. into a dogma on
incest, and insert it in their symbolical books. John Knox, fresh from
Geneva, and Calvin, elaborated along with his fellow labourers, no such
symbol for the earliest Scotch Confession, or the First Book of Dis-
cipline. And Andrew Melville, fresh from the Continent, and Beza,
constructed with his fellow labourers, no such symbol for the Second
Book of Discipline. Yet these were the only symbolical books in the
Presbyterian Church during all that period ranging from 1560 to 1643
—a period which was really the most momentous within the Christian
era. It was then that the great battle between liberty and despotism,
which was to determine the world's history for centuries, had to be
fought. It was during that period, and it was in Scotland, that the fight
was fought and the victory won. “ This that Knox did for his nation
we may really call a resurrection from death. The people began to live,
and from that time the Puritanism of Scotland became that of England
—that of New England.” * Froude, speaking of Knox, says : —“ He
only, in this wild crisis, saved the kirk which he had founded, and saved
it with Scottish and English freedom. But for Knox, and what he was
able still to do, it is almost certain that the Duke of Alva would have
landed on the eastern coast.” t
In my opinion, the doctrine of degrees was altogether a foreign
element, and thoroughly contradictory to the whole character and spirit
of the Scotch Reformation. In the earliest symbols of the Presbyterian
Church we find no mention of degrees; and I suspect that, at that
period, in Scotland, the term degrees would have meant something very
different from what it does mean in our “ Confession.” Knox and the
other Reformers had, at one struggle, thrown off from religion, the whole
load of encumbrances, from the canon and civil law. They had succeeded
to a high degree in establishing the principle, that no laws are binding
on the conscience except Christ’s laws; and it was, therefore, impossible
for them to accept of any of the old merely human formulas on incest, and
forbidden degrees, either from heathen, or papal Rome.
In England, when the country was under Popery, ecclesiastical courts
had full power of adjudication in all matters of a matrimonial description;,
and this state of things was not changed at the Reformation. The
ecclesiastical courts retained jurisdiction, and exercised authority till
very recently. The Statute 32, Henry VIII., 38, did two things. It
removed many vexatious impediments to marriage, on the ground of
kindred, which prevailed in the time of Popery; and it fixed those
marriages which are still illegal, in England, because of proximity of
degree.^;
Our own formula (“ Confession,” xxiv. 4) so thoroughly exhibits that
statute, that it appears as a substantial extract from it; and this suggests
that the formula got admission into the Standards as an afterthought;
or that its compilers never considered all the issues which it fairly
included; and that it then came into the Scotch Church on sufferance,.
* Thomas Carlyle’s “ Hero Worship,” p. 294.
f Froude’s “Short Studies,” 2nd ed., p. 114.
X See Stephen’s “ Commentary on Laws of England,” vol, ii. pp. 193, 194.


because of the otherwise great value of the “ Confession.” I doubt if we
can ever interpret it fully, without falling back on this old English law.
I doubt if there is any mode of determining what is meant by “degrees,”
or by “ consanguinity and affinity,” in their practical application, except
by making England’s law book our vocabulary; and the only legitimate
way of filling in the details with precision— i.e., instancing the forbidden
degrees, is to go to Arch. Parker’s “Tables of kindred and affinity, wherein
whosoever are related, are forbidden in Scripture, and our laws, to marry
together.” In none of the Scotch formularies was there anything of
this kind. In the “ First Book of Discipline” a whole host of Popish
impediments to marriage are swept away. The chapter on Marriage
thus begins : —“Because that marriage, the blessed ordinance of God in
this cursed Papistry, hath partly been contemned, and partly hath been so
infirmed, that the parties conjoined could never be assured in conscience,
if the bishops and prelates list to dissolve the same.” * It then shows
how, in the future, such confusion should be avoided. It lays down
clear and minute regulations as to marriage, but has no reference to
forbidden degrees. The only guard, or standard given for a right or
wrong marriage between matured individuals —apart from adultery—is
in the case provided for, when parents or guardians stubbornly refuse
to let their children or wards enter into a reasonable and suitable
marriage, the minister or magistrate may enter into the place of the
parents, and may admit them to marriage. “ For the work of God
ought not to be hindered by the corrupt affections of worldly men—the
work of God we call , when two hearts without filthiness before committed
are so joined, and both require , and are content to live together in that holy
bond of matrimony." f
When our ancestors shelved their own native formularies, and adopted
in their stead “The Westminster Confession of Faith ” as “ a part of the
covenanted uniformity in religion betwixt the churches of Christ in the
kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland,” it was not all clear gain
for the Presbyterian Church. Both freedom and soundness in the faith,
were in some respects higher in Scotland under the old, than under the
new symbolism. The earlier reformers had probably a clearer view and
firmer grasp than the later divines of Westminster, of what ought exclu-
sively to constitute the symbolism of a body of believing Christians—
that is, “ Truths through which we are Christian, and out of which we
are not —truths, the frank confession of which in word and deed dis-
tinguishes and ever will distinguish in the eyes of all Christians a true
brother in Christ —truths, not one of which can be suppressed without
dealing a blow to the heart of Christianity.” X The early reformers saw
no necessity for theorizing on Lev. xviii. They probably believed the
law to be more perspicuous and more easily understood in the words of
Moses than condensed into any human formula; and the experience of
all these ages, the great diversity in opinion and practice among all
bodies of Christians which prevails to-day, and the impossibility of
formulating any one symbol on the subject which would meet with a
* First Book of Discipline, xiii. I, 2.
+ Ditto.
J Yinet’s “Outlines of Theology,” p. 370.


unanimous or general approval of Christians, prove them to have been
right.
In the want of books to refer to, the writer knows little of Alexander
Henderson's views on this subject. As a member of the Westminster
Assembly he is known to have prepared a draft of the Confession, at an
early stage of its proceedings, nearly in the form in which it still exists.
But to me, in my ignorance, there are some solid reasons for presuming
that he did not approve of the Westminster formula on “ forbidden
degrees.” He died before the Confession was received in Scotland,
and therefore cannot be said to have given his approval of it in its
present form, as the Confession of the Church of Scotland.
These then, are the three great mighties of the early Presbyterian
Church. Of the first two at least, lam justified in affirming that they
did not approve of such a doctrinal symbol as this in our Confession.
Chalmers was another of her mighties. He was our Luther of modern
times. Chalmers has clearly, decidedly, and deliberately given utter-
ance to his opinion that marriage with a deceased wife’s sister is not
unlawful. Attempts have been made to destroy all the force and effect
of this remarkable admission. The fact itself cannot be destroyed. It
has been said that the expression of his opinion was a “hasty jotting of
a hasty thought.” I think a hasty jotting by such a man, in such
circumstances as those by which Chalmers was surrounded, may not
unlikely be the truest of all jottings. These “ Scripture Readings ”of
his well represent what Lord Bacon meant by “ the first flowings of
Scripture—the first gentle pressure, while as yet they are not wrung
into controversy.” (The quotation is from memory, and may not be
verbally correct.) It was in his old age and matured wisdom, after
having, if not originated, at least stamped his own individuality on the
Free Church, and after having thrown a new practical sagacity into the
spirit and working of all churches; it was after having studied, and
written works on social, and domestic economics, and specially it was in
his hours of devotion—it was then that he declared it as his opinion
that marriage wiih a deceased wife’s sister was lawful.
It would be a great matter if we could bring forward whatever
of enlightened opinion and sound conviction there is in the world
to-day. We may find a sure index and exponent of what these are
in Scotland at present, in “ The British and Foreign Evangelical
Review,” and its learned editor. Dr. James Candlish is emphatically a
representative man. The fact of his having been chosen, and appointed
to superintend this noblest of Christian periodicals in the British Isles,
proves that he represents the best type of Presbyterian Protestantism in
Scotland, if not also in the world. The inaugural paper which he
addressed to his readers, on assuming the editorship at the beginning of
this year, takes ground considerably to the front of the usual orthodox
lines, and is no doubt, the keynote to much that will follow. It is a
grand and masterly article on “ Soundness and Freedom in Theology.”
He brings forth and develops two great principles of the early
Reformers, viz.—“ ist. That Christianity is not a revelation of truth to
be believed and acted on, but is a real and actual work of God —a
work of redemption and renewal of sinners, wrought by the Father,


through the Son, and in the Spirit, made known and offered to men in
the Gospel, and personally received and experienced in Christian life
by all who believe in Jesus.” 2nd. “That theology (theologising)
requires as its basis vital personal experience of Christianity as the
restoration of fellowship between God and man, and on this basis it
proceeds to discover the scientific relations of the various parts of this
experience to one another.”*
These two principles secure both soundness and freedom ; for if vital
godliness—living experience of Christianity be strong in the soul, it
will be a good security for truth in the theology ; and it will largely
remove the necessity of being ever hedged in by the external barriers of
human dogmas. He who has “ become partaker of the divine nature,”
has an internal instinct which will naturally give him good taste and
freedom, and even scientific soundness.
In the ages that followed the Reformation there was a falling back
into mediaeval ideas of faith, and its relation to religion. In most of the
churches parts of this Protestant scholasticism still remain; and Dr.
Candlish declares, while he protests against the fact, that articles of faith
and favoured dogmas are actually being made the touchstone to sound-
ness ; and all opinions are being condemned as heretical, if they do not
square with certain external formularies. And he firmly maintains—“ that
the only true test of soundness that should be put to any theory or opinion
is the question, ‘ls it consistent with the reality of the Christian life
experienced in the soul of a true believer in Jesus,’ If it be not incon-
sistent with this, then whether true or not it cannot be a fundamental
error.” f And he protests against the spirit that insinuates heresy
or cherishes suspicion against a man because he differs from the
common opinion on some minor point. “If he thinks that Anselm’s
theory of the Atonement is erroneous ... or that the Confession
of Faith ought to be abridged and revised, &c.” And he closes by
declaring that the tendency to condemn all such opinions “is one abso-
lutely fatal to Protestant theology, and fraught with danger to Evan-
gelical religion. For the doctrines of the Reformation cannot be main-
tained without the recognition of the distinction between fundamental
and non-fundamental articles.
In this paper of Dr. Candlish we have some of the best results of
theology and modern Christian thought. The critical test by which we
are to judge of opinions in general, or of theories of prohibited
marriages, is not merely the written law of Moses ; not even the whole
written Revelation of God, but it is vital personal religion in the soul of
man. To us the truth of God is neither a form, nor a formula external
to us, but a life within us. When the objective truths of Christianity
have become internal moral facts, then this internal form of truth,
nursing reason and conscience to their true and normal level, invests
men appropriately with the function of judging all truth and doctrine ; as
St. Paul says, “Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world.”§
* British and Foreign Evangelical Review, January, 1876.
+ Ditto.
X Ditto.
§ I Cor. vi. 2,


We are justified in assuming that this is the highest rule, and canon of
theology, furnished by modern Protestantism for testing soundness in the
faith. Let us then apply it to the above three theories as to forbidden
marriages, which are based on the Sinaitic eicalogue. As this law itself
is a carnal ordinance, and as the theories built on it lie far distant from
the vital centre of religion, it shows conclusively that there is something
altogether unsatisfactory in raising a formula on these prohibitions ; and
in erecting it into an authoritative, yet a non-essential article of faith.
Christ himself gave us the general concept of the decalogue, of all the
law, and the prophets in the grand formula, “ Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart,” &c. But no subordinate similar condensa-
tion has ever successfully been secured for this eicalogue by any church,
and we venture to think that no formula other than that of Moses in
the sixth verse, will ever obtain general approval. If we put the first or
Westminster theory under this test, one result at least is clear and
decided. It comes forth with no pre-eminence of soundness over the
second, or third theory. It cannot be shown that the system of prohi-
bited degrees is more in harmony with vital personal religion, than that
of the literal system, or than that of the partially moral system.
Again, it cannot be shown that the second, or the third theory, is
inconsistent with the life of God in the soul of man. But this test
discerns as to the relative freedom of these three theories. The first
has the largest number of prohibitions, which are all alike affirmed
to be absolutely and rigidly binding. The second has fewer prohibi-
tions, and therefore yields us a greater freedom than the first, but
it gives less freedom than the third. The first has extended the com-
mandment beyond the letter of the law, and raised prohibitions, which
are made solely by human inference, to a level of strictness equal to
God’s express words. If the Christian life errs in keeping to this
theory, it no doubt errs on the safe side, but it has added to the written
law of God, and therefore increased our heavy burdens. The second
alone keeps strictly to the letter of the law, which in this case is
“ a revelation to be believed and acted on.” The third has a broad
margin. If only evangelical principles could be made to expiscate all
that is properly moral, from all that is merely civil or expedient in the
commandment, it would prove itself to be the only true theory on the
subject, but as yet they have failed to do this.
Let us apply this test, to the individual question, “Is marriage to a
deceased wife’s sister lawful?” The clear and distinct answer is—lt
does not condemn it. It is not unlawful. There is nothing in such a
conjugal union that is inconsistent, or out of harmony, with the Christian
life. There is, however, no fundamental doctrine directly involved in
the question. When husband and wife are in concord religiously, there is
likely to be a greater sacredness, and a deeper spiritual fellowship, in
such a union than in any other second marriage; and just in virtue of
the antecedents. Death has come, and touched with a sacred pathos,
all former relations and interests, more fully unveiled their essential
character, woven them into certain heavenlier associations than were
possible before, and given an intense reality to their transitory nature,
and yet also, to their abiding permanence aloof from all change. He


has united the living ones, in the widowed home, to the departed loved
one, with such tender ties of hope and communion, that home and
domestic ties are all bathed in a divine and hallowing effluence from
above, which could only visit them in such circumstances. And if
there are children from the former marriage, they are doubly endeared
to both now, through the common affection for their departed mother.
For their sakes, even though for no other, it is the best arrangement in
the nature of things that could be made. Thus the kinds, and the
amount of domestic affection are actually augmented by the marriage
referred to; and we are justified in saying that this canon, or test of
theories, not merely permits, but clearly approves of it.
The chief, and almost the only real objection that is now urged by
opponents to freedom, takes the form of an assertion that such marriages
injure domestic purity. But I fail entirely in apprehending the truth, or
good reasoning that may be in the objection. The suggestion is, that
conjugal love, and fidelity generally, would be ruined or injured, where-
ever there was a marriageable sister-in-law who at any time, should
mingle in the family circle. It appears to me an absurd, if not also a
truthless objection, for ist. If it is good and true in reference to a wife’s
sister, it is good and true in reference to any other woman who may
visit, or serve in the home; or, in reference to the husband having
meeting, or converse of any kind whatever, with any woman except his
own wife. 2nd. If God has really permitted and approved of such
marriages, the objection has no force or propriety whatever. 3rd. The
very emphatic prohibition of any marriage union with a living wife’s
sister, is itself the provision or answer, which God has supplied to meet
this objection. It is His safeguard for domestic purity in all the inter-
change of friendliness between a man and his living wife’s sisters.
Though the churches of the Reformation generally adopted in their
theological formularies, some such dogma on “ forbidden degrees” as
our own, it is matter of fact, that churches which have risen since that
period have as a rule, refused to adopt any such dogma; and that all
the former churches have now either shifted their ground, and accepted
a more liberal or accurate interpretation of the original Hebrew statute ;
or are at this moment distressed with a diversity of opinion, and with
an unsuccessful struggle to obtain for their old formula a 7nodum
Vivendi. It is most certain, that the enlightened sentiments and sound
convictions of Protestants generally, are now largely in favour of the
lawfulness of marriage with a deceased wife’s sister; and that in no one
church is there a general consensus on these vexed forbidden degrees.
In England, the Speaker’s Commentary rises almost to the proud
position of the National Commentary of England. It is truly so, in so
far as the nation is Episcopalian. It is itself a gathering up, and
exhibition of some of the richest and best Biblical scholarship of our
day; and its interpretation of the passage in question, is in favour of the
lawfulness of the marriage referred to.
In the Wesleyan, the Baptist, and the Congregational churches of
England there is little or no support given to this old formula : there is,
in general, a strong leaning towards the lawfulness of said marriage,
and a firm and deliberate protest, against the exercise of any authori-


tative prohibition, either from civil or ecclesiastical authority,* We
have been given to understand, that the Rev. Dr. Morley Punshon
recently —either immediately before, or whilst he was president of the
Conference of the Wesleyan Church, married the sister of his deceased
wife.
Dr. Adam Clarke's Commentary is deservedly held in high esteem in
all the churches, and it very decidedly declares said marriages to be
lawful. Its note on the 18th verse says:—“There is nothing in this
which rendered it illegal to marry a sister-in-law when the sister was
dead;” and it gives as addendum; “ Some think that the text may be so
understood as also to forbid polygamy.” Dr. Cameron, of St. Kilda, has
attempted to destroy all the real value of Dr. Clarke’s note, and affirms
that, “No one translating the words as he (Dr. Clarke) did, could
possibly have held that they also forbad polygamy.”t Dr. Clarke’s own
opinion is most clear, and loudly enounced : Two sisters in marriage at
one and the same time are forbidden, but marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister is not illegal. Then, as to what others believe, it is of little
moment, but he states it. Some of them think that these words do also
forbid polygamy; and so they do, in a sense that has escaped Dr.
Cameron. Marriage of two sisters at once is polygamy. It is one
species of polygamy; and if one kind be forbidden, it is not absurd for
some to think, nor for Dr. Clarke to state their thought, that general
polygamy in this rBth verse is also prohibited.
In Germany we find the richest and furthest advanced biblical scholar-
ship, and literature, of all Christendom to-day. Our churches are only
beginning to spell their own way into sacred exegetics; and if they are
adequately to prosecute the subject, or fully to understand the recondite
archives of Christianity from the side of human learning, they must
borrow largely from the land of Luther; and German exegetes all
but universally, declare for the lawfulness of the marriage referred to.
As fit representatives of the great Presbyterian Church in the United
States of America, we select the two Drs. Hodge—the distinguished
father and the distinguished son.
The venerable Dr. Charles Hodge, in his truly great work, “Syste-
matic Theology,” says : —“ As nearness of kin varies from the most
intimate relationship to the most distant, so these marriages vary in
their impropriety from the highest to the lowest degree. Some of them
may in certain cases be wrong, not in themselves, but simply from the
obligation to uphold a salutary law.”:};
“ Strong repugnance is often felt and expressed against the Levitical
law, not only because it is regarded as placing all the marriages specified
on the same level, representing all as equally offensive in the sight of
God, but also from the assumption that all the marriages forbidden
are, if contracted, invalid. This is a wrong view of the subject. It
is inconsistent with the law itself, and contrary to the analogy of
Scripture.”;}:
* See the late Rev. And. Robertson’s admirable statement of their case in his
pamphlet, “Forbearance.”
4 Dr. Cameron’s “ Scripture Law of Marriage,” p. 55-
J Dr. Hodge’s “Systematic Theology,” vol. iii., p. 417.


“No man can force himself to believe that a man’s marrying the
sister of a deceased wife is the same kind of offence as a father marrying
his own daughter.”* •
“ There may in some cases be honest difference of opinion as to what
the will or law of God is, but when ascertained, it is our wisdom and
duty to make it the rule of our conduct.”f
To say that the statements made in the above quotations, or that the
sentiments involved in them are in strict harmony with the Westminster
formula on incest, is to affirm what is not true; and to say that said
statements and their implied sentiments are not in favour of making
“ marriage with a deceased wife’s sister ” an open question in the
Church, is also to affirm what can easily be shown to be erroneous.
Dr. A. A. Hodge, in his “ Commentary on the Confession of Faith,”
says, “ The only law on this subject (incest) in the Scriptures is the
Levitical law recorded in Lev. xviii. and xx. If this law is still binding,
it carries with it the principle that it is incest for a man to cohabit with
any one of his deceased wife’s relatives nearer in blood than it is lawful
for him to do of his own.’’l “ It is asserted (this principle) in these
sections of our Confession. But a great diversity of sentiment and
practice prevails in different parts of our Church on this subject, and for
the most part the enforcement of this rule has been left to the discretion
of the majority of each local church court.”§
The admission is thus made that the principle is indeed asserted in
the Confession, but that the repudiation of the principle, both in opinion
and practice, prevails in the great Presbyterian Church of the United
States, and that the chief practical expedient used for compelling
obedience to the confessional dogma is the discretion of a majority in a
local session, &c. The admitted fact is one of grave importance. The
expedient resorted to is a rather undignified compromise, and the
outcoming effect in the applied discretion of a majority, which may
either be for, or against the aggressor, will generally mean very little.
Such discretion is more likely to represent the mind of the individual
whose case may come under consideration, than the letter of the law.
In short, both virtually and really, marriage with a deceased wife’s
relatives must thus be an open question.
It is impossible to take a historical view perspectively of this dogma
without realizing that concessions, or compromise must be made; and
that in the Presbyterian Church a relaxing, or a revising of the
Confession must be made. In Victoria we are given to understand
that all the Protestant churches, except the Presbyterian, hold the
marriage referred to as an open question. She must come to that too,
sooner or later. Her present position is one that so thoroughly
condemns herself, that fixes her on such an untenable compromise that
it would be hurtful to her best interests any longer to retain it. The
proceedings of her General Assembly in 1873 lead us to believe that at
that time there was not less than one-third of this Church, who held
* Dr. Hodge’s “ Systematic Theology,” vol. iii., p. 418.
f Do., do.
J Dr. A. A. Hodge’s Comty. on Conf. of Faith, p, 416.
§ Do., p. 417.


and believed in the lawfulness of said marriage. If so, there must
necessarily be cases frequently arising in which individuals will con-
sistently carry their opinions into practice. What then will this Church
do ? To censure or excommunicate on such grounds would be to
refurbish the old rusty tools of ecclesiastical tyranny. It would also be
to act inconsistently with her present position; with even a suicidal
policy; for she by said proceedings, has made the holding of the
opinion that this marriage is lawful a matter of forbearance and freedom.
But opinion must always lead to practice and characterize it; and if the
Church permits the opinion, she cannot, without outraging decency and
higher interests, lay a violent hand upon any one for consistently carry-
ing his opinions into practice. Moreover, the minority is not only a
large one, but it is believed to be increasing. It is intelligent; and
thoroughly loyal to the Supreme Standards. It claims from the majority
equal liberty with them to hold its own biblical views, and to practise
them. Can this with any show of justice or truth be refused ? We
trust that it will not be refused. We hope and trust that living faith in
Jesus Christ will vindicate herself in our Church, more fully than she
has ever done before, as the real and only organon of Christian truth;
and that she will manifest her supremacy in a triumph over all heresy
on the one hand, and over all intolerance on the other.
FINIS.


INDEX
PART I
EXEGETICAL
Notes Introductory to the Hebrew Statute
among the heathen nations around them
Analysis
Exegesis and Criticism -
I.—The General Law against sexuality
tions, and incestuous marriages
wrong objects
PART 11.
DOCTRINAL AND THEORETICAL
The First Theory -
Remarks
The Second Theory
The Third Theory
PART 111.
HISTORICAL
I.—lts nature, as an application in detail of the Seventh Command'
ment, and a renaissance and protection of the original pure
institution of marriage ....
lE—The actual state of facts, as to marriage and sexual relations,
both among the Israelites to whom it was addressed, and
ll.—Prohibitions of what is generally understood as incestuous connec-
HI. —Prohibitions whose raison d'etre is something temporary
IV,—Prohibitions against human nature, in its department of sexuality,
seeking its help-meet, or reciprocal, in wrong modes and in
io
13
r 4
H


Mff
616U0
FtoSG+
Walker , May, and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillof Street, Melbourne .


-
.


