

CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE
PHYTOGRAPHT OF THE NEW HEBRIDES
LOYALTY ISLANDS.
FROM MR. F. A. CAMPBELL'S COLLECTIONS.
BY BARON FERD. VON MUELLER,
C.M.G., M.D. PH.D., F.R.S.
“ Quaerite invenietis.” — Evangel. Math., Cap. vii., 7 ;
et Evangel. Luc., Cap. xi., g.
GEELONG:
GEO.' MERCER, PRINTER, MALOP STREET.


y 7 . ’O/ /j* a-'K""
r '% ph-’*s K"


CONTRIBUTIO
f fetofiprapfe % Setofe
AND LOYALTY ISLANDS,
FROM
MR. F. A. CAMPBELL’S COLLECTIONS.
jSARON VON JA UELLER^
C.M.G., M.D., PH. D., F.R.S.
et Evangel Luc., Cap. xi., 9,
“ Quaerite et invenietis.” — Evangel Math, Cap. vii., 7 ; v
hl ~V>l




APPENDIX.
ifeatagrapfes
OF THE
EBR IDES AND J SLANDS,
The notes of the following pages arose from various considerations.
The writer wished to place connectedly on record his observations on
a series of plants from some of the Pacific Islands, gathered, in ready
response to his request, by a young friend during the past year.
It seemed likely, also, that the narrative of this itineration, while it
would be scattered through the mission settlements, might animate
others, to add likewise to our store of phytographic material from these
and other island groups, if a special chapter was devoted to the plants
collected on this occasion. More particularly this might be expected
if it could be shown that, even during the very transitory visit of places
discovered fully a century ago, a search among the constituents of their
rich vegetation had still brought to light a proportionately large share
of plants, either imperfectly understood, or perhaps utterly unknown
before ; and this from a collection necessarily limited. Furthermore,
it appeared manifest that, by promoting a gradual scientific disclosure
of the vegetation of any part of Polynesia, while civilization proceeds
on its glorious path, new natural treasures would also become early
scrutinised,-the value of the indigenous resources of many a remote
and lonely spot would be enhanced, and even intellectual enjoyment
be increased in perhaps some distant solitudes.
To these general reasons for appending the subsequent unpreten-
sive Notes to Mr. Campbell’s work, one may be added, emanating *
from direct wishes of the writer. It is felt that the important works
of the venerable Dr. Asa Gray and of the lamented Dr. Berthold See-
mann, which form already a solid foundation for our knowledge of the
-1 --1-T1


plants of the Polynesian groups, should be extended, not only to the
vegetation of numerous Pacific islands almost totally unexplored, but
also to the plants of many inland recesses, to which heathen barbarism
formerly gave no access, although the littoral skirts of these interior
regions, on numerous islands, were brought long since under the be-
nign influence of Christendom.
Since almost the middle of the last century, naval discoveries have
rendered the world gradually acquainted with the almost endless num-
ber of isles—many almost of a paradisaic nature —dispersed through
the Pacific ocean ; but it yet remains a startling fact, that of their
vegetation far less has become elucidated than of the flora of many
other wide spaces of the globe, in regions discovered, occupied, or
colonised since a much more recent date.
Vicinity and commerce necessarily must bring most of the Pacific
islands prominently in contact with the Australian colonies, and, as a
sequence, these beautiful groups will be connected also with us most
easily for scientific communion.
Thus, ever since the untimely death of his friend Berthold Seemann,
in the latter part jof 1871, the writer has ventured to nourish a hope
that a work on the whole vegetation of Polynesia might most readily
be promoted from a centre of phytographic research, such as, in
Australia, he endeavoured to form.
If, then, the many educated inhabitants located in the various
groups, as well as scientifically inclined travellers, would aid in secur-
ing material of any kind for extended researches in the direction in-
dicated, new sources of delight would arise to the writer, by affording
not merely special information to the Senders, but also by obtaining
gradually, the material for an universal work.
Moreover, the vegetation of the South-Sea islands stands in mani-
fold bearings to that of Australia ; so much so, that even the elucida-
tion of the plants of the Australian continent, which has engaged ex-
tensively the writer’s attention during more than a quarter of a cen-
tury, would receive much collateral support from a closer insight into
the whole vegetable empire of Polynesia.
Our unacquaintance with much of the vegetation of the Pacific
islets may be largely traced to the fact, that the generality of the in-
habitants or travellers, even if imbued with any desire to turn easy


opportunities to scientific account, become attracted, during any of
their searches for plants, mainly by the gracefulness or lovely
delicacy of the ferns, which Nature, with a prodigious and marvellous
lavishness, has strewed over these islands. Or the Searcher’s pre-
dilections and exertions are limited to efforts of obtaining the more
gorgeous forms of plants which present themselves to his view. Thus
a modest herb, though of medicinal virtue—thus a plain-looking grass,
though of nutritive importance—thus a concealed moss, though of
microscopic beauty—or thus a delicate seaweed, though of charming
structural perfection—are left alike unregarded. Need I speak of
blossoms at first sight unshowy, or of fruits perhaps still less attrac-
tive, though the produce of trees both utilitarian and stately ? to say
nothing of the unwieldy flowers and bulky fruits of many a graceful
palm, or of numerous succulents, ever so useful, but less readily
amenable to any preparation for museum or study purposes.
But since Divine wisdom has called forth all these vegetable be-
ings by a godly design, to be subservient to our earthly wants, we
ought to recognise it as a duty, while we wish to enjoy and utilise all
these gifts of providence, to draw them also from thoughtless disregard
and hidden obscurity into the cyclus of rational reflection, into the
precincts of experimental tests, and into the reach of the full light of
natural science.
PITTOSPOREAE.
Pittosporum Campbelli.
Arborescent; leaves broadly lanceolate, thickly chartaceous, some-
what acuminate, glabrous, like the peduncles verticillate crowded ;
pedicels several or rather numerous, slightly downy; calyces minute,
almost bell-shaped, only to about one-third of their length cleft into
five rounded'teeth; corolla white, exceeding the calyx several times in
length; petals narrow, disconnected; filaments
somewhat dilated, twice as long as the slightly pointed anthers ; style
extremely short; capsule bivalved, many-seeded ; valves thick, almost
oval, narrowed at the extremities, especially at the summit; uneven
yet not wrinkled on the outside; seeds dark—or blackish-brown,
turgid, angular, wingless.
Found on Tana, on wooded places. Seen about fifteen feet high.
Leaves 3 to 5 inches long, 1 to i£ inches broad, paler beneath ; veins
and lateral nerves exceedingly thin. Petioles i to f inch long.
Primary peduncles varying in length from J to ij inches, terminal or


in the axis of the upper leaves. Pedicels 2 to 3 lines long, rather
crowded. Calyces only one line long, glabrous. Petals about 4 lines
long, blunt. Anthers measuring about one line. Pistil smooth.
Ovary very slender. Valves of the capsule about §of an inch long,
sometimes verging into a rhomboid form, but always longer than
broad, and often considerably so; outside turning blackish, inside
orange-yellow, not viscid. Seeds generally almost ij line long, not
sticky. Funicles almost obliterated.
The flowers are delightfully odorous, like those of most congeners.
The species is dedicated to the young gentleman, who thoughtfully
and kindly provided the material for this essay. It is the first
Pittosporum from the New Hebrides, and bears some alliance to
P. rhytidocarpum (Asa Gray, Botany of Wilkes's Exploring Expedition,
p. 228, tab. 18.) The differences, however, are obvious; for
P. rhytidocarpum has sessile umbels, free sepals (though not so
shown in the plate,) a downy sessile ovary, a longer style, larger
capsules outside warty or tubercular and deeply wrinkled, and
finally larger and more compressed seeds.
P. glabratum (Lindley, in the Journal of the London Horticultural
Society , vol. 1, p. 230) differs already in its deeply divided slightly
ciliated calyces, connate petals, thinner and broader valves, which are
three in number, also larger seeds. P. ferrugineum (W. T. Aiton,
Hort. Kew, sec. edit., 11., 27) is still more widely distinct.
Pittosporum Brakenridgei (Asa Gray, I. c., p. 225, tab. 17) accord-
to Seemann’s Feegee-plant numbered 56, presents, like the following,
a short-lobed calyx, but is dissimilar in many other respects.
P. ramiflorum (Zollinger, in Miquel Flor. Ind. Batav., vol. 1,
part 11., p. 122) is to be distinguished already in its entirely lateral
inflorescence, smaller and connate petals. This species again is
closely allied to P. Richii (A. Gr., I. c.,) and both have the short-lobed
calyx of P. Campbellii, while the fruit of P. Richii is broader than
long.
P. Timorense (Blume, Mus. Bot. Lugd., 1., 160) is described as
having short and only dentated calyces. The only specimens of any
Pittosporum which I possess from Timor (in fruit only) have roundish
capsules, J to f of an inch long, strongly compressed, outside almost
even. None of the described species of Pittosporum from New
Caledonia (Brogniart and Gris, in Annales des Scien. Nat. 1865,
p. 143 —147) is closely allied to Mr. Campbell’s plant.
RUTACEAE.
Micromelum pubescens (Blume, Bijdragen , vol. 1, p. 137.)
M. minutum (Seemann’s Rep. on Mis. to the Viti Islands,
P- 434-)
Efate. Recently detected, also, in the Samoan group, by the Rev.
S. T. Whitmee, F.L.S., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.


Murraya exotica (Koenig, in Linn. Mantiss. Alt. Plant.
There only four feet high, when in flower. The older and
restorable name, Chalcas paniculata (Lin. Mantiss ., p. 68 ; Chalcas
cammuneng, Burmann’s Flor. Ind., p. 104) is referable to this plant.
Known also from New Caledonia.
Clausenia crenulata ; Murraya crenulata (Oliver, in the
Proceed, of the Linn. Soc. vol. 5> SU P- P- 2 9-)
Tana; A tree attaining a height of thirty feet, and perhaps more.
Leaflets chartaceous, the lower ones sometimes hardly above an inch
in length ; all often only very faintly crenulate. Cymes forming a
dense corymbose terminal panicle. Peduncles and pedicels thinly
downy; the latter when flower-bearing about one line long, when
fruit-bearing lengthened to three or four lines. Calyces five—cleft,
hardly above half a line high, nearly one line wide ; its lobes deltoid —
semi-orbicular. Petals almost oblong, overlapping at the lateral
margins, white, sessile, nearly a quarter of an inch long. Stamens
ten ; five alternately somewhat shorter; the longer filaments about
two’ lines long, downward more dilated than the others ; all nearly
subulate. Anthers • one-third of a line long, erect, with two parallel
oval cells. Pistil glabrous. Style about one line long, deciduous,
rather thick. Stigma visibly exceeding the width of the style. Berry
depressed—globular, slightly raised on an extremely short stipes, about
two-thirds of an inch broad, four celled, not rarely perfecting all its
seeds. Pericarp thin. Septa membranous. Seeds smooth, ovate —
trigonous. Cotyledons plan —convex, not folded.
This plant connects the genera Clausena and Murraya, which
eventually might be united, should even no additional members of the
genera hereafter be discovered. Clausenia claims antecedence as be-
ing published in 1768 (Burmann, Flor. Ind., p. 87); whereas Murraya,
or, as it was originally written, Murraea, became promulgated in 1771.
But, with still greater justice, Burmann’s generic name would have to
give way to that of Calchas, established by Linne in 1767 (both in his
first Mantiss. pag. num. 1261; and in the twelfth edition of the
Syst. Nat. vol. 2, p. 293,) Chalcas paniculata being referable to
Murraya exotica. '
Mr. Campbell’s plant agrees with that from Queensland, at least
as far as foliage and fruit are concerned, the flowers of the East
Australian congener having as yet not been collected. Those of the
Tana plant accord, however, with the short description given by
Oliver of the original species from the Phillippine Islands. The
corymbosely depressed inflorescence separates Clausenia or Chalcas
crenulata already from all other species of that genus known to me.
In the shape of its berries it differs, likewise, from most, if not all, of
its congeners. This is a new plant for Polynesian records.
Euodia hortensis (R. and G. Forster, Charact. Gener.,
p. 14, tab. 7.) a
Santo, Efate, and Tana. Flowering already at a height of two
feet. Both the narrow and broad-leaved varieties were collected by
Mr. Campbell.


TILIACEAE.
Triumfetta angulata ( La Marck, Encyclop. Method.,
in., P- 421.)
Aneityum and Tana. Abundant on clear flats. Height, two to
three feet. Not previously recorded from any of the islands of the
Pacific ocean, nor from Australia. Sepals conspicuously hairy.
Stamens, twelve to sixteen. Fruit-awns sometimes beset with
minute bristles.
Grewia mallococca (Linne fil. Suppleni. Plant., p. 402.)
Santo and Tana, in forests. Height to twenty feet, and per-
haps more. Leaves attaining a length of eight inches. Peduncles
one to three-flowered, solitary or two together. Flower-buds first
globular, soon egg-shaped. Bracts two to three lines long, ovate
lanceolate, very early deciduous. Sepals four to six lines long, white
inside, not distinctly nerved. Petals acute. This species approaches
in many respects to G. orientalis (L., Sp. PI. 964) and to G. laevigata
(Vahl, Symbol , 434.) Irrespective of some other differences, its longer
leaves with deeper indentations distinguish it.
It may here passingly be observed, that Trichospermum Richii
(Seemann, in Bonplandia, p. 254) has been found also in the Samoan
group by the Rev. S. T. Whitmee. The leaves of this remarkable tree
attain a length of-over six inches.
MALVACEAE.
Sida rhombifolia (Linne, Sj>. Plant, 961.)
Santo. This herb might be utilised for the sake of its beautiful
fibre—especially as the plant is perennial, and occurs probably in abun-
dance on all the islands of the group, Captain Cook himself (as recorded
by Dr. Seemann) having gathered it already at Tana. The leaves are
more frequently lanceolar than rhombiformed, and on the specimens
transmitted from Santo, they are scarcely paler beneath. The sides of
the fruitlets are distinctly reticular to above the middle.
Hibiscus Abelmoschus (Linne, sp. pi., 980.)
Santo. A purple-flowered variety, according to Mr. Campbell’s
note. In respect to colour, the flowers of this plant seem to be variable ;
although in no instance this capability of variation among Malvaceae is as
great as in the Hollyhock, while in most species of this extensive order no
play of colours seems to occur.
Hibiscus Rosa Sinensis (Linne, sp. pi., 977.)
Eramanga. The number of segments of the surrounding bracteal
involucre varies from six to ten.


STERCULIACEAE.
Kleihovia hospita (Linne sp.pl., 1365.)
Aneityum. New for the group. The transmitted flowering and
fruiting specimens came from a shrub only four or five feet high; whereas
in age this plant assumes the dimensions of a stately tree. Hasskarl’s
description (PI. Jav. Par., 313) is from the tree in its living state. The
Rev. S. T. Whitmee found it in Samoa.
Melochia odorata (Linne, fil. stippl. pi. p. 302.)
Efate ; originally described from Tana. Attains a height of
twenty-five feet, as observed by Mr. Campbell. Bark light-coloured.
Lower leaves orbicular-cordata, measuring about five inches ; uppermost
leaves only one to one and a-half inches long, and lanceolate, all char-
taceous. Petals much longer than the stamens. Anthers broadly ovate,
dorsifixed. Fruitlets separating in age. Seeds not conspicuously winged.
This species occurs also in Dr. Veillard’s collection of New Caledonian
plants.
SAPINDACEAE.
Cardiospermum Halicacabum (Linne, sp.pl. 925.)
Aneityum. Occurs also in the Samoan Islands, according to collec-
tions from the Rev. S. T. Whitmee.
LEGUMINOSAE.
Sophora tomentosa (Linnd, sp.pl. 533.)
Efate.
Canavalia obtusifolia (De Candolle, Prodr. 11., 404.)
Tana, along the sea-shore.
Dolichos Lablab (Linne, sp. pi. 1019.)
Aniwa, on open ground. The white flowering variety collected.
Brief notes on the uses of this bean are given in the volume of the Ac-
climitisation Society of Victoria for 1872.
Desmodium polycarpum (De Candolle, Prodr. 11., 334.)
Tana, in open places. The upper leaves consist sometimes of a
single leaflet only. Found also in Samoa by the Rev. S. T. Whitmee
and Rev. S. Powell.
Desmodium umbellatum (De Candolle, Prodr. 11., 325.)
Eramanga. Pod sometimes five-seeded, sometimes reduced to a
single article.
Desmodium pendulum.
Tana ; abundant in the forests. A shrub; according to Mr. Camp-
bell’s notes attaining a height of fifteen feet. Racemes pendent, wfith
white flowers.
This plant, according to an imperfect specimen from the museum of
the Botanic Garden of Calcutta, communicated under the above name


and collected by Mr. Tyesmann, seems identical with a species from the
island of Ternate. It differs from D. ormocarpoides (De Candolle,
Prodr. it., 327) so far as the material before me allows me to judge,
already in’narrower stipules, short-toothed calyces and long-stalked pods.
The latter, in a half-ripe state, resemble those of D. laburnifohum (De
Candolle, Prodr. 11., 337,) but are not sessile, and the articulations are
still deeper. In the simplicity and form of the foliage, the Tana plant
agrees with D. ormocarpoides. The expanded upper petal is beyond its
base almost orbicular. The tenth stamen is free. Ripe fruit is unknown
to me. The racemes attain a length of one foot. The large
leaflets are sparingly beset with short appressed hair; but this
would not be a positive characteristic of the species, inasmuch as
D. ormocarpoides occurs in Ceylon with leaflets copiously downy be-
neath, including therefore, probably, D. zonatum (Miquel, Flor. Ind.
Bat., 1., 250.)
Tephrosia piscatoria {Pers. Enchir., 11., 329.)
Eramanga and Efate. About two feet high. Flowers white.
Dr. Yeillard’s plant from New Caledonia, distributed under the above
name, appears to represent a distinct species.
Acacia Farnesiana (Willdenow, sp.pl., 1083.)
Mare, Loyalty Islands, where it grows to the height of twelve feet.
Pinnae sometimes reduced to two pairs. Peduncles not rarely solitary.
Calyces and corolla occasionally six-cleft.
MYRTACEAE.
Eugenia Richii (Asa Gray, in Wilkes’s Unit. Stat. Explor.
Exped. Bot., p. 510, pi. 58.)
Tana, where it grows to a height of forty feet. This evidently
stately tree, with large leaves and globular fruits above an inch in size,
either belongs to the above-indicated species, or must be regarded as
botanically new. It has the characteristic winged-angular branchlets,
and the round or cordate based-leaves of E. Richii, and it may thus be
easily discriminated in comparison with E. Malaccensis, (Linne, sp. pi. 672,)
but the flowers seem somewhat smaller than those delineated by Sprague,
the calyx-tube is more turgid, the calyx-lobes are conspicuously unequal;
and for the comparison of the ripe fruits of the Tana species with that
from Fiji and Tonga, no opportunity has as yet been afforded.
Barringtonia racemosa (Blumd, in De Cand. Prod.
in., 288.)
Tana, inland in forests. A tree, forty feet high. Petals and stamens
white. Fruit greenish. Kernels, according to Mr. Campbell’s note,
eatabie. This appears to be the most widely-spread of all congeners, ex-
tending even to East Africa, but in Australia it has as yet only been
found on Rockingham’s Bay. The racemes are sometimes fully four feet
long on trees of the last-mentioned locality. The allied B. Samoensis
(Asa Gray, Bot. Wilk. Explor. Exped., 508) has much smaller flowers,


with a calyx cup-shaped in bud, but not closed, while the fruit is much
larger—one-and-a-half to two inches long, and so much impressed around
the pedicel as to form four turgid prominences. In Upola, where it is
frequent, it passes by the name of “Falaga,” according to the Rev. S. T.
Whitmee. Barringtonia speciosa (R. & G. Forster, Char act. Gener.,
p. 76, tab. 38) occurs, doubtless, also in the New Hebrides and adjoining
islets, it haying been traced to Rockingham’s Bay and some other shores
of North Queensland. Some of the other Indian species of Barringtonia
may be looked for in the Pacific archipelagus as well as in tropical Aus-
tralia. The sections Butonica and Stravadium of Barringtonia hold, in
reference to the forms of their calyx, almost the same relation to each
other as Busbeckia to Eucapparis in the genus Capparis.
MELASTOMACEAE.
Melastoma Malabathricum (Linn<f, sp.pl. , 559; M. velu-
tinum, Seemann., Flor. Vit., p. 90.)
Aneityum ; there a bush five feet high. Petals white, as in the
variety described as M. Taitense [De Cand. prod, ill., 144.)
The allied order of Lythracese, by an oversight, is passed unnoticed
in Dr. Seemann’s work, so rich in original observations. The following
plants of that order are known to exist in the Pacific islands : —Pemphis
acidula (R. & G. Forster, Charact. Gener., p. 68, tab. 34) ; Lythrum
maritimum (Humboldt, Bonpl. et Kunth. nov.gen. et spec. Amer ., vi., 193)?
Sonneratia acida (Linne, fil. supp>l.pl., 252); and to these are probably to
be added, Lythrum hyssopifolium, Lawsonia alba and several species
of Ammannia. Cupheanthus Neo-Caledonicus (Seemann, Flor. Vit.,
p. 76) requires to be moved from Myrtacese also to Lythraceae, as sug-
gested by its author.
EUPHORBIACEAE.
CODI.EUM variegatum (Blume, Bijdrag., p. 606.)
Tana, in the woods, where it attains a height of fifteen feet. The
generic name, established by Rumpt ( Hcrbar. Amboin, iy., 65-66) al-
ready 120 years ago, should be adopted also in horticultural appellations
for this plant, as it is not a Croton in the scientific meaning of that ex-
tensive genus.
Euphorbia hirta (Linne, Amoen. Accident., hi., 114.)
Santo; frequent near the sea-shore. The above specific name is far
preferable to that of E. pilulifera, first given on the same page of the
work quoted.
Acalypha Fosteriana (J. Mueller, in De Cand. prodr. xvi.,
pars 11., 870.)
Efate, and other islands of the New Hebrides; abundant in woods.
A shrub up to six feet high. Another species exists in Tana, growing in
woody localities to the height of twenty feet. It requires further examina-
tion from more extensive material.


Carumbium pedicellatum (Miquel, Flor. Ind. Batav.,
vol. i., part ii., page 414.)
Tana, where it forms a shrub about five feet high. Easily dis-
tinguished from C. populifolium (Reinwardt in Blume’s Catalogues, Van
Gervassen, Buitenzorg, p. 105) a plant also extending to some of the
Pacific isles, in having its staminiferous racemes provided with minute
gland-like bracts, which generally occupy the middle of the more elongated
and singly dispersed pedicels, in having the calyces far less conspicuous,
the stamens more numerous, and the basal glands of the leaves arising
from the lower page. Moreover, the fruit is pointed at the base and
apex, though it is not longer than broad. The Rev. S. T. Whitmee has
found the identical species in Samoa, where the large-fruited C. acuminatum
also exists.
URTICACEAE.
Trema cannabina (Loureiro, Flor. Cochinchinens, ed.
Willd., 689.)
Abundant in Tana. A lithogram of this plant has been issued in my
work, “The Plants of the Colony of Victoria,” plate xc. This bush
has shown itself poisonous to pastoral animals, who in dry seasons will
eat it with avidity, but die (according to Mr. T. Maitland’s observations)
a few hours afterwards. The specific name is derived from the textile
bast, which might yet be drawn into extensive use on localities where the
plant spontaneously vegetates. Sent from Samoa by the Rev. S. T.
Whitmee.
Pipturus argenteus (Weddell in Candolleprodr. xvi., 235)
Tana, on hill-sides in woods. The bast-fibre resembles that of the
Ramee, according to experiments in my laboratory. Mr. Campbell
found this plant to attain a height of about twenty-five feet, and the fruit
to be white and watery-succulent.
Boehmeria spicata (Thunberg in the Transact, of the Linn.
Soc. of Lond., h., 330.)
Santo. Frequent in forestland. A bush about five feet high. Mr.
Campbell’s collection contains a small branchlet without fruits, which
does not admit of specific recognition; but the very variable B. spicata is
recorded as occurring in the New Hebrides. Moreover, it was desirable
that this plant should not be passed altogether on this occasion, especially
as it yields a fibre similar to that of the Rhea or Rhamee. The fibre of
the Santo-Boehmeria would likely become an article of extensive export,
if its value was once recognised by the native inhabitants, and it would
probably be obtainable also as an indigenous product from-many 'of the
adjoining isles. This plant requires still comparison with B. acuminata
(Weddell in De Candolle, prodr. xvi., 209) from New Caledonia. It is
identical with a species from Wagap, in Dr. Veillard’s collection, dis-
tributed under number 1226, so far as, in the absence of fruit, it is possi-
ble to judge.


UMBELLIFERAE.
Trachymene Austro-Caledonia (Bentham and Hooker,
Gener. Plantar 1, 873; Didiscus Austro-Caledonicus ,
Brogniart and Gris, in Annul, des Scienc. naturell. ,
cinquihne serie, Botanique, tom. m., p. 235.)
New Hebrides. Previously only gathered in New Caledonia and
the isle of pines.
COMPOSITAE.
Vernonia cinerea (Lessing, in Sehlechtendals Linnaea ,
p. 291 ; Chrysocoma purpurea , G. Forster, prodr. p. 54.)
Eramanga and Efate. Not mentioned in Dr. Seemann’s work ;
perhaps therefore not extending eastward through the Pacific isles, but
occurring in New Caledonia also, according to Mons. P anchor's and Dr.
Veillard’s collections.
RUBIACEAE.
Hedyotis foetida (Sprengel, Pugillus plantar ., 11., 28,
non Dalzell.)
Tana, along the sea-shores. About two feet high. Corolla white.
Not before gathered in the New Hebrides. This plant is very closely
allied to H. racemosa (La March, Encyclop. methodique, 111., 76) which
is shown by Mr. Whitmee to exist also in Samoa, while Mr. Campbell
found it in the island Espiritu Santo. It is now also known to occur in
North Queensland.
Calycosia Milnei (Asa Gray, in the Proceed, of the Americ.
Acad, of Scienc ., iv., 48.)
Aneityum, in woodlands. Attains a height of six feet. The limb
of the calyces is rather herbaceous than membraneous, and in a dry state
yellowish ; like the leaves and corollas also, the calyces are densely beset
with black dots, reminding of those of many primulaceous plants.
Ixora pavetta (Roxburgh, Flor. Bid ., 1., 385.)
Efate, abounding in woods near the sea, and attaining a height of
six feet. Not previously recorded from Polynesia.
GOODENIACEAE.
Scaevola Koenigii (Vahl, Symbol , m., 36.)
Aneityum, Tana and Efate ; abounding on the sea-shore.
Native name, Nanatto.
LOGANIACEAE.
Geniostoma rupestre (R. & G. Forster, Charact. gener.,
p. 24, tab. 12.)
Tana: there discovered already in Captain Cook’s second expedition.


On wooded ridges. Height to about fifteen feet. Corolla white. Style
glabrous. It varies with leaves rounded at the base, and also with
rounded capsules. The Rev. S. T. Whitmee has sent the same plant
from Samoa.
ACANTHACEAE.
Eranthemum repandum (R. Brown, according to Roemer
and Schultes’ Systerna Vegetabilium, i., 175.)
Mare, Loyalty Islands. To the brief definition published in 1786, by
George Forster (yusticia repanda, Flor. Insul. Austral., prodr., page 3)
which appears as yet to be the only record of this species, the Mare-plant
sufficiently responds. Tana being about 150 geographical miles distant
from Mare, it may very readily be assumed that Forster’s original
Tana-species extends also to the Loyalty Islands. Mr. Campbell’s plant
forms a bush about three feet high. The leaves are two inches long, or
less, ovate or verging into a rhomboid form,, chartaceous, lightly or im-
perfectly repand, not acuminate, but provided with conspicuous petioles.
The number of flowers on the short axillary peduncles is either three or
it is reduced to two, or even occasionally one. The bracteoles at the base
of the short pedicels are only two-thirds line long and cymbeo-
semilanceolar. Segments of the calyx subulate-semilanceolate, hardly
one and a-half lines long. Corolla white, fragrant, its tube nearly or
fully one and a-half inches long, slender, slightly curved; lobes broadly
oval, blunt, one-third to one and a-half inches long. Anthers enclosed
within the summit of the tube. Style with its upper part exserted.
Stigma distinctly two-1 obed. Fruit unknown.
This Eranthemum may have a cyclus of forms as wide as that of
E. variabile. The precise relation of two other congeneric plants of Mr.
Campbell’s collection to E. repandum remains to be investigated. One
of these from Eramanga has narrower oblong or lanceolar leaves, with
not distinctly repand margin, the tube of the corolla shorter in respect to
the lobes and the anthers exserted. The other Eranthemum alluded to
came from Santo, where it forms a shrub five feet high, with showy white
flowers sprinkled with red. The leaves are almost membraneous, the
lower ones about four inches long, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, on com-
paratively short petioles, repand at the margin; the upper leaves are al-
most sessile, broadly ovate, gradually narrowed into the pointed apex and
not repand; the lower peduncles are usually only one-flowered, while the
flowers of the summit form a small corymb; the bracteoles are longer and
so also the segments of the calyces; the tube of the corolla is hardly one
inch long. Fruit-capsules of none of these three plants are extant for
comparison, and it may thus on this occasion be passingly remarked, that
on carpologic characteristic in most in most instances the safe limitation
of specified forms of plants can be perfected, when floral characters fail to
effect an exact discrimination. Indeed, the truth of the Bible words,
“A fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos,” (Eva ngeliu m Matt had, caput VI., 16)
is also here significant.
Beyond the species recorded by the late Dr. Seemann as Polynesian,
the writer is acquainted with Eranthemum variabile (R. Brown, Prodr.


Flor. Nov. Holl., p. 47) from New Caledonia, out of Pancher’s collec-
tion; further, with a large leaved densely downy species, producing ter-
minal somewhat racemose flowers from the Society Islands. This hand-
some plant seems to have hitherto remained phytographically unnoticed;
but the material before me is not really sufficient for absolute diagnostic
definition, especially as we are aware that the genus Eranthemum con-
tains numerous closely allied forms, of which several have unduly been
raised already to a specific rank.
Ruellia reptans (G. Forster, Flor. Instil. Austral .,
Prodr., p. 44.)
Santo. This plant was seen by Mr. Campbell to attain a height of
five feet. He noticed the corolla to be whitish. Peduncles not rarely
solitary. Flowers very few in terminal, almost fascicular cymes. Seeds
about fourteen, dark brown, obicular-ovate, smooth, slightly turgid, about
two-thirds line long.
Solanum Milnei (Seemann’s Journal of Botany , 1863,
page 210.)
Eramanga. The specimens collected represent a small leaved
variety.
ASPERIFOLIAE.
Cordia Myxa, (Linnd, spec, plant, 273.)
Tana, on hills. Height to fifteen feet. Flowers white. Not previ-
ously recorded from the New Hebrides—thus, like many others of Mr.
Campbell’s plants, new from there.
LABIATAE.
Ocimum sanctum (Linne, Mant/ss., p. 85.)
Santo. Three feet high. Flowers purplish, according to Mr.
Campbell. This is the first record of this and the following plant from
Polynesia.
Ocimum Basilicum (Linne, spec, plant. 883.)
Santo and Efate. This species has also been found in Feegee by
Dr. Seemann, but is mentioned in his work as O. gratissimum. Probably
the latter occurs in Feegee also, along with O. Basilicum, like in many
parts of India, and both may have been mixed in Seemann’s collection.
A small flowered variety was gathered in Madagascar by Dr. Meller,
according to specimens communicated by Sir Henry Barkly. The limits
of most species of Ocimum have not yet been accurately ascertained.
Coleus scutellaroides (Bentham in Wallich plant. Aslat.
rarior., 11., 16.)
Santo.


Teucrium inflatum (Swartz, Prodr Flor. Ind. Occid.,
page 88.
Tana, near the sea-shores. Three feet high. Corolla purple.
VERBENACEAE.
Lippia nodiflora (Cl. Richard, in Michaux Flor. Boreal
Americ., n., 15.)
Tana. Frequent in swampy places. Mr. Campbell records it two
feet high. Peduncles not rarely opposite, such as may be observed also
in specimens from other parts of the globe.
Vitex trifolia (Linne, fil. suppl. pi., 293.)
Tana and Aneityum. From the latter island with five leaflets,
representing apparently Vitex bicolor (Willdenow, Enumerat. Plant.
Hort. Berolin , p. 606.} Leaflets sessile or conspicuously stalked.
Premna obtusifolia (R. Brown, Prodr. ,Flor. Nov.
Holland, 512.)
Aniwa, in woods. Five feet high. Flowers white. Fruit black.
The seemingly identical species occurs in New Caledonia and Samoa,
according to the collections of Dr. Veillard and the Rev. S. T. Whitmee,
but the distinctions between P. integrifolia (Linne, Mantiss. 252) P.
Taitensis (J. C. Schauer, in De Candolle, Prodr. xi., 638) and P. latifolia
(Roxburgh, Flor. Ind., in., 76) have never yet been set forth with
clearness. Roxburgh designates the flowers of the last mentioned plant
as yellow. The length of the petioles of P. obtusifolia is variable, and
the leaves verge more or less into an oval or orbicular or cordate
form.
MYRSINEAE.
Maes a baeobotrys (Roemer et Schultes, Syst. Vegetal?.,
v. 226.)
Tana, on sides of hills. Height up to about fifteen feet. Leaves
charactaceous, verging sometimes into an almost orbicular form.
Bracteoles rhomboid-orbicular. Lobes of the calyx almost deltoid; those
of the corolla about as long as the tube, roundish semiovate, white.
The opposite leaves of some species of Ardisia on the one hand, and
the almost woody stem of several Lysimachiae on the other hand, oblitrate
still more the physiognomic differences between Myrsineae and Primu-
laceae.
Mr. Campbell’s collection from Tana contains also a branchlet with
flower buds only of a sapotaceous tree, evidently distinct from the like-
wise yet obscure Bassia obovata (G. Forst., Prodr., p. 35) from the same
island. The sap of this tree should be subjected to experiments for
ascertaining whether it could be converted into gutta-percha; it being now
well known that many very different kinds of sapotaceous trees yield this
substance, now so extensively in demand for commerce and manu-
factures.


PRIMULACEAE.
Lvsimachia decurrens (G. Forster, Flor. Insul. Austral,
prodr. p. 12 ; L. Javanica, Plume, Bijdragen tot de Flora
van Nederlandsch , Indie , p. 736 ; L. multiflora, Wallichin
Candolle prodr. vm., 62, non Klatt, fide Miquel Annal.
Mas. Bot. Lugdun, Batav., iv., 145 ; L. sinica, Miquel
in yourn. de Botan., Ne'er land, 1., no.)
Herbaceous, glabrous; leaves scattered, membranous, almost
lanceolate, acuminate, narrowed into a conspicuous and decurrent
petiole, mainly towards the margin glandulous; racemes terminal,
many-flowered; bracts subulate-linear, shorter than the pedicels ;
flowers small; corolla white, little longer than the lanceolate segments
of the calyx ; its lobes twice as long as the tube, blunt, entire, almost
oblong; stamens disconnected, exserted; anthers almost oval, many
times shorter than the capillary filaments; staminodia none ; style
rather long, filiform; capsule globose, valveless, slightly excelling the
calyx in length; seeds smooth, almost tetrahedrous, numerous,
wingless.
In open flats of Tana. A herb, about one foot high, not much
branched. Stems fistulose, prominently angular. Leaves, when fully
developed, from two to three inches long, entire, somewhat paler be-
neath. Racemes attaining a length of eight inches, but occasionally
few-flowered, and then hardly above one inch long. Pedicels thin,
very spreading, at first about two lines, subsequently four lines long,
angular, beset with exceedingly minute glands. Calyces about one
and a-half lines long; the segments broadly or oftener narrowly
lanceolate, at the inner side marked with four streaks. Corolla, chiefly
in its lower part, dotted with minute dark glands ; its lobes overlapping
in bud. Stamens inserted on the base of the lobes of the corolla.
Filaments one and a-half to two lines long, downward beset with
minute black prominent glands. Anthers versatile, about one-fourth
of a line long. Style also glabrous, thinly filiform, slightly thickened
upwards, about two lines long, persistent. Stigma depressed, exceed-
ingly minute. Capsule extensively surrounded by the appressed calyx,
thinly cartilagineous or slightly crustaceous, measuring one and a-half
to two lines, breaking at last irregularly, outside opaque, inside very
shining. Placenta thinly and conspicuously stalked, globular, densely
covered with the seeds. The latter dark brown or black, smooth, of
about a quarter line measurement, flat at the vertex, thus forming,
with the placenta, an even globular mass.
From the material, brought by Mr. Campbell, I am now enabled to
bring this plant, which was buried in obscurity for almost a century,
anew into fuller light; and therefore I offer now a somewhat extensive
description of it. The two Forsters discovered it in I ana during
Cook’s second voyage, and the younger Forster gave, in 1786, the


first and hitherto only description of the Tana plant, in the work
above quoted, with the customary briefness of the time. Blume, not
having access to Forsters’ plant, was prevented from recognising it,
when he discovered the identical species in Java; but I find original
specimens from Blume in my collection, precisely agreeing with the
plant from the New Hebrides. Dr. Klatt, in his elaborate and pro-
fusely illustrated monography of the genus Lysimachia, published in
1866 [Abhandlungen aus dem Gebiete der Natur-wissenschaften, Ham-
burg,) passes Lysimachia decurrens, as then almost unknown. My
late friend, Dr. Berthold Seemann, in his highly meritorious work on
the Fiji plants, just completed, and in its concluding portions posthu-
mous, alludes passingly {Flora Vitiensis, p. 147) to the original plant
of Forster’s, which he had the advantage of re-examining in the British
Museum, and identified with it Macgillivray’s Lysimachia from the isle
of Pines. I possess L. decurrens also from New Caledonia, where
Mons. Pancher found it in “ prairies humides,” the specific identity
not having been established before.
Since the issue of Klatt’s monography, many new localities have
been additionally recorded for the species then enumerated. On this
occasion it would lead too far to dwell on that particular subject; but
it may here be observed that the following species have since been
defined :
Lysimachia Cousiniana, Cosson. On the river Zhour, near Collo
in Algeria.
Lysimachia Keiskeana, Miquel, Annul. Mus. Bot., Lugdun,
Batav., hi., 120. (L. acroadenia, Maxim. Melang. Biolog.,
vi., 272 ; L. multiflora, Klatt in Hamburg Abhandlungen,
1866, part iv., p. 14, non Wallich,) Japan.
Lysimachia Sikokiana, Miquel, I. c., in., 121. Japan.
Lysimachia inconspicua, Miquel, Journ. de Botaniq., Neerland.
1., no, South China.
Lysimachia salicifolia, F. von Mueller in Bentham’s Flor.
Austral., iv., 269. New England (N. S. Wales); Gipps-
land.
Lysimachia Christina, Hance in Trimen’s Journal of Botany,
1873, p. 167. North-east China.
Lysimachia samolina, Hance. North-east China.
Lysimachia Hillebrandi, J. Hook, according to Seemann’s Flora
Vitiens. p. 147. Sandwich Islands.
Lysimachia pacifica. Lubinia pacifica, Seemann, I. c., p. 147.
Isle of Pines.


It might still be added, that L, deltoidea, Wight, Illustrat. of
Indian Bot., 11., 137, tab. 144, has been reduced to L. Japonica by Dr.
Thwaites (enumeration of Ceylon Plants, p. 172) ; further, that L.
quadriflora (Sims in Botan. Magaz., tab. 660) by priority should take
precedence of L. longifolia (Pursh Flora of North America, 1., 135,)
although the excellent Dr. Asa Gray still upholds the latter appella-
tion. (See Manual of Botany of the Northern United States, fifth
edition, 1870, p. 316.)
L. decurrens is nearest allied to L. lobelioides (Wallich in Roxb.
Flor. Ind., 11., 22) which, according to Himalaian specimens from Dr.
Falconer, differs already in its capsules valved towards the summit.
L. Leschenaultii, (Duby in Candolle prodr. vm., 68,) also from upper
India, of which I have no authentic museum-plants for comparison,
is distinguished, according to the illustrations given by Wight and
Klatt, in more distinctly denticulated leaves, and in a more general
and conspicuous glandular pubesence. It requires closer com-
parison.
ASCLEPIADEAE.
Asclepias Curassavica (Linne, System. Veget., 289 ; spec,
plant, 1., 314-)
Aneityum ; frequent now, though originally immigrated from
tropical America.
Hoya australis (R. Brown in the Transactions of the Horti-
cultural Society of London, vil, 28.)
Tana, the original place of discovery of this plant; Dr. Seemann
having identified it with Asclepias volubilis (G. Forster, prodr. p. 21.)
In Tana it grows on rocks along the sea.
APOCYNEAE,
Cerbera Lactaria (Hamilton in De Candolle, prodr.
vm.. 253.)
Tana, frequent; there a tree about twenty feet high. Mr. Camp-
bell’s specimens are without fruit, and imperfectly in flower, but seem
to belong to the above noted species. He describes the fruits egg-
shaped, green, and abont two inches long. The same species appears
to occur in Queensland and New Caledonia. It differs from C.
Odollam (Gaertner, de fructibus, 11., 193, tab. 124) in shorter less
acute lobes of the calyx, and in smaller and blunter lobes of the
corolla, which are almost as broad as long, further in smaller fruits.


Tabernaemontana orientalis (R. Brown, Prodr. Flor.
Nov., Holland, 468.)
Efate, together with Ixora Pavetta. Only the fruit gathered.
CONVOLVULACEAE.
Convolvulus parviflorus (Vahl, Symbol, in., 29.)
Efate. Mr. Campbell notes the flowers as light-yellow. R. &G.
Forster originally found this plant in New Caledonia already during
Captain Cook’s second great discovery voyage; but it had hitherto
not been brought from any part of Polynesia, although it is known to
be amply dispersed over continental and insular India and the more
littoral parts of tropical Australia.
CASUARINEAE.
Casuarina equisetifolia (R. & G. Forster, Charact.
Gen. p. 103, fig. 52.)
Aniwa.
CONIFERAE.
Nageia cupressina (Podocarpus cupressina, R. Brown in
Memoir, du Musee, xiil, 75.)
New Hebrides. L’Heritier’s genus Podocarpus was first publicly
noticed in 1806, by La Billardiere {Nov. Roll, plant spec, n., n) in a
note referring to the South-African Podocarpus elongata, and repub-
lished by Persoon in 1807 ( Synops. Plantar., n., 580,) whereas
Gaertner’s genus Nageia was clearly rendered known already in 1788
{De Fructib. et Seminib., 1, 191, tab. 49.)
SCITAMINEAE.
Guillaina Novo-Ebudica.
Flowers solitary in the axil of the thinly chartaceous very obtuse
slightly distant bracts, without any special cylindrical bracteole; lobes
of the corolla as well as the labellum small and short.
Santo, somewhat inland, in open places of the forests.
The finder noticed only one individual plant, which was six feet
high. Well developed leaves, long lanceolar, one to one and a-half
feet long, about two inches broad, paler beneath ; clasping portion of


the petiole fissured longitudinally, terminated by a semi-ovate firm
ligula; free portion of the petiole very short. Spike one and a-half
feet long, proliferous at the base, the offshoots bearing leaves one to
two inches long. Bracts red, not crowded, oblong or oval, somewhat
cuneate, moderately spreading, one to one and a-half inches long, and
a third to a half inch broad, or the lower ones still larger. Calyces
very slender, one-half to two-thirds of an inch long, tubular, with
three short acute teeth, not conspicuously slit downward. Corolla
half exserted ; its tube gradually widening at the summit, its lobes
narrow and acute. Labellum roundish, measuring hardly two lines,
crisp, above bearing two raised lines and some short downs; its length
hardly exceeding that of the limb of the corolla. Filament linear,
channelled, on the surface towards the summit finely silky. Anther
cells contiguous, parallel, about one and a-half line long ; the apex of
the anther protracted into a minute roundish membrane. Style ca-
pillary, glabrous. Stigma small, obconic, truncate. Fruit unknown.
This plant, impressingly beautiful through its long red spikes, is
placed here provisionally into the genus Guillaina, the identification
resting ou the examination of the remnants of a few shrivelled flowers.
Genericly this plant, as well as the original G. purpurata (Veillard,
Notes sur quelques Plantes interessantes de la Nouvelle Caledonie, p. 4)
recedes materially from Globba, in the completely three-celled ovary,
the ovules being attached to the parietal part of the septa. So far as
observations could be instituted on existing material, the New Cale-
donian typical plant diverges from that of Santo in thicker leaves and
bracts, in longer lobes of the flowers, and especially in the presence of
an accessory tubular bract, which frequently embraces two flowers,
and is sometimes binerved and bilobed, thus indicating a confluence of
two bracteoles. The only specimen of Dr. Veillard’s plant, which
could be compared, was presented with numerous other New Cale-
donian plants to the Melbourne Phytographic Museum by Madame
Lenormand, of Vire, Calvados—a lady who for many years has most
generously and enthusiastically promoted the progress of the scientific
knowledge of plants, and especially those of the marine Floras.
Canna Indica (Linne, spec.pi., i.)
Tana. The variety with red flowers.
ORCHIDEAE.
Spathoglottis pacifica (G. Reichenbach in Seemann’s
Flor. Vitiens p. 300.)
Eramanga. Only a few flowers occur in Mr. Campbell’s collec-
tion ; these seem not to differ from those of the Fiji-plant above.


named. S. plicata (G. Reichenbach, I. c.,) from New Caledonia, ac-
cording to Turpin’s delineation (La Billardiere, sert. Nov. Celled., t. 25)
has the labellum saccate at the base. Two other allied plants of the
genus are :S. plicata (Blume, Bijdragen, p. 4 00 ) from India, and S.
Paulinas (F. Mueller, Fragmenta Phytographice Australia, vol. 6, p. 95)
from Queensland.
Peristylus Novo-Ebudarum ( Habenaria Novo-Ebudarum,
F. V. M.)
Glabrous; leaves several, lanceolate, membraneous ; spike slender;
bracts semi-lanceolate, acuminate, almost as long as the flowers ;
sepals very small, lanceolate-oblong, the inner two hardly shorter;
labellum nearly as long as the inner sepals, broadly unguiculate, the
upper part rhombiform in outline, with two shallow sinus in front, thus
three-toothed, the teeth blunt, the middle one slightly longer; spur
globular-ovate, gibbous, attenuated upwards, hardly half as long as the
calyx; column extremely short.
Aneityum, on hilly and bushy timberland.
The whole plant about one foot high. Tuber narrow, ellipsoid-
cylindrical, measuring about one inch in length. Petioles tubular, ex-
cept the summit, the lower ones leafless and blunt; free part of the
upper ones very short. Lowest leaves only about one inch long ; all
others attaining a length generally from two to four inches, and a width
of one-fourth to three-fourths of an inch; apex acute. Spike a few
inches long- Bracts three to five lines long. Flowers, according to
the discoverer of the plant, brownish-yellow. Sepals about one and
a-half line long, the upper one almost oval, all bluntish and undivided.
Labellum slightly downy on the surface, only crenated in front, the
lateral teeth or lobes roundish ; cilia or conspicuous appendages none.
Spur less than a line long, blunt at the base, turgid in front. Anther
bluntly bilobed. Pollen masses, consisting of minute granules. Ovary
slender, gradually attenuated to the summit, sessile.
Peristylus Lawii (Wight, Icon. Plantar. Ind Orient., tab. 1695)
from Malabar, shows the nearest affinity. The flowers of the Aneit-
yum plant are still smaller, and the teeth of the labellum are still
shorter and not acute. P. brevilobus (Thwaites, Enumer Plant.
Zeilan., 311) differs already in its short and dense spike, and in the
minuteness of the middle tooth of the labellum. The genus
Habenaria, in its normal type, extends to Samoa, one long-spurred
species having been discovered there by the Rev. S. J, Whitmee.
Dendrobium Tokai exists there also.
Gastrodia OROBANCHOIDES.
Racemes few-flowered, slightly hairy; bracts lanceolate, acuminate;
pedicels extremely short ; calyces small, their lobes much shorter than


the undivided tube ; labellum nearly half exserted, cleft to the middle
into two rhomboid-cuneate in front and outward irregularly denticu-
lated lobes, slightly thickened but not cristate towards the middle;
column exceedingly short; anther very minutely rostrate, also ter-
minated by two narrow-spathulate transparent appendages, and
furthermore produced on both sides into two linear-subulate laciniae.
Eramanga ; discovered by the Rev. Hugh Fraser.
Two raceme exstant in Mr. Campbell’s collections. Bract below
the raceme empty, about two-thirds of an inch long, tubular towards
the base, like the floral bracts, membraneous. Flowers crowded al-
most into a corymb. Their bracts three to five lines long, one-nerved,
beset with but few hairs. Calyces membraneous, more or less bluntly
or acutely five-toothed, oblique at the broad base, there rounded on
the outer side, and almost gibbous on the inner one, only about three
lines long; the petaline lobes still more delicately tender than the
sepaline ones ; the tube not separated into two labia as in the section
Leucorchis. Labellum four to five lines long, membranous; the
sinus between the two lobes forming an acute angle ; the lower por-
tion of the labellum broad-linear, canalicular-bent. Appendages of
the anther less than one line long. Pollen-masses oblique ovate,
granular. Young fruit obovate, somewhat pear-shaped, conspicuously
constricted at the junction of the floral parts. Fruit-pedicels hardly
one line long.
This very remarkable species accords in the size of its flowers
and their paucity with G. verucosa (Blume, Mus. Bot. Lugdun. 11., 173)
and G. pallens (Epiphanes pallens, G. Reichenbach, in See man ns
Flor Vit., 296; Didymoplexis pallens, Griffith in McClelland s
Calcutta fourn. of Nat. Hist., 1844, P- x?; Apetalon minutum, Wight,
Icon. Plant. Ind. Orient., v., tab. 1758 ;) while it agrees in the short-
ness of the column, and also in the very abbreviated pedicels, with
G. Cunninghami (J. Hooker, Flor. Nov. Zeel., 1., 251,) but it differs
not only from these three congeners, but also from all others hitherto
known, namely, G. sesamoides (R. Brown, prodr. 330) G. gracilis,
G elata, G. Hasseltii (Blume, I. c.) G. silvatica (Leucorchis sylvatica,
Blume, /. c., vol. 1., 31) and G.Javanica (Endlicher Genera P1ant. ,212)
in the deeply bilobed and partly exserted labellum.
Corymborchis veratrifolia (Blume, Les Orchidees de
Archipel. Indien. et du ffcipon, p. 125, planch. 32 and 43-)
Santo, in dense forests. Attains a height of six feet.
LILIACEAE.
Dianella intermedia (Endlicher, Prodr. Flor. Norfolk ,
page 28.) . . .
Aneityum and Eramanga. The fibre of all Dianella species is of


remarkable strength. The Pacific plants of this genus require yet a
fuller description from ampler material.
FLAGELLARIEAE.
Joinvillea elegans (Gaudichaud, Voyage autour du Monde
sur la Bonite, Botanique, Allas, pi. 39, fig. 7, 26.
Aneityum ; very abundant on flat open ground. Mr. Campbell
observes that the plant is up to ten feet high, and very useful to the
natives, it being used for trellises, thatches, fences and other require-
ments. The material before me consists of a flowering panicle, and
another with umipe fruits. I note some discrepancies from the
descriptions given by Jos. Hooker (Kew Miscellany, 1855, p. 200, pi. 6)
The anthers are attached to the filament near their base, and the
latter are not as long as or even longer than the anthers, but so short
as to render the anthers almost sessile. Brogniart and Gris (Annales
des Scienc. Natur., 1864, p. 332) also found the “ filets assez courts.”
These diversities of structure, in all probability, may be reconciled to
dimorphism ; or perhaps the stamens become elongated in advancing
age. The sepals are more or less acuminate, and the three inner ones
are sometimes hardly shorter than the rest. In Fiji specimens, re-
corded by Seemenn ( Flor. Viti., p. 315) the stigmata are mostly yet
persistent in the ripe fruit, while the berries of the Aneityum plant
are generally deprived of the stigmata already in a young state. When
not all three seeds are ripening, then the berry becomes oblique.
This stately somewhat palm-like plant would probably prove hardy
here, like the allied Flagellaria Indica, and would for scenic effect be
valuable in our gardens.
CYPERACEAE.
Rhynchospora aurea (Vahl, Enumer. Plant. 11., 291.)
Aneityum ; also in Samoa. Whitmee.
SCLERIA MARGARITIFERA (WilldeHOW, Sp. PL, IV., 321.)
Santo, on open flats. Found by Mr. C. H. Walter, during the
Victorian Eclipse Expedition on Fitzroy Island.
The brown disk, divided into three acute deltoid lobes, protrated
downward and encircling the thus hollow base of the fruit, distinguishes
this species from Scleria laevis (Retzius, Observ. Bot., iv., 13) and from
Scleria Sumatrensis (Retzius, Observ., v., 19.)
Fimbristylis communis (Kunth, Enumerat. Plantar.,
11., 234.)
Aneityum, on hill-sides near the coast. Farvensis (Vahl, Enumer.,


11, 201) is likely to exist also in the New Hebrides, it having been found
in New Caledonia and the Fiji Islands. It has shorter leaves, and al-
most smooth fruits.
Cyperus distans (Linne, fil., SuppL Plant., 103.)
Aneityum. A variety with larger and less distant florets. In Samoa
also, according to the Rev. S. J. Whitmee.
GRAMINEAE.
Coix Lacryma (Linne, Spec. Plant., 1378.)
Tana, on the sides of streams. The natives use the seeds as beads.
Centotheca lappacea (Desvaux in Journ. de Botanique
1813, p. 70.)
Aneityum and Tana.
Panicum compositum (Linne, Spec. Plant., 84.)
Santo, near the sea-shores; also in Aneityum. Several of the nu-
merous forms of this excedingly variable species occur on these islands.
Panicum sanguinale (Linne, Spec. Plant, 84.)
Aneityum, near the coast.
Thuarea sarmentosa (Persoon, Synops. Plant., 1., no.)
Aneityum; frequent on the sandy sea-shores. The spikes sometimes
above an inch long.
Cenchrus anomoplexis (La Billardiere, Sertum Austro-
Caledon., vol. 1., p. 14, tab. 19.)
Santo, on open hill-sides. The specific validity of this grass as dis-
tinct from Cenchrus Australis (R. Brown, Prodr. 196) requires yet to be
further demonstrated. Sprengel (Systerna Vegctabilium, Cura posteriores,
page 33) regarded La Billardiere’s plant merely as a variety of that of
R. Brown. Its destination seems to rest mainly on larger size, particu-
larly of leaves and flowers. The segments of the inner involucellum are
more densely bearded than shown in the analytic figure of the plate above
quoted. Comparisons with C. calyculatus (Cavan., Icon., v., 39, t. 463;
C. Fainsis, Steud. glum., 1., 419) are needed.


Erianthus Japonicus (Beauvois, Agrostographie, p. 14 ;
Eulalia Japonica, Trinius Acta Societ. Petropolit. 1833,
page 333-)
Aneityum, near the sea-shores. The stalks attain a length of five
feet. Steudel (Synopsis Plantarum glumacearum, 1., 412) and Seemann
(Flora Vitiensis, p. 321) describe the leaves as linear-filiform, and
Bentham also (Flora of Hong Kong, p. 420) calls them narrow. This ap-
plies, however, scarcely even to the uppermost leaves, and almost pre-
vents the recognition of this species from description alone; inasmuch as the
lower leaves, not only of specimens from the New Hebrides, but also
from the Fiji Islands and from Whampoa (the latter from Dr. Hance’s
collection) are over half an inch or even fully one inch broad. Such,
indeed, are shown likewise in Turpin’s plate 18 of La Billardiere’s
Sertum Austro-Caledonicum.
Apluda mutica (Linne, Spec. Plant, i 486.)
Aneityum. One of the two lateral peduncles bears not rarely a two-
flowered spikelet, articulated with it, one of its flowers being staminifer-
ous, the other separately pistilliferous; but the latter seems not to perfect
any grain. The ultimate peduncles or pedicels are at the base
laterally dilated, to form a receptacle for the sessile fertile spikelet. The
flowers of the latter are not always advancing to their normal develop-
ment. A. geniculata (Roxburgh, Flor. Ind., 1., 327) seems not specific-
ally distinct from A. mutica. This is the first record of Apluda in Poly-
nesia; nor is this genus found hitherto represented in Australia. As a
whole the grassflora of the South-Sea Islands seems remarkably scanty.
Beside the few gramineae alluded to in Dr. Seemann’s work, and those
mentioned in these pages, our museum collections here contain only
Lepturus acutiglumis (Steudel, Glumac., 1., 359) from the almost unex-
plored Gilbert’s group, procured there by the Rev. S. J. Whitmee;
Setaria glauca (Beauvois, Essai d'une nouvelle Agrostographie, p. 51)
from New Caledonia; Aira sabulorum (La Bill., Sert. Austro-Caled.,
p. 51, tab. 21,) Andropogon cortortus (L., Spec. Plant, 1480) both from
the same island; Andropogon pertusus (Willd., Spec. Plant, iv., 22)
in its efoveolate form from Fiji, where it was gathered by Mr.
Swanston, and two other Andropogons, are allied to A. fragilis (R. Br.,
202) from New Caledonia, the other belongin gto the section Spodi-
opogon, and from the Loyalty Islands.
LYCOPODIACEAE,
Lycopodium cernuum (Linne, Spec. Plant. 1566.)
New Hebrides.
FILICES.
Selaginella Wallichii (Spring, Monograph. Lycopod.,
page 86.)
New Hebrides. Lycopodium phlegmaria (Linne, Spec. Plant,


1564) as well as L. sq.uarrosum (G. Forster. Prodr., p. 86) were some
years ago collected in the same group of islands by Mr. H. Richards, of
Sydney, who communicated to the author besides many other ferns from
these islands. The same zealous collector discovered there the Lycopodium
serratum (Thunb., Plot. Japan., p. 341, tab. 38) the most lovely of all
species; it was found also in Honolulu by Dr. Hillebrand, an early contributor
to our museum. Like the last-mentioned species also L. laterale (R.
Brown, Prodr., 165,) noted in 1824 as New Caledonian already by La
Billardiere (Serf. Nov. Caled., p. 10., tab. 15,) remained unrecorded in
Dr. Seemann’s work.
Acrostichum repandum (Blume, Flor. yavx, 39,
tab. 14 and 15.)
New Hebrides. F. Campbell, Esq. In the fifth volume of the
Fragmenta Phytographice Australia, p. 130, I referred at some length to
the characteristics of this fern from Bishop Patteson’s Eramanga collec-
tion.
Schizaea Forsteri (Sprengel, Anleitnngzur Kenntniss der
Gewaechse, m., 175.)
Aneityum. This species is often misunderstood and confused with
S. dichotoma (Smith, Act. Turin, 1791, p. 419,) from which it differs in
the more regularly flabellar disposition of the frond-segments, and also
in the proportionately but not always absolutely greater width of the
latter, by which means the aspect of the plant becomes very distinct
when compared with the outline given by the unequal heights of the
ramifications of S. dichotoma, the sori of that species not being placed
into an almost equal radius. But a still more important distinction be-
tween these two plants consists in the arrangement of the sori, which are
strictly pinnate in S. dichotoma, though the lower ones may occasionally
be bifid or trifid; whereas in S. Fosteri the disposition of the sori is
fascicular, almost in the manner of that of S. digitata, (Swartz,
Filicum, p. 150, t. 4,) although their length is very much less. The sori
of S. Fosteri are sometimes reduced to two or three in total number, and
generally less numerous than those of S. dichotoma, which however vary
from eight to about sixty, with a length from one and a-half to five
lines.
Specimens of S. Forsteri have on this occasion been compared from
New Caledonia, Fiji, various islands of the New Hebrides, also from Lify
(Allan Hughan.) Dr. Seeraann records it from Tahiti, but of the occur-
rence of this plant anywhere in Australia I am not aware, although
this, as well as S. digitata, may be expected to occur in Queens-
land.
Schizaea bifida (Swartz, Synops. Filic., p. 151) embraces merely such
forms of S. dichotoma, as are reduced from the typical very multifid state
to but few divisions of the frond; and this reduction may even proceed so
far as to render the plant utterly branchless, when it assumes closely the
appearance of the South-African S. pectinata (Sm.. 1.c., from which S.


tenella, Kaulfuss, Enumer Filic., t. I, fig. 7, may not be specifically
distinct) S. dichotoma is found sparingly from the southern extreme of
Australia through the littoral eastern regions quite to the remotest
northern points of the Australian continent; it occurs also in New Cale-
donia, Fiji, and Samoa, and likewise in Mauritius, according to Lady
Barkly’s collections. It may exceptionally be seen fruit-bearing when
hardly two inches high.
Lygodium reticulatum (Schkuhr, Barren Kraeuter,
tab. 139.)
New Hebrides. The fronds membraneous, as in plants of this
species from N. E. Australia.
Angiopteris evecta (Hoffmann in Comment. Soc. Reg.
Goetting , xil, p. 29, tab. 5.)
New Hebrides
Alsophila lunulata (R. Brown, Prodr. 158.)
New Hebrides. A. decurrens (Hooker, Spec. Filic., 1., 51, and
Cyathea propinqua, Mettenius in Miquel, Annul. Mus. Bot. Lugd.
Batav., 1., 56) occur in a collection of ferns kindly gathered and com-
municated by Captain Fraser, the commander of the mission ship “Day-
spring.” Several other tree ferns are known already from these isles,
and others remain likely to be discovered. The characteristics, however,
of the stems, generally very distinctive, are ascertained in but few
cases.
Polypodium acrostichoides (G. Forster, Flor. Insul. Austr.
Prodr. p. 81.)
New Hebrides.
Polypodium phymatodes (Linne, Mantiss. Plant , 306.)
New Hebrides.
Polypodium rigidulum (Swartz, Synops. Filic., p. 34.)
New Hebrides. The magnificent P. conjugatum (Kaulfuss, Das
Wesen der Farn. Kraeuter, p. 104) was found in the group by Capt.
Fraser.
Aspidium exaltatum (Swartz, Synops. Filic., p. 45.)
New Hebrides.


Aspidium aculeatum (Swartz in Schrader’s Journal fuer
die Botanik, 1800, 11., 37.)
New Hebrides. This fern, though regarded as almost cosmopolitan
is absent from most parts of Australia, being there restricted, as far as
hitherto ascertained, to the south-eastern and eastern regions.
Asplenium falcatum (La March, Encyclopaedic method.,
ii., 306.)
New Hebrides. Under the above specific name A. polyodon and
A. caudatum (G. Forster, Flor. Insul. Austr., Prodr. p. 80) are to be
combined.
Asplenium Nidus (Linne, Spec. Plantar ., 1537.)
New Hebrides.
Asplenium Vulcanicum (Blume, Enumerat. Plant. Jav.
Filic., 176.)
New Hebrides, from whence this stately fern was not recorded
before.
Pteris longifolia (Linne, Spec. Plant., p. 1047.)
New Hebrides. F. Campbell. Collected in Eramanga already by
Bishop Patteson, the martyr of Santa Cruz, who, amidst the arduous
duties devolving on his high office, set also an example for zealous and
devoted appreciation of Divine revelation, as afforded us in the works of
nature. So, through the personal exertions of this unfortunate prelate,
we became early acquainted with numerous plants fromi the islands then
under his Lordship’s ecclesiastical care.
The marginal serratures of the pinnae of P. longifolia are at times very
conspicuous; the auricular protrusion of the anterior basal angle measures
occasionally fully a quarter of an inch.
Pteris crenata (Swartz, Synops. Filic.,
p. 96 and 290.)
Aneityum, F. Campbell; Eramanga, Bishop Patteson,
Pteris comans (G. Forster, Flor. Insul. Austral., Prodr.
P- 79-)
Eramanga. Collected by Bishop Patteson, Captain Fraser, and
Mr. F. Campbell. The lateral pinnae attain a length of one and a-half
feet; also the upper segments are sometimes lobed.
Pteris quadriaurita (Retzius, Obscrvat., vl, 38.)
New Hebrides.


Pteris aquilina (Linne, Spec. Plant. 1074.)
New Hebrides.
Vittaria elongata (Swartz, Synops. Filic., 109.)
New Hebrides.
Lindsaea nitens (Blume, Enum. Plant. Jav. Filices,
217.)
New Hebrides.
Adiantum caudatum (Linnd, Mantiss. Plant., p. 308.)
New Hebrides. Seemingly not known before from any of the
Polynesian groups.
Adiantum diaphanum (Blume, Enum. Plant, jpav.
Filic., 215.
New Hebrides. Many observations, bearing also on the ferns of
Polynesia, are recorded in the writer’s “Vegetation of the Chatham
Islands (1864) p. 62-74 ; and in his “ Fragmenta Phytographise
Australise,” vol. V. (1866) p. m-142.
Mr. Campbell’s collection contains also a few mosses of the genera
Hypnum, Spiridens and Leucobryum, and likewise several algae referable
to the following genera :• —Halimeda, Galaxaura, Turbinaria, and
Sargassum.
Printed by George Mercer, Malop Street West, Geelong.








