

CONTRIBUTION FROM THE BRITISH
TREASURY.
(No. 22.)
1854.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
ENCLOSURES IN MESSAGE No. 11.
Ordered by the Council to be printed, 25th July, 1854.




(No. 154.)
[Executive.]
Van Diemen's Land, Government House,
2nd July, 1853.
My Lord Duke,
In a Despatch No. 32, dated 22nd February, 1853, Your Grace, in notifying to me
that Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land was immediately to cease, was pleased to
direct me to call upon the Comptroller-General to report his views as to the best course to
be taken in carrying out the progressive reductions in the different Convict Establish-
ments ; and to annex to this Report such comments or observations as might appear to me
best adapted to bring the whole subject clearly before Her Majesty’s Government.
I have the honor to forward herewith the Report which I have received from the
Comptroller-General, accompanied with such tabulated Abstracts of the Registers of the
Department as will enable Your Grace to see at a glance the probable period at which the
principal reductions in the department will begin to operate in lessening materially the
expenditure.
3. This Report is so clear and precise as to leave me but little to say, so far as
regards the reductions to be made in the Convict Department itself. I fully concur with
the Comptroller-General in recommending the maintenance, for some years at all events,
of the existing system, which has worked, and is working in the most satisfactory manner;
and I have every confidence that, under the judicious arrangements suggested by Mr.
Hampton, the difficulties attendant upon the transference of the Convicts from Norfolk
Island will be overcome, and that the discipline to which they will be subjected at Port
Arthur will be productive of such effects upon them as to allow their gradual emancipation
to take place with the least possible injury to the Colony.
4. The Comptroller-General, in his Report, has confined himself of course to that
branch of the subject which has reference to the changes to be introduced into his own
Department: but as the arrangements of the Colonial Government are in many instances
dependent on, or controlled by, considerations connected with the penal condition of the
Colony, it will be my duty now to bring these under Your Grace’s notice, in order that I
may be informed as to the views of Her Majesty’s Government with regard to them; and
be furnished with such general instructions as may be sufficient for my guidance in
organising the Legislative and Executive changes which must sooner or later be adopted
in this Colony, in consequence of the cessation of Transportation.
Ist.—As regards the treatment of Offenders.
5. As Transportation has hitherto been the form under which the more severe kinds
of secondary punishment have been inflicted, the practice has been to send all persons sen-
tenced to transportation to the different Penal Stations, where the cost of their maintenance,
and that of enforcing the discipline to which they are subjected, is defrayed exclusively
by the British Treasury.
6. From henceforward of course not only must an alteration be made in the Criminal
Law of the Colony, substituting certain periods of imprisonment with hard labour for
transportation, but arrangements will have to be made by the Colony for establishing and
maintaining certain places of detention where the labour of offenders so sentenced may be
made available for the construction of such Public Works as can be performed by them
without affording an opportunity of escape, or relaxing in any way the discipline to which
they must be subjected in order to make the punishment effective.


7. In these arrangements the penal condition of a large proportion of the population
must be specially noted: for all those who may still be Convicts, under whatever form of
indulgence they may be living, will, should they subject themselves to punishment, be
maintained at the expense of the British Treasury at some of the present Convict Stations;
while those who have always been free, or whose term of punishment has expired, or who
have received a Conditional Pardon, will have to be maintained by the Colony.
8. Taking this, however, as the general rule, there will be certain classes of exceptions
with regard to which it will be desirable that I should receive from Your Grace such
general instructions as may guide me in dealing with the particular cases as they occur.
For instance, a Convict whose character has been notoriously bad, who has been sentenced
again and again to every kind of punishment, who has perhaps been sent out to the
Colony as an incorrigible offender, becomes free, and commits in a short time an offence
which subjects him to a long period of imprisonment with hard labour. Is this man to
be maintained at the expense of the Colony simply because he happened to be free at the
time he committed the offence for which he is undergoing punishment ? It would seem
hardly fair to charge the Colony with the expense of maintaining a man to whom a prison
is almost a home.
9. I am aware that it would be difficult to define the amount of previous criminality
which ought to transfer the charge of maintaining an offender from the Colony to the
Convict Department. Indeed it would be impossible to do so in any written instruction.
Some discretion should therefore be given to the Lieutenant-Governor in interpreting the
general rule, by a due exercise of which constant discussion between the Convict Depart-
ment and the Colonial Government will be avoided, as well as constant references to the
Secretary of State.
2nd.—As regards the maintenance of Sick, Invalids, Lunatics, &c.
10. At present the various Establishments for the treatment of the sick, the support
of the aged and infirm, and the care of lunatics, are maintained by the Convict Depart-
ment. To these different Establishments the Colonial Government has been accustomed
to send those for whom it may be compelled to provide the particular kind of accommo-
dation which their case may require, paying of course some given sum for their treatment
and maintenance.
11. Here, again, questions will arise as to the fund upon which any given individual
will be chargeable.
12. In 1848 I brought the subject under the notice of Lord Grey; and in a Despatch
No. 200, dated 2-3rd December 1848, I was told “ that the Colony was not to be charge-
able for the maintenance, in Convict Hospitals or Invalid Depots of persons sent out as
Convicts who, either at the time of their arrival in the Colony, or when they ceased to be
employed in compulsory labour on government works, were incapacitated from age or
organic disease, or mental or bodily infirmity, from supporting themselves. ’’
13. At present it is true that it is perfectly competent to Her Majesty’s’Government
to sppcify the conditions upon which any classes of persons shall be admitted into Estab-
lishments maintained at the expense of the British Treasury ; but in a few years it
will be found advisable to transfer these Establishments to the Colonial Government, by
which the relation between the two parties will be precisely reversed ; and in order to
obviate any risk of future discussion, I would suggest a modification of the rule laid down
in the Despatch before quoted, to the effect that the maintenance of those who while they
are Convicts become incapable of maintaining themselves either in consequence of age,
chronic disease, or mental or bodily infirmity, and of those who at the time of their landing
in the Colony were above sixty years of age should be charged to the British Treasury ;
while the cost of the maintenance of all free men should be paid by the Colony.
3rd.—Religious Instruction.
14. In a Despatch No. 554, dated 22nd October 1845, Lord Stanley notified to the
Lieutenant-Governor the appointment of Six Missionary Chaplains; and in a previous
Despatch, No. 553, instructions were given as to the mode in which they were to be
employed. At present but one of the six originally sent out from England is officiating
as a Missionary Chaplain, but others have been from time to time appointed to the vacan-
cies caused by the resignation or promotion of these Reverend Gentlemen; and there are
now four receiving pay from the Convict Department,—one has lately resigned, whose
vacancy is not filled up, and the salary of the sixth is distributed in accordance with the
recommendation of the Bishop, among sundry Catechists officiating in the remote Districts


of the Colony. As the reduction in the number of the men for whose benefit these Chaplains
were originally sent out will in a very short time remove the only ostensible grounds of
claim which can be made upon the Home Government for their support, I should suggest
that in those cases in which it might be in the power of the Lieutenant-Governor to nomi-
nate one of the Missionary Chaplains to a vacant Parish in the Colony it should at once
be done, and the vacancy thus caused should not be filled up; while, with regard to those
for whose provision no such opportunity may offer itself, notice should be given to them
that at the end of three years from the present date, at which period the passholder class of
Convicts will no longer exist, all further payments from the British Treasury to Missionary
Chaplains will cease.
4th.—Contributions to the Police, and towards the expense of Witnesses in Criminal
Trials.
15. The amount of annual contribution is .£25,000, of which £24,000 is for Police
and Gaols, and £lOOO for Witnesses’ expenses.
16. It is not necessary that I should enter into the detail of the reasons which induced
Her Majesty’s Government to grant this amount of aid to the Colony. It is evident,
however, that the same reasons will apply, though with diminished force, for some years
to come. I would wish, however, to call Your Grace’s attention to the fact that since the
period at which the amount of this contribution was fixed the expense of the Police has
very much increased, —that now, even with diminished numbers, the cost is nearly double
that of 1845, —that the cessation of Transportation, by enhancing the price of labour, has
to a certain extent been the cause of the increase. Under these circumstances I would beg
to suggest that no decrease should take place in the amount of this contribution till the com-
mencement of 1855; and after that a reduction of one sixth should be made every year, so
that all payments from the Military Chest on account of Police should cease at the end of
the year 1860. A similar reduction should of course be made in the contribution towards
the expense of Witnesses.
17. It is of course impossible to establish any definite proportion between the relative
liabilities of the Mother Country and the Colony in a question of this kind; but the above
suggestion seems to me to meet the justice of the case, especially as the Convict Depart-
ment will be compelled to maintain an effective local Police in the neighbourhood of their
own Establishments.
sth.—Contribution towards the Salary of the Lieutenant-Governor.
18. By the Act Bth Viet., No. 8, the Salary of the Lieutenant-Governor is'fixed at
£4OOO per annum, of which sum £2OOO has for the last six years and upwards been paid
out of the Military Chest. The same reasons which are conclusive as regards the reduction
of the sum contributed towards the Police and Gaols apply here ; and the diminution in
the business of the Convict Department will at the expiration of three years be such as to
negative all claim on the part of the Colony to be relieved from the payment of the portion
of the Salary of the Lieutenant-Governor. I should therefore recommend that at the termi-
nation of three years from the date of this Despatch this payment should cease.
19. I have now brought under Your Grace’s notice the reductions'in the Convict
Department itself, and in those expenses chargeable on the British Treasury which are
contingent upon the cessation of Transportation, with the single exception of 4 that of the
Military force at present stationed in Van Diemen’s Land.
20. With regard to this, as it is a question of a mixed character, involving not only
the consideration of the obligation on the part of Her Majesty’s Government to place at
the disposal of the Colony a Military force of sufficient strength to maintain order among
the Convict population, but also that of the Military support to be given to Colonies in
general, I need only say that for some years to come a Military force of some strength
will be required to support the Civil authorities in maintaining order among the very bad
class of offenders who will be left on the hands of the Government; and that I should be
sorry to see any reduction in the Military force stationed in the Colony until the experi-
ment of transferring the men from Norfolk Island has been fully carried out.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord Duke,
Your Grace’s most obedient humble Servant,
W. DENISON.
Bis Grace the Duke of Newcastle,
fyc. ifc. cfc.


(No. 23.)
Downing-street, 14th February, 1854.
Sir,
I have had under my consideration your Despatch No. 154, of the 2nd of July
last, accompanied by a Report from the Comptroller-General, and containing the views
which you have formed on the steps to be taken for the progressive reduction of the Con-
vict Establishment in Van Diemen’s Land, in consequence of the abolition of Transpor-
tation to that Colony.
I shall now proceed to convey to you, in succession, the decisions of Her Majesty’s
Government on the leading proposals contained in your Despatch.
First, with regard to the apportionment of the expense of future punishment, the
general rule of course will be, that convicts who commit fresh offences will be punished
at the expense of the Imperial Government, whilst free men or expirees, or holders of
conditional pardons, who commit offences will be punished at the expense of the Colony.
In order, however, to provide equitably for the case of hardened convicts who may
commit fresh crimes very shortly after having served out their time, I have to authorise
you further to adopt the following rule:—Any convict who, within twelve months of
becoming free, either by expiration of sentence or by receipt of a conditional pardon,
shall be convicted of an offence for which he is sentenced to a punishment of two years
or upwards, shall be maintained at the expense of the Imperial Government; but no
claim whatever shall be admissible upon the Home Government in respect of the punish-
ment of a convict for any fresh crime which he may commit after the lapse of one clear
twelvemonth from the date of his becoming free.
Secondly, the maintenance of invalid, lunatic, or pauper convicts, and of those free
men who, at the time of their arrival in the Colony as Convicts, were above sixty years
a g e > but of no other free men, shall be chargeable to the British Treasury.
Thirdly, notice should be given, as you propose, to the several Clergymen concerned,
that at the end of three years, at which period the passholder class will no longer exist
the payments from the British Treasury on account of Chaplains will cease.
Fourthly, with reference to the sum of .£25,000 which is now annually contributed to
the expense of Police and Gaols, you propose that no reduction should occur until the
commencement of the year 1855: that, after that date, a reduction of one-sixth should
be made every year until the payment is extinguished. This rate of reduction does not
appear either sufficiently prompt or sufficiently large. On the other hand, it seems fair
that the reductions should be somewhat less in the two first years, when the number of
Convicts will still be great, than in subsequent years, when it will be rapidly diminishing
For these reasons the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury have concurred with me m
adopting the following scale of reduction, which will commence from the Ist of April
1854: — '
Reduction of the grant in the first year £3OOO
Ditto ditt > second year 4000
Ditto ditto third year 6000
Ditto ditto fourth year 6000
Ditto ditto fifth year 6000
£25,000
Fifthly, I see no objection to your proposal that at the end of three years from the
date of your Despatch, viz., July 1853, the contribution of £2OOO from the British
Treasury towards the Governor’s salary of £4OOO should cease; but it must be borne in
mind that, when that event occurs, it would seem material that the Colonial Legislature
should be induced to make permanently such provision as it may deem fit for maintain-
ing the salary of the Governor at an adequate amount. You will remember that the
supposition (at least in this department) was that such provision had been made: but that
the Law Advisers here (concurring with those in Van Diemen’s Land) were of opinion
that the Act making it was superseded by the provisions of the Act of Parliament
establishing the Van Diemen’s Land Constitution.
Sixthly, with regard to the request which you submit that no early reduction may
be made in the number of Troops maintained in Van Diemen’s Land, 1 have to state that
due attention will be paid to the presence of Convicts in the Colony in regulating the
strength of the military force which shall be there maintained.


The Comptroller-General in his Report supplies some useful information, and
proposes to make reductions as fast as occasions may present themselves.
I have every reliance on your vigilance and on the zeal and efficiency of Mr. Hamp-
ton : but, adverting to the heavy charges which are now thrown on Great Britain for the
maintenance of Convict stations in other parts of the Empire, it is my duty to impress
upon you the importance of seizing the earliest opportunity to make every practicable
reduction, both in the general expenses of the Convict Department and in the establish-
ment itself.
T have the honour to be,
Sir, ’
Your most obedient Servant,
NEWCASTLE.
Lieut.-Governor Sik W. Denison,
fyc. fyc. §c.
