

Peru
/lustralasian dissociation for
.Advancement of Science*
AND
Royal Society of R* $. Ulales.
* 0 %
CONVERSAZIONE
HELD IN THE
Great Hall of the University
of Sydney,
FRIDAY, 13th JANUARY, 1911,
At 8.30 p.m.
J. H. MAIDEN .. } Hon. Secs- of the Combined
F. B. GUTHRIE) Conversazione.


fir. A. Ranclaud will give selections on the Great
Organ during the evening.
The Engineering School, the Fisher Library
and the different Science Laboratories
will be open during the evening, and
Exhibits will be on view.
The Mueller Medal of the Australasian Associ-
ation for the Advancement of Science (for
researches in Natural Science) will be presented
to Mr. Robert Etheridge by the President
of the Association (Prof. Orme Masson, d.sc., f.k.s.)
during the evening


EXHIBITS.
Exhibited in the Great Hall of the University.
Australian Historical Museum, Commonwealth Library
(Petherick Collection), Melbourne.
Six Water-colour Views of Sydney, 1796, by Edward
Hayes—
1. Brickfield Hill and Tillage on the High Road to Parramatta
2. South-east View of Sydney, extending from the Old to the
New Barracks, including Church, Pitt, and Spring Rows.
3. North View of Sydney Cove, taken from the end of Pitt’s
Row.
4. Eastern View of Sydney.
5. Western View of Sydney Cove.
6. South View of the Town of Sydney from the Brow of the
Hill leading to the Flagstaff.
These views were engraved for Collins’ “New South Wales,” 1798.
ea °k 7in., and temporarily mounted on boards.
Ihe Speaker, Hon. Charles M’Donald, has sanctioned this loan
for the Conversazione at the University, 13th January, 1911.
Australian Mutual Provident Society, 87 Pitt-street
Sydney.
Calculating Machines —
The “Arithmometer,” the “ Millionaire.”
Adding Machines —
Ihe “Comptometer” (2), the “Burroughs,” ditto, with
electric motor.
Mr. P. Neville Barnett, “Alcot,” Strathfleld, Sydney.
A remarkable collection of Bookplates, designed by Mr.W.P.
Barrett, an eminent artist, who was born at Christchurch,
N. A, but who for many years has been residing in
London.
These include a unique series of Royal plates, notable amongst
winch are Queen Alexandra’s (an exquisite pictorial) and the
magnificent heraldic plate of His Majesty King George, as used
when Prince of Wales. The wonderful artistic feeling and execution
shown in these marks of book ownership stamp Mr. Barrett as a
master craftsman in this phase of art.
Mr. E. O. Barton, Consulting Engineer, Queen-st. Brisbane
India Rubber Balloons for Un-manned Ascents.
Un-manned balloons of this type are used for exploring the high
air, up to heights of 60,000 feet. They are of sufficient buoyancy to


carry instruments and yet retain an ascensional force of 30 or 40
ounces, which enables them to accomplish an ascent of 50,000 feet in
less than an hour.
In preparation for the ascent the balloon is inflated to one quarter
or one third of its ultimate size. An instrument of the barograph
type, carrying attachments for registering temperature and humidity
as well aspressure, is then attached, and further weight is added,
in the shape of a small shot bag, until the balloon’s ascensional force
is exactly balanced. A definite quantity of the shot is then taken
off, say 33 ounces, leaving an upward pull of known amount. From
this knowledge, and from a measurement of the girth of the balloon,
the ascensional velocity can, with considerable accuracy, be calcu-
lated, a fact which enables the observer to dispense with a second
theodolite when obtaining the necessary data for “ plotting ” the
track of the balloon. From the plotted track can be calculated the
direction and velocity of the wind at the various heights attained
by the balloon. The balloons will rise to a height of 50,000 or 60,000
feet. They then burst, and in falling the tattered balloon forms
a parachute, so that the instruments reach the ground undamaged.
At a number of meteorological stations in the world such unmanned
balloon ascents are made regularly, especially on the dates known as
“ international days.” It was by means of such balloons that
Teisserenc de Bort discovered the “ Isothermal ” layer where the
regular decrease of temperature with upward movement ceases, and
frequently inversions take place, the uppermost layer being warmer
than Ihe layer immediately beneath. Such inversions are common
near the earth’s surface, especially in winter, but seldom at greater
heights than 3000 or 4000 feet.
Pilot Balloons.
Pilot Balloons as made at Trappes in the workshops of
Teisserenc de Bort.
These Pilot Balloons are made of paper, and generally of about
200 cubic feet capacity. They are used only for studying the move-
ments of the upper air up to heights of 30,000 feet. They are not
suited for carrying instruments to ascertain the humidity, and
temperature at the successive altitudes reached.
The paper balloons are usually sent up at sunrise, or an hour
before sunset, because the balloon is then illuminated by the hori-
zontal rays of the sun, and stands out clearly against the compara-
tively dark sky. If an ascent were made at noon the balloon would
be illuminated on the upper parts, and the observer would suffer
from the disadvantage of watching it against a back ground of
brilliantly illuminated sky.
The preparations for an ascent consist in inflating the balloon to
about one third of its ultimate size, and until it has a lifting
(ascensional) force of about one pound avoirdupois. IN o instruments
are attached to the balloon ; the mouth is carefully closed ; the gas
used may be hydrogen gas or ordinary town gas. With hydrogen a
smaller quantity of gas will suffice, but the paper must in this case
be more carefully varnished, in order to reduce the leakage of the
hydrogen through the paper dnring the ascent. The dimensions of
the balloon and its ascensional force being known, the ascensional
velocity may be calculated approximately, thereby obviating the
necessity for observations from two theodolite stations, the data
from one station being sufficient for the calculation of the path


followed by the balloon during the ascent. From the path of the
balloon, the wind velocity and direction at each level can readily be
found. The Quervain Theodolite is the instrument generally used
for the purpose of taking the observations.
Messrs. Burroughs, Wellcome and 00., 481 Kent-street
Sydney.
“ Wellcome ” Brand Chemicals.
“ Wellcome ” Brand Products.
Mr. G. W. Oussons, Box 617, Sydney
Physics or Engineering Section.
Fletcher’s Trolley Apparatus for experiments on acceler-
ation etc., and movement along an inclined plane.
Oussons’ Tape or Self Recording Atwood’s Machine.
In this machine, the usual fine silk cord running in grooved pulley
is replaced by a paper tape running on a flat frictionless pulley.
Above the tape, to which the weights are attached, is a vibrating
steel spring, accurately calibrated, which traces on the paper a curve
of tenth-second periods. Ihe space passed over during each successive
vibration can then be measured, and the velocity and acceleration be
directly determined. Results of great accuracy may be determined
by this machine.
Wilberforce Spring Apparatus to show the rotatory
impetus imparted to spiral springs by elongation and
vice versa.
A specially made spring supports a weight provided wirh screws
for exact regulation. On giving the weight a pull downwards, and
releasing it, the spring will naturally oscillate up and down, but will
at the same time acquire a rotary movement. In a few moments the
vertical movement will die down, but at the same time the circular
motion will increase, being at its maximum when the linear vertical
motion has ceased. The action will then be reversed, the linear
oscillations increasing as the circular oscillations decrease. The
cycle of operations succeed each other for several minutes, until the
entire motion has practically ceased.
Botany Section.
Lantern Slides of Botanical subjects.
Photo. Micro. Slides of Botanical subjects.
Microscopic Slides, Elementary Botany Series for Educa-
tional purposes.
Geology Section.
Micro. Slides of Rock Sections.
Micro. Slides of Coal Fossil Plants from the rich veins of
the English and Continental Coalfields.
Lantern and Photo. Micro. Slides of Geological subjects.


Ernest B. Docker, District Court Judge, “Eltham,”
Edgecliff Road, Woollahra.
Stereoscopes and Stereoscopic Views of New South Wales
chiefly on the North Coast.
The Ascent of Mount Warning.
Through the Lakes from Taree to Newcastle.
Mr. E. Esdaile, 54 Hunter Street.
“Brunsviga” Calculating Machine with typewriting
attachment, which prints the operations performed
by the machine: addition, subtraction, multiplica-
tion and division, adding signs and prefixes.
Microscope of New Design by Otto Himmler, Berlin.
Microscopes by R. and J. Beck, London.
Simple Petrological Microscope by Beck.
Oolzi Polarizing Solar Eyepiece for Astronomical Tele-
scopes by Carl Zeiss.
Specimens of Modern Spectacle Lenses, shewing in stages
of manufacture Fused Bifocal, and Toric Lenses.
Mr. John L. Bstbns, 55 Flinders-street, Sydney.
Case of Flint Lock Duelling Pistols of extra choice finish,
in first-class preservation (British).
The Duelling Flint-lock Pistols are fine specimens of the duelling
age in Great Britan. In addition to the brace of duellers are a
small pair of Pocket Pistols in this case, usually called Ladys Pistols <
Two Dyak Head Hunters’ Swords with the loose rivets
which keep the tally of the heads taken (Malay).
The Dyak Head Hunters’ Swords are very rare specimens of Malay
weapons, associated with a very murderous custom, which Rajah
Brook of Borneo acquired considerable fame by suppressing.
Professor Fawsitt, University of Sydney.
Photographs of the Department of Chemistry, University
of Sydney.
Photomicrographs of Iron and Steel.
Crystals of Sulphur and of lodine from the Chemical
Laboratory, University of Sydney.
Artificial Manure from Atmospheric Nitrogen
Calcium Oyanimide Ca : N • 0 I N.
Obtained by passing nitrogen into a mixture of calcium carbonate
and coke, heated in an electric furnace. This substance decomposes
under the influence of moisture, so as to form ammonia; it is therefore
a good manure.


Synthetic Camphor, made by Scherings Chemical Works,
Berlin.
This substance, which has the same composition as natural
camphor is obtained from pinene, a substance contained in turpen-
tine. The relation of the two substances is shown from a comparison
of thelformulae.
CH 2 c— CH CH 2 c CH 2
CH 3 —C—CH 8 CH3-C-CH3
ch 2 —c—ch 2 ch 2 —c c
ch 8 ch 3 o
Pinene. Camphor.
Palladium and Hydrogen Coin
Palladium is a metal which can absorb about 900 times its own
volume of Hydrogen. Professor Thomas Graham discovered this
property while Master of the Mint in London (1868), and had a few
coins made of the new alloy. One of these coins was given to Dr.
James Young, his assistant, and was afterwards given to the present
exhibitor. The coin is bent owing to the escape of hydrogen.
Portrait of the Late Prof. Thomas Graham, 1805 - 1869.
Professor of Chemistry at the University of London,
1837 -1855.
Portrait of the Late Dr. James Young, f.r.s., founder
of Shale Oil Industry.
Magnetic Alloy of Copper, Manganese, and Aluminium.
This alloy was made at the Chemical Laboratory of Sydney
University, by fusing together 3 parts of copper, 2 of manganese,
and 1 of aluminium. All these metals individually are non-magnetic.
The magnetic quality of the alloy depends on the heat treatment
given.
Silver Tree.
This is the result of placing mercury in a solution of silver nitrate
The mercury displaces the silver very slowly, and precipitates it into
a crystalline condition.
Glass Coloured by Sun’s Rays.
This glass was originally quite free from colour, but after exposure
to the sun in New South Wales for six years became violet-coloured.
The rays which effect this are the ultra-violet (actinic) rays. A.
somewhat similar colour effect is produced more quickly by radium.
Mr. Walter W. Frogg att, Entomological Branch, Depart-
ment of Agriculture.
Economic Entomology, Injurious Insects.
Geology Department, University of Sydney
Geological Specimens brought back by the British Ant-
arctic Expedition of 1907-09 :
1. Series of alkaline lava from Mount Erebus and Cape Bird.


2. Series of inclusions in the volcanic rocks of Ross Island.
3. Series of Erratics from Cape Royds.
A few other miscellaneous specimens such as Mirabilite, Peat,
Limestones, etc., from different parts of the Antarctic.
Mr. B. Griffiths, Chemistry Department, University of
Sydney.
An Obsidian “ Button ” found in 1907 in the neighbour-
hood of Sydney, about one mile N.W. of Unwin’s
Bridge, Cook’s River.
Seed of Bursaria spinosa (Blackthorn) and some fixed
oil extracted from the seeds.
Mr. G. H. Halligan, “Riversleigh,” Hunter’s Hill.
Self-registering Tide Gauge, designed by exhibitor.
As it is necessary that the Tide Gauges on the New South Wales
coast shall be attended to by men not always used to handling
delicate instruments, extreme simplicity, commensurate of course
with efficiency for practical every day use and for scientific purposes,
has been aimed at. The instrument exhibited has had two years
constant use, and has given the greatest satisfaction, though attended
to by unskilled workmen only. Twelve of these gauges have recently
been made by the State Government for use on this coast, and are
now being installed. One was lent to Lieutenant Shackleton for use
in his British Antarctic Expedition. The cost, as made in Sydney,
was <£ls each, or with wrought iron float column, eighteen feet long,
and vitrified earthenware float, ,£26 ss. complete.
(The instrument is exhibited by the permission of the Minister
for Public Works.)
Mr. Lawrence Hargrave, Woollahra Point
Rigid Stable Aeroplane. A development of the Cellular
Kite.
The Cellular Kite was designed in 1893, and after enduring much
discredit was, and is still, largely used for meteorological purposes.
This aeroplane, when used as a kite, is superior to the very best
cellular kite that the maker can construct. It is lighter and pulls
harder per square foot, attains a greater angle of elevation, and has
fewer parts than the cellular kite. It may be understood and
adopted after a like period of incubation.
Mr. Charles George Hodgson, 157 Macquarie-street,
Sydney.
Apparatus for the administration of Ether without
rebreathing.
Experiments in England have shown that contrary to the general
belief ether may be advantageously inhaled in pulmonary tubercu-
losis, bronchitis, tubercular pharangitis and laryngitis, heart disease
and certain kidney diseases, provided it be administered without the
admixture of exhalations from the lungs.
That ether when thus administered is a safe anaesthetic.


That Clover’s inhaler, when used with the bag, is most dangerous.
That the danger only creeps in when the ether becomes impure by
an admixture with the patient’s exhalations.
That as a general rule anaesthetic ether is not dangerous.
That the sputum of bronchitis is thinned, rendered much more
translucent, rapidly reduced in quantity, and more easily expecto-
rated when pure ether is inhaled; the reverse of which obtained
when the ether administered has become only slightly adulterated by
admixture with the patients’ exhalations.
That the same admixture appears to be the cause of excitement
during the administration of ether for the purpose of operation.
That patients treated with ether exhibit increase of muscle tissue*
and do not become flat and flabby.
That by making use of ether as the vehicle, various drugs can be
given by inhalation, the fumes from many of which are ordinarily
most deadly for inhalation purposes, but which may be inhaled with
impunity through an apparatus such as is here exhibited.
That there is no other apparatus extant that does not admit of
rebreathing.
Dr. R. Logan Jack, 58 Hunter-street, Sydney.
Section of Silicilied Tree Trunk.
Mr. R. Macdonald, Under Secretary, Department of Lands.
A treatise in Italian on Surveying by Carlo Oarazzi.
(Modo del dividere O’alluvioni) Published at Bologne
in 1579.
“The Compleat Surveyor” by William Leybourn. Loudon
1674.
Mr. Arthur Marshall Mclntosh, 157 Macquarie-st. N.,
Sydney.
Aeroplane Model.
Mining and Geological Museum, George-street North,
Dawes Point, (G. M. Card, Curator),
1. Glaciation of Granite.—A piece of granite from California
naturally polished, showing a large crystal of felspar
with glacial striae.
2. Pilbarrite—A new radio-active mineral from Pilbarra,
Western Australia. In composition it is a hydrated
silicate of Uranium, Thorium, and Lead, and also con-
tains Helium.
3. Large Crystal of Gypsum.—Exhibit comes from the Mount
Elliott Copper Mine, Cloncurry. Crystals up to about
13 ft. in length have been found in this mine and fre-
quently interpenetrate.


4. Collection of twinned crystals of Orthoclase. —Baveno
type : The twinning plane is parallel to the clino-dome.
Manebach type : The twinning plane is parallel to a
basal plane. Carlsbad type: The twinning plane is
parallel to the ortho-pinacoid.
5. Glendonite. —These consist of carbonate of lime and are
pseudomorphous after Glauberite. They are abundant
at certain horizons of the Permo-Carboniferous strata at
Singleton and Jervis Bay.
6. Spherulitic Trachylyte (Basalt Glass). A small flow
occurs near Inverell and exhibits magnificent spherulitic
structure.
7. Dynqjnical Geology— (a) Several examples of rocks show-
ing contortion and faulting—the result of earth move-
ments. (b) Crushed pebbles from Cobar Field. (Cobar
Series). These extend from the 40 mile peg on the
Bourke Road to Rookery, a distance of 60 miles. They
appear to have arisen as a result of a sharp uplift of the
region.
8. Metasomatism.—The specimen, which comes from Wilga
Downs, Cobar, shows various copper ores replacing the
original crumpled schist. The copper minerals—native
copper, oxide, sulphide and carbonate—are deposited
sympathetically with the foliation planes.
9. Photographic Albums.—Several albums of views of geo-
logical and mining interest in New South Wales which
were collected by ofticers of the N. S. Wales Geological
Survey and others.
Mining and Geological Museum, Mines Department.
Large specimens of Palaeozoic Corals, specially selected
to show forms of growth and structural detail: —
Cystiphylluiri , Silurian, Molong.
Tryplasma lo7isdalei, Silurian, Yass.
~ princeps, Silurian, Molong.
Spongophyllum giganteum, Devonian, Isis River.
Sandidophyllum Davidis, Devonian, Tamworth.
Cyathophyllum Mitchelli, Devonian, Savau.
Diphyphyllum gernmiformis, Devonian, Savau.
Endophyllurn Schulleri, Devonian, Crawney.
Actinocystis cornubovis, Devonian, Tamworth.
Also Palceaster Permo-Carboniferous.
Stenopora crinita, Permo-Carboniferous.


Mr. James Nangle. f.r.a.s., “St. Elmo,” Tupper-street,
Stanmore.
Two Microscopes, one Spectroscope, one Sun Camera
and telescope.
Mr. Norman Selfe, 279 George-street.
Silver Medal of the Royal Humane Society of England,
issued to the exhibitor’s Great Grandfather in 1794.
One of the only eight ever issued of the first series, before the
present pattern was adopted, and one of the only three known to the
authorities in London as being still in existence.
Gold Snuff Box presented to the Managing Partner of the
firm of P.N. Russell and Co. in 1858.
Partly designed by the exhibitor, and made in Sydney by Mr.
Hogarth Goldsmith, of Hunter-street. Left to the exhibitor by will
of Mr. Dunlop, recently deceased.
Prof. Anderson Stuart and Dr. H. G. Chapman, Uni-
versity of Sydney.
Microscopes and Instruments.
Mr. G. L. Sutton, Wheat Experimentalist, Department of
Agriculture.
Some of the most successful wheats created by the late Wm.
Farrer, showing their characteristics as compared with ordinary
wheats.
Mr. Fred. Walsh, Patent Attorney, George and Wynyard
Streets, Sydney, and 49 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.
Two thick volumes —Collection of Rare Patent Specifi-
cations relating to the shearing of animals by
machinery, and particularly sheep shearing machines.
Prof. J. T. Wilson, f.r.s., University of Sydney.
Oasts of prehistoric human crania.
Anatomical Models.
Pedestal stereoscope with series of stereoscopic slides.
Half a dozen microscopes, including binocular stereo-
scopic stand.


Fisher Library.
Antiquities.
1. Book of the dead : facsimilies of the papyri of Hunefer,
by E. A. W. Budge, folio London, 1899.
2. Carter, J. : The ancient architecture of England, folio
London, 1845.
3. Carter, J. : Specimens of the ancient sculpture and paint-
ing now remaining in England, folio London, 1838.
4. Hamilton, Sir W. : Collection of Etruscan Greek and
Rofuan antiquities. 4 vols. folio Naples, 1866-67.
(Exhibit Vol I only.)
5, Kingsborough, Lord E. : Antiquities of Mexico (coloured
plates). 9 vols. folio London, 1830 - 48. (Exhibit, Yol.
I. only).
6. Layard, A. H. : Monuments of Nineveh. Plates 2nd
series, folio London, 1853.
7. Lepsius, G. R. : Denkmaeler aus iEgypten und
12 Bde. folio Berlin 1859. (Exhibit Yol. I only.)
8. Roy, W. ; The military antiquities of the Romans in
Britain, folio London, 1793.
9. Select papyri in the Hieratic character,...of the British
Museum, folio London, 1844.
Australian.
10. Collins, D. : An account of the English Colony in New
South Wales. 4to London, 1798.
11. Hunter. Capt. J.: An historical journal of Port Jackson.
4to London, 1793.
12. Phillip, A. : The voyage of Governor Phillip to Botany
Bay. 4to London, 1789.
13. Sturt, Capt. C. : Two expeditions into the interior of
Southern Australia. 2 vols. Bvo London, 1833. (Exhibit
Vol. I only.)
14. Sydney Gazette, Vol. xiv, 1816. folio Sydney, 1816.
15. Sydney Herald, Yol. 11, 1832. folio Sydney, 1832.
16. Tench, Capt. W.: A complete account of the settlement
at Port Jackson. 4to London, 1793.
17. Wentworth, W. G.: A statistical account of the British
Settlements in Australasia. 2 vols. Bvo London, 1824.
(Exhibit Vol. I, only.)


18. White, J. : Journal of a voyage to New South Wales.
4to London, 1790. (John White came with Governor
Phillip as Surgeon General).
Bibles.
19. Holy Bible. folio Camb., 1763. (Printed by John
Baskerville.)
20. Biblia polyglotta, edidit Brianus Waltonus, 2 vols. folio
London, 1657. (Exhibit, Yol. I only.)
21. Hebrew Scroll : a parchment roll containing the whole
of the Pentateuch (72 feet in length).
The script is in different handwritings and belonged, in all proba-
bility, to Karaite Jews. Its age is not exceeded, except by a very
short interval, by any similar document in the world.
22. Hebrew Scroll; containing the whole of the first twenty-
three chapters of Genesis, together with the first thirty-
nine verses of the xxiv chapter, written on goat skin.
23. Hebrew Scroll : comprising a portion of Genesis com-
mencing with the 14th verse of the xxxi chapter and
ending with the 25th verse of the 1 chapter, written on
goat skin.
24. Hebrew Scroll: The book of Esther. (A modern script).
25. Bible, translated according to the Ebrew. 4to London,
1607. (Black letter copy).
English Literature.
26. Fletcher, Phineas ; The purple island. 4to Camb., 1633.
This book is very rare, but what makes this copy of peculiar in-
terest is that it is one of the very few copies, which besides contain-
ing the verses by Francis Quarles also possesses the duplicate fly-
sheet in the front.
27. Shakespeare, W, : facsimile of the first folio. folio
Oxford, 1902.
28. Shakespeare, W.: Venus and Adonis, being a reproduc-
tion in facsimile bf the first edition (1593) 4to Oxford
1905.
29. Shakespeare, W. ; Dramatic works, edited by George
Stevens. (Boydell’s edition) 11 vols and plates. (Vol.
I and plates exhibited).
30. Shelley, P. B.: Prometheus, unbound. Ist edition. Bvo
London. 1820.
31. Tennyson, A.: MS. copy of the second stanza of his poem
“ Will.” (Presented by Lord Tennyson when Governor
General of Australia).


Greek Literature.
32. Homer : Ilias, Codex venetus A, Marcianus 454, photo-
typici editus, folio Leyden, 1901.
Religion.
33. Albeatus Magnus : opera. 2 vols. folio Leyden 1651.
(First collected edition of his works). Exhibit vol. I.
34. Calvin, John : Commentaries sur la concordance . . . des
trois Evangelistes. Geneva 1563. (First edition).
35. Innocent 111., Pope : Opera, folio Cologne (with por-
trait of Innocent 111. beautifully painted on the front
panel.)
36. Legenda aurea : Passionael (book containing the suffer-
ings of the martyrs), 2 parts bound in one. 4to. Delf
1489. (The oldest printed book in the Fisher Library).
37. Luther, Martin: Opera. 7 vols folio Willenberg, 1545-
57. (The latin section of the first collected edition of
Luther’s works. The first volume was published a year
before Luther’s death).
38. Miracles of the Blessed Virgin Mary ; The Ethiopia
text ed., by E. A. Wallis Budge (privately published by
Lady Meux), folio London 1900.
Science.
39. Boyle, Robert: Works. 5 vols., folio London 1744
(Though Boyle believed in the possibility of some of the
alchemistic transmutations, yet he is justly termed the
true precursor of modern chemistry). Exhibit Vol. I.
40. Cook, Capt. James : A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean. 3
vols. 4to. London 1777. (This is the account of Cook’s
fatal third voyage). Exhibit Vol. I. and plates).
41, Gould, John: The Birds of Australia, 8 vols. folio
London 1848-69. (Gould’s works on ornithology are
quite the finest in the world. All the illustrations were
coloured by himself and his wife. A complete set of
his works is valued at about £1000). Exhibit Vol. I.
42. Fitzgerald; R. D. : Australian orchids, 2 vols. folio
Sydney 1882. Exhibit Vol. I.
Miscellaneous.
43. Bede, The Venerable : opera, 8 vols. fol. Col. Agrip
1612. Exhibit Vol. I.
44. Hansard; English Parliamentary Debates, Ist series,
Vol. 37. (An example of a book eaten by white ants).


45. Hume, David : The History of England, 5 vols. in 10.
folio London 1806. (Bowyer’s edition, beautifully illus-
trated with steel engravings).
46. Leinster, Book of: A collection of pieces in the Irish
language, about the middle of the twelfth century, folio
Dublin 1880. (The beauty and clearness of the text in
these M.S.S. is particularly noteworthy).
47. Mareri, Louis : Le Grand Dictionaire, 10 vols. folio
# Paris 1759. (Though not, as is often supposed, the
first work of its kind, it is nevertheless much more
complete, if later, than that by Juigne).
48. Parey, Ambrose: The works of that famous chirurgeon
Ambrose Parey. folio London 1678.
49. Victoria, Her Majesty Queen : Speeches and addresses
of H.R.H, The Prince Consort. Bvo London 1862.
(Presented to Sydney University Library and auto-
graphed by Her late Majesty Queen Victoria).
50. Watt, Isaac and Matthew Bolton. (The signed contract
which created the engineering firm of Watt and
Bolton).
Engineering School.
Lecturbtte on the Brennan Mono-rail Oar, by Pro-
fessor Laby.
An explanation of the mono-rail, illustrated by experiments on
rotating bodies, a model of the mono-rail in its simplest form, and
pictures of it as now developed by Mr. L. Brennan, will be given.
Macleay Museum.
H. Ingbmen Jensen, n.s'c.
Alkaline Rocks of Eastern Australia.
The collection embraces specimens collected from divers districts
of New South Wales and Queensland. The New South Wales dis-
tricts represented are—(l) The Warrumbungle Mountains. (2) The
Nandewar Mountains. (3) The Canobolas. The Queensland districts
are—(l) The Maroochy area. (2) The Glass House Mountains. (3)
Mount Flinders, and (4) The Fassifern and adjoining Main Range.
The Warrumbungle specimens comprise—Comendites, pantella-
rites, trachytes, phonolitic trachytes, olivine trachyte, alkaline
basalts and normal basalts, together with breccias, petrified wood
and diatomaceous earth.


The Nandewar alkaline rocks comprise—Comendites, pantellarites,
trachytes, phonolitic trachytes, bostonite. pulaskite porphyry, labra-
dorite porphyry, akerite, monchiquitic lamprophyre, essexite, alka-
line basalts and dolerites.
The Canoblas series includes the leucocratic comendite, pantellarite
and trachyte, the melanocratic phonolitic trachytes, trachy andesites
and trachy phonolites, andesites and basalts, and tuffs.
In the Maroochy area comendite, pantellarite and trachy tic breccias
are the main alkaline eruptives. They are accompanied by dacites,
rhyolites, quartz porpyhries and basalts in places.
The Glass Mountains area possesses the usual leucocratic alkaline
rocks, but none of the melanocratic or basic types. Dacites occur in
the area, and basalts to the north of it.
Mount Flinders has all the usual leucocratic types, and in addition
phonolitic trachytes and nepheline-bearing tuffs and breccias. Dacite
also occurs in this province.
The Fassifern area has a complete series of both leucocratic and
melanocratic alkaline rocks, succeeded by basalts on the main range.
The alkaline rocks of all these provinces are closely related,
although the areas are separated by great distances. The similarity
of the specimens from all these alkaline-rock districts, forms strong
evidence that in early Tertiary and middle Tertiary times the whole
of Eastern Australia, from Tasmania to Clermont in Queensland,
constituted one petrographical province.
F. W. White, General Printer, 3tt Kent Street, Sydney.
