





THE
NORTH BRITISH REVIEW
FEBRUARY, 1863.
Art. I. — l. Observations on the Treatment of Convicts in Ireland.
By Four Visiting Justices. 1862.
2. Further Correspondence on Transportation to Western Aus-
tralia. Parliamentary Paper. 1861-1862.
3. Transportation—Report of a Committee of the House of Com-
mons. Parliamentary Paper. 1861.
The public mind of England awakes periodically, and with a
start, to a sense of the danger it incurs by the presence of a
large criminal population in the very heart of the community,
which is dealt with on no rational or consistent system, watched
by no adequate police, and disposed of in no conclusive manner.
We rave against the evil, we abuse our rulers, we insist upon a
remedy being found, we listen eagerly to every quack and every
philosopher, we discuss the subject passionately, illogically, and
superficially; and we end by adopting some fresh plan which
touches only a small fragment of the mischief and darns only a
small rent in the tattered garment, and which is usually some ill-
digested and unworkable compromise between old habits and new
fancies. We then grow' sick of the subject, ashamed of our
panic, and stupidly satisfied with our mild aperient and our emol-
lient plaister,—and go quietly to sleep again for another term of
five or seven years. Meanwhile, however,, there are two classes
of men who never sleep: the criminals, wlio are always at work
to invent new modes of preying'on society and new dodges for
evading justice; and the officials, who are always, after the fashion
of their kind, and by a sort of ineradicable instinct, wriggling
back into the old channels, and falling away into their normal
inertness. There was such an awakening as we have described
in 1853; there was another in 1857 ; there is another now. Let
YOL. XXXVIII. NO. LXXV. A


ns see whether this last cannot be made to yield some better and
more lasting fruit than its predecessors.
That the evil is a very great one no one can doubt. It amounts
to a positive insecurity of life and property which is disgraceful
in the richest, most civilised, most complicated society on earth.
At this moment, the number living by depredation and outrage,
and known to belong to the criminal class, is estimated to reach in
the United Kingdom to 130,000. In this year, 1863, a consider-
able portion of the respectable inhabitants of London are reduced
to carry concealed weapons for their own defence; and this from
no groundless apprehensions, but because they may any day be
called upon to use them, and often are. We annually commit to,
and liberate from, our county jails in England and Wales, at least
130,000 offenders, a very large proportion, if not the majority, of
whom are habitual pilferers, burglars, or in other ways violators
of the law, and recognised preyers upon the industrious and
peaceful part of the community. Besides these, we turn loose
every year, at the expiration of their sentence of penal servitude,
or shortly before its expiration, 3000 convicts, nearly all of whom
are professional, finished, hardened offenders, and all of whom,
with scarcely any exceptions worth naming, have been confined
for crimes in which ruffianism and dishonesty were combined.
Of these 3000, at least 2500 on an average are liberated in this
country and almost invariably go back to their evil courses,
more vicious, more skilful, more irreclaimable than ever. Many
of them have been convicted several times, never dream of adopt-
ing an honest mode of life, and could not do so if they wished.
In :a word, we have among us an army —very active, very well
trained, tolerably organized, very resolute, and in part very
desperate—of internecine enemies and spoliators, as numerous
as the troops of most European kingdoms, and more numerous
than the military and police forces in our own country combined.
This is the evil we have to deal with. It is an evil, in some
degree and in some form, incidental to every large and populous
community; but the form and degree depend entirely on our
own management. We may reduce it to the minimum which
human temptation to wrong and the imperfection of human
powers of repression must always leave, —a minimum which would
be seldom heard of and little felt, and which should be always
tending to decrease. Or we may suffer it, as we are in a fair
way to do now, to augment and intensify year by year till it
reaches the maximum compatible with a comfortable existence
and a secure civilisation. Now what we affirm is, that, for the
height to which it has reached at the present moment, we have
only ourselves to thank. For a long time back, in spite of cease-
less warning, and ignoring all the lessons of experience, physio-


logy, and common sense, we have done little to repress crime
and much to encourage it. Our plans of dealing with it have
been based upon no clear understanding and no settled prin-
ciple ; the changes we have introduced from time to time, have
been either inconsistent nibblings or mutually destructive fluc-
tuations ; we have neither aimed at felling the tree, nor at cutting
off the nourishment from its roots; we have simply pruned the
branches, and contented ourselves with wondering that it should
flourish still. We believe that all this is remediable still, though
the mischief has assumed such vast dimensions ; but that what"is
imperatively needed before we can hope to remedy it is, that we
should boldly face all patent facts; that we should courageously
accept all undeniable conclusions from those facts; that we should
at once and for ever place sentiment under the control and
supremacy of sense; that no inconvenience should drive us to do
injustice to others; and that no expense should make us shrink
from doing justice to ourselves.
Criminals, the moment we look at them closely and analyti-
cally, divide themselves into two distinct categories—the casual
and the habitual. Many of the more trifling, and some of the
most heinous offenders, belong to the former class. Temptation
there wall always be; and this will be liable to increase with the
progress and complexity of civilisation, as long as some are poor
and some are rich, and as long as the appliances of wealth are
spread out in the sight of the struggling and needy. Defec-
tive moral natures there will always be—natures weak to resist
and prone to fall; but these, it is to be hoped, will diminish as
comfort and instruction penetrate among the masses. Passions
will always exist among all ranks, and passions will occasionally
burst through the restraints of morality and law. Boys will
thieve who are no worse than idle, neglected, and ill trained.
Poor men, who are habitually respectable, will steal under cir-
cumstances of sudden and desperate necessity. Clerks will oc-
casionally forge or rob to avert exposure, to meet debt, or to
purchase vicious pleasures. Any man, in any rank, of violent
or malignant temper and ill-disciplined mind, may, in a moment
of provocation or of fury, be guilty of manslaughter; or, if he be
thoroughly bad and licentious, may outrage a defenceless woman,
or murder one whom he hates, or whose possession he desires.
Crimes and criminals of this sort, however, are not those that
embarrass our police, and perplex our rulers and philosophers;
they do not constitute the social problem we have to solve. They
are the casual outbreaks of human vice and passion, incidental
to all stages and forms of civilisation, and incurable by any. But
besides and independent of these cases, w r e have among us a
large population, numbered by thousands and tens of thousands,


who live hy outrage and depredation; to whom crime is an em-
ployment and profession; who are brought up to it; who have
no other teaching, no other vocation, no other resource; to whom
the respectable and industrious portion of society is the oyster
they have to open; who prey upon the community, and sometimes
hate it also. They are simply the enemies of society; and the
protection of society against them constitutes precisely the diffi-
culty which at this moment our thinkers have to master, and the
duty which our rulers have to discharge.
Now we do not say that the obstacles and embarrassments with
which the solution of the problem is surrounded are not actually
great, because they are. But the problem itself is neither diffi-
cult nor obscure, as soon as we take pains to place before our-
selves distinctly its precise nature and conditions. The thing to
be done is simple enough; the impediments in the way of doing
it are nearly all of our own creation, arising partly out of igno-
rance or thoughtlessness, and partly out of wilfulness,—partly
because we have not fully understood what we had to do, and
partly because we have been unwilling to accept the conse-
quences and incur the annoyance and expense of doing it.
Divested of all complications, our task is defend ourselves against
the criminal population, the professional criminals, —to guard
society against their outrages and depredations in the most
prompt, effectual, and enduring fashion we can devise. That is
all: we have NOT to punish them ; and we shall only confuse our
minds and perplex our action if we try to do so. It is the almost
universal neglect of this vital distinction, more than any other
error, which has led us into such grotesque and inconceivable
blunders. Individuals may regard these offenders in any light
which harmonizes with their several idiosyncracies. Some may
look at them as objects of vengeance; some as objects of com-
passion ; some as subjects of conversion ; some as patients to be
cured; some as unfortunate lunatics to be carefully and comfort-
ably confined : and there may be much truth in all these dif-
ferent views, and they may be allowed to influence some of the
details of the practical treatment of criminals in prison and on
their discharge from prison. But the State , as we said, has only
got to protect the community against them—to regard them as
domestic foes, against whom self-defence is legitimate and neces-
sary. The reason why it should not seek to punish them, in the
strict and proper meaning of that word, is, that it has not the
knowledge requisite for the just discharge of that function. It
cannot possibly apportion the penalty it inflicts to the guilt of
the offender, which apportionment constitutes the very essence-of
punishment. Neither the wisest judge, nor the most patient and
enlightened jury, nor the most omniscient police officer, can do


more than form a plausible conjecture as to the moral criminality
of any convict, —since this, it is obvious, must depend on the
organization which he inherited, on the antecedents which have
surrounded him from the cradle, on the degree of instruction he
has received, on the special nature and adaptation of the tempta-
tion, on a multitude of circumstances which we neither can
know', nor could estimate if we did. The State, too, is just as
incompetent to estimate the severity of the infliction as the guilt
of the offence. How is the legislator who awards, or the judge
who pronounces, to ascertain the weight and bearing of any
given sentence upon any individual culprit ? The same penalty
which to one man would be almost too lenient for a theft, may,
to a differently organized and differently trained offender, be too
severe almost for a murder. The educated convict, whose un-
governed passion led him to a heinous but a single crime, would
be driven mad by the association and the entourage which the
habitual and hardened ruffian would find congenial and even
pleasant. Punishment which retributes , like vengeance which
repays, can, by its very term, belong only to that higher Intelli-
gence which can estimate aright both the debt to be repaid, and
the intrinsic value of the coin in which repayment is awarded.
The thing to be done, then, being ascertained, the next point
for consideration is how to do it. Now, society may protect itself
against habitual criminals in three ways, separately or in com-
bination. It may deal with him so as to deter him, to reform
him, or to get rid of him. It may so arrange and contrive its
penalties as to frighten him from bad courses, or to incapacitate
him from recurring to them, or to persuade him to amend them.
And, putting out of view the very few whom it will or can hang,
it has to effect these objects by such secondary punishments as
lie within its reach, as the public purse will pay for, and public
conscience and feeling will allow the State to inflict.
I. Deterring Penalties. —There are several reasons which pre-
vent us from being very sanguine as to the effect of any feasible
punishments which can be inflicted in our jails in deterring the
habitual criminal from relapsing into crime—reasons which sug-
gest themselves at once to the mind, and the soundness of which
all experience confirms. In the first place, such men are not
to be deterred by chances , unless, perhaps, the chances are very
much against them, and the stake very serious indeed. If de-
tection followed invariably upon crime, and followed speedily,
and involved a much-dreaded infliction when it did come, then
crime would be minimized at once, and the professional rogue or
villain would cease to exist. It is the certainty, the prompti-
tude, and the realizability of punishment that deter from crime.


Now, as we well know, our punishments are very uncertain,
very slow, and almost never visible. It is estimated that an
average thief may count upon six years’ impunity. The chances
against his being caught in each particular offence are very
numerous. He seldom grows rich; he seldom escapes alto-
gether ; but he lives, sometimes luxuriously, for years, and he
may always calculate on escaping this time and next time. He
knows, moreover, that, even if he is detected and convicted, there
is still another set of probabilities in his favour. He may have
committed a number of very great crimes, and yet may be caught
in a very small one ; and then, unless previous convictions can
be proved against him, he will be dealt with not as a regular,
hardened, and heinous criminal, but merely as a casual and
venial offender. Again, he may be captured tried; but he
has still other chances of safety, positive or comparative, in the
lenience of the judge, in the folly or mercy of the jurv, in the
skill of his counsel, in the countless possibilities of legal irregu-
larities or flaws in evidence. In fine, you cannot hold out s in
terrorem before the practised depredator or ruffian more than
the contingency of a remote retribution.
In the second place, to these men crime, we must remember,
is a calling, a profession, which it is very difficult for them to
change, and the incidental disadvantages and risks of which
they have long been accustomed to consider. The jail, the con-
vict ship, the treadmill, the quarry-gang, are among the unfa-
vourable possibilities of their profession, which have been familiar
to them from infancy; and which no more make them recoil
from that profession, than the chance of death, or wounds, or a
foreign prison, makes the soldier desert or shrink from his more
honourable calling. They are things to be avoided with sedu-
lous caution, but are neither dreadful enough, nor certain enough,
nor near enough, nor realized enough, to prevent them from
embracing that career, or pursuing it with activity and daring.
It may be doubted, indeed, whether the probability of penal servi-
tude or lengthened imprisonment, to the habitual thief, is as
great-as that of violent death or mutilation to the coal-miner, or
of an early grave by a painful malady to the Sheffield grinder;
yet we know that neither of these two latter prospects are suffi-
cient to outweigh the attractions of large earnings and an early
independence. Why, then, should we hope to alarm the male-
factor by a slighter chance of a slighter suffering ?
Something in the way of determent might, however, be effected
by our secondary punishments, if only they were severe enough
and visible enough. If they were seen and known, as hanging,
public flogging, and working in chains were in former times, they
might frighten away the young from the threshold of a profession


that included such inflictions even among its chances. Many,
not yet trained, not yet hardened, not yet seeing all other means
of living closed to them, would shrink from the possibility of
being flogged or hanged, who think little of the probability of a
clean cell, and a comfortable diet, and moderate exercise under
the name of labour. Many villains, again, who bring up their
children without remorse to one set of chances, would not be
unfeeling or unaffectionate enough to expose them deliberately
to the other. Finally, if penal servitude were really a wretched
position; if it involved inflictions that were really penal , and
positively dreaded; if it at all resembled, for example, the life
of a galley-slave in France (which some have been known to
commit suicide to escape from, or to avoid being re-consigned
to) ; if, in a word, it was made so bad—as doubtless it might
be—that no man who had once encountered it would wittingly
or lightly risk it again, there can be little doubt that we should
have far fewer re-committals than at present. The convict,
when he came out of jail, instead of relapsing immediately into
his old habits, as he now almost invariably does, would, while
the recollection of his misery was fresh upon him, make fresh
efforts to escape from his evil courses, and would at least second
with earnestness the efforts that others made to put him in an
honest way of life. Therefore, while we may not be too sanguine
as to our power of frightening away hardened criminals from
crime, we may be quite sure that we have been both foolish, and
clumsy, and wrong, if even our severer sentences have no terrors
for the evil-doer, but are accepted by him as coolly as the
announcement that he had drawn a blank in a lottery would be
by a gambler, or that he had to pay forfeit would be to a better
and a blackleg. Now, it is notorious that a sentence of penal
servitude (as carried out in England at least) has no terrors for
the convict; and a few explanations as to the meaning and prac-
tical execution of that sentence will make us understand why
this is so.
The sentence is carried out according to Sir Joshua Jebb’s
notions, and all his plans are based on, or pervaded by, the idea
that convicts are to b q persuaded and induced into good behaviour
while in prison, and abandonment of vicious courses when they
leave it, by rewards rather than by punishment. They are made
comfortable if they conduct themselves with decency, and are
made more and more comfortable, by a regulated scale of in-
creased indulgences, as time goes on, unless they do something
to forfeit this amended treatment. They are first confined from
seven to nine months in a separate cell at Pentonville or Mill-
bank, —a cell which, though certainly confined and deprived of
every luxury, is as comfortable as cleanliness and good air can


make it; —and we admit at once that it would not really be
feasible to make it otherwise. Their confinement is nominally
solitary .- that is, they have no communication either with their
fellow-prisoners or with the outside world; but they are visited
daily, or almost daily, by the chaplain, the warder, the school-
master, the instructing tradesman, and often by the governor.
They attend prayers, and often attend school. They are saved
from the tedium of idleness by having work provided for them.
It is a period of seclusion, and as such, is often felt by them as
very irksome; but much of the painful monotony and solitude
of it is broken by the various devices and visits we have named,
ktill, it is the only part of their sentence which approaches even
to the character of a severe infliction, and it lasts only from about
a tenth to a fifth of their total term. During this period they
are fed upon wholesome, well-cooked, and varied food in great
abundance—in an abundance and of a quality which no veteran
soldier, no innocent pauper, no hard-working labourer can com-
mand, —such as even themselves, in their periods of liberty and
crime, do not habitually enjoy or expect. They have meat nearly
every day; they have cocoa; they have excellent bread and
vegetables. Now, when we bear in mind what sensualists nearly
all criminals are, —how their god is their belly, and their body
the only thing they care for, —we must feel at once that good
lodging, good food, and plenty of sleep, constitute elements of
their condition which must go far, both in their anticipation and
their recollection, to counterbalance the few painful features in
their jail life—or rather its only painful features, namely, loss of
liberty, and enforced abstinence from women, spirits, and tobacco.
It is said that the physical and nervous effect of separate confine-
ment is so depressing to the system, that very nutritious food, in
ample quantities, is found indispensable to counteract this influ-
ence. We believe the allegation to be perfectly true :itis in
full accordance with a well-known physiological law; though,
considering that the Irish convict dietary is considerably lower
than the English, it may be questioned whether this consideration
has not been carried somewhat too far. But the necessity for a
generous diet does not at all affect the argument which we are
now enforcing—viz., that the fact of such diet being one of the
known and recognised concomitants of prison life, prevents that
life from being looked upon with dread, or with any very vivid
dislike, by the regular and professional offender.
W hen the convict passes from the first to the second stage of
penal discipline, and begins to work in gangs at Portland, at
1 ortsmouth, or at Dartmoor, the period of anything that can be
called punishment (beyond the mere deprivation of freedom) is
virtually over; unless, indeed, he should bring chastisement or


restriction on himself by gratuitous turbulence or disobedience.
The hours of work are short; the work is discontinued in wet
weather; the amount of work done is trifling in the extreme—
indeed, a mere gentle and intermittent exercise, by which no man
could earn a decent subsistence. Mr Coode, engineer to the
Admiralty, estimates the work performed by one free labourer
at Portland as equal to that of two and a-half or three convicts.
The food allowed during this stage is ample and progressively
appetizing: meat is habitual, beer frequent, pudding and tea (if
wished for) procurable by mere negative good behaviour; con-
siderable gratuities are earned; and though tobacco is not formally
permitted, yet it is in evidence that the convicts find little diffi-
culty in procuring it from, or by the means of, the free workers
employed in the skilled labour needed on the island. Intercourse
and conversation is allowed between the convicts when at work
and at exercise, and indeed could not well be prevented; and
permission to see their friends — i.e ., their old associates and
accomplices—is one of the special rewards conceded (with increas-
ing liberality as time goes on) to all convicts who are guilty of
no prison offences, — i.e., who have the ordinary discretion to be
neither turbulent, fractious, nor disobedient. We need scarcely
comment on the extreme want of judgment displayed (as it seems
to us) in all these arrangements. We only wish here to point
out, that, if we except the bare fact of detention, there is literally
nothing in the whole discipline to which the convict is subject
that deserves the name of punishment, or can be expected to exer-
cise any deterrent influence whatever. He is better fed, better
housed, better clothed than when at liberty : his health is more
cared for; his physical comfort in most points more secured;
no work is exacted from him that bears a comparison in severity
or amount with that which every honest peasant or artisan must
undergo; he is only partially and for a time secluded from his
habitual and mischievous society ; and he is subjected to no
suffering, except for fresh offences while in jail.
We need not be surprised, therefore, at the now proved and
published consequences, as shown by c the Visiting Justices,’ in
contradiction to Sir Joshua Jebb’s utterly untrustworthy statis-
tics. Penal servitude, as actually carried out, contains nothing
to deter convicts, and, as a fact, does not deter them. It appears
nearly certain that one-half of those discharged, on ticket-of-leave
or at the expiration of their sentences, from Government prisons,
are re-convicted; and it is shown that sixty-two per cent, of these
recidives (as the French term them) are sent back within a year
after their liberation.
Now we know all that may be said, and that is so confi-
dently urged, to prove that mere imprisonment cannot be made


deterrent; that convict cells must be kept clean and well venti-
lated, and that cleanliness and good air involve and imply a
great amount of comfort; that men in confinement, and especi-
ally in separate confinement, require much more nutritive food
than men at large, and that both health and intellect break
down if it be withheld; that the cooking in a vast establishment
like Pentonville or Chatham, must of necessity be better than
that of a labourer’s cottage, and that good cooking inevitably
makes food appetizing; that it is next to impossible to exact
severe labour from unwilling and unrewarded labourers, except
by such perpetual corporal inflictions as public opinion will not
tolerate; and that, in order to induce criminals to merely nega-
tive good conduct ( i.e ., simple manageability) in prison, you must
hold out to them the inducement of various small mitigations
and indulgences. We admit that there is a large and undeni-
able element of truth in all these representations. We regret
deeply that the lash, as applied for the more heinous offences in
the army and the navy, is not made a portion of the sentence of
all offenders, whether old or young, who are convicted of crimes
of violence or brutality, or exceptional atrocity of any kind. We
are satisfied) that the cat would do more to deter ruffians from
their worst crimes than ten or twenty years of penal servitude;
that it could by no possibility do them any harm; that it would
be peculiarly appropriate to their case; that if every garotter or
violator were flogged (as desperately bad soldiers are flogged),
those descriptions of crime would become rare in the extreme.
But, apart from this suggestion, for the adoption of which pub-
lic opinion may or may not be prepared, we have ample proof
that penal servitude might be made far more painful, more
dreaded, and more deterrent than it is under Sir Joshua Jebb,
because it has been made more so in Ireland. The separate
stage is made more severe by a much lower diet during the
earlier portion (a diet from which meat is excluded), and the
withholding of any occupation except the most tedious and dis-
gusting. The food supplied throughout the whole period of the
sentence is decidedly inferior to that in England; and the lodg-
ing, in the intermediary prisons especially, involves little beyond
shelter. The labour, too, is more arduous and better enforced;
but, as we shall see presently, this labour is not to be reckoned
among the inflictions of the system. That labour might, however,
be made to constitute a very significant and effective portion of
a deterring punishment, the annals of ordinary prisons fully testify.
Imprisonment with hard labour in a bridewell or penitentiary used
to be regarded as one of the severest of secondary punishments,
and was felt to be so by its victim ; for the labour was the tread-
mill or the crank, and was exacted to the utmost limit that the


prisoner’s strength would bear. The reason for the partial or
total abandonment of this system was, not that it was ineffective
and contained no terrors for the evil-doer, but the very reverse.
Novelists and philanthropists cried out against it as too terrible
and too hard. Even now —we were assured the other day by a
judge of great experience, and who has had much intercourse
with convicts, not only from the bench, but in the cell—habitual
criminals dread a sentence of two years’ imprisonment in most
county jails more than one of five years’ penal servitude; partly
because the latter involves variety and change, which the former
does not; partly also because the work in the former case is
more severe, distasteful, and monotonous than in the latter.
-11. It is not, however, in its deterring so much as in its re-
forming operation, that the Irish system has proved so immea-
surably superior to the English, and has shown how effective for
its purpose penal servitude may be made in the hands of a judici-
ous and conscientiously laborious officer like Sir Walter Crofton.
We admit at once that the ultimate purpose and definite aim of
prison discipline, or of any scheme of punishment, must not be
to reform the criminal. His reformation may be an incidental
and most felicitous consequence of the treatment he receives and
the sentence he undergoes. It may be, also, and often is, and
might be generally, the most efficacious mode by which society is
protected against his future depredations and hostility. But it
is not the end itself—only a means by which the end sought is
to be obtained. That end, as we have already seen, is simply
and solely the defence of the community against an internal foe.
Our object is, having once got possession of a criminal, so to
deal with him while in our hands, that, on his liberation, he
shall be neither desirous, nor capable, nor under the necessity, of
resuming his vicious and lawless courses. The object of the
process, as pursued in Ireland, is to extinguish the criminal
desire, to obliterate the criminal habit, and to remove the crimi-
nal associations; to render an honest life attractive and possible
to the expiree; to turn him forth with an appetite for labour,
and with labour, and therefore maintenance, provided for him.
The English system can scarcely be said to make any attempt
at these objects, except by making labour too easy to be very
distasteful, and by handing over to the liberated convict, as he
leaves the prison door, a gratuity so considerable, that want at
least need not drive him back at once to crime. No attempt is
made, either by a sound general system or by careful action on
individual character, to render steady labour attractive, to create
habits of voluntary and real industry, or to teach and enforce
work by which the prisoner who has undergone his sentence may


thenceforth earn an adequate subsistence. No attempt, or none
worthy of the name, is made to start him, on his liberation, in
an honest livelihood, or in regular employment. His railway fare
is usually paid to the place from which he came, or to his native
town, or he is sent back to his friends —probably the very worst
people to whom he could be sent. Often these friends, it is said,
are waiting for him at the prison door. Finally—and this is the
worst and wickedest feature of the whole—no attempt is made
to prepare him for freedom, or to test his fitness for it, and the
probability of his using it well. He is at once allowed to step
From a condition of absolute control to one of absolute emanci-
pation. For five years, or for ten, all his acts are ordered for
him, and all his wants supplied to him; he has to eat, to wake,
to sleep, to work, to go to school, at the word of command; he
has no liberty of action, no self-responsibility whatever. At the
expiration of this period, suddenly, without the slightest grada-
tion, he is turned out into the world, his own master, with
money in his pocket, with power to go anywhere or to do any-
thing he likes, with all his appetites to regulate, all his passions
to command, all his temptations to resist, with every inducement
to self-indulgence before him, and with nothing behind him but
a prison which contained no serious terrors, and implanted no
virtuous resolutions. Is it too much to say that nothing has been
done here to eradicate the vicious will or to impair the vicious
habit? Could any plan be devised more calculated to ensure
his return to crime and to punishment ?
The system pursued in Ireland is the reverse of all this.
Knowing that, as a rule, all convicts would have to be discharged
at home, the directors set themselves diligently to work to devise
some plan by which such discharge might be effected with toler-
able safety to the community. It is in evidence that they had
a particular bad lot of ruffians to act upon, and that for nine
years none have gone to Western Australia; so they had few
advantages to facilitate their operations. Their first step was to
render the convicts assistants and accomplices, as it were, in the
change of character and habits that it was sought to work upon
them. In the first half of the stage of separate cellular confine-
ment, the diet is very moderate, and no work except the most
tedious is allowed. After four months of this treatment, the
prisoners are found desirous of real occupation,—some trade or
by which they can beguile their ennui , and earn some marks
which will be carried to their credit. They thus learn to associate
the idea of work with pleasure. It is no longer penal—it is a
means and a step towards their ultimate emancipation. It is then
explained to them that everything in future depends upon them-
selves—their advancement to progressive stages, the gradual re-


laxation of their bonds, and the curtailment of their period of
detention—in a word, that both their comfort in prison, and
their earlier liberation from it, will be determined by their con-
duct ; but that this conduct must be not merely marked, as on the
English plan, by abstinence from turbulence and fractiousness,
by mere negative good behaviour, but by absolute exertion, indus-
try, and improvement. Each convict must attain a certain
number of marks before he can be promoted from one class to
another; and these marks are assigned (1) for regularity and
orderly demeanour, (2) attention and diligence in school, (3) for
industry at work. Any ill conduct forfeits marks, and relegates
the offender into one of the inferior classes. The prisoners are
very anxious about these marks, and very jealous of a forfeiture
of them ; and a hearty co-operation with the authorities is se-
cured by the conviction which is speedily engrained in all their
minds, that in everything they do, and learn, and forbear, they
are in reality working for themselves.
But perhaps the most peculiar and essential portion of the
Irish system is to be found in the Intermediate Prisons. After
the first stage, that of separate confinement, is passed, the convicts
are set to work—if labourers, at Spike Island; if artisans, at
Philipstown. Here they work for the most part in association,
but under strict vigilance, night and day. As their period for
liberation approaches, they are (if their previous conduct have
deserved it) removed to the intermediate prisons at Lusk or
Smithfield. The account given of these establishments by the
‘Four Visiting Justices,’ is interesting in the highest degree.
At Lusk, which is merely a waste common, enclosed and brought
into cultivation by convict labour, there are scarcely any of the
appliances of a prison. There are no walls; there are no soldiers;
there are no policemen; there are warders, indeed, who super-
intend and join in the work of the convicts, but would be quite
inadequate either to restrain or resist them if inclined for mischief.
The diet is only moderate, and the lodging the very reverse of
luxurious. Escape would be easy, but escape is never attempted.
Misconduct would be natural, but misconduct is very rare; and
the punishment for it consists in being sent back to the ordinary
prison. The work allotted must be done, and the prescribed
rules rigidly adhered to —that is all. Sixpence a-week is allowed
to the men to spend as they please; and many of them spend it
in bread. The explanation of this extraordinary good conduct
in originally bad subjects is twofold: they know that escape
would be followed by recapture, and a fresh sentence, or the
addition of a considerable terra to their old one; while there is
no severity of treatment which should drive them to so foolish
and losing a game. The men sent there, too, have earned the


privilege of this comparative freedom; they have struggled up
through the preparatory stages, in any one of which failure or
ill-desert, as shown by the marks, would have detained them;
they have already proved their fitness for a larger degree of
responsibility and self-management, by the way in which they
have exerted and restrained themselves previously. They have,
again, no motive to misconduct themselves, or to abuse their
(/Masz-freedom, since the first step in that direction would make
all the fetters of ordinary prison life close round them once more.
In this manner they are prepared for freedom, and their state of
preparation tested. By their mode of acting when almost at
liberty, we can judge how they will act when altogether liberated.
They can go wrong if they please, just as they can after the
expiration of their sentence: it is a proof of good sense and
self-control if they do not; and this good sense and self-control
will stand them in the same stead when they are suffered finally
to mix with the community at large.
At the intermediate prison of Smithfield, their reformation
and desire to do well and honestly are still more curiously and
courageously tested. Smithfield is in the heart of Dublin, and,
‘ Being a prison, does not afford the same apparent liberty as Lusk.
But the test of character supplied by the latter is made up, in the
former, by its position in the midst of the temptations of a great city,
from which the prisoners are not wholly secluded. The work at
Smithfield being all of a kind that can be measured, the prisoner’s
gratuity is made to depend on the work done by him, in such pro-
portion as to be about 2s. 6d. a-week, —a little exceeding, or falling
short of, that amount, according to his industry and skill. Of this he
is allowed to retain in his own possession sixpence a-week, which he
may save, or expend, as he pleases, in anything but spirituous liquors.
This affords an opportunity for the exercising real self-denial of pre-
sent gratification by saving for the future, or an indication of character
by the mode in which he spends it.
‘ A still severer test is this :—A prisoner taken in roster from
those whose terms of detention are drawing to a close, is placed on
messengers’ duty daily; he is then permitted to make purchases of
articles of dress, diet, etc., for the other prisoners. It was considered
advisable to prove whether or not the confidence of prisoners in each
other was equal to that entertained by the authorities. As the
prisoner has frequently fifteen or twenty shillings at his disposal, the
test is considered valuable. The ordinary temptations of the world,
in the shape of public-houses, etc., of course constantly present them-
selves to the messengers ; and, strange to say, only one case has arisen
of a man having been drinking. In this case, though his duty was
accurately performed, the breach of rule was immediately punished,
and the culprit forthwith removed to an ordinary prison.
‘ This was after twenty months’ trial. Two years later, the super-


intendent of Smithfield writes;—“ With reference to the conduct of
the prisoners both here and at Lusk, only eight breaches of discipline
took place during the year, some of them being of a trifling nature;
yet, for example’s sake, those men were remanded to an ordinary
prison to undergo a longer probation. The messengers continue to
give the fullest satisfaction ; and in only one instance did any of them
swerve from his duty, and that was by attempting to bring a pro-
hibited article into the prison. It is, indeed, a wonderful thing to
think of those prisoners walking daily through the public streets of
Dublin, and never yielding to any temptation, never idling or out-
staying their time, but delivering their messages with perfect correct-
ness, and then returning to their prison with a punctuality which is
most creditable to them, and truly surprising, when one thinks that
these walks are the first they had taken with freedom—in fact, at liberty
—for years. The prisoners continue to receive sixpence a-week out of
their earnings, and I find they evince every desire to spend it to advan-
tage ; for instance, in the purchase of clothing which will be useful to
them on their discharge. These purchases, as usual, continue to be
made by the messenger on duty; and I have never seen an instance
where such trust was betrayed , but, on the contrary, every one of them
is anxious to assist to lay out to the best advantage; neither has there
been any instance of a dispute between them on the subject .”
‘ It is hardly to be denied, that a character thus tested, and, stand-
ing the test, thus strengthened, as it must be, by exercise, is as diffe-
rent a thing from our English “ prison character,” as that of the soldier
who has been under fire, from that of the raw recruit.’
It remains to be seen what is done with and for the Irish
convict, who, after having passed through these reformatory-
testing stages on his way to freedom, is at length liberated
on ticket-of-leave, or unconditionally on the expiration of his
sentence. It is to be remembered that, by training in the pre-
paratory stages, he has been taught to associate labour with
progressive relaxation and with ultimate freedom, and therefore
to seek it, and to like it; and, further, that the effect of this
treatment on his character, in forming habits of steadiness and
self-restraint, has been tested in the intermediate prison. He can,
in consequence, be liberated with some degree of confidence, and
can be recommended for employment hopefully and conscientiously.
Employers of labour know that a ticket-of-leave from Lusk and
Smithfield is in reality and honestly a certificate of character;
they know that it is not granted either carelessly or with levity,
but that it truly means what it implies. Many are therefore
willing to try the liberated convict on the recommendation of
the directors, who take great pains to find him a good and willing
master ; and as there has scarcely occurred an instance of these
men behaving with either violence or dishonesty in their new
places, those who have tried some are willing to take more, and


the public generally have acquired confidence in the class. The
masters, in many cases, have assured the directors that the
licensed men are, as a rule, better conducted and more reliable
than the average of ordinary labourers. The employers are
always made acquainted with the antecedents of those they
receive; but the secret is carefully kept from others. But a
second and most efficacious precaution is adopted in Ireland:
the ticket-of-leave man is required to report himself to the con-
stabulary station of the district in which he is employed, or to
which he may remove, on the first of every month; failing which,
or in case of any idleness or irregularity of life, his licence is at
once revoked. 1 At first the men do not like this restriction at
all, and remonstrate against it earnestly; but it is found to operate
most advantageously. It shows them that the eye of justice is still
upon them ; it compels the continuance of caution and self-con-
trol ; and in no instance, we believe, has it been found to act as
any impediment to them in finding honest occupation. Indeed,
in several cases they admit that the constabulary have assisted
them to find places.
But this is not all. It is felt that a new scene and a new
world must) always offer to men of these unfortunate antecedents
better prospects, and an easier course of fidelity and self-redemp-
tion, than a country where they may be recognised, and where,
at all events, they are liable to meet with old associates and old
temptations. Emigration is therefore recommended to the ex-
piree as urgently as possible, and facilitated , though not assisted.
While still in the intermediate prisons, he is made acquainted,
by means of lectures and books, with the advantages of the
various colonies and foreign lands, with the wages of labour
prevalent in each, and the sort of labour most in demand, as well
as with the cost of a passage thither. He is thus made to feel
that his chances elsewhere would be greater than at home, and,
in a great number of cases, is thus induced to emigrate; but
nothing whatever is done either to urge or to assist him to go,
beyond placing him, if he desire it, in communication with the
emigration-agent at Liverpool, and paying him the gratuity
which he has earned, —a gratuity which, in the case of the Irish
convict, is usually only one-half that given to the English one. 2
To our amazement, we find, from the Report on the Chatham
Mutineers, that some of these convicts (and some of the worst
among them) would have been entitled, on their liberation, to
sums varying from L. 27 to L. 33 each.
1 A portion of the gratuity to which he is entitled, moreover, is withheld, and
is only ultimately granted to him on a certificate of his good conduct furnished
by the police inspector.
2 We find that about 25 per cent, of the men discharged have emigrated, and,
as far as they can be traced, are doing well.


We may now sum up, in a few words, the net results of the
system pursued in England and in Ireland ; and we shall do so
mainly from the well-sifted facts and figures given by the ( Four
Visiting Justices,’ whose account every one desirous of mastering
the subject should read and digest. Ihe results show two things
very clearly and beyond dispute: first, What may be done, and
has been done, by a sound system ; and, secondly , How wilfully
and obstinately we have, in England, persisted in not doing it.
They fully bear out the assertion we made at the beginning of
this paper—that our difficulties and our dangers are*all of our
own creation and our own perpetuation. They are not inherent,
but artificial, and laboriously and ingeniously superinduced.
_ 1. We have seen that, if facts were duly registered and statis-
tics conscientiously and fully drawn up, at least 50 per cent, of
the convicts discharged unconditionally or on license from
English prisons, are sooner or later re-convicted, to say nothing
of those who, though unconvicted, are believed to have returned
to a life of crime; and that of this number, from 60 to 70 per
cent, relapse within one year of their liberation. So often and
so speedily do many of them relapse, that Baron Bramwell de-
clared from the bench (and ascertained and published cases fully
bear him out), that he has had instances of criminals brought
before him with 1 three sentences overlapping each other,’ — i.e.,
who had been convicted, liberated on license, re-convicted and
Again liberated, and a third time re-convicted, before the period
of their original sentence had expired. How any official, or any
Home Secretary, under whose reign such a shameful proceeding
occurred, or was possible, could retain his post, we are unable
to conceive.
In Ireland, out of 1800 men discharged on license, only 75,
or four per cent., have been re-convicted ; and out of a total of
4643 convicts discharged since the establishment of intermediate
prisons, only 460, or ten per cent., have returned to jail, either
by revoked licenses or re-convictions.
. I n England, in 1854, there were in Government prisons
(independent of considerable numbers at Bermuda and Gibraltar),
7916 convicts in all. In 1861, there were about the same num-
ber, 7794, although during this period there had been drafted
off out of the country, 1566 to Bermuda, 1306 to Gibraltar, and
3307 to Western Australia, —in all, 6179, all of whom may be
considered as being, and ought to have been, permanently dis-
posed of. That is to say, England, notwithstanding the aid
afforded her by her colonial and military penal settlements and
outlets, has not been able to reduce her convict population, but has
her jails as full as ever.
VOL. XXXVIII. NO. LXXV. B


In Ireland (independent of several hundreds in Bermuda and
Gibraltar), in 1854, there were 4278 convicts on the hands of
the Government. In 1861 (there being only 30 left at Bermuda
and elsewhere) the number was reduced to 1492, or one-third , —
though, in the interim, not a single one had been sent to Western
Australia, and only 650 to Gibraltar and Bermuda. That is,
without extraneous aid, the Irish convict population has been
reduced by two-thirds, and several of the jails shut up.
3, The preventive or deterring effects of the system pursued
may be measured by the fact, that the yearly number who become
convicts — i.e., who are sentenced to various terms of penal ser-
vitude—fell off, in Ireland, from 710 in 1854, to 331 in 1860, —
a decrease of 53 per cent.; while in England, for the same period,
the diminution was only from 2418 to 2219, or 8 per cent.
minor sentences passed at sessions and assizes since 1856 (at
which time the Summary Jurisdiction Act introduced a change
of system which renders it impossible to carry our comparison
further back), have diminished, in*lreland, from 3630 to 2675,
or 26 per cent., and in England, from 12,234 to 9780, or 20
per cent. )
4. The expense to the country fully confirms the above results.
Not only do Irish convicts cost L. 25 per head a-year, while the
English cost L. 32 (no deduction being made in either case for
the fancied value of their labour) ; but while the Parliamentary
vote for the Irish convict establishment at home is L. 50,000 less
than it was six years ago, that for the English establishment is
L. 77,000 more.
Let us now, by the light of the facts we have detailed above,
and a few others which we shall lay before our readers as we go
along, lay down some of the principal conclusions as to the mode
in which our criminals ought to be dealt with, which flow logi-
cally from what has been proved, and as to the general sound-
ness of which (apart from mere details of management) there can
now, we apprehend, be little difference of opinion among those
who have attended to the subject.
The first clearly is, that prison life must be made more unplea-
sant than it is to those who are sentenced to it. It is meant as
a punishment, and must be made such in reality. It must be
made such, that those who have once experienced it will shrink
earnestly from undergoing it again. The convict jail must be
looked upon as a place of terror, not as a refuge or a comfortable
and fattening though restricted home. The diet must be reduced
and altered. We are aware that it cannot be made bad. We
are aware that it must not be made scanty. We know well that
it would be practically impossible to reduce it to the ordinary


level of the honest labourer, —scarcely to that of the parish
pauper. It has been proved that, if permanently kept low, the
prisoner loses not only health, but possibly reason and life. His
brain, while in confinement, soon loses its physical activity, unless
stimulated by good food. But the Irish experiment has clearly
shown, that for a while —a couple of months at first, and occa-
sionally afterwards—a low diet does no harm, yet is severely felt
by men devoted to sensual gratifications. Moreover, it is found
very serviceable, especially when combined with light labour, in
taming the animal propensities, and rendering prisoners both man-
ageable and impressible. It should, therefore, be resorted to as fre-
quently, and continued as long, as the medical officer pronounces
can be done with safety; and should be more freely used than at
present as a punishment for prison offences. The labour, too,
must be made more severe and real. A certain measurable
amount should be exacted; failing which, scantier food, degra-
dation to a lower class, such a forfeiture of marks as will entail
a prolongation of imprisonment, and, if need be, the black hole,
solitude, and the lash, should be resorted to. Severe labour might
be exacted, if vigilance and physical force were adequate; and
might be exacted easily, as in Ireland, if the co-operation of the
convict were secured, as it is there, by making his comfort and
his term of servitude notoriously and inexorably dependent, not
on mere abstinence from disorder (according to our wretched
system at Portland and Chatham), but on zealous and steady
industry. The reasons which are urged in favour of a generous
diet while in the separate cell, are not valid when the convict
lives out of doors, and works and associates with others. There
is no ground then for feeding him more highly than the free
labourer. It would be found, moreover, that really hard work
would be of inestimable value in preventing outbreaks and re-
straining turbulence. The convicts are nearly all men in whom
the animal predominates, and a great point is gained by using up,
if not exhausting, day by day their physical energies. Any
physiologist might have taught our authorities how necessary
this is. Possibly the alarming mutiny at Chatham and at Perth,
and the undesigned revelations of ‘ Female Life in Prison,’ may
serve to teach it now. Hitherto Sir Joshua J ebb’s plan has been
to feed and train his men up to the highest point of animal
vigour, to use that vigour as little as possible, by assigning to
them a degree of work which is exercise only, and not toil—in
fact, to keep them perpetually on the verge of the explosive point
in the animal thermometer. Practically there need be no diffi-
culty in finding work. Prisons might be made nearly self-sup-
porting ; and since moveable prisons were invented, all the
rougher Government work ought to be, and might be, done by


convicts. We know, too, that in many of the best managed
county jails the work exacted is made really hard and penal,
and is the part of their sentence which the criminals most
dread.
There has been some discussion lately on the propriety of re-
viving the punishment of the lash, as administered to the worst
class of naval and military offenders, in the case of convicts con-
fined for crimes in which great brutality and ruffianism have been
shown, as for outrages on women, and robbery with savage vio-
lence on men. The matter is no doubt open to dispute. For
ourselves, we cannot feel any hesitation in pronouncing in favour
of corporal punishment, for three simple reasons : that it is the
retribution specially appropriate for such offences; that it is the
infliction most intelligible to, and most dreaded by, ruffianly
natures, and therefore peculiarly calculated to deter both those
who have once undergone it and those younger offenders who
only hear of it; and that, if kept for the proper set of criminals, it
can do no harm, —for it is simple nonsense to talk of its 1 brutaliz-
ing’ effects on villains whose hardened and remorseless brutality
is proved by the very nature of their crime. How can a convict,
who has beem brute enough to violate or kick a woman, or to
beat a prostrate man into insensibility, be made more of a brute
by receiving fifty lashes ? It is what a ruffian does, not what he
endures, that brutalizes him. 1
Next to women, drink, and idleness, what the sensual natures
of professional criminals most desire, is the society of their old
associates and their fellow-criminals. What they most dread is
pain, labour, and seclusion. It appears to us clear, that visits
from guilty associates—indeed, from all so-called ‘friends’—ought
to be sternly forbidden, unless in the most exceptional cases, and
as a rare and hard-earned indulgence. There should not be, as
is the case in England, certain fixed days set apart, on which all
convicts who have reached a certain stage of their confinement
are privileged to e receive.’ As to association while at work with
their fellow-convicts, we are aware how difficult, perhaps how
impossible, it would be to prevent this ; but we are perfectly sure
that, as a rule, the endeavour should be to seclude the prisoner
as much as possible from all intercourse with those who have fol-
lowed a similar course of crime with himself, and whose conver-
sation can have no influence except to perfect him in villany, and
to crush out any good seeds that solitude, the schoolmaster, and
the chaplain, may have succeeded in sowing in his breast.
l lt cannot fail to be remembered how frequent were attempts, real or pre-
tended, on the life of the Queen, by men of vicious or ill-regulated tempers, till
an Act was passed subjecting all future offenders to a flogging. Not a single
offence of the sort has been heard of since.


There can be no doubt as to the second principle,—viz., what
ought to guide us in our treatment of confirmed and professional
criminals, —though there maj be very considerable doubt as to
the extent to which, in the present unenlightened state of the
public mind upon the subject, it will be possible to carry it out.
Liberation, whether final or on license, should be made condi-
tional on proved fitness for liberation. Common sense dictates
that those only should be turned loose upon the community, who
can be turned loose with safety to the community. Any other
system at once negatives, stultifies, and foregoes that very object
which we have seen to constitute the definite aim and the sole
justification of all punishment, viz., social self-defence. The
State is bound to protect society from the depredations of incor-
rigible depredators—from the enmity of inveterate foes. When
it has once got hold of a convict known to live by crime, proved
by previous convictions and recorded character to belong to the
class who habitually, professionally, for profit and as a craft,
prey upon and outrage the peaceful and honest community, it is
obviously guilty not only of a foolish solecism, but of a gross
dereliction of duty, if it let him go till it is satisfied that in some
way or other—either by terror, or reformation, or altered habits
and circumstances—it has removed him from this class. The
law does not condemn a dangerous lunatic to be confined for
three years, or for five years, or for ten, but till he is cured.
Why should we adopt any other principle in dealing with habi
tual and regular criminals, who, as far as their relations to society
are concerned, are precisely in the same category? Such is
the plain principle we ought to follow; let us now see how far
we can expect practically to be allowed to carry it out.
And, first, as to ‘ ticket-of-leave’ men. Notwithstanding the
recent outcry against the system of licenses, by which a well-
conducted convict is permitted to be discharged from jail before
the full term of his sentence has expired, we maintain that the
principle of the system is at once sound and indispensable. As
regards Sir Joshua Jebb’s practice in distributing these licenses,
and the Home Secretary’s conduct in endorsing them, the public
indignation was perfectly just and well-merited. Nothing could
well be conceived more flagrantly absurd or more deeply cul-
pable. They have been habitually, and as an invariable rule, given
to men as to whom not the slightest doubt existed, or was even
pretended, in the minds of the authorities, that (miracle apart)
they would go back to crime and dishonesty on the earliest
occasion. That is, the known enemies of society were syste-
matically turned loose upon society, some months before there
was any necessity of doing so. But, as regards the ticket-of-
leave men, as distinguished from other discharged convicts who


had served their full time, the public alarm and outcry was in-
consequent and unwarranted. It is not only, nor specially, the
convicts who are out on license , but nearly all the convicts who
are out at all, that resort to crimes of violence, and constitute
our recent accession of garotters and burglars. A ticket-of-
leave man is only a rascal who is let loose in April instead of
October, —or in 1861 instead of 1862. If the licensing system
were abolished to-morrow, the same number of convicts would
be let loose in the end in each year, and would be let loose just
as vicious, just as hardened, just as uncured, and yet more vin-
dictive. All that we should gain would be, that our houses would
now be broken into, and ourselves garotted, by the villains who
were incarcerated in 1856, instead of by the set who were incar-
cerated in 1857. We have, therefore, no wish to abolish the
license system. Indeed, we hold it to be all but indispensable,
both as a means of securing the docility of the convict while in
jail (a most difficult and important point), and as an instrument
in that reformation to which (so long as we will neither hang
him, nor flog him, nor imprison him for life) society must mainly
trust for its fixture security. It has everywhere been found, that
the prospect of being able to abridge his term of durance by
abstinence from disorder or by active exertion, is, of all influences
which can be brought to bear for good upon the convict’s mind,
incomparably the strongest. How powerful an instrument it
may become, has been shown in Ireland. What, however, the
public have a right to insist upon, and what the Government
will be simply insane if they do not enact without waiting for
coercion from without, is, that the English mode of administering
the license system shall forthwith be assimilated to the Irish:
that is, that positive and not mere negative good conduct shall
be required; that no man shall be liberated one day before his
full term shall have expired, who has only abstained from what
is prohibited, and has not also done what is desired; who has
not earned and worked out the curtailment of his sentence; who
has not shown earnest and regular industry in the earlier stages,
and who has not survived the test of steadiness and self-control
to which he is submitted in the intermediate prisons;—in a word,
that no one shall be released on license till he has proved his
fitness for such release, and has proved it not to the chaplain
but to the warder and the overseer; not by words but by deeds;
not by promises and prayers, which might be mere hypocrisy,
nor by quiet and docility, which might be mere crafty sense, but
by persistent and active exertions and forbearance —by real co-
operation in his own amendment. ‘ Prison characters,’ as we all
know now, are worth absolutely nothing. Every man with the
least experience will assure us that the most incorrigible, habitual,


and desperate offenders are, as a rule, the best conducted men
in prison; they are too shrewd and too well acquainted with the
penal servitude system to be otherwise. In the case of the
Chatham outbreak, —one of the most violent and formidable
with which we have ever had to contend, which had to be put
down by a large military force, and to be punished with frightful
severity,—out of 857 convicts who were implicated, 713 were
men whose ‘prison character’ was recorded as ‘exemplary,’
‘good,’ or ‘very good;’ the licenses of several of them were
actually in the governor’s hands at the time of the mutiny, and
others had already been recommended for discharge, and were
entitled to large gratuities.
But we would go further than this. However ill a man
behaves in prison (short of actual fresh crime, which he has
scarcely the means of committing), however indolent and recal-
citrant he may be, however obvious, in fine, it may be to the
authorities that he is a hardened and irreclaimable scoundrel,
who is certain, and who may even avow it, to resort to robbery
and outrage as soon as he is free—still, as the law now stands, when
his sentence has run out, when he has served his five years or
his seven, he must be set at liberty, and recommence his course
of enmity to, and depredations upon, society. We therefore
propose to meet this anomalous absurdity by one material change
in penal sentences (in addition to other regulations, to be here-
after adverted to). We would introduce labour sentences in
place of fixed terms, in the case of all heinous crimes and all
second convictions—wherever, in fact, we have reason to believe
or know that we are dealing with habitual malefactors. There
is not yet philosophy or comprehensiveness enough diffused among
the British public to enable us to hope for an Act empowering
the judges to sentence such men (as we should wish to do,
and in consistency and prudence ought to do) to be ‘ imprisoned
and kept to hard labour till they are cured] — i.e., till they have
satisfied the jail authorities that they are cured. But we may
do the next best thing, which in its practical operation would
probably be much the same: we may empower and direct the
judges to sentence men, not to be in penal servitude so long, but
to earn in penal servitude so much. In place, for example, of
condemning a garotter, who has been once or twice ‘up’ before,
to five years’ penal servitude, we would have him sentenced to
earn (say) L. 200, by way of repayment and atonement to the
public which he has robbed, and which has had to pay for his
incarceration; and another L. 50, to be paid to him (in certain
instalments ) after his release, by way of enabling him to start in
an honest course of life, or to pay his passage-money to other
shores. We would double or treble these sums for longer terms.


The rate of remuneration for labour, as well as the sort of labour
allotted, to be, of course, at the discretion of the authorities—
among which authorities, as discretion is implied and required,
Sir Joshua Jebb must not be numbered. The result would be,
that the convict—knowing that he could work himself out, and
thathe could get out in no other way; that the duration of his
punishment, in fact, depended wholly on himself; that it would
be long if he were idle and refractory, short (comparatively) if
he were docile, strenuous, and steady,—would become as anxious
to give good measure as the authorities now are to exact it from
him; nay, far more anxious, and incomparably more successful.
Prison discipline would at once become easy, punishments far
fewer, exuberant diet less necessary, because the excitement and
interest of labouring for self would supply its place; and the con-
vict establishments would become at once self-supporting, and
nearly self-controlling. No one who has watched the Irish
experiment, and no one who has studied the past history of
the ‘ convict question,’ will be disposed to entertain much doubt
on this head. But this would be by no means the whole—nor
the best. It is in the nature of things in the highest degree
improbable, not to use a stronger word, that men who had been
working for five or six years for themselves to escape from irksome
confinement and privation, and to regain their cherished liberty
and indulgences, should not, in the course of this process, have
acquired a taste for labour, as they would assuredly have formed
habits of labour. Every spadeful of earth moved, every stroke
of the pick, every yard of cloth wove, every tale of bricks made,
would be associated in their minds with pleasure, not with pain
—with the desired aim to which every exertion was bringing
them nearer, instead of with a forced infliction, which was imposed
upon them by and for others. Labour would cease to be dis-
tasteful, because it was a step towards freedom, and the only
portal of escape open to them; and it is not unreasonable to
expect that, in the majority of cases, industrious tastes and habits
thus acquired would survive the compulsion (mainly moral, by
the way) which gave them birth. And the lash and the black
hole would seldom need to be resorted to, when every day of
idleness and every act of insubordination entailed its own sure
penalty, as certainly as every special act of energy or steady toil
brought the day of emancipation nearer.
• It is known to all who have investigated this subject with any-
thing of a philosophic spirit, that besides the few regular criminals
who can be deterred by the severity of the penalties awarded,
and the comparatively many who can be reformed, in their habits
at least, it not in their character, by a judicious system of prison
discipline, there remains a considerable residue of evil-doers whom


no infliction can terrify, and whom no treatment can amend or
humanize, —whose redemption from a career of crime and dis-
honesty is practically and notoriously hopeless,—who, from defec-
tive organization, or early raal-training, or the inveterate and
engrained habits of a lifetime, may safely, and without any lack
of charity, be pronounced incorrigible,—on whom all influences
have been brought to bear in vain, and who return to jail again
and again so certainly and so soon, that with them incarceration
is the rule, and freedom the exception. What is to be done with
these men ? They are not always bad enough to be hanged;
and virtually we have abandoned hanging for anything short of
murder. Flogging, however cruel, would be thrown away upon
them, for their nature is too inveterately criminal for any inflic-
tion to operate effectually upon it. They are not men to trans-
port, because their return to vicious courses would be just as
absolutely certain in the colonies as at home; and they are too
thoroughly bad decently to be made a present of to any country.
Clearly they ought , without scruple, to be imprisoned for life
after the second or third conviction. Virtually they are now
imprisoned for life, with short intervals of liberation, which are
invariably and actively employed in adding to their already heavy
catalogue of crimes. But as there is an irrational objection in
the public mind to shutting a man up avowedly for life, nearly
as strong as that which prevails against cutting him off from life
altogether, the same object might be attained by the infliction,
in these cases, of very heavy labour sentences—by condemning
them to earn such large sums, or so many marks, as would almost
certainly never be reached by ruffians who are usually incurably
idle as well as incorrigibly vicious. Most assuredly, the one
thing which we ought not to do—the one thing which the State
cannot do without making itself particeps criminis in all those
men’s future offences—is to let them loose upon society on any
terms, or after the lapse of any time.
It now remains to be considered, what is to be done with
the convict when the day of his discharge arrives, when the term
of his sentence is expired, or his good conduct has entitled him
to conditional liberation, —when he has either undergone his
awarded time, or earned his allotted sum. This is the most
critical period of all. As matters are at present conducted in
England, all the facilities and most of the inducements lie in the'
way of a relapse into crime; most of the obstacles are in the
path of virtue. It is in every way far easier for a liberated convict
to resume his old course than to commence a new one; and we
have taken considerable pains—partly from bad judgment, partly
from carelessness, partly from helplessness —to make it easier


still. On the one hand, the labour market being usually rather
overstocked than the reverse, it is particularly difficult for a man
who has seldom or never sought honest employment before, to
begin to find it now; few masters will take him without knowing
something of his character and antecedents; and, as things are
now arranged, a prison character and prison antecedents are (in
England at least) the very worst a man can have. Unless he be
a man of unusual determination and unusual energy and re-
sources, it is scarcely possible for him, unaided , to establish him-
self in any regular and paying industry; and when his prison
gratuity is spent, he commonly finds himself with the only alter-
natives of starvation, mendicancy, the parish workhouse, or a
life of theft. Who can wonder if he falls back on that which is
at once the easiest and the most familiar? On the other hand,
he comes out of prison naturally with a strong appetite for the
ease and luxuries from which he has been debarred so long; and
sensual indulgences almost necessarily lead him into bad com-
pany. Then he longs for companionship; and his old associates,
even if they are not waiting to receive and re-capture him, are
those whom he can most easily approach, and whom he best
knows where xo find. To them, therefore, he as a rule resorts,
and in that case it is all over with his reformation. In plain
truth, it is scarcely too much to say that the discharged convict
must and will relapse, if left to himself and to his own resources,
—unless, that is, we both assist him to go right, and watch
against his going wrong.
The first thing, therefore, which is most especially
is that he should not be released from supervision. At present,
as we have seen, the men who are discharged on license in
Ireland are never lost sight of by the police; they have to report
themselves at head-quarters frequently and periodically; the
life they are leading is well known and closely watched; and
they must lead an industrious and reputable life, or go back to
prison. We have described the admirable results of this system.
In England, so far from being obliged to report themselves to
the police, and being vigilantly though quietly looked after, the
police have special orders to let them alone, to shut their eyes
as far as they can to them; in fact, to treat them not only as
men earnest in the pursuit of honesty, but strong and confirmed
in its practice; and we have seen the result of this plan also.
Sir Joshua Jebb defends this proceeding on the ground that, if
they were kept under surveillance , they would never be able to
get into work; that the fact of such surveillance would transpire,
and betray their secret, and ensure their dismissal. The ticket-of-
leave men have been said to complain bitterly that they are hunted
by the police; and that, as soon as they had got employment, or


a good place, some officious peeler informed their master of their
antecedents, and ensured their immediate dismissal. If this be
true—and we have little doubt there is some truth in it—we can
only say the police have been guilty of a great wrong, and must
have had very inadequate or very injudicious instructions; for
surely there is all the difference in the world between supervision
and delation. In Ireland, as we have seen, the policeman is the
friend of the really struggling and well-intentioned licensee;
and the surveillance there exercised does not betray him to his
fellow-workmen, and it is not needed to warn his master, who
has already been informed of his antecedents. The duty of the
police seems to us clear; and it might easily be made so intelli-
gible by those who give them their instructions, that they scarcely
could go wrong. They should have their eye upon every dis-
charged convict: if he is in regular work, keeps good company,
and abstains from suspicious haunts or proceedings, they should
be absolutely silent and unrecognising. If, on the contrary, he
consorts with thieves, or otherwise gives ground for believing
that he is likely to relapse, and perhaps rob his employer, let the
police warn him at once that they are watching him, and that,
unless he alter his course, they will have to inform his master
or remand him to prison. If instructions to this effect are issued
and enforced, the ticket-of-leave man who is really endeavouring
to do w T ell, and recover his position, will have no ground for
complaint, and his employer no ground for remonstrance; for
the police, as a rule, are judicious and forbearing as well as in-
telligent. But, most assuredly, to relieve him at once from all
surveillance, is to deprive him of the most effectual aid and
motive to his new-born and halting virtue.
So much for ticket-of-leave or conditionally-liberated convicts.
But we propose to extend the principle of police supervision
much further, so as to include all who have been more than once
convicted of theft or other crime, or against whom, after one
conviction, proof can be brought that they are addicted to dis-
honest courses, and belong, in fact, to the class of habitual or
professional malefactors. What we should propose with reference
to such men is this : that, as a part of their sentence , they shall
be awarded to remain for three years, or five, or ten, after their
discharge, at the discretion of the judge, under the same conditions
as the ticket-of-leave men are in Ireland— i.e ., that, unless they
emigrate, they shall be required to present themselves before the
inspectors of police at stated periods, and to satisfy them that
they are leading respectable and industrious lives ; failing which,
their licenses shall be revoked, or rather their discharge shall be
cancelled. The effect would be to place every known thief and
every proved malefactor under the perpetual, or at least the pro-


longed, vigilance of the authorities; and we should escape from
the singular anomaly of our present system, under which many
thousands (45,000, according to the last volume of ‘ Judicial
Statistics’) of malefactors are at large, living by crime, ever on the
watch to commit crime, and perfectly well known to the police
as such, and yet who, under the present law, cannot be interfered
with unless taken jlagrante delicto , and against whom the com-
munity are not, and cannot be, protected. 1 There is no injustice,
and there would be no hardship, in such an enactment as we
suggest: there would be none even if we were to add to it a
decree that these regular depredators should be compelled to
procure recognisances for their good behaviour, as a condition of
being suffered to remain at large, or to be discharged at all. The
English law, and common charity as well as common sense, pre-
sume every ordinary man to be innocent till he has been proved
guilty, and regard every man as entitled to be at large till he has
proveably forfeited this right; but the presumption of sense is,
that every relapsed convict and every known thief is guilty un-
less he can prove his innocence; and this ought to be the pre-
sumption of the law likewise. A man who is known to be the
enemy of society has forfeited his natural claim to be at large.
In ordinary cases, the onus prohandi is properly thrown upon the
community which accuses : in the cases specified, the onus pro-
handi would be justly thrown upon the offender who protests his
purity. A man who has been twice or thrice in prison, or who,
after previous convictions, gets a sentence of penal servitude, has
no primd facie claim whatever to be supposed to be leading an
innocent or honest life, and it is simply impudence to advance
any such claim. Society has a perfect right to say to him—and
it is imbecile and suicidal if it does not say— £ You have forfeited
your privilege to rank among common citizens or honest men ;
you have twice at least sinned against society; and society, after
dealing with you, has forgiven you, and you have returned again
to your malefactions: henceforth, for at least such or such a
term of years, it cannot trust you, and its officers shall not lose
sight of you. We will not, for } r our pleasure, have to do our
work over and over again : for the period specified, therefore,
your liberty is only provisional: you are at large, indeed, but vou
are not free, as uncontaminated men are free.’ We say to a
man who has committed such and such a crime or felony, that, in
addition to his other punishment, he shall be declared incapable
of ever holding office, etc., etc. Why not, in the same fashion,
say to a professional ruffian or thief that he shall be incapable
of ever (or for long) recovering unfettered and unwatched
liberty?
1 This is in addition to 39,000 more who are ‘ inspected.’


If the simple regulations we have here urged were adopted,—
all of which approve themselves to common sense, and most of
which have been tested by actual experiment, at one time or
another, and on a larger or smaller scale, —every magistrate and
police inspector of experience will bear us out in confidently
anticipating, not, indeed, the extinction of the class of professional
malefactors and depredators, but such a large and rapid reduction
of them as would make dealing with them a very easy matter.
The schools of many of the most skilful and inveterate of them
would be virtually closed by the perpetual incarceration of the
schoolmaster; and a large proportion of the young pupils in
yillany might be dealt with and cured by the multiplication and
improvement of juvenile reformatories. Numbers who are not
yet irrecoverably hardened or committed to a life of crime would
be cowed, and recoil where they found the probable penalties so
much more real and so much more formidable than they expected.
Numbers more, having earned their liberty by industry and self-
control, would endeavour to preserve it by the same means, and
the habits acquired in prison would stand them in good stead
when they came out. Those with whom nothing could be done
would come out no more. Those who did come out, would come
out, as it were, with a halter round their neck—with a vigilant eye
ever upon them—and would be obliged to be honest, as the sole
condition of being free; while, having once been assisted in the
first steps towards honest industry, it would be their own fault if
they ever left it. The community could be efficiently protected,
because fifty thousand rogues would be no longer able to congre-
gate and plot in sacred security ; and crime, which we now only
permit ourselves, in such rare cases as we can, to detect and
punish, we should then be able to watch while hatching, and to
hinder from coming to the birth. The only further requisite—
‘ Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies’ on a large scale—we have
left ourselves no room to dwell upon, yet it is about the most
important of all. Much has been done in this direction, but
much more is wanted. The greatest practical difficulty, no doubt,
which our criminal reformers have to deal with has always been
the nearly insuperable obstacles experienced by the discharged
convict who sincerely wishes to do well, in obtaining employment
for the first time. Unless we can help him to do this, all our
other contrivances can seldom avail to save him from nearly un-
avoidable relapse.
At the risk, however, of wearying our readers, we must not
conclude without a few words on the question so much in men’s
mouths at present —the proposed revival of Transportation.
The suggestion is by no means creditable to the heads and hearts


either of the writers who have so recklessly*urged it, or of the
public, which at first seemed so well inclined to welcome it. The
readiness with which it was made and received, was too indica-
tive at once of indolent desire to evade the necessity of facing a
difficult and painful problem, and of a selfish determination to
regard only our own perplexities, and to trample without consi-
deration on all the claims of justice to others, and of plain and
peremptory morals.
For a long series of years after the first establishment of penal
colonies, they were felt as a vast relief and resource by those who
had to deal wdth the criminal classes of this country. They dis-
posed easily, conveniently, and for ever, of large numbers whom
we could neither hang, nor manage, nor reform. They answered
also another purpose —that of preparing, at Government expense,
for the settlement of free colonists, and of tempting colonial capi-
talists by the promise of cheap labour. We may concede at once
that they greatly facilitated the colonization of Australia, and
paved the way, in early days, for much of the progress and pros-
perity which has been so remarkable. It may, however, be
doubted whether their reflex action on the great problem we are
considering on the whole, been beneficial. We could get
rid of our convicts so readily, that we cared little how fast they
multiplied. Had we had no penal settlements to send them to, we
must long since have come face to face with the problem which
is perplexing us now. Had our colonies continued as willing to
receive our criminal population as they used to be, perhaps that
problem would have been neglected still.
A variety of circumstances, however, combined to close this
outlet to us somewhat suddenly and for ever. The public mind
at home was awakened by some startling revelations of the social
and moral character of the community which we were founding
at the other side of the globe, and a committee of the House of
Commons reported strongly against the continuance of trans-
portation. A rapid succession of Colonial Secretaries, each with
his own special notions on the subject, introduced unmanageable
confusion into the whole system. Lord John Russell, in 1840,
decreed that no more should be sent to New South Wales; and
Tasmania, in consequence, was inundated with them at the rate
of 3500 a-year. Lord Stanley, in a fit of economy, ordered that
no free settlers should obtain convict labour without paying a full
price for it. The poor Tasmanians, whose only inducement to
become settlers was, that they had calculated upon it at half-price,
were unable to endure this new arrangement, and threw back
the convicts on the hands of Government. The Government
had no means either of employing, or of guarding, or even of
housing, such an accumulation of rascals ; so Mr Gladstone


was obliged to suspend all transportation for a while. Lord
Grey organized a better system, and tried to send a number of
picked convicts to the Cape; but the Cape rose in rebellion at
the idea. The Australian colonies about the same time, at last
fully awoke to the mischiefs ensuing from the vast numbers of
convicts and expirees who mingled with the now teeming free
emigrants, refused to receive any more ; and the discovery of the
gold-fields (which rendered Australia about the last place in the
world to which criminals under punishment ought to be sent),
added to all other considerations, finally decided the Home
Government to give up transportation altogether as a punish-
ment, —except as regarded the few who could be disposed of in
Western Australia, —and to substitute penal servitude instead.
Now, the reasons why transportation, once abandoned, cannot
and ought not to be revived, lie in a very small compass, and
may be stated plainly enough. Transportation may be looked at
either as a resource or a 'punishment; i.e ., it may be either an
exile to a populous community which will absorb the criminal,
or imprisonment in a foreign jail, which will confine him. Let
us look at it in both lights. In the first place, it is no doubt
most advantageous to have a large and well-peopled country in
which liberated convicts can obtain employment on liberation,
can recommence life under a new sky, away from old associates
and old temptations, and with known antecedents not always
hampering them in every effort to become honest and respect-
able. The value of such a colony or nation could not be exag-
gerated for the convicts after they had endured their punishment;
and whether they endured this at home or in the colony, was a
question of detail which mattered very litttle. But the very pri-
mary essential for such a community is that it should be popu-
lous — capable of really absorbing and utilizing the rascality
poured into it—so full of honest, industrious, flourishing inhabit-
ants or settlers, that the convict element shall be little felt, shall
be no more than a drop in the bucket, shall not perceptibly affect
the social system or modify the moral tone of the mass. If it
cannot do this; if the convict element either constitute the com-
munity or preponderate in it, or form a very large portion of it,
we at once come upon the difficulty which proved fatal to the
system in New South Wales. Now, the only remaining colony
which, in any approximate degree even, offers the above requisite
is Western Australia. It is the only settlement which will
receive our criminals. The old colonies, the populous colonies,
will never suffer the landing of another ship-load; so it is idle
for Home Secretaries to hanker after those lost lands of Goshen.
How many convicts, then, can Western Australia really absorb ?
Obviously not above 500; some say 1000, and these only for a


time. 1 The colony is a small one, and by no means hitherto
particularly prosperous. The present free (that is, untainted)
population is only 11,000, of which 5400 are women. The pre-
sent convict population is 5800—including the ticket-of-leave
and conditionally-pardoned men— and all these are males. That
is to say, the criminal element already outnumbers the honest
element; and if the colony is to retain its absorbing power —if
it is not to become a mere community of liberated convicts—it
is clear that transportation ought to be suspended for a series of
years, and every encouragement given to emigration till the
balance is restored.
Practically, therefore, the demand for the revival of transporta-
tion resolves itself into the demand for a new penal settlement—
i.e., a prison or convict establishment in some distant quarter of the
world—to which our ruffians can be at once removed, and where,
after they have undergone their sentence, they can be made to re-
main as colonists, cultivate the soil, become farmers or shepherds,
and form the nucleus and originators of a future colony. This is
avowedly the idea in the head of those who advocate this scheme
for disposing of our criminals. Of course it is intended that the
convicts shall remain there; otherwise the settlement would not
permanently relieve England at all—it would be merely a larger
Pentonville or Portland in another country, with no superiority
whatever over those establishments at home, and with the addi-
tional disadvantage of being vastly more expensive, less secure,
and more mismanaged. Is it then possible, or would it be per-
missible, to found a colony with such materials in any corner of
the globe, however desert and uninhabited it may now be? Let
us test the idea by a few close questions. Is it designed that the
liberated convicts shall live on as gardeners, or stock-keepers, or
hunters, in single wretchedness, with no females among them,
and to die out one by one when their time comes? This, of
course, is not contemplated. We know too well what would
result from such an arrangement, and what such a community
would become. (We leave out of view the certainty that from
such a life all the victims would sooner or later escape—by land,
if Labrador were the locality; by means of whalers or otherwise,
if the Falkland Isles were selected.) Well, then, since a settle-
ment cannot be founded without women, and no such foundation
ought to be dreamed of for a moment, whence are the women to
be provided who are to become the wives of the original popula-
tion and the mothers of the future community? Are they to be
native women—savages ? But in none of the proposed quarters
do aborigines exist in any numbers; and, if they did, are we pre-
1 The number we must dispose of yearly—the number liberated from our con-
vict prisons—averages 2500.


pared to send the refuse of our jails, the lowest specimens of
Anglo-Saxon ruffianism, to compete with the Esquimaux and
the 1 atagonian for the possession of their few filthy females, and
can we look with complacency upon a mixed breed thus originated?
The mere statement of the scheme is its sufficing condemnation.
Are we to send out female convicts as well as males, that the two
sexes may pair when liberated ?_ In the first place, this would
only partially meet the case, since the men committed to our
convict prisons outnumber the women in the proportion of five
to one. In the second place, no one who has followed the history
of the convict system in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, where female convicts used to be sent, would ever be dis-
posed to repeat the experiment. Mr Elliot, in his evidence before
the Transportation Committee in 1861, was very distinct upon
this point. No good and much evil resulted from the minglimr
of the depraved of both sexes; and the female convicts proved
far the most unmanageable and incurable of the two. Are we
to send out the wives and families of the convicts to them as soon
as their period of penal detention has expired ? In some cases
where this has been done in the Australian the result
has been very satisfactory. But this would be a very inadequate
resource, since comparatively few of the convicts are married ;
and of these many are such ruffians, that nothing could induce
their ill-used wives voluntarily to rejoin them. 3finally ? are we
to seek for free female emigrants, whom the bribe of an outfit
and a fiee passage might induce to venture out, to become the
companions of the congregated and half-reclaimed ruffians with
whom we have peopled our new colony? But what decent or
pure woman would go ? And are we prepared to ship off the
unfoitunates who crow r d our streets, like the Athanasian creed
with quicunque vult written on their foreheads, —and abate our
other ‘ evil,’ not by cure but by removal ? Is it not
obvious that in no way and by no means can we face this pro-
blem ? In a word, dare we attempt —dare w r e even propose—to
found a community of which the parents and sources—the ‘ Pil-
grim Fathers’ of the future race—shall be the ruffians and harlots
whom we call into existence wholesale, but whom we dare not
keep at home ? Is it not clear to demonstration, that neither the
old colonies, whom we have disgusted, nor any new one we
could form, can be henceforth a resource for the disposal of our
criminal population ?
We hope we have now made it abundantly evident that there
is a better way of dealing with and diminishing our criminal
classes than the one we have so pertinaciously pursued in this
VOL. XXXVIII. NO. LXXV. C


country, and that there could not well be a worse. As soon as
the public, and through it the Government, is convinced of this,
the only important obstacle towards the adoption of the sounder
system "we have sketched out lies in the expense which must at
first attend it. Considerable outlay may have to be encountered
at the beginning, in providing a greater number of reformatories
for juvenile delinquents; in increasing the amount of cellular
accommodation in ordinary prisons, so as to enable separation to
be carried out more universally and for a longer time ; in build-
ing or procuring a*sufficient number of convict jails for the
reception of those criminals whom it is desirable to detain for
terms or for life; in selecting and maintaining a large number of
intelligent officers and warders both to supervise the execution of
the * labour sentences,’ and to individualize the management of
the prisoners; and, finally, in providing adequately both for the
supervision and the assistance of the convicts when restored to
freedom, so as to check those who might otherwise relapse into
crime, and to aid those who are struggling back to an honest
course. The expense, however, would only be temporary, and,
when once the new system was at w r ork, would lessen every year,
as it has been found to do in Ireland. But the cost of the im-
proved mode of treatment —whatever sum it may amount to
will not, we are sure, weigh one feather with any sensible or
thoughtful man, when we reflect that no plan of keeping crimi-
nals can be half so expensive as allowingi them to heep themselves;
that they cost far more out of jail than in, feed themselves more
luxuriously, help themselves more wastefully; that the most
effectual way of diminishing the cost of our criminal classes
reduce their number; and that every thief or ruffian who remains
at large is busily occupied in training and creating others. We
have some means now of ascertaining the sums which the crime
of the community exacts from its resources, —how much, in a
word, it now costs us every year to watch, to punish, and to main-
tain our rogues and depredators, whether incarcerated or at large.
The materials for this estimate are furnished by the Parliamentary
volume of 1 Judicial Statistics’ for England and Wales for 1862,
and the result is startling. The following are the items :
Police and constabulary salaries and expenses, . L. 1,580,000
Outlay in local prisons, ..... 430,000
Vote for convict establishments at home and abroad, 465,000
Outlay for reformatories, . 50,000
Proportion of judges’ salaries, and incidental ex-
penses, ...•••• 35,000
Carry forward, . L. 2,560,000


Brought forward,
Supposed real value of prisoners’ labour
L.2,560,000
(a mere estimate), ....
Maintenance of 90,800 registered thieves, re-
ceivers, tramps, etc., known or confidently be-
lieved to be living at large by crime and pilfering
(at L.30 a-head, the prison cost, probably it is
160,000
L.2,400,000
much more), say ......
2,700,000
L. 5,100,000
This is a formidable amount enough, and there is too much
reason to believe that it is below rather than above the truth.
But these returns relate to England and Wales alone; that is,
to scarcely more than two-thirds of the population of these islands.
If the cost and quantity of crime in Ireland and Scotland were
at all proportionate, we should have to swell the above figures to
a very startling result. But, though we have no accessible infor-
mation which would allow us to speak positively, or with much
pretence to accuracy, a comparison of the criminal returns of the
different parts of the United Kingdom warrants us in saying that
such an assumption would be certainly excessive. If we add
L. 1,400,000 for Ireland and Scotland, we shall probably be near
the mark; and the aggregate total would then show six mil-
lions and a half sterling as the tax yearly levied by the crime
of the country upon its industry and its wealth. This is the
pecuniary view of the problem we have to solve.


Art. ll.—l. The Pentateuch and Book of Joshua Critically
Examined. By Right Rev. John William Colenso,
D.D., Bishop of Natal. London, 1862.
2. An Introduction to the Old Testament, Critical, Historical,
and Theological. By Sam. Davidson, D.D, London,
1862. (Yol. 1., Portion on Pentateuch.)
3. Introduction to the Pentateuch. By the Rev. Donald
Macdonald, M.A. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1861.
4. The Veracity of the Book of Genesis , with the Life and Cha-
racter of the inspired Historian. By the Rev. William
Hoare, M.A. London, 1860.
5. A Few Words with Bishop Colenso on the subject of the
Exodus, etc. By Charles T. Beke,Pli. D. London, 1862.
6. The Pentateuchal Narrative Vindicated from the Absurdities
charged against it by the Bishop of Natal. By John
Collyer Knight. London, 1862. Etc., etc.
7. on the Pentateuch, addressed to the Laity. By
Isaac Taylor. London, 1863.
The history of books, like the history of individuals, seems often
ruled by a sort of accident or caprice. A production which, in
certain circumstances, w r ould pass noiselessly into existence and
remain unheeded, will, in others, create a universal stir, and give
rise to extensive agitation and even permanent results. The
quarter especially from which it proceeds, the place and position
of the writer, appear at times to have the singular power of im-
parting a measure of their own greatness or insignificance to the
offspring of his brain ; and it is not so much what is said on the
particular subject of discussion, as who it is that has said it,
that awakens inquiry, and sets the springs of thought in motion.
Were it simply matters of taste and fashion, or even the affairs
of political life that are so affected, it were not much to be
wondered at; for there, to a large extent, the conventional
bears sway, and the will of individual minds virtually deter-
mines what is to prevail. But it ought surely to be otherwise,
when the disclosures and averments trench on the acknowledged
principles of science or facts of history ; and still more, if possible,
when they materially affect the statements of Holy Writ: for
here the truth alone is of moment; it is not the person who
speaks, but the way in which his words stand related to the verity
of things, that should chiefly weigh with intelligent and thought-
ful minds.
In reality, however, other elements enter largely into people’s




' *
