





o E-
If
CONVICTION
INNOCENT MEN
W. H. BUNDEY,
A Judge of the Supreme Court of
South Australia.
WV
ADELAIDE;
Published by E. S. Wigg & Son, Adelaide and Perth.




14062
GOIWIGTIOfI OF HIfIOGEJIT HEJL
“In cases of doubt, the side of mercy should always be preferred.”
Law, Max.
J"n the year 1898 the community was much ex-
cited over a number of daring burglaries and
highway robberies with violence. Several con-
victions took place, and exemplary punishment
was awarded. Some of these cases were tried
by jurors when I was presiding Judge.
In one instance a conviction ensued for hiali-
way robbery with violence, which was afterwards
proved to have been a case of mistaken identity.
The charge rested almost entirely on the
evidence of the person assaulted, the jury
disbelieving an attempt to establish an alibi.
The main witness for the prosecution, appar-
ently, was in every respect worthy of credence,
and I think no one who heard his testimony
could come to any other conclusion than that


he was a conscientious man. He was most
positive as to the prisoner’s identity. The jury
believed him and convicted the prisoner, who
was sentenced to seven years with hard labor.
The prisoner’s manner, the tone of his voice,
and his emphatic denial of the crime when
called upon to show cause why sentence should
not be passed upon him, made the impression
on my mind that the prosecutor was probably
mistaken, and I think it very possible had
the appeal which was made to me
been made to the jury before they re-
tired to consider their verdict that some of
them would have been much influenced by it.
Owing to the impression to which I
have referred, I refrained from ordering' the
prisoner to be whipped, a punishment which,
on the principle of the lex talionis, the real
culprit deserved; but which, applied to an
innocent man, is enough to make him a criminal
or a madman, and the lashes can never be re-
called. When some months afterwards three
prisoners were convicted of burglary before me
at the Gladstone Circuit Court, I was not at
all surprised to hear that they confessed to


being the perpetrators of the crime of which
the previous prisoner had been found guilty.
The Government very properly had a thorough
investigation made by my colleague, the Chief
Justice, I being too ill to be asked to undertake
it. The Chief Justice was fully satisfied of the
convicted man’s innocence, and on his recommen-
dation the prisoner was released. A close re-
semblance will be found between this case and
those dealt with in this pamphlet.
I have purposely refrained from men-
tioning the names of any of the parties
concerned. Probably all the actors in the
cases of thirty-five years ago have joined
the great majority ; still, they have doubtless
descendants living amongst us whose feelings
have a right to be respected, and it would be
improper to unnecessarily mention the names
of the parties concerned, which do not affect
the point I desire to emphasise, which is the
fact that justice does sometimes miscarry in
times of public excitement. My object is to
guard against, and if possible in some small
degree prevent similar errors in the future.
The events I am about to refer to can be


verified by reference to the public records of
the colony, and to the columns of the Press on
the dates of their occurrence.
Thinking over the circumstances attending
the mistaken conviction in 1898, during
my late enforced rest, it occurred to me
that a few notes respecting some rather
startling experiences in the administration
of criminal justice when practising at the
Bar of South Australia, and since occupying
a seat upon its Judicial Bench, might possibly
be of service to jurymen, upon whom devolves
the always grave, and in capital cases the
solemn, duty of determining upon the guilt or
innocence of accused persons ; and it may be
that practitioners defending prisoners may be
able to glean assistance from the facts I am
about to relate. Those who read what follows
will, I think, be impressed with the danger
there always is of errors occurring even in our
highest courts of justice when a community,
especially a limited one, is excited by the
prevalence of any particular class of crime, and
jurymen are called upon to enquire into charges
of similar character during such excitement.


This is especially the case where crimes of
violence are rife. They naturally give rise
to indignation, and a determination to punish,
if possible. The columns of the Press teem
with news respecting the outrages ; they form
the subject of conversation everywhere, and
jurymen are as liable to feel as much repug-
nance towards the culprits as others. Some-
times this feeling is apt to unconsciously color
their deliberations in the jury-room, however
much they may strive to banish it from their
minds. It is no doubt the duty of a pre-
siding Judge to administer a caution in
all such cases. The stern impartiality that
should characterise a Judge throws upon
him the imperative duty in summing up of
fairly and honestly analysing the evidence both
for and against the prisoner, but the responsi-
bility of determining upon such evidence rests
entirely with the jury. A Judge may no doubt
state the effect the evidence has made on his
mind, but he has no more right to dictate to a
jury what view they should take of the facts
than they have to disregard his instructions to
them as to the law applicable to any particular


case The following pages will show that jury-
men make mistakes—sometimes serious ones—
and it should tend to more charitable feeling
and less censoriousness when Judges are misled,
and have to grant new trials or modify their
previously expressed views. There never has
been, and never will be, a human tribunal in
which errors will not occur. The utmost that
can be hoped for is to strive to make as perfect
a system as possible, and do one’s best to carry
it out.
In a pamphlet on the “ Administration of
Criminal Justice” published some years ago,
I ventured to express admiration for the manner
in which juries in criminal cases generally dis-
charge their duties, and I shall not qualify one
sentence then written. Juries are no more
infallible than Judges, though both are, I hope,
generally right. Moreover, nothing in the
following pages derogates from the respect
then expressed, because, although verdicts
are shown to have been mistaken, it would,
in my opinion, be extremely unfair to aver
that the results, however mistaken, were not
honestly arrived at on the evidence in each


case; and it is upon evidence alone the jury are
sworn to find an accused person guilty or not
guilty.
In addition to the bona fide mistakes of
prosecutors, witnesses, and jurymen, these cases
impressed me with the unreliability of circum-
stantial evidence, and the danger of giving
unqualified credence to policemen’s testimony,
however honorable they may be as a body.
Taking the latter point first, I may mention
that the learned editor of “Taylor on Evidence”
puts it admirably and succinctly when he says :
“ That all men are guilty till they are proved
to be innocent is naturally the creed of the
police, but it is a creed which finds no sanction
in a Court of Justice but, he adds, “Asa set-
off to this tendency on the part of the police to
regard conduct in the worst point of view, it
must in fairness be stated that in every other
respect the general mode in which they give
their testimony is unimpeachable,” and that,
except when blinded by prejudice, they may
well challenge a comparison with any other
body of men in their rank of life as upright, in-
telligent, and trustworthy witnesses. After


upwards of thirty-five years’ experience of them
in the Courts of South Australia, I can cheer-
fully bear testimony that these favorable re-
remarks are as applicable to the police of this
colony as to those of the Mother Country.
Nothing here written is to be construed into any
expression of want of confidence in the Force
—it would ill become an administrator of the
law to do or say anything that would tend to
weaken its just influence—but from their very
position as detectors of crime, policemen’s
evidence ought to be carefully watched by both
Judge and jury to see that their zeal does not
mislead. The spirit in which I conceive a Court
should receive a policeman’s testimony if given
honestly is this : This is apparently the witness
of truth, but from his position he is open to a
natural bias. Is he biased ? or do the circum-
stances and the other evidence show he is not
mistaken ? These remarks do not apply to
every case in which a policeman is a witness,
as there are many in which they are quite dis-
interested. It is when the officers are detailing
alleged admissions or acts of prisoners when in
custody, or other circumstances of a like nature,


that Judges and juries are bound to watch their
testimony most carefully.
With respect to the danger of relying on cir-
cumstantial evidence, the case I am about to
detail has been an object lesson through life.
On this point Mr. Taylor says : “Witnesses may
lie, but circumstances cannot.” This has been
more than once repeated from the Bench, and is
now almost received as a Judicial axiom; yet
certainly no proposition can be more false or
dangerous than this; and he proceeds to give
numerous instances to prove his proposition
from Holy Writ and secular writings inter alia.
He instances the viper fastening on St. Paul’s
hand, the staining of Joseph’s coat with kid’s
blood, the finding of the bloody daggers on the
pillows of the grooms by Lennox and Macduff,
and lago’s story of the handkerchief which
goaded Othello to madness. In each and all of
these cases erroneous conclusions were drawn.
Those who peruse the following pages will see
how strong the chain of circumstantial evidence
was upon which the accused was convicted;
and yet, as the sequel will show, each of the
links were satisfactorily and clearly explained
away, and the convicted man was released.


I cannot resist the temptation to relate an
incident, not strictly evidence but in the nature
of circumstantial evidence that was witnessed
in the course of a trial many years ago in the
old Supreme Court House. In order to pro-
perly appreciate the position it is necessary
that the reader should understand the arrange-
ment of the room in which trials took place.
The central public entrance was on the north.
The Judge’s seat was on a raised dais against
the south wall. Doors covered with crimson
baize were on the east and west sides of the
dais, and these were the entrances from the
Judges’ rooms through which they came to
take their seats in Court. The jury box was
on the western side; its southern end facing
the door of the Judges’ room. Counsel, of
course, faced to the south when addressing the
Judge, and to the west when addressing the
jury. In this position the doors of the Judges’
chambers were in full view of the counsel, and
the door on the western side could be equally
well seen by the jury, who sat close to it. On
the occasion to which I am about to refer the
chambers on the western side were occupied by
the late Mr. Justice Wearing.


A case in which heavy damages were sought
against a well-known public man for libel and
slander excited a good deal of interest. It was
tried before a jury, and the late Mr. Justice
Andrews was leading counsel for the plaintiff.
The learned counsel was at that time in his
prime. In this particular action he had, I
think, the additional promptings of personal
antagonism to the defendant, who was a political
opponent. Be that as it may, he certainly made
a most bitter and eloquent attack upon him. I
was in the Court, and heard his speech through-
out. Whilst he was addressing the jury the
western baize door was pushed softly open for a
little way, and it was evident from the counsel’s
position that this was done to enable someone
to listen to what was being said. Mr. Andrews
was not slow to observe this, and when he came
to deal with the fact that the defendant had not
gone into the box to deny the allegations made
against him he was merciless in his castigation.
Suddenly pausing in the midst of this outburst,
he said something to this effect: “And yet,
gentlemen, the defendant was here to-day. I
myself saw him within the precincts of the


Court this morning.’' Then raising his voice to
its fullest pitch, and pointing with his left hand
full at the partially-opened door, he added,
with startling and dramatic effect: “ Gentle-
men, he is within these precincts now. I believe
he is there !” No sooner had the words passed
his lips than the door was suddenly closed,
amidst a perfect roar of laughter, in which Judge
and jury were unable to refrain from joining.
No one doubted that the inference was correct,
and that the defendant had been listening' at
the door. lam confident it had a great effect
on the jury, who found for the plaintiff, and
awarded him £750 damages. Yet the conclusion
drawn by all who witnessed it was wholly un-
warranted ; the simple explanation being that the
learned Judge who occupied the chamber—who
was dearly fond of a good joke, or.of hearing a
rattling speech from counsel—had the curiosity
to listen, and held the door ajar for the purpose,
little dreaming of what was to follow, and when
the startling climax came, hurriedly closed it,
as before described. The defendant was not
there, or anywhere else about the Court. The
learned listener frequently related in his own


inimitable way his surprise and feelings under
the circumstances. He is, I think, entitled to
the palm as the wittiest Judge that ever sat on
the South Australian Bench. Possibly some
may think the late Mr. Justice Stow entitled to
the distinction, but the latter’s wit was more in
the nature of sarcasm—sharp, piercing, and
unrelenting when deemed necessary.
This little episode has been introduced, as I
venture to think it proves that circumstances
may occur even in the midst of a trial by which
Judge, jury, and spectators may be misled.
In the months of August and September, in
the year 1866, in the Supreme Court of this
colony, four prisoners were wrongfully con-
victed by juries of highway robbery, and re-
ceived sentences of 14 years each, or a total of
56 years. The late Mr. Justice Stow defended
two of these, and I defended the other two.
The late Sir Richard Hanson, C.J., was the
presiding Judge. The convicted men remained
in gaol for upwards of seven months, when they
were released under the following circum-
stances :
In the early part of 1867 I was retained to


defend two young men upon a capital charge.
Owing to the terror inspired amongst the
citizens by a series of outrages alleged to have
been committed by my clients, a section of
the Press had written so strongly that I was
instructed to apply for an adjournment of the
trial on the ground that it would be prejudicial
to their interests for them to be tried in tbe
fever of excitement then existing. His Honor
the late Mr. Justice Gwynne was presiding Judge,
and granted the application. The accused were
subsequently tried, convicted, and sentenced to
death. Whilst lying under this sentence they
voluntarily confessed to having been the perpe-
trators of the crimes for which the four innocent
men were incarcerated. Their statements were
duly enquired into, and established to the satis-
faction of the Government. The four unfor-
tunate men were released, and received sub-
stantial compensation.
Such a startling experience as this at the
threshold of a professional career seldom falls,
to the lot of a young barrister. As may be
supposed, it made an indelible impression on
me, and was often present to my mind when


addressing a jury in my professional, or charg-
ing them in my Judieial, capacity.
In order for the reader to properly understand
what follows it is necessary to shortly explain
the reason why the public mind was so excited
at this period.
The City of Adelaide and its suburbs had for
many months been kept in a constant state of
alarm by frequent highway robberies, most of
them robberies under arms. The Press teemed
with indignant letters on the subject; citizens
went about armed with revolvers, and many
bitter taunts were launched against the police,
because of their apparent inability to secure the
culprits, one of whom assumed the name of
“ Captain Thunderbolt.” His exploits, how-
ever, were scarcely worthy of his high-sounding
title.
The police made a raid upon all the known
rogues and vagabonds of the metropolis, and
numbers of these gentry who could not give a
good account of themselves were sent to gaol.
I mention this because, in the sequel, it will
appear as one of the factors that conduced to
the conviction of an innocent man. When one


of the class referred to saw a policeman coming
towards him, he concluded he was about to
be “run in,” and therefore often “ran off.”
That is precisely what the accused did in the
case lam about to describe. His doing' so was
treated by the prosecution as strong presump-
tive evidence of his guilt. As a matter of fact
it had no bearing upon the charge preferred
against him, but the jury were doubtless much
and adversely influenced by it. The police have
always some undesirable characters under
observation, and when crimes are committed
it is to these they naturally turn with suspicion.
They did so in this particular instance, with
the result that a grave miscarriage of justice
occurred. It will be seen as I proceed that it
was the police who suggested to the prosecutor
who the robber probably was, and it will also
appear that the person suspected was one of
those who the police alleged were under their
surveillance as rogues and vagabonds.
O O
The charge preferred against the prisoner
whose trial I am about to relate was one of
robbery under arms.
On the day of the trial the Court was full to


overflowing. I was conscious as I entered upon
the defence that there was an immense amount
of suppressed excitement over the case, as the
robbery was an impudent one; and the man
robbed was well known and respected There
had been so many others similarly treated
amongst the spectators that the prospect of
securing one of the perpetrators was doubtless
pleasant to them. I naturally felt nervous,
because it was more than likely the jury shared
in the general feeling, which would give me
very uphill work. The prisoner’s manner in
the dock was also prejudicial to him. He had
a lisp, and persisted in speaking in a voice loud
enough for the jury to hear, and they could
detect this peculiarity. The presiding Judge
(Sir R. D. Hanson, C.J.), of course, had read
the depositions taken at the prisoner’s com-
mittal, and it was not long before it was evident
he had come to the conclusion that if the
evidence was true and remained unshaken
the prisoner was guilty. Altogether, there-
fore, it was about as unpromising a case for a
young counsel (I was but 28) to conduct success-
fully as one could desire to be engaged in.


The Crown Prosecutor opened the case for the
prosecution in a manner that gave little hope
of breaking any of the strong links in the chain
of positive—-supported, as it was, by circum-
stantial—evidence, of an apparently conclusive
character. The first witness, the man who was
robbed, was a broad-shouldered, upstanding,
and honest-looking North-country man. I
knew him well, and believe he was also known
to the majority of the jury and spectators, and
his demeanour and evident truthfulness im-
pressed all who heard his evidence, the purport
of which was as follows (I am writing without
reference to anything to refresh my memory ;
I mention this to show the depth of the im-
pression made upon my mind to which I have
previously referred) : “ Accompanied by a
friend, I was crossing the park lands to the
east of the city. The night was fine, and the
moon was just showing over the Mount Lofty
Range. Suddenly the prisoner, who had crape
over his face and was dressed (describing his
dress) ordered us ‘to bail up,’ and hand over
our money. This was done on the presentation
of a revolver to back up the polite request.


Sixteen shillings were handed to the robber.
During the conversation that took place both
of us (the men assailed) kept a sharp look-out
to obtain a clue upon which to be able to satis-
factorily identify our assailant, and this we
succeeded in doing. I distinctly saw his
face, which enables me to swear that the
prisoner was without a shadow of a doubt the
man. As is often the case on the Adelaide
plains, the land breeze from the eastward
freshened as the moon rose, and in course of the
interview this wind blew aside the crape from
the prisoner’s face, and both of us had ample
opportunity of seeing his features. Moreover,
we each noticed that the man had a lisp in his
voice. I had a somewhat lengthened cdnverSa-
ton with the prisoner, advising him to adopt a
more honest mode of getting a living, &c., and
in his replies I particularly noticed that he
lisped. The money he succeeded in obtaining
from me was all in florins—-that is eight
two shilling pieces. On the prisoner leaving
us we returned to Adelaide and reported the
matter to the police. After a minute descrip-
tion had been given of the features, dress,


height, color of hair, lisp, &c., an officer of the
force said— ‘ Come with me ; I think I know
the culprit.’ We accompanied him to a certain
street in the city. On entering such street the
prisoner was seen a short distance from us.
Immediately he caught sight of us he ran away
at full speed. After a smart chase he was
captured, and was at once positively identified
by us. The prisoner protested his innocence,
his unmistakeable lisp only confirming, in our
minds, his identity. After being lodged in the
lock-up search was made at the house in which
the prisoner was living with a member of the
other sex, and in his bed, concealed beneath the
bed tick, was found 16s. in silver, eight florins,
the exact sum and the like coins to those taken
from me. In the same room was also found
a hat and a piece of crape similar to those worn
by our assailant.”
The Judge allowed this hat to be placed upon
the prisoner’s head in the dock, with the crape
attached to it, in the mariner the witnesses said
it was attached when the robbery was com-
mitted, and he certainly looked anything but
prepossessing; but who could stand being so


dressed and not look to some extent forbidding.
When this positive testimony was supported by
the other reputable witness, who was in the
prosecutor’s company, in every particular, and
with a calm air of certainty that carried the
Court with the witness, I do not believe there
was any one but the prisoner and his
counsel who did not believe in his guilt. At
my previous interviews with him his protesta-
tions of innocence were so apparently sincere
that I felt it possible the prosecution was
mistaken.
I felt oppressed with the weight of the direct
evidence, supported as it was by such damna-
tory circumstances. I knew it was worse than
useless attempting to disparage or throw the
slightest doubt on the truthfulness of the two
principal witnesses on the main facts, and my
whole cross-examination was directed to show
that they had erred conscientiously, that it was
a case of mistaken identity, and when my turn
came Iso opened the case to the jury. The
alleged vagabondage of my client was explained
as his reason for running away when he saw the
police (for although he denied that he came


under the description of a rogue and vaga-
bond, he knew the police held a different
view), and he feared being run in by
the policeman that accompanied the prose-
cutor. 1 was instructed that the fair lady
who lived with the prisoner would explain the
hidden coin incident and the finding of the
crape, and intimated that I should call her to
do this, and to prove she was in the prisoner’s
company in the house during the time of the
commission of the alleged offence. The pri-
soner could give no explanation, either of
the concealed money or the crape, for the
simple reason that he knew nothing about
them. It must be borne in mind that at that
time prisoners were not allowed by the law to
give evidence on their own behalf. On con-
cluding my opening address to the jury, the
woman was called, but failed to appear. She
had been subpoenaed, but I was subsequently
informed she had reasons of her own for not
helping the prisoner, and the police stated she
did not, in her own interests, care to face a
cross-examination. Another witness also failed
to answer to his subpoena, and the attempted


establishment of an alibi completely collapsed.
I felt then that the prisoner’s fate was sealed.
Every counsel knows how dangerous a defence
is a weak alibi, but one that fails altogether
simply clinches the case for the Crown.
A more unpromising case has never fallen to
my lot to defend. Look for a moment at the
apparent strength of every link in the chain of
evidence. First, the positive and unshaken
testimony of the two principal witnesses, their
lengthened conversation with, and opportuni-
ties of identifying the prisoner, the lisp in his
voice, the manner in which he was dressed, his
running away when he saw them, the discovery
concealed in his bed of the exact sum in similar
coins to those taken, his alleged vagabondage,
and the total absence of any explanation of
any of these incriminating circumstances and
the failure of the alibi, and it may be easily
imagined that my task was a hopeless one. The
learned Judge dissected all I could advance in
his usual impressive style, and his summing up
was dead against the prisoner. The jury took
but little time to consider their verdict, and on
finding him “guilty” he was sentenced to 14


years imprisonment with hard labor, the prisoner
solemnly asserting his innocence as he left the
dock. The explanation of the various links of
the evidence was as follows : —The prisoner was
of the same height and build as the actual
culprit. The latter purposely assumed a lisp
to disguise his identity, he usually dressed as
men of the prisoner’s class dress, but he adopted
various disguises on different nights. The
prisoner’s running away, and his reason for
doing so, has already been explained, but it will
readily appear how such conduct on his part
would confirm the two men assailed in their
opinion of his guilt, and when the eight florins
were discovered under the circumstances before
mentioned any possible doubt on their minds
would disappear. Those eight florins were
never in the prisoner's possession, nor did he
know anything about them. They were
purposely hidden from him by the woman
already alluded to, as she had earned £1 un-
known to him, out of which she paid her land-
lord 4s. for rent, receiving the eight florins in
change, and which she placed under the bed
tick so that the prisoner, who she said would


have made her hand the money over to him,
might not know anything about it. The piece
of crape also belonged to her, as she had
recently been in slight mourning for a relative.
It has already been explained under what
circumstances the prisoner obtained his release,
viz., by the confession of the two young men
who were under sentence of death for another
crime—they not only confessed to the offence,
of which this prisoner was found guilty, but also
to those of which the three other men were
wrongly convicted. 1 have not recorded the
evidence in two of the other three cases because,
as before mentioned, the late Mr. Justice Stow
defended them, and I had no interest in nothin’
the particulars in these. Beyond the fact of
his conviction, the circumstances under which
the other prisoner I defended was convicted,
have gone from my memory. The broad fact
remains, that four innocent men were found
guilty by juries of grave crimes, were each sen-
tenced to 14 years imprisonment with hard
labor (56 years in all) at one Criminal Sittings
in this Colony, which was presided over by one
of the most able and least emotional of the


Judges who have sat upon its Bench. But for
the detection and conviction of the real culprits,
and their confession, these innocent men would
have had to serve their full term, and one
almost shudders to think what might have
occurred if they had been charged with the
particular offence of which the two young men
were convicted, instead of some of the lesser
offences the latter committed—there is no re-
calling the dread capital penalty. Happily this
was not so, but I trust every juryman who may
read this will bear in mind the absolute neces-
sity of not being led away by the excitement
and nervous tension that arise in communities
when certain crimes are rife ; it is at such times
that the reasoning powers must control the
emotional, or great injustice may follow. The
object of the Criminal law is to deter from
crime as well as to punish it. One can well
imagine an innocent man coming out of the
Stockade with a bitterness in his heart that
would be likely to make him a criminal. Let
each of us try to imagine what we should feel
under such circumstances.
Finally, let me guard against being supposed


to convey any fear to jurymen in the discharge
of their responsible duties. No one could
blame the jury for convicting in the case 1
have detailed. Had they found the prisoner
not guilty there would probably have been
universal condemnation. The point I de-
sire to emphasize is this. When dealing with
questions of identity do not let it suffice that
the evidence of the prosecutor, or principal
witness, is to all appearance that of truth, but
watch with the utmost care whether he had
such opportunities of judging, seeing, or feel-
ing what he describes as to make it clear
beyond all reasonable doubt that he could not
be mistaken, and then let it be equally clear
that he has come to this conclusion with an
unbiassed mind, and that he has not been put
upon the trail by any one, whether a policeman
or not, having an interest in a conviction. The
latter consideration, even if proved, need not
necessarily detract from the truth, though
it does materially lessen the weight of his
testimony. The preceding pages show how
dangerous it may be not to watch such evidence
with the greatest care. A. Judge’s duty does


not consist in merely saying ;—“ Gentlemen of
the Jury—lf you believe the evidence you will
convict the prisoner, if you do not; you will
acquit him.” In some cases this may be allow-
able, but in a great number it would be a
gross injustice to a prisoner, especially
if undefended. There are cases in which
a jury may believe every word • a witness
has said to be honestly spoken, and yet they
ought not to convict, because they may con-
clude he is truthful but mistaken, and it is the
Judge’s duty to point out where, in his opinion,
there are circumstances disclosed by the evi-
dence that tend to show a mistaken deduction
by a witness.
If the preceding points are attended to, and
a juryman’s conscience is satisfied of the
accused’s guilt, his duty is clear ; and if it should
afterwards appear that untruthful or mistaken
evidence—as in the cases I have dealt with—
has misled him, there is no reflection on him.
Let him do the right, and fear not. Eleven
other men have to be equally satisfied of the
prisoner’s guilt, and this is a great safeguard
and help to each individual juryman. Should


he err, that is human ; having done his utmost
to do right, he can do no more, and he may rest
content. lam quite aware that it is easier to
preach than to practise the latter doctrine.
Judges feel that as well as jurymen.
Vardon & Pritchard, Printers, Greaham-street.




1508 01365014
