

CONVENTION
(Geneva: 28th July, 1951)
RELATING TO THE
STATUS OF REFUGEES
AUSTRALIA.
TREATY SERIES, 1954.
No. 5.
AUSTRALIAN INSTRUMENT OF ACCESSION
(SUBJECT TO RESERVATIONS) DEPOSITED:
22ND JANUARY, 1954.
Entry into force (Article 43): 22nd April, 1954.
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
CANBERRA.
By Authority :
L. F. JOHNSTON. Commonwealth Government Printer. Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
2547.— Price 1S. 3D.




CONVENTION
(Geneva: 28th July, 1951)
RELATING TO THE
STATUS OF REFUGEES
AUSTRALIA.
TREATY SERIES, 1934.
No. 5.
AUSTRALIAN INSTRUMENT OF ACCESSION
(SUBJECT TO RESERVATIONS) DEPOSITED:
22ND JANUARY, 1954.
Entry into force (Article 43) ; 2 2nd April , 1954.
Department of External Affairs,
CANBERRA.
2547.
By Authority:
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)




CONVENTION RELATING TO THE STATUS OF REFUGEES.
Preamble
The High Contracting Parties,
Considering that the Charter of the United a n( l the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights' 2 ' approved 1 o ce &
1948 by the General Assembly have affirmed the principleAhat huma
beings 7 shall enjoy fundamental rights and fieedo
■discrimination,
Considering that the United Nations has, on various occasions
manifested concern for refugees and endeavoured to assni (
refugees the widest possible exercise of these fundamental rights and
freedoms, ,
Considering that it is desirable to revise and previous
international agreements relating to the status of rrfugM and to extend
the scope of and the protection accorded by such instruments by mea
of a new agreement, ,
Considering that the grant of asylum may place unduly heavy
burdens on certain countries, and that a satisfactory solution of
problem of which the United Nations has recognised the international
scopean<3l nature cannot therefore be achieved without international
co-operation, . . , q
Fxnressino- the wish that all States, recognising the social and
humaSknnature of the problem of refugees, will do everything
within their power to prevent this problem from becoming a cause of
tension between States,
Noting that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is
■charged with the task of supervising international conventions P^
for 'the protection of refugees, and recognising that the effective
coordination of measures taken to deal with this problem will depend
upon the co-operation of States with the High Commissioner,
Have agreed as follows:
CHAPTER I. —GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Definition of the Term “ Refugee "
A .—For the purposes of the present Convention, the term “ refugee
Shan who Arrangements of
* 12 May 1926 and 30 June 1928 or under the Conventions,
of M (Sober 1988 W and 10 February 1988*), the
Protocol of 14 September 1939 < s ' or the Constitution of the
International Refugee Organization \
(1) United Kingdom Treaty Series No 67 of 1946 (Cmd. 7013).
(2) United Kingdom Command Paper I<m 5347).
3 United Kingdom Treaty Senes No. 4of 1937 Cmd. d
(4 United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 8 ofJi&o (Cmd6222).
(B) n^^^n nR Catv T Seri y es S l94 e 8 No. 16; United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 25
of Series Vol. 18, p. 3.


Decisions of non-eligibility taken by the International
Refugee Organisation during tbe period of its activities
shall not prevent the status of refugee being accorded to
persons who fulfil the conditions of paragraph 2 of this
Section;
(2) As a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951 and
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons
of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular
social group or political opinion, is outside the country of
his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that
country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside
the country of his former habitual residence as a result
of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
to return it.
In the case of a person who has more than one nationality, the term “ the
country of his nationality ” shall mean each of the countries of which
he is a national, and a person shall not be deemed to be lacking the
protection of the country of his nationality if, without any valid reason
based on well-founded fear, he has not availed himself of the protection
of one of the countries of which he is a national.
B. —(1) For the purposes of this Convention, the words “events
occurring before 1 January 1951 ” in Article 1, Section A, shall be
understood to mean either
(a) “events occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951”; or
(h) “events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January
1951 ”; and each Contracting State shall make a declara-
tion at the time of signature, ratification or accession,’"
specifying which of these meanings it applies for the
purpose of it obligations under this Convention.
(2) Any Contracting State Avhich has adopted alternative (a) may
at any time extend its obligations by adopting alternative (h) by means
of a notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
C. —This Convention shall cease to apply to any person falling under
the terms of Section A if:
(1) He has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the
country of his nationality; or
(2) Having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily reacquired
it; or iir
(3) He has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the protection
of the country of his new nationality; or
(4) He has voluntarily re-established himself in the country
which he left or outside which he remained owing to fear
of persecution; or
* At the time of accession Australia made a declaration in the following terms: —
In accordance with Article 1, Section B (1), the Government of the?
Commonwealth of Australia declares that, for the purpose of its obligations under
this Convention, the words “ events occurring before 1 January 1951 ” in Article
1, Section A shall be understood to mean “ events' occurring in Europe before 1
January 1951 ”.


protection of country nQt a ly to a
C SVg to « ail “° f th<! ProteCti ° n
nf the country of nationality,
(~ Being a person who has
circumstances ir t ******
recognised asa g habitual residence;
t 0 the shall not apply to a refugee
StrZlin? to "turn to the country of his former
habitual residence.
D. —This Convention shall not o^anfte
r Sriron?ffigh cSoner for' Refugees protection or
'"'such protection or assistance
without the position of such persons eing ] Assembly of the
;i»sr;»r'Ar/tftWS wa—
of this Convention.
This Convention * al ' “°* 0 which beta's taken residence
are attached to the possessmn
of the nationality of that countiy.
such crimes; . ~
« anas txssss
a refugee; ,
(c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes
V principles of the United Nations.
Article 2
General Obligations
2547—2


Article 3
N on-discrimination
The Contracting States shall apply the provisions of this Convention
to refugees without discrimination as to race, religion or country of
origin.
Article 4
Religion
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees within their terri-
tories treatment at least as favourable as that accorded to their national-
with respect to freedom to practice their religion and freedom as regards
the religious education of their children.
Article 5
Rights granted apart from this Convention
Nothing in this Convention shall he deemed to impair any rights
and benefits granted by a Contracting State to refugees apart from thi>
Convention.
Article 6
The Term “ in the same circumstances "
For the purpose of this Convention, the term “ in the same circum-
stances ” implies that any requirements (including requirements as to
length and conditions of sojourn or residence) which particular
individual would have to fulfil for the enjoyment of the right in question,
if he were not a refugee, must be fulfilled by him, with the exception of
renuiremeuts which by their nature a refugee is incapable of fulfilling.
Article 7
Exemption from Reciprocity
1. Except where this Convention contains more favourable provi-
sions, a Contracting State shall accord to refugees the same treatment as
is accorded to aliens generally.
2. After a period of three years’ residence, all refugees shall enjoy
exemption from legislative reciprocity in the territory of the Contracting
States,
3. Each Contracting State shall continue to accord to refugees the
rights and benefits to which they were already entitled, in the absence of
reciprocity, at the date of entry into force of this Convention for that
State.
4. The Contracting States shall consider favourably the possibility
of according to refugees, in the absence of reciprocity, rights and
benefits beyond those to which they are entitled according to paragraphs
2 and 3, and to extending exemption from reciprocity to refugees who
do not fulfil the conditions provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 apply both to the rights
and benefits referred to in articles 13, 18,19, 21 and 22 of this Conven-
tion and to rights and benefits for which this Convention does not
provide.


Article 8
Exemption from Exceptional Measures
With regard to exceptional measures which may he taken. a S a^ s t the
nerson property or interests of nationals of a foreign State, the bo
tractin’o- States 7 shall not apply such measures to a refugee who i>
formally a national of the said State solely on_ account of such
nationality. Contracting States which, under their legislation, are
prevented from applying the general principle expressed in this article,
shall, in appropriate cases, grant exemptions in favour of such refu & ..
Article 9
Provisional Measures
Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a Contracting State, in
time of war or other grave and exceptional circumstances, from taking
measure* which it considers to he essential to the national
security in the case of a particular person, pending a deteimmation y
the Contracting State that that person is in fact a refugee and that the
continuance of such measures is necessary in his case in the mteies
national security.
Article 10
Continuity of Residence
1 Where a refugee has been forcibly displaced during the Second
World War and removed to the territory of a Contracting State and s
resident there, the period of such enforced sojourn shall he considered to
have been lawful residence within that terntoiy. _
2 Where a refugee has been forcibly displaced during the Secom
World War from the territory of a Contracting State and ms, P rlor)
I date of entry into force of this Conventio, here fc,r th
nuroose of taking up residence, the period of residence before and aitei
such enforced displacement shall be regarded as one uninterrupted peno
for any purposes for which uninterrupted residence is required.
Article 11
Refugee Seamen
In the case of refugees regularly serving as cr ™ . m^“ b y S sl "“ n
a ctdn flvimr the flag of a Contracting State, that State snail g
sympathetic Consideration to their establishment on its territory and
the Lue of travel documents to them or their temporary admission to i-
territory particularly with a view to facilitating their establishment
in another country.
CHAPTER II. —JURIDICAL STATUS
Article 12
Personal Status
3. The personal status of a refugee shall be governed by the law of
the country of his domicile or, if he has no dom.etle, by the law of the
country of his residence.


2 Rights previously acquired by a refugee and dependent on personal
status, more particularly rights attaching to
sut p'S & **
thTn questL ?s one which would have been recogmsed by the law
of that State bad be not become a refugee.
Article 13
Movable and Immovable Property
The Contracting States shall accord to a refugee treatment as
favourable as possible and, in any event, not less favourable than tha
accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances as regards th
acouisition of movable and immovable propeity and other right,
pertaining thereto, and to leases and other contracts relating to movable
and immovable property.
Article 14
Artistic Bights and Industrial Property.
In respect of the protection of industrial property, such as inventions,
designs or models, trade marks, trade names, and of rights m htera JJ’
artistic and scientific works, a refugee shall be accorded in the country
in which he has his habitual residence the same protection as is accorded
to nationals of that country. In the territory of any other Contracting
State, he shall be accorded the same protection as is accorded in tha
territory to nationals of the country in which he has his habitual
residence.
Article 15
Right of Association.
As regards non-political and non-profit-making associations and trade
anions the Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying
in their territory the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals o.
a foreign country, in the same circumstances.
Article 16
Access to Courts.
1. A refugee shall have free access to the courts of law on the
territory of all Contracting States.
2. A refugee shall enjoy in the Contracting State in which he has
his habitual 'residence the same treatment as a national in matters
pertaining to access to the Courts, _ including legal assistance and
exemption from cautio judicatum solvi.
3. A refugee shall be accorded in the matters referred to in paragraph
2 in countries other than that in which he has his habitual residence the
treatment granted to a national of the country of his habitual residence.


CHAPTER III. —GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT
Article 17
Wage-earning Employment
1 The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying
in their territorytlemost favourable treatment accorded to nationals
of a foreign country in the same circumstances, as regar o
to engage in wage-earning employment.
9 Tn anv case restrictive measures imposed on aliens or the
employment of almns for SreaSy °frox"tL^
SlteoS Into forcTof this Convention for the Contracting
State concerned, o/who fulfils one of the following conditions:
(a) He has completed three years’ residence in the countiy.
(b) He has a spouse possessing the nationality of the country o
residence A refugee may not invoke the benefits of this
provision if he has abandoned his spouse;
(c) He has one or more children possessing the nationality of the
country of residence.
o The Contracting States shall give sympathetic consideration to
d ine * * f u re f u „ees with regard to wage-earning
“12 t 0 th ’fe „f natflu, and in particular of those refugees
who have entered their territory pursuant to programmes of labour
recruitment or under immigration schemes.
Article 18
Self-employment
The Contracting States shall accord to a refugee lawfully in their
territory treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not les
durable tha” that accorded to aliens generally in the same circum-
stances as regards the right to engage on his own account m agriculture,
industry handicrafts and commerce and to establish commercial and
industrial companies.
Article 19
Liberal Professions
1 Vnnli Contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully staying
in tket trriC w“o hold diplomas recognised by the competent
authorides ofthat State, and who are desirous of practising a liberal
nrofession treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not
less favourable than that accorded to aliens generally in the same
circumstances.
2 The Contracting States shall use their best endeavours consistently
with their laws and constitutions to secure the settlement of such
Te/uUs In the territories, other than the metropolitan territory, for
whose international relations they are responsible.


CHAPTER IV.— WELFARE
Article 20
Rationing.
W here a rationing system exists, which applies to the population at
large and regulates the general distribution of products m short supply,
refugees shall he accorded the same treatment as nationals.
Article 21
Housing
\s regards housing, the Contracting States, in so far as the matter
• r.ponilated by laws or regulations or is subject to_ the control o pu
authorities shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their tern ory
S“Ltl a Tahle as possible and,
than that accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances.
Article 22
Public Education
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees the same treat-
ment as is accorded to nationals with respect to elementary education.
2. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees treatment as
favourable as possible, and, in any event, not less favourable than that
a CC orded to aliens generally in the same circumstances, with respect to
education other than elementary education and, in particular, as regar s
access to studies, the recognition of foreign school certificates, diplomas
Tnd the remission of fees and charges and the award of scholar-
ships.
Article 23
Public Relief
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in
their territory the same treatment with respect to public relief and
assistance as is accorded to their nationals.
Article 24
Labour Legislation and Social Security.
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying
in their territory the same treatment as is accorded to nationals in
respect of the following matters.
(a) In so far as such matters are governed by laws or regulations
or are subject to the control of administrative authorities.
remuneration, including family allowances where these
form part of remuneration, hours of work, overtime
arrangements, holidays with pay, restrictions home
work, minimum age of employment, apprenticeship and
training, women’s work and the work of young persons, and
the enjoyment of the benefits of collective bargaining,


m Social security (legal provisions m respect of employme
injury, occupational diseases, maternity, sickness, dis-
ability, old age, death, unemployment, family respon-
sibilities and any other contingency which, according to
national laws or regulations, is covered by a social security
scheme), subject to the following limitations:
({) There may be appropriate arrangements for the
maintenance of acquired rights and rights in
course of acquisition;
fii) National laws or regulations of the country of
residence may prescribe special arrangements
concerning benefits or portions of benefits which
are payable wholly out of public funds, and con
cerning allowances paid to persons who do not
fulfil the contribution conditions prescribed for
the award of a normal pension.
2 The right to compensation for the death of a refugee resulting
from employment injury or from occupational disease shall not be
affected by the fact that the residence of the beneficiary is outside the
territory of the Contracting Stcite.
3 The Contracting States shall extend to refugees the benefits of
arrangements concluded between them, or which may concluded
between them in the future, concerning the maintenance of acquired
rights and rights in the process of acquisition in regard to social security,
subject only to the conditions which apply to nationals of the States
signatory to the agreements in question.
4 The Contracting States will give sympathetic consideration to
extending to refugees so far as possible the benefits of similar agree-
ments which may at any time be in force between such Contracting
States and non-contracting States.
CHAPTER V.—ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES
Article 25
Administrative Assistance
1. When the exercise of a right by a refugee would normally require
the assistance of authorities of a foreign country to whom he cannot
have recourse, the Contracting States in whose territory he is residing
shall arrange that such assistance he afforded to him by their own
authorities or hy an international authority.
2 The authority or authorities mentioned in paragraph 1 shall
deliver or cause to he delivered under their supervision to refugees such
documents or certifications as would normally he delivered to aliens
by or through their national authorities.
3. Documents or certifications so delivered shall stand in the stead
of the official instruments delivered to aliens by _or through their
national authorities, and shall be given credence in the absence of
proof to the contrary.


4. Subject to"tiaTh?!^^
commensurate with those charged
articles 27 and 28.
6. The provisions of this Article shall he without prejudice to
articles 27 and 28.
Article 26
Freedom of Movement
contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully in its
territory the right to choose their place of residence and to move freely
within its territory, subject to any regulations applicable to alien,
generally in the same circumstances.
Article 27
Identity Papers
The Contracting States shall issue identity papers to any refugee in
their territory who does not possess a valid travel document.
Article 28
Travel Documents
1 The Contracting States shall issue to refugees lawfully staying m
their territory travel documents for the purpose of travel outside their
territory unless compelling reasons of national security or public ordei
otheS require, Ji the "provisions of
shall apply with respect to such documents. The Contracting States
may issue such a travel document to any other refugee in their territory
they shall in particular give sympathetic consideration to the issue o
such a travel document to refugees in their territory who are unable to
obtain a travel document from the country of their lawful residence.
2. Travel documents issued to refugees under previous international
agreements by parties thereto shall be recognised and treated by the
Contracting States in the same way as if they had been issued pursuant
to this article.
Article 29
Fiscal Charges
1. The Contracting States shall not impose upon refugees duties,
charges or taxes, of any description whatsoever, other or higher than
those which are or may he levied on their nationals in similar situations.
2. Nothing in the above paragraph shall prevent the application to
refugees of the laws and regulations concerning charges in respect of the
issue to aliens of administrative documents including identity papers.


Article 30
Transfer of Assets
1. A Contracting State shall, in conformity with its laws and regu-
lations, permit refugees to transfer assets which they have brought into
its territory, to another country where they have been admitted for the
purpose of resettlement.
2. A Contracting State shall give sympathetic consideration to the
application of refugees for permission to transfer assets wherever they
may be and which are necessary for their resettlement in another country
to which they have been admitted.
Article 31
Refugees unlawfully in the Country of Refuge.
1. The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of
their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly from
a territory where their life or freedom was threatened in the sense of
article 1, enter or are present in their territory without authorization,
provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities
and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.
2. The Contracting States shall not apply to the movements of
such refugees restrictions other than those which are necessary am
such restrictions shall only he applied until their status in the country
is regularized or they obtain admission into another country, ihe
Contracting States shall allow such refugees a reasonable period and
all the necessary facilities to obtain admission into another country.
Article 32
, Expulsion
1. The Contracting States shall not expel a refugee lawfully in their
territory save on grounds of national "Security or public order.
2. The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in pursuance of a
decision reached in accordance with due process of law. Except where
compelling reasons of national security otherwise require, the refugee
shall be allowed to submit evidence to clear himself, and to appeal
to and be represented for the purpose before competent authority or a
person or persons specially designated by the competent authority.
3. The Contracting States shall allow such a refugee a reasonable
period within which to seek legal admission into another country. The
Contracting States reserve the right to apply during that period such
internal measures as they may deem necessary.
Article 33
Prohibition of Expulsion or Return (“ Refoulement ')
1. No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler ”) a
refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where
his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.


2. The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed
by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a
danger to the security of the country in which he is, or who, haying
beeiT convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime,
constitutes a danger to the community of that country.
Article 34
Naturalization
The Contracting States shall as far as possible facilitate the assimila-
tion and naturalization of refugees. They shall in particular make every
effort to expedite naturalization proceedings and to reduce as far as
possible the charges and costs of such proceedings.
CHAPTER VI.-EXECUTORY AND TRANSITORY
PROVISIONS
Article 35
Co-operation of the National Authorities with the United Nations
1. The Contracting States undertake to co-operate with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or any other
agency of the United Nations which may succeed it, in the exercise of
its functions, and shall in particular facilitate its duty of supervising
the application of the provisions of this Convention.
2. In order to enable the Office of the High Commissioner or any
other agency of the United Nations which may succeed it, to make
reports to the competent organs of the United A ations, the Contracting
States underake to provide them in the appropriate form with
information and statistical data requested concerning:
(a) the condition of refugees,
(&) the implementation of this Convention, and
(c) laws, regulations and decrees which are, or may hereaftei
be, in force relating to refugees.
Article 36
Information on National Legislation
The Contracting States shall communicate to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations the laws and regulations which they may adopt
to ensure the application of this Convention.
Article 37
Relation to Previous Conventions
Without prejudice to article 28, paragraph 2, of this Convention,
this Convention replaces, as between parties to it, the Arrangements of
5 July 1922, 31 May 1924, 12 May 1926, 30 June 1928 and 30 July
1935, the Conventions of 28 October 1933 W and 10 February 1938< 2 >,
the Protocol of 14 September 1939 60 and the Agreement of 15 October
1946 < 4 >.
(1) United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 4 of 1937 (Cmd. 5347).
(2) United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 8 of 1939 (Cmd. 5929).
<3) United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 2rt of 1940 (Cmd. 0222).
(4) United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 3 of 1947 (Cmd. 7033).


CHAPTER VII. —FINAL CLAUSES
Article 38
Settlement of Disputes
Any dispute between parties to this Convention relating to its-
interpretation or application, which cannot he settled by other means
shall be referred to the International Court of Justice at the request ol
any one of the parties to the dispute.
Article 39
Signature, Ratification and Accession
1. This Convention shall be opened for signature at Geneva on 28
July 1951 and shall thereafter be deposited with the Secretary-Genera!
of the United Nations. It shall be open for signature at the European
Office of the United Nations from 28 July to 31 August 190 l and
shall be reopened for signature at the Headquarters of the United
Nations from 17 September 1951 to 31 December 1952.
2. This Convention shall be open for signature on behalf of all
States Members of the United Nations, and also on behalf of any other
State invited to attend the Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the
Status of "Refugees and Stateless Persons or to which an invitation to
sign will have been addressed by the General Assembly. _ It shall be
ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall be open from 28 July 1951 for accession
by the States referred to in paragraph 2of this Article. Accession shall
be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 40
Territorial Application Clause
1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession,*
declare that this Convention shall extend to all or any of the territories
for the international relations of which it is responsible. Such a
declaration shall take effect when the Convention enters into force for
the State concerned.
2. At any time thereafter any such extension shall be by
notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of this notification, or
as from the date of entry into force of the Convention for the State
concerned, whichever is the later.
3. With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not
extended at the time of signature, ratification or accession, each State
concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps in
order to extend the application of this Convention to such territories,
subject, where necessary for constitutional reasons, to the consent of the
Governments of such territories.
• Australia's accession to the Convention applies also to the Territories of Norfolk
Island and Papua and the Trust Territories of New Guinea and Nauru.


Article 41
Federal Clause
In the case of a Federal or non-unitary State the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) With respect to those articles of this Convention that come
within the legislative jurisdiction of the federal legislative
authority, the obligations of the Federal Government shall
to this extent be the same as those of Parties which are
not Federal States;
( b ) With respect to those articles of this Convention that come
within the legislative jurisdiction of constituent States,
provinces or cantons which are not, under the constitu-
tional system of the federation, bound to take legislative
action, the Federal Government shall bring such Articles
with a favourable recommendation to the notice of the
appropriate authorities of states, provinces or cantons at
the earliest possible moment.
(c) A Federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the
request of any other Contracting State transmitted through
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, supply a
statement of the law and practice of the Federation and
its constituent units in regard to any particular provision
of the Convention showing the extent to which effect has
been given to that provision by legislative or other action.
Article 42
Reservations
1. At the time of signature, ratification or accession, any State may
make reservations to articles of the Convention other than to articles
1,3, 4, 16 (1), 33, 36-46 inclusive.*
2. Any State making a reservation in accordance with paragraph
1 of* this article may at any time withdraw the reservation by a
communication to that effect' addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
♦ At the time of accession Australia made the following reservations
Articles 17, 18, 19 and 2G.
The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia understands that none of
the oblSStlra” with regard to refugees stipulated in Articles 17, 18, 19 and 20
° f th (o) C the Ve fipMiK 1U o£ PS conditions upon which a refugee may enter the
(0) * Commonwealth of Australia or any of its Territories where the entry
Is made for a specific purpose; or . . . .
(h) the making of arrangements with a refugee under which he is required to
( undertake employment under the direction of the Government of the
Commonwealth of Australia for a specified period after his entry into
fhe Commonwealth of Australia or any of its Territories.
Article 28
The Government of the Commonwealth of Austria make*, a
and Pe does°not e accept the owfgltions in this paragraph but is prepared
to travel documents issued by other Contracting States pursuant to
this Article.
Article 32
Government of the Commonwealth of Australia makes a reservation with
re.Stto Sp“ »W 0«! contained In Article 32 of the Convention and doeo not
accept the obligations stipulated in this Article.


Article 43
Entry into force
1 This Convention shall come into force on the ninetieth day
following the day of deposit of the sixth instrument of ratification
!ie °r For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the
as imusts 1
deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification or accessio .
Article 44
Denunciation.
1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention at any time
by a notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the Unite.
Nations. 0 . .
2 Such denunciation shall take effect for the Contracting : S a*
concerned one year from the date upon which it is received by the
Secretary-General of the United A ations.
3 Any State which has made a declaration or notification under
article 40'may, at any time thereafter, by a notification to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, declare that the Convention shall ceas-
to extend to such territory one year after the date of receipt of t
notification by the Secretary-General.
Article 45
Revision
t. Any Contracting State may request revision of this Convention a*
any time by a notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations shall recommend t ic
steps, if any, to be taken in respect of such request.
Article 46
Notifications hy the Secretary-General of the United Nations
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform al.
Members of the United Nations and non-member States referred to in
.irticle declaration s an( j notifications in accordance with section
B of Article 1; . . ,
(6) of signatures, ratifications and accessions in accordance with
article 39; . ... ~ ,
(c) of declarations and notifications in accordance with article
40 • • . .
( (I ) of reservations and withdrawals in accordance with article
( e ) of the date on which this Convention will come into force
in accordance with article 43;
* Australia's Instrument of Accession was deposited on the 22nd January, 1954, and
Ratification or Accession to be deposited. According
the Convention came into force on 22nd April, 1954.


(/) of denunciations and notifications in accordance with article
44; _ _ .
( g ) of requests for revision in accordance with article 45.
In faith whereof the undersigned, duly authorised, have signed this
Convention on behalf of their respective Governments,
Done at Geneva, this twenty-eighth day of July, one thousand nine
hundred and fifty-one, in a single copy, of which the English and French
texts are equally authentic and which shall remain deposited in the
archives of the United Nations, and certified true copies of which shall
be delivered to all members of the United Nations and to the non-member
States referred to in Article 39:
[Here folloivs the list of Signatories]
SCHEDULE
Paragraph 1
1. The travel document referred to in article 28 of this Convention shall
he similar to the specimen annexed hereto.
2. The document shall be made out in at least two languages, one of which
shall be English or French.
Paragraph 2
Subject to the regulations obtaining in the country of issue, children may
be included in the travel document of a parent or, in exceptional circumstances,
of another adult refugee.
Paragraph 3
The fees charged for issue of the document shall not exceed the lowest
scale of charges for national passports.
Paragraph 4
Save in special or exceptional cases, the document shall be made valid
for the largest possible number of countries.
Paragraph 5
The document shall have a validity of either one or two years, at the
discretion of the issuing authority.
Paragraph (>
1. The renewal or extension of the validity of the document is a matter for
the authority which issued it, so long as the holder has not established lawful
residence in another territory and resides lawfully in the territory of the said
authority. The issue of a "new document is, under the same conditions, a
matter for the authority which issued the former document.
2. Diplomatic or consular authorities, specially authorized for the purpose,
shall be empowered to extend, for a period not exceeding six months, the
validity of travel documents issued by their Governments.
3. The Contracting States shall give sympathetic consideration to renewing
or extending the validity of travel documents or issuing new documents to
refugees no longer lawfully resident in their territory who are unable to obtain
a travel document from the country of their lawful residence.


Paragraph 7
The Contracting States shall recognize the validity of the documents issued
in accordance with the provisions of article 28 of this Convention.
Paragraph 8
The competent authorities of the country to which the r ® f^J ee . ‘J 1
proceed shall, if they are prepared to admit him and if a visa is -j
affix a visa on the document of which he is the holder.
Paragraph 9
1. The Contracting States undertake to issue transit visas to refugees who
have obtained visas for a territory of final destination. . ...
2. The issue of such visas may be refused on grounds which would justm
refusal of a visa to any alien.
Paragraph 10
The fees for the issue of exit, entry or transit visas shall not exceed the
lowest scale of charges for visas on foreign passports.
Paragraph 11
When a refugee has lawfully taken up residence in the territory of another
Contracting State, the responsibility for the issue of a new document, umc
the terms and conditions of article 28, shall be that of the competen an mi ,
of that territory, to which the refugee shall be entitled to apply.
Paragraph 12
The authority issuing a new document shall withdraw the old document and
v nl l rp : iirn it to the country of issue, if it is stated in the document that it
Suld S™ returned “otherwise it shall withdraw and cancel the document.
Paragraph 13
1 Each Contracting State undertakes that the holder of a travel document
issued by it in accordance with article 28 of this Convention shall be readmitted
to its territory at any time during the period of its validity.
2 Subiect to the provisions.of the preceding sub-paragraph, a Contracting
State may require the holder of the document to comply with such formalities
as may be prescribed in regard to exit from or return to its territory.
3 The Contracting States reserve the right, in exceptional cases, or in
cases where the refugee’s stay is authorized for a specific period, when issuing
the document, to limit the period during which the refugee may leturn to a
period of not less than three months.
Paragraph 14
Subiect only to the terms of paragraph 13, the provisions of this Schedule
In no way affect the laws and regulations governing the conditions of admission
to, transit through, residence and establishment in, and departure from, the
territories of the Contracting States.
Paragraph 15
Neither the issue of the document nor the entries made thereon determine
or affect the status of the holder, particularly as regards nationality.
Paragraph 16
The issue of the document does not in any way entitle the holder to the
protection of the diplomatic or consular authorities of the country of issue,
and does not confer on these authorities a right of protection.


ANNEX
SPECIMEN TRAVEL DOCUMENT
The document will be in booklet form (approximately 15 X 10 centimetres).
It is recommended that it be so printed that any erasure or alteration by
chemical or other means can be readily detected, and that the words
- Convention of 28 July 1951 ”, be printed in continuous repetition on each page,
in the language of the issuing country.
(Cover of booklet)
TRAVEL DOCUMENT
(Convention of 28 July 1951)
No.
(1)
TRAVEL DOCUMENT
- (Convention of 28 July 1951)
This document expires on unless its validity
is extended or renewed.
Name
Forename
Accompanied by child (children).
1. This document is issued solely with a view to providing the holder with a
travel document which can serve in lieu of a national passport. It is without
prejudice to and in no way affects the holder’s nationality.
2. The holder is authorized to return to •
(state here the country whose authorities are issuing the document] on or
before . unless some later date is hereafter specified. [The
period during which the holder is allowed to return must not be less than three
months.]
3. Should the holder take up residence in a country other than that which
issued the present document, he must, if he wishes to travel again, apply to the
competent authorities of his country of residence for a new document. [The old
travel document shall be withdrawn by the authority issuing the new document
and returned to the authority which issued it.] (D
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
(1) The sentence in brackets to be inserted by Governments which so desire.
(2)
Place and date of birth
Occupation
Present residence
'Maiden name and forename(s) of wife
*Name and forename(s) of husband


Description
• Height
Hair
Colour of eyes
Nose
Shape of face
Complexion
Special peculiarities
Children accompanying holder
Name Forename (s) Place and date of birth
* Strike out whichever does not apply.
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
(3)
Photograph of holder and stamp of issuing authority
Finger-prints of holder
(if required)
Signature of holder
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
(4)
1. This document is valid for the following countiies.
2. Document or documents on the basis of which the present document is
issued:
Issued at
Date
Signature and stamp of authority
issuing the document:


Fee paid:
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
(5)
Extension err renewal of validity
Fee paid: From
To
Done at Date
Signature and stamp of authority extending or
renewing the validity of the document:
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid: From
To
Done at : Date
Signature and stamp of authority extending or
renewing the validity of the document:
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
(6)
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid: From
To
Done at Date
Signature and stamp of authority extending or
renewing the validity of the domment:
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid: From
To
Done at Date
Signature and stamp of authority extending or
. renewing the validity of the document:
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
(7-32)
Fisas
The name of the holder of the document must be repeated in each visa.
(This document contains pages, exclusive of cover.)
By Authority: L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.


