

HUXLEY MEMORIAL LECTURE 1928
CONVERSION
IN SCIENCE
BY G. ELLIOT SMITH, F.R.S.
Professor of Anatomy
in the University of London




CONVERSION IN SCIENCE
BY G. ELLIOT SMITH, F.R.S.
On November 13th, 1859, eleven days before the
publication of The Origin of Species, Darwin wrote : “If
I can convert Huxley I shall be content.”
The psychological process of conversion in science,
the nature of the factors that convince a man of the
validity of a theory as an adequate expression of the
results of observations and experiments, has, so far as I
am aware, never been made the direct aim of any inquiry.
In making this statement I am not forgetting the brilliant
pictures of the great movements of thought which the
genius of historians such as Lecky, Lord Morley and
Bury, among many others, has given us, or the clear
light the letters of Huxley, Darwin, Lyell, Hooker and
their contemporaries shed upon the factors involved in
a change of dpinion. In fact one of my chief reasons
for selecting this topic for discussion is precisely because
Huxley has given us more definite material for such an
inquiry than would otherwise have been available.
Hence it seemed to me that I might render a useful
service by collecting from his writings some of the
characteristic passages dealing with the process of con-
version, and by discussing their bearing upon some of
the big problems that are awaiting a solution at the
present time.
There is an extensive literature dealing with conversion
*n religion, which is the central purpose of the practical
theologian’s activities. But the process of conversion
m respect of issues that should be decided by what
A


Huxley called “ purely philosophical and scientific
reasoning,” which has hitherto not received the attention
it deserves, is a matter of fundamental importance in the
advancement of every kind of knowledge and practice,
whether in the intellectual or the social spheres of human
activity. Hence I make no apology for using the
opportunity which the electors to this Lectureship have
given me to discuss certain aspects of this important
subject, which affects the advancement of learning just
as much at the present time as in the past, when Coper-
nicus, Galileo, Harvey, Newton and Darwin respectively
revolutionised the outlook of science for their own and
succeeding generations.
Before embarking upon the discussion of my subject,
I must express my appreciation of the distinction of being
invited to deliver this Lecture, and for the opportunity
it affords me of giving public expression to the deep
personal debt I have always felt to Huxley’s writings.
They were responsible for revealing to me when a mere
child a new world of ideas, and for determining my
chief interests.
Darwin fully realised the difficulties of the task he was
undertaking in trying to convince his fellows of the
reality of evolution, and was therefore anxious to secure
the help of Hooker, Lyell and Huxley. When we recall
the obstacles which throughout the ages have ever
hindered the advancement of learning, and in particular
the efforts of isolated pioneers to defy traditional
doctrines, we can the better appreciate Darwin’s good
fortune in being associated with three such exceptional
men as Sir Joseph Hooker, Sir Charles Lyell and Thomas
Henry Huxley. Different as they were in temperament
and mental attitude, each of them in his own depart-
ment was endowed, not only with wide and exact know-
ledge, but also with rare powers of clear insight and
sound judgment.
For many years Darwin had been discussing with
Hooker the evidence for the transmutation of species


and the difficulties that had to be surmounted before they
could convince themselves and their colleagues of the
justice of their cause. Hence when his book was ready
he knew he could count on the support of Hooker, who
was, to quote his own words, “ a complete convert.”
Lyell’s attitude forms a marked contrast. With him
Darwin had had much correspondence during the time
he was writing his book, and when the proof was ready
Lyell was the first to read it. Concerning the result
Darwin wrote : “ Hooker thinks him a complete con-
vert, but he does not seem so in his letters to me : but
is deeply interested in the subject.” Events proved that
Darwin was right in this attitude of scepticism; for it
required eight more years of strenuous argument and
persistent persuasion before Lyell (in the tenth edition
of his Principles of Geology, 1867) clearly and unequivocally
admitted his acceptance of evolution. On several occa-
sions before then, however, many people assumed, as
Hooker did in 1859, that Lyell had definitely adopted
Darwin’s views. In 1863, for example, he wrote The
Antiquity of Man, in which he admitted that the duration
of man’s existence on the earth was immeasurably greater
than he himself and the upholders of traditional views
had previously been prepared to admit. It is impossible
to estimate the magnitude of the moral effect of this
retraction of his earlier opinion.
But if he did not give his full support 1 to the great
cause until the battle was won —largely as the result
of Huxley’s persistent championship —it must not be
forgotten that Lyell’s book ( Principles of Geology) was, as
Huxley expressed it, “ the chief agent in smoothing the
toad for Darwin.” “It brings home to any reader of
ordinary intelligence a great principle and a great fact—
the principle that the past must be explained by the
present, unless good cause be shown to the contrary;
and the fact that, so far as our knowledge of the past
1 For an illuminating account of Lyell’s conversion see Poulton’s
Charles Darwin, pp. 105, et seq.


history of life on ouf globe goes, no such cause can be
shown.” 1
The principle of continuity—by illuminating the past
in the light of what we can see happening in the world
to-day, and interpreting the events of the present by the
history of the circumstances that were responsible for
shaping them—is the essential factor in biology, as well
as in any attempt to explain human institutions and
behaviour, or, in fact, any kind of evidence. The
historical method of inquiry—the study of the con-
nections between events —is the vital process in all
research. It aims at explaining phenomena by discover-
ing how they began and the factors and circumstances
that shaped their development. In 1859, however,
Lyell was not yet ready to extend the application of this
principle to man, if it meant accepting the theory of
descent, which was “ repugnant to his feelings.” 2
Yet a century before Lyell’s time essentially the same
principle of continuity had been confidently applied to
human affairs by Turgot in words described by the
late Lord Morley 3 as “ among the most pregnant, as
they were among the most original, in the history of
literature, and reveal in an outline, standing clear against
the light, a thought which revolutionised old methods of
viewing and describing the course of human affairs, and
contained the germs of a new and most fruitful
philosophy of society.”
The tragedy is that the true philosophy of society
enunciated by Turgot in 1750 did not revolutionise old
methods of viewing and describing the course of human
affairs. In spite of Lord Morley’s appreciation of the
1 Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, Vol. 11., pp. 187-190 and
1 95~ 1 97 > also quoted in Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley,
Vol. 1., pp. 167-175.
2 Leonard Huxley, Life and Letters of T. H. Huxley, Vol. 1.,
P- 172.
3 John Morley, Article on Turgot in Critical Miscellanies, Vol. 11.
of Collected Works, 1886.


greatness of Turgot’s achievements, men failed to apply his
teaching for the salvation of humanistic studies. It is,
in fact, the most urgent need of ethnology at the present
time that this long-delayed reform should begin. Turgot
contrasted the operation of the laws of nature with the
behaviour of mankind. “ The phenomena of nature,
subjected as they are to constant laws, are enclosed in
a circle of revolutions that remain the same for ever!
The succession of men, on the contrary, offers from age
to age a spectacle of continual variations. Reason,
freedom, the passions, are incessantly producing new
events. All epochs are fastened together by a sequence
of causes and effects, linking the condition of the world
to all the conditions that have gone before it. The
gradually multiplied signs of speech and writing, giving
men an instrument for making sure of the continued
possession of their ideas, as well as of imparting them to
others, have formed out of the knowledge of each
individual a common treasure, which generation trans-
mits to generation, as an inheritance constantly aug-
mented by the discoveries of each age; and the human
race, observed from its first beginning, seems in the eyes
of the philosopher to be one “ vast whole, which, like
each individual in it, has its infancy and its growth ”
(Lord Morley’s translation).
For more than a century men continued to render lip
service to Turgot’s recognition of the fundamental factors
underlying human institutions, without, however, apply-
ing them with full understanding and consistency.
Under the influence of Lyell’s revival of the idea in
reference to geology, Edward Burnett Tylor in 1871
reaffirmed the fundamental importance of the principle
of continuity and the historical method as the essential
factors in the interpretation of human institutions. Thus
in the first edition of Primitive Culture he wrote : “ The
notion of the continuity of civilisation is no barren
philosophic principle, but is at once made practical by
the consideration that they who wish to understand their
A 2


own lives ought to know the stages through which their
opinions and habits have become what they are ” (p. 17).
“ History, taken as our guide in explaining the different
stages of civilisation, offers a theory based on actual
experience. This is a development-theory, in which
both advance and relapse have their acknowledged places.
But so far as history is to be our criterion, progression is
primary and degradation secondary; culture must be
gained before it can be lost. Moreover, in striking a
balance between the effects of forward and backward
movement in civilisation, it must be borne in mind how
powerfully the diffusion of culture acts in preserving the
results of progress from the attacks of degeneration. A
progressive movement in culture spreads, and becomes
independent of the fate of its originators ” (p. 34).
By a strange irony this reaffirmation of the sound
principles that should find expression in all humanistic
inquiries occurs in a book that was reviving the fatal
appeal to “ constant laws,” against which Turgot
protested. For by claiming that mankind as a whole
display an innate tendency to develop animistic beliefs,
Tylor was inventing a “ law of nature ” for which there
is no evidence. While referring to this flagrant defiance
of the principle of continuity one is tempted to quote
Tylor’s own warning. For the learned author of
Primitive Culture himself discusses (Vol. 1., pp. 378,
379) with characteristic frankness the curious pheno-
menon that ethnologists enunciating certain views often
cite evidence stultifying their own opinions. After
giving specific illustrations of this neglect of logical
consistency, he makes this interesting comment: “ Such
cases show how deceptive are judgments to which
breadth and generality are given by the use of wide
words in narrow senses.” The late Sir Edward Tylor
thus missed the great opportunity of giving full expression
to the principles enunciated by Turgot. He was
deflected from his purpose by his enthusiasm for the
theory of animism—a lapse into the methods of Cartesian


scholasticism that was fatal to a consistent exposition of
the Newtonian method which Turgot had introduced
into the study of mankind. Tylor thus lost the chance
of introducing a great revolution in the whole range of
humanitarian studies, and of achieving in ampler measure
what Lecky claimed for the great teachers of the seven-
teenth century, “ destroying old prejudices, dispelling
illusions, rearranging the various parts of our knowledge
and altering the whole scope and character of our
sympathies.”
This revolution of attitude still awaits its accomplish-
ment. I have referred to Tylor’s failure to seize his
great opportunity to illustrate the hindrances that are
placed in the way of conversion in ethnology by the
creation of confusion whenever the human factor
becomes involved in the argument. I shall return to
the discussion of this significant matter when I have
explained how Huxley became drawn into the particular
field of inquiry adumbrated in Turgot’s prescient
statement.
Huxley finished reading the proof of the Origin of
Species two days before the book was published, and on
the following day Darwin received his verdict in these
words : “ I think you have demonstrated a true cause
for the production of species, and have thrown the onus
probandi, that species did not arise in the way you suppose,
on your adversaries.”
Looking back on this episode many years afterwards
(his essay on “ The Reception of ‘ The Origin of
Species,’ ” in The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin),
Huxley has given a characteristically frank account of his
own conversion. While he “ had long done with the
Pentateuchal cosmogony,” even the persistence and the
dialectic skill of Herbert Spencer were impotent to
persuade him to admit the reality of evolution. He
justified his stubborn refusal, not because the uncon-
vincing arguments of Lamarck and the author of Vestiges


of Creation aroused his opposition, but because the
evidence in favour of transmutation was wholly in-
sufficient, and no suggestion respecting its causes had
been made which was in any way adequate to explain
the phenomena. Even when, on November 23rd,
1859, he adopted the theory of evolution without
reservation, he would not admit that the hypothesis of
natural selection was the whole explanation. But
Darwin’s insistence on the facts revealed by the selective
breeding of domestic animals and plants convinced
Huxley of the possibility of finding natural factors to
establish the fact of transmutation. No longer did he
harbour any doubt as to the reality of evolution. To
quote his own words : ££ I imagine that most of those
of my contemporaries who thought seriously about the
matter were very much in my own state of mind —
inclined to say to both Mosaists and Evolutionists, ‘ a
plague on both your houses ! ’ and disposed to turn aside
from an interminable and apparently fruitless discussion
to labour in the fertile fields of ascertainable fact. And
I may therefore suppose that the publication of the
Darwin and Wallace paper in 1858, and still more that
of the ‘ Origin ’ in 18 59, had the effect upon them of the
flash of light which, to a man who has lost himself on a
dark night, suddenly reveals a road which, whether it
takes him straight home or not, certainly goes his way.
That which we were looking for, and could not find, was
a hypothesis respecting the origin of known organic
forms which assumed the operation of no causes but
such as could be proved to be actually at work. We
wanted not to pin our faith to that or any other specula-
tion, but to get hold of clear and definite conceptions
which could be brought face to face with facts and have
their validity tested. The £ Origin ’ provided us with
the working hypothesis we sought. Moreover it did the
immense service of freeing us for ever from the dilemma
■ —Refuse to accept the creation hypothesis, and what
have you to propose that can be accepted by any cautious


reasoner ? In 1857 I had no answer ready, and I do
not think that anyone else had. A year later we re-
proached ourselves with dullness for being perplexed
with such an inquiry. My reflection, when I first made
myself master of the central idea of the ‘ Origin ’ was,
c How extremely stupid not to have thought of that! ’
I suppose that Columbus’ companions said much the
same when he made the egg stand on end. The facts
of variability, of the struggle for existence, of adaptation
to conditions, were notorious enough; but none of us
had suspected that the road to the heart of the species
problem lay through them, until Darwin and Wallace
dispelled the darkness, and the beacon-fire of the £ Origin ’
guided the benighted.
“ Whether the particular shape which the doctrine
of Evolution, as applied to the organic world, took in
Darwin’s hands, would prove to be final or not, was to
me a matter of indifference. In my earliest criticism of
the ‘ Origin ’ I ventured to point out that its logical
foundation was insecure so long as experiments in
selective breeding had not produced varieties which
were more or less infertile; and that insecurity remains
up to the present time. But, with any and every critical
doubt which my sceptical ingenuity could suggest, the
Darwinian hypothesis remained incomparably more
probable than the creation hypothesis. And if we had
none of us been able to discern the paramount significance
of some of the most patent and notorious of natural facts,
until they were, so to speak, thrust under our noses,
what force remained in the dilemma —creation or
nothing ? It was obvious that hereafter the probability
would be immensely greater, that the links of natural
causation were hidden from our purblind eyes, than that
natural causation should be incompetent to produce all
the phenomena of nature. The only rational course
for those who had no other object than the attainment of
truth was to accept ‘ Darwinism ’ as a working hypothesis
and see what could be made of it. Either it would prove


its capacity to elucidate the facts of organic life, or it
would break down under the strain. This was surely
the dictate of common sense, and, for once, common
sense carried the day.” 1
In the whole range of literature relating to the advance-
ment of learning I know of no statement that sheds so
clear a light on the process of conversion. It is the
frank confession of the man who in larger measure than
any other individual was responsible for persuading the
world of educated men to accept the essential part of
Darwin’s teaching. In this respect he was the chief
agent in effecting the most profound and far-reaching
revolution in the intellectual outlook of mankind that
in all probability has ever been made. For it included
within its scope the problems of man’s origin and history,
and raised questions that involve the deepest thoughts
and aspirations of mankind in all ages. We may say of
Huxley’s achievement what he himself said of Darwin :
“ He found a great truth trodden underfoot, reviled by
bigots and ridiculed by all the world; he lived long
enough to see it, chiefly by his own efforts, irrefragably
established in science, inseparably incorporated with
the common thoughts of men and only hated and feared
by those who would revile, but dare not.” 2
It is difficult for us at the present time to appreciate
Fluxley’s reluctance (before he read The Origin of Species )
to accept the fact of evolution, when, as he himself
admits, the real stumbling-block for most people had
already long ceased to be an obstacle for him. For
once the morphological similarities of nearly related
animals were appreciated, and the identical processes
revealed in ontogeny were admitted, what explanation
was possible other than the recognition of a common
origin ? Looking back to the eighteenth century, the
very fact that Linnaeus had included man in the natural
Order of Primates seems to carry its own implication—
1 Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley, Vol. 1., pp. 170-171.
2 Danviniana, p. 247.


that Man cannot be left out of the natural scheme, the
only adequate explanation of which is provided by the
doctrine of evolution.
Yet, as Dr. Chalmers Mitchell showed so clearly in
his Huxley Memorial Lecture a year ago, Huxley was
not only free from the thraldom of tradition, but also
was distinguished for a logical consistency in argument
and expression such as is rare even among the most
learned of men.
Everyone who has ever undertaken serious research,
or, in fact, creative work in either art or science, knows
from his own experience that for months or even years
he may have all the evidence for a complete solution of
his problem, before the simple and—after he has got
the idea —obvious explanation suddenly flashes upon his
mind. Creative work needs for its accomplishment not
only truth but also imagination. What we call intuition
is really the ability to imagine how masses of apparently
irreconcilable information might be interpreted. It
would, in fact, be difficult to exaggerate the important
part played by the formulation of hypotheses in the
advancement of learning. For the tentative interpreta-
tion of a collection of data does far more than provide
an explanation of the evidence already available: it
suggests new tests and new lines of inquiry, and points
the way of progress. In my own experience the factor
that has helped most in creating such working hypotheses
has been teaching and lecturing. The effort to make a
subject intelligible to those who lack technical knowledge
—especially if one avoids the terminology that is so
often a mere evasion of real explanation—is the most
useful discipline in honest thinking and the most potent
influence in creative work. No single factor has done
more to impede progress than the overworking of
technical terms and the reliance on stereotyped forms of
interpretation as means of evading thought.
As Huxley tells us, he did not wholly accept Darwin’s
theory as an adequate explanation. But it convinced


him that a natural explanation was possible. If Huxley
had not been endowed with superb courage and honesty,
his genuine doubts as to the adequacy of Darwin’s theory
might have found expression in niggardly criticism to
cover his retreat from a situation full of difficulties which,
as he knew, would involve him in a maelstrom of
vexatious misrepresentation and abuse.
Before considering the effect of Huxley’s sudden con-
version and its contrast to Hooker’s calm acceptance
and Lyell’s prolonged wrestling, it is important not to
forget that they were all men of exceptional intelligence,
who were ready to confess the truth when they were
convinced. The majority of Darwin’s contemporaries
were unable to readjust their views to the new ideas.
To quote Professor Poulton ;
“ Looking at the history of opinion on this subject, the
slowness with which the new ideas were absorbed appears
remarkable. Even so able a man as the late Professor
Rolleston wrote in 1870 (Forms of Animal Life, Intro-
duction, p. xxv, first edition) the following carefully
guarded sentences, which, it is to be noted, deal with
evolution rather than natural selection. Speaking of
‘ the theory of evolution with which Mr. Darwin’s
name is connected,’ Rolleston says ; ‘ The acceptance
or rejection of the general theory will depend, as does
the acceptance or rejection of other views supported
merely by probable evidence, upon the particular con-
stitution of each individual mind to which it is presented.’
“ It was too much to expect that many of the older
scientific men would retain sufficient intellectual flexi-
bility as to be able to recognise, as Lyell had, that the
facts of nature were explained and predicted better by
the new views than by those in which they had grown
up. Darwin thoroughly understood this, and writing
to his friends maintained that ‘ the fate of his views was
in the hands of the younger men.’
“ A grand, yet simple conception like that of natural
selection, explaining and connecting together innumer


able facts which people had previously explained differ-
ently, or had been accustomed to regard as inexplicable,
must always remain as a stumbling-block to the majority
of those who have reached or passed middle life before
its first appearance.” 1
Darwin himself was very much perturbed and puzzled
by the slowness with which the new ideas were absorbed.
But this is not an unusual phenomenon. Everyone
who has tried to persuade his colleagues to accept a new
theory of knowledge as the interpretation of an otherwise
incomprehensible mass of evidence must realise the rarity
of his success in inducing them dispassionately to con-
sider his suggestion, much less to accept it. It is a
comfort, when faced with such disconcerting obstinacy,
to turn to the experience of Lister and Darwin, of Harvey
and Galileo, and of Vesalius and Copernicus, and realise
that such behaviour on the part of critics is the rule,
and not the exception.
This universal tendency in men has been studied
more intimately by those who devote themselves to
psychological medicine. In his recent Long Fox Memo-
rial Lecture at the University of Bristol, Dr. Henry
Devine has focussed the present views upon this subject
in an address with the paradoxical title—“ The Reality
of Delusions.” 2
It is one of the distinctive functions of the mind to
confer a meaning, which is strictly personal and indi-
vidual, upon the sensory impressions and feelings,
whereby each of us forms his idea of the world and
his own personality. In other words, there is an innate
impulse to interpret experience and give coherence to
the otherwise disjointed incidents that impress each
individual’s consciousness at every moment of his life.
The separate impressions of the cinematograph of our
experience are blended into a living picture to confer a
biological meaning on these isolated incidents. They
1 Poulton’s Charles Darwin, pp. 156-157.
2 British Medical Journal, March 17, 1928, p. 457.
A 3


are rationalised and integrated with the individual’s
personality, so that they become part of his own expe-
rience and are attuned to his own mental make-up.
No man accepts a new theory of knowledge unless he
can fit it into his own scheme. Such rationalisations
of his experience are essentially of the same nature as
delusions, strictly personal interpretations for his own
use. It is only when they assume complete control of
behaviour and are of such a nature as to be definitely
anti-social that they can be regarded as pathological and
bear the implication usually associated with the word
delusion. A change of opinion, whether in religion or
science, presents analogies to such a process. In cases
of serious readjustments of personality, there is first a
sense of anxiety, discomfort and tension—the conscious-
ness of change, the enlightenment for which the subject
is unable to account —and then the sudden crystallising
out of the delusion as a rationalisation which solves his
difficulties and relieves the condition of his anxiety.
With the solution comes a new sense of power and
purpose. Once a man has reached this stage of satis-
faction, either by a strictly rational or a merely rational-
ising process, it requires an altogether exceptional set
of circumstances to induce him to renounce the Nirvana
he has attained. The set attitude of mind of a scholar
may become almost indistinguishable from a delusion.
The saturation with traditional doctrines may be so
complete that he is unable to absorb a new idea; or he
may have so intimately integrated all his knowledge in
terms of some hypothesis as to be unable to abandon
or modify it when new evidence that does not harmonise
is forthcoming. His reasons for retaining this attitude
of mind may be wholly illogical and irrelevant; but
they may have become so much a part of his whole
formula of life and behaviour as to be as immune from
change as pathological delusions are. As the late Dr.
Rivers showed, 1 dreams are the solution during sleep of
1 Conflict and Dream, 1922.


the conflicts of the waking life. In most cases they are
absurd and ridiculous, because they are fashioned when
reason and discrimination are in abeyance. Similarly
much of the conventional theory of human behaviour
has all the appearance of having been made when the
reasoning powers were dormant. For the normal
behaviour of human beings is obviously the one sort
of knowledge that is within the experience of everyone.
If anyone denies Turgot’s doctrine of continuity or of
man’s reliance upon former generations for his cultural
equipment, the only reasonable explanation of such
behaviour is that his intelligence is sleeping. This is
not written in a spirit of levity or sarcasm, but is a
serious attempt to explain a phenomenon that is in-
credibly amazing—the persistent refusal of scholars pro-
fessing to enlighten the world in the principles of human
behaviour to pay attention to the most elementary facts
that are matters of common knowledge to every human
being. Darwin’s difficulty in converting his fellows,
excepting in the cases of men of such outstanding
intelligence and openness of mind as Huxley, Hooker
and Lyell, was due precisely to the fact that most of his
colleagues were living in a world of delusions in respect
of the vital natural phenomena.
There is only one method of conversion for the
majority of intelligent people, who as a rule are imper-
vious to mere logic and consistency. It is necessary to
lead them on gently, and by subtle appeals to their own
knowledge, allow them to discover the truth for them-
selves, rather than to give them the solution direct.
This is not simply a question of personal vanity—giving
them the feeling that they are making the discovery
themselves—so much as the consideration that all true
assimilation of knowledge is of the nature of original
research. A man does not see things and appreciate
their meaning until he has really investigated the evidence
and formed his own interpretation, and, as I have already
emphasised, integrated the new facts and ideas with his


highly organised system of knowledge and interpre-
tation.
Huxley’s comparison of the effect upon him of reading
the Origin to “ a flash of light ” must not be taken to
imply that it was in any sense identical with St. Paul’s
blinding vision. There is a profound contrast between
the phenomena discussed by the late Professor William
James in his Gifford Lectures (The Varieties of Religious
Experience') and the psychological process involved in
convincing a man of the validity of a scientific theory.
The sudden solution of a scientific problem may, how-
ever, have something in common with the phenomenon
of religious conversion. Evidence that is puzzling and
conflicting and incapable of any satisfactory interpreta-
tion suddenly emerges in a form explicable in terms of
some definite formula or conviction. In one case a
man escapes from a state of anxiety, discomfort and
tension by making a compromise with himself whereby
he attains a state of peace and contentment; in the
other he has the satisfaction of discovering an explana-
tion of things that hitherto had been puzzling and
unintelligible, and of bringing them into relationship
with the general body of knowledge. The process in
respect of religious conversion, however, is a personal
and essentially emotional experience, whereby the indi-
vidual escapes from despair by adopting a new con-
viction to wipe out his former causes of distress. In
science, truth and understanding are the ultimate aims
of conversion, and not merely the convert’s peace of
mind. It implies the attainment of an interpretation of
phenomena which satisfies other open-minded and com-
petent men of its adequacy as a just expression of the
known facts.
In attempting to determine the nature of the obstacles
that stand in the way of conversion of men of science
there are three among many factors that call for special
consideration : in the first place, preconceived ideas and
traditions that interfere with a clear view of the truth;


secondly, lack of the imagination to devise working
hypotheses, not merely for interpreting the known
facts, but also for suggesting problems to be tested by
observation and experiment; and, in the third place,
reluctance to discard hypotheses with the utmost ruth-
lessness once they have been proved to be false or not
to be in accord with the established evidence that is
available.
Huxley himself has given such lucid expression to
these ideas that I make no apology for quoting him once
more. In the preface to the English edition of Haeckel’s
book on Freedom in Science and Teaching (1879) wrote :
“ No profound acquaintance with the history of science
is needed to produce the conviction that the advancement
of natural knowledge has been effected by the successive
or concurrent efforts of men whose minds are charac-
terised by tendencies so opposite that they are forced
into conflict with one another. The one intellect is
imaginative and synthetic; its chief aim is to arrive at
a broad and coherent conception of the relations of
phenomena; the other is positive, critical, analytic, and
sets the highest value upon the exact determination and
statement of the phenomena themselves.
“ Every science has been largely indebted to bold,
nay, even to wild hypotheses, for the power of ordering
and grasping the endless details of natural fact which
they confer; for the moral stimulus which arises out of
the desire to confirm or to confute them; and last, but
not least, for the suggestion of paths of fruitful inquiry,
which, without them, would never have been followed.
From the days of Columbus and Kepler to those of
Oken, Lamarck and Boucher de Perthes, Saul, who,
seeking their father’s asses, found a kingdom, is the
prototype of many a renowned discoverer who has
lighted upon verities while following illusions which,
had they deluded lesser men, might possibly have been
considered more or less asinine.
“ Nor have I, for one, anything but cordial assent to


give to his declaration, that the modern development of
science is essentially due to the constant encroachment
of experiment and observation on the domain of hypo-
thetical dogma; and that the most difficult, as well as
the most important, object of every honest worker is
‘ sich entsubjectiviren ’ to get rid of his preconceived
notions, and to keep his hypotheses well in hand, as the
good servants and bad masters that they are.”
In the first edition of The Origin of Species (p. 488)
Darwin made the statement that “ light will be thrown
on the origin of man and his history.” But it remained
for Huxley to take up the challenge thus thrown into
the arena and become responsible for defending the
most controversial of all the issues involved in the
discussion of evolution. It so happened that for a
couple of years before 1859 Huxley had been engaged
in a controversy with Owen respecting the differences
between the brains of men and apes, which I have
discussed elsewhere. Hence it became inevitable that
when the publication of The Origin of Species invested such
discussions with special significance, Huxley was com-
pelled, if one may use this word about a controversy
into which he entered with such zest, to take up the
challenge and defend Darwin’s views by arguing the
most contentious issue involved in it.
During the decade 1860-1870 many diverse circum-
stances contributed to the development of a special
interest in the study of mankind. Looking back at
these events in the light of our present knowledge, it is
surprising to find that discoveries which to-day seem
the more essential factors in the great controversy
attracted little interest. The Neanderthal skull was dis-
covered three years before The Origin of Species was pub-
lished. Huxley became interested in it in iB6O, when
Lyell asked his opinion on it for the book on The
Antiquity of Man he was then contemplating. But
although Huxley became involved in the controversy
that developed around this interesting fossil, the signifi


cance of its bearing upon the problems in dispute seems
to have been strangely neglected. Nor, indeed, did the
discussion of the theory of evolution play the chief part
in the sudden awakening of interest in anthropology in
iB6O. The great event that riveted attention upon,
and in the eyes of most men established, the antiquity
of man was the demonstration of the authenticity of the
long-ignored and ridiculed discoveries of palaeolithic
implements by M. Boucher de Perthes. Huxley’s interest
was aroused by these events because Lyell had played
an important part in establishing the truth of Boucher
de Perthes’ claims and sought Huxley’s help in the
matter of the Neanderthal skull. Another scholar who
was destined to play a very decisive part in the future
direction to ethnological theory also became involved.
Edward Burnett Tylor was an intimate friend of Henry
Christy, who, with Lyell and Evans, turned the scale in
favour of Boucher de Perthes.
Interest in anthropology was “ in the air,” to use
Andrew Lang’s expression. Other factors contributed
to this movement. The investigations of McLellan and
Sir Henry Maine into social organisation and juris-
prudence, the intense cultivation of comparative philo-
logy and the study of mythology that went with it, all
helped to extend the range of the appeal made by the
study of the early history of the human family, which
gradually came to crystallise around the idea of evolu-
tion. Before long interest in the early history of human
institutions inevitably became merged in the story of
man’s evolution, and the technical language of biology
came to be used to give expression to the new ideas
which were then being formulated to interpret the
history of civilisation.
The serious study of ethnology can be said to have
begun in the middle of the eighteenth century. The
geographical discoveries in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries had aroused men’s interest in the outlying
parts of Africa, Asia and the New World of America,


and led them to speculate on the origin of these hitherto
unknown peoples and their civilisations. But such
desultory speculations were in the main circumscribed
by the conscious endeavour to bring the new facts into
relationship with the traditional teaching of the Bible.
But all this time other forces were at work to prepare
the way for a less biassed view of the new facts. It is
one of the curious and intriguing phenomena in the
advancement of learning that at times the atmosphere is
favourable for change in doctrine and men become ready
to accept new theories irrespective of whether they are
true or false. Early in the seventeenth century, when
belief in the infallibility of Aristotle, Ptolemy and Galen
had been seriously undermined by more than a century
of pioneer work in astronomy, physics, anatomy and
physiology, Descartes attained high distinction as a man
of broad vision in science. He had the good fortune
to be born at a time when the world was hungering for a
new doctrine. As Dr. Ivor Hart has said : “It is curious
that after the spade-work of investigation, experiment
and observation had been done by Kepler, Galileo and
Gilbert, the final overthrow of the Aristotelians should
have been produced by what has since proved to be a
futile speculation, having foundation neither in fact nor
experiment.” But Descartes stimulated men to think
on other than traditional lines, and as the result his own
doctrines became the object of just attack.
The new era of sound learning was inaugurated by Sir
Isaac Newton, who insisted that scientific inquiry “ must
set out from the observation of the actual facts of
the objective world.” In 1750 Turgot applied these
inductive methods to the study of mankind. Although
Montesquieu and Voltaire played some part in this
movement of enlightenment, it was Turgot who saw the
facts clearly and indicated the only method by which the
true discipline of science could be introduced into
humanistic studies.
In his illuminating book The Idea of Progress (1920) the


late Professor J. B. Bury has drawn a brilliant picture
of the intellectual movement (“ essentially humanistic in
that it put man in the centre of the picture ”) in the
middle of the eighteenth century that excited so pro-
found an interest in the problems of society and politics,
and eventually, among other far-reaching effects, pro-
voked the French Revolution. These events, which
have had a profound influence upon the world’s history,
have been clearly interpreted by Professor Bury as the
direct outcome of anthropological inquiries. “ Interest
in the remote peoples of the earth, in the unfamiliar
civilisations of the East, in the untutored races of
America and Africa, was vivid in France in the eighteenth
century. Everyone knows how Voltaire and Montes-
quieu used the Hurons and Persians to hold up the glass
to Western manners and morals, as Tacitus used the
Germans to criticise the society of Rome. But very few
ever look into the seven volumes of the Abbe Raynal’s
History of the Two Indies, which appeared in 1772. It is,
however, one of the most remarkable books of the
century. Its immediate practical importance lay in the
array of facts which it furnished to the friends of humanity
in the movement against negro slavery.”
This important epoch in the history of learning pro-
vides the clue for the interpretation of all that has
subsequently happened in ethnology, and in particular
the events a century later, when Huxley once more “ put
man in the centre of the picture.”
The attempt to introduce the methods of exact science
into the study of mankind was frustrated in the nine-
teenth century in much the same way as it was a century
earlier. In fact it was the survival of the scholastic
methods, which brought to nought the enlightened
pioneer work of Turgot in 1750, that wrecked the new
movement a hundred years later.
In the whole history of intellectual endeavour there
have always been two more or less definitely opposed
tendencies. There is the broad road of facile speculation,


the formulation of so-called “natural laws,” as often as not
mere phantasies without substance, into conformity with
which all the evidence is forced. In opposition to this
there is the straight and narrow path of laborious observa-
tion and experiment, leading to some principle which will
give adequate expression to all the known facts. During
the three centuries before the Christian era the true
scientific method was first developed by the exacting
discipline of this inductive method in the museum of
Alexandria. In the early centuries of the Christian era
the downfall of this same school was brought about by
the neglect of the inductive method and the indulgence
in fantastic day-dreams. The indolent mystics who
swarmed to the schools of Neo-Platonism preferred
futile speculations to the exacting discipline of experi-
mental research. In later centuries every great advance
in knowledge was effected by men who trusted to observa-
tion and experiment and fought against those who
attempted to give dogma and tradition supremacy over
“ the actual facts of the objective world.”
A similar process came into operation in the eighteenth
century. A quarter of a century after Turgot’s illumin-
ating essay, Dr. William Robertson, Principal of the
University of Edinburgh, wrote his History of America
(1777), in which he expressed views in flagrant opposition
to the Newtonian principles so clearly expressed in
Tugot’s essay, and called the tune of the reactionary
movement with which anthropology is still shackled
to this day. Principal Robertson put forward a specula-
tion in attempted explanation of the similarities of early
American civilisation, which exemplifies all the fallacies
against which Turgot had been contending in 1750.
Without any sort of justification, or relevance to the
established facts of the behaviour of primitive people,
Robertson expressed the opinion that in similar
circumstances any people could invent similar customs
and beliefs. Having enunciated this opinion, he pro-
ceeded to regard it as a Law of Nature without any


attempt to justify it by appealing to the evidence that was
available, beyond selecting such illustrations as suited his
purpose. The whole doctrine of modern ethnology has
been shaped in the conflict of opinion regarding the
origin of ancient American civilisation. When Robert-
son is arguing in favour of the principle of the similarity
of the working of the human mind, the resemblances of
culture are said to be “ surprising ”; but when he is
arguing against diffusion, the resemblances are called
“ casual ” —a device of which many examples are
provided in the current journals of ethnology.
One cannot accuse Robertson of any originality in
devising the formula that was destined to paralyse clear
thinking for a century and a half. He was merely
repeating in other words the teaching of Fontenelle, who,
to use the words of Professor Teggart, 1 was “ completely
dominated by the a priori method of Descartes.” Hence,
long after “the study of physics, under the influence of
Newton, had shaken itself free from the Cartesian type
of scholasticism,” the study of man remained fettered.
Fontenelle was seriously trying to bring humanistic
problems within the scope of scientific inquiry. Un-
fortunately his conception of science was the method of
Descartes. Like many ethnologists at the present time,
Fontenelle refused to recognise the principle of con-
tinuity, and poured scorn on the historical method. His
reason was that he was adopting methods which he
imagined to be those of science. The parallelism be-
tween the Cartesians of the eighteenth and the twentieth
centuries is complete, as, in fact, it should be, seeing
that the scholasticism of the latter is a direct survival of
the anti-Newtonian attitude.
It is a singular commentary on the methods of human-
istic study that such a reckless travesty of logic and
consistency should have survived until the present day
and have come to be regarded as the strictest orthodoxy
1 “ Turgot’s Approach to the Study of Man,” The University of
California Chronicle, April 1926, p. 129.


of ethnological doctrine. From the time of Robertson
until the seventies of the nineteenth century the theory of
independent development of culture did not receive
any particularly enthusiastic support in England, or, in
fact, anywhere; but there was an uncertainty as to the
method of interpreting the similarities of culture which
were found to exist when the civilisation of America was
compared with that of the Old World. Baron von
Humboldt in the early part of the nineteenth century
was frankly in favour of the diffusion of culture as the
explanation of the similarities that everyone admitted.
Prescott at first was deeply impressed with the strength
of the evidence in favour of the dependence of America
on Asia for its cultural inspiration; but in 1847, when he
published his Conquest of Peru, he was taking up an
attitude of criticism, if not of definite opposition. But
in iB6O, when Adolf Bastian (of Berlin) began his
voluminous writings in ethnology, there was no rigid
theory, either of diffusion or of independent origin, that
was generally accepted by ethnologists. The great
figure in ethnology during the nineteenth century was
Sir Edward Tylor, whose illuminating treatise on The
Early History of Mankind (1865) gives a clear picture of
the state of ethnological opinion at the time when
Huxley first became involved in the discussion of the
problems of human institutions. Both men (Huxley and
Tylor) gave clear expression to the view that, except
possibly in respect of the simplest and most generalised
ideas, diffusion was the only explanation of such
similarities as were found in the more complex and
arbitrary ingredients of civilisation. Perhaps I can
express in Huxley’s own words his attitude towards this
vital problem. In his Methods and Results of Ethnology
(published in 1865, and reprinted in Volume VII. of his
collected essays. Mads Place in Mature, 1895, p. 213), one
is surprised to find Huxley seriously quoting the old
Cartesian dogma in Robertson’s words : “ The minds
of men being everywhere similar, differing in quality and


quantity, but not in kind of faculty, like circumstances
must tend to produce like contrivances, at any rate so
long as the need to be met and conquered is of a very
simple kind.” But having thus, unwittingly, paid
homage to tradition, Huxley at once set to work to
reduce the doctrine to reasonable proportions by adding
the damning qualification : “On the other hand, it may
be doubted whether the chances are not greatly against
independent peoples arriving at the manufacture of a
boomerang or of a bow, which last, if one comes to
think of it, is a rather complicated apparatus, and the
tracing of the distribution of inventions as complex as
these, and of such strange customs as betel-chewing
and tobacco-smoking, may afford valuable ethnological
hints.”
Having thus definitely adopted the principles of
diffusion, Huxley then proceeded to develop them in an
even more definite and emphatic way than Tylor did in
his book The Early History oj Mankind, that was published
in the same year. For example (on p. 225) Huxley
remarks that “ the bows and arrows, the perched houses,
outrigged canoes, the habits of betel-chewing and kava-
drinking which abound more or less among the Southern
Negritos (Melanesians) are probably to be regarded not
as the products of indigenous civilisation, but merely
as indications of the extent to which foreign influences
have modified the primitive associated state of these
people.” In respect of many customs and methods Sir
Edward Tylor spoke with equal emphasis in favour of
diffusion as the only possible interpretation of the facts;
but in 1871 a subtle change was taking place in his
opinions. Then he was admitting, in the preface of his
Primitive Culture, the fact of his indebtedness to Adolf
Bastian. While criticising in the most scathing terms,
and with a wealth of forcible illustrations, his con-
tempt for those who had pretended to ignore the
historical method and the principles of diffusion of
culture, Tylor himself was drifting towards the very


views he was denouncing, and adopting the phrase—
similarity of the working of the human mind—which was
the slogan of those who continue to ignore the century-
old remonstrance of Turgot, and the facts of anthropo-
logy. During the decade in which Tylor was developing
his theory of animism many prominent anthropologists,
such as Meadows-Taylor, Pitt-Rivers, Fergusson, Park
Harrison and others, were explaining the similarities that
are found widespread throughout the world to the
diffusion of features of culture from some original centre
where each of them was first invented. Before the
seventies had come to an end, however, the views of
Adolf Bastian had become dominant. Ethnologists
were adopting from him the old Robertsonian dogma
that different communities had quite independently one
with the other built up similar systems of civilisation in
different parts of the world. Such a view was in science
analogous to the biological theory of “ spontaneous
generation ” that was being championed by Bastian’s
namesake in London. With a curious disregard to its
true nature, Tylor, who had been calling his views of
independent development “ the development theory,”
began to refer to the doctrine of spontaneous generation
of culture (which he had adopted from the Berlin Bastian)
as “ evolution,” a word which by this time had come to
acquire a certain respectability and in England was
already a fashionable phrase. There is a peculiar irony
in the use of the word “ evolution ” for a doctrine
championed by Adolf Bastian, for at the time this strange
phenomenon was happening in England Bastian was
being attacked by his own countrymen, such as Haeckel,
for the recklessness of his opposition to the principle of
biological evolution ! In 1879 Huxley wrote the preface
to the translation of a lecture by Ernst Haeckel called
Freedom in Science , in which the distinguished German
biologist refers to Bastian as “ this ‘ enfant terrible ’ of the
school—this well-nicknamed ‘ acting privy councillor
of the board of confusion.’ ” This is the man whose


ethnological teaching, when transplanted to England, was
labelled “ evolution.” It would be difficult to imagine
anything more ironical or more eloquent of the state of
confusion of thought that was developing in ethnology.
Nevertheless the fact remains that ethnologists, who to
this day proudly call themselves “ evolutionists,” are,
in respect of this very matter, adopting the views of the
bitterest enemy of evolution, whose doctrines of spontan-
eous generation of culture are a fitting counterpart of the
foolish doctrine in biology, championed by his English
namesake, which in 1872 received its quietus at the hands
of Pasteur, Huxley and Tyndall.
This historical sketch is sufficient to make it plain
that the big theories of ethnology have developed out of
the discussions that arose from the discovery of the New
World. The Humanists in the middle of the eighteenth
century, Robertson in 1777, the industrious writers in
the first sixty years of the nineteenth century, were all
concerned with the problem whether or not the civilisa-
tion of the Maya and Aztec peoples, of the Pre-Incas
and Incas, was indigenous or was inspired by Eastern
Asia. To-day this problem still remains the rock upon
which ethnology is split asunder.
Yet there is little excuse for any doubt at the present
time. We have at our service vast accumulations of
exact evidence derived from America, Oceania, Eastern
Asia and the rest of the world to establish the fact that
between the sixth and the twelfth centuries a.d. (and
possibly six or seven centuries earlier) the civilisations of
Cambodia and Java, as well as other parts of Eastern
Asia and Oceania, were influencing events in America
and shaping the nascent civilisations in Central America
and South America.
The evidence in substantiation of this fact is precise
and abundant, and has repeatedly been set forth clearly.
To the serious scholar who is earnestly striving to solve
the problem upon which the whole theory of ethnology
depends, the disconcerting aspect of the present situation


is not so much the denial of the Asiatic influence in
America as the refusal of those who deny it seriously to
discuss the evidence. Galileo’s critics refused to look
through his telescope. They preferred not to see
Saturn’s rings. But that attitude of mind is three cen-
turies out of date. I have been endeavouring to show
in this Lecture that this refusal to be converted by definite
and unassailable evidence is not due to any lack of know-
ledge, but is due wholly to a peculiar attitude of mind
that has survived from the time of Descartes. The
scholastic attitude of mind —mere juggling with phrases
—is fatal to the serious pursuit of knowledge.
I must now return to the consideration of the real
significance of Huxley’s achievement. This can best be
done by trying to put it into its historical setting. In the
sixteenth century one of the chief obstacles that Coper-
nicus had to overcome was the consideration of the
distinctive position assigned to mankind. For, as
Dr. Ivor Hart 1 has clearly explained, one of the con-
sequences of man’s exalted rank and attributes as a
candidate for immortality was a reluctance to admit that
his home, the earth, was not the centre of the universe,
fixed and immovable. By putting the earth in its proper
place Copernicus thus dealt a blow at this paralysing
anthropocentrism; but he also liberated science from a
wider thraldom—the worship of Aristotle, which had
impeded the advancement of knowledge for many
centuries. In fact the advancement of learning has always
been much more intimately bound up with the personal
human factor than is generally recognised.
Modern speculation as to the motives which influence
primitive man has gone sadly astray in assuming that
he displayed an almost instinctive curiosity to discover
the meaning of natural phenomena, which prompted
him to devise stories of creation and to invent so-called
“ nature gods.” There is no evidence in support of
1 Makers of Science (1923), p. 75.


such views. Nor is it generally recognised that, until
less than sixty centuries ago, all men were living a life
such as the Punan of Borneo 1 are leading to-day, utterly
devoid of anything that could be called culture. The
implications of this fact cannot be ignored in the inter-
pretation of human behaviour. For if men lived in
the world for hundreds of thousands of years without
attempting to devise any form of civilisation, there
cannot be any innate impulse to do the sort of things
that the theory of the independent development of
culture requires.
Primitive man’s interests were, in fact, centred almost
wholly upon his own welfare—the preservation of his
life. He first paid attention to the moon and celestial
phenomena because he believed they controlled the
physiological processes that gave life to human beings.
He thought the heavens controlled his own destiny as
they measured time and determined the span of his life.
Plis interest in the flow of rivers, in animals and plants,
in the minerals in the earth and the shells in the sea was
centred almost exclusively on their value as food or
magic to sustain and protect his own existence. Man
was the centre of the universe, the whole history of
which had for its object to shape natural events for his
personal welfare. “It would be difficult to conceive
any conception more calculated to exalt the dignity of
man than one which represents the career of each indi-
vidual as linked with the march of worlds, the focus
towards which the influences of the most sublime of
created things continually converge.” 2 The influence
of this tradition was for a time shaken when Pythagoras,
five centuries before Christ, suggested a truer idea of the
earth’s place in the universe; but for twenty centuries
after his time the world was given up to a belief in a
crude astrology, which encouraged the pretence that
1 See Charles Hose, Natural Man, 1926.
2 W. E. H. Lecky, History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of
Rationalism in Europe (1910 ed.), Vol. 1., p. 277.


the whole universe was working for the control of
man’s destiny. Hence one can the more readily under-
stand the strength of the obstacles Copernicus and
Galileo had to remove to persuade people to see and
appreciate the most obvious facts and the simplest
experiments. The process of conversion that was
necessary before men could adopt their teaching involved
a complete reorientation of their ideas of the world and
the renunciation of the doctrines of Aristotle and Ptolemy,
in accordance with which they had been taught.
The emancipation of learning from the false concep-
tion of the universe was the beginning of the freeing
of all knowledge from the shackles of tradition. For
the emergence of a real science of astronomy involved
the downfall of astrology and the supposed influence of
the celestial bodies upon man. It took some centuries
to achieve this freedom; and until it was complete the
process of assigning man his true place in nature could
not even be begun. With the disappearance of the
personal interest the hampering effect of emotion in
warping men’s judgment disappeared once for all from
astronomy and physics, so that reason obtained complete
sway.
In the light of these historical facts Huxley’s achieve-
ment takes on a new significance. It is the culmination
of the process, which had been in operation for several
centuries, of stripping away the obstructions that prevent
man from seeing himself as he really is.
The old anthropocentric conception was determined
by man’s preoccupation with his own safety. It is
obviously a truism that the manifold activities of every
living organism have for their ultimate purpose the
preservation of the life which is the distinctive attribute
of all living organisms. Whether we think of the
blood-stream or the digestive system or the nervous
mechanisms which provoke movements away from
harm or towards food, the ultimate purpose of all such
reactions is to safeguard the very existence of the living


organism. From the moment that human beings first
became articulate and strove to shape their own destiny,
the conscious aim of their striving was to protect their
own lives and avert the risk of death and extinction.
The earliest evidence we have of the behaviour of
human beings reveals their attempts to devise measures
to add to their vitality and to avert the risks of annihila-
tion. If the magical properties they attributed to blood-
like substances, to shells and to the teeth of ferocious
animals, seem to us childish, we must recognise in such
practices the rational basis of a serious attempt to dis-
cover means of averting the dangers to which life was
exposed. Throughout the whole subsequent career of
the human family, in all the sacred literature of every
religion, the same cry goes forth that was expressed in
all these ancient practices; for every religion, both of
ancient and modern times, plainly sets forth its purpose
as the salvation of existence. Life and resurrection are
the themes of the higher religions, and this motive lies
at the heart of all the human aspirations which found
expression in the creation and development of civilisation.
In spite of constant reiteration in the literature of
every religion, in folklore and mythology, ethnological
theory still ignores the fact that the motive underlying
human behaviour and inspiring the development of
civilisation is the life-quest. In religion, as my friend
Professor Canney has recently shown, 1 the technical
term “ salvation ” means “ the giving of life.” But it
does not require such learned philological demonstration
to establish a fact that is so plainly and repeatedly ex-
pressed in all sacred literature and profane folklore.
The kingship was first devised as a means of insuring
the life and prosperity of the community. 2 The dead
king was embalmed in order to enable him to continue
his beneficent work. A special temple was built wherein
1 Maurice A. Canney, “ The Meaning of ‘ Salvation Theology,
August, 1927.
2 W. J. Perry, Gods and Men, London, 1927.


to safeguard his mummified body—not simply to protect
it from injury, but to provide a place where the king’s
subjects could make offerings of food and perform the
ceremonies appropriate for reviving him, so that the
reanimated king could actively participate in protecting
the lives and the welfare of the people.
Around these ideas were crystallised the social,
political and religious systems, not of one community
only, but of the whole world. The recognition of these
facts, which can easily be substantiated by anyone who
studies the sacred literature of any religion, is the funda-
mental factor in the interpretation of civilisation and
the behaviour of civilised men. Yet in the past these
obvious truths, which are stated in endless repetition in
the New Testament and in all ancient literature, sacred
and profane, have been in a large measure ignored
because of the tradition that attributed ideas of fertility
to practices which really had for their aim the safeguarding
of life.
By putting man into his place and studying him as a
living creature with certain distinctive attributes, we
are led to pay attention to the fundamental factors
involved in such an admission, which have been almost
wholly ignored in humanistic discussions.
In the past most of the great revolutions of thought
turned upon some simple and obvious fact, to which in
many instances specific attention had been called centuries
before its importance came to be recognised. Con-
version in science, however, is rarely effected simply by
stating the truth. In most cases it requires many years
of persistent argument and subtle persuasion to make
people realise the importance of familiar facts. Hence
the recognition of the principle that as a living creature
man’s activities, conscious and unconscious, must con-
stantly be centred upon the preservation of life, seems
so banal and axiomatic as hardly to be worth mention-
ing. Yet the recognition of all that is implied in it
means much more than the demonstration of the sun’s


function as the centre of the solar system. For it is
the spring of every human activity, including our per-
ception of the facts of the universe. In a sense it is the
biggest fact in the universe. All the knowledge that
man has acquired, and the whole fabric of civilisation,
material and spiritual, are the results of man’s striving
to safeguard his life.
The late Mr. Lecky is the only scholar, so far as I am
aware, who has recognised the importance of the vital
factor : “ These great questions of the nature and origin
of life may be almost said to form the basis of all real
knowledge.” 1 But for twenty centuries and more the
whole issue has been obscured by the practice of scholars
using the word “ fertility ” instead of life. The dominant
motive in religion was inspired by considerations neither
of sex nor of reproduction, but of life-giving. In the
New Testament life and resurrection are the aims of
salvation. In every religion the dominant motive is the
life-quest. Phallic ideas originally were expressions
of life-giving rather than of mere sex. The kind of
fertility that interests man is that of his crops and herds,
because it contributes to his food supply and promotes
his prosperity. In some communities he takes a vital
personal interest in begetting sons to perform the rites
upon which his continued existence and welfare after
death are believed to depend. But apart from the
feelings of affection which all normal human beings
display towards their offspring and the innate pride in
a sense of virility, man is not dominated by any over-
whelming interest in human fertility. In spite of what
Freudian psychologists claim, the deepest beliefs of men
in every age testify to the fact that self-preservation is
the cardinal factor in human belief and behaviour.
Man’s distinctive attribute is the possession of an
intellect that enables him to learn from his individual
experience and by means of articulate speech to transmit
to others his interpretation of his experience. No one
1 Op. at., p. 343-


can dispute this truism, the true significance of which
Turgot emphasised in 1750. Yet its adoption implies
—what, in fact, everyone knows from his own personal
experience—that the diffusion of culture is a normal
and inevitable factor in human behaviour. Every
human being obtains his cultural outfit from the com-
munity in which he happens to be brought up. He
does not invent the speech, the clothes, the houses and
the innumerable distinctive attributes of his society.
He acquires them from his fellows and then adapts
them to his own personal needs and circumstances.
The mere fact that man is so highly adapted to learn
from personal experience necessarily implies that the
actions of human beings are not uniform or easily pre-
dictable—for they are determined by each man’s experi-
ence, which is individual and distinctive. The physio-
logist has shown that the behaviour of animals becomes
really automatic only when the cerebral hemispheres are
destroyed. In proportion as the cerebral cortex is
developed the less predictable behaviour becomes. In
virtue of the high development of his brain and the
tremendously heightened powers of modifying behaviour
under the effects of individual experience, man’s thoughts
and actions are less predictable than those of any other
living creatures.
These obvious and generally admitted facts are fatal
to the common speculation regarding “ the similarity
of the working of the human mind,” a meaningless
jargon that has survived from the Cartesian scholasticism
of the eighteenth century. The assumption that there
is a universal symbolism and an innate tendency to create
similar myths, similar social and industrial systems —in
fact the claim for the independent development of similar
civilisations and elements of culture—is as false to all
that is known of the working of the human mind as it
is to the evidence of the history of civilisation and the
widespread diffusion of culture from the earliest times.
If the individual elements of our civilisation have


been diffused from one place to another, it is obvious
that there must be a time and place where the process
began. Moreover there is a further corollary. The
essential ingredients of civilisation must have been com-
bined into an organised system in one definite place.
Ample evidence is available to demonstrate clearly and
decisively that the place where this happened was Egypt
early in the fourth millennium. It is not merely the
circumstance that archaeological investigation has re-
vealed civilisation to have existed in the Nile Valley
in the fourth millennium which makes it probable.
Agriculture and irrigation, the domestication of cattle
and the weaving of linen, the use of metals and the
invention of boats, the creation of architecture and all
the crafts that are necessarily involved in such efforts,
the making of the first calendar and the acquisition of
the knowledge of the sun, moon and stars, upon which
the improvements in that calendar are effected—these
and a thousand and one other elements that went to the
making of the original civilisation and its material
equipment, its social and political organisation, its
system of government and its religion, and the circum-
stances of the river that formed the bond of union
between all the cultured communities which became
welded together into the first state, all point clearly to
Egypt as the place where civilisation was first invented,
not for the Nile Valley only, but for the world at large,
which learned its lesson from the Egyptians and adapted
these strange inventions to their own needs and aspira-
tions. The evidence points to Egypt as the one place
in the world where the opportunity for doing all these
things existed, but it also reveals quite clearly the nature
of the arbitrary circumstances which impelled men to
embark upon the hazardous career of invention. The
date of the commencement of civilisation in Egypt is
several centuries older than that of any other country.
The exaggerated claims for antiquity which have recently
been made, month by month, by the excavators at Ur


and Kish, not to mention the valley of the Indus, are
obviously devoid of any sort of justification. But even
if one were to admit that Sumerian civilisation began
as early as 3500 b.c., a claim which Mr. Woolley and
Professor Langdon are now making—without any
reasonable justification—this would not make the civil-
isation of Sumer anything like as ancient as that of Egypt.
The first dynasty in Egypt (3400 ± 100 b.c.) does not
represent the beginning of Egyptian civilisation, but it
is the culmination of several centuries of pioneer work
of building up the organic structure of civilisation, the
individual elements of which bear the distinctive impress
of their Nilotic origin.
However, it is not merely the claim for the priority
of civilisation in Egypt, nor the circumstance that this
country alone in the world provides the conditions
necessary for such development to have occurred, that
convince us of the fact that Egypt was really the
inventor of civilisation. There is a much more power-
ful argument than either of these that establishes the
certainty of such claims. It can be shown by careful
analysis of the facts collected from the world at large
that every early civilisation of which we have any know-
ledge has been built up around the practice of mummi-
fication of a distinctively Egyptian type. The preserva-
tion of the body of the dead king and the ceremonies for
reanimating the mummy were acts upon which were
focussed all of the arts and crafts as well as the ritual
and the ceremonies the aim of which was to confer upon
the community the benefits of his life-giving activities.
The leading archaeologists admit the debt of Crete to
Egypt, and many of them realise that Syria also derived
its cultural capital from Egypt. But few people are
prepared to recognise that the civilisation of the whole
world was inspired by Egypt—that Mesopotamia and
India, Africa and Europe, and indirectly the rest of
Asia, Oceania and America derived their cultural capital
from the same source. Yet the evidence afforded by


intensive analysis of the earliest civilisations of every part
of the world establishes the fact beyond any possibility
of doubt. In 1926, Professor Breasted, having then
recently returned from the study on the spot of new
discoveries in Egypt, Syria and Mesopotamia, claimed
that “ it is now a finally established fact that civilisation
first arose in Egypt.” 1
In spite of the completeness of the evidence which
goes to establish these fundamental facts, which lie at
the heart of all anthropological inquiry, there is the
same sort of opposition to admitting the obvious and
patent evidence as there was in the sixteenth century to
recognise Galileo’s simple experiment, or in the nine-
teenth century to admit the conclusive force of Darwin’s
demonstration of the reality of evolution.
“ It is an error,” Turgot wrote, “ which opposes the
progress of truth; it is indolence, obstinacy, the spirit
of routine, everything that favours inaction.”
Speaking a quarter of a century after the publication
of The Origin of Species, Huxley made an impressive
plea for the exercise of constant vigilance in the pursuit
of scientific truth. History, he said, warns us that it is
the customary fate of new truths to begin as heresies and
end as superstitions. There was the danger lest a new
generation should accept the main doctrine of The Origin
of Species with as little reflection, and it may be with as
little justification, as so many of his contemporaries years
before rejected it. So dire a consummation, he declared,
must be prevented by unflinching critisicm of science,
for the scientific spirit is of more value than its produce,
and irrationally held truths may be more harmful than
rejected errors.
In recalling these words of warning I should like to
make an earnest appeal to the student of human institu-
tions who refuses to admit the influence of the Old
World upon the development of ancient American
culture or the part played by Egypt in creating civilisation.
1 James H. Breasted, The Conquest of Civilisation, 1926, p. ix.


It is not a matter of vital significance whether he accepts
or rejects these interpretations of the evidence. But it
is a matter of fundamental importance that he should
repeatedly submit to impartial and critical examination
the evidence upon which his theories are built up, and
that, whatever view he adopts, it should be founded
upon unquestionable data and strictly rational arguments.


Printed in Great Britain bv
Richard Clay & Sons, Limited,
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.
