





COPIOUS REMARKS
Dri -the .DISCOVERY bf
I*.
NEW SOUTH WALES;
With a circumftantial DESCRIPTION of
BOTANY BAY,
AND THE
Iflands, Bays, Harbours, See. lying near it:
With enlarged Obfervatiorts on the Natural Productions.',
and Face of the Country.
To which dre added.
Prefatory OBSERVATIONS on TRANSPORTATION;
A Sketch of the Equipment, defigned for the Conveyance of
the Convifh, and the Number of Criminals in~
tended to be put on Board each Veffel,
LONDON:
Printed for the Bookfelters in Town and Country, 1787#


OBSERVAT I O N S
ON
TRANSPORTATION,
AND THE
Establishment of a Colony in NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE plan adopted by the Brilijh legiflaturefor tranfport-
ing criminals of a certain, defervption to Botany Bay,
in New South Wales, di[covered by Capt. Cooke, in 1770,
has'been Jo long and- Jo' generally the topic of converfation*
that every information reldiive to a country fo extraordinary
and fo little known, it is prefamed, will be agreeable to the
Public. . , , .
■ With regard to the fcheme itfelf of forming a fettlement' in
that country, readers of every clafs are , from the publicity of
the fubjcCt, alreddy in pojjeffioii of innumerable arguments,
touching its probable advantages, or disadvantages. Thus
much, however, may be ajjerted with fq/ety, that the mainte-
nance of the convidls at home 1 has been attended with great ex-
pence; without qnjwering the end of exemplary correction
and that though a frigate was fent to the coa/l of Africa, for
difeovety, no proper place could be found whereon lb form a
fettlement for the purpofe of exonerating this country of its
obnoxious members.'
The prefent intention of government feems,'. therefore, to be
the only experiment which bids fair to anfwer the wiftes that
have been long entertained on this head by the fober part of
the community ; and, when it-is confidered as an experiment,
the objections of thofe who exclaim againft founding a colony,
upon the infamous afjcmblage oj exiled felons, will Jail to the
ground. If government. \iad .chqfen to,adopt the Jingle pur-
f°J e


j bofe of efablijhing a fettlemcnt at Botany Bay, they would he
jujlly blameable in inviting the indufrious and reputable ar-
tifan to exchange his own happy foil for the pojfeffion of ter-
ritory, however extenfive, in a part of the world ’ to which we
are as yet juch ptrfeftf rangers. But criminals, when their lives
or liberties areforfcited tojujlice, are confidered as lof in the eye
of the flate, and have always beenjudgeda fairfubjeft of hazar-
dous experiments, to which it would be unjujl to expofe the more
valuable members offociety. If there be therefore any terrors
in the profpeft before the wretch who is bani/hcd to New
Smith Wales, they are no more than he expefts: if the dangers
of a foreign climate, or the improbability of returning to this
kingdom, be confidered as almnfl equivalent to death, the de-
voted'convift myji refleft that his crimes have drawn on him this
puniflment, and that offended juflice, in confgning him to the
inhofpitable Jhore of Nexu Holland, does not mean thereby to
'feat‘him for his life, on a bed of rofes. Though, after
all, this fentence will perhaps be in its effefts more merciful
than numbers of tkoje who are the objects of it have either de-
ferred or expelled. The country of New Wales does not re-
ceive them in a bleak hideous fohtude, dejhtute off teller from
the fury of an inclement Jky, like the frozen dejerts of Siberia ;
and Juch of thofe unfortunate people asfiew an amendment in
their morals, or an inclination to embrace the profejfton, of
honefl mdufry, will perhaps not be /hut ouljrom enjoying in
fome meafure even the comforts of life.
The Cape of Good Hope is indeed the mofl convenient fpot
of any upon the globe, as a place of call in the Eajl India
voyage ; on the other hand, Botany Bay, and the ref of New
South Wales, may be rendered, in the hands of this nation, an
important ihfrument for the improvement of her commerce :
tho an infrument, it is true, of a paffive nature ; for, notwith-
founding the extent of New Wales, Juppofmg it to be now colo-
nized, it can never, while the charier of the Eafl India Com-
pany exjh pnfe/s a commerce of Us own. It mirkt, perhaps, ap-
pear impfjible, to prevent the inhabitants of a whole colony, if
mereafed to any magnitude from becoming merchants on their
own account; but, befdes the reflriftion which it is in the
power.of the Bntijhnation to impofe, a [ingle aft of govern-
ment, rendering per font pofj'efjed of wealth in Great,-Britain
or


or Ireland, di[qualified to become pofieffors of fixed property
in New South Wales, would, it is believed, almojl effeEl juch d
prevention. But the future cxifencc of fuch a colony is
with ferine confidered as a vifionary event, and deprecated by
others as the probable fource of unhappinefs to the parent fiate.
A regular government, efiablifhed in a region fo extenfive
and fo difant from this nation, may produce unlooked for
events. The experiment at leafi is made, and wears a good
affect. Time will Jhew how far it deferVes the approbation
of the judicious and difnterefled, by either adding to the ac-
quirements of philofophy, or pointing out new Jources of
national wealth: alfo how far the knowledge of thofe
lately difeovered parts of the globe may be directed to enhance
the comforts, and add to the lights of polijhed fociety, as wel
as of their own fill uncivilized pofiefsors ; and how far it may
tend to the general happinefs of mankind, and the glory efi
that Being, whofe providence has rejerved the difeovery of
them to the prefent generation.


COPIOUS REMARKS
On the DISCOVERY of
NEW SOUTH WALES, &c.
CHAP. I.
New South Wales discovered by Capt. Cook.—Marks of the Coast
from Point Hicks to Botany Bay.—Account of the Inhabitants
feen at the latter Place.
THAT part of the Continent of hJew Holland, deno-
minated New South Wales, was originally difco-
Vered by Capt. Cook, in his firft voyage round the world,
in the Endeavour bark. He was accompanied from
England on this voyage by Mr. (now Sir Joi'eph) Banks,
and Dr. Solander, gentlemen eminent in the world fo%
their learning and indefatigable ardor in the purl’uit of
botanical knowledge. The obje£l of this expedition is
well known. A fhort detail, however, of the circuiri-
ftances that led to it, and of the incidents of the voyage
previous to Capt. Cook’s arrival on the coafi of New South
Wales, being connefted with the fubje£t before us, may
hot be unfeafonable here.
The tranfit of the planet Venus over the fun’s difk,
a phenomenon of great importance to allronomy, and
which every where engaged the attention of the learned
in that fcience, being to take place in the year 1769 ; the
beginning of the preceding year the Royal Society pre-
fented a memorial to his majelty, fetting forth the advan-
tages to be derived from accurate observations of this
tranfit in different parts of the world, particularly from a
fet of fuch obfervations made in a Southern latitude bc-
B ' tween


tween the 140th and 180th degrees of longitude Weft
from the Royal Obfervatory at Greenwich; and that
velfcls properly equipped, would be neceft’ary to convey
the obfervers to their dcftincd Rations. In confequcnce
of this memorial Capt. Cook was named by his majelly to
the command of the above-mentioned veifel, which had
been purchafed and fitted out for the voyage ; and was at
the fame time alfo appointed by the Royal Society, in
conjunction with Mr. Charles Green, aftronomer, to
make the requifite obfervations on the tranfit. Thcidand
ofOtaheite, which had been difeovered by Capt. Wallis,
in a late expedition, was chofen as a proper fpot for this
purpofe ; and Capt. Cook, having failed from Plymouth,
the 26th of Augult, 1768, and palled Le Mairc's Straits,
entered the Pacific Ocean by Cape Horn in January,
1769, and arrived at that ifland the 13th of April follow-
ing. After remaining in Otaheite three months, during
which time the intended obfervations on the tranfit were
made, he fet fail from that place with Tupia, (or, as he
is called in Sydney Parkinfon’s Journal, Toobaiah, and
"by Dr. Forfter Tupaya,) one of the moll intelligent na-
tives of the ifland, who was taken on board at his own
requeft, and a boy of the name of Taiyota. Both thefe
Otaheiteans died afterwards at Batavia, where the En-
deavour touched on her return to Europe. Capt. Cook’s
inftruQions had direfled him, after the afironomical ob*
fervations fhould be completed, to profecute his difeo-
veries in the Pacific Ocean; proceeding as far South as
lat. 40 deg. where, if he did not find any land, he w r as to
fail Weftward between 40 and 35 deg. until he fhould
fall in with New Zealand, which he was to explore, and
from thence return to England by fuch a courfe as he
fhould think proper. Having, therefore, after his depar-
ture from Otaheite, difeovered the Society Iflands; he
proceeded to the South ; til! on the 6th of Oflobcr, he
fell in with the Eaft fide of New Zealand. He circum-
navigated the iflands which bear that name, and was the
firft who determined their infularity; and having re-
mained upon that coaft till the 31ft of March, 1770, he
•failed Weftward for what is fuppofed to be the Eaftcrn
fide


fide of New Holland. Here be arrived on the igth of
April, and took polfefiion of the country, with all the
bays, harbours, rivers, and iflands upon its coaft, in right
of his Britannic Majefty, by the name of New Soutji
Wales.
New South Wales, therefore, which is fuppofed to
form the Eaftern fide of New Holland, extends through
almofl 27 deg. of latitude, terminating to the North at
York Cape, in lat. 10 deg. 30 min. and to the South, at
Point Hicks, in 38 deg. South latitude : the coall from
the latter extremity as far as Smoaky Cape, in 30 deg.
30 min. lying in the direftion of North Eall by North and
South Weft by South, thence running due North to Sandy
Cape, in latitude 24 deg. 45 min. from which laft point
the land ftretches nearly in a ftraiglu line, North Weft
by North and South Eall by South, quite to York Cape,
at the entrance of Endeavour Straits. Capt. Cook, hav-
ing begun his range on this coaft from the South, fell in
with the land firft in latitude 38 deg South, and longi-
tude 148 deg, 53 min. Eaft, where he made the fore-
mentioned Point Hicks, fo named becaufe Mr. Hicks, his
firft lieutenant, was the perfon who difeovered it. To
the Southward of this Point no land was to be fecnj
though from the longitude afligned by Tafman to Bay
Frederick Henry, on the Eaftern fide of Van Diemen’s
Land, the body of that country ought to have borne due
South; and indeed, from the hidden falling of the fea
after the wind abated, we had reafon to think this to be
the cafe, yet as we did not fee it, and, as we found this
coaft trend North Eaft and South Weft, or rather more
to the Eaftward, we could not determine whether it joins
to Van Diemen's Land or not. Steering Eaft North Eaft
in order to clear Point Hicks, we continued to fail along
the coaft, and in lat. 37 deg. 51 min. came in fight of
another point, which rifes in a round hillock very much
refembling the Ram Head at the entrance of Plymouth
Sound, and was therefore now called by the fame name.
The variation was here 3 deg. 7 min. Eaft. What had
been feen of the land between Point Hicks and the Ram
Head is deferibed as moftly low'and level, a part however
B a fifing


rifing moderately high ; the fea fhore flat and covered
with a white land, but the country within green and woody.
In general the weather being foggy, a good view of it
could not be obtained. Shortly afterwards, however, the
Iky clearing up, they had a more favourable profpeft of
the country, which afforded a very pleafing appearance,
being moftly rather level, though in fame parts of a mo-
derate height, diverfified by hills and vallies, ridges
and plains, and interfperfed with a few lawns of no great
extent. The afeent of the hills and ridges is gentle, and
their fummits are not high, and in general they were co-
vered almoit entirely with wood, forne of which appeared
large. Sailing along fhore towards the North with a brifk
gale, they found it to exhibit ftill much the fame appear-
ance, or, if differing in any thing, to lie rather lower ; but,
in a run of upwards of fixty leagues from Point Hicks to
the Northward, it affords no harbour whatfoever. The
firft place which could deferve that name lies nearly in
latitude 35 deg. 45 min. and is called Bateman's Bay.
This is ah open bay, in which are three or four fmall
iflands, and, though it feems to afford but little {belter
from the fea winds, is neverthelefs the only fpot in the run
abovementioned where there appeared a probability of
finding anchorage, Keeping at the diflance of three
leagues from fhore, they continued to fleer a Northerly
courfe, feeing fmoke in feveral places near the fea fide,
and being at times fo near land as to diflinguifh the na-
tives upon the beach, who appeared to be of a black or
very dark colour. Here they found a current, fettingto
the Southward," which in two days carried them twelve
or fourteen miles South of the ffiip’s reckoning, and at
the fame time a large hollow fea rolling in upon the land
from the South-Eafl, which indeed had been the cafe ever
fince their coming upon this coaft. Within land, behind
Bateman's Bay, and for fome leagues on each fide of it,
the country may be called mountainous, the fhore alfo to
the fame extent forming alternately rocky points, and
fandy beaches j for, about fifteen leagues to the South of
the bay, there is a high mountain lying near the fhore,
winch, on account of its figure, they called Mount Dro r
medary.


medary. Under this mountain the fhore forms a point,
to which they gave the name of Point Dromedary, and
over it there is a peaked hillock. Between Mount Dro-
medary and another remarkable peaked hill about ten
leagues to the North of Bateman's Bay, being in latitude
35 deg. 19 min. South, and longitude 150 deg. 18 min,
Eaft, which refembled a fquarc dovehoufe, with a dome
at the top, and which for that reafon they named the
•Pigcon-houfe, they faw feveral high mountains within
land, and all of them, except two, covered with lofty trees.
Thefe two lie behind the Pigeon-houfe, and are remark-
ably flat at the top, with deep rocky cliffs all round them,
as far as the eye can fee.
Capt/Cook was defirous of finding fome convenient
harbour or bay on this coaft, but had hitherto been un-
fuccefsful. About two leagues, indeed, to the Northward,
of a point of land, which, being difeovered on St. George's
day, had received the name of Cape George, the fhore
feemed to form a bay. and fuch a one as promifed flicker
from the North-Eafl winds; but having a leading wind,
he could not look into it without beating up, which he
obferves would have coll him more time than he was wil-
ling to fpare. The North point of this bay, on account
of its figure, he named Long Nofe ; its lat. is 35 deg'.
6 min. and about eight leagues North of it there lies a
point, which, from the colour of the land about it, he
called Ked Point: its lat, is 34 deg. 39 min. and its
long. 151 deg. 15 min. Eatt, This point may be known
by a round hill Handing to the North-Well of it, a little
way inland, the,top of which looks like the crown of a
hat; and in lat. 34 deg. 10 min. appear fome remarkable
while cliffs, which rife perpendicularly from the fea to
a confiderable height. The coaft here, by the frequency
of the fmokesand fares obferved in failing along it, feems
to be pretty thickly inhabited, and, notwithftanding it hi-
ther to afforded no appearance of a harbour, Capt., Cook,
.who was probably impatient to land, and take a' nearer
view of the face of the country, finding himfelf within
two miles of the fhore, hoifted out the pinnace and yawl,
jn to attempt a landing; but the pinnace, proving
leakv.


leaky, was found unfit for that fervice. At this time fe-
veral of the natives were feen walking brifkly along the
beach, four of whom carried a canoe upon their fhoul-
dcrs, and finding that they did not come off to the fhip,
with which expectation he had flattered himfelf at firft,
the Captain determined to go on fhore in the yawl with
as many as it would carry. Embarking, therefore, with
the gentlemen, Tupia, and four rowers, they pulled for
that part of the fhore where the Indians appeared, near
which four fmall canoes were lying at the water’s edge.
The Indians fat down, fays Mr. Cook, upon the rocks,
and Teemed to wait our landing, but, to our great regret,
when we came within about a quarter of a mile, they ran
away into the woods. We determined, however, to go
afhore, and endeavour to procure an interview, but in
this we were again dilappoiuted, for we found fo great a
furf beating upon every part of the beach, that landing
with our little boat was altogether impracticable : we were
therefore obliged to be content with gazing at fuch ob-
jects as prefented thcmfelves to our view. The canoes,
upon a nearer fight of them, feemed very much to refem-
ble thofe of the fmaller fort at New Zealand, and near
the part of the beach where they were drawn up, Hood a
kind of wigwam, or hut. We obferved, that among the
trees on fhore, which were not very large, there was no
underwood, fo that they appeared like plantations in a
gentleman’s park, and we could diftinguifh numbers of
them to be of the palm kind, and feme of them cabbage
trees. After many a wifhful look we were obliged to re-
turn, with our curiofity rather excited than fatisficd, and
about five in the evening got on board the fhip.
• The next day, however, April 28, was more favour-
able to Mr. Cook’s wifhes; for, running a little farther
to the Northward, they difeovered at day-break a bay,
which feemed to be well flickered from all winds, and
into which, therefore, he determined to carry the fhip,
both for the purpofe of fupplying her with wood and wa-
ter, the former of which the land afforded vifibly in abun-
dance, and alfo from the natural and laudibk defire of in-
fpeCling


fpcfling a country, ofwhich he had the foie merit of being
the difcoverer.
The pinnace therefore being repaired, Capt. Cook
fent her with the mailer to found the entrance of the bay,
while he kept turning up, having the wind right out. At
noon the mouth of the bay bearing N. N. W. dillant
about a mile, they faw a fmokc on the (bore; and, di-
recting their glalfes to the fpot, foon difcovered ten peo-
ple, who, upon the nearer approach of the lljip, left their
fire, and retired to a little eminence, whence they could
conveniently obferve her motions. Soon after, two ca-
noes, each having two men on board, came to the fliorc,
juft under the cmimence, and the men joined the reft on
the top of.it. The pinnace, which had been fent ahead
to found, now approached the place, upon which all the
Indians retired farther up the hill, except one, who hid
himfelf among fome rocks near the landing place. As
the pinnace proceeded the fhorc, moft of the peo-
ple took the fame route, and kept abreaft of her at a
diftance. When fhe came back the mailer reported,
that, in a cove a little within the harbour, fome of them
had come down to the beach, and invited him to land by
many figns and words, of which he knew not the mean-
ing: but that all of them were armed with long pikes,
and a wooden weapon lhaped fomewhat like a feymetar.
Thofc of the natives who had not followed the boat,
feeing the fhip approach, ufed many threatening geftures,
and brandilhed their weapons, particularly two, who
made a very lingular appearance; for their faces feemed
to have been dulled with a white powder, and their bo-
dies painted with broad llreaks of the fame colour, which,
pafling obliquely over their breafts and backs, looked not
unlike the crols belts worn by our foldiers. The fame
kind of llreaks were alfo drawn round their legs and
thighs, like broad garters, and in fome a fingle ftreak ran
from the Ihoulders diagonally downwards like a fafti.
Each of thefe men held in his hand the weapon deferibed
by the mailer as rcfembling a feymetar, which appeared
to be about two feet and a half long, and they feemed to
talk to each other with great earnellncfs.
Capt.


Capt. Cook’s entrance into tins bay, .which, from thtf
great quantity of plants colledcd on Ihore. he afterwards
named BOTANY BAY, is thus deferibed. We con-
tinued to Hand into the bay, and early in the afternoon
anchored under the South (hore, about two miles within'
the entrance, in fix fathom water; the North Point of the
Bay, (afterwards named Cape Banks) bearing due Eaft,
and the South Point, or Point Solander, South Eaft.
As we came in we faw on both thefe points a few huts,
and feveral of the natives alfcmbled, men, women, and
children; and under Point Solander w<? faw four final!'
canoes with each one man on board, who were very bu-
fily employed in firiking fifh with a long pike or fpear.
They ventured almoft into the furf, and were fo intent
upon what they were doing, that, although the fbip palfed
within a quarter of a mile of them, they fcarcely turned
their eyes towards her; poffibly being deafened by the
furf, and their attention wholly fixed upon their bufinefs
or fport, they neither faw nor heard her pafs them.
The place where the (hip had anchored was abreafl of
a fmall village, confiding of about fix or eight houfes;
and, while we were preparing to hoill out the boat, we
faw an old woman, followed by three children, come out
of the wood. She was loaded with fire wood, and each
of the children had alfo its little burden. When.fhe came
to the houfes, three more children, younger than the
others, came but to meet her; fhe often looked at the
fhip, but expreffed neither fear nor furprize; in a fliort
time fhe kindled afire, and the four canoes came in froni
fifhing. The men landed, and, having hauled up their
boats, began to drefs their dinner, to all appearance
wholly unconcerned about us, though we were within
half a mile of them. We thought it remarkable, that of
all the people whom we had yet feen, not one had the
lead appearance of clothing, the old woman herfelf being
deftitute even of a fig leaf. After dinner the boats were'
manned, and wc fet out from the (hip, having Tupia of
our party. We intended to land where wc faw the peo-
ple, and began to hope, that, as they had fo little re-
garded the fhip’s coming into the bay, they would as little
regard


regard our coming on ftiore. In this, however, we
were difappointed ; for, as foon as we approached the
rocks, two of the men came down upon them to difpute
our landing, and the reft ran away. Each of thefe two
champions was armed with a lance ten feet long, and a
fhort ftick, which he feemed to handle as if it were a ma-
chine to aflift him in'managing or throwing the Jance.
They called to us in a very loud tone, and in a harfh dif-
fonant language, which neither we nor Tupia underftood,
often repeating the words warra warra wai. They bran-
diflied their weapons, threatening us with countenances
that befpoke difpleafure, and feemed refolved to defend
the coaft to the utmoft, though they were but two and
we were forty. We could not but admire their courage,
and being very unwilling that hoftilities (hould commence
with fuch inequality of force between us, the boat was
ordered to lie upon her oars. We then parlied by figns
for about a quarter of an hour; and, to befpeak their
good-will, we threw them nails, beads, and other trifles,
which they took up and feemed to examine with pleafure.
We then made figns that we wanted water, and, by all
the means that could be devifed, endeavoured to con*,
vince them that we would do them no harm. They now
waved to us, and we were willing to interpret it as an in-
vitation; but, upon our putting the boat in, they came
again to oppofe us. One appeared to be a youth about
nineteen or twenty, and the other a man of middle age :
as we had now no other refource, a mufket was fired be-
tween them. Upon the report, the youngeft dropped a
bundle of lances upon the rock, but recollecting himfelf
in an inftant he fnatched them up again with great haftc.
A ftone was then thrown at us, upon which a mulket was
ordered to be fired with fmall fhot, which ftruck the
eldeft upon the legs, and he immediately ran to one of
the houfes, which was diftant about one hundred yards;
both of them fhouting for afliftancc, and calling hala halo,
vice, that is, (as our people afterwards learned,} “ come
hither,” while their wives and children fet up a molt
horrid howl, Wcnow hoped that our contcll was over,
C and


and immediately landed; but, we had fcarcely left the
boat when the eldelt man returned, and we then perceived
£hat he had left the rock only to fetch a fhicld or. target
for his defence. As foon as he came up he threw a
lance at us, and his comrade another. They fell where
we flood thickefl, hut happily hurt no body. A third
mufket with fmall fhot was then fired at them, upon
which one of them threw another lance, and both imme-
diately ran away. If we had purfued,.wc could probably
have taken one of them; but, upon a fuggeflion that the
lances might be poifoned, it was not thought prudent to
follow them into the woods. In this flight the oldcft of
the men dropped his target, which, upon taking it up
and examining it, we perceived to have been made out
of the bark of a tree. It was of an oblong or oval fhape,
being about three feet in length, and eighteen inches
broad, painted white in the middle, and had two holes in
it to fee through. It appeared alfo to have been pierced
through with a Angle pointed lance, near the centre.
We repaired immediately to the huts, in one of which we
found the children, who had hidden themfelves behind a
fhicld and fome bark. We peeped at them, but left
them in their retreat, without their knowing that they
had been difeovered ; and we threw into the houfe, when
we went away, fome beads, ribbons, pieces of cloth, and
other prefents, which we hoped would procure us the
goodwill ofthe inhabitants when they fhould return; but
the lances which we. found lying about we took away
with us, to the number of about fifty. They were from
■fix to fifteen feet long, and all of them had four prongs
in the manner of a fifh gig, each of which was pointed
with fifh bone, and very fharp. We obferved that they
were fmeared with a vifeous fubflance of a green colour,
which favoured the opinioii of their being poifoned,
though we afterwards difeovered that it was a miflakc.
They appeared, by the feaweed that we found flicking to
them, to have been ufed in flriking fifh. Upon examining
the canoes that lay upon the beach, we found them to be
the word that we had ever leen; they were between
twelve and fourteen feet long, and made of the bark of a
tree


tree in one piece, which Was drawn together and tied up
at each end, the middle being kept open bydlicks whiclV
were placed acrofs them from gunwale to gunwale as
thwarts. -We then fearchcd for frefh water, but found'
none, except in a fmall hole which had been dug in the
fand.
Such was the reception which Captain Cook met with
from the natives upon his entering Botany Bay, the in-
cidents of which have been recked nearly in his own
words. Indeed, the circumflances that tend to furnilh
us with a clear idea of this place and its inhabitants, be-
ing fo intimately connected with the proceedings of his
people,as with difficulty to be feparated from them in the
narrative, a continuance bf it nearly in the words of that-
intelligent commander, wil.l probably be molt acceptable
to the reader.
Having reimbarked in our boat, we depofited our
lances on board the ffiip, and then went over to the North
point of the bay, (Cape Banks,) where we had fecn feve-
ral of the inhabitants when we were entering it, but
which we now perceived to be totally deferted. Here,
however, we found freffi water, which trickled down
from the top of the rocks, and flood in pools among the
hollows at the bottom; but it was fituated fo as not to be
procured for our ufe without difficulty.
In the morning, therefore, (April 29,) a party of men
was fent to that part of the ffiore where we firfl landed,
with orders to dig holes in the fand where the water
might gather: but, the Captain going afhore with the
gentlemen foon afterwards, they found, upon more dili-
gent fearch, a fmall ftream on the South fide of the bay,
which was more than fufficient for our purpbfe.
Upon vifuing the hut where we had fecn the children,
we were greatly mortified to find that the beads and rib-
bons which we had left there the night before,‘had not
been moved from their places; and that not an Indian
was to be fecn.
Having fent fome empty Water cafks bn ffiore, and left
a party of men to cut wood, Capt. Cook went himfelf in
the pinnace to found and examine the bay. During his
C a excurfion


excnrfion he faw feveral of the natives, but they all fled
at his approach* In one of the places where he landed
he found feveral fmall fires, and frefli mufcles broiling
upon them; and here alfo he found fome of the largclt
oyfter (hells he had ever feen.
Ai foon as the wooders and waterers came on board to
dinner, ten or twelve of the natives came down to the
place where the latter had been at work, and looked with
great attention and curiofity at the calks, but did not
touch them. They took away, however, the canoes
which lay near the landing-place, and again difappeared.
'ln the afternoon, when our people went on Ihore again,
llxtcen or eighteen Indians, all armed, came boldly within
about one hundred yards of them, and then Hopped.
Two of them advanced fomewhat nearer j and Mr.
Hicks, who commanded the party on fhore, with another,
advanced to meet them, holding out prefents to them as
he approached, and expreffing kindnefs and amity by
every fign he could think of, but all without effeft; for,
before he could get up with them, they retired, and it
would have anfwered no purpofc to purfue. In the
evening we went to a fandy cove on the north fide of the
bay, where, in three or four hauls with the feine, wc took
above three hutidred .weight of fifh, which was equally
'divided amongfl; the (hip’s company.
, The next morning, before day-break, the Indians came
down to the houfes that were abroad of the (hip, and were
heard frequently to (hout very loud. As foon as, it was
light, they were feen walking along the beach, and foon
after they retired to the woods,; where, at the didance of
about a mile from the fliore, they kindled feveral fires.
Our people went afliore as ufual, and with them Mr.
Banks and Dr, Solander, who in fearch of plants repaired
to the woods. Our men, who were employed in cutting
grafs, being the farthed removed from the main body of
the people, a company of fourteen or fifteen Indians ad-
vanced towards them, having (licks in their hands, which,
according to the report of the ferjeant of the marines,
/hone like a mufket. The grafs cutters, upon feeing
them approach,, drew together, and moved towards the
main


main body. The Ifidians being encouraged by this ap-
pearance of flight, purfued them, but flopped when they
were within aboufa furlong of them, and, after (homing
feveral times, went back into the woods. In the evening
they came again in the fame manner, (homed at the fame
diftance, and retired. The Captain followed them him-
felf alone and unarmed a confiderablc way along the
(hore, but he could not prevail upon them to flop.
Early the next morning (May i) the body of Forbes-
Sutherland, one of our fearaen, a native of the Orkneys,
who died the evening before, was carried on (hore, and
buried near the watering-place; and, from this circum-
(lance, the point which the land forms in this part of the
bay was called Southerland Point. We refolved this day
to make an excurfion into the country: being, therefore,
ten in number, properly accoutred for the expedition, we
fet out and repaired firfl to the huts near.the watering-
place, whither fome of the natives continued every day
to refort; and, though the little prefents which we had
left there before had not yet been taken away, we left
others of fomewhat more value, confiding of cloth, look-
ing-gla(fes, combs, and beads, and then went up into the
country. We found many houfes of the inhabitants, ahd
places where they had dept upon the grafs without any
(belter, but we faw only one of the people, who the mo-
ment he difeovered us ran away. At all thefe places,
however, we left prefents, hoping that at length they
might procure us the confidence and goodwill of the na-
tives. From this excurfion we returned between three
and four o'clock, and having dined on board, we went
on (hore at the watering-place, where a party of men were
filling calks. Mr. Gore, the fecond lieutenant, had been
fent out in the morning with a boat to dredge for oyfters
at the head of the bay. When he had performed this
fervice he went afliore, and having taken a midfliipraan
with him, and fent the boat away, fet out to join the wa-
terers by land. , In his way he fell in with a body oftwo
and twenty Indians, who followed him, and were often
not more than twenty yards diftant. When Mr. Gore
perceived them fo near, he (lopped, and faced about,
upon


upon which they (lopped alfo, and when he went on again
continued the purfuit. They did not however attack
him, though they were all armed with lances, and he and
the midftiipman got in fafety to the watering-place. The
Indians, who had flackened their purfuit when they came
in fight of the main body of our people, halted at about
the diftance of a quarter of a mile, where they flood (till.
Mr. Monkhoufe, and two or thr£e of the waterers, took
it into their heads to march up to them, but feeing the
Indians keep their ground till they came pretty near
them, they were feized with a hidden fear, very common
to the rafli and foolhardy, and made a hafty retreat. This
ftep which infured the danger that it was taken to avoid,
encouraged the Indians, and four of them running for-
ward, difeharged their lances at the fugitives with fuch
force, that, flying nolefs than forty yards, they went be-
yond them; As the Indians did not purfue, our people,
recovering their fpirits, (lopped to colle£l the lances when
they came up to the place where they lay ; upon which,
thedndians in their turn began to retire. Juft at this time-
the Captain came up, with Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander,
and Tupia ; and, being defirous to convince the Indians
that we were.neither afraid of them, nor intended them
any mifebief, we advanced towards them, making figns
of expoflulation and entreaty, but they could not be per-,
fuaded to wait till we could come up. Mr. Gore told us
that he had feen fome of them up the bay, who had in-
vited him by figns to come on (bore ; which he, certainly
with great prudence, declined. . ,
' In the afternoon of the next day we made another ex-
curfion along the fea-coad to the Southward. At our firft
entering the woods we met with three of the natives, who
inftantly ran away: more of them were feed by fome of
the people, but they all difappeared with great precipation
as foon as they found that they were difeovered. By the
boldnefs of thefe: Indians at our firft landing, and the ter-
ror that feized them at the fight of us afterwards, it ap-
pears that they were fufiicicntly intimidated by our fire-
arms. Not that we had any reafon to think the people
much hurt by the final!.(hot which we were obliged to
fire


fire at them when they attacked us at our coming out of
the boat; but they had probably feen the effefts of them
from their lurking places upon the birds that we had fhot.
Tupia, who was now become a good markfman, frequently
firayed from us to fhoot parrots, and he had told us, that
while he was thus employed, he had once met with nine
Indians, who, asfoon as they perceived that he faw them,
ran from him in great confufion and terror.
The next day twelve canoes, in each of which was a
fingle Indian, came towards the watering place, and were
within half a mile of it for a confiderable time; they
were employed in linking fifh, upon which, like others
that we had feen before, they were fo intent, that they
Teemed to regard nothing clfe. It happened, however,
that a party of our people were out a fhooting near the
place, and one of the men, whole curiofity might at
length perhaps, be roufed by the report of the fowling
pieces, was obferved to haul up his canoe upon the beach,
and go towards the fhooting party : in fomething more
than a quarter of an hour he returned, launched his ca-
noe, and went off in her to his companions. This inci-
dent makes it probable that the natives acquired a know-
ledge of the dellruQive power of our fire-arms when we
knew nothing of the matter; for this man was not feen
by any of the party, whofe operations he had reconnoitred.
Before this the Captain had gone with Dr. Solander and
Mr. Monkhoufe to the head of the bay, that they might
examine that part of the country, and make further at-
tempts to form fome connexion with the natives. In their
way they met eleven or twelve fmall canoes, with each a
man in it, probably the fame that were afterwards abreaft
of the fhorc, who all made into Ihoal water upon our ap-
proach. We met other Indians on fliore the fill! time
we landed, whoinftamly took to their canoes and paddled
away. We went up the country to fome difUnce, and at
our return to the boat, feeing fmokc upon another part
of the coafl, we rowed thither, in hopes of meeting with
the people, but at our approach thefe ajlb ran away. Wq
found fix fmall canoes and fix fires very near the beach,
v/ith fome mufclcs roalting upon them, and a few oyflcrs
lying


lying near; by this we judged that there had been one
man in each canoe, who, having picked up fomc fhell
fifh, had come afhore to cat it, and made his feparate fire
for that purpofe. We tailed of their cheer, and left theni
in return fome firings of beads and other things, which
we thought would pleafe them. At the foot of a tree in
this place we found a fmall well of frefh water, fupplied
by a fpring, and the day being now far fpent, we returned
to the (hip.
The next morning, May 4, as the wind would not per-
mit us to fail, feveral parties were fent into the country,
to try again whether fome intercourfc could not be efta-
blifhed with the natives. A midfhipman, who belonged
to one of thefe parties, having ftraggled a long way from
his companions, met with a very old man and woman,
and fomc little children : they were fitting under a tree,
by the water fide, and neither party faw the other until
they were clofe together: the Indians (hewed figns of
fear, but did not attempt to run away. The midfhipman
happened to have nothing to give them but a parrot that
he had (hot; this he offered, but they refufed to accept
it, withdrawing themfelves from his hand, either through
fear or averfion. His ftav with them was but fhort, for
/ 7
he faw feveral canoes near the beach fifhing, and being
alone he feared they might come afhore and attack him :
he faid that thefe people were very dark coloured, but
not black; that the man and woman appeared to be very
old, being both grey-headed; that the hair of the man's
head was bufhy, and his beard long and rough : that the
woman’s hair was cropped fhort, and both of them were
ftark naked.
Mr. Monkboufe, the furgeon, and one of the men who
were with another party near the watering place, alfo
firayed from their companions, and, as they were coming
out of a thicket, obferved fix Indians (landing together
at the diftance of about fifty yards. One of them pro-
nounced a word very loud, which was fuppofed to be a
fignal, for a lance was immediately thrown at him out of
the wood, which very narrowly miffed him. When the
Indians faw that the weapon not taken effefil, they
ran


rUn away with the greateft precipitation; hut oh turning
about towards the place whence the lance had been
thrown, he faw a young Indian, whom he judged to be
about nineteen or twenty years old, come down from a
tree, and he alfo ran away with fuch fpeed as made it
hopclefs to follow him. Mr. Monkhoufe was of opinion
that he had been watched by thefe Indians in his paffage
through the thicket, and that the youth had been ftationed
in the tree to difcharge-the lance at him, upon a fignal, as
he fhould come by; however this be, there could be no
doubt but that he was the perfon who threw the lance.
This is the fubftance of what Capt. Cook has related
concerning the inhabitants of the country round Botany
Bay, with whom he found it impoffible to eftablifh a
friendly correfpondence during his fliort flay in that har-
bour, which was only eight days* Their dread of our
people's fire-arms, and the refentment which they con-
ceived from the flight hurt that one of their number pro*
bably felt from the final! fliot fired amongft them upon
the firft landing of the Endeavour’s boat, were ever after
invincible obflacles to a peaceful and amicable intercourfe
with them.
CHAP. II.
Deseription of Botany Bay.-Soil and Productions of the Country
around it; Sails Northward on the Coast, and lands at Thirsty
Sound.—Deseription of that Place. Enters Endeavour River.—
Dangers in approaching that Harbour.
BOTANY BAY is fituated in the latitude of 34 deg.
South, and longitude 151 deg. 23 min. Eaft. It is a
capacious, fafe, and convenient harbour for {flipping,
being only two or three points open to the. South of Eaft ;
and may be known by the land on the fea coaft, which is
nearly level and of a moderate height,- in general higher*
|han it is farther inland, with ftqep rocky cliffs next the
fea, which have the appearance of a long illand lying clofe
tlpder the fhore. The harbour lies about the middle, of
ibis landy.and, in approaching it.frqtn the.3outh.ward, is
~ * D ' difeovered


difcovered before a fhip comes abreaflof it, but from the-
Northward it is not difcovered fo foon. The entrance is
little more than a mile broad, and lies in Well North
Weft between the two points of land before-mentioned;
the Northernmoft of which is called Cape Banks; and
the Southernmoft Point Solander. To fail into it, the
Southern fhore fhould be kept on board till the fliip is
within a fmall bare ifland which lies clofe under the North
fhore. Within this ifland the deepeft water on that fide
is feven fathom, {hallowing to five a good way up. The
water indeed of the bay is in general of no great depth,
and it has feveral arms extending from it, which are alfo
fhallow. At a confiderable diftance from the South fhore,
there is a fhoal, reaching from the inner South point, or
Point Sutherland, quite to the head of the harbour; but
over towards the North and North Weft fhore, there is
an arm or channel of twelve or fourteen feet at low wra-
ter for three or four leagues, lip to a place where there is
three or four fathom; but even at this diftance from the
harbour there was very little frefh water to be found.'
The place which Captain Cook chofc for anchorage
was near the South fhore, about a mile within the en-
trance of the bay, for the convenience of failing with a
Southerly wind, and becaufe he then thought it the beft
fituation for watering. But he afterwards found a very
fine flream on the North fhore, in the firft Tandy cove
within the ifland, before which a fhip might lie almofl
iand-locked, and procure both wood and water in great
abundance.
The foil of the country about Botany Bay, is not every
•where of the fame quality; in general, how'ever, we have
favourable reports of it, for though it was the beginning
of winter when Capt. Cook arrived there, every thing
feemed in perfection.
To the South and South Weft of the bay he found it
to be either fwamp or light grey land, and the face of the
country finely diverfjfied with wood and lawn. The trccS
are tail, flraight, and without underwood, Handing atfucli
a diftance from each other, that the whole country, at
leaft where the fwamps do not render it incapable of cdU
tivation,


livation, might be cultivated without cutting down one of
them. Between the trees the ground is covered with
grafs, ofwhich there is great abundance, growing in tufts
about as big as can well be grafped in the hand, which
Hand very dole to each other.
To the Weftward of the bay the face of the country
was found to be nearly the fame with that which has been
juft deferibed, but the foil much richer; for inftead of a
grey fand, it was a deep black mould, fuch as might be
judged very fit for the production of grain of any kind.
Here the woods were interfperfed with fome of the fineft
meadows in the world; not. however, without a few rocky
patches, the ftone of which is Tandy, and might be ufed
to advantage for building.
To the North of the bay the face of the country
changes: it is comparatively bare, producing no wood,
and lomewhat refembling our moors in England. The
furface of the ground, however, is covered with a tint)
brufir of plants about as high as the knees: the hills near
the coaft are low, but others rife behind them, increafing
by a gradual afeent to a confiderable diftance, with
marfhes and moraffes between. Wood is every where
plenty round Botany Bay, but there are only two kinds
which may be confidered as timber. Thefe trees are as
large or larger than the Englifhoak, and one of them has
not a very different appearance: this yields a gum or ra-
ther relin, which is of a deep red colour, and refembles
the fanguis draconis: poflibly it may be the fame, for this
fubftance is known to be the produce of more than one
plant. The wood is heavy, hard, and dark-colourcd,
like lignum vita;. The other' tree is tall and ftraight,
fomething like the pine; and the wood of this, which
has fome refcmblance to the live oak of America, is alfo
hard and heavy. In fome of thefe trees'fteps had been
cut at about three feet diftance from each other for the
convenience of climbing.
It need hardly be repeated that the country about Bo-
tany Bay affords a great variety of plants to enrich the
collection of a botanift, but very few of them are of the
efculenf kind. There was alfo found here a variety of
Ds flowering


flowering flirubs, a fpecies of falvia fortea . and fcveral
kinds of the palm; befides a fmall tree which produces
■berries of a pale crimfon colour, and about the fize of a
cherry. This fruit has a (tone within fide, and, though
not remarkable for flavour, its juice has an agreeable
taftnefs.
As to animals, thofe of the four-footed kind feem not
to abound either in number or variety : for during the
eight days that Capt. Cook lay in the bay, he faw only
one quadruped, and of that he and his party had but a
tranfienfand impcrfefl. .view : nor were his people more
fortunate. This beall was about the fize of a hare oh
rabbit. A greyhound being with the party when it was;
put up, got fight of it, and would probably have caught
it, but the moment he fet off he lamed himfclf againft a
flump which lay concealed in the longgrafs. In the fame
excurfion they faw the dung of an animal which fed upon
grafs, and which they judged could not be lefs than a
deer; and the footfteps of another which was clawed like
3 dog, and feemed to be about as big as a wolf. They
alfo tracked a fmall animal whofe foot refembled that of a
polecat or weafel.
The woods here abound every where with birds of ex-
quifite beauty and variety of plumage, particularly parr-
rots of different kinds, cockatoos, and loriquets, that flew
about in flocks of fcveral fcores together ; and one of the
gentlemen, in a fowling excurfion, found fuch vaft ntiim
hers of quails, refembling thofe in England, that he
might have fliot as many as hepleafed, had number been
his objefl. There are alfo crows the fame
as thofe in England, fome of which, as well as of the forts
before mentioned, were fhot, and found to be very agree-
able food.
Befides thefe land fowl, they faw about the head (or
Weft fide) of the harbour, where there are large flats of
fand and mud, great plenty of birds of the aquatic kind,
moft of which are altogether unknown in Europe. One
of the moft remarkable was black and white, much larger
than a fwan, being near five feet high, and in ftiape fome-
wbat refembling a pelican.
On


On thefe banks of fand and mud there are great quan-
tities of oyfters, mufcles, cockles, and other {hell fi(h»
which feem to be the principal fubfiftence of the inha-
bitants, who go into fhoal water with their little canoes,
and pick them out with their hands. It was not obferved
that they eat any of thefe {hell fifti raw, nor do they al-
ways go on fhore to drefsthem, for they have frequently
fires in their cartoes for that purpofe. They are not,
bowevCr, under the neceflity of fubfilting wholly upon
this food, for the bay abounds with a variety of other
filh ; fome of which they ftrike with gigs, and fome they
take with hook and line. On hauling the feine, the En-
deavour’s people caught great numbers of thofe frnall
fifh which are well known in the Weft Indies; and
which our failors call leather jackets, becaufe their fkin
is remarkably thick. They {truck alfo'feveral fting rays,
of which there is great plenty in the bay. Thefe are of
an enormous fize ; they follow the flowing tide into the
{hallows, where there is no more than two or three feet
■water, and are there cafily ftrUck. One of thefe great
fifh weighed no lefs than two hundred and forty pounds
after his entrails were taken out; and another was ftruck
ftili larger, for when hisentrailswcre taken out, heweighed
three hundred and thirty-fix pounds. They tafted very
much like the European rays, and their vifeera had an
agreeable flavour, not unlike Hewed turtle.
It is high water in Botany Bay, at the full and change
pf the moon, about eight o’clock, and the tide rifes and
falls perpendicularly between four and five feet. The va-
riation of the needle (A. D. 1770) was 11 deg. 3 min. E.
During Capt. Cook’s ftay here, he caufed the Englifh
colours to be difplayed on fhore every day; and the
{hip's name, with the date of the year, to be inferibed on
one of the trees near the watering-place on the South
fide of the harbour: and having completed every pur-
pofe of his ftay, he fet fail from Botany Bay on Sunday,
the 6th of May, at day-break, and, with the wind in his
favour, fleered a Northerly courfe at a fmall diftance
from land.
The


The coaft to the North of Botany Bay Teems to he
more favourable with refpeft to affording anchorage for
Shipping, than any part to the. South of it, as far, at leafl,
as Point Hicks. After failing fame lime, we obferved
an inlet that bore Weft, at the diftance of about a league,
Capt. Cook, therefore, determined to enter it with the
fhip, if it fhould be found to afford proper anchorage,
his intention being to wait a few days till the moon fhould
increafe, and in the mean time to examine the country.
For this purpofe, he fent the mafter with two boats to
found the entrance of the inlet, which he afterwards calls
Thirfty Sound.
As foon as the fhip could be got under fail, the boats
made fignal for anchorage, upon which we flood in and
anchored in five fathom water, about a league within the
entrance of the inlet; which, as we obferved a tide to
flow and ebb confiderably, falling twelve feet in fix
hours, we judged to be a river that ran up the country
to a confiderable diftance. In this place it was propofed
by the Captain, to lay the fhip afhore, and clean her bot-
tom ; we therefore landed* in fearch of a convenient
place for that purpofe, accompanied by Mr. Banks and
Dr. Solander.
We found walking here exceedingly troublefome, for
the ground was covered with a kind of grafs, the feeds
of which were very fharp and bearded backwards, fothat
whenever they ftuck into our clothes, which indeed was
at every ftep, they worked forwards, by means of the
beard, till they got at the flefli; and, at the fame lime,
we were furrounded by a cloud of mofquitos. which in-
ceffantly tormented us with their flings. We foon met
with fevcral places where the fhip might conveniently be
laid afhore, but, to our great difappointrnent, we could
find no frefli water. We proceeded, however, up the
country, where we found gum trees, like thofe that we
had feen before, and obferved that here alfo the gum
was in very fmall quantities. Upon the branches of thefe
trees and f'ome others we found ants nefts, made of clay,
as bigas abufhel. The ants which inhabited thefe nefts
were fmall. and their bodies white; but upon another
fpecies


fpccies of the tree we found a fmall black ant, which per-
forated all the twigs, and, having worked out the pith,
occupied the pipe which had contained it: yet the parts
in which thefc infetts had thus formed a lodgement, and
in which they fwarmed in amazing numbers, bore leaves
and llowers, and appeared to be in as flourifhing a (late
as thofe that were found. We found alfo an incredible
number of butterflies, fo that for the fpace of three or
four acres the air was fo crowded with them, that mil-
lions were to be feen in every direction, at the fame time
that every branch and twig was covered with others that
were not upon the wing. We found here alfo a fmall
fifh of a fingularkind ; it was about the fize of a minnow,
and had two very flrong bread fins : we found it in places
that were quite dry, where we fuppofed it might have
been left by the tide ; but it did not feem to have become
languid by the want of water, for upon our approach it
leaped away by the help of the bread fins, as nimbly as a
frog: neither, indeed, did-it feem to prefer water to
land; for when we found it in the water, it frequently
leaped out, and purfued its way upon dry ground; we
alfo obferved, that, when it was in places where fmall
dones were danding above the furface of the water, at a
little didance from each other, it chofe rather to leap
from done to done than to pafs through the water, and
we faw feveral of them pafs entirely over puddles in this
manner, till they came to dry ground, and then leap away.
In the afternoon we renewed our fearch after frelh
water, but without fucccfs; we therefore determined to
make our day here but fliort; however, having obferved
from an eminence that the inlet penetrated a confiderable
way into the country, we determined to trace it in the
morning. ■ - ■ - ■
At funrife we went afliore, and, climbing a confiderable
hill, took a view of the coad and the iflands that lie off it,
with their bearings, having an azimuth compafs with us
for that purpofe; but we obferved that the needle differ-
ed very confiderably in its pofition, even to thirty degrees,
in fome places more, in others lefs; and once we found it
differ from itfelf no lefs than two points in the didance of
• : fourteen


fourteen feet. We took tip fomc of the loofe ftones that
lay upon the ground, and applied them to the needle j
but they produced no elfeft. and we therefore concluded
that there was iron ore in the hills, of' which other in-
dications were remarked both here and in the neighbour-
ing parts. After we had made our obfervations upon the
hill, we proceeded up the inlet: .then fet out with the firfl
of the flood, and long before high water we had advanced
above eight leagues. Its breadth, thus far, was from two
to five miles, upon a South Weft by Weft dire&ion; but
here it opened every way, and formed a large lake, which
to the North Weft communicated with the fea, and we
not only faw the fea in this direction, but found the tide
of flood coming flrongly in.from that point. We alfo ob-
ferved an arm of this lake- extending to the Eaftward,
and it is not improbable that it may communicate with
the fea in the bottom of the bay which lies to the Weft-
ward of Cape Toivnfhend. On the South fide of the lake
is a ridge of high hills, which we were very defiroUs to
climb; but it being high water, and the day far fpent,
we were afraid of being bewildered among the fhoals in
the night, efpecially as the weather was dark and rainy*
we therefore made the beft of our way to the fliip. In
this excurfion we faw only two people, and they were at
a diftancc ; they followed the boat along the fliore a good
way ; but, the tide running ftrongly in our favour, we
could not prudently wait for them. We faw, however,
feveral fires in one direflion, and fmpke in another.
While we were tracing the inlet with Dr. Solander, Mr*
Banks was endeavouring to penetrate into the country,
where feveral of the people, who had leave to go afliorc,
were alfo rambling about.. Mr. Banks, aji.d his party
found their courfe obftrufted by a fwamp covered with
mangroves, which however, they refolved to pafs; the
mud was almoft knee deep, yet thoyAefolutely went on ;
but, before they got half way, they repented of their un-
dertaking: the bottom was covered with branches of
trees interwoven will) each other ; fometim.es they kept
their footing upon them, fometimes, their feet flipped
through; and. fometimes. they were fo entangled.among
them,


them, that they were forced to free themfclves by grop-
ing in the mud and flime with their hands. In about an
hour, however, they croffed it, and judged it might be a
quarter of a mile over. After a fhort walk, they came
up to a place where there had been four fmall fires, and
near them fome fhells and bones of fifh that had been
roafted. They found alfo heaps of grafs laid together,
where four or five people appeared to have flept. The
fecond lieutenant, Mr. Gore, who was at another place,
faw a little water lying in the bottom of a gully, and near
it the track of a large animal: fome bullards were alfo
feen, but none of them fhot, nor any other bird, except
a few of the beautiful loriquets which we had feen in Bo-
tany Bay. Mr. Gore and one of the midlhipmen, who
were in different places, faid that they heard the voice of
Indians near them, but had feen none. The country in
general appeared fandy and barren, and, being deftitute
of frefh water, it cannot be fuppofed to have any fettled
inhabitants. The deep gullies which were worn by tor-
rents from the hills, prove that at certain feafons the rains
here are very copious and heavy.
The inlet in which the fhip lay we called Thirfty
Sound, becaufe it afforded us no frefh water. The mouth
of it forms a bay, which is open to the North, is very
large and deep, and capable of containing a navy at an-*
chor. It lies in lat. 22 deg. 10 min. South, and long'.
149 deg. 42 min. Eaft, and may be known by a group of
fmall iflands lying under the fhore, from two to five
leagues diftant, in the direftion of North Weft; and by
another group of iflands that lie right before it, between
three and four leagues out at fea, thirty ofwhich we had
in view at once, from a hill at the entrance into the bay.
Over each of the points that form the entrance is a high
round hill, which on the North Weft is apeninfula that
at high water is furrounded by the fea: they arc bold to
both the fhores, and the diftance between them' is about
two miles. One part of the fhore feemed to be quite a
rock, compofed of broken ftones cemented together with
jnud., In Thirfty Sound there is good anchorage iii
feven, fix, five, and four fathom, and places very conve-
£ nient


jiicnt for laying a fhip down, where at fpring tides the
■water does not rife lels than fixteen or eighteen feet.
The tide flows, at the full and change of the moon, about
eleven o’clock.
The country about the bay is but indifferently clothed ;
the trees are fmall, and the foil on the hills is very ftrong,
and the ground bare of grafs under the trees. There
were many of them yam trees, and appeared the greater
part of them to have been dripped of the bark. No four-
footed animals were feen on fhorc, and the footdeps only
of one were found, which had a cloven hoof. On our
.firft view of this coad, we conceived the mod plea Ting
hopes; but, on a nearer examination of it, found our-
felves confiderably difappointed.
We have already obferved that here is no frefh water,
nor could we procure rcfrefliment of any other kind : we
faw two turtles, but were not able to take either of them ;
nor did we catch either fifh or wild fowl, except a few
jfnall land birds.. We faw indeed the fame forts of wa-
ter fowl as in Botany Bay, but they were fo fliy that we
could not get a diot at them.
Having therefore not a Angle inducement to remain
any longer in fuch an unfavourable dation, Capt. Cook
weighed anchor and put to fea, danding to the North
«Wed, without the group of iflands before-mentioned,
that lie in diorc to the North Wed of Thirdy Sound ;
but having at the fame time a great number of iflands
without the fhips courfe, extending as far as could be
feen out to fea. During this run, the depth of water
was ten, eight, and nine fathom. When abroad of a
point, (which we called Cape Grafton) we were in
twenty fathom water. Cape Grafton lies in lat. 16 deg.
57 min. South, and long. 145 deg. 54 min. Ead, and the
land here, as well as the whole coad for about twenty
leagues to the Southward, is high, has a rocky furface,
and is thinly covered with wood.
On this coad fevcral fires Iricl been obferved by night,
one of which yielded a very grateful odour, not unlike
that produced by burning the wood of gum Benjamin;
and lome of the inhabitants were feen by day. From
Cape


Cape Grafton the land trends away North Weft by
Weft, and three miles to the Weftward of the cape is a
bay, in which the Endeavour anchored, about two miles
from (bore, in four fathom water, with an oozy bottom ;
the Eaft point of the bay bearing South 74 Eaft, the Weft
point South 83 Weft, and a low green woody ifland,
which lies in the offing, North 35 Eaft,
As foon as the fliip was brought to an anchor, we went
afhore, with a view to procure fome frcfh water, and as
the bottom of the bay was low land covered with man-
groves, where it was not probable that freffi water was
to be found, we went out towards the cape, and found
two fmall ft reams', which, however, were rendered very
difficult of accefs. by the furf and rocks upon the fliorc.
We faw alfo, as we came round the cape, a fmall ftream
of water run over the beacli in a Tandy cove, but did not
go in with the boat, becaufc we faw that it would not be
eafy to land. When we got afhore, we found the country
every where rifing into fteep rocky hills; and as no frefh
water could conveniently be procured, we were unwilling
to lofe time by going in fearch of lower land elfewhcrc ;
we therefore made the beft of our way back to the fliip,
weighed, and ftood to the North Weft, afterwards North
North Weft half Weft, as the land lay,' at about three
leagues diftance, with ten, twelve, and fourteen fathom
water, Coming in fight of a fmall low ifland, which lies
about two leagues-diftance from the main, and great part
of which at that time, it being high water, was overflowed
they hauled off North, in order to get without it, and
when arrived in latitude 16 deg. 20 min. South, being in
fifteen fathom water, they perceived another ifland, which
is more elevated than the former, lying about three
leagues to the North Weft of it, and clofc under the
main land, to bear from the ffiip North 55 Weft, diftant
feven or eight miles, at which time alfo Cape Grafton
bore South 29 Eaft, diftant 40 miles, and the Northeni-
moft point of land in fight North 20 Weft. Between this
laft point and Cape Grafton the ffiore forms a large but
not very deep bay, which, being difeovered on Trinity
Sunday, received the name of Trinitv Bav. The point
E a ' ' itfclf


itfelf lies in lat. i 6 deg. 6 min. South, and long. 145 degj
ci min. Eaft, and received the name of Cape Tribula-
tion, from the circumftances of danger and diftrefs that
furrounded our voyagers on this part of the coaft. Steer-
ing along the fhore North by Weft, at the diflance of be-
tween three and four leagues, and having from 1410 ia
and 10 fathom water, they perceived in the oiling two
iflands, which lie in lat. 16 deg. South, and about fix or
feven leagues from the main; and fhortly afterwards two
other low woody iflands, which fome in the ihip took for
rocks, bore North half Well, at which they ihortened
fail, and hauled off fhore, Eaft North Eaft, and North
Eaft by Eaft, clofe upon a wind, intending to flrctch to
feaall night, as well to avoid the dangers ahead, as to fee
whether any iflands lay in the offing, efpecially as they
were now near the latitude afligned to thofe difeovered
by Quiros, and named by him Aujlralia del Efpiritu
Santo. In Handing offfrom fix till near nine o’clock, in
the evening, with the advantage of a fine breeze and a
clear moon-light, they failed down a reef of coral rocks,
near which the water fuddenly fhoaled from twenty-one
to eight fathoms, This created fome alarm; but meeting
at the next eaft of the lead with deep water again, they
concluded that they had gone over the tail of the fhoals,
and that all danger was paft. Before ten o’clock they
had twenty-one and twenty fathom, and, this depth con-
tinuing, the gentlemen left the deck in great tranquillity
and went to bed ; but, a few minutes before eleven, the
water fhaliowed at once from twenty to feventeen fathom,
and before the lead could be eaft again the fliip ftruck,
and remained immoveable, except by the heaving of the
furge that beat her againft the crags of the rock upon
which fhe lay.
This ledge of rocks lies in latitude 15 deg. 45 min.
South, and between fix and feven leagues from the main :
it is not, however, the only fhoal upon this part of the
coaft, efpecially to the Northward, and the fhip had paffed
over the tail of another to the Southward, at the time of
the firft alarm from the inequality of the foundings, about
two hours before Ihe llruck. A part of this latter Ihoal
is


is always above water, and has the appearance of white
fand: a part alfo of that upon which the fhip {truck is dry
at low water, and in that place confifls of fand (tones,
but all the reft of it is a coral rock ; a fubftancc which is
much more fatal to (hips than any other, becaufe the
points of it are {harp, and every part of the furfacc fo
rough, as to grind away whatever is rubbed againft it,
even with the gentleft motion; and this effeft it per-
formed upon the timbers of the Endeavour, in a manner
very remarkable, there not being a fplinter to be feen
upon the part damaged, when they afterwards infpefled
her bottom, but the whole cut away as fmoothly as if it
had been done by an inftrument.
It was found, upon examination, that the vcffel had
been lifted over a ledge of this rock, and lay in a hollow
within it, with her head to the North Eaft, having in fome
places about her from three to four fathom water, and in
others not fo many feet; but, at the diftance of about
thirty yards on the {larboard fide, the water deepened to
eight, ten, and twelve fathom, and was Hill deeper aftern.
The dangers of fuch a fituationmay cafily be imagined.;
they had (truck upon this ledge at the falling of the tide,
and were therefore (after having vainly endeavoured to
warp her off by the purchafe of two anchors) under the
neceffity of waiting for the morning flood, with the ex-
pectation that (he might poflibly float at that time; but,
to their great furprize and. concern, the (hip did not float
at high water by a foot and a half, although they had
lightened her near fifty ton, fo much did the day tide on
this part of the coaft fall (hort of that in the night. How-
ever, having again confiderably lightened her, they, by
the afliftance of the night flood, heaved her into deep
water, and, warping her to the South Eaft, once more
got under fail, and flood for the land in order to lay the
{hip down in fome convenient harbour, and examine the
■Jeak that fire had fprung, and the other damage that flie
had received upon the rock, which, while (Ire lay on it,
had grated her bottom confiderably under the (larboard
bow, and that with fuch force as to be heard in the fore
ftore-roorn. Indeed, the prefervation of the fhip in this
perilous


perilous exigency, is aferibed to a lingular circumftan'ce ;
tor, upon examining her bottom afterwards, they found
a large hole through the planks into thd hold, which had
a piece of coral rock half a yard fquare flicking in it;
and if this fragment, after making the wound, had not in
a great mcafure plugged it up, the leak would have been
fufficient to fink the thip, if Ihe had had eight pumps in-
llcad of four, and been able to keep them all incelfantly
going. ....
Rccourfc now was had to an expedient which is called
bothering the (hip, both in order to fparc the labour that
would have been required to keep the leak under by the
pumps, and alio becaufe it could not polfibly be flopped
within fide, its exacl fituation being unknown. They now
edged towards the land, and, having palfed clofe without
two fmall iflands r lying in latitude 15 deg. 41 min. South,
nnd about four leagues from the main, to which they
gave the name of Hope Illands, found themfelves
in lat. 15 deg. 37 min. South, and about three
leagues From the land, the Northernmoft part of which
bore North 30 Well, and Hope Illands extended from
South 30 Eall to South 40 Eail. In this fituation they
had twelve fathom water, and feveral fand banks and •
fhoals all round, amongfl which they found it very diffi-
cult to lleer, particularly as the Ihip would not work,
having twice milled flays.
The boats being fent to examine the coall, in which
was an opening that looked like a harbour, one of them
returned with the report, that Ihe had difeovered juft fuch
a harbour as the neceffities of the Ihip required, in which
there was a fufficient rife of water,' and every other con-
venience that could be defired, either for laying the Ihip
afhore, or heaving her down. Every precaution being
neceffary in the critical fituation of the Ihip, Capt. Cook
went himfelf and buoyed the channel, which is very nar-
row, the fhip in the mean time lying at anchor in four
fathom water, about a mile from the Ihore, lat. 15 deg.
26 min. South. In this pofition they remained two days,
the wind blowing frefh ; at the end of that time, how-
ever, they ventured to weigh and pufh in for the har-
bour.


hour, in doing which the fhip ran twice aground,"and the
fecond time ftuck faft; but the tide happily riling, fhe
was foon afloat, and, having warped her up into the chan-
nel, they moored her along-fide of a ficep beach, on the
Eaft fide of the harbour, which is now diftinguilhed by
the name of Endeavour River.
CHAP. III.
Deseription of Endeavour River.—Animals found there.-Vegetables
and other Productions.—Inhabitants.
THE harbour which is formed by the mouth of En-
deavour River, is only a fmall bar harbour, or creek,
that runs in a winding channel three or four leagues in-
land, and at the head of which there is a fmall brook of
frefh water. There is not depth of water for {hipping above
a mile within the bar, and at this diftance only on the
-North fide, where the bank is fo deep for near a quarter
of a mile, that a fhip may lie afloat at low water fo near
the fhore as to reach it with a ftage; and the fituation is
extremely convenient for heaving down, which was alfo
the cafe on that fide of the harbour where the Endeavour
was refitted, a ftage having been made from the fhip to
the fhore, which was fo bold that fhe floated at twenty
feet difiance. At low water the depth upon the bar is not
more than nine or ten feet, nor more than fcventccn or
eighteen at the height of the tide, the difference between
high and low water at fpring tides being about nine feet.
At the new and full of the moon it is high water about
nine or ten o’clock. This part of the coafl is fo barri-
caded'with fhoals as to make the harbour very difficult of
accefs; the fafeft approach is from the Southward, keep-
ing the main land clofe upon the hoard all the way. Its
fituation may always be found by the latitude, which is
15 deg. 26 min. South, and the longitude 145 deg. n
rain. 52 fee. Over the South point is fomc high land,
but the North point is formed by a low fandy beach, which
extends about three miles to the Northward, where the
land begins again to be high. The country, immediately
about


about the harbour, efpecially on the South fide, affords
by no means a comfortable profpebl: the lew land
near the river is wholly overrun with mangroves,’amongfl
which the fait water flows every tide, and the high land
appeared to be every where ftony and barren; The land
on the North fide was found to confift principally of fand
hills, where fome Indian houfes were feen, that appear-
ed to have been very lately inhabited. But the rifing
grounds here afford a more pleafmg view of the inland
country, than there is on the South fide, and you find it
agreeably diverlified by hills, yallies, and large plains,
which in many places are richly covered with wood.
This fide of the harbour alfo affords a fine ftream of frefh
Water. From the hills that lie over both points of the
harbour, you have an extenfive profpeft of the fea all
round it, which prefents to your view innumerable fand
banks and fhoals fcattered all along the coafl in every
direftion : the innermoft of thefe He about three or four
miles from the fhore ; the outermoft extend as far as can
be feen with a glafs, and many of them do but juft rife
above water. The belt, and probably the only paffage
out of Endeavour River is ,to the North Eaft; for
though your entrance is from the Southward, yet as the
wind blows conftantly from the South Eaft, it would be
difficult, if not impoffible, to return by the fame courfc.
Indeed, there is no paffage whatfoever, but through the
winding channels between the rocks and fhoals, that lie
without number off the mouth of the harbour, and which
cannot be navigated without a confiderable degree of
difficulty and danger.
. .The animals of the four footed kind feen here by the
Endeavours people, are numerous, and of a variety of
fpecies, fuch as are unknown to an European. Of the
kangoorpo.thc followingdcfcription is given.lt is of a kind
nearly approaching the mus genus, about the fize of a grey-
hound, having a head like a fawn’s, lips and-ears, which
it throws back, like a hares, on the upper jaw fix large
teeth, on the lower two only. Its neck is ffiort and fmall,
near to which are the fore feet, that have five toes each,
and five hooked claws, The hinder legs are long, efpe-
cially


dally From the lafl. joint, which, frotti the callofity below
it, feems as if it lies flat on the ground when the animal
defcends any declivity: and each of the hind feet has
four long toes, two of them behind placed a great way
back, the inner one of which has two. claws, the other two
tefembling a hoof, but one of them much larger than the
other, and the print of its foot is laid: to be like that of a
goat: we fhould have taken it for a wild dog, if it had
not leaped like a hare or deer. The tail which if carries
Ijke a greyhound is almoft as long as the body; thick near
thte rump, and tapering gradually to the end: The chief
bulk of this animal is behind, the body being largeft, and
the back riling towards the pofteriori. The. whole body
is covered with a ftiort afli-coloured hair,land .the flefh of
it taft.es like that of a hare, but has a more agreeable
vour.;
Of birds there wdrc found here grey .pigeons with red
beaks ahdreddilh brown crefts, whicheatvery well; they
flew in numerous flocks, fo that, notwithftanding their
extreme Ihynefs, the people generally killed ten or twelve
of them dn a day ; thefe birds are very beautiful, and
erefted in a manner very differently from any hitherto
known ; two forts of Small doves, and as many of beau-
tiful parroquets; a .very uncommon hawk, pied black
■and .white, with the iris of its eyes very broad, of a rich
Scarlet colour inclining to orange, a black beak, ears of a
.dirty grey yellow, and feet of a gold or deep buff colour
like the kings yellow; and feveral other forts of hawks*;
Jarge hlack cockatoos, with icarlet and orange coloured
ifeatheri oh their tails, and fome whil;e fpots between the
.beak and the ear, as well a?on each wing; the goat-
sucker. x»r churn owl ; merops or bee-eaters; crows ex-
ia&ly the fame as in England, hut fo fhy that none of the
people could get within reach to ihoot them; and large
-bats,' of which the following defcription is given.
■ ' One of the feamen who had been rambling in the
.woods told us at his return, that he verily believed he had
Seen the devil; we naturally enquired in what form he
appeared, and his anfwer was in So Angular a ftyle, that
Ave fluff Set. it down in. his own words, “He was," fays.
F John,


John, “as large as a one gallon keg, and very like it: he
had horns and wings,i yet he crept fo flowly through the
grafs, that if I had not been ofeardl might have touched
him." This formidable 'apparition we afterwards difeo-
vered to have.beema bat, and the bats here mull be ac-
knowledged to have a frightful appearance, for they are
nearly blackiand full/as large as a partridge. They have
indeed no horns,' but the fancy of a man who thought he
faw the devil might eafily fupply that defeft. :To return;
the next fpecies enumerated is afmall bird, with wattles
of. a deep orange red; a bird like a tetrao, having wattles
of a. fine ultramarine colour, and-whofe beak and legs
were black ; an owl, having the iris of its eyes gold co-
lour, the pupil, .of them dark blue y'.a large .black and
•white gull with a bright yellow beak; on the gibbous part
of which was a fpot of fcarlet, the corners of its mouth
find the irides of its eyes were of a’bright fcarlet colour,
theilegs and feet a.greenilh :yellow'. a black bird;.of ! the
oyftercracker genus;! with atbright red beak, except tdV
rwardthe point, where it was yellow, the pupil of; its eyes
.fcarlet, the irides of them bright orange, the feet and legs
of a pale red colour :• a large olive-coloured bird of the
■loxia genus, "havihg. the iris of its eyes of a gall’ftone co-
lour, and the pupils. of them black : a black and white
fhag, the iris of whofc eyes was of affine dark green co-
dour, the pupils black,, the fkin which , furrounded'the
eyes was of a verdit'er-green colour, the beak a pale grey,
.on each fide ofwhich was a yellow fpot, : and the feet black:
a large beautiful pigeon, with’ the iris of its eyes of a
blood colour, the pupils of them black, arid its legs and
feet pale red: bolides feveral other t curious land birds.
The water fowls.are herns, whiftlirig ducks, which perch
and perhaps rooll upon wild goefe, curlews, and a
few others; but theie'do not abound. : ' ■ : ;
Offilh manydifferent forts were found here, and par-
ticularly a variety, of beautiful fhell fifh. i Among'the
latter were three forts ofdyllers, forrie : found in lagoons,
I’ome. adhering to the mangrove, and others along the
fhore; large cavalhe .or feomber ; large mullets; feme
Cat filh ; a great number of fmall fcombri, and Ikatc or
ray


ray fifli, one of which' was curioufly marked on the back,
with polygons finely coloured, and another of an orbi-
cular figure, with abluifli-grey coloured back and white
belly, which tafted like veal, I'ome other parts of it like
beef, and the entrails as agreeable as turtle. There were
turtles alfo caught here of a bright green colour, fome of
which weighed near four hundred pounds: in one of
them, when opened, there was found a wooden harpoon,
or turtle peg, fuch as the natives ufe, about as thick as a
man’s finger, near fifteen inches long, and bearded at th«
end, which had gone in by the bread before the calapee,
and was kicking through both the {boulders. The turtle
appeared to have been (truck a confiderable time, for the
wound had perfectly healed up over the weapen. The
coral rocks, in particular, that lie off the harbour’s mouth,
are faid to abound with (hell fifh of every fort, efpecially
turtle, three of which the people caught with no better
inftrument than a boat hook, and they weighed together
791 pounds. Many alligators were feen in the harbour,
and fwirnming round the (hip, fome of which were of a
great fize. Alfo feveral forts of fnakes were found here,
fome venomous and fome harmlefs; and a finall eulex
or fly not bigger than a grain of fand, the bite or fling of
which was venomous, and caufed protuberances on the
Ikin that itched violently. This place produces alfo
white ants, refembling, exaflly, thofe of the Eaft-Indies,
the mod pernicious infefl in the world ; thefe however,
on the contrary, are perfectly harmlefs. Their nefts arc
of a pyramidical figure, from a few inches to fix feet
high, and very much referable the (tones in England
which are faid to be monuments of the Druids. In many
parts of Endeavour river large quantities of pumice
Hones were obferved.
Vegetables grow here in plenty and variety ; of thofb
found by our voyagers, are enumcratcd the glycine rofea ,
which yields a fort of bean, growing upon a (talk which
creeps along the ground; purflain, that cats very well
boiled :: thefe are found chiefly upon the Candy beaches
and fand hills near the fea : cycas circinalis, the kernels
of which roafled take like parched peafe,. but it was ob-
F a lerved


fervfed to make fame of the Endeavour's people fick who
ate of it. Of this fruit they make a kind of fago in the.
Eaft Indies : many of them were here cut down for the
cabbage, which is very good food.
The 6th of July, in the morning, they fetout in a fmali
boat up the river, with a view tofpend two or three days
in an excurfion, to examine the country, and kill forneof
thofe-artimals which had been fo often fqen at a diftance;
and, about four o'clock in the afternoon of the Bih, the
party returned, and gave us this account of their expe-
dition. Having proceeded abolu three leagues, among
fwamps and. mangroves, they went up into the country,
.which they found to differ but little from what had been
feen before. They purfued their courfe, therefore, up
the river, which at length was contrafted into a narrow
channel, and Was bounded not by fwamps and mangroves,
■but by deep banks, that were covered with trees of a mold
•beautiful, verdure. The land within was in general low,
and had a thick covering of long grafs : the foil feemed
to be fuch as promifed great fertility to any. who fhoulcl
.plant and improve it. . In the courfe of the day Tupm
fa'to an animal which by jiis defeription was judged to be
a wolf. They alfo.faw three other animals, but cduld
neither catch nor kill 'one of them, and a kind of bat
(before deferibed,) as latge as a partridge, but this alfo
eluded all their diligence,and fkill. :At night they took
up their lodging dole to the banks of the river, and made
.a fire; but the mofquitos fwarmed about them in fuch
‘numbers, that their quarters were almoft untenable ; they
followed them into the fmoke, and almoft info the fire,
which, hot as the climate was (the thermometer riling to
8,7 in the Ihade on the ift of July, anfwerable to our iff
of January,) they could better endure than the ftings of
thefe infers, which were an intolerable torment. The
fire, the flies, and the want of a better bed than the
ground, rendered the night extremely uncomfortable; fo
that they paffed it not in fleep, but in reftlefs wifhes for
the return of day. With the fifft dawn (July the yth,*)
they fet out in fearch of game, and in a walk of many
milos they faw four animals of the fame kind, two of
which


which Mr. Banks’s greyhdund fairly chafed, but they
threw him out at a great diftance, by leaping over the
long thick grafs, which prevented his ranking. This ani-
mal (the katigooroo before deferibed) was obferved not
to run upon fore legs, but to bound or hop forward upon
two, like the gcrbiia, or mus jaculus. About noon they
returned to the boat, and again proceeded up the fiver,
which was foqU contrafled into a frefh water brook, where
however the tide rofe to a confiderable height. As even-
ing approached it became low water, and it was then fo
(hallow, that they were obliged to get out of the boat
and drag her along, till they could find a place in which
they might with fome hope of reft pafs the night. Such a
place at length offered, and while they were getting the
things out of the boat, the)' obferved a fmoke at the dif-
tance of about a furlong. As they did not doubt but
that fome of the natives, with whom they had fo long and
earneftly defired to- become perfonally acquainted, were
about the fire, three of the party went immediately to-
wards it, hoping that fo fmall a number would not put
them to flight: when they came up to the place, how-
ever, they found it deferted, and therefore they conjec-
tured that before they had difeovered the Indians, the
Indians had difeovered them. They found the fire kill
burning in the hollow of an old tree that was become
touchwood, and feveral branches of trees newly broken
down, with which children appeared to have been play-
ing: they obferved alfo many foot-fteps upon the fand
below high water mark, which were certain indications
that the Indians had been recently upon th 6 fpot. Seve-
ral houfes were found at a little diftance, and fome ovens
dug in the ground, in which victuals appeared to have
-been drefted fince the morning, and fcattered about them
lay fome (hells of a kind of clamm or oyfter, (which grows
(b faft to the rocks, that there is no feparating it from
.thence,, the, meat of which is very large, fat, and fweet)
and fome fragments of roots, the refufe of the meal.
After regretting their difappointment, they repaired to
their quarters, which was a broad fand bank under the
flicker of a bulh.
Their


Their beds were plantain leaves, which they fpread
upon the fand, and which were as foft as a mattrefs; their
cloaks ferved them for bed-clothes, and feme branches
of grafs for pillows. With thefe accommodations, they
hoped to pafs a better night than the laft, efpecially as,
to their great comfort, not a mofquito was to be feen.
Having flept therefore till the morning, they then exa-
mined the river, and finding that the tide favoured their
return, and that the country promifed nothing worthy of
a farther fearch, they reimbarked in their boat, and made
the beft of their way to the (hip.
Gn the afternoon of the laft mentioned day, feven or
.eight of the natives appeared on the South fide of the
river, and two of them came down to the fandy pointop-
pofite to the (hip, but on feeing a boat put off towards
them, they all ran away with the greateft precipitation.
The next morning, four of the natives appeared upon
the fandy point on the North fide of the river, having
with them a fmall wooden canoe with out-riggers. They
feemed for fome time to be bufily employed in linking
fifh : fome of our people were for going over to them in
a boat, but this the Captain would not permit, repeated
experience having convinced him, that it was more likely
to prevent than procure an interview. We then deter-
mined to try what could be done by a contrary method,
and accordingly let them alone without appearing to take
the lead notice of them. This fucceeded fo well, that
at length two of them came in the canoe within mufket
(hot of the (hip, and there talked a great deal in a very
loud tone. . We underftood nothing that they faid, and
therefore could anlwer their harangue only by (homing,
and making all the figns of invitation and kindnefs that
we could devife. During this conference they came in-
fenfibly nearer and nearer, holding up their lances, not
in a threatening manner, but as if to intimate, that if we
offered them any injury, they had weapons to revenge it.
When they were almoft along fide of us, we threw them
fome cloth, nails, beads, paper, and other trifles,: which
they, received without the lead appearance.of fatisfaflioric
at laft one of the people happened to throw them a finall
fifh j


fifh ; at this they exprefled the gfeateft joy imaginable,’
and, intimating by figns that they would fetch their com*
panions, immediately-paddled away towards the fhore*
In the mean time, fome of our people, and among them
Tupia, landed bn the oppofite fide of the river. The ca-
noe, with all the four Indians; very foon returned to the
fhip,.and came quite along fide, without exprefling any
fear or diftruft. We diftributed fome more prefents
among them, and foon after they left us, and landed on
the fame fide of : the river where our people had gone
alhqre: every man carried in his hand two lances, and a
flick which is ufed in throwing them; and advanced to
the place where Tupia and the reft of our people were
fitting.:.: Tupia. foon prevailed upon them to lay down
their arms, : and come forward without , them: be then
made figns that they fhould fit down by him, with which
they complied, and feemed to be under no apprehenfion
or conftraint. . Several more of us then going rafhore,
they exprefled fome jealoufy left we ihould.get between
them and their arms: we took, care, however to fhew
them that we had no fuch intention; and, having joined
them, we made;tbem fome more.prefents,' as a further
teftimony of our goodwill, and our defire to obtain theirs.
We continued together with the. utmoft cordiality till
dinner time, and then giving them tounderftand that we
were going to eat; we invited them by figns to go with
lis : this.however they declined,; and as foon as we left
them they went away in their canoe. One of thefe men
was fomewhat above the middle age, the other three were
young. Their features were far from difagreeabletheir
eyes were lively ,1 and; their teeth even and white ; their
voices were foft and tunable, and they repeated many
words after us with great facility.
The next morning, we had another vifit from four of
the natives: three of them had been with us before, but
the fourth was a ftranger, whofe name, as we learnt from
-his companions who introduced him, was Yaparico; This
gentleman was diftinguilhed by an ornament of a very
linking appearance: it.was the bone of a bird, nearly as
ihi,ck as a man’s finger, and five or fix inches long, which
he


'he had tbrrift into a hole made in the griftle that divided
the noftrils. Of this we had feen one inftance, and only
one, in New Zealand; blit, upon examination, we found
that among all thefe people this part of the nofe was per*,
foratcd to receive an ornament of the fame kind. They
brought'with them a filh, which they gave us, as we fup-
pofcd, in return for the filh that we had given them the
day bcfpre. They feemed to be much pleafed, and in no
hafle to leave us; but, feeing feme of our gentlemen ex-
amine their canoe with great curiofity and attention, they
were alarmed, arid, jumping immediately into it, .pad-
died away without fpeakinga word.
Early thp next morning three Indians ventured down
to Tupia's lent, and were lb well pleafed with their re-
ception, that one of them went with the canoe to fetch
two!others whbiri we had never feen: when he returned,
he introduced the Granger'by name, a ceremony which
upon fueh occafions was never omitted.’ As they had re.*-
ceived the filh that was thrown into their canoe, when
they firft approached the fhip, with fo much pleafure,
feme jfifh .was [offered ’ toi them now, and Me were greatly
furprizedto fee that it was; received With the greateft in*
difference: they made figns however to fome of the peo-
ple that they fhould drefs it for them, which was imme-
diately done ; but after eatfng a little of it, they threw
the reft to Mr. Banks’s dog. They ftaid with us all the
forenoon; but would; not .venture.above twenty yards
from their canoe. We now perceived that the colour of
their fkin was not fo dark as it appeared; what we had
taken for their complexion being the effefls of dirt and
fmbke,'in which, weimagined, they contrived to fleep,
notwithHanding the heat of.the,climate, asithe only means
in their power to keep off the .raufquitos. Among other
things! that we had given! them when we firfHaw them,
were feme medals, which we hadihtmg round.their necks
by a .ribband; and thefe ribbands wore fo changed by
fmoke, that we .could not eafily .diftinguifh of what co-
lour they hadbeen : this incident led usimore narrowly tp
examine the colour of their fkin. While thefe people
were,with us, we fiw-two.others on the pcint oflaodthat
lay


lay on the oppofite fide of the river, at the diftanch of
about two hundred yards, and by our glafl’es difcovercd
them to be a woman and a boy, the woman, like the reft,
being {lark naked.
Tupia, who had been on the other fide of the harbour
by himfclf, reported that he had feen three Indians, who
had given him fome roots about as thick as a man’s finger,
in fhape not much unlike a radifti, and of a very agree-
able tafte. This induced us to go over (on the 17th),
hoping that we fhould be able to improve our acquaint-
ance with the natives. In a very little time we difcovercd
four of them in a canoe, who, as foon as they faw us,
came afhore, and though they were all ftrangers, walked
up to us without any.figns of fufpicion or fear. Two of
thefe had necklaces of {hells, which we could -not per-
fuade them to part with for any thing that we could give
them; we prefemed them, however, With fome beads,
and after a fhort ftay they departed; We attempted to
follow them, hoping that they would Conduft us to fome
place where We fhould find more of them, and have an
opportunity of feeing their women; but they made us
underftand by figns that they did not defire our company.
At eight o’clock the next morning, we were vifited by
feveral of the natives, who were now become quite fami-
liar. One of them, at our deflre, threw his lance, which
was about eight feet long; it flew with a fwiftnefs and
fteadinefs that furprized Us, and, though it was never
more than four feet from the ground, it entered deeply
into a tree at fifty paces diftance. After this they ven-
tured on board, where we left them feemingly much en-
tertained, and went to take a view of the country. At our
return we found feveral of them ftill oh board, and we
were told that the turtles, of which we had np lefs than
twelve upon the deck, had fixed their attention more,
than any thing elfe in the {hip.
On the 19th, in the morning, we were vifited by ten of
the natives, the greater part from the other fide of the
river, where we faw fix or feven more, mod of thenrwo-
men, and, like all the reft of the people that we hadfeen
in this country, they were quite naked. Our guefls
G brought


brought with tlkm a greater number of lances than they
had ever done before, and having laid them up in a tree,
they fet a man and a boy to watch them ; the relt then
came on board, and we foon perceived that they had de-
termined to get one of our turtles, which was probably as
great a dainty to them as to us. They fu ll afked us by
•figns to give them one, and, being refufed, they expreffed
both by looks and geftures great difappointment and an-
ger. At this time we happened to have no viftuals
drefled, but we offered one of them fome bifeuit, which
he {hatched, and threw overboard with great difdain.
One of them renewed his requeft to Mr. banks, and,
upon a refufal, {lamped with his foot, and pulhed him
from him in a tranfport of refentment and indignation.
Halving applied by turns to almoft every perfon who ap-
peared to have any command in the fhip, without fuccefx,
■they feized two of the turtles, and dragged them towards
the fide of the fhip, where their canoe lay: our people
foon forced them from their hands, and replaced them
with the relt. They. would not, however, relinquifh
their enterprize, but made fcvcral other attempts of the
fame kind, in all which being equally difappointed, they
fuddcnly leaped into their canoe in a rage, and began to
paddle towards the fhore. At the fame time fome of our
party went into the boat, and got afhore before them,
where many of our people were already engaged in va-
rious employments. As foon as they landed they feized
their arms, and before we w r ere aware of their defign,
they {hatched h brand from under a pitch kettle which
was boiling, and making a circuit to the windward of the
few things that we had on fliore, they fet fire to the grafs
in their way with furprizing quicknefs and dexterity.
The grafs, which was five or fix feet high, and as dry as
bubble, burnt with amazing fury,-and the fire made a ra-
pid progrefs towards a tent of Mr. Banks’s, which had
been fet up for Tupia when.he was lick, taking in its
courfe a fow and pigs, one of which it fcorchod to death.
iMr- Banks leaped into a boat, and fetched fome people
from on board juft time enough to fave his tent by haul-
ing it down upon the beach; but the fmith’s-forge, at
kail


lead fuch part of it as would burn, was confumed-'
While this was doing, the Indians went to a place at,
feme dillance, where leveral of our people were walk-
ing, and where our nets, among which was the feine, and
a great quantity of linen, were laid out to dry; here they
again let fire to the grafs, entirely difregarding both
threats and entreaties. We were therefore obliged to
difeharge a mufket loaded with fmall fhot atone of them,
which drew blood at the dillance of about forty.yards;
and this putting them to flight, we extinguilhed the fire
at this place before it had made much progrefs, but
where the grafs had been lirft kindled, it fpread into the
woods at a great dillance. As the Indians were Hill in
fight, we fired a mufket charged with ball abreaft of them
among the mangroves, to convince them that they were
not yet out of our reach : upon hearing the ball they
quickened their pace, and we foon loft, fight of them.
We thought they would now give us no more trouble,
but foon after we heard their voices in the woods, and
perceived that they came nearer and nearer. ,We let
out therefore with Mr. Banks and three or four more to
meet them. When our party came in fight of each
other, they halted, except one old man, who came for-
ward to meet us: at length he Hopped, and having ut-
tered fome words, which we were very forry that we
could not underhand, he went back to his companions,
and the whole body flowly retreated. We found means,
however, to feize fome of their darts, and continued to
follow them about a mile: we then fat down upon fome
rocks, from which we could ohferve their motions, and
they alfo fat down at a hundred yards dillance. After a
fhort time the old man again advanced towards us, carry-
ing in his hand a lance without a point: he Hopped fe-
veral times at different diftances, and fpokc. We au-
fwered by beckoning and making fuch ligns of amity as
we could devife; upon which the melfenger ol peace, as
we fuppofed him to be, turned, and fpokc aloud to his
companions, who then fet up their lances againft a tree,
and advanced towards us in a friendly manner. When
they came up, we returned the darts, or lances, that we
G 3 had


had taken from them, and we perceived, with great fatis-'
faffion, that. this rendered the reconciliation complete.
We found in this party four perfons whom we had never.,
feen before, who, as ufual, were introduced to us by
name; but the man who had been wounded in the at-
tempt to burn our nets and linen, was not among them;
\vc knew, however, that he could not be dangeroudy hurt
by the diftancc at which the (hot reached him. Wc made
all of them prefents of fuch trinkets as we had about us;
and they walked back with us towards the (hip. As we
went along, they told us by figns that they would not fet
fire to the grafs any more, and we difiributed among
them fome mufket balls and endeavoured to make them
underftand their ufe and effebl. When they came abrealt
of the fhip, they fat'down, but could not be prevailed
upon to come on board; we, therefore, left them, and in
about two hours they went away, foon after which we
perceived the woods on fire at about two miles diltancc.
If this accident had happened a very little while fooner,
the confequence mightjiave been dreadful; for our pow-
der had been aboard but a few days, and the {lore tent,
with many valuable things which it contained, had no;
been removed many hours,
Early in the morning of the 23d, fome of our people
were fent into the country to’gather a fupply of the greens
called by us Indian kale; when one of them, having
draggled from the reft, fuddenly fell in with four Indians,
three men and a boy, whom he did not fee, till, by turn-
ing fhort in the wocld, he found himfelf among them.
They had kindled a fire, and were broiling a bird of
fome kind and part of a kangooroo, the remainder of
which and a cockatoo hung at a little dillance upon a tree.
The man, being unarmed, was at firfl greatly terrified,
but he had the prefence of mind not to run away, judg-
ing very rightly that he was moll likely to incur danger
by appearing to apprehend it; on the contrary, he went
and fat down by them, and with an air of chcerfulnefs and
good humour offered them his knife, the only thing he
bad about him, which he thought would be acceptable to
them; they received it, and having handed it from one
to


to the other they gave it him; again. He then made an
offer to leave them, but this they. Teemed not diTpofcd to :
permit; Hill, however, he diflcmbled his fears, and fat
dowiragain : thev confidered, him with great attention
and curiofity, particularly his clothes, and then felt his
hands and face, and fatisfied thcmfelvcs that his body was
of the .fame texture with their own. They treated him
with the greateff civility ; and, having kept him about
half an hour, they made figns that he might depart; he
did not wait for a fccond difmiffton, but, when he left,
them, not taking the dircH way to the (hip,, they came
from their fire and directed him, fo that they well knew’
whence he came.
In the mean time, Mr. Banks, having made an excur-
fion on the other fide ol the river to gather plants, found
the greateff part of the cloth that had been given to the
Indians laying in a heap together, probably as ufelefs
lumber, not worth carrying away:.; and perhaps, if he
had fought further, he might have found the,other trin-
kets, for. they feemed to let very little value upon any
thing that we had, except our turtle,, which was a com-
modity that, we were lead able to fpare. And, on the
25th, having made an cxcurfion up the river, we found
a canoe belonging to our friends the Indians, whom we
had not feen lince the affair of.the turtle: they had left
jt tied to fome mangroves about a mile diffant from the
Ihip, and we could fee by their fires that they were re-
tired at leall fix miles direcilly inland. From this time
to the fhip’s departure, Auguff the 14th, they were feen
no more.
The inhabitants of the country about Endeavour River
•are deferibed as being rather below the common ffature,
and remarkably fmall limbed. Mr. Parkinfon favs, that
their bones were fo fmall, that he could fpan their an-
cles and their arms too above the elbow joint. The
tailed that we faw meafured but five feet nine inches,
though their, flimnefs made them appear taller: in gene-
ral, their height was about five feet five inches. Their
(kin was of the colour of wood-foot, or what would be
fulled a dark chocolate colour. They had flattifli nofes;
mouths


mouths of a moderate fize, regular, well fet, large teeth
tinged with yellow. Their hair was black, but not woolly ;
it is naturally long and lank, though they wear it univer-
sally Short cropped: in general it is ftraight, but Some-
times it has a flight curl. We Saw none that was not
matted and filthy, though without oil or greafe, and, to
our great allonifhment, free from lice. Their lances and
levers were very neatly made of a reddifh wood; and
were like thofe ufed by the Botany Bay Indians. Their
canoes were not above ten feet long, and very narrow,
made out of the trunks of trees.
We have given an account of the coaft of New South
Wales, from Point Hicks to Endeavohr River. Every
information refpe&ing this country was collected during
Capt. Cook’s ftay at Botany Bay.
Having doubled the Northernmoflpoint of the main,
and perceiving the land to trend away to the South Weft
as far as it was vifible, we conceived hopes of having at
lafl found a paffage between New South Wales and New
Guinea into the Indian Sea, the expe&ation of finding
which was one principal motive of our undertaking fo ha-
zardous a navigation as that to the North of Endeavour
River, and particularly of our entering within the for-
midable faarracade of rocks that line the coaft. In order
to determine with more certainty whether we were right
in our conjectures, we refolved to land upon an iflaml at
the entrance of the channel, which we afterwards named
Endeavour Straits. For this purpofe we came to anchor
at a fmall diltance from the ifland, at which time we faw
many of the inhabitants upon it: and when we afterwards
went into the boat, with a party of men, accompanied by
the gentlemen whofe euriofity induced them to go afhore
in fearch of natural productions, ten of the natives were
feen Handing upon a hill. Nine of them were armed
with fuch lances as were commonly to be feen amongll
the inhabitants of the main at Botany Bay and Endea-
vour River, and the tenth had a bow and a bundle of ar-
rows, weapons which had never been feen in the poffef-
fion of any of the natives of this country before. Two
of them were obferved to have large ornaments of mother
of


oFpearl hanging round their necks. Three of thefe people,
one of whom was the bowman, placed themfelves upon
the beach abreaft of the boat, fo that the party expected
to find their landing oppofed, but when the boat came
within a mulket’s ftiot of the beach, the Indians walked
leifurely away. The captain and the reft immediately
climbed the highelt hill on the ifland, which was not
more than three times as high as the maft-head, and the
moll barren of any that they' had feen. From this hill
no land was vifible between the South Weft and Weft
South Weft, fo that there remained not a doubt but a
channel could be found running in a direftion between
thefe two points, that fliould lead into the Indian ocean.
As we were now about to quit the Eaftern coaft of New
Holland, which we had coafted from latitude 38 to this
place, being latitude iof South, we took poftcffion, in
right of his Britannic Majefty We then fired three
vollies of fmall arms, which were anfwered by the fame
number from the fliip, and by three cheers from the
main-fhrouds, and re-embarking in the boat, left this
ifland, to which, from the ceremony juft performed upon
it, we gave the name of Pofleffion Ifland.
ADDITIONAL REMARKS.
r | "'HE land of New South Wales to the Southward of
33 or 34 deg. is in general low and level; farther
Northward it is hilly, but in no part can be called moun-
tainous, and the hills and mountains taken together make
but a fmall part of the furface, in comparifon with the val-
lies and plain?. It is upon the whole rather barren than
fertile, yet the rifing grotlnd is chequered by woods and
lawns, and the plains and vallies are in many places co-
vered with herbage. The foil, however, is frequently
fandy, and many of the lawns or favannahs are rocky and
barren; efpecially.to the Northward, where in the belt
fpots vegetation was lefs vigorous than in the Southern
•part of the;country;, the trees were not fo tall, nor was
the herbage fo rich., -The grafs in general is high,, but
thin,


thin, and the trees, where they are largeff,- are feldom lefj
than forty feet afunder: nor is the country inland, as far
as could be examined, better clothed than the fea-coaft.
The banks of the bays are'covered with mangroves to the
didance of a mile within the beach, under which the foil
is a rank mud that is always overflowed by a fpring tide:
farther in the country you fometimes meet with a bog,
upon which the grafs is very thick and luxuriant, and
fometimes with a valley clothed with underwood. The
foil in Tome parts feems to be capable of improvement,
but the far greater part is fuch as can admit of ho culti-
vation. The coafl, at lead the part of it which lies to the
Northward of 25 deg. South' abounds with fine bays and
harbours, where vefiels may lie in perfeQ. fecurity from
-all winds.
’ ■ In New South Wales are ferpents of various kinds,
fdme noxious and fome.harmlefs-; fcorpions, centipees.
and lizards. The infers are but few : the principal arc
the mofquito and the ant.. Of the ant there are feveral
forts ; fome are as green as a leaf, and live upon tree; .
■ where- they build their ncds, of various flzes, betwee:-.
that of a man’s.head and his fid. Thefe neds are of a
very curious drutlure: they are formed by bending down
feveralof the leaves, each of which is as broad as a man’:
hand, and gluing the points of them together .fo as to form
a purfe: the vifeus ufed for this purpofe, is an anim.d
juice, which nature has enabled them to elaborate. This
method of fird bending down the leaves, we had not an
opportunity to obferve; but we faw thoufands uniting
all their dreugth to hold them in this pofition, while other
bufy multitudes were employed within,, in applying th<
gluten, that was to prevent their returning back. To ft-
tisfy ourfelvcs that the leaves were bent,'and held down
by the effort of thefe diminutive artificers, we didurbeo
them in their work, and as foon as they were driven from
their dation, the leaves on which they were employed
fprung up with a force much greater than we could have
lltought them able to conquer by any combination 0'
their drength. But though we gratified our curiofity at
their, expence, the injury did not go unrevenged; for
; ' thoufand


thotifands immediately threw themfelves upon us, and
gave; us intolerable pain with their flings, efpecially tbofe
which took poffeffion of our necks, and our hair, front
whence they were not eafily driven.. The fling was
.fcarcely lefs painful than that of a bee, but except it was
repeated, the pain did not lafl more than a minute.
The fea that wafhes the coafl of New Holland is much
more liberal of food to the inhabitants than the land.
Upon the fhoals and reefs along the Eaflern coafl,. there
are incredible numbers of the finefl green turtle in the
world, and oyflers of various kinds, particularly the rock,
oyflcr, and the pearl oyfler. Thefe fhell-fifh are alfo
found on the Weflern coafl.
The number of the inhabitants of New Holland ap-
pears to be very fmall in proportion to its extent. There
were never feen by Capt. Cook fo many as thirty of them
together but once, (which was at Botany Bay) where men,
women, and. children affembled upon a rock to fee the
fhip pafs by.. ;
. The only furniture belonging to their houfes, which,
we obferved, was a kind of oblong veflel, .made of bark,
by the fimple contrivance of. tying up the .two ends with
a withy, which not being cut off ferves for a handle; thefe
it was imagined, were ufed as buckets, to fetch-water
from the fpring, which may be fuppofed fometimes to be
a confiderable diflance. They have however a fmall
bag about the fize .of a. moderate cabbage net, which is
made by tying threads, loop within loop, fomewhat in the
manner of knitting ufed by our ladies to make purfes.
This bag the man carries loofe upon his back, by a fmall
firing, which paffes over his head; it generally contains
a lump or two of paint and refin. fome tifb hooks and lines,
a fhell or two, out of which their hooks are made, ,-a few
points of darts, and their ufual ornaments, which.include
the,whole worldly treafure of the richefl man amongfl
them. > . . , ,
. The weapons of the New Hollanders on the Weflern
Coafl, are lances made of wood, with the points hardened
by lire, but not very fharp; befides a fort of wooden
faulchion of rude workmanfhip. At Botany Bay the
. H lances


lances 'had four prongs pointed with bone and barbed;
the points were alfo»fmeared with a hard refin, which
gave them a polifh, and made them enter deeper into
what they ftruck. -To the Northward, the lance has but
one point: the (haft is made of cane, or the flalk of a
plant fomewhat refembling-a bulrufh, very ftraight and
light, and from eight to 14 feet long, confiding of feveral
joints, where the pieces are let into each other, and
bound together. To this are fitted points of different
kinds’, four e are of hard heavy wood, and fome are the
bones of fifh: feveral were pointed with the flings of the
fting'ray,-the largcft that they could procure, and barbed
with feveral that were fmaller, faftened on in a contrary
direction. The lances that are thus barbed; are indeed
dreadful- weapons; for whenever they have taken place,
they can never be drawn back, without tearing away the
flcfh; or leaving the fharp ragged fplimers of the bone;
which forms the barb, behind in the wound.
The canoes, which are only to be found on the Eaftern
toad,' are as mean and ; rude as the houfes. Thof’e ufed
about Botany Bay* are nothing more than a piece of bark,
about twelve feet long, tied together at the ends and kept
open irt the middle by fmall-bows of wood; yet a vefiel
of this coridruQion was fbrnctimes feen to hold three
people. ; In the middle of thefe canoes there was always
a heap Of Tea weed; and upon this a fmall fire, probably
that the fifh may he broiled and eaten the moment it is
taught.
We could never learn pofitively, whether the flood
tide on the coaft of New South Wales came from the
Southward, the Eallward, or the Northward. We in-
clined to the opinion that it came from the South Ead,
By what means the inhabitants of this country are re-
duced to inch a number as it can fubfid, is not perhaps
very eafy toguefs: whether, like the inhabitants of New
Zealand, they are dedroyed by the hands of each other
in conteds for food, whether they are fwept off by acci-
dental famine, or whether there is any cattle that prevents
the increafe of the fpecies, muff be left to, future adven*
turers to determine. .
Capt.


. Capt. Cooke’s comtnentator, Dr. Hawkefworth, re-
marks, in favour of the increafe of population which our
globe is capable of, that New Holland, a country equal to
all Europe in magnitude, (its extent being nearly 2000
miles) admirably well calculated by its.fituation, and no
lefs fo by its foil, to afford fubfiftence, together with every
focial and rational enjoyment to many, many millions of
the human race, is found to be the folitary haunt of a few
mifefable favages, deftitute of clothing, ill provided with,
food, and whofe lives are rendered fupportablc merely
by that principle of happinefs with which the Creator has
endowed all his creatures, namely, a confcioufnefs of
existence. ~
- —.-I—m—iME3BP—ip1 —m—iME3BP—ipm —r-.
The expedition to New South Wales being expefted
fhortly to take place, it is prefumed, it. will be acceptable
to the reader to be informed of the numbers and equip*,
jment of. the fleet deflined for thatpurpofe, and the na>-
ture of the cftablifhment with which it intended to
commence the regular government of that place. ri
Capt. Arthur Phillip of the navy, Governor and Cora?
mander in Chief of the territory of New South Wales,
and of his Majefty’s (hips and veffels employed on that
coafl. . .
- Major Rob. Rofs, Lieutenant Governor.—. Richard
■Johnfon, Chaplain..—-Andrew Miller, CommiffaryvLf
David Collins, Judge Advocate.—John Long, Adjutant;.
James Furzer; Quarter Mafter.—.James Alexander*
Provoft White, Surgeon.---Tho. ArndeU
and Wm. Balmain, Afliftant Surgeons. <'<
His .Majefty’s fliip. . Sirius* Capt. Arthur Phillip, and,
Capt. John Hunter.- —The armed tender Supply, Lieut. ,
H. L. Ball.-- Six tranfports carrying the convifts, viz.
Alexander 21a men convifts. women conviQ.s.
Scarborough 210 ditto,
Friendfhip ;' ; 8o dittcr : ’ j 24
Charlotte 100 ditto. 24
Prince of Wales 30,
Lady Pcnryn ioa Each


'"'/Each (ranff brt'lias a detachment of marines on boaril,
; as fpecified below, out of which the garrifon is to be
formed.
.-Three (lore Ihip’s, viz. the Golden Grove. Fiflibum,
.and Borrowdale ; to carry provilions, implements for
•jhufbahdry, clothing, &c. for the convifls.
.■Jpiftributron of the detachment of marines, with the
number to be put on board each of the tranfports
; ‘ above-mentioned, with the-place where they are to
* j embark.
Lady Tenryn tranfport, Capt. Campbell, Lieut. G-
johnfon, Lieut. Wm. Collins, and 3 privates, at Portf-
jnoiuh.—:—Scarborough tranfport, Capt. Shea, Lieut.
Kellow, Lieut. Morrifon, 2 ferjeants, 2 corporals, one,
drummer, 26 privates, at Portftnouth.- Fricndfhip',
Capt. Lieut. Meredith, Lieut. Clarke, Lieut. Faddy,
2-ferjeants, 3 corporals, one drummer, 36 privates, at
Plymouth.——Charlotte,Capt. Tench, Lieut. Crelfwell,
Lieut. Poulden, 3 ferjeants, 3 corporals, one drummer,
94 privates, at .Plymouth. - Alexander/ ’Lieut. J.
Jobnfon, Lieut.’.Sharp, 2. ferjeants,. 2 corporals, one
drummer, 30 privates, at Woolwich.——-Prince of Wales,
Lieut. Davy, Lieut. Timmins, Proved Martial, 2 fer-
jeants', 2 corporals, one drummer, 25 privates, at Wool-
wick. One ferjeant, 3 drummers, 6 privates, to be
put on board his Majefty’sfhip Sirius as fupernumeraries.
1 — : —Total of the detachment going on this expedition:
Four Captains, i 2 Lieutenants, 12 ferjeants, 12 corporals’,
8 drummers, 160 privates.- Forty women, wives to
the marines, permitted to go out’ with the garrifon.
r n ■ -i
