

h\ \ PctH
jj? 0-
\{ 4 £
■t
COPIES OF LETTEES
BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA
HENRY MATSON,
REGARDING THE SALE OF LANDS APPLIED FOR BY HIM
UNDER HER MAJESTY’S ORDERS IN COUNCIL.
STEAM PRESS OF WILLIAM FAIRFAX AND CO., 78, COLLINS ST. EAST. ,


CORRESPONDENCE.
No. 1. (Copy)
Ballengourooke, Dec. 19th, 1851.
Sir, —Being desirous to purchase part of my licensed run,
called Pentland Hills, I have the honor to request you will
obtain the sanction of His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor
to the following portions being measured to me:—
Commissioners District, F. A. Powlett, Esq.
Name of Run,
Pentland Hills and Ballengourooke.
Edward Goodman.
Name of Licensee
DESCRIPTION.
320 acres, commencing at S. W. corner Section 18, Korkuperrimul, running
East 40 chains. North 80 chains, West 40 chains, South by boundary of Section 18,
and 19, 80 chains to starting point.
320 acres, commencing at same corner of Section 18, running West 40 chains
North 80 chains, East 40 chains, South by boundary of Sections 18 and 19, 80 chain B
to starting point.
160 acres more or less, commencing 40 chains West from N.E. comer of Section
No. 2, Korkuperrimul, ruuning South 20 chains, West about 110 chains across Section
No. 1, to near junction of Werribee River and Myrinong Creek, following Myrinong
Creek to N. W. corner of Section No. 1, then East about 85 chains to starting point.
160 acres more or less, commencing 40 chains West from N.E. corner of Section
No. 2, Korkuperrimul, bearing South 20 chains, East 70 chains, North 40 chains to a
gully (boundary with Mr. McLaughlan), following gully to a point where a line
bearing North from starting point intersects it.
These sections are roughly shown on the enclosed outline of the
run, I have the honor to be, Sir,
The Hon. Your most obedient Servant
The Colonial Secretary, ED. GOODMAN.
Ac., &c., &c., Melbourne.
No. 2. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
19th January, 1862.
Sir, —I have the honour, by direction of His Excellency
the'Liutenant-Governor, to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated 19th ultimo, applying, on behalf of Mr. Edward
Goodman, to be allowed to purchase a portion of the licensed
run, called Pentland Hills, situated in the Western Port District;
and, in reply, to inform you that the application in question has
been duly recorded, and will meet with proper consideration.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) G. W. RUSDEN.
John Goodman, Esq., Ballengourooke.


No. 3. Ballengourooke, April 15th, 1852.
Sir, —Having become the purchaser of Mr. E. Goodman’s
run, of Ballengourooke and Pentland Hills, and wishing a
transfer of the run, I have the honour to request that I may be
informed if the Government have any objection to transfer along
with the run the pre-emptive right to purchase a portion of the
station, as applied for by Mr. Goodman, —in order that, in the
event of its purchase, the title may be made out in my name.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Melbourne.
No. 4. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 20th April, 1852.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 15th instant, in which you apprise me that you have become
the purchaser of a run named “ Ballengourooke,” and request to
be informed whether there will be any objection to the transfer
of the right to purchase a portion thereof.
In reply, I am directed to inform you that, under the Regula-
tions of the 28th June, 1850, any licensee of Crown Lands may
claim the privilege of purchasing—subject to certain restrictions
—a portion of his run ; and therefore that, as soon as the trans-
fer of the station you refer to is duly completed, you will, as
licensee of the same, be in a position to apply for the purchase
of any portion you may select.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Yoar most obedient servant,
W. LONSDALE.
Henry Matson, Esq., Ballengmrooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 5. Cdonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 21st June, 1852.
Sir, —With reference b your application of the 19th
December, 1851, to be allowd to purchase, under pre-emptive
right, a portion of your licensd run, known as Ballengourooke,
in the Western Port District cf the Colony, I have the honour to
inform you that the applicaion has been referred to a Board
appointed by His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to report
upon it, and that His Excelleicy approves of your being allowed
to purchase the following prtion, viz.,—64o acres, to include
your homestead, at the prie of 20s. per acre, amounting to
£640, which sum you are rquested to pay into the Colonial
Treasury within one month fom this date.
I have, &c.,
(Sigjed) W. LONSDALE.
E. Goodman, Esq.
[This letter I never saw.-H. Matson.]


CORRESPONDENCE.
No. 1. (Copy)
Ballengourooke, Dec. 19th, 1851.
Sir, —Being desirous to purchase part of my licensed run,
called Pentland Hills, I have the honor to request you will
obtain the sanction of His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor
to the following portions being measured to me:—
Commissioners District, F. A. Powlett, Esq.
Name of Bun,
Pentland Hills and Ballengourooke.
Edward Goodman.
Name of Licensee
DESCRIPTION.
320 acres, commencing at S. W. corner Section 18, Korkuperrimul, running
East 40 chains. North 80 chains, West 40 chains. South by boundary of Section 18,
and 19, 80 chains to starting point.
320 acres, commencing at same corner of Section 18, running West 40 chains
North 80 chains, East 40 chains, South by boundary of Sections 18 and 19, 80 chain B
to starting point.
160 acres more or less, commencing 40 chains West from N.E. comer of Section
No. 2, Korkuperrimul, ruuning South 20 chains, West about 110 chains across Section
No. 1, to near junction of Werribee River and Myrinong Creek, following Myrinong
Creek to N. W. corner of Section No. 1, then East about 85 chains to starting point.
160 acres more or less, commencing 40 chains West from N.E. corner of Section
No. 2, Korkuperrimul, bearing South 20 chains, East 70 chains, North 40 chains to a
gully (boundary with Mr. McLaughlan), following gully to a point where a line
bearing North from starting point intersects it.
These sections are roughly shown on the enclosed outline of the
run, I have the honor to be, Sir,
The Hon. Your most obedient Servant
The Colonial Secretary, ED. GOODMAN.
Sec., &c., Sec., Melbourne.
No. 9. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
19th January, 1859.
Sir, —I have the honour, by direction of His Excellency
the Liutenant-Governor, to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated 19th ultimo, applying, on behalf of Mr. Edward
Goodman, to be allowed to purchase a portion of the licensed
run, called Pentland Hills, situated in the Western Port District;
and, in reply, to inform you that the application in question has
been duly recorded, and will meet with proper consideration.
I have, See.,
(Signed) G. W. RUSDEN.
John Goodman, Esq., Ballengourooke.


No. 3. Ballengourooke, April Isth, 1852.
Sir, —Having become the purchaser of Mr. E. Goodman’s
run, of Ballengourooke and Pentland Hills, and wishing a
transfer of the run, I have the honour to request that I may be
informed if the Government have any objection to transfer along
with the run the pre-emptive right to purchase a portion of the
station, as applied for by Mr. Goodman, —in order that, in the
event of its purchase, the title may be made out in my name.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Melbourne.
No. 4. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 20th April, 1852.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 15th instant, in which you apprise me that you have become
the purchaser of a run named “ Ballengourooke,” and request to
be informed whether there will be any objection to the transfer
of the right to purchase a portion thereof.
In reply, I am directed to inform you that, under the Regula-
tions of the 28th June, 1850, any licensee of Crown Lands may
claim the privilege of purchasing—subject to certain restrictions
—a portion of his run ; and (therefore that, as soon as the trans-
fer of the station you refer to is duly completed, you will, as
licensee of the same, be in a position to apply for the purchase
of any portion you may select.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
W. LONSDALE.
Henry Matson, Esq., Ballengmrooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 5. Cdonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 21st June, 1852.
Sir, —"With reference b your application of the 19th
December, 1851, to be allowed to purchase, under pre-emptive
right, a portion of your licensed run, known as Ballengourooke,
in the Western Port District cf the Colony, I have the honour to
inform you that the applicaion has been referred to a Board
appointed by His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to report
upon it, and that His Excelleicy approves of your being allowed
to purchase the following prtion, viz,,—64o acres, to include
your homestead, at the prie of 20s. per acre, amounting to
£640, which sum you are rquested to pay into the Colonial
Treasury within one month torn this date.
I have, &c.,
(Sigied) W. LONSDALE.
E. Goodman, Esq.
[This letter I never saw.-H. Matson.]


No. 6. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
June 95th, 1859.
Sir, —In reference to your letter, dated 90th April, 1859, I
have the honour to inform you that the station of Ballengou-
rooke and Pentland Hills has been transferred to me by Mr. E.
Goodman, together with his application to purchase four lots of
land, a portion of the run.
I have the honour to request that you will obtain the sanction
of His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to the transfer of
Mr. E. Goodman’s claim (to purchase the four lots referred to)
to me, and also that the following lots may be reserved for me to
purchase,—requesting that Mr, Hurst, the surveyor, who is now
surveying the parish of Korkupurrimul, may be instructed to
mark the east and west line, commencing about 75 chains north
of Werribee River, running east about 53 chains, as shown in
the enclosed rough sketch.
Commissioner’s District - • F. A. Powlett, Esq.
Name of Run - - - Pentland Hills.
Name of Licensee - - • Henry Matson.
DESCRIPTION.
Lot 1. About 320 acres, commencing on the Werribee River, running north about
140 chains; west, about 26 chains ; south, 120 chains east, by the Werribee about 26
chains.
Lot 2. About 300 acres, comm Acing aboit 75 chains back from the Werribee
River, on line of No. 1, running north 50 ciains; west, about 63 chains; south, 50
chains; east, to starting point (not marked), 63 chains.
Lot 3. About 180 acres, commencing on tie Korkupurrimul Creek, running west
about 50 chains; north, about 40 chains to a gully ; then following gully eastwards,
and the Korkupurrimul Creek to starting point, as surveyed.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Honourable the Colonial Sicretary, Melbourne.
No. 7. Balleigourooke, July 30th, 1859.
Sir, —I have the honour to irform you that I addressed a
letter to you, dated 95th June, 1851, applying to purchase a por-
tion of my run as licensee, in accctdance with the tenor of your
letter to me, dated 90th April, 859, and applying to have a
boundary-line of 60 chains markei by Mr. Hurst the Surveyor,
now on the land ; also, requestiig that the lots applied for in
Mr. Goodman’s name may be traisferred to me. I have the
honour to request to be informed if the letter above described
came to hand, and to state that I paid Mr. Goodman a large
sum of money for the purchase of tiis pre-emptive right, secured
to the lessee by Her Majesty’s Orcßrs in Council, and that for
many months I have had capital uninvested and prepared to
meet the purchase of the land appied for, which land I require
for the purpose of grazing shee), considering only a small
portion of it fit for agriculture.
May I request to be informed it what period of time His


Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor will- probably decide on my
applications ?
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Melbourne.
No. 8. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
September 2nd, 1852.
Sir, —Having sent in an application to purchase a portion of
my licensed run known as Ballengourooke and Pentland Hills,
dated June 25th, to which application I received no answer, I
have the honor to request that I may be informed if my applica-
tion was duly received.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Melbourne.
No. 9, Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 11th Sept., 1852.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
2nd inst., referring to a former communication, and to inform
you that it has been found necessary to refer them both to the
Land Board for further information; as soon as this may have
been received, and I may have obtained the Lieutenant Gover-
nor’s decision thereon, it shall be made known to you without
delay. I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Henry Matson, Esq., W. LONSDALE.
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 10. Melbourne,
Sept. Bth, 1852.
Sir, —Having made application to purchase about two
thousand acres of land, a portion of my run, known as Pentland
Hills, under the impression that I was entitled to purchase any
portion of my run, and having been informed that it is the
intention of His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor to allow
the Licensee to purchase the homestead only at present ;
I have the honor to request that you will be pleased to lay
before His Excellency this my application to be allowed to
purchase two lots of land as surveyed (on my application), of
about 660 acres on the Pentland Hills, as I wish to remove my
homestead there, finding the present homestead too wet for a
residence. I have the honor to be, Sir,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary,
Melbourne.


No. 11. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 11th Oct., 1852.
Sir, —Your application to purchase 1760 acres in the parish
of Korkuperrimel at Pentland Hills, under the Regulations
dated the 28th June, 1850, having been brought under the
consideration of the Land Board, and duly reported upon for the
information of His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor ; I am
directed by his Excellency to inform you, that consistently with
the Regulations, your claim cannot be allowed, as it does not
include your homestead.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Henry Matson, Esq., W. LONSDALE.
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Mash.
No. 12. Ballengourooke, Oct. 12th, 1852.
To His Excellency C. J. LaTrobe, Esq.,
Lieutenant Governor, &c., &c.
Sir, —I have the honor to inform you that I purchased
Mr. E. Goodman’s station, known as Ballengourooke and Pent-
land Hills, paying a large sum of money for his pre-emptive
right to purchase a portion of the run, believing that the Govern-
ment by the Queen’s Orders in Council were anxious that holders
of Crown Lands should purchase the same. I beg to apprise
your Excellency that Mr. E. Goodman by his attorney applied
tor (about) 1000 acres of land on the Pentland Hills, and that
Mr. Hurst, a surveyor, was sent to survey the land as applied
tor, and that before completing my purchase from Mr. Goodman,
I wrote the Colonial Secretary, requesting to be informed if the
Government would transfer Mr. Goodman’s claim to me; I beg
respectfully to enclose the answer on the faith of which I com-
pleted my purchase and applied for about 800 acres more land.
I beg to state that Mr. Goodman’s home station was originally
on the land applied for, and the run returns to carry 8000
sheep. I have not applied for the homestead, being under the
impression that any time before the lease expired would be suf-
ficient ; I have, however, applied to your Excellency to be
allowed to take 640 acres of my claim on the Pentland Hills,
pending a decision about the land, and have this day received a
letter from the Colonial Secretary, a copy of which I beg to
enclose, trusting that your excellency will be pleased to take my
case into consideration, as the loss of my run on the Pentland
Hills would ruin my prospects, it having annually sent to the
market, from 4000 to 5000 fat sheep; and I beg to apprize your
Excellency that I should not have purchased the run except on
the faith of the Government Regulations.
I have the honor to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.


No. 13. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 22nd Oct., 1852.
Sir, —In acknowledging your letter of the 12th instant,
respecting your application to purchase a portion of your run
known as Ballengourooke and Penlland Hills, I beg to refer you
to my answer dated 20th April, to the request contained in your
letter of the 15th same month, and to inform you that it was
always intended to place certain restrictions upon the purchases
in question, and that until further instructions are received by
His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor from the Secretary of
State, the only portion, which at present can he purchased, is
the section containing the homestead.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Henry Matson, Esq., W. LONSDALE.
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 14.
Melbourne, 31st Dec., 1852.
Sir, —Having ascertained from enquiries at the Land Office,
that my home station, Ballengourooke, and 640 acres of land
has been granted on my application for a portion of my run sent
in by Mr. Goodman before the transfer of the land, and that
notice of the same was sent him to pay the sum of £640 within
one month, which notice I have reason to believe never reached
him (Mr. Goodman), that gentleman having transferred all rights,
together with the lease of Ballengourooke to me, should have
sent in coarse of post, the above notice to me also.
I have the honor to enclose a cheque for £640, in payment of
640 acres attached to the home station of Ballengourooke, and
to request that the deed or title may be made out in my name,
and that the land may be conveyed as early as convenient. I
have this day written Mr. Goodman, requesting to transfer all
claim or title to the land in question by return of post, and to
state that Mr. Goodman’s application was in fact my application,
as I was in possession of everything except the land which was
transferred to me I believe in July.
I have, &c.,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
No. 15.
61st Dec., 1852.
Sir, —I have the honor to request that my application to
purchase land, a portion of the Ballengourooke and Pentland
Hills, may be transferred to Mr. Henry Matson, and that the
Deed or Grant may issue to him, the licensee, the station, to-
gether with all rights attached were transferred to Mr. Matson
in July last.


The land granted is 640 acres, including the homestead at
Ballengourooke, £640, which amount Mr. Matson has paid to
the Colonial Treasurer. I have, &c.,
(Signed) For EDWARD GOODMAN,
By his Attorney John Goodman,
By virtue of Power of Attorney.
Witness to Mr. Goodman,
George James Jones.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
No. 16. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 31st Dec., 1852.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
31st instant, applying to complete purchase of the homestead
section known as Ballengourooke, and to inform you that it has
been found necessary to refer it to the Colonial Treasurer for
further information; as soon as this may have been received, and I
may have obtained the Lieutenant Governor’s decision thereon,
it shall be made known to you without delay.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant.
for the Colonial Secretary,
Henry Matson, Esq., L. GILLES.
Melbourne.
No. 17. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 18th Jan,, 1853.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
31st ultimo, enclosing a cheque for the sum of six hundred and
forty pounds, (£640) in payment of 640 acres of land containing
the homestead of the run known as Bullengourooke, granted
under pre-emptive right to Mr. E. Goodman, and which run has
been transferred to you; lam desired to inform you that at your
request the deed of grant will be issued in your name when the
land has been measured and description obtained.
I have the honor to be. Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
• for the Colonial Secretary,
Henry Matson, Esq., L. GILLES.
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 18. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, Ist April, 1853.
Sir, —Your application to purchase a portion of your licensed
run in the Western Port district, known as Ballengourooke,
under the Regulations dated 28th June, 1850, having been
brought under the consideration of the Land Board, and duly
reported upon for the information of His Excellency the Lieu-
tenant Governor, I am directed to inform you that, consistently


with the Kegulations, your claim cannot be allowed, the home-
stead section having already been allowed to the former licensee-
I have the honor to be. Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
By Order, L. GILLES, A. C. Secy.
To Henry Matson, Esq., Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
No. 19. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
April Bth, 1853.
Sir, —Having received a letter, dated April Ist, 1853, from
L. Gilles, Esq., stating that my application to purchase a portion
of my run has been refused by the Land Board, the homestead
section having already been allowed to the former licensee.
I have the honor to inform you that, by your letter dated
October 92nd, 1852, I was given to understand that the matter
of my application was referred to the Secretary of State, and that
the only portion I could then purchase was the homestead section,
which I have paid for.
May I request to he informed if your letter of the Ist instant
is to be considered a final answer to my application to purchase,
and that I am to understand that no land will be allowed me
under the pre-emptive right except the homestead section,
I have the honor to state in reference to the above that, by
your letter dated April 20th, 1852, I was given to understand
that I could purchase any portion of my run, and therefore sup-
posed there would be no difficulty in procuring a homestead on
the Pentland Hills, for the pre-emptive right of which I paid the
former Licensee a large sum of money.
I beg to request that the homestead section at Ballengourooke
may be surveyed, and the title or gi’ant issued.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENKY MATSON.
No. 20. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 18th April, 1853.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your communica-
tion of the Bth instant requesting to be informed whether His
Excellency’s decision with regard to your application to purchase
a portion of your run, under pre-emptive right, as conveyed by
my letter of the Ist instant, is to be considered final.
In reply, I am directed to state that the homestead section of
your run is all that can at present be granted ; the consideration
of all further applications being deferred until instructions on the
subject may have been received from the Home authorities.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant.
W. LONSDALE.
H. Matson, Esq., Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.


No. 31. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
May 30th, 1853.
Sir, —Having ascertained that certain portions or lots of
land in the parish of Korkuperrimul, on my licensed run, are not
within the Agricultural Reserve, and in consequence have been
withdrawn from sale, I have the honor to request that I may be
allowed to purchase the following lots under the pre-emptive
right, by fixed value, or by a valuation, should His Excellency
the Lieutenant-Governor approve of my application.
I beg to state for your information that the following lands
have been applied for by me and were surveyed on my applica-
tion, but withheld pending reference to the Secretary of State.
I beg also to call your attention to the three nearest lots on the
Korkuperrimul Creek, sold on Friday, at the Government sale,
to Mr. Wm. Williamson : No. 179 at £2 per acre, No. 100 at £1
14s. per acre, and No. 181 at £1 11s. per acre.
No. 1 of Section 1 - 112 Acres.
» 4 „ 2 - 312 „
„ 6 „ 2 - 362 „
„ 3 „ 2 - 274 „
„ 1 )> 2-80 „
„ 2 „ 2-80 „
„ 1 „ 17 - 67 „
» 2 „ 17 - 116 „
1394
I am also prepared to purchase at a valuation the other land I
applied for within the reserve :
No. 6 of Section 18 - 98 Acres.
„ 5 „ 18 - 104
„ 1 „ 18 - 326
» 7 „ 19 323 ~
851
2,245
Should His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor determine to
place me in competition with the public for the purchase of all
or any of the above land, may I request to be informed some time
before the sale, to enable me to sell the stock (4,500 sheepj now
running on the land.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Yours, &c.,
HENRY MATSON.
No. 22. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 16th July, 1853.
Sir, —Your application to purchase certain portions of land
forming part of your licensed run, Ballengourooke, under the
regulations dated 28th June, 1850, having been brought under
the consideration of the Land Board, and duly reported upon
for the information of His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor,


I am directed to inform you that, consistently with the regula-
tions, your claim cannot be allowed, as you have already been
allowed 640 acres on that station.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
By Order, L. GILLES, A. C. Sec.
To Henry Matson, Esq., J.P.,
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
Minute endorsed on the foregoing note, by Lieutenant-Governor.
I presume, nevertheless, that if the portion of land alluded to
be situated without the limits of the reserve sanctioned by me in
this quarter, there is no fear of its being sold before an alteration
in the present instructions with regard to the extension of the
limits of such reserves takes place. Will Mr. Buckley say how
this is, for Mr. Matson’s satisfaction ? C. J. L.
No land unless situated within the proclaimed reserve will be
offered for sale. WILLIAM H. BUCKLEY.
sth Aug., 1853.
No. 23. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
January 2nd, 1864.
Having seen in the Government Gazette certain sections of
land advertized for sale at Geelong on the 14th day of February,
1854, and described as follows —
No. 92 Portion 1 Section 18 Parish of Korkuperrimul, 326 Acres
„ 96 „ 6 „ 18 „ 98 „
„ 97 „ 7 „ 19 „ 323 „
which land is a portion of my licensed run, and now within the
proclaimed agricultural reserve, in the immediate district—l have
the honor to inform you that I, through Mr. E. Goodman, who
then held my license, applied to purchase these sections, together
with others, in December, 1861, and that Mr. Hurst, Govern-
ment Surveyor, was ordered to measure the same which was
completed. The answer I afterwards received stated that at pre-
sent I could only take the homestead of Ballengourooke (situated
twelve miles distant) which section of 640 acres, I found, was
granted by the Board without application, and for which I hold
the Grant Deed.
I beg to state that my object is not to embarrass the Government
by claiming land within the proclaimed reserve ; but, having paid
a large sum of money in 1850 to Mr. E. Goodman for his pre-emp-
tive right, taking a bond drawn up I believe under the direction
of the present Attorney-General, securing to me all pre-emptive
rights under the law of the Queen’s Orders in Council of 1847, I
wish to place on record my claim to compensation for the land
thus taken, and to state that I have applied a second time to
purchase the land at a valuation, together with other lots outside
the reserve. I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.


No. 24. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 28th January, 1854.
Sir, —I do myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 2nd instant, in which you request that certain
land in the parish of Korkuperrimul which is advertised for sale
on the 14th proximo may be withdrawn from such sale, as you
claim to exercise the privilege of purchase at a valuation under
pre-emptive right.
In reply, I have to acquaint you that His Excellency the
Lieutenant Governor is unable to comply with your wish, the
land in question being included in a legally proclaimed reserve
from lease which was notified in the Government Gazette of the
24th March, 1853, as having been made in accordance with the
provisions of Her Majesty’s Order in Council, dated 9th March,
1847. I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Henry Matson, Esq., J.P., JOHN FOSTER.
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 25. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
July 17 th, 1854.
Sir, —Having ascertained that certain inhabitants of Bacchus
Marsh have petitioned His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor,
to offer for sale portions of my run, situated outside an agricul-
tural reserve in the parish of Korkuperrimul, county of North
Bourke, I have the honour to request that you will be pleased to
place before His Excellency, the Lieutenant-Governor, my claim
to be considered in the disposal of this land, for the following
reasons:—
Ist. I applied, in 1850, to purchase 960 acres of land in this
locality, which was surveyed on my application, but after-
wards partly included in an agricultural reserve, and is now sold
by auction ; I also applied to pm’chase other lands in 1852 and
1853, joining the reserve. The answers to my applications stated
that I could only purchase my homestead of 640 acres, until
further instructions arrived from the Secretary of State.
2nd. That in consequence of my full belief that the Queen’s
Orders in Council would be carried out in their integrity, I pur-
chased my present homestead of 640 acres of land at Ballen-
gourooke, under the impression that I should be entitled to
purchase any of my run, not especially reserved from sale, on
the Pentland Hills.
3rd Having learnt from the Secretary of State’s despatch
that the Government do not intend to carry out the pre-emptive
right beyond the 640 acres, and having been misled by the
Queen’s Orders in Council, by which I paid the former proprietor
a large sum of money for his pre-emptive right, I beg now to
claim to be allowed, by His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor,
to cancel rny deed of grant for 640 acres at Ballengourooke


(reserving the improvements only), and to be allowed 640 acres
in lieu, taking in the old home-station on the Pentland Hills;
and also that, in consequence of the survey, I may not be
strictly confined to the usual square mile, but allowed to include
my out-station huts, if possible.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your very obedient Servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Melbourne.
No. 26.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Melbourne, 16th Aug., 1854.
Sir, —I do myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 17th ultimo, in which you set forth the posi-
tion in which you are placed relative to your claims to purchase
Crown Lands under pre-emptive right, on your run called Bal-
lengourooke, and request that His Excellency may consider
those claims in the disposal of certain lands about to be sold by
public auction, and allow you to purchase a section of land at
the old home station intead of the portion which has already
been granted to you at the home station.
2. In reply I am directed by the Lieutenant Governor to
inform you that the exchange solicited cannot be permitted.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Henry Matson, Esq., Your most obedient servant,
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh. J. MOORE, A.C.S.
No. 27. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh, Nov. 28th, 1854.
Sir, —Having called at your office when in Melbourne, on
the Bth inst., for the purpose of ascertaining the views of the
Government respecting my claim to compensation for the
loss of my run on the Pentland Hills, the particulars of which
claim have been under your notice and admitted ;
I have the honor to state that on the occasion above referred
to I saw Mr. Moore, the Assistant Colonial Secretary, who gave
me to understand that you were not then prepared to enter into
my case, and that probably I should hear from the Government
respecting it.
I beg to represent to you that in consequence of the almost
loss of my fattening station by sale at auction, which has ruined
my prospects, I am compelled to seek an eaidy settlement of my
claim to enable me to enter into other pursuits, and trust that I
may not be considered intrusive in calling your attention to it,
feeling certain that His Excellency Sir C. Hotham and the
Executive Government will see the justice of remedying an
admitted hardship as speedily as possible.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Melbourne.


No. 28. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
December sth, 1854.
Sir, —The principal portion of, my.run on the Pentland
Hills having been sold by auction, and my interest and claim
in the same being now under the consideration of the Govern-
ment, I have the honour to inform you that a small portion
called the “Island” still remains in my possession, under
licence from the Crown, and on this land I have the remainder
of my sheep, now suffering from the disease called Scab. In
consequence of the small dimensions of this run, and its dis-
tance from my homestead, I offered it for sale with the sheep to
Mr. Gordon, who has purchased other portions of my run at
auction ; that gentleman has refused to purchase, because he has
been informed at your office that the land will be sold imme-
diately. Having suffered most severely by the loss of my
fattening station (but for which I expect to be fully compensated),
I trust you will in this instance prevent my receiving further
injury; the land called the “ Island ”is unsurveyed, is unfit for
agriculture, and the assistant-surveyor, Mr. Gibbons, now near
the locality, can verify this report; it is not within the parish of
Korkuperrimul, and is not within an agricultural reserve; my
sheep, being scabby, are by law not allowed to move off their
run. Under these circumstances, may I request you will be
pleased to state the longest period I can be allowed to retain
this land, now under license to me from the Ci'own.
I have the honour to be, sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY MATSON.
The Honourable the Surveyor-General, Melbourne.
No. 29. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, sth January, 1855.
Sir, —In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of the
28th November, 1854, claiming compensation for the loss of
your run on the Pentland Hills, I have the honor to inform you
that His Excellency, the Lieutenant-Governor has ordered the
consideration of the subject to be postponed, until the Crown
Lands’ Tenure Commission have made their report.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
J. MOORE, A.C.S.
Henry Matson, Esq., Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 30. Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh,
April 30th, 1855,
Sir, —Having received an answer to my application, dated
28th November, 1854, respecting my claim upon the Govern-
ment for breach of promise and sale of certain lands leased
by me;


I have the honor to inform you that the reply referred to,
dated sth January, 1855, states that His Excellency the Lieu-
tenant Governor has ordered that the consideration of my claim
shall be postponed until the Crown Lands Tenure Commission have
made their report.
May I request to be informed when it is probable this report
may be made ; I trust you will not consider this question intru-
sive, when I i-efer you to the speech of the late Hon. Colonial
Secretary, who admitted my claim, and he considered that I had
received a hardship.
I have only to add that I was called on to pay license and
assessment for the land in question a short time only before its
sale, and also that the Protest alluded to in the correspondence
laid before the House, on the motion of Mr. Goodman,
was made on the day of sale, and handed the Acting Colonial
Treasurer.
I have, &c., &c.,
HENRY MATSON.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary,
Melbourne.
No. 31. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 30th August, 1855.
Sir, —I am directed to reply to your letter of the Bth ult.,
in which you renew your claim for compensation for the loss of
your Pentland Hills Station.
2. 1 am therefore to inform you that the minute of His Excel-
lency Mr. La Trobe, which you state was not complied with,
cannot be considered as a promise that the lands in question
should be withheld from sale ; but merely implied that such sale
would not be proceeded with until an alteration had been made in
the instructions with regard to the extension of reserves. That
alteration has taken place, and a great extent of land not in-
cluded in reserves then existing has since been sold.
3. Such being the case, I am to state that you are held to be
in the same position as that of many other Crown tenants who
have suffered by the sale of lands held by them under depas-
turing licenses; but that your application cannot be finally
determined on until the Squatting Question has been settled.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
J. MOORE, A.C.S.
Henry Matson, Esq., J.P.,
Ballengourooke, Bacchus Marsh.
No. 33.
Melbourne, August 38th, 1857.
Messrs Kaye & Butchart, Melbourne.
Gentlemen, —I am making a claim on the Government for


the resumption of my Portland Hills run. You would oblige me
by stating you consider the value of that run with the
Ballengourooke run, and 8,000 sheep, in 1853 (say December.)
I am, Gentlemen,
Yours faithfully,
HENRY MATSON.
No. 33.
Melbourne, 29th August, 1857, •
Henry Matson, Esq.,
Dear Sir, —In reply to your letter of yesterday, as to the
value of your run in December, 1853, we should say it was worth
about 28s. per head. About that time we effected several sales
at from 255. to 30s. (£11,200.) *
We are, Dear Sir,
€? Yours truly, '
KAYE & BUTCHART.
No. 34. 28th September 1854.
I hereby protest against the sale of certain land held by me
under her Majesty’s Orders in Council of 1847, to be offered for
sale in Melbourne this date.
HENRY MATSON.
No. 35. 21st June, 1852.
E, Goodman,
640 Acres at Ballengourooke, Western Port District, to
include Homestead, at 20s. per acre—£64o.
