

OA Fp
Bio r
c*--- 4?
Copland King
And His
Papuan Friends




COPLAND KING
AND HIS
PAPUAN FRIENDS
BEING A MEMOIR
OF
THE REV. COPLAND KING, M.A., Th. Soc.
REV. CECIL J. KING, M.A.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by "The Worker” Trustees,
St. Andrew's Place, Sydney.


X.
Jf V
GULF OF PAPUA
MANDATED V.
X,
s \ \ A Morobe
GUINEA^bA
\ \
\ JL fr w»ona
MAP OF
THE DIOCESE OF
NEW GUINEA
(PAPUA)
Mission Station shonn thus .— o MAMBA
s %
3
g
B
o
£
O
c
ort Moresby^b^v
s
\ AN,6ELA r~\
UJAKU6 COLL! N6W000 V )
601 POTA t /
2
u
H
l=>
A
4 \
. /> \
XDaru
s. j^orobe
\ \$K ANGLICAN
MISSION
0 i?
a. Cape
</
Port Morestte *nr»
TORRES; STRAIT \.
/
J. Cape York
Samarai
t
A L SEA
/ 1. CORAL SEA
AUSTRALIA
I V
0 25
Scale of Miles
50 75 100 125 rao
— 1 * 1 H.E.C.A.


Foreword.
I feel greatly honoured in being asked to write a
foreword to the reminiscences of Copland King gathered
by his twin brother Cecil. Having read through the
MS. I am confident that the book will give an intimate
knowledge of a humble, capable and self-sacrificing
personality, and that was what Copland King was to
those who knew him.
I met him first at the Church Congress in Brisbane,
in 1913, and we were attracted to each other. To have
met and known, however slightly, such a missionary
has always been an inspiration to me.
This book adds to the picture of Copland King por-
trayed by Bishop White in his admirable “Pioneer of
Papua,” and, I am sure, will be much appreciated by
those who knew him, or of him, and the many interested
in the wonderful New Guinea Mission.
It is good for us who are tempted to despondency in
these difficult times to hear more of a man who unflinch-
ingly faced such great difficulties, the difficulties of a
pioneer missionary, and won through.
JOHN S. NEEDHAM,
Chairman, A.B.M.




REV. COPLAND KING, M.A., Th.Soo.




Preface,
The folloiving pages, often scrappy and disjointed, but
all connected with the work of my twin brother the
Rev. Copland King during his twenty-seven years as
Missionary, were written with a view of adding to the
story of his life written by Bishop Gilbert White, and
entitled, “A Pioneer of Papua,” S.P.C.K. Some of the
stories were related to me in 1931 on the spot by those
who had known and loved him in Papua. Some were
told me by himself, and others were culled from his
letters* An Australian of the third generation, he was
\ .
ordained Priest in 1887, and, on meeting the Rev. Albert
Maclaren in the trail, three years later, on his way north,
where he was to spend a holiday on his cousin’s station,
he resigned his Curacy of Castle Hill, near Sydney, and
with Maclaren arrived on the field in August, 1891.
Invalided home in three months, he heard of Maclaren’s
”passing” and immediately set to work to return and
take charge, for the time at least, of the New Guinea
Mission. He refused to be nominated as Bishop, but
loyally served under Bishops Stone-Wigg, Sharp and
Newton, until he died on October 5, 1918, aged 55 years.
CECIL J. KING.


REV. A. A. MACLAREN


The Summons to Service .
The story of the meeting of Maclaren and King, in
February, 1891, in the train going north, has been often
told, but one significant little incident King related to
me. The two men had left the train at Quirindi in the
late evening to wait for the early morning train to
carry them on. They had been talking about the subject
which was so 1 prominent in Maclaren’s mind, but he had
not then suggested that his companion should join him.
They went together to call on a bachelor slightly known
to Maclaren with whom they proposed to have supper
and wait for their train. Maclaren’s hand was raised
to knock at the door when a voice said, “Well, what
shall it be, nap or euchre?” Maclaren looked round —
“I don’t think we are wanted here.” So they turned
away and, walking up and down the dusty road of
Quirindi, the question was asked: “How about you com-
ing to New Guinea?” The result we know. On King
saying that he knew very little about such work,
Maclaren said, “I will do the work, but I want a
University man like yourself just to learn the language,
compile the grammar and give us the books. Also I
should like one who was not of the same ‘Party’ as I
am supposed to be. I want the Mission to be able to
claim Church-wide sympathy and support.” At that
time, as they recognised, the demon of “Party” spirit
ran high in Australia. In fact some good and prominent
clergyman in Sydney told Archdeacon King that he was
astonished at his son going out with a High Churchman
like Maclaren. This dear man has been in Paradise some
years now, where he has probably changed his views.
Copland King was troubled about one thing. He said
that he could not enthuse over the lovable natives as
Maclaren did. He was not drawn to them as being so
very attractive. When he was asked, “Then why have
you offered your life for them?” he replied, “Well, I
felt that here was something I could do for Christ, and
no one else has volunteered, so I am going.”


We who knew him, know how his love for the people
and the work grew, so that he always welcomed the end
of his furloughs. Love begets love, and when he was
leaving for his first furlough after four years’ work,
he was writing at his table in his room at Dogura, and on
looking round in the semi-darkness, he found that several
of the boys had crept in and were crouching on the floor
weeping at the thought of “Amau Kingi” leaving them
for the mysterious south. Thirteen years after his death,
his twin brother visited Ambasi and was welcomed even
with tears for his brother’s sake. “Amau Kingi’s
brother!” “Amau Kingi’s same face!” and a huge pile
of native food had been collected for him “in Memor-
iam.” They did not expect him to sit down and eat it
there probably, but if they did, they were sadly dis-
appointed. He did not even try to do it, and so they
took it on board the launch “Maclaren-King,” where it
came in useful' for others. Howevfer, the incident made
his brother feel that at Ambasi at least, if nowhere else,
he was a howling swell, and he certainly felt a great
lump in his throat that morning. He felt the same thing
when, exactly 40 years after the landing of the two
pioneer missionaries, to the very day, August 10, he
took part in the service held round the cross at Kieta
on the identical spot where Albert Maclaren and Copland
King had stepped on shore, to start reclaiming the
East Coast of Papua for the Kingdom of Christ, and start
the New Guinea Mission, the brightest jewel of the
Australian Church—as the Church.
According to Isaiah’s Prophecy, these two young men
had both seen the vision, or to put it in another way,
as this is being written on the Epiphany Festival, these
two Magi had seen the Star rising in the North-East of
British New Guinea, and had followed it to pour out
the gold of their allegiance to their King, the incense
of their devotion, and the myrrh of their lives for their
Lord. The Vision, or the Star, was the triumph of the
Cross over the dark heathenism of God’s children in
Papua.


THE FIRST BUILDINGS AT DOGURA.
KING’S WHALEBOAT.




Truly, the very spot where they landed is rightly
and ever shall be held as Holy Ground!
Lines
Written by Rev. Copland King while crossing Milne
Bay in an open boat on our Missionaries’ first
arrival on the N.E. Coast of Papua, August Bth, 1891.
0 Saviour who didst lay Thy brow
Upon a pillow splashed with spray,
Look down upon Thy servants now
Who journey our appointed way.
Tend Thou our sails, guide Thou our course,
Be Thou our compass and our breeze,
And let the Gospel’s magic force
Be manifested o’er these seas.
Give grace to us who know Thee, Lord,
To live, to teach, to glorify.
That so the power of Thy word
May train these sheep for lives on high.
And soon through all this heathen land
The souls once lost in misery
Shall praise Thee in a holy band,
And sing Thy goodness endlessly!
As soon as the Head Station was built and the work
there organised, the next step was to start other stations
up and down the coast. King was generally the first to
start a new station, which, when established, would be
handed on to others. He himself would then move on
to break fresh ground.
Some instances of this early work may be interesting.


From Log at Didiwaga.
Taupota, 1892.
On September 21, Rev. Copland King arrived by boat
at Didiwaga or Taupota with John Par, 5.5.1., to or-
ganise the work there, at 2 a.m. and camped out. Next
day the studding (garigari) was put on the house and
the first coat of lining (paruta) was tied round. The
cutter came in at 1 p.m. bringing his stores, and Mr.
King took up his residence in the half-finished house.
Two days after that, a goat and fowl arrived, and
Crispin, a Taupota boy, was installed as Cooky boy.
Spending his time itinerating amongst the neighbour-
ing villages, organising school classes, building schools,
rest houses, etc., and always working at the languages,
King frequently had to knock off and rest, as he was
by no means in good health. After two months’ work
here he left the station in charge of Elijah, 5.5.1., and
his wife Janet.. Dear old Father John (Rev. J. Hunt)
arrived from Hoige, and eventually in January took full
charge of this station, as Mr. King was leaving for the
Northern Division, where his chief work lay for the
rest of his life.
Such are some of the brief entries in “Taupota Log.”
Brief, but to those who stop to think, indications of
weeks and months, expanding into years, of the steady,
patient, effective work of laying the foundation of a
new Branch of Christ ’s One Holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church, to last until !
Making Friends with Strangers
in the Early Days .
“On July 18, 1895, we went to a place called Awaki.
Here a chief, wearing a shirt, came aboard the schooner
and went off with me in the dinghy. I had also my
three boys and a big schooner boy.


The natives crowded down to the beach and out
to the dinghy, and the schooner-boy, Pumpkin, got
terribly frightened. I went ashore and left two
boys with him, but they were all scared. I sat
down, and the natives surrounded me, yelling away,
holding out things for which I was to give them
“kilam.” The boy with me was frightened at my
sitting down, but I could see it was only a wild thirst
for iron. The old chief took charge of me in the same
way that he did of the Governor, and when I said, “I
wish to go back to the schooner,” he said, “No, you
have some more trade (iron, looking-glasses and beads!,
finish that and then go! ” Sol had to go on buying till
I had nothing more to buy with. In the afternoon I
landed again, and much the same game went on. The
old chief had some stone tomahawks which I bought,
and when I had finished my trade, I put my purchases
into the boat and went for a walk, and found a lot
more villages inland. Coming back to the shore I looked
in the dinghy for my native tomahawks, and, as I did
not see them, I asked the chief about them. He had
stowed them away in his house, and in someone else’s
house too, hoping that I would forget about them, but
he made no trouble about going for them and giving
them up to me again.
Next day we anchored off a large village. At first
they would not come near us, thinking that we might be
enemies. A piece of red calico was generally the first
signal, and then, when we heard their cries, we repeated
them. The whole lot in the canoes would then begin
shouting, “Orowarowarowaro,” and paddle nearer. Then
we would shout, “Kilam ta na gimona” (Iron to sell).
We landed, and I sat down on the sand by the side of
a man who looked important, and waited till they sat
down near me, leaving a clear space in front. ... I
put a piece of iron on the sand in front of me, and, in
a minute, if was out of sight. I asked for it, and a man
shoved it up from under the sand a foot or so away.
By and bye the captain came up, and before his eyes
a man lifted up a belt of white cowrie shells from my


heap, and tried to sell it to me again. Then, as there
was a creek to cross, I gave my boots and socks to a
man to carry. Soon I found that I had not put my
notebook with pencil into the bag, so I walked back for
it, and the natives immediately brought me a mirror
which they had stolen out of the bag. I took it without
a word and walked on, but my book had already been
taken away to another village. However, they sent for
it, and I sat down till it was brought. Then I thought
I would put my boots and socks on. I put one boot and
sock on, the natives displaying great interest in the
performance; then I turned to the other boot, and be-
hold ! the sock that was in it was gone. The natives sent
messages all over the place, but for a long time could
not find out who had taken it. At last they brought it
back from another village. Then I had my walk.”
(This illustrates how Mr. King began to know his
charges in the early days. These crude beginnings were
the start of the chain of Mission Stations extending now
right along the hundreds of miles of the N.E. Coast of
Papua, from East Cape to the village of Mamba, where
German New Guinea commences.)
A Rough Spin.
In October, 1907, while Rev. J. Hunt was stationed at
Taupota, one night a fierce gale was raging and the
Mission Schooner, Albert Maclaren, was blown on shore.
Oliver and other boys were on board and let down both
anchors. But the schooner dragged them both and was
thrown up on the beach near Wawawamana. Fortun-
ately no lives were lost, but Oliver and Adams were
bruised and terribly knocked about. Oliver said to Mr.
Hunt, “I stuck to the boat and if I died, I could do
no more.” Adams also said, “I was not afraid. If I
die God knows, and is wjth me.” Later on the launch
came, and the Albert Maclaren was found to be not very
much damaged.


A Wailing Scene near Taupota .
In October, 1909, a man named Tirnrubi died, pro-
bably from pneumonia. Two Christians, George Keko
and Bartholomew, were accused of having caused his
death because they were old ‘‘ bararu ’ ’ boys, who> were
supposed to be able to cause death by witchcraft. They
confessed to have practised “bararu” in days gone by,
but, at the same time, they said that they knew it was
humbug. On one occasion one of the “bararu” men,
Philip, had fasted for nine days (on patimo) in order
to ensure fine weather for a feast that was in prospect.
He said his fast nearly killed him, and never again for
any feast “would he do it.” The weather was fine on
that day. To return to the wailing scene: Mr. Hunt
saw and heard the wailing for Tirurubi. On one side
of a small gully nearby men were sitting; on the other
the corpse was arranged in a sitting posture on a kind of
bier made of saplings and palms. His hair was dressed
and he wore plumes. A large “Kai” was suspended
over his mouth. The face was painted. The father and
mother sat on either side of the corpse, with near rela-
tions close by. All others on this side of the gully were
women mourners. The father and the widow embraced
the body from time to time. Mr. Hunt addressed the
mourners and friends, and then left them to finish their
rites of burial.
Quid Pro Quo.
On one .occasion Mr. King took out a chip of bark
which had become embedded in a boy’s eye, and dropped
some castor oil into the eye to heal it up. Next day
the boy came to him and claimed a stick of tobacco
in exchange for what had been extracted from his eye
the day before. Tit for Tat! A present is generally
meant to be returned, and all the better if with interest.


*Surgical Operations,
From the Sydney “Bulletin,” September 9, 1931:
“Tamata”: The Sydney press, broke out into headlines
xhe other day over a ship’s captain who successfully set
a compound fracture, that is, a break which is compli-
cated by the broken bone protruding through the flesh.
Sea history is full of much more complicated operations.
There is the famous one of the young naval lieutenant
commanding a gunboat on the West Coast of Africa,
who decided that a seaman’s leg must come off if his
life was to be saved. The ship had a volume on anatomy,
and, laying this beside the unchloroformed patient, the
neophyte got to work with a couple of seamen’s knives
and the carpenter’s tenon-saw and made a capital job
of it. One of my memories of that great missionary and
fine gentleman, the late Copland King, concerns an opera-
tion successfully performed under similar difficulties.
A native labourer was sent down by his miner employer
from the Upper Gira in Papua with a hand blown off
by dynamite. King borrowed the K.M.’s emergency first-
aid kit and a couple of trade knives from the Govern-
ment store. He enlisted my services as assistant and 1
have wondered since what was the most intriguing part
of the performance—King’s coolness and skill, though
he had had no surgical training, or the calm indifference
of the Papuan native, who, without an anaesthetic, looked
interestedly on while his arm was being pruned and
dressed.
* Bishop Newton says that it was Nurse Combley who was in
charge of the operation. King assisted her. Mr. Cecil Abel relates
that his father, the late L.M.S. Missionary at Kwato, once took
the arm off a native which had been crushed three weeks
previously, and had not been attended to. It was in a state too
awful to be described. In lieu of an anaesthetic, the man was
made blind drunk, and the operation performed with a tenon-saw
at Kwato. It was entirely successful.


NATIVE CANOE.
NATIVE HOUSE.




Radava, 1893 .
Sir William McGregor, the first Governor, was away
up the Fly Rfver on the West Coast of Papua, and at
that time there was no other white man on the Bast
Coast, except the missionaries. It was in the early days
of the Mission, and word came to Dogura that, at a cer-
tain village, which is now entirely Christian, a series
of cannibal feasts were being held. Mr. King sent word
to the chief that, if he did not stop his funny business,
he would report him to the Government. The reply
came back that the said chief cared nothing for the
Government, and that the Government could go to ■ ——!
or words to that effect. Whereupon King threatened
that he would come himself. The answer was, in effect,
“Come and we will eat you, too.” King got some boys
together with difficulty and went over the mountains
to the village. Leaving his boys in the scrub he went
on by himself, sat down in the open space in the middle
of the village and called out the name of the chief.
The men came rushing out, and, fully armed, surrounded
him, meaning, as they said afterwards, to kill him. One
after another came and tried to speak to him, but the
visitor would take no notice of anyone but the chief.
After a while, expecting every moment to be riddled
with spears, he noticed a movement behind him and,
looking over his shoulder, saw a piece of a pig which had
been placed on the ground at his back. This, of course,
was meant as a bribe. Seizing hold of it by the pro-
truding bone, he flung it away, and hit a squatting
warrior, knocking him over. The man jumped up and
was about to fling his spear when the others, with a
laugh, pulled him down.
At last the chief came, and, when accused of his tricks,
denied the soft impeachment, meaning, perhaps, by this
denial, that he would not do it again—till the next time.
King later on found out that the head of the man, round
which they had been dancing the night before, was
sticking on a spear in the house next to him. After


palaver, King said that he had some boys near by in the
scrub who had some “Kilam” (iron) and other valuable
gifts, but that the chief must guarantee their safety.
The chief did so. Going to the edge of the village, King
blew his whistle, and the Mission boys very timidly,
but, as I take it, very bravely, came forward. Trading
and presents having been completed, King naively, in
his diary, said, “Fever came on me and I lay down under
a bush for awhile till it passed, and then obtained a
couple of hundred words for my vocabulary.” He then
went home with his party, but borrowed the son of the
chief for “half a moon.” After which he sent him
home from Dogura, laden with gifts and with wonderful
stories of the white man. Thus was a friendly tribe
added to the others, and an opening made for the
entrance of the Kingdom of Christ into another dark
stronghold of the enemy.
Ambasi in June, 1914 .
Ambasi is in the Northern part of British New Guinea,
near the German Boundary.
Rev. Copland King, M.A., Th. Soc., could have been
seen one day teaching about 30 Papuan boys and girls,
putting them through a catechism of the three R’s, and
the elements of our faith. With him was a tall young
clergyman, his nephew, Rev. F. R. Elder, who had re-
cently joined him, and a dusky native teacher, named
Christopher Asembo.
The class, having been finished quite leisurely, he then
walked down to the village beach to meet his sister, his
sister-in-law, and his twin brother, who had just
anchored in the bay on the Mission launch, Whitkirk.
Not even for them would Copland King scamp or cut
short his lesson. They could toss about at anchor paying-
tribute to Neptune (which they did) before he would
hurry to get out the boat and bring them to land,


jMi
. ■
-. ■ . ■
|
t : p|L
- WSP
jj
I.
#
J
Mi
■'-'... • . _
:■ '■■ \
■ *‘h 1* 1 ppi MpF 1i|p;
P
i # ■ ■
BISHOP SHARP, REV. H. NEWTON. A BAPTISM GROUP.




Dressed in a pair of trousers, more or less white, an
open shirt and an absolutely shapeless panama hat, a
stranger would hardly have taken him for a scholar.
Yet he had already made an enduring name for himself
by first learning and then publishing grammars and
dictionaries, with psalms, hymns, Gospels, and reading
books of twoi new and distinct languages. This work
was made much more difficult, as, every few miles, vari-
ous dialects and usages had to be taken into account,
starting from East Cape, in the China Straits, 400 miles
of coast, up to the alligator-infested Mambare River,
thirty miles further North of Ambasi, King’s last head-
quarters. Here, when at home, he had his three-roomed
and three-walled house, built on the top of a ridge, at
the base of which the “ever restless sea” lapped and
lashed the narrow beach.
We quote from the “Sydney Bulletin”:
“After lunch, sitting at his table surrounded by his
books and papers, ‘in sweet confusion blended,’ he would
be sought by his dusky and almost entirely unclothed
parishioners, who would sit on the floor quite patiently
until he would turn and attend to them. He would
settle their disputes, give relief for their sores and sick-
nesses, and, that finished, would go on with his writing,
with a little pet naked piccaninny sitting on the table.
He would be corresponding with savants in France,
Germany, Philippine Islands, etc., describing newly
found ferns, orchids, etc., and preparing his addresses
to be given in several different places, and perhaps in
various dialects, the following Sunday.”
A Village Service, June 9 1914 .
Coming into Ambasi Village, where, as yet, no church
had been built, Mr. King drew a large rectangle on the
sand with his stick, and divided the rectangle by a line
down the centre to form the “Aisle” of the “Church”
and a crossline at one end to represent Reading Desk,
Lectern, Sanctuary and everything else of the usual
church fittings. Telling a boy to ring the bell—that is,


to blow the conch shell —he waited, but only a few
women and children came and sat on their side of the
“Aisle.” At last a man came and objected to the
position of the “Church” as being too near some cocoa-
nut palms which might drop some nuts on their “nuts.”
So the whole Church was moved bodily in three minutes
just by drawing the lines in a more open space. Then
the dusky lords of creation condescended to come and
squat on their side of the dividing line, and the service
commenced.
A hymn was sung in the native tongue, and prayers
were said by Amau Kingi. The three visiting palefaces
said “Amen” when they guessed the right time had
come, trusting that what was prayed for was satis-
factory.
The address was founded, as we were told afterwards,
on the parable of the Marriage Feast, the Gospel for that
Sunday, adapted and localised. The sermon was in
Binandere, told very graphically and with a lot of ges-
tures. “Now, then, come along to the Feast, all you
people—guriga, guriga. There are heaps of food —taro,
yams, bananas —come along.” But they would not come.
So the men went out and found others, and said, “Come
along to the Feast.” But one said, “I must go and catch
fish.” Another, “I must go and water my garden,” and
another said the same. Then, after the sermon and
another hymn, all knelt for the final prayer, and one
could only pray that some glimmering of the light might
pierce those dark hearts, and the beautiful land of Papua
be won for Christ.
During this address the preacher broke off now and
then to address someone by name or to scold a woman
who kept exchanging a little pig for her baby in the
basket, on her back or on her lap. Soon a good-sized
pig careered through the congregation, chased by dogs,
to the delight of the little boys. When this service,
called “Taparoro,” because held in the native language,
was over, King went through the village hunting up
absentees. Various excuses were made, one lady saying
that she was watching several pots of food being cooked,
some for the men and some for her pigs, and she was


afraid that two-legs or four-legs would eat each other’s
food. Chuckling over the humorous things, pondering
over the others, and planning how to carry on the work
to better advantage, the party went home up the hill,
and enjoyed a talk, a meal, and lastly English Even-
song in the native-built church, to which a few baptised
Papuans came.
Visit to the Goldfields,
Climbing over the mountains, King used, at times, to
visit the Gira and other goldfields. The services he
always tried to arrange to hold with the miners were
often very weird. occasion, one of the men who,
perhaps, had feared that the sermon would he dry, had
fortified himself against thirst beforehand. Halfway
through, he left his seat for the doorway, where, sitting
on the step, he lit his pipe, and subjected the speaker
to running comments both in the prayers and sermon.
At the close, he took another man’s hat and went round
for the collection. When the offering of gold dust or
promised sum from any of his mates seemed to him too
mean, he stood and harangued the tardy giver until he
contributed a fair amount. This took place during the
singing of the last hymn. The hymn after the sermon
may rightly be called an invention of the enemy to drive
away the impression made by the address, but, on this
occasion, it had its use and justification.
A Government officer, who was with King in the
Yodda Goldfield, gives an account of a similar service.
“King mentioned a rock in his address. One of the
men said out loud; ‘I wonder if it was on a sandy
bottom.’ The sandy pockets are where they often find
gold. This gentleman took the plate round, and when
the men asked him how much their mates had promised,
told him to put them down for the same amount, as a
rule, but sometimes for a larger sum, to make their
mates feel small.”
Miners from the Gira and Waria Rivers would pass
through mission stations occasionally, on their way to
and from Tamate, on the Mambare River, where there


was a store and public house. King would go to Tamate
on Sundays and hold services for them, and occasionally
go to the mines themselves. These men were always
appreciative of his visits to them, and, sometimes,
showed it by gifts of gold dust for the Mission.
When the Missionary on one occasion had to rebuke
the men for certain sins, they got very angry. King
said that after the service they would have a discussion
on the subject, and so they allowed him to finish. At
the meeting, afterwards, they complained that the
Bishop had accused them of bad behaviour, and they
were going to take it out of Mr. King. “I can’t fight
yon,” he said, “but my friend here (Mr. Ramsay) will
be happy to take you on, one at a time!” The offer
was rejected, but Mr. Ramsay was wondering what he
would have been like when he had finished. ■ There
were thirteen of them!
Matrimonial Problems ,
Humorous and numerous entries in the Missionaries’
Jogs are made from time to time. E.g., Mr. F. found that
“David was suffering from neuralgia combined with a
sick mother-in-law, which, he explained, had prevented
his returning to his work at Rumamina.”
While in the Northern division of the Mission area,
King found his two teachers waiting for him when he
returned home one Sunday night. They had been offi-
ciating in different directions. One had been taking
service at the home village of the other man. When
they met he said to him, “You were married yesterday
to so and so.” The bridegroom had been married by
proxy and without his knowledge or desire, all in order,
according to the native custom. The boy objected, for,
though he had been sweet on the girl, he did not want
her for a wife, as she was still a heathen. As a way out
of the difficulty, he was sent out on Monday to say to
his people that, as he was a Christian, the old customs
did not apply to him, and that “when he did marry, it
was to be as a Christian, and by Amau Kingi, and to a
Christian girl.”






Threatened by Sorcerer .
On one occasion Mr. King had offended a certain
sorcerer, who threatened to come and kill him by magic.
King asked how he would do it, and was told that the
man would make a grab at him, which would take away
his heart; another grab which would take away his liver;
and a third grab which would take away his lungs. But
he would feel nothing for twenty-four hours, when he
would fall sick and die. The sorcerer came and duly
made his grabs (a kind of Jolly Miller business). Ex-
actly twenty-four hours after, King, who had laughed
at the gentleman at the time, telling him to “fire away,”
had really forgotten it, but went down with the first
attack of fever he had had for eighteen months. The
Mission boys were very seared and some of them bolted.
But King soon recovered, and that was the end of that.
Translation Work,
It is, perhaps, as a translator that Copland King’s
most lasting and useful work for Papua was accom-
plished. At school and at the University, he never
bothered himself with French or German, though he
learnt theni both. As has been mentioned elsewhere, it
was for this work chiefly that Maclaren asked him to
join the Mission. After his chief’s death, in five months’
time, King had charge of the Mission affairs as well as
this, until the consecration of Bishop Stone-Wigg in 1908.
And even after that, he had travelling and building and
a thousand and one other things to attend to. Yet not
only did he publish a Gospel, a book of hymns, prayers,
catechism, etc., in Wedauan, but had to find out the
paradigms, etc., of the verbs and their uses, and having
had to start, be it remembered, from scratch —that is,
without knowing a single word of the tongue, and with-
out a teacher. What an achievement for nine years!
“Without a teacher,” did I say? Ah! no! for he must
have been specially gifted and endowed by that Teacher


to Whom he was accustomed to refer everything, viz.,
the Spirit of Wisdom Himself, Whose servant Copland
King always aspired to be.
Mr. King was the first to investigate the languages
spoken in the East Coast of British New Guinea, hut
other scholars have stated that Wedauan, spoken on the
southern part of the Coast, is akin to some of the
Melanesian languages, while Binandere is much more
difficult, and is spoken further north, up to the old
German Boundary, and is pure Papuan. The first
Binandere dictionary he printed in 1901.
_ Canon Tomlinson, the G.O.M. of the New Guinea Mis-
sion, has completed the Bible in the Mukawan language.
Miss Cottingham, in her cottage at Dogura, though help-
less through her rheumatism, is always translating and
revising, building well on the foundation laid by King
in 1891 and after, and thus crowning her long and won-
derful service in the Mission.
An almost complete list of King’s translations and
published writings is published as an Appendix to “A
Pioneer of Papua.”
Brothers in Christ.
One Sunday morning, at a Celebration, amongst the
Communicants, two natives, one of whom had come in
from the outside village, found themselves kneeling side
by side. One had eaten a portion of the other one’s
father. With a great effort they both remained and both
were filled with the Spirit of the King of Love. At the
end of the service they were seen walking away together
as close friends. Could one have a more striking proof
of the effectual change which is spreading in Papua
through the work initiated by Maclaren and King in
1891, and, since then, carried on by their successors
with the same devotion, and for the same Master?
The Mission is being carried on on the old lines of
commonsensical churchmanship, and those who love to
call themselves Evangelicals or Catholics or High
Churchmen or Low Churchmen, or favour any other
party label, all seem to have dropped ecclesiastical nar-


GOING TO CHURCH.




rowness on their way out; and, like Maclaren and King,
and Stone-Wigg and Tomlinson, agree to differ in non-
essentials, but are one in the great essential object of
the New Guinea Mission, of preaching Christ, King,
Saviour and Lover of souls, black, white, brown or
brindled.
Nature Study.
Some people think that a Missionary’s life is dull,
monotonous, and uninteresting. King’s life never seemed
so to him. Besides his teaching in the schools, and his
daily study of his Bible, he was keenly alive to nature.
A lover of nature in that wonderful land of Papua can
always find interest around him. One of his close friends
who lived and worked with him for years in the northern
parts of the field (Mr. Henry Holland) writes as
follows:
He made a study of the timbers of Papua, sending
them to be tested. He studied bird life, and started to
write a book on them. He once asked his colleague why
he thought God made them so beautiful. When asked
for his own opinion he said: “Because God Himself
takes such an interest in them! ’ ’
Tama and Sina.
There was one unspeakable blessing that was granted
to Copland and to all his fellow missionaries without
which God alone knows how they would have fared.
On the day that the two pioneer Priests of the New
Guinea Mission landed at Kieta, and started to found
the Head Station at Dogura, Mr. and Mrs. Samuel
Tomlinson were farewelled at St. Peter’s, Melbourne,
and arrived in September to join the Mission. Mr. Tom-
linson is now Canon Tomlinson, Th. Soc., and, though
nominally in retirement, still lives and works with his
good wife in their cottage at Dogura. What the subject
of this sketch owed to these two beloved and devoted
friends, no words can say. They tended him while sick,


they helped him with his literary work, and indeed in
every possible way; and they still take every oppor-
tunity of expressing their love and admiration for him.
For years, at Mukawa, Canon and Mrs. Tomlinson
worked, and, under his care, the complete Bible was
published in the native tongue spoken around Collin g-
wood Bay. How many doctors and professors and re-
puted scholars and pillars of the Christian Church can
claim such an honour? Th. Soc. is the Canon’s degree,
honoris causa, and richly deserved.
God bless and still keep you, Tama and Sina —dear old
Septuagenarians!
Copland King, Botanist .
As all his friends know, King was a good botanist, and
discovered many plants, until then unknown in the
civilised world. One, a flowering bamboo, was named
after him, Schizostachyum Coplandi.
Several new or very rare orchids and ferns were
collected by him on his travels amongst the mountains.
One of the former, a very evil-smelling one, in appear-
ance and odour very much like raw and rotten meat, he
sent to Mrs. MacArthur Onslow. When taken out of
the hothouse at Camden Park, for the men objected to
work while the orchid was there in bloom, a swarm of
blowflies immediately settled on it, and appeared to
enjoy it, showing that the resemblance to rotten meat
was not just a fancy of mere humans.
King left his valuable collections of dried ferns to the
Sydney Botanic Gardens. The late Curator, Mr. J. H.
Maiden, worked with him at his hobby all the time he
was in New Guinea, and one of the first things King
did whenever he came south for his furloughs, was to
spend a few hours in the hothouses and herbarium at the
Sydney Gardens with Mr. Maiden.
The Journal published by the Bureau of Science.
Manila, Philippine Is., printed a list of 160 species of
ferns found by him in Papua, 40 of them having never
been previously described.


“ Hanged ” — A Child of God *
While King was living for a while at St. Andrew’s
Station, about thirty miles up the Mambare River, and
onr most northern Mission Station, a Government officer
passed one day on his way to loma, a Government post
a few miles further on. He had with him a boy who was
to be hanged for shooting his white master for almost
unbelievable crime and cruelty. The hoy came from
a district whose language King knew almost nothing
about. He requested the officer to leave him at the
Mission until he was returning down the river. Mean-
while, and with many hours of hard work the Missionary
and the boy learnt to understand each other, and the
lad was taught simply and definitely to lay hold on
lesu Keriso and His Great Love.
In about a month’s time, the Government officer,
returning home, came in and said: “I must hang the
boy to-morrow morning.” That evening he was bap-
tised, making the answers himself, as he had been taught
so lovingly and patiently by his friend. The officer
stood sponsor at the service. King and the young
Christian spent that nhdit together, saying, at times, the
simnle translation of the children’s hymn, “Jesus loves
me.” When they went out together at sunrise, and
saw the two ropes hanging from the branch of the tree,
the hoy began to whimper. “Now then, you must not
do that, you must show Tesu that you are brave because
HE is taking care of you and you trust Him.” “I
will.” said the boy. drawing his hands across his eyes,
“foT- I will soon see Tesu Keriso.” He died, and was
buried —a Christian, in a Christian’s grave, with the
Christian’s service.
King and the officer were both deeply affected, and
confessed so to each other, each one saying that he
hoped never to have such a task again.


Anthropology,
When in England, in 1904, my brother was asked to
meet the members of the Anthropological Society, in
Cambridge. The members were so interested in what he
had to say. that another meeting was arranged for him
in London. He wrote several theses on the origin and
so-called religions of the Papuans. He held that the
Papuans might be termed Animists, at least, in some
places, but that lie could never trace the slightest idea
of a Supreme Being. There were, however, evil spirits,
and the spirits of dead, often ready to harm their
former friends.
When becoming Christians, the people feel that such
a great step is taken that they often tattoo their bap-
tismal names on their bodies. This is very convenient,
sometimes, for the whites. When baptised, they generally
choose their own new names. One boy asked to be called
“Lucifer.” In the school it is funny to hear the teacher
call out “Napoleon, stand up!” “Nelson, come and do
this sum.” “Stone-Wigg, behave yourself!” “Ananias,
how many farthings in fourpence?” etc., etc.
T ravelling.
Ambasi was King’s home and head station during his
latter years. Prom there he would visit his out-stations
every month or six weeks. His frequent visits both
up and down the coast were made at times very uncom-
fortable by bad weather. The trip to St. Andrew’s
Station, for instance, meant twenty-eight miles of coast
line, and then thirty miles up the Mambare River. In
those times very few rest-houses were provided by the
Government, though these are now provided in most of
the principal villages. Mr. Holland thus writes about
the St. Andrew’s trip:
“'Travelling was done by whale-boat, with a crew of
ten or eleven boys. It meant twenty-eight miles of coast
to the mouth of the river in Mamba Bay, and three


VILLAGE SCENE.




days’ rowing- up stream. The myriads of mosquitoes
and the slow rate of travelling in the heat were, to say
the least, very trying. When we reached a village in
the evening, the natives would sometimes turn out of a
house for us to camp in, but we often had to sleep in
a place with some of the people. One character of these
houses was, that we coidd not stand straight up in them,
and we had to move about in a stooping or even kneeling
position. It took one day to return to the month, and,
if the weather was calm, one day to reach Ambasi.”
Whenever he visited a village, Mr. King would gather
the Mission hoys and the others together and hold some
kind of a service, and try to teach them about God. A
teacher would be placed in a district, and, of course,
he had to be trained and supervised all the time until
fit to he left. In the Mambare District he was, from
time to time, assisted by Mr. Clarke, or Mr. Ramsay, or
by the two nurses, Misses Comhley and Nowland, who
were in charge of the Hospital at St. Andrew’s. Nurse
Comhley has been called to her rest, and Miss Nowland
was in charge of the school for half-caste children at
Doubina, near Dogura, till called Home in 1983.
The Missionary Message o
King was asked to write a paper on “The Missionary
Message.” In thinking it over, he said, “There is first
the thought that we must not adapt Christianity to our
hearers, but get them to adopt Christianity. I don’t
believe in Avatering down. Then there is the question as
to how far the native religion can he used as a prepara-
tion for Christian teaching. Not much, I think, al-
though this is a favourite argument of many. And then
comes the question—how best to commend Christianity
to one’s hearers? What is the most effective way of
making Christians? What parts of Christian teaching
have the greater power of appeal? We are accustomed
to say, ‘The Cross,’ or ‘The Incarnation,’ or something
else. But the point is that we are going by what appeals


to ns, and that is not what we want. For instance, the
people who have no idea of the nature of God cannot
see the wonder of God becoming Man. And people who
are not conscious of sin do not understand the Cross.”
It will be seen by this extract from a private letter,
how the various problems were studied thoughtfully by
him, and also, I think it refutes the idea that brains and
education are unnecessary for a Missionary. The work
calls for the best men and women available, as well as
ordinary folk.
Baptism at Mamba .
Early in November, 1912, Bishop Stone-Wigg visited
Mamba for Confirmation. This is King’s account of the
dav:
“At 7 a.m. the Bishop celebrated, and there were twelve
Communicants. At 10 a.m. we commenced the Baptism
Service in the Church. Before the blessing of the water
we walked out to the river bank. The river was in flood.
I walked into the water above my knees, and the candi-
dates followed one by one. I took them by the hand and
they went in a little deeper, and w r ere immersed. After
the reception, they walked out again, seven men, seven
women, and two. little toddlers. They did it all so
seriously that the whole thing was very impressive. We
returned to the Church for the final part of the service,
and, after an interval, the newly-made Christians came
in with the rest to the Confirmation. We commenced
with a Processional, “My God accept my heart this day,”
which Christopher had translated from the Wedauan.
But I had found that the accent was totally different,
though he had counted the syllables in each line. So I
composed a Trochaic tune instead of the lambic one we
sing.
“David, 5.5.1., carried the Bishop’s Staff. He wore
cassock and surplice, and Bishop was in cope and mitre. I
interpreted for the Bishop, who read the service from a
type-written copy. He reads these languages very well.
Of course, this was the first time the Confirmation Ser-


BISHOP STONE-WIGG.
BAPTISM SCENE.




vice had been held in this language (Binandere). There
were seven candidates. Two more, who are living with
us here, may be confirmed in June.”
At the Confirmation Service the A.R.M. was present,
the only white man within thirty miles. He came five
miles, and arrived rather late. He is an R.C., trained in
a Jesuit School, but he tries to be very friendly. The
Bishop preached at the fourth Service at 4.30 p.m., to
the villagers, and, after tea, we had our usual prayers,
followed by Native Evensong.
The “ Baigona” Cult.
In 1912 the Missionaries were troubled by the above-
named “Baigona” or'“Snake” cult.
Some of the Catechumens, who were converts from
among these people, came to the classes at Ambasi, as
a sign that they had abjured this superstition. King
writes:
“Some people talk about using the native beliefs as
a stepping-stone to Christian teaching. I, on the other
hand, am rather pleased to have something which I can
show is entirely opposed to Christianity. The quitting
of a. heathen cult is a great step to take. It means more
than a simple enquiry into Christianity, because there is
nothing else. The Baigonas took up certain practices
cribbed from us, whether consciously or unconsciously,
I don’t know. They baptised their people and gave new
names. The whole matter is extraordinarily interest-
ing.”
It will be seen by this, how vital and, at the same
time, how extraordinarily interesting are the problems
that are being faced by our Missionaries. It is their
endeavour to make men see when their old ideas, super-
stitions and customs militate against acceptance of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Whatever is not harmful is not condemned and for-
bidden. Whatever can be helpful is not only allowed,
but is used and controlled. It is not our desire to make


Western Christians of Papuans, and the same may be
said with regard to other Missions and races. In Papuan
villages men may be seen living as natives, but as
Christians who, by their upright and pure lives, are
adorning the doctrine of God their Saviour, and attract-
ing many heathen friends and relations to Christ.
These people are proving the truth of the words, “I
if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me!” Even
such superstitions as the Baigona Cult prove that Papuans
can be taught to look at things unseen, and to submit
to rules which, on the surface, have no material, tangible
gain to offer.
Miss Ethel King .
One cannot write about my brother Copland without
paying a small tribute to our sister, who, all through
the history of the New Guinea Mission, was his confi-
dante, agent, correspondent, and everything else that
she could be' to him especially, but also to the whole
Mission Staff. She spent her life for Papua, just as
truly in Sydney and in the Head Office of the A.8.M.,
until God called her to Higher Service on Easter
Tuesday, 1929.
She travelled with him to England, and when on
furlough she watched over him in every possible way,
with a wisdom, love, and devotion, which she kept up
to the end. She was with him at the last, and when
unable to speak clearly, he tried to say something, she
and our brother, Rev. Raymond King, at last made out
what it was. It was the verse, “Nevertheless, I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. ’ 7 It was the last thing
he said, or tried to say,_ and that verse expresses the
secret and inspiration of the lives and work of these
two, so dear to each other. They are now together again
in His Service, and of both we may say: “They that
turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever.”


MISS ETHEL KING.
REV. COPLAND KING AND TWO OF HIS
SCHOLARS.




Bishop Newton .
One more old friend of Copland I must mention, viz.,
Bishop Henry Newton. In 1915 lie left the N.G.M.
be consecrated Bishop of Carpentaria, and in 1922 he
was translated to the See of New Guinea, on the resigna-
tion of Bishop Sharp, late Archbishop of Brisbane. A
more experienced and devoted man could not have been
chosen. Still working there, spending and being spent,
he has ever been trusted and beloved by Missionaries,
white people and natives. God bless and keep him at
his post for many years to come!
Outside Testimony .
Extract from “Bulletin ” October 16th, 1918.
“Copland King, New Guinea Missionary (Anglican),
who died in Sydney lately, aged 55, was a son of the
late Archdeacon King, formerly of Sydney, and a great-
grandson of Philip Gidley King, third Governor of N.S.
Wales. In 1891 he helped the late Rev. A. A. Maclaren
to establish the first New Guinea mission-station on
Dogura Hill (Bartel Bay), and the pioneers had a fight
against the then-little-understood malaria and other un-
familiar worries. When Maclaren died, King took charge.
In 1899 another station was started near the mouth of
the Mamba River, close to the German border, with the
Rev. W. E. M. Hines in charge, and when Hines retired,
sick, King kept the vineyard flourishing. He remained
thereabouts for 17 years, and was the only white man
who has so far got a working knowledge of the tongue-
tangling local Binandere dialect. He translated the
Scriptures into the native language, and the man who
could do that deserves his halo and harp. 7 ’
“Johnny Cake”: “I missed meeting the late missionary
Copland King in 1911, when going up the Mambare
River with Governor Murray. In his absence we camped
for the night at his house at Umi—and I’ve never ceased


to admire the pluck and determination of King. Umi
is one of a large number of small native villages lining
the upper reaches of the Mambare, about the most un-
wholesome stream in that part of Papua. The scholarly
King lived absolutely alone with the natives, and his
home was little better than a village hut. The well-
thumbed books in his little library all bore on his work.
Beyond this, he apparently had no recreation. His per-
sonal attendants were a middle-aged boy who had at
one time worked on the Banana-land plantations and his
(the boy’s) wife, a black monstrosity, half Hottentot,
half Australian, gin. They both had the tired feeling in
an acute form. Their work seemed to consist entirely
of minding a rooster and one hen, which wandered at
will about the village. But they complained that this
was really a very exhausting form of labour. Umi and
its surroundings are dismal beyond expression—a mud-
banked stream meandering through sago swamps and
jungle wastes in an endless flat tangle of tropical vege-
tation. Seldom seeing a white face, the wonder is King
stuck it so long and retained his sanity.”
The Following Letter shows the Humility of the
Writer and his Absolute Sincerity, and some of his
Difficulties:
Schr. “Albert Maclaren,”
Sep. 23, 1906.
My dear ,
Prom the 19th to the 25th is our Anniversary. I have
been trying to think steadily about it, but it is hard work.
On the 19th we had a celebration at Ambasi, instead of on
Sunday, as Shaw and Johnson went to Koena Lake on the
Saturday to take a Sunday morning service. Well, on
Wednesday evening we started by schooner and got to
Bima by 5 p.m. Thursday. Then we were two days getting
to Cape Nelson, and instead of spending to-day at anchor,
we have been beating against a head wind, and are still a
day off Tufi, our next calling place. My excuse for hurry-
ing is that the Bishop has told me to be at Dogura by or


BISHOP NEWTON OP NEW GUINEA




before October 1, and it will take ns all onr time, and I am
afraid that if late it may lead to the Newtons missing the
steamer south. Otherwise I should take my time, as lam
not so anxious to take up the Dogura work. I have no
doubt that it will do me good, but it will have its draw-
backs, which I prefer to consider of little consequence
when in N.G. company.
Twenty years in orders ! One feels humbled, not merely
in estimating the work one has done, but more especially
in realising the very poor growth one has made in holi-
ness. Indeed, how can the word “holiness” be mentioned
in connection with such a life as mine? We tell our people
that if they are not going forward they are going back.
And for ourselves it does not require the proof that
we have gone back. Only temporarily, I trust!
My little Bible, with the date September 25, 1887, is
with me, but it is dilapidated, and my eyesight this year
has begun to fail. I have to hold books further away if
the light or the print is not good. It is a new experience,
but I don’t mean to go to spectacles till I am forced.
We are anchored to-night in a bay at Cape Nelson, in
which I was anchored in the Merrie England in ’93. It
had been given the name Port Hennessy in ’9l, when
Maclaren was on board. Afterwards the name was trans-
ferred, by mistake, to a bay some ten miles to the west,
which we now call Okein. I have tried to locate the
Port Hennessy of my knowledge every time I have passed
Cape Nelson, but failed until we came in here after 5
p.m. this evening, and now lam certain. Okein is where
Money is going to have a sanatorium to go and stay the
wet months in.
* *
The Pss. in Common Life, and the Truth of Chris-
tianity, have both escaped the fire. The latter is on loan
to a rubbergetter. Of the books I bought in England,
Gibson’s “Job” and Smith’s “Book of XII Prophets,”
Vol. 1., alone remain from the fire.
His house at Ambasi had been burnt down during his
absence. Yours ever,
COPLAND KING


At Rest,
Revising his last Binandere translation right up to the
last, in the Coast Hospital, near Sydney, Copland King-
passed away on October 5, 1918, ten days before his
friend Bishop Montague Stone-Wigg, the first Bishop
of New Guinea, also heard the call. His grave is on the
hillside in the beautiful little churchyard of St. John’s,
Camden, his brother’s Parish for thirty-six years, where
he loved to stay and regain his strength for further ser-
vice. There his worn-out body was laid to rest, under
the very shadow of the Church, with its slender spire
pointing upward and ever upward. As one gazes on
the snow-white marble cross laid down on a rough hewn
block of stone, nestling in the green grass, one realises
that Copland King has laid down his cross of trial and
hardship for the crown that now is his. Part of his
favourite text, giving the secret of his calm devotion
and wise character, is carved on the stone.
“I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.” These
were the last words he tried toi utter.
His daily prayer through all the years of his Mission-
ary life, the same prayer still used every day, and prac-
tically at every service in the Mission, whether in Eng-
lish or in the native Taparoro, is:
“Bless, 0 Lord, we beseech Thee, with Thy special
favour those whom Thou hast called to extend Thy
Kingdom in New Guinea. Endue them with Thy Holy
Spirit; watch over them in the hour of danger, and make
them continually to do Thy holy will.
“Touch the hearts of those who shall hear the message
delivered in Thy Name; and grant that all who accept
it may rise to newness of life.
“And upon all of us in this favoured land (or all in
Australia) pour out the spirit of prayer and almsgiving,
that many more labourers may go forth to gather in the
harvest of the souls for whom "Thou hast died; Who with
the Father and the Holy Spirit livest and reignest,
One God, for ever and ever. Amen.”


A HALF-CASTE WEDDING, DOIfBINA.




General Note .
In attempting to appreciate the extent and great merit
of Rev. Copland King’s work as translator it must be
remembered that the labour was carried on amid the mul-
tifarious duties of the Mission field, away from authori-
ties and philological assistance. When Mr. King took up
his residence in the far distant and lonely Mamba River
district he pursued his studies amid dangers from men
and from climate, and in complete isolation. It speaks
volumes for his remarkable linguistic skill, force of char-
acter and consecration of spirit that, amid all these dis-
tractions and difficulties, he put upon lasting record the
structure and etymology of at least two distinct, and pre-
viously unknown, languages (Wedau andßinandere), and,
in addition, translated into Wedau the whole of the Bible,
the Book of Common Prayer, the Catechism, and the
Hymn Book (omitting mention of many minor works) ;
and into Binandere, Genesis, St. Luke, the Book of Com-
mon Prayer and the Hymn Book.
This great service was rendered to the Papuans. Cop-
land King’s supreme linguistic gift to the Mission lay in
the reduction of unknown languages to scientific form,
in order that future missionaries might learn them with
facility, and so, in their turn, become translators and
philologists. The world of Science will always honour Cop-
land King, for he has embalmed for ever in his diction-
aries, grammars and translations in classic form of
languages which will inevitably disappear or become con-
taminated and impure.


WwaWi
-W? k f j
* £
m**4l ■ *
M| Site #
■nwm 1
% ■ 'V ■ * ‘ ' ;
■
■ •• r . ■■ :■ pB• *
*' -C J ■ •
jH
' jyw& ®
" flPK4\ £ - f^i38BMMi
#4 aJCgfn
Wt:."'.
•
CANON
TOMLINSON AND HIS PARISHIONERS.


Notes on the Early Days.
Samarai, 28/4/1905.
My dear
Yon asked me to write fully about the Mission. I feel
inclined to take you at your word to-night, and to give
you a historical account of this station. If, as I go
further up the coast, I am able to do the same for other
places, the series would be useful, I think, for reference.
Some day a historian for the Mission will be needed, and
will arise. But our place is to furnish the data for future
use.
Mr. Maclaren and I landed from the Grace Lynn at
Samarai on August 6, 1891. The Governor was here at
the time, and the Merrie England was in attendance. The
Resident Magistrate was Mr. Hely, who was afterwards
removed to the Western Division, and Mr. David Ballan-
tyne was his assistant. He is now Treasurer. The Resi-
dence, in which the Government officers lived, and a
small building in which Messrs. Burns, Philp kept their
store, with one white officer in charge, were the only two
timber houses on the island. Mr. Whitten had a store in a
ramshackle building, and there were quarters for the
native police, and not much else in the way of habitation
on the island. The extent of the island is 52 acres. The
centre of it was a mud swamp. On one side was the hill,
and the other was a low sandbank, not many feet above
high-water mark, on which a grove of cocoanuts had been
planted. The island had once been occupied by the
L.M.S., who had been given Kwato, an island two miles
away, in exchange. I don’t think it was originally in-
habited by natives. Its importance was due to the fact
that there is a reef which gives very good anchorage for
small craft in a fairly sheltered position.
Of course, Mr. Maclaren had been to Samarai with the
Governor the year before, and it had for some years
been a centre for traders, of whom a man named Nicholas
Minister, or Nick the Greek, was a specimen. Kissack,
an early settler, had sold out and taken up land at Kuiaro,
on the mainland. He afterwards died in Cooktown.


The .two Government officers ran a Customs office, a
post office, a Magistrate’s Court. They were the Health
Officer, the Sub-curator of Intestate Estates, the Labour
Inspector, and a dozen other officials. They toured the
coast in their whaleboats, or in the schooner Hygeia,
which was then attached to the station. And they always
extended their hospitality to any gentlemen who turned
up, while traders and others camped on the beach at one
of the stores. Subsequently there was a distinction among
these. One of the storekeepers said to me once: “If the
men want to be quiet, they come and stay here; if they
want to be rowdy, they go to the other place.”
I was at Samarai from time to time during the next
few years, and noticed each stage in its advancement. A
Magistrate, Capt. Hennessy, brought his wife to live here
—the first white woman to live on the island. She had a
girl, a nurse for her baby; on the occasion of one of my
visits I found that during her husband’s absence Mrs.
Hennessy was taken ill and died, leaving her child to the
care of the nurse. I attended the funeral, which was con-
ducted by the Assistant Resident Magistrate, Mr. R. J.
Kennedy, a co-religionist of the deceased (R.C.). The
cemetery was on the island. The island was surveyed
and pegged out in allotments, but the roads were all
under the shade of the cocoanut trees. A large part of
the island was marked off as a Government reserve. A
gaol was built, and the prisoners were employed in dig-
ging down the hill and filling up the swamp. So long
as the swamp remained, the island was a hotbed of fever.
But at last the centre was grassed over, and made into
a cricket pitch, tennis lawn, and so on, besides giving
grazing ground for some cattle and sheep. And avenues
of trees were planted around the “Park.” The roads
were cleared.
When Sir Wm, MacGregor left the country better stores
were built, residences for the increasing number of white
men engaged at them, and then three hotels were erected
for the convenience of the traders, and of the diggers
who passed through the island on their way to the dif-
ferent gold diggings. Previously the stores had been


allowed to sell liquor over the bar; but it was a great step
when the liquor ceased to be sold in the stores. The first
hotel built was by Wisdell, generally known as Billy the
Cook. Then Clunn came over from Cooktown and started
both store and hotel. The largest hotel was built by Mrs.
Mahoney, and is now owned by Mrs. Platt. These three
still remain, and I do not think the number is likely to
alter.
The Government erected a bonded store, in addition
to a complete set of offices, and residences for the in-
creasing staff. Messrs. Burns, Philp ran out a very ser-
viceable jetty, where large steamers can berth. Messrs.
Whitten built a very roomy store. The residents clubbed
together and built a School of Arts, and all these years
the people had been dependent for religious observances
on the very occasional visits of any of our staff, and the
very occasional offers of Mr. Abel, the L.M.S. Missionary
at Kwato. I held a service in Samarai whenever I was
here for a Sunday, for years before Mr. Abel ever did.
The teachers used to come from Kwato and hold services
for the prisoners, but the whites were neglected. Lord
Lamington spoke very strongly about it when he came
here in ’9B, and the Bishop, who was with him, saw also
what little attention the white residents had from any-
one who cared for their souls. Mr. Abel did come over
sometimes; but he explained that it was outside his
regular duty. He was a missionary to the heathen, and
if there were no heathen he would not be there. I have
heard him speak in this style myself, and have, on the
other hand, said that we recognised a duty to our fellow-
Christians as well as, if not before, our duty to the
heathen.
Of course the complication was that this place is outside
our Mission District. On the other hand, it is not
primarily a native settlement. So when the Bishop had
organised his Mission proper, and not before, he turned
his attention to Samarai, called a meeting of the inhabi-
tants, and asked them if they would support him in erect-
ing and maintaining a school for the white children. He
told Mr. Abel his plans, and met with no opposition at


first, but after the meeting of residents had agreed to
his proposals, Mr. Abel wrote to say he could not fall in
with the Bishop’s proposals.
Nevertheless, the school was built; Miss Synge and
Miss Challman were placed here in charge in May, 1900;
a committee was appointed to collect funds, and the
schoolroom was used for services whenever any of our
staff could be there.
When Miss Synge left, and Miss Challman’s period of
three years came to an end, the school was passed on to
Miss Adams and Miss Scarth was to take charge of the
house. Both these ladies had to be removed through ill-
ness, and Miss .Oliver came here in sole charge. The
Bishop has, now placed Rev. F. W. Ramsay here, and he
and Miss Oliver live in a comfortable house, in which there
is room also for visitors, like myself, travelling to or from
the Mission. To avoid housekeeping troubles, arrange-
ments have been made with the adjoining hotel for meals.
Miss Oliver has the school, with about a dozen scholars,
and gives some music lessons. Mr. Ramsay gives religious
instruction in the school, coached some boys who are too
old for school, has a night school for natives employed on
the island, conducts a service in the gaol for the prisoners,
looks after the Mission boats whenever they are in
Samarai (sometimes they are sailed by natives only), and
holds himself open to do anything for the progress of
religion and morals in the district. When he can get an
opportunity he is going to take trips to other places
where the whites do congregate, such as the Woodlarks
and Sudest At present he is helping to resuscitate the
School of Arts, the cricket club, and so on. Last night
a visitor gave a lecture in the schoolroom, giving one-
third proceeds to the school fund (that came to £l/16/-).
A young man acts as organist, and several of the con-
gregation attend choir practices.
This is now up to date, and my letter overweight, so I
will close, hoping the situation here is clear to you.
Yours very sincerely,
COPLAND KING.


Appendix .
Reprinted from “A Pioneer of Papua.”
Translations by the Rev. Copland King into the Wedauan and
Binandere languages:
WEDAUAN.
1897. St. Luke’s Gospel, pp. 99. (Sydney.) New Guinea Native
Dictionary, pp. 90. (Sydney.)
1899. Portions of the Prayer-Book, pp. 59. (Sydney.) Catechu-
men’s Book, pp. 54. (Sydney.)
1900. Confirmation Service and Hymns. (Dogura Mission Press.)
Manual for Communicants. (Dogura Mission Press.)
1901. Book of Genesis, pp. 64. (Dogura Mission Press.) Grammar
and Dictionary of the Wedau Language, pp. 91.
Catechism. (Dogura Mission Press.)
1902. Book of Sunday Lessons, pp. 128. (Dogura Mission Press.)
Hymns and Psalms, pp. 126. (Dogura Mission Press.)
Gospel of St. Matthew. (Dogura Mission Press; reprinted
later by the Bible Society.)
1903. Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, pp. 215. (Dogura
Mission Press.) Occasional services. (Dogura Mission
Press.)
1905. Reading Book, pp. 42. (London.) Psalms, pp. 109. (Sydney.)
1907. 0.T.: Joshua to 2nd Chronicles, pp. 376. (Sydney.) O.T.
Lectionary, pp. 407. (London.)
1912. Hymns and Psalms, pp. 88. (Sydney.) In the later
Wedauan translations King had the assistance of Canon
Tomlinson, Miss Ker, Mr. Taylor, and other members of
the mission.
BINANDERE.
1901. Dictionary of the River Mamba Language. (Sydney.)
1903. First Eight Chapters of Genesis, pp. 14. (Dogura Mission
Press.)
1904. Revised and more extensive Binandere Grammar and
Dictionary. (Typed only; not complete at Mr. King’s
death.)
1906. Prayers, Psalms, and Passages of Scripture. (Sydney.)
1912. Gospel of St. Luke, pp. 74. (Sydney.)
1916. Service of Holy Communion. (Typed in Sydney.)
1917. Prayers, Psalms, Hymns, and Catechism, pp. 39. (Sydney.)
Book of Common Prayer, pp. 254. (Sydney.)
GENERAL.
Theological Terms in Native Languages, pp. 16. (Sydney.)
History of the New Guinea Mission, 1891-1901. (Sydney.)
Articles on linguistic and missionary subjects in “A.B.M. Review”
and other missionary and scientific periodicals.


m
B
O
M
B
B
£




