

" *te- vv
E EjMv f 'M E
m 1 * a
\ Vv W
COPPERTOP
Harold Gaze


WA.






COPPERTOP


Affectionately inscribed to my /title friend
CELIA HALL
Without whom there would have been no
COPPERTOP




W A S 8PT-\ ; a
a p* tsm r\ ■
Hv / : a , "%
Hv S_
•’oim
J yv
\' tBt I B
-•
•P^sm/ ? - :
COPPERTOP


I
I
I
I
I
l
II : [
COPPERTOP
The Queer Adventures of a Quaint Child
•G '
IBY
HAROLD GAZE |
AUTHOR OF |
“ The Mite Merry Stories.” “ War in Faerieland,”
' * I
If
ILLUSTRATIONS BY THE AUTHOR J 1
1
;
I I
' I
a I
J ! I
ißelbournf IJufalmfjing Company
S CROMWELL BUILDINGS j |l
MELBOURNE |i
■
w »
8 I B


OF
/. \
V 14N0V1919 T
*** OF the tO^
MELBOURNE PUBLISHING COMPANY
Cromwell Buildings
Melbourne


CONTENTS.
I. In the Old Four-Posted Bed 9
11. Off on an Adventure 19
111. They Make an Enemy 21
IV. In the Middle of a Thunderstorm 25
V. They Meet Their First Bear 30
VI, Under the Snow 36
VII. The Castle of the South Wind 40
VIII. Towards the Great West Land 46
IX. In the Tropics 57
X. Shipwrecked 62
XI. Waomba—Mother of the West Land 65
XII. Lost in a Forest 69
XIII. In the Arms of the Mist Maidens 77
XIV. Inside a Crocodile 82
XV. The Clerk of the Weather Lays a Trap .. 90
XVI. Discovered by the East Wind 97
XVII. The Strangest Ride that Ever Was .. . . 105
XVin. The East Wind and the White Elephant . 110
XIX. The East Wind in a Rage 115
XX. In the Den of the Spinster Spider .. .. 119
XXL Coppertop and the Old Mother-Bird .. .. 128
XXII. Tibbs and Kiddiwee to the Rescue 133
XXIII. The December Day is Almost Theirs 140
XXIV. Biddy-be-sure, the Irish Witch 145
XXV. Coppertop Kisses the Blarney Stone 148




ILLUSTRATIONS
Colored.
Coppertop Frontispiece
“Come along,” cried Tibbs To face page 16
The Albatross and the Sea-Maidens .. „ „ 48
“Look again, little one,” said Waomba . . „ „ 80
Tibbs and Kiddiwee escape from the
Crocodile „ „ 96
“Foolish ones,” said Amon Ra „ „ 112
Miss Smiler sits on the White Elephant „ „ 128
Black and White.
“If a Book of Travels can’t move about a bit, who
can?” 16
The Clerk of the Weather 22
“Oh, my hair is on fire!” cried Coppertop 26
The South Wind 43
Skipper Blubberkins 53
The Four-posted Bed at Sea 60
The Chief of the Monkey Tribe 73
The East Wind 101
“Don’t talk of husbands to me,” said the Elderly
Spinster Spider 125
The North Wind 142




COPPERTOP
CHAPTER I.
IN THE OLD FOUR-POSTED BED
SHE sat up in the big four-poster and listened to
the wind as it blew round the house.
A ’possum on the roof uttered a plaintive
gurgling cry, which sent a little shiver down her
back, and she snuggled under the bedclothes, thank-
ful for their cosy protection.
But to-night the old bed felt less “snuggly”
than usual, and she had a strange “I-wonder-what-
will-happen-next” feeling, which would not allow
her to sleep. It was such a night as witches love,
when they fly about on broomsticks, and you feel
sure-as-sure there is a black cat with green, staring
eyes, hiding behind the burnt log in the chimney
corner.
Even the old colonial house, with its new slated
roof and the strange terracotta gargoyles—that
Coppertop was certain-sure had moved several times
since they were first put up there—shook and
shuddered in the bitter south wind which blew down
from the ranges.
“Oh, Pm just too lonesome!” sighed Coppertop,
“if the old wind won’t stop whooling round the
house, I simply don’t know what I’ll do.”


Celia Anagusta Sinclair —for that was her real
name —was rather a lonely little girl at the best of
times, as her father and mother were obliged to
spend many months of the year in far-away India,
and left their little ten-year-old daughter in the
charge of Mrs. Grudge, the housekeeper; and it must
be confessed that she and “Miss Celia” were not
always the best of friends.
Mrs. Grudge could not abide a nickname, and
never used the term “Coppertop” by which the child
was known to everyone else; she was of the old
school, stern and strict, and had come out in the
early days from Home. She could not understand
“these colonials,” she would say, and Coppertop’s
cheeks would glow and her auburn plaits would seem
to grow even more coppery, for she was an Aus-
tralian bred and born, and proud of it, too, and
simply hated to be called one of “these colonials.”
The old four-posted bed had come out from
Home, too, but it had a very different spirit from
that of dour Mrs. Grudge; it was old, and massive
and beautiful, with richly carved legs—which, of
course, Mrs. Grudge couldn’t boast of—and it
seemed to whisper of old rose gardens, and ivy-clad
towers, and quaint, sleepy, thatched cottages, and
knights in armour, and May-day revels, and, most
of all, of security and comfort.
“I wouldn’t care one bit if only Mummie and
Daddy were here,” sighed the child; “the old wind
could blow as hard as it liked. I wouldn’t care if it


blew away the house, and the old clock, and Mrs.
Grudge. Oh, if only it would—and left just
Mummie and Daddy and me, all alone in the dear
old bed, cuddling tight.”
Coppertop threw her little freckled arms round
the soft, bulgy pillow, and tried to “ ’magine” that
it really was so; but still the wind howled, and the
rain pattered on the windowpane.
“Oh, Pm tired of ’magining! I wish they were
really-truly here. I believe I shall hate that horrid
old India soon, for keeping them away. Well, per-
haps I won’t quite hate it, but I wish it were here,
then they’d be here too, and so would Simla and the
beautiful Taj Mahal.”
“But if India were here, where would Here be?
Oh, it’s awfully muddling,” she added.
Then here face brightened up, and plunging one
hand under the pillow she brought out a very
crumpled letter, a letter that had been hugged and
kissed till it was scarcely readable.
Screwing up her grey eyes, Coppertop read it,
word by word, keeping her place with a wet finger
with which she had just flicked away a tear:
My Dearest Child, —
I am writing this letter to you from our bunga-
low at Simla—the one in which you stayed two
years ago—do you remember?
I am sitting on the verandah, looking out over
the mountains, and thinking of you, my darling,
oh, so hard, that I believe I can almost see you,
dancing through the long grass in the orchard,


and climbing the trees, to see if the green apples
are not too hard for your strong little teeth. And,
dear, you really must not eat green apples, they
are not good for little girls—it is so much better
to let them grow into big, rosy ones.
Daddy is lying in the deck-chair under the
punkah, and the breeze from it is making his hair
stand up in queer little tufts—you would laugh so
to see it—and he is snoring! Snoring so loudly
that I thought it was the punkah. He is sound
asleep, and dreaming, I expect, of his darling little
girl in far-away Australia.
And now for some beautiful news! We are
coming back to our little girl. Daddy has applied
for his leave, and w r e may sail quite, quite soon.
I expect we shall go to England first, and then
back again, through the Canal, and see the
Pyramids and the Arab donkey-boys, and the
camels. Take care of that little bronze camel
Daddy gave you—don’t lose it, dear.
And try to be good to Mrs. Grudge, and do as
she tells you.
How I am longing to give you a big, big hug.
Good-bye, my own darling child.
MUMMIE.
P.S.—Daddy will write next mail.
When she came to the last line Coppertop's lips
trembled, and two big tears rolled down her cheeks.
It was just that “Big, big hug” that she was want-
ing this very minute.


“Of course,” she said to herself, “I’ve got
Tibbs and Kiddiwee, and although they’re only
’maginary brothers, they do get terrifkly real at
times, and I’ve got this pudgy little bronze camel—
Miss Smiler —but they don’t make up for Mummie
and Daddy, and it seems so long waiting for them
to come.”
She sat lost in thought for some minutes, then
she yawned and lay back on the pillow. The candle
winked and spluttered and sent huge shadows danc-
ing upon the walls and ceiling with each flicker.
Coppertop wished dreamily that she could be a
shadow too, and tried to imagine just how it would
feel to be dancing upon the ceilings, and growing
suddenly large and small, and long or short, as the
shadows seemed to do.
“It’s a regular witches’ dance!” she exclaimed.
And as she said this, there came a nervous tap-tap
at the door.
Coppertop lay very still, with a wildly-beating
heart, wondering if she had really heard a tap on
the door or not.
Then a voice said:
“Miss Celia! Are you awake?” It was Jane,
the maid, who spoke, but in a voice so hushed and
mysterious that it sent a shiver down the child’s
back.
“I—l suppose so,” replied Coppertop, sitting
up in bed to make quite sure. “What is it, Jane?”
Jane opened the door cautiously, and continued
in a hushed voice—


“I hardly think I ought to tell you, seeing it’s
so late.”
“Tell me what?” asked the child in an excited
whisper.
“They’re coming home, miss. Mrs. Grudge has
had a telegram to say Captain and Mrs. Sinclair
will be here to-morrer mornin’, being the first of
December!”
“GOOD GRACIOUS!” cried Coppertop. And
bounding out of bed she dragged the nervous maid
into the room by her apron.
“Mummie and Daddy coming home!” she cried,
“absolutely really-truly! Eeeeeuggh!” and Copper-
top gave a shrill squeal of delight, and capered madly
about the room.
“Oh, hush, miss! If Mrs. Grudge should hear
us. I never ought to have told you, only I simply
couldn’t ’elp it. You’ll be that excited you’ll never
sleep a wink. Lor, here she is!”
And at the sound of someone coming along the
passage, Jane beat a hasty retreat.
Coppertop wanted to rush after her and pour
out a string of burning questions—but on second
thoughts she remembered Mrs. Grudge, and drew
back; it would never do to get Jane into trouble.
But whatever would she do? How could she
ever get through the long night with all this excite-
ment bottled up inside her?
“I believe I shall positively explode!” she mut-
tered, as she clambered back into the old bed.


For what seemed long, long ages she lay and
tossed from side to side. The night would never
pass! The solemn “Tick-tock! Tick-tock!” of the
grandfather clock outside her door told her so.
“Never - never! Never - never! NEVER-
NEVER!” it seemed to say.
Her head burned upon the pillow, which seemed
to grow larger and larger, till it almost smothered
her. She turned it over to the cool side, and closed
her eyes tightly.
“Never-never! Never-never!” ticked the old
clock.
A sudden gust of wind shook the window,
followed by the patter of raindrops on the pane.
“That doesn’t sound much like the first of De-
cember,” she thought, and shivered a little as it
came again.
“Whatever shall I do if it isn’t a fine day to-
morrow ? Why, I must have a fine day for Mummie
and Daddy to arrive on—a real scrumptious, warm,
December day.”
The more she thought about it the more im-
portant it seemed. “It would be dreadful if it wasn’t
even fine.”
She sat up in bed to consider this all-important
question, and as she did so, a large Book of Travels
which she had been reading fell on to the floor with
a loud thump.
Coppertop jumped. Then, bending over the
edge of the big bed to pick up the Book, she noticed,
to her great surprise, that it had risen of its own


accord, and was walking sedately over to the
window.
“That’s awfully strange!” exclaimed Copper-
top.
“If a Book of Travels can’t move about a bit, who can?”
“Not a bit,” replied the Book without turning
round. “I must improve my circulation somehow!
And if a book of travels can’t move about a bit, who
can, I should like to know?”


\ - 7 -
7— \ \
*7 ■■ ' \ ' ST \~ —•
ome along,” cried Tibbs (p. iq)




While Coppertop was wondering what reply to
make, the Book reached out its hand and pulled the
blind, which went up with such force that it twirled
round and round the roller at the top.
“What a day for the first of December!” ex-
claimed the Book. “Pm going to look for something
better,” and so saying, it sat on the floor and rapidly
turned over its own pages, saying as it did so:
“North, South, East, West,
Weather’s never at its best.
India, Egypt, or Japan,
Give us better, if you can.”
Coppertop blinked at the book of travels, and
then at the window, unable to believe her eyes.
It was daybreak, and RAINING HARD.
“Oh dear, oh dear, how dreadfully botherat-
ing!” she exclaimed, almost in tears.
“I simply must get a fine December day some-
how. It will never do for ‘them’ to arrive on a soak-
ing wet day like this. It’s all the fault of that stupid
old clerk of the weather, he does get things so mixed
up! Why, this is more like a horrid July day!”
“That's what it is,” muttered the Book of
Travels.
“Oh, I do wish Tibbs and Kiddiwee were here
to help me,” continued the child; “I don't know what
to do.”
“I expect they're waiting for you on the roof,”
remarked the Book. “Follow me,” he continued,


“we’ll soon put this little matter right.” And so
saying, the book of travels ran over to the fireplace.
“You may have to go all round the world to
find a really fine December day,” he added, “so
you’ve no time to lose. Come along!”
And with a flap of his covers he flew up the
chimney.
“It looks as if it’s going to be a truly grand ad-
venture,” cried Coppertop, with her eyes sparkling.
And, springing out of the big four-posted bed, she
followed quickly after the book.


CHAPTER II
OFF ON AN ADVENTURE WITH TIBBS AND KIDDIWEE
COME along!” cried Tibbs, who was seated
upon a puff of smoke above the chimney-pot,
“we thought you were never coming.”
“ ’Es we did!” chimed in Kiddiwee, from a
swallow’s nest under the ledge of the chimney.
“On the contery,” said Coppertop, as she
emerged from the chimney-pot in a dignified fashion,
“on the contery, you knew perfectly well I was
coming, else you "wouldn’t have been waiting here,
would you?”
“ ’Spose not!” said Tibbs. “What’s the trouble
this time?”
0h > if you’re going to be grumpy, I shall wish
I hadn’t ’magined you,” said Coppertop, looking
down her freckled nose and pouting her lips; “and
my book’s gone! I can’t see it anywhere!”
Don t cry, Cece!” piped up a tiny voice from
the^swallow r ’s nest. Kiddiwee always took Copper-
top’s part in any dispute that arose.
I m not crying! But he needn’t be so grumpy,
and on a beastly old day like this, too!”
“That’s why!” cried Tibbs. “You shouldn’t
have called us on such a day! It’s warm and cosy
in the Far-away-Beyond,” he added, with a shiver.


“You don’t seem to understand,” said Copper-
top, with tears in her eyes. “Mummie and Daddy
are coming home to-day, and it simply must be fine.
This is just a horrid July day that’s gone astray!
We really can’t have it here on the first of December.
Whatever can we do about it?”
“So that’s it, is it?” cried Tibbs; “you want us
to help you put the weather right?”
“Oh, yes!” cried Coppertop eagerly. “It’s not
for myself, it’s for Mummie and Daddy!” she added
beseechingly.
“It’s an awful big interference,” said Tibbs,
his eyes beginning to sparkle at the thought of it.
“But we’ll do it.”
“ ’Es, so we will,” agreed Kiddiwee.
“We’ll push this beastly old July day back to its
right month, and find the December day that ought
to be here. My, but it will be a spree!” and Tibbs
rubbed his hands delightedly.
“That’s right! I knew I could depend on you!”
said Coppertop, and her pale cheeks began to glow
with excitement.
“ ’Es, but how?” asked Kiddiwee anxiously.
“I don’t know exactly how,” replied Copper-
top, “but it must be done! Perhaps we’d better call
on the Clerk of the Weather, he ought to be able to
help us!”
And so saying, off they flew to interview that
important personage.


CHAPTER 111
THEY MAKE AN ENEMY
WHAT do you want here?” cried the Clerk of
the Weather, crossly.
It wasn’t a very nice greeting, especially
as the three anxious children had been standing and
knocking upon the thundercloud door of the Clerk’s
house for the last half hour.
It was Monday morning, and the Clerk of the
Weather was never at his best on Monday. A
muddler at all times, on Monday he was usually the
most muddled muddler who ever muddled muddles!
“He’s cross as two sticks!” whispered Tibbs;
“we shan’t get much help from him.”
“I wonder if he is related to Mrs. Grudge,”
said Coppertop in a subdued voice; “he has her
nose ”
“And her temper,” agreed Tibbs.
“Yes,” continued Coppertop, “and that’s about
all there is of Mrs. Grudge—nose, and temper, and
teeth.”
“ ’Es, and not always teeth, only sometimes,”
added Kiddiwee.
“Hush!” corrected Coppertop, “you should
never notice uncertain teeth.”


5 r ' i ) }
'c, *
The Clerk of the Weather.


“What do you want here?” repeated the Clerk
of the Weather, growing angrier and more like Mrs.
Grudge each moment.
“If you please, we’ve come ”
“I can see that!” interrupted the Clerk.
“To—to ” stammered Coppertop.
“Two and two makes four!” snapped the Clerk.
“Well! what have you come for?”
“Smarty!” cried Tibbs. And the Clerk glared
at him.
“We’ve come to ask you very kindly for a De-
cember day, if you please,” said Coppertop, speak-
ing in her best party manner, to hide Tibbs’ rude-
ness.
“Well, I don’t please!” rapped the Clerk of the
Weather. “I haven’t one! And I wouldn’t give it
to you if I had! December day, indeed! The most
precious thing in my whole year! What do you
think I’m made of?”
“Nose and temper and teeth,” said Kiddiwee,
who thought the Clerk was asking a question to be
answered.
“Insolent!” yelled the Clerk, purple with rage.
“Be off at once! December day, indeed! You won’t
get one if I can help it!” And so saying, he shut
the thundercloud door with a bang!
“That’s a jolly bad start!” exclaimed Tibbs.
“ ’Es, it is!” echoed Kiddiwee.
don’t call it a start at all,” pouted Coppertop.
“I’m afraid we’ve made an emeny of him.”


“Enemy, you mean/’ corrected Tibbs. “Yes,
I’m afraid we have. But that makes it all the more
exciting.”
“ *Es, it does too!” said Kiddiwee.
Just then a sharp breeze sprang up, flattening
their gauzy wings (of course, they all had wings)
against their sides, and nearly blowing them off the
cloud upon w T hich they were standing.
“I have an idea!” cried Tibbs, his face brighten-
ing up. “Let’s call on the Four Winds. They’re
some of the Powers-that-be, and maybe they’ll help
us.”
“Very well, then,” assented Coppertop, but
without much enthusiasm; she never liked the
Winds very much, they always made her hair so
untidy. “But which shall we call on first? We
ought to know before we start.”
“The South Wind, I should think; I expect he
looks after the July days.”
“Oh, but he’s so cold! He nips my nose and
fingers. I don’t like him one bit!” cried poor
Coppertop, shivering at the very idea.
“Then I shall have to go alone,” cried Tibbs.
But at such a threat the others spread their
wings, and prepared to follow him to the Castle of
the Chill South Wind.


CHAPTER IV
IN THE MIDDLE OF A THUNDERSTORM
THE three adventurous children had not flown
very far on their way to the Castle of the
Chill South Wind before they found them-
selves in the middle of a dense black cloud.
“Wherever did it come from?’' asked Copper-
top in a scared voice.
“I can guess whom it came from,” said Tibbs;
“it’s sent by the Clerk of the Weather. He’s going
to try and stop us reaching the South Wind. But
he won’t!”
At this moment there came a low, dull rumble.
“Thunder!” cried Tibbs.
“Goodness gracious! Then this must be a
thundercloud we’re in!” gasped Coppertop.
And it was.
It very soon commenced to roar and rumble
round them in a most terrifying way, and vivid
flashes of lightning shot here and there and zig-
zagged across the sky. It grew so dark that the
children could scarcely see each other, and had no
idea in which direction to fly.
“Oh, my hair is on fire!” cried Coppertop, after
a vivid flash. “Oh, whatever shall I do? Please
put it out, somebody. Quickly!”


But it was a false alarm. Her little red head
wasn’t more on fire than usual, but it was full of
“Oh, my hair
fire!” cried Coppertop.
electricity, and sparkled and crackled all over. And
when she put up her hand, to feel if her ribbons were


still there, her hair went off in sharp explosions
wherever her fingers touched it.
“Oough, how funny!” exclaimed Kiddiwee,
Cece has turned into a real firework.”
“It’s not at all funny. I only hope I’m not a
rocket, and that my head won’t shoot off!”
“Take hold of her pig-tails on either side,” cried
Tibbs, “then it won’t.”
But as soon as they did this, they received such
an electric shock from her hair that it knocked them
both over!
Now it was Coppertop’s turn to laugh, which
she did very thoroughly; but she suddenly stopped
the smile faded from her face, and gave way to a
look of blank dismay.
Tibbs and Kiddiwee were nowhere to be seen!
Mheie can they be?” she cried, trying vainly
to see through the dense black cloud. “Whatever
shall I do if they have melted away, or something
ternfikly annoying like that? Whatever shall I do?”
c bed! ” cried a harsh v °ice, which
sounded like Mrs. Grudge’s, “and don’t try to steal
my fine December days!”
, ! rf g ° Cried C °PP ert °P defiantly,
and I hate you for being so beastly!” she added
for she knew now that it was the Clerk of the
Weather who spoke.
“Then I’ll throw you into the sea!” he snarled
At the words the thundercloud melted awav
and Coppertop found herself far out over a wide


ocean, and falling rapidly. She tried to fly up, but
her wings had been injured by the storm, and were
useless.
“I suppose I shall be drowned, she muttered
to herself, as she fell faster and faster, “and that
will be the end of me and the December day. I sup-
pose Tibbs and Kiddiwee are down there too, and
that’ll be the end of them. I ought to be simply
terrified, but I’m not. This falling-down feeling is
so funny, that I believe, if I m not dreadfully care-
ful, I shall laugh instead.”
Still faster she fell, and nearer and nearer
came the sparkling ocean.
Just as she began to prepare for a splash, she
fell PLOMP on to something soft and springy.
“Why, it’s a BED!” she cried. “MY bed!” and
her eyes opened so widely with surprise that their
lashes tangled with her eyebrows.
“My big four-posted bed!” she muttered, unable
to believe it.
She crawled cautiously to the edge and peeped
over, and found that the bed was floating, like an
old Spanish galleon, upon the ocean.
“Well!” she exclaimed, “I’ve gone back to bed,
but not the way that horrid old Clerk thought.”
And then she flung herself down and hugged the
bulgy pillow.
“Thank you, old Bed!” she cried, “thank you,
just heaps and heaps!” And she almost wept with
joy to find herself safe.


“Please don’t weep,” said a gentle, soothing
voice, “it makes me damp, and damp beds are
DANGEROUS!”
As it said this last word the voice became quite
fierce, and so surprised Coppertop that she sat up
and dried her eyes hastily. “But where are Tibbs
and Kiddiwee?” she faltered. “I’m dreadfully un-
happy about them.”
“Some folks are never happy unless they’re
unhappy about something!” droned the voice, grown
soft and almost feathery again. “They’ll be all right
—boys always are. Just wait and see, my dearie,
just wait and see.”
As the Bed was saying so soothingly, “Wait
and see, wait and see,” a gentle breeze began to
blow, the curtains of the old bed filled out like sails,
and it glided with a gentle roll over the silvery
ocean.
Before Coppertop could worry any further
over Tibbs or Kiddiwee, she was sound asleep.


CHAPTER V.
THEY MEET THEIR FIRST BEAR
WEEN Coppertop opened her eyes, her first
thought was that the bed had become very
hard, and her second that she was cold,
freezingly cold.
She sat up. And then, to her great surprise,
she saw that she was on the bed no longer, but seated
upon something white and glistening.
“Why, it’s snow!” she declared, “beautiful,
crisp snow. But however did I get here?”
“What does that matter?” said a familiar voice,
and, looking round, she beheld Tibbs and Kiddiwee.
With a scream of delight, she flung her arms
round them, but Tibbs wriggled out of her reach—
he never liked being hugged.
“But I simply must know how we all came to
be here,” repeated Coppertop, when she had re-
covered from her excitement.
“It’s awfully strange!”
“Don’t bother about a little thing like that.
Girls are funny,” remarked Tibbs, grandly.
“But it isn’t a little thing,” said Coppertop.
“Well, anyhow, you are!”
“ ’Es, and Tibbs and me is too,” piped up
Kiddiwee, “twemendously small!”
“Small, are we?”


“Rather,” assured Tibbs; “why we’re not as
large as these snow-flakes, see.”
“Good gracious!” exclaimed Coppertop, “so we
are! However did it all happen?”
“Oh, don’t bother about that,” said Tibbs again.
“Pretend we know,” suggested Kiddiwee.
“All right. That’ll be rather fun,” assented
Coppertop. And so it was settled.
“Oh, how the dear old snow sparkles,” she con-
tinued, “and isn’t it a lovely day. Perhaps we can
And a fine day here to take back to Australia for
Mummie and Daddy to arrive on. Do let us try.”
“You can’t take one without asking the South
Wind,” warned Tibbs. “He’d be furious about it.
Besides this is too cold for December.”
“My toes are freezing, they are,” cried Kiddi-
wee.
“Joggle them about,” suggested his sister.
“I can’t, Cece, they won’t joggle!” came a piti-
ful little voice.
“Then rub some snow on them,” said Tibbs.
While this was being done, he climbed up to the
top of a snowflake to spy out the land, and find
the way to the South Wind’s Castle.
“It’s just snow, and snow, and snow, as far as
I can see,” he cried.
“Oh, do let me see,” said Coppertop. “Pull me
up.”
Tibbs lent her his hand from above, and Kiddi-
wee did his best to push from below. But she found
it was not at all easy to climb a snowflake. Each


piece that she took hold of melted away under her
warm hands.
“How wonderful!” she exclaimed, when she at
last reached the top. “And look—LOOK! What-
ever is it? It looks like a huge white mountain
running towards us.”
They all looked. And, surely enough, a great
white mass was charging down upon them.
“It’s a Teddy Bear!” exclaimed Kiddiwee, “only
it’s the hugestest that ever was.”
“Kiddi is right!” cried Tibbs. “It is a bear, I
can see his mouth and teeth.”
“Oh, dear! Whatever shall we do?” cried
Coppertop, beside herself with fear.
“Don’t be ’fraid, Cece,” said Kiddiwee; “I’ll
just shoo him away.”
“Stupid! He wouldn’t even see you,” cried
Tibbs. “Look out, he’s coming! We must run!”
And he seized hold of the other two and pulled them
along with him, helter-skelter down the snowflake,
away from the bear. They could hear the thud!
thud! of his great paws, under which the snow
shook.
Faster and faster they ran! But the bear
was running faster still. When suddenly the thud
of the paws stopped.
After waiting breathlessly for some moments,
Tibbs climbed up to a snowflake top to see what had
happened.
“Look! Look!” he cried, and the other two
scrambled up after him.


A few yards away sat the mighty bear, solemnly
staring at a large brown hair-ribbon.
“Y/hy, it’s mine!” exclaimed Coppertop, feel-
ing one of her plaits and finding the ribbon gone;
“but how tremendous it’s grown!”
“He’s never seen one before,” whispered Tibbs.
“Look, I believe he is going to eat it.”
“ ’Es. P’r’aps that will do instead of us!” said
Kiddiwee.
And so it did, for no sooner had the bear swal-
lowed the hair-ribbon—which he seemed to enjoy—
than he smiled broadly, and, lifting up one paw, he
waved it at the children in the friendliest way.
“He really does look very nice and soft and
kind,” whispered Coppertop to Tibbs, “he reminds
me, somehow, of my big bed. I wonder if we ought
to speak to him.”
“Yes, let’s,” agreed Tibbs. “I haven’t spoken
to many bears—it’ll be rather a rag!”
After a little hesitation, the three adven-
turers walked boldly up to the Polar Bear.
“How-de-do?” he said, smiling his broadest
smile, and holding out his paw, which, however, was
far too large for them to shake.
“How do you do, Mr. Bear?” replied Copper-
top, in her best society manner, and feeling, some-
how, that she was addressing her bed, which was
rather absurd.
“Mr. Bear, indeed!” said the animal, and went
off into peals of huge laughter. “Bare! Ho, hoi
That’s a good one! Bare, indeed! With all this


fur on! I’m not nearly as bare as you are!” And
he rolled about and gurgled with mirth.
And the children laughed too, although not
quite sure what the joke was.
“What are you doing here?” he asked.
“That’s just what I was going to ask you,”
interrupted Tibbs, “because there aren’t any bears
at the South Pole, you know.”
“That’s why we came,” replied the Bear. “We
thought it was quite time they had some. But what
about yourselves?”
“We’re looking for the Castle of the South
Wind,” said Tibbs. “Perhaps you can tell us the
nearest way.”
“That I can,” replied the Bear, good-
humouredly. “Jump up on my back and I’ll give
you a lift. I’m going that way myself.”
“How perfectly splendid!” cried Coppertop,
joyfully, and scrambled up on to his back, followed
by the others. And off they started at a big jog-
trot.
Swiftly over the snow and ice trotted the Bear,
climbing, at times, to the top of a huge iceberg, to
spy out the way, and the children had to hold tightly
to his fur as he swung along.
Mile after mile they went, and Coppertop felt
sure they must be nearing their journey’s end.
“We shall soon get the December day at this
rate!” cried Tibbs.
“Will you?” screamed a piercing voice in their
ears. “Not if I can prevent it! Oh, dear me, no!”


“The Clerk of the Weather!” they all three
exclaimed.
Before they could utter another word, they
found themselves in the midst of a terrific blizzard.
And a squalling, snowing, blowing, freezing,
breezing, tearing, scaring blizzard it was, to be sure.
It blew the children down from the back of the
Bear, and rolled them over and over. It bowled
them along helplessly till they arrived at the bottom
of a great bank of snow. And here it could blow
them no further, and so it heaped the snow over
them, in a large white mound, until they were com-
pletely buried.


CHAPTER VI
UNDER THE SNOW
IT’S getting so warm, it is. I can hardly find
any breff,” cried Kiddiwee.
“I call it beautifully cosy. This is how the
snow keeps the flowers warm, I suppose. I like it,”
said Coppertop.
“Oh, dear! It’s getting hotterer and hotterer!”
he panted.
“The snow is melting all round us—we shall
soon have room to walk,” said his sister. “And
there will be more air, too.”
“The question is, how are w T e going to get out?”
cried Tibbs.
“If you had any sense—winch I very much
doubt —you wouldn’t want to, at least till the
blizzard’s gone!” piped up a little shrill voice beside
them. And looking down, they beheld a tiny little
creature, so w T ee that, small as they were just then,
he made them feel like giants. He was so very
minute that he could have built a ninety-roomed
castle on Coppertop’s little finger-nail, and hung out
the household washing upon one of her golden eye-
lashes, if she had been her natural size.
“Make yourselves at home —you’re quite wel-
come,” continued the small voice.
“Is this YOUR home?” asked Coppertop.


“Yes, more or less. Let me explain,” went on
the little voice. “My name is Mr. A. Tom —Atom
for short.”
“ ’Es, very short!” interrupted Kiddiwee, look-
ing down grandly upon the little creature.
“You shouldn’t say that!” cried Coppertop; “he
might be offended, and we’re in his house, you
know.”
“ ’Es, and I wish we weren’t,” said Kiddiwee,
wearily; “it’s drefful stuffy, it is.”
“Yes, I know,” agreed Coppertop; “but don’t
say so, it sounds so rude. We’ll just ask him to
tell us the nearest way to the South Wind’s Castle.”
“I will,” volunteered Tibbs. “Please, Mr.
Adam ”
“Atom —ATOM! Not Adam! Mr. A. Tom.”
“Well, Mr. Atom, please ” repeated Tibbs,
rather confused by his mistake. “Please, Mr. Atom,
can you tell us where the South Wind’s Castle is?”
“Still in the same place, I should imagine,”
answered the merry little man, with a twinkling eye.
“Unless it has moved,” he added.
“Oh, please, he means how can we get there?”
cried Coppertop, coming to the rescue.
“Well, you can run there, walk there, jump
there, fly there, or think there! But you’re far too
small as you are to undertake a journey like that.
Bless me, you’d spend all your time climbing over
the snowflakes.”
At this the children looked very crestfallen.


“But, my dears,” continued Mr. Atom, “it is a
very simple thing for me—with a wave of my hand
and the use of a magic spell—thus—to cause you to
become any size you may wish.”
Mr. Atom stretched out one hand towards the
children, and with the other he beckoned to the snow,
saying at the same time, “Elementi-allione!”
As the strange little person said this, the snow
on either side of the children melted away, and they
found themselves growing.
“Oh, how funny!” cried Coppertop, as she felt
herself getting larger and larger. “Oh, Mr. Atom!
However can you do it?”
“It’s a ripping feeling!” cried Tibbs. “I feel
as if I could jump over a house.”
And still they continued to grow, larger and
larger.
“Hallo! Where is Mr. Atom gone?” exclaimed
Tibbs. “I can’t see him at all.”
“Pm here, sure enough,” said a tiny voice,
which seemed to come from everywhere at once.
“Only you are getting so large that you can’t see
me, except with a microscope.”
And still they grew.
Then came a crash and a crunch, and a shower
of snow fell all round them. And, to their surprise,
they found that their heads had smashed through
the snow under which they had been concealed, and
they were once more able to look out upon the great
white world.


“We are still growing!” cried Tibbs.
“We shall be giants soon,” replied Coppertop;
“but I only hope our clothes grow as well, or we
shall look too silly for words.”
“How lovely to be giants!” cried Kiddiwee, glee-
fully.
And now the world round them seemed to be
growing very small.
“The Clerk of the Weather did us little harm
with his blizzard after all,” remarked Tibbs.
“Horrid person,” said Coppertop.
“He doesn’t know what a good friend we’ve
found through his old blizzard. Mr. Atom is
awfully nice. And he is going to help us —heaps.
It’s funny how things happen.”


CHAPTER VII.
THE CASTLE OF THE SOUTH WIND
THE fact that the children were now so big
helped them greatly on their journey; but
they had to walk, as they were far too large
and cumbersome to fly, their gauze wings would
never carry them.
“Really, I’m very grateful to Mr. Atom,” said
Coppertop; “what a wonderful little person he is.”
“Yes, it isn’t always size that counts,” came a
tiny voice from a cloud near by, which she instantly
recognised as belonging to Mr. Atom.
“Why, I believe he’s up here, too!” she cried.
“Quite right, my dear,” continued the small
voice. “You see, I’m pretty well everywhere,”
“So am I,” replied Coppertop, who had mis-
taken his meaning, “except in India! Of course I
love India terrifikly, because I’ve been there, and
it’s nearly always warm and sunny; but people get
so dried up—l know Mummie and baddy do!”
“That’s why you call her Mummie, I suppose,
instead of Mother?” interrupted Mr. Atom, with the
sound of a smile in his voice.
“Not at all,” replied Coppertop; “I’ve always
called her Mummie. But oh, I’m always well in Aus-
tralia —it’s simply glorious! The paddocks and the
scrumptious little gardens full of flowers; the birds


—I know all their names —and the air smells so
wonderful, it feels just like music when you breathe
it.”
“Ah, yes, precisely,” said Mr. Atom.
“It makes me want to cry when I think of it
I believe I’m going to be homesick!” At this Tibbs
and Kiddiwee commenced to laugh.
“You’re both very horrid!” said Coppertop, and
she pouted her lips and waited for them to say
something nice. But boys never will, when you
want them to.
“Come along,” was all the response she got
g from Tibbs, but Kiddiwee squeezed her hand.
S r '
So they continued their tramp to the Castle of
the South Wind.
And now they found themselves walking on
§ thick ice across a frozen ocean, stepping over moun-
„ tainous icebergs which shone and glittered like
== green diamonds in the soft sunlight. It was the
g most exciting and amusing part of the whole trip, so
I far, and Coppertop thoroughly enjoyed it.
“What a fine story all this would make! I
§ think I’ll try and write it some day,” she said.
As she was speaking, a brilliant bluish light
lit up the sky in front of them. From the centre of
this light rose slowly a widening circle of flame,
from which shot out jets of rainbow-coloured fire.
The beauty of this light took away the
children’s breath, and they could only gaze in
wonder and amazement at the sight.


Slowly the light faded, and where it had
been they beheld a towering Castle built of glisten-
ing blocks of ice.
“Come along! Let us see if the South Wind is
in ” cried Tibbs.
But before the giant children had gone far to-
wards the iceberg gateway, a great voice, like the
sound of a hurricane, cried: “Who dares to enter
my thawless Castle, and tread the icy cloisters of
my hall? Who wakes me rudely from my slumber?”
The children were too awed to speak, and the
mighty voice continued:
“Summer is at hand! and she and I have
quarrelled since the world began. Why do you
waken me at such a time? ’Tis I who rule the
wintry southern world, holding it tight within my
icy grasp. I scatter with a lavish hand the jewels
of frost! I make the rosy cheeks of children glow!
And yet I can be cruel! I can be cruel!”
“I wonder if he has finished the recitation?
These winds are so long-winded,” whispered Tibbs
to Coppertop.
“Oh, do be careful what you say! He’s annoyed
already!” she said warningly.
“Pooh! Think Pm afraid of a puff of wind!”
“Please be quiet!” pleaded his sister. “You
know weVe come to ask a favour.”
Just then an icy gust, like a huge hand, shot
forth and touched Tibbs on the hands and feet. In-
stantly he howled with pain and tried to warm his
frost-bitten fingers by holding them in his mouth,


whilst he hopped first on one foot and then on the
other.
The South Wind.
“I was only saying ‘How-do-you-do!’ ” laughed
the mighty voice of the South Wind. “Won’t you
shake hands?”
But Tibbs had had enough.


“You have no manners/’ continued the South
Wind, “although you are so big. What has She-of-
the-sunset-hair to say?”
“That’s you, Cece,” said Kiddiwee, giving her
a nudge.
“Oh, we’re very sorry you think us rude,” stam-
mered Coppertop, colouring.
“What is your name?” asked the South Wind.
“It’s Anagusta Celia Sinclair, thank you.”
“Don’t thank me, Anagusta.”
“Oh, please don’t call me Anagusta! I hate
it!” cried Coppertop, quite forgetting to whom she
was speaking.
“Softly, softly!” chuckled the South Wind, in
quite a gentle-breeze mood. “If you get so hot,
you’ll melt my Palace. Why have you honoured me
with this visit?” he asked.
“He means what are we here for,” whispered
Tibbs to Coppertop.
“Oh, dear! It’s so hard to explain. You see,
Mummie and Daddy are coming home from India
to-day—and it’s the first of December.”
“How I hate that name!” grumbled the South
Wind to himself.
“And —and it should be a fine day, but it isn’t
—it’s a horrid July day!”
“You are ungrateful!” reproved the South
Wind.
“You have much to thank the dull July days
for. They soften the ground, and supply it with
moisture to feed the coming spring-time crops.”


“Yes. But it shouldn’t be July in December,
should it?”
“Er —well, no! Perhaps not! I know my
winter days do stray at times.”
“Oh, please DO call it back!” pleaded Copper-
top. “And tell us where to find the December day
in its place.”
“Very well, I’ll call back my July day,” con-
sented the South Wind. “But I can do no more.
I’ll have nothing to do with December. I loathe it!”
“Oh, but then there will be no day at all for
them to arrive on —and that will be worse than ever.
How awfully puzzling it all is!” cried Coppertop.


CHAPTER VIII.
TOWARDS THE GREAT WEST LAND
WE don’t seem to have done much good,”
grumbled Tibbs.
“And you never will, if you grumble,”
said a cheery voice, which they knew belonged to Mr.
Atom, although he was far too small for them to
see. “You’ll never find a December day in these
cold parts, if you stay here till the moon turns into
cheese.”
“I suppose not. But whatever are we to do?”
said Coppertop.
“See if the West Wind has one to spare.”
“ ’Es, but how are we to find him?” asked
Kiddiwee, in a tired little voice.
“That’s easy,” said Mr. Atom cheerily. “He
lives in the Great West Land.”
“How shall we get there?” asked all three
children, excitedly.
“Just —
Walk with the Sunshine
Upon your right shoulder,
And you’ll reach the West Land
Before you’re much older.
Ta-ta!’
And with this advice he left them.


“Come on! Let’s try it,” cried Tibbs, beaming.
And turning their backs on the South Wind’s Castle,
they commenced their long tramp to the West.
“I do wish I was my right size again,” sighed
Coppertop. “It’s so tiring walking, and we simply
can’t fly whilst we’re so large.” As she uttered
this wish she suddenly commenced to grow smaller
and smaller, until, to her great joy, she was her
right size again.
“That’s strange!” she exclaimed, and then she
noticed that she had her foot upon a bright green
stone, frozen into the ice.
“It’s a Wishing Stone!” explained Tibbs, who
was also growing rapidly smaller.
“ ’Es, so it is,” cried Kiddiwee. But how either
of them knew anything about it was a puzzle, for
they had never seen it before.
“Hurrah!” exclaimed Coppertop joyfully,
realising the power that the Wishing Stone gave
her. “I’ll wish for a fine, hot ”
Before she could say “December day” a gust
of warm wind blew round them, and the sun came
out through the hazy sky and shone brightly upon
them.
“It IS a December day!” she cried, clapping
her hands with joy.
“It is the right day at last!”
“But in the wrong place!” sneered a voice from
a passing cloud. And looking up, the children saw
the mean, spiteful face of the Clerk of the Weather.


“What does he mean by that?” growled Tibbs.
“I’d like to punch that chap!”
But they soon found out what he meant. For
the snow and the ice all round them were melting
rapidly with the heat of the December day sun upon
it.
The icebergs thawed into waterfalls, and the
snow melted from under their feet, and in a very
short while they were floating helplessly in a vast
sea, where the field of ice had been.
******
“Cheer up!” said the familiar voice of Mr.
Atom. “Things are seldom as bad as they seem.
Keep up your hearts and your heels, and you’ll never
drown.”
“I don’t believe I care much if I do!” sighed
Coppertop. “Things are so awfully disappointing
—just when I thought I had it, too! If I don’t get it
soon, Mummie and Daddy will arrive on no day at
all, and I shan’t be there either. They’ll be terrifikly
upset —I know they will. And I’m just dying to
see them.”
“You’ll die without seeing them, my dear, if
you don’t do as I tell you. Keep your heart and
your heels up.”
“Cheer up, old girl!” said Tibbs, who was
swimming close by.
“ ’Es, cheer up, Cece!” echoed as he
floated past.
“But I did think I had it at last!” sobbed
Coppertop.


I
/'■“a „
O
c
s’ '■ m
c - : -. j i- ,-"■ ( ' \
*f\ * N .
'*V 4 ’ _^ : - Tj
f JT* i • >/f'' s — ,-r —«Sfc-- ■
W (533*)
The Albatross and the Sea-Maidens (p. 58).




“You can’t get a thing by just ‘wishing’ for
it,” warned Mr. Atom. “Nothing that’s worth
having is won that way.”
“That’s all very well, but however are we to
get it? We shan’t find it in this horrid old sea,”
pouted the child.
“Then take to your wings and fly to the West
Land as fast as you can—that’s my advice,” said
Mr. Atom.
“Wings!” shouted the children.
“Why, we quite forgot we had any!” cried
Coppertop, brightening up.
“There is always a way out of troubles,”
smiled Mr. Atom. “By-by!” And he was gone.
Up into the warm air flew the children, spread-
ing their wings gladly. And—
Keeping the Sunshine
Upon the right shoulder
they sped off towards the West.
After flying some miles, they came upon a
number of sea-gulls, who seemed very interested in
the children.
“Funny things,” said one gull. “They don’t
seem to have any tails.”
“I expect they’re some new kind of bat,” said
another. “Bats have four legs, and so have these!”
“Very ugly bats!” cried a third; “their skin is
all loose, and they haven’t any fur on it.”
“They are not bats. Bats only fly in the twi-
light! These have wings like flying fish,” said one
who had travelled far.


“Queer fish!” sneered another. “I shouldn’t
like to eat ’em. You try.”
“Gracious! I only hope they don’t!” cried
Coppertop, in alarm.
“They’d better not attempt to!” said Tibbs,
rolling back his sleeves. “Do you remember that
lovely sea-gull pie we ate last Sunday!” he cried in a
loud voice.
“We didn’t ” began Coppertop.
“Hush!” warned Tibbs. “Look!”
For at the mention of “sea-gull pie” the birds
nearest to them grew pale, and edged nervously
away.
“Monsters!” shrieked a large hen sea-gull, but
she flew off when Tibbs looked at her. And very
soon they all departed, uttering dismal cries, and
the travellers were left in peace to continue their
journey.
“Gracious me! what is that great bird?” cried
Coppertop, pointing to a large white creature gliding
through the air in front of them.
“It’s a great-great-grandpapa sea-gull, I
’spect,” ventured Kiddiwee.
“Nonsense!” said Tibbs. “That’s an Albatross.”
“’Es, so it is!” agreed Kiddiwee. “Do Al-
bertroters bite?” he added.
“We shall soon know,” said Tibbs, as the great
bird swooped round and came towards them.


“ ’Es, but I don’t want to know —like that!”
cried Kiddiwee. “If he bites Cece, I’ll kill him
dead! I will.”
“Oh, I’M not frightened of a bird!” said
Coppertop, “besides, he’s got quite a kind sort of
face, hasn’t he?”
“Thought you might like a lift, my hearties!”
said the Albatross, abruptly, as he flew up. “Where
are you bound?”
“West Land, sir,” said Tibbs, who determined
to humour the bird.
“It’s a long, long way to ”
“Is he going to sing ‘Tipperary?’ ” thought
Coppertop.
“West Land!” remarked the Albatross. “Get
aboard, you lubbers —I’m sailing that way.”
Coppertop didn’t know whether to be annoyed
or not at being addressed as a “lubber,” but decided
that the bird meant it kindly.
“Not all on the starboard side, or we’ll capsize,”
warned the Albatross, as the children hastened to
avail themselves of his kind invitation. “Stow
yourselves abaft the hatch between the main-
sheets,” he directed.
“But there aren’t any sheets!” said Coppertop,
in bewilderment, “or even blankets!” although as
she said this, it seemed to her that he was rather
like a bed—a feather one.
“He means his wings,” whispered Tibbs; “we
must sit up here on his shoulders.”
“Are you all aboard, my hearties?”


“Aye, aye, sir!” answered Tibbs, in truly
nautical style.
And they started off. But the children found
it rather hard to keep their balance, as the bird’s
back was inclined to be slippery, and Kiddiwee slid
backwards on to its tail.
“Ahoy, there!” shouted the Albatross, “keep
that young shaver off my steering gear!” And the
other two hastily pulled him back.
And now they were swaying and gliding in a
most soothing way, and at a very good speed, over
the deep blue waters. It was the strangest trip
they had ever made, and quite one of the nicest.
Sometimes they flew so 1ow t that they skimmed the
water, and flecked it into a thousand glowing spray-
bubbles, and the shadowy form of some large fish
could be seen gliding along under the water, hoping
for a chance nibble, if the Albatross should be foolish
enough to settle. Then, again, they would glide up-
wards till they were on a level with the fleecy clouds,
and the waves looked like ripples beneath them.
“If that isn’t old Skipper Blubberkins, the
Whale. What’s he doing up in these warm parts?”
cried the Albatross. “With your permission, my
hearties, we’ll just pull alongside and see what the
old pirate has to say for hisself.”
The Albatross certainly talked like a true old
Salt, but whether he learnt it from the sailors, or
the sailors learnt it from him, is a problem hard
to decide—you never can tell.


Skipper Blubberkins —the Whale —was asleep
when they arrived, and looked much more like an
island than a living animal.
“He’s the hugestest person Eve seen,” ex-
claimed Kiddiwee; “how ’normous his great-great-
grandpapa must be!” He always had an idea that
the word “great” before “grandpapa” referred to
Skipper Blubberkins.
the size of that individual, and not to his place upon
the family tree.
They were cruising about in the air above the
Whale’s head, wondering how to announce their
visit politely, there being no front door knocker, nor
even an electric bell.


“Look out! I believe something’s going to
happen!” cried Tibbs, suddenly.
For there had come a strange gurgling sound
beneath them. And the next moment, before the
Albatross could move a wing, the Whale SPOUTED!
They were drenched! They were soaked to the
skin, and even under that!
This was evidently a little joke on the part of
the Whale, for he had his absurd little eyes open
all the while, and must have waited until the Alba-
tross and the children were over his head.
“Man the pumps, you lubberly longshoremen!
I’m foundering!” shouted the distracted bird.
“Who’s floundering? What do you mean?”
cried Tibbs, bewildered by the sudden uprush of
water.
Kiddiwee was too frightened to say anything
at first; he just clung to one of the bird’s big wing
feathers, and waited for the deluge to stop.
Coppertop was the calmest of all. She was so
busy trying to obey the orders of the confused Alba-
tross that she had no time to be afraid.
“Tibbs, do help!” she cried.
“He wants us to 'man the pumps’—whatever
that is! And where are the pumps? I can’t see
any. It’s terrifikly confusing!” she added. “And
my hair’s all in my eyes! I’m positive I look a
sight!”
“Yes, you do!” said Tibbs, with brotherly
frankness. “And the old bird is crazy!” he cried.
“He imagines he’s a ship.”


“He looks more like a bed to me!” said Copper-
top. And then she wondered why she had said it.
Then came the gurgling sound from below,
once more.
The Albatross swerved, and the children turned
pale—they thought they were going to have a second
drenching.
But this time it was only Mr. Skipper Blubber-
kins laughing at the success of his little joke.
At this the Albatross quivered with rage, and
flew down to tell the Whale exactly—or very nearly
—what he thought of him. He in a furious
temper, and shrieked at the placid Whale. But Mr.
Skipper Blubberkins only gurgled more than ever,
until the bird grew so hoarse he could not utter
another word.
“You shouldn’t lose your temper, and say
things like that in front of my sister!” cried Tibbs,
leaning forward and shouting to the angry bird.
“Lar! Bless me!” cried the Whale, as he
caught sight of Tibbs. “Why didn’t you say you
had a cargo aboard. Maybe I shouldn’t have made
so free with my spoutings, if I’d known.”
“Blow me!” retorted the Albatross, “you
should look before you spout!”
“Where are e’ going, my dears?” shouted the
Whale, as two other heads came peeping over.
“To the West Land,” answered Coppertop.
“We’re searching for a December day,” she added,
“and we thought the West Wind might lend us one
of his.”


“Lar, now! Why, you’ve just missed the West
Wind by a fin’s length! He blew by here about two
bells after the dog watch. Won’t you come inside
and sit down?” added Mr. Skipper Blubberkins,
with an inviting smile.
“Not if I know it!” said the Albatross un-
graciously. And with one sweep of his mighty
wings he sped on, and the Whale was soon left
behind.
“I —I should rather like to have gone in!” said
Coppertop.


CHAPTER IX.
IN THE TROPICS
THEY were now in the tropics. The ocean lay
basking in the heat, with scarcely a ripple
upon its placid green face.
It was very beautiful and mysterious. A slight
mauve haze hung over the sky, and the horizon was
lost in a golden mist.
It seemed to the children that the whole world
had fallen into a peaceful slumber, and was dream-
ing a beautiful dream. Nothing moved, nothing
stirred but the heat that danced on the hazy ocean.
Without a visible movement of his mighty
wings, the Albatross glided calmly along, gazing
dreamily at his reflection in the water below.
Then, without warning, from the shimmering
waves came the words of a mysterious song!
Very faint, at first—like the dream-voices of
fairies —it grew louder, until they could catch the
words clearly—
“Albatross! Albatross!
Where are you flying?
Stay here, we pray you,
We’ll take no denying.
Beautiful bird,
With a wonderful motion,
Tell us what lifts you
With ease o’er the ocean.


The Albatross heard too, but he was nervous and
pretended he didn’t.
“Albatross! Albatross!
May we draw near?
You are so beautiful,
Pearly and dear.
You most magnificent
Bird of the ocean,
May we draw near you
And offer devotion.
At this the Albatross visibly trembled. Then
turned his head and preened a stray feather into
place.
“Albatross! Albatross 1
Be not afraid,
Fly not away
From a little sea-maid.
Long have we waited
In vain for this hour,
Now you have entered
The realm of our power.
At this the Albatross made an effort to fly
away. But a golden rainbow rose from the ocean
and encircled him, and he did not know which way
to fly.
As the song ended, all the waters around
seemed to ripple with joyous laughter. And here
and there a little foam-crest appeared, and pearly-
white arms robed in a mist of rainbow spray
stretched up towards the Albatross. The ocean
beneath them seemed to be alive with shadowy


forms, and merry little faces smiled up through the
veil of emerald water.
It was evident that the head of the foolish bird
had been turned by all this praise, for he hovered,
hesitating, just above the little white arms. Then
he sank lower and lower.
Countless silvery voices repeated the enchant-
ing song. And it seemed to the children that they
were being rocked to sleep in a cradle of silver
sound.
Kiddiwee and Coppertop were enraptured.
And they gazed wonder-eyed at the beautiful sea-
maidens.
Lower still drifted the Albatross, and there
came a dreamy far-away look into his eyes.
So near the ocean was he now that one of the
enchanting sea-maidens leapt out of the foam to-
wards him, and winding her arms round his neck,
she pressed her lips to his beak.
Instantly a terrible change too place!
The song of the sea-maidens turned to cruel
laughter. The golden tresses of their hair became
coarse seaweed. Their eyes glowed with a pale
green light, and their lips grew hard and cruel.
The Albatross fell to the water —dead!
After floating some moments, the bird began to
sink, and the terrified children tried to fly away,
but found that their wings had gone!
The sea-maidens swam round and round them,
and one, bolder than the rest, reached out of the
water and tried to grasp hold of one of Coppertop’s


plaits, but Tibbs rushed bravely forward and
thrust his sister behind him.
“Look! Look at her face!” screamed Copper-
top. “It’s exactly like Mrs. Grudge!”
“ ’Es, so it is! With all her teeth—sharp
ones!” cried Kiddiwee.
And now a very strange thing happened.
As the poor Albatross lay stretched upon the
ocean, slowly sinking, from the four corners of his
The Four-Posted Bed at Sea.
body arose four carved posts, and his back became
a large feather mattress!
Before Coppertop, Tibbs or Kiddiwee could re-
cover from their astonishment, the Albatross turned
into the old four-posted Bed!
“That’s the second time you’ve saved us!” cried
Coppertop, clapping her hands with joy. “When
we get home, I’ll buy you a real golden counterpane,


and you shall live in a crystal case, and never be
slept on unless you wish.”
As for the sea-maidens —they were so annoyed
at being cheated of their prey, that they sank be-
neath the ocean and were seen no more.


CHAPTER X.
SHIPWRECKED
DO these belong to you, my dears?” said a
large voice behind them, as they were sail-
ing peacefully along on the old Bed.
And looking round, they beheld a black form
towering above them.
“It’s old Skipper Blubberkins —the Whale!” ex-
claimed Tibbs.
“I found these floating around,” continued
their huge friend, “after you left. I shouldn’t
wonder but what they were washed off by that
sudden shower we had,” he added, gurgling glee-
fully at the remembrance of his little joke, at the
same time holding up an immense fin, upon which
lay three pairs of gauzy wings.
“Oh, you dear, great person!” cried Coppertop.
And I think that she would have embraced him, then
and there, had there been any part small enough
for her to put her arms round.
“Thanks awfully. You’re an old sport!” cried
Tibbs.
And Kiddiwee lisped, “You’re the beautifullest
whale of all the whales, you are!”
And the Whale was so overcome by all this
praise, that he dived beneath the waves to hide his
blushes.


A gentle breeze sprang up, and the old bed
sailed merrily over the waves with her cargo of
happy adventurers.
They w T ere sailing so fast that Coppertop felt
sure that they would catch the West Wind before
he blew away to his home in Africa.
Tibbs climbed up one of the posts—or “masts,”
as he called them —to keep a look-out for land ahead.
And Kiddiwee steered the ship with a large piece
of seaweeed.
“We shall be there in almost no time at this
rate,” said Coppertop gleefully, watching the foam-
ing trail they were leaving behind.
“Will you?” cried a spiteful voice in her ear,
as a little gust of wind shot by.
Coppertop shivered! It sounded unpleasantly
like the Clerk of the Weather.
“Will you?” came the voice again. And this
time it arose to a scream. And a sharp gust of
wind lashed the sea-spray in her face.
“Storm brewing!” called out Tibbs, from the
masthead. “Furl the sails!”
The other two ran to carry out the orders, fold-
ing up the curtains against the bed-posts as fast as
they could. But they were just too late!
In that moment the full force of the gale burst
upon them.
It wrenched the curtains from their hands and
tore them to shreds! It blew Tibbs from the main-
mast, and whirled him far up into the air! It beat


upon the sea till the waves rose up in anger, and
the peaceful ocean became a fury of troubled waters!
The old Bed struggled bravely to keep her
head above the waves, but she could not be expected
to swim in such a gale.
After floating about helplessly for some time,
she slowly sank beneath the angry sea.
Coppertop clung to the bulgy pillow, which
floated like a raft, and Kiddiwee took refuge upon
one of the carved bed-posts, which had been broken
off by the first blast of the gale, and floated away
on the waves.
Soon the great mountains of water hid them
from each other, and Coppertop was all alone.


CHAPTER XL
WAOMBA—MOTHER OF THE WEST LAND
AFTER a while the gale died down as suddenly
as it began. The sea grew calm once more,
and the sun shone out brightly.
Coppertop dried her wings in the warm sun-
light, and leaving the pillow upon which she floated,
flew up into the golden air.
She looked eagerly round for Tibbs and Kiddi-
wee, but they were nowhere to be seen.
And Coppertop felt too broken-hearted and sad
even to cry.
Far away in the distance she espied a peak of
land, showing blue above the horizon. And not
caring very much whether she reached it or not, she
flew in that direction.
But as she drew nearer her spirits rose.
“After all,” she said to herself, “even that
horrid old Clerk of the Weather wouldn’t dare to
drown them! ’Maginary brothers can’t be drowned,
I’m positively sure they can’t. But where are they?
Ido love them so! And I shall never find the De-
cember day by myself.”
So she pondered wearily, until she reached the
West Land, and beheld a great mountain, with a
queer tablecloth of cloud upon it, as though it were


laid for a feast of giants. This looked so strange
and interesting that she flew towards it.
“I wonder/’ thought Coppertop, “if it is laid
for the West Wind’s breakfast? It will be most
disappointing if I miss him!”
Her thoughts were interrupted by a loud
roaring from somewhere beneath her. The roar of
a lion! This was followed by the cries of smaller
animals. And looking down, to her surprise, she
found that she was now flying over several large,
open cages, in which were many animals.
“Why, I do believe it’s a Zoo!” she exclaimed.
“Oh, Ido hate to see the poor things shut up! How
would we like to be shut up in cages and stared at
by crowds of animals, I should like to know? People
are so funny! It’s just the same way with flowers.
They say, ‘Oh, I do love the beautiful flowers!’ and
then, off they pull their heads, and stick them in
ugly old vases, in stuffy rooms! That isn’t much
like loving them! I wouldn’t love things that way.”
Pondering deeply, she added, “Oh, I don’t know how
I’d love! It would be bigger than the biggest bal-
loon! Oh, much huger! I wish I had someone to
scrumble and squeege now! It’s simply miserable
being alone!”
“Those who love as you do are never alone,”
said a soft rich voice from the mist in front of her.
For she had now reached the tablecloth of cloud
which hung over the mountain top.
Coppertop was startled. And yet she did not
feel really afraid —the voice was too gentle for


anyone to be afraid of. It reminded her of her
mother’s voice.
“Do not fear, little one!” continued the voice.
“It is I, Waomba, who speaks.”
“I don’t think I know you, do I?” stammered
Coppertop. She had never heard the name before,
but the gentle voice she knew quite well.
“I came from the Shadowland of the Barimo,
because I heard you call.”
“I —I don’t think I did call!” murmured the
child.
“Yes, little one, your heart did! It was
lonely, and it called to me. Come!”
And at these words the mist rolled back and
§ revealed a gigantic, but beautiful, negress.
Upon her head, which towered almost to the
p sky, were two large buffalo horns, held by a band
g of gold; her shoulders and arms were bare, and
2 round her waist coiled a golden snake, which held
in place her robe of bluest blue. Against her heart
■
there cooed a grey ring-dove; and ah, she looked
E serene and wonderful.
Coppertop was so awestruck that she could
£ neither move nor speak, until the great negress,
smiling, held out her arms and said—
“l am Waomba, whom the great tribes love.
To me come all the hurt things—large and small.
The wounded Kudu,
And the Lioness,
The tiny Ant,
Or Hippopotamus!


I hear each cry, and soothe and understand.
I am the Mother of the great West Land.”
As she heard these strange words Coppertop
forgot to be afraid, and, without hesitating, flew
up to the outstretched arms, and was pressed close
to Waomba’s great heart.
Side by side with the cooing dove she lay, her
cheek against its soft grey head —and she was
happier than words can tell.
As she seemed to be sinking into a delicious
slumber she heard a small voice say—
“Cece! Cece! Ido want you, I do!”
It was Kiddiwee speaking. Of that there could
be no doubt. But where was he? And where was
Tibbs?
She felt ashamed at having been happy even
for a moment, when they were lost, and perhaps
in great peril.
“See!” said Waomba.
And as Coppertop looked, she saw them both.
They were many, many miles away, and yet
she saw them clearly, which, of course, was due to
the magic spell of Waomba; and not only could she
see them, but she could hear them as well.
And this is what she heard and saw.


CHAPTER XII.
LOST IN A FOREST
TIBBS was blown many miles by the gale
which had wrecked the four-posted Bed. At
last he found himself passing over the silver
sands of a strange coast, and fell at the edge of
a forest which grew almost down to the water.
As soon as he recovered his breath, he picked
himself up, in no way hurt, and very excited to
find himself in a strange country. He stood up,
brushed the sand from his clothes, and looked round
him. As he did so, he spied a black speck upon
the sand, just beyond the reach of the angry
breakers.
Running towards this, he found, as he drew
near, that it was a large carved post tossed up by
the sea; and then, to his amazement and joy, he
caught sight of the golden head of Kiddiwee beside
it.
The two brothers fell into each other’s arms,
and Kiddiwee wept with joy, and even Tibbs had
tears in his eyes.
“Well, this IS an adventure!” he said.
“ ’Es, it is!” replied the little chap. “But I
do wish Cece was here!”
“Perhaps she is,” said Tibbs, with more cheer-
fulness than he felt. The thought of Coppertop
filled him with fear as to what had become of her.


“I shouldn’t wonder,” he continued, “if she
hasn’t been blown here, too. Perhaps she is looking
for us in the forest. Come on, we’ll hunt for her.
She may be lost!”
And so saying, the two boys flew into the dense
forest.
They could see very little at first, because it
seemed so dim, after the bright sunlight outside,
but soon they made out great tree-trunks reaching
up out of sight and lost in the thick foliage. Strange
creepers twined through the branches of the trees,
like never-ending serpents; masses of bright scarlet
flowers showed here and there, and clusters of
orchids shone from the green of the undergrowth.
To the eyes of the two adventurous boys, the
forest seemed peopled with strange shapes; great
arms shot up and twined round the shoulders of the
trees; weird plant faces grinned up from the deep
shadows, and all the trees and plants and creepers
appeared to be struggling with each other to reach
the air and sunshine above.
The hot, moist air was rank with the smell of
decaying leaves, and Tibbs and Kiddiwee gasped
for breath.
As they passed what seemed to be the limb of
a tree, it suddenly coiled up and hissed in their
faces, and they were terrified to find that it was a
huge boa-constrictor.
This so frightened them, that they flew on
rapidly, without noticing where they were going,
till Kiddiwee said—


“I wonder where we are? ’Cause I ’spect we’re
lost! I do.”
Tibbs turned pale, but he said bravely—
“We’ll find a way out, somehow. But it is a
bit risky. And I can’t see a sign of Celia.”
While he paused to decide which way to fly, a
flock of parrots flew past, screeching at the in-
truders. And they heard the roar of a lion from
the undergrowth, awakened from his morning
slumber by the parrots, and in a very angry mood.
“I think we’d better move on,” whispered
Tibbs.
“ ’Es. They don’t seem very pleased we’ve
come, do they?”
“If we can find some of the Monkey People,”
said Tibbs, after they had flown some distance
further, “they’d be able to tell us which way to go.”
“It’ll be lovely to see Monkey People,” said
Kiddiwee.
“It’ll be more lovely to get out of this beastly
hot-house,” answered his brother. “We must reach
Celia, and help her to find the West Wind, and it
will be gone if we don’t hurry.”
“It’s mislerable without Cece!” pouted Kiddi-
wee, with tears in his eyes.
“Hum!” said Tibbs gruffly. “I can’t see a
monkey anywhere!”
Scarcely had he said this, when Bang! Crash!
Down came a cocoanut, just missing his head by half
an inch!


The Monkey People had found them, and were
sending a greeting.
“Hurrah! We’ve found them!” cried Tibbs, as
he dodged another nut. “It’s a jolly good thing they
can’t throw straight.”
The Monkeys were very shy at first, and kept
well out of reach, thronging the branches above
the boys’ heads, peering at them with bright, in-
quisitive eyes. Then seeing that the intruders were
only small man-cubs, and not dangerous, they came
nearer.
“Greeting!” cried a grizzled old Monkey, who
was evidently the head of the tribe. “0 cubs-with-
the-butterfly-wings! Welcome! In the name of
the Garra-garra-pom-nutta-garra Tribe, I greet
you!”
So said the aged Monkey, in a solemn manner.
Tibbs wanted to laugh as the animal mentioned
the name of his tribe. “I wonder if I’ve got to call
him names too?” he asked his brother, anxiously.
“ ’Spect so,” Kiddiwee replied, vaguely.
“Oh —er. 0 He-of-the-long-curly-tail!” Tibbs
began, hoping the Monkey would not be offended.
“I’m—l’m very well, thank you! How are you, old
chap?” he concluded nervously, and feeling very
foolish.
“0 cubs - with - the - butterfly - wings! What
want you?” asked the old Monkey, without a smile.
“Well, we’re lost. And we want you to help us
out!” replied Tibbs.


The Chief of the Honker Tribe,


“I and the Garra-garra-pom-nutta-garra Tribe
are at the service of the Man-cubs!” said the Monkey
kindly. “Come with me, 0 little-lost-ones!”
Wondering what would happen next, Tibbs
and Kiddiwee followed him, with the whole tribe
chattering behind them.
Before long they arrived at the edge of the
forest, and the old Monkey said—
“Fly over the plains—
Keeping the sunshine
Upon the right shoulder,
until you reach a mighty river, and follow that till
you come to the West Wind’s bower —and there you
will find what you are seeking!”
“Does he mean Cece or the December day?”
whispered Kiddiwee.
“Both, I expect,” cried Tibbs, overjoyed.
“But beware! 0 cubs-with-the-butterfly-
wings,” continued the kindly Monkey, “beware of
the arrows of the Bushmen!”
And before they could thank him, he was gone,
with his chattering tribe, and they were alone once
more.
Far across the plains they flew,
Keeping the sunshine
Upon the right shoulder,
as they had been told to do.
Before long they passed over a circle of huts,
round which were standing a number of fierce,
black people—the ugliest they had ever seen.
“Bushmen!” warned Tibbs.


They were naked, and carried bows and
arrows. In the centre a large group of excited
black men were lighting a fire, and over this fire
was a cauldron, and in this cauldron they beheld,
to their amazement, a man! A white man!
“By jingo!” exclaimed Tibbs, “they’re cooking
him for dinner! We must rescue the poor beggar
before he is too well done!”
And braving the arrows of the Bushmen—
poisoned with the n’gwa juice—they flew down to
the poor half-crazed man in the cauldron.
At the sight of the winged boys, the blacks fled
in terror, their woolly hair uncurling, and their
eyes starting from their eye-sockets.
“Um gullaber n’ging boo!” they yelled, which
means “The Evil Ones have come!” Then rushing
madly away, they left their dinner to cook itself.
Tibbs and Kiddiwee were delighted at the suc-
cess of their surprise visit, and ran to the cauldron
to help the poor man out, but when they beheld his
face they drew back with a cry.
“It’s the Clerk of the Weather!” gasped Tibbs.
“So it is!” sneered the spiteful Clerk. “Have
you found your precious December day yet?”
“No,” growled Tibbs, still too amazed to know
what to do.
“And I don’t think you will!” yelled the Clerk
of the Weather. Then, leaning suddenly forward,
he grasped hold of the two boys and pulled them
into the cauldron, jumping out himself as he did


so; then, flying up into the coil of smoke from the
fire, disappeared.
“It was just a beastly trick!” cried Tibbs,
scrambling as best he could from the hot cauldron,
and helping Kiddiwee out after him. “I’d like to
punch that fellow into fits!”
But he had no time to think of revenge, for
the Bushmen grew bold at seeing the winged boys
in the cauldron, and now ran towards them threaten-
ingly.
The boys turned to fly, but their wings had
been scorched by the heat and would hardly carry
them.
So they took to their heels and ran, pursued at
a safe distance by the cowardly Bushmen, who fired
flights of poisoned arrows at them.
Two of these arrows wounded Tibbs.
“Kiddi, Pm—l’m hit!” he groaned. “We must
reach a river, somehow, and wash out the poison.”
Kiddiwee helped him along as best he could.
And after travelling many weary miles, they came
at last to a mighty river.
The river was red with the mud washed into
it by numerous streams, and large trees floated past,
torn from the river banks, for it was in flood.
But the two boys were so hot and weary, that,
heedless of danger, they plunged in, and were
carried rapidly away on the stream.


Look again, little one,” said Waomba (p. 77




CHAPTER XIII.
IN THE ARMS OF THE MIST MAIDENS
COPPERTOP was so terrified when she beheld
Tibbs and Kiddiwee floating down the
stream of the great river that she cried
out —
“Oh, don’t let them be drowned! Please don’t!”
and hid her eyes.
“Look again, little one,” said Waomba. “Look
closely!”
And as Coppertop did so, she seemed to be
standing at the edge of a mighty waterfall, which
sent up clouds of rainbow-coloured spray, in which
were the forms of Maidens, transparent and airy as
soap bubbles.
Hundreds of feet below, the water seethed
round a beautiful island covered with trees, and
looking quite peaceful, in spite of the angry torrent.
While she stood there, wondering, two tiny
forms were borne along by the river, and flung out
over the edge of the waterfall.
“Oh, Tibbs! Oh, Kiddiwee!” screamed Copper-
top, “Oh, how terrible! They will fall and be
smashed into a thousand pieces!”
But this was not to be. For the Mist Maidens
clustered round them, and bore them upward, high


above the falls. And there in the sunlight, Copper-
top could see them clearly.
The two boys seemed to be asleep in the arms
of the Mist Maidens, who bent and kissed them.
And at each kiss they grew smaller, until Copper-
top feared, if it went on much longer, they would
be kissed away.
And to be sure, the boys grew so small at length
that they slipped from the arms of the Maidens, and
floated down gently, like autumn leaves, on to the
island at the foot of the falls.
* + * * *
“Oh, horrors! Look!” exclaimed Coppertop, in
tones of fear; and well she might, for as she watched
Tibbs and Kiddiwee, a large crocodile —a crusty,
carnivorous crocodile —came slowly out of the water
and crawled towards her brothers.
“Oh, I must save them!” she cried, and with
that one thought in her mind, she spread her wings
for flight.
“But what of the West Wind, little one—and
the December day?” said Waomba.
“Oh, how can you ask me to think of such a
thing now,” almost sobbed Coppertop, “when they
are in such dreadful danger?” So saying, she flew
from the arms of Waomba toward the island in front
of her.
♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
“You’ve missed the West Wind entirely,” said
a queer little voice beside her. “You’d better try the
East Wind, now!”


Coppertop thought she recognised the voice, but
there was no one to be seen.
“You’ve grown so big now that you can’t even
see your old friends,” continued the small voice,
good-naturedly. “But I’m here all the same—in
fact, I’m everywhere. Come, come, my dear! Don’t
say you’ve forgotten Mr. A. Tom.”
“No, of course I haven’t. But it’s hard to re-
member someone you can’t even see,” cried Copper-
top. “And I’m so miserable!”
“Oh, don’t be miserable, my dear. It’s a silly
habit! Get out of it. How would the world go along
if I became miserable? Why there wouldn’t be an
atom of happiness left!”
“But whatever am I to do?” pouted the child.
“I’ve missed the West Wind-all through the horrid
Clerk of the Weather and his old storm! And now
Tibbs and Kiddiwee are in awful danger. I simply
don’t know what to do,” she added.
“Yes, you do! I have told you. Find the East
Wind as soon as you can. He may have a December
day to spare. Y ou’ll probably meet him in Pyramid
Land, and can pick up your brothers on the way.
Ta-ta!” And he was gone.
“I expect they will be ‘picked up’ before I get
there!” thought Coppertop, and she shuddered.
Before long she arrived at the waterfall, and,
flying through the rainbow spray, landed safely
upon the island.
Her heart almost stood still as she drew near, at
the thought of what she might see. But with great


courage she clambered down the steep bank to the
water’s edge, expecting every moment to be faced
by the monster.
But neither the crusty, carnivorous crocodile
nor her brothers were to be seen.
With beating heart she knelt down to examine
the ground, as she had read that trackers and
hunters always did, and there, surely enough, she
made out the footprints of the crocodile!
This discovery made her tremble, but she
clenched her teeth and continued her search for
Tibbs and Kiddiwee.
She had only gone a few steps, however, when
her sharp eyes caught the gleam of gold upon a twig
near by. Going closer, she saw that it was a long
golden hair.
Once more her heart stood still! It was Kiddi-
wee’s, pulled from his tiny head as he and Tibbs
fell through the branches.
Then the crocodile had them! There was no
doubt of that.
And having made up her mind on that point,
she decided that the creature must be found at once,
and induced to smile! She would tell him the
funniest joke she could think of, and if she could
only succeed in making the reptile laugh really
heartily, why then it would be the easiest thing in
the world for her brothers to walk out unobserved.
“I don’t see a bit why they shouldn’t,” she said
aloud. “Jonah was quite comfy in the whale!
And I expect the crocodile is the same inside, only


not quite such large rooms! I think they will be
quite all right, if they didn’t get too much chewed
up going in!”
It was no use flying, as she had to follow the
footprints very closely, which was not easy to do on
the rocky ground.
“What a good thing it was that he didn’t go
back into the water,” thought Coppertop; “I could
never have found him then, and Tibbs and Kiddiwee
would have got damp, I expect, and have started
sneezing!” And she smiled at the thought of the
crocodile’s expression when this happened.
It was back-achy work stooping down to follow
the crocodile’s tracks, but she was in the mood to
endure things bravely.
“Tearful heart goes lame they say,
But smiling heart runs all the way!”
she repeated, remembering an old rhyme her mother
used to sing to her when she was “quite a little
thing” out in India.


CHAPTER XIV.
INSIDE A CROCODILE
COPPERTOP had travelled many miles, and was
growing very tired, when she remembered
that she was on an island, and therefore must
be going round and round in her search for the
crocodile.
And now the question arose as to which was
chasing which.
“I can’t be running after him and away from
him at the same time, can I?” she exclaimed.
“Was that question addressed to me?” chirped
a small blue bird, from the branch of a baobab tree.
“Oh, yes, if you like,” said Coppertop, not at
all surprised to be conversing with a strange bird;
nothing surprised her now. “If only I had brought
Pudgy with me, instead of Miss Smiler,” she mused,
“he would have been able to tell me!”
“Who is Pudgy?” asked the Bird, who was very
curious.
“Why, my little bronze Golliwog, of course.”
“Golliwog! Golliwog!” exclaimed the Bird,
putting his little blue head first on one side and
then on the other. “Never tasted Golliwog! Don’t
suppose it grows in these parts.”
“It isn’t to eat!” cried Coppertop, glancing
nervously behind her as she hurried along.


“Not to EAT! Then what’s the use of it?
Everything is to eat here, and everything eats every-
thing else,” explained the bird, “until there’s no-
thing else left to eat anything else!”
“What happens then?”
“Then! Oh, then we turn back and start the
other way,” chirped the Bird, with an air of great
wisdom.
But Coppertop found this more puzzling than
the question as to which was being chased, she or
the crocodile.
“Which is what you’d better do,” continued the
Bird.
“Which—what?” asked the child, very much
confused.
“Why, you’d better turn round and go the other
way,” said the Bird.
“And meet the crocodile face to face! Thank
you very much, but I’d rather not!” replied Copper-
top with decision.
“Well, it’s the only way!” cried the Bird, with
a shrug of his wings, “otherwise you and the croco-
dile will go round and round for ever! And that’s
an awTul long time.”
“I have it!” exclaimed Coppertop; “I’ll fly
across the island and catch the crocodile in the
flank!”
“Oh, yes!” said the Bird, but he didn’t really
understand, and she couldn’t w r ait to explain any
further.


So, spreading her wings, she flew across the
island.
******
When she reached the other side an unexpected
sight met her eyes!
Close by the water’s edge lay the crocodile,
motionless as a rock. Its tail was still in the water,
as though it had fallen asleep in the very act of
crawling out.
“It looks very much like Mrs. Grudge!” thought
the child. “Just her expression—especially about
the teeth! I wonder if it IS Mrs. Grudge! It might
be, in a kind of way.”
Coppertop flew nearer. “Is it asleep, or only
pretending?” she muttered, and breaking off a large
twig, she threw it at the monster. But he never
stirred.
Then she came to the ground, and, picking up
a large stone, she flew up with it and dropped it on
to his forehead. But still he never moved an eyelid.
Perhaps he was only pretending, and would
snap at her suddenly, as soon as she was within
reach. But in spite of her fears she flew down and
touched him with a trembling finger.
Nothing happened.
Growing bolder, she crept up and placed her
ear against his side, and listened.
As she did so she heard a small voice say,
“Wake up! Wake up, Kiddi! Something has hap-
pened! I can’t hear the old chap’s heart beating
at all! And we’ve come to a full stop!”


“ ’Es, so we must have!” she heard Kiddiwee
say, sleepily.
“Isn’t he simply too dear for words?” she cried
out, forgetting the crocodile in her excitement. “I
shall almost squeedge him to nothing when I see
him. But how shall I let them know I’m here?”
With a trembling hand, she tapped three times
on the side of the crusty, carnivorous crocodile.
And, to her joy, she heard a faint tap, tap, tap, in
reply.
“But that’s not much use unless they can find
a way out, is it?” thought Coppertop.
She studied the crocodile carefully to find some
way of escape for them. She noticed that there was
a board fastened on to its back, upon which was
written—
“GOOD ACCOMMODATION WITHIN!”
“That’s rather unusual!” exclaimed Coppertop.
“Not at all!” chirped the Bird. “It’s done to
attract the young monkeys.”
“Well, it’s not the sort of place I should like to
stay at!”
“You can’t help staying, once you’re there!”
explained the Bird.
“No, I s’pose not! But it’s horrid of you to say
so, when I’ve two brothers inside!”
“Cannibal!” shrieked the Bird, glancing at her
disdainfully.
“Inside the crocodile, I mean!” cried Copper-
top. “How stupid you are!”
And the Bird looked reassured.


“Well, the front door is closed/’ he observed,
after hopping round looking closely at the monster’s
head.
“Yes, it is!” agreed Coppertop, in a depressed
tone. Then she said, “Do you happen to remember
any funny stories?”
“Why?” asked the Bird.
“Because if you do, tell one to the crocodile,
and when he smiles my brothers can just hop out!”
“The only one I know w T as told me by a bear
who had once been in a thing he called a circus.”
“Say it all in a loud voice,” interrupted Copper-
top, “so that the crocodile can hear!”
“The man thing who looks after the animals,”
began the Bird, chirping his loudest.
“You mean the Keeper!”
“Yes, the Keepit!” corrected the Bird, flurried
by the interruption. “The Keepit man thing had to
give the bear a powder. And so he put it in a long
tube, and he put one end in the bear’s mouth and
the other end in his own, ready to blow it down the
bear’s throat. But the bear blew first!”
They both waited anxiously for the smile on
the face of the crocodile. But it never came.
“I believe the joke has killed him—it’s a very
old one,” said Coppertop. But she was sorry after-
wards, as the poor Bird looked so very crestfallen.
“We’ll soon see!” he cried. And flying down,
he perched upon the crocodile’s eyelid and pecked at
it.
But it never flickered.


“Dead! Dead as a stone!” he remarked. And
bursting into tears, he flew away, sadly twittering.
After he had gone, Coppertop sat wondering
how she was to release Tibbs and Kiddiwee, when
she saw a sharp-pointed stone lying near her feet.
“Why, it’s the very thing!” she exclaimed.
“I’ll make a hole in the old reptile with this, and
then they can crawl through.”
So saying, she set to work, and quickly removed
a piece of his hard, leathery skin.
The hole was certainly not much larger than
a penny, when to her surprise she saw the head and
shoulders of Tibbs through the opening, and then
Kiddiwee. The next moment they both flew out and
rushed towards her, trying to throw their tiny arms
round her neck.
Of course she was overjoyed to see them. But
what had happened? They were no larger than
dragon-flies.
Then she remembered all she had seen from
Waomba’s arms—how the Mist Maidens had kissed
them till they grew smaller and smaller and floated
down like leaves on to the island.
“It was all the fault of those stupid Maidens!”
apologised Tibbs, as soon as the excitement of their
greeting was over, “They would keep on kissing
us! And it made us feel small! And, of course,
when you feel small, I suppose you become so!”
“Never mind,” said their sister, soothingly, as
she snuggled them under her chin against her warm
neck.


“Hurry up, my dears!” cried a voice near by,
“or you’ll miss the East Wind, too.”
“Why, it’s old Mr. Atom!” cried Tibbs, in sur-
prise.
“Where? Oh, where?” said Kiddiwee.
“There, sitting on that spider web,” replied
Tibbs. “See!”
“I can’t see him,” said Coppertop, who was too
large. “But Ido believe I had forgotten all about
the East Wind. Do let us hurry.”
“You mean the West Wind,” corrected Tibbs.
“No, I don’t. It’s the East Wind we’ve to find
now. Isn’t it, Mr. Atom?”
“That’s so,” he replied. “And you’d better
look sharp about it. But you two boys aren’t much
use that size, are you? On the bank of the river
you will find growing a fruit called the mabola. It
is like a strawberry. Eat it, and you’ll soon be your
natural size. Ta-ta!” And before they could thank
him he had disappeared.
“He’s a dear!” cried Coppertop. “But I do
wish he wasn’t so small.”
Quicker than words can tell, the little party
flew across the river. And they had no trouble in
finding the berry which Mr. Atom had described.
Tibbs tasted it, and immediately he began to
grow.
“It’s scrumptious!” he cried, eating more and
more as his mouth grew larger. Kiddiwee did like-
wise, and in less than no time they were restored
to their right size.


Coppertop gave a little sigh. They couldn’t
nestle against her neck any more, now.
“Oh, dear!” she thought. ‘T suppose it’s
terrifikly greedy, but I did love them being so small
and cuddly.”


CHAPTER XV.
THE CLERK OF THE WEATHER LAYS A TRAP
YOU see, it’s Pyramid Land we have to reach
now,” explained Coppertop.
“That’s where the mummies and sacred cats
come from!” cried Tibbs. “And Arab steeds, and
Bedouins! We shall have a ripping time there!”
“ ’Es, it will be beautiful if there are lots of
Mummies. We can have one each, and heaps of
cuddles!” cried Kiddiw r ee.
“Oh, they’re not that kind,” explained his
brother. “They’re not like Celia’s mummie. These
mummies are all dried up, and yellow, and wrapt
up in thousands of bandages.”
“Well, there’s not much difference—’cept the
bandages,” said Kiddiwree.
“Oh! You’re very, very, very rude!” cried
Coppertop. “Mummie may be a little w T ee bit thin
and sunburnt, but people from India are all like that,
and she’s beautiful underneath.”
There was an uncomfortable silence after this.
Then Tibbs said—
“Well, come on, you people! There’s no time
to lose. Let’s make a start.”
“But which way do we go?” asked Coppertop,
screwing up her eyes with a puzzled expression.


“Oh, I know the way,” said Tibbs. “Just
follow me.”
And off they flew, their wings glinting in the
bright sunlight.
They passed over a wide desert, and reached
a long, blue river, on the banks of which were the
ruins of old, old cities.
“What lovely ruins!” said Coppertop. “They’re
too lovely for words! Ido love old things!”
“Just look at that huge person!” she cried,
pointing to a gigantic stone figure, standing on
guard at the entrance to an ancient temple.
“I expect that is older than—older than ”
“Mummie!” suggested Kiddiwee.
“Oh, millions of times!” laughed Coppertop.
“Mummie isn’t so very old.”
As they were passing by a sudden breeze
sprang up—a spiteful, waspish breeze—that flat-
tened their wings against their backs, making it
difficult to fly; and it blew the sand up into clouds.
And as it whistled round the great stone figure
they distinctly heard a voice say:
“Come inside!
Come inside!
I have wonderful treasures,
Such gems and such jewels!
Come, see them, I pray.
And if you will venture,
I have—for the asking—
That which you are seeking,
A December day!”


“Did you hear that?” cried Coppertop, hardly
able to believe her ears. “Our December day at
last! Oh, how splendid!”
“It’s a funny place to keep it,” said Tibbs doubt-
fully.
“’Es, it is!” agreed Kiddiwee; “a dark old
place, I ’spect.”
“But we must go down and see,” urged Copper-
top, her eyes sparkling.
“All right,” assented Tibbs; “it’ll be rather
fun exploring, anyway.”
So they flew down. And close to the ground,
between the feet of the stone figure, they found a
crumbling doorway.
With beating hearts, they entered.
♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
“It’s getting darkerer and darkerer!” cried
Kiddiwee, in an awed voice.
“I shouldn’t be surprised if we come across
some snakes!” exclaimed Tibbs. “Better look where
you’re going, Celia!”
“I can’t see! And I ’spect I’ll tread on one if
it gets any darkerer,” piped Kiddiwee.
They had come to the head of some old, half-
ruined steps leading down to a dark passageway.
“It’s an awful risk,” said Tibbs, hesitatingly;
“I don’t care about myself—but you two kids!”
“Oh, no! Do let’s go on!” cried Coppertop.
“There may be something frightfully old and mys-
terious down there. I’ll go alone if you’re afraid.”


Tibbs and Kiddiwee escape from tbe Crocodile (p. 87).




That settled it! To be taunted by a mere girl
was too much for Tibbs, and taking Kiddiwee by
the hand, he descended the steps.
It was now so dark that they had to feel their
way along the wall, and once or twice they stumbled
over the uneven flooring. On one occasion their
blood went cold at the sound of a venomous hiss!
And “something” brushed against Coppertop’s legs.
After walking along this passage for what
seemed to be a very long way, Tibbs said breath-
lessly—
“I say! This passage is going down hill! We
shall be miles underground, soon. I don’t believe
there is a December day down here, or any other
day. We have been done!”
“But the voice did ask us to come in, didn’t it?”
said Coppertop.
“Yes. But whose voice was it? It sounded
to me very much like the Clerk of the Weather.”
“It’s dreadful if it was!” panted Coppertop.
“Whatever shall we do?”
“Nothing to do but go on, now,” said Tibbs;
“we don’t know the way back—and perhaps it’s all
right,” he added, seeing how scared they both
were.
There was something so mysterious and awful
about this dark, down-hill passage, that they all be-
came quite silent, and only the sound of their
stumbling steps and quick breathing could be heard.
“If you take my advice, my dears,” came the
familiar voice of their old friend, “you’ll turn back.”


“You’ll never find what you are seeking down
there,” he added; “and even if Amon Ra had one to
spare he’d never part with it. He dislikes
foreigners. Take my advice and turn back. You’re
near his temple now.”
“Oh, we can’t turn back now!” cried Copper-
top. “I’ve never seen Amon Ra. He’s the Sun God.
Daddy told me about him. We must go on.”
“Well, I’m going on, for one,” agreed Tibbs.
“ ’Es, so am I!” echoed Kiddiwee, although his
voice trembled.
“Australian —very Australian!” sighed Mr.
Atom, and left them to their fate.
After groping along a little further, the children
turned a sharp corner and found themselves within
a vast chamber.
There were huge pillars on one side, and mas-
sive blocks of carved stone on the other. The place
was lit by a strange glow which fell between the
pillars, throwing their long shadows across the tiled
floor.
“Oh, dear! My wings have gone!” gasped
Coppertop, for they had vanished the moment she
entered the chamber; “I wish I had not been so
curious and stupid as to come here!”
“Look!” cried Tibbs, in a thrilled voice.
Motionless, they all three turned their eyes to
the far end of the chamber.
A golden disk appeared out of the dim shadows
which hid the top of the columns; it spun in mid-air,
growing brighter and brighter till it shone like the


sun itself. Then from the tiled floor under it came
two coils of bluish vapour floating up toward the
golden sun-disk. As they reached it there came a
strange sound, like a mighty whisper, which filled
the chamber.
Then, slowly, from behind this veil of vapour,
the children beheld a mighty figure appearing.
“It’s Amon Ra!” cried Tibbs, in a husky voice,
through his dry lips.
Coppertop fell to her knees, and buried her face
in her hands. But Tibbs, although rather shaken,
faced him boldly. And Kiddiwee actually ran to-
ward Amon Ra fearlessly, attracted by the bright
sun-disk which shone in his forehead.
“Foolish ones!” said Amon Ra in a mighty
voice, deep and melodious as the thunder of an
organ. “Why have you ventured here? You who
have dared to kill a sacred crocodile!”
“If—if you please, sir!” said Tibbs, keeping his
voice as steady as he could, “we didn’t kill him! He
swallowed us, and the poison from the Bushmen’s
arrows settled in his tail—and so—he pegged out!”
“Pegged out?” repeated Amon Ra.
“Well, died,” explained Tibbs.
“That is not true!” thundered Amon Ra, in a
voice that made the stone blocks tremble and the
pillars sway; “the Clerk of the Weather told me
otherwise!”
“The sneak!” broke out Tibbs, between his
clenched teeth.


“Silence!” roared the Sun God. “You shall be
punished for this. BEGONE!”
As he uttered these words, a fierce hurricane
swept through the chamber, carrying the children
off their feet, and whirling them away!
And the last thing they were conscious of was
the spiteful laughter of the Clerk of the Weather
ringing in their ears as they were blown along.


CHAPTER XVI.
DISCOVERED BY THE EAST WIND
I WILL drop them here!” growled the Clerk
of the Weather. “They’re not worth carry-
ing further —wretched brats!” And so say-
ing, he dropped them down beside a pyramid—the
Pyramid of Gizeh.
“I don’t think they’ll pester me again,” he
chuckled. “And when the East Wind finds them
littering up his favourite resting place he’ll bury
them deep beneath the sand!”
Laughing, he went on his way, and left Copper-
top, Tibbs and Kiddiwee lying in the shadow of the
Pyramid.
Before long the East Wind came—as was his
time-long custom—to rest beside the Pyramid.
He was weary and hot with blowing over the
burning desert, and was not in the best of temper.
He had just arrived from India, having blown a
plague from Shah Land into the Ruby Sea, and he
felt that he fully deserved a snooze beside his
favourite Pyramid.
But what was this?
Nestling against its base, in the very spot where
he himself would sit, he beheld three small forms.
Who had dared to place them there, in his
private snuggery?


“Some frivolous breeze has blown this rubbish
here!” cried the East Wind, angrily. “But they
shall not trouble me long! I will heave up the sand
about them and bury them deep—and then sit there-
on!”
He had just commenced to blow up the sand
into little swirls and eddies, when he was inter-
rupted by a voice saying—
“Oh, no you don't, my friend! Oh, no you
don't!”
The East Wind paused, and looked round in
astonishment. But he could see no one.
“I am a kind of fairy god-father to those three
‘little bits of rubbish,' ” continued the voice, “and
anyone who harms them will have to reckon with
me!”
The East Wind grew slightly nervous. And
the voice went on, “If you take MY advice ”
“Who,” burst out the East Wind, “is going to
take your advice when they can't even see you?
Who are you?” he added, feeling nervous and
irritated.
“Mr. Atom, at your sendee!” laughed the
gallant little person. “And, if you lay a finger on
these children, I shall just ”
“In that case, I'm off!” cried the East Wind,
without even waiting to hear just exactly what Mr.
Atom would do, for he was a great coward, and
frightened of anything that he couldn’t see or under-
stand.


And away he flew, back to India, in a very bad
mood.
“H’m! Fm rather sorry I frightened him away
like that,” remarked Mr. Atom; “he may have had
the December day that Coppertop is in search of.
They’d better rouse up in double-quick time, and
follow the rascal back to India.”
“Wake up! Wake up!! WAKE UP!!!” He
cried to the sleeping children.
To Tibbs and Kiddiwee he caused his voice to
sound like the song of golden larks in the Far-away-
beyond.
And to Coppertop it sounded like the crowing
of her pet bantam in the farmyard at home.
“I thought that would do the trick!” laughed
Mr. Atom, as he watched the effect of his magic upon
the children.
“I think they will be all right now, bless ’em,”
and the kindly little person disappeared.
At the sound of his voice each child roused up
with a happy smile.
“Gracious! I thought I heard ” began
Coppertop.
“ ’Es, so did I!” exclaimed Kiddiwee.
“I say, this is jolly funny! Where on earth are
we?” cried Tibbs. And the three bewildered
children sat up on the sand and gazed around them,
trying vainly to make out where they were, and how
they got there.
“Heavens! Why, we’ve got to the Pyramids,
somehow!” exclaimed Coppertop, staggering to her


feet and gazing up helplessly at the huge stone
monument towering above them. “Isn’t it simply
tremendous?”
“Let’s climb it!” exclaimed Tibbs.
“We couldn’t, why each step’s as big as I am.
And besides ”
“Well?”
“I distinctly heard my little bantam crow!”
and Coppertop set her lips firmly.
“’Es, and I heard the Golden Larks —I did!”
cried Kiddiwee, his little face glowing with excite-
ment.
“Well, so did I; but that’s no reason why we
shouldn’t climb the Pyramid. Come on!”
“No,” said Coppertop, and she meant it. “That
crowing was a kind of mysterious warning!”
“Oh, rot!” interrupted Tibbs, but he looked
slightly uncomfortable all the same.
“Yes, it was! I shall be dreadfully angry if
you say it’s ‘rot.’ It’s a warning that time is getting
short, and I’ve simply got to find that old December
day as fast as ever I can.”
“Look!” cried Kiddiwee. “What funny sand!”
The others looked, and saw, to their surprise,
that letters were being written on the sand, as
though by some great invisible finger. Spelling it
letter by letter, it read—
FOLLOW THE EAST WIND TO
INDIA: HE SAYS A PRAYER AT
THE TAJ MAHAL EACH MORN.


\
“Now, then, you see! I was right!” cried
Coppertop, as soon as she had breath to speak.
The East Wind.
“There’s something very, very mysterious about all
this. I wonder what the third thing will be.”


“Why should there be a ‘third thing’? Girls
are always so superstitious!” said Tibbs. He felt
decidedly uncomfortable, and did not like mysterious
things in any shape or form.
“I don’t know, but there always is,” answered
Coppertop gravely. “I wonder why the East Wind
prays at the Taj Mahal? It’s the grave of an old
Indian Queen-woman called Nur Mahal—which
means Light of the Harem. Daddy told me all
about it.’
“Where is it?” asked Tibbs.
“At Agra,” replied Coppertop. “And I’ve seen
it. It’s simply gorgeous!”
“Well, if we’ve to go to India, let’s start. It’s a
jolly long way. Come on, Kiddiwee.”
“But however am I to go?” cried Coppertop.
“My wings are gone!”
“I forgot that!” said Tibbs, ashamed of his
thoughtlessness. “Couldn’t we carry you?”
“It would take ages that way,” she replied.
And they sat down on the sand again to think
the matter over.
“If the old Big Bed hadn’t been shipwrecked,
w T e might have sailed over the sand on that.”
“Or if we could find some camels,” suggested
Tibbs; “they call them the ‘ships of the desert,’ you
know.”
“Miss Smiler is a camel,” said Coppertop,
fingering the little bronze animal that hung on a
chain round her neck. “But she’s so very small, I
don’t suppose she’d do.”


“That little thing!” laughed Tibbs. “Lor, no!”
“You’ve no business to laugh at her, anyway,”
pouted Coppertop. “Daddy gave her to me, and
she’s a very dear little person,” and, so saying, she
took the little bronze camel from the chain and kissed
it.
No sooner had she done this, than it began to
grow.
“Oh, look!” she cried. “How perfectly wonder-
ful! It’s coming to life! It’s turning into a real
one I”
And so it was.
It raised its head, and looked round in a calm
and dignified way, opening its languid eyes a little
wider, and then—catching sight of the children—
smiled broadly.
“What a duckie little thing!” exclaimed Copper-
top. “Oh, do look! It’s simply screaming with
laughter now!”
“Oh, crikey!” laughed Tibbs. “It’s a lively
little beggar!”
“Yes. It’s tiggling so!” giggled Coppertop.
“I can hardly hold it!”
For Miss Smiler was now racing round and
round her hand as fast as her legs would carry her.
“She’ll grow to any size we want her, I believe,”
said Coppertop.
“Ough!” exclaimed Kiddiwee; “I’d like her as
big as a real one, I would!”
“Hush!” warned his sister; “don’t let her hear
you say that! She IS a real one, or, at least, she


thinks she is. And she’d be terrifikly angry and
hurt if she thought that you thought that she wasn’t
—see?”
“ ’Es, but IS she?” whispered Kiddiwee.
“Yes —perhaps,” she whispered back.
“I’d like her as big as this old Pyramid,” she
added, aloud. “And then she would go at a simply
huge rate!”


CHAPTER XVII.
THE STRANGEST RIDE THAT EVER WAS
WELL, do let’s decide what size she is going
to be,” cried Coppertop, “and then we can
make a start.”
“I don’t believe it can alter its size,” said Tibbs.
“It’s impossible.”
“Nothing’s impossible!” retorted Coppertop;
“Mr. Atom said so.”
“I’d like him like a real one,” repeated Kiddi-
wee.
“It isn’t a ‘him,’ it’s a ‘she’!” said his sister.
“Do be careful, we don’t want to offend it.”
“Yes, I think we’ll have her a proper camel size,
to begin with,” she added.
“I don’t believe ” began Tibbs.
But ere he could finish a sentence, Coppertop’s
hand was forced open by the swiftly-growing camel,
which, with a joyful cry, she put on the ground.
There the animal continued to grow rapidly.
“Good morning!” said Miss Smiler, the camel,
as soon as she was large enough to have a voice at
all.
“She talks!” exclaimed Coppertop.
“Frequently,” said the Camel; “did you ever
know a girl who didn’t?”


“She’s still growing!” cried Tibbs, scarcely
able to believe his eyes.
“I usually grow faster than this,” said the
Camel, “but one of you three didn’t believe I could.”
By this time she was as large as an ordinary
camel, and in every w 7 ay like one, except that she
had no hump, and she wore a large silk bow upon
her forehead, and another one upon her tail.
“You’d better climb up while I’m a comfort-
able size,” said Miss Smiler. “One of you wants
me to be as big as this pyramid. I feel it in my
bones. So hop on, I’m still growing!”
The children did not need another warning,
and tried their best to reach the Camel’s back. But
in spite of their efforts, they found that she
already too large.
“I shall have to kneel,” remarked Miss Smiler.
“It’s a bit of a bore, but I can say my prayer at the
same time.”
“Whatever is your prayer?” asked Coppertop.
“Oh, I just say—
Please keep the horrid Hump away,
And let me smile from day to day.
Try it, my dear, three times a day, after meals.”
By this time Miss Smiler was down on her
knees, and without very much trouble the children
clambered upon her broad back.
Immediately they had done so, the Camel rose
to her feet, and continued to grow rapidly. But
what was the strangest thing of all, the children on
her back felt themselves growing, too!


Everything round them appeared to be getting
smaller and smaller. The Pyramid now seemed
only half its original size, and the river looked like
a little stream. And before many moments had
passed, there was no difference in size between the
Pyramid and themselves, and the surrounding
country lay stretched beneath them like a map.
“We must be awfully huge!” cried Coppertop,
in a high-pitched voice, screwing up her little eyes.
“Yet I don’t feel a bit conceited!”
“That’s because there is nobody here but our-
selves,” said Tibbs, “and we’re all as large as each
other. Wait till we meet some ordinary people—
we shall feel like Greek gods then!”
“Why Greek?” asked his sister.
“Why not? Girls always want to argue!”
“I wonder that you have anything to do with
us, then,” pouted Coppertop.
“Oh, do stop being so grumbly with each other,”
cried Kiddiwee. “See where we’re going. I ’spect
we’re nearly at India.”
Miss Smiler had now settled into a long, swing-
ing trot. And when you consider her great size,
and that she covered at least half a mile at each
stride, you will then have some idea of the rate at
which they were travelling.
They had long ago stepped across the Ruby
Sea, and were now striding through Shah Land.
Here it was that Miss Smiler ate up a few hundred
mulberry trees as she passed, and gobbled down
some fine carpets. Feeling refreshed, she galloped


at an increased speed down on to the plains of
Indus.
Although it was early morning, the sun now
grew intensely hot. And Tibbs and Kiddiwee were
very glad when Miss Smiler knelt down to rest
beneath the shade of some tall palm trees. But,
owing to their size, it was rather like an elephant
trying to shelter beneath a toad-stool.
“If we could only go up to Simla,” sighed
Coppertop, “I believe we should find several of
Daddy’s friends there. But I couldn’t go this size,
could I? I’d only be able to get about half my nose
into one of those wee bungalows, and the punkah-
wallahs would all die of fright! And the ‘pi’ dogs
would run mad at the sight of me. And the Colonel
Sahibs would come fuming out of the clubs! And
I should just be able to push them all away with my
little toe.” And Coppertop laughed heartily at the
thought of it.
The Himalaya Mountains spread before them in
all their glory, for the morning sun was dressing
their highest peaks in a rich robe of rose and golden
sunbeams.
“Aren’t those mountains simply too gorgeous!”
cried Coppertop; “and dear old Simla is just there
at the foot of them.”
After a short rest under the palm trees, Miss
Smiler arose and continued her journey.
They passed many beautiful valleys, but saw
no sign of the East Wind. Neither was he cooling


J \ c'x I/I
J- >y\IT ’ 1 I • j%v j
| in'At' *”~''-\i^’NL^"
* / _yV" r Wf"‘- y
jl r \ |
j M wk n
V
/ / r f~
Ji ■ B
FoolisK ones,’ said Amon Ra (p. 95).




So the
prayers
himself in the shade of the mountains,
chances were that he was even then at his
beside the Taj Mahal.
And thither they went at full speed.


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE EAST WIND AND THE WHITE ELEPHANT
IF YOU take MY advice, you won’t go near the
East Wind at present,” said a tiny, familiar
voice, “he’s in a terrible rage!”
“Why?” asked the three children together.
“Well, my dears, it’s the old, old story,” said
Mr. Atom. “He fell in love, some years ago, with
the White Elephant of Amrapure. For long years
he has whispered love songs round the folds of her
unheeding ears. At length, driven to despair, he
asked a friendly Cyclone if he would kindly blow
the White Elephant from Amrapure to the Taj
Mahal, and there shut her up, a prisoner, until she
consented to w r ed him. Which the friendly Cyclone
did, blowing the little elephant along, willy-nilly,
past Benares and Allahabad, till they reached Agra.
And it so happened ”
“ ’Es, but who is Willie Nilly?” asked Kiddi-
wee.
“Don’t interrupt! That’s only an expression,”
corrected Tibbs.
“And it so happened,” continued Mr. Atom,
“that a great Rajah found the White Elephant
there. Thinking it was a gift from some other
Prince, he called his retainers, and had the White
Elephant removed to his palace, near by.”


“This sounds exactly like an Arabian Nights
story,” interrupted Coppertop.
“Perhaps it does, my dear. But it’s perfectly
true, I assure you,” said Mr. Atom.
“Of course it is!” cried Tibbs. “Don’t stop
him.”
“Now, when the East Wind heard of this, he
flew into a great rage. He howled and screamed
round the Rajah’s Palace, and finding that this had
but little effect, he rustled, he murmured, he im-
plored. But no! The Rajah refused to part with
the Elephant, and shut all his casements to
the pleading voice of the East Wind.”
“Is that all?” exclaimed Miss Smiler, when
Mr. Atom ceased speaking. “Because,” she con-
tinued, “I think I can help that East Wind in his
little affair.”
“Can you? Oh, Miss Smiler, tell us how!”
cried Coppertop.
“Easy as—smiling,” assured the Camel. “I’ll
just push the Rajah’s Palace down, and then sit
on the White Elephant till she consents to marry
the East Wind.”
“I think that is an excellent plan, my dears!”
cried Mr. Atom. “The East Wind will be so grate-
ful to you for your assistance that he’ll surely spare
you a December day. He’s in Tibet at present,
cooling down after his rage. So if you take MY
advice, you’ll carry out your plan at once. Ta-ta!”


“Whatever should we do without him?” re-
marked Coppertop when Mr. Atom had disappeared.
“He’s really a most useful little person, isn’t he?”
“Yes, but he seems to know everything, and
makes a fellow feel an awful dunce!” grumbled
Tibbs. “But don’t worry about him. This ele-
phant affair is getting exciting. Come along,
Smiler, old girl, let us try your plan, it sounds
ripping!”
Without any further delay, they made their
way to the Taj Mahal.
As they drew near, Miss Smiler lifted her head
and tittered.
“There it is!” she cried, “the little White Ele-
phant, out for a morning stroll, with the Rajah on
her back.”
“Where?” cried the children.
“There! On the other side of that queer little
box you call the Taj Mahal.”
From their great height they could easily see
over the building to the jungle beyond. And there
they beheld her.
“’Es, but it’s only a tiny wee toy eferlent!”
exclaimed Kiddiwee, disappointedly.
“No, it isn’t a bit,” exclaimed Coppertop;
“that’s only because we’re so huge. It’s quite the
ordinary size. Oh, don’t you understand?”
“ ’Es, I ’spect I do,” said Kiddiwee, rather
doubtfully.
“What are you going to do, Miss Smiler?” in-
quired Tibbs.


“Oh, call me Smiler, for short!” corrected the
Camel. “What am I going to do? Why, Pm going
to hop over the Taj Mahal, like a bird, and sit right
down on the little Elephant. That’ll surprise the
Rajah, won’t it?” and Miss Smiler smiled hugely at
the very idea.
In an instant Miss Smiler jumped right over
the Taj Mahal, and with one stride reached the
White Elephant. Without a moment’s hesitation,
she sat down on it, greatly to the terror of the Rajah
and his servants, who thought the end of the world
had come.
Smiler was in the highest of spirits at the suc-
cess of her plan, and shook with laughter when she
saw the Rajah and his attendants running away
like frightened rabbits.
The little White Elephant was most indignant.
She was accustomed to be treated with the greatest
respect, and she objected strongly to being sat on;
in fact, she kicked and struggled, and she raised her
trunk and trumpeted her loudest. But it was all
to no purpose.
As soon as he saw that the Elephant was
secure, Tibbs ran off in the direction of Tibet, to
(find the East Wind and tell him the good news.
Kiddiwee climbed on to the Taj Mahal to watch for
his return.
Unfortunately, Miss Smiler had acted rather
hastily in jumping over the Taj Mahal, for, in so
doing, her hind legs caught against the beautiful
central dome, and partly destroyed it; and her


shoulder struck against one of the marble towers
and broke it in half.
This unlucky accident was the cause of much
delay in finding the December day. For it so hap-
pened that the rascally Clerk of the Weather was
watching from a passing cloud, and saw the whole
thing happen, and, in order to upset the plan of
Smiler and the children, he rushed off to find the
East Wind and poison his heart against them before
Tibbs could reach him.


CHAPTER XIX.
THE EAST WIND IN A RAGE.
I CAN’T see Tibbs anywhere, I can’t!” cried
Kiddiwee, after watching a long time for
his return, to Coppertop, who was seated
on the Camel and laughing heartily at the antics of
the Rajah and his attendants, as they rushed madly
about, trying to find some means of getting the
little White Elephant from under Miss Smiler. But
I’m afraid that—
Not all the King’s horses,
Nor all the King’s men,
Could lift such a Camel
As Smiler was then.
“Oh, he’ll be back soon!” cried Coppertop.
“Do look at these queer little excited things.
They’re too funny for words!” and she laughed until
she nearly fell off Miss Smiler’s back.
“Oh, look! LOOK! They’re trying to pull the
White Elephant out by her trunk! I shall scream
if it stretches and goes back with a bang!”
“ ’Es, like ’lastic,” cried Kiddiwee.
“Yes! Ido hope Miss Smiler isn’t sitting too
heavily on her; the East Wind won’t care very much
for a squashed wife, will he?”
“We’ll ask for the December day before we give
him the Elephant, don’t you think so?” she con-
tinued, addressing the Camel.


“Bet your life!” observed Miss Smiler.
“I never bet,” replied Coppertop, with dignity.
“Except—well, it isn’t betting exactly—but Daddy
always puts me on the Calcutta Sweep,” she added,
truthfully.
“Nice for the sweep,” remarked the Camel.
“Oh, you really are stupid,” exclaimed Copper-
top. “You don’t understand. It’s not that kind of
a sweep. It’s a ”
But before she could utter another word the
roar of a rapidly approaching gale drowned all
further utterance. The trees of the jungle were
bent nearly double, and the next moment the East
Wind rushed upon them in a fury, blowing Tibbs
helplessly along in front.
The poor boy felt so small at this indignity,
that he quickly became so, and running off, hid him-
self behind a stone by the roadside.
“Where is the creature who has ruined ray
beautiful Taj Mahal?” roared the East Wind, in a
voice of seven hurricanes.
“Where is the Goth who has done this deed?
I will blow him off the earth!
I will grind him to the dust!
The Ganges shall lift its head like a hooded snake, and
drown him!
He shall be whirled in a hurricane to the highest peak
of the Himalayas and left there to freeze!”
“Is that all?” remarked Miss Smiler, smiling
broadly. “And who is the lucky person?”


“The Clerk of the Weather told me it was a
creature called ‘Smiler’!” cried the East Wind,
tearing down the palm trees as he spoke, and whirl-
ing them about like straws. “SMILER!” he bel-
lowed, “who has dared to use my Best Beloved as
an air cushion!” he roared, blind with rage.
And Smiler smiled no more.
She looked hastily round at the ruined Taj
Mahal, and she wept an inward tear of remorse.
She glanced down at the little White Elephant
struggling beneath her, and she blushed with shame
at the way she had treated her.
Now, all this made Miss Smiler feel very small.
And, feeling small, she quickly became so!
The White Elephant, feeling the weight on her
back grow less —as Miss Smiler grew smaller—
scrambled to her feet, and made off into the jungle,
trumpeting joyfully.
As for Coppertop, the first rush of the East
Wind blew her off the Camel’s back and whirled
her up into a tall palm tree. And there she hung
—by the leg of her pyjamas—in mid air.
Of course, such an undignified position made
her feel very “small,” and she quickly became so in
fact.
Then Kiddiwee, left all alone on the ruined
Taj Mahal, shrinking with fear, grew so small that
he was carried off by the Clerk of the Weather, who
was hiding close by, and thrown into the den of an
Elderly Spinster Spider, in a crevice of the ruined
building.


As for the East Wind, being changeable, as
most winds are, he forgot his rage as soon as he
caught sight of his beloved White Elephant. Sigh-
ing deeply, he made off into the jungle after her.
There they were wed, I think, for the trees still
whisper of his tender wooing.
But the three children were in great distress.
They were all separated, and were so small that
they had little chance of finding each other; for a
distance that is only a few paces to a giant, may be
several miles to a tiny dwarf.


CHAPTER XX.
IN THE DEN OF THE SPINSTER SPIDER
THE East Wind soon repented of his rage,
and, feeling not a little ashamed of the
harsh way he had treated the children, he
came back to apologise. Finding Tibbs sitting alone
upon a pebble, he murmured his deep regrets.
But Tibbs was in no mood to forgive him easily.
“It’s pretty easy for you to say you’re sorry,
and all that, after you’ve blown my sister and
brother and Miss Smiler ”
“Don’t mention that Camel’s name!” inter-
rupted the East Wind, “or I shall get annoyed
again!”
“Anyhow, you’ve blown them to—to smither-
eens. And then you come to me and say you’re
sorry! But, if you’re a sport at all, the first thing
you ought to do is to find them for me, or at least
tell me where they are,” continued Tibbs.
“Let me think,” began the East Wind. “The
Clerk of the Weather took the little sunbeam
boy ”
“Kiddiwee!” corrected Tibbs.
“Yes. And dropped him into a crevice in the
dome of the Taj Mahal; and there he lies asleep,
in the safe keeping of an Elderly Spinster Spider.”


“A Spider!” cried Tibbs, growing white,
“Why, she’ll suck his blood. Well, what about
Celia?”
“Do you mean the boy with the golden fire
falling from his head in two long streams, on to his
shoulders?”
“Yes; but she’s a girl, not a boy,” corrected
Tibbs.
“But, she was wearing ” and the East
Wind paused in slight confusion.
“Pyjamas! Yes, I know,” said Tibbs; “heaps
of girls do in Australia.”
“Pity I didn’t know!” sighed the East Wind,
“because I hung her up by the leg of her py—
py ”
“Jamas!” finished Tibbs.
“Yes, pyjamas, to a leaf of a tall palm tree,
and a bird came along and flew off with her, think-
ing she was a worm, no doubt; she looked rather
like a worm in those striped things, didn’t she?”
“I never saw a worm in blue and white
pyjamas! That bird must have been crazy! But
this is terrible news. How on earth are we to find
her?” cried Tibbs.
“It —it was a Japanese bird,” ventured the
East Wind; “maybe that will help you to find her.”
“Yes, by Jove it does!” cried Tibbs. “I expect
he has carried her to Japan. And what about the
Camel?”
“Oh, that I was too disgusted with even to
blow on. I left it where it was. But I have reason


to know that it followed the flight of the bird as best
it could on its puny legs, and galloped along after
them. ,,
“Good old Smiler!” exclaimed Tibbs. Then he
added in a matter-of-fact way, “I suppose you
haven’t a December day knocking around anywhere,
that you don’t particularly want? If you have, old
man, you might lend it to me. I’ll give you some
marbles and a piece of string in exchange, and it’ll
help to make up for the way you’ve behaved!”
Just then the East Wind happened to glance
up at his beloved Taj Mahal, and his brow clouded.
“No, I haven’t,” he growled, “and you deserved
all you received!” He was turning his back to go,
when from the jungle came the soft, sweet trumpet-
ing of the little White Elephant. At the sound of
his loved one’s voice the East Wind changed again,
and, turning once more to Tibbs, he added:
“Try the North Wind for a December day,
mine are not so warm as his.” Then turning on
his heels, once more he blew back into the jungle.
As soon as the East Wind had departed, Tibbs
commenced to search for Kiddiwee. But it was no
easy matter for a little chap no larger than a lead
soldier to clamber over a huge building, such as the
ruined Taj Mahal. However, he struggled on
bravely, and at length came to a large slanting crack
in the side of the building, which was like a wind-
ing mountain pathway to him. Up this he strode,
and at last arrived at a deep crevice between two
great blocks of marble, across which was hung a


dusty cobweb. With a great effort of will —for
he hated spiders above all things—he shook the web,
and after doing this once or twice, a huge, hairy-
legged spider appeared and looked at him hungrily.
“Well!” said the Elderly Spinster Spider, for
it was she, “What do you want?” This was not a
very polite greeting, but Tibbs thought it as well to
humour her, so he said —
“Nothing, Madame ”
“Miss!” corrected the Elderly Spinster Spider,
folding two legs across her chest.
“Miss,” repeated Tibbs, “I want nothing but
a glance into your eyes, for they are said to be the
brightest gems in the Taj Mahal.”
“Rubbish!” exclaimed the Elderly Spinster
Spider, but she carefully combed her eyebrows with
the comb on her third left leg.
“It is also said,” continued Tibbs, “that you
have the kindest heart in all Spiderland, preferring
rather to remain single than to marry and be
obliged to eat up your husband!” (Tibbs had read
somewhere that this was the usual custom amongst
lady Spiders.)
“Don’t talk of husbands to me!” said the
Elderly Spinster Spider, “the shy, undersized,
nervous, shamefaced things! Ugh! I wouldn’t eat
one if there wastn’t a fly left in India!”
“Tender-hearted creature!” murmured Tibbs.
“Not that I haven’t had my little flirtations!”
sighed the Elderly Spinster Spider, combing her
spinnerettes, “but I always stopped before it came


>+G
“Don’t talk of husbands to me,” said the Elderly Spinster Spider.


to eating the beasts. I think men-spiders taste
horrid! I nibbled the leg of one I was rather fond
of once, just to see!”
After this heart-to-heart confession, the
Elderly Spinster Spider sighed again, and her eyes
grew dreamy.
“I hear that gentlemen spiders are not your
only suitors,” continued Tibbs; “wasn’t there once
a golden-haired boy?”
“Once?” exclaimed the Elderly Spinster Spider,
“not once, but NOW! He is inside my den at this
very moment, sound asleep.”
“I can scarcely believe it!” cried Tibbs, hiding
his relief.
“Don’t you?” said the Elderly Spinster Spider,
with a touch of her former severity; “then, pray
walk in, and see for yourself.”
Tibbs needed no second asking.
The Spider’s den was a gruesome place—hung
with the remains of flies and insects —and in a far
corner lay Kiddiwee, fast asleep. The question was
how to get him away from the old Spider.
“I must get her out of the way,” he said to
himself. Then, turning to the Elderly Spinster
Spider, he said, “By Jove, you know, he looks very
pale.”
“Does he?” said the Spider, looking anxiously
at Kiddiwee.
“These boys are awfully thirsty little chaps,
you know,” added Tibbs; “they want plenty of
water.”


'■ , u\ 11
/ f.T K \ "4 - — dKf' Mf J : w -Sj*j®55typF ’.- } f ? •’; C3> ■ n^J
v * ’ ; ( Va ' >; M ,. r vif
iss Smiler sits on tKe White Elephant (p. 112).


-


“Dear, dear, and I haven’t a drain of water
in the den!” cried the Spider.
“I saw a dew-drop—a beauty—hanging from
the next crevice as I came along,” said Tibbs. “I
can’t climb for toffee, else I’d get it like a shot; it’s
the very thing for a thirsty boy. But you, with
your eight beautiful, long legs ”
Before he had finished the sentence, the
Elderly Spinster Spider—who was very good-
hearted, as Spiders go—left the den in search of
the dew-drop. As soon as her back was turned,
Tibbs seized the sleeping form of Kiddiwee in his
arms, rushed out of the den with him, and, running
down the long crevice road at breakneck speed, was
soon out of reach of the Elderly Spinster Spider.
“Goodness gracious!” said Kiddiwee, waking
up suddenly, and using one of Coppertop’s expres-
sions—perhaps he had been dreaming of her —
“Wherever am I? Why! it’s Tibbie. Oh, lam
glad, I am!” and he threw his arms round his elder
brother’s neck, and gave him a real big squeeze.
“Stop that!” cried Tibbs. “Fellows don’t hug
each other,” but he was pleased nevertheless.
“ ’Es, but where’s Cece?” asked Kiddiwee,
looking round anxiously, “and Miss Smiler?”
“Celia’s gone to Japan,” explained Tibbs,
briefly, “and Smiler has followed her. We’re going
there also, if we can find the wav!”
“Ou! how lovely! I love going to Japan—l
do!” exclaimed Kiddiwee, his fair little cheeks grow-


ing red as roses, with excitement, and his big, blue
eyes sparkling like dew on a blue-bell.
“But how are we to get there; we’re so hugely
tiny?”
“Don’t worry about that,” said a small voice.
“Mr. Atom!” exclaimed both boys in a breath.
“As I told you some little time ago, size is
nothing. Even now, to some of the insects, you look
like giants. But it was a pity about the Taj Mahal,
wasn’t it? Never mind,” he added, “when you get
to Japan look for the North Wind. He’s a good
fellow, and perhaps he’ll lend you a December day.”
“Yes! But how are we to get to Japan?” burst
out Tibbs.
“Quite easily,” answered Mr. Atom. “If you
take MY advice, you’ll walk quietly along this road
till you reach a Bungalow on the left-hand side.
There you will find a little Baba-Sahib blowing
beautiful soap bubbles. Wait until one falls to the
ground, and then—before it breaks —step inside,
and think hard that you want to go to Coppertop in
far-away Japan. You’ll be there in the twinkling
of an eye. Ta-ta!”
Before they could thank him, Mr. Atom had
gone, at least as far as they could tell.
They soon arrived at the Bungalow, and there
was the little Baba-Sahib, busily blowing soap
bubbles, as Mr. Atom had foretold.
They waited till a large and beautiful one came
gracefully to the ground, where it bounced light-
heartedly once or twice and then stood still! With


the greatest care they crawled inside, and thought
hard of their wish to go to Celia in Japan.
After a moment’s hesitation the glorious bubble
rose gracefully into the warm air, and off they
started.


CHAPTER XXL
COPPERTOP AND THE OLD MOTHER-BIRD.
NO! you can’t. You can’t have another
WORM!” said a strange voice.
Looking up, or down —Coppertop wasn’t
quite sure which —she found to her amazement that
she was no longer hanging by one leg to the palm
tree, but was sitting in a large nest, made of sticks
and clay, and surrounded by a nestful of very ugly
chicks, all beaks and eyes! But what surprised her
most was the hideous old Mother-bird —very like
Mrs. Grudge—perched above them with a long,
wriggling worm in her beak.
“Oh, goodness gracious!” she exclaimed. “I DO
hope I haven’t been eating WORMS! And, how-
ever did I get here? And what am I?”
“What are you?” croaked the old Mother-bird,
“a chick, like the rest, of course! Only you’ve the
largest mouth of all, and a rampageous appetite for
WORMS!”
“Yes,” admitted Coppertop, sorrowfully; “I
have got a large mouth and little piggy eyes, and
—and —the only nice thing about me is my
hair ”
“Hair!” shrieked the old Mother-bird,
“HAIR!! Feathers, you mean. Hair, indeed! As
though any chick of mine ever had hair!”


“But —am I a chick of yours?” cried Copper-
top, feeling that some terrible change must have
taken place.
“I suppose so,” replied the old Bird; “but I
never could count.”
“And am I—am I like the other chicks?”
“Like as two rice!” replied the old Mother-bird,
as she dropped a worm into one of the ever-open
beaks.
This was all such terrible and confusing news
to the poor child, that her brain failed to grasp it at
once.
“And what kind of a bird are you?” she asked,
for she had never seen one like it before.
“An UN-KIND, if you ask any more foolish
questions!” snapped the old Mother-bird.
“Just as if you didn’t know that we are all
Scarecrows!” she added.
“Oh, I know I’m a plain little thing!” said
Coppertop, tearfully, “but I never thought I was a
Scarecrow before.”
“Neither you are, before—this is ‘after’.”
“After what?” cried Coppertop, feeling sure
that she must be going mad.
“After to-morrow, of course!” replied the old
Mother-bird, with surprised eyebrows.
“Oh, dear!” cried the poor, bewildered child,
“what’s after to-morrow?”
“The day* stupid! Haven’t you heard the old
saying, ‘The day after to-morrow’? The day is
always after to-morrow, but he never catches it.”


“Well, I’m after a December day, and I never
catch that,” sighed Coppertop.
“Hush!” suddenly cried the old Mother-bird.
“There goes the Mikado!”
“The Mikado!” exclaimed Coppertop; “why, he
lives in Japan!”
“Well, isn’t this Japan, stupid?” snapped the
old Mother-bird.
“Is it? I thought it was India,” said Copper-
top, wearily, “nothing seems to be right. I’ve got
feathers instead of hair, and I eat worms! I don’t
believe I’m me at all! I must be someone else, but
if I’m not ‘me,’ who am I?”
“Be quiet!” said the old Mother-bird, sternly;
“if the Mikado hears you, he’ll order us to jump into
the river—like poor Tom Tit.”
“But how ” persisted Coppertop.
“I’ll explain it all,” cried the voice of kindly
Mr. Atom. “Take MY advice, my dear, and don’t
argue with the old Bird.”
“When you see a chance,” he continued, “jump
out of the nest and fly to the ancient Japanese Lan-
tern over there.”
“Then are we really in Japan?” whispered the
child.
“Yes,” replied Mr. Atom. “The old Mother-
bird found you hanging from the palm tree in India,
and, thinking that you were one of her precious
chicks, she flew with you here to Japan. Now you
know all about it. Ta-ta.” And he was gone.


Coppertop lost no time in doing as Mr. Atom
had told her. Just as soon as the old Scarecrow’s
back was turned, she scrambled from the nest and
jumped.
As she flew down to the Lantern, she saw that
she was really and truly in Japan.
How beautiful it was, to be sure! It seemed to
be a land of colour and sunshine. Flowers grew in
profusion, and here and there quaint little Japanese
houses peeped up, like golden and red-haired
children playing at hide-and-seek amongst the
blossom of the plum trees. And in the distance she
caught a glimpse of snow-capped Fujiyama, the
sacred mountain of Japan.
Upon reaching the Lantern, which was made
of stone, and very old and large, Coppertop
clambered inside, and sat down to have a deep, deep
think, for she had much to think about and to con-
sider.
The more she pondered, the more sad she be-
came, for it seemed to her that all her plans had
gone astray, and that she was no nearer finding the
precious December day for which she had now
searched the wide world over. The South Wind had
helped her but little, the West Wind she had missed,
the East Wind was enraged with them. Now there
was only the North Wind left, and she was not at
all certain where she could find him.
“Fm simply too miserable for words!” sighed
the poor child. “Whatever can Ido all alone, with-


out Tibbs, or Kiddiwee, or even Miss Smiler to help
me?”
“Wherever are they?” she cried aloud. “I do
love them so! And perhaps I shall never see them
again!” And the tears rolled down her cheeks at
the very thought.


CHAPTER XXII.
TIBBS AND KIDDIWEE TO THE RESCUE.
IDO wish you’d go away, or—or —move —or
do something!” sobbed Coppertop. “You
make me feel terrifikly nervous, standing
there and saying nothing; just staring and staring,
and leaning on that horrid, sharp sword!”
These words were addressed to a strange-look-
ing person, who had been standing beside the
Japanese Lantern for some time, silent, motionless,
and mysterious.
He was dressed in the armour of a Samurai
of old Japan, and leant upon a long and very sharp
two-handed sword. His face was so stern and still
that Coppertop could not decide if it really were his
face or only a mask. And it made her feel most un-
comfortable and nervous.
She had spoken to him several times, but he
took not a bit of notice, which was extremely im-
polite, to say the least.
“Whatever shall I do with the horrid old
thing?” she cried, and she wept faster than before.
Splash, splash, fell the big crystal tears, on to
the steps of the ancient stone Lantern.
“Don’t splash so, up there!” cried a small voice,
which sounded so very familiar that Coppertop


ceased weeping, and, drying her little grey eyes,
looked down.
And there, to her intense delight, she beheld
Miss Smiler.
“Oh, you dear, duckie, little old person!” she
cried. “However did you get here?”
“Oh, I just trotted along on my four legs,”
replied the Camel, smiling up at her, “until I came
to the sea, and then—
Myself and a Nautilus
Put to sea
In a beautiful ship
Of purple shell.
And the Nautilus smiled
In the highest glee,
But I felt far from well.
For a storm came on—
As storms will do—
And rocked our shell-ship
Fro and to,
Fro and to,
And to and fro.
The way that shell-ships
Rock, you know.
And I cried, 'Though I’m fond of the ocean, too,
With its billowy waves, so green and blue,
I like it much better quite still, don’t you ?’
But the Nautilus didn’t agree.
She said, ‘When it’s still
As still can be,
And there isn’t a breeze
To fill my sail,


Great fishes come up
And stare at me,
Till I feel my cheeks
Grow pale.’
‘Don’t talk about “pale,” I cried. ‘Oh, please!
I’m getting so shaky about my knees;
Such rickety-rockety boats as these
Should never put out to sea.’
For the storm grew worse—
As storms will do—
And rocked our shell-ship
Fro and to,
Fro and to,
And to and fro,
The way that shell-ships
Rock, you know.
Then the Nautilus into
A rage she flew!
‘My beautiful ship
Of shell,’ cried she,
‘ls far too good
For a Cameloo!’
And she pushed me
Into the sea.
But I reached here just the same!” beamed Miss
Smiler.
“Yes, but how?” asked Coppertop, who was so
interested by this story that she almost forgot the
horrid Samurai.
“Before I answer any more questions,” inter-
rupted Miss Smiler, in a hushed voice, “I’d like to


know who that piece of old china is, standing there
on guard, like a figure on a teapot?”
“Hush!” cried Coppertop. “Oh, I’ve been
terrifikly worried about him.”
“I don’t wonder,” interrupted the Came!,
whose manners were not too good. “I should think
he’s worried about himself, with such a face!”
“Oh, I don’t mind his face so much,” whispered
back Coppertop; “he’s a Samurai of Old Japan, and
they all have faces like that!”
“Poor things!” exclaimed the Camel.
“If we were used to their faces, we should
think them quite handsome,” exclaimed the child.
“I expect they think we’re ugly, too. It’s all a
matter of taste.”
“Taste!” cried Smiler. “We don’t have to taste
them, do we? It’s painful enough to look at them.”
“Do be quiet!” warned Coppertop. “If he
hears you he’ll chop your head off! That’s what
he’s waiting to do with mine, I expect.”
“Don’t you let him take such a liberty,” cried
Miss Smiler. “Once you lose your head you don’t
know where you are. And it’ll be extremely hard
to put it on again.”
“Oh, I’ve had such arguments with the horrid
old thing! I’ve told him all that. If only Tibbs and
Kiddiwee were here to drive him away,” she added,
tearfully.
“They’re not so very far away,” replied Miss
Smiler, peeping round the edge of the Lantern.
“In fact —HERE THEY ARE!” she exclaimed.


And, lo and behold, floating along over the
river toward the Lantern, came the beautiful soap
bubble, with Tibbs and Kiddiwee inside.
“Oh, where? Where?” cried Coppertop, ex-
citedly, for she could see nothing from her side of
the Lantern, and she dared not venture out because
of the Samurai, who looked most anxious to prove
how sharp his sword was.
“I can’t see without a head,” she added.
“Otherwise I believe Fd risk it.”
Just then the soap bubble was seen by the
Samurai, who evidently wondered where it had come
from, and looked a trifle uneasy.
While he was looking, it suddenly exploded, and
out shot Tibbs and Kiddiwee. As soon as they were
released from the bubble they grew rapidly to their
usual size.
Head or no head, Coppertop could resist it no
longer, but flew down from the old stone Lantern,
and flung herself into their arms.
At this strange sight the Samurai showed little
surprise, but he walked sternly forward, and in the
calmest manner, without even waiting to say “May
I?” or “By your leave!” he aimed a terrible blow
at Coppertop’s head with his cruel two-handed
sword.
Fortunately, she moved her head, but the blade
cut through both her wings, and, with a cry of dis-
may, she saw them fall to the ground.


Instantly Tibbs and Kiddiwee threw themselves
on the Samurai, flying round him rapidly, to dazzle
and confuse him.
They kicked and they punched him—for what
else could they do? They pulled his long, black hair.
They scratched him. Anything to take his atten-
tion, and to prevent him from again attacking
Coppertop.
Miss Smiler joined in also, and did what she
could, which wasn’t very much, for she was smaller
than ever now, being no larger than when she hung
on the chain round the neck of her little mistress.
Making a final effort, the Samurai tried, with
one sweep of his terrible sword, to cut through the
bodies of the two boys. But his foot slipped on a
stone which Smiler had rolled under it, and he fell
crashing to the ground, the sword flying out of his
hand.
In a flash, Tibbs seized the sword, and, swing-
ing it above his head with both hands, he rushed
upon the fallen Samurai.
But, before he could strike, the armour of the
Samurai was flung asunder, and revealed the craven
face, the snub nose, and the trembling form of the
wretched Clerk of the Weather!
“Mercy! Mercy!” he cried, grovelling on the
ground at the feet of the two boys. “Spare me, and
I’ll worry you no more! You shall be free to find
your precious day unhindered.”
“Perhaps it would be better not to kill him,”
suggested Coppertop. “You see, if we did, the


weather would be simply too awful for words, with
no one to look after it.”
“All right,” agreed Tibbs, reluctantly. At the
words the Clerk of the Weather rose shakily to his
feet, and, springing into the air, disappeared behind
a passing cloud.
“I don’t trust him a bit!” muttered Tibbs.
“And I may never get another chance to cut a real
head off,” he said, regretfully.
“Oh, you two dears!” cried Coppertop, beside
herself with joy, “you’re both positively Victoria
Cross heroes! I’m terrifikly proud of you. If I
£ wasn’t so upset about my poor old spoilt wings, I
g could almost cry with happiness!”
“Funny things—girls?” remarked Tibbs, feel-
ing awkward at being regarded as a hero. “Let’s
find another head. This sword’s too sharp to waste.
Come on, Kiddiwee,” and off he raced.
“Boys are funny—l should think,” remarked
5 Coppertop. “Fancy leaving me like that, when
V we’ve only just found each other. Oh, I do wish
§ I had a baby to squeedge.”
At this moment she glanced down, and there
she beheld Smiler; smiling, too, with all her might.
“Oh, I do love you, I do!” cried the child, im-
pulsively, and seizing the surprised Camel in her
hands, she kissed her fondly.
As this happened, Miss Smiler heaved a deep
sigh, and became just a little bronze camel once
more.


CHAPTER XXIII.
THE DECEMBER DAY IS ALMOST THEIRS
YES! I guess ITI fix you up with a December
day, all right,” answered the genial -North
Wind, in response to the entreaty of the
children. For, shortly after their fight with the
Clerk of the Weather, there came a gentle, warm
breeze, which they felt sure must be the North Wind.
And finding that this was so, Coppertop and Tibbs
implored his aid in their long search for a December
day.
“Oh, you dear!” exclaimed Coppertop, scarcely
able to believe their good fortune; “the address is:
‘Chesney Grange, near Mount Dandenong, Aus-
tralia,’ ” she added, lest the precious December day
should go astray.
“The World,” added the North Wind, with a
smile. Bless you, I guess I know all Australia from
Perth to Sydney, and Darwin to Hobart. I’ll send
the December day along to this Australia of yours,
direct by Sunbeam —that’s heaps faster than Mar-
coni.”
“ ’Es, but I like marconi!” interrupted Kiddi-
wee, “with lots and lots of milk!”
“You mean macaroni, stupid!” corrected Tibbs.
“Whatever CAN we do to thank you?” cried
Coppertop, beside herself with joy.


“Don’t thank me till you get it,” said the North
Wind, with a decided American accent, due to the
fact that he had often travelled over the United
States. “And you don’t get it till you’ve paid the
price!”
“The price!” exclaimed Coppertop, her face
falling.
“Yep! Everything has a price in this world,
dearie! Nothing is given away. We must earn
everything that is worth having, and then we know
how to value it. I guess you’ve pretty well earned
your wish by now, and there’s only one thing more
to do ”
“Oh, do say!” cried Coppertop, anxiously.
“Well, you must kiss Biddy-be-sure, or the
Blarney Stone, and then the December day will be
yours.” And, without any more explanation, the
North Wind blew by.
For some time after his departure the children
remained silent; they were decidedly disappointed,
for the December day seemed as far off as ever.
“Why, the Blarney Stone is on Blarney Castle!”
said Tibbs.
“And where’s that?” asked Coppertop.
“Right away over in the Emerald Isle! It’s an
awfully long way from here!”
“However shall we get there,” cried Copper-
top, hopelessly, “now that I haven’t any wings?”
“Keep smiling!” replied the small voice of
Smiler—the Camel-without-the-Hump— who now
hung by a string round Coppertop’s neck.


The North Wind-


“The Camel is right!” said a voice which
seemed to come from everywhere at once, “always
smile at difficulties; they don’t like being smiled at,
and soon get out of your way. Now, if you take my
advice ”
“Yes, we will!” cried each of the children
eagerly, for they recognised the voice of dear Mr.
Atom.
“You’ll put the two wings which were cut off
upon the sword of the Samurai, then seat yourselves
upon it —on the blunt side—and sing:
“Smiles to-day
Make smiles to-morrow;
Smiles will banish
Bogey Sorrow.
Smiles will help us
Over stiles,
Making life
Just miles of Siniles!
Then hold tight, and see what happens. Ta-ta!”
Trembling with excitement, the children
hastened to carry out the instructions of Mr. Atom.
Tibbs and Kiddiwee fetched the sword of the Samu-
rai, and laid it upon the steps of the old Japanese
Lantern. Coppertop picked up her beautiful wdngs
very tenderly, shedding a tear or two unseen, and
placed them —the wings, not the tears —upon the
Samurai’s sw’ord, to which they at once became at-
tached, and commenced to quiver with life!
Feeling that something most magical was about
to happen, Coppertop and her brothers seated them-


selves upon the sword—their legs hanging over the
blunt side —and commenced to sing:
“Smiles to-day
Make Smiles to-morrow.”
At this, the sword of the Samurai quivered
violently, and then rose several feet into the air—
“Smiles will banish
Bogey Sorrow.”
continued the children, hardly able to sing for ex-
citement. They felt that they were in for another
wonderful trip.
“Smiles will help us
Over stiles.”
And now the wings began to beat, and the sword
moved forward—
“Making life
Just miles of Smiles!”
shouted the children.
At these last words the sword of the Samurai
shot forward at lightning speed with its precious
burden, and never stopped till they arrived at the
Emerald Isle.


CHAPTER XXIV.
BIDDY-BE-SURE, THE IRISH WITCH
IT was raining. It sometimes dies in the
Emerald Isle; but the country looked wonder-
fully green and fresh and beautiful.
It somehow reminded Coppertop of a lovely
lady, a lady who was weeping, always weeping, yet
smiling at times at her own tears; a lady with great,
tragic, blue eyes and black lashes, which weeping
could not spoil.
When the children arrived upon the magic
sword, at the cabin of Biddy-be-sure, they were sur-
prised to hear a good-natured voice from within say-
ing—
“Come in! Come in, me dears!”
“She seems to expect us!” cried Coppertop.
“Witches are always like that!” explained
Tibbs; “they can see right through walls and things
without using their eyes.”
As soon as they were inside the cabin, Biddy-
be-sure rushed forward to greet them. But she was
so very ugly that they shrank from her in fear.
“Sure,” she cried, wondering at their evident
dislike to being embraced, “sure and Oi’ll give ye a
kiss each,” and she came forward with her lips
pursed up.


“Oh! I —l think we really must be going,”
cried Coppertop, backing to the door.
“Would ye be after lavin' me the momint ye
arrive?” said Biddy, looking very crestfallen. “Sure,
ye moight jist as well 'ave gone before ye came!”
“It’s the Blarney Stone ye’ve come to kiss,” she
added, peering at them sharply, “and not poor ould
Biddy-be-sure, ye'll be after sayin’. But ye can't
go into the Castle atall, atall, these toimes, unless Oi
help ye.”
“And it's moighty dangerous!” she warned.
“However did you know that we wanted to kiss
it?” cried Coppertop in astonishment.
“Sure, the North Wind had a gossip wid me,
not ten minutes agone, on this very subject!” ex-
plained Biddy, with a twinkle in her eye.
Whilst this conversation was going on, Kiddi-
wee had discovered Pimby, the Flying Pig, and the
two had struck up a fast friendship. Pimby was
quite a dear, but, being an inflated pig, he was apt
to give himself airs; he had two really beautiful
wings, and—well —Flying Pigs are rare, and Pimby
knew it.
As for the Black Cat, it had scuttled up the
chimney as soon as the children appeared, and was
seen no more.
“But Oi know the Keeper of the Castle,” said
Biddy-be-sure, going back to her former conversa-
tion, “and Oi jist smoile at him, and look at him wid
me little eye, and ‘Bedad,’ he’ll say, ‘Biddy-be-sure,


ye can go up and come down a hundred toimes a
day, if ye’ve a moind, for jist such another smoile
as that, bedad!’ ”
“Come on, let’s start at once!” suggested Tibbs,
who did not want to run the risk of being kissed.
“We’ve no time to spare.”
“Oh, but ye have!” cried Biddy-be-sure,
wagging her old head wisely; “ye spare Toime, and
Toime ’ill spare ye!”
“But if it isn’t troubling you too much,” cried
Coppertop, “we are rather in a hurry. You see,”
she added, “Mummie and Daddy may arrive home
at any moment now.”
“Then, begorrah, weil start at once. Come,
Pimby! Pimby!” she called to the Flying Pig.
Then off they started, she riding upon the
broomstick, and the children upon the magic sword
of the Samurai.


CHAPTER XXV.
COPPERTOP KISSES THE BLARNEY STONE
UPON arriving at Blarney Castle, Biddy-be-sure
tried her wiles upon the Keeper most suc-
cessfully, and they were given full per-
mission to enter the Castle.
Up a dark winding staircase they went, and
then round the gallery of the old banqueting hall,
and so out on to the parapet under which the Blarney
Stone lies.
Pimby, the Flying Pig, got stuck in the stair-
case once or twice on the way up, but otherwise the
party reached the top without mishap.
Upon arriving at the spot, there was some
argument as to which of them should kiss the stone,
but Coppertop reminded her brothers that the North
Wind had distinctly told her to do so; and besides,
Tibbs, being so strong and manly, was just the one to
hold her legs and prevent her from falling.
For, in order to kiss the stone properly, she had
to be lowered over the edge of the parapet, head
foremost.
It was a very dangerous thing to do, for, if she
fell, she would be dashed to pieces at the foot of the
Castle.
The sword of the Samurai lay upon the parapet
and kept guard, and Coppertop kissed Smiler,


hugged and kissed Tibbs and Kiddiwee, and pre-
pared to be lowered over the parapet. Of course, she
was nervous—“terrifikly”—but she just grit her
teeth, and determined to do this last thing to gain
her precious December day, and thus to be able to
greet her Mummie and Daddy with sunshine and
beauty.
Kiddiwee grew so white and nervous that it
was decided he should watch from one of the
windows of the tower.
“ ’Es, but I do wish I could do it instead of
Cece,” were his last words as he went below.
Biddy-be-sure mounted her broomstick, and,
flying over the parapet, she hovered under the
Blarney Stone with her apron spread out, to catch
Coppertop if she fell.
White and anxious, Tibbs helped Coppertop
over the side of the Castle, holding tightly to her
legs until she was able to grasp the iron rail, which
has been put there for the purpose. She was now
hanging over the side of the Castle, upside-down!
The blood rushed to her head, and she felt terribly
giddy, but with great courage she held on, and
lowered herself, inch by inch, whilst Tibbs held her
legs in a tight grip, until her head was on a level
with the Blarney Stone.
To make things safer, Pimby, the Flying Pig,
flew over also, and insisted on catching hold of the
coat of Coppertop’s pyjamas, which he held tightly
between his teeth.


Tibbs’ face was perspiring with anxiety and
fatigue, but he would rather have fallen to the
bottom himself, than have let go of those precious
little ankles.
There was a distant rumble of thunder, and a
few drops of rain fell upon them.
Coppertop’s heart beat faster at the sound, and
she felt as though she must choke, for she hated a
thunderstorm. Besides, it sounded ominously like
the Clerk of the Weather, up to his mischief again,
in spite of his promise. It would be too terrible if
he interfered now—just at the critical moment
She must hasten to kiss the stone without delay.
She was surprised to find that it had a face, and
that it pouted its lips to be kissed, in a most amusing
way. Coppertop wanted to laugh, and then to cry.
And as she looked down she saw that Biddy-be-
sure, with her white apron outstretched, had grown
to look strangely like her big four-posted Bed!
She suddenly felt very limp and nerveless, but
she thought of the December day, so nearly hers;
and, with a mighty effort, she raised her head for-
ward, and—KISSED THE BLARNEY STONE!
There was a blinding flash of lightning! A
roar of thunder! And, to her amazement, Copper-
top felt herself FALLING!
Tibbs still held her ankles, but he was falling
too! The Castle was falling! EVERYTHING was
FALLING!


Down, down like a stone she fell, through
Biddy’s apron, pulling the Flying Pig with her!
Oh! what would happen when she reached the
ground? But there was no ground, for that was
falling, too!
Whirling! Swirling! Down! DOWN!
WALLOP!
BANG!!
Coppertop opened her eyes, and sat bolt upright
in bed!
“It was a REAL Bang! Of course it was! It’s
Jane, banging on the door,” exclaimed Coppertop,
rubbing her eyes and yawning. “Goodness me!
however did I get back here? And I never said
good-bye to Tibbs and Kiddiwee!
“Gracious!” she exclaimed, as she recalled the
events of the previous evening, “why, it’s the First
of December! Mummie and Daddy are coming
home to-day! It’s simply too glorious for words!”
she cried, as she sprang out of her bed. “I’m so
happy I —l shall positively explode!”
As she jumped up, Coppertop felt something
dangling round her neck, she put up her hand, and
grasped—Smiler!
“There now, I knew it was all real!” she cried,
her eyes growing dark with wonder, “and the De-
cember day? I must rush and see!”


And so she did. Up shot the blind, and in
shone the most heavenly December day! It flooded
the room with warmth, and the glory of sunbeams,
which made a halo of light and beauty round Celia’s
happy little “Coppertop.”
As she stood, breathless with wonderment and
rapture, the door behind her was gently opened, and
Captain and Mrs. Sinclair stole softly into the
room—so softly that Celia heard no sound.
The tall, soldierly man, bronzed by the hot sun
of the East, smiled as his glance fell tenderly upon
the quaint figure of Coppertop, standing there in
her pyjamas, her hands clasped in ecstacy over the
tiny bronze camel, and seeming to be part of the
glowing sunshine which filled the room.
“What IS she looking for?” he whispered to
his wife.
“Hush, dear!” warned Mrs. Sinclair, with
finger on lip. But it was too late.
Coppertop had heard the whispering voices!
She turned, and stood for one moment too over-
joyed to move. Then, uttering the very highest
little scream of delight she had ever uttered, she
bounded towards them.
Trembling with excitement, she flung a freckled
arm round each dear neck, and, pulling their laugh-
ing faces down to hers, she covered them with
kisses.


“What a perfect December day to welcome us
on!” said Captain Sinclair, as soon as he had suf-
ficiently recovered from Coppertop’s embrace to
speak*
“Perfect!” echoed his wife, smiling down at
their little daughter.
And Coppertop’s cup of happiness was full.
THE END.




3 1508 02112008 9


. Si-*' r • A* \ *
•••> *'
*
i
Srr -1, - #£•* * ■ . . ’
*
. *•
* v- *
<-V - • ■:
s & ■ ■■ - - - - -
m '
*
w* yi
•Of
> '
