

COPY OF A LETTER
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
JOHN AND ELIZA DOWTON,
WHO WENT FROM KELSHALL, NEAR ROYBTON.
Adelaide, September 27.
Dear Father and Mothers,
This comes with our kind love to you all, hoping it will find you
all well, as it levcs us at present, thank God for it. We receyed your kind and welcom letter on Tusday,
the 22nd of September, and glad to hare you was all well. Dear Mother, we lost our dear little Adam on
November the 11th, 1839, but I hope he is beter prefied for then we are. Charles is quite well, and sends
his love to his Grandmothers, and to Eliza Staines. We are very comfertuhle, and have a nice house, and
two peaces of land of our own; and before this reeches you we shall have another peace. The Country
agreas well with us, and is a very plesent Country; there is not much Land culteaveted at present, except for
Gardens: things grow much faster hear then in England. John set some peas, and in three weeks they
was six inches high. We have paid Forty Pounds for our House and two peses of Land; besides
making ourselves confortable at home in this twelve months that we have been hear, and so we do not repent
for comming. John is still getting Two Guines per week, and is at work with Mr. Darby, from Hartford;
he came in the same Ship that we did, and I myself wash for them, and I have done a grate deal of that.
I have been out four days in a week, and have three shillings per day. I dount wish any one to come
aganst there will, but if thay wish to come, let them try it on, as we did. We have it very hot in Summer,
much hotter then in England, and not so cold in Winter, we dont have any frost nor snow. Christmas time
is our hotest time. Give our love to Mr. and Mrs. Shalckelton, and we shall be very glad to receve a letter
from them, we shall not mind the postage, for it is not much to us. Dear Mother, I will continue
sinding every three months, and I hope you will give our love to Miss Staines, and to all her sons, and to
all our enquiring frinds. We are now giving 6d. a pound for flour, and Is. Bd. a loaf for bread; it is
much cheaper then it weare. We have give fore shilings a lofe; but grosere goods are very reesnuble.
So no more at presents from your loving son and daughter,
( Signed)
JOHN AND ELIZA DOWTON.
To John Atkins,
Kehhall, near Royston,
Ueartfordshear.
Tie Royston Press: J. Warren.


%
'■<
$ (
