

COPY REPORT by GEORGE STEWART, Esq. to the COLONIAL SECRETARY
at Sydney, dated 18th June 1836.
Sydney, June 1836.
Sir,
In obedience to the commands of His Excellency the Governor
conveyed to me in your letter of the 4th ultimo, I embarked on boaid the
Revenue Cutter on the 6th of that month for the purpose of proceeding to Port
Philip ; and when off the Heads of Port Jackson, I delivered to Captain Roach
his sealed instructions.
2. Our arrival at Port Philip was delayed by contrary winds, but we reach-
ed it on the 25th of May, and on the 2?th, I had the pleasure of seeing Mr
John Wedge, who resides about thirty (30) miles west of what is called the
Settlement. To this gentleman and all the other residents, I am indebted for
all the information which they readily afforded me.
3. I have, in the first place, to report, that the parties who are believed to have
committed the two outrages at Western Port, one upwards of 18 months ago,
and the other in March last, have long since left the colony.
The principal accused of perpetrating the first, commanded a sealing vessel,
and was killed by the natives in the neighbourhood of Spencer’s Gulph. One of
the females he carried from Western Port is reported to have been with him at
the time he was killed. The perpetrator of the latter, is, I have every reason to
believe, a half-caste named Tomlins, at present employed in a whaling esta-
blishment at Portland Bay. In the spring of the year, when the whaling
season is over, it is the custom of the men belonging to this establishment to
employ themselves in collecting Mimosa bark, during which employment an
attack was made upon a native family, in which two women were wounded. It
is expected that next season they will again return to Western Port, when,
should the Government not deem it necessary to make any Police Establish-
ment, I have every reason to hope that the delinquent and his accomplices, if
any, will be apprehended by the residents of Port Philip.
4. The only aggression known to have been attempted by an European at
Port Philip upon any of the blacks was committed by a stocksrnan, who some
time ago attempted forcibly to violate the person of one of their females, and
who, on that account, was sent back to Van Diemen’s Land by Messrs Wedge
and Batman, with which punishment the friends of the female were quite sa-
tisfied.
5. The Port Philip residents appear to be treating the blacks with great
kindness, and are endeavouring to instil habits of industry into them. But, like
all savages, they will steal when they can find any opportunity; and three of
them are reported to have speared two white men near ‘ Indented Head,’ that
they might possess themselves of seme flour these two were carrying. The tribe


they belonged to, however, offered to give them up to the Europeans for punish-
ment, which offer, under existing circumstances, was declined.
6. The only convicts that are known to have escaped to Port Philip, are two
from Van Diemen’s Land, who secreted themselves in the ‘ Caledonia’ trader,
on her last trip from Launceston. They are supposed to be lurking within ten
miles of the Settlement, and during my stay of eight days, I used every exertion
for their apprehension, but having completed every other object of His Excel-
lency’s instructions, I did not feel myself at liberty to detain the cutter longer,
and accordingly I embarked on the 3d instant on my return to Sydney. I had
less inducement to delay my departure, knowing that the residents are keeping
a strict watch on these men, and there is little chance of their long escaping de-
tection. Such is the feeling, indeed, among the persons now forming the esta-
blishment at Port Philip, that they expressed to me their determination to use
their best endeavours to apprehend any convict who may escape thither, and to
forward him by the first opportunity to the police of either New South Wales
or Van Diemen’s Land.
7. On the Ist of June, I held a conference with the aboriginal natives, and
I distributed to them some of the blankets which were placed at my disposal for
that purpose. So far as my information extends, lam of opinion the number
frequenting the country occupied by Europeans is about eight hundred (800,) of
which four hundred (400) have assembled on the Settlement at one time. Their
movements are, however, very uncertain ; and though I was somewhat surprised
that, from the means I adopted of sending notice that blankets would be dis-
tributed, a larger number did not meet, the residents accounted for the circum-
stance in various ways, and my impression is, that either the shortness of the
notice, or some feast at which they were supposed to be present, occasioned the
small assemblage. Messrs Wedge and Batman having undertaken the charge
of the remainder of the blankets, and promised to distribute them to the natives,
I have no doubt His Excellency will approve my having left them with these
gentlemen for that purpose, as I was informed by Buckley that even if I remain-
ed another fortnight I might not see more of them.
8. The use of tobacco is yet unknown to them, and it would not be appreci-
ated had any been distributed.
The respectable residents are anxious to prevent their acquiring a taste for
either it or spirits; and by their advice I have brought it back to Sydney. The
articles most prized by the blacks are blankets, tomahawks, knives and brass
ornaments.
9. The blacks above alluded to are divided into seven (7) principal tribes,
and the following, as far as I have been able to ascertain, is the name of each, its
chief, and the country it inhabits, viz.
Tribes. Chiefs.
Yow Whamgetee, Murradonnanuke,
Wodewawow, Coralcurke,
Geraltimi6, . Bodedoneuneuke,
Bemgalite, Nullamboine,
Odeboligitcorong, Eugait,
Dutagalla, Jagagaga,
Boatnairo, Wodelanenuke,
I am inclined to think it has not been sufficiently ascertained what distinguish-
2


ing title the chief prizes most, but have been led to believe that they designate
themselves as the chief of such a tribe, and not the king of such a country.
10. On the same day of my holding the conference with the natives, there was
a meeting of the Europeans at the Settlement, and I embraced that opportunity
of promulgating the proclamation of His Excellency Sir Richard Bourke, and cir-
culated copies of each, for the purpose of their being posted up at the various sta-
tions of Europeans.
11. I further, agreeably to my instructions, embraced the opportunity of my
stay at Port Philip, to collect all the information I could relative to that Settle-
ment and neighbouring country, and the following is the result of my inquiries.
The Bay of Port Philip is about 100 miles in circumference, and, owing to the
numerous shoals, is of rather difficult access. All the vessels, with the exception
of one, which always chooses the western passage, go by the eastern channel,
although the western is the more direct way to the Settlement, owing to the for-
mer not being so well known. The town “ Bearbrass,” is on the left hand of the
Yarro Yarro, about seven miles from its mouth, which at present consists of
thirteen buildings, viz. three weather boarded, two slab, and eight turf huts.
The whole amount of European population consists of 142 males and 35 fe-
males ;of these, nine are proprietors claiming under Mr Batman’s treaty with
the natives in June 1835 ; four of whom reside on their lands, and some of the
others are soon expected to follow their example.
Twenty-four others are individuals who have settled in the vicinity without
any regard to the above treaty, and the remainder are composed of
and servants of the above.
The number of sheep grazing at Port Philip when I left was computed at
26,500, the number of horses at 57, and of horned cattle 100. The estimated
value of the whole stock, together with farming implements, &c. was computed
at L. 80,000. There was last year under cultivation 60 acres, and the settlers
have now brought the means to cultivate to any extent which, under the tenure
of their circumstances, they may deem expedient. I could not find, however, that
their object was so much agriculture as to secure pasture for their stock. The
wheat which had been grown, Mr Batman assured me, was of excellent quality.
12. The Europeans occupy an extent of about 100 miles of country, but no
person is known to have penetrated more than 70 miles within land, and the
most distant station is not, that I could learn, more than 35 miles from the town-
ship.
The soil is generally available for all agricultural purposes, and for the most
part, open grassy plains or downs. A very considerable tract of fine country is
represented as extending to the westward of Port Philip. The land in other di-
rections beyond the limits claimed by the proprietors who acquired under Mr
Batman’s treaty with the natives, is not known to any extent, but it is supposed
there is an available country extending to the north and north-west, as well as to
the eastward as far as the western extremity of the Australian Alps.
13. The country about Port Philip did not suffer last season from the severe
drought that was experienced in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land ; and
Buckley states that during his long experience of upwards of thirty years, he has
never seen the pastures materially affected by the want of rain, nor the country
during all that period flooded. In a ride which I took across the country be-
tween the two branches of the Yarro, 1 observed on some plains considerable
3


Enterprize,
-
55 Tons
9 Trips
Adelaide,
-
100
14
Norval,
-
300
7
Caledonia,
-
300
4
Champion,
-
110
3
Vansittart,
-
110
2
Gem,
-
80
3
Hetty,
-
100
1
Chili,
-
200
2
Henry,
-
150
2
Edward,
-
60
1
Total tons,
•
1565 No. of trips,
48
cracks in the ground, which I thought must have been caused by dry weather,
but, on my remarking the circumstance, I was told that the pasture did not suffer
in the least.
14. Little appears to be known by the residents of Port Philip relative to the
country about Western Port ; but the impression seems to be, that there is at the
latter place but a small extent of available country compared with the former.
On our way to Port Philip, being caught in the straights by a gale of wind, which
injured the sails of the cutter so materially as to compel us to put into Western
Port to repair, I took the opportunity of visiting the country where the Settle-
ment formerly was, (about eight miles from where we anchored,) and walked for
some miles through as rich a country as I have seen. It was thickly clothed with
Kangaroo grass, upwards of three feet in height, and in mentioning this at Port
Philip, I was informed that, in that direction, there are excellent cattle stations,
but the ground is considered too wet for sheep.
I beg to annex a long and interesting communication, addressed to me by Mr
George M‘Killop, an intelligent gentleman lately from India, who has embarked
a large capital in the Port Philip speculation.
It is perhaps unnecessary for me to draw the attention of His Excellency to
any separate portion of that letter, except it be the important subject mention-
ed in the postscript, viz. the smuggling of tobacco, which, together with spirits,
I found were, by means of the vessels trading thither, constantly imported with-
out paying duty either at Sydney or Van Diemen’s Land.
For His Excellency’s information, the following list of the vessels now em-
ployed in bringing stock from Van Diemen’s Land is given.
Indeed, if I may venture to give an opinion, the establishment of a branch of the
customs appears necessary to regulate the introduction of those articles of trade.
15. In conclusion, I beg to assure His Excellency, that the residents generally
expressed great satisfaction at the Government of New South Wales having
made inquiry into their state, and would, I am persuaded, feel much gratified if
this Government would extend to them its protection.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed) George Stewart.
To the Honourable The Colonial Secretary, &c.
4


COPY REPORT,
BY
George Stewart, Esq.
TO THE
Colonial Secretary at Sydney.
Dated 10th June 1836.
