

COPY OF REPORT FURNISHED TO MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BY MR. COMMISSIONER H.W. DANE UPON THE PUBLIC INQUIRY HELD
BY HIM INTO THE PROPOSAL TO UNITE THE MUNICIPALITY OF
BLACKHEATH, THE CITY OF KATOOMBA AND THE SHIRE OF BLUE
MOUNTAINS AND CONSTITUTE THE UNITED AREA AS A MUNICIPALITY -
INQUIRY HELD IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS, KATOOMBA, 17TH - 21ST
FEBRUARY, 1947, INCLUSIVE.
During 1945 public inquiries were held into proposals to
transfer (1) the Leura Urban .'.Area from the Blue Mountains Shire
to the Katoomba Municipality and (2) the Emu Plains District from
Blue Mountains Shire to Penrith Municipality. The Blue Mountains
Shire considered that if these localities were transferred to the
respective Municipalities mentioned the Shire area remaining
would be uneconomical to administer and rates would have to be
increased. At the time the public inquiries referred to were
held there were secession movements in other towns within the
Shire and the Shire Council considered that the problem of
boundaries on the Blue Mountains would not be settled by trans-
ferring small localities here and there. Such transfers, whilst
perhaps desirable from the viewpoint of the Katoorrba, B3a ckheath
and Penrith Municipalities, could only be made at the expense of
the Shire which would be left in a weakened position. The Shire
Council considered that the matter should be approached from a
general point of view having regard to the whole of the Blue
Mountains District and submitted certain suggestions concerning
a general realignment of the boundaries of the Katoomba and the
Blue Mountains Shire. The Minister withheld his decision in
respect of the proposals to transfer the Leura srban Area to
Katoomba Municipality and the Emu Plains District to Penrith
Municipality pending consideration of these suggestions at a
conference to be convened by the Shire, of the Katoomba and
Blackheath Municipal Councils and the Blue Mountains Shire
Council.
The conference was held on 14/5/46 and the following
resolution carried:-
f, That without prejudice to the decisions of the Minister
with regard to any pending inquiries regarding alterations
to boundaries the conference is of the opinion that no
further alterations of boundaries §re desirable*. 11
On 24/5/46, -the Blackheath Municipal Council advised
that if the Minister considered further boundary alterations
to be desirable the Council was of the opinion that the whole of
the Blue Mountains area should be divided into two Municipalities,
the common boundary to be at Whipcord Hill (Approximately the
present common boundary of the City of Katoomba and the
Blackheath Municipality.)
On 9/7/46 the Blue Mountains Shire Council made
application, in pursuance of a resolution passed on 18/6/46,-
for the approval of the Governor to the issue- of a proclama-
tion uniting the Municipality of Blackheath, the City of Katoomba
and the Shire of Blue Mountains and constituting the united
area as a Municipality*
The proposal was notified in Government Gazette No.
90 of 16/8/46 and objections were received from the following:-
1. Blackheath Municipal Council.
2. Katoomba City Council.
3. 468 certified electors of Blackheath Municipality.
4. 197 certified electors of the City of Katoomba.
5. 45 certified electors of the Blue Mountains Shire.
The Minister decided to refer the matter to a public
inquiry and appointed me in that connection.
The inquiry was held in the Council Chambers, Katoomba,


on 17/2/47 and succeeding days and concluded on 21/s/47,
Appearances.
The appearances at the inquiry wore as followss-
Mr* B,P* MoParlan, Barrister, instructed by Messrs, Dawson,
Waldron, Edwards and Nlcholls, Solicitors, of Sydney, for
the Blue Mountains Shire Council*
Mr, J, Bales, Barrister, on behalf of the Katoomba City
Council (instructed in that matter by Messrs. Perns and
Aubrey, Solicitors, of Katoomba) and on behalf of the
Municipality of Blackheath (instructed by Mr. G,H. Houen,
Solicitor of Blackheath.)
Witnesses.
The following witnesses gave evidence at the inquiry;-
In support of Proposal -
Councillor A.M. Hodgson, President, Blue Mountains Shire
Council,
” J. Liggins, Blue Mountains Shire Council,
w E.S.Ho Miller n " " «
Alderman SoR O Thompson, Katoomba City Council.
Mr. P.H, Caro, Engineer, Blue Mountains Shire Council.
Mr, C.H. Williamson, Chief Health Inspector, Blue
Mountains Shire Council.
Mr. P.J, Small, Katoomba Branch, Australian Communist
Party.
Against Proposal -
Alderman W. Freelander, Mayor, Katoomba City Council,
n P. Walford, Katoomba City Council,
Councillor E, Hurlow-Jones, Blue Mountains Shire Council,
Mr, M. Waterhouse, Leura Urban Committee.
Mr. A .S. Heriot, Leura Progress Association.
Mr. B.L, Hollier, Katoomba-Leura Branch, Blue Mountains
Chamber of Commerce,
Councillor A.W, Robinson, Blue Mountains Shire Council.
Mr. a.P.G, Murphy, President, Lawson Division, Blue
Mountains Chamber of Commerce,
Alderman H, Hodgson, Katoomba City Council*
u E.J. Lake, Mayor, Blackheath Municipal Council,
M J.R.W. King, Blackheath Municipal Council.
Mr, J.S. Pryor, Town Clerk, Katoomba,
Mr, C.A, Thompson, Blackheath.
Mr, C.A, Wadson, Hon. Secretary, Blackheath and District
Progress Association,
Mr, C.C, Phillips, Health and Building Inspector,
Blackheath Municipal Council.
Mr, H. Bursill, Engineer, Katoomba City Council.
Mr. R.W, Thomas, Chief Health and Building Inspector,
Katoomba City Council.
Mr. A.S, Hunt, Deputy County Clerk, Blue Mountains County
Council, (to tender certain
financial statements and estimates
of Blackheath Municipal. Council
only.)
Statistical information.
The following details were'included in the statistical
information tendered at the inquiry:- .


Blue Mountains City of
Shire KAT00MBA
Blackheath
. Municipality,
Area - Square Miles
500
l2i
2585
Population (Estimated)
15,845(a)
25,000(b) 4,500(c)
Number of electors
11,533
7,786
3,046
U.C.V, of ratable land (valued
by Valuer General). £688,709
£788,392
£231,867
General Rates - 1946
Amount in £
4d.
8id.
6^d,
11 n n - Urban Farm
Lands
4d.
-123
3 ISUd,
3 Z
x6
Limit
£11,181
£26,046
£7,319
Income
£11,181
£25,261
£6,514
Rates - 1946
Limits
-
£32,314
£8,989
Income
£23,253
£25,261
£7,915
Revenue (1945)
General Fund
£20,504
£30,815
£11,085
L«cal Funds
£8,658
—
£921
Total
£29,162
£30,815
£12,006
Administration expenses
charged to
General Fund 1944
£4,423
£2,541
£648
General Fund 1945
£4,843
£3,552
£2,400
Local Funds (other than Water
Supply and Sewerage)1944
' £428
—
£155
Local Funds (other than Water
Supply and Seweragej1945
£456
—
£120
Loan Liabilities as at 31/12/45
General Fund
£28,626
£35,018
£10,6315
Local Funds
£6,763
—
—
Road Mileagess-
£ar or Bitumen
8
25
9
Gravel and Metal
-
20
-
Forme d
159
22
4 24
Unformed
104
35
19
Total
271
102
52
(a) Population estimated by multiplying the number of tenements
by 4,36 persons per tenement,
(b) Estimated average population. The Council stated that . visitors
frequently raise the population to from 60,000 to 80,000 persons*
3


(c) Estimated average population.
A map showing the areas affected by the proposal is
at the rear of this file.
Evidence.
It is not proposed to deal separately with the '
evidence of each witness, but to summarise the information fur-
nished through the evidence and the reasons advanced respectively
by those who supported the proposal and those whocpposed it.
The Case for the Proposal.
The reasons given by the Shire Council when sub-
mitting its proposal for the union of the Municipality of
Blackheath, the City of Katoomba and the Shire of Blue Mountains
and the constitution of the united area as a Municipality,
were as followss-
(1) The Municipal Council would be able to levy a reduced
rate on land used for rural primary production;
(2) For administrative purposes the area could be zoned to
prevent overlapping;
(3) The proposed Council’s borrowing powers would be in-
creased and a more economical operation of services
could be expected.
Ibwas stated that the Shire Council’s resolution
proposing the amalgamation of the three areas had been prompted
by the dissatisfaction of both Municipalities with their present
boundaries. An inquiry had been held in connection with a
proposal submitted by certain electors of Leura that the Leura
Urban Area be attached to the Katoomba Municipality and this
proposal had been supported by representatives of Katoomba
Council. . A further inquiry was held in connection with a
proposal to attach the Emu Plains District to Penrith
Municipality, However, if these portions of the Shire were
transferred the administration of services within the portion
of the Shire remaining would be uneconomical and rates would have
to be increased throughout the area.
The Shire Council considered that the proposed
amalgamation would result in the reduction of administrative
costs, give a greater borrowing power to the area, and be of
advantage to the whole Blue Mountains District, It was stated
that the Shire was mainly a tourist area to which tourists were
being encouraged to come. It was necessary that the Shire area
be developed in order to encourage tourists and that the Council
should be strong enough to accept the responsibilities which
would be Incurred in connection with such development. The Blue
Mountains Shire Council as at present constituted was unable tr
undertake the developmental programme which it considered
desirable in the interests of the Blue Mountains because its
limit of borrowing by way of Special loan (which would include,
inter alia, loans for roads, kerblng, guttering and paving) was
insufficient for requirements. Considerable building activity
was taking place within the Shire but the condition of roads
generally was deplorable aid out of a total of 271 miles of
Shire roads only 8 miles were bitumen surfaced. There wore
practically no concrete footpaths. The difficulty as regards
the limit of borrowing would be overcome by an amalgamation of
areas... There were difficulties associated.with administering
the Shire at present because it was necessary to travel through
11 miles of country comprising the City of Katoomba and the
Municipality of Blackheath in order to reach the western portion
(.A Riding) of the Shire from the Council’s headquarters at
Lawson. This added to the cost of travelling.
The Shire of Blue Mountains and the Municipalities
of Katoomba and Blackheath were constituted as the Blue Mount-
ains County District on 14/7/44 for the purpose of water supply,
4


sewerage,, supply of electricity and gas, the business Of con-
veyance of goods or passengers for hire, the licensing of public
vehicles, advertising the advantages of the area to attract
settlers or tourists, and the erection and sale or teasing of
dwellings, shops and other buildings. The County Council took
over the actual performance of those functions on l/l/45 the
constituent Councils having carried on until that date by arrange-
ment with the County Council. Councillor Hodgson who has been
a member of the County Council since Its and was
Chairman in 1945, expressed the opinion that the County Council
had been very successful and its administration.a great improvement
over that of the constituent Councils, and overlapping had. been
avoided. Having regard to his experience with the County Council,
Councillor Hodgson considered that one amalgamated Council having
all the powers now vested in the County Council and the three
constituent Councils, and working for the common good* would be
to the advantage of the whole area'.
If the amalgamated area were constituted a Municipality
a lower general rate could be levied on urban farm land and
settlement for the purpose of carrying on rural pursuits would
be encouraged. It was not permissible for the Shire Council
to levy a lower general rate on such lands at Emii Plains,
Mount Wilson and elsewhere in its area. The Shire could not be
constituted a municipality, (except by \snion of areas) as if did
not have an average density of population of at least one in-
habitant per acre as required by law as a condition precedent
to the constitution of a new municipality (except by union of
areas ).
The siting of communal amenities such as libraries,
baby health centres and community centres could be arranged more
advantageously by one Council after amalgamation, having regard
to the needs of the population, than by three Councils acting
independently of one another, and such amenities could be ad-
ministered more easily by one central Council,
The constitution of the County Council had not achieved
any financial saving in administration because the three con-
stituent Councils were still functioning. However, with one
Council for the combined area instead of four as &t present there
would be better co-ordination of services to the benefit of the
whole area, and a considerable saving in the cost of adralnistration.
It should be possible to carry out engineering
services with one Engineer, and an Assistant Engineer, whereas
the three existing Councils normally each employ an Engineer.
The combined area would be in a position to acquire
up-to-date plant and machinery for the construction of roads,
whereas the purchase of such a plant would be beyond the
financial capacity of any one of the three individual Councils,
With such a plant reads could be constructed more quickly, of
a better standard and at considerably less expense than by
manual labour as present.
Works could be planned and equipment employed to the
best advantage. Metal and gravel deposits could be used for
the benefit of the whole area.
Garbage services are rendered by the Shire Council
to Leura Urban Area, Springwood, Bullaburra and part of
Wentworth Palls. The Shire Council considered that garbage ser-
vices should be given to each town within its area, but owing
to the difficult y of disposing of the garbage in a sanitary
manner, because of the difficult y obtalnig sufficient
suitable land, it was considered necessary to erect at least one
incinerator. The Health Department had complained about the-
present method of disposing of garbage by dumping. It was
considered that the disposal of garbage by incineration ™as a
matter which could best be handled by one Council
the combined ares.
5


There are 5 slaughter houses within the three
existing areas - one at Blackheath, two at Katoomba. one at
Emu Plains and one at Leura (not working at present). The
provision of central abattoirs was regarded as desirable and it
was considered that this could be handled best by a combined
Council,
The Shire is approximately 70 miles from end to end.
The main centres of population are situated along the railway
and highway between Emu Plains, Mount Victoria and Bell with
settlements at Megalong, Mt. Irvine, Mt, Wilson, and Mt. Tomah
and Bilpln, This necessitates very extensive travelling and
adds to the difficulty of supervision under present conditions*
It was considered that these difficulties could be largely over**
come and a considerable saving effected on both the time and
expense of travelling if one Council administered the combined
area as it would then be possible to zone the area into districts
with a road maintenance gang and health Inspector located in
each district. It was contended that an arrangement of this
nature would result in better service at a lower cost than is
possible under present conditions where each Council works
and administration of the western portion of the
Shire ( n A n Riding) involves travelling miles of,the
Katoomba and Blackheath areas*
Katoomba was referred to as being the logical place
for the headquarters of a combined Council as it is the largest
centre of population and is situated approximately halfway
(about 35 miles) between the eastern and north western limits of 4
the area. It was contended that with headquarters at Katoomba the
needs of the public would be met as the section from Emu Plains
to Bell, which contains by far the greater proportion of the,
total population, is served by rail and the Great Western Highway
with regular bus service between Katoomba and most of the other
towns. The settlements at Mt, Wilson, Mt, Irvine, Mt, Tomah
and Megalong are connected to Katoomba by road;
The Case against the Proposal.
Katoomba City Council,
Although the youngest town on the Blue Mountains,
Katoomba had progressed rapidly and had outstriped other older
centres of population such as Mount Victoria, Wentworth Palls
and Lawson and was now recognised as one of the premier
tourist resorts of the Commonwealth.
Since its incorporation as a Municipality in 1889
Katoomba had steadily progressed. The efficient and capable
manner in which the township and surroundings had been developed
was an indication of the worth of Local Government in its truest
sense,
The most Important factor in the development of the
area had been the fact that the Municipality was of a comparatively
small size and the Aid ermen and Administrative Officers were
able to concentrate their energies on Improving and advancing
their area because they had intimate local knowledge of conditions
and were in constant touch with the needs of the people. It was
contended that this was in marked distinction to older established
centres such as Wentworth Palls and Mount Victoria which could
not capitalise on local attractions because there was no direct
cohesion between the residents and the local controlling
authority due to the fact that the area of the Shire in which
these towns are situated is 500 square miles whilst Katoomba is
only 12ir square miles.
The Katoomba City Council was in a strong financial
position and had a borrowing margin of £115,267 which was ample
for its requirements. The City Council provided many services
and amenities to the public and had under consideration the
6


provision of a new cricket ground built to international
standard, Olympic size swimming pool, community hotel,
artificial lake to incorporate picnic grounds, aquatic sports
and boating, new Town ' Hall Building and/or Civic Centre, and
extensions and improvements to present camping area to Include
overseas features and all modern amenities. These matters
should be afforded special attention by representatives of the
people of Katoomba, possessing detailed local knowledge and
constituted as one Council, to prevent outside jealousies
intruding, in order to ensure the success of such projects.
The City Council contended that the functions,
development and peculiar qualities and inherent natural assets
of Katoomba were deserving of special consideration in any
proposal for amalgamation of areas, because the prosperity of
Katoomba depended almost entirely on the tourist Industry; and
practically all business revolved round this factor with
its various adjuncts e.g, guest houses, tourist vehicle
operation, novelty sales, restaurants, cafes, picture theatres
etc, Katoomba’s existence and future were wholly dependent
upon its ability to maintain its status as one of the leading
tourist resorts of the Commonwealth and this could only be
achieved by intensified and concentrated attnntion being devoted
to the square miles of the area. The Mayor of Katoomba had
found that because of the special circumstances of the area the
position called for the devotion of practically fulltime effort
to the office. In the City Council’s view the Mayor and
principal servants of an amalgamated area would be unable to
devote the same time to Katoomba, which would then be only a
portion of the new municipality, and consequently Katoomba
would be retarded in its progress ,
There was no community of interest between the
western and eastern towns of the Blue Mountains. Prom
Wentworth Palls the towns were tourist centres but east of
Wentworth Palls they were, in the main, purely residential
centres,
The effect of an amalgamation of areas would be to
concentrate all activities on the Blue Mountains in one body
with headquarters in one particular place and around which the
whole of the local government structure of the Mountains would
focus. This was; particularly undesirable as the lower Mountain
towns were not interested in Katoomba- and it was only towns froi&
aboutr.Woodford upwards that regarded Katoomba as a centre to
which they travelled to shop and look to for changes in social
life, Blackheath and Lawson would decrease in status owing to
the removal of the present civic headquarters from those towns
and greater Inconvenience would be occasioned ratepayers and
visitors by reason of the headquarters being so far removed from
them.
A combined area between Penrith, Mount Victoria and
Mount Irvine would be unwieldy and difficult to administer. It
would be impossible for members of a combined Council to have an-
intimate knowledge of each and every part of the area, whilst
representation of vach township on the Council would be limited.
In order to transao.t the business' of a large area, meetings
of the Council and Committees would need to be held frequently
and inspections of particular portions of the area made in the
day-time. Distance and available time would debar the
ordinary citizen from offering himself for election to a com-
bined Council and there would be the tendency for its personnel
to be drawn from a minority who were fortunate enough to have
the leisure to devote to local government.
So far as staffing costs were concerned no economy
would be effected by the constitution of an amalgamated area as
the present staff of the Councils would of necessity have to
be employed at their present salaries and at least the same
number of technical officers, e.g. Engineers, Health Inspectors
etc, would be required for the area. Endowment of £5OO per
7


annum paid to the Blue Mountains Shire Council would he lost.
The argument that the creation of a combined'area
would enable the Council to acquire large items of plant,
particularly road-making equipment that larger Councils * cannot
afford did not apply to Katoomba which possessed all the,
machinery necessary for the proper construction and maintenance
of roads. In any case if Councils on the Blue Mountains were cf
the opinion that further expensive items of plant were required
and the creation of a machinery pool was necessary there did not
appear to be any deterrent .to the Katoomba City Council co-
operating in the establishment of such a pool.
It was contended that the people.who would be
affected by the amalgamation were against the proposal and that
the wishes of the people should receive consideration!
In cross-examination the Mayor of Katoomba (Aider-
man Preelander) stated that in general principles Katoomba was
for itself irrespective of co-operation with adjoining areas.
This attitude applied to such matters as the provision of
community centres, community hotels, clinics, public libraries
and incinerators. As regards bush fire prevention Alderman
Preelander stated that the City. Council sponsored a movement fcr
the formation of a voluntary bush fire fighting brigade. Money
was raised and a certain amount of equipment was purchased
and the brigade was formed in 1946 for service in the wooded
Zands of the City of Katoomba or outside should it become
necessary. The Council had made no plans for co-ordinating
the activities of similar bodies in adjoining areas it being
considered that this was a matter for the officer in charge of
the bush fire brigade. The Mayor knew of no such arrangement
having been made although he stated that the fire hazard
on the Blue Mountains was a considerable one and that sometimes
the bush lands of the Mountains were ravaged by fire atfhequent
periods. Alderman Preelander did not agree that the provision
of adequate fire precautions in localities outside those
administered by the Board of Plre Commissioners was the
responsibility of the local governing bodies.
Alderman Preelander, who was Chairman of the County
Council in 1946, agreed that the County Council had proved a
success.
Blackheath Municipal Council.
It was contended that the proposed new area would
be .too large for proper supervision and efficient management and
too much time would be taken up by aldermen and officials in
travelling long distances in the proposed new municipality.
Inconvenience would be caused to the people who would be
compelled to travel long distances to transact business at the
headquarters of the Municipality - probably at Katoomba,
Contact between the aldermen and people would be more remote and
aldermen would not have the necessary knowledge of all parts of
the Municipality.
Progress had come to the Blue Mountains not from the
creation of larger areas but from division into smaller areas,
e.g. Katoomba and Blackheath. Since its constitution as a
Municipality in 1919, Blackheath had progressed considerably ard
now had modern amenities in water, electricity, parks, swimming
pool and an aerodrome. It was stated that this was due to the
area being small and compact and thus able to give excellent
service. The Shire, constituting the residue of the Blue
Mountains, had progressed the least and it was suggested that
this was because the Shire area was too unwieldy. The
constitution of one combined Municipality would create con-
fusion and mean retrogression for the whole area and especially
the Upper Blue Mountains,
The Lower Blue Mountains from Glenbrook to
8


Bullaburra have not Identical Interests with the Upper Blue
Mountains and it was feared that the Upper Blue Mountains would
suffer by amalgamation to the possible advancement of the Lower
Blue Mountains. It was considered that a combined Council would
not extend to Blackheath the attention and prominence that its
potentialities warranted and that, consequently * the carrying out
of local improvement works, such as opening up tourist
the proposed Lake of Remembrance in the proximity of Blackheath
War Memorial Park, and Blackheath Aerodrome t would be retarded*
It would be difficult for public opinion to make Itself felt in
connection with matters affecting the welfare of Blackheath
because most of the Aldermen of an amalgamated Council would
reside in other districts*
Comment:
The three areas the subject of this inquiry were
constituted as the Blue Mountains County District on 14/7/44 fd?
the purpose of water supply* sewerage, supply of electricity and
gas, conveyance,of goods or passengers, licensing of public
vehicles, advertising the advantages of the area, and the erection
and sale or leasing of dwellings, shops and other buildings*
The County Council took over the actual performance of these
functions as from l/l/45 to which date the constituent Councils
had carried them out by arrangement. The transference of specified
functions to the County Council resulted in a sharp decrease in
the revenue of the constituent Councils, so that now the com-
bined revenue of the three constituent Councils is only about
half that of the County Council. For example in 1945, the first
complete year of the County Council’s administration, the revenue
of the County Council was £144,796 and the total revenue of
the three constituent Councils was £71,983, as followss-
Katoomba City Council £30,815
Blue Mountains Shire Council 29,162
Blackheath Municipal Council 12,006..
£71,983
The creation of an additional local governing
authority (the County Council), making four of such authorities
for the Blue Mountains, each with its own organisation, resulted
in a fairly substantial increase in the total administrative
expenses in 1945 compared with 1944.
The constituent Councils, when operating the
electricity, water supply and sewerage undertakings, were able
to charge a proportion of their administrative expenses against
those undertakings to cover the cost of the office work etc,
performed for them. Following the transfer of these undertakings
to the County Council the constituent Councils were unable to
reduce their administrative expenses proportionately with
the result that there has been a considerable Increase in
administrative expenses charged to the General Funds of the con-
stituent Councils compared Tfcith 1944.
Under Section 565 A of the Local Government Act if
the three areas included in the Blue Mountains County District
are united the County Council shall be dissolved and the powers
and functions of the County Council shall be exercised and per-
formed by the Council of the united area. It is considered that
the constitution of one Council on the Blue Mountains to take
the place of the four Councils existing at present will result
in a substantial saving in administrative expenses, which
totalled £17,500 in 1945 for the four Councils.
Considerable evidence was given with the object of
showing that the combined area, 538 square miles in extent,
woyld be too large and unwieldy and that the combined area
could not be administered adequately by a Council of up to 15
9


members (the maximum number allowed for a municipality) in
place of the three constituent councils the total of whose
members is 27. In this regard it should be noted that the
County Council at present exercises certain powers throughout
tho areas of the three constituent Councils and the extent of
its operations may be gauged from the fact that in 1945 it
had a revenue of £144,796, or slightly more than twice the
total revenue of the three constituent Councils, and it was
able to carry on satisfactorily with only 5 members* It is not
to be expected, nor is it desirable, that aldermen concern
themselves with each detail of tho Conner’s activities. The
modern trend, which has proved successful >, is for aldermen to
concern themselves mainly with the determination of matters of
policy leaving the implementation of that policy and matters of
detail to the Council’s trained and experienced servants. The
carrying out of engineering services and health.administration
throughout the combined area in an efficient and economical
manner should not present any great difficulty.
Following the constitution of the County Council
the total income of the Blackheath Municipal Council was
reduced to £12,006 in 1945 of which £2,520 or 21$, was absorbed
in administrative expenses. For several years the office work
of this Council has been in arrears with the result that
statements of accounts for the years 1944 and 1945 signed by ths
Auditor are not yet available. The statements of accounts as
presented for audit show that in 1945 a deficiency of £1,485
was incurred in the General Fund because of increased
administrative expenses (only £648 was charged to the Fund for
administrative expenses in 1944.) This deficiency was
financed partly be drawing upon bank overdraft accommodation
and partly by collection of debts due to the Council, It was
difficult to obtain accurate Information with regard to the
result of the financial transactions in 1946 but it appears that
a further deficiency was Incurred in the general Fund. The
estimates for 1947 adopted by the Council budget for a deficiency
of £775 in the General Fund, allowance having been made for the
collection of arrears of outstanding rates and charges in order
to prevent a further retrogression in the cash position. If
the deficiency budgetted for in the General Fund is actually
incurred it appears that accrued liabilities of the Fund will
exceed realisable assets. The Council has appointed an Engineer
at a salary of approximately £6OO per annum who is to take up
duty shortly. No provision appears to have been made for
Engineer’s salary in the Council’s estimates for 1947.
The financial position of the Blackheath Municipal
Council is weak, the condition of its office work is un-
satisfactory and its administration costs are high. The
Council’s total income for 1947 is estimated at less than
14,000 and its present rating limit for all rates is only
£8,897. It does not now comply with the conditions precedent
to the constitution of a new municipality (except by union of
areas) as the unimproved capital value of all ratable land is less
than £240,000 (£231,867 for 1947) and it has mot the required
density of population. In my opinion the Municipality has now
become an uneconomic local government unit. As at present con-
stituted the area of the Blue Mountains Shire is unwieldy due to
the fact that 11 miles must be travelled through the Katoomba
and Blackheath areas in order to reach the western portion from
the Shire headquarters at Lawson. Considerable building
activity is taking place in the Shire and much requires to be
done in the construction of roads, kerblng, guttering and paving.
The Council has prepared a .loan programme of £64,000 with the object
of carrying out the more urgent of these works, but is hampered
in carrying out development works by its present high cost
of administration and lack of adequate plant. The Council’s
limit of borrowing for such works is only about £90,000, Ordinary
administrative expenses, excluding health administration and
engineering supervision, absorbed 18$ of the income in 1945*
Considerable evidence was given on the question of


community of Interest, it being contended on behalf of
Katoomba and Blackheath that there was no community of interest
between the towns of the Upper and Lower Blue Mountains* This
view is not concurred in. It is considered that the areas of
the three existing Councils constitute a geographic entity which
have a common interest in the development and advancement of the
Blue Mountains as a whole. In my opinion this common Interest
can best be advanced by the constitution of one Council having
the power to exercise all the functions of Local Government,
Such a Council would have an annual income of over
£200,000 immediately upon constitution. It would comply with
the conditions precedent to the granting of a proclamation under
the provisions of Section 181 D of the Local Government Act and
upon the issue of this proclamation the limit of borrowing under
the Act will not apply to the Council, neither may a poll be
demanded in respect of any loan proposal of the Council* nor in
respect of the basis of any loan rate. The Council would
have the financial strength to undertake developmental works
which are beyond the scope of the three existing Councils,
At the present time there is a lack of do-operatlon
and co-ordination in many important aspects of local government
affecting the Blue Mountains as a whole. It was stated quite
frankly that in general principles Katoomba was for itself
irrespective of co-operation with adjoining areas. This is a
short sighted policy as the prosperity of Katoomba as a tourist
resort does not depend only on the development of the 12s- square
mlLs comprising the City of Katoomba but on the development
of the whole of the Blue Mountains,
There should be one policy for the advancement of
the Blue Mountains, It is considered that this objective
would best be achieved by the constitution of one local govern-
ing body in place of the four existing authorities in the same
way as it was achieved as regards certain specific functions
by the constltutlon'of the County Council, which is stated to
be functioning well*
With one Council a better organisation of activities
will be possible than at present. There will be sufficient work
to justify the acquisition of up-to-date roadmaking plant, which
will permit more work to be done at a lower unit cost, A
lower general rate would be leviable in respect of rural land
which conforms to the necessary requirements under the Local
Government Act. This power could be used to encourage
settlement to carry on rural pursuits,
A combined Council would be in a position to employ
the most up-to-date methods in connection with its administration.
The opportunities for advancement it would offer, and the
extent and variety of its activities, would enable members • »
of its staff to be trained and become qualified to occupy the
highest positions in its service. Positions could be filled
largely from within its own service and there would not be
disorganisation of work which frequently occurs in small
Councils as a result of staff resignations, and which has occurred
at Blackheath in recent years.
The fear was expressed by . representatives of
Katoomba and Blackheath that the progress of their areas would .
be retarded by amalgamation. It is considered that this fear
is groundless and will be largely overcome by an arrangement of
wards which will ensure adequate representation on a new Council,
At the inqa iry the Shire Council did not seek . preponderance
of representation for its own area.
Recommendstion.
Reviewing the matter I have come to the conclusion
that the proposal to unite the Municipality of Blackheath, the


the City of Katoomba and the Shire of Blue Mountains and to
constitute the united area as a Municipality would be in the
Interests of the people in those areas and it is recommended that
favourable consideration be given to the proposal,
(Sgd,) H, DANE.
Commissioner,
13th March, 1947.
The Hon, the Minister for Local Government.


PlfASe. QUOTE FILE No
All communications must he PPS/BP ,
addressed to the /? ■/ s'*!
“Shiv Clerk’’ &AV /A/ A • /
&c6rzacmazJ (c/pu^tccc
TEL.: No. 6 LAWSON-.
Correspondents will greatly
facilitate transaction of C~/? ■*'
business by communicating 26th, September,
separately tn reference to •
each subject.
Dr, C. H. Currey,
19 Llandilo Avenue,
STRATEFISLD.
Dear Sir,
Report of Amalgamation of Areas,
As requested in your letter of the Bth inst.,
a copy of the Report by the Commissioner to the Minister for
Local Government, upon the proposal to unite the areas of the
Blue Mountains Councils is enpiosed#
flkithfullv, /
Shire Clerjp* '
