

COPY of a Letter addressed , on the 11th July 1850, to
B. Hawes , Esq., Under-Secretary of State for the
Colonies , on the necessity of arresting the further
Transportation of Convicts to the Island of VAN
DIEMEN’S LAND.
In venturing once more to address Earl Grey, in reference
to the continued transportation of convicts to Van Diemen’s Land, I feel
a difficulty in giving any additional weight to those considerations which
I have on former occasions submitted to his Lordship, in proof ot the
expediency, under the existing condition of the colony, of arresting the
introduction into it of a single additional convict. In the letter which 1
had the honour to address to you on the 12th March 1849, I showed that
the census taken in the preceding year exhibited that three-fourths ot
the adult population of the island were of the convict classes ; and since
then the addition of more convicts, and the subtraction of more tree
people, can only have augmented this ratio of the worst elements ot
colonial society. I confess that this concise but deplorable statement
seems to me to supersede all discussion ; for I can conceive no human
agency whereby such a population can be rendered endurable, nor any
amount of pecuniary or temporal good which can compensate for the
social evils that, upon the lowest estimate, must be engendered by it.
Indeed, I believe I may assume that Lord Grey would willingly and even
gladly renounce Van Diemen’s Land as a place for the reception of trans-
ported offenders, did his Lordship consider that there was a,ny ready
alternative for the practice which has been established in this respect
since the year 1840. I am led to say this not only from the general
impression produced by his Lordship’s speeches and published corres-
pondence, but from the efforts made by his Lordship in the course ot the
last two years to induce other colonies to receive convicts—efforts which,
if responded to by those colonies, would have entirely relieved Van
Diemen’s Land. I cannot, however, for my own part, resist the hi m
conviction that it has for some years past become a primary obligation to
arrest transportation to Van Diemen’s Land, let the results be what they
may to this country ; at the same time, I am strongly led to the opinion,
that there are modes of carrying on the system of transportation still
open to Her Majesty’s Government which, under the most unfavourable
presumptions that can be raised against them, would involve less public
embarrassment, and fewer evils generally, than are the consequence ot
adhering to Van Diemen’s Land as a penal colony. I am chiefly con-
cerned, however, in establishing the former proposition ; and the best
method which I can now pursue will probably be to invite Lord Grey s
attention to the principal features in the history of transportation during
the last ten years.


Various discussions which had for some time taken place on the
subject of secondary punishment generally, and on the alleged merits and
defects of that particular form of secondary punishment which had
grown into existence in the Australian colonies prior to 1838, led at
length to the parliamentary inquiry which took place in that year on the
subject of Transportation, The report of the Select Committee of the
House of Commons of August 1838, is too important a document not to
be noted in any narrative of events in connexion with this subject. It
shows that while the alleged evils of the old system of transportation
were estimated as alike applying to New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, the remedies which were proposed were alike applicable to both
colonies. The report states (at page 34) that “if the penal colonies are
to continue to depend upon our gaols for their supply of labour, their
prosperity has reached its climax, and must decline, without such an
extension of crime in this country as it must be hoped is altogether
unlikely. Nothing can be better demonstrated than that labour must be
supplied from other sources than that of transportation, if New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land are to continue to flourish.” And
further (at page 43), “ In order effectually to maintain discipline and
subordination among convicts sentenced to confinement abroad, and also
to prevent a recurrence of those social evils which have been found by
experience to result from transportation as hitherto conducted, the peni-
tentiaries or houses of confinement that may be established abroad ought
(so far as possible) to be strictly limited to those places wherein there are
at present no free settlers, and the convicts who have been there punished
should be compelled to leave those settlements within a certain period
after the expiration of their sentences. Your Committee must observe,
that if any convenient island in the immediate vicinity of the coasts of
the United Kingdom could be fixed upon for the building of peniten-
tiaries, and no persons but the prisoners and their superintendents were
permitted to reside there, it would combine, as a place of punishment,
the chief advantages both of a penal settlement at home and abroad.”
The Committee, however, add that “ until penitentiaries can be built,
it would be necessary to send abroad a considerable portion of the con-
victs ; but your Committee are of opinion that at the earliest possible
period it would be expedient to discontinue sending them to New South
Wales, and the settled districts of Van Diemen’s Land.” “ Convicts sen-
tenced for long periods,” the report continues, “ might be sent to the
present penal establishments of Tasman’s Peninsula and Norfolk Island,
provided the system of punishment now pursued there were completely
altered.” (page 43.)
Then the question naturally arose as to the disposal of convicts after
the expiration of their punishment; and on this point the Committee
observe as follows :
“ It was an important question for the consideration of your Com-
mittee, whether this most desirable object of enabling a criminal, after
the expiration of his punishment, to commence a new career, might not
be obtained without entailing on the colonies the social evils which have
been occasioned by transportation ; and the mode in which it might be
attained appears to your Committee to be well described in the following
extract from a letter of the Archbishop of Dublin :
“ ‘ Under a reformed system of secondary punishment, it strikes me as desirable,
with a view to the prevention from a return to evil courses of persons released from


penitentiaries, &c., after the expiration of their punishment, that such as may have
evinced a disposition to reform should be, at their own desire, furnished with means
of emigrating to various colonies , British or foreign, in which they may mix, not
with such men as their old associates in crime, hut with respectable persons, unac-
quainted with their past history.’ ” (page 46.)
The Committee conclude their report w r ith recommendations corres-
ponding with the views of the distinguished prelate whose words they
quote, and they specifically suggest that those convicts who are punished
abroad should be compelled to leave the settlement in which they have
been punished, means being afforded them by the Government for the
purpose.
Here I may appropriately recal the following facts, which occurred
after the date of the Report:—Transportation to New South Wales was
abolished in 1840, but transportation “to the settled districts of Van
Diemen’s Land” was not abolished ; on the contrary, this small island
received into its very heart the entire stream of transported offenders, of
which formerly the larger pai’t had gone to New South Wales. The
convicts, as they became free, or were released from the restraint of the
punishment-gangs, were not sent away “from theirold associates in crime”,
the expense of their deportation to other countries being defrayed by the
Government, but they were all left in Van Diemen’s Land. Not only
was there thus a large actual addition to the convict element of the
population, which it had been the great object of penal reformers to avoid,
but a large deportation has ever since been going on of origfnally free
emigrants—an increase of the population thus taking place where it was
urgently desired to lessen it, and a decrease where it was equally desired
to augment it.
I am aware that the recommendations of a report of a Parliamentary
Committee, however entitled to high respect, are not necessarily an
authority binding on the Executive Government ; but I believe I am
right in saying, that the steps taken in 1840 were the result of the general
movement of the few preceding years towards a reform in our system of
secondary punishment; and it was a remarkable consequence of those
measures, devised, as they were, to benefit the colonial communities of
Australia no less than the interests of the mother country, that they infi-
nitely aggravated all previous evils of the convict system in Van Diemen’s
Land. It is only proper, however, to observe in this place, that had Lord
Melbourne’s administration not terminated in 1841, it is probable the
reforms which commenced with the Order in Council of May, 1840,
would have been followed with very different results. Lord John Russell
is reported to have spoken as follows, in the course of the speech deli-
vered by his lordship in the House of Commons on the colonial policy of
the present Government, on the Bth of February last :
“ When I held the seals of the Colonial-office, I became acquainted
with the mischief transportation had done in New South Wales ; and I
advised Her Majesty accordingly, and obtained an Order in Council, to
put a stop to transportation; and there is no act of mine, while I was in
the Colonial-office, to which I look with greater satisfaction than having
done so But when I made the change, I had in view to diminish
very considerably the total number of convicts. That change, owing
partly to the disposition of Parliament, and partly to the Government
which succeeded us, did not take place. A large number of convicts
were accordingly sent to Van Diemen’s Land. The noble lord at the


head of the Colonial Department in the Government which succeeded
us, found, however, that too many convicts were introduced into that
colony, and proposed to suspend transportation to Yan Diemen’s Land ;
a measure which was carried into effect by the Government.”
I quote the above from “ Hansard’s Reports”, and having had the ad-
vantage of hearing the noble lord deliver the speech on the occasion
referred to, I feel that I may regard it as a correct statement of what his
lordship said on this part of his subject. But while it may follow from
this that had Lord John Russell remained Secretary of State for the
colonies, the reform commenced by his Lordship would have_ been pur-
sued into all its consistent consequences, I think Lord Grey will perceive
that the practical grievances to which the Colonists of Yan Diemen s
Land have been subjected, are not the less matter for just dissatisfaction
on that account. .
It is not necessary that I should tax his lordship’s attention with all
the details of the successive changes which have taken place in the system
of convict management, and in the social state of the island, subsequently
to the issue of the Order in Council of 1840. Their leading features are
readily summed up. All convicts were transported to Yan Diemen’s
Land, or Norfolk Island as its future dependency. “ Assignment” was
abolished. Criminals have been congregated in large masses, and fearful
demoralization has been the inevitable consequence. The free labouring
population, with their wives and families (those best securities for the
social regeneration of the island), have been driven away ; a large pro-
portion of them being those who had been introduced by the proceeds of
the sale of colonial lands —a kind of repayment, as it has been contended,
of the high prices paid for their lands by the colonists, and which they
the more readily bought at such prices, from the general impression pre-
valent for some years before 1840, that transportation was about to cease.
Great discontent has prevailed among the colonists ever since the new
system began to develop itself; and when it is remembered that there
never yet has been a vicious social or economical system which does not
create some exceptional advantages to particular interests, and which,
though dearly paid for by society at large, it is ever the aim of such
interests to confound with the well-being of all, —it is worthy of remark,
how very nearly universal has been this discontent. Public meetings
have been constantly held, at which the social evils of the colony are
denounced. The local Government and the colonists have been brought
into unprecedented hostility. Her Majesty and Parliament have now
been implored in numerous Petitions for the abolition of transportation,
such petitions being signed by the larger portion of the colonial magis-
tracy, and, with few exceptions, by all the respectable colonists of the
island. Petitions have been lately received in this country to both Houses
of Parliament, which are more urgently remonstrant than ever ; and one
from the northern division of the island alone, which has been forwarded
to me, contains among its 2000 signatures the names of upwards of fifty
magistrates,—among these being the names of Messrs. Thomas Archer,
James Cox, Thomas Anstey, and Benjamin Horne, the four senior magis-
trates of the island, gentlemen of the greatest colonial experience, and
of the highest character in every public and private relation.
But while this has been the general aspect of society in the colony
from 1840 to the present time, I am not unmindful that during that
period various efforts have been made to remedy the evils to which the


colonists have been subjected; though, however excellently intended, and
whatever the actual result of those efforts, it is a fact that the colonists
at large consider that nothing has been effected to diminish all the
greater evils of their condition. And it must be admitted, that up to this
period the bulk of the convicts have been sent to Van Diemen’s Land
—that they are still being sent there, and there exclusively, if we except
a few sent to Western Australia —that the free people are still leaving—
and that giving the local authorities the very utmost credit for improved
discipline at the penal stations and in the gangs, a labouring population
produced as that of Van Diemen’s Land has been, and continues to be,
must ever be a fearful one for respectable Englishmen with their families
to live among. But I will now, with your permission, glance at the suc-
cession of remedies which have been attempted since the evils of the late
penal system began to develop themselves. I am bound to say that, from
some oversight, those evils did not seem to be much anticipated, any
more in the colonies than in this country —in the colonies, perhaps, from
the preoccupation of most men in the active pursuits of life. It was not
until some time after 1840, when the consequences of directing the large
stream of transported offenders from an illimitable continent to a small
island whose good land was long since brought into active production,
began to display themselves in a tangible form, that the inherent vice
of such a change seemed to be fully comprehended—foreshadowed as it
may seem to have been in the Report of 1838. Lord Stanley applied
himself to the reform of the existing system in its internal economy.
Increased superintendence, the appointment of a better class of men as
superintendents and overseers, and the appointment of additional and
zealous religious instructors, were the means by which the more flagrant
internal evils of the system were to be encountered. But Lord Stanley
perceived that to touch the mere economy of discipline was insufficient.
A change of scene was needed, both for the better working of the system,
and the effective relief of society in the colony. Thus, with the entire
suspension of transportation to Van Diemen’s Land for a period, which
was determined on, it was intended to establish a new colony in North
Australia for the reception of transported offenders. It was also Lord
Stanley’s project to draw off from Van Diemen’s Land, what might be
regarded as its existing surplus convict population. To some extent,
then, this might be regarded as an intended replacement of Van
Diemen’s Land in its old position. The continent of New Holland would
become again open to the reception of criminals, while it received back
those who for a time had been unduly thrown into Van Diemen’s Land.
If I may be bold enough to say so, it thus happened that Lord John
Russell’s policy failed because only partially adopted ; while the remedy
proposed was, not in wholly carrying out that policy, but by, in a great
measure, reverting to the old system as existing prior to 1840. The dif-
ference was that North Australia was substituted for New South Wales,
that assignment was abolished (though a system somewhat approximating
to it appears to have been since adopted), and certain alterations of de-
tail were effected in the management of the prisoners under the direct
control of the Government.
You are aware, Sir, that these arrangements were never carried into
effect. Earl Grey succeeding to Mr. Gladstone, the North Australian
settlement was abandoned; and that system was adopted which was


matured in the early part of 1847. Transportation to Van Diemen’s
Land was not to be revived at the end of the two years for which it had
been suspended, but the convicts were, after a period of punishment and
probation in England, to be dispersed in various colonies as “exiles”.
That, I believe, will be found a perfectly correct description of the general
system then proposed, as gathered from Lord Grey’s Dispatch to Sir
William Denison, of sth February, 1847; Sir George Grey’s letter to
Lord Grey, of 20th January, 1847, and his Lordship’s reply of sth
February, 1847. Sir George Grey observes that it is proposed “that,
as a general rule, and whenever the conduct of prisoners may render
them fit subjects for the indulgence, conditional pardons should be granted
to them after a certain time passed in penal labour # The
condition of the pardon would be the same as that now enforced in the
case of the exiles from Pentonville ; namely, that they shall quit this
country, and not return to it during the term of their original sen-
tences.”
The following passages also appear in Sir George Grey’s letter: —
“To send large numbers of convicts, collectively, to any of our colonies, though
they were to become free on their arrival there, would, if continued for a series ot
years, lead to many of the evils which have resulted from transportation. . _ . It
is proposed, therefore, that on obtaining the conditional pardon, the only restriction
on the liberty of persons holding such a pardon, should be the prohibition
of remaining in this country; and that facilities foremigration should be afforded
them individually, instead of collectively, &c.”
Lord Grey in his reply observes that, “ while the Australian colonies
are far from possessing any advantages for carrying into effect the
strictly penal part of the sentence inflicted upon convicts, they do pos-
sess the highest advantages for the reception of criminals whom it is
desirable to remove, after their punishment has been completed, from the
danger of being again brought into a criminal course of life in this
country.” And his Lordship adds—“ That if the punishment in this
country shall be successfully improved in the way proposed, and shall be
rendered really reformatory in its character, I am persuaded that the sub-
sequent exile of those who shall have been subjected to it may take place,
not only without injury, but with advantage, to the colonies to which
they are sent, more especially if, as I should propose, due care is taken
to adopt measures, at the same time, for promoting the emigration
to those colonies of a considerable number of persons untainted with
Thus the colonists of Yan Diemen’s Land believed themselves
relieved, and were loud in expressions of gratitude to Her Majesty’s Go-
vernment. Transportation was wholly abolished; and looking at the proposed
plan of sending out exiles —considering that, where exiles were sent,
there also were free people to be sent, and remembering the state o
Van Diemen’s Land, then over-run with convicts, and its free people
leaving it—remembering that the immediate object was the relief of
Yan Diemen’s Land, as it had been the object of the North Australian
settlement—it seemed evident that, for a long period to come, not even
exiles would have their steps directed to that quarter. It seemed that
any other colony would be more likely to be selected, as embracing those
necessary conditions which were contemplated in Sir George Grey s
letter. Assuredly it never was contemplated that “ large numbers of


convicts” would be sent “ collectively” to Van Diemen’s Land. You
are aware, however, that early in the following year it was determined
that all transported offenders should be sent to Van Diemen’s Land, and
to Van Diemen’s Land exclusively. #
I am well aware of the many and great difficulties which at that hme
beset the Government. The great increase of criminals, the critical
state of Europe, the agitation in this country and in Ireland, and the opinion
of Parliament on the subject of transportion, all conspired to render it
difficult for Government to adhere to its former projects of 1847, and to
avoid having recourse to the only colony which the policy of 1840 had
left as a legal receptacle for convicts. But ray object is to show the
hardships entailed on the colony, which, not responsible for that policy,
came to be saddled with injuries, from which no sooner did it appear to
have escaped than they were fated to be reimposed upon it. And here
I would earnestly beseech Lord Grey to consider how some means may
be now adopted to meet the wishes of the free people of Van Diemen’s Land.
That a season of difficulty might arrive, under which _ even the great
British Government should be unable to carry out its wishes as repects
the immediate relief of a small British community, from evils confessedly
the result of imperial measures, is whatl have no doubt the colonists would
readily admit; but they will never persuade themselves that these evils
can be perpetuated by an authority respected even more for its mag-
nanimity than its power. ~ ~
I gladly recognise the subsequent efforts made by Lord Urey (in the
course of last year) to mitigate the evils entailed on Van Diemen’s Land
by the arrangements of 1848, which in fact and effect were little else
than the prolongation of the system adopted in 1840; and had New
South Wales, and other colonies, to receive convicts, after
undergoing the probationary course of punishment in this country, X
believe that the Government would have attained an excellent system
of secondary punishment. lam firmly persuaded that no large bodies
of criminals will ever, for a permanence, be at once firmly, judiciously,
and humanely controlled in remote settlements. This is recognised in
the policy now adopted of keeping the convicts in penitentialies in
England, before transportation to the Australian colonies. It is, perhaps,
the & leading idea of the Parliamentary Report of 1838. But the sub-
sequent wide dispersion of convicts, in large expansive territories, is
indispensable to the success of this combination of the penitentiary and
exile systems. Unhappily for Van Diemen’s Land, New South Wales
finally determined not to receive convicts. Had that colony agreed to
receive them, every opportunity would have presented itself for the
attainment of those objects, which, on various occasions, the Government
have professed such laudable anxiety to secure. In New South Wales
there is a large free population, yet so large is the territory, that with the
annual introduction of convicts, there would still be ample room for a
continued influx of free people, so precluding all possibility of the convicts
ever again forming a large proportion of the population. But so much
has it now become a sentiment of national pride in New South Wales, to
reject all overtures for the introduction of convicts, that I feel pretty
sure there is no hope of that colony consenting again to receive any.
Resistance to “ convictism ” is daily forming itself into a popular tradi-
tion, and though many excellent settlers and employers of labour would


willingly receive convicts, they are a small minority, and quite unable to
resist the pressure of the other side.
Thus, then, in 1850, we are brought to this, as the general result of
the penal reforms first indicated by the Parliamentary Committee of
1838. New South Wales has wholly escaped the convict system, but
she has done so at the expense of Van Diemen’s Land. This latter
colony has been inundated with convicts, and lost its free labouring
population. It is not too much to say that thus far the great aims of
penal reform have missed their objects ; while the departure from the old
system has only led to a fearful gross augmentation of evils, though it
may have varied the specific character of some of them.
I am aware that it is contended a better system of convict management
now obtains in Van Diemen’s Land. I have no means of gainsaying
this ; and it is possible that to some extent it is so. It is well known,
however, that the colonists deny much of what is affirmed in this respect
by the local authorities. But admitting all that the latter assert—and
assert, I am bound to believe, with full assurance of its accuracy—how
is it possible that such a population, the criminals of modern civilization,
and the very worst of them, since transportation is no longer the punish-
ment awarded to trivial first offences, as was formerly the case —how is it
possible that such a population as that of Van Diemen’s Land can be
other than an awfully depraved one. We know that the probation
system had its few years of direful operation in the colony—that large
numbers of Norfolk Island men, who had been for years in that dreadful
receptacle during its worst days, have been brought into the Island—
that Port Arthur has contributed its thousands—that Punishment Gangs
and Hiring Depots still exist —that the very worst in the home peniten-
tiaries, those who despise all efforts to earn their tickets of leave, and so
entitle themselves to be forwarded as ticket of leave holders direct to the
colony, are by recent arrangements transported to Norfolk Island, thence
to be eventually cast into Van Diemen’s Land—and knowing how slow
in its growth, and how little to be depended on, is the information of the
criminal, we can have no hope that the character of the penal population
of Van Diemen’s Land will be sensibly much less bad than it was three
or four years ago. The settlers loudly allege that as far as they can
judge from those whom they employ—and this is the best test, and one
which the Government cannot make use of—there is no amendment
whatever. I think it must be evident that there can be no very great
amendment until the population does not consist principally of convicts—
until the free people who have left are restored to the colony, or numbers
equivalent to them brought in—and until transpoitation shall have been
for some years suspended, and replaced by free emigrations.
There are some passages in the speech delivered by Lord Grey on the
12th April last, on the third reading of the bill for the better government
of Convict Prisons, upon which I would now, with the greatest respect,
venture to make a few observations. His Lordship remarked:—“l
consider the colonists of Van Diemen’s Land have no just right to call
upon this country to discontinue the practice of sending convicts
there Van Diemen’s Land was founded as a convict colony. This
country has spent millions of money in fitting it for the reception of
convicts ; and the free population which has established itself there for
the sake of the pecuniary advantages of that expenditure, has no right


whatever to expect that the policy of this country should be altered when
they think proper to demand it, and that we should be compelled again
to incur the heavy expense of preparing some new settlement for the
reception of convicts.” (Hansard.)
I would with great deference submit to his lordship that, though the
colony was founded originally as a penal settlement, it cannot follow from
that mere fact, that a right is given to this country to maintain it as a
penal settlement through all, the subsequent changes of its condition.
When the colony of Yan Diemen’s Land was founded, the island was an
unpeopled waste, —unpeopled, with the exception of a very few native
tribes. After a time, British colonists were invited to settle there, and
great has been the advantage of their settlement to this country. They
acted in effect as unpaid superintendents of convict labour ; and if
millions have been spent in the Australian colonies by this country,
millions have been saved by the support of convicts in private service
there. But I would submit that from the moment free Englishmen were
encouraged to settle in Van Diemen’s Land, from that moment the colony
was no longer merely a convict settlement. In those free Englishmen
and their descendants, and in the free descendants of the convicts, a new
interest was introduced, whose welfare must ever be the subject of soli-
citude to the Government of Great Britain ; and that new interest, by
its very nature, must in time have rendered a perpetual introduction of
convicts an impossibility,except upon the principle of driving out the free
to make room for the bond. Further; when, more recently, some thou-
sands of free labourers were invited to settle in the island, when all the
available land was occupied, and there was scarcely room for another
convict, the colony had inevitably assumed a character beyond the reach
and influence of the accidents which had marked jts early settlement. It
might still, by a technicality, be termed a penal settlement; but the pro-
gress of events had brought it to the natural limit of its history in that
character. Moreover, Yan Diemen’s Land was, when first settled, only
an off-shoot of New South Wales. That colony, not Van Diemen’s Land,
was the great original penal settlement of the southern hemisphere; and
the evils entailed on Yan Diemen’s Land are the results of the national
policy which gave up that great country for penal purposes, at a time
when Van Diemen’s Land, from its limited area, could really offer no
further advantages of that kind. I may also observe, that to send con-
victs now to Yan Diemen’s Land, means less to send them to a penal
settlement than to send them to be the servants of free settlers —to coerce,
by the force of social laws, free Englishmen to employ convict labourers
on their own land, their own freeholds. Then I would further submit
to his lordship, that the millions spent (during the period, however, of
nearly half a century) for the convict services in Yan Diemen’s Land,
really resolve themselves into an expenditure for the support and main-
tenance of the many thousands of British criminals sent there, and not
supported in the private employ of free settlers ; and very much less
has been expended in Yan Diemen’s Land on this account, than in New
South Wales. Van Diemen’s Land, again, is only now in any way fitted
as a receptacle of convicts, as far as the country itself is concerned (and
apart from the convict department, which has at present its establishment
there), simply from the existing public buildings now devoted to convict
purposes in the island. I much question, confessing however that I have


no very accurate data to calculate from, whether the whole are worth
£50,000 at this moment, including all works at Tasman’s Peninsula.
Nor, unfortunately, am I enabled to concur with his lordship’s state-
ment, that the settlers established themselves there for sake of the public
expenditure in the island. At least, if the original settlers who went
out to the colony had any more than the same vague idea of ultimately
benefiting their families which possesses the majority of settlers in Canada
or any other new country, and actually contemplated the advantages of the
Government expenditure, the time has long gone by for the reasonable
operation of such a motive. I am sure his Lordship is too experienced in
economical inquiries, not to perceive that the present expenditure, so far as
it confers an advantage on Van Diemen’s Land, is a mere trifle. dhe large
amount of home products consumed by the people, and the large foreign
trade of the island, are the great exponents of its wealth. The “ expen-
diture” is but another word for the receipt by the Government of British
goods, wheat, and sheep and cattle, supplied in the colony, dhe clear
gain on the transaction is the profit on those deliveries, which may be ten
or twenty per cent, on the amount received in return for them a profit
which might be made on the same capital and industry employed in other
directions, were this expenditure at an end. But even this profit, incon-
siderable though it is in reference to the gross income of the colony, is
not by any means the gain of Van Diemen s Land alone. It is shared by
all the colonies. The Commissariat demand for wheat, if it affects prices
at all, affects the colonial market generally, raising prices at Sydney and
Adelaide no less than at Hobart Town. Meat is actually supplied in
large quantities by sheep and cattle sent over from the pastures of Port
Phi Hip. „ „ _ _
There is another point upon which I beg to offer a few remarks. lam
convinced the introduction of additional convicts can never be justified
by any prospect of Van Diemen’s Land having its resources so hugely
developed as to give occupation for a much larger population than is now
in the island, for many years to come; though indeed, were the case
otherwise, it would, in the present state of the colony, be rather the jus-
tification for sending in free emigrants. The accidental circumstances of
a given year, may slightly increase the breadth of tillage, or a temporary
stimulus may be given to other branches of colonial industry. But as all
the most available land has now been long occupied, it would be chiefly
by highly improved culture, that the island could be made to employ
a much larger population. Such a system of culture, it is well known,
will not pay in young colonies. It may seem a paradox, but it
is in the experience of every old settler that it is only what in England
would be called bad farming which will pay. In England land is dear,
its rental, and other annual charges upon it, are high; while the cost ot
human labour is low. In young colonies land has almost a nominal
value, and labour is high priced. Even the convict labour of Van
Diemen’s Land, unskilled as so much of it is now represented to be, and
with the inevitable tendency of men to work somewhat in the proportion
of wages, is in the end a dear class of labour. It may thus well happen
in a colony, and the result is found to be so in actual practice, that the
same labour, extended over a greater breadth of cultivation, is more pro-
fitable than high farming on a small surface. In England land is more
economised than labour; in young countries, labour than land. The


censures often passed on the slovenly farming of Australia and America,
are based on a forgetfulness of the different conditions of the colonial
and European systems ; and I think we may be certain that any general
form given to industrial pursuits by Englishmen, or their descendants,
is that which experience has shown to be, on the whole, in reference to
time and place, the most productive of profit. "Were Van Diemen’s Land
isolated altogether, and a large population forced into it, without means
of escape, then, indeed, we should find its land brought under other
influences than those now acting on its condition. But as it is, that
island forms at present part of the productive system of Australia, and
so long as the pastoral occupations of the neighbouring continent pre-
sent, as they do, the most profitable method of employing capital and
labour—so long as there are large tracts of land in South Australia and
Port Phillip well adapted for agricultural purposes, yet still untouched by
the plough—we can never expect the strange exception in that part of
the world which Van Diemen’s Land would present of a densely peopled
and very highly cultivated country.
When, then, I revert to the state and prospects of Van Diemen’s Land
prior to 1840, when I survey its history during the ten years now ter-
minated, when I look to the facts, as admitted on all hands, which mark
its present condition, and contemplate its social and political future if
retained as a penal settlement, I feel that every consideration of good
policy, of justice, of religion and morality, points to the immediate
renunciation of it as a receptacle for convicted offenders. And let me
beseech his Lordship to believe that these are my sincere and earnest
convictions. I feel that they are the irresistible deductions from facts
beyond the possibility of controversy ; and fortunate I should esteem
myself if I could be in any the humblest degree instrumental in moving
Her Majesty’s Government to grant the prayer of the Van Diemen’s
Land colonists. The future disposition of the criminals of the British
Empire is more than ever a question demanding the attention of the
statesman, the magistrate, and the philanthropist. The painful expe-
riences of the last ten years in more fully exposing its difficulties, has
also perhaps afforded many useful beacons for future guidance in this
field of inquiry. But if one thing more than another stands clearly
designated, it seems to my understanding that it is that not another con-
vict should,be sent to Yan Diemen’s Land.
I have, &c,
J. A. JACKSON.
RICHARDS, PRINTER, 100, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.


