

1873.
QUEENSLAND.
COPY OF THE DIARY OF THE NORTHERN EXPEDITION UNDER
THE LEADERSHIP OF MR. WILLIAM HANN.
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command, -
Wednesday, 26t/t June, 1872.—After numerous delays and detentions, the party was collected together
at Fossilbrook Station—consisting of Mr. Hann, leader; Mr. Taylor, geologist; Dr. Tate, botanist and natu-
ralist; Mr. Warner, surveyor; Mr. Stewart and Mr. Nation, members of the party; and Jerry, a black boy—
with twenty-five horses and twenty sheep in all. Being the first day of a long trip, delays in packing became
necessary; still, everything was ready for a start by 11 o’clock, at which hour we bade farewell to Fossilbrook
—an out-station belonging to Mr. Firth, of Mount Surprise—and at whose garden here we did justice to the
vegetables before our departure, in anticipation of a long denial of such comforts. After starting, followed the
creek for five miles; crossed a small sandy creek, as well as two others, later in the day, and after nine miles
of travelling, formed our first camp on Fossilbrook Creek. Killed our first kangaroo this day.
Thursday, With June. —Made a good start by nine o’clock, still following Fossilbrook Creek, and after
journeying ten miles, formed our second camp. The first six miles of the journey consisted of basaltic forest
country, timbered with ironbark and bloodwood, and the latter four miles, of sandy stony ridges with tea-tree,
indicating very wet ground during the rainy season. The change in the country here is very remarkable—the
creek, in the first place, is wrongly named, for it possesses no fossils; but running over a limestone bed, some
might take it for small fossil remains of the coral species. This limestone bed is hedged in on both sides of
the creek by basalt, which in some cases comes down to the water’s edge, thus forcing the limestone further
over on the opposite bank. The water takes its course for the first few miles through beds of reeds and rushes,
after which it is collected in a well-defined creek, running through basaltic country of the usual character.
At the woolshed, the land is of the finest description, and it maintains this character for some miles, but it is
of no great width, and its distance from a market virtually shuts out a free-selector. The garden bore evidences
of its fruitfulness, for pumpkins and other vegetables could not have been seen in greater abundance anywhere
with so little attention given to their culture. As a small cattle station, it is unsurpassed, and contrasts most
favorably with the land we appeared to be entering on. On the north-west, the ranges come to within ten
miles of this creek, while to the east there is of course the Lynd, which runs through a poor country; there-
fore, the extent of available country on this creek is not large. Its general course to its junction with the
Lynd is nearly due north. Observations were taken by Mr. Taylor and myself in the afternoon. Readings of
instruments at sunrise.—Bar., 28 13; ther., 52.
-Friday, 28 th June. —At half-past 8 o’clock we were ready for a start, and, in six miles, we came upon
the Lynd. The observations of the previous day promised us a rough journey, which were realised in broken
stony ridges, causing us frequently to dismount and lead our horses. The prospect ahead was not very
favorable for easy travelling, but a pass had to be forced to reach our destination, and we set to work to
accomplish it. After eight miles of a severe journey, we formed our camp on a sandy creek running into the
river, which I have named Hackett’s Creek. I went ahead on foot with Dr. Tate, to examine the nature of
the country before us, and found that its appearance was by no means inviting.—Camp 3, Ther., 48 ;
bar , 28 , 31.
Saturday, 29 th June. —Ready to start by 9 o’clock; before doing so, got some stone from a good-
looking quartz reef, which, however, shewed no sign of being gold bearing. While all but Mr. Nation were
absent from the camp—some examining the reef, and others bringing up the horses—there was as narrow an
escape from all the stores and saddles being destroyed by fire as it is possible to conceive. Mr. Nation’s
disinclination to take the walk was the salvation of everything. I had frequently to call the attention of the
members of the party to the dangers by fire, caused by throwing down lighted matches after lighting their
pipes, but it needed this narrow escape to convince them of their carelessness, which, but for the presence of
one person in the camp, would have wrecked the expedition at its outset, The fire was within a few inches of the
bedding of the guilty individual when it was discovered by its crackling noise. At starting, we crossed the creek,
and in seven miles made the Lynd. The river here is a wide, sandy, and stony bed, cut up into numerous channels,
the ground between them being overgrown with tea-tree and shrubs of various descriptions, forming excellent
cover for troublesome natives, if they had had any disposition that way. The natural features of the river
in ugliness, and surrounded by similar country, gave us a hard day’s travelling, having frequently to dismount
and clear our road.—Camp 4. Ther., 44; bar.,28'48.
Sunday,


Sunday, 30 th June. —Made a start by 9 o’cloek ; the first five miles were performed on foot, over a
porphyry formation, the nature of the country not permitting of riding; the ridges and sidelings being
dreadfully strong, caused the horses to face their work with fear. After having forced a pass, we had good
travelling for four miles a mica schist and granite formation, with quartz pebbles through the surface,
and mica of great size imbedded in the rocks. The horses now went on merrily to the camp, which was in
front of the Kirchner Range on the opposite side of the river. The word “ range” is scarcely applicable to
these five or six bills, but they are remarkable for their height (about four hundred feet) as compared to the
surrounding country, which consists of low open ridges. Mr. Warner had the misfortune this day to lose my
prismatic compass, having left it on the ground while making an entry of the bearings which he bad taken,
but failed to find it on his returning to search for it, the country in the meanwhile having been burned by a
bush fire. The descriptions of Leichhardt are accurately borne out by the features and formation of this
country.—Camp 5. Ther., 04; bar., 28-08.
Monday, ls< July. —Made this a permanent camp for two or three days to prospect for gold. As I was
anxious to recover my compass, I requested Mr. Warner to return to the same spot where it was supposed to
have been lost, accompanied by Dr. Tate and Jerry the blackboy, and prosecute a further search with the
latter, while the Doctor was requested to prospect some of the good-looking gullies which had been passed
over the previous day, with the view of ascertaining whether they might not show some signs of yielding gold.
I regret to say that Warner’s search was unsuccessful—he and the blackboy having carefully followed all the
tracks which could possibly lead to its recovery; they saw many natives about the ridges, and I conclude that
these people were hanging about our tracks the previous day, and thus became the possessors of my much
needed compass. The Doctor’s search for gold was equally barren, the dishes, after being panned off, showing
only black sand and garnets, both of which were secured by me as samples. The other members of the party
were prospecting on both sides of the river with similar results.—Ther. 48; bar. 28-75.
Tuesday, 2nd July. —The first thing in the morning most of the party ascended one of the hills
forming the Kirchner llangc, from whence there was an extensive view to the N. and N.N.E., showing a large
tract of broken and undulating country to the S. (on which side of the river we were camped), the same
description of country extended for fifteen miles to the foot of a range which bore S.W. After returning to
camp Mr. Taylor and Mr. Nation proceeded to a remarkable bluff about four miles to the E. of the Kirchner
Range, not mentioned by Leichhardt, but in itself a most notable feature on the river, and Which I have
named Gregory’s Bluff, as owing to this mountain I attribute the loss of the compass, Warner being engaged
at the time in taking its bearings; this compass was a serious loss to me, and I felt it such ever after. From
the summit of the bluff Mr. Taylor reported a similar view to the N. as seen from the Kirchner Range, while
to the S.E. the view extended over the broken and rugged country which we had such difficulty in pushing
through. The ascent of the bluff was effected with considerable difficulty, while half way up there was a
large cave, which, from appearances and odour, was the frequent resort of kangaroos and other wild animals;
at the same time I proceeded seven miles in a S.W. direction over a mica schist and granite formation of
country similar to, and surrounding neighborhood of our camp. Warner and the Doctor went out prospecting
but with no better success than on the former occasion.—Ther., 48 ; bar., 28-74.
Wednesday, 3 rd July. —After breakfast all hands went out prospecting—the Doctor and myself to some
gullies which I had passed over the previous day during my short seven miles’ trip, while Mr. Taylor and Mr.
Nation proceeded to the foot of the Kirchner Range, where other gullies had been seen which were deemed
worthy of being tested for gold; the results, however, in all-cases were the same—black sand and garnets.
The whole of this day was devoted to this sort of work.—Ther., 58 ; bar., 28-78.
Thursday, 4th July. —The loss of my compass troubled me sadly, so I determined before quitting this
neighborhood to make a search for it personally; with this view I started off with Jerry, my blackboy, and
went over the ground very carefully, but, I regret to say, with no better success than Warner and my com-
panion. I now feel persuaded that the natives were watching Warner on the first occasion, and no sooner had
he retired from the spot where he had been taking bearings than they visited it and secured the compass
Other members of the party prospecting for gold, but without success. As my supply of provisions would not
permit of my devoting too much time to prospecting, considering the journey I had before me, I resolved to
make this my last day of sojourn on the Lynd, which is certainly not an inviting river to remain on—whatever
it may be lower down; the water runs shallow over a sandy and rocky bed, which is cut up, as already stated,
into numerous channels, with vegetation between them. Mr. Taylor gavo it as his opinion that the country
around the Kirchner Range was not a gold-bearing one; but the mica and hornblende schists, and other meta-
morphous rocks, impressed me with a different view; however, my party was too small to devote my attention
to this search—considering the vast extent over which this description of formation extended—but which
is well worthy the attention of those who follow gold-digging as a profession.—Ther., 58 ; bar., 28-83.
Friday, sth July. —All ready for a start by half-past 8 o’clock; followed up a creek in a gap of the
Kirchner Range, on a northerly course over quartz ridges with open forest and good-looking country for gold,
the timber—iron-bark, bloodwood, and apple-gum, with patches of stringy-bark. The first nine miles consisted
of easy travelling ground, after which we struck a creek and a gorge, which, after going north one mile, bore
away to the north-west through mica schist hills; the gorge was most difficult travelling owing to the steep
ravines coming into it; at the end of fourteen miles were fortunate to meet with water when we came to camp,
all well tired out. —Ther., 57; bar., 28-75. Camp 0.
Saturday, Qth July. —Before starting, got a prospect in the creek—yield, black sand and garnets—away
by a quarter past 4 o’clock. In one and a-half miles north, struck a large sandy river coming from the south-
east, which I have named the Tate. lam under the impression that in my last report to the Government, I
mentioned this as a Mitchell tributary, which I had struck during a short excursion from Fossilbrook Creek,
but now I am convinced that it is a Lynd water, and joins that river about twenty miles below the Kirchner
Ranges. In four and a-half miles further, struck thchead of a creek, which was followed —ithavinghigh sandstone
ridges, on the left bank, which were covered with small stringy-bark timber. Great fears of not getting water,
but sufficient was procured for the men of the party from a native well in the bed of the creek—the horses
faring as well as they could on some water in a clay pan. Saw the first natives to-day—agin and her infant—
travelled twelve miles over an easy country.—Ther., 01; bar., 28 84, Camp 7.
Sunday, 7ih July. —lntended camping for the day, but the want of water compelled us to move—found
abundance within a quarter of a-mile of our camp, but as the horses were packed we pushed on further for
three


three miles—finding water the whole distance in billjbongs. The stupidity of the gin or of Jerry, caused us
to move camp to-day, instead of spelling; she, of course, knew of the existence of this water, but instead of
showing it, she took Jerry to a native well in the bed of the creek. After coming into camp, the Doctor and
myself proceeded down the creek, where we secured some ducks; and, after this, in company with Mr. Taylor
and Mr. Warner, proceeded to a hill, distant about two miles from camp, from which we had a view to the
north, shewing level country, as also some peaks in the same direction, which I have named Warner’s Peaks.
We could get no view of the Kirchner Range from this elevation. The doctor secured a new plant of the
myrtacem order—the general appearance of the tree, is very handsome, with dense green foliage, affording a
beautiful shade. The leaves, which grow in pairs, arc six to seven inches long, by four wide —a vein runs
round each leaf near tliQ margin, giving it a double appearance—there is also a small flange on either side of
the base of the leaf-stalk. The tree is deciduous with bark like box.—Ther., 52; bar., 28-87. Camp 8.
Monday, Sth July. —Sent Mr. Taylor and 'Mr, Warner to take observations with the view of fixing
Kirchner Range from cur present camp; they did not succeed in seeing it; moved on witli the rest of the
party at half-past 10 o’clock, following the course of the Nonda Creek, so named from having met with this
fruit for some time,'and often mentioned by Leichhardt; also met with “fan palm” and yellow “ grevillea,”
in flower. After six miles of easy travelling over a light sandy soil, on sandstone formation, timbered with
stringy-bark, bloodwood, gum, and nonda tree; we halted for the night. Had some prospects washed in this
creek, but garnets were only found. I omitted to mention yesterday that four other natives were seen by the
Doctor, who were so alarmed at his near vicinity, that they ran off, the gins dropping everything they had in
their flight, and which consisted of trifling necessaries, besides ochre, feathers, &c.—Ther., 56; bar., 28'87.
Camp 9.
Tuesday, 9 th July. —Got ready for a start by a quarter to 8 o’clock; followed the creek for two miles
in a north-westerly direction, when finding it bearing away too much to the westward, I crossed it and
pursued a northerly course through scrubby sandstone country for four miles, then struck the head of a creek
loading us on our track, when shortly we came upon a wide sandy-bedded river of over a quarter of a mile in
width, which it is supposed is mentioned by Kennedy as one of the heads of the Mitchell. However, I deter-
mined to form a permanent camp for a few days to explore its head and its course downwards; near the camp,
the banks in places were eighty feet in height, with red precipitous faces, first pn one side, then on the other.
I have named this stream the “ Walsh,” not because I pretend to be the discoverer of it—that merit is due to
Kennedy, the unfortunate explorer who lost his life at Capo York; but, because I find it on the charts without
a name, and giving it one might facilitate future explorations, as well us filling in the charts on which streams
arc set down without any designation,—and, moreover, L shall do the same with all other streams where not
named previously. The camp was formed on the north bank of the river.—Ther., 45; bar., 28 87. Camp, 10.
Wednesday, 10 th. July. —Started out with the blaekboy to examine the nature of the country on the
intended excursion, course up the river, and also to examine it downwards; could perceive that the steep banks
did not extend far cither up or down the stream ; light soil on the level ground on the top of the banks, which
was also lightly timbered, hut this only proceeded for a short distance, after which it became more scrubby and
thick as it receded from the edges of the banks. Had some pans of river drift washed, which produced nothing
but garnets, innumerable, of but little value. Intend starting to-morrow to examine the heads of this river.—
Ther., 50 ; bar., 29-10.
Thursday, 11 th July. —Started away with Mr. Taylor and the blaekboy, following up the right bank
of the river in a south-easterly direction, and after travelling nine miles came to a small table-topped hill,
composed of sandstone as a cap, with a mica schist for base—took bearings from this point; we then crossed
tbo river, which took an easterly course, and went on further six miles, when we camped on a tributary coming
from the south. Wo appeared now to be on auriferous country, although Mr. Taylor was of a different
opinion. The first six miles was composed of sandstone country, then came mica schist, quartz, and a mixed
formation of various debris. The country appeared to be thickly peopled with natives, notwithstanding its
miserable character ; the first natives seen by us quickly decamped, and my blaekboy in following them got
thrown from his horse, which ended his hunt. On this trip the instruments read, ther., 48 ; bar., 29 - 10.
Friday, 1 ‘ItA July. —Just before camping the previous evening saw another lot of natives, all of whom
started away, with the exception of a boy and girl, whom we did not interfere with, but gave them a few fish-
hooks as signs of amity. After going four miles in yesterday’s direction, came to a hill of mica schist; took
bearings from it, and then went in an easterly direction for nine miles to another hill of mica schist. From
this we saw three hills of ironstone distant about one and a-half miles from our position, but as there was no
time for their examination to-day, I resolved to camp for the night on a small running stream, which I found
to be issuing from limestone.—Ther., 49; bar., 29-01.
Saturday, 13 th July. —Proceeded to examine the ironstone hills seen the previous day, and found them
to bo composed of magnetic iron in vast quantities in the immediate neighborhood of limestone, without any
signs of fossils. This latter is similar in character to a like formation on the Broken River, running into the
Clarke, which is one of the tributaries of the Burdckin. At the head of the limestone there was a limited
strip of good pastoral country, about 200 square miles in extent. We then proceeded north, and again struck
the river, and in doing so passed over very rough and broken country, so much so that we had to dismount
and lead our horses for several miles. As the view to the eastward looked no better, 1 abandoned the idea of
going in that direction. We then re-crossed the river, and after travelling eight miles by moonlight, camped
on a sandy creek with water, the absence of this element at sundown causing us to travel during the night.—
Then, G 3; bar., 28-71.
Sunday, 14 th July —Started from last night’s camp at half-past seven o’clock, and after running down
the creek for tour miles, and finding it going north, it was left, and we made for the camp on the river, which
was reached in other eight miles. Pound everything safe and in order.—Ther., 65; bar., 28-87.
Monday, 15 th July. —Having completed my examination towards the head of the Walsh, I resolved to
break up camp and move forward on our northerly course. Owing to the straying away of some of the horses,
did not leave camp before 10 o’clock; started down the right bank of the river, the first three miles being over
poor stringy-bark country; wo then struck a limestone formation similar to that on the Barcoo and Upper
Flinders, and after going further two miles, I resolved to camp, as the formation gave every indication of
fossils of which I wished to make a collection ; these we found in great numbers on the ridges and in the river-
bed, whose banks, in places, were sixty feet in height, consisting of light soil resting on shale, in which latter
limestone boulders were embedded as well as laying about the bed of the stream; made a large collection;


found the vertebrae and bones of an animal which I secured; the ancient remains were so numerous that a
stone could scarcely be broken without showing the various forms of extinct life.—Ther., 64; Bar., 29-78.
Camp, 11.
Tuesday, IGt/t July. —Made a further search for fossils for half-a-day, but finding nothing new; packed
up some of those secured, and buried the remains under our camp fire; place, due east, fifteen yards from
marked tree 11; started oif at 12 o’clock, and followed down the river for nine miles, and camped at a long water-
hole. All signs of the limestone formation had here disappeared, but the soil was of fine quality, and I
believe was better in the back country. Saw very complete and perfect native huts this day; they wore raised
from two to three feet from the ground on forks, which were traversed by light sleepers, on which rested bark,
and the whole was well covered over with the same material; it was evident that they were intended as pro-
tection against mosquitos, as the remains of fires were to be seen at both ends of the structures; this form of
tent is adopted by the Gulf natives with this view.—Thor., 64; bar., 29-22. Camp, 12.
Wednesday, 11 th July, —ln the morning the horses wore away, and whilst being hunted for, I went
back to examine the country, and at two miles came on the creek crossed on the 13th ; then in three miles
came on good cattle country, which extended to the eastward, and appeared to be equally good, in fact, improv-
ing. Reached the camp at midday; the horses had been found and the packing completed, so that at 10 o’clock
we were off again. Some natives who had been seen the previous night, were camped less than a mile below
us. In three miles came to the creek of the 13th instant, which I have named Elizabeth Creek, after my
youngest child; limestone showed itself here again in patches; we then passed a long waterhole, in its neigh-
borhood were many bustards, and after proceeding three miles, camped at the mouth of a creek running into
the river.—Ther., 64; bar., 29-32. Camp 13.
Thursday, 18</i July. —Started off at 8 o’clock, and in two miles came to a creek which I have named
Louisa Creek; here we saw a large extent of fine pastoral country, in fact, the best I have seen in Northern
Queensland; the formation was of limestone with deep rich soil, lightly timbered with mimosa and bauhinia,
and carrying many of the grasses of the Barcoo; the whole country had been burnt in patches. _ After
travelling eight miles, came to a creek whicli altered this character of the country to an open forest with rich
alluvial soil, and after continuing a north-west course for three miles further, struck a fine running river coming
from the north, about three hundred yards in width. From a mile near Louisa Creek, which I take to be a
portion of Kennedy’s Pebbly Range, I saw the Walsh bearing away to the westward; the course of this river,
from the time it had beeen first struck, had been north 30° west. —Ther., 57; bar., 29-18. Camp 14.
Friday, 19th July. —Finding that the limestone formation again showed itself here, determined to
camp for another fossil searching, intending next day to make a trip down the river to fix its point of junction
with the Walsh, and ascertain for a certainty that it is one of the tributaries of the Lynd. The search for
fossils was so successful that two or three varieties of forms were procured—not seen at the fossil camp—all of
which have been carefully secured. In the bed of the river pieces of agate were found, showing that more
must exist further north, and I look forward with great hopes to interesting discoveries in that direction ; the
river abounds in fish, and the signs of animal life are more numerous than we have seen up to this time. The
natives appear to be in great numbers on this river, judging from their camps, but none have been seen.—
Ther., 56 ; bar., 29-22.
Saturday, 29th July. — Formed a temporary camp, to enable me to proceed down the river and fix its
point of junction, by observation, with the Walsh, and after with the Lynd. With this view, took Mr.
Warner and the blackboy with me; when, at 9 o’clock, we proceeded down the stream, and in eight miles
came upon the Walsh, and fixed its junction with the stream we were on, in lat. 16° 24' 39"; travelled twelve
miles further down, and camped for the night on the river. Readings of instruments at fixed camp, ther. 57;
bar., 29-26.
Sunday,2lst July. —This morning continued our journey down the river, and at the termination of
nineteen miles cut the Lynd, which is here narrow as compared with what had been seen of it before, its
width not exceeding two hundred yards; arrived at the junction too late this day to fix the point of latitude
by mid-day observation. According to Leichhardt’s description, we found the junction to agree exactly with
his account, which made it appear that I had fixed my temporary camp on the Mitchell, which, according to
the chart, should have been further to the north. I had an idea that this river was the Mitchell, and this was
confirmed on following it down—notwithstanding the position assigned to it on the chart—so that this discovery
did not surprise me in the least; the chart on many points has been found to be totally erroneous. The
country between the junction of the Mitchell and the Walsh and the Lynd is composed of conglomerate and
sand coming on to the river, carrying stringy-bark and other timber common to this formation; at the junction
of the two former rivers two trees were marked. Tho Mitchell is one of the finest rivers in Queensland for
water, the stream runs strong, with reaches from one mile and even more in length; it abounds in fish, and
the natives are numerous (as has already been stated), while their food, among other things, consists in great
numbers of mussels, in which the river abounds. The moment the Mitchell joins the Lynd, it enters on the
wretched description of country of the latter, which at the junction bears the same character as seen by us
further up. Saw no signs of Leichhardt’s camp. The marked trees at the junction alluded to above bear the
initial H and broad-arrow. Ther., 48 ; bar., 29-23.
Monday, 22nd July. —At midday fixed the point of junction of Mitchell and Lynd rivers, in
lat. 16-23; owing to the loss of the compass ease by Mr. Warner—which had been lent to me by Mr. Taylor
—we did not get away till late in the afternoon. After starting we crossed the river and proceeded for two
miles in a N.E. direction, to avoid gullies coming into it; then twelve miles E., and met with a shallow
lagoon, on which we camped for the night. The country passed over was well grassed, and free from floods—
tho good country appeared to extend a long way to the north; we were now ascending tho Mitchell, on its
north side, on our return to the camp formed on it. The country was very lightly timbered with the mimosa,
and belts of bloodwood and stunted gums.—Ther., 37 ; bar., 29-22.
Tuesday, 23 rd July. — Started at eight o’clock, and found the first six miles to he the same description
of country as met with yesterday, which is of the finest for pastoral purposes. We then crossed a creek and
came upon a different formation of country, consisting of low standstone ridges and conglomerate with stringy-
bark on the latter; and in twenty-one miles further reached the camp, where all was well. The cold during
the last two nights was intense, as shewn by tho thermometer. During the morning’s travel met with a camp
of natives, but they were all women and children.—Ther., 34 ; bar., 29-24,
Wednesday,


Wednesday, 24 th July. —l resolved to move on this day, which was done by ten o’clock. After going
one mile had a splendid view of the river from one of its precipitous banks—it lay at our feet enclosed on
both sides with dense foliage of various forms and colors—giving the scene a most beautiful appearance. Tra-
velled ten miles through a very good country ; at this point found the river running north, which, when we
first struck it, was taking a south course. 1 here resolved to camp for the night, a bar of mica schist ran right
across the river, which, during floods must form a mighty waterfall. Dr. Tate unwell from a slight attack of
fever; one of the horses also ill, which was attributed to poison plant; had a most successful afternoon of
fishing, which supplemented our breakfast very agreeably.—Ther., 37 ; bar., 29‘24. Camp 15.
Thursday, 25th July. — Started off by half-past 8 o’clock, still following the Mitchell upwards; had a
severe day of it, owing to the broken nature of the country along the river, and had to cut a passage on one
occasion through scrub lining the bed of the river, the brush being too close to allow the horses to pass. At
the termination of eight miles formed camp for the night, with the intention of proceeding next day with a
part of my party to explore the river higher up, as it was now going directly away from my course. Signs of
natives very numerous, but none were seen. The river still maintained its character for water and its beautiful
appearance; agates were picked up in its bed. Here, also, were signs of coal and slate, both indicating the
existence of these somewhere on this stream. Here, also, were seen numerous tracks of crocodiles, and fish in
abundance.—Ther., 44; bar., 29-25. Camp, 10
Friday, 26 th July. —Mr. Taylor went out this morning to take bearings, in some of which he suc-
ceeded; but one point which ho wished to reach ho was not able to get at, owing to the want of a passage
across the river. Preparing and shoeing horses for the next day, as I found that many of the animals had
dropt their shoes and were beginning to show signs of tenderness; moreover, rough country was anticipated,
and it became necessary to prepare for it. Gave instructions that the camp Was never to be left without two
persons being in it, in ease of a surprise from the natives, who are never to be trusted. It has been my inten-
tion from the first never to allow any interference with them, nor allow them to interfere with my movements.
—Ther.. 47; bar., 29-21.
Saturday, 27th July. —In company with Mr. Taylor and Dr. Tate, proceeded to the exploration of the
Mitchell, on its upwards course; went thirteen miles this day up the left bank; the first eight miles was
basalt country, of good quality. Here we found the source of the agates, but all of inferior quality; then
two miles of limestone country, with good grass (the last for many miles) ; then over three miles of a slate
formation, with bad feed for our horses. On our way up we passed and examined a range which Mr. Taylor said
was of carboniferous formation, and to which I gave the name, “ Taylor’s Carboniferous Range.” Camped at
the termination of the last three miles.-—Ther., 60; bar. 29 - 21.
Sunday, 28 th July. —Resumed our exploration of the Mitchell. The whole of this day was over a
horrible slate country of the roughest description, the horses stumbling about in every direction. Had to
descend into the bed of the river, and force a passage through a difficult gorge owing to the ranges coming
close on to the river, and over which it was impossible to travel. The range on the west side I named “ Warner’s
Range” : it is conspicuous for several steep and precipitous peaks, and is of slate formation. These were the
peaks seen on the 7th in st., and then named “ Warner’s Peaks.” Travelled fifteen miles, which was severe
on the horses in such a country; and again camped on the river.—Ther., 51 ; bar., 29-21.
Monday, 29 th July. —At 7 o’clock ready to start, when we took a south-east course to try to avoid
the rough country, and to reach what we supposed to be a more level one, and, after going ten miles, had to
return to the river and camp, as we found it impossible to travel over the slates, which were as sharp as knives,
and varied from three inches to three feet in height. The horses winced considerably over this country: they
should have leather put on when being shod, in order to protect the frog from these cutting slates. We then
tried to cross the river, but found it an impossibility owing to the numerous slate.bars crossing it, over which
the horses could get no footing, and therefore could not proceed. From this point of the river saw a hill in
the distance, which I resolved to reach, somehow, next day, as nothing was to be seen from our present
position. The river here contained more water than lower down, being from two feet to three feet in depth
and fifty yards in width.—Ther., 57 ; bar., 29'22.
Tuesday,BOth July. —ln company with Dr. Tate, started off dn foot, at daylight, by crossing the river,
which we had to wade, and, after walking seven miles, reached the hill observed yesterday, passing over a slate
country exceeding in roughness anything before experienced. From this hill, at the distance of about twenty
miles south-east, a very conspicuous mountain came into view which I have named Mount Lilley, and from
it we could also trace the river coming from the south-east for a distance of thirty miles, and, apparently,
from the Bellenden-Ker ranges and others in its vicinity. Seeing that the river went so far south and too far
out of my course, I was not able to explore its sources, which I much regretted, as I believe them well worthy
of further examination, and, also, that the slates would end in a more favorable feature in all respects, as they
were getting lower and quartz was showing itself in greater quantities. Got back to camp after fourteen
miles of the severest walk I ever had, and immediately started on our return, when in ten miles reached
yesterday’s camp. Mr. Taylor was unwell, and could not accompany us in the morning.—Ther., 59; bar.,
29-09.
Wednesday, 31si Jidy. —Started on our return for the permanent camp, and after travelling twenty-
eight miles reached it and found everything safe. The horses were very much fatigued ; some had lost their
shoes over the rough slates, which tore them off in passing over them; the camp was reached long after sun-
down, when all were glad to be together once more. The latitude of this camp was fixed 16° 16' 69".—Ther.,
48; bar., 29-13. Camp 16.
Thursday, Isf August. —During my absence the river had been searched for a crossing, which
fortunately was found at hand with few obstacles, and these being removed, we crossed and travelled due
north eight miles, passing through mica schist country, which was prospected for gold, but without any good
results, as only garnets and black sand were found in the panning off; these were secured. The country was
well watered, having crossed several running creeks during the day, but otherwise of a poor quality. A
remarkable lofty hill in view, which I intend ascending the next day; camped on a creek, having the mount
due north of us distant three miles.—Ther., 44 ; bar., 29 23. Camp 17.
Friday, 2nd August. —Got away from camp by nine o’clock; proceeded ahead with Mr. Warner, with
the intention of ascending the mount, which I have named Mount Mulgrave. This mount presents a grand
and magnificent appearance, rising as it does abruptly out of a level country to the height of thirteen or
fourteen


fourteen hundred feet above the plain, with precipitous faces to the south and west; it forms the termination
of a range running north and south, bearing the same name. The ascent was most difficult, the sides of the
mount being composed of loose matter, which slid away from beneath the feet, causing us to bring hands and
knees to our assistance. Having accomplished the ascent, wo had an extensive view on all sides, and took
bearings from its summit. Found the descent still more difficult and dangerous than the ascent. After
travelling four miles, passed over some country with favorable appearances for prospecting, and formed camp
with this view. The results, however, were not successful, and have invariably been the same when prospecting
mica schist country. Found it to be the same at Kirchner Range, as well as yesterday, and this last trial
gave the same results with precisely similar stones and gems, these latter being garnets; in fact, the sand is
composed of little else but these latter valueless gems.—Then, 40; ban, 29-18. Camp 18.
Saturday, 3rd August. —Started away from camp by a quarter to eight o’clock, and after passing over
four and a-half miles of similar mica schist country—most severe on the unshod horses, owing to the innu-
merable sharp quartz stones covering the whole country —wo struck the head of a creek, which we followed for
nine and a-half miles on a north course; then left it, and after another one and a-half miles struck another
fine creek with abundance of running water, which I have named Garnet Creek. The country, after the mica
schist formation, was very poor and sandy, timbered with stringy-bark and broad-leaf tea-tree, both useless for
any purpose; the sand in the creek is full of garnets; in fact, they can be picked up in handfuls. Travelled
fifteen miles; horses glad to be relieved of their packs.—Ther., 42 ; bar., 28-9 G. Camp 19.
Sunday, 4th August. —Rested here for the day, intending to-morrow to visit a remarkable mountain
in sight of the camp, bearing N.E., and which I have named Mount Daintree. This camp was fixed in
lat. 15° 51' 59".—Ther., 4G; bar., 29-11.
Monday, sth August, —Started off in the morning, accompanied by Mr. Taylor, to examine and take
bearings from the mount, in sight of the camp ; found it to be three miles distant from it, and composed of
sandstone and conglomerate resting on quartzite—from its summit could sec another large water-course to the
north, distant about three miles, which I took to be Kennedy’s J)0 yards wide creek—resolved to move to it in
the afternoon. Packed up on return to camp, and started at once, and arrived at the above river, which I
have named the Palmer, after the Chief Secretary of Queensland; it is a fine wide river bed, with long and
deep waterholes, with a small connecting stream from each, the banks open, also the country on either side,
which is timbered with ironbark, and other trees generally found on a light sandy soil.—Ther., 50;
bar., 29-12. Camp 20.
Tuesday, 6th August. —Employed shoeing horses in preparation for the north and sea-coast. Some
short time before had offered a reward of half a pound of tobacco to any person who would find gold, knowing
that this desirable article would be an incentive to some to whom it is almost a necessary; early in the day
Mr. Warner returned from a prospecting walk, and enquired if the offer was still in force, and being informed
that such was the case claimed the “ weed,” at the same time showing gold in the dish. I started off at once
and examined the locality, and found the trials to confirm the fact; three members of the party prospecting
all the afternoon, and found traces in all the little ravines running into Warner’s Gully; this determined mo
to devote some days in a further search, as it was the opinion of Mr. Taylor that the gold had come down the
river, it having been separated from the conglomerate drifts visible on all sides, and had settled into the
different water courses—the bed rock in all cases so far was granite. This being the first indication of the
existence of gold we have met with, the excitement was consequently high in camp, and prospecting was the
order of the day ; shall follow the traces so long as they can be met with, and satisfy myself of their extent
and value.—Ther., 50; bar., 29-12.
Wednesday, Ith August. —Left two members of the party prospecting for further traces, and I pro-
ceeded down the river, accompanied by Dr, Tate, to ascertain how far this gold-bearing country extended, while
Mr. Taylor proceeded up the river with the same view. We found the country had altered in character only
a short distance from the camp, and was unfavorable in appearance, so retraced our steps by keeping back
from the river where no good indications showed themselves. Mr. Taylor’s report was not much bettor.
Traces of gold found in a distinct ravine, not running into Warner’s Gully ; the morning search proved that
the traces did not reach far back from the river, in fact no gold was found far up in the ravines running into
the above gully. I shall follow up the river and ascertain whether these traces exist in any other formation
but the one in which they have been met with. This camp has been fixed in lat. 15° 49' 14".—Ther., 53 ;
bar., 29-14.
Thursday, 3th August. —lnstructed one of the members of the party to proceed down the river and
examine a range, distant between seven and eight miles, whilst I proceeded, in company with Mr. Taylor, to
look at the country up the river. The downwards report was unfavorable, the country becoming sandy,
bearing no traces of being gold-bearing, and the hills of mica-schist formation. Confirmed this view, as all
search for gold in this description of formation has been so far unfavorable. Up the river, Mr. Taylor and
myself found the traces, about five miles from our present camp (numbered 20), so I determined to move up
to-morrow and prosecute a further search in various localities in this neighborhood. Fish in great abundance
in this river.—Ther., 58; bar., 29-14.
Friday, 9 th August. —Got all packed and started away by 9 o’clock, proceeding up the river in the
direction of yesterday’s discoveries by Mr. Taylor and myself; arrived in camp by 1 o’clock and proceeded to
prospect, whilst Mr. Taylor went up the river to examine the country. The prospecting led to the confirma-
tion of the previous finds, while Mr. Taylor’s report induced mo to proceed still further up the river and
endeavor to trace this gold into another formation, and more favorable to its being found in payable quantities.
We have now found the existence of gold on both sides of the river, and I am in great hopes of finding some-
thing better than hitherto still further on.—Ther., C 8; bar., 29 01.
Saturday, 10 th August. —Owing to the imprudence of one of the party, the start was a late one.
Coming in the evening before, a young horse was suffered to be cast adrift without being put with mob; the
consequence was that, not finding its mates, it rambled off to the former camp. Started off at 10 o’clock,
leaving two members of the party and the blackboy to come on when the horse was found. After going five
miles, again struck the river and camped; those left behind came up later, so all were together again once
more. ' The blackboy, on his way to camp 20 for tile stray horse, came across some pretty fresh cattle dung,
which was brought to mo, and, judging from its appearance, it is evident that there are some cattle hereabouts;
tho blackboy says three, according to the tracks. I intend to hunt them up with tho view of procuring more
beef


beef if possible, as, though my supply, with care and economy, may see the party through, more would be
desirable. The country travelled over this day carried the indications of other camps; tried some prospects in
a creek on the way up, but without favorable results, which, however, proves nothing; the river banks open,
and the bed is more shallow. The sandstone ridges appear to be ending here, and bear a north-easterly
direction from our camp. I believe I am now to the eastward of Kennedy’s outward track —Ther., 66;
bar., 29-06.
Sunday, 11 th August. —Did a little prospecting with Mr. Warner, and found the traces of gold on
several of the river bars. We made this a day of rest for both men and horses; for the latter, rest is almost
imperative on a long journey, and they have one before them. The men wash, and camp, and fish.—Ther., 64;
bar., 29-06
Monday, Vlth August. —Got everything ready packed, and started off by 9 o’clock, and reached the
intended camping ground by 1 o’clock; prospected a gully on the road, and found traces of gold. After a slight
refreshment proceeded to prospect; results were more flattering than hitherto, in fact I was now in hopes of
being on the right track for discovering a gold field. In the evening, I determined to make this a permanent
camp for a few days, in order that I might bo able, with a light party, to proceed still further up the river,
and continue ray search. I greatly expected to meet with very rough country, over which I did not think I
could drive my packhorses, in fact, the same description of country which drove me back on the Mitchell,
whereas, with two or three horses, I could pick my way quickly, and prospect as I went along.—Ther., 52;
bar. 29-10.
Tuesday, 13 th August. —The loss of two horses, by straying, and shoeing my own horse for the trip,
detained mo till nearly 12 o’clock, when, taking Mr. Warner and the blackboy with me, I proceeded up the
river, prospecting all likely looking places on my way, which was principally in the bed of the river, to avoid
very broken country on either side. The journey was a severe one for the hbrses, owing to the rough nature
of the travelling, but I succeeded in getting over twelve miles, and camped. Still carried the traces of gold
along with me, which were more or less favorable, yet sufficient to encourage me to carry out my intention.
The blackboy shot two ducks, and Mr. Warner succeeded in catching some fish, which came in seasonably.—
Ther., 49; bar,, 29.10.
Wednesday, \Ath August. —First thing in the morning prospected at the camp, and got gold, then
started off at 7 o’clock, pursuing the same track, but cutting off heads of the river wherever practicable;
found gold in two ravines on either side of the river as well as in the bed ; at midday found the packhorse had
wrenched off a shoe owing to the rough country, so I formed camp after travelling seventeen miles. The river
hero was one hundred yards wide, and in other places a quarter of a mile, with little drift, showing that the
floods must sweep all before them, the marks of which were high in tree tops and along the ridges on either
side. The gold on the Palmer was found in a slate formation, excepting where it was first met with, and there
it was in granite. Ther. 53 ; bar. 29-11.
Thursday, 15 th August. —As the packhorse was now suffering from the effects of the dropt shoo, and
the others were flinching from the severe nature of the slate country in which we found ourselves, I left the
blackboy in camp with two horses and continued up the river with Mr. Warner prospecting, and carrying gold
along our track; found the country now getting very rough, and a view from a high hill gave no better hopes
of a change for a long distance, so we returned to camp; on our way back saw the tracks of natives made
since we had passed up, so I felt anxious for my boy; it appears that he had heard them before our return, but
was quite unconcerned in the matter. We had everything packed and ready to start when they made their
appearance and commenced firing the grass on all sides, but ran off as soon as they saw the blackboy, who was
now in a groat state of excitement; but the most ridiculous part of the affair was that they were running in
opposite directions—Jerry for his firelock, the natives for their safety, the latter uttering sounds of fear;
however, nothing came of it, so we started on our return track, and, after travelling eight miles, came to camp
on a large sandy creek which we had already prospected. We had to lead our horses over a great deal of this
country, its rough nature making it almost impossible for them to travel.. No one must venture here with
unshod horses, and, moreover, the horses should have leather under the shoe to protect the frog from the sharp
slates, as already recommended by me when on the Mitchell. Ther ,52 ; bar., 2912.
Friday, 16//t August. —Again prospected at the camp and found traces of gold; got away by 7 o’clock
on our return to the permanent camp; here bad news awaited me, which, added to my disappointment at not
having been more successful on the up river trip, considerably annoyed me. The bad news was nothing less
than the loss of all my fresh meat, in the shape of seven sheep, which were allowed to stray so far that they
were not recovered the day they were lost; this was now a very serious matter to me, considering what meat I
had in store—one that necessitated either my return for more, or risking my onward march with all its risks
and anxieties with that which I had left, and, I confess, I could not decide at once what course to adopt, as I
had persons on the party to whom privations were distressing, and who would not look to what might befall
us, but who were constantly complaining because the food was not in such quantities as they could have wished,
though there was quite sufficient to keep men in health and strength to meet and overcome the difficulties of
exploration—and who could say what was in store for us? Added to this, for the second time Mr. Taylor has
been the cause of ahorse straying away from the same cause as before, namely, setting one horse adrift
where it could not see its mates; warnings appear to have little effect on him ; I was compelled, on a former-
occasion, to speak sharply with respect to fire, when, by the merest accident, my camp was saved through one
of my party remaining in it. During my absence for a few days the same want of thought has caused him to
lose his gaiters, partially burn a pistol-case, and warm his compass (now the only prismatic left), simply owing
to his lighting a fire and not watching it. The horse is not yet recovered, and I shall hold him responsible for
its loss. I cannot decide on my movements until to-morrow—the matters require grave consideration. Ther.,
68; bar., 29-11.
Saturday, \lth August. —l omitted to mention yesterday, that on my way to the camp I fell in with
the Doctor, who was one of the party sent to look for the lost sheep; from him 1 received the first intimation
of the great loss. lat once sent off my blackboy, Jerry, in company with him, to examine some tracks found
that morning, with instructions to follow them up and learn the direction the sheep had taken. The boy did
not return till very late, and then gave such a report that I determined upon making an effort to recover them,
and with this view sent off Stewart with Jerry, instructing them to camp out if the sheep were not overtaken,
this day. I have considered the position in which lam placed by the loss of these sheep, and find that, by
returning


returning for more meat, I must lose one month at least, which would throw me into wet weather on the coast;
or that, if I proceeded with what I have, it will make each man’s allowance 5 lbs. of meat per week—and how
many can do this is the question. It is true that 1 have abundance of ammunition for procuring animals and
birds which would help us out, but I do not like to depend upon such contingencies. However, taking all
into consideration, I have resolved to push on; and this I have communicated to the members of my party,
and they can choose whether.they will return or proceed with me. I believe men can do their work and be
healthy on what we shall have as our daily allowance of food; upon which my determination has been taken,
and Igo on. Continued prospecting the bars of the river, but with no better results than heretofore; so I
closed my further search for gold. I regretted very much not being able to trace it in any gullies off the river,
but still am of opinion that the search is worthy of being followed up. No traces of the lost horse—in fact,
I shall be lucky if I see him again. The Doctor was very successful in a haul of fish, which were very accept-
able.—Ther., 02; bar., 29-06,
Sunday, 18 th August. —Stewart and Jerry did not return last night, so that there is just a hope that
they may have been successful in overtaking the sheep; arranging packs and loads for our return to camp 20,
from whence to pursue our northern journey. The up-river camps have not been marked and numbered, as I
consider them out of my direct line of route. —Ther., 54; bar., 29-10.
Monday, 19 th August. —Stewart and Jerry returned last night, and I was overjoyed at the sight of
them and the lost sheep, which had been recovered some fifteen miles from the camp, making straight for
Firth’s station, which no doubt they would have reached if not disturbed by blacks or wild dogs; an old gin
and two children were spoken, and she indicated the direction the sheep had taken; she was very much alarmed
at the sight of the whiteman and her sable brother; the lost horse not recovered; got all packed and started
by 10 o'clock for No. 20 camp down the river, which we reached in fifteen miles; the natives had been at this
camp since we were last at it, and had fired all the grass in its vicinity.—Ther., 56; bar., 29 08.
Tuesday, 20 th August. —After breakfast started down the river with Jerry the blackboy in search of
the lost horse; the loss of one horse is a considerable matter, when that horse carries a pack, as others must
share its burden and thus suffer an extra weight of loading; could find no traces of the animal; had it been
there the blackboy would have detected its tracks at once, as he is an invaluable and certain tracker; the
manner in which he followed the lost sheep was something marvellous—whether over stones or beateu-dowu
grass his sight was seldom at fault. After spending half a day fruitlessly in searching for the horse, returned
to camp and commenced shoeing others for to-morrow’s start. In the morning visited a native camp about one
mile from my own; found them all asleep, but when they saw my party their alarm was very great; the men
all cleared off at once leaving the women and children, but their fright was such that nothing could be got out
of them but continuous howling. My object was to learn something of the cattle tracks previously seen, but
all my efforts were ineffectual owing to their fear of the whitemen, so I retired after giving them some fish-
hooks.—Ther., 56; bar., 2915.
Wednesday, 21st August. —l determined upon making another effort to recover the lost horse, so I
told off Mr. Warner and Jerry for this service, with instructions to visit our two up-river camps, in case the
horse might have visited them in search of his mates; also to visit a lagoon on our track, and after beating
round, they were to overtake the party the following day. All was ready for a start by half-past 8 o’clock,
when we were off at a course N. 30° west over strong and sandy ridges, with quartz reefs peeping out in all
directions; saw more of these this day than on any previous occasion. Alter following this course for
fourteen miles, altered the course to N.W., and struck a creek, which shewed we were on another watershed
than the Palmer, and, in one mile, made a camping ground on the right bank of this creek, which was here
flowing north. I have resolved to mark this camp “ 21” for the reasons stated on the 18th instant. —Ther., 46;
bar., 29-12. Camp 21.
Thursday, 22 nd August. —Everything was ready for a start by half-past 8 o’clock, at which hour we
moved off. The course was again brought to N. 30° W., and a range which we had in view on our left hand
all the way from the Palmer, appeared to end at the creek on which we were camped last night. We then
travelled over a sandy flat country, and crossed a creek evidently making for our last camp creek. Wo then
got into an open forest country of some miles in extent, with the best timber which 1 have seen in North
Queensland, consisting of stringy-bark, bloodwood, and many other forest trees. The country was rising the
whole distance, and consisted of sand on the surface—the grass was very dry; and after four miles of this
forest travelling we struck a creek, when the country altered its appearance and timber, tea-tree appearing
now, and in one mile further, made another creek with plenty of water, on which we camped. Mr. Warner
and Jerry overtook us shortly after we bad formed camp, but, I regret to say, without the horse; they had
visited all the three up-river camps, but without success—in fact, no clue was seen as to where the horse had
gone. They, however, reported having seen the cattle tracks quite fresh, and they belonged to one beast,
which, they believed, remained on the river. Great quantities of nondas seen to-day; when quite ripe, their
fruit is not to be despised. Ther., 43 ; bar., 29-08, Camp 22. In the early part of the day, accompanied
by Mr. Taylor, I proceeded to a conglomerate and sandstone table land to the N.E. of our course, and which
we had so far kept on our right all the way from the Palmer. From it, we had an extensive view to the
westward over a low flat country; while to the N. and S.—the points most desired to be observed by us—we
could see nothing, owing to the timber and the flat nature cf the country on which we were standing. A view
to the north would have given us an idea of the country along our intended route, and a view to the south
would have enabled us to take the bearings of already known points.
Friday, 23rd August. —Started off at a-quartor past eight o’clock, keeping the same course, N., 30°
W., and rising ground through heavily timbered country, until we had reached the ascent and found the fall
to the eastward; the country was sand resting on conglomerate. I believe 1 was now on the Coast Range,
which is here low; the timber was of the finest description, consisting of stringy-bark, bloodwood, and large
nonda trees. After keeping the top of the range for about seven miles, it began to descend to the west, and
after two miles more we reached some small waterholes in a sandy flat, which came in luckily, as it was getting
late and the horses had had a severe day of it over the sandy country; bad feed for the animals. The Doctor
collected many supposed new varieties of plants on the top of the range.—Ther., 64; bar,, 29-14. Gamp, 23.
Saturday, 2ith August. —All ready for a start by 8 o’clock, when the same course, N. 30° \V., was
taken, over sandy ridges showing outcrops of quartz; after travelling a short distance, went west and struck
the waters we were camped on last night, which were found to be going north; so the course was again altered
to


to N. 30° W. ; passed over a great deal of burnt country, all showing signs of |being impassable during the
rainy season, which is made evident by the ever present tea-tree. After travelling fifteen and a-half miles,
camped on the creek which we were following down.—Ther., 58 ; bar ,29 20. Camp 24.
Sunday, 2bth August . —Being Sunday, I camped so as to take observations of the sun, and allow the
members of the party to perform many necessary duties not to be done on days of travelling; and, also, with
the view of giving the horses a day’s spell. This has proved a very bad camp for the animals, owing to the
poor quality of the grass and limited quantity of water in its vicinity. Proceeded with Mr. Taylor to a high table-
land, about three miles to the eastward of the camp, which I have named Jessie’s Tableland, from whence wo took
bearings of the surrounding country; to the eastward a long range was in view, running north and south,
distant about twelve miles; to the westward the country appears low and uninviting, while that along our line
of route did not present any apparent difficulties; sol count upon easy travelling after our start from the
present camp. Observation made this camp in lat. 15° 4' 14".—Ther., 64; bar., 29 - 50.
, Monday, 26th August. —The horses were late in coming up, having rambled away in search of better
grass than the neighborhood of the camp afforded, owing to which, it was a quarter to nine o’clock before wo
got'away. It was apparent now that the party was on eastern waters —either one of the northern tributaries
of the Kennedy, or some other river running into Princess Charlotte’s Bay, to the north of it. I, however,
wished to keep on the western slope, and believed that I could get on that fall without altering my course of
N. 30° W., which I continued for the day’s journey. We camped on a fine large creek running south-east,
with abundance of fine grass and water for the horses. During the day, crossed several running creeks going
in a north and north-easterly direction. Travelled fourteen miles.—Ther., 58 ; bar., 29 49. Camp 25.
Tuesday, 27 th August. —Got away by half-past seven o’clock—the good grass and water preventing the
horses from straying away far, and after travelling over seven miles of broken and stony country, we recrossed
the main range, which was of gneiss formation. We then had good travelling for five miles over poor sandy
country, timbered with the broad leaf tea-tree and banksia, after which we came upon a large creek running
south-west, and near its junction with a river coming from the north, which I have named the Coleman. I
take these to be Mitchell waters. After camping, proceeded with Mr. Taylor to a high hill in the neighbor-
hood of the camp, from whence took the bearings of another hill on our line of march. The first hill was of
mica schist formation, in which garnets were largely imbedded; numerous quartz reefs were also seen. We
weic camped at the junction of the Coleman with the creek, and while the creek was abundantly supplied
with water, the river was the reverse, as it only had small waterholes at long distances. The grass was all
burnt, but there was good feed for the horses round about. Jerry procured a large quantity of wild honey.—
Ther., 71; bar., 29.39. Camp 26.
Wednesday, 28 th August. —l was determined to assure myself of the course of the Coleman, so I
camped here for the day. After breakfast, I proceeded in company with Mr. Taylor, and followed the river
for seven miles, which I found was bearing away to the south-west, thus confirming my opinion as to its being
a Mitchell water. From a hill here, we saw the river for fifteen miles still continuing the same course, and it
appeared to bo doing so through similar low and flat country as the Mitchell, and the other streams crossed by
us. I therefore did not think it necessary to follow it any further. During my absence from the camp, two
gins quietly walked past on the opposite side of the creek, looking at the party in camp. They then put down
their household goods and took a better look, but on some of the party approaching them, they as quietly and
unconcernedly took them up and walked away. Shortly after, two men walked past the camp, but took no
notice of our men; they showed no signs of fear. I think they are numerous hereabouts, but do not show
themselves. I have made it a rule not to molest them in any way. This camp has been placed in lat. 14° 45'
59'.—Ther., 74; bar., 29 - 20.
Thursday, 29 th August. —Got away by eight o’clock, and followed the course of the Coleman upwards
for the whole day, for seventeen miles, through as wretched a country as one could wish for'—sandy ridges and
miserable timber. The Coleman itself is prettily fringed with various trees, which give it a pleasing appear-
ance, but outside of this all is uninviting. Surprised a-native and his boy, but they were very wild, and ran
away. The man levelled a spear at one of my dogs, but our shouting checked his evil intentions. Camped at
a very small hole of bad water, and hobbled all the horses for the night, as the grass was very bad, and they
had not had their fill of water. I had to adopt the precaution of hobbling to ensure an early start, but
usually I give them every chance.—Ther., 71; bar., 29 21. Camp 27.
Friday, 30 th August. —Owing to the precautions of last evening, as well as watching the horses, they
were procured early, and the party started by half-past seven o’clock. After proceeding a few miles, crossed
the Coleman, as I found this river now leaving my course by its coming from the north-east; in eight miles,
crossed a low range, and struck a creek, when I found its waters running to the north, and after proceeding a
short distance, the blackboy’s unerring sight made out some cattle tracks, but very old. However, the party
had not proceeded far when other signs presented themselves, and unmistakcably fresh, the dung not being
many days old. This was the second sign of stray cattle—first on the Palmer, and now here, —and they must
be some of those escaped from Jardine’s party on their way to Cape York. We followed the creek for six
miles, and after travelling fourteen from our camp of this morning without any change in the appearance of
the country, I found a little water in a small hole close to the creek, which so far had been dry; it was fast
taking the dimensions of a considerable outlet for the drainage in these parts, which I think will form the
Kendall of Jardine. We camped on burnt country, which promised considerable trouble with the horses. In
a small creek almost at our camp was found an abundance of water, but not till after the horses had been
washed and watered. In the afternoon three natives were passing our camp very leisurely and fearlessly.
They were hailed and brought in. In appearance they did not show the same signs of ugliness as most
Australians. The nose was not flat, as in the generality of natives; the forehead was good, but otherwise I
think they were pure Australians, without any admixture from other races. They were smeared with mud,
even on the head—perhaps, as a, safeguard against flics. One had a large quantity of wild honey, but this was
all the food in their possession. After giving them some fish-hooks they left, intimating that they had a long
way to go —no doubt, to join their families.—Ther. 69 ; bar. 29 05. Camp 28.
Saturday, 31si August. —The sight of the fresh cattle tracks made me anxious to procure one of the
beasts, so I determined to devote a day in a search for them. I then proceeded with my blackboy to their beat,
but the search was ineffectual; they had continued in the neighborhood of their tracks until the water had
failed them, and had then gone on to what I take to bo the Kendall, this being the stream on which I believe
they


they were lost. Mr. Taylor proceeded to the mountain. Mount Newberry, for which I had been steering, and
which is about two miles from the camp, and thence saw that the creek we were on was going westward, as
was also the case with many others on our line of march, which gives some proof to my assumption that it is
the Kendall, judging from its position on the chart, and ours at our present camp. Not having been successful
in my search after the cattle, and having spelled this day, I shall proceed to-morrow on roy course, which is
fast drawing to its goal, namely, the fourteenth parallel of latitude, when I shall make direct for the sea-coast
at the head of Princess Charlotte's Bay. The hill ascended by Mr, Taylor I have named Mount Newberry,
after a friend of his in Melbourne.—Thor., 73; bar., 29 09.
Sunday, Isi September. —The party having rested yesterday during my search for the cattle, thus
giving rest to the other horses, I determined to push on and make a few miles towards the limit of my northern
course. Passed over sandy ridges for four miles, when we crossed a sandy creek, and in two miles more
crossed another, all going west; we then crossed sandy ground, heavily timbered with stringy-bark and blood-
wood, with poor grass, and after travelling ten miles arrived at a springy flat with abundance of water; it had
banksias and mimosas, and numerous small wild flowers growing oyer it, all of which were collected by Dr.
Tate; we had plenty of wild honey from our friend Jerry. Observation of the sun taken here by Mr.
Warner, who placed the camp in latitude 14° 13' 4".—Ther., 69 ; bar., 29 09. Camp 29.
Monday, 2nd September. —Everything ready by eight o’clock, and started at that hour; first part of the
road very much broken, after which, as we ascended towards the Main Dividing Range, the country was more
level and the travelling easy. After going seven miles we arrived on the summit and could see the eastern
fall at our feet; could not discern the sea owing to a thick haze; the descent was short but rough, over a
granite formation, after which we came on flat ground with long grass, and in five miles camped on what I
believe to be Kennedy’s River, 100 yards wide, emptying itself into the northern end of Princess Charlotte’s
Bay. Before descending from the top of the range we had an extensive view of the country at our feet in a
northerly and easterly direction, that to the north being composed of high ranges, whilst to the east it was
low, evidently skirting the bay alluded to. There was an instant change in the appearance of the country so
soon as we had descended from the Great Dividing Range, but the nature of the soil was still sandy and poor.
We followed the river on which we were camped, and here met with many varieties of plants and trees to which
we were strangers. Dr. Tate says he collected over twenty varieties, many of which were strange in appear-
ance, while others were exceedingly pretty. The camp was formed on an anabranch of the river, which gave
good grass for the horses. Weather very unfavorable for taking sights, being cloudy and windy; but I shall
endeavor to fix the latitude of this camp and follow the river down to the sea, the next great object of interest
to the expedition.—Ther., 67 ; bar., 28 98. Camp 30.
Tuesday, 3rd September. —Proceeded with Mr. Taylor to a hill about one mile from our camp to take
bearings and examine the nature of the country on our intended line of route; did not leave until after twelve
o’clock, as I intended taking the sun. The first part of the journey was over, sandy country heavily timbered
with stringy-bark and bloodwood; we then had some broken country for one mile, which was so bad in places
that we had to dismount and lead our horses; after this we emerged on a flat (fauntry, all recently burnt but
heavily timbered, and then over two and a-half miles of open forest country to camp, having made ten and
a-half miles during the afternoon. We camped on a reedy lagoon running into the river, which I have named
the Stewart, after one of the members of my party. The hill ascended this morning by Mr. Taylor and myself
was composed of hornblende schist, and mica schist, and gneiss; the mountains to the north were said by Mr.
Taylor to be of the same description ; this formation of country has been followed by us for a considerable
distance.—Lat., 14° 2' 34". Ther., 69; bar., 29-60. Camp 31.
Wednesday, 4ih September. —Owing to two of the horses having strayed we did not start from camp
before nine o’clock; in three miles we passed a lagoon similar to the one we wore camped on last night, in three
miles more crossed the river, and very fortunate in doing so, as the banks were becoming closely timbered,
and further on might have caused me trouble and labor. The country passed over maybe classed as second
quality pastoral country; the river contained abundance of water. In six miles of a sandy flat tea-tree country,
I found that I was approaching the vicinity of the sea, so I hunted up for water and camped ; the country
was poor and sandy and very dry. After L had formed camp, 1 proceeded on foot with my black boy to
ascertain hew near I was to the ocean, when, to my surprise, in a mile and a-half I reached it, —it presented a
dreary open beach as far as I could see north and south, the mouth of the Stewart being about one mile to
the north; returned to camp with several new plants—the collection of which is now getting large. No signs
of natives in the neighborhood; the sandy beach I should say was not favorable for procuring much fish.
Killed a large kangaroo in the morning, which is a seasonable addition to my store of meat; we have had
many of these animals during our trip so far.—Ther., 73; bar., 29-68. Camp 32.
Thursday, sth September. —After breakfast, proceeded to the sea, in company with Mr. Taylor. Dr.
Tate and Mr. Warner intending to take the sun, but, owing to the beach in Princess Charlotte’s Bay running
north and south, at our position, found it not possible to get a horizon. The banks of the river we found to be
lined with mangroves, through which we had to pass. The country is worthless for all purposes of culture,
and only second-class pastoral country. It is low and sandy, covered with tea-tree and other descriptions of
timber, all tending to prove its barrenness. Experienced great trouble in keeping the horses together, owing
to the country having been but recently burnt, and two of them were not found this day. The beach has a
most dreary and uninviting aspect. There is nothing to break the sand and surf, so far as we could see, along
the coast.—Ther., 76; Bar., 29-89.
Friday, 6 th September. —I crossed over the river this morning, taking a northerly course for six miles,
when I struck a creek, and seeing that the country in that direction maintained its character for barrenness,
I returned to camp, hoping that the blackboy might have found the missing horses, but, to my regret, I
learned that he had not returned from his search. As I was not successful in getting an observation yesterday,
I determined on doing so to-day at the camp, and thus delay my departure until afternoon. The latitude was
13° 59' 49", which made my position over the 14th parallel; but I have some doubts as the correctness of all
my observations, believing that I am six miles south of all my positions, owing to the derangement of my
sextant, but of this lam not certain. The blackboy now made his appearance with the missing horses,
which had strayed back nine miles; so I packed up at once, and by half-past one o’clock got away from a camp
which all were glad to leave. I now started on a south-east course for the Kennedy; the first five miles was
over sandy tea-tree country, then two miles of a light loamy soil with long grass, which was terminated by a
belt of vine scrub of no great width, when we emerged on a flat with the most beautiful varieties of trees yet
, seen,


seen, the foliage of which was so dense that no sun could penetrate beneath, and the consequence was that the
undergrowth, nourished by moisture, had an appearance of freshness very diiferent from what was seen in its
immediate neighborhood; it was a beautiful spot. After this, crossed on to a sandy ridge with stringy-bark
of great height and straight, which would answer admirably for telegraph poles in any other situation but the
one where they were found. When in four miles found water just in time to enable us to wash our horses and
form camp before dark; poor feed for the animals; the soil of the forest was of a light and reddish quality
—Ther., 73; bar., 29-90, Camp 33,
Saturday, Ith September. —Got all ready, and started away by eight o’clock, when we again entered
the stringy-bark forest, which was cut by a creek with abundance of water. Here I dropt one of my horses,
which had been ailing for. many days, and which had to be relieved of its pack in consequence. I have no
doubt but that the horse was suffering from the effects of poison eaten on the road, and a drink of water at
this creek seemed to be the climax for not travelling further; the blackhoy who followed after us saw the
horse lying down. After crossing' the creek, had a continuation of the same forest country for another nine
miles, and in four miles more came upon some open country with broad leaf tea-tree, subject to floods, when we
made a creek with a little muddy water in it, and on which I camped for the night; there was water both
above and below the camp, and fair feed for the horses. Travelled twenty miles this day.—Ther., (30; bar.,
29-82. Cqjnp 34.
Sunday, B th September. —Could not think of spelling in my present position, so pushed on at a-quarter
to eight o’clock; left Mr. Warner to follow, as four of the horses were not found at the starting hour, and the
blackhoy was in search of them. On the road passed several lagoons and creeks; when in six miles I relieved
the horses of their packs, thinking of finishing the day at my halting place, where there was a fine large
waterhole. But in this I was deceived; the horses would not look at the old feed, but wore rambling about in
all directions over the burnt country, on which there was not a blade of grass; feo I had to pack up again,
notwithstanding the wet clothes of all the members of the party, who had been washing up their linen. After
starting, we, in four miles, came to good feed, but no surface water’; but, as we were in a low moist flat, with
a forest of tea-trees, I thought I could procure water easily, which I did by digging, and in sufficient quantities
for the use of the camp. Mr. WarnerandJerryovertookusatourday camp. —Ther., 65; bar., 29 86. Camp3s.
Monday, 2lh September. —The first news that awaited me in the morning was the information that the
last two sheep were not in their fold, and that none of the watch had heard them getting out during the
night; this was unlucky, but fortune was again in my favor, and the unerring eyesight of my blackhoy
enabled him to pick them up three miles from the camp; left Stewart and him to look for them, but I must
confess with small hopes of success. Got away from the camp by eight o’clock, when in two miles I left my
party to look round; a native path brought me to a lagoon, on which was a party of natives, who were very
friendly; exchanged presents with them, giving them fishhooks for a net and some native twine of great
strength; they offered me some fish, but these I declined, and wo parted company. I then rejoined my party,
and after travelling ten miles since the morning start, and finding that I did not cut the Kennedy, I altered
my course to cast, and in two miles more made a creek with large waterholes, on which I determined to camp,
as I was anxious about Stewart and the blackhoy, owing to the natives on some former occasions having been
known to visit our tracks after we had passed on, when seeing two persons thus separated from the party
might be a temptation to them to do them mischief. Most of the country passed over this day carried marks
of being flooded. Travelled fourteen miles.—Thor., 71; bar., 29 88. Camp 36.
Tuesday, \(Hh September. —Owing to some of the horses being away did not. leave camp before ten
o’clock, when, after going two miles over low flooded tea-tree country, struck what was apparently a creek, but
which was backwater from a larger stream. Here the dogs killed a kangaroo, which led to considerable delay,
as cither from the smell of the animal, or other cause, some of the horses were taken with a wild freak, when
several of them bolted off—one kicked himself clear of all his pack and was off in the bush. I followed with
my blackhoy, and after considerable delay, found them in the neighborhood of the morning’s camp. During
my absence one of the party, whilst looking to the horses, found himself suddenly on the banks of a large
river, about three hundred yards from where the party had drawn up to pack on the kangaroo; so we were
on the Kennedy, which I expected to cut somewhere here. While away searching for the horses, which took
me a considerable time, the party moved on to camp to relieve the horses of their loads, as good feed had been
found about one mile distant from where the party had drawn up; and on my return I met two-who were
coming back for the kicked-off pack, and from whom I learnt the tidings of being on the Kennedy. The river
where struck had low banks, and a deep channel, and reaches several miles in length. The description of the
country, as shewn on the charts, answers to what was seen by the party, but was of the poorest description, and
all subject to flood—the grass was wretched. Close to our camp were clumps of fan palms of immense size
and beauty—nothing had been seen like them before; the banks of the river were free from thick scrub, and
in many places showed perpendicular banks of sandstone grit from six to eight feet in height, and great depth
of water. Signs of alligators during the night, from which it would appear that they are here in great
numbers.—Ther., 66; bar., 29 - 93. Camp ST 1 .
Wednesday, 11 th September. —After breakfast, leaving my party in camp, I proceeded down the river,
accompanied by my blackboy, as I wished to satisfy myself of the nature of the country down stream. In
two miles and a-half, whilst following a native path, I came to a bar of sandstone grit stretching right across
the river, and only a few feet lower than the surrounding country; hence, during the rainy seasons, tbe waters
pass off on either side and inundate the country for miles, as shewn by its general aspect. I also found that
I was now at the tidal influence, as at the lower end of the bar the water was salt, and above it it was fresh.
I here crossed the river and went south-east for four miles, when I came upon a saltwater orecK which I
followed for three miles, when I found that its existence was owing to flood waters from the surrounding
plains, which had cut this channel to the sea. I then went five miles north, the greater portion over plains
showing flood marks from four to six feet in depth, where, from a sandhill in the vicinity, I had a view of the
surrounding country, which was all of a similar description; so I retraced my steps to camp, finding that there
was nothing to ho gained nor seen by a further examination of a country which was neither fit for agricultural
nor pastoral purposes. The paths radiated in all directions, shewing the bar to bo a crossing-place for the
natives. I also saw a regular corroboree ground here, which is, no doubt, a meeting place on great occasions.
—Ther., 72; bar., 29 95.
Thursday, 12 th September. —As there was nothing to be gained by a longer delay at this place, I
• packed


packed up and started away by half-past eight o’clock, and after passing over lightly timbered forest land in
three and a-half miles, struck another bar up the river whilst going south, and in another half-mile another
branch, which is the main one. I then changed my course to south-east, and passed over seven miles of a
burnt and wretched country to a long lagoon of permanent water; then, in two miles, to a swamp with great
numbers of geese and other waterfowl; and in three miles came on the banks of a fine river, with steep banks
clear of scrub. At the first sight of this river, which was running with a strong stream, I certainly came to
the conclusion that I was on the Kennedy proper (it had an average width of 100 yards) ; but, on reflection,
my observations by sun, and my dead reckoning, soon convinced mo that I was on water never seen by
Kennedy the explorer, it being many miles to the east of his track. As this is a large and remarkable river,
and one discovered by this expedition, I have named it the Normanby, after Lord Normanby, the present
Governor of Queensland. After meeting with the first lagoon with permanent water the country was a series
of these, also swamps and backwater, which, during the rainy season, must be a sea for miles, notwithstanding
the steep banks of the river, which, in places, shew a height of from twenty-five to thirty feet.—Thcr., 67 ;
bar., 29-93. Camp 38.
Friday, 13 th September. —As it was necessary to examine this river further on its course to the sea,
I left my party in camp, cautioning them about the natives, whose marks were very numerous, and proceeded
in company with Mr. Taylor and my blaekboy to follow its downwards course. We traced it for thirteen
miles, and found the country to be of a similar description to that seen by me on my trip down the Kennedy,
excepting that the floods showed higher marks—in fact, as high as fifteen feet above the surrounding country,
thus rendering it uninhabitable for either man or beast. Seeing that further down it must be of the same
description, or even worse, I did not deem it necessary to pursue the river any further, as its course no doubt
ends in the mangrove swamps skirting Princess Charlotte’s Bay at its southern end. During the day we saw
several mobs of natives, most of them friendly, to whom I made presents of fishhooks. Retraced my way to
camp, which I reached at eleven o’clock at night. Some short distance back from the river we found the
ridges to be of sandstone timbered with stringy-bark, but all of a wretched description. I had left Mr.
Warner with instructions to take the sun, but he found that the instrument would not show a higher reading
than 142 J; consequently, I have not the position of this camp. The future distances must be computed by
dead reckoning.—Ther., 60; bar., 29-93.
Saturday, 14 th September. —At twenty minutes past eight o’clock, all being packed, the party moved
on, following the river for three miles, which so far was going south-east, being the course which I intended
to follow. Poor sandstone, stringy-bark ridges came close to the river at this spot. In two' miles came to a
plain covered by seedling gums, evidently the deposits of floods; and the river at this spot was broad and
shallow, showing the sandstone grit bottom. At one spot on this plain was observed numerous alligators’
heads all stuck on a sapling tree, but whether as trophies of the chase or some superstition entertained by the
natives with respect to these animals, is unknown. All the other parts of the body appeared to have been well
cleaned, showing no compunctions so far as a feast was concerned—supposing the brutes to have been eaten.
The river here branched; I took the one going in an easterly direction, which I found coming round to the
north-east through a thick forest of stringly-bark and tea-tree. This continued up to our camping time, which
was a late one, having travelled fifteen miles since the morning, when we made a swamp off the creek, which
had narrowed here, but still had abundance of water. The day was a severe one for the horses, and all were
glad to halt. The feed for the horses did not promise to be very grand.—Ther., 68 ; bar., 29-96. Camp 39.
Sunday, 15 th September. —As the feed for the horses was very inferior at this camp, as was proved by
their rambling and not being found till late, which made it a nine-o’clock start, I determined upon pushing on
and camping on the first good grass and water that should be met with. Crossed the creek, our course being
in a south east direction, when in one mile two other creeks and a large swamp were passed: this latter would
have been better for us as a camping ground had we known of its existence the night before. We no sooner
passed the swamp than we entered a scrub of stringy-bark, tea-tree, and other small timber growing on sandy
soil, which took us on for fifteen miles, and then five miles of more open travelling brought us to a creek on
which we camped, having made twenty miles of a severe day for the horses, which were unpacked at half-past
four o’clock. Fortunately, the feed was good, so that they were enabled to recruit themselves here. —Ther.,
71; bar., 29-91. Camp 40.
Monday, 16$ September. —All ready to start by eight o’clock, when the same course, south-east, was
pursued over a more open country timbered with box, and in seven and a-half miles came to a lagoon on which
we saw some natives engaged in fishing with a net; they were all gins and children, and ran off so soon as they
saw us. The Doctor and Jerry took another direction in search of natives whom they saw; the former
brought a boy before him on his horse to the camp. In one mile we again cut the Normanby, which was here
running from east to west, and, as the feed was good for the horses, I proposed giving them rest for the
remainder of the day. In the afternoon my blaekboy went out in search of wild honey, taking the stranger
with him, but in a short time he returned with numbers of wild natives following him up; they had evidently
come to rescue their young relative, but whether with hostile intentions, or mere make-believe, I cannot say.
We, however, met them, and, after some chattering on both sides, we parted on apparently good terms with
each other. I, however, had my doubts of this, as some of them retired with evident signs of triumph, and I
told the party that the next morning would prove their intentions. I very much regretted the appearance
of the native boy at the camp, although he came willingly, showed no signs of fear, nor was he anxious to
return ; but his people did not know that he was a willing visitor, hence the demonstration in his favor. The
river here had steep banks on either side with a strong stream, and was thickly timbered; it had a few chains
of good soil on both sides, which was all that could be said for it.—Ther., 74 ; bar., 29-82. Camp 41.
Tuesday, 17 th September. —My doubts of the previous day were verified this morning, when Stewart and
the blaekboy went in search of the horses; these had been put together during the night by the Doctor and
myself, as a measure of precaution. They say that while collecting the horses a body of natives made their
appearance from a lagoon, simultaneously with another body from the river, evidently with the intention of cutting
off their retreat to the camp; they, however, quickly collected the horses and made a quick retreat, while the
shouting and yelling of themselves and the natives put us all on our mettle, and wo instantly sallied forth to
meet the enemy. We saw them coming from all directions in front of us, and all with bundles of spears, but
how many natives there were we could not say, but certainly more in numbers than on the previous day, when
eighteen were counted. Stewart galloped past, shouting and yelling, and driving the horses before him
paying,


saying, “ They mean it!” while my black boy was now very valiant. He was evidently conscious of being on
his own hill, as he was challenging them to come on and do, but at the same time keeping a respectful
distance from their spears. As they kept on advancing in great numbers, it was now time to show them that
we did not intend to bo trifled with ; so two of the party fired upon them at long distances, to endeavor to check
their advance. The effect was instantaneous; the quick advance was immediately turned into as quick a
retreat—they did not wait for a second admonition; some of our party ran after them, but with little chance
of overtaking them, when the chase was given up and all returned to camp. I was not sorry that the affair
ended_as it did, although the natives were the aggressors, and would only have had themselves to blame had it
been otherwise, as they throw spears at Stewart in the morning, while collecting the horses. These fellows
had evidently heard of the efficiency of firearms, as, no sooner had they heard the report of the guns, than they
made off. We now packed up, and by half-past 8 o’clock the party moved on. We had to go down the river
a short distance to find a crossing; in five miles and a-half made a flat-topped carboniferous range, on an east-
south-cast course, which I ascended with some members of the party to take bearings. Mr. Taylor here found
some fossil shells in the capping of the hill; in two miles more found some water, on which we camped, as I
was doubtful of finding it for a later camp in this flat tea-tree country. We kept the range on the right
hand.—Then, 65; bar., 29-78 Camp 42.
Wednesday, 18/7i September. —The horses were not secured very early, owing to the poor feed for them;
so did not got away before a quarter to 9 o’clock. Shortly after leaving camp, crossed a small sandy creek,
and came on to a low sandstone range; the general course was south-east, but had to be deviated from at times
to avoid the broken country, all of which was of sandstone formation. We then descended a steep hill into
the Valley of the Normanby, and had to cross the river, owing to the range abutting on its banks and across
our course. In one mile further, again found the range coming on to the river, so I came to a halt and formed
camp, determining upon the crossing of the range for the following day’s work. A view from the range
showed the river coming from the south, through an impassable and worthless country, and it is my opinion
that it will be found to take its rise a long distance from this, in a southerly direction. For the first time, we
here met with the Moreton Bay chesnut and banana trees. The day’s travelling' was ten and a-half miles.—
Then, 70; bar., 29-68. Camp 43.
Thursday, 19fA September. —By twenty minutes to eight o’clock the party moved on, and commenced
mounting the range, following a south-east course, when, in five and a-half miles, we came to an abrupt fall,
which we had considerable difficulty in descending; the sides of the hill were composed of loose sand and
stones, which caused the horses to fear for safe footing-ground, but, giving them time, it was accomplished.
This range was the divide between the waters of the Normanby and the Endeavour, and from the hill which
we descended, we had a considerable view of the country to the east, which course I intended now to follow;
the country had the appearance of being very much broken. After our descent we followed a gully, which
soon became a considerable creek; it was followed for nine and a-half miles, through a poor country, with
stringy-bark and bloodwood, and in the creek we saw the old familiar oaks —the first since leaving Fossilbrook,
owing to which circumstance I have named it “ Oaky Creek.” Wo camped on the south of a very conspicuous
range, of considerable height, composed of slate and sandstone, which I partly ascended with Mr. Taylor,
and had a view of the country towards the sea. The threatening aspect of the weather prevented us from
ascending the highest point; but what we saw answered our purpose, so returned to camp. The range I have
called “ Cunningham’s Range.” Travelled fourteen miles and camped on good feed. Poplar gums seen in
this flat—Then, 70; bar , 29-61. Camp 44.
Friday, 20 th September. —During the night slight showers of rain fell, being the first since our start-
ing out on the expedition ; secured everything under a fly in anticipation of a day of it, but shortly after sun-
rise it cleared off, and so soon as our things were dry we packed up and started. This, however, was not before
half-past twelve o’clock, when we followed the course of Oaky Creek in an easterly direction; had to cross the
creek several times to avoid steep broken country on either side, and after travelling eight and a-half miles, we
camped on a flat on the creek, having good soil of limited extent and good burnt grass for the horses; this was
the first good soil that we had seen—perhaps 150 acres in extent. —Then., 67 ; bar., 29-80. Camp 45.
Saturday, 21st September. —All appearances of rain cleared off; ready to start by a quarter past
8 o’clock, when we were off. The first two and a-half miles was over tea-tree country, with broken ridges and
steep gullies, making travelling heavy for the horses; then in two and a-half miles we found ourselves on the
banks of a large river just above its junction with Oaky Creek, the river here running north and south and
was salt. This river was, of course, no other than the Endeavour, of which so much has been said and heard from
time to time; it was 300 yards at this point; the first glimpse was not a flattering one, nor have we seen any-
thing of it since to change our first impression. We followed the river up for another mile and found a crossing;
the width here had narrowed to 30 yards, with a rapid stream; followed its windings for ten miles, when we
came to saltwater tea-tree and mangroves, which we followed until we found fresh water and camped; the
distance accomplished was sixteen miles over much broken country, making it heavy travelling. Then., 63;
bar., 29-90. Camp 46.
Sunday, 22 nd September. —Made this the camp for the day, whilst I, in company with Messrs. Warner
and Nation, proceeded to the sea with the view of seeing the mouth of the river, which, however, we did not
reach owing to the tide; on first seeing the sea a canoe with three natives was seen, but we had no communi-
cation with them, as they made off; neither did we discover the spot used by Captain Cook as a careening
ground for his ship. The sea was about four miles from the camp, and finding that the feed was better on the
coast than where it was at present, I resolved to give the horses a day or two here, as well as a chance to the
members of the party to roam over historical ground. Found abundance of water in the vicinity of a conspicuous
hill on the south side of the river; we here also saw an old deserted fishing establishment belonging to Towns
and Co., of Sydney; after spending the day in the neighborhood returned to camp.—Ther., 69; bar., 29 94.
Monday, 23 rd September. —All the horses but two were found, and these the blackboy was to find and
bring on to camp when found; we then packed up and started off, and reached the intended camping ground
before twelve o’clock. This is an exceedingly pretty place, and it is much to be regretted that the Endeavour does
not hold out prospects for settlement, but there is nothing on it but its beauty, that we have seen, that would
induce anyone to come to it. The soil is poor, therefore what else would induce people to come when so many
other places within easy communication with civilised parts are still open : however, I shall follow the river up
as far as I can, and look to its mineral capabilities. The rock is of slate formation everywhere—in fact we have
had


had it such since descending the sandstone range on to Oaky Creek; it is also seen on the beach everywhere,
but very little quartz is visible anywhere.—Ther., 64; bar., 29 93. Camp 47.
Tuesday, 24 ih September. —Remained here for the day to give the horses the benefit of the good feed
in the neighborhood of the sea; the members of the party spending the day exploring about the beach and
bringing up arrears of camp work. The natives are camped close to us, but make no advances to a friendly com-
munication ; a small party has been seen every day in a canoe fishing, but cannot be induced to come and hold
converse with us, although they do not seem to be at all alarmed. These people have, no doubt, been fired upon
by recent visitors, as it is not likely they were so shy when the fishing party lived at this place; I am not
sorry that they did not hold converse with us, but 1 should have liked to have given them some fishhooks as
sign of friendship. The Doctor, Warner, and Stewart, embarked in a frail and unseaworthy canoe to visit the
mouth of the river; the canoe capsized with them, leaving boots and revolvers on the bottom of the sea, both
of which they had some difficulty in recovering; they at last reached the mouth of the river—the Doctor wading
a part of the way—certainly not a very safe thing to do where there must be alligators; however, the day
ended without any serious mishaps.—Ther., 70 ; bar., 29-96.
Wednesday, 25th September. —This day the party turns its back on the bay, not without some slight
regrets, as it is an exceedingly pretty place, and its site would be well suited for a small settlement which
should be on the north side ; but the utter want of any inducement to come to the place must, perhaps, for ever
debar this, as the land is generally poor, while the small good patches are wide apart; lam speaking of the
south side of the river now. Everything being packed we were off by 8 o’clock, and first made for our old camp
four miles back; we then followed the creek and pursued a course W. 10° S.; in two miles we crossed a
patch of good soil, but limited in extent—perhaps, 300 acres. We then crossed a low greenstone range, when
tho country changed to a miserably poor soil with tea-tree and poplar gum. In two miles more we came to a
running creek flowing to the north; in another mile and a-half we struck the Endeavour, which we ran up
and camped for the first day. The river is hemmed in on the western side by a steep range, and on the eastern
side by very broken country, making it severe work for the horses. Quartz of a poor quality seen on tho
ridges; the prospecting for gold gave no good results. I'anticipate very rough travelling further on. It is
evident that wo are entering upon a mountainous region. Two turkey buzzards were shot to-day, which came
in as a treat.—Ther., 70 ; bar., 29 93 Camp 48.
Thursday, 28th September —The horses were secured early, owing to our being camped on good feed,
so that wo were away by half-past seven. Followed the river, and at three miles a creek joined it on the
western side; and, in another three and a-half miles, another joined it on the eastern side. Here the hills
came close on to the river on both sides, which made it necessary to climb them, and pass along the sidelings,
where it was most dangerous for the horses, owing to the treacherous nature of the ground, but it was
accomplished without any accident. The country ahead looked very rough, but before entering upon it, we
had a mile and a-half of good flats, with fine feed. Here we crossed the river, owing to a spur from Mount
Cook coming right on to its banks, debarring our progress on the south side, which we had been following.
We had a rough crossing, having had to unpack several horses as a measure of precaution to the loads. Saw
the stinging nettle for the first time, but fortunately very little of it. Then came a rough country, all burnt
for two and a-half miles, and another steep hill again compelled us to recross the river, when we travelled on
till very late, horses and men very much used up, although only thirteen miles accomplished. We then
reached some old grass, which had been spared by the fires, and camped on it, as I saw no hopes of reaching
any better within some miles. Ascended a hill in front of the camp, found the prospect from it anything but
cheering. So far, the trip has been a pleasure party, but I much fear that it will not be so any further, as I
see great difficulties across our onward path. It has always been found troublesome to keep horses on old feed,
with burnt country around, on which they will ramble and starve, sooner than eat pretty fair old grass. It
was not certain that natives were not heard this evening, but none were seen.—Ther., 69; bar., 29-71.
Camp 49.
Friday, 21th September. —As was expected, the horses rambled on the burnt ground, and starved
themselves, and it was a quarter to nine o’clock before the party moved on. We then followed a well-beaten
native path for a short distance, when it was lost. Then a devious course was followed, to avoid steep
mountains and dense scrub. The first, most laborious on men and horses; the former having constantly to
dismount and lead the latter. The general course was south-east. Determined to camp on the first good feed
for the sake of tho horses, and, after travelling five miles, had to ford the Endeavour again, at a most dangerous
crossing, as the bottom of the river was strewn with large boulders, which the horses could not distinguish,
consequently they were floundering about with great danger to themselves and their loads. One poor old
horse fell, and it was some time before ho could recover his footing. As soon as the river was crossed, camped
on good feed for the animals. But the last night’s camp was a most disastrous one for mo, owing to my best
and surest riding horse having picked up some poisonous food, from the effects of which he died shortly after-
coming into camp. It had been agreed amongst us that two shots from a pistol should draw stragglers into
camp, and whilst I was away looking out for a road, I heard the signal, and hurried to camp, when the
unlooked for news awaited me, that poor “ Darkie ” had just died. 1 must confess that I would rather have
heard that we were assaulted by the natives, who, during tho morning, had shown themselves on our track,
and who had yelled and danced on the hill in our rear, without making a nearer approach. Door “ Darkie,”
however, was not the only horse that had picked up this poison; two others appeared to be suffering from the
same cause, but their fate has not been sealed yet. I feel as if I had lost one of the members of my party, in
the loss of my horse, as after travelling so long together, a melancholy is experienced at leaving an old anil
tried companion in the wilderness. In my morning’s ramble, I came across a well-beaten native path, which
I shall follow out if I can, as it may help to lead me out of this labyrinth in which I find myself; at any
rate, I hope so. In passing over some of the hills, observed the soil was of very good quality, but in most
inaccessible places. It would be well adapted for coffee-growing, but the whole of the produce would have to
be packed out to the coast, on horses or mules; therefore, this is a question for the future.—Ther., 64;
bar., 29-14. Camp 50.
Saturday, 28th September. —At a-quarter to eight o’clock all was ready, when we started, following
the native track for a short distance, which was then abandoned, and very much to my regret, as a dense scrub
brought the party up; it had to be sought again, when we found that it led us to tho Endeavour, which it
crossed and again recrossed to a hill surrounded by scrub, which it then entered. As I guessed this to bo one
of their tracks to tho sea, where laid my only hopes of getting on ahead, the party was brought up and
camped


camped. The crossings of the river were most difficult and dangerous to accomplish, the first one owing
to large sunken boulders, which made precarious footing for the horses, and the last one was over a large granite
bed, most slippery to their feet. The first crossing had to be made on the opposite bank, so as to give them
footing, which was crossed safely by all; the second was crossed safely by all but one marc, which slipped and
fell and could not help herself, so she had to be dragged out. Two of the sick horses still in a very precarious
state from eating the poison plant, in fact I expect them both to die. As soon as we had arrived in camp, the
Doctor and Stewart with Jerry were sent off by me to run the native track, and ascertain where it went to; on
their return they reported the track to come out on a small plain, then re-enter another scrub which they
could sec had a tremendous fall into the country bordering on the sea. I now saw that two choices were offered
me —either to retrace my steps or force my way through the scrub with tomahawks. To.return would entail
great labor without results, as the country was frightful; to proceed would give me a chance of progressing
south, so I resolved to adopt the latter. The Doctor and Stewart were instructed to clear and remove all
impediments from the plain through the scrub to the camp, so that the party could be moved the next day,
which was done for a distance of two miles.—Ther., 71; bar., 29-18. Camp 51.
Sunday, 29th September. —As the horses were in a sort of a paddock, we got away shortly after seven
o’clock. The plan adopted was for one man to lead his riding horse and drive three or four others before him,
when another party would do the same, until the whole were in a string to pass through. I led the way, so
that the first four could see and follow me; but the plan was most difficult to carry out, as the horses would
frequently leave the track and get entangled in the vines, when the whole string was often thrown out, entailing
great trouble to bring it into moving order again; some horses were too eager, while others would not move
when the driver was far behind them. Two horses left the track unobserved and hid themselves in the scrub,
and its closeness may be imagined, when they were passed by twice without Jjeing seen; the horses had bells,
but they never moved to give notice of their whereabouts. In an hour and a-quarter the party emerged on the
small open space between the two scrubs, about 300 acres in extent, where, after taking some refreshment, I
started off with three members of my party and my blackboy, to follow out the native track through the second
scrub, which I found to emerge on a small space of flat country leading on to the sea; I then retraced my
steps for camp, clearing the scrub as I went on along the path; which was often most difficult to distinguish.
At last we came to a very bad part, which I skipped for the next day’s labor, the walk and the day’s work
having told on the little party. I could see that I had a most difficult task before me, the fall into the flat
being estimated at 1,200 feet, and very nearly the whole of it was during the first portion of the descent, conse-
quently it made it very steep; rocks had to bo doubled, and roots had to be removed, and I really began to think
the attempt to descend impossible, but I could not retrace my steps, so forward the party must move. To-morrow
will be a severe day, as the most difficult part of the track has to be made and cleared, and I sincerely hope
with success. The sick horses are getting over it, but will be long in a condition not to be used.—Ther., 68 ;
bar., 28 63. Camp, 52.
Monday, 30 ih September. —Went to work early, with three members of the party and Jerry, to cut
and make the road; the blackboy was to keep the native track to indicate its direction, so that it could be
made use of wherever practicable, and where not so, another road had to be cut and made until it was joined
again. After great labor, the work was finished a little before sundown, and severe work it was for all parties, as
deviating from the native track necessitated a fresh road, which had all to be cleared of rocks and trees and vines.
But notwithstanding all this, the difficulty and danger to the men and horses will be very great, as, in many
places, once ahorse is started, he must go through for many yards of an incline on which there is no stopping;
and should the horse stumble, or the man leading him do so, both stand a chance of being crushed upon the
rocks. All hands look forward to the descent with some dread, and wish it well over; every packed horse
will have to be led.—Ther., 62; bar., 28-46. Camp—.
Tuesday, October. —The horses being all at hand—the opening between the two scrubs answering
the purpose of a paddock—six of the horses were packed, which was one for each member of the party, who
had to drive his riding horse before him. Now came the anxious moment to embark on our perilous journey,
which we did at once. Jerry was the advance guard to keep the track; I then followed, leading a packed
horse, my riding horse being urged on by the next man, and so each member of the party following in turn.
Fortunately, we accomplished the dangerous task without any greater mishap than one horse falling; but it
could not go far, the scrub being too thick to admit of its rolling over. This part of the track ran along the
top of a ridge only a few feet in width and very stony, and to have been able to fall on either side would have
been destruction ; but the scrub was too thick, so the horse stuck where it fell. Many yards of this descent
were most frightful to look at, but our position compelled us to move and run the risk of life and limb to
men and beasts. So soon as the pinch had been passed over, I sent back two of the party to pack the remain-
ing horses, while I led the first batch to the flat below, and left them in charge of Mr. Taylor during my
absence. The second batch bad equally good luck, and it was felt to be a relief by all parties that all had
been landed safely on the low country. We immediately packed up, and proceeded to camp distant two miles,
which was on a beautiful little stream of water, with abundance of good feed for the horses on the adjoining
plain. The flat country was of a very poor character, and can never be of any service but to those who are its
present inhabitants. To look back on what we had passed over this day was anything but a pleasing prospect,
and all sincerely hoped that it was the first and last of such on our line of march ; the scrub was two and a-half
miles in length, consequently four and a-half miles was our day’s work.—Ther., 55; bar., 28 40. Gamp 53.
Wednesday, 2nd October. —All packed and ready to start by 8 o’clock. The blackboy, lam sorry to
say, had to walk, owing to one of the poisoned horses being his riding horse. Pursued a south-east course
until the sca-bcach w-as reached; this was followed until stopped by a broad stream—the Bloomfield of the
chart—which was found to be impassable at this point. The river was not the only obstacle in our way; I
found the hills and scrub on the opposite shore to bo of such a character that I did not venture to cross, but
took a course up stream. I then struck inland in hopes of getting south, and in a mile and a-half came to
the summit of a ridge crowned with dense scrub ; this I explored, and found that I could clear it in a quarter
of a-mi!e by cutting a track through it. The track went down a steep ravine, exposing several feet of slate
in jumps. How the horses were to be got over it was a puzzle. I led the way with four horses, and the first
jump had scarcely been accomplished, when I had the four horses down in a narrow space and one upon
another. One poor old horse rolled over four times before securing footing, and that the others did not break
their limbs was next to a miracle. I immediately ordered all the remaining horses to be unpacked before
taking


taking the first descent, as to risk the loss of a horso could not be afforded, and thus the remainder were got
down with considerable risk and difficulty. But now came the severe labor to the men of the party who bad
to carry down the packs over ground which had a very precarious footing, and most severe work it was, as all
felt more or less exhausted after so hard a day. The horses were rewarded, at the bottom of the ravine, with
fine water, which they much wanted, and, afterwards, fine grass in the neighborhood of the camp. Shortly
before sundown, all were settled for the night, thinking how little the hopes entertained of the first descent
in the second scrub were realised in this last painful and abominable pass. Two of the horses were very much
cut—one of them was a sick horse, and the other a young mare that remained stationary after coming into
camp, owing to the frightful wounds received during the descent, which I don’t think, however, will prevent
her from travelling.—Ther., 67; bar., 29-74. Camp 54.
Thursday, 3rd October. —The horses that fell the day before were stiff from the wounds received during
the descent, so much so, that the marc had only her packsaddle, and twenty pounds in weight beside. I went
ahead with my blaokboy to ascertain where I could find a pass out of where I was, and succeeded in finding
one at the head of a saltwater creek—a branch of the Bloomfield—where it was necessary to cut through 100
yards of a scrub. I returned to camp, and made a start by half-past nine o’clock, and accomplished the cross-
ing by half-past ten o’clock. The ascent was then up a high ridge, which was hard work for men and horses,
and when all had arrived at the top, I found to my great horror that further progress was arrested by a dense
scrub stretching across and along the ridge. I ordered the party to halt, and went on ahead to explore the
road. I found that this required time, so I retraced my steps to the party, when I ordered the heavily-packed
horses to be unloaded, and all the remainder in two hours, which were then to be driven down the
hill to feed. This was to be done in the event of my not returning in two hours. I then again started off
with Mr. Warner and Jerry to make another attempt at exploring the scrub, which along the ridge was found
to be impossible; but to the eastward, a practicable spot was found, which would lead us to the southern
branch of the Bloomfield—a splendid stream of twenty-five yards in width, with a strong current. I then
returned to the foot of the ridge, and found that the horses had just come down, leaving their loads and packs
on the summit. This necessitated another ascent to bring down the loads, which I much regretted; but there
was no help for it, as the ridge could not be followed, and the work entailed severe labor on men and horses.
I now found myself hemmed in on all sides by hills and scrubs, and could not exactly see my way through
them, but to remain stationary was impossible, and to return was equally so; therefore, there was nothing for
it but to bore on and cut through it. I now became very anxious about my position, and two or three days
will decide what course I must take—whether to beat a retreat for the interior, or push on to the sea, and
ascertain whether another attempt to reach the south by that road might not be more successful than hitherto.
My rations are diminishing every day, and I fear the horses will suffer from the severe labor, so that I have
not much time to spare to consider my course. All safe in camp by sundown, but not in the most cheerful
spirits, as we find that we have jumped into the thick of our difficulties, which have ever been increasing since
leaving Endeavour Bay. I hope all may sustain brave hearts to meet them—there is no other way of over-
coming them. The land in the scrubs here was good—but to what purpose ? It can never be of any service
to the colony, and moreover, is too limited in extent The Bloomfield finds its outlet in Weary Bay—an
uninteresting spot, with a sandy beach bordered by light scrub. The south end is relieved by high inaccessible
hills, under which the river enters the sea.—Ther., 67; bar., 29 70. Camp 55.
Friday, ith October. —The horses brought up early and packed. I sent on Mr. Warner and Jerry,
immediately after breakfast, to cut the track, which I found done by my arrival at it; they had both worked
well. All got safely through, and reached the Bloomfield, which was followed until stopped by the closing in
the hills on both sides, where there was a waterfall of 100 feet in descent over a slate formation. Here was
a complete block on all sides, so I camped, resolving to shoe one or two horses suffering from tenderness, and
in the meantime causing an exploration of the ridges around for an outlet. This, I was informed, was to be
met with in one place only, and on the face of a steep hill, and that it was doubtful whether the horses could
manage it. After the'ascent came ridges which promised a circuitous outlet, and this I shall have to pursue
to extricate the party from its great difficulties. Its position is worse to-day than it has hitherto been—the
whole country in every direction is broken into ridges of most difficult travelling. My anxiety is increasing
every hour—so very different to what it was before crossing the main range into Princess Charlotte’s Bay. Up
to the Endeavour River the expedition had been a pleasure trip; but since crossing it, there have been nothing
but troubles and difficulties, with still more ahead, and how they will end remains to be proved. The first
alligator was seen here by some members of the party while out fishing. These eastern streams have very few
fish in them, so that we do not get many; and as for a kangaroo, we have not seen one for many a day, which
is hard for the poor dogs, that have been of such service to us on many occasions.—Ther., 66 ; bar., 29 71.
Camp 56.
Saturday, sth October. —So soon as all were ready the anxious moment arrived to make the fearful
ascent. All went well to the last and final pinch, when two or three horses were got up safely, but as these were
the strongest ones, I saw at once that there was no chance for the weaker ones; so I ordered them to be relieved
of most part of tbeir loads and so led them up. One poor horse fell in the ascent, and, but for two trees
that arrested its progress, it must have rolled to the bottom of the hill and thus have finished its existence.
The horse had to be unpacked and dragged into a position to enable it to stuggle up, which it fortunately did
without losing further ground; the pack-saddle, however, was crashed and rendered unserviceable, so that it
was broken up and abandoned, and the load dispersed amongst the other horses. Fortunately for them the loads
are getting lighter every day, but unfortunately for the party, as the rations arc lessening. Another horse
slipped away from the person leading it, and was expected to have been dashed below but; being a strong
brute, it recovered itself and walked to the bottom of the pinch, when, on its second attempt, it carried all its
load to the crown of the hill. At last all were got up safely, when came the labor of the men of the party,
who had to carry up what the horses had left behind ; and most painful was the task, owing to the steepness of
the hill and the bad footing it afforded; it was hard to say which was the most laborious bf the two works—
carrying down the loads on a previous occasion, or carrying them up on this one. However, it was accom-
plished and all repacked, when we started, following the crown of the ridges, which led the party generally in
a westerly direction—far from the one desired to be followed—but nothing else could be done for the present
but to get out of the troubles we were in. In two miles we came upon a creek and had to cut a road through
it; here the strong horse ol the morning had a complete roll over, owing to coming into contact with an unseen
root


root not cut; while another horse, being one of the sick ones, stuck in the creek owing to the steep bank on the
opposite ascent, but at last all got out safely, and wb proceeded on our way—not rejoicing, but thankful so far.
With all our troubles we made seven miles of hard work travelling, and camped on a creek with green grass,
which was more then I expected, as the party had been travelling the whole day over unburnt country. Had to
cut a road through the scrub to the watering place to enable the horses to get at the water. After unpacking
I took Jerry with me to look at the road ahead of us, when I found that a short cutting through a scrub next
morning would allow me to follow out the ridges. My blackboy said that he had heard the voices of natives
in the scrub.—Ther., 50; bar., 29-81. Camp 57.
Sunday, C th October. —No spelling—time and circumstances will not permit of it, I only wish it could
be done for the sake of the horses; ordered these to be packed and to follow, whilst I, with Jerry, went on
ahead and cut the road alluded to yesterday. Hero we came plump upon a mob of natives coming in our
direction, and, strange to say, that neither party heard each other until in sight of one another ; the natives
immediately dropped everything and ran away, leaving spears, tomahawks (all of iron), and food, which we
placed on a fallen tree; but my blackboy broke all the spears, nor could he resist “ looting” all the food, which
consisted apparently of bruised “zaraia” nuts. The cutting through the scrub was then commenced
preparatory to taking the horses through, both of which were soon accomplished, as the scrub was open, and
the horses followed well; the track crossed a granite creek in the scrub and came out on ridges. After
going a short distance the party drew up to enable me to prospect further, when I ordered the horses to be
unpacked to ease their backs while the party took a pot of tea. Mr. Warner found a crossing over the creek
on which we had pulled up—which was crossed safely—when we still followed the ridges, and in six and a-half
miles found ourselves on the top of a hill which we had labored to ascend only to find that it must be.descended
again, as it led nowhere but to an abominable impassable country. In another mile we struck a creek and
camped with good grass for the horses; the general course was still a westerly one.—Ther., 54 ; bar., 29-26.
Gamp 58.
Monday, Ith October. —All ready by seven o’clock, when the party moved on in a westerly direction,
over broken slate ridges, and after travelling seven miles came to a creek with water and green grass for the
horses. As many of these required shoeing, I thought it advisable to stop here-and do this work before
tackling the rough country ahead. Prospects not improving by any means ; however, a day or two will
decide; quartz showed itself on the ridges here, in consequence of which the Doctor prospected for gold, but
without success.—Ther., 67; bar., 29-24. Camp 59.
Tuesday, tit It October. —By a quarter to eight o’clock all was ready, when the party moved on, follow-
ing the same course as yesterday; in one mile made a creek running south-east, which was re-crossed in four
and three-quarter miles, when we reached a peak from which we had a view of the whole country beneath our
feet. To the west the country was low and undulating, showing the Main llango in the distance. To the
south the same range rose a perfect barrier to further progress, while to the east the country presented the
appearance of an outlet to our hopes to proceed on our wished-for course. But it was a moment of great
anxiety to me, and considering that'others depended upon me for their safety, I did not like to take upon
myself the responsibility of our further progress without a consultation with all parties. With this view we
drew together, when Messrs. Taylor and Warner made out our position to be due west of Cape Tribulation,
then only a few miles distant from us, and this was borne out by their plotting and dead reckoning, and on
reference to the chart they showed that the country was passable if the sea-coast was once reached, upon which
they gave their vote in favor of this route. This decided many of the others, who were also in favor of this
route after hearing the above opinion. I now clearly pointed out the possible difficulties by the way, and our
position with respect to rations, so that no one could accuse me of blindly leading them into inextricable
troubles, and pointed out that now was the moment to decide, as further on it might be too late. The general
feeling appeared to be for the coast, so the party once more moved on. We followed a leading spur, in some
places only affording footing for one horse at a time, while some of the pinches were so severe that the horses
suffered greatly from their work; and it was equally difficult to get them to descend these, owing to the sharp
slates hurting their feet, which caused very precarious footing. After a most laborious day, during which we
made thirteen miles, equal to thirty on level ground, wo reached a creek, and camped amongst the ridges, all
fairly worn out with the day’s work. The horses had old grass for feed with good pickings in the creek, out
of which they could not climb, owing to being short hobbled. The camp was the most dismal one we had had
for many a day, as the ridges closed us in on all sides, covered with long grass and timber.—Ther., 66; bar.,
29-19. Camp 60.
Wednesday, 9 th October. —At a quarter to eight o’clock, all being in readiness, the party moved on,
following a general course of south-east for two and a-half miles, when the Bloomfield was cut, running north.
We then descended into a flat, thinking to run it up, but the hills closed iu on both sides, thus presenting a
barrier to our doing so. The party then ascended the ridges, thinking to find a passage further on, but in this
I saw no possibility, so returned to the flat. As many of the horses required shoeing, and the flat afforded
tolerable feed, I took this opportunity of doing the first; and in the second, gave the horses a spell for their
severe work and bad feed the previous day. I sent out Stewart to look for a crossing-place, and after a long
search, and many trials, he actually found one at our chance camping ground. These crossings arc difficult to
find, owing to the dense vegetation on these watercourses, as well as to the nature of the rock, which here is
slate, presenting sharp edges to the horses’ feet; but hero it was shallow, with a little gravel in the crevices,
which made it an easy crossing. Shod several horses during the afternoon, many of which were very bare. —
Ther,, 67 ; bar., 29-12. Camp 61.
Thursday, IQth October. —At half-past seven o’clock crossed the river, and at once mounted the ridge
over a short and easy ascent; pursued a general course of south-east. When in two miles drew up the party
to seek a road, as a dense scrub crossed the leading ridge, which necessitated cutting, if I followed its course.
1 then went in search of a track, and while in the scrub came across the largest snake I ever saw in Australia,
which I shot; it was of the boa tribe, and measured fully sixteen feet when quite dead, which, while descending
the hill, had a most formidable look, so much so as to startle me at the first glance. My blackboy was in
ecstasies, and what to do with it, in order not to add its weight to my horses, was soon settled by Jerry winding
it round his neck and shoulders and carrying it himself, rather than bo baulked of the great chance which
fortune had thrown in his way. After seeking and finding the leading ridge the party moved on, when in
five miles some water was procured for the men in a scrubby gully; we again moved on, and in another mile
and a-half one of the marcs gave in; when she was unpacked, and the lead placed on the horse that fell on the
face


face of the steep hill coming out of the Bloomfield, as before alluded to, and had not been packed since then;
in another half-mile I drew up the party again, as I was puzzled about the leading ridge once more. I went
out in one direction to look for a road, and returned unsuccessful; I sent out Stewart in another direction,
who also returned, stating that the ridge at our feet was the main one, which he had followed for two miles,
and found that it bore away in the direction which I wished to follow; he had, however, met with no water,
and how far I might have to go for it being uncertain, I resolved to unpack and camp on the ridge, sending
the horses back to the last water, with instructions that a road should be cut to it for them; and at which
place, there being good feed, two of the members of the party (Stewart and Nation) and Jerry were to camp
and return early next morning with the horses to pursue the onward journey. When leaving, Jerry seemed
reluctant to move, frequently turning his eyes so wistfully to the dead snake, which had been lying on the
ground since its arrival some hours before; he evidently wished to remain with his treasure, for certainly his
heart was with it—so, seeing that its skin was not in a good state for preservation, having, besides the shot
holes, the damage it got by being rolled on by the packhorse, I gave a sign of acquiescence, which Jerry at once
availed of, and walked off with his prey. Subsequently I had reason to regret this generosity (?) on my part,
for I found I had evoked the ire of the Doctor, who it seems had thus been disappointed of an anticipated
meal, his zeal too, in the cause of science, had been damped by his not even getting the skin; the latter
reason did not trouble me nor him either, I daresay, in reality, for he had plenty of opportunity of taking it
off if he had wished, but I was grieved to have deprived his stomach of its share of the reptile. Jerry was
not a selfish man after all, and next morning not only the Doctor, but all who wished, partook of as much of
the cause of original sin as they pleased. I. must not omit to mention the fact that my blackboy has been
walking for the last twelve days, owing to his riding horse having been poisoned at the camp where my other
horses partook of the same food, by which one of them was sacrificed; that during some portion of that time
he has been suffering from the effects of a stake in the foot and sickness—yet he never complained, but followed
on cheerfully. This has never been taken into consideration, and if the boy deserves any indulgence, surely
such devotion is worthy of it. I doubt if one of my white companions would be patient under such circum-
stances, and certainly not Dr. Tate. I know it would at once be required to re-distribute the load of a pack-
horse in order to procure him a horse to ride. It is to be regretted that lam obliged to place some restriction
on the appetites of the party. I started with abundance of provisions, and on a liberal scale; but the many
delays for prospecting, branch expeditions, &c., have consumed more time than I anticipated; and as in our
present position it is impossible to foresee what further difficulties and delays we may have to encounter, I
consider it only common prudence to economise. The Doctor, whose desires, I fear, are only limited by his
capacity, considers it hard from his point of view.
To resume: Water was procured in an adjoining scrubby gully for my camp by Dr. Tate and Mr.
Taylor. On the return of the horses another mare gave in and was left, but the first one was picked up and
driven on with the mob to the camping ground. Ther., 03 ; bar., 29-27 Camp 62. .
Friday, llt/t October. —As my black boy returned early and before the horses, I started off with him
to look at the ridge seen the day before by Stewart. I left instructions to have the horses packed and follow
me down the ridge, and in case they should meet with a mark in shape of a triangle made with sticks, they
were to draw up and await my arrival. I followed the ridge down and came to a scrubby creek, at the
crossing of which I found plenty of water. It appears that Stewart came in sight of this gully but never
descended to look at it, for had he done so, he would have saved my horses a painful and fruitless return
journey of a mile and a-half, and the second mare her distress, as on arrival at the camp it was found that the
horses could not be watered, owing to the scrubby, steep, and boggy nature of the ravine, which was also blocked
up with fallen timber and contained very little water; out of four horses led down, one only partook of water,
the others refusing to descend into the ravine, and as it was just sundown the other horses had no chance of
getting any. The party met me at the creek and I resolved to give them the remainder of the day and so give
the mares a chance to gain strength; the old horse which had suffered from the effects of poison is still very
weak, his fate is in the balance, On the creek, Jerry and I met with a party of natives who were very
friendly; I hoped to gain some information from them with respect to a road to the sea, but it was very un-
satisfactory, as Jerry could only very partially understand them. I gave them some handkerchiefs and fish-
hooks, and they remained in camp or in sight of it the whole day; their friendship for Jerry was shown by a
present of food wrapped up in green leaves, and baked thus in the ashes Shortly after arriving in camp and
taking some refreshment, I started off in company with Mr. Nation and Jerry, taking rations for one day, as
also two native boys as guides, intending to explore the road to the sea on foot, and learn for ourselves how
far the native reports could be relied on. We took a ridge in front of the camp, and had not gone far before'
I saw reluctance on the part of the native boys to follow us; they wished us to take another direction, but we
continued, when they dropt us, and we went on without them. In three miles we drew near the summit of
the ridge, which was crowned with scrub, this we' pierced and saw at one glance why the boys would not follow
us; at our feet lay miles of thick and impenetrable scrub, covering ridges and gullies alike; to have ventured
into it with or without horses would have been sheer madness, as the sea- lay miles away—not even in sight —
the prospect was worse than anything seen by us hitherto. Cape Tribulation and the country for miles around
its base was a sea of scrub, which extended as far as our vision in a southerly direction. We turned away from
the prospect with a dismal sensation of disappointment, as wo had hopes that this was our way out —whereas
it proved a gate shutting us in more completely then ever. But still there was one other hope, and that was
the road indicated by the natives, so we buoyed ourselves up for another trial and returned to camp to think
and prepare for the morrow, as we had done enough for one day, so far as walking and prospecting the country
was concerned; my journal was falling in arrears, and it was necessary to bring it up while all the incidents
were fresh on the memory.
In the morning, before starting with Mr. Nation, I put Mr. Taylor in charge of the camp, requesting
him to watch over its interests. On ray return, he came to me stating that he must, on another occasion,
decline such a charge, as during my absence, Dr, Tate had taken the opportunity of entering into a warm
altercation with him, in fact, a “ row,” as he called it, and that sooner than such a thing should occur again,
he must decline any future charge of such a character. The particulars Mr. Taylor has not communicated to
me, but I put it down to jealousy. Dr. Tate is not a person in whom I have that confidence now which I
entertained for him once. And, in this matter of confidence, I must mention a trifling circumstance, which
is quite sufficient to destroy this feeling in the members of a party in the bush. It has been my usual custom
to have some tea made after our arrival in camp, which has generally been early in the afternoon. On this
occasion,


occasion it was made and partaken of by us all before I started off with Mr. Nation, but when I returned, I
found that another billyful had been made, and was quietly being partaken of by those in camp. Now,
this in itself was a very trifling matter, but entirely contrary to the rules of my camp, and I maintain that
if this is done in one thing, there is no reliance that it will not be done in another, and thus confidence is
destroyed. Knowing the extent to which my rations will reach, what position would the party be in if such
conduct was pursued every time I was unavoidably absent from the camp ? I must confess that I was sorry to
see it, and am more sorry'to refer to it, but it is such palty trifles nevertheless that shake faith in your fellow
travellers. And how about those who would not be able to partake of the refreshments, would it be a fair
and equal share ?—Ther., 66; bar., 28‘35. Camp 63.
Saturday, 12 th October. —Our doom is sealed. All further progress south is debarred us, and the
retreat to the westward has become imperative; it is now a case of personal safety. After an early breakfast,
I started off in company with Dr. Tate, Stewart, and Jerry, to hunt up, for the second time, a road to the sea
shore. I took Stewart in case I should meet with a camping ground a few miles on our line of march, when
he was- to return to camp, pack up, and move forward. In three miles such a place was found,
and he returned to carry out my instructions. I then went on with Dr. Tate and Jerry, and
the furthest point reached by us, was about nine miles from our morning’s camp, whence from
the top of a high hill, I saw at once how completely I was frustrated in my desire to reach the
coast, which, if I had reached, would have wrecked the expedition. From this eminence I had a
view of the whole country beneath me; towards the sea, stretched miles of broken country densely
covered with scrub, of an impenetrable character. To the south, the dividing range towered to an immense
height, forbidding approach, and also covered with scrub, which seemed to spread over the whole country.
The range ended abruptly over the sea, and as far as I could discern, maintained the same character south, as
far as visible. Here my last hope vanished, and I descended the hill with a feeling of disappointment, exceeded
by anything I had felt the previous day, when I found my first road was shut against me. I have struggled
hard, but to no purpose; all my endeavors have been frustrated by the completely impassable nature of the
country for white men, with horses. I had a native guide, but, as usual, he slunk off. One old man told
Jerry that there was no road to the sea for us; that they themselves reached it by canoes, which came up to
saltwater creeks to within a few miles of our camp, and that the ranges along the coast were a complete
barrier to our progress, which I can well believe from what I had myself seen. And now, in what position
am Ito retreat in a westerly direction ? It is true, I believe that I have enough rations to last me for that end,
supposing no insuperable difficulties to arise. lam certain the western country must be in a frightful state for
the horses, owing to the season of the year, and the sandy nature of the country, and should the horses fail
me, how will the men fare ? All these are considerations which will force themselves upon me, and cause mo
serious uneasiness; not so much for myself, as for some others of the members of the party, who are in a
poor way to meet great difficulties. Two or three may be said to be at this point without boots; how is the
distance of 300 miles of a retreat movement to be accomplished by them ? Mr. Taylor complains of great
debility, owing to the insufficiency of food upon a not over strong constitution, and how is he to bear up for
another month, even supposing all goes well ? But should we have long stages without water, which I fully
anticipate, I fear he will suffer much, and not only him, but all others; and as for the poor horses, I dread for
them. Three of them are in such a condition that I fear I shall have to abandon them, which I shall much
regret, as they are the property and favorites of my children. All these considerations, and the fact that I
am driven back against my will, cause me great distress of mind; but I cannot fight against nature, therefore I
must bo resigned to my fate. I reckon that I have 300 miles of a retreat movement to accomplish, and I only
hope that all are sensible of the difficulties before them, and will meet them with courage. I shall
do my best to carry them through; let them do their best to aid me, and thus mutually we shall
overcome all our difficulties. On my return towards camp, 1 found that the party had moved up.
My friend, Mr Nation, told me that he saw disappointment depicted on my countenance, and guessed
the result of our fifteen miles of a walk over gullies and scrub. I communicated the result of my
journey to all, and the feeling of being frustrated was general, as I saw a gloom on all countenances.
I now learnt, for the first time, the friendly character of the natives, who had been all the pre-
vious day at our camp. During the first watch, which fell to Dr. Tate, I was aroused by him, when he
stated that natives were about, he having seen two figures slinking away from the vicinity of where I was
sleeping. I got up, as did Mr. Nation, and we watched for a considerable time, but as no one appeared we lay
down again. Next morning, the general feeling in camp was that the Doctor had been mistaken, and I must
confess that I distrusted the statement and fact altogether, and said so in language which I now admit I regret.
The fact proved that I had done the Doctor a great injustice, and I acknowledged it. The next morning one
of the stolen articles was required, when it could not be found, but no attention was paid to this, as it was
supposed to be amongst the other things. After this, some ammunition was required by Mr. Nation, which was
also gone, and with it all the necessary articles for mending clothes, including many trifles besides, all of which
were in one parcel. This led him to search further, when, from the same pack, the digging pick was missed,
also a wash-pan, when came the conviction that the doctor was right, and that all these articles had been stolen
by the two figures he had seen slinking away during the night; in fact, there could bo no doubt of it, these
things were taken from within a very few feet of where I was sleeping, and under cover of a log and some
they had effected their object. After my departure to look for a road, they again came near the
camp, but they were warned off and not suffered to approach it; they seemed to know what a gun was, as one
of them who did come, soon cleared out when Mr. Nation seized it to enforce his orders. On the way to the
upper camp, they were met, and most anxious were they that the party should camp at their present location,
but the experience of their character was a sufficient warning, and they were not suffered to follow the party to
our [camp. I wished to have no dealings with them, but it appears that some of the party could not resist
visiting them at their camp. The natives hereabouts are a good-looking race of men ; they do not preserve
the hideous features so common to Australian natives, namely the-broad, flat nose, the low forehead, curly hair,
and huge mouth; if anything, these people have noses well-shaped[ straight hair, and decent mouths, and are
altogether well-featured. They are very numerous hereabouts, the scrubs affording them abundance of
vegetable food, which, I think, is their chief means of subsistence, as very few bones of animals were seen in
their numerous camps along the river. And here I may as well mention what Jerry told me about an animal
found in these scrubs, as related to him by the Cardwell blacks. He says that it is a kangaroo or something
like it, and climbs trees, and he was fortunate enough to see one on a day when we were camped among scrubs,
in which he was hunting for the eggs of the scrub turkey. According to his statement, he at first took it for
a f( miall”


a “ miall ” blackfellow, but found it to be an animal; it ran up a tree and disappeared. lie has scon monkeys,
but says that it is not a monkey, neither is it a boar; yet, like the first, it chatters, and, unlike the latter, it is
very agile in its movements, as it climbs or swings itself among the branches when disappearing. I went the
next day into the scrub with Dr. Tate and Jerry, thinking to see one, but was not fortunate enough in doing
so; then Jerry took us to the very tree where he had seen the animal, on the bark of which were two deep
scratches, but no other marks by which an animal could assist itself to climb; the marks were totally different
from those of an opossum, which leaves marks as if made with a pin’s point, being very fine, and 1 question
whether a bear leaves any marks; those in question appeared to have been made with toes on the hind feet,
but no animal could run up a smooth, straight surface with only its hind feet, without receiving assistance from
the forearm, which in this ease had loft no marks; we saw similar marks on numerous trees, so I imagine the
animal to be plentiful. To entertain the idea that any kangaroo known to us, or approaching its formation,
could climb a tree, would be ridiculous; the animal was not formed for such work, but that there is an animal
in these scrubs not known to us, I believe, because I have never found my blackboy to err in his statements
or reports; and, moreover, he spoke to me about this animal many months previous, when going overland to
Melbourne with sheep. Some bones were picked up in a native camp near where Jerry had seen this
“ bunyup,” which were collected by Dr. Tate; possibly these may throw some light on the mysterious animal
found in these scrubs; the bark bearing the two toe-marks was also secured, but this, I fear, will not assist the
solution of the mystery very much. And here is a chance for some enthusiastic naturalist to distinguish
himself and enrol his name on the list of Fame, by adding another object to the natural history of the world.
Where shall the enthusiastic “Du Chaillu” be found?—Ther., 08; bar,, 29 05. Camp 64.
. Sunday, 13 th October, —No spelling, all hands at work preparing for the enforced retreat to the
westward. Stewart and I were shoeing horses all day, the other members of the party bringing up back work,
and lightening packs; all not absolutely required was now abandoned; I threw away large quantities of
ammunition, my past experience proving to me that so much was not needed. We were in no way disturbed
by the natives; in the evening some of the abandoned cartridges were fired off, which Jerry said had a good
effect on them, as he was asked to be mediator between the whites and themselves, believing that we were
very angry with them. Jerry quite laughed at their fears, and they shifted their camps in consequence of
our amusement. They said they were very good fellows, so they stole from us, and this after giving them
fishhooks and handkerchiefs; they certainly were good enough to ease us of many things that arc often
wanted.—Ther., 67 ; bar., 28'92. Camp—.
Monday, 14t/i October. —This day we turned our backs on the sea. We could not conquer the physical
difficulties thrown across our path by nature, at which we felt great disappointment; so with resigned wills
we beat the retreat of safety. First thing in the morning finished shoeing the remaining horses, and having
arranged the various packs, at midday we were on our way back to our sixty-third camp, at which we found
ourselves early, and turned out the horses. I have great fears for some of these ; if I could only get them on
some of the western waters I should feel satisfied, as I could secure them at some future period ; the old horse
which was poisoned is in a very poor way still. Jerry is still without a riding horse, but the boy trudges on
willingly; he is now as anxious as any of us to leave this inhospitable country. —Ther., 65; bar., 28 - 94.
Tuesday, 15 th October. —At a quarter past seven o’clock we were ready to start, and bid farewell to
our sixty-third camp; the horses went well over their old tracks, notwithstanding some severe pinches which
had to be got over; reached our sixty-second camp on the Bloomfield River by twelve o’clock, after having
travelled eleven miles. Shod two horses in the afternoon, and I hope this is the last work of this description
which I shall have to perform to carry us in. The jaded horses came on very well to-day, and if I can only
get them on more level country I shall have some hopes of taking them on with me. —Ther., 67 ; bar., 28 97.
Wednesday, 1 6th October. —All ready to start by half-past seven o’clock, when wo moved on keeping
our old track for two and a-half miles, and passed through our sixtieth camp ; wo then commenced mounting
several ridges which were hard on men and horses, as they were very steep; the long grass made footing very
insecure, consequently more laborious; the horses had to spell on the hillside to gain their wind; one of the
mares gave in about a mile from camp, butj; was afterwards brought in by Dr. Tate. After crossing the
dividing ridge met with the Normanby waters at its base; to the west of our camp is a high and conspicuous
as well as a strong and scrubby range, which I have named Andrews’ Range at the request of the Doctor, who
had a friend of that name in the ill-fated “Maria,” bound to New Guinea, and who was drowned after the wreck
of that vessel. Travelled seven miles and made camp before twelve o’clock. In the afternoon Jerry spoke to
a blackfellow; the grass was fired near us, but could do us no harm, as we were on already burnt ground.
The appearance of the country has totally changed; no running stream now, with dense foliage on its banks,
and a rocky bed; the familiar sandy bed and tea-trees have replaced these—the green and fresh-looking scrubs
have also disappeared, to be replaced by dry and hard looking ridges. This is our first new camp towards the
west. —Ther., 71; bar., 29J9. Camp 65.
Thursday, Vlih October. —At a quarter to eight o’clock we were ready to move, and did so. When
all the horses were brought in, one of the mares (“ Maggie”) was missing. Left Stewart and Jerry to find her
and bring her on. Followed the course of the creek on which we camped last night, running in a north-westerly
direction, when in six miles we drew up in its bed to freshen the horses and wait for Stewart and Jerry with
the missing marc. After their arrival packed up again and moved on other four miles, making ten miles for
the day, still following the course of the stream. At our intended camp surprised a mob of gins and children;
the elder ones ran off; one gin took to a tree from which nothing could induce her to descend; two yo’dug
children were fast asleep on the sand in the river unconscious of the visitors, but, on awakening shortly after-
wards, they also went off. In their camp we found pieces of iron, and amongst them a rod of the same metal,
about three feet in length, evidently used as a yam stick. During the Doctor’s watch an alarm was given
that the blacks were prowling about the camp; when he fired upon them their retreat howling was proof that
such had been the case. The Doctor heard the rattling of spears as they were running away. We did these
fellows no harm to come upon us in this way during the night, but I suppose the natural desire to satisfy
curiosity, or something else, induced them to visit us. They were within a few feet of one of the sleepers.
The report of the firearms was enough for them. In the morning some natives were yelling at Stewart and
Jerry while hunting for the missing mare, but keeping well out of range while doing so. This is the second
instance in which natives have shown themselves during tjic night, and on both occasions during the Doctor’s
watch.—Ther., 72 ; bar,, 28’92. Camp 66.
Friday,


Friday, 18 ih October. —At half-past seven o’.clock, all being packed up, wo started, keeping the east
side of the creek for half-a-milc; then crossed and had fair travelling country for five miles over low ridges;
then for two miles followed the course of a creek with slate and quartz of good appearance for gold; we then
mounted a ridge and had two miles of very rough country, which the horses found great difficulty in passing
over, and then descended into another branch of the Normanby, and in half-a-mile further came to a halt.
This river at this spot is as wretched in aspect as one could desire; the ridges were of slate on the surface and
bare of vegetation, so that the horses had not a good time of it; it had water in holes at long distances, and
the bed was without the usual river feed for animals When we parted from this river, before making the
Endeavour, it was running a strong stream, and I imagine that its supply of running Water must be derived
from tho coast range, where the high scrubby mountains have water in every ravine. The river at our camp
was Avide, and in tho rainy season must pour an immense volume of water into the permanent branch, as it
takes its rise in the dividing range. One of the mares slipped her foal at this camp : I hope she will travel
all the better for it, and manage to get over the dry-looking country ahead of us—Ther., 75; bar., 28T8.
Camp 67*. .
Saturday, 1 Vth October. —At seven o’clock all ready, and started in a westerly direction for two miles
over a slate formation; we then mounted a basaltic ridge, and on the opposite fall passed over some of the
finest soil I have seen in the country, but its position renders it valueless for all useful purposes. I must here
mention that we have had the slate formation from the time we first came on the Endeavour, Oaky Creek
being its northern branch, and on which it was first met with; we carried it with us on to the Bloomfield,
and then through all the intervening country up to where we struck the basalt to-day, where the slate appears
to have been divided, it keeping the southern bank of the stream on Avhioh we now are, whereas the basalt
keeps the northern one; the stream appears to form the boundary between the two formations. We then
continued to pass over basaltic country for six miles, when a running creek was cut, on which I turned out
the horses for two or three hours, to give them the benefit of some good feed and rest a while. I ascended a
hill about two miles from our temporary camping ground, and ascertained that the creek ran north-westerly;
and I had, at tho same time, an extensive view over table land in a north and north-easterly direction. At one
o’clock, packed up again, following a west-north-west course over basaltic table land, and cut the creek in
four miles, following it down for three miles further in a north-Avesterly direction, making in all fifteen miles
of travelling for this day. I believe this to be the head waters of the Kennedy, as its general course is in
that direction; in fact, it can be no other river, as avc have long since done with the Normanby, the only
other stream it could bo, supposing the natural features of the ctrantry to permit of it There was
abundance of water here, in fact, in places it was running; the country around was not of first quality—that
is to say, on its western bank, the eastern one being of basaltic formation, and, no doubt, similar to what we
had already passed over. The ridges shewed considerable amount of quartz on the western side, with sand-
stone and slate bases. It was my intention to follow this river for this day, which I did, although not quite
my course; but I shall be satisfied with its identity with tho Kennedy, and it may lead me to a low part of
the range between this and the Palmer, which I wish to reach without much fatigue to the horses. —Ther.,
72 ; bar., 29-15. Camp 68.
Sunday, 2Oth October. —No spelling. As usual, lately, at a quarter to eight o’clock started, still following
the course of the river, which maintained its north-westerly course; in nine miles I came to a halt, and
formed camp, and as there was all the appearance of rain, had the fly pitched and the provisions secured.
Before sundown it commenced to rain, and continued to do so until ten o’clock, when it ceased in a great
measure; all very uncomfortable, as we have not been accustomed to rain, having had beautiful weather the
whole time out. The camp was on the same stream as in the morning; it has little animal life either on or in
the water. These eastern streams are singularly devoid of fish of any size, and very little game is to be seen.
The general course of the river would still indicate it to be the Kennedy. I cannot folloAV it much longer—it
bears me away too far out of my course; to-morrow will decide the point of tho range which I shall take,
which here, fortunately, is not very high. I hope to make an easy passage over to the western waters. The
description of country passed over to-day consisted of stony and broken quartz ridges, with box flats of very
poor soil; we still kept the basalt on our right hand. Another of the mares slipped her foal; the work has
been severe on these horses.—Ther., 72; bar., 29TC. Camp 69.
Monday, 21 st October. —Started at a quarter to eight o’clock, following a north-west course, the river
doing tho same. Went on ahead with Mr. Taylor to take bearings from a remarkable saddle hill, which I
have named Mount Aplin, after a friend in Townsville ; but did not succeed in our desire, as the weather was
hazy and showery. In six miles further cut a creek, and while I was ahead of my party came upon a native,
who at first ran away, but shortly returned with his friends, who began to shout and gesticulate, and brandish
their spears; I rode away to join my party without paying any attention to them. In one and a-half miles
again cut the river, which had increased in size, owing to a large tributary having joined it from the north-
east, about two miles below our morning’s camp. Here the natives again made their appearance, and began
to yell at us, all being armed with spears. I now thought it necessary to disperse them, so four of us dis-
mounted from our horses and advanced towards them. When one of our party went to within eighty yards of
the mob, one native made himself more conspicuous than the rest by preparing his spears for an onslaught;
but a ball fired in amongst them had the desired effect, for they all ran away without looking behind. This
was all I Avantcd. I had no wish to have these fellows hovering about the neighborhood, watching every
chance to pilfer or prowl about our camp at night. Started again, and in another mile and a-half pitched our
tents, as rain had fallen more or less all tho day, and towards evening settled into a steady fall. The day’s
journey amounted to nine miles; the camp was close under a range of sandstone. lam most anxious about a
pass, as the horses could not climb these precipices, and to make any more northing is throwing me terribly
out of my course. I have no doubt now as to this stream being the Kennedy.—Ther., 72; bar., 29-21.
Camp 70.
Tuesday, 22 nd October. — Eain during the night, and this morning more steadily than ever. Horses
brought up but let go; had hopes at mid-day of making a start, as the Aveathor cleared up for a short time;
no sooner were the horses brought up than it began again. I much regretted this delay, but, on the other
hand, it was favorable for the horses before beginning their passage to the Avestern Avaters, and Avould moreover
gives us this necessary element ingoing across; so I became resigned to our fortune. No sign of tho natives.
There is apparently a break in the range near us, which I hope Avill prove favorable to my Dosage. — Ther., 72;
bar., 29 - 36. Wednesday,


Wednesday, 23 rd October. —The weather having cleared, all was ready, and at a-quartcr past eight
o’clock, moved off the camp. In one and a-half miles, mounted a ridge which I took for a pass; when on the
other side, fell into a valley hemmed in on botlfsides by precipitous sandstone hills, isolated and broken, making
the ascent of one of them useless labor, as it would lead to no continuous ridge or table-land to assist me on
my course. The river here took a general course of west, with these forbidding hills on both sides. In the
middle of the day, turned out and shod a horse, the slates being very severe here. Saddled up again, and
went seven miles in a south-westerly direction over sandstone and conglomerate, the latter making the
horses to flinch in passing over them; and just about sundown, found a little—but sufficient—water to camp
on. Mr. Taylor had the misfortune to lose his barometer to-day—how, he does not know, but probably it was
dragged off his belt in the scrubs.—Ther., 71; bar., 29-40. Gamp 71,
Thursday, 2ith October. —At ten minutes to seven o’clock all was ready, and we started, when, after
going eleven miles, we came to a large river with fine feed, where I drew up and camped for a few hours to
enable the horses to make up for last night’s poor grass. I must be careful of my animals, as to push them on
without being certain of the'state of the country ahead, would be too imprudent during this season of the
year. About one o’clock re-saddled, following a south-westerly direction. Travelled seven and a-half miles,
and came upon a large running creek, with fine feed for the horses. The appearance of this creek, with its
large volume of water, has entirely changed my opinion as to the waters we have been encountering ever since
crossing the ridge dividing the Bloomfield from the Normanby. I now believe that we have been the whole
time on the watersheds of the latter river, and that all the large creeks—in fact, rivers—have been so
many tributaries of this stream. I have arrived at this conclusion from knowing that when the Normanby
was last seen by us it had a strong current, whereas none of the tributaries passed by us had any running
water at all, and the meeting with this last stream has drawn my attention to this fact, from which I have
drawn the above conclusion; and I also now believe that no water is supplied to the Normanby from the
ravines of the scrubby mountains on the coast, the whole of which drainage is carried off by the Endeavour and
Bloomfield Rivers. It would take a long time to examine every watercourse of the Normanby. These extend
over an immense area of country, and taking their rise as they do in different directions, it is very puzzling to
arrive at a correct conclusion of their ultimate course, and this difficulty is increased by the natural appearance
of the country, which shows ranges of more or less height to throw it out of its present course. And my
opinion is in a measure confirmed by the extent of the flooded country met with on the Normanby, where a
depth of fifteen feet of water was shown above the surrounding country—notwithstanding the steep banks of
the river, which would alone contain and carry off an immense volume of water. The tributaries enter the
dividing range at long distances apart, and In different formations of country. This last one is entirely in
sandstone, whereas others are in slate and basalt. Should Ibe right in my conclusions, it is evident that we
have not yet seen the Kennedy, which was not running when parted with, neither have we passed any other
river which showed the absorption of so strong a running stream as the one now met with by us, from which
I have drawn the inference that it forms the Normanby. Travelled ten and a-half miles to-day. The old
horse gave in in sight of camp; I fear that I shall have to abandon him.—Camp 72.
Friday, 'lbth October. —Left instructions to pack up at half-past seven o’clock. Whilst in company
with Mr. Taylor, proceeded to a sandstone hill near the camp, to take a view of the country and strike our
course; we, however, could not ascend to its summit, owing to its precipitous sides, but from just below it we
saw that we should have to leave the course desired to be followed, on account of a sandstone ridge coming
across our track, but by going a little to the south of west it could be rounded, when we believed that
our course could be resumed. Started at eight o’clock, and travelling six miles in the above direction, when
we were again thrown out, and had actually to go two miles north to travel at all, which was turning our backs
on the homeward route; but as this would not do, I drew up on a creek with water, in order that I might look
and hunt for a pass through these towering sandstone hills with precipitous sides, over which a pass was out
of the question. The horses would not touch the green-looking grass lining the banks of the creek, owing, no
doubt, to its sour character. I now started off on foot, and was absent two hours while ranging these
formidable barriers to our progress, and at last found a ravine that would lead me to the top, if I could only
get the horses to climb up it; its rough and rugged characted made it almost hopeless, but as every attempt
had to be made to overcome this difficulty, I resolved upon trying the ravine at all risks, as turning our backs
to our course went sadly against the grain, seeing how far we should have to go to get out at all from amongst
these frowning hills. 1 returned to camp, packed up and started, making the blackboy to lead the way and
clear all obstructions in the shape of trees across our path; the horses were driven in small mobs with a man
between each lot to keep them under control. When we commenced the passage, the difficulties of footing for
the animals were very great, owing to large slippery boulders lining the bed of the small creek, and in places
the passage was completely blocked by rocks, when they had to ascend the mountain sides to avoid them; the
sandstone hills were looking down upon us, at a height of 300 feet on either side, making the whole scene
grand but not pleasant. At last the difficult ascent was accomplished, and I congratulated myself on
its success, as on reaching the top I had the western fall at my feet, by following which I should reach
the Palmer in safety; this river being looked upon by us all as our half-way house towards Fossilbrook,
the goal of our thoughts. Immediately over the other side of the summit of the pass, we struck
the head of a creek, almost as rough as the ravine just ascended, which we followed down to the camp,
where about sundown we got some water in its bed, which was here hemmed in on all sides by steep slate hills,
forming it into a gorge. We had to camp in the bed of the creek near the water. The labor was severe on
the horses, owing to the stony nature of the country and the deep gullies they had to descend at the head of
the creek, where the ridges were thickly strewn with conglomerate quartz pebbles—in fact, paved with them—
and which the horses faced with great reluctance; added to this, the grass was old and worthless, so that there
was not a good night in store for them. But we were all thankful for being where we were. The old horse
was brought on this morning, but again gave in in sight of camp; and I very much fear that this day’s work
and bad night, will settle for him; however, I shall place him in as good a position as I can, and leave him.
The country travelled over this morning, before arriving at those sandstone ranges, is of the poorest description,
being nothing but sand, and timbered with stringy-bark, bloodwood, and numerous other trees found on sandy
soil; water was found in abundance in creeks and swamps. Travelled fourteen miles to-day, which, altogether,
was a hard day’s journey.—Camp 73.
Saturday, 26 th October. —As anticipated, the horses came up looking wretched after a night on such
poor feed as they had had; consequently, the sooner we were out of our imprisoned camp the better. This we
did


did by seven o’clock, keeping the bed of the creek, which was rough at first, but soon began to open and fast
assume the proportions of a river, owing to the tributaries which now joined it. After travelling seven and
a-half miles, I drew up on some fine feed for the horses, which they much needed ; and after spelling three
hours re-saddled and commenced our journey, which was generally in a westerly direction. But I found, at
last, that it would not do to follow this river any further, as its course was most tortuous, and it kept bearing
away in a northerly direction, which I, at first, attributed to the sandstone hills by driving here and then
there. However, its general trending to the north at last compelled me to draw up, as I was determined not
to follow it further without first ascertaining the ultimate course, which I resolved to do the following morning.
I now'retraced my steps to within a short distance of our mid-day camp, so as to give the horses the benefit of
the, good feed there. I may say here that doubts began to arise in my mind whether I was on western
waters yet, seeing the course this river was taking. Yet it was hard to bring myself to believe that it was
not, and to solve this doubt became necessary before travelling further. After arriving in camp proceeded
with Mr. Taylor to a high range near the camp, which was most difficult of ascent, and from its summit
Mr. Taylor recognised a limestone hill and a carboniferous range seen during our former camping on the
Palmer, which was, of course, against our being on western waters; still I felt reluctant to credit it. We
were camped at the entrance of a valley which was running our course, and promised us some fair travelling
for a few jniles on our road to-morrow—supposing we were not on western waters.—Camp 74.
Sunday, 27 th October. —lmmediately after breakfast, started away on horseback to ascertain the course
of the river on which we were camped, when in five miles and a-half all doubts were solved as to which water
it was, by its taking a northerly direction, and sometimes to the east of that point. Up to hero the river ran
among sandstone ranges, but after this I found this formation to end on the western side, while it continued
to maintain its character on the eastern branch of the stream as far as I could see. I believe this to be a
continuation of the range seen by Mr. Taylor and myself from Jessie’s Tableland on the 25th August last,
while on our way out. Here then we were still on the eastern slope, while our severe passage through the
sandstone hills was nothing more than a dividing feature between two sources of waters, of which the one we
were camped on was the Kennedy, and was no doubt the one followed by the explorer of that name, to its
outlet in Princess Charlotte’s Bay. It was most important to learn this, and I felt some satisfaction at it, but
the next source of anxiety was, what was the character of the Main Dividing Range between our present
position and the Palmer? As far as I could see it promised to be easy; but appearances are so deceptive, as we
have found out more than once on this trip, that it is unwise to arrive at any conclusion until the actual fact
has been tried and proved, which I hope we will be able to do to-morrow. I returned to camp, and at twelve
o’clock started up the valley on a course of south; when in five miles I camped. By this I hoped to break the
next day’s stage, which I expected to be a long one, if not a severe one. The valley is bounded on one side
by a slate range, and on the opposite side by a sandstone one; in one spot it had some fine soil, but to a limited
extent, it also had a creek running down its whole length, containing abundance of water. The old horse
still able to follow. —Camp 75.
Monday, 2Sth October. —Delayed a short time in consequence of two of the horses having left the
mob, but by eight o’clock we were off, following up the valley at a point of south ; travelling very good until
the two ranges draw together, when it became a mere pass for one horse at a time—still not a very bad road;
this we had for about one mile, when the travelling became good, and the ascent easy and gradual until we
reached the summit of the range, which is here low between the eastern and western waters. Here we at once
beheld old familiar landmarks noted by us during our former sojourn on the Palmer, which was now at our feet
at a distance of about six miles or thereabouts. The first point which we at once remembered was a conical
hill about one mile from the river, while, in the distance to the south, rose Mount Mulgrave, showing out
boldly against the horizon, and indicating to us the road we had to follow. This is a very remarkable moun-
tain, being the southern termination, at a precipice of a range which shoots away from it northerly, where it
gradually merges into low ridges, whilst its rising abruptly out of low lands to the south gives it a bold and
picturesque appearance. On arrival at the river found the stream had very considerably increased, owing, no
doubt, to the same rains which we had experienced, and which must have fallen heavily in the ranges; crossed
the river, and formed camp, after having travelled twelve and a-half miles. Our present camp was between two
of our former ones, when prospecting this river for gold.—Camp 76.
Tuesday, 29 th October. —Remained here this day to spell the horses, and give the members of the
party a day to do necessary work, and bring up the charts so far. The country in the vicinity was on fire,
and as it was approaching us fast, all hands turned to, when we fired tlie grass at the camp, on which so soon
as a patch had been cleared everything was removed, and the fire allowed to take its course. In less than an
hour we were surrounded by flames, but everything was safe, and we felt contended. Two horses that had
lost their shoes had others put on. Sent out Jerry to hunt for traces of the horse lost hereabouts on our
outward trip, but he could see none. I hope the horse has made his way in, but I have my doubts of it. All
remark the difference of temperature on this side of the Dividing Range; on the coast the breezes were cool
and refreshing, while here there is very little, and it is at once hot and dry—the pleasing verdure of the coast
is also wanting.
Wednesday, 3 Oih October. —Commenced our first day’s stage from what all consider the half-way house
to Fossilbrook, and by half-past seven o’clock we were leaving our camp on the Palmer. Went a south course
with Mount Mulgrave as our signboard, when, in seventeen miles, we reached a creek at its base, on which we
formed camp—thus making a long day for the horses. The first twelve miles of the morning’s journey was
over a mica schist formation, with quartz in great quantities over the surface; this brought us to the divide
between the Palmer and Mitchell Rivers, after which the formation consisted of the same rocks with patches
of sandy country. The old horse gave in about one mile from camp, but was brought in in the evening. The
day’s travelling was easy, being across low ridges. A bold and conspicuous range, named by me Thompson
Range, commences on the banks of the Palmer, and stretches across to the bank of the Mitchell, and forms a
remarkable configuration of the country j its direction is north and south, and between it and the Mount
Mulgrave Range the Palmer can be reached over easy travelling ground. Should any enterprising diggers be
disposed to follow up the indications of gold which were met with in this river, they should bear this in mind
so soon as they have sighted Mount Mulgrave. Water was found everywhere, and I have no doubt, judging from
my experience of this country, that it is of a permanent character. —Camp 77.
Thursday, 31s* October. —By eight o’clock we bade farewell to Mount Mulgrave, and started for the
Mitchell. On the road killed a fine kangaroo, which was most acceptable to all, as we had long lived on salt
meat


meat. Here we also procured a vegetable called “Jack’s grass,” which makes a tolerable edible when boiled :
it makes its appearance after rain, and bears a small blue flower. The kangaroo saved me three meals of salt
meat, which will considerably help me on my road to Fossllbrook, as it was running short. At one o’clock
we found ourselves on the banks of the Mitchell again, and at our former crossing-place. The river had con-
siderably increased owing to the late rains; it was reached in fourteen miles from our morning’s camp. Made
a great haul of fish here; wo did the same at the Palmer —Camp 78.
Friday, Ist November. —The first thing in the morning 1 started olf with my. blackboy to look at the
crossing-place, which I found to be easy fording, the water not passing much over the horse’s girths, and, as
these had been packed during my absence, we started off and crossed the river in safety; we then followed a
course of S. 20 W. for the first three miles, over basalt country; then over three miles of a sandy and flat
country; after which we had a limestone formation during the remainder of the day. It was my intention to
have made a moderate day’s stage to-day, but at nine miles, where I expected to find water and grass, there
were neither; so I had to push on other nine miles' before I could secure these for the horses. I had to
abandon the old horse after going nine miles (my proposed camping ground), as I knew that he could not
accomplish the remaining half of the day’s stage ; he is on good country, and I have no doubt that his instinct
will lead him to water on the Walsh (which is at no great distance) or some of its tributaries. Passed over
some of the finest soil conceivable, the same as noted by me on the outward trip; it extends very nearly to the
Walsh, and would be splendid pastoral country, supposing the rains hereabouts to be regular, but of which
nothing is known. Made Elizabeth Creek by four o’clock, which the horses were glad to reach, as they had
had a severe day in passing over the limestone formation plains, owing to the rotten and sinking nature of the
soil. We struck Elizabeth Creek at the spot crossed by us on our outward track, and camped in its bed.—
Camp 79.
Saturday, 2nd November. —l resolved to make a short day, so pushed on and reached the Walsh in
three miles; here I found abundance of grass and water. This camp was below our 12th camp on our outward
journey. The finest fish are to be found in these western waters, so different from the eastern ones; hero
something can bo shot, there nothing; but the coast country is cooler and fresher in appearance, the first
owing to the sea breezes, the latter to the dense vegetation of the scrubs and their different tints of green.
Our situation on the coast was becoming an anxious one. It is very doubtful indeed whether we could have
stood the endurance requisite to struggle with our position among the huge mountains on the coast upon our
restricted allowance of food; in fact, some of the members of the party said so, but now all are cheerful,
seeing the end approaching which is to terminate months of roughing. Jerry saw two natives near us whilst
the horses were being washed, but they quickly disappeared. The diary will contain very little interest now,
as we are travelling .over known ground, and where not, it is simply deviated from to cut off bends.—Camp 80.
Sunday, 3rd November. —Although this is Sunday, the party preferred waiting for repose until the
haven of rest is reached. Owing to five of the mares having strayed away from the other horses, no start
could be made before eleven o’clock, at which hour we were off again, and after going twelve miles camped on
the river between our 11th and 12th camps. Abundance of grass and water —Camp 81.
Monday, Aih November. —The first thing after breakfast started with Mr, Taylor to hunt for some more
fossils, being now on the ground whore wo had procured some on our outward track; went to the spot where
I had made a cdche, and opened it, when I found that those I had buried on my way out were completely
destroyed by the water getting to them in their broken state. As our short search gave us nothing new, we
resumed our journey at ten o’clock, when the course of the river was followed for nine miles and camped.
Passed our 10th outward camp during the day. The river at this point bore a strikingly dissimilar aspect to
that below. There we had innumerable birds, whereas here it had all the appearances of desertion. As this
was to be my last camp on this stream, and as I saw sandstone making its appearance on the opposite bank,
promising a rough country, I thought it best to camp early, so as to give the horses the benefit of good feed
before pushing across to the Tate, as I expected a long and dry stage to that river, and was not very certain of
finding water even there. I dread to-morrow’s journey for those of my horses that have no shoes. —Camp 82.
Tuesday, bth November. —Started at half-past seven o’clock ; went up the river one mile and crossed,
and immediately got in amongst sandstone hills and ridges, the latter of which were very scrubby in places;
these were then cleared in six miles, when we came upon open ridges, some of which had been burnt, while
others not so. At ten o’clock some water of very inferior quality was found in a small hole, at which I drew
up and camped for two hours; the horses did not like the water, of which a small quantity satisfied them ;
the members of the party had some of it as tea, but it was not found to be good or wholesome. At three
o’clock packed up and pushed on over low ridges until sundown, when wo camped without water for men and
horses—the creek at which we drew up having become dry. But there was water in the neighborhood some-
where, as evidenced by the presence of certain birds that cannot do without it; during the early part of,the
evening I traced the creek down for three miles in search of water, but found none—so did Jerry, my black-
boy, who was equally unsuccessful—so that there was nothing for it but to wait till the next day. It was no
more than what I expected, and I felt for the horses, the day having been very hot, during which they had
travelled twenty-two and a-half miles.—Camp 83.
Wednesday, Gth November. —The horses had not strayed much, considering that they had had no
water, and as there was no breakfast to be got ready for the party, shortly after sunrise we were cn the move;
after going four miles cut a large tributary of the Tate, but found no water; tried for it by digging
with equal result, and Jerry was not more successful down the creek; so I pushed on for the Tate, which was
reached in eight miles from the morning’s camp, where wo found abundance of water for men and beasts, and
were thankful for it. The heat in this river bed was something intense, and as one or two horses had to be
shod it was doubly painful to bear. Feed for the horses very inferior; however, I did not intend camping
here for the night, so at four o’clock packed and started up the river for two miles, where I found its course to
bear away too far to the eastward to be within ray lino of travel, in consequence of which I drew up and
camped on the left bank of the river, where there was splendid feed for the horses along its flats. I look
forward to another long stage to the Lynd, unless I am helped along my road by some tributary of the Tate
coming from the direction of my course, which I shall consider a fortunate circumstance. The horses are
now all lightly packed, having come to the last of our provisions, which will just reach Fossilbrook, so that I
can push them if required; but this I dread doing, as many of them are very lame and tender for the want of
shoes, which I bad not to fit them; travelled ten miles in all. Roused up during the early part of the night
to pack


to pack away everything likely to damage, as the appearances for rain were threatening, but none fell at the
camp, although a few miles off it appeared to bo falling heavily.—Camp 84. *
Thursday, 7th November. —Started off at half-past seven o’clock, and pursued a southerly course,
following the windings of a tributary of the Tate; the ridges very stony for the horses’ feet; the creek con-
tained water which promised to help us across to the Lynd. Found last night’s rain had fallen sufficiently
heavily to collect in holes, which also promised to be in our favor Passed over a greenstone formation of
country with quartz veins popping out in all directions, but nothing known of its extent—possibly it may
reach to the river. Travelled seven and a-half miles, and camped for a few hours; when in other three and a-
half miles camped for the night, making eleven miles for the day; fine grass for the horses. During nearly
the whole of this day passed over a most promising looking country for gold, and well worth the time and
attention of gold seekers; believed to be of considerable extent, thus presenting a large area for prospecting
operations; it is the best looking country seen by us as yet.—Camp 85.
Friday, Bth November. —At twenty minutes to seven o’clock we were on the move, when in five miles
we came to two hills on our course, one of which was ascended by Mr. Taylor and myself, in order that we
might view our position ; the first hill I named Mount MaoDevitt, after the member for the Kennedy, and the
other Mount St. George, after the Commissioner at the Etheridge. Up to this point the country was of
similar character for gold as that passed over by us yesterday. We saw a rough road before us for a few
miles, which was indeed rough, as our course entered into low granite ridges most painful for the horses; but,
fortunately, the grass had been burnt, which enabled them in some measure to pick their way over their stony
track, which lasted for about three miles, when all at once we emerged on a flat sandy country, giving us fair
travelling for the remainder of the day; when we drew up at some rain water collected in a shallow creek and
camped, making eleven miles for the day’s stage. Roused up during the night to put up the tent to protect
us against the rain, which fell heavily enough to make all wet. After Arriving in camp, Mr. Taylor and I
proceeded to a hill near us, from whence we saw the Lynd and Fossilbrook Creek at a distance of three miles
in a southerly direction.—Camp 86.
Saturday, 9 th November. —The feed on this sandy granite country looks better than it is, and the
straying of the horses proved this; when they were brought in, one of the mares laid down, and was evidently
suffering from pain, as she showed by signs, which were by constantly looking round at her flanks. I
immediately attributed it to some poisonous grass generally found on this sort of country, when I received
another alarm by the announcement from the Doctor that Mr. Taylor’s riding horse was also poisoned, and
that many other horses were lying down, all supposed to be affected in the same way. This, however, turned
out to be nothing more in the case of these latter but a desire to rest; but I immediately packed up, not
waiting for a missing mare, as I did not wish to run the risk of losing any more horses. Left Stewart and
Jerry to seek “ Creamy” whilst I pushed on with the rest, and after going six miles crossed the Lynd and camped,
awaiting Stewart and Jerry, who shortly afterwards came up with the missing mare. Packed up again after
giving the horses a spell on good feed, and passed on to Fossilbrook Greek, which was followed for five miles
and a-half, when camp was formed. The promise of a bottle of brandy among us, with half a fig of tobacco to
each member, was now fulfilled by me, having said that I would give this on arrival at Fossilbrook Creek.
Tent again pitched, as we were threatened with rain, but none fell. I had now given the last of my supply
of tobacco, which in fairness belonged to my blackboy, so that with this brandy and doughboy, all saved for
this occasion, there was tolerably high feeding in camp, as compared to what we had been accustomed to
lately.—Camp 87.
Sunday, 10 th November, —The horses were soon got, when by 8 o’clock we were again on our road ;
followed the creek, which was frequently crossed and re-crossed to avoid rough country, and in twelve and
a-half miles, once more saw other civilised faces besides our own, having arrived at a lambing station of Firth’s,
situated on this creek, where we were hospitably received by his sons, and where we also got some fresh meat,
a luxury long looked for by us all. I intended pushing on to the head station at Mount Surprise the following
day.—Camp 88.
Monday, 11 th November. —So soon as all were ready, which was not very early, as the horses which
had been brought up were off again while the party was at breakfast, we were on the road for Mount Surprise,
which we reached by one o’clock, and were here received and hospitably entertained by Mr. Firth’s family,
whose kindness was appreciated by us all. I intended going on to Junction Creek to telegraph the arrival of
the party, but was informed by some travellers, who had just arrived from there, of the absence of the Tele-
graph-master along the line, so I delayed my departure to the next morning.
Tuesday, 12 th November. —l started off early this morning, leaving my party to follow, as I was
desirous of forwarding messages, if possible, announcing my safe return. Fortunately, Mr. O’Brian came home
at one o’clock, and at the same moment my party arrived from Mount Surprise, so that all anxieties were at
an end. I telegraphed at once to W. 11. Walsh, Esquire, the Minister for Works, announcing my return, and
requesting instructions as to the disbanding of my party, which I look upon as the closing scene of the
expedition, its troubles and anxieties.
Conclusion.—l cannot conclude my journal without one more regret at our inability to continue our
journey down by the east coast. lam disappointed, because the discoveries I had hoped to make, have been
diminished. I have, however, already sufficiently detailed the difficulties which opposed me, and rendered a
return southwards, in that direction, an impossibility. On looking back on those few miserable and trying
days, which required all our resolution and fortitude to carry us through, I am impressed with a feeling of
thankfulness to the Almighty, that we were enabled to surmount the difficulties which surrounded us, and
effect our retreat and ultimate return to civilization in safety, and every man in good health.
Still the expedition will not have been fruitless, even .if the only result were that the country has been
travelled over. When once an unknown country has been explored, the way is comparatively easy for the
future. Most of the difficulties are now known, and once they are placed on record, they are difficulties no
longer, for they are anticipated, and can be prepared for; amongst the trials of an explorer, not the least by
any means is the “ Unknown.”
During


During tlic journey, occupying about five months, comparatively devoid of interest and incident as
it was—unvaried, save by the monotonous unpacking, camping, and re-packing, always with more or less of
discomfort and privation, if not even of actual hardship, and consequently requiring an amount of self-
abnegation, which is rarely practised or required in a community—it was not to bo expected that the trip would
be entirely exempt from an occasional loss of temper, and perhaps a few sharp words, but these were few, and
produced no lasting ill-will amongst any of us: in one respect, however, there was, throughout, perfect
harmony and unanimity in the party, who, one and all, did their utmost in carrying out the objects of the
expedition, and in their endeavor to promote its success; and, though all deserve duo credit, and my best
thanks for that, I would especially refer to the native hoy, Jerry, who, unsustained by the same inducements,
was faithful and obedient in every difficulty, and staunch in every danger.
WM. HANN.
Authority : James C. Beal, Government Printer, 'William street, Brisbane






