

AkO \J. 0\
PRINTED FOR PRIVATE
circulation.
Xmas iqo6.
C°py °J Rlter addressed to J. A. v did my printing for the Exhibition at
Panton, Esq., J.P., from the late Sec-, that time.
rotary of the St. Kilda Cemetery. I was sent to officially take posses-
Dear Sir,
It is with the greatest reluctance I
herewith take the liberty of addressing
you re my troubles, but friends in my
forced exile have counselled .me to do
so, and tell you the whole truth ; in
the hopes of your publishing same. In
doing so, I must not only go into part
of my own private life, but must refer
to matters well known to your self, for
the edification of others who, I hope,
will read this. If I say anything in
this appeal that may hurt the feelings
of anyone, lam very sorry. What Inns
finally decided me to appeal to you is
the attack made by Mr. Ehnsley in
the Legistative Assembly on the Trus-
tees and myself, as set forth in the
“ Argus,” in the beginning of Novem-
ber last, and I feel certain that he will
be sorry when he reads this, the truth
ol the whole matter, that he made
me solely for the personal interests
of one person.
io begin with, there should never
have been a cemetery on the site it now
occupies, and had it undergone the se-
vere tests made by the officers of the
Boai d of Health which is now carried
out by them on proposed sites for
Cemeteries, it would never have been
gazetted as such.
I came to this State (Victoria) to
the Exhibition of 1880, and my love
ol flowers and Landscape gardening,
coupled with my profession, that of an
Undertaker, and spending some years
in a Contractor’s office, adapted me
for the position I occupied the best of
mv life, a period of 23 years.
Mi. M Cutchon, of the Legislative
Assembly, must remember me for he
sion of the Cemetery at the beginning
of 1883. My official appointment as
Resident Secretary and Manager, dat-
ing from April of that year.
Through the absence of the Chair-
man in England, there had at that
time been no meetings of importance
held for some months, and things had
got into a muddle. At the time of my
appointment, there were twelve Trus-
tees, seven representing religious bod-
ies, and five the neighbouring Munici-
palities. Ihe representatives of reli-
gion, hold their appointment for life,
but the others retained theirs only
while on the Council they represented.
This means constant changes ; each
fresh Trustee coming with an axe to
grind. There were also, prior to my
appointment, three leading officers, all
with separate duties, viz. Secy., R.
Kellerhcr, Esq., Barrister at Law.
Surveyor, Sydney Smith, Esq., C.E.
and Manager, Mr. James Opray. I was
appointed solely responsible under the
Trustees, for the Cemetery and its
maintenance. •
Later on, the appointment of the
Mayor of St, Kilda lapsed on account
of the shortness of his term of office,
thus leaving eleven Trustees as now
constituted. At the time of my ap-
pointment I was preparing to return
to England, but my friends . wished me
to stay, and for them to send ..out an
invalid wife to this delightful climate
to join me. The late Detective Walk-
, living then in Westbury St., was a
fellow worshipper at our Parish Church
and to him I confided the greatest
trouble in my management, vi/.., the
robberies from the graves, and I pres-
sed him into helping me to put it
down.
1


From information I received from
Mr. Dear of the neighbouring firm of
Tope tSc Dear, I suspected my own men
so it was arranged that we were t not
to communicate with each other until
he was prepared with a report. For
six weeks he was watching men em-
ployed about the Cemetery and then
reported that Mr. Dear and his men
were doing the robberies, and he put
me in the way of detecting them. This
I did ; in a very short time he and one
of his men were summonsed before the
Magistrates at St. Kilda. I had no
pity for him, and in spite of all man-
ner of promises and offers of bribery, I
followed the matter up very severely.
They were well defended by Mr. Leon-
ard, of Messrs. Mcßean and Leonard,
and at a time when Mr. Kdwards, of
the present firm of Messrs Edwards
Cook, was in their employ. But in
spite of a most able defence, Mr. Dear
was found guilty, and heavily fined.
At this trial and all subsequent trials
Mr. Tope found the cash, and I have
been followed up with an unjust perse-
cution ever since, terminating with
this my present troubles.
A few evenings after the trial a lady
called upon me, and said she kept an
Hotel in St. Kilda, and she could not
sleep at nights through thinking over
the dreadful threats she had over
heard made by Mr. Dear and his men
as to‘what they would do to me, she
therefore thought it her duty to put
me on my guard ; but they did not as-
sault me as she anticipated. We had
as clerk in the office at that time, one,
who’s only fault was drink. At that
time we opened the office of a Sunday
morning, and he used to dine with me,
(being left in charge). On these occas-
ions I detected him the worse for
drink, and my housekeeper gave as her
opinion that drink was brought to him
in the Board room during my absence
at Church, and on my consulting my
ever revered friend, the late Rev. J. H.
Gregory, he advised me to give the of-
fice a visit of surprise. His words
were,” Hymn me into the pulpit, then
oil you go, but I hope and trust your
visit will be a failure, for I very much
like your clerk.” Unfortunately I dis-
covered him drinking with Mr. Dear
and examining the books. I ordered
Dear out, and suspended the clerk. As
I am a very early riser, and access to
my Chairman was ever open to me be-
fore his breakfast, I consulted him ear-
ly on Monday morning, and obtained
his consent to instantly discharge the
man, giving him wages in lieu of no-
tice. This I did, in no doubt too se-
vere a manner, for after paying him I
rang the signal for my fellow officer,
Mr. John Green and told him to sec
that the man took nothing from the
place, but his own property, and to
ring me up if he had trouble.
I then went down the grounds to as-
sist at the Rockeries, very soon my
signal rang, and John met me by say-
ing, “ Your office is clear sir.” I
smelt Rum, and found that the re-
mains of a bottle had been unearthed
and disposed of.
The clerk left me a note as follows :
” What you have done for me thanks.
Thanks for the money I have not earn-
ed, but what I shall do for you will be
seen in the future.” My first im-
pulse was to tear the letter up, but
on second considerations I kept it. A
few days after, just about 9 o’clock
a.m.,my Chairman, Vice Chairman,
and the late Mr. David Johnstofl,
into the office, I could not understand
their stiff reception, until a statuary
declaration was handed to me, signed
by the late clerk, stating that I was
in the habit of borrowing nouey from
the Under takers, and that I received a
tip of £5 from Mr. Simmers, a Monu-
mental Mason. I told them I had
been in the habit of collecting money
owing from the Undertakers, when
friends of deceased people referred me
to them, and that a sum of £5 had
been collected from Simmers fen* ten
monumental fees, and showed them tha
entry. During the investigation Mr.
Johnson sat outside. My Chairman
and Vice Chairman were perfectly sat


isfied, and wishing me “ Good Morn-
ing went into town. Mr. Johnson,
however, told me that if anything had
been wrong, they would have locked me
up. Knowing that under the circum-
stances I could not retain my authori-
ty if I took no notice of the matter, I
sent a messenger; to town saying that I
wanted an audit at once. They got their
report into the Chairman by n » m.
next day, and Mr. Turner and >lr. Al-
ston allowed me to proceed with sum-
mons etc. •
I again pressed into the work my
dear friend Walker, and there was no
trouble with the evidence on hand to
get both the Clerk and Mr. Dear com-
mitted for trial for wilful and corrupt
perjury and conspiracy. Then commen-
ced a long and tedious trial, before
the Chief Justice Higgenbottom. Mr.
Purvis was defending.
Undertakers were called beastly birds
of prey, who feasted upon the dead.
Mr. Simmers, a drunken bankrupt Ma-
son, because he had an overdraft, and
his banker proved he could not have
given me a £5 tip and paid fees
owing. Mr. Purvis found out I did mot
like being called a sexton. On my assoc-
iating a date with Cup Day, I was in-
troduced to the jury as a racey sexton.
All the witnesses for the prosecution
were grossly insulted, and the case dis-
missed. We were then under the Crown
Taw office, not the Board of Health,
at#( the persecution 1 had to suffer was
the means of the Chief Justice having
to be applied to and he gave as his
opinion that a gross miscarriage of
Justice had taken place. The clerk
has since taken a statutory declaration
that he was lead on by Dear, under
the influence of drink, to do what he
did. Mr. John Green, who is at pre-
sent in the employ of the Trustees wit-
nessed it, and he always has said had
he been in the witness box instead of
me, the prosecution taken up by the
Crown would have been successful. The
result of this trial was that Dear be-
came insolvent and never got his cer-
tificate, Tope found most of the me 11-
cy. Soon after this all Cemeteries
were placed under the control of the
Health Department.
When 1 was first appointed, I induc-
ed the Trust to take over the respon-
sibility of decorating and mainten-
ance of graves. My predecessor was
allowed to do this work, and it was a
source of profit to him. On my Trus-
tees reminding me I was giving up a
privilege, I asked in return to be al-
lowed to collect the All Saints pew
rents in our office. They acceded to
my request, and took over the work,
the profits arising from same they al-
lowed me to spend beautifying the
Cemetery. This gave great offence to
Tope & Dear, and the fight continued.
As years went on and the fees for
burials and sale of land began to fall
off I gained permission to do outside
work. I said to my Trustees, here we
arc in the midst of a rich locality,
with plenty of conveniences, let me do
Nurserv Work, I will then keep the
Cemetery beautiful for ever. Unfortun-
ately for me, as it afterwards turned
out, this was acceeded to, for a depu-
tation, headed by Tope & Dear, waited
on the government, and although we
kept the accounts separate from the
gazetted fees, the Minister of Health
decided it was illegal. In spite of the
whole of my Trustees waiting on him
and the Board of Health pleading our
cause, we received an official communi-
cation from the Board of Health stat-
ing that the Minister could see no
cause for altering his decision. So* you
see, said our Chairman, we cannot sup-
port you in your plans, although we
all appreciate them.
Dr. Gresswell who very much ap-
preciated my efforts, but who remind-
ed me we were servants to the repre-
sentatives of the people, advised me to
start a company, and he went so far
as to say he would take shares if nec-
essary. The then Mayor, Victor Sem-
me, also advised me to take my ideas
outside for I had introduced grave
mouldings to do away with tiles and
iron rails, which gave great offence,
3


As my duties then would not allow me
to accompany my ideas, I was the
means of forming the Adamant Grave
Moulding, & Maintenance Co. and Sun-
beam Nursery, which established them-
selves next door to Messrs. Tope &
Dears, and I made over all my proper-
ty to Adamant Co. Then followed a
most disastrous sale of the Trustees
property connected with my ideas,
which nearly broke my heart. Named
Roses worth }/- a piece went for 9d.
per dozen ; Bulbular plants, in pots
collected by Mr. Godfrey and myself
from all parts of the world, and en-
ough to extend from gate to gate like
the Chrysanthemums did, were wilful-
ly mixed up, and practically given
away. The glass houses went for shil-
lings that had cost as many pounds,
and that three days sale, which was
presided over by a sub Committee con-
sisting of Messrs. Godfrey, Wimpole,
and Matthews, was very near the
death of me. All the work of years
swept away in three days. Had the
nursery been allowed to remain an in-
dustry would have been established that
wonlh have been a blessing to the Cem-
etery, and locality. No one appealed
in vain for contributions from this
source, either to forward good works
or Charity. My prize Chrysanthem-
ums were sold in bundles at many a
Charitable Bazaar. All was knocked in
the head by Tope & Dear & Co.
The Grave Mouldings would have
paid, had not shoddy stuff got into
the market which practically stamped
them out, and the Company did not
pay a penny dividend. At about this
time we had to shorten hands, and a
man named Boothman had to go. He
was, however, retained half time, on
our decorating staff, and the other
half of his time he worked for the
Adamant Co., and turned it into a
Monumental. Works. We all had just
cause for dispensing with his services,
and he entered into the employment of
Mi* lope. "I 'hen followed another per-
ihfa time brought on by Mr.
Dear, Mr. Tope again finding the
money.
We had to answer seven charges, a
list of which were officially forwarded
to us. At this time Dr. Gresswell was
constantly consulting us re the propos-
ed sites for the new Cemeteries, arid I
often saw him. Two of the charges I
wiped oil prior to the trial, one was
prostituting the ofiice by taking pew
rents, and the other was utilising Gov-i
eminent buildings by letting lodgings]
t(> a Church of Kngland Clergyman,
who was doing other Clergy and Mini-
sters out of their fees. The first I gave
over to a friend, the second, I caused
a lady friend to rent a house right op-
posite the Church, and to take over the
Curate. Our legal adviser informed me
he was most anxious to secure the ser-
vices of Mr. McArthur, but unfortun-
ately the other side had retained him,
and he had therefore retained Mr. Pur-
vis. When I expressed my astonishment
Mr. Purvis having been against us in
1883, he said all the better, but it will
be a hard fight, for Mr. McArthur was
sure to do his best against a veteran
like Mr. Purvis. The case was tried
before Mr. Justice Gaunt, and previuus
to the trial our council said, “Look
here Trnelovc, 1 had you on toast in
1883, now be careful, only answer yes
or no and be as brief as possible, you
are a terrible bad witness.” When Mr.
Dear got in the box Mr. Purvis said,
“Let me see I have seen yon before,” to
which Dear said, “ No doubt.” Mr.
Purvis then said,“ Did not I defend
you in 1883.” “ Yes,” said Mr. Dear.
“ Did I ever get fully paid for it,” said
Mr. Purvis, “ No,” said Mr. Dear,
gleefully. Then'followed a cross-exam-
ination, chiefly on the two charges
named. I was very roughly dealt with
by Mr. McArthur, called a champion
liar, and I do not know what, but I
stuck to my instructions as the follow-
ing incident will show. Mr. McArthur
in his speech said that I had called
my friends and relations together, fig-
nrativelv speaking, my sisters and cou-
sins, arid aunts and formed a company
4


to ruin his client, called the Adamant
Grave Moulding and Maintenance Co.,
& Sunbeam Nursery etc. etc. Now,
said Mr. McArthur, I will read out the
names of the share holders of this com-
pany. W. B. Hayward, Ksq., Chair-
man, “ What relation is he to you?”
“ None whatever,” I replied, J. Glad*
stone Wright, Ksq, “ What relation is
he to you,” “ None whatever was the
answer. George Savage, Ksq., “ What
relation is he to you,” again 1 answer-
ed, “ None whatever.” Mr. Purvis
then said, “ These are the sisters, and
cousins, and aunts, gentlemen, and
looked approvingly at me. There was
a laugh which caused a break during
which Mr. Dear gained the ear of his
Council. “ Did not Mr. Haywood
marry your housekeeper,” “He did,”
said I. “ Did not Mr. Gladson Wright
marry your housekeeper,” “ He did,”
I answered. “ Did not Mr Savage mar-
ry your housekeeper,” “ He did,” was
the reply. At this there was a titter
iu Court, and the Judge said, “ Bless
me, do you keep a matrimonial agen-
cy, sir. I began then to explain that
my late housekeepers were ladies be-
yond reproach, recommended to me by
the neighbouring Clergy, and my choir
men did marry my housekeepers and
they got in every case a treasure, but
the laughter in the Court, fortunately,
prevented my disobeying Mr. Purvis’s
instructions. It pained me greatly
however to sec gentlemen like Dr.
Gresswell, Mr. Alston, Mr. Wimpole,
and other business men wasting their
valuable time waiting about the Court.
The result of this trial was that Mr.
Dear lost on all seven charges, and had
he not been an uncertificated insolvent
he would have had to hand us over £SO.
1 know this cost Mr. Tope a pretty
penny.
Things went on gis usual, and unfort-
unately for the share holders of the
Adamant Monumental Works, it did
not pay. I therefore relieved them by
taking over the ground on which stands
the school for Modeling and Sculpture,
and commenced building same. T had
to submit to many insults, Mr. Dear
would call out “ Build away, our flag
will soon be flying there,” and Mr.
Tope illegally pulled down the part-
ing fence, which my lawyer said was
actionable, but I l.et it lay, and longed
to be friends. About this time his wife
presented him with a. little son, and I
who am so fond of children often
thought that perhaps he may be the
means of ns being friends. On the oc-
casions when Ihe boy accompanied his
father to the works, I used to watch
them, and it was touching to see bow
he loved that boy. And when the
child was ill, I was greatly concerned
mv wife sa3 r ing 1 could not make more
fuss if it were my own. I tried to get
an opportunity to argue with him ov-
er our affairs, and say what a benefit
it would be to the two businesses if
the school of Modeling and Sculpture
were established, but I never got an
opportunity.
About this time T was imprudent en-
ough to call Mr. Dear 1 1 conspirator,
through Cemetery business transact-
ions with the Wimpole Reserves. I
was therefore sued for £2/|9 damages,
iu the Countv Court, before Justice
Williams. Dr. Gresswell, Mr. Wimpole,
Mr. Alston, and many other gentle-
men had to give evidence, which dis-
tressed me greatly. On this occasion
our solicitor secured Mr. McArthur,
which 1 thought very singular. The de-
cision in this case was that T had no
right to call a man a conspirator until
1 had proved him as such, and the
Judge showed me his displeasure by fin-*
ing me one pound, each party to pav
his own costs. But, said our Council,
the Plaintiff a lready owes ns £ so for
costs of the last trial. Well, said the
Judge when he pays you the £SO, von
can refund him the £l. Needless to say
the £SO has never been paid, but the
matter again cost Mr. Tope a great
deal. Some of mv Trustees complained
bitterly at mv imprudence, and gave
me. to understand that if 1 made anoth-
er slip, I should have to meet the case
myself without their aid. Then fol-
5


lowed a deputation to the present Min-
ister, Mr. Cameron, introduced by Mr.
Hlmslie. In the corridor, Dr. Gresswell
asked me where Mr. Dear was, I told
him Mr. Tope had thrown him over,
and had taken up with Boothman,
who accompanied him, a discharged
Adamant and Cemetery hand, the Dr.
said, I thought so. Mr. Tope and his
party complained about the presence of
our solicitor and myself, and Mr. Cam-
eron had to remind him that under the
British rule, both sides should be heard
The chief point was the transfer of
land, and Mr. Tope wanted to know
where all the money went to, I got up
to tell where the brokerage made by
my transfers went to (namely £120)
and to say I was using it instead of
straining on the State Cow, for I
knew very well he knew, for T never
kept it a secret from his Mr. Booth-
man that I was collecting transfers, but
Mr. Cameron said, who is this person?
Mr. Tope hid not fail to emphasise who
I was by looking at me like a fury,
and saying, “ Thou art the man.” Our
solicitor commanded me to be quiet,
and informed the Minister that no
ground had been sold since the closing
This seemed to satisfy Mr. Cameron,
and the deputation retired, Mr. Tope
called after us in the street in a
threatening manner, and said to our
solicitor, “ You’re a pretty Rechabite,
you are.”
Then came Mr. Topes circulars with
numbers of all maiden graves sunk
The Chairman came and enquired re
same, and I showed him where some
of the pieces sunk on had been sold
years before closing, and explained the
transfers, but I did not sav llicv were
mine. But the constant strain of anx
icty and trouble proved eventually too
much for me. T was promised a
mortgage on the School at 5 per. cent
when the roof was on. This fell
through, on account of reports etc. I
however, got accomodation from my
mv banker, promising to reduce my ov-
erdraft £f.s per month. I told him all
about mv transfers and he seemed sai-
isfied. To fully explain what I mean
by transfer deeds in my possession I
must commence again from the begin-
ning. About the time of my appoint-
ment, I said, you were one who agitat-
ed for the closing of the cemetery on
Sanitary reasons. After examining the,
plan, drainage etc. I did not at all won-
der at your doing so, for the cemetery
was drained by a most expensive sub
soil drainage which carried a volume of
water through a I2in. drain which ran
through the then pound, and discharg-
ed itself at your back door on its way
to the sea. When at the meeting which
was got up to oppose you, a man said
that the water from the Cemetery only
wanted a little whisky to make it
drinkable, he could not have been
aware of this sub soil drain, but must
have only seen the surface drain which
still discharges the area catchment.
Knowing of this perfect system of sub
soil drainage which was then working
and it being a comparatively drv
season, T challenged you to have holes
sunk wherever you like to choose,, and
examined by Mr. he Caplain, the en-
gineer for Board of Health. This T
had done on my own authority. Mr.
Lc Caplain reported on those holes
not containing enough moisture in
them to wet a postage stamp. But
when I told him of the sub-soil drain
that made the Cemetery drv, and
showed him it, and the one by Mr.
Couches’ front gate that was then
smelling, he gave as his opinion that
they should be done awav with. His
opinion was, that the Cemetery being
laid out on latitude and longitude
lines, with a path running everv 16 ft,
from north to south, and one every
32 ft. from east to west, with a good
fall south, the water could quickly
clear awav without being contaminat -
ed, especial Iv if we put good drains all
round the drives. I laid his ideas be-
fore our suvevor, Mr. S. Smith, who
was opposed to the drives beino- des-
troved and foretold trouble if it were
done. But as he intended resigning,
I could do as I liked. On our new sur-
6


veyor taking office, I got his consent
to carry out my ideas, and we broke
through the drains, both corners of
the south, east and west. We did
not, however, reckon on the body of
water sinking in from the hills. This
was dealt with by putting in a very
substantial concrete foundation, going
18 inches into the clay under the wall
running north to south of the eastern
boundary. In some cases this founda-
tion goes down 15 ft., then rises up
within 3ft. of the surface. The work
was done by measurement, under a
very strict and just clerk of works,
and came to such an amount that the
Trustees did not pass the account un-
til re-measured by our Suveyor. This
had the desired effect, and we had no
trouble except in the water holes, as I
call them, these are caused by the un-
dulations of the sub-soil clay or rock.
These holes T strictly avoided, and
marked the spots by planting a Shinns
Motley, Pinus Insignus, or any othei
tree. On owners complaining about
these trees being planted on their
graves, I either gave them pieces higher
up, or refunded them the face value of
their deed or certificate of right of
burial. As I transferred these rights to
higher ground, I destroyed the old
deed, the best mode in my opinion of
never again using the site. For these
deeds I generally refunded a £i, ad-
vancing same myself, but in all cases
T charged io/6 for new deed, which
went through the cash'book in the us-
ual way. My great efforts were to
cause the Cemetery to hold its own im-
purity. I was constantly agitating
the closing of the Cemetery, and had
not the Roman Catholics given over
the ground allotted to them (which we
used for nursery purposes) to the pro-
testants, the Cemetery should have
been closed in 1903, instead of iqoo.
Mv chief opponents for closing were the?
representatives of the rate payers, and
Mr. Wimnole and Mr. Michaelis who,
represented the Roman Catholic and
Hebrew denomination. I therefore won
them over by getting the Trustees to
allot them reserves to transfer to their
co-re!ironists as required.
Through the trial before Judge Wil-
liams, these reserves were withdrawn,
greatly to the annoyance of both Mr.
Wimpole and Mr, Michaclis. I there-
fore asked these gentlemen if I could
use the transfer deeds in my posses-
sion on these sites. Mr. Michaelis
said that his increasing infirmities
debarred him from entering into the
question, but he referred me to the
Rev. Mr. Blanbaum. His opinion was
that this could well be done,but on
no occasion would he consent for any
one, but those of the Jewish persuasion
occupying the sites. I explained to him
that by the transfers not only a new
deed should be charged for, but the
balance between, a private and Trustees
selection, viz. £2 3s. should be paid,
this he consented to. On consulting
Mr. Wimpole he gladly fell into my
views, so did Mr. Matthews, the lion.
Surveyor, on conditions the Roman
Catholic representative allowed Protest
tants to be privileged as well as Rom.
Catholics. On consulting him as to
what T should do with balance, he
gave as his opinion that he considered
it was only the profits of brokerage,
and that I was entitled to it. That
bringing it before the Trust or
Board of Health would only cause
more discussion, I therefore proposed
that I should use these profits up on
the School for Modeling and Sculpture
and refrain from asking the Govern-
ment for a grant, as was my intention t
He thought this a capital plan. Now
the numbers given on Mr. Tope’s cir-
cular are :
1. New ground sunk on, purchased
before the closing.
2. Transfers brought before trust,
on printed Circulars prepared by
Trustees’ Solicitor, and*
3. Deeds, of transfer to higher sites.
It is on the latter that the profits
are made, but not a penny more was
charged, beyong the gazetted fee for a
selection, and many I transfered for
what they cost me, as poor and bene-
7


volcnt people can come forward and
testify. I, however in all cases charg-
ed for a new deed, and rny minutes will
show that for those in safe made out
with surname only and giving is
extra trouble entitled me to charge an
additional fee of 10/6. Therefore the
number of deeds charged for since 1900
amounts to a considerable sum, all of
which is entered in the Cash Book. I
roughly estimate that the Trustees
signed at their last meeting in 0599
about 420 deeds which consists of :
i. 290 deeds in alphabetical order
in safe, with surname only, but
all particulars written in cor-
ners, in red ink.
2. 60 in names of persons to whom
the Trust gave credit.
3 Heeds with dates, denomina-
tions and numbers, but no
names, to which in every case
was pinned a cancelled deed, re-
presenting an insanitary site,
on which hi red ink was writ-
ten all particulars.
As to No. i, my minutes show rea-
sons why these should be signed. The
friends or undertakers often posponed
giving names in which deeds should
be made at the time of burial, and
ultimately forgot that they should do
so. I pointed out that it would be
very unfair to close the Cemetery to
all but owners of rights of burial,
when the books showed the family was
entitled to same, I therefore obtained
w ,
permission to draw them out with sur-
names only and with book referen:es.
As to No. 2, these deeds made out to
persons to whom the Trustees gave
credit, include those granted to men
and the cash entries crowded in at the
end of the old 1899 Cash Book, as I was
anxious that the new 1900 Cash Book
should contain no entries in connec-
tion with the sale of land. The crow-
ding of these folios gave our official
auditors a great deal of trouble, but
at the time our Clerk who made them
explained every thing, and he passed
them, but he expressed his great dis-
pleasure at the mode adopted, and
threatened to report same to trust.
Mr. Norris, the expert, sent from Gov-
ernment, was very much excereised ov-
er them, and I endeavoured my hard-
est to get our old clerk out from town,
who made the entries to come and as-
sist him.
Re No. 3, the deeds with dates, de-
nominations, numbers, etc., but with
no names, and to which a cancelled one
was pinned. In signing these deeds, I
gave all particulars to those signing.
Those alive must remember me doing
so, for I can remember one saying,
What is the meaning of this Truclove,
there is no name to it ? T then ex-
plained, calling attention to cancelled
deed. In every case I had witnesses to
the destroying of old deeds; sometimes
my fellow officers, T should
have told everything to Mr. Norris, the
expert, who not only represented the
government, but the Trustees. Tie
worked very hard at the books, Sun-
days included, but 1 am afraid I be-
came very rude to him.
Trior to the enquiry, I had some
very long interviews with the Chair-
man, and would iiave told him all had
it not been that 1 had to mention tran-
sactions with the dead. I went to
him with the sample of the mode a depu-
ted by me, and on his reading at the
note at back, which reads, as far as I
can remember, thus
“ Phis deed, or Certificate of right
of burial represents a piece of land
sold prior to the closing, and transfer-
ed to on above date, the ori-
ginal deed being destroyed,” he expres-
sed his disapproval of the transaction,
and said, the date on face would look
»
like a lie, in a Court of Justice, I
went to Mr. () Donnell, he said things
looked very queer, and gave me no
comfort, and that he was afraid Tope
had got me at last, then Mr. Godfrey,
who told me how deeplv the Chair-
man was feeling it. Then to Mr.
Alston, my very dear patron and
iriend, to get his permission for me to
8


sec his son, but found he was very un-
well, then back to Mr. Turner, who
said, “ I do not care if it was a quag-
mire, you should not change a site
without consent of the Trustees, or the
Board of health. I could not under-
stand this, for in some cases I had on-
ly one hour to make the change, and; of-’
ten did so in that time, one hour be-
fore burial, 1 so dreaded an epidemic
in the future the cause of which would
date back to my management. When
the water came in and I had no time
to change, I always attended the fun-
eral, and was often insulted by the
mourners. On one occasion a gentle-
man ol position, whose opinion I
highly respect, said, “ Truclove, you
are burying my friend in a water hole,
you ought to be ashamed of yourself.”
On vSept., sth, I heard there was an-
other charge brought against me by
Mr. Tope, that of burying within four
feel of the surface. I therefore waited
on the Chairman, to see if true, and he
referred me to Chairman of Board of
Health. On Wed. the 6th, I called on
that gentleman, and he referred me to
his Chief Engineer, a gentleman I had
worked with in testing proposed sites,
on explaining the case was a removal,
and in a large packing case that was
buried with it, he said this may make
a difference, then he advised me to en-
gage the best of counsels, for a strict
investigation was to take place. I
then went to see Mr. Norris who con-
firmed what Mr. Butler had said.
Knowing that I had not a penny in
the world I could spare for law, I
went clean off my head and rushed to
on board the “ Marrung,’ ’
which sailed on the 7th. I was under
the delusion I had only been away
from England a few months, and that
I could get money from the residue of
my estate there, to defend myself, my
dear wife and children, and save her
property.
When I got outside the headss, I
found in my pocket the instructions I
had written for Mr. Chamberlain. My
(lear wife knew there was something
wrong with me, but I was mad and she
was afraid of me. I slunk out of the
house by the front, after the office was
closed, saying goodbye to no one, pas-
sing my old friend John Green on the
way.
The friends left to me after 27
years’ absence were very kind and sent
me to Bournemouth, as I felt the cold
so acutely. From there I wrote my
first letter home, my wife answered,
not telling me one tenth of her great
troubles, but that my old Cathedral
boys' had sent her £lO at Christmas,
half of which she sent me. I eventual-
ly found out the Rev. W. J. Storrs,
who sent me back, on my promising
not to break the journey. I did some
good Church work at Bournemouth,
which kept me going, but went clean
oh my head here, and had a very ser-
ious illness. When I got to Adelaide 1
was told to keep away till end of the
year, by which time things would be
settled down. This advice I foolishly
took ; but on reading Mr. Klmslies’
charges in the “ Argus,” of the 2nd,
or 3rd of November, I felt determined
to return to answer them, and any
charges that may have been collected
by the peisistent advertising of Mr.
Kdwards, who had served Mr. Tope
from his youth up until now.
In answer to Mr. Elmslie’s charges
I think it the duty of all Trustees to
do work for Public at a time when
they mostly require protection. As to
the Trustees allot ing themselves select-
ions, T am responsible. I begged of
them to do so, to use up the pieces not
sold and to make the laying out more
uniform. I alone am responsible for
their actions. In Mr. Godfrey’s case
I alloted him four, without first con-
sult ing him, they also allowed the men
to have two each, at my recommenda-
tion. They were chosen to make the
rows complete, at different points of
the Cemetery. It is rt wonder the Chair-
man’s name is not among the list gi-
ven by Mr. Klmsie, which is most
grossly exaggarated. All the family
graves round where the Chairman’s


ground i»s situated measures Bxl2
whereas his is Bxß, and I begged of
him to take up piece at back, which
would only be a space in which rubbish
would accumulate. 1 would only take
£1 lor it, telling him it was not neces-
sary to pay more.
1 made no secret of the fact that I
was transferring graves, as I have des-
cribed ; the men have cleared the
maiden land for this purpose over and
over again. As for bones being taken up.
and burned, this is an abominable and
wicked lie. I burned all the rubbish I
could, in our stoke hole, lam a great
believer in cremation, and if any cats
or dogs are killed, or found dead in the
grounds, I have put them in the fur-
nace ; but I have never heard of human
bones being put in.
Re the two bodies in ground. Let
Mr. Klmsley name his constituent, and
have the thing thoroughly looked into,
1 am not at all surprised at gentlemen
being horrified at such charges. I can
fully understand Mr. M‘Cutcheon’s feel-
ings at the time, who knows me so
well.
I did not embezzle, but went away as
T have described driven mad with con-
stant persecution.
I am most anxious to clear myself
from these dreadful charges. I can
cjuite remember the Minister and Dr.
Norris calling, and I am afraid I was
very rude, but it was at a time when
I was worried to death, and not ac-
countable for my actions. I knew that
most of in}- Trustees wished to resign,
and be out of the constant quarreling,
and being insulted. 1 have repeatedly
begged of them not to resign. I hope
it will be a public enquiry, and I there
to defend myself. There are many
who have instructed me to carry out
their most sacred wishes. I will give
you three instances of the past whose
friends, I know, will forgive me in
mentioning under the circumstances.
I disobeyed the Hon. Bruce Smith’s
orders at the burial of his Father, Cap-
tain f Howard Smith. The Captain met
me by appointment with his wife, and
told me his wishes. An order came to
open ground at the side of the Capt.’s
deceased grandchild, the eldest son of
the Hon. Bruce Smith, but on consul-
ting his mother, after the funeral,
found I had carried out the wishes of
his deceased father, and thanked me
for sq doing.
A few days only before the Windsor
Railway accident, the late Mr. Parks,
who after, his wife’s death, seldom mis-f
scd visiting the Cemetery on a Sunday
morning, and always looked out for me
to have a chat, expressed his regret
that he could not be buried with his
wife. lie had bought a piece of ground
opposite his old friend the late Rev.
Dr. Boakc, and thought he would
have to be buried there.
The grave being Bft. x 12ft., I told
him I could make room by shifting the
collins, but by law he would have to
send a representative to see this done.
He said he would rather come himself.
Young Mr. Sargood gave orders to
open the new ground, and thanked me
for not acting on same. lie said it
cleared up a great mystery. Mr. Parks
was late one morning to breakfast, a
very unusual thing, and when he ap-
peared, they cduld .see he was very
much cut.up. In the third ca.sc I will
suppress the name.
A little fellow, who occasionally met
me with his nurse, and always inform-
ed me he was going to be one of my
“ Chorister boys,” died. Orders came
to open the Family Vault, which I
found half full of water. I therefore
buried the dear little fellow in ground
near. The owner was very wrath, but
on inspecting same, and finding his
first wife’s coffin floating partly face
downwards, he fell weeping on my
breast. I tried to persuade him to do
away with the Vault all together,
but he declined, I therefore obtained
permission to build an outer wall be-
fore disturbing the Vault. This made
the Vault very large. When finished
for inspection, he and his second wife
ami he gayc instructipns for
10


future. On refusing a present, he pro-
mised to help me with my Organ
Scheme, for our Church. I have often
thought, however, 1 should have con-
sidered Mr. Fred Chamberlain, then
in our office, who made the plans, but
he, in his good natured retiring way,
said it did not matter. His wishes
were carried out at his death,and the
family before dispersing, insisted on
my receiving three Volumes of the
Cathedrals of England. I can give
you many instances as to how Mr.
Tope has no doubt been deceiving Mr.
EUnslie and others. In your own case
you must remember, saying, how you
would like to lie at the side of your
old friend Mr. Templeton, and I said
you could by purchasing the ground.
This you did, now had you wanted to
use that ground, after the close of the
Cemetery, your number would be in
Mr. Tope’s list. The same with your
neighbour, he cho.se but he did,not pay
at the time of choice. I therefore
dropped him a line, telling him if he
did not take up the ground, he would
lose it- Unfortunately, the letter was
received when he was 011 a bed of sick-
ness, and it greatly shocked his wife.
Had this piece been used since 1900, it
would have been on Tope’s list.
By appearances, I have no doubt,
that the Trustees were justified in tak-
ing out the Warrant for my arrest.
The Rev. W. T. Storrs, who so kind-
ly advanced my passage, told me my
successor was a temperate, Christian,
Gentlemen. He also told me of the
fearful treatment my dear wife and
darling children had to put up with,
but I can imagine how such disciplinar-
ians as Mr. H. G. Turner, Thomas
Alston and Col. Hughes would act, and
appearances are greatly against me. I
have never shaken hands with my
Chairman once during the whole of
the 23 years I have been working under
him. I forbade all children from going
down the Cemetery, and used cruelly
to punish mine for so doing. I have
often seen, however, the dear little
feet of my foreman’s children when
hiding away from me under a bush.
lam sure their Club Doctor must
have a lot of trouble with that family.
I was very much shocked on hearing
of the death of Mr. and Mrs. Matthews.
The deceased took a great interest in
establishing the nursery, and estimated
that in paying off the overdraft of £lBO
the Cemetery benefited £l,lOO. His
statement is among the Cemetery
papers.
In my seemed light with Messrs.
Tope & Dear, I was charged with tak-
ing tips, but I never did. I often how-
ever guided a donation to the hospital
and towards the Church work,
which was a great antidote to my
dull work, and no doubt many things
happened that mislead Mr. Tope. I
was most anxious to put in some
Choir Stalls at St. Martin’s Church,
and with the co-operation of my very
dear friend, Bede Walsh, of Messrs
Moore & Co., I commenced same,
when they were finished, but not paid
for, the Adamant Co. allowed me
to put them in their show room until
they were. The Treasurer, was an old
St. Martin’s Chorister boy, and he
fixed a money box at end of one of
them. When anyone offered me a tip
I gracefully declined it, then got them
interested in my choir work, taking
them down to see my stalls. Many an
offered naif crown has doubled itself
by this little attention, but it unfort-
unately looked as if I was touting for
the Adamant Co., and people have
been annoyed, by a demand to know
what order was given.
One of the most touching cases of
this kind occurred about Xmas 1898,
one of my old Chorister boys had work-
ed himself up to be Chief Clerk in the
Education Department, at Perth and
was visiting Melbourne at that time.
Of course he called on me, and I took
him down to see the “ Memorial
Stalls.’’ After the visit the Treasurer
informed,me there was 5/- iu the box.
When I went back to the Cemetery my
dear wife said, how proud I should be
of my old boys, and that while they
11


Were alive, my memory would be ever
green.
Before leaving Melbourne, he wrote
me a farewell letter saying how he re-
gretted the Stalls were not going to
“ All Saints,” for he felt he would die
happier if he thought his name would
be on the place he used to sit to sing
the praises of God. He also informed
me that my old antagonist (he knew
him) had stopped him before he had
readied the reserve, and demanded to
know what order I had got out of him.
Poor Kddie went home to catch Typ-
hoid and die. His many friends sent
me a photo of the beautiful Cross they
put over his remains, but if I live,
and there are choir stalls in dear All
Saints, I shall endeavour to have a
first head boy of the Choristers under
the Scholarship system.
C And now, dear sir, I hear that the K.
S. & A. Bank are foreclosing on my
wife’s property and the School of Mod-
eling and Sculpture. If this is carried
out we shall be utterly ruined. lam
writing an appeal to the general Mana-
ger re same and do hope 4 it will have
the effect of at least posponing the
sale.
In conclusion, let me beg of you to
get this published, not only for the
sake of my .dear wife and darling child-
ren, but to let the hundreds of Choris-
ter boys, who have loved and respected
me and are now distributed all over
the World, know the truth the whole
truth and nothing but the truth, of the
plate put on his place, for he was the , dUUculties at the St. Kilda Cemetery,
