

IV.—CORALS AND CORAL-ISLANDS, WITH SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO THE NEW HEBRIDES GROUP.
BY THE REV. J. H. LAWRIE.
(Bead Jan. S 6, 1808.)
The New Hebrides group of islands extends to about 400
miles in length lying N.N.W. and S.S.E., between 21°
and 15° south latitude, and 171° and 166° east longitude.
Aneityum, the most southerly island of the group, lies about
1000 miles due north of New Zealand, 400 miles east of Fiji,
and 200 miles east of New Caledonia. The first European
navigator who discovered the largest and most northerly island
of the group in the year 1606 was Pedro Vernandes de Quiros,
a native of Portugal. That island is still known by the name
he gave it of “Espirito Santo." Quiros, elated with his
supposed discovery of the great southern continent, returned
home at once, instead of prosecuting his inquiries further,
In a series of most wonderful statements, he presented his
memoirs to King Philip 111. of Spain, pleading the urgency
of sending out another expedition to open up the wealth of
the country. When we state that the island of Santo is only
70 miles long by 40 miles broad at its widest part, the
ridiculousness of Quiros’s report will he apparent. “Your
Majesty,” said he, “may be assured that the extent of these
countries exceeds that of Europe, Asia Minor, the Caspian
Sea, and Persia, together with the islands of the Mediterranean
and Atlantic, including England and Ireland.”
Although there are few song-birds in the country, Quiros
spoke of millions of birds announcing the rising sun, and of
gold, silver, and pearls being found in abundance. Later
inquiries have found pearl-shells in the sea, but neither gold
nor silver has been discovered on land. Quiros must have
had the missionary instinct, as he set up a wooden cross and
called the place where he anchored his ship the harbour of
“ Vera Cruz,” or the true cross. lie also named a river
running into it the Jordan, intending to found a city to be
called the New Jerusalem. He met with but poor success,


however, at the Spanish Court, and a few years,afterwards he
died —disheartened and disappointed.
The Trench navigator, Bougainville, was the next to visit
Santo and the neighbouring island of Malelcnla; hut the
greatest honour was reserved for our own Captain James Cook,
who in the year 1774 spent forty-six days in the group, and
discovered the other islands, some thirty in all. When these
wore set down on his chart, ho saw, or fancied he saw, a
resemblance to the islands on the west coast of Scotland, and
accordingly felt himself entitled to give the group its present
name—" The New Hebrides.”
Tor the most part these islands are of .volcanic origin;
there are many indications of hurnt-ont craters; and large
active, volcanoes still exist on Tanna, Ambrim, and Lopevi,
The Haro in the sky from the Tanna volcano can ho seen some
sixty miles oil*, like a great lighthouse. Since, Captain Cook’s
day, and probably from long before that time, the explosions
have taken place without intermission every four or live
minutes, the steam being generated from a lake of water a
short distance away from the mouth of the crater. Some
twelve years ago, along with a party, I ascended the volcanic
cone on the weather side, and approaching as near the edge
as possible in the intervals between the explosions, wo saw
the molten lava, at a depth of live or six hundred feet, like
the molten metal from a grind, hlast-furuaco. Tran side to
aide the crater would he a rille-ahot across. There were live
vents, and when the explosions took place hundreds of tons of
scoria; were sent high into Mm air with a fearful roar and
rumbling underground noise, lit to strike terror into the
stoutest heart. The sulphur fumes are very strong and
almost suffocating on the mountain-aides, proceeding from fis-
sures here and there at; irregular intervals. Many shiploads of
sulphur have been taken away from a large deposit near the
sea-shore. ISartlupmkes are of common occurrence in this
region, and are sometimes accompanied by a tidal wave which
carries all before it with irresistible force. After one such
wave we noticed marks on the trees near the sea-shore seven
feet from the ground. Quantities of dead fish and Aihis of
every kind were left on our mission station, to be cleared
away next morning,


Great masses of coral abound in these tropical seas, but
islands of the atoll type are not common in the New Hebrides.
The fringing reef, from the shore seawards and terminating in
deep water, is common to all the group. On some islands,
such as Aneityum, a small barrier reef exists on the south-
west and north-east sides, whereas on the weather side, where
the south-east trade-winds blow, the coast is hold, with the
mountain ridges terminating in deep water. These harrier
reefs are from one to two miles from the shore or inner reef,
and the intervening space makes an excellent and safe fishing-
ground for the natives. Owing to subterranean activity, there
is abundant evidence of both elevation and depression. On
the island of Tanna there was a great earthquake on the 10 th
January 18*7 8, which caused a surge of the water at Port
Resolution to rise forty feet, and to sweep everything before
it, destroying all the canoes of the natives. Two minutes after
the earthquake a rise of the land took place on the whole
west side of the harbour, to the extent of about twenty feet,
This narrowed considerably the effective anchorage of the
harbour, and a lost anchor came into view where a ship had
ridden safely some years previously. About a month after-
wards another earthquake caused a further elevation, so that
rocks which were formerly covered with seven or eight fathoms
.of water are now above high-water mark. On Aniwa, and
especially on Futuna, there are distinct evidences of successive
upheavals, solid coral rocks being seen at a considerable height
in the mountain-side.
The marvellous beauty of the growing coral when under
water must be seen to he understood. When, from a canoe
or rowing-boat, one looks through the clear blue water upon
patches of brain coral, branching coral, and other corals of
every description, it seems a fairy castle in the depths of the
sea. The branching coral, with delicately mauve-tipped points,
is like a vast array of stag’s antlers. On the deep caverns
among the coral masses may he seen multitudes of bright-
hued fishes, some blue, others red, yellow, and grey, striped
and spotted, and of all curious shapes. Lurking in the nooks
and corners may be seen the cowrie, the turbo, or the large
edible clam, or, it may be, the sea-urchin with its blunt red


spines, or the bright-blue starfish with its finger-like arms
spread out.
Outside the barrier roof the long ocean Swell rolls in, wave
after wave, each gradually rearing its crest higher and higher,
until it curls over, and falls like an avalanche of white
foam, with a thunderous roar, upon the Hat coral-reef. The
native oarsmen toko a special delight in steering as near to
the breakers as possible: they know exactly how near they
may venture with safety. Tut wot; hetido the canoe that is
carried by the swell broadside on in one of these huge
breakers! The cauoo and its occupants are rolled over and
over, until they are at last dashed with terrific force against
the sharp points of the outer roof.
To what depths the solid (‘orul-reeJs may go is not yet
known ; but the first thing that raised in Darwin’s mind the
suspicion -that those coral-islands are sinking into the ocean-
bed was the deep soundings he obtained quite near the outside
of the coral rim in some of the atolls ho visited. In his study
of the subject, Darwin startl'd the theory that “ the original
coral-reef gradually subsided, ami the coral polyp, which is
unable to live at more than a curtain depth below the water,
is kept perpetually rebuilding on the surface.” Dr John
Murray, on the other hand, asserted that “the oceau-lloor has
risen owing to the heaping up of the mucins of marine organ-
isms, and the coral-builders have lived and worked on these
elevated hanks.” In order to test the truth of Darwin’s
theory, an exploring party was organised soma few years ago by
the Royal Society of Loudon, After they had made some
inconclusive observations, an expedition was despatched from
Sydney, consisting of Professor T. 10. David of Sydney Uni-
versity, Mr George Sweet, Follow of the Geological Society,
and six trained diamond-drillers. The party loft Sydney in
June 1897, and ultimately chose for their purpose the island
of Tuna Futi, in the Ellice group, lying 000 miles due north
of Fiji. The island is from ten to fourteen miles in diameter,
and is well supplied with cocoa-nut trees, which furnish the
inhabitants with their main food-supply. As soon as the
party landed they were lodged in bungalows in. the native
village, on the inner rim of the coral-reef. They at once


proceeded to transport the diamond-drill plant and scientific
instruments to a convenient spot near the outer edge of the
reef, and a suitable site was found for commencing drilling
operations. With 100 tons of coal to keep the boilers going,
the diamond-drill men started on their arduous task, and got
down 200 feet without leaving the coral in situ, through what
they call “ the toughest material they had ever tackled.”
Boring was continued, however, until in December 1897 it
was reported that a depth of had been reached, the
drill being still in solid coral, and there could be no reasonable
doubt that the substance had subsided from the surface, and
that fresh accretions by the indefatigable coral-worker had
continually renewed the top of the reef by what Darwin
called “ a renovating agency.” Seeing that the coral-builders’
life-zone is only from 120 to 160 feet below sea-level, and
that, in spite of frequent breakages, the drillers got to the
depth above stated, it is evident that the theory regarding
coral-islands formulated by Darwin over fifty years ago has
been established by these recent experiments.
Professor Dana states that “there are 290 larger coral-
islands in the Pacific Ocean, representing an area of 20,000
square miles.” In addition, these tiny architects have built
up a barrier .reef along the shores of Hew Caledonia for a
length of 400 miles, and another barrier reef which runs
along the north-east coast of Australia, 1000 miles in extent.
These vast edifices of the coral polyp have been raised in the
midst of the ocean waves, and in defiance of the tempests
which so rapidly annihilate the strongest works of man.
Allowing for the operation of “ a renovating agency ” on the
top of the reef, there must have been a series of gradual
subsidences of the rocky basis from the shore seawards, carry-
ing the fringing reef downwards to enormous depths. Who
from this can conceive the antiquity of the globe we now
inhabit, or the countless ages that have passed since the
atoms of which it is formed were first brought together by a
Divine Creator ?
In geological formation the south end of the Hew Hebrides
and the north end of Hew Zealand bear a striking re-
semblance, so that it is possible the one may at some time
have been a continuation of the other. In both regions the


climate, as far south as Auckland, is humid, modified by the
sea-breezes. In both cases numerous streams descend from
the mountain-sides, producing a profusion of undergrowth
only seen in moist regions. New Zealand is noted for its
ferns, and so is Aneityum, the magnificence and variety of
these being marvellous. A professional botanist who explored
the south end of the New Hebrides stated that he found 120
different kinds of ferns on Aneityum, in addition to crotons,
dracaenas, hibiscus, and other decorative plants. A variety of
the far-famed Kauri pine of New Zealand grows in abundance
on the hillsides of Aneityum. Of quadrupeds, the only in-
digenous animal found in New Zealand was a small dun-
coloured rat: this also was the case in the New Hebrides.
Pigs were found on some of the islands by the early navi-
gators, but these are supposed to have been imported. Horses
and sheep have been tried, but the humid atmosphere does
not seem to suit these animals, for they do not thrive. Pigs,
goats, and cows appear to do well. The pig is held in great
estimation by the native population. It is used on the
heathen islands for the purpose of appeasing the gods and
the rain-makers. At all public ceremonies numbers of pigs,
young and old, are always in evidence. A man rises in the
scale of chieftainship on Malekula in proportion to the
number of full-sized pigs he presents at the public feasts.
Wives are also purchased with this animal, ten tusked pigs
being the price of a princess.
The problem as to the early occupation of these islands still
remains unsolved. The many languages spoken by the natives
on the several islands, the various styles of dress, the diverse
shapes of weapons, and the different heathen customs, all lead
one to suppose that they did not all come from a common
centre at the same time, although it is admitted that the
native inhabitants are of the Negrillo type, the majority
having the Papuan cast of countenance. On some islands,
such as Futuna and Pila, there is an admixture of Malayan
blood from Eastern Polynesia. This can he accounted for by
fishing or trading parties being blown out to sea, and then
driven before the south-east trade-winds until they reached
one or other of the New Hebrides Islands. If the islands
have always remained as they are, then the progenitors of the


Island.
Sun.
Moon.
Aneityiuu
Tanna
Entuna
Eronmnga
Efatd
Epi
Amorim
Maleknla
Santo
Nangesega
Meri
Tara
Nipminen
Elo
Maregio
Yal
Niar
Metaualo
Iiimoliog.
Makua.
Tamrama.
Itais.
Atslag.
Simberio.
01.
Nebtir.
Wtila.
present inhabitants must have found their way thither by
means of navigation. If, on the other hand, a great sub-
sidence has taken place in that portion of the Pacific, ob-
literating a continent and leaving the mountain-tops to form
islands, then naturally the strongest would seek to save them-
selves by taking refuge in the higher regions, and the fittest
would survive. As matters are at present, long years of
isolation have done much to intensify the differences in
language found on most of the islands in the Hew Hebrides
group. These are not mere dialects, but languages as distinct
from one another as English is from Erench, or that from
German. In some of the larger islands, such as Tanna, Epi,
Malekula, and Santo, from two to six languages are ■spoken.
The tribes, moreover, have little intercourse with each other,
national jealousies and hatreds continuing from one generation
to another, as in the case of Tanna, where tribal war is the
rule rather than the exception. These differences in language
may be illustrated by giving the names for the sun and moon
on some of the islands :
A further philological study of the many languages spoken
by the natives, and a fuller inquiry into the folk-lore and
legendary stories of the older people, may lead to some clue
as to their original abode, and the means by which these New
Hebrideans have been distributed over so wide an area in the
South Pacific Ocean,
