

to the
man who
owns a
DODGE


Correct Lubrication of the
Dodge Brothers Motor Car
Models
1924 - 1923 - 1922 - 1921 - 1920
CORRECT LUBRICATION is the most important
of all factors that affect the maintenance and
operation of your Dodge motor car. Over one-half
of all the troubles and repairs made necessary are
due to incorrect lubrication.
Quite properly, then, it is of importance that your
Dodge be CORRECTLY LUBRICATED, and the
following contains Correct Lubrication Recommen-
dations that will assure you the most efficient and
economical operation.
To make a Correct Lubrication Recommendation,
however, requires a detailed analysis of all those
factors of design, construction and operation that
affect lubrication.
For this reason, we have made a lubrication
analysis of the Dodge motor cars. This has been
prepared with the intention of giving technically
sound and correct advice consistent with the most
modern practices and methods known in the correct
application of oil.
Analysis of the Dodge Bros. Motor Cars
Features of Engine Design
This engine is of the four cylinder, four stroke
cycle, vertical type. It has a bore of 3? inches, and
a stroke of 4 h inches, and is water cooled with
positive pump circulation. Cylinders and the upper
crankcase half are cast in a unit and the cylinder
head is detachable.
1/3/24]


The valve arrangement is of the L-head type.
Up to the 1923 models the pistons were made of cast
iron, and were fitted with three rings above the
piston pin, one oil return groove and sixteen oil
drain holes.
In the 1923 and 1924 models, aluminium alloy
pistons of the constant clearance type are used.
These pistons are fitted with four narrow rings
above the piston pin, and are slotted just below
the fourth ring to prevent expansion of the skirt,
which is also cut to maintain uniform clearance.
System of Lubrication
The lubricating system is of the Splash Circulat-
ing type, employing a vane oil pump, located directly
under the timing gears in the forward end of the
engine.
This pump draws the oil through a cylindrical
perforated metal oil strainer, from a reservoir in
the bottom of the crankcase and forces it through
an oil feed pipe located in the top right hand corner
of the crankcase chamber.
Jets of oil are forced through holes in this oil
feed pipe into pockets lubricating the camshaft
bearings. Oil drains from these camshaft pockets
through channels in the cylinder block, to open wells
over each crankshaft bearing, providing for their
lubrication. Other holes in this oil feed pipe allow
oil to flow directly into four oil troughs under each
connecting rod and to the timing gears.
Drilled dippers on the bottom ends of the con-
necting rod bearings dip into and splash the oil
from these troughs in the form of a fine mist, which
is distributed throughout the crankcase chamber.
This oil spray lubricates the cylinders, pistons,
piston rings, piston pin bearings, cams and cam
followers.


The impact of the dippers on the bottom of the
connecting rods in the oil, forces a sufficient quantity
through drillings in the connecting rod bearings to
provide for their lubrication.
Excess oil drains back into the reservoir and is
recirculated by the pump.
Lubrication Requirements 1922-1920 Models
(inclusive)
In all Dodge engines using cast-iron pistons, the
limiting factor insofar as lubrication was concerned,
was the detonation of the fuel charge when carbon
deposits formed. ’
Small accumulations of carbon in the combustion
chambers or on the piston tops, resulted in knock-
ing or detonative burning of the fuel charge.
The thin walled cast-iron pistons, as used, limited
the heat flow so that when carbon accumulations
occurred in any amount, the added blanketing effect
of this layer of carbon held the flame temperature
at the critical point and a disagreeable knock or
“ping” occurred when the car was accelerated or
under heavy load at low speeds.
This condition necessitated using an oil that would
be of such character as to leave a minimum of
carbon deposits, but still be of such body as to
provide adequate engine lubrication.
GARGOYLE MOBILOIL ARCTIC exactly meets
these requirements and this oil is recommended
for all Dodge engines prior to 1923 models.
1923 and 1924 Models
The change from the cast iron pistons to the con-
stant clearance aluminium pistons in the 1923 and
1924 models has a direct bearing on the lubricant
which should be used. This change has removed the
feature of design that formerly was largely re-
sponsible for demanding the use of the lighter
bodied, specially clean burning lubricants.


The aluminium pistons provide a more ready
transfer of heat from the piston tops to the jacket
water, as aluminium possesses over twice the heat
conductivity of cast iron. This in turn results in
reduced piston temperatures and combustion chamber
temperatures, and under this condition, heavier
bodied lubricants can be used without resulting in
the former objectionable spark knock or ping.
Further, aluminium, while superior to cast iron in
many respects, is more difficult to lubricate. It does
not take on a high surface polish, and oils fairly
rich in lubricating character must be used in order
to provide proper piston lubrication and efficient
sealing of the piston rings. The oil also must be
of the proper fluidity to provide thorough atomis-
ation and distribution by the Splash Circulating
lubricating system.
Under summer operating .temperatures GAR-
GOYLE MOBILOIL “A” exactly meets these re-
quirements, and this oil will provide the most
efficient engine lubrication.
Under winter operating temperatures (i.e., where
freezing temperatures prevail), due to the exposed
position of the oil pump and its elevation above the
oil level in the reservoir, GARGOYLE MOBILOIL
ARCTIC must be used.
Under these conditions this oil is of the proper
fluidity to provide positive priming of the pump;
will assure immediate and thorough distribution, to
all engine parts and will provide adequate lubrication
of the aluminium pistons.
Summary
Oils Recommended
For all 1923 and 1924 models, GARGOYLE
MOBILOIL “A” should be used in summer and
GARGOYLE MOBILOIL ARCTIC should be used
in winter.
For all other models, GARGOYLE MOBILOIL
ARCTIC should be used in both summer and winter.


Detailed Instructions for Correct Engine Lubrication
Filling the Crankcase
Pour in a supply of the recommended grade of
GARGOYLE MOBILOIL through the combination
filler and breather pipe, located directly in back of
the carburetor, until the button on the top of the
oil level indicator rod comes up to the upper oil
level mark. This oil level indicator is located be-
tween the starter generator and the cylinder block.
The capacity of the system is six quarts.
Do not overfill the reservoir. Too high an oil
level will result in overflooding the connecting rod
dipper troughs, and due to the increased dip of the
splashers, over lubrication will result.
Replenish the oil supply daily, to the correct oil
level. Better and more efficient engine lubrication
will result by adding small quarltities of oil peri-
odically than to add larger quantities at less
frequent intervals.
Dilution of Crankcase Oil
A very important factor in reducing wear and
maintaining engine efficiency is the frequent and
periodical draining of the crankcase oil.
This oil becomes contaminated with carbon
particles formed on the under side of the highly
heated piston heads, with dust particles drawn in
through the breather pipe, with fine metal particles,
quantities of unvaporised fuel (motor spirit), as
well as quantities of water.
Fuel of low volatility and winter operation in-
volving excessive use of the choker together with
the intermittent service found in passenger car
work, greatly increase this oil dilution, and con-
tamination.
This dilution and contamination will result in
premature engine wear, inefficient piston ring seal,
as well as loss of power and waste of fuel.


For these reasons, the crankcase oil should be
drained after the first 500 miles of operation and
thereafter at intervals of 1000 miles during summer
and 500 miles during winter.
To Drain Engine Oil Reservoir
To drain the reservoir, disconnect the oil feed
pipe from the oil pump body and remove the oil
strainer flange, held in place by two cap screws,
on the lower side of the crankcase below the
generator.
Allow the old oil to run out. Do not flush crank-
case with kerosene. The same results will be at-
tained if the crankcase is drained while the engine
is hot. Under this condition the oil is thinned by the
heat and will flow faster tending to carry with it
any existing sediment.
If necessary, flush with one quart of fresh oil.
Oil Strainer
Before replacing the oil strainer, wash out the
strainer with kerosepe or motor spirit.
Replace strainer, reconnect oil pipe to pump and
then refill crankcase with GARGOYLE MOBILOIL
to the correct level.
Oil Pressure Gauge
The oil pressure gauge located on the instrument
board indicates the circulation of the oil in the
lubricating system, and does not show the quantity
of oil being delivered for the lubrication of the
engine.
Normal oil pressures run from one and one-half
to two pounds for car speeds of fifteen to twenty-
five miles per hour, with slightly higher pressures
for greater speeds.
Engine Grease Cups
Grease cups are located on the Fan Shaft Bush-
ing, Water Pump Shaft, and Distributor Shaft.


These cups should be filled with MOBILUBRI-
CANT, a high quality grease of medium hard con-
sistency, which is especially suited for lubrication
where grease is required.
Turn these cups down every 250 miles, anti when
empty, refill with MOBILUBRICANT.
Starter Generator
Oil cups are provided for the lubrication of the
starter generator bearings.
Every 2000 miles fill these cups with a few drops
of GARGOYLE MOBILOIL “A” or ARCTIC.
Correct Lubrication of the Dodge Chassis
Clutch
A dry plate clutch is used and no lubrication of
the friction surfaces is necessary.
Keep the oil drain hole in the bottom of the
clutch housing open and free from dirt in order
that any oil may readily drain, out.
Clutch Release Bearing
The clutch release bearing is lubricated by means
of a grease cup placed on the toe board next to
the starter switch pedal.
Every 100 miles turn this cup down and, when
empty, refill with MOBILUBRICANT. In refilling,
be sure that the long grease tube connecting this
cup to the bearing is tightly connected and filled
with grease.
Transmission
The transmission is of the selective sliding gear
type. The spline shaft is carried on annular ball
bearings, while the counter shaft is bronze bushed
and rotates on a steel pin secure with the gear
case. i


The correct oil for this type of transmission must
possess ample body to cushion the gear mesh and
maintain an unbroken film under widely varying
gear tooth loads; the oil must be of adhesive
character to cling to and properly coat the re-
volving gears; must be sufficiently fluid for ready
distribution to the spline shaft ball bearings and
be free from all substances which would tend to
corrode or pit the highly polished balls and race-
way surfaces; must facilitate gear-shifting and must
resist any tendency for the gears to “channel” even
under low operating temperatures.
A specially prepared gear lubricant of the body
and character of GARGOYLE MOBILOIL “C” is
recommended for use in this transmission. It pos-
sesses those qualities essential for proper gear and
bearing lubrication and being a straight mineral oil
of fluid nature, is free from harmful ingredients
of either corrosive or insoluble nature.
Filling Transmission
Unscrew the filler plug in the top of the trans-
mission case and fill with GARGOYLE MOBILOIL
“C” until the lubricant thoroughly covers the
counter shaft.
Every 1000 miles replenish the lubricant to this
level.
Every 5000 miles remove the drain plug on the
bottom of the case and allow the old oil to run
out. Plush gears and case with kerosene, replace
drain plug securely, and refill case to the proper
level with GARGOYLE MOBILOIL “C.”
Differential and Final Drive Gear
The differential is of the four bevel pinion type
and is carried on two tapered roller bearings. The
final drive gearing is of the spiral bevel type.


GARGOYLE MOBILOIL “C” is the correct lubri-
cant for this construction. As in the transmission,
it will provide a thorough coating for the gear
mesh and because of its fluidity it will work into
and thoroughly lubricate all bearing surfaces.
Filling Differential
Through the filling plug on the rear of the hous-
ing, fill with GARGOYLE MOBILOIL “C” until the
level of the lubricant is even with the filling hole.
Every 1000 miles replenish the lubricant to the
proper level.
Every 5000 miles unscrew the drain plug on the
bottom of the differential and drain out the old
oil. Flush with kerosene, replace the drain plug,
and refill to the correct level with GARGOYLE
MOBILOIL “C.”
Wheel Bearings
The front and rear wheel bearings are of the
tapered roller type.
These bearings should be packed with MOBI-
LUBRICANT. To remove the front wheels, take
off the hub cap, unscrew the adjusting nut and pull
wheel off.
To remove the rear wheels, remove the drive
flange and drive shaft attached to it, loosen the
clamp screw, unscrew the adjusting nut and pull
wheel off.
In pulling off the front and rear wheels the outer
roller bearings will come with them. Remove inner
bearings, clean all bearings with kerosene or motor
spirit, repack with MOBILUBRICANT and replace
the wheels.
Adjust bearing nuts so that all wheels will spin
freely, without excessive side play.


Miscellaneous Points Requiring
Grease Lubrication
An Alemite grease gun is supplied with the car
and is ideally adapted to force MOBILUBRICANT
to parts requiring grease lubrication.
This grease gun is fitted with a flexible metal
hose and special attachment to connect to the ball
check connectors provided on all parts lubricated
by this system.
Connectors are provided on the following parts—
Steering Gear: Fill case at bottom end of the
steering column every 1000 miles with MOBI-
LUBRICANT.
Universal Joint: Everv 2000 miles fill case with
MOBILUBRICANT.
Propeller Shaft and Pinion Bearings: These bear-
ings' are located at the rear end of the propeller
shaft. Fill with MOBILUBRICANT every 2000
miles.
Spring Shackles and Bolts: Re-grease every 200
miles.
Steering Knuckle Bolts: Re-grease every 200
miles.
Steering Gear Tie Rod: Re-grease every 200 miles.
Steering Arms Drag Link: Re-grease every 200
miles.
Miscellaneous Oil Holes
The rear spring seat straps, foot and hand brake
rod joints, brake operating shaft connections, and
brake equaliser connections are all provided with
oil holes.
Every 500 miles flush these bearings with GAR-
GOYLE MOBILOIL “A” or ARCTIC
IF THE INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN ARE FOL-
LOWED, WEAR AND DEPRECIATION WILL BE
REDUCED TO A MINIMUM AND THE VERY
BEST OF SERVICE ASSURED.


The Choice of Fuel for
Dodge Motor Cars
Your motor car engine was designed to
develop a certain horse power. Do you get
it? If your engine is mechanically perfect
the answer depends upon the quality of
motor spirit you are using.
PLUME MOTOR SPIRIT enables your
engine to develop the maximum power
that its makers designed it to give.
PLUME MOTOR SPIRIT is a highly
volatile motor spirit which vaporises quickly
and completely in the carburetor, without
waste. It makes a perfect explosive mix-
ture which is consumed cleanly and com-
pletely in the combustion chamber, increas-
ing mileage and enabling your engine to
develop its full rated horse power.
Volatility is fundamental—no other quality
or factor can compensate for lack of vola-
tility. Without volatility of high degree,
motor spirit cannot produce 100 per cent,
power.
DODGE owners who use PLUME
MOTOR SPIRIT, speak in glowing terms
of the splendid results it gives.
Try PLUME MOTOR SPIRIT in your
Dodge car to-day and note the difference.
Order your supplies now
Vacuum Oil Company Pty. Ltd.
G. W. Green &. Sons. Printers. Melbourne.
