

CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN
THE LORD BISHOP OE SYDNEY
AND
MR. W. A. BRODRIBB.




Correspondence between the Right Rev. the
Lord Bishop of Sydney, and Mr. W. A.
Brodribb.
Buckhurst, Double Bay,
28th June, 1880.
To the Eight Eeverend the Lord Bishop op Sydney,
Bishop’s Court.
My Lord, —In consequence of some little mistake
in my appointment to succeed Mr. Henry Mort as a mem-
ber of the Synod, I was prevented from offering some
explanation with reference to the correspondence that took
place as to my son’s application for a license to preach in your
Diocese. I had this correspondence printed in the form of
a pamphlet for two reasons —Ist. Your Lordship remarked
in your letter to me, dated the 9th inst., in the 11th para-
graph, “ I cannot be surprised that your friends on hearing
your version of the matter should agree with you. Perhaps
if they heard my statement they might change their opinion.”
2nd. Scarcely a day passes but I am asked “what is this
between the Bishop and your son.” Therefore in justice
to your Lordship, my son and myself, I thought it better
to print the correspondence and circulate it. When I did
myself the pleasure of calling on your Lordship in the latter
end of March, to ask your Lordship to place my son as
curate in the “ Waverly Parish,” after the little conversa-
tion we had on that occasion I left your presence with the
conviction on my mind that you were determined not to
employ my son in your Diocese, and after my son saw your
Lordship and you had imparted to him your objections.
We both came to the conclusion that some wicked evil dis-
posed person (a Member of the Church Association) had
poisoned your mind against my son.
Hence my determination to put my son right, not only in
your mind but in public estimation. The mere fact that


you had refused him a license would he injurious to his
character as a clergyman, not only in this and the neigh-
bouring colonies, but in England also.
I do not for one moment question your right to refuse my
son employment in your Diocese.
I hope you will allow me to offer some explanation re-
garding our correspondence on this subject.
Ist. My son is a native of New South Wales.
2nd. He was educated at the St. Kilda Church of England
Grammar School, under Doctor Bromby.
3rd. After he finished his education at the Grammar
School he attended the Melbourne University and obtained
his degree B.A.
4th. I then sent him to Moore College at Liverpool, at
the request of Bishop Perry, he remained at this college
twelve months, on leaving Moore College the Principal, the
Eev. Eobert Canon King, gave him the following testi-
monial :
William Kennedy Brodribb’s ability in—
-Ist. Public Reading —A clear voice, a careful and deliber-
ate articulation. The sense clearly apprehended and
emphatically and deliberately and generally speaking
correctly given.
2nd. Composition of Sermons —Pair, imagination lively,
and method orderly, yet wanting occasionally in mathe-
matical precision in statements and conclusions. Will
probably make with more experience a good and attractive
as well as useful preacher.
3rd. Style of delivery —Wants animation, but will improve
with age and increasing confidence.
4th. Acquisition of Knowledge —Above the average, —
acquires readily and retains correctly.
sth. General Parochial Management —Kind —would proba-
bly be orderly in arrangement and conscientious in the
discharge of duties assigned.
6th. Visitation of the Sick —Kind and acceptable.
7th. In spiritual conversation —Somewhat reserved, but
generally sound.
Bth. Learning as regards acquaintance with the Scriptures
in the authorized version, the Prayer Book, Ecclesiastical
History, generally good and accurate, has made consider-
able progress during the last year.


9th. Greek and Latin —Good—has more critical knowledge
of these languages than the majority of those who come
under my charge. As a Christian and a gentleman, Mr.
W. K. Brodribb has given me satisfaction, his theological
knowledge is not extensive, but as far as it goes is accurate.
His views are I believe sound on the great questions of the
day, but he is young, and easily led, and his future will,
humanly speaking, greatly depend upon the influences to
which he is subjected on his entrance into the Ministry.
After leaving Moore College my son returned to Mel-
bourne and was made a Deacon by Bishop Perry and
subsequently ordained priest by the same Bishop and was
placed by him as curate of Bt. James’ Parish, West Mel-
bourne, he remained in this Parish for twelve months and
then was removed by Bishop Perry to the Wannon District—
before leaving St. James’ my son was presented with two
addresses, one from the Parishioners, the other from “ the
Young Men’s Christian Association,” dated February,
1872 ; these addresses are published in my pamphlet.
As my brother and his wife were about to visit Europe,
I obtained Bishop Perry’s consent to my son going home
with his uncle and aunt. My son travelled all through the
United Kingdom, Prance, Italy, Germany, part of Poland,
and through the Holy Land, After his tour I met him in
London, he shewed me a letter from the Eev. Dr. Eussell,
asking him to return to the Wannon and take his place as
his health had given way, and his medical adviser urged
him to take a voyage home. Bishop Perry was then in
London, I consulted him and he recommended my son to
return to Victoria and take Dr. Eussell’s place. I returned
to Victoria with my son in 1874. My son remained on the
Wannon until the Diocese of Ballaarat was formed and
Bishop Thornton took charge of the Diocese. At my
request he came to Sydney, and received a license from the
Dean as Curate of St. Mark’s Parish, “ Darling Point.”
He remained with the Incumbent of St. Mark’s for some
twelve or fifteen months —as his uncle was about to take
another trip home, with my consent he went home with his
uncle. Before leaving he received from the parishioners of
St. Mark’s a letter asking him to remain, this letter was
handed to my son by Mr. Phillip Gidly King, I enclose you a
copy of my son’s reply, marked A. Some short time after


my son’s arrival in England he obtained a curacy with the
Eev. R. I. Salmon, Yicar of St. Martin’s, Brighton.
Now my Lord with regard to our printed correspondence,
In your letter to me dated the 15th April, 2nd paragraph,
you remark, “ Whose aim as recently stated by the Chair-
man, is to bring about a Union with Rome.” I have since
gone carefully over the Chairman’s address on the Ist of
January last, to the Members of the E.C.U. I cannot find
a single sentence that would bear this interpretation. The
E.C.U. is trying to do what I consider an impossibility.
The Chairman says “ We may live to see made a restoration
of faith and practice in the Church of England, as may lead
up to the gathering in of those outside our own (dissenters)
fold at home and pave the way on principles which East
and West could alike accept,” etc.
“ A consummation devoutly to be wished for,” but to my
mind impossible.
In the sth paragraph of the same letter you say my
Lord, “by belonging to the society, and by taking a
curacy in a well known church in Brighton, where all the
curates were members of the E. C. U., he has to a great
extent identified himself with it.”
My son’s reply to this is in his letter to your Lordship,
dated 21st April, see paragraph 6. “ This was not so
though the Yicar laid no instructions on his curates in this
matter and we all three belonged to it yet he himself rather
disapproved of it, and would not have suffered us (had we
wished), to obtrude any connexion with it. We constantly
exchanged pulpits with the Evangelical clergy of Brighton,
(there is of course no inconsistency in Members of the
Union doing so.” This statement is fully confirmed by a
letter I enclose marked B.
In your Lordship’s letter dated 9th June, paragraph 10,
you remark “to this movement I am conscientiously and
resolutely opposed and when a young clergyman seeks my
licence and refuses to separate himself from an organization
whose aims and tendencies are such as I have described, I
have no other course than to refuse his request,” your only
objection to grant my son a license is that he happens to
to be a member of the E. C. U. The same objections
would hold good if you had done the same with a “Lay
Reader,” to whom you gave a license to act as “Lay


Reader,” this gentleman lately wrote to your Lordship and
told you he was a member of the E. C. XL, and tendered
his resignation of his license a short correspondence ensued,
which ended in your returning him his certificate with your
fullest confidence and approval.
Surely my Lord, it was more imperative upon you to
insist upon this gentleman withdrawing from the E. 0. U.
than my son. The one was only employed in the Ministry
as a “ Lay Reader,” besides which, this gentleman (I
believe), is a Member of the Colonial Branch in Sydney.
Whereas my son is not, nor did he intend to join the Colonial
Branch.
My son is far from being an extreme High Churchman,
his only desire is to impart warmth and vitality in the
Church of England service and so make it attractive, he
has no desire to go beyond the Rubric and the Common
Prayer Book, and had he remained in your Diocese he
would have conformed to the wishes of your Lordship and
the Parishioners in the Parish in which he might have
officiated. I know your answer will be “ why did your son
not withdraw from the E.0.U,” my answer is, you must
have had a very poor opinion of my son’s conscientious con-
victions—surely you do not wish to interfere with private
judgment? Had my son complied with your request, I
should have entertained a very poor opinion of him as a
Church of England clergyman.
It appears to me my Lord that you have been trying to
establish in your Diocese “ One school of thought on Eccle-
siastical questions ” —I fancy this is an impossibility and
I am confirmed in this opinion by listening to the debates,
that have taken place in the Synod for the past week, for
instance the very diversity of opinion on Mr. Alex.
Cordon’s motion affirming “ The desirableness of a Church
of England political combination to promote Church in-
terests.” I regret not being a member of the Synod (at
the time) to give this my hearty approval. Then Canon
Allwood’s motion, with regard to religious instruction in
our Public Schools, you I believe differ with Canon All-
wood, on this question. These two circumstances alone,
have confirmed me in my opinion, viz., that it is impossible
to establish one school of thought on religious questions.
I cannot express to you the pleasure I felt in reading your


remarks, on Friday evening, in the Synod, when the ad-
journed discussion was resumed on the Motion of Mr. C.
Stuart. I hope my Lord you do not suppose that I enter
the Synod to oppose your views in any way. My object is
to give you support whenever I can do so conscientiously.
I am a determined supporter of the Church of England.
I assisted years ago to form the Diocese of Goulburn
financially by subscribing £IOO, and I gave £IOO towards
the Ballarat Diocese. I was a member of the Church
Assembly in Melbourne before Bishop Perry left. When
state aid was partially abandoned in Victoria, I assisted to
form what was called “ the clergy augmentation fund,” so
as to assist half yearly, those clergymen whose stipends
were reduced in consequence. The last half year I was on
the committee we collected over £IOOO, which was a great
help to the country clergymen.
I remain,
My Lord with every respect,
Your obedient servant,
W. A. BEODRIBB.
(Copy A.)
To P. Kino, Esq., and other members of St. Mark’s
congregation.
Gentlemen, —I desire to express to you my sincere
gratification at receiving the requisition signed by you to the
effect that you would be pleased, should any alteration be
possible in my intention of for the present quitting this
diocese. My sojourn here assures me that, were I remain-
ing in the diocese, I could wish for no post more agreeable
to me, or more in accordance with my ecclesiastical convic-
tions than the curacy of St. Mark’s. It has however for the
last three years been my desire and full purpose to return
to England. I think it would be unwise of me to throw
away the opportunity which now presents itself of proceed-
ing thither with my relatives, especially as all my arrange-
ments have been completed; my passage by the Mail having
been taken, and my books, effects, &c., being already en


route. Trusting that my inability to change my plans may
not seem ungracious.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
W. KENNEDY BEODRIBB.
Buekhurst, May 21, 1878.
(Copy B.)
Burwood, June 19th.
Dear Mr. Brodribb, —While residing in Brighton
a short while ago, I had special opportunities of acquiring
a knowledge of the Church of Saint Martin, at which your
son, the Eev. W. K. Brodribb, held a curacy, and I have
therefore read the correspondence between the Lord Bishop
of Sydney and yourself and your son with the greatest
interest. An intimate friend and fellow student of my own
at the University of Oxford, held a curacy at Saint Martin’s
Church, and I was thus enabled, not only by attending the
Church, to observe closely the services conducted there, but
also from conversation with my friend to obtain an insight
into the principles upon which the administration of the
Church was conducted. Having this knowledge I have
been much surprised to learn that the Church of Saint
Martin is connected in the minds of many people with what
I find termed in one of the Lord Bishop of Sydney’s letters,
“ the extreme opinions of the party of the English Church
Union ” ; and that an impression prevails that the services
conducted at Saint Martin’s Church were of what is called
a Ritualistic nature. His Lordship would seem to be of
this opinion when he writes “ .... by belonging to the
Society, and ly talcing a curacy in a well-known Church in
Brighton, where all the curates were members of the
“ Church Union,” he {re the Rev. W. K. Brodribb) has to
a great extent identified himself with it.” I certainly was
not aware that “all the Curates were members of the
Church Union,” for I was decidedly under the conviction
that my friend was not a member of that Society. I always
understood from him—what was well-known in Brighton—
that the Yicar of Saint Martin’s, the Rev. R. Salmon, was
strongly opposed to any extreme views or practices, especi-
ally in the direction of Ritualism; but I believe lam right


in concluding that it is from the manner in which the ser-
vices are conducted, that both a Church, and those who
officiate in it are to be characterised. In all the services
that I attended at Saint Martin’s I never observed any
practice that could according to any interpretation of the
term be called Eitualistic. The services were the same as
those which I was accustomed for eight years to see cele-
brated in the Cathedral of Winchester, under Bishops
Summer and Wilberforce, and Deans Yarnier and Branston,
and as those which I believe are celebrated daily in all the
Cathedrals of the English Church throughout the United
Kingdom. If the services of Saint Martin’s were Ritualistic
I can only conclude that the Cathedral Service of the
Church of England is Ritualistic also.
I may perhaps be allowed to suggest an explanation of
the fact that, in spite of the overwhelming evidence fur-
nished by the services at Saint Martin’s, and the well-
known opinions of the Yicar, that Church lies under the
imputation of Ritualism.
Your son will no doubt have told you that the Church of
Saint Martin was built by the Rev. Arthur Wagner, in
memory of his father, a former Yicar of Brighton. Mr.
Wagner has not without reason been accused of Ritualism,
and the Church which he built at his own cost has shared
the imputation. But those who have been so ready to use
this connection as a weapon of attack upon Saint Martin’s
Church, have overlooked the fact that from the day on
which the Church was consecrated by the Bishop of Chich-
ester it passed entirely from the hands of the gentleman
who expended a fortune in building it, and was from that
time no more under his control than under that of those
who occupy themselves in promoting charity and harmony
in the Church, by prosecuting their fellow-members.
It would be unbecoming on my part to enter on the
general question of the English Church Union, and its
merits or defects. I notice however in one of the Lord
Bishop of Sydney’s letters a reference to that Society in
connection with the Diocese of Oxford and Cuddesdon
College: I may therefore perhaps, be allowed to trespass
on that ground to the extent of stating that while at Oxford
I had the acquaintance of many clergymen, some of them
being connected with Cuddesdon College—who, while dis-


approving strongly of all extreme views and Ritualistic
practices, yet upheld the English Church Union simply
because it afforded the only means of procuring a fair hear-
ing—which right in contra distinction to prove other
members of the English Church, they would extend even
to High Churchman, for those who are singled out by their
brethren of a certain other association for—“ correction.”
Believe me,
Dear Mr. Brodribb,
Yours very truly,
CHARLES E. HOTHAM.
Bishopscourt, Sydney.
2nd July, 1880.
My dear Sir, —I have received your letter and
enclosures, the latter I return. I may mention that it is
not usual to print correspondence without the permission
of the writers and I was not aware of your intention to
publish until some friends of mine received a copy of the
letters.
My answer to the memorial contains my deliberate conclu-
sion on this matter, and if any further publication takes
place I shall be glad if that reply is enclosed in it.
The case of the Lay Reader who wrote to me anouncing
himself to me a member of the E.0.U., and tendered his
resignation is entirely different from your son’s case. Mr.
had been licensed by me without my being conscious
that he was a member of the E.C.U,
On enquiring I found that he had been serving the
Church as a Lay Reader with much acceptance and this
testimony of his clergyman was highly favourable.
He had joined I understood while a boy at school in
England. I did not accept his resignation. If any clergy-
man now in my diocese and holding my license should
tender his resignation to me on the ground of his being a
member of the E. C. U., I should pursue the same course.
On the other hand, if a clergyman or layman asks me to
give him my license and avows himself a member of the
E. C. U., I shall decline his services.
If your son acted rightly in joining the E. 0. U., it does
not follow that he is right in retaining his membership
when the true character of the Union is known.


The authority for stating that all the curates of St.
Martin’s were members of the E. C. U, is your son himself.
In the opinion of Mr. Hotham, St. Martin’s does not deserve
to be classed amongst the Eitualistic churches. It has that
reputation nevertheless, and Ido not think that I have said
more than the facts known to me wartant me in saying.
I see no particular object to be gained by continuing this
correspondence, but cannot close it on my part without
again expressing my great regret at having been the cause
of so much pain and anxiety to you, and my acknowledg-
ment of the strong claim you have upon my consideration
by your character and conduct as an attached member of
the Church of England.
Believe me,
My dear Sir,
F. SYDNEY.
W. A. Brodribb, Esq.
To the Eight Eev. the Lord Bishop of Sydney.
July Bth, 1880,
My Lord, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of
your note dated the 2nd instant. I quite agree with your
Lordship “ that there is no particular object to be gained
by continuing this correspondence.”
As our previous correspondence has been published, I
venture to ask your permission to publish my last letter
and your answer.
I remain, my Lord,
With every respect, your obedient Servant,
W. A. BEODEIBB.
Sydney, July 12, 1880.
My Dear Sir, —If you tkink any useful purpose is
secured by the publication our correspondence, I must leave
you to use your own discretion in the matter.
Believe me,
My dear Sir,
Sincerely yours,
F. SYDNEY.
W. A. Brodribb, Esq.


Buckhurst, Double Bay,
12tb July, 1880.
To the Eight Eey. the Lord Bishop of Sydney,
Bisbopscourt.
My Lord, —Since I wrote you a short note on the
Bth inst., I have seen Mr. Clarke and obtained from him a
copy of the correspondence that took place between your
Lordship and that gentleman.
In your last letter to me dated the 2nd inst., you say :
“In the case of the Lay Eeader who wrote to me announ-
cing himself to me a member of the E.O.U. and tendered is
resignation, is entirely different from your son’s case! ! ! !
I did not accept his resignation.”
This gentleman wrote to you on the 19th April and again
on the 28rd, and you replied on the 28th. In this letter
you say:—“l certainly do not wish to conceal from you
that if there was to be a resignation on your part, I should
much have preferred that you had resigned your connection
with the E.C.U. I consider that the line recently taken by
it in the affair of Mr. Maconochie, requires all trile lovers
of the Church of England to disconnect themselves from it.
I thank you sincerely for the services you have rendered and
regret very much their discontinuance. I am sure Mr.
Childe would have only been too glad to avail himself of
your valuable help.”
Mr. Clarke and his friends came to the conclusion that
his resignation had been accepted by your Lordship, and
the Colonial Members of the E. C. U. came to the same con-
conclusion at their last meeting. Subsequently Mr. Childe
saw you and interviewed Mr. Clarke, who told him, if he
wrote to your Lordship withdrawing his resignation it
would be accepted —this he did and you retained his ser-
vices without requesting him to withdraw from the E.C.U.
Perhaps my Lord you are right in saying “this is entirely
different from your son’s case.”
No doubt they are different as far as you have acted. In
my son’s case you insisted on his withdrawing from the
“ Union.” In the other case you retained the services of
Mr. Clarke without insisting upon his withdrawing from it.
This latter gentleman is a member of the Colonial Branch,
whereas my son is not, nor did he intend to join it. As far


as their membership with the E. C. U. is concerned, the
two eases are parallel.
Perhaps your Lordship would he kind enough to inform
me in what way they “ entirely differ ” ? Certainly one is
an ordained clergyman, the other a “ Lay Reader.”
I remain, my Lord,
With every respect,
Your most obedient Servant,
W. A. BEODEIBB.
Bishopscourt,
Sydney,
July 13, 1880.
My Dear Sir, —I have already stated my view of
the difference between the case of Mr. Clarke and your son,
and decline to enter upon any further discussion of the
subject of your letter.
I remain,
My dear Sir,
Yery sincerely yours,
E. SYDNEY.
W. A. Brodribb, Esq.
12




