

CORRESPONDENCE
AND
STATEMENT
OF
FACTS
RELATIVE TO THE
ROMAN CATHOLIC MISSION,
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
4
1852.


/j ( ' e^c X^
c(/ l\c*/~, -X., (Peif/ix,y
j£.f *,&(&*>, <-dl rv* <V*vCCk/ fCJjXtdm.
td; ,■ (te- -a-
A) Pl \i£


PREFACE.
The Catholic Church shall be never free from
trouble and persecution, during her sojourn in this
valley of tears, until she arrives in her true country,
which is the Kingdom of Heaven. “ All who wish
to live piously in Jesus Christ,” says St. Paul,
“shall suffer persecution.” The persecutions of
the Church are sometimes manifest, and sometimes
hidden. No sooner do the public and violent per-
secutions disappear, than the hidden ones arise,
which, doubtlessly, are by far the most grievous.
In the first ages, the Church suffered from the
fury of the Jews and Gentiles, —subsequently, false
brethren waged war against her, which shall con-
tinue until the last persecution of antichrist, 'and
which shall be the most terrible of all.
The second kind of persecution is called hidden,
because being raised by concealed enemies; but
what shall we say of those whom God has ap-
pointed ministers of His Church ? Are not some
of them deserving of that reproach uttered by
the Holy Spirit against the Jewish priests,—“You
have departed out of the way, and have caused
many to stumble at the law; you have made
void the covenant of Levi, said the Lord God of
Hosts,” &c. ( Malachias , chap. ii).


In effect, the injuries inflicted upon religion by
unfaithful ministers, are far more serious than the
crimes of the laity; and, consequently, they are
generally visited by the most awful punishments:
for what can be more provoking to the Deity than
the bad examples of those whom He has constituted
ministers of His Word, to correct the vices of the
people, when they transgress His laws—when He
beholds them intent upon worldly pursuits, on seek-
ing their own aggrandizement, and following their
own ambitious views. At the same time, suffering
so many souls entrusted to their care, to wallow in
vice—in ignorance—and thereby bring opprobrium
upon religion; cause her doctrines to be despised
and ridiculed, and the sacred name of God to be
blasphemed by unbelievers.
They are pretended friends, yet concealed ene-
mies—they are domestics of Christ’s household, yet
they disturb its tranquillity—they are the ministers
of Christ, yet they serve antichrist.
The temporalities of God’s altar procure for them
worldly respect and honour, yet they dishonour the
Lord, and scandalise the people. Behold in peace
my bitterness —ecce in pace amaritudinem.
In the death of martyrs bitter; in conflict with
heretics, more bitter; in the deceits and treachery
of domestic enemies, most bitter, St. Bernard.
Now, with respect to religious orders, many, very
many indeed, of their members have been orna-
ments in the Church, yet there has and
there are now, alas! too many who disgrace her
by conduct that would not be tolerated amongst
the lowest class of society.
“ I have never seen better men than in monaste


ries,” says St. Augustine, “ nor have I ever seen
worse men than in monasteries.”
During the life-time of their holy founders, and
for several years afterwards, monks led exemplary
and pious lives; but, in course of time, when they
became numerous, they became relax in discipline,
as well as in morals; multitudes, who were never
called by Almighty God, to a religious state, made
their religious vows in monasteries, whom the
miraculous star never conducted to the crib of
of Bethlehem; i.e., they never were called by a
heavenly vocation to imitate the humility, meek-
ness, and poverty of Jesus, but the desire of flesh
and blood, which militate against the spirit, impelled
them to seek the enjoyments of an idle life,
to escape the pressure of poverty or to obtain
those emoluments and honours in a religious state,
to which they could never aspire had they remained
in the world. Hence arose contentions for prefer-
ments, enmities, and quarrels, in the House of
God—even in the Sanctary, where peace only
ought to be the grand object. They have put on
religious habits, but they have despised—cast away
religious morals. Speciem pietatis habentes vir-
tutem autem negantes. Much more is expected of
religious, than of any other class of Christians;
because they make solemn vows to observe the
three Evangelical counsels. They promise to ob-
serve and practise the virtue of humility in a
special manner, in imitation of their Divine Master,
who has said, “Learn of me, ,because I am meek
and’humble of heart.” They solemnly declare
against the pomps and vanities of this world. They
are not even allowed to seek preferments in religion ;


yet they are not only ambitious of prelacies,* but
they even dishonour and degrade their poor reli-
gious habits by the insignias of secular titles.
Hence their religious names are changed into
secular names; for instance, a Brother Benedict
becomes a Count Benedict.
For these observations on the vices of religious
orders let it not be inferred that we are at all ini-
mical to them on account of all the scandal and
disedification given lately to the faithful of Perth
by the introduction of some Spanish monks into
the diocese of Perth; on the contrary, as degene-
rate children are entitled to respect on account of
the virtues of their parents in like manner the most
relax religious have a special claim to certain re-
spect and compassion on account of that veneration
entertained for their saintly founders. Meanwhile
the faithful ought not to allow themselves to be
scandalized by the vices and irregularities of her
disloyal children, or unfaithful ministers, for in
reality, by their treasons against religion, the good-
ness of a merciful God is most wonderfully dis-
played, the great truths of His church are proved,
and her infallibility vindicated and established; were
there no original sin there would be no need of a
Redemption. The Son of God, the second person
of the adorable Trinity, would, have never taken
upon himself our human nature, and thereby be-
come our brother: were there no heresies the great
truths of the Church and of God’s special provi-
dence over her in preserving her doctrine pure and
unsullied, would not have been so fully develbped
and so explicitly believed.
With respect to the late dispute and contentions


in this small portion of the Church, if his Grace
the Arahbishop of Sydney did not make the great-
est mistakes and commit the greatest errors in the
discharge of the responsible duty entrusted to him
from the Holy See, the injuries and most gross
calumnies inflicted upon our beloved pastor the
Right Revererid Dr. Brady, would not have been
so triumphantly exposed and refuted as they have
been since his Grace’s arrival in this colony; and
the low, cunning, deceitful, and treacherous conduct
of his coadjutor and party, would have perhaps re-
mained concealed under the cloak of religion.
We have thus premised these few general obser-
vations on the state of the Church, in order to pre-
pare the minds of our readers for a subject of the
most grave nature and importance; a subject which
not only concerns the faithful of this colony, but all
the faithful in general; because since the period of
Arianism, and the violence and anarchy of the
middle ages, nothing like this has taken place in
the Catholic Church in any civilised country, be-
cause this nefarious affair has been carried on and
maintained under the pretext of pleasing God and
the Holy See.


CORRESPONDENCE AND STATEMENT
OF
FACTS,
RELATIVE TO THE
ROMAN CATHOLIC MISSION IN WESTERN
AUSTRALIA.
The injury done to the roost humble, but not the least
deserving portion of the Roman Catholic community of
Western Australia has been, occasionally, of considerable
utility to the public. The most erroneous principles can-
not so deeply impress us with their evil tendencies as the
stubborn facts which we have now to relate.
The wholesale and unwarrantable excommunications
which you caused to be published yesterday from the altar,
against the majority of the Roman Catholic community of
Western Australia, has already created the greatest public
sensation. Doubtlessly you have felt that your novel pas-
toral could not bear examination or criticism; consequently
your grace has endeavoured to protect it from further
criticism by ecclesiastical censures, which the Roman
Catholic church has not authorised. But as it has been an
explosion of your own passionate fermentation, or political
belief, the holy see is by no means concerned in it, except
inasmuch as she will make your lordship responsible for it.
The unhappy results of your mission to this colony incon-
trovertibly prove that you have mistaken your vocation for
the exalted office of delegate from the chair of St. Peter;
for, had you confined yourself to the simple mandate which
you state you have received, you could not have done so
much harm to religion, nor now give her cause to bewail
your rashness, and bitterly reproach you for having in-
flicted injuries—which we shall point out to the reader in
B


the sequel—on this infant church, which the missionary
zeal of our beloved pastor, the Rt. Rev. Dr. Brady, has so
carefully and successfully planted and established here, in.
this most distant land.
In what capacity, and with what power, your lordship
travelled to this distant part of Australia, is still a conjec-
ture. Some are of opinion that your lordship has been
delegated by the holy see, as a messenger of peace ; yet, up
to tine present, you have not presented to the Roman
Catholic community of Perth—not even to our revered
bishop—even a copy of your apostolic commission, without
which, canon law will not allow any faith to be placed in
the self-constituted commissioner. However, that com-
mission is of minor importance, when compared with a
series of gross mistakes, on account of which, and for the
honour of the holy see, the Roman Catholic inhabitants of
this colony consider it their duty to appeal to the supreme
tribunal. Your lordship shall have a fair trial, and we
promise that no other witnesses shall be brought against you
than those of your own creation, and of which you are still
so enamoured. Facts are stubborn witnesses or arguments.
As this unfortunate transaction is still in its growth, we
must confine ourselves to the circumstances of its beginning
and progress; and for that purpose we beg to inquire by
what authority have you constituted yourself judge, and
erected your tribunal in the solitude of Aus,tralind, a
distance of one hundred miles from Perth ?
In the beginning, it was the subject of curious inquiry
what cause you had to try, and what criminal you had to
condemn. After the lapse of a few days, your own letters
discovered to the anxious people the object of your indig-
nation. With all the cunning of an eastern tyrant, you
first endeavoured to allure your victim by an epistolary
profession of friendship—by a sweet invitation to him to
repair to the snug Bdvidere residence of Mr, Little, in
order to console your grace after the fatigues of your
journey from the Sound. Secondly, should he prove so
ungrateful as to postpone this tribute of condolence and
sympathy which was ,due to you, at least in charity, as an
invalid, and more especially on account of old friendship,
your lordship deemed it salutary to terrify him into a


reciprocity of friendship and charity by an authoritative
epistle, in which your grace threatened his disobedience
with the heaviest censures of the church.
“ Belvidere, June 13 th, 1852.
“ My Lord,
“ You will be glad to learn that I have reached
this place, Mr. Little’s residence, in health and safety. My
journey has been sufficiently fatiguing, its effects, however,
fast passing away. I shall expect the pleasure of seeing
you here at your earliest convenience. Mr. Little’s son,
the bearer of this communication, will accompany your
lordship, and take charge of the parcel of linen and other
necessaries you may require.
“ I have honour to be, my Lord,
“ Your Lordship’s faithful sert. in J. C.
“t J. B. FOLDING, Archbishop
of Sydney, Metropolitan of New Holl.
“ To the Right Reverend Bishop Brady, &c., &c.”
“ To the Right Reverend Bishop Brady.
“ My Lord,
“ In virtue of your oath of obedience, taken on
the day of your consecration, and by the authority of the
holy apostolic see specially committed to us, we require
your lordship to come to us, now residing at Belvidere,
near Bunbury; and we admonish you once, which shall
suffice for all canonical forms, that the neglect of com-
pliance with this our solemn injunction, sub gravi, will be
followed by the heaviest censures of the church.
“ And, furthermore, we inform you that we will not allow
or receive any excuse, pretext, or hindrance in bar of this
our order under obedience.
“ Belvidere , June 13 ih, 1852.
“f JOHN BEDE FOLDING, Archbishop
ofi Sydney, Metropolitan of New Holl.”
Mr, Little could not find, in all Perth, a member of the
Catholic church to serve as a witness to the second letter
or summons.
These’ two letters, bearing date the 13th of June last,
were despatched by your grace from Australind by Mr.


Thomas Little, junior, to the lit. Rev. John Brady, Roman
Catholic bishop of Perth, with instructions to your mes-
senger, should his lordship decline the invitation, contained
in the former letter, to serve him with the latter, and bring
witness too with you, in order to summon the contumacious
and disobedient bishop of Perth. Your grace is resolved to
make an example of him who would profanely suspect your
friendly intentions. Come he must: our solemn injunction
shall be obeyed subgravi. “Neither poverty or sickness shall
stand in the way of our mandate or order under obedience .”
In the name of common justice and common sense how
could ecclesiastical censures affect the Bishop of Perth,
for having declined the invitation under such circum-
stances ? Besides the good bishop had no means (for the
coadjutor bishop retained possession of all Dr. Brady’s
personal and real property) to undertake such a journey in
the most stormy season of the year, and suffering from
rheumatism with a severe cold and headache: moreover,
there was no case to be tried with respect to the Bishop of
Perth; for, on being fully informed of this suspension, altho’
obtained under false pretences and ex informata conscientia ,
the Right Rev. Dr. Brady immediately ceased all his
episcopal functions, and acted in every respect in conformity
with the mandate of the holy see.
Supposing your lordship had received a special com-
mission, and that you had been appointed a judex delegatus ,
as such you were obliged to insert a copy of the mandate,
without which no faith (says the canon law) can or ought
to be given, and the accused is by no means obliged to
appear. The accused must be furnished with the bill of
indictment, in order to prepare himself for his defence.
The place of trial must not be far distant. The way to it
must be safe. The circumstances and rank of the party
must be taken into consideration —for instance, whether he
has means to meet the expenses of the journey; and if he
be in good health, &c.: for it is iniquitious, continues the
canon, to compel the accused, with great inconvenience,
to appear before the judge, especially when the judge had
erected his tribunal at such a distance, for his own ease
and comfort, not considering the Bishop of Perth’s position
and circumstances. Now, as we have already observed,


there was no case to be tried. It was a simple declaration
of the bishop’s suspension, to which he declared and pro-
fessed his entire obedience and submission, in his first
letter to your grace, and in his last exhortation to us all,
stating that, although it had been surreptitiously obtained
by the agent in Rome, and by the Spanish benedictines, still,
on account of the respect due to the holy see, and on
account of the good order and discipline of our holy Catho-
lic church, no resistance should be offered by any of his
beloved flock, but all was to submit and acknowledge the
document in question. Your lordship had been informed,
at the same time, of the bad state of our bishop’s
health, and that he was without means to undertake the
voyage; he could not even obtain of the coadjutor the use
of his own horse: not one shilling to defray the necessary
expenses of a long and dreary journey through the bush,
which was at that time infested with bushrangers.
Indeed there is so much folly and cruelty in the first
trial of your judicial ability and tact, that we cannot dwell
on it without feelings of disgust and indignation, notwith-
standing our deep respect for your exalted station. We
cannot discover one single argument or motive to mitigate
the enormity of the strange and unjust proceedings adopted’
by your lordship, and directed against our venerated bishop.
We repeat that your unnatural conduct towards your
brother bishop fills us all with just indignation, for he is
your equal as a gentleman ; as a scholar and sound theolo-
gian he is your superior; as an obedient and zealous
defender of the rights of the holy see, he yields to none;
and as a missionary he ranks superlatively above your
grace.
Whether your lordship or the Bishop of Perth is entitled
to the greater amount of missionary labour and merit, can
be fairly ascertained by a comparison of the circumstances
of both your missions in their beginning, ifi their respective
progress, and the results of your individual labours.
We shall fully contemplate in retrospect your lordship
entering upon your mission in 1834, already in full opera-
tion with a splendid church and schools already established,
first, through the indefatigable zeal of the reverend father;
and, secondly, augmented and increased by the apostolic
b 3


labour and exertions of tbe learned and pious Dr.
UUathorne, now Lord Bishop of Birmingham, England.
Your lordship just stepped in upon a field already prepared.
The good seed was in full growth, and likely to produce an
abundant harvest, when a number of active and zealous
missionaries were shortly after added to your mission, all
through the care and exertions of the present Bishop of
Birmingham, at that time your lordship’s vicar-general.
You found a wealthy and numerous congregation in Sydney
and its vicinity, who were both able and willing to supply
your lordship, not only with the necessaries of life, but
also with comforts. They presented your lordship shortly
after, or, we believe, upon your arrival, with a handsome
carriage and a pair of horses. Shortly after, you received
from the local government a salary of <£soo a year for
yourself, and £2OO a year for each of your clergy, for the
special purpose of attending to the spiritual wants of the
convicts. Surely no bishop in foreign parts could have
had brighter prospects before him, and most certainly
your diocese ought to have been by this time in a most
flourishing condition. We will now consider Bishop Brady
with poor old father Joosten in Perth, without a cabin to
live in, or a donkey to carry the poor old clergyman
through the bush to visit his widely-scattered flock. What
a gloomy prospect lay before those two missionaries.
They had a church to erect in Perth, schools to establish,
and the native population to civilize : means they had not.
Your lordship induced Dr. Brady to undertake that mis-
sion, assuring him that tlie Government of Western Australia
had adopted the church act; but, alas, it was not so. The
only assistance afforded by the local government was a site
for a church and clergyman’s residence. It was a pious
fraud practised on those good missionaries, for which we
give you credit, and feel grateful, on account of the great
benefits conferred upon ourselves and our children, by the
ministry of Dr. Brady and companion having obtained a
site for the erection of a place of worship, and having laid
the foundation stone of the new church, Dr. Brady resolved
to proceed to Europe, in order to obtain a sufficient number
of labourers to cultivate this much-neglected portion of
your lordship’s jurisdiction. This .resolution was perfectly


in accordance with the instructions given by your grace to
Dr. Brady, at the time of his departure from Sydney; and
had he means to obtain a sufficient number of missionaries,
he would not have left for a moment the mission of
Western Australia; your grace, indeed, sent him sine
pera , &c. The missionaries had not wherewith to pay their
passage from King George’s Sound to Perth. The captain
who conveyed them from Adelaide to King George’s Sound,
was kind enough to take them to Fremantle for three
pounds each, which was advanced to him by one of the
inhabitants of Perth. May God reward him for so kind
and benevolent an act. Your grace, however, was pleased
to address a letter to Dr. Brady, directing him to select a
certain number of zealous missionaries—some for Western
Australia, and some others for your grace’s own diocese—
but leaving Dr. Brady without pecuniary means for their
passage and outfits, so that when Dr. Brady arrived in
Europe, in 1844, he found himself in the impossibility of
securing the means to effect the object of his mission to
Europe ; consequently, he hastened to the holy see in order
to be released from any obligation of even returning him-
self to Australia. Dr. Brady was warmly received by
Pope Gregory the XYL, of happy memory; but instead of
granting his request to remain in Europe, he commanded
him to lay before Propaganda the wants of his mission,
and the result was that Perth was erected into a diocese,
according to the plan which your grace had some time
before submitted to the holy see, in which Swan River was
included. Subsequently the question arose respecting the
appointment of a bishop to take charge of the new diocese.
Dr. Brady, in the report to the sacred congregation, pro-
posed the Very Reverend Dr. Ullathorne, now the Bishop
of Birmingham, who, upon being consulted, begged to de-
cline the responsibility. Several clergymen were proposed,
but his Holiness the late Pope Gregory XYL, of happy
memory, by a motu proprio, elected and appointed the
humble missionary, Dr. Brady, to the newly-erected see
of Perth. Notwithstanding all the unwarrantable and
malicious assertions made with regard to his appointment,-
it is well known in Rome with what reluctance Dr. Brady
accepted the episcopal dignity. In vain did he remonstrate


with his holiness, that having spent more than twenty years
on foreign missions, he thought he might be allowed to
spend the remainder of his days in Europe. He considered
the task too great for his strength ; in fine, that he was un-
worthy of so high an office, surrounded as it was with so
much difficulties. All this Dr. Brady laid before his holi-
ness, prostrate at his feet, and begging to be released from
the responsibility.
'Phe reasons assigned by Dr. Brady to induce his holiness
to allow him to decline the appointment, only served to
elevate him in the estimation of the Pope, and to command
him , under obedience , to accept the charge. Besides, your
lordship’s honourable testimonial of Dr. Brady’s worth and
merit as a missionary, served to corroborate the good
opinion which his holiness entertained of Dr. Brady’s mis-
sionary qualifications. Pope Gregory XYL, whilst cardinal
prefect of Propaganda, received a report from the Honour-
able and Very Rev. Henry De Solages, respecting the emi-
nent services rendered to religion by Dr. Brady, during
twelve years of missionary labours in the Isle of Bourbon.
“ Joannes Beda Dei et Sancta;, Apostolicae sedes gratia
Sydneinsis Archipiscopus, et Novae Hollandie Yicarius
Apostolicus dilecto nobis in Christo Joanni Brady salutem
in Domino.
“ Cum onus Episcopalis ministerial tanti sit momenti ut
etiam Angelicis humeris formedandum videatur, operae pre-
tium duximus in adjninistratione Yastissimae hujus Aus-
tralia; seu Novae Hollandiae Yicaritatus quem S. S. Pastor
omniam fidelium imbecileitate nostrae superimposuit Yica-
rios idoneos eligere, qui partem nostrae solicitudinis aleverat.
Hinc aciera nostra* mentis in personam tuam dirigentes et
de fidelitate probitate, prudentia, scientia et experientia
aliisque quibus poles virtutibus confisi te Nostrum Vica-
rium Generalem in 'Australia Occidental! et in partibus
circumjacentibus ad nostrum beneplacitum in spiritulibus
et temporalibus tenore praesentium facimus, constituimus,
et deputamus ; dantes et concedentes tibi potestatem bene-
dicendi Ecclesias litieras commendatitias et testimoniales
concedendi; Missionarias turn saecularis, turn regulares,
intra limites supradictae provincial et circum-examinandi
approbandi et facultates concessas ex causa revocandi.


“ Volumus autem in Vicarium Generalem omnes intra
limites jurisdictionis tibi concessae te cognoscant recipiant
et admittant atque ut par est tibi obediant.
“In quorum fidem has praesentes manu nostra sigilioque
munitas per infrascriptum nostrum secretarium expediri
jussimus.
“ Datum apud ades nostras prope Sydney hac prima die
Septembris, 1843.
“JOANNES BEDA, Arciepus Sydneien:
et Novae Hollandiae Yic : Aptus.
“ De mandate Illustmi Reverendmi Archiepiscopi,
f “H. G. Geegokt, Secretarius.
“ Feast of St. Ambrose ,
“ Torororaiha , Dec. 7th , 1840.
“ My dear Mr. Brady,
“ The vicar general has this day communicated
to me the letter he received from you, and supposing that
the letter addressed to me was on the same subject, this he
also placed in my hands. I have been very unwell, and
much reduced in strength, I am now recovered, and
thank God I can make an act of submission to his ever
adorable will, and surrender the victim he may demand
without repining; I know not that I could have done this
at an earlier period.
“ Dear Mr. Brady, I am now past the meridian of life.
It has been my happy privilege to be on terms of intimate
friendship with many; in fact, I cannot live unless those
about me, into whose souls I may pour my thoughts freely
and uncontrolled by any apprehension of the nuihber. I
am not aware that I ever lost the confidence, or forfeited
the esteem of one; and it is to me now, and must be for
the remainder of my life, a subject of deep affliction that
this misfortune has at length befallen me, and in regard of
one whom I have loved and venerated from the first—
whom, in all circumstances, I shall love and venerate. To
enter into an explanation of the past would not, I conceive,
be of use; suffice it to say, that you never lost that place
in my esteem and confidence you must feel you possessed;
that, in this view, I did intend to have requested you to


accompany me to Europe as my confidential friend and
adviser ; that I then arranged with the Y.G. that he should
take the general charge of the important district over
which you preside ; that Mr. Gregory’s, very delicate state
of health, when the Y.G. stated that he should not feel
happy in his situation after my departure, unless you
remained to support and advise him—feeling, myself, the
value of a real friend in such circumstances, influenced me
to take Mr. Gregory, in the hope that the voyage would be
the means of prolonging a valuable life, especially as he had
expressed often to me a most earnest desire to see his
mother once more. I had thus arranged, and had men-
tioned the subject to Mr. Gregory, when the Y.G. opened
to me his determination to return to England, in conse-
quence of letters received respecting the state of the Bene-
dictine congregation. I considered that the same cause which
induced him to return would probably deprive the mission
of his services in England; and I therefore at once deter-
mined, great as the inconveniences of my absence might be,
to proceed, notwithstanding this. I came to this conclusion
without consulting any individual; for I saw no alternative.
It had been publicly announced that I was about to go, and
I considered it best to adhere to the purpose.
“ Had I remained, I should certainly have carried into
effect the plan that I intimated to you, when there was
question of return on the part of the Y.G. on a former occa.-
sion. I have always felt happy with you. You must be
sensible, dear Mr. Brady, that no one could speak more
unreservedly—more confidentially—than I was accustomed
to commune with you ; nor am I aware of any circumstance
which has influenced me to be otherwise with you. In my
absence, and in the present paucity of clergy, I did not see
how I could make any alteration in the - position of the
c l er gy> without inflicting a serious detriment on some one
or another important district of the mission. When, there-
fore, Mr. Murphy had signified to me that in next July,
the term for which he came to the mission would expire,
and that then he purposed to return to Europe, I
told him that, in that case, I could not go ; for, who -fras
to perform the duty in Sydney ? And to fix him, as it
were, in the position in which he now is, I requested him


him to perform the duties of the Y. G. during my absence.
This is the plain history of this transaction, and I regret
exceedingly that an expression which, at the time it was
used, and in the sense by me understood, was entirely
devoid of sense, should have been made the means of
wounding deeply your peace of mind, and of altering your
disposition in my regard, and regard of the mission. As
respects the latter, may not I use the words of him that
sinned and obtained forgiveness—Ego sum qui peccavi, ego
qui inique egi isti qui oves sunt quid fecerunt ?
“ My dear friend, of course I cannot interfere in the way
of altering your design. Wherever you* are, you will do
good; and in that good no one will rejoice more cordially
than myself, and I shall ever feel most grateful for the
assistance you have given. I trust, however, you will not
dissever a connection which I did hope would hot be of
of this world only, without seriously perpending the cause
at the foot of the cross. If he who endured ignominy,
dishonour, torments, with joy, to give us an example, that
we may follow in his footsteps, bids you to go, far be it
from me to gainsay the word. If, ofa the other hand, he
tells you —Nolite abire de domo ad domum sed in quocum-
que loco, vos recipient ibi mane ; if you must feel convinced
from experience that, however useful your ministry may be
elsewhere, it cannot produce more abundant fruit than it
has in your present position, may I not entreat you to
pause ? and when the cause is stripped of every circum-
stance, is it one which should produce such an effect ?—one
which,"in the retrospect of life, you will contemplate with-
out an alloy of pairt. Forgive me, my dear friend, if I thus
expostulate with you. I cannot prevail upon myself to
surrender a friend, and one whom I have loved, and do
love, as a second self. If I did not consult and advise as
has been my wont, the reason was, simply, I had of myself
formed my determination as regarded my departure, and
as regarded the arrangements consequent to that event. I
did what seemed best for the general interests of the
mission. I could not leave that vast and important district
without a head, over which you preside. I could not leave
Sydney without an efficient pastor. Why I did not more
freely communicate—as, on reflection, I now perceive I


might have done—l really know not; but I can most sin-
cerely assure you that want of confidence or decay of
regard was not the cause. No, my good friend, this is
impossible; and, on my return, you will find that I am
what I have ever been in your regard. May I then con-
sider that letter to the V. G. as not written ? Balance the
reserve, if such it were, of some few days, with that effu-
sion de caur which has distinguished our communications.
Make some allowance for the jealousies of a pastor, whose
sole desire is to live for his people, and to obtain for them
clergy according to God’s own heart. Write to me a
I’ordinaire, and in a petit mot. Comfort me, by assuring
me that that note is as if not written. For my own part, I
repeat that my regard and confidence in you are undi-
minished, and the greatest solace I have during my absence
from N. S. W., is m the reflection, that so large a portion
is under your pastoral care. How much I have felt in the
apprehension of your loss, wrinkles and grey hairs testify.
By the grace of God, like Abraham, I am resigned to the
sacrifice. Perhaps this was the disposition which was
required, and the actual immolation of the victim may not
be demanded; if so, I shall rejoice. I shall say —Bonum
est quia humiliati me ut discam justifictiones tuas. If the
chalice is not to pass, I must say—Fiat voluntas; but in all
circumstances, believe me to be, with unalterable regard,
“Yours most affectionately in J. C.,
“f J. B. FOLDING, Bp. Y. A.”
This and other honourable testimonials which Dr. Brady
can produce, but which we do not require, are so many flat
contradictions of Dr. Folding’s malicious insinuations, made
by him during his visit here, in order to lessen the great
respect, esteem, and veneration, which wejill entertain still
for our beloved bishop.
Although your grace addressed a letter of congratulation
to the Rt. Rev. Dr. Brady, subsequently to his lordship’s
episcopal censecration, requesting him to command your
advice and assistance whenever he might require it; yet
we have been informed that your grace has industriously
circulated, that Perth would not have been erected into a
diocese, had not Dr. Brady exaggerated to the holy see
several circumstances relating to that mission, although


your grace was well aware that Dr. Brady’s report to the
holy see was a bona fide one. He relied upon the infor-
mation given him by your grace, before leaving Sydney ;
and according to a letter addressed to Dr. Ullathorne, by a
respectable inhabitant of Perth, that the one half of the
entire population of Western Australia were Roman
Catholics; but, in consequence of not having a place of
worship and a clergyman of their own faith, they would not
acknowledge and profess their faith openly. Such was the
simple and bona fide statement given by Dr. Brady to the
holy see. Moreover, 'there had been no regular census
taken by the government to ascertain the amount of popu-
lation up to that time. Your grace’s animadversion is
entirely unmanly, when we consider that upon your lord-
ship’s report of Port Essington, the holy see was pleased to
erect a see where there was no city or town, not even a
civilized inhabitant. Western Australia had been erected
into a separate colonial government. There were six Pro-
testant ministers, with those of other denominations; but in
your grace’s new diocese there does not exist the smallest
trace of any civilized institution. So that your two newly
disappointed brother bishops of Port Essington are seeking
refuge in Western Australia, and endeavouring, with your
lordship, to disturb the waters that fertilize that portion of
the Lord’s vineyard. We now leave to our readers to
judge, whether in your grace’s report, or that of our be-
loved bishop’s, things have been exaggerated to the holy see.
Indeed, we cannot conceive how the numerical mistake
made by Dr. Brady could authorise your grace to state,
that had the holy see been made acquainted with the exact
number of Roman Cal holies in Western Australia, Perth'
would not have been erected into a bishopric ; whereas, it
is a positive fact that Swan River was named by your lord-
snip as one of the principal districts to be provided for; or,
m other words, to be erected into a diocese, and it is so
expressed in the bull of erection,
h rom one fact alone, it would appear to us that, in your
s idea, bishoprics ought to be erected there, where no
W T objects are found.
We feel convinced that the holy seeds deeply indebted
0 you for your lordship’s visionary labours in Port
c


Essington. It is your own creation, or establishment, at
your own request, having claimed it as your right to pro-
vide for the spiritual wants of that locality. As yet, you
have not sent one missionary to continue the religious
instructions given to nearly four hundred natives by the
truly apostolic labours of Don Angelo Gonfalonier!. Before
that the Almighty was pleased to call him to himself, your
grace would not even send him a priest in his last moments,
because he had been sent there by our bishop.
We shall not presume to make any further comments
upon that subject; the just judge will render to every one
according to his works. Let us now consider and follow
the bishop of Perth, making the necessrry preparations in
Rome for his lordship’s new diocese and missions.
This missionary party consisted of twenty-eight persons
—seven priests, six Ladies of Mercy, and the remainder
were students and catechists.
The introduction of so many missionaries into that much-
neglected portion of the Lord’s vineyard, was a strong
proof of our beloved bishop’s ardent zeal for < the glory of
God and the good of religion. But he unfortunately
consented to take with him two Spanish Benedictine
monks, who had escaped by night from their monastery,
without obedience or will of their superior. The venerable
abbot of La Cava, near 'Naples, complained of their mis-
conduct and ingratitude to himself and community, for they
had been received and affiliated members of the aforesaid
monastery upon their expulsion from Spain. The silver
plate, &c., which they had surrendered upon their recep-
tion, could not be found after their departure from La
Cava. We shall briefly state here that one of the bishops
who assisted at Dr. Brady’s consecration embarked with
Dr. Brady and his party at Civita Yecchia, and during the
navigation to Marseilles, seeing some improper conduct on
the part of one of the Benedictine monks, reprimanded
him, but the Benedictine monk, in digue ferens , the good
bishop complained to Dr. Brady of his conduct, and told
him, at the same time, that he was sorry he had taken
them with him, for he was sure that the same Benedictine
monks would give our good bishop a great deal of annoy-
ance, which came out afterwards to be but too true. Al


though there was a branch monastery of the order in Paris,
the two Spanish Benedictines would not stop or spend the
time in it that Dr. Brady had to remain in Paris, for the
benefit of the mission; but should have full liberty to go
where they liked, and to the most expensive hotels.
When Dr. Brady, however, arrived in London, they
were compelled to remain in the college of Downside, with
the English Benedictines, but still they were constantly
writing to Dr. Brady to allow them to come to London, so
that the very idea of confinement in a monastery was a
subject of great constraint upon them.
The Bishop of Perth arrived at Swan River, Western
Australia, on the 7th of January, 1846, with the above-
named party. The travelling expenses of the several mem-
bers—five from'Rome, six from France, and seventeen from
Ireland to London, £230; for passage and outfits from
London to Perth, £1946 13s. 4d., including expenses in
London; and £3OO to the Rev. John Smith, partly for the
Sisters of Mercy, and partly for books, &c.
In order to provide for the above expenditure, Bishop
Brady had received from Propaganda £620, and from the
Association of the Propagation of the Faith in France,
£1270 3s. 4d.: with the balance the Bishop of Perth
entered upon his new diocese, having twenty-eight persons
to provide for. Fortunately, his lordship had received
some aid from his own private property at Bourbon, which
he freely employed for the benefit and support of his mis-
sionaries.
Immediaiely after their arrival, the bishop opened two
schools—one for the male, and the other for the female
children. The first was conducted by the students of the
and the other by the Sisters of Mercy. Up to
that time there was no public school or institution for the
education of the children of Western Australia; conse-
quently, these schools were of great public utility; and we
are happy to state here that both the catholic and pro-
testant parents gratefully acknowledge the great advantages
and benefits their children derive from these schools. As
provisions were then cheap, his lordship purchased a
certain quantity of flour, tea, sugar, rice, &c., partly on
credit, which he divided amongst the several missions. In


the next place, he obtained from the government probation-
ary farms for the purpose of civilizing the natives. The
two Spanish Benedictines soon became very impatient to
separate, in order to erect an establishment for themselves.
In fact, a separation of some kind was absolutely ne-
cessary, on account of the bad temper and annoyance of
those two monks, who, by their insubordination and quarrel-
ing dispositions, disturbed the peace and -harmony of the
community. The Rev. Don Angelo Confalonieri, that ex-
cellent missionary, implored of his lordship to separate
them from the college, and remove the scandal they were
giving to the young men. Consequently the two Bene-
dictines were dispatched with two large teams of provi-
sions, and a quantity of farming utensils, seeds, &c.
The French missionaries were also pressing his lordship
to allow them to go to King George’s Sound; but, as
means were wanting, he disapproved of their project. He
considered it advisable for them to remain in Perth, or in
some of the nearer settlements, for'at least one year,
during which time they would have an opportunity of
acquiring a knowledge of both the English and native
languages.
When they continued their importunity, his lordship
said to them:—“ If you are determined to go to King
George’s Sound, I shall not prevent you ; but, remember,
if you do not succeed in your undertaking, I shall not
hold myself responsible. The distance by water is five
hundred miles, and upwards of three hundred by land;
the communications are both rare and very difficult; as
our means are very limited at present, you may find your-'
selves in great want befoib any relief can be sent. If you
are determined to leave Perth, you are at liberty to remain
either in Guilford or Bunbury. The soil in both places is
very good, and the distance comparatively short. The
natives are both numerous and intelligent; besides, there
are a great many settlers in those localities.” To this
paternal exhortation one of the French missionaries re-
plied, “ When we joined in France, you promised to send
us to King George’s Sound.” The secret of bis zeal for
King George’s Sound was centred in his ambition of be-
coming its vicar apostolic. The bishop at length yielded


to his importunity: he gave them all he possibly could
spare, and his blessing.
Three months gfter, the two Benedictine monks returned
to Guilford for their stores, books, and wearing apparel,
which they had left in a damp storehouse in that town.
They would not allow them to remain in the college in
Perth, lest the bishop should have any control over them ;
but, to their great surprise, they found them all destroyed
—quite rotten. The moths and dampness of the place
entirely rendered them completely useless. When they
came to the bishop for more provisions, &c., “ Surely,”
he said, “ you couldn’t have used the large quantity of pro-
visions, &c., you took with you. The monks first stated
that they had been robbed by the natives, but soon after
the bishop ascertained the truth of the matter; and having
no means himself, he applied to Captain Scully, a Roman
Catholic magistrate, in the district where the monks were
located, who furnished them with the necessary supplies
for that season. They constantly importuned the bishop
for more land, a flock of sheep, and a herd of cattle.
They paid little or no attention to the natives, although
they had expressed the greatest anxiety for them in the
commencement.
During this year the schools in Perth were well attended,
and gave great satisfaction. The care and attention paid
by the Sisters of Mercy to their pupils, gained for them the
respect and admiration of all. This brought about a
friendly intercourse and a desire to be instructed in a re-
ligion which recommended so much charity and kind feel-
ing ; in a word, during that year and the two following
years, no fewer than three hundred persons were received
into the church by the bishop and clergy. Some of these
converts were soldiers with their families, who have since
left with their regiments for India; others went to South
Australia, to the copper minesand now, since our good
bishop has left, hundreds of our Roman Catholic families
are leaving for the gold mines in the Port Phillip district.
Don Angelo Confalonieri, with Messrs. Fagan and
Hogan, were also sent to Port Essington, for the civili-
zation and conversion of the natives of that unfortunate
district. The zeal of the French missionaries very soon
c 2


became cold. Instead of cultivating and settling down
amongst the natives, upon the probationary farm, they pre-
ferred the town of Albany, and where the natives were not
allowed to frequent; before that they would do
by remaining amongst the natives, if allowed: now that
they are ordered to settle down upon the farm, they refuse.
The ambitious L’Abbe Thevaux incurred suspension on
account of his contumacious conduct towards the bishop’s
orders. The rest followed the example, and shortly left
for the Mauritius. As for the Spanish Benedictines, their
zeal for more live stock and land daily increased—much
would have more—always, of course, for the glory of God,
and for the civilization of the natives, although they had
not mkde an effort to convert and civilize one up to this
time. Their mission had been attended with most unfor-
tunate circumstances. Scarcely six months had elapsed
when a fine, promising, young student (John O’Gorman)
was shot accidentally by one of the Benedictines. A ser-
vant man of the Benedictine monks, after drinking all their
wine, on his way down to Perth, in company with Don
Serra, now the coadjutor bishop, killed a poor man, for
which he was afterwards sentenced to die. Since that
another was killed by a c&rt, and another was lost in the
bush. Since that, and during Bishop Brady’s absence,
several of the Spaniards died, and, onb having lost his
reason, attempted several times to stab Bishop Serra,
Many other misfortunes and scandals we are obliged to pass
over in silence, for brevity sake. The Perth mission
progressed daily—the sacraments were frequented—and
the schools were in the highest repute amongst all classes
of the community. The bishop now became very anxious
about the allocation for the year 1846, having drawn
upon his agent in London for supplies and contracts entered
into for the several establishments and missions during
that year. Thanks to the generosity and charity of the
members of the committee of the Association of the Pro-
pagation of the Faith at Lyons and Paris, the bishop found
himself once more relieved and enabled to satisfy the most
pressing wants of his missions. The expenditure of 1846 :
£ s. d.
For house rent and the support of convent 223 6 4
For the Benedictine or Victoria Mission. . 85 13 4


£ s. d.
For the French Mission, King George’s ) g g
Sound j
For the college at Perth . r 239 7 4
For the completion of the church and debts 183 3 8
For belfry and bell * 39 12 6
To the Port Essington Mission, and pas- ) 254 15 4
sage of three missionaries . ... )
For a large quantity of rice for the na- ) 32 12 8
tives j
On account of which he only received in February, 1847,
'30,000 francs.
The failure of the mission at King George’s Sound did
not in the least surprise the bishop, for the apparent zeal
of the missionaries was combined with a great deal of self
will and obstinacy: he did not expect that much good
would result from their labours.
Meanwhile he began to feel very uneasy for the mission
at Victoria plains. The Benedictine monks, to whose care
it had been Intrusted, were making little or no progress
amongst the native tribes; and the reason they assigned
for the sterility of their mission, was, that they had not a
sufficient quantity of land and stock to enable them to
carry out their missionary views of civilization amongst
the tribes ; whereupon Dr. Brady resolved to convene his
first diocesan synod, or meeting of his clergy, for the pur-
pose of receiving an account of their past labours, and
making provisions for future exertions. Accordingly, in
January, 1848, his lordship held the first synod at the Vic-
toria plains, at Which it was agreed, after passing several
useful regulations for the better government and direction
of the missions, to form a central establishment at the Vic-
toria plains, with several small secursals or establishments
for the civilization of the natives, wherever it might be
deemed necessary or useful. It was resolved upon forming
two immediately: one for boys, and the other for the girls.
The latter was to be placed under the immediate care of
the Ladies of Mercy, and annexed to their schools in
Perth. And should there be more houses or branches of
that admirable order formed in Western a native
branch should necessarily be equally instituted. All these
established were to receive support from the central estab


lishment at the Victoria plains : consequently, it was. re-
solved upon to enlarge the probationary form at the afore-
said station, in order to provide for all the other missions*
and establishments of the diocese of Perth ; but how was
this to be effected : the poor Bishop of Perth had no funds
wherewith to purchase land and stock. “ However,” said
he to his clergy, “let us trust in that living Providence
which has been so kind to us up to this time; and with
prayer and perseverance we shall, with the blessing of God,
be soon able to carry out what we have just resolved upon.”
One of the Benedictine monks, Don Serra, now coad-.
jutor bishop, proposed to his lordship, that, should he be
allowed to go to Spain, his native country, he would collect
a large amount of money, and thereby raise funds for the
purpose of purchasing a large block of land adjoining the
mission, which was to be offered for sale shortly after the
meeting, he (Joseph Serra) pledged himself that, should
his lordship make the purchase, and give bills at six, nine,
and twelve months, he would provide for the due payment
of the aforesaid bills. His lordship, with the advice of his
council, yielded at length to Don Serra’s importunity, and,
in a short time after, made good the purchase of 2560
acres of land adjoining the probationary farm. But as the
bishop had no funds, he gave bills to the amount of £I3OO,
payable in London, which bills Don Serra promised most
faithfully to meet so soon as they became due.
Don Serra left Swan River in February, 1848. The
bishop arranged for his passage, and that of a native boy
whom he sent to be educated in the College of Propaganda.
Don Serra was to bring him first to Spain, in order to
excite the attention and rouse charity of the faithful in
that country, in favour of the poor children of nature in
Western Australia. However, it did not suit Don Serra’s
views to proceed immediately to Spain, in order to collect
for the due fulfilment of his mission. He considered it
more advantageous to go to Lyons and obtain seven
hundred francs from the Association of the Propagation of
the Faith—and that in Bishop Brady’s name : and after re-
ceiving the above sum he proceeded to Rome, where he
was informed that he had been proposed by Dr. Folding to
a see somewhere to the north of Australia. He had re


ceived some intelligence of it in London on his arrival, still
he continued to draw upon Dr. Brady’s funds, and collect
for the mission upon which he was sent. As he con-
templated going to Rome in search of ecclesiastical pre-
ferment, he considered it politically expedient to produce
some extraordinary specimens of his missionaryjadventures.
He exhibited the little native boy as one of his spiritual
children, with a list of natives whom he had baptised be-
fore his departure from the mission. The Bishop of Perth
was not made acquainted "with the fact of his baptising
seven native adults without any previous instruction or
knowledge of a Supreme Being, or belief in Jesus Christ
the Redeemer. Besides, it was expressly understood by
the rules adopted in the synod, according to the general
practice and teaching of the church, that no adult should
be regenerated in the waters of baptism, without the know-
ledge and belief of the Three adorable Persons of the
Blessed Trinity, and the mystery of the incarnation. They
are now running wild in the bush, and are not likely to
be ever instructed in the necessary articles of our divine
faith. That act alone might be sufficient to give an idea of
the kind of man Dr. Brady had sent to Europe. This is
the man your grace proposed to the holy see, although you
had never seen the subject before, or could have known
what manner of man he was. Although you had been
totally ignorant of all that, you first procured his appoint-
ment, to the see of Port Essington, and the bull for his
consecration; and on your return to Sydney you scrupu-
lously inquired of Dr. Brady, and even commanded him to
inform you of his conduct, dispositions, and character.
Surely your grace will admit that this is not quite so bad
as hanging a man and trying him afterwards. Indeed it
would appear that you meant to sacrifice your own reputa-
tion for the sake of your brother Spanish monk, tjpon the
reception of your letter to Dr. Brady, concerning the sub-
ject in question, the Right. Rev. Dr. Brady hastened to
give you the necessary information, but, alas! it was too
late. He expressed his willingness to give you up your
Benedictine brother, but he begged of your grace, at the
same time, not to impose hands upon him, stating, at the
same time, what he knew of the subject. However, your


grace was disappointed and deprived of the gratification
you expected to enjoy; for the above-named subject had
been sent on a mission to Europe, by the Right Rev. Dr.
Brady; but as you had been the principal agent in making
the selection for the civilization of the aboriginal tribes to
the North of Australia, your grace shall be held respon-
sible for all.
Let us now review the conduct of the envoye extraordi-
naire, in Rome, in Naples, and in Spain. Although he had
been informed of his new appointment, he did not resign
his mission from Western Australia, but pursued it with
more eagerness; for he had in view the possibility of his
translation from Port Essington to Perth, and that through
per bond temporalia.
He first of all obtained 2000 Roman scudi from the
branch propagation of the faith in Rome, in order to take
up the first bill which Dr. Brady gave for the land. The
first bill, however, is presented for acceptance, but there
was no provision made at the commercial bank in London,
as had been agreed upon. The envoye extraordinaire, after
placing the sums collected in the savings bank in Monte de
Pieta , is now seized with a scruple of conscience—now, for
the first time, and all at once—that whereas he is to be
shortly consecrated bishop of Port Essington, he should
not any longer be obliged to provide for the bills drawn by
bishop Brady, he considered that the sums collected might
be piously employed for his own special purpose. He,
therefore, and after devout meditation on the subject , came to
the conclusion that it was both meet and just for him to
retain the aforesaid sums of money, which he had collected
for the purpose of taking up bishop Brady’s bills, and what-
ever else Providence would send in his way, until bishop
Brady would consent to certain conditions which he was
about to propose—that was to obtain, first, bishop Brady’s
consent for his translation from Port Essington to Perth, as
coadjutor, with future succession. He did not, however,
allow his cogitations or scruples to interfere with his conse-
cration ; but, soon after, he contrived to insinuate his pre-
conceived plan, and obtained letters to Dr. Brady to that
effect. Unfortunately they were twelve months before they
arrived in Swan River, having been addressed to bishop
Brady, Port Essington, instead of Perth. Meanwhile the


bills bad been presented and protested for non-acceptance.
The apprehension of being disappointed of his becoming
the coadjutor of Dr. Brady, urged the new Benedictine
bishop to make use of other instruments, in order to assist
him in carrying out his ambitious views. He was well
aware that by allowing Dr. Brady’s bills to be dishonoured,
he would find himself considerably embarrassed; conse-
quently an opportunity presented itself to turn the moneys
collected to a good purpose.
To purchase an honourable situation in the church, might
be sinful and simoniacal with respect to aspirants who had
neither merit nor zeal like unto his to recommend them;
but confident that his qualifications were at least equivalent
to a dispensation from whatever guilt that might be
incurred by the offer of a small sum for permission to
exercise his zeal as coadjutor bishop, he addressed a letter
to brother Thomas Heptonstall, of Acton, near London,
who, in the double capacity of procurator and stock-broker,
renders most important services. The following is the
purport of bishop Serra’s letter to the Rev. Thomas Hep-
tonstall —“ Rev. dear sir,—The enclosed is a sum of 400
pounds which I have obtained in Rome to meet Dr. Brady’s
first draft for the land; but you will not pay one farthing
of it until his lordship, Dr. Brady, will have complied with
my conditions.” At the same time he wrote a letter to his
other bishop brother, Salvado, in Western Australia,
requesting him to use all his influence with bishop Brady
to admit him as coadjutor, and in case of refusal, he in-
structed him to sell off all the goods and chattels on the
Victoria plains mission, and start off immediately for Port
Essington. As this letter is so edifying, and at the same
time so interesting, we feel it our duty to make a present
of it to our readers. The original is in Spanish, and is now
in the archives of Propaganda, in Rome. It was faithfully
translated into English, in Rome.
“ Rome , 18£A October , 1848.
“ My dearest Rosendo,
“ I have just concluded whatever was in my power to
do in Rome. To-morrow I set out for Naples to begin, or
rather to continue my begging life. Here; in Rome, taking
everything into consideration, it has not been so bad, con


sidering the circumstances in which we are placed. I have
already collected 35000 dollars—2loo of which I have kept
to send to London, to make the first payment for the land,
on 23rd of October, if the purchase has been really made :
but, my dear Kosendo, you must know that the Propa-
ganda would be satisfied to have me as coadjutor bishop
to Mons. Brady, at Perth, but I don’t wish to disgust them,
for they will not nominate me, until the reply of his lord-
ship, in the affirmative, shall have arrived. My answer
was, very well.
“ Suppose that his lordship should say, no; I shall then
set off for my diocese of Port Victoria. Do you intend to
follow me; and that Mons. Brady will restore to me the
money for the land, which I am obliged to collect with so
great humiliations and labour, for the glory of God ? Or,
that he will allow me to sell it over again, as well as every
thing else belonging to the Nurcia Mission, in order that
we may go and do well at Port Victoria, begging anew,
for the glory of God ? The Propaganda will decide no-
thing, so long as the answer of Mons. Brady has not arrived.
I have protested that I would not pay one half a farthing
more for the land, until I secure what remains for ourselves;
neither can I do it in conscience, since much of the money
is from the Benedictine monasteries, which contribute it
only for the Benedictine mission. You will endeavour to
find out what is Mons. Brady’s answer to the Propaganda,
and let me know it by return of post. If he admits me
as his coadjutor, I shall remain at Nurcia, and the Bene-
dictine mission shall then go on flourishingly.
“ It is needless to say that, in such case, I will pay for all
the land. If the case should be otherwise, that we must set
off for Port Victoria, make known to Mons. Brady that I
shall not pay any other bill in London, for the aforesaid
reason. Take care to have given to you either ally or a part
of the 2100 dollars, or £4OO, together with the exchange
given in London for his account, and convert everything
into money, by selling the oxen, cows, sheep, horses,
mill, &c. and proceed, without a moment’s delay, to Port
Victoria.
“ But I am anxious that, in every case, you maintain
every possible' harmony with Mons. Brady; and above


all things, I charge you to tell me what he may do, without
the loss of even one minute. At this moment that I am
about to start for La Cava, I received your two letters of
the 6th of May, and the 9th of June; and consequently I
received your four letters, up to the present time, and I
hope not one of your or my letters shall be lost, since I have
already declared to Mr. Thomas Jones that the Benedic-
tines, in money matters, have nothing more to do with the
antique gentleman. That late exactness induces me to
believe that we shall not be obliged to change our direction.
“As to the wool, do what you think proper; but I be-
lieve that, in this first year, in which I suppose you will be
in want of money, I cannot as yet assist you, in the un-
certain state in which we are of either remaining at Nurcia,
or whether we shall have to go to Port Victoria, and there
commence de novo. For the sake of charity, deliver me at
once from this state. The will of God must be manifested
through the medium of Mons. Brady, since the same
propaganda will decide nothing until the arrival of his
reply. What I now beg of you is, that you inform, without
a moment’s delay, so soon as you know it, his resolution,
&c., &c., &c.”
The pious author of the letter feels a remorse of con-
science on account of his strong temptation to disgust Pro-
paganda about his appointment as coadjutor. However, he
thinks that his humiliations and labours in procuring
money for the glory of God entitled him to an equivalent
from bishop Brady, and no doubt his Christian views of the
subject were in accordance with the old adage—no money,
iio paternoster. Should his lordship say no to my proposal,
I will not pay one farthing more for the land, and do you,
my Caro Rosendo Salvado, convert everything into money,
by selling off the oxen, cows, sheep, horses, mill, &c., and
proceed without a ■ moment’s delay to Port Victoria;
live, however, in harmony with Mons. Brady ; imitate the
dove in its simplicity, and the sweet music of the Irish
Harper, O’Carrolan, in its harmony ; but in money matters,
have nothing to do with the antique gentleman, I charge
you to fleece his sheep, and do what you will with the wool.
My health is very much impaired. Am I not like unto
a woman in labour ?—for the sake of charity deliver me at
D


once from my burthen. The will of God must be mani-
fested through the medium of Mons. Brady.
His success in Rome animated the new bishop to prose-
cute his pious undertakings with increased energy and per-
severance, taking into consideration, if things had not been
so bad in Rome, what think you ought to be the fruits of
his labours in Naples. As his time was too precious to
waste in private devotions, he immediately started for that
city, in order to continue the good work. His charitable
labours were amply rewarded in that city by munificent do-
nations of silver and gold, given for the same purpose, as
he had been a disinterested party, who had no other ambi-
tion than the glory of God ; nor did he seek any other re-
ward for his pains than that which he expected in a better
world, for collecting alms from the faithful in order to pre-
vent the arrest of one bishop for one debt, contracted for
the conversion and civilization of the black natives of
Western Australia. His appeal to the people of Naples
produced the desired effect. Many of them were horri-
fied at the idea of allowing a bishop to be arrested for debt
contracted by him for so noble an end. In a word, money
flowed to him from all quarters. Cardinal Reario Sfforza,
Archbishop of Naples, to whom he first applied, granted
him a large sum for the special purpose of meeting Dr.
Brady’s bills, as his Eminence and Dr. Brady had been
consecrated in Rome, on the 25th May, 1845.
Having fulfilled his mission in Naples, he started off to
Spain. The same appeal he repeated to the Spanish people
in Madrid, Cadiz, Barcelona, &c., and was most generously
responded to, for we have been informed by Captain
Quisada, of the ship Ferrolana, that he collected in Spain
at least £lB,OOO Sterling. Meanwhile all Bishop Brady’s
bills had been protested for non-acceptance, and dis-
honoured for non-payment, and afterwards returned upon
the bishop of Perth, twenty-five per cent. cost. So soon as
Dr. Brady was apprised of the transactions, that Dr.
Serra had thus violated his promise and betrayed his trust,
he communicated the subject to his Benedictine brother
Salvado, who, filled with ei'her apparent zeal or indigna-
tion at the base conduct of his brother monk, and immedi-
ately offered to go himself to Europe, saying, at the same


time, that he would not betray the trust that would be
placed in him, that he would compel his brother, Benedictine
to pay over all the moneys collected for the Western Aus-
tralian mission. The poor bishop, situated as he was, con-
sented to allow him to go and make the necessary arrange-
ments for his passage, and for two native boys, to join the
first sent with Don Serra to Propaganda. As the credi-
tors of the mission knew Dr. Brady’s circumstances, and
his great anxiety to pay every one his own, they did not
press the execution of the several orders upon him. In
the course of this year the Sisters of Mercy took possession
of their convent, which cost the mission upwards of <£2ooo
sterling; another branch convent was opened at Fre-
mantle. Three more nuns arrived from Ireland, and three
native children we received into the establishment for
native girls, under the care of the Ladies of Mercy. In
a word, the prosperity of the mission in that year served
to mitigate the sorrows of Dr. Brady, which had been in-
flicted through the perfidy of Don Serra, now Bishop Serra.
THE EXPENDITURE OF THIS TEAR. £ S. d.
To completion of the new convent 783 18 4
Erection and completion of another large \ g
building, comprising store kitchen, &c. j
For levelling convent premises and sink- 1 39 2 6
ing well j
For nigh enclosure and gates 59 7 6
Convent Support 201 3 9
For native children and others destitute... 95 10 0
For the support of the Victoria mission ... 243 9 6
For rent of college and support 168 7 8
For Don Serra’s passage and native boys ... 93 2 6
As we have already stated, Don Salvado vehemently
exclaimed against the treachery of his brother Joseph Be-
nedict Serra, and begged of bishop Brady to allow him to
go to Europe, in order to expose the perfidy of brother
Serra, and compel him to render an account of all the
moneys collected by him for the mission of Western Au-
stralia, and finally to make provisions for the due fulfilment
of all debts contracted for the mission in Western Australia.
All who have had the honour of bishop Brady’s acquaint


ance must be well aware of his meekness and kind dispo-
sition. Charity thinketh no evil. In character, he is an
Irishman of the good old times. In him there is neither
guile nor deceit, flattery, nor hypocrisy. If you offend him,
he will charitably forgive you. If you apologise for the
offence, he soon buries it in oblivion, becomes your friend,
and, void of suspicion, he measures others’ hearts by the
goodness of his own. As your grace has already, by re-
peated experiments, brought his character to light at his
expense, but to your own disgrace. We are sorry to state
you can bear testimony to the correctness of the sketches
we have taken. Dr. Brady, therefore, in consenting to
allow Don Salvado to go in pursuit of his brother, Benedict
Joseph Serra, confiding in his protestation and promises,
hoped that the injuries inflicted by his brother monk would
be speedily repaired by the fidelity of Don Rosendos Sal-
vado in Europe; but, alas! the par nobile fratrum joined
hands in Europe; and not only that, but they combined to
injure him in his reputation and honour; nay, more, we
have been given to understand that his very life has been
more than once, both here and in Rome, in the greatest
danger. The moneys which have been collected for the
benefit of the Western Australian mission have been em-
ployed in seeking to injure Dr. Brady, in every possible
manner.
Although your grace has been already eighteen years in
Australia, in the enjoyment of a most lucrative episcopal
living, and in the annual receipt of funds from the propa-
gation of the faith. We have not heard that your labours
amongst the poor children of nature in your extensive
diocese have been crowned with much success; yet
Bishop Brady, notwithstanding all his difficulties and dis-
appointments, has sent two more native boys to propaganda
to be educated for the priesthood. It is true your grace
has caused to be published in the annals of the propagation
of the faith that you have ordained a native, but it happens
to be a young man born in New South Wales, of Irish
parents; his name is O’Connell.
The holy resolution which Don Rosendo Salvado had
made to atone for the misdeeds of his brother monk Serra,
were left behind him, probably on the plains of Victoria, or


were lost in the south Pacific ocean. However, it is most
certain that he did not import into England so much as a
good desire 1 to attend to any other interests besides his own.
Money he wanted, and money he shou!(T have. He had two
aboriginal boys with him, sent by bishop Brady, as we have
already observed. Could not the good monk make some-
thing by exhibiting them to the public in Liverpool,
Dublin, and London ? As the idea was not bad, but good
and profitable, Doq Salvado lost no time, and without delay
opened his exhibition in Dublin. The novelty of the thing
attracted public attention. Two native boys going to pro-
paganda, and intended for the priesthood, coming from the
wilds of Australia, some of the first fruits of the apostolic
labours of an Irish bishop, were a pleasing spectacle of ad-
miration and interest to the Roman Catholic inhabitants of
Dublin. Thousands and thousands of blessings were heaped
upon the head of the Irish prelate in Western Australia,
and devout prayers were ejaculated for him and his fellow-
labourers, a proportionate share of which was besowed upon
the zealous and mortified Salvado; and, what was more
efficacious and desirable, for him, they filled his Spanish
purse with money.
His progress through England was equally successful.
Meanwhile, like his brother monk, he lost sight of Dr.
Brady’s bills, and of his pretended mission to England. As
he had been engaged in a holier cause for himself, he could
not suffer his mind to be distracted with secular trans-
actions. Although he was sent to carry the bags of money,
yet he considered it prudent to go on with the good work,
and leave Dr. Brady to do as they do in France. In Paris
and Lyons, the faithful and pious ladies were enthusi-
astically interested for the welfare of the two juvenile
aborigines destined for the priesthood, as well as for the
civilization and conversion of their people. With respect
to the reverential long beard of father Salvado, like that of
his brother Joseph Benedict Serra, it drew the favourable
regard of all upon him, whom they looked upon as another
Aaron, and thought it a great privilege to get his blessing,
and to be allowed to offer their liberal gifts to him for the
laudable object he had in,view. As he took good and pre-
cious care to deposit all his money in the bank of faith, and
D 3


in accordance with his vow of poverty, he deemed it expe-
dient to make known his distress (imitating, through,
his brother Serra), to the association of the propagation of
the faith. In Lyons and in Paris, the good and charitable
members sympathised with him in his sorrows, and relieved
his poverty, which sum was subsequently charged to the
account of his embarrassed bishop in Western Australia;
so that instead of alleviating Dr. Brady’s embarrassment,
he aggravated it the more. From Marseilles he sailed to
Naples, where he also madg collections for the Western
Australian mission, in the name and on behalf of the bishop
of Perth, the Rt. Rev. Dr. Brady. He could not go to
Rome at that time, as that city was in a state of revolution,
and surrounded by the French army.
His holiness Pope Pius IX. was then at Gaita, and his
eminence the cardinal prefect of propaganda resided in the
monastery br mission-house of the Fathers of St. Vincent
of Paul, where his eminence received Dr. Brady’s letters,
stating the manner in which he had been treated by his
euvoye extraordinaire, Joseph B. Serra., He felt so dis-
gusted and annoyed at the vile conduct of Don Serra, that
he went immediately to the Pope, who, on being informed
of the matter, ordered that Don Serra should be imme-
diately invited to forward the money to London, and have
all Dr. Brady’s drafts duly honoured, and further to pro-
ceed, himself, with all the means or moneys'collected to
assist Dr. Brady in his arduous missions, and repair, as
much as possible, the injuries he had inflicted on that mis-
sion. We have already stated how the Rev. Don Salvado
had gained the confidence of bishop Brady before he left
Perth for Europe. However, he considered it advisable to
procure for him a separate mission, as remote as possible
from Perth. He, Dr. Brady, thought that a favourable
opportunity had now presented itself. He supposed that
Don Salvado would perform what he had so warmly advo-
cated and promised, before he left, and that he would return
with funds to carry on the glorious works of civilization
among the natives. King George’s Sound had bepn aban-
doned. Perhaps bishop Serra might succeed in imposing
himself on him as coadjutor; wherefore, considered his
lordship, I can only remedy or prevent the threatening


evils by recommending Salvado to be my coadjutor at the
Sound. A ccor( iingly, Dr. Brady addressed a letter to the
cardinal prefect of propaganda, requesting the appointment
of Salvado to the Sound. The great difficulty was to get
the moneys out of Don Serra’s hands for the mission of
Western Australia, He had already declared that, unless
Dr. Brady would accept him as his coadjutor, he would not
pay one farthing. His holiness the Pope wrote a most
affectionate letter to Dr, Brady on the subject, and so did
also the cardinal prefect of propaganda, inviting bishop
Brady to receive Don Serra as his coadjutor—“ although,”
says his holiness, “we refrain from inserting or making
mention of it in our apostolic letters; but in this our pa-
ternal recommendation which we address - to you, venerable
brother, we advise the measure, as we have been informed
that, through your great zeal, you have been thrown into
great.difficulties, from which we desire to release you ; and
as your apostolic labours will be more usefully exercised
and extended, not only to the white population, but also to
the natives of Western Australia, for whom you have done
so much already. We are convinced you will rejoice on
the arival of your coadjutor.” Such was the purport of the
truly paternal letter which his holiness was pleased to send
or address to our good bishop; and we can testify that,
notwithstanding all the past, Dr. Brady received the newly
appointed coadjutor with open arms, as if he had never in-
curred his displeasure, and would have treated him with
the greatest kindness and friendship, had Don Serra ob-
served the conditions imposed upon him by the holy see;
but his first act was to refuse support to the convent, and to
place one of his Spanish monks as a steward over Dr.
Prady’s household, and, secondly, to shut qp a school-house
and a chapel, in Fremantle, although Dr. Brady* had esta-
blished it as a permanent place of worship for the Roman
Catholic community of that town. Thus, not only did the
newly appointed temporal' administrator refuse absolutely
the necessary means of supporting the religious establish-
ments, but he also interfered with the spiritual jurisdiction
of the ordinary of the diocese, in whom the entire spiritual
jurisdiction rested. The coadjutor now separated himself
and his party from Dr. Brady, the bishop of the diocese,


and efected altar against altar. Even in the town of Perth,
he authorised the Spanish monk, whom he appointed
steward over Dr. Brady’s episcopal residence, to erect an
altar in a public-house, and celebrate mass there, whilst
the bishop and all the faithful were performing divine ser-
vice in the Roman Catholic church of Perth.
Soon after, Dr. Brady convened a synod and invited
Don Serra and his refractory party to attend, in order to
bring about a better understanding, and prevent the great
scandal which they were then giving; but, both Don
Serra and his party refused to come, and went their way.
They seized upon all the property belonging to the mis-
sion ; even the flower and sheep that Dr. Brady had
ordered down from the mission for the support of the con-
vent and native children in Perth were stopped by them
on the way down, and brought back again : so that Dr.
Brady was left with all the religious establishments in the
diocese without support; and that after devouring all
that Dr. Brady had at his own residence, where he enter-
tained Don Serra and his party for nearly ten days upon
their arrival, they left Dr. Brady wthout a loaf of bread,
or a shilling to procure one. Whilst this was going on
here we received the news of Don Salvado’s consecration,
as bishop of port Essington, in room of Don Serra. Be-
fore the arrival of Don Serra and party the schools con-
siderably increased, five more native children were added
and received into the establishment, under the care of the
Sisters of Mercy. At the Victoria plains there were six
native boys in training, and three Europeans, as also from
ten to twelve native adults, occasionally employed on the
mission station. Father Jostens left for Batavia to collect
for the mission, but was not successful, the only means Dr.
Brady had to support the religious establishments since
Serra’s departure was procured from his little property in
Bourbon, which he was obliged to sell out in order to keep
up the mission in Western Australia. As the bills for the
land had been dishonoured and returned, with costs 25 per
cent., the debt increased to £1,500, along with other ex-
Eenses incurred, by sending the two monks and three native
oys to Europe during 1848 and 1849.
Although the two envoys extraordinaire, now the two


new bishops Serra and Salvado, had obtained thousands
under pretence that they were collecting for the mission of
Western Australia, and as they said to prevent one bishop
from going to prison for debt. Yet they would not, even
for the Pope himself, take up’one single bill of Dr. Brady’s
until appointed coadjutor. Most certainly their object was
to embarrass Bishop Brady, and compel him to quit his
diocese altogether, in order that they might have an oppor-
tunity of usurping his property, without paying any care to
the flock, upless the flock of sheep.
This is so evident, from what we have seen and witnessed,
that we defy contradiction, and what grieves us all the more
is, to find your grace implicated in this nefarious work.
Were your grace placed in the very awkward and embar-
rassing position in which Bishop Brady found himself in
1848 and 1849, what sacrifices would your lordship have
made to extricate yourself from it. Perhaps you might re-
ply, I would curtail my personal expenditure, by living on
half my salary for a year or two, I would reduce the
number of my servants, and perhaps my carriage ; but may
it please your grace, Bishop Brady had no salary to curtail,
for, from the year of our Lord, 1848, up to this present
time, he has not received so much as one farthing; nay,
more—he has not had the common necessaries of life; he
could not reduce the number of his servants, for he had
but one. He had no carriage to dispose of, and for two
years he lived in a miserable small room, eight feet
square, attached to the chapel, for he could not afford
to rent a house for himself. At the end of this year his
lordship had three heavy debts to meet; the first for the
land; the second for the convent; and the third for that
year’s support of the religious establishments.
We have already alluded to the sum of £625 6s. Bd.
which Bishop Serra obtained in Rome and in Naples, for
the special purpose of taking up Dr. Brady’s drafts for the
land. As Dr. Brady apprehended that the creditors and
holders of the bills would seize upon the real and personal
property of the mission, he directed his agent in London to
pay, to take up the bills given for the land with his own
private funds, and whatever the association would be
pleased to vote for that purpose. The coadjutor Bishop


Serra had at last been compelled to discharge the remainder
of the bills for the land, with the four hundred pounds
which he had forwarded to Father Heptonstall, as above
stated, out of the sums collected in Rome and in Naples,
Don Serra still retaining in his possession £225 of the afore-
said sum of £625, to which he added £4l 13s. 4d. out of
the immense sums he had raised in Spain; and thus the
debt incurred for the land was finally settled. It is, there-
fore, a great error to think, and a notorious falsehood to
state that it was with Don Serra’s funds that the bills were
paid : whereas it was with the funds which Dr. Brady had
every right to, for his own personal support and that of the
other religious establishments that the bills were paid.
In the year 1849, the newly appointed coadjutor, Bishop
Don Serra, began to make arrangements for his departure;
he obtained of the Spanish government a free, passage for
himself and associates; his party, forty in number, were
composed principally of artisans—seven only were priests,
the rest were laymen. The coadjutor’s conduct on board
the Ferrolana was so contrary to that which might be ex-
pected from a bishop, that Captain Quesada frequently had
to expostulate with, and at length was compelled to inform
him, that should he persevere in his insubordination he
would proceed directly to Manilla, and have him tried for
mutiny.
Three of his priests, seeing his Extraordinary manner of
acting, and the great dissatisfaction given to so many young
gentlemen belonging to the ship Ferrolana , declared that
they could no longer witness such conduct. They resolved
to celebrate mass in the chapel belonging to the chaplain of
the vessel. They were, shortly after, suspended by Don
Serra for so doing, and afterwards excommunicated. A
poor sailor had the misfortune to take one of the carpenter’s
tools belonging to Don Serra—he did not take it with the
intention of appropriating it to himself, but the use of it for
a short time—but having been found in his possession, he
was accused of having stolen it out of an open case, and was
sentenced to receive fifty lashes. The next morning the
poor fellow was brought upon deck, and begged to see the
chaplain of the ship, who was then expostulating with Don
Serra in his favour. The humane and charitable chaplain


respectfully entreated the bishop to come up and obtain the
poor sailor’s pardon, but he (the coadjutor) would not listen
to the entreaties of the chaplain; and, to the great disgust
and indignation of all the officers, young aspirants, and of
all the spectators, the poor sailor had to undergo the
flagellation. Captain Quesada, with four-and-twenty offi-
cers of the Ferrolana, related this most cruel and unchris-
tian-like conduct of Bishop Serra to the present Governor
of Perth, as well as to several of the inhabitants here.
In January, 1850, the coadjutor and company landed at
Fremantle. The three priests, having separated themselves
from the coadjutor bishop, immediately applied for monies
which they had given up to him at or before the commence-
ment of the voyage. Don Serra not only refused to give up
the monies, but absolutely denied he had received any
monies at all from them. Cast upon the shore without any
means to provide for their daily sustenance, the three
priests applied to a Catholic inhabitant of Fremantle for
relief; but, soon after, Don Serra understanding that they
had been received by this benevolent member and his cha-
ritable wife, went to the house of Mr. Marmion, and threat-
ened him with the heaviest censures of the church should he
give them any admittance, but this only served to induce
their host to redouble his care and attention towards the
three poor priests.
The commandant of the Ferrolana , Captain Quesada, ap-
plied to the governor, in order to compel Bishop Serra to
refund the several sums of\ money to the priests. The
governor and Captain Quesada, however, thought it advis-
able to request the interference of the Bishop of Perth
before application would be-made to the civil court for
justice. The Right Rev. Dr. Brady was accordingly
requested by Captain Quesada to use his influence with his
coadjutor, and succeeded in persuading him to restore the
sum of 380 Spanish dollars to the Rev. Jose, a Spanish
priest; with respect to the other two priests, Don Serra
denied having received any money from them. The priests
were compelled to bring the matter before the civil court,
and Bishop Serra was compelled to refund the sums received
from them in Cadiz, to the great scandal of our holy reli-
gion. The arrival of these three priests in the colony at


that time was very desirable, and Dr. Brady, taking into
consideration the want of efficient clergymen, resolved upon
employing at least two of them, especially as a numerously
signed petition, on the part of the Roman Catholic members
had been presented to Bishop Brady, praying his lordship
would be pleased to allow the two priests to remain with
them.
The Sisters of Mercy also begged of his lordship to
appoint the Rev. Father Urquhart their ordinary director,
which he willingly granted, but the temporal administrator
refused to give the necessary support—however, the two
clergymen remained. Father Jose departed on board the
Ferrolana for Manilla; necessity alone, and a mind like Dr.
Brady’s to comply with the arrangements of the holy see,
can plead for, or justify the connexion formed between
himself and Don Serra; upon his return to the colony, his
lordship invited Don Serra and party up to Perth,, where he
entertained them during ten days, during which time he
endeavoured to prevail on his coadjutor to supply out of
the funds the wants of the several establishments and
missions, having allowed all the propagation funds, both for
his own use as well as for the other religious institutions, to
remain in Europe in order to pay the bills for the land, he
found himself without pecuniary aid.
Dr. Brady reminded his coadjutor of his former promises
which he had violated, and that he had an opportunity now
given him of redeeming his past neglect; and, seeing Dr.
Serra’s unwillingness to co-operate with him, he (Dr. Brady)
finally declared his intention of appealing to the holy see, in
order to compel him to fulfil the conditions prescribed, and
imposed upon him on his being appointed temporal admi-
nistrator.
After a lengthened debate, the coadjutor was compelled
to give £2OO for the special purpose of erecting a house for
the native female children under the direction of the Sisters
of Mercy. Afterwards, he regretted his liberality, and tried
to recall his donation; however, it was too late, for the
cheque given to the Ladies of Mercy for £2OO was handed
over to the contractor for the erection of a house for the
native children. “ That money,” said the coadjutor, “ I
intended for the general use of the convent—let the Sisters
of Mercy provide now for themselves.”


It was now that the rupture began, and ended in the
removal of Don Serra and his party to Guilford, leaving
Dr. Brady and all the establishments without subsistence.
Don Serra and his party, forty in number, had devoured all
the little provisions, tea, sugar, rice, flour, &c., which Dr.
Brady had procured with his own private means from
Bourbon. From Guilford, Don Serra and party started
for the Victoria plains; and, on his way, paid a friendly
visit to the flour mills belonging to a man of the name of
Cruse, and, in Bishop Brady’s name, demanded and obtained
a quantity of flour which Bishop Brady had ordered for the
support of the native children. So soon as the, good miller
was made acquainted with the imposition practised upon
him by the religious coadjutor, he summoned him before
the civil court in Perth, and thus compelled him to pay for
the flour.
Your grace, no doubt, is well read in the chronicles of
your order, consequently you may remember with some
pleasure the remarkable, vision that one of the Westminster
monks had, in which St. Peter appeared to him, and by a
solemn act bestowed upon him and his brother monks all
the fish that inhabited the waters of the Thames, from
Westminster Bridge to Millbank, near Poplar, so that by
virtue of that vision (which bears a striking resemblance to
your grace’s pastorals) not a cockney dare fish for so much
as a sprat in that part of the river Thames without incur-
ring the malediction, and the heaviest penalties of that
brotherhood.- -
In like manner, by some supernatural privilege, the
temporal coadjutor fancied himself the owner of Bishop
Brady’s property, whether fish or fowls, horses, cattle,
sheep ; in a word, he seemed to claim all as if given to him
by some supernatural agent—whether black or white we
leave our readers to judge. It was now high time to check
the growing evil which seemed to threaten the mission with
destruction; wherefore Bishop Brady assembled his clergy
in order to consult with them about the adoption of the
most expedient measures, in order to restrain the mad
career of the coadjutor, a letter of invitation to the con-
ference was sent to Don Serra,which he trampled under his
feet with the greatest contempt. This conduct was severely
E


censured by all the members, and a report was carefully
drawn up and forwarded to the holy see, but never arrived
to the knowledge of his holiness, for the coadjutor had
taken the necessary precaution to prevent all documents or
teports against him. The principal circumstances of the
past two years were reviewed—the progress of the mission
and the difficulties opposed to it. A very important mis-
sion had been commenced some two or three hundred
miles north of Perth, where the native tribes are very nu-
merous and intelligent. His lordship resolved upon giving
this mission to the coadjutor, and so divide the large field
of operation, where all might work without let or ninder-
ance ; but the coadjutor would not, for he still entertained
hopes of compelling Bishop Brady to surrender all up to
him. The coadjutor had the purse, and was determined to
storm the garrison, or take it by famine. Besides, he had
secured the influence and support of some powerful agent
de change, 1 with the means given to aid and assist the
Bishop of Perth, and not to be employed against him and
his religious establishments.
The Rt. Rev.* Dr Brady, seeing that all his efforts were
vain to re-establish order and peace, resolved upon going
to Rome and procure the separation called for, he com-
mitted the care of his flock to his Vicar-General. Cate-
chists were appointed to take charge of the natives at the
Victoria plains, notwithstanding the difficulties and dis-
appointments of the past year, Bishop Brady’s property
had increased very considerably, for at his departure he
left two flocks of sheep 2000 in number, forty head of
horn cattle, sixteen horses, twelve working bullocks, a herd
of swine, a large quantity of poultry, drays, carts, and
different kinds of farming implements; besides, he had a
large productive farm near Perth, and a house and pre-
mises in Fremantle, valued from £6OO to £BOO, having left
his affairs in the best order he could, he started for the
eternal city in February, 1850.
We have already observed that his holiness and Cardinal
Fransoni addressed private letters to Bishop Brady, re-
questing him to allow the Spanish coadjutor to be ad-
ministrator of the monies he had collected in Europe.
With the exception of the probationary farm, convent, and


cottage, there was no other mission property whatever of
which he could have been the administrator; besides,
the European alms, he collected for the Western Australian
mission. Strictly speaking, everything else, though used
for the benefit of the mission, belonged to Bishop Brady,
for they had been procured by his own industry and with
his own private funds. However, as the brotherhood of
Westminister Abbey obtained by special favour the exclu-
sive dominion over all the fish in the River Thames, the
coadjutor very piously and logically inferred that, as the
Pope permitted him to be the administrator of the afore-
said charitable donations in his possessions, he was also
privileged to usurp his bishop’s private property, because
he had hitherto employed it for the benefit and use of the
mission; wherefore, by a motu proprio of his own manufac-
ture, he directed his associates and novices to clear the
Victoria plains of everything they could conveniently lay
hands upon at that time; sheep, oxen, carts, farming im-
plements, &c., very soon disappeared; yet a portion of
them was subsequently restored by order of the civil court.
In the next place, the coadjutor directed his special atten-
tion to the improvement of the flocks of sheep; he con-
sidered it his duty to give them the benefit of his ad-
ministration, for his knowledge of wool was so extensive
that one might suppose that he had been brought up in the
woollen trade; consequently your grace will admit that
your brother monk thoroughly understood the manner of
improving the quality of wool; in order to have good
fleeces it was necessary to have good sheep to produce
them. In the flock he observed there were [twenty rams
that incurred his displeasure: consequently, and by virtue
of his ministerial jurisdiction and authority, he com-
manded Barker, the shepherd, to castrate them immedi-
ately.
So soon as the vicar-general heard of the surgical opera-
tion on the merino rams, he not only accused him of
quackery and cruelty, but also summoned him before the
civil court, in order to compel him to produce his diploma
and authority, in default of which he expected to recover
damages for the injuries inflicted. The trial came on, yet
the proceedings were stayed by the coadjutor, on the


grounds that Don Rosendo, who was then in R6me, and the
vicar apostolic of the London district, now his eminence
cardinal Wiseman, were necessary witnesses in the case.
Upon this the vicar-general remarked that he could not
conceive in what respect the vicar apostolic of the London
district was concerned in the castration of rams, unless he
had his diploma from him. The case, however, was post-'
poned. In the interim, the coadjutor had recourse to his
agent de change in Rome, in order to procure the removal
of the vicar-general from the diocese of Perth ; for he was
one of'the priests who had separated himself from him in
Fremantle, and who had compelled him to restore a certain
sum of money which was deposited with the coadjutor on
his departure from Cadiz.
Whilst this sinner was in the way, the coadjutor could
not apply his mind, without distraction, to the temporal
administration and improvements of the flocks of sheep and
cattle; hence the necessity of calling upon cardinal Wise-
man and brother Rosendo Salvada for assistance. This
happy and much desired clearance could be only effected
but by establishing a good case against him in Rome. -As
he was an acute observer, and was endowed with a reten-
tive memory, he had only to consult it for solid arguments,
and facts which might have escaped it he could easily
supply. In a word, he arranged his accusations against the
vicar-general, and in due order and time forwarded them to
Rome, and through the powerful influence of his agent de
change at Rome, he obtained a verdict against him, by
which he was to resign his office into his own pure hands,
and quit the colony of Western Australia, although neither
himself nor any of his monks could not so much as give a
simple instruction in English to the faithful of the diocese.
Before the mandate had been issued from propaganda, his
general agent de * change , Barnabas, intimated to bishop
Brady that it was the Pope’s good pleasure to recall the
vicar-general from the diocese of Perth, otherwise the duty
would devolve upon himself to recall him. His lordship,
Dr. Brady, replied, that should his holiness order it, he
would recall him, and would proceed immediately to Ire-
land, in order to procure a substitute; and with the appro-
bation both of the cardinal and his holiness, Dr. Brady


proceeded to Ireland, and was upon the point of sending a
most pious and learned subject to take charge of the diocese
during his absence, when the general agent de change
wrote to Dr. Brady, stating that it was not the intention of
the Pope to send, or allow any one to be sent, to Western
Australia; that the coadjutor, Serra, was to have both
temporal and spiritual jurisdiction until all matters would
be finally adjusted in Rome. Accordingly bishop Brady
returned to Rome, and letters were sent to recall the vicar-
general, and place the coadjutor in possession of all tempo-
ralities. The removal of the vicar-general was a death
blow to the faithful of the diocese, and to the progress of
our holy religion in this colony ; for had he been allowed to
remain, he would have triumphed over the enemies of our
holy religion, and this little, but interesting community,
would have reaped the benefit of his most excellent instruc-
tions and exhortations; for although he had spent some
year? in the solitude of Latrappe, he had not lost his speech.
His instructions and preachings drew a multitude of all
denominations to hear him. Those who had heretofore
absented themselves from the sacraments, began to frequent
them. The lukewarm became devout, and several of our
dissenting brethren resorted to him for instructions pre-
paratory to their entering the Catholic church. As he had
been respected by all, and dearly beloved by his flock, con-
sequently the withdrawal of the vicar-general was a death
blow to religion in the diocese of Perth, and to the missions
in connection with it, whilst it filled all with grief, and
exasperated several of the community so much that they
declared the coadjutor should never get possession of the
church. In a word, they procured materials to stop up the
doors until the arrival of their beloved bishop. However,
overcome by the charitable entreaties of the vicar-general,
they desisted from the execution of the proposed closing
the chapel door. His obedience to the holy see wks so
strict, that a simple intimation from her served as a com-
mand to him, though the circumstances of that unhappy
time were sufficient motives to convince him that he would
not have incurred the displeasure of the holy see by re-
maining in Perth, until he would receive new instructions
from Rome. Notwithstanding, he thought it more meri-
K 3


torious to resign his spiritual jurisdiction according to the
instructions which he believed to come from the holy see ;
but with respect to Dr. Brady’s personal property, he
was determined to protect it from the rapacity of the
coadjutor, by entrusting it to the care of a secular party;
yet, as he had not means to meet the expenses of his voyage
to Europe, and as he was unwilling to dispose of a portion
of the personal property to raise a sufficient sum of money
for the aforesaid passage, he considered it expedient, under
all the circumstances, to grant the sub-agency of it to the
coadjutor, under certain restrictions, and with the condition
that he would afford him the necessary means to proceed
on his voyage to Europe.
The active zeal of the vicar-general during his short mis-
sion in Perth, merited for him the veneration and love of
the people. Consequently, in order to gratify their feelings,
and to testify their affections to him, they convened a
public meeting, at which they poured forth the sentiments
of their hearts in appreciation of his missionary labours,
and expressed their profound sorrow that he was now
forced to leave them, in the absence of their revered bishop,
as sheep without a pastor.
So soon as the enthusiastic proceedings of that meeting
had reached the ears of the vigilant coadjutor, it appeared
evident to him that the vicar general had violated the con-
ditions of the late agreement. If he had given him a
considerable sura to quit the colony, surely he did not pay
him to take with him to Europe the affections and good
wishes of the people. In his idea it was a gross violation of
the spirit of the power of attorney which the vicar-general
had given him over bishop Brady’s property, because, by a
rhetorical figure, the sub-agency of the people’s veneration
and love was indirectly included in the administration of
the sheep and stock. However, he could not legally rescind
the contract, but he fancied he could remunerate himself
by pronouncing an excommunication against every un-
grateful sinner who assisted or took part at the meeting, or
signed the address to the vicar-general. Consequently, on
the following Sunday, the entire mass of the people were
put off from his communion, and the vicar-general departed
from Swan River to Europe, with their affections aud bles


sings. An account of the moneys received by the vicar-
general for the sale of the produce of the bishop’s property,
from the 7th of February, 1850, tothe 24th of December, of
the same year —total £412 Bs. 7d. Besides this, meat, fari-
naceous, and vegetable supplies to the convent and mission,
amounted to £2OO from the personal property of bishop
Brady. Now, the coadjutor having got possession of the
property, he determined to make the most of it. He had
now two flocks of sheep, a large herd of cattle, working
bullocks, horses, &c., probationary farms, a large estate,
and a number of his fellow-countrymen to cultivate the
land. Consequently, he entertained sanguine hopes of ac-
cumulating a large fortune in the course of a few years, as
he stated himself in his letter, to spend, perhaps, in Spain, or-
in Manilla, provided no intruder would interrupt him in his
industry. In case of any change or emergency, he would
have no objection to sell off the entire property, and set off'
with the proceeds to some other country. There was one
only from whom he apprehended an interception in his
project, and that person was bishop Brady, who was then
in Rome, and it was necessary to procure his detention in
the eternal city, if possible. In order to obtain this desirable'
end, he repeatedly addressed letters to the propaganda,
complaining of bishop Brady’s administration, and that for
his own ease, comfort, and above all, for the good of the
Benedictine religion, he ought not to be allowed to return
to Western Australia. He felt convinced that, should the
authorities of propaganda reason with Dr. Brady, he would
yield to persuasion; if not, he would humbly, but instantly,
suggest to postpone the hearing of the case pending, and no
doubt, what they could not obtain from him by agreement,
they would from his impatiepce. With regard to himself,
the glory of God, and the salvation of many souls, alone
could induce him to remain in the wilds of Australia, where
not a single wild fruit could be found to relieve the
starving missionary. In fact, he had nothing to live upon
except a frog, a snake, or the dead carcass of a native. In-
credible to relate, Don Salvado, in one of his extraordinary
reports to propaganda, stated that he was reduced by star-
vation to partake of a portion of the dead body of a native,
at another time of a snake, and a compound of maggots.


The coadjutor took always precious care to insinuate that,
should Dr. Brady return, he would not give him up one
farthing of the missionary funds for the support of his dio-
cese. That he had, with his own, forty mouths to provide
for—forty zealous missionaries spreading and diffusing the
light of the gospel amongst the forlorn children of nature
in the wilds of Australia; and finally, though a foreigner,
he enjoyed the veneration and love of all, both Catholics
and Protestants, in the colony of Western Australia.
Your grace can easily conceive what a deep impression
this very plausible statement must have made upon the
minds of (propaganda, supported as it was by the general
agent de change in Rome. Now, although they never, not
for a moment, doubted the ardent zeal of bishop Brady, yet
they considered there existed sufficient reasons to justify
them in postponing the case, and eventually proposing to him
to retire on a pension. Doubtlessly this was, in a worldly
point of view, an excellent offer. Should his lordship re-
turn to Western Australia, he had nothing to expect but a
continuance of privations as before. By remaining in
Rome, he would have the advantage of associating with the
most polite and eminent ranks in society; yet those prof-
fered enjoyments could not make him happy, so long as his
dear flock remained under the guardianship of one whom
he justly considered a wolf in sheep’s clothing.
At any sacrifice, he resolved to rescue them, by returning
himself, or by procuring a substitute in the room of the late
vicar-general during his absence. Towards the end of the
year an opportunity presented itself to him in the person of
an Irish priest, whose service he engaged for the diocese of
Perth, and directed him to proceed to Western Australia
without delay ; and as he had not then the means to defray
the expenses of the voyage, he gave him a letter to earl
Grey, in London, requesting his lordship to grant his mis-
sionary a passage on board of one of the convict ships.
Lord Grey regretted he could not comply with his lord-
ship’s request, consequently the priest was obliged to await
the return of bishop Brady to London. We shall now
leave Dr. Brady in Rome, bewailing the sorrows of his
faithful flock in Perth, inflicted upon them by the Spanish
coadjutor, in order to pay your grace a visit in your lord-
ship’s arch-diocese.


The good works you have done, the missionary duties
you have performed, and the sacrifices you have made—all
which have been hitherto so concealed from the world, that
its inhabitants have not as yet derived much edification
from them. The very able manner in which your lordship
has handled the motu proprio is a brilliant proof of your
profound knowledge of moral and dogmatic theology. You
have added to it an important dissyllable which his holiness
forgot to insert , because he had not the felicity of consulting
your lordship. You have illustrated its obscurities by an
original and luminous interpretation. Henceforth, in all
our schools of divinity, your grace will be quoted as an
authority, especially when professors will treat of the spi-
ritual acts of a prelate suspended nine months before he
had heard of his suspension. Of course, according to your
lordship’s recent theological discovery in the retirement of
Australind, such spiritual acts are illegal, if not invalid.
For many years you have been in the peaceable pos-
session of a handsome annuity—from £ISOO to £2OOO a-
year. Besides this you have been in the annual receipt of
20,000 to 25,000 francs from the Propagation of the Faith
for the Civilization and Conversion of the Aborigines of
Eastern, South-Eastern, and North-Eastern Australia.
We shall soon see what you have done for these poor
children of nature, from your grace’s wonderful talent for
extemporaneous prayer. We are of opinion that your ab-
sence is sadly lamented by the elect in Sydney, as no other
Roman Catholic clergyman can supply your place in that
me'thodistical form. How affectionately you spoke of our
island of saints, and how fervently you implored their inter-
cession in behalf of one thousand of her exiled children,
whom you excommunicated with bell, book, and candle
light, for the crime of loving and supporting their beloved
bishop and countryman, the Right Rev. Dr. Brady, whom
your grace has most inhumanly treated and persecuted
gratis. What a pity your position in life does not afford you
other opportunities of proving the extent of your affections
towards Ireland, besides that of an excommunication. Your
grace was pleased to agree with the protestant Bishop of
Adelaide, that the colonies of Australia are so enlightened
and religious that they can at present dispense with the


literary and moral teaching of British convicts. In your
lordship’s opinion, agreeable to that of Dr. Short’s. Those
distinguished and celebrated professors of morality from
London, Manchester, and Liverpool, might be henceforth
very usefully employed in Ireland—if not in teaching les
belles lettres, at least in instructing the Irish people in in-
dustrial habits. J. B. Folding m Arrioni colony, Dr.
Short, Yescovo Angelano, on board the schooner Louisa, in
latitude 38deg. 15m. south and 123 deg. east longitude. The
above conversation was attested and certified by the pas-
sengers-and captain on their arrival in Western Australia.
Your grace and Dr. Short have even pointed out the locali-
ties where they might be so employed. Their academies
might be very judiciously managed if placed under the
control of the Queen Colleges in Connaught, principally in
the Diocese of Tuam, and on the islands on the western
coast. This valuable information to the Irish people, of
your grace’s practical plan of ameliorating their condition,
will serve as an apology for our digression, and hasten to
return to your own arch-diocese. Your grace is entitled to
the merit of having built one church in Sydney: it is dedi-
cated to St. Benedict. All the other churches and chapels
throughout your arch-diocese have been erected under the
direction and by the exertions of your priests. For
instance, it was the venerable and pious Father Therry
who built that beautiful church, St. Mary’s, your lordship’s
cathedral, although you have represented and exhibited a
well-drawn plan of that church, taking to yourself all the
merit of having erected it. The inscription placed in the
foundation stone of that edifice, will contradict your lord-
ship’s assertion, and give the merit to the zealous Father
Therry. The Church of Parramatta was the work of the
pious and learned Dr. Ullathorne, now Bishop of Birming-
ham ; the Church of Windsor to the much-lamented Father
Corchoran and Father Brady, who conjointly contributed
to the erection and completion of that beautiful and spa-
cious edifice. The present Bishop of Perth built three
churches and three chapels in the Windsor district: so
have all the other clergymen —all nearly Irishmen. Dr.
Murphy (now Bishop Murphy) St. Patrick’s Church in
Sydney; Dr. Gould (now Bishop Gould) in Campbletown ;


the Rev. Dean O’Reilly, in Bathurst; Fitzpatrick, in
Goulburn; Brennan, in Yass; Rev. Drs. Mahony and
Lynch, two churches in Maitland; O’Marum—God be
merciful to his soul—left an elegant church in Liverpool,
et alibi alii alias. The faithful contributed largely to the
erection of the church and clergymen’s residence, as long as
they had their own priests and countrymen to govern and
direct them; but, so soon as your grace thought well to
replace them by another order of ministers—we mean by
your own Benedictine order, you found out t hut we appre-
hend too late , that the faithful knew how to appreciate the
change, and to feel the loss both themselves and children
sustained. Your grace’s anxiety for your secular priests,
to observe the evangelical counsels of strict obedience and
poverty, by putting on the habit of your order, caused you
to forget the active duties of your episcopacy. , According
to your late shrewd observation to a Roman Catholic of
Fremantle, praying for an efficient clergyman, one, in fine,
who would be able to teach and instruct us in our religious
duties and belief, your lordship’s reply was, —“ Let the
people become good Christians before it would be lawful
for them to ask for efficient instructors.” Most probably,
on this grand missionary principle, you considered that you
could not conscientiously allow the spiritual wants of the
Roman Catholics of Western Australia, and those of the
poor prisoners, to distract your monastic thoughts, until
they would succeed in sanctifying themselves without the
ordinary aid which Christ left in his Church, and com-
manded His apostles to “Go and teach all nations,” &c.
In the meantime, your grace would prepare efficient
teachers for them in a monastery, according to your own
views of an ascetic life, who, when the time arrived, would
sally forth to congratulate the children of Western
Australia, prisoners and aborigines, after they had suc-
ceeded in the new extraordinary plan of Christianizing
themselves. All the merit due to the originality of the ex-
periment, was given to your grace; yet, as it had not the
sanction of the Gospel, in the words of Christ to his
apostles, “Go forth, teach all nations,” &c. The Roman
Catholics of Western Australia, continue to cry out for
efficient clergymen. Both themselves and their children


“ Cry out for the bread of life, and there is none to break
it to them.” In fact, some of your own clergy are of
opinion that your grace is endangering your own salvation,
by retaining, under your episcopal jurisdiction, such an ex-
tent of country as would require the special care of at
least three bishops ; and, we believe, do intend to lay the
awful state of your diocese and mission before the holy
see.
Your grace, upon a stern admonition from one of your
priests, was, some ten or twelve years ago, convinced that
you could no longer retain the direction of such extensive
and numerous congregations, without at least incurring the
displeasure of the holy apostolic see. May your grace
think well on it now, and have pity on your own soul and
upon your poor abandoned flock. As your lordship, upon
the admonition of one of your priests, proposed to the holy
see the erection of three or four bishoprics, so you may
now submit to the same authority the necessity of efficient
ministers to take upon themselves the care of so many
of your lordship’s destitute and forlorn children; mean-
while, you may take with you your Spanish monks, and
form them according to your own heart.
Whatever praise your grace may claim for establishing
schools in Sydney, &c., we are informed that the Govern-
ment of New South Wales, by its educational system, is
entitled to a fair portion of it. Your charity towards the
poor of Jesus Christ, seems to have been of a very passive
character, such as that mentioned by our Divine Saviour,
of the Levite, but not that of the good Samaritan. Your
grace’s interior sympathies for the poor widow and the
orphan, we do not doubt, but we regret that we are not
able to record here any monuments or facts to prove that
these sympathies were not that of the Levitical dispo-
sition. What sacrifices you have made on their behalf? we
have not heard of any yet. We understand that your grace
was pleased to accept a present of one, which was made for
your sake in the diocese of Sydney. It was the gift of Dr.
Brady. The precious donation was presented to your lord-
ship by Dr. Brady, on the occasion of his final departure
from your arch-diocese. It consisted of thirty-six desti-
tute and orphan children, three of whom were aborigines.


For nearly three years Dr. Brady fed, clothed, and cherished
them in a large house built at his own expense. Upon
being sent by your grace, in quality of Vicar General, to
Western Australia, he consigned them to your care, hoping
your grace would prove a tender parent and father to them.
Your lordship accepted the gift, and seemed to appreciate
the usefulness of that interesting institution. But, alas,
your charity towards those poor forlorn creatures, very
soon waxed cold. You considered them a great burthen;
consequently you abandoned them to the world, and the
three aboriginal children you suffered to return to their
natural wilds, although they had been baptised and initiated
in the divine mysteries of our holy religion. Besides, there
was a debt of forty pounds contracted for that establish-
ment, which your grace promised to satisfy at the time of
Dr. Brady’s departure; yet you allowed our poor bishop
to be sued for it six years after, at the very time of his
greatest difficulties in Western Australia, although you had
Converted the house which he had built, to you own private
purposes. Since your lordship’s first arrival in Sydney,
up to the present moment, you have received large sums
of money annually from the Propagation of the Faith for
the civilization of the poor children of nature. What
missions have you formed for that purpose ? We give you
credit for one attempt 'in 1843, on a small island, near
Morton Bay, four hundred miles north of Sydney; but
that was 4 complete failure; and the good religious Pas-
sionists whom you employed, were compelled to give up
the enterprise, because you would not give them sufficient
temporal means to carry on the mission.
What schools have your lordship opened for the educa-
tion of the native children ? What probationary farms
have you established for training and forming the native
adults to habits of industry ? We are sorry to find that
your grace has not as yet established one single school for
the benefit of those poor forlorn children! What has
your grace done with the annual receipts from the Propa-
gation of the Faith for the aforesaid objects ? The sum
total, at an average of 25,000 francs per annum, amounts
to <£8333 6s. B d. Will you not have to render an account
to'God, and perhaps to the holy see, for all that you have
F


received for the benefit of those poor aboriginal tribed
who are still sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death?
Probably there are some who would be disposed to defend
your lordship’s woful neglect of the natives, by attributing
your failure to the whimsical incapacities knd moral defects
of the subjects you experimented on. In some particular
instances their might be some incapacity or moral defects,
but generally speaking we absolutely deny that such cases
do exist. Are there not many natives employed by the
different colonial governments, as policemen and as letter-
carriers. Our dissenting brethren in Southern and Western
Australia have established schools for the civilization of the
aborigines, and have been, in many instances, successful.
Your grace has been struck with astonishment in witnessing
the progress and dispositions of the native children under
the care and direction of the Sisters of Mercy in Perth.
Taking every thing into consideration, they are as apt and
intelligent as the children of European parents ; and had
our beloved bishop been allowed to carry out
plan of civilization, he would have convinced your grace,
and all who detract or deny to the aborigines of Australia,
the use of reason, or the faculties of the understanding, that
they are capable of instruction and of civilization. The
fact of it is—and we do not hesitate in giving our humble
but constant opinion, the aborigines have been wronged,
injured, persecuted, and calumniated by a set of interested
inen, who, having taken possession of their natural rights,
endeavour now to degrade and misrepresent them, in order
to persuade themselves and the world that they are hot
capable of civilization. Your grace would seem disposed
to join in the general cry, and condemn them for ever;
although, as we have already stated, you have received,
and do annually receive, large sums of money for the
special purpose of civilizing and Christianising the poor
native tribes of Australia. You have sent one native boy
to Europe—the first after eighteen years upon the Aus-
tralian missions; and that was the gift of one of the set-
tlers who had compassion upon you.
The'natives believe or admit two principles : in a good
spirit, and in a bad spirit. They believe in a future state,
where the good shall be rewarded and the wicked punished.


Can those creatures be so dull of apprehension as to be
incapable of religious instructions ?
We shall now allow your grace some time to ponder and
think well on it, and return to review the coadjutor’s
movements. He still continued in correspondence with his
general agent in Rome, in order to secure himself in the
unjust possession of bishop Brady’s private property. He
assured them, notwithstanding his own unworthiness, that
the Almighty paid a special regard to his missionary
labours. That if there were some refractory members to
try his patience, God permitted that to exercise his hu-
mility and meekness, and make him more vigilant and
charitable. However, that God, in his mercy and goodness,
had now so changed their hearts, that they were all devout
frequenters of the sacraments. In a word, he was the idol
of all parties, and ranked so high in the confidence of the
governor, that he introduced him, the coadjutor, to his lady ,
privately first, and afterwards invited him to a ball. These,
and the like statements, produced the desired effect. The
officials in Rome could not, would not, trouble his holiness
with any petitions or supplications from the faithful in
Perth. Meanwhile, Dr. Brady began to feel the obligation
of returning to his flock, seeing the intrigues and foul
means employed by the coadjutor and agents. He received
letters from Perth, descriptive of the state of his diocese,
and the loss religion sustained by his protracted absence.
Consequently, he made up his mind to return. He took
his case out of the hands of propaganda and appealed to the
Pope, and after a short audience with his holiness respecting
the deplorable state of the diocese, his holiness said to him
“ Then you must return to your flockand in the
month of July his lordship left Rome, having obtained his
passport and a free passage on board the French steamer;
and on the 13th of September, 1851, he and his missionary
priest went on board the ship Anna Robertson, bound for
Western Australia.
Now, the agents of the coadjutor in Rome having heard
of bishop Brady’s departure.from Rome, hastened to inform
propaganda of the circumstance, and importuned the car-
dinal prefect of propaganda to recall him. The secretary,
we presume, not aware of the result of bishop Brady’s au


dience with the Pope, wrote a letter, it is said, to Dr.
Brady, to France, requesting him to return to Rome, but
that letter his lordship has not received as yet; but from a
recent communication from the postmaster-general in
Dublin, respecting a letter addressed to the bishop of Perth,
it is supposed to be the same one. At the same time, other
letters were despatched to the coadjutor by his agents in
Rome, informing him that the bishop of Perth was on his
way to Western Australia. The unexpected event filled
the coadjutor with surprise and • alarm, for he feared
that the return of Dr. Brady would effectually blight his
future temporal prosperity in the colony. It appeared to
him for certain that he would be compelled to resign the
administration of the sheep, stock, &c., into the hands of
the right owner. No doubt this was a subject which de-
manded the most serious attention and a good deal of
inward light, so as to enable him to see his way clearly.
Accordingly, he immediately entered into all its intricacies
by profound meditation, at the end of which he experienced
an irresistible temptation to sell off by auction the whole of
the property belonging to Dr. Brady, and start off with the
produce to Manilla.
On the 17th of December, 1851, the Anna Robertson cast
anchor in the roads of Fremantle, in sight of Swan River.
In consequence of the hooping cough which prevailed
amongst some children on board, the ship was put under
quarantine. The report of his lordship’s arrival filled the
hearts of the Roman Catholics of Perth with joy and glad*
ness. At any time they would have hailed their good
bishop’s return amongst them with great delight; but as
one remarkable circumstance absolutely required his pre-
sence on that very same day, their feelings were raised to 51
kind of enthusiasm. It was this—to prevent the sale and
destruction of his private property by public auction in
Perth, on the 18th day of December, 1851.
On the morning of the 18th, previous to the sale by auc-
tion, several of the faithful applied to the sheriff in order
to stop the sale of the property, on the grounds that its
owner was on board the Anna Robertson. The sheriff
informed them that he had not power to grant their request
until they would procure from Dr. Brady a letter tb that


effect. In accordance with his instructions, one of the
party proceeded to the ship and obtained the necessary
document. In the meantime the sale went on, and a very
considerable portion of the property was sold before the
bearer of Bishop Brady’s letter could return to Perth and
obtain an injunction, by which means the auction was
eventually stopped.
“ Building Materials , Live Stock .
“Mr. Samson (government auctioneer) is instructed to
sell by auction, atjiis rooms,' Perth, onThursday, Dec. 18th,
1851; (unless previously disposed of by private contract,)
the following articles: building materials, consisting of 150
to 300 yards of building stone, deliverable near the Com-
missariat Store; 2 to 400 yards at the quarry near Fresh-
water Bay; 85 to 90,000 extraordinary large bricks, at the
kiln, near Mr. Roe’s dwelling, half immediately, and half
in about a fortnight; Bto 8,000 feet timber, 7 inch wide;
2 or 3,000 feet quartering 4 by 2 and 5 by 5, deliverable in
Perth ; a boat, 10 or 12 tons, with masts, sails, &c. A small
flat. 26 head of horse-stock, consisting of—l 2 well broken-
in mares, with filly and colt; 5 ditto for saddle or draught;
one extraordinary lengthy mare; an entire horse, (2-years
old, * Young Farmer,’ broken in for saddle or cart;) hand-
some entire colt, 18-months old (Young Barkstone) ; 2 bay
horses, for gig or saddle ; pony mare, with her filly; cart,
with harness for 2 or 3 horses ; about 20 tons of hay ; 30 to
40 head of cattle, consisting of cows, steers, &c., all in excel-
lent condition. Also, a flock of sheep, about 1,800 in
number, of which about 800 are in lamo, the rest wethers
and one-year old sheep ; also, 30 superior rams, now depas-
turing at the plain. Also, an almost new gig, with new
harness. Terms and conditions at the time of sale, and
further particulars to be obtained of the auctioneer, Perth.”
“ Dear Sir,
“ It is evident from what transpired during the
proceedings of this morning, that Don Serra is making off
with the property of the mission by sale and otherwise. Mr.
Butler informs me that Tondint says that Don Serra re-
quested him to sell the stock, &c. I have, therefore,
thought it might 1 be well to apply to Mr. Mackie for an
F 3


injunction to restrain Don Serra from selling, or wasting
the stock, &c., pending the legal proceedings.
“ What do you say to such an application, on Monday or
Tuesday next?
“ I beg to remain, dear sir, yours truly,
“G. FRED. STONE,
“ 1 5th March, 1850.
“ The very Her. Dr. Urquhart.
“Addendum. You must not permit this morning’s
defeat, (if there has been a defeat, for I have not heard the
decision,) to disconcert you. Every legal means should be
tried to circumvent the other party.
“G. F. S."
OFFICE COPY.
In the Civil Court in Equity.
Between The Rt. Rev. John Brady, Roman
Catholic Bishop of Perth, and the several
Deponents hereunder named, Complainants.
And the Right Rev. Jose Maria Benito Serra,
Roman Catholic Bishop, Defendant.
Patrick Doyle, Richard Gallop, John Dearden, Terrence
Farrelly, David Ronayne, Bernard Smith, and John
Stanton, all of Perth,* in the colony of Western Australia,
complainants in this cause, and being members of the
Roman Catholic church, and being appointed as a com-
mittee, at a publjc meeting of the members of the said
church, severally make oath and say that the said defendant
lias advertised for sale, in the public papers of Perth, a
large quantity of building materials, consisting of stone,
bricks, and timber; also horses, and mares, and ponies, both
old and young, in number about twenty-five; also carts
and harness, and about twenty tons of hay; and likewise
from thirty to forty head of cattle, cows, steers, heifers, and
bullocks; also a large boat and flat, with sundry other
things, all or the greater part of which goods and chattels
the deponents believe are of right belonging to, and do be-
long to, and are property, goods and chattels of the Roman
Catholic mission in the said colony, and over which goods
and chattels, in whole or in part, the said complainant,
Bishop Brady, ought of right to have control and manage


merit, as tire head and superior of the said Roman Catholic
mission. And the said deponents do further severally
say that the proceeds of and arising from the said goods
and chattels have been and are, and ought to be applied
solely for and towards the support and maintenance of
the Roman Catholic mission, and the clergy and other-
wise in the said colony, and for the support and main-
tenance of the mission schools, and for reclaiming {he
natives and educating their children, as well as others, and
for the support and maintenance, in part at least, of the
convent of the Sisters of Mercy, and their public schools,
both for white and aboriginal girls of the said colony; and
the said live stock, or the greater part thereof, and many
other parts of the said goods and chattels, were formerly
purchased by the said complainant, Bishop Brady, as the
superior bishop and pastor of the said Roman Catholic mis-
sion, for the sole purposes of, and to /orm an increasing
stock or fund for such support and maintenance as afore-
said of the different branches of the said Roman Catholic
missions and its servants. And the said several deponents
do further say that the said defendant has no individual or
separate right or property in the goods and chattels of the
said mission, other than to administer them for the use and
benefit and support of the said mission in the said colony ;
and that /the said defendant has no right, by virtue of any
office or otherwise, to sell and dispose of the said goods and
chattels, except for the purposes of the said mission, to
which the said goods and chattels were intended from the
first formation of the said mission, and ought so to be ap-
plied, and for no other use or purpose whatsoever, and that
a considerable portion of such property has been already
sold, and deponents severally believe that more will be sold
by the said defendant, thereby committing great waste of
the said goods and chattels; and that the said advertise-
ment embraces all the personal property of the said Roman
Catholic mission in Western Australia. And the said
several deponents further say, that by the sales already
effected, and likely to be effected by the said defendant in
manner aforesaid, the said deponents and many others,
members of the said Roman Catholic church, in the said
colony, will be very seriously injured and damaged, inas


much as they will then be under the necessity, out of their
own immediate and private incomes, to defray in whole or
in part the current expenses of the said Roman Catholic
mission, and to make up the deficiency of monies required
for paying their priests, stipends, and the expenses of their
public schools, and the expenses of the said convent of the
Sisters of Mercy, and their public schools, (in whole or in
part,) and other incidental expenses oif the said mission, and
which are now, and have been partly provided for out of
the profits and increase of the said goods and chattels. And
the said deponents further say that the greater portion of
the said live stock was, as aforesaid, and for the purposes
aforesaid, purchased by the said complainant Bishop Br«.dy,
and has been paid for, wholly or in part, out of funds and
moneys remitted or sent out to this colony for the use of
the said mission by the propaganda society at Lyons, and
from other for the support and maintenance of the
different branches, the priests, and others of the said mis-
sion. And the said deponents further severally say, that
all the building materials as above described have been
purchased and procured with the moneys of the said mis-
sion for the avowed purpose of erecting a Roman Catholic
church at Perth, for the public worship of Almighty God,
and that the said materials ought not to be diverted to any
other purpose than the one originally intended, and that
although the name of the said defendant does not appear on
the face of the said advertisement, yet the said several de-
ponents kre well advised and verily believe that the said
defendant did cause the said advertisemCt to be published,
and that the said goods and chattels mentioned therein are
all, or in chief part, the goods and chattels of the said mis-
sion. And the said deponents do further severally say,
that they have good reason to believe, and do believe, that
the said defendant in so disposing of and selling the said
goods and chattels of the said mission, and converting the
same into money, will apply the moneys arising from such
sales to his own use, and that the produce of such sales will
not be applied, as it ought to be, towards the benefit and
support of the said mission, and that such moneys will be
wholly withdrawn from the said mission, to the great loss
and damage of the said deponents and others, and their


families, and the poor in general. And the said deponents
do further severally say, that such a sale of the said goods
and chattels will be attended with, and be a great loss and
damage to the said deponents, they severally having interest
therein.—P. Doyle—Richard Gallop, his mark—John
Dearden—T. Farrelly—D. Ronayne- I —Bernard Smith—
John Stanton.—Sworn at Perth, the 20th day of December,
1851, before me, W. H. Mackie, Commissioner.
A true copy, this 11 )3 | 52.
A. H. STONE.
During the quarantine, Dr. Brady received several
letters from the people respecting the extraordinary violent
conduct of the coadjutor, having failed in the attempt made
to dispose of Bishop Brady’s property. The subject of one
of the letters was of a most fearful character. Indeed, it
was a most friendly warning to Bishop Brady and his
priest, to be aware of the Spaniards, for, on the Sunday
previous, it was the general belief amongst the people that
the coadjutor had his Spaniards armed with knives and
daggers; some were placed inside the door of the church;
and' some others outside, as if they anticipated the invasion
of an enemy. The writer of the letter anticipated an
attack would be made on Bishop Brady’s life, by some of
the coadjutor’s party; consequently it was advisable for
him to use all necessary precaution after he would disem-
bark from the ship. For a long time previous to this the
coadjutor had publicly announced that it was in vain for
the faithful to expect the return of their bishop, for
that he was both excommunicated and confined in the
Castle of St. Angelo in Rome. The notorious and extra-
ordinary conduct of the coadjutor was so well known by
the people, and so detested, that they would not believe
him, • though he should confirm his slanderous assertions
against Dr. Brady, by a solemn oath.
On Christmas-eve, his lordship arrived in Perth amidst
the acclamations of the faithful, who had assembled on the
pier to hail his return on his way to the church, to return
thanks to the Almighty for his providential care over him,
during the long and painful voyage —the multitude of the
people accompanying him considerably increased, even by
great additions of other denominations. The church door


was open, for the administrator did not expect him so
goon. His lordship entered, followed by a great number
of people who joined in the procession to the church.
So soon as the coadjutor heard of the bishop’s arrival, he
rushed into the church and violently assailed the Bishop of
Perth, and that by the most insulting language. The
people, seeing the very unbecoming conduct of the coad-
jutor, became so exasperated that they resolved to drive
him and his party out of the church, and take possession
of it; but his lordship, by his charitable interposition,
appeased'their just indignation; and, as he would not
sanction the execution of their design, they peaceably, yet
reluctantly retired to their respective homes. The week
following they called a public meeting for the purpose of
presenting their bishop with a congratulatory address, and,
at the same time, inform his lordship of the injuries in-
flicted on his flock, during his absence, by the violent, liti-
gious, and speculating conduct of the administrator; and,
finally, for the purpose of adopting measures to put his
lordship in possession of his church and property. From
the month of July, 1851, until his arrival in the colony, in
December of same year, his lordship never anticipated the
resistance he since met with from his coadjutor. During
the voyage he frequently as we have since learned from
his priest, discoursed with his priest about the future
prospects of his diocese; he was chiefly concerned about
the aborigines: he knew from experience the method to
be employed in civilizing them. In the wilds of Australia
the trees produce no fruit, nor does the uncultivated soil
afford any edible roots except the “warrang,” which is very
rare, and in small quantities; consequently the subsistence
of the poor natives cjepends almost entirely on their cap-
turing kangarooes, opposuras, &c.; and sometimes these are
so rare, and retire so far into the interior of the country,
that they are often exposed to hunger and want. In this
state the natives will easily attach themselves to their bene-
factors. His lordship, according to his means, frequently
availed himself of this favourable opportunity, by distri-
buting amongst them quantities of flour and nee; and, by
this means, so gained their confidence and respect, that he
had every reason to hope, had he a sufficient number of


zealous labourers to assist him, in the course of time he
would succeed in bringing thousands of them to a state
of civilization. As the monks of the venerable order of
Latrappe, or Mount Milliray, lead a solitary life, and
employ a considerable portion of their time in mechanical
and agricultural pursuits, he contemplated the introduction
of them into his diocese, to employ them in the conversion
and civilization of the natives; he had also engaged the
services of two talented and zealous Irish priests, who
would have been, by this time, exercising their ministry
amongst us, had not the common enemy of mankind thrown
obstacles in the way of the good work.
One day his lordship, complaining of his pecuniary em-
barrassment, observed that he did not expect any assist-
ance from the coadjutor. “ However,” said he, “ Providence
will never fail, provided we abandon ourselves entirely into
his hands. His lordship’s property was in the hands of the
coadjutor—even his cottage, furniture, library, &c. So
that, on his arrival, he was compelled t 6 rent a small cot-
tage for himself and his missionary priest; fortunately, he
brought with the ship, outfits, consisting of two mattrasses,
a few chairs, two washhand stands: he had no servant.
Some of the 99th Regiment occasionally swept the two
little rooms, and brought him water.
The heat of the weather, at that time, was so intense,
and the flies so numerous and troublesome, that the priest
could not endure it. Your grace can easily imagine the
Sufferings of his lordship for more than three weeks, until
such time as he procured his present humble residence.
The grievious hardships inflicted on Dr. Brady, the oppro-
brium cast upon religion, and the impossibility of obtain-
ing possession, without going to law, of the property, was
most keenly felt by the faithful people. They frequently
reproached themselves for having allowed the coadjutor to
obtain possession of their church. “He is,” they ex-
claimed, “not only a Spaniard who is ignorant of our
language, habits, &c., but he is, moreover, a litigious*
avaricious, and selfish monk. It is not for our good and
the good of our children that he endeavours to maintain
himself in the possession of the church we have built, and
in the possession of our beloved bishop’s property. Let


Us go and drive him off, and place our bishop in his own
place as before/’
As the execution of their design might have been at-
tended with danger to themselves, and serious injury to the
Spaniards, his lordship exhorted them to patience and
Christian forbearance for some time longer.
To one accustomed like your grace to live in comfort and
ease, the privations which Dr. Brady had to endure would
be a strong temptation to murmur at the dispensation of
Providence; but to an individual well-disciplined in trials,
mortifications, and self-denial, like Bishop Brady, even the
loss of all his property could only serve to increase his
patience and humility. We presume that your grace will
not deny that a few knives, forks, spoons, books, &c., are
indispensable articles for every civilized human being, con-
sequently, the loss of them would be a very great incon-
venience to him. Now all the aforesaid articles belonging
to Bishop Brady are still in possession of the usurper
bishop. We have repeatedly heard the commissioner of
the civil court advise the coadjutor to give up ,to Bishop
Brady his private effects, maintaining against certain
allegations made by the coadjutor, that every bishop and
clergyman ought to have some private effects which he
ought to enjoy, under all circumstances. The coadjutor
promised to give them up several times, but never did,
although the time and persons had been appointed for that
purpose.
The unparalleled inhumanity of the Spanish usurper to-
wards Bishop Brady and priest, ought to be a sufficient
motive to any one of the most ordinary capacity to doubt
the truth of any letter or statement made by him, in order
to establish his claim, especially as he had made some very
false statements before Dr. Brady’s arrival.
The faithful knew full well that Bishop Brady had a
most wily and powerful enemy to contend with; that the
few lawyers in Perth were engaged and employed by the
Coadjutor, before Dr. Brady’s arrival; and that, by his
distribution of gifts and other stratagems, he would suc-
ceed in preventing or deferring justice, and thereby have
an opportunity of ruining the property. We have already
stated that the commissioner had ordered the restoration of


tlie private property or effects of Dr. Brady. To this, the
coadjutor several times assented, and would deliver them
up to any one, Dr. Brady would send. Accordingly two
were sent the same day, and were told to come the next
morning. It occurred to a few of the people that a fa-
vourable opportunity had just presented itself of taking
peaceable possession of their bishop’s cottage, with his jiri-
vate effects. Accordingly it was agreed upon to send a
small party for the private effects, and take possession of
both cottage and private effects, should they find no resist-
ance. The next morning three or four waited on Dr.
Brady, and exposed to him their plan of operation. Dr.
Brady entreated them, by no means, to take forcible pos-
session. When they arrived at the cottage they found it
open, and went in and took peaceable possession of the cottage
and all Dr. Brady’s private effects, for the coadjutor had
removed all his things to some retired place before Bishop
Brady’s arrival. They immediately dispatched a messenger
for his. lordship, who arrived shortly after. They had now
taken peaceable possession, and closed all the doors.
When the Spanish coadjutor had been informed, he
alarmed all his Spaniards, who rushed forward like so
many'savages —they raised the most dreadful shout, just
as if they were to engage in a quarrel in some mountain-
pass in Spain—the doors and windows of the cottage were
broken in, and the three men were soon expelled; for they
had been advised by Dr. Brady to make no resistance.
Bishop Brady himself had a very narrow escape, for one of
the Spaniards (a carpenter) raised a bludgeon or club over
his lordship’s head, and was on the point of striking the
deadly blow, when one of Dr. Brady’s men warded off the
blow. The coadjutor left the altar, charged one of Dr.
Brady’s men with a broom-stick, when all was over, and
relieved his heart by pouring forth a shower of invectives
against Dr. Brady and party. His lordship repeated his
application to the commissioner for his private effects.
When the commissioner insisted that they should be given
up, the coadjutor said he would inquire what private effects
might be at the cottage; and on the following day the coad-
jutor sent Barney his boy with them to Dr. Brady. Dear
reader, in what think you did they consist ? Perhaps you
G


■will say he sent him, of course, his library, his plate, furni-
ture, horse, saddle and bridle, &c. No; not one of the
above-named articles. In what think you, then ? In an
old cassock —two pair of old stockings, and two pair of old
slippers! Was the coadjutor the bearer of those articles ?
for, we presume, we could not find any one in Perth to be
the bearer. Yes, —he found one wily creature, who had
the barefaced effrontery to present them to Dr- Brady.
"When the convicts, having heard that this most notorious
and disreputable carrier might be said to belong to them-
selves, they hastened to declare that so vile a being did not
belong to them. To a generous mind there is an aggrava-
tion of malice and injustice in this one act alone, which
surpasses the collective guilt of all the other misdeeds. A.
pair or two of old stockings, cast-off slippers, and an old
cassock, are the full amount of Bishop Brady’s private
effects. Behold the fruits of nearly twenty years industry
in Australia. His lordship has not received so much as one
shilling from the funds since his arrival up to the present
time, and we have already stated that the mission was in-
debted to Dr, Brady, at the end of 1850, £1445 14s. sd.
Your grace is in the receipt of about £2OOO a year, besides
25,000 francs from the Propagation of the Faith. Con-
sequently, it will not be considered extravagant to allow
Bishop Brady £SOO per annum. Now, for the space of
six years, he has been entitled to that support, the total of
which would amount to £2500, which being added to
£1445 14s 5d., would make the sum of £3,945 14s. 5d.,
which sum he has expended on this mission, because he
was compelled to give, not only his yearly support, but
also draw upon other private resources, in order to liqui-
date the debts; hence, it by no means follows that the
land purchased by Bishop Brady, and paid for with the
funds in Europe, became missionary property; whereas
Bishop Brady had to supply a much larger amount of
his own private funds in support of the missions. Now,
if we deduct the £ISOO for the land, from the above sum
of £3945 14s. sd. due to Dr. Brady, from the mission, the
remainder of the debt due to him will be £2445 14s. sd.
We have already alluded to the deception and trickery
successfully employed by the coadjutor in order to embar


rass Dr. Brady, by compelling him to give up his annual
support and remittance of 1849, from the -propagation of
the faith, in payment of the land. From the commence-
ment, Dr. Brady, seeing that the Catholics of Western
Australia were generally of the poorer class, resolved to
establish a missionary property for the diocese of Perth
from his own private means and industry; for he was of
opinion that the future remittance from the French associ-
ation would be precarious, owing to the unsettled state of
affairs in France. Like a true apostle, his heart and soul
were concentrated in his mission ; consequently he resolved
to make a permanent provision for it, by establishing a
property for the support of himself, and all the clergy and
charitable institutions; and this property, which has been
lately in the court of equity, Dr. Brady was in the habit of
calling “ missionary propertyeven in his private letters
he has spoken of it as such. When he was asked the reason
why he would not call it by its proper name, “ his own
property,”, his lordship’s reply was, “ I use it for the be-
nefit of the missions, and intend to leave it after my death
for that special purpose.” Again, he would remark, “ I
belong to my people, and my people belong to me.—
Surely, if I love them, as a bishop, I must make provisions
for their spiritual wants ; for they have not means to sup-
port a sufficient number of clergymen to attend to the
spiritual wants of themselves and their children.” The
coadjutor, on the contrary, from the very day that he was
prevented, by an injunction, from selling off the aforesaid
property by auction, began to retail it. Numbers of sheep,
stock, and other moveables, gradually disappeared. The
people, as usual, vented their indignation upon him and his
party. Some reproached themselves with cowardice, for
having suffered the coadjutor to tamper with their patience.
Though he professes to be in communion with the holy see,
yet his violence, rapine, and plunder, prove to us that he is
an Arian in practice. However impressed with the re-
proaches uttered against him personally, the coadjutor
resolved to strike terror into the hearts of his disobedient
children. If they would not respect his meekness and
charity, he would cause them to admire, and dread, and
tremble at his authority. An excommunication majo?,


would strike terror into them, for some time at least. This
salutary remedy he applied to them with due solemnity;
yet, unfortunately, the cure was worse than the disease.
Meanwhile, he would not allow any profane remarks,
observations, or scandals to interfere with him in his indus-
trial pursuits. He supplied builders with bricks at the
market price, and he stored flour when it was cheap, and
retailed it out when it became scarce and dear ; reserving
it for the poor until the time of great dearth, that the scar-
city of the article in the market might enhance the price.
As several of the sharp-shooters of Perth had no guns for
fowling amusements in the bush, the vigilant coadjutor,
ever intent in consulting the temporal welfare of his neigh-
bours, fortunately, at that time, was able to accommodate
his customers with as many as fifteen of those instruments
of war, by which traffic he gained the small profit of forty
per cent.
Having anticipated some resistance from the people in
opposing his attempts to sell Bishop Brady’s property, the
coadjutor endeavoured to secure their passiveness by pre-
senting arms at them in the public streets. As a Spanish
knight, he would mount his one horse Noble (by the bye,
Dr. Brady’s own favourite horse), and he would make the
on-shoot on the rebel Irish who would attempt to oppose
his will. That was canon law with him, when excommuni-
cation would not do as a salutary remedy. Subsequently,
an opportunity presented itself to the coadjutor of dis-
playing some military courage and skill. Upon the day of
the sale, he got upon his horse, Noble, and rode down
to the place'wherc the sale was to be, armed, in order to
shoot some one man of rebel Irish. As a monk, he said he
had the honour of serving under Don Carlos during the
revolution in Spain.
The English have frequently boasted of their British
valour and courage against foreigners; but if those
foreigners had been beaten by the English, it was because
they had not a right rev. coadjutant to command them, as
the following will prove.
In the month of last March, some of the soldiers of her
Majesty’s 99th regiment proceeded to the Roman Catholic
burial ground in Perth, for the purpose of erecting a head


stone over one of their deceased comrades. The coadjutor,
on being informed, hastened, with all his Spanish party, to
oppose the intruders. The soldiers had come on a work of
charity, and without arms, in the name of God, and not in
the name of their queen ; consequently they did not expect
to meet with resistance. They remonstrated with the coad-
jutor and entreated him to allow them to perform this
friendly office to their departed friend. All their entreaties
were in vain; he resolved they should not enter without
fighting. He blockaded the entrance; the Spaniards were,
as usual, armed with knives and clubs, and the coadjutor
put a gun into the hands of a ticket-of-leave man, com-
manding him to fire on the soldiers, should they attempt to
enter the cemetery. The soldiers retired from the* battle
ground without wounds, yet sadly disappointed, and the
ticket-of-leave man was that same day lodged in gaol.
About this time, the clergyman who shared in the disap-
pointments and sorrows of his bishop, since his arrival in
the colony, considered it most desirable to entreat the cha-
ritable intervention of your grace. He knew full well that,
at some time or other, your grace would be delegated by
the holy see to make known her will respecting the dis-
putes in the diocese of Perth; yet, on account of the
political troubles of the papal states, he apprehended that
your commission to this colony would be considerably de-
layed. Consequently, he determined to proceed direct to
Sydney, in order to direct your grace’s special attention to
the unhappy affairs of the diocese of Perth. Both Dr.
Brady and all the people highly approved of this resolution.
Accordingly, his lordship prepared for him the necessary
letters, and the Roman Catholics sent a petition to your
grace, stating the scandals and the acts of the coadjutor.
In the month of March last, 1852, the priest started for
Melbourne, and arrived there about the middle of April.
His mission, and the state of distress which he was then in,
should have induced the vicar-general of that diocese to
afford him, at least, as a priest and countryman, hospitality.
We are aware that the Rt. Rev. Dr. Gould would have ex-
ercised it towards any priest under such circumstances;
but, unfortunately, Dr. Brady had been one of your grace’s
counsellors when your lordship framed certain rules and
• G 2


regulations for your priests; and the Rev. Mr. Geoghan,
now vicar-general of Melbourne, was one of the priests
who complained of the aforesaid rules and regulations, and
blamed all your grace’s counsellors for passing such un-
heard-of regulations. This rev. gentleman had also some
other pretext of complaint against Dr. Brady—that he
was too zealous, and was too great a favorite in New South
Wales; in fine, he seized, with some degree of satisfaction
this opportunity of revenging his spite against Dr. Brady.
Consequently the' poor priest had to bear all his spite and
indignation; for, on his arrival, the vicar-general ordered
his box and carpet bag to be thrown out, and himself sent
adrift.
No doubt this strange treatment, accompanied with in-
sult, was most keenly felt by the disappointed priest. He
had but eight pounds sterling in his possession, and no
friend to whom he might appeal for assistance. ' Under
such distressing circumstances he could not return to Swan
River, unless he could overtake your grace at Adelaide.
The priest, however, fortunately found a little schooner
going to Adelaide, and arrived there ip the beginning of
May, where he had the honour of an interview with your
grace, at the hospitable mansion of the Rt. Rev. Dr. Mur-
phy, bishop of that diocese. Your grace received that poor
penniless priest with a cold indifference, and treated him
most inhumanly in the absence of Dr. Murphy, who was
then on a visit to a distant part of his diocese. Although
your grace knew for, a certainty that neither he nor the
bishop of Perth had been advised of the suspension which
you afterwards declared you had been commanded to inti-
mate to Dr. Brady, and that your own brother Benedict
had been the guilty party, yet, because your lordship was
determined to ruin Bishop Brady, as he had the misfortune
to be appointed bishop of Perth without your sanction, you
resolved to inflict on the priest the first fruits of your in-
dignation and malicious designs against Bishop Brady ; for,
any one who respected the honesty and integrity of Bishop
Brady would be, in your opinion, a suspicious person, and
one very unlikely to assist you in persecuting him, at the
sacrifice of his own conscience and honour. Though the
priest admitted the suspension of his bishop on your au-
thority, yet he entertained too high an opinion of him to


believe that the aforesaid suspension was incurred by hi*
lordship at the time and the way stated. However, as he
could not then contradict your grace, whose veracity he
then respected, he immediately declared his secession from
Dr. Brady, and, in proof of his sincerity, resigned into your
hands his letters and office as vicar-general of Dr. Brady.
During the space of a few days after his arrival in Ade-
laide, his lordship, Dr. Murphy, who had been absent on
duty in the country, returned, he invited the destitute
priest under the shelter of his hospitable roof. Bishop
Murphy could not conceive that any blame could be at-
tached to the priest, as he could not have known anything
about the suspension, pronounced against Bishop Brady.
After their departure for Western Australia to the present
time, his lordship Bishop Murphy, as an Irish prelate, sym-
pathised with him in his sorrows, and encouraged him by
offering him a mission in his diocese. Your grace then
became less hostile, and promised him a mission, or pay all
his expenses to Europe, should he prefer it, if he would ac-
company him to Swan River, and use all his influence with
Dr. Brady and the people to submit to whatever your grace
would be pleased to ordain. The priest stated that he
would; and moreover', that he never would have come to
Australia, had he not entertained the highest respect and
veneration for Bishop Brady. He noticed in him certain
qualities peculiar to the bishops of Ireland—that meekness
and urbanity of manner by which he gained for himself the
respect, esteem, and good-will of several of the highest dig-
nitaries, and of all who had the honour of his acquaintance.
Consequently, a conscientious duty, and the special interest
of his bishop, whom he saw now for the first time sus-
pended, induced him to return to Swan River; and, after
mature deliberation, your grace came to the conclusion
that his knowledge and experience of the disputes and
troubles of the church of Perth qualified him to render
your grace an important service in the discharge of your
commission to that diocese. Accordingly, your grace pro-
posed to make him the companion of your journey thither.
As the office was one of great importance to all parties, he
willingly assented to the proposal; at the same time he did
not consider the honour conferred a sufficient remuneration
for his anticipated inconveniences and troubles.


The passage to King George’s Sound was so very rough
and tedious, that your grace resolved to go on shore and
continue your journey by land to Perth. You directed
your law-agent, whom you employed on board, to purchase
you a stout horse for your overland trip. It is well to re-
mind your grace that when you sent first Dr. Brady and
poor old Father Joostens, you sent them like two real
apostles, sine per a , §*c., for when they arrived at King
George’s Sound, they had not wherewith to pay their pas-
sage —-£3 each from the Sound to Perth—much less to pay
for the charge of a horse and law-agent’s commission. As
you intended to execute your wily plan at Australind, you
Arranged with the captain of the ship to land your companion,
the poor priest, at Australind, where he would meet you at
the comfortable residence of Mr. Little. So soon as the
inhabitants of King George’s Sound heard of the object
of your mission to Perth, they felt so annoyed that only
one of them would wait upon you—not, indeed, for the
purpose of hailing your arrival amongst them, as a special
favour, but to plead the cause of your zealous and chari-
table bishop; and to protest against the unchristian con-
duct of the coadjutor. With all those feelings which are
peculiar to an Irish lady’s heart, when suffering from afflic-
tions caused by gross injustice, she declared to your grace
that she never could, that she never would, receive sacra-
ments from the hands of that man whose presence in the
colony was a reproach to religion—naming the coadjutor,
your brother Benedictine; and we can assure your grace
that there are more than five hundred like her in this
colony, who would tell your lordship the same thing, and
still more; but you carefully and industriously avoided
hearing their complaints and spiritual wants.
Your lordship’s trip through the bush, on the back of
your spirited steed, preserved you from far greater dangers
and hardships which you should have to endure. Had you
continued your journey by water, from the Sound to
Fremantle, the passage was not only unpleasant but most
alarming, for a violent storm arose which continued for
nearly a-week. The captain could not comply with your
request to put in at Bunbury. The speedy return of the
priest was unexpected indeed to his afflicted bishop, whom
he accidentally met with in Fremantle, though your grace


had already informed him by letter of your arrival in the
colony; yet he could only suspect the object of your visit,
as you fancied it a matter of political expediency to con-
ceal from his lordship the secrets of your legation. Your
grace’s companion and theological adviser soon relieved
him from the doubts he entertained respecting your myste-
rious letter; and, at the same time, he advised him to be
aware of your grace, for two circumstances alone convinced
him that you were (to say the least of it) touched with a
little vanity, improved by a mixture of English bigotry,
against the Irish bishop, who had been elected and ap-
pointed to the see of Perth, without your grace’s inter-
vention.
Your grace may perhaps recollect that during your
last visit in Rome, you engaged two Irish students for your
'•Sydney missions; you may also remember that, on the
occasion of one of their visits to your private residence,
they introduced to your grace a young German friend of
theirs a profound philosopher and a linguist. In the
course of conversation you shewed them the plan of your
Benedictine chapel (the only chapel or church commenced
by your lordship, during a period of twenty years on that
mission,) and assured the admirers of your plan of the
chapel, that you builded it yourself. The honest but
eccentric German, feeling a deeper interest in the gram-
matical structure of languages, than of drawings or plans
of chapels, thought that by correcting your grammatical
error, he would render you a greater service than by ex-
tolling your architectural talent; wherefore he exclaimed
in'these words, “My God! this archbishop does not
know his own language!”
In refutation of this very remarkable observation, your
grace ably refuted it by attributing your grammatical error
to your intercourse with the Irish. No wonder, said your
lordship, that I have forgotten my own language, for. I
have been now so long amongst the Irish. This apology
for your grammatical error so disgusted the two excel-
lent students, that they from that very time renounced
all further connections with your lordship. Your little
impatience under the occasion of a small contradiction at
King George’s Sound is the subject of the second circum


stance. Through a motive best known to yourself at that
time, yet strongly suspected by your theologian, you as-
serted that the Roman Catholic population of the diocese of
Perth amounted to only two hundred and fifty souls ; your
adviser replied that he knew for a certainty that there were
more than five hundred Roman Catholics in or about Perth,
and that there were twice that number in Western Austra-
lia. This contradiction, although made with all due re-
spect, was of course an insult to your grace’s infallibility,
which you vindicated by requesting your theologian not
to contradict your opinion. We shall not mention here the
many instances we have had of your grace’s natural vanity
and bigotry against the Irish generally. We shall only
observe here your extraordinary plan of civilizing the Irish
by establishing convict settlements amongst them, especially
to the West of Ireland. This your grace cannot deny, for
we have been informed of your conversation on board the
Lousia with the Right Rev. Dr. Short, the Protestant
Bishop of Adelaide, His lordship received the news of his
suspension without murmur or complaint, for he knew full
well that it had been obtained through the most false and
gross representations, consequently he would not resist the
temporary decision of his holiness’ tribunal, the improba-
bility of which he never doubted. The announcement of
his lordship’s suspension by your theologian was so respected
by him, that he immediately discontinued the exercise of
his Episcopal function, and advised us all to receive your
grace with due honor, respect, and submission as the arch-
bishop of the province, and more particularly as delegate
from the holy see. His lordship knew that the successor of
St. Peter and vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, was to be
obeyed, even in a case decided ex informata conscientia , but
he also knew, as we can and do here testify, that systematic
slander, when continued and supported by official agents,
will in the course of time. soil the fairest reputation, as it
has done in Bishop Brady’s case.
The authority of a priest, however respectable, concern-
ing his suspension, was not a sufficient motive for his lord-
ship to resign the office of his episcopacy, for though a hun-
dred of the highest dignitaries of the church had declared
to Bishop Brady that they had actually seen his holiness


sign the letter of his suspension, yet he would not be botind
in conscience to discontinue the exercise of his jurisdiction,
until your grace authoritatively announced it to him. The
great excitement caused by this announcement obliged your
adviser to remain in Fremantle with Dr. Brady, in order
to remove the great obstacles in your way, and conciliate
the people by explaining to them the reasons of his unex-
pected return amongst them, his advice, approved of by
bishop Brady, was so appreciated by the majority of the
faithful, that it served to calm their just indignation and
resentment against the coadjutor and to induce them to
give your grace a favourable reception.
Your grace was well atyare of the extreme poverty of the
priest when you engaged his services at Adelaide, yet you
made no provisions for his support at Perth; pending your
arrival in Perth he applied to the coadjutor according to your
direction ; his visit was short and unproductive ; the coad-
jutor invited him to officiate in the chapel, but not to par-
take of his hospitality. In a word, the poor priest might
have starved amongst the lot of the benedictine brotherhood,
had not the charity of those faithful members attached to
Dr. Brady supplied those necessaries which your grace and
brother in religion was bound in justice and by contract to
supply. In the commencement of this letter we have noticed
you in your judicial capacity seated on your tribunal in the
snug residence of your spiritual child at Belvidere impa-
tiently awaiting the arrival of your victim, the Rev. Dr.
Brady, Bishop of Perth. The method which your grace
adopted both to allure and compel him to appear before you
is a modern specimen of that base and bloody treachery
frequently practised on our own unsuspecting forefathers
in Ireland by the heartless usurpers of their country.
Under the cloak of the most sincere friendship they would
invite them to splendid entertainments for the sole purpose
of assassinating them at their tables in the midst of convi-
vial enjoyments. Is not your little deceptive plan to en-
snare our good bishop, a very strong indication of the deeds
you would have perpetrated had you lived in the days of
those bloody tyrants ? To this question we will not reply,
lest you may accuse us of prejudice or want of respect
which we profess for your grace’s high office, but if your


intentions were pure and undesigning, of course your own
letters will bear testimony and vindicate your innocence * .
In whatever state he maybe, sick or dying, though swin-
dled out of his property (without even a horse to ride on)
by a covetous foreigner and without a shilling in his pocket,
come he must to your tribunal at Australind. When he
received episcopal consecration he swore on oath to visit
ypur grace at Belvidere. The holy see also authoritatively
reminded him of the obligation of fulfilling his solemn pro-
mise by starting off to Banbury in the depth of winter,
under torrents of rain, in order to pay his respects and
devoir to your grace. Surely it was both cruel and wicked
to have disappointed your grace, especially as you were still
suffering from the fatigues of a long journey and over-
whelmed with mental anxiety, lest your authority might
not be respected. No doubt another letter will make him
sensible of his dereliction of His ' duty, and will serve to
modify his obdurate heart in commiseration of our suffer-
ings. Mr. Little, said your grace, you have returned with-
out his lordship, bishop Brady, you assure me he is unwell;
however, you must go back to Perth or Fremantle imme-
diately for him, bring him my oppossum cloak, it is a com-
fortable companion in the bush and a faithful servant to us
during our journey from the Sound. A few days after
Mr. Little returned with another epistolary invitation from
your grace to Dr. Brady, he also was bearer of a manuscript
of your extraordinary pastoral, and with instructions to
have it printed and published on the following Sunday.
Now as the aforesaid letter is so interesting and calculated
to establish your reputation all over Christendom as well as
to recommend you to Rome for future legations. We pre-
sume we will render your grace an important service by
giving it publicity f.
We cannot suppose your grace ranks so high in the esti-
mation of his Holiness that he would consider it sacrifice
make by Bishop Brady, in this instance, to gratify your un-
warrantable caprice, as special favours conferred upon him-
self. Indeed, the benevolence of Pope Pious IX. is so well
known, that none could believe that an act of inhumanity
♦ Vide p. a. ' y Vide p. 3.


would afford him any comfort or pleasure; and we feel
persuaded that your grace will incur his great displeasure,
so soon as he will hear that you have made use of his name
as an inducement to his lordship to hazard his life, by
undertaking a long and painful journey to Australind in the
depth of winter, and suffering severely from rheumatism,
with an opposurn or kangaroo skin to keep him warm, and
a farmer’s cart to jolt him along a rugged road or tract,
and suffering, as we have observed, from a severe attack of
rheumatism. The distance from Perth to Australind is
one hundred and twenty miles. No doubt, comforts were
very few which itinerant paupers enjoy. Your grace had
grave matters to transact with him about his property, of
course, which he had i already put into trust for the benefit
of the Roman Catholic community, in order to save it
from the rapacity of the coadjutor, apprehensive that his
lordship, Bishop Brady, would exercise any control over
it, you determined to intimidate him by depositions, ex-
communications, &c.
It appears, from your letter, that you have come to
transact business as metropolitan, and not as legate from
the holy see'. As metropolitan, you again inform Dr.
Brady of that which has already been sufficiently made
known to him, that is, his suspension. Now, up to the
present time, nothing of the kind has been canonically
jnade known to him, for you have not sent him even a
copy of your commission.
“ Let no faith,” says the canon, “be attached or given
to the legate, unless he has produced the letter of his com-
mission.” However, his lordship will take no advantage of
this very serious omission ; for, from the time that the ob-
ject of your lordship’s arrival in Western Australia was
announced to him, he thereupon discontinued the exercise
of his episcopal office. What joy you anticipated in the
perfect submission of Bishop Brady to you as the represen-
tative of the holy see ! and yet his lordship has not resisted
you for one moment; but you seem to have been so intoxi-
cated with pleasurable sensations, that you began to groan
under the pressure of them, and endeavoured to relieve
yourself of the weight of them through the medium of that
part of speech called an interjection. Alas ! “ what hap-
H


plness if Bishop Brady will submit to me, by resigning into
my hands, his private property, and silently allow me to
hold him up to all the opprobrium and scandal I am capable
of, and by allowing himself to be packed out of the colony
as a steerage passenger, under the care of Dr. Short, the
Protestant Bishop of Adelaide, on board the government
schooner,” As the motu proprio had not arrived from Rome
at the time of the poor priest’s departure to Melbourne,
he could not have heard of it unless from your grace ; how-
ever, after his return to Perth, he accidentally met with it,
and at once discovered, to his great surprise, that your
grace had deceived ihim, by having assured him that
Bishop Brady had returned from Rome to Perth, with a
knowledge of his suspension again, as your grace presumed
that the priest was innocently led into error by Bishop
Brady, you directed him to vindicate his innocence by in-
serting, in his declaration, the words —bond fide adhesion.
From that day on which he read the aforesaid motu pro-
prio, he began to apprehend that the greatest evils would
result from your legation to the diocese of Perth.
Bishop Brady was still the Bishop in jurisdiction, for you
had not officially announced to him the contrary ; and yet
you would have the priest declare that he had been led into
error by Dr. Brady. In the meantime the people were
impatiently expecting your arrival in Perth. Some
fancied you were afraid to appear among them, and others
remarked that you were plotting some deep scheme to ruin
their beloved bishop. The latter were not mistaken, for the
publication of your pastoral address, on the following
Saturday, explained the mystery. The contents of that
pastoral exceedingly offended and scandalized the faithful,
yet, through that respect for your character, they regretted
that, whereas, neither the coadjutor, nor any other of his
party could correctly pronounce a word of it, he was ob-
liged to employ your servant in a surplice to read it pub-
licly from the altar. For our part we believe no weak,
ignorant catholic ought to read it, for it contains a false
doctrine, and richly deserves a place on the Roman index
—Y.
Your grace was still absent. Some reports were afloat
that you would be at Fremantle on Tuesday ; others, that


you would be at Government House, with your friend Dr.
Short, Protestant Bishop of Adelaide; there were still a
few who fancied that your grace was so respected by the
British Government, on account of your legation, that the
government schooner was to be placed at your disposal, in
order to transport Bishop Brady to some foreign land—
perhaps to Connaught, Ireland and that you were still
impatiently waiting for him at your comfortable Belvidere.
However, Dr. Brady's state of health, and the painful cir-
cumstances in which his lordship was placed by your
brother Benedictine coadjutor, prevented the execution of
that wily concocted conspiration against our beloved
bishop.
At length, however, you made your appearance, but what
a mournful entry was that of an archbishop for the first time
your grace’s visitation—how differently your grace would
have been received had you not published your unfortu-
nate pastoral before you arrived; you would have found
faithful people professing and manifesting their love and
respect for you, and ready to submit to any command or
mandate from the holy see. But alas, your grace put your
foot in it, consequently you were obliged to come in disguise
and conceal yourself from the just indignation of all the
people. How degrading to the high character and office of
an archbishop—our hearts were full of respect and disposed
to manifest our veneration and love to the holy see through
you; but the extraordinary, uncalled-for manner in which
your lordship directed your proceedings against our revered
bishop Dr. Brady, would not allow us to hail your arrival
amongst us, or give any other signs but those of disgust and
indignation.
Shortly after your arrival, however, your theologian
waited upon your grace (at the episcopal cottage which
our good bishop had erected with his own private means
before he went to Rome, in 1850) in order that you might
be made sensible of the great error you committtd by the
publication of your pastoral; you expressed a wish to see
his lordship, bishop Brady, that same night; the Interview
was short; on the following Sunday morning it was repeated,
the nature of which the people ascertained at last mass in
the church on the same day.


The Bishop of Perth, said the faithful, has been awfully
deceived and treated by the archbishop, for he invited him
into the house of God in order to cloak and conceal his
nefarious plan of operation by the religious form of obe-
dience to the holy see. All this business, said they, has
been transacted in the retirement of the sanctuary, for the
door of the church had been locked, that none could enter,
that none, in fact, but God could be witness to the sacred
act. Yet now he, the archbishop, publishes it to the world,
that which he had most solemnly declared to bishop Brady
was a mere form, to be sent privately to our most holy father
the Pope, he, the archbishop, we say publishes it to the
world as a substitute for the excommunication which he,
the archbishop, has not had, as yet, a plausible opportunity
of inflicting on his victim, and now to the horror and dis-
gust of every intelligent mind, both catholic and protestant.
Your grace’s comments on'that assignment of his pro-
perty and spiritual authority into your hands, was most
insulting and humiliating to the character of a bishop. You
published him as a penitent, and as one who had made satis-
faction for some guilt incurred by a wilful, obstinate, and
contumacious conduct against the laws of the church, and
that without judge or jury, or himself pleading guilty. Oh
we remember how your grace rejoiced in having obtained
this assignment of himself and property into your paternal
power and hands, how charitably your grace apologised for
the frailty of his nature by the application of a theological
adage, “ Humanum est errore diabolicum auteni perseve-
rare.” Now whatever consolation his assignment into your
hands afforded your paternal heart, indeed you would lay
it down at the foot of the cross. Satisfaction , exclaimed your
grace , has been made to me, the Pope's representative , on
earth.” “ Go,” said your grace, “to your well-beloved co-
adjutor, and take down the publication of excommunica-
tion, of suspension and degradation, and of whatever else
might be required and needed to bring the sinner to a sense
of duty. Go,” said your grace, “and take them down forth-
with, for I am satisfied, my anger is appeased, and my au-
thority was at once recognised. I was well aware that the
bishop of Perth would not resist me, for he was once my
bosom friend, and walked together with peace and joy in
the house of God, &c.


ZSTow whatever hopes the faithful had entertained that
your grace would receive their petitions respecting the de-
gradation to which religion had been reduced by the scan-
dalous conduct of the coadjutor, your grace’s discourse on
that Sunday removed, and frustrated them all, your grace
declared you would receive no petitions from them. They
however persevered, and deputed some few to wait upon
your Iqrdship and make known to your grace their wants,
and beg of your lordship to take into your paternal consi-
deration the state in which they would be left after Dr.
Brady’s departure. They presumed to trouble your grace
again with their humble petition, and with one for pur most
holy father, and notwithstanding the justice of their prayer,
you rejected it. All was in yain, you made a resolution to
support the coadjutor through thick and thin. Like mi-
nisterial politicians of modern times, a corporation has no
conscience, and the coadjutor being a member of that corpo-
ration and one of your creation—consequently the coadju-
tor must be supported, right or wrong, per fas et ne fas , no
matter what becomes of the miserable Irish Roman Catho-
lics of Western Australia, of the instruction and edification
of themselves and of their children, no matter about all
that. Your grace would not listen to any argument that
might raise scruples in your mind, or allow your absolute
will to be in the least contradicted.
Your grace’s determination not to hear the just com-
plaints of the faithful in private, caused them to make
publicly known their grievances; consequently, they ad-
dressed to your grace a letter through the public press.
What effect that letter has produced in your mind, your
own conscience can best tell; with respect to the impres-
sion it has made on the public, we are perfectly satisfied.
The results of your legation from' the holy see to the
diocese of Perth, are so very extraordinary indeed, that a
parallel cannot be found on the records of history, except
in the persecuting and avaricious spirit of Arianism.
You came to announce the bishop of Perth’s suspension.
Authoritatively, yet virtually, the bishop of Perth is not
suspended; but, for the sake of good order, the bishop of
Perth has ceased to exercise his office and is gone to Rome,
in order to contradict and counteract your own and your
H 2


brother coadjutor’s false assertions and nefarious machi-
nations.
We state, firstly, because you have not produced to him
the letter of your commission; and, secondly, because you
have rendered the apostolic document of his suspension
null and void, by the addition of words of your own coinage
to it, and by a most false and disedifying interpretation
of it.
The second duty of your legation was to investigate the
causes which had created so much division and scandal,
and by so doing you would have discovered an irregularity
incurred by the coadjutor on account of his scandalous and
contumacious conduct since the first time of his arrival up
to the present time, wherefore he became an unfit subject
and incapable of entering upon the office of administrator ;
fbr the papal rescript made no mention of absolution ah
censuris ad cantelane.
Had your grace faithfully discharged those sacred duties,
you would have merited for yourself an eternal reward
from God, the just judge, and both the prayers and ap-
plause of the afflicted Catholics of the diocese of Perth.
But you proposed to yourself another very different
duty, to perform which, in your idea, was paramount to all
other duties ; and that was, to cloak, if possible, the nefa-
rious conduct of the coadjutor, and thereby maintain and
secure his permanency as administrator, and that at* the
expense of Bishop Brady’s reputation and property, as well
as to the great scandal and detriment of our holy religion.
In order to effect your purpose, you added to, and falsified
the motu propria , and by doing so, gained for your trouble
the reward of an ecclesiastical interdict, by which you are
prohibited from entering into the church of God, until such
time as you shall make due satisfaction, as prescribed by
the church. Your grace has, moreover, incurred another
interdict from entering the church, for refusing to give a
copy of the form of excommunication which you pronounced
against several innocent persons ; but, in the meantime, on
being admonished of that transgression of the rules of the
apostolic see, by our beloved bishop, you left, and went on
board the schooner Louisa , in order that you might not
have to spend one month as prescribed by Clement the


VIII., interdicted from entering the church. You thought
well to spend that time at sea. So much gained; but that
way of endeavouing to jllude the censure which you in*
curred, will not do. Your grace’s own letter, which you
call a pastoral, is your accuser. Never have you addressed
a letter to any congregation so uncalled for, and, at the
same time, so disedifying, and we feel certain your grace
never penned a letter so ruinous to your own reputation.
You must have been labouring under very strange notions,
otherwise you would not have called it a pastoral, in the
first place; for the bishop of the diocese alone has a right
to address a pastoral to his flock. Again, you claim them
as your spiritual children, which it hath pleased the Lord to
consign to your paternal care, and that as metropolitan,
although some years before your grace had declared that
the holy see had not consulted you in the erection of the
diocese of Perth. Now, as metropolitan, you are not
allowed to administer sacraments to the faithful of another
diocese, without the special permission of the bishop or or-
dinary of the diocese. You exercise a certain jurisdiction
over your suffragan bishops, but not over their subjects.
You have the right to convene a provincial synod, and bear
your cross publicly in your suffragan’s diocese, but you are
not allowed to make an official visitation in any of your
suffragans’ diocese, except by special authority given you
in a provincial synod, or by the Pope, which authority
your grace could not exhibit.
We have never heard of a single instance in which the
holy see has permitted any of her most learned and holy
bishops to add or diminish, or even give a private interpre-
tation to any of her decrees on matters of faith or discipline,
no matter whether they he the decrees of general councils or
motu proprios of Popes , no one is allowed to add to or pri-
vately interpret them, without incurring the heaviest
censures of the church. Now, if your grace has had per-
mission both to add and take from the letters apostolic of
Pope Pius IX., you have been the most favoured prelate
since the days of St. Peter to the present time. However,
as we have no reason to suppose that the holy see excepted
you from and above all others from the common rule, we
must at least suspect you as guilty Of an innovation in this


case, and recommend you to the mercy of the holy see. In
the entire of the motu proprio we cannot discover the Latin
of the word “ divers" in English. In the Latin we read
fravissimas causas existere. The true translation of the
iatin would be “ most grave or most serious reasons exist.”
Your grace has given, in your pastoral, “for divers most
weighty reasons." That word “ divers" is an addenda of
your own, and Indeed it is a most malicious addition. Your
grace most gladly availed yourself of the opportunity of
charging Bishop Brady with something of this kind ; for,
as we have before stated, he was not one of yolir creatures;
he was too zealous in representing the spiritual wants of
the poor Catholics of the West of Australia to the holy see,
and the state of the poor forlorn children of nature whom
you had so strangely neglected—these were, in your mind
and heart the “ divers most weighty reasons,” &c.
The coadjutor’s general agent in Rome falsely stated
that he had brought with him, from Spain, forty monks as
missionaries for the conversion of the aborigines, and that
they had a monastery of zealous monks established in the
bush, for the civilization of the natives. Now, to break up
that monastery in this most distant part, would be a serious
reason. This, added to other unwarrantable assertions
made by the same party, were considered by the holy see
most serious reasons to suspend Dr. Brady from his office,
until she should have an opportunity of ascertaining the
real state of things in this diocese. That word divers is
an improvement of your own. By it you have multiplied
the Papal letter, and converted it into a motu proprio of
your own, of the Metropolitan of Australia, &c. Now,
by adding or changing a word in a will or testament after
the death of the testator, the will becomes null and void,
and subjects the guilty party to the penalty of transporta-
tion.
If the civil law deals so rigourously with offenders
against wills, surely the church, which is equally careful
and zealous in preserving the integrity of her decrees, is
not without means to punish the presumption of those who
would dare to change or corrupt them.
The motu proprio does not contain so much as a sylla-
ble, either directly or indirectly, authorising your grace to


Sronounce judgment on the spiritual and temporal acts of
ishop Brady, from the date of his suspension in Home ;
but merely treats of his lordship’s suspension now, both in
spiritual and temporal matters, without any allusion to the
past acts of his administration : the following are the words
of the Papal letter on this subject:—
• ‘ We suspend, during our good pleasure, in both spiritual
and temporal matters, the present Roman Catholic Bishop
of Perth, John Brady, from the administration of said
church and missions.”
However, the omissions of the Pope, in his motu proprio
were of little importance to him, as your grace knew now
to supply them, and that with a good deal of both moral
and dogmatical ability.
In the words, “ we suspend the Right Rev. John Brady,
Bishop of Perth,” your grace discovered the spirit and
meaning of the Papal document, which is, that a bishop
who has suffered himself to be robbed of his diocese and
property, by a wily coadjutor (a Spaniard) cannot perform
a valid act either in spirituals or temporals. This conse-
quence your grace very philosophically drew from the
motu proprio. Your lordship’s pastoral is our authority,
which we now quote.
This act styled a motu proprio , bears date the third of
October, 1851, and commences with these words:—“ Ro-
man us Pdtefex Pontifex, ad quern, &c.
“ Wherefore,” says your grace, “ we declare all acts of
temporal administration transacted by the Right Rev. Dr.
Brady, since the period of the said date, to be radically
invalid. We declare all acts of spiritual administration
performed by the Right Rev. John Brady, since the same
date, to be illegal, if not invalid. Now, may it please your
grace to consider that Dr. Brady-was suspended on the 3rd
of October, 1851, that is, three months after he had left
Rome, and'on the very day, i. e. the 3rd of October, 1851,
the Right Rev. Dr. Brady had been three weeks at sea
from London, on board the ship Anna Robertson , bound
for Western Australia, of which suspension your grace has
been the medium of communication to his lordship by the
command of the holy see. How could you declare that all
the spiritual acts of bishop Brady were illegal if not invalid,


or as temporalities are more tangible than spiritual entities.
Therefore, according to your apparent appreciation of them,
the temporalities have a right to a priority of position in
your pastoral, and consequently have the prior claim to
your grace’s moral them.
All temporal acts of Bishop Brady’s administration,
from the 3rd of October, 1831, to the 20th of June, 1852,
were radically invalid, according to your grace’s modern
teaching, though he had not heard of any law or suspension
prohibiting the exercise of his administration. Surely
your grace will agree with us, that laws require promulga-
tion before they become binding on the consciences of those
whom they may concern. Laws and ordinances are the
rules of our actions ; consequently we cannot regulate our
actions by them, except we know and have them before us.
Your grace might just as well persuade the world that a
mechanic can work without his tools as to undertake to
to convince the most ordinary intellect that a man is bound
to the observance of a law of which he never heard to
exist. Is not this doctrine of yours a renovation of one of
Martin Luther's propositions, which is —that God damns
some men for the violation of laws of which they know
nothing. During the aforesaid intervening period, for in-
stance, Bishop Brady contracted debts for the mission—
very little for himself; yet all these temporals of his ad-
ministration were radically invalid, as he has not been able
to meet those demands ; because the coadjutor had robbed
him of his private property. So much the better. So
much is gained for the corporation of Benedictine monks ;
“ for there is no obligation,” says your grace, “of ever
paying the poor labourer—not even the poor widow who
received Bishop Brady and his priest, and supported them
out of her own scanty means —no obligation to pay the
poor man who cut some firewood to warm the truly aposto-
lic bishop and priest, exposed, as they were, to the incle-
mency of the weather. AVe forbear adding to the list (on
your grace’s account) all which acts you declare to be
radically invalid.
It is an article of,faith that the sacraments and the holy
sacrifice of the mass do not derive their efficacy from the
state, condition, or sanctity of the minister or priest; con


sequently, an excommunicated priest can validly consecrate,
administer the holy eucharist, baptise, and even, in case of
necessity, give absolution to a penitent at the hour of
death ; yet, if any credit is to be attached to your grace’s
new theological discovery, the aforesaid article of faith
makes no allowance whatever for the spiritual acts per-
formed by Bishop Brady and his priest within the above
period. In fact, were we to take your grace as a faithful
expositor of the Christian doctrine, the holy Roman Ca-
tholic church does not know how to judge them ; for, you
say, “If they are not illegal, they are invalid ” Hence,
any admirer of your grace’s orthodoxy would be at perfect
liberty to avail himself of your grace’s doubtful decision of
the aforesaid spiritual acts. According to sound philo-
sophy, in doubts there is liberty, i. e., a liberty of opinion
respecting the morality of doubtful acts; consequently,
it would be allowable for one to say of those spiritual acts,
they are illegal. In like manner, another, of the opposite
opinion, making use of his liberty of opinion, might main-
tain that they were invalid. Surely, this would not be Ca-
tholic doctrine ; and yet your grace, by a printed form or
circular, publicly proclaims to the world, that the Pope of
Rome, the successor of St. Peter, has authorised you to
announce the above doctrine to the faithful of Western
Australia.
We know for certain that some of the Roman Catholics,
alarmed at your extraordinary announcement, went to
consult your grace on the point in question, in order to
know if you considered it necessary for them to have the
spiritual acts of Bishop Brady reiterated. They had been
told the same by the coadjutor’s ignorant monks. A cer-
tain member became a convert to the Catholic church, and
was married by the bishop, after receiving conditional bap-
tism. He was informed that he should receive conditional
baptism a second time, and be married over again.
The man was willing to get your grace to pronounce the
marriage invalid, in order that he might find himself single
once more, and, we believe, return again to the pro-
testant establishment as he was not edified by the conduct
of your brother coadjutor and party.
Inlike mannerthe parents of achild who had been baptised


by bishop Brady, on board the Anna Robertson , on the
line, in 19 west long., had been ordered to get the child
baptised over again by your grace. Strange to relate, your
grace began now to feel uneasy, and acknowledged the error
contained in your pastoral by telling the parties that they
might not give themselves so much trouble as you did not
intend to disturb any one in their belief, supposing your
grace had announced the same doctrine respecting Don
Serra’s acts, who is so very unpopular, and detested iby
the people; the consequence would be that his security from
the grossest insults and popular execration, would solely
depend on that protection the law would affotd him.
According to your pastoral address you date bishop Brady’s
suspension from the day of its publication ; these afe your
words : —“ By that same apostolic authority which for divers
most weighty reasons, hath now suspended Mm." And yet
though the lawful bishop of Perth up to that very day, you
declare all his spiritual and temporal acts invalid—what
strange contradictions, and into what gross errors God has
allowed you to fall—in order to confound your worldly
pride and wisdom. Lost to every sense of justice and
honour, you set at defiance the opinions and judgements
this part of the world would pronounce on your unprece-
dented inconsistencies, but your grace was bent, as we have
already stated, upon supporting the Benedictine coadjutor
in his unholy position by the most iniquitious means against
the bishop of Perth. Thus by impressing the minds of the
people with a religious horror of his lordship’s acts, you
probably thought that it would serve as a powerful motive
to them to yield a blind obedience to your absolute autho-
rity ; you knew that the coadjutor had been in schism against
his lawful bishop, and consequently unfit to enter upon his
office of administrator; this you endeavour to conceal by
the aforesaid scandalous and foul means. On the 3rd of
October, 1851, the bishop of Perth was suspended in Rome;
now as he could not have had any official intimation of this
suspension, and whereas your grace, by a special direction
of the holy see, came to announce it to him, it necessarily
follows that it was only on that day of its 9fficial announce-
ment that the suspension could effect in any way Dr. Brady’s
acts.


From bishop Brady’s return from Rome in December,
1851, to the date of your pastoral in June last, the coadju-
tor schismatically resisted his lawful bishop by usurping
all the property and jurisdiction of the diocese. We have
already proved that even long before that he had incurred
the guilt of irregularity which disqualified him for the office
of administrator, and even now disqualifies him for that
office.
The many and great misfortunes which have attended
your legation to the diocese of Perth, shall afford you a
very melancholy subject for your daily meditation during
the remainder of your career. In the first point, you will
well consider how you have nullified the motu proprio by
the addenda of the dissyllable divers to it, and by an erro-
neous interpretation of it, by which you have gained for
your trouble an ecclesiastical interdict, prohibiting your
grace from entering the church of God, until you make
satisfaction to the church for the offence committed. In
the second point, your grace will consider how your Bene-
dictine administrator became guilty of an irregularity, for
the second time, by resisting his lawful bishop, and thereby
could not legally assume the office of administrator. In the
third and last point consider and dwell on it, the awful ac-
count your grace will have to render to the great judge of
the living and the dead, for all the errors and evils you have
committed, and will be the cause of in this your very unfor-
tunate legation. Your private transaction on Sunday the
4th of July last, was not only humiliating and injurious to
bishop Brady, but it was also a gross insult to religion as
well as to common sense and decency. You succeeded in
persuading his lorship to surrender into your own hands all
his property on the following conditions. Ist., that you
would pay all his debts; 2nd, that you would restore to
him all his lordship’s private effects, with ample means to
take him to Rome, and in case he should not return to his
diocese, that he should receive a certain annuity, say 100/.
per annum. “ With respect to these conditions,” said your
grace, when asked for your signature, “ it is quite unneces-
sary to ask me for my signature, I am delegated by the holy
see; what I say the pope will ratify, and should your lord-
ship,” pursued your grace,/‘still entertain any doubts of my
i


sincerity, our old friendship and my quality of legate from
the holy see, ought to be a sufficient guarantee that the
conditions you propose shall be religiously fulfilled by me
your metropolitan. Let there be no conditions sent in this
form to the holy see. ' We shall observe all you require in
this form, but in the one which you will sign on the altar,
and which wilLbe private, entirely private, for the holy see,
which I will forward to our most holy father Pope Pius IX.
let there be none, and it is for your own sake I wish this
to be done privately between us and God.”
“In the next place, I should like to state to the holy see
that your lordship regrets the disturbance and disedifica-
tion which has unfortunately existed for some time in the
diocese of Perth ” —to this Dr. Brady replied, “ by so doing
it might be inferred or construed that the Bishop of Perth
has been the cause of the unfortunate disturbance.” —“ By
no means,” replied your grace, “ I myself, and every lover
of peace and good order in the church, must deplorefthe
same. It is only a matter of form calculated to give edifi-
cation, and it will afford much pleasure to the holy see.”
Your grace’s pathetic discourse produced the desired
effect by removing from his simple, but honest mind, his
former suspicions of your trickery, the thought that the
solemnity of the day, and the sacredness of the place, where
you were to ratify and perform this religious act, would
awe you into a sense of honesty for that time at least.
Again it was a private affair for the holy see, and never to
appear in any civil or law court; besides, his lordship did
contend with your grace in the house of God, as you declared
to him that the pope would cause all the conditions to be
observed. Your grace called upon God to witness the
transaction, and forthwith you proceeded to put on your
pontificals, and seated on your throne, you received due
honours from his lordship; not as the representative of
Pius IX., but in, and for the person of John Bede Polding,
His holiness, Pius the IX. would not require of the
Bishop of Perth such honours, they are only fit for yourself,
Monsignore Polding. But did you presume to ask them
by the sanction of his name, there is not in the church a
bishop, more attached to the holy see than our beloved
bishop, the Right Rev. Dr. Brady, and of this your grace


ought to be well aware, for although convinced of his
innocence, and that the holy see has been deceived by the
false representations of his enemies ; still he wishes to give
a signal proof of his obedience and attachment to the
chair of Peter, by complying and submitting to the sus-
pension, and by his paternal exhortation to every one of us,
to submit in like manner. His holiness the Pope, told him
in Rome, that he should return to his diocese, and yet so
soon as he had reason to believe that his holiness deceived
by mis-representations had given his assent to his temporary
suspension, he unhesitatingly resigned his jurisdiction;
although our revered and much afflicted bishop had not
been in schism, not even for a moment, yet you have treated
him as such in that sacred place, in order to gratify your
own vanity, and in order to defame and ruin him in the
good opinion of his people and acquaintance.
Your grace has afterwards published this sacred transac-
tion which was intended solely for the holy see, as your
grace had declared to Dr. Brady, in presence of the most
holy and adorable sacrament of the altar. Nay more, in
less that six days you have made use of it in the Civil
Court of Perth, for the purpose of swindling our beloved
bishop out of his private effects, which consisted of some
furniture, a small library, and a small quantity of plate,
allowed by every one to be Dr. Brady’s own absolute
private property.
When your grace was called upon to prove that such
was one of the conditions upon which the Bishop of Perth
consented to surrender all the other property into your
hands, you would not certify to the fact, but forwarded the
private and sacred document to a public court, in order to
dismiss Dr! Brady’s just claim by this deceitful and treache-
rous conduct. As we cannot find expressions strong enough
to reprobate this shameful and disgraceful transaction,
which every honest mind will deeply regret, we shall leave
it to our readers to draw their own conclusions and make
their comments on this most extraordinary mode of proceed-
ing on the part of a religious body, encouraged and sup-
ported by an archbishop and delegate from the holy see.
All the private property produced in the civil court, and
belonging to Dr. Brady, consisted of an old purple cassock,


two old pairs of slippers, and a pair of old stockings, which
bishop Brady sends to Rome for the consideration of his
holiness. This strange exhibition caused a deep sensation
upon the judge, and upon all who were present in the civil
court, with the exception of your grace and brother coadju-
tor, and no doubt but it will cause a deeper sensation of
horror and indignation in Rome, when it is stated that these
where all the private effects of a bishop who had spent more
than twenty years on the foreign missions.
By the aforesaid proceedings your grace has virtually
became the sole master of bishop Brady’s property, yet its
indispensable* right of possession depended on the honest
payment of a few debts contracted for by Dr. Brady for
the very humble board and lodging for himself and priest,
for boat hire to and from Fremantle on missionary purposes,
for salary due to his priest for schools, and other unavoid-
able necessaries. Of course as your grace were and are, we
presume, from what you stated in your pastoral, so skilled in
both the radical invalidities of his lordship’s previous spiri-
tual and temporal acts, it was for you to determine what
debts of his lordship you ought to pay according to your
own views of justice. Like a man of business you prepared
yourself at the Sound for the difficulty, having employed a
young colonial lawyer just starting into life, on board the
ship Louisa , who would give you his maiden advice respect-
ing the daily quantity and quality of food a plundered and
inj tired priest ought to consume daily, weekly, or monthly.
Your grace invited his lordship’s creditors to send in
their bills, yet from your grace’s skill in economy, and from
your opinion of the charity and love of the people towards
their bishop and pastor, swindled out of his property (which
in this circumstance alone you freely acknowledge to have
justly merited), your grace judged some demands to be too
much. You said that the now charged for articles which
theyintended to give as presents to their beloved bishop;
for instance, you asked one creditor, a gardener, if he did
not intend his vegetables and fruit to bishop Brady as pre-
sents. Eventually they became so annoying to your grace,
that you would have them settled by arbitration, which,
however, did not satisfy your parsimonious idea, conse-
quently you put the entire matter into the hands of your


colonial lawyer. Amongst other claimants, his lordship’s
priest sent you his demands for a certain amount of salary
and monies spent by him in the services of the mission.
This missionary of the priest for a small remuneration for
his two years. Your grace peremptorily rejected his de-
mand, and immediately directed your lawyer to inform him,
the priest, that he had neither a moral or a legal claim to
any remuneration whatever, not even for his daily support.
As your grace employed him at Adelaide to assist you on
your legation to Perth, he considered that he had at least a
claim upon your grace, for remuneration. This claim you
also repudiated, consequently the poor priest was forced to
appeal to the law for address. On the following Sunday
you paid him off by a bill of exchange on your bank of ex-
communication. “What,” exclaimed your grace (on the
altar of God, preparatory to the awful ceremony), “ shall I
.suffer myself to be summoned before a civil court by that
man of an assumed title of Dr. of Divinity ; I who am the
metropolitan and judge, &c., in fine the sole representative of
the pope on earth; shall I suffer this indignity with impu-
nity ? No, I will cut him off from the church, for he has
violated the canon law, which prohibits one ecclesiastic
from compelling another to appear before a civil court.
Forthwith your grace, in a great passion, which was not.
at all edifying or becoming your high station and office as
the sole representative of our most holy father on earth , pro-
ceeded to the execution of paying the priest off. The bells
were rang. The candles were put out, and flung outside
the door ; the church doors were closed.
The poor priest was not the only victim of your ana-
thema. On that same Sunday, in fact, upwards of three
hundred Roman Catholics of Perth and Fremantle, shared
the same fate, this inde*ed was called a wholesale excommu-
nication. There was, however, one in particular who be-
came the object of your special malediction, that is the
author of that able criticism on the errors of your pastoral.
It was a vindication of the moral and dogmatical truths of
our holy religion, which your grace disfigured and insulted
in your pastoral, in order to ruin our reverend bishop’s re-
putation—what fault the writer of that letter has committed
we shall leave our readers to judge from the letter itself,
which is the following :
I 2


Unto His Grace the most Reverend John Bede Podding,
Archbishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of the Roman
Catholic Ecclesiastical Province of Australia, Sfc. >
May it feease tour Grace—
The pleasure which we your grace’s most distant children
experienced on the announcement of your first visit to us,
is now, alas! changed into the most profound sorrow and
mourning, which have been occasioned by the subject of
your lordship’s pastoral letter. Notwithstanding the me-
lancholy information it contains, yet on account of the re-
spect which we entertain for your grace as metropolitan,
and more especially as delegate from the holy see, our sor-
row has been still increased in consequence of the degra-
dation to which the aforesaid pastorals have been subjected,
by (what we consider) a very imprudent circulation of
them.
We feel persuaded that the eminent cardinals would never
have advised our most holy father the pope, to the measure
he has adopted against our venerable bishop, had they not
been misinformed. Little have, they heard of his apostolic
labours, and of the extraordinary difficulties he had to con-
tend with in planting the faith of Jesus Christ in this most
distant portion of the universal church.
But as it has been the fate of all infant churches from the
beginning of Christianity to have suffered opposition and
persecution, we are not surprised at the obstacles which
the common enemy has opposed in order to check its growth.
Would to God that the arch fiend had employed other in-
struments for his wicked purposes, but, alas! he has made
use of one who like another apostle, should have attentively
and diligently watered the seed which was then above
ground in health and beauty. One circumstance alone
renders it superfluous to dwell upon past events during
the protracted absence of Dr. Brady—The people aban-
doned to ignorance, established schools suppressed, the
frequent appeals of poor labourers to the civil court for
the recovery of wages and other small debts, slanderous
assertions industriously circulated defamatory of our beloved
bishop’s character.
That his lordship had been degraded, excommunicated,


and confined by command of the pope in the prison of St.
Angelo—these and like incontrovertible charges are but of
minor importance, •when compared with one sole fact, which
in our opinion is of the most aggravating nature; for the
knowledge of this fact the Roman Catholic community are
indebted to'Don Serra and your grace ; it is contained in
the document called a “ motu propria,” which is authen-
ticated by your pastoral address to the Roman Catholics of
Western Australia.
It is contrary to law, both in church and state, for any one
to assume an office which can only be conferred by supreme
authority. In the state, the intruder is liable to the heaviest
penalties; in the church, he is treated as an imposter.
The Right Rev. Dr. Serra, from the 23rd December,
1851, the day of the arrival of the Right Rev. Dr Brady
in Perth from Rome, has maintained his position as bishop
administrator of the diocese of Perth, has publicly declared
against his lawful bishop, and denounced him as a schisma-
tic. In order to establish his usurped authority he, bishop
Serra, produced certain documents issued from Propaganda
which he called papal decrees. We now learn, to our as-
tonishment, that he has been only virtually appointed to
the aforesaid office on the third day of October, one thou-
sand eight hundred and fifty-one, and we presume he could
not legally enter upon the duties of it until he received
his appointment, or rather, until it had been authenticated
by your grace, who has been delegated by the holy see for
that special purpose.
This is most certain according to the words of the docu-
ment appointing him, which are—“ By virtue of the present
writ we suspend,” and of course by virtue of the same writ
—“ We select and appoint you venerable brother, &c., who
are already appointed coadjutor of the aforesaid Bishop of
Perth, with the right of succession, to be apostolic adminis-
trator of the said church and the annexed missions.”
The words “we elect and appoint,” have no reference
whatever to the past, for they are verbs of the present
tense. The inference that any one of the most extraordi-
nary capacity would draw from this is, that since the return
of the Bishop of Perth to the colony, his coadjutor, Dr.
Serra, has been in open rebellion against the lawful autho


rity,. and consequently has been in schism, to the ruin of
his own soul, to the shame and confusion of those whom he
led into error, and now, alas! to the scandal of the whole
community.
As for the Right Rev. Dr. Brady, he could not have had
any knowledge whatever of the documents in question un-
til the present time, because, on the same day that the
motuproprio was issued in Rome, Dr. Brady was exactly
three weeks at sea, on board the Anna Robertson , bound for
Western Australia. Now, if by virtue of the aforesaid
writ, Dr. Serra was duly authorised to enter upon the office
of administration, it follows, as a necessary consequence,
that it was by virtue of the same writ authenticated by
your grace, the Righ Rev. Dr. Brady has been suspended
from the functions of his office; and most certainly, up to
the aforesaid period, he was the lawful bishop, possessing
full power in things spiritual and in things temporal.
Your grace’s interpretaion of the Papal document con-
tained in your Pastoral, has filled us with great surprise,
for we have never heard before that any one was bound to
the observance of a law the existence of which he could
not have possibly known, until your grace was pleased to
enlighten our ignorance by a new doctrine, which, no
doubt, is worthy to occupy a distinguished place in the
moral code.
Notwithstanding the respectability of your grace’s very
remarkable moral idea, we beg leave to assure you that it is
the general custom amongst the rules of all civilized na-
tions, to have their laws sufficiently promulgated before
they consider them binding on the consciences of their sub-
jects. With theological opinions we do not presume to
meddle, for, in our humility, our knowledge of divinity is
limited to that contained in the “Abridgement of the
Christian Doctrine.” In illustration of our meaning, for
instance, , —
“ Sin is any known wilful thought, word, deed, and omis-
sion against the law of God; ” hence it follows that one must
have a knowledge of an act, and knowingly and wilfully
perpetrate the act, otherwise the act cannot be imputed to
him as a sin, and yet your grace, in this sad case respecting
Bishop Brady’s temporal and spiritual administration, put
forth to the world the contrary in the following words, —


‘ wherefore we declare all acts of temporal administration
transacted by the Rev. Dr. Brady since the period of the
3rd October, 1851, to be radically invalid. We declare all
acts of spiritual administration performed by the Rt. Rev.
John Brady since the same date to be illegal if not invalid.
Now, in our simplicity, we presume to ask your grace a
question which appears to us to bear upon this point:—
supposing the home government, on the 3rd October, 1851,
had appointed another governor for Western Australia in
the room of Captain Fitz Gerald, and that his excellency
had received no intimation whatever of the aforesaid ap-
pointment, and of his own removal from the government
of Western Australia until the 20th June, 1852, does your
grace suppose that the home government would consider
and declare to the public, that all the acts of his admini-
stration were illegal and invalid during that period ? The
second point of your grace’s teaching is far more serious
and astounding. Supposing even the Rt. Rev. Dr. Brady
had returned to his diocese with a full knowledge of his
suspension, does your lordship insinuate, if Bishop Brady
baptised, confirmed, and ordained priests, that all these
acts would be invalid—that is to say, that all these children
were not baptised, that those confirmed were not con-
firmed, aud that those ordained are no priests, and there-
fore these sacraments are to be reiterated ? But what of
the masses his lordship celebrated, were they invalid ? if so,
there was no real presence of the body and blood of Christ
in his consecrations—in one word, all his masses were so
many acts of idolatry.
From your grace’s pastoral words, which arc “ illegal or
invalid,” we infer you are in doubt, and consequently un-
prepared to reply to these questions, wherefore we will not
press your grace for an answer.
We are not aware that there is a single Catholic of our
community who would presume to question the supreme
authority of the successor of St. Peter; we know and
recognise his divine right “to erect, suppress, to appoint,
to suspend, and change as shall seem to him for general and
individual good,” and far be it from us to demand reasons
“ and to summon before our ignorant and daring selves the
supreme authority in the church.” We hope we are second


to none in the Christian world in fidelity to the holy see,
consequently your grace need not apprehend that we will
be aliens to the people of God; indeed the only inheritance
which most of us poor aliens have brought with us from our
afflicted country to this most distant land, is the faith of
our forefathers, which in reality is the only inheritance we
value; an inheritance to which we will cling even at the
sacrifice of our lives; for a long time our faith has been
considerably tried, and we feel that the remembrance of
the fidelity of our forefathers, and our hopes for the future,
have served to fortify our faith and to moderate our impa-
tience, as also to induce us “ to think of and appreciate
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever modest, whatsoever
just, whatsoever holy, whatsoever amiable, and whatsoever
of good fame.” Now, as men and Christians, we will venture
to say there is virtue, and we hope some praise of discipline
amongst us. In the name and for the sake of these two,
virtue and discipline, we implore your grace to take our
case into your paternal consideration, make known our
complaints and wants to our most holy father Pope Pius IX.;
we now consider ourselves as sheep without a shepherd, and
our faith without a defender * * * * * In conclu-
sion, we beg of your grace to attribute whatever may be
displeasing to your mind in this address, to the sad neces-
sity which your pastoral has imposed upon us.
Be pleased to forgive our freedom of speech, and none
shall feel more grateful than
Your grace’s most obedient servants,
Signed by upwards of One Hundred.
Though a layman is not officially called upon to defend
his religion, yet there are times and circumstances which
render it an imperative duty on the part of every lover of
truth to advocate and defend it the best way he can. If
the aggressor of his religion had been an alien to his faith,
he could have experienced no resistances opposing him ;
but the idea of correcting the wilful mistakes of an
archbishop on points of religion committed through
motives of worldly policy, must have been most painful and
annoying to his feelings—however his love of justice and
truth could not allow his profound respect for the high
dignity and office to prevent him from discharging a


positive duty : consequently from his knowledge of the
Christian duty alone, he considered himself qualified to
point out to your grace and correct the gross errors and
mistakes of your pastoral, which correction called, forth
your excommunication of him, and we may say of the
great majority of the Roman Catholic population of this
colony.
An excommunication is the severest punishment the
church can inliict upon her disobedient children, conse-
quently it can only be used in extreme cases, and that only,
as a most salutary medicine, which no one is allowed to
administer, except the malady of his patient absolutely
require it, but in order to prevent the misapplication of
this remedy, and that its utility may not be slighted by the
faithful, in consequence of its producing no salutary effect
when wantonly applied, the church has very wisely
enacted that no bishop or prelate can use it according to
his own arbitrary views, hence he must have jurisdiction, a
sufficient cause ; and he must also give sufficient notice or
admonish according to the council of Trent, which enacts
that at least two admonitions shall be given to the party,
otherwise the excommunication is null and void. According
to that same canon of the council of Trent, all your grace’s
wholesale excommunications were a complete failure, for
you had none of the above-mentioned or named conditions.
In the first place, you were not the ordinary of the diocese,
who alone has jurisdiction and authority over his subjects;
secondly, you had no cause for excommunication; and
thirdly, you gave no notice or admonition of the intended
anathema. You attempted to excommunicate one for
having dared to correct your pastoral errors, and the poor
priest for having conscientiously believed that he had both
a moral and legal right to summon you to the civil court
for the recovery of a lawful debt.
The law, on which you have grounded your motive of
excommunicating the priest, is a local and not a general
law. The canon instructs us that the civil customs of the
countries are to be observed on this point, where there are
ecclesiastical tribunals established for the adjustments of
clerical differences, those are to be resorted to by them,
and -where they do not exist they may appeal to the civil


tribunals. Heuce, in France, Germany, England, &c.,
where the canon and civil laws are not in unison, both
priests and bishops apply to the civil courts in disputed
cases for the administration of justice.
Your grace’s novel improvement on the motu proprio, by
the addition of words, and by -your unorthodox inferences
from it, so deeply impressed the minds of the faithful with
horror and disgust, that your excommunications only
served to increase those feelings to a degree of hatred to
your corporation, difficult to describe. “What!” said
they; “to excommunicate a poor priest for having sought
the assistance of the law of the land, to make his grace
sensible of the justice of his claim on him. Is not this act,
as well as his other acts towards our beloved bishop, a
tyranny worthy of the middle ages. The very law of
nature execrates this unheard of despotism. The church
of Christ has no part whatever in it. It is an act intended
by himself as an atonement to his wounded pride. We
do not think, remarked others, that his grace has got the
right faith in him ; for instance, look said they, at the cut of
his jib—look at that little hat—even that little article alone
would be sufficient to create suspicion in our minds, had we
nofthe evidence of so many and notorious facts before us.
However, if your grace had not been successful in terrifying
the faithful by wholesale excommunications that was no
fault of yours—it was owing to the obdurate hearts of the
people upon whom you intended to operate.
The censure or remedy was a good one, and well pre-
pared. If it proved inefficacious in one case, it would be
beneficial in another. Your grace thought it advisable to
give it a fair trial. You had another subject to experiment
on; and that was our beloved pastor and bishop.
As his lordship had surrendered himself and property
into your hands, on certain conditions, which your grace
has not fulfilled, you now resolved to pack him out of the
colony as soon as you possibly could; and, in case of re-
fusal, you would operate on him by an excommunication;
accordingly, your grace addressed him the following
“Perth, July 26, 1842.
“Mr Loan,
“In conformity with the command of his Holiness,


and in conformity with your lordship’s solemn declaration,
made on Sunday, the 4th July, to the effect that you would
follow and fulfil any directions and injunctions in regard of
the time when, the manner which, and the circumstances in
connexion with your lordship’s proceeding to the holy see,
for the purpose of obtaining absolution from Holy Father,
and in obedience to his holiness.
“ I signify and make known to you my injunction and di-
rection, that you proceed in the Eleanora to Adelaide;
from the Port of Adelaide that you embark for England ;
and to proceed to the holy see.
“ I have arranged that you shall have your passage in
comfort from this colony to Adelaide; that whilst re-
maining in Adelaide your lordship may be lodged in the
house of the bishop ; your passage in comfort shall be pro-
vided to England; and to Rome you will bear letters to
secure these points.
“ y esterday, from the altar, all parties whom it might con-
cern were cautioued at their peril, not to place any obstacle
to prevent your lordship from fulfilling your duty to the
holy see.
“ Moreover, it was made known that if contrary to expecta-
tion, your Lordship remained in the colony after the sailing
of the Eleanora , I would not acknowledge or recognize any
charge or debt claimed cn account of your board, lodging,
or under any head whatsoever.
“ I add and admonish you, that if your Lordship remain
in the colony after the sailing of the Eleanora , I shall con-
sider you as contumacious in your disobedience to the holy
see, and proceed to the very painful duty which will be in-
cumbent upon me, of declaring you to be separated from
the Church of God.
“ I have the honour to be,
“ My Lord,
“ Your faithful Servant,
CSigned) “ J. B. Folding,
“ Archbishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of
“ New Holland and Van Dieman's Land and
'•'•their dependencies.".
“ The Right Rev. Dr. Brady,
“ Bishop of Perth.”
K


“ Perth, July 27, 1852.
“Mt Lord Archbishop,
“ In conformity with the command of the holy see,
and in accordance with my declaration, 1 have fulfilled all
your grace required of me—perfect submission to the will
of the holy see, although convinced that his holiness and
the eminent cardinals had been misinformed, and that the
suspension had been obreptitiously and surreptitiously ob-
tained, i. e. ex informata conscientia.
“As to the time, the manner in which, and the circum-
stances in connection with my proceeding to Rome, for the
purpose of having that suspension removed, one might sup-
pose and , expect that your lordship would be graciously
disposed to allow me to make such selection of route and
convenience as the season and the state of my health re-
quire. Besides, your grace has not as yet fulfilled the
necessary conditions, nor observed your Lordship’s own
solemn engagement. I have not as yet received one single
article of my private effects, which your grace promised to
have restored to me.
“ Your lordship promised to send me my vestments and
pontificalia, also a letter for the holy see : I have not re-
ceived them. In consequence of your not having placed
at my disposal certain funds for the due payment of certain
debts, as was agreed upon the last time I had the pleasure
of seeing your grace, I have been summoned to appear
in the Civil Court, Perth, on the 31st inst. and on the 10th
of August next.
“Your grace states that you have cautioned all parties
whom it might concern, at their peril not to place any ob-
stacle to prevent my departure ; but my lord archbishop,
the very parties concerned have already obtained sum-
monses, and unless your grace will allow their just claims
I shall be detained and prevented from leaving the colony.
I cannot think of exposing myself to be arrested for debt at
the moment of my departure, and brought back by an
agent de police : such unseemly proceeding would dis-
honour the sacred character of a bishop, which your lord-
ship is bound to protect.
“ With reference to the last paragraph of your letter, I
should be sorry to see your grace proceed to such uncalled


for steps, and which would only prevent my departure and
compel me to protest against them.
“ I have the honour to be,
“ Your Grace’s most obedient servant,
“JOHN BRADY.
“ It. C. Bishop.
“ The Most Rev. Dr. Folding, &c.”
One would suppose that after having perpetrated so many
acts of inhumanity against the Bishop of Ferth, you would
now at least endeavour to perform some small acts of kind-
ness which might serve to make it appear that they were
not altogether the acts of a malicious heart, but the errors of
an unthinking mind. After so many severe trials, and now
that he had a long and painful journey before him, he ought
to have been made comfortable, especially as bishop, whose
sacred character even self-interest and respect might have
prompted your grace to respect. But one who has so re-
peatedly trampled upon the laws of humanity and justice
could not be expected to honour the episcopal character
and dignity. Your authority and commandments, whether
just or unjust—whether right or wrong —should be main-
tained to the end. Indeed it has cost you so much trouble
to make it respected, if possible, since your grace’s arrival
here, that you could not in conscience allow the slightest
infringement on it without an excommunication wholesale
or retail.
The protestant bishop of Adelaide having heard that your
grace had obtained free passage for our much-lamented
bishop and priest to Adelaide, on board the government
schooner, objected to their company on the ground that
they had been excommunicated by your lordship. You,
therefore, applied for at least a steerage passage for his
lordship Bishop Brady and priest, which being granted, you
hastened to inform the protestant bishop that you would not
give his lordship, Dr. Short, any subject of dissatisfaction,
but wishing to act agreeably to his wishes, you had now
made other arrangements for your two victims in the
steerage.
So soon as this most degrading arrangement, made and
entered upon between your grace and Dr. Short, had been


announced to Bishop Brady, his lordship spurned it with
silent contempt and indignation. “ What,” said his lord-
ship, “ not satisfied with having plundered me of my pro-
perty and reputation, they now combine to make me instru-
mental in degrading my character, by leaving the colony
like one guilty of felony, and as a steerage passenger in
the government schooner. Surely this is too bad—this is
an intolerable outrage. Who could endure it ?
As our beloved bishop would not —could not indeed sub-
mit to that sort of treatment—of unheard of treatment , you
publicly announced,. on the following Sunday, that, for
having disobeyed your grace's peremptory command and
injunction, by refusing to depart from the colony, as a
steerage passenger in the government schooner, he (the
Rev. Bishop of Perth) became ipso facto excommunicated.
We must also remind your grace of some other obstacles
which prevented Dr. Brady’s departure. Had he consented
to leave, as you wished him to do, his lordship could not —
would not be allowed—for he had received three sum-
monses to appear at the civil court for small debts, which
your grace was bound to satisfy.
We must inform our readers again of your grace’s plan,
in order to get rid of the difficulty. “ Go,” said your
grace, “ to your colonial young lawyer, and place yourself
on the Fremantle Jette. Should any one attempt to arrest
the Bishop of Perth for debt, &c., inform them that he has
nothing in this land of the living; and there is, fortu-
nately, a new colonial act just passed, that no debtor can be
arrested or prevented from leaving the colony, when he has
no property to answer for such debt. Here bring with
you this document which will prove to any one, as well as
to all and every one, that Dr. Brady has no property in the
colony, for he has resigned all up to me. If any one
should after that, attempt to stop him, let him do it, or he
shall or will do it at his own risk and peril, let this be
respected. ( Signed ) J. B. Poi.uixg.” This was another
plan or mode of proceeding to which Bishop Brady could
not submit without degrading the episcopal character, and
committing the greatest injustice towards his creditors ;
indeed it was so revolting and so hurtful to his feelings,
that he fell dangerously ill.


“ My Lord Archbishop,
“ His lordship, Bishop Brady, requests me to inform
you that he has been confined to bed since last Saturday
evenin';:, and is still seriously ill. Our dormitory is unfit
to stable a good horse in, for the rain falls copiously, even
on our wretched beds, through the unrepaired shingle roof.
“ To Dr. Bolding. “ 12th July, 1852.”
Notwithstanding all those unparalleled and unheard-of
injuries and insults which were heaped upon our beloved
bishop and pastor, still he would not change his honourable
position with that of your grace’s unenviable and disgrace-
ful position to which you have reduced yourself by the most
foul and disreputable proceedings.
Though our venerated and much lamented bishop has
not shed his blood for the faith, you have caused him to shed
many a tear in seeing himself obliged to leave his beloved
Hock, now exposed to the mercy of ravenous wolves, and
you have also been the cause of many a tear on the part of
the poor and desolate flock now left without a shepherd.
Although, we repeat, our revered bishop has not had the
honour of martyrdom In the discharge of his ministry, yet
he has had to endure both a long and cruel persecution, of
which your grace has been the chief promoter and abettor.
By this time his lordship’s property is worth upwards of
£lO,OOO sterling, for its value has been very considerably
increased by reason of the convict establishments, and the
bishop of Berth, the right owner, (Dr. Brady) of that pro-
perty is now starving, and your grace and your brother
monk is feasting and fattening on that property. We can
all certify that you have expended more since your arrival
here, than our good bishop has expended upon himself for
his own comforts during the space of eight years; in less
than a month you caused five or six cooks to be employed
for supplying you with all the best dishes and delicacies the
colony could afford, besides you had engaged the services
of a professed Italian cook and confectioner.
We can, as we do, hereby bear testimony, that since our
beloved bishop’s first arrival amongst us, he has never
employed a cook for his own special purpose—with one
servant man he had been satisfied.
k 2


Your worst endeavours to injure bishop Brady have
only served to exalt him in the good opinion of all who
knew him, for the more he is known the better he is liked ;
not so with regard to your lordship : the more we have seen
of your extraordinary proceedings towards our beloved
bishop and towards the Catholic community, the less we
deeply regret to state —the less is our esteem for you. In
fact, you have degraded and ruined yourself for ever, and
we trust that God will look down upon the humility and
patience of our own beloved bishop, and support him under
all the crosses and trials of this life, and will conduct both
pastor and people to a better life, where neither malice nor
euvy can effect us.
His lordship is now about to depart from us with a con-
sciousness of having faithfully discharged his duty to God
and the church, and with the pleasing reflection that the
nefarious means intended to ruin him have admirably served
to elevate him in the estimation and respect of all who have
known him. Though suspended for a time, yet he is an
orthodox bishop This cannot (we deeply regret) be said
of your lordship—if the doctrine contained in the pastoral
be the criterion of your faith.
His lordship will carry with him from his diocese the
good-will, sympathy, and affections of his people, whilst your
grace shall depart with their execrations. Had your name
come here with the proper spirit of conciliation, you would
have healed the wounds inflicted on the religious feelings
of the faithful of the diocese of Perth by the coadjutor.
Your grace would have restored the longed-for peace.
The faithful expected that you would hear and receive their
petitions, and impartially investigate their grievances and
represent them to the holy see. Instead of doing that, you
rejected their petitions, and treated the faithful with the
greatest contempt. In the name and on behalf of the
faithful Roman Catholic members whom your grace has
deprived of their beloved pastor, and left in the hands of
a mercenary or hireling coadjutor, we beg to take leave
of your grace. We regret that your cruel and tyrannical
conduct has placed us under the painful necessity of holding
up to the public scorn and indignation the conduct of one
whose exalted position in the church of God and whose


old age and grey hairs should have served as a most power-
ful motive to preserve his integrity and honour without
stain or blemish to the end, to the grave; but alas! what
a painful recollection when we reflect on all the nefarious
transactions which have now left us to deplore the loss of
our revered and beloved pastor, who we fear will still be
the object of your persecuting association.
Your grace has received other petitions, and especially
from the poor prisoners, to which we subjoin other inte-
resting documents in reference to our beloved pastor, the
Rt. Rev. Dr. Brady; but, alas! you determined to ruin
our beloved bishop, and deprive us of his valuable ministry
and service.
“To the Right Reverend Beloved and Venerated
Bishop Brady, &c., &c., &c.
“ We, the undersigned Roman Catholics of the diocese of
Perth, and the vicariate of Western Australia, your lord-
ship’s ever devoted and humble spiritual children in Christ,
beg to approach your lordship with hearts overflowing with
gratitude to Almighty God for your safe return to your
neglected, bewildered, and sorely-afflicted flock, who have,
we may say, been for the past twelve months without a
shepherd. It was not only that we were totally without
spiritual instruction, but entirely void of Christian example
in (we are but too sorry to say) the person of your coad-
jutor, the Right Reverend Dr. Serra, whose unjust pro-
ceedings and unabating spirit for litigation have been as a
destroying angel to our holy religion in this far distant
part of the globe, a penal colony, which of all others is
assuredly the worst arena for such scenes as we have been
obliged to witness. Through respect to your lordship, and
for the honour that is due to the character of a bishop, we
refrain from mentioning the majority of the circumstances
which have so frequeutly, during the past twelve months,
called forth such universal honest indignation against the
conduct of your lordship’s coadjutor, and we do so, as we
know that your lordship will have but too frequent oppor-
tunities of witnessing the sad effects of such conduct, and
the irreparable injury done thereby to our holy religion.
“ The last and most enormous of Bishop Berra’s acts has


been commenced some three weeks ago. When he learned,
through his London agent, that your lordship was about to
return to your diocese, he commenced the destruction of
the mission property, which your lordship had gathered
together with so many hardships and privations to yourself.
To justify himself for the perpetration of so unjustifiable a
proceeding, he proclaimed and established here with many,
that your lordship was excommunicated, and returning to
this diocese in the capacity of a protestant bishop. He
then called a sale of all the mission property with the short
notice of seven days. Providence sending your lordship to
us on the eve of the day of sale, put a stop, in some mea-
sure, to that wicked project.
“ Though your lordship had arrived in the colony pre-
vious to last Sunday, the fact of your not having arrived
at Perth, owing to the ship being obliged to perform
quarantine, afforded another scandalous scene, by the
unchristian, uncharitable, and unjust language fulminated
by him against your lordship, and threats of excommuni-
cation against any who should communicate with you, from
his place on our altar at Perth, at the same time having the
doors of the church guarded by Spaniards, apparently, and
considered to be armed for offensive purposes.
“ It is surprising, although perhaps satisfactory, that our
just indignation knew how to contain itself, even in the
moment of our bitterest exasperation, and that so much
forbearance should be shown towards a person who, for the
gratification of his animosity, and with the view of giving
greater point to his vituperation and slander, thought
proper to select the very altar of that church, which has
been consecrated and made holy by your lordship’s pre-
sence, as the place from which to pour out his incensate,
uncharitable, and unchristian language.
“ But now, my lord, knowing well your spirit of Christian
charity and forbearance, we desire to follow your good ex-
ample, and thanking the Giver of all good gifts for the
blessings conferred on us by your lordship’s return, we for-
get all our past misery and afflictions in the joy of possessing
you again. We see, with inexpressible pleasure, that Al-
mighty God, being pleased to afflict the poor Catholic com-
munity of this penal settlement for a brief season, has not


abandoned us. The tears of the widow and afflicted mother
are now dried up. See, those who have hitherto denied
themselves the benefits of their holy religion, on account of
the many enormities committed for the past year, approach
your lordship with renewed faith. All this gives ample
testimony that Divine Providence has interposed in our
regard, and directs the future prosperity of the church at
Perth ; but, my lord, we feel for your present position, in
being obliged to come in contact with a person (we are
indeed sorry to say a bishop) whose sole occupation since
he came into this diocese has been uninterrupted litiga-
tion and scandal to our religion. We, nevertheless, have
taken measures to secure your and our just rights, and will,
with God’s blessing, urge perseveringly that right to the
end, no matter who governs our church. We have been
forced to take such measures through the unheard-of pro-
ceedings of your lordship’s coadjutor.
“ Again, my lord, let us manifest to your lordship our
veneration, esteem, and regard, so justly deserved and well-
earned by you, who first came amongst us to minister to
ourselves and our children. We are not unmindful of the
many personal privations you have suffered for the sake qf
our holy religion, devoting the too scanty means for your
own maintenance to the establishing of, and support of,
schools for the poor, that they might not be brought up in
ignorance; though these establishments have been neglected
and in part altogether abandoned by your coadjutor. That
your lordship will revive them, and that they will again
flourish and prosper as they formerly did, we have no
doubt.
“At the same moment that we notice prosperity has at-
tended your mission in this colony, we cannot omit calling
to mind the unjust and unchristian means that have been
resorted to by designing men, whom you fostered and cared
for like a father, to supplant your lordship, for no other
end, that we can conceive, than self-aggrandizement. Such
might, through improper means, have taken your place in
the government of the church, but never in the affections
of your devoted people.
. “ At a more tit and opportune time, we will lay before
your lordship a full, true, and particular statement of all


things that have taken place in your absence, relative to
our church.
“ Requesting your lordship’s benediction, we remain your
lordshp’s ever-devoted and obedient children in Christ.
“ Signed, for the Catholic community, by their duly
appointed committee—T. Farrelly—D. Ronaync—John
Dearden—John Stanton—Richard, Gallop, his mark.
Witness, D. Ronayne.
“ Dated 23rd December, 185 J.”
Copy of the lit. Itev. Dr. Brady's reply to the address
presented to his lordship by the Roman Catholics of Perth ,
on his return amongst them.
“ Dearly beloved in Christ,
“ The address which you have so kindly and affec-
tionately presented me with on the part of my beloved
flock, whilst it affords much joy and satisfaction on receiving
tliis renewed mark of fidelity and attachment from my be-
loved people, it grieves me to the heart in finding that you
have been deprived of the spiritual consolations of our holy
religion and that you have been subjected to so great and
so many vexations and hardships, as stated in your affec-
tionate address. Had I been made fully acquainted with
the awful state of this diocese since my departure, I should
have implored of our most holy father, the Pope, to send
you some efficient clergyman, who could attend to the
wants of the faithful whilst 1 myself was engaged in pro-
curing the removal of the Rt. Rev. Dr. Serra and com-
panions to one of the apostolic vicariates.
“T cannot but admire the patience of our beloved chil-
dren in Christ, when I consider all you had, and still have
to endure, deprived, as it were, of the sacraments, and your
children calling out for the bread of life, and there was
none to break it to them ; and now again, when you all
flock around your own pastor, both you and your children
are prevented fi’om entering into the church or chapel
which you have built for the special purpose of hearing
the, divine word of God; that our most holy father, the
Pope, on hearing of your distress, will soon put an end to
all scandals and vexations, by ordering a proper investi-
gation of all matters concerning the church of Perth, and
by restoring to his beloved and devoted children their
afflicted pastor and bishop, “ j- J. BRADY.”


To his Grace the Most Reverend John Bede Folding , Arch-
bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of the Roman Catholic
Ecclesiastical Province of Australia, §~c.
The humble petition of the undersigned Roman Catholics
of the diocese of Perth, &c.
Reverentially and respectfully sheweth,
“ That the right Reverend Dr. Brady arrived here as
your grace’s vicar-general, and immediately there flocked
to his ministry the scattered sheep of the fold of which he
was by your grace appointed shepherd. After remaining
and suffering from indigence for some time in this colony,
he departed for Europe for the purpose of the mission,
having previously added numbers to the church of Christ.
Upon his return he introduced a number of foreign and
other young gentlemen, either belonging to or intended for
the church, several of whom were appointed to distant sta-
tions, and sad to relate met with a watery grave.
“ That we witnessed with feelings of intense joy and satis-
faction, the advances made by our holy religion under the
right Reverend Dr. Brady’s auspices. Schools were esta-
blished and reputably kept, and the mission was a credit
and reflected credit upon all the Catholic community.
This state of happines continued until Dr. Serra arrived
and announced the fact of his appointment as temporal
administrator; the creditors of the mission produced their
respective accounts, and not only they, but the whole of
the Roman Catholics were astonished and absolutely stulti-
fied to find that scarcely one account (although recognized
as correct by our venerated pastor, Dr. Brady) would be
paid, consequently the applicants were obliged to have
recourse to a legal court, and the sentence being invariably
in favour of the creditors, it necessarily threw odium on a
community heretofore respected. It was the more astound-
ing to the Roman Catholics as it was thoroughly understood
that Drs. Serra and Salvado were sent to Europe for the
purpose of collecting funds for.the liquidation of certain
bills, amounting to fourteen hundred pounds sterling, for
the payment for lands purchased expressly and at the re-
quest of the last-named reverend gentlemen.
“ That we are wholly unconscious of Dr, Brady’s having
committed any error, and are sadly sorry to hear that our


most holy father has determined or decided a case without
a thorough investigation therein and the facts of the case
being; placed before him.
“ That the Roman Catholics here ardently but most re-
spectfully request a full, clear, and deliberate investigation
of the matter in dispute before your grace’s departure.
“ That we have serious apprehensions that should any
degradation be offered to the right Reverend Dr. Brady, a
sad and grievous affliction will be felt by the Roman Catho-
lic community of Western Australia.
“ That we implore of your grace (if any blame is attached
to the right rerverend Dr. Brady) as great blame has been
incurred by the right reverend Dr. Serra, as will appear
on investigation, 1 we would respectfully and humbly sug-
gest that both bishops be removed from hence, as no good
can result to the mission or the Roman Catholic community
under Dr. Serra’s auspices or direction.
{ ‘ We therefore humbly beseech your grace, that we may
be permitted to state and prove our grievances, and how
much the community are degraded through the instrumen-
tality of Dr. Serra, and also implore of your grace to ac-
quiesce as far as possible to our request for the removal
of those who have not, or are not likely, we unfortunately
know, to increase or adorn the community we used to bear
an honest pride in.
“ And your petitioners will, as in duty
bound, for ever pray.”
Signed by 345 members.
“ Fremantle , Western Australia ,
“ June 21st, 1852.
“ To the most Rev. Dr. Folding,
Archbishop of Sydney and the Australian Colonies.
The humble memorial of the undersigned Roman Catholics
of the Diocese of Perth in this territory, humbly
sheweth:—
“ That the Right Rev. Dr, Brady arrived here as your
grace’s Vicar-General; that he collected together the
scattered sheep of the fold of which he was then the shep-
herd; —that, after having remained for some time, he de-
parted for Europe, and, upon his return, introduced a


number of foreign and Irish young gentlemen either in, or
intended for , the church; —That several of these were ap-
pointed to distant stations, and some, sad to relate, met a
watery grave.
“ That we witnessed with feelings of intense satisfaction
the advances made by our holy religion under Dr. Brady’s
auspices. Schools were established and kept up the
mission was in credit, and reflected credit upon all the
catholic community ; but as soon as Dr. Serra arrived and
announced the fact that he was appointed Temporal Ad-
ministrator, and the creditors of the mission produced
their biljs, the whole of the Roman Catholics were not only
astonished, but absolutely stultified, to find that scarcely
one account was paid until the applicant was obliged to
place the matter in court. This was still more astounding
to the Roman Catholics here, as it was generally known
that the Right Rev. Drs. Serra and Salvado were sent to
Europe for the purpose of collecting funds for the pay-
ment of certain bills (£1400) amounting to fourteen
hundred pounds for the purchase of lands, purchased ex-
pressly at the request, and by the advice of those then
reverend gentlemen.
“ That we are wholly unconscious, of Dr. Brady’s having
committed any error ; and are sadly sorry to hear that the
holy father has determined a case without the whole facts
being placed before him. That the Roman Catholics
here ardently request a full, clear, and deliberate investi-
gation of the matter in dispute before your grace’s de-
parture.
“ That we have serious apprehensions that should any de-
gradation be offered to Dr. Brady, a very, very sad afflic-
tion will be felt by the catholic community.
“ That we implore of your grace (if any blame is
attachable to Dr. Brady) that both the bishops be removed,
as no good can result to the mission or the catholic com-
munity under Dr. Serra’s direction.
“ That we, therefore, beseech your grace to acquiesce,
as far as possible, in our request.
“ And your memorialists, as in duty bound,
will ever pray.
“ Moved by Mr, Quinn, and seconded by Mr. Ronayne,


that the above memorial be presented to his grace, Dr.
Folding; and that a deputation, consisting of Messrs. P.
Marmion, P. Lehiff, D. Ronayne, and J. Quinn be re-
quested to present the same.
James Quin
Edward Keaughran
Jno. O’Conner
John M‘Kirman
James Cunningham
Andrew Burns his A mark
P. Marmion
D. Ronayne
W. M‘Marner
Patrick Taucy
Patrick M‘Mahan
Dennis Donlay
J. Smith
R. Moor
G. Gaffling
J. Davis
John Barrett
James M‘Murmann
Richard Connolly
P. M‘Glade his A mark
R. Connolly, Jun.
John W. Rees
David M'lntyre
Bernard Byeras
Robert Polin
Michael Carroll his A mark
William Carroll
William Delaney
Michael Moran
Charles Kenny
George Swift
Patrick Griffin his A mark
L. Langowland
John M‘Courts
Dennis Monachal!
John Driskell
Chairman.
John Stanton
Michael Kennedy
Timothy Caromady
Charles M‘Gee
Michael Hynes
Dennis Tuchy
John Regge
Edmond Sheedy
James M‘Yagh
P. G. Allan
M. Mitchell
James M‘ Morrin
Thomas Smith
Michael o‘Brien his At mark
John Byrne
Richard Gallop his A mark
John Keleugher
Patrick Duffy
John Johnson
Robert Moore
James Smith
Michael Maxwell
Thomas Barratt
D. Meara
Thomas Hackett
Thomas Russell
W. Stone
Michael Sheedy
John Dearden
Robert D‘Arcy
John Gumming Lesser
Edward Jeffers
George Pettitt his A mark
Jeremiah Mahoney
Michael Carney
Michael M‘Donland
“PATRICK LAHIFF


Michael Purcell
William Gillens
Richard Jeffers
Patrick Meany
Peter Murphy
Patrick Murphy
Thomas Murphy
John Murphy
“ Regr. 338. —Saturday 26th June, ] 852.
“ Convict Establishment ,
Fremantle , Western Australia.
“ To his Grace the Most Rev. Dr. Folding, Archbishop ot
Sydney, and Metropolitan of New Holland and
Van Dieman’s Land.
“ The humble petition of the Roman Catholic prisoners
“ Respectfully showeth,
“ That we, the undersigned Roman Catholic prisoners in
this colony, approach your grace with great confidence,
because of your lordship’s well-known charity and Christian
feeling for all poor unfortunates, as we now are. We, by
leave, therefore, lay before your grace that, ever since the
Rt. Rev. Dr. Serra took charge of our spiritual directions,
we have been deprived of religious instructions, such as we
want and require ; for, in the first instance, we do not un-
derstand, nor can we be understood by Dr. Serra or his
clergy. With all due respect, we mention one little cir-
cumstance which took place on last Sunday, the 20th
instant, while receiving catechetical instructions from one
of the Spanish clergymen, whose name we do not know.
The gentleman alluded to asked one of the prisoners on
what day did Christ arise from the dead, and on being
answered by the prisoner that it was on Easter Sunday, he
then paused, as if to comprehend the meaning of the word,
and said, after the lapse of a few minutes, in a very con-
fused manner “ Yes, it was on holy Sunday.” Now, your
grace may be assured that we, as Catholics, must have felt
very much for the reverend gentleman at the time, well
knowing that, notwithstanding the above and similar other
mistakes, which are generally made by the Spanish clergy-
men through their ignorance of the English language, they
are pious and learned men in their own and various other
languages, we are however, in duty bound to inform your
grace that the Spanish clergymen are no way calculated to


advance the morals of the Catholics of this colony, nor in-
struct their children. In the second place, most reverend
father, stands the Rev. Mr. Donovan, who is the only one
that understands and speaks any kind of English; but
when he attempts to preach or instruct, we are all at a loss
to know what he himself wishes to inculcate. We all
regret to find that, instead of instructing others, he himself
is entirely deficient in that which he pretends to teach.
There is neither sense nor meaning in his words; in fine,
we have no clergyman capable of exhorting, of instructing,
of directing, and forcibly pointing out to us the great and
powerful lessons and maxims of the everlasting gospel of
Jesus Christ, and the duties of our holy religion. We are
convinced, and that from sad experience, that should we be
left much longer to ourselves, and deprived of the necessary
support of our holy religion, many of us poor unfortunate
prisoners will be carried awky by the evil propensities of
corrupt nature, and will be still exposed to all kinds of
temptations, perhaps with the loss of eternal salvation.
We, therefore, most humbly and respectfully implore of
your grace, that your lordship may take into your paternal
consideration our spiritual wants, and afford us that conso-
lation which we so much stand in need of, that is, an en-
lightened and pious priest, who will be to us, as your grace
and the Rev. Dr. Brady has been, a father and a friend to
many like us in the land of banishment. We also earnestly
beg and implore that your grace will make such arrange-
ments with the holy see, as well as with the government,
that we shall soon have the consolation of our beloved and
much esteemed Bishop Brady to be over and direct us, as
we have every confidence in his truly Christian and paternal
heart for us all. We also wish to remind your grace that
this colony will, ere long, be populated principally by pri-
soners from the united kingdom, who will, no doubt, have
a great number of Roman Catholics among them, that will
be, like ourselves, very much in need of spiritual instruc-
tions, but who will, I am afraid, if the present state of
affairs exists, be sadly disappointed. We again most re-
spectfully repeat that men like (the writer of this four
years and eight months a prisoner, and seven years without
nearing a sermon preached by a Catholic clergyman) us,


who, with very few exceptions, have been living for years
without knowing God, are the very persons who require
most the services of clergymen of true Christian piety and
sound learning, that will preach, and teach us in our own
language, and who will, with the blessing of God, be able
to impress upon our minds the duties we owe to God and
our neighbour. We once more address your grace, not as
a temporal peer or severe judge, but as dutiful children
would a fond (with love and respect) parent, beseeching of
your grace to restore, or cause to be restored unto us our
beloved and much esteemed Bishop Brady, in whom we
have no fault, but otherwise well pleased. In case your
grace do not relieve those our spiritual wants, we can truly
say that we are as sheep wanting a shepherd ; but, on the
other hand, by complying with this our humble petition,
your grace will secure for yourself and the church, during
life, our prayers, and those of our children when we are all
no more. A visit from your grace will dispel any doubts
that may rest upon any of the foregoing statements. Con-
fidently relying, therefore, npon your truly Christian cha-
racter, we remain, most reverend father in God, your very
humble and sincere petitioners,
“JOHN LLOYD
“P HILIP DIXON, &c."
“My lord, —This is a true copy of the original, except
that the writing is not so good, owing to it being taken
down in a hurried manner. My lord, yours truly,
“J. L. and P. D.”
“ May it please your grace to receive this the humble
petition of we, the Roman Catholics of this establishment,
in favour of the Right Rev. Dr. Brady, bishop of Perth.
My lord, I deem it not expedient, in the present instance,
to go through the long forms of etiquete, as if addressing a
temporal peer, but merely that of a dutiful son addressing a
fond parent, with love and respect. My lord, I have now
been an inmate of this prison nearly fourteen months, and
in all that time I have not heard a sermon preached, and
scarcely mass celebrated propperly. My lord, we may
truly say that we are sheep wanting a shepherd. As for
Mr. Donovan, tho’ not speaking disrespectfully of him, he
l 2


is not competent to teach even children propperly ; there-
fore it is evident that he must be a long way in the back
ground with men like us, who, with very few exceptions,
have been living for numbers of years away from God, and
who now requires the services of some talented clergyman,
who can impress, if possible, Christ’s holy religion on our
hearts. As for the Spanish clergymen, they are no way at
* all qualified for so great a work. Having, however, heard
of the great services rendered to prisons at Sydney, by the
Right Rev. Dr. Brady, who is now persecuted by those
who I do not hesitate to call wolves in sheep’s clothing,
intreats your lordship, therefore, to impower Dr. Brady to
visit us as our chaplain, until such time as your lordship
receives an answ;er to the just statement which I have no
doubt you will make. Your lordship may believe me when
I say that I pour out the whole sentiments of my heart in
again requesting that you will restore unto us his lordship
Dr. Brady, to be our pastor and preceptor. My lord, not-
withstanding our present low possition in society, we may
yet, if spared, become settlers in this country, and perhaps
staunch supporters of our creed and country. My lord,
our last earnest supplication is the restoration of Bishop
Brady to us, and for which your lordship shall ever receive
our blessing, and that of our children.
“ My lord, we conclude by remaining your lordship’s
humble petitioners, &c.
“PHILIP DIXON, &c.
“ Fremantle , 29 th June , 1852.
“ My Lord.
'• I have seen your letter to Mr. Marmion with
regard to the pastoral letter which was posted here on
Sunday. We are all much surprised that his grace the
archbishop would forward such a document to the public
without hearing the merits of the case, but however, I am
still of the same mind, that your lordship is wronged and
gravely wronged by the deceitful Spaniard who is now
placed over us as our spiritual adviser, a man who I shall
never acknowledge, nor any of my family. Marmion sends
you the address from the prisoners, it seems to me by the
pastoral letter that his grace the archbishop will neither


hear or listen to anything we have got to say on the
matter, therefore my lord 1 would propose that our feelings
on the matter should not be left in oblivion, but to place
them before the public, which I am sure will coincide with
us and with our request to his grace in our Mr. Marmion ;
also the address from the convicts, which I am sure his
grace must take sqjne notice of. Your lordship might
mention this to Mr. Farrelly and have his advice on the
matter. “ I am, my lord, your faithful and most
humble servant,
D. RONAYNE.”
“ Victoria Plains , May ls£, 1851.
“ My dear Mr. Farrelly.
“ I cannot help reflecting with myself, but that
whilst all things seem to smile in Perth, those who rule over
ns in the church; but dirty work is industriously carried
on at home, and by such work push Dr. Brady not only
out of the administration of his diocese, but out of the
spiritual jurisdiction too; and is not that too bad, if such is
done by unfair means. lam now of opinion, and I think
yourself and Mr. Fowler, and all honest men, will coincide
with me, that the more just way would be to apply the axe
at once to the tree, and inform Home of the real state of
the diocese in as concise a manner as possible, and that not
upon the ipsit dicit of any one, but upon the solemn decla-
ration of two or more persons well conversant with all things
relating thereto, saying nothing offensive to any one, in the
first place giving a full statement of the amount of property
given over to bishop Serra at Christmas last, and an account
of the number of persons supported by bishop Brady in the
years 1846 —47—48—49 and 50, and by this means Rome
will at once come to a conclusion as to how bishop Brady
has managed the funds forwarded to him for the support of
the mission. I cannot see any more just way to put an end
to the whole affair, and at the same time a statement could
be made that not one shilling’s worth of property has been
made away with clandestinely, or for any use whatever than
the support of the mission.
“If the extracts of which you are aware, copied from
bishop Salvado’s phamphlet be true, you know that they


are unworthy of a man, much less a bishop, but I confers
from all that is past, I do not believe unless I see it in his
own hand. If the matter is fairly laid before Rome, I
would be quite content with any conclusion she would come
to, and of course willing to obey any head, but am always
of opinion that bishop Brady acting as the ordinary and
spiritual head, bishop Serra, administrator, and bishop
Salvado here at the plains, you may depend such would be
the best for religion and property of all. With best respects
to Mi's. Farrelly and son, I am, &c.
J. M. BUTLER.
On Board the Eugene , 4th Sept. 1852.
My Lord,
Little are you aware of the diabolical treachery on
the point of completion, but I beg to state that their
machinations are frustrated; I never shall give myself to
such. In fact, I have been offered a very fair sum to serve
them; conscience and justice to an injured individual, even
for all the money coined, would not induce me to the fact—
the attempt is to charge your lordship and Dr. Croyle with
forgery, relating to the address published, and requesting,
as stated above, that I should withdraw my letter, or
rather write another one, and give all information respect-
ing the drawing of it up, if induced, he should proceed with
the charge, and lay the statement before Cardinal Fransina,
and that would make his way clear, and defy you or any
other to remove him; that he had all arranged for the
purpose, and he never wanted anyone to serve him without
payment, and that he had given very heavy sums for the
purpose.
I beg to remain, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s obedient servant,
JOHN DEARDEN.
To the Right Rev. Dr. Brady.
“ Perth , Western Australia , Jan. lB5O.
“ The humble petition of the Roman Catholics of the
diocese of Perth, in Western Australia, to our most holy
father, Pope Pius the Ninth.
“MOST HOLY FATHER."


“ We, the undersigned Roman Catholics of Perth, most
devotedly attached to the Divine Faith of the One, Holy,
Catholic, Roman and Apostolic Church, most filially subject
to your highness* spiritual authority, and most humbly
obedient to every apostolic mandate emanating from the
holy see —the chair pf St. Peter; filled with a deep sense of
our own unworthiness, and with hearts sensibly alive to,
and afflicted with the bitterest and most poignant grief, at
the present position in which we, your holiness* spiritual
children, are placed, and at the gloomy prospect of the
future evils that already threaten this isolated portion of
the fold pf Christ, the bitterness of which we are already
forced to taste, in the conduct of Bishop Serra, and by the
scandals he has given, from the 29th of December last up to
the 20th instant, not only to us, but also to all the catholics
in this colony. We, with all reverence, love, and humility,
presume to prostrate ourselves at the feet of your holiness,
and most suppliantly beseech your holiness to listen to, and
grant the prayer of the petition of your spiritual children in
Christ, cast, as our lot has been, by the wise dispensation of
Divine Providence, in the wilds and forests of this infant
colony of Great Britain, far removed, unhappily, from all
immediate communication witn the holy and apostolic see,
which we have been taught from our very cradles to vene-
rate and to pronounce with piety and love, even with our
infant tongues.
“ Finding, most holy father, that our beloved, venerable,
and saintly prelate, the Right Rev. John Brady, has been
thrown into the deepest affliction and most painful diffi-
culties by unchristian, heartless, disobedient, contumacious
and scandalous conduct of Bishop Serra. Deeply do we
feel the anguish that afflicts and lacerates the heart of our
beloved and venerated prelate ; and are fearfully alive to
the sad and lowering prospects that now stare us in the
face; to the great evils and destruction that at this moment
impend our holy religion, if Bishop Serra, a foreigner,
ignorant of the English language, of English laws and cus-
toms, and a perfect stranger to Irish and English feelings,
is to be continued by your holiness as administrator of the
missionary funds appropriated to the wants of this poor
diocese; or as coadjutor bishop to our own incomparable,


charitable, and saintly prelate, the right reverend John
Brady.
We beg leave, most reverently to suggest to your holi-
ness, that it appears to the Catholics of this colony, that the
holy see has been misinformed and deceived by the grasping
and ambitious views; the cunning and gross misrepresenta-
tions of Bishop Serra; and that the holy see thus deceived
has, unintentionally, divided a house against itself; and
that, without knowing the genuine worth, the heroic virtues,
the multiplied sufferings, the personal privations and apos-
tolic labours of our own saintly bishop, or the many scandals
to religion, the violent temper, ungovernable passion, vindic-
tive feelings, cruelty and spirit of litigation of Bishop Serra,
who, by his public actions, seems to fear neither God nor
man, and who is justly despised and avoided by the catho-
lic body of Western Australia. So fearfully great is his
avarice, most holy father, that, in some cases, it is with
great difficulty he has been induced to liquidate a portion
of the debts due by the catholic missions of this diocese;
whilst in others, recourse was obliged to have been had to
the civil courts of justice, for the recovery of creditors’
lawful demands out of the funds collected in Europe for
this poor and infant diocese; all of which debts had been,
through absolute necessity, lawfully incurred for the support
of our own most charitable bishop; of the community of
the Sisters of Mercy also: and likewise for the adequate
maintenance of an asylum and school, designated “ The
Benevolent Institute,” for aboriginal female children, at-
tached to the Convent of the “ Holy Cross ; ” and, finally,
all and every aid was obstinately refused by Bishop Serra,
to all other missionary establishments and purposes.
“ Prostrate, in spirit, at the feet of your holiness, with
the most profound humility, reverence, and love, we, there-
fore, earnestly supplicate your holiness, in the name of
Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ ; for the love of
God and of the Blessed Mart ever Virgin ; for the
prevention of any further scandals ; for the propagation ot
our holy religion; for the glory of God, the conversion,
sanctification, and salvation of souls, not only to appoint
our own beloved bishop as trustee or administrator of the
missionary funds ; or, (as it would be far more gratifying


to his lordship’s kind and generous heart,) one or more
agents to act conjointly with him, according to the several
necessities of the Perth Missions, —but also to withdraw
Bishop Serra totally from this colony; and to appoint, as
coadjutor bishop, to the Right Rev. Dr. Brady, with the
right of succession, v some worthy, competent, and efficient
Irish or English priest* known to, and recommended to the
holy see, by our own beloved, most deserving, indefatigable
and apostolic prelate, the Right Rev. John Brady, in this
far distant and promising portion of Christ’s vineyard.
“ And your holiness’ humble, faithful, and devoted peti-
tioners will, as in duty bound, ever pray.”
[Here follow 114 Signatures!]
“ Convent Holy Cross , Friday Morning.
“ My dear Lord,
“ After contracting for the erection of the chil-
dren’s house, there was still a small sum remaining in the
bank, out of which we beg your lordship’s acceptance of
the enclosed trifle, seeing that your right reverend temporal
administrator seems to have overlooked your lordship’s
household affairs in the multiplicity of his other concerns.
We earnestly hope your lordship will not be displeased at
the liberty we take, as also that you will be assured of the
regret we feel at the annoying circumstances connected
with the funds ordered to be placed at your lordship’s dis-
posal, for the general good of your mission.
“ I have the honor to be, with great respect,
Your lordship’s most obedient
and humble servant in Jesus Christ,
SISTER MARY URSULA."
June 23, 1852.
“ My Lord,
“ Having maturely weighed and considdered the
very unchristian uke "course which Dr. Serra & his agents
lias adopted in missrepresenting your Lordship at the
Court of Rome Spain and other Catholic Countries and the
final result of the said uncharitable proceeding in the form


of the late Bull and also the verry inhospitable maner in
which you were received by him Dr. Serra & his clergy
on your recent arrival from England is therefore of oppinion
in the first place that your Lordship has been & is basely
slandered & crualy persecuted by Dr. Serra and his ad-
herents and in the second that you have been taunted and
insulted above measure. My Lord without waiting to
inquire what the original views of his Holiness were in
first appointing Dr. Serra as your coadjutor not the
actual motives of the aforesaid dignatory in bringing
with him a number of Clergy and lay Brothers to a
Country where all are of another Language and who
cannot without difficulty be understood I merely state that
the low mean cunning used by Dr. Serra and his adherents
to undermine your lordship out of your Dioceses the
Dioces which in Christian charity you are the founder and
apostle is I say highly dishonourable to him as a man and
verry ill accords with the devine nature of his office and
it matters not My Lord in what maner the disgraceful and
inveterate act may be viewed it carries with it all through
the peace quite a temporal aspect therefore it behoves your
Lordship to arouse yourself once more & call upon the
Lord of heaven & earth who is Almighty and true god to
guide guard and govern your thoughts words and actions
and thajt he may be pleased to give you sufficient strength
of Boddy and mind to bear with Christian fortitude the
verry severe* trials that has overtaken you my Lord all of
us should have recours to prayer in such seasons
of fiery trial My Lord I also wish that you go among
your Flock who will no doubt rally round you and
acknowledge you as their Bishop and no other I also
advise your Lordship and people to wait on his grace the
Archbishop and lay before his notice in the most candid
and explicit maner possible the whole particulars of the
case so that his Grace may be able to understand thoroughly
and pass a just judgement thereon and send a true copy of
the same to Borne which will I hope show all in their true
colours and change the present aspect hoping that God will
enable you to overcome your worldly minded enemy
“ I remain your Lordships verry respectfully
“PHILIP DIXON."


“ My Lord,
“ Owing to the severe reprimand which I received
from Mr. Donovan & other officials of this Establishment
with the letter of inquiry which I sent to you a short time
tho 1 still kept under strict survelence I do however embrace
the present opportunity of communicating a few of my
sentiments on the present subject in dispute with regard to
the Spanish Clergymen I may venture to say that some of
them are learned & pious men but only good to those that
understands their language the certainly are no way calcu-
lated to advance the morrals of Irish Catholics nor instruct
their children there Ido not see. the use o them to Colo-
nists I mean however to draw up a petition to present to
his grace in your Lordships behalf
“ I must at present conclude by remaining
“ Your Lordships devoted servants
“P. DIXON & JOHN LLOYD."
“April 12.
“ My dear Dean,
“ I duly received your favour -with the contained
—the memorial of one whom, whilst living, I venerated as
a saint, of whose happiness I feel confident; nevertheless,
of her I will make a remembrance on the first vacant day
in the holy sacrifice.
“ Well, we shall for the present be somewhat nearer to
each other. I have engaged to take Major Drent’s house
and ground for my own residence, and for the seminary.
We remove before the first of June.
“ In my arrangements for the aboriginal mission, I have
reckoned, I find, without my host. One of the passionists
has an instrument from Rome, the existence of which I did
not suspect, by which he is constituted prefect of the mis-
sion to the natives. I was speaking confidentially with him
respecting the mission and my intentions, intimating my
conviction that an English missionary of experience ought
to accompany them, when he immediately drew up, and
took the earliest opportunity of exhibiting this instrument
to me. Of course, this has placed us in a somewhat difficult
position, and presented a difficulty I must have very clearly
M


settled before I proceed. Imperium in imperio will never
do. Let this go no farther.
“ Wishing every blessing, I am, my dear sir, very affty.,
“J. B. P., Abp. Syd.”
“ Rome, July 31st, 1848.
“ My Lord,
The first time I visited cardinal Franconi, he told
me that since the month of November I was nominated
Bishop Vicar Apostolic of Port Victoria, and that the pope’s
bulls been sent—l remained as a stone-man, and asked
some days to give an answer. After a few days I did say
‘ cardinal Franconi, it was almost impossible to think of
founding a new mission in the very moment in which will
be not money enough at Lyons for the manutention of the
established missions,’ I added, ‘it was very sensible to me
to put off Nursia, after so much labour as been endured
by us to put it on,’ I did propose cardinal Franconi to
be bishop if would be indispensable to be but bishop in
partubus coadjutor of your lordship. But nothing have
pleased his eminence, and finally, after plenty of days of
representations and prayers has been resolved, that I will
be Bishop Vicar Apostolic of Port Victoria, but will be
allowed to me to have any resident at Nursia, with the
condition to send one my vicar at Port Victoria; with this
condition I wil be consecrated the 15th August by cardinal
Franconi, and to-morrow I will go to the retreat. I am sure
that with the peaceful principle of your lordship’s dummodo
Christusprcedictum, Sfc., and with the respect I will always
conceive for a bishop who has been so good to us, never
will be between your lordship and myself any unpleasant
doubt about the boundaries of the contiguous diocese.
“ The most humble and obedient servant,
“JOSEPH SERRA
Missionary Apostolic.”
“ Nursia, 27 th Nov., 1847.
“ My Lord,
“ It is very pleasing to me to be obbliged of proving
myself in the highest degree grateful to your lordship in
the moment in which this Benedictine mission, owner of a
flock by favour of your lordship see his subsistence assured


for ever. May the Almighty God bless the sacrifices made
by your lordship on the establishing of this Benedictine
mission. We will endeavour to correspond to your lord-
ship’s aim, ceaseless labouring for the good of these poor
natives.
“ Moreover, I would be very glad to tell myself to fore-
tellers of cold dispositions of your lordship towards the
Benedictines, what your lordship have made for the Bene-
dictine mission, the state to whom your lordship have
condescended to entrust this mission. It will be for ever in
the memory and in the heart of the Benedictines, and it
make of your lordship the most recognisee and grateful
servant,
“Joseph SERRA, B.M."
“ Fremantle, Deer. 17 th, 1851.
“ My Lord,
“ Being at Fremantle when the vessel appeared in
sight, and stopping at Mr. Marimon’s, I, at his request, and
in the name of .all the Catholic community, entreat your
lordship will land this night, without delay; and, since
Providence has given you again to your people, stay, the
present disgraceful proceedings, and allay the fears of the
poor Catholics of Western Australia by your presence.
“ In haste, I remain your lordship’s devoted servant,
“ William Fobder.”
“ I enclose advertisement of the sale of Catholic mission
property to-morrow, Deer. 18th, without reserve.”
“ My Lord Archbishop,
Seeing the very unseemly manner in which your
grace appears disposed to treat me on the eve of my de-
parture for the eternal city, and the inconvenient and very
unbecoming way you wish to provide for our long and
painful voyage to Europe, I beg to state, for your lord-
ship’s information, that it is morally impossible for me to
proceed in the Ellenora to Adelaide, and thence to Eng-
land, via Cape Horn, and arrive in England in the depth
of winter, suffering as I am, even in this temperate climate,
from rheumatism. I shall take the first vessel for Point des
Galles and overland route. I hope your grace will not
refuse the request of your grace’s most obt.,
“JOHN, BP. of Perth."


Declaration of the Rt. Rev. Dr. Brady.
“ The undersigned, bishop of Perth, in submitting to
mandate of the holy see, is willing to give up all his pe.
sonal and real property, in trust (for the benefit and use of
the Roman Catholic mission in Western Australia) into the
hands of the Most Rev. Dr. Folding, archbishop of
Sydney, and delegate of the holy see, upon the following
conditions, viz. > —
“ Ist, Upon the liquidation of all lawful debts. 2ndly,
On the restoration of all his private effects; and 3rdly,
Upon the faith and security of a reasonable and sufficient
support be made for his maintenance and support for life.
(Signed) “ John Brady, R. C., Bp. of Perth.”
This admirable declaration of our beloved bishop, your
grace admitted to be just, and assured him that all would
be right. The amount of the third condition was left
to the decision of the holy see; but, strange to state, when
your grace had obtained the property from Dr. Brady, you
denied the conditions you had so solemnly declared to ob-
serve, and by means of another private declaration, which
you forced Dr. Brady to make, to send to the holy father,
m order to procure his lordship’s perfect submission to the
motu proprio, you deprived Dr. Brady of his private effects,
and our beloved bishop is now subjected, after all he has
done and suffered for the establishment of our holy religion
in, this colony, to endure all the difficulties and hardships
which we have reason to apprehend, from your grace’s past
treatment and unheard of conduct towards a brother
bishop. We have heard that upon your arrival in Sydney,
you boasted that you had been victorious, using the words
of an eastern tyrant, “ veni, vidi, vici." What, in the mime
of God, had your grace to conquer ? There was no resist-
ance—no opposition ; for, the moment you declared the will
of the holy see, our beloved pastor and bishop, not only in
words, but by his admirable conduct, set the example.
THE END.
