

o
?£TH- r'Rm ■, /y P
NEW ZEALAND,
TREAT Y OF WA IT AN GI


f


NEW ZEALAND.
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEBN THE
WESLEYAN MISSIONARY COMMITTEE
AND THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE EARL GREY,
Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonial Department,
APPREHENDED INFRINGEMENT
TREATY OE WAITANGI:
AS PUBLISHED IN THE REPORT OF THE WESLEYAN MISSIONARY SOCIETY,
FOR 1848.
LONDON.


P. THOMS, PRINTER, 12, WARWICK SQUARE.


CORRESPONDENCE, & c .
Copy of a Letter from the Wesleyan Missionary Committee to the
Right Honourable Earl Grey.
Wesleyan Mission-House,
Bishopsgate-Street-Within, February 23 rd, 1848.
My Lord,— The Committee to whom is entrusted the management
of the Foreign Missions of the Wesleyan Society, most respectfully
request permision to express to your Lordship the deep solicitude which
has been awakened in their minds, by tthe agitation of the question re-
specting the correct interpretation of thee Treaty ofWaitangi,* upon which
the Colony of New Zealand is based.
* Copy of the Treaty of Waitaingi From “ Copies or Extracts of
Correspondence relative to New Zealand, &c., ordered by the House of Com-
mons to be printed 11th May, 1841.”
“Her Majesty, Victoria, Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, regarding with Her royal favour the Native Chiefs and Tribes of New
Zealand, and anxious to protect their just rights and property, and to secure to
them the enjoyment of peace and good order, has deemed it necessary, in conse-
quence of the great number of Her Majesty’s subjects who have already settle
in New Zealand, and the rapid extension of emigration, both from Europe and
Australia, which is still in progress, to constitute and appoint a functionary
properly authorized to treat with the Aborigines of New Zealand for the recog-
nition of Her Majesty’s sovereign authority over the whole or any part of those
Islands. Her Majesty, therefore, being desirous to establish a settled form of
civil Government, with a view to avert the evil consequences which must result
from the absence of the necessary laws and institutions, alike to the JNative
population and to Her subjects, has been graciously pleased to
authorize me, William Hobson, a Captain in Her Majesty s Royal ISavy, Consul
and Lieutenant-Governor over such parts of New Zealand as may be, or h “®‘
after shall be, ceded to Her Majesty, to invite the confederated and independent
Chiefs of New Zealand to concur in the following articles and conditions
“Article the First.—The Chiefs of the Confederation of the United Tribes of
New Zealand, and the separate and independent Chiefs who have not become
Members of the Confederation, cede to Her Majesty the Queen of England
absolutely, and without reservation, all the rights and powers of sovereignty
which the said Confederation or individual Chiefs respectively exercise or possess.


A preliminary remark or two maiy be requisite to render it apparent
that the Committee are not presurming to intermeddle with the subject
beyond their proper province, but tlhat in the maintenance of the Treaty
of Waitangi, in its full integrity, tthe Wesleyan Missionary Society has
important interests at stake. This will partly appear,—■
1. From a statement of the extentt and influence of the Wesleyan Mis-
sion in New Zealand. The Missiom was commenced in the year 1819,
and has continued in effective operation to the present time. The
Wesleyan Society has now Twelve; principal Stations in the Northern
Island, and two others in the Middke Island, each of which Stations is a
centre of operations extending over ® considerable District. Eighty-nine
Chapels have been erected, and One; Hundred and Twelve other buildings
have been provided for Religious Woorship amongst the Native population
comprised within the limits of these The number of accredited
Church-Members, or Communicantts, now amounts to Three Thousand
Seven Hundred; and Six Thousand! Two Hundred and Twelve Scholars
attend the Week-day and Sabbath Scchools. The whole Mission is placed
under the superintendence of Eightteen ordained Missionaries, who are
assisted by Thirteen other subordinaite paid Agents, and Six Hundred and
Thirty Christian Natives who remder their services gratuitously as
Teachers in the Mission-Schools, oir in conducting occasional Religious
Services among their countrymen. It may be further remarked that, in
accordance with a Resolution passed at a Public Meeting held in
Auckland, in the year 1844, “A. Wesleyan Native Institution” was
formed at that place in order to insttruct a select number of Natives of
or may be supposed to exercise or possesss, over their respective territories, as the
sole Sovereigns thereof.
“Article the Second.—Her Majesty; the Queen of England confirms and
guarantees to the Chiefs and Tribes of Neew Zealand, and to the respective families
and individuals thereof, the full, exclusivve, and undisturbed possession of their
lands and estates, forests, fisheries, andd other properties which they may col-
lectively or individually possess, so long aas it is their wish and desire to retain the
same in their possession. But the Chiefs of the united Tribes, and the individual
Chiefs, yield to Her Majesty the exclusiwe right of pre-emption over such lands
as the proprietors thereof may be disposeed to alienate, at such prices as may be
agreed upon between the respective proprietors and persons appointed by Her
Majesty to treat with them on that behellf.
“ Article the Third.—ln consideratiom thereof, Her Majesty the Queen of
England extends Her royal protection, and imparts to them all the rights and
privileges of British subjects. “ (Signed) W. Hobson.
“ Now, therefore, we, the Chiefs of tine Confederation of the United Tribes
of New Zealand, being assembled in Clongress, at Victoria, in Waitangi, and
we, the separate and independent Chiefs of New Zealand, claiming authority
over the Tribes and territories which aire specified after our respective names,
having been made fully to understand tlhe provisions of the foregoing Treaty,
accept and enter into the same in the full! spirit and meaning thereof.
“ In witness whereof, we have attached our signatures or marks, at the places
and dates respectively specified.
“Done at Waitangi, this 6th day off February, in the year of our Lord
1840. “ (512 Signatures.)”


New Zealand in the English language, and with a view to their having
access to the stores of English Literature, and also to their becoming more
efficient Teachers of their countrymen in Religion and Civilization.” The
acknowledged utility of this Institution may be inferred from the fact,
that His Excellency Governor Grey is a liberal subscriber to its support.
The success which has attended the experiment is indeed such as to
encourage greatly-increased efforts in this Department of usefulness.
Such a Mission, it will at once be seen by your Lordship, must neces-
sarily exert great influence upon a large proportion of the Native popu-
lation ; and that influence has been highly beneficial in humanizing the
Natives, suppressing and preventing Native wars, and promoting the
peaceful arts of civilized life, as the testimony of many impartial and
independent witnesses has satisfactorily shewn. The Missionary in
New Zealand, in fact, prepared the way of the Colonizer. Previous to
the commencement of the Missions of the Church-of-England and
Wesleyan Missionary Societies, New Zealand was the dread of mariners,
who justly apprehended that, should they be cast upon its inhospitable
shores, they would become the feast of Cannibals. It was not until
Missionary teaching had exerted a powerful ameliorating influence upon
the Native character, that New Zealand was included in the schemes of
European Colonization.
2. It may be further premised, thiat the. Missionaries of the Wesleyan
Society, as well as those of the Chmrch-of-England Society, in compli-
ance with the wishes of the Represemtative of the British Crown, Captain
Hobson, took a prominent part in thee settlement of the Treaty of Waitangi,
and pledged themselves to the Natiwes under their care, that the plighted
faith of the British Government wass a sufficient guarantee for the strict
performance of that Treaty in its provisions relating to the soil.
These considerations, it is hoped by the Committee, will be deemed
by your Lordship a sufficient apology for their interference with a question
which might, at first sight, appear to be foreign to the proper business of
a Society whose principal and leading object is the diffusion of Chris-
tianity and its attendant blessings.
The solicitude which the Wesleyam Committee feel upon the subject,
if not produced, has been greatly increased, by Letters recently received
from the Missionaries under their direction! in New Zealand, strongly
expressing the state of alarm into which they had been thrown by the
publication, in that country, of your; Lordship’s Despatch to His Excel-
lency Governor Grey, under date of 23rd December, 184 6. Regarding
that Despatch, in connexion with tlhe “ Instructions accompanying the
Charter” published at the same time, as affixing a meaning to the Treaty of
Waitangi, very different from that in which it was understood by the
parties principally concerned in its; execution ; and, apprehensive that
were it to be attempted to carry what they regard as a new interpretation
of the Treaty into effect, the most disastrous consequences would inevitably


ensue, they earnestly entreat the Committee to make such representations
upon the subject, in the proper quarter, as may tend to prevent the actual
occurrence of the evils which they fear.
In taking the Letters of the Missionaries into their most anxious con-
sideration, and carefully examining your Lordship’s Despatch and the
instructions accompanying the Charter, in the light of your explanatory
Despatch of the 30th of November last, contained in the papers recently
presented to both Houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty, the
Committee regret to state that, in their judgment, the latter official com-
munication is not calculated very materially to allay the apprehension
excited by the former.
Your Lordship recognises anew tthe proposition that “the savage
inhabitants of New Zealand have no iright of property in land which they
do not occupy, and which has remaiined unsubdued to the purposes of
man,” as containing “ the true principle in regard to property in land ; ” a
principle which would be the best ffoundation on which to commence
colonization, and which is even now (capable of being applied to a great
extent in New Zealand.
In regard to the principle itself, tlhe Committee, with great deference
to your Lordship, remark that the judgment of the Supreme Court of the
Colony, to which your Lordship refers, however supported that judgment
may be by high legal authorities, does not enable them to reconcile the
principle in question with the great principles laid down by the Divine
Legislator, in those precepts of the Holy Scriptures which are designed
to regulate the dealings of men with their fellow-men. It may be that,
according to the judgment of the Supreme Court, the principle, “for
nearly Three Hundred years, has been uniformly recognized and acted
on by the consents of civilized nations;” but the Committee nevertheless
entertain the deep conviction, that that colonization must be decidedly
wrong in principle, before the advaiwce of which the Native population
has uniformly and inevitably melted away, and many Aboriginal Tribes
and nations have perished from the face of the earth. They think that
these fatal results cannot be rationally ascribed to accidental circum-
stances, but that a viciousness of principle may be fairly suspected. Yet,
if the quotation from Dr. Arnold, given by your Lordship, were to be
admitted without great qualification, all these results, which doubtless
your Lordship, in common with all the friends of humanity, deplores,
would receive vindication. In that quotation, no exception whatever is
made in behalf of men who may remain in a barbarous state, without
subduing or cultivating the ground ; and, if it is to be supposed that that
eminent writer designed his language to be strictly understood, then
would it justify the destructive process by which barbarous Tribes are
finally swept away by the advance of colonization. The Committee
deeply regret that they are called to offer objections to views so delibe-
rately expressed by your Lordship; but, with the greatest respect for your


Lordship’s high character and distinguished ability, they must, with much
deference, state that, while they cheerfully admit the doctrine that the
earth was made for man, they at the same time believe that Aboriginal
Man was included in the bountiful provision of the Creator, as well as
civilized man, and that that principle of colonization must be essentially
unsound which, in its operation, during successive ages, has so uniformly
operated to the great injury, and, in process of time, to the final destruc-
tion, of Aboriginal Tribes and Nations.
In proceeding to remark upon your Lorship’s views on the extent to
which the principle in question is yet capable of being applied in the
Colony of New Zealand, the Committee thankfully notice that you
distinctly recognize the binding character of the Treaty of Waitangi,
and warrant the conclusion that you do not intend that any lands shall
fall under the operation of the principle which are fairly included within
the provisions of the Treaty. The whole question thus appears to turn
upon the meaning of the Treaty; and the difference between your Lord-
ship and the Committee is reduced to this, —that your Lordship evidently
calculates that a much greater quantity of land may be fairly claimed for
the Crown than could possibly be the case, in the judgment of the
Committee, were the Treaty of Wailtangi carried into effect in the sense
in which the Native Chiefs signed the Treaty, and the Wesleyan Mis-
sionary Society and its Agents bemame parties to its execution. The
Committee will, therefore, respectfuilly submit to your Lordship, with as
much brevity as possible, that intterpretation of the Treaty to which
themselves, and the Missionaries acting under their direction, stand
solemnly pledged to the Native Clhiefs and people who are under the
influence of the Society’s Mission im New Zealand.
At the commencement of the proceedings adopted by Her Majesty’s
Government for founding a Colony iin New Zealand, the Committee dis-
tinctly understood, that the previous recognition of the independence of
New Zealand by the British Government having taken that country
out of the category of barbarous Tribes and people without a national
character or national rights, the ordinary course pursued in colonization
would not be adopted in its case; tout that New Zealand would be nego-
tiated with as an independent State, and that the British Crown would
not take anything from the Aboriginal Proprietors which was not ceded
on their part by fair and honourable treaty. This view of the subject was
fully supported by the Despatches aind other official documents,presented
to the House of Commons, by the; Queen’s command, in pursuance of
an Address to Her Majesty, of the Bth April, 1840. In the instructions
furnished to Captain Hobson, on hiss appointment to the office of “ Her
Majesty’s Consul at New Zealand,”’ by the Most Honourable the Marquis
of Normanby, dated Downing-street, August 14th, 1839, his Lordship,
after adverting to various proceedings of British subjects in reference to


New Zealand, and the great advantage which might probably accrue to
this country, by its colonization, remarks :
“On the other hand, the Ministers of the Crown have been restrained
by still higher motives from engaging in such an enterprize. They have
deferred to the advice of the Committee appointed by the House of Com-
mons, in the year 1836, to inquire into the state of the Aborigines residing
in the vicinity of our Colonial Settlements ; and have concurred with that
Committee in thinking that the increase of national wealth and power,
promised by the acquisition of New Zealand, would be a most inadequate
compensation for the injury which must be inflicted on this kingdom itself,
by embarking in a measure essentially unjust, and but too certainly
fraught with calamity to a numerous and inoffensive people, whose title
to the soil and to the sovereignty of Mew Zealand is indisputable, and has
been solemnly recognized by the Brritish Government. We retain these
opinions in unimpaired force; and tlhough circumstances entirely beyond
our controul have at length corapellied us to alter our course, I do not
scruple to avow that we depart from it with extreme reluctance.”
On the question of the independence of New Zealand, his Lordship
further observes :
“I have already stated that we acknowledge New Zealand as a
sovereign and independent State, so far at least as it is possible to make
that acknowledgment in favour of a people composed of numerous, dis-
persed, and petty Tribes, who possess few political relations to each other,
and are incompetent to act, or even to deliberate, in concert. But the
admission of their rights, though inevitably qualified by this consideration,
is binding on the faith of the British Crown. The Queen, in common with
Her Majesty’s immediate predecessor, disclaims, for Herself and for Her
subjects, every pretension to seize on the Islands of New Zealand, or to
govern them as a part of the dominion of Great Britain, unless the free
and intelligent consent of the Natives, expressed according to their esta.
Wished usages, shall be first obtained!.”
His Lordship, having thus instructed Captain Hobson that his whole
proceedings were to be based upon the principle that New Zealand was
recognized by the British Government as an independent State, then points
out the objects which he is to endeavour to attain. The first was the
cession of sovereignty by the Natives, concerning which it is remarked:—
“ Believing, however, that their own welfare would, under the circum-
stances I have mentioned, be best promoted by the surrender to Her
Majesty of a right so precarious, and little more than nominal, and, per-
suaded that the benefits of British protection, and of laws administered by
British Judges, would far more than compensate for the sacrifice, by the
Natives, of a national independence which they are no longer able to
maintain, Her Majesty’s Government have resolved to authorize you to
treat with the Aborigines of New Zealand for the recognition of Her


Majesty’s sovereign authority over the whole or any parts of those Islands
which they may be willing to place under Her Majesty’s dominion. I am
not unaware of the difficulty by which such a Treaty may be encountered.
The motives by which it is recommended are, of course, open to sus-
picion. The Natives may, probably, regard with distrust a proposal,
which may carry on the face of it the appearance of humiliation on their
side, and of a formidable encroachment on ours; and their ignorance
even of the technical terms in which that proposal must be conveyed,
may enhance their aversion to an arrangement of which they may be
unable to comprehend the exact meaning, or the probable results. These,
however, are impediments to be gradually overcome by the exercise, on
your part, of mildness, justice, and perfect sincerity, in your intercourse
with them. You will, I trust, find powerful auxiliaries amongst the Mis-
sionaries, who have won and deserved their confidence, and amongst the
older British residents who have studied their character, and acquired
their language.”
The second point relates to land, in reference to which, two or three
short extracts will sufficiently explain the views of his Lordship. He
proceeds:—
“It is not, however, to the mere recognition of the sovereign autho-
rity of the Queen, that your endeavours are to be confined, or your
negotiations directed. It is further mecessary that the Chiefs should be
induced, if possible, to contract with you, as representing Her Majesty,
that henceforward no lands shall be cceded, either gratuitously or other-
wise, except to the Crown of Great Blritain
“Having, by these methods, obvhated the dangers of the acquisition
of large tracts of country by mere lamd-jobbers, it will be your duty to
obtain, by fair and equal contracts with the Natives, the cession to the
Crown of such waste lands as may be progressively required for the oc-
cupation of settlers resorting to New Zealand. All such contracts should
be made by yourself, through the intervention of an officer expressly
appointed to watch over the interests of the Aborigines as their Protector.
The re-sales of the first purchases that may be made will provide the
funds necessary for future acquisitions ; and beyond the original invest-
ment of a comparatively small sum off money, no other resource will be
necessary for this purpose. I thus assiume that the price to be paid to the
Natives by the Local Government wiill bear an exceedingly small pro-
portion to the price for which the same lands will be re-sold by the
Government to the settlers. Nor iis there any real injustice in this
inequality. To the Natives, or them - Chiefs, much of the land of the
country is of no actual use, and, in thieir hands, it possesses scarcely any
exchangeable value. Much of it musst long remain useless, even in the
hands of the British Government alsot, but its value in exchange will be
first created, and then progressively increased, by_the introduction of


capital and of settlers from this country. In the benefits of that increase
the Natives themselves will gradually participate
“ All dealings with the Aborigines for their lands must be conducted
on the same principles of sincerity, justice, and good faith, as must
govern your transactions with them for the recognition of Her Majesty’s
Sovereignty in the Islands. Nor is this all: they must not be permitted
to enter into any contracts in which they might be the ignorant and
unintentional authors of injuries to themselves. You will not, for
example, purchase from them any territory, retention of which by them
would be essential, or highly conducive to their own comfort, safety, or
subsistence. The acquisition of lamd by the Crown for the future settle-
ment of British subjects must be comfined to such districts as the Natives
can alienate, without distress or incconvenience to themselves. To secure
the observance of this, will be ome of the first duties of the official
Protector.”
On the authority of the Noblfee Marquis, then at the head of the
Colonial Department, the Committeie thus distinctly understood that New
Zealand was to be dealt with as an iundependent State; that the cession of
the sovereignty was to be obtained by treaty; that the cession of the
sovereignty was not to involve the surrender of territory, either in whole
or in part; that the cession to the Crown of such waste lands as might be
progressively required for the use of settlers, should be subsequently
obtained by fair and equal contracts with the Natives; and that no lands
were to be claimed for the Crown in New Zealand, except such as might
be obtained by purchase from the Natives, or by their own free consent.
In this interpretation of the Instructions given to Captain Hobson,
the Committee are supported by the views expressed by Captain Hobson
himself, previous to his departure, in the Letter of Inquiry which he
addressed to Mr. Labouchere, the Under-Secretary of State for the
Colonies, dated 34, Great George Street, August, 1839. His remarks
show that he clearly understood that all his proceedings with New Zealand,
at all events so far as the Northern Island was concerned, (to the Chiefs
of which “ His late Majesty’s Letter was addressed on the presentation
of their flag,”) were to be conducted on the principle that it was possessed
of a recognized national independence, and the only point on which he
required explanation, in reference to the question, was whether, if he
were urged by circumstances, he might not plant the British flag in the
Southern Island, by virtue of the right of discovery, remarking, “it is
obvious that the power of the Crown may be exercised with much
greater freedom in a country over which it possesses all the rights that
are usually assumed by first discoverers, than in an adjoining State, which
has been recognized as free and independent.” To this, it maybe added,
the Marquis of Normanby replied, on the 15th August, stating that his
Instructions relating to the independence of New Zealand, were strictly


applicable only to the N ortbern Island; and that if it were not possible
to establish British sovereignty in the Southern Island, “ by treaty,” then,
for the purpose of affording efficient protection to the Natives themselves,
it might be done “on the ground of discovery.”
On his arrival in New Zealand, Captain Hobson, in pursuance of his
Official Instructions, and under the conviction that the Natives would not
take any important step without the counsel of their Religious Teachers,
made application to the Wesleyan Missionaries, as well as those of the
Churcb-of-England Society, to use their influence with the Chiefs in
favour of the Treaty which he had prepared for ceding the sovereignty of
the country to the British Crown. His Excellency assured the Mission-
aries of the Wesleyan Society, that it was “ in accordance with Instructions
which he had received from the highest authority in the realm, ’ that he
requested their assistance in effecting the negotiation with which he was
entrusted. Feeling themselves bound by their allegiance to render all
dutiful support to the representative of their Sovereign, yet, knowing
how great bad been the solicitude of the Committee under whom they
acted to avert from the New-Zealanders the evils attendant upon coloni-
zation, as it had been generally conducted, in which solicitude themselves
had largely participated, —the Missionaries of the Wesleyan Society, never-
theless, deemed it to be their duty fully to ascertain the sense in which
Captain Hobson intended that the Treaty should be understood by the
Native Chiefs. They had not read Captain Hobson’s Instructions, for
those Instructions were not then published ; but they fully understood the
claims of the Natives upon the soil of New Zealand, and the point to be
ascertained was, whether the Treaty was designed to admit and confirm
those claims, in the full and unqualified sense in which they were made.
The Missionaries knew that the Natives claimed, as their own, the
entire soil of New Zealand. On this point, the Committee of the Church
Missionary Society, in an official document, printed by order of the
House of Commons, in 1844, made the following statement:—
“ With regard to the universal right of ownership to the land of New
Zealand being in the Natives, the testimony received by the Committee
from the Society’s Missionaries, is clear and express. The question has
repeatedly been put to them, and their answer has uniformly been, one
and all, affirmative of this proposition.” In answer to the inquiry whether
there are certain tracts of land in New Zealand which do not, of right,
belong to any Chief or Tribe, one of the Missionaries remarked, “We
have not been able to ascertain a single case of the kind.”
The evidence of the Wesleyan Missionaries is in entire accordance
with this testimony. For a great number of years, the land-question has
been continuously pressed upon their attention by a combination of cir-
cumstances ; but, in their extensive correspondence with the Committee
upon this question in all its various bearings, they have never reported a
single case of a tract of land without a Native claimant. On the contrary,


their communications all warrant the conclusion that the entire country
is divided among the several Tribes, —the boundaries of every property
being accurately defined, —and that the proprietorship is so vested in
each Tribe, according to well-understood Native usage, that all the
families and individuals of the Tribe have a beneficial interest therein.*
In this view, therefore, at the time when the Treaty of Waitangi was pro-
posed for adoption, there was not any such public property, contra-distin-
guished from the property of individuals, as could be understood to be so
connected with the sovereignty, that, on the principles of public law,
the one must naturally and necessarily be transferred with the other.
, In the view therefore of both the Natives and the Missionaries, the
sovereignty and the land were two entirely distinct things; and to preserve
the latter intact, while they surrendered the former, was the great solicitude
of the Natives. From Captain Hotuson, the Missionaries received the
most satisfactory explanation of the terms of the Treaty. The Treaty
which he had prepared dwelt explicittly on both the sovereignty and the
land, and the interpretation which tlhe Missionaries were authorized to
give of it was that, while the entire sovereignty should be transferred to
the British Crown, the entire land should be secured to the Natives.
Most certainly the Missionaries received the fullest assurance that, in
surrendering the sovereignty, the Natives would not by that act surrender
their original claims upon any part of the soil. In this sense the Chiefs
themselves also understood the Treaty, as it was propounded to them.
They clearly comprehended its two main features, as explained in their
own figurative style, that “ the shadow of the land,” by which they meant
“ the sovereignty,” would pass to the Queen of England, but that “ the sub-
stance,” the land itself, would remain with them.
Nor were the Chiefs and the Missionaries peculiar in their views of
the meaning of the Treaty. They are supported by the independent
testimony of parties who were present at Waitangi when the Treaty was
executed, some of which parties were not favourable to the Treaty itself;
as for instance Mr. Brodie, who, when the question was put to him before
the Committee of the House of Commons, 4th June, 1844, “ Do you
mean that there is no land which the Crown could take upon itself to
dispose of in New Zealand ? ” answered, “ Not without coming into con-
flict with the Natives; at the Stipulation at Waitangi, it was agreed that
the Government should not take an inch of land, unless paid for by the
Government; that was expressly mentioned by all the Chiefs, and I
believe it is mentioned in the Deed of the Treaty.”
* In a Letter received at the Mission-House, after this Memorial was prepared,
the Rev. Thomas Buddie, one of the Society’s Missionaries, writing from Auck-
land, New Zealand, July 3, 1847, remarks, in reference to lands having no Native
claimants, —
“No such lands have yet been discovered in this Island I question
mucn whether there is an acre on this Island that has no owner.”


On the question as to whether the wild lands were not to be con-
sidered as comprised in the surrender of the sovereignty, he answered,
“ I should say not. Captain Hobson mentioned, through Mr. Williams,
that they acknowledged that all the lands belonged to the Natives, and
that they did not intend to rob them of any land, or to take any, but what
they purchased from them.” Mr. Brodie further said—
“ I think that the Natives understood that they were not to be con-
sidered bound to give up any waste land; they never had any idea of that.”
Other witnesses from New Zealand testified to the same effect, before
the same Committee.
As was anticipated, the Chiefs would not enter into the Treaty,
without the advice of their Religious Instructors. The Wesleyan Chiefs
said, in effect, to their Missionaries, “We do not know the Queen of
England; but we know you, and can trust you. If you say that the
British Government speaks true about the land, we will believe you, for
we know you will not deceive us.” The Society’s Missionaries, under-
standing that the primary object of the British Government was to throw
the shield of its protection over the New Zealand people, and considering
that the measure proposed was perhaps the best, if not the only, course
left for preserving the Natives from the evils by which they were
threatened, could not hesitate to assure their people, that, when once the
faith of the British Crown was pledged,, it would be maintained inviolate.
On the strength of the assurance thus; given, the Wesleyan Chief Neni,
(more generally known by his Christian name of Thomas Walker, pro-
nounced by the Natives Tomati Wakai,) and his relative Patawoni, went
from the Hokianga to the great Native Meeting at Waitangi, and ac-
cording to Captain Hobson’s own Despatch to the Marquis of Normanby,
of the sth February, 1840, contributed very mainly to the settlement of
the question; the eloquence and influence of Neni having decidedly
turned the scale in favour of the Treaty, which was signed by the Chiefs
present on the following day. A few days afterwards, (on the 11th,)
Captain Hobson proceeded to the Wesleyan Mission at the Hokianga,
where another large Meeting was convened, at which the Rev. Mr.
Hobbs, one of the Society’s Missionaries, acted as interpreter, and
rendered into the Native language Captain Hobson’s own interpretation
of the Treaty; which then received the additional signatures of One
Hundred and Twenty principal Chiefs. The signatures of the Chiefs in
the Southern Districts of the Northern Island were shortly afterwards
obtained by Commissioners appointed for the purpose; and, at all the other
Wesleyan Stations, the Society’s Missionaries shared with their Brethren
in the North, the responsibility of encouraging their people to place
reliance upon the faith of the British Government. In conclusion of this
transaction, Lieutenant-Governor Hobson issued a Proclamation on the
21st May, in which he rested the claims of the British Crown to the
sovereignty of the Northern Island exclusively upon the Treaty which


had thus been completed.* Impelled!, as he had anticipated might be the
case, by the pressure of untoward oiircumstances, he, on the same day,
issued a second Proclamation assertiing the sovereign rights of the Queen
over the Middle and Southern Isllands, principally on the ground of
discovery; but afterwards, when thee Chiefs of the principal Bays and
Harbours of the Middle Island had also signed the Treaty of Waitangi,
Major Bunbury, who had been comtmissioned to execute this task, issued
another Proclamation on the 17th Jume, on the ground that the sovereignty
had been ceded by the principal Nattive Chiefs.t
Hie following is a Copy of the Proclaamation as given at page 18, in “ Copies
or Extracts of Correspondence relative tto New Zealand, &c., ordered by the
House of Commons to he printed, 11th MVlay, 1841.
“ proclamation.
“In the Name of Her Majesty Victoria, Queen of the United Kingdom of
Grea Britain and Ireland. By William, Hobson, Esquire, a Captain in the
Koyal Navy, Lieutenant-Governor of Mew Zealand.
“Whereas by a Treaty bearing datte the sth day of February, made and
executed by me, William Hobson, a Captain in the Royal Navy, Consul and
Lieutenant-Governor in New Zealand, vested for this purpose with full powers
nf y. of die one part, and the Chiefs of the Confederation
°r at Tribes of New Zealand, and the separate and independent Chiefs
Z T and i not Members of the Confederation, of the other, and further
ratified and confirmed by the adherence of the principal Chiefs of this Island of
New Zealand, commonly called‘The Northern Island,’ all rights and powers
of sovereignty over the said Northern Island were ceded to Her Majesty the
Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, absolutely and without reservation
Now, therefore, I William Hobson, Lieutenant-Governor of New Zealand
m the name and on the behalf of Her Majesty, do hereby proclaim and declare
to all men, that from and after the date of the above-mentioned Treaty, the full
sovereignty of the Northern Island of New Zealand vests in Her Majesty
Queen Victoria, Her heirs and successors, for ever. 1
‘‘Given under my hand at Government-House, Russell, Bay of Islands, this
21st day of May, in the year of our Lord 1840.
“(Signed) William Hobson,
~ , “ Lieutenant-Governor.
By His Excellency’s command,
“(.Signed) Willoughby Shortland,
“ Colonial Secretary.”
f Official announcement of this Proclamation is contained in the following
Despatches, copied from the above-mentioned Parliamentary papers, “printed
11th May, 1841,” page 59.
“ Copy of a Despatch from Governor Sir George Gipps to Lord John Russell.
“Government-House, Sydney, 24th July, 1840.
r“ MY Lord,—With reference to my Dispatch of the 15th June last, in which
I reported that Her Majesty’s ship ‘ Herald,’ having on board Major Bunbury,
had sailed from the Bay of Islands, for the purpose of procuring the acknowledg-
ment of Her Majesty s authority from the Chiefs in the southern parts of New
Zealand, I have the honour to inform your Lordship, that the ‘ Herald’ returned
o y ney this day, and that the duty on which Major Bunbury was dispatched
by Lieutenant-Governor Hobson, appears to have been very satisfactorily per
Every point of importance on the eastern coast of New Zealand was
visited by the Herald, as far as the southern point of the Southern, or Stewart’s


“ In the views which the Committee have thus expressed respecting
the meaning of the Treaty of Waitangi, they have been confirmed by the
published Despatches and official acts of the several successors of the
Marquis of Normanby in the Colonial department. The Instructions
addressed to Governor Hobson, on the 9th December 1840, by the Right
Honourable Lord John Russell, as to the measures to be pursued for the
protection and improvement of the New Zealanders, who had then by
Island, and Her Majesty’s authority established, either by the acknowledgment
of the Chiefs, or (in the Middle and Southern Islands) by declaration on the
right of discovery.
“The ‘Herald’ afterwards visited Port Nicholson, where everything was
perfectly quiet; the agent of the Company having made full submission to Mr.
Shortland, the magistrate who had been sent to Port Nicholson by Lieutenant-
Governor Hobson. The ‘ Herald’ touched at the Bay of Islands, on her return
from Port Nicholson, and landed Major Banbury.
“ I enclose herewith, a copy of a Letter addressed by Major Bunbury to my
private secretary, which will explain to your Lordship why I am unable by the
present opportunity to forward any official account of his proceedings.
“One of the places visited by the ‘Herald’ was Banks’ Peninsula, the spot at
which it has been said that a settlement is about to be made by a company
formed in France: of this company, however, or of any of its proceedings, I
know nothing save what I have derived from English newspapers. The French
discovery ships ‘Astrolabe’ and ‘Zellee’ had been at Banks’ Peninsula,but made
no indications of forming a settlememt there.
“ 1 have, &c.
“ (Signed) Geo. Gipps.
“ Russell, Ath July, 1840.
“Dear Sik, —You will obliges me by acquainting His Excellency the
Governor with my return from the mission I had undertaken at the request of
Captain Hobson, R.N., Lieutenant-Governor of New Zealand, to the Native
Chiefs and Tribes on the Eastern coast.
“ Captain Hobson being absent at present on a tour of duty, I feel a delicacy
in entering into the details of the circumstances attending my visits officially ;
it may, however, interest Sir George to know, that I visited the harbours of
Coromandel, Mercury Bay, Towranga, Akaroa, Hawke’s Bay, Cloudy Bay, Port
Nicholson, Robuka Island (Foveaux’s Straits,) the Islands ol Capiti and Mana,
Ortago, and Southern Port (Stewart’s Island.) From all these places I obtained
the necessary signatures, excepting in one or two places, where my mission had
been anticipated by other gentlemen sent by Captian Hobson.
“At Southern Port (Steward’s Island,) and at Cloudy Bay (Middle Island,)
Captain Nias and myself, judging it would be for the best interests of the
Natives, as well as European Settlers, that further delay should not take place, we
proclaimed the Queen’s authority with the usual ceremonies, at the former place,
on the sth of June, where we did not meet with Natives, by right of discovery;
and at the latter on the 17th of June, from the sovereignty having been ceded
by the principal Native Chiefs.
“At Port Nicholson I learnt that Captain Hobson had also taken a similar
view of the subject, by proclaiming the Queen’s authority. Here we met with
Mr. Shortland, and a Subaltern’s party from my detachment, who had been
sent by the Lieutenant-Governor. The place appeared tranquil, and well
supplied with provisions ; and Mr. Shortland, as well as the troops, had been,
I understand, well received on their landing, by the inhabitants.
“Yours, &c.,
“(Signed) Thomas Bunbury,
“ H. Parker, Esq., &c.” “Major 80th Regiment.”


their own act become subjects of the British Crown, —warranted the
conclusion that his Lordship designed that the Treaty of Waitangi should
be faithfully observed, in the sense in which it was understood by the
Natives, and the Missionaries of both the Church and Wesleyan Societies.
His Lordship distinctly recognized the Treaty as the ground on which
the title of the British Crown to the sovereignty of New Zealand exclu-
sively rests; while his reasoning on the advances which the Natives had
made towards a civilized state, and their instruction in the Chriatian
faith, furnished a vindication of the previous recognition of the inde-
pendence of New Zealand by the British Government.
“ Amongst the many barbarous Tribes,” observed his Lordship, “ with
which our extended Colonial Empire brings us into contact in different
parts of the globe, there are none whose claims to the protection of the
British Crown rest on grounds stronger than those of the New-Zealanders.
They are not mere wanderers over an extended surface, in search of a
precarious subsistence; nor Tribes of hunters, or of herdsmen; but a people
among whom the arts of government have made some progress; who
have established by their own customs a division and appropriation of the
soil; who are not without some measure of agricultural skill, and a certain
subordination of ranks ; with usages having the character and authority
of law. In addition to this, they have been formerly recognized by Great
Britain as an independent State; and even in assuming the dominion of
the country, this principle was acknowledged, for it is on the deliberate
act and cession of the Chiefs, on behalf of the people at large, that our
title rests. Nor should it ever be forgotten, that large bodies of the New-
Zealanders have been instructed, by the zeal of our Missionaries, in the
Christian faith. It is, however, impossible to cast the eye over the map
of the globe, and to discover a single spot where civilized men, brought
into contact with Tribes differing from themselves widely in physical
structure, and greatly inferior to themselves in military prowess and social
arts, have abstained from oppressions and other evil practices. In many,
the process of extermination has proceeded with appalling rapidity. Even
in the absence of positive injustice, the mere contiguity and intercourse of
the two races, would appear to induce many moral and physical evils,
fatal to the health and life of the feebler party. And it must be confessed
that, after every explanation which can be found of the rapid disappearance
of the Aboriginal Tribes in the neighbourhood of European Settlements,
there remains much which is obscure, and of which no well-ascertained
facts afford the complete solution. Be the causes, however, of this so-
frequent calamity what they may, it is our duty to leave no rational
experiment for the prevention of it unattempted. Indeed, the dread of
exposing any part of the human race to a danger so formidable, has been
shewn by the Marquis of Normanby, in his original Instructions to
you, to have been the motive which dissuaded the occupation of New
Zealand by the British Government, until the irresistible course of events


had rendered the establishment of a legitimate authority there indis-
pensable.
“ Amongst the practical measures which you can adopt or encourage,
for the protection of the Aborigines, the most important are,—the support
of the Missions and the Missionaries established for their conversion to
the Christian faith, and for their instruction as Christians; the assigning
officers charged with the duty, and, as far as may be, provided with the
means, of protecting them in the enjoyment of their persons and their
property; the enactment and enforcement of such laws as can be devised
for preventing and punishing any wrongs, to which their persons or their
property may be exposed; and the encouragement of the education of
their youth.”
Stress has been laid upon the fact that, in the Charter for erecting
New Zealand into a separate and independent Colony, which, by the
advice of Lord John Russell, passed the Great Seal in December, 1840,
and in the Instructionsaccompanyingit, “ occupation ” and “ enjoyment ”
are mentioned as alone establishing the right of the Natives in property;
but, without entering into any disquisition on the meaning to be attached
to these terms, it may be remarked, that, in whatever sense it was meant
that the rule thus laid down should apply to the Middle and Southern
Islands, the Committee were not abde, from Lord John Russell’s admin-
istration as Colonial Secretary, to gather any reason for concluding that
his Lordship intended that that rulle should be made applicable to the
Northern Island, in opposition to thie understood meaning of the Treaty of
Waitangi.
The consideration that the Riglht Honourable Lord Stanley belonged
to another Ministry, and was therefore in a position for forming an entirely
unbiassed and independent opinion on the Treaty of Waitangi, tended
greatly to strengthen the conclusions of the Committee as to the inter-
pretation of that Treaty which they had been led to adopt. In a dispatch
to Governor Fitzroy, August 13, 1844, his Lordship, while commenting
on the Report of the New-Zealand Committee of the House of Commons,
just presented to the House, having dwelt upon the superior claims of
the New-Zealanders as compared with other uncivilized nations, then
adverted to the views which he had formerly expressed to his Excellency
in reference to the extent of the Native rights, and remarked—
“To restrict those rights to lands actually occupied for cultivation,
appeared to me wholly irreconcilable with the large words of the Treaty
of Waitangi— ‘ Lands and estates, forests, fisheries, and other properties
which they may collectively or individually possess,’ and of * which the
full, exclusive, and undisturbed possession is thereby confirmed and
guaranteed to them.’ The claim of the Crown to all unoccupied land,
to the exclusion of the Natives, appeared to me not less at variance with
the directions of the Marquis of Normanby to Captain Hobson, 1 to obtain,
by fair and equal contract with the Natives, the cession to the Crown of


such waste lands as may be progressively required for the occupation of
Settlers, and to apply the proceeds of the ‘ re-sales of the first purchases ’
to the provision of funds necessary for future similar acquisitions. It
must be remembered, that these directions had not only been promulgated
but acted upon in the Colony at an early period after the sovereignty had
been assumed.
“Lastly, it appeared to me inconsistent with the practice of these
Tribes, who, after cultivating, and of course exhausting, a given spot for
a series of years, desert it for another within the limits of the recognized
property of the Tribe.”
This liberal view of the Treaty of Waitangi, adopted by Lord Stanley
fiom the consideration of the terms ot the Treaty itself, in connection
with the Despatches of his noble predecessor, was invariably maintained
by his Lordship in practice. Although he had supposed that there might
be found some lands in New Zealand without a Native claimant, yet his
management of the affairs of New Zealland, throughout the whole period
of his remaining in office, strengthened the Committee’s opinion, that
that meaning of the Treaty of Waitamgi to which the Missionaries had
pledged themselves, was the correct interpretation.
The decided views of the Bight Honourable William Gladstone,
Lord Stanley’s successor, in favour off the widest interpretation of the
Ireaty of Waitangi, are so well known as not to require any comment.
If the meaning which the Committee have been led to attach to that
Treaty is thus sustained by the concurrent judgment of those distin-
guished individuals who have been successively at the head of the Colo-
nial Department, that meaning is further confirmed by those to whom
has been entrusted the local administration of the affairs of the Colony of
New Zealand. The interpretation of the Treaty to which the late
Governor Fitzroy adhered, it is sufficiently understood, was in unison
with that of the heads of the Colonial Office, and therefore need not be
enlaiged upon; but it is deemed important to cite the testimony of his pre-
decessor, Mr. Willoughby Shortland, who became Acting-Governor after
the decease of Governor Hobson. From the official relation in which
he stood to Governor Hobson, at the time when the Treaty of Waitangi
was adopted, he must be regarded, not merely as the exponent of his own
views, but also as a competent expositor of the Treaty in the sense in
which Captain Hobson proposed it, and afterwards practically admitted
its obligation. In a letter addressed to Lord Stanley, after his return to
England, dated lorquay, 18th January, 1845, he comments upon the
Beport of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, of the pre-
ceding Session of 1844, and, adverting to the opinion expressed in the
Beport, that the Treaty of Waitangi amounted to little more “than a
legal fiction ; that the sovereignty of those Islands might have been at
once assumed without this mere nominal Treaty; and that there would
have been no greater difficulty in obtaining the acquiescence in the


assumption of the sovereignty, than in gaining their consent to the con-
clusion of the Treaty,” expresses himself to the following effect;
ii A careful perusal of the Treaty, and of the various documents laid
before the Select Committee, would not, I must confess, lead me to similar
conclusions ; but I will speak from my personal experience. I was
present at the several Meetings of the Natives at Waitangi, Hokianga, and
Kaitaia, for the purpose of considering the Treaty; and the impression
on my mind at the time was, that the subject was fully understood by
them, and they were quite aware of the nature of the transaction in which
they were engaged. I was so impressed with this idea, and so struck with
the shrewdness and intelligence of many of their remarks, at the first
Meeting at Waitangi, that, at the subsequent ones, I noted down the
speeches of the Chiefs, copies of which I have the honour to enclose,
as they will serve to show to your Lordship, not only that the Natives
understood the Treaty, but that they were peculiarly sensitive with regard
to every question affecting their lands.
“ Respecting the cession of the sovereignty to the Crown by the Abo-
rigines, without a reciprocal guarantee to them of the perfect enjoyment
of their territorial rights, I do not hesitate to say, such a proposition
would not for a moment have been entertained by the Natives, who,
during the whole of the proceedings of the Government at the first
establishment of the Colony, manifested a feeling of great anxiety and
mistrust in regard to the security of their lands. Of this I could produce
many instances, did space permit, but 'will content myself with noticing
that the Church and Wesleyan Missionaries, possessing, as they deservedly
did, before the assumption of the sovereignty by Her Majesty, the unlim-
ited confidence of the Natives, incurred by their aiding the local Govern-
ment to effect the peaceable establishment of the Colony, the suspicion
of the Aborigines, who frequently upbraided the Missionaries with having
deceived them, saying ‘Your Queen will serve us as she has done the
black fellows of New South Wales; our lands will be taken from us, and
we shall become slaves.’ How, therefore, could the Colony have been
founded with the free and intelligent consent of the Native Owners of the
soil, on any other terms than those laid down by the Ireaty of W aitangi,
viewed in the light in which it has always been understood and acted on
by the local Government?”
If considerable space has thus been occupied in showing the sub-
stantial agreement between the Wesleyan Missionary Committee s inter-
pretation of the Treaty of Waitangi, and the views of the successive
heads of the Colonial Department on the one hand, and of those to whom
the local administration of the Government of New Zealand has been
successively committed, on the other, as well as with the reluctant testi-
mony of witnesses unfriendly to the Treaty itself, it is because the
Committee consider that, in respectfully pressing upon your Lordship a
wider interpretation of the Treaty than you have hitherto apparently


admitted, it was due to your Lordship to state what appear to the Com*
mittee cogent reasons for its adoption ; because, moreover, the Committee
judge they owe it to themselves to show that they have not pledged the
character of the Society with the direction of whose Missions they are
entrusted to the interpretation in question, on light and insufficient
grounds; and also for the reason that such a full and explicit explanation
is necessary to unfold the true cause of that alarm into which the Natives
and Society’s Missionaries, in common with others, have been thrown
by the publication of Your Lordship’s Instructions in New Zealand.
The fact is simply this, that they discover a real discrepancy between
your Lordship’s Instructions and the true interpretation of the Treaty of
Waitangi. That wide interpretation of the Treaty, which is now sub-
mitted to your Lordship by the Wesleyan Committee, may be said to
prevail universally in New Zealand. No class of objections which are
urged in some quarters against th® Treaty, no force of reasoning as to
what ought to be its meaning, in any degree affects the matter-of-fact
questions as to the sense in whidh the Treaty was actually agreed to.
The Missionaries, after all that can be said on such points, retain the
most perfect conviction that, when they counselled the Natives to sign
the Treaty, it was on the explicit assurance of the Representative of the
British Crown that, while the entire sovereignty should be ceded by the
Natives, they should at the same time retain in their rightful possession
the entire soil; and the Natives, on their part, are prepared to maintain,
at all hazards, that that was the only sense in which the Treaty received
their assent.
The Missionaries and their friends in New Zealand thus reason upon
the subject.-—They argue that, although contrary to Earl Grey’s intention
and wish that such should be the result, the effect of his Despatch, and
the Instructions accompanying the Charter which his Despatch was
intended to explain, if applied according to their obvious and literal
meaning, would most extensively violate the Treaty of Waitangi. The
Instructions evidently provide that, contrary to the Treaty, some claimed
lands may be taken from the Natives without their own free consent. If
the Instructions did not contemplate this, they were unnecessary ; for all
unclaimed lands in the Middle and Southern Islands, and also any lands
without Native claimants, even in the Northern Island, —if any such
could actually be found there, —would, as a matter of course, fall to the
Crown; but, if it was designed that, according to the provisions of the
Thirteenth Chapter of the Instructions, no Native claims upon land should
be admitted by the Colonial “ Land Courts” except in cases where benefit
is derived from the land “ by means of labour expended thereupon,” the
inevitable consequence would be that large tracts of land would be seized
for the Crown, in violation of the Treaty of Waitangi; for that Treaty
most unquestionably was designed to guarantee to the Natives the undis-
turbed possession, not merely of the lands upon which they had actually


expended labour, but of all the land which was theirs by native law and
custom, —in fact, the entire soil of the Island.
It becomes the duty of the Committee to inform your Lordship,
without disguise, that the Missionaries of the Society apprehend the most
fatal results from the strict enforcement of those Instructions. It is cor-
rectly stated by the late Acting-Governor Mr. Shortland, in the Extract
previously quoted from his Letter, that, in the progress of events since the
Treaty of Waitangi, the suspicions of the Natives have, at times, been
aroused respecting the intentions of the Government on what is to them,
the all-absorbing question of the land; and that some have been disposed
to fear that the Missionaries had deceived them, and had sent for their
countrymen to take possession of the country. But, if the Instruc-
tions should be brought into actual operation, those occasional suspicions
of the Native mind, it is apprehended, would give way to a thorough
persuasion that the Missionaries had abused their confidence. The influ-
ence of the Missionaries would thus be lost; their beneficial labours
■would be interrupted; and the very existence of the entire Mission
would be placed in jeopardy. In a formal document recently received
by the Committee, the whole body of Wesleyan Missionaries, and some
other principal Agents of the Society, thus give expression to their fears
respecting the consequences :
“ From our knowledge of the Native character and the circumstances of
this country, we believe those consequences would be, —the regarding of
their Christian Teachers as false men and deceivers; the abandonment
of the Christian faith ; the throwing off all the restraints of the Christian
religion; the resumption of the ferocity of the savage ; the alienation of
our loyal Natives; the strengthening of the hands of rebels ; a combina-
tion of all the tribes to resist what they would regard as an unrighteous
encroachment; the spread of war and murder, through the length and
breadth of the land; the breaking up of our Mission-establishments; the
destruction of every British Settlement in the Colony; the jeoparding of
the lives of thousands of our fellow-countrymen ; and (as British power
must ultimately prevail) the utter annihilation of the noble race of New-
Zealanders.”
These, it is admitted by the Committee, are strong views ; but they
are the views of sober-minded, considerate men, intimately acquainted
with the Native character, and with the modes of thinking and principles
of action by which it is formed and developed; men, several of whom
have spent the best part of their lives in the country, were acquainted
with the Natives in their wildest and most savage state, and have expe-
rienced the difficulties connected with the work of their enlightenment
and incipient civilization.
The Committee are led to attach greater importance to this expression
of alarm on the part of the Missionaries, by the perusal of Governor
Grey’s Despatch to your Lordship of the 7th of April last. In that


Despatch, his Excellency, having reported the arrangements which he had
concluded “ for the settlement of the land-questions in the Districts of
Porirua and in the Middle Island,” thus remarks; —
“ I should also observe that the position I understand to be adopted
by the New Zealand Company’s Agent,—that if tracts of land are not
in actual occupation and cultivation by Natives, that we have therefore
a right to take possession of them; appears to me to require one important
limitation. The Natives do not support themselves solely by cultivation,
but from fern-root, from fishing, from eel-ponds, from taking ducks,
from hunting wild pigs, for which they require extensive runs, and by
such like pursuits. To deprive them of their wild lands, and to limit
them to lands for the purpose of cultivation, is in fact to cut off from
them some of their most important means of subsistence ; and they cannot
be readily and abruptly forced into becoming a solely agricultural people.
Such an attempt would be unjust, and it must, for the present, fail because
the Natives would not submit to it; indeed, they could not do so, for they
are not yet, to a sufficient extent, provided even with the most simple
agricultural implements; nor have they been instructed in the use of
these. To attempt to force suddenly such a system upon them, must
plunge the country again into distress and war; and there seems to be no
sufficient reason why such an attempt should be made, as the Natives are
now generally very willing to sell to the Government their waste lands at
a price which, whilst it bears no proportion to the amount for which the
Government can re-sell the land, affords the Natives, (if paid under a
judicious system,) the means of rendering their position permanently far
more comfortable than it was previously, when they had the use of their
waste lands, and thus renders them a useful and contented class of
citizens, and one which will yearly become more attached to the Govern-
ment.
“lam satisfied that to have taken the waste lands I have now purchased,
by any other means than those I have adopted, would once more have
plunged the country into an expensive war, which, from its supposed
injustice, would have roused the sympathies of a large portion of the
Native population against the British Government, and would thus
probably have retarded for many years the settlement and civilization of
the country.”
The Wesleyan Committee are not able to distinguish any material
difference between the principle of obtaining land from the Natives
which is declared by his Excellency to be inapplicable, without great
modification, to New Zealand, and that contained in your Lordship's
Instructions which shortly afterwards arrived in the Colony; and they
are led to conclude that, if such very serious consequences would have
resulted, in the judgment of His Excellency, from the enforcement of
that principle in two cases, only one of which, it is moreover to be
remarked, was in the Northern Island, the views expressed by the


Missionaries as to the probable ruin which would ensue, were the Land-
Courts to adopt that principle for the general rule of their proceeding,
cannot fairly be charged with extravagance.
In reporting again to your Lordship, on the 11th May following, that
the outbreak at Wanganui had, as he hoped, been subdued, Governor
Grey gives renewed expression to his apprehension of the consequences
which would result from improper treatment of the Natives.
“ These proceedings at Wanganui,” he remarks, “ clearly show how
much the settlers are still dependant upon the Natives, and how essential
it is, that nothing should be done which, by alienating from us the affec-
tions of the great mass of the Native population, should drive them all
into actual rebellion.”
And, two days afterwards, in his Despatch of the 13th May, in recom-
mending to your Lordship such modifications of the Charter as would
conciliate the Natives by the recognition of their representative rights,
he adverts again to the same subject, and says,—“ I think, that if nothing
occurs now to alarm the Natives, after two or three more years of peace
and tranquillity, the Colony may be regarded as quite safe, and the lives
and property of the settlers would be in a state of complete security ;
whilst, on the other hand, I cannot but view with the greatest alarm and
anxiety, the possibility of the frequent and extended recurrence of such
scenes as that which recently took place at Wanganui.”
These Extracts are sufficient to show that the Missionaries of the
Society are not peculiar in the apprehension which they express, that
the effect of throwing the Natives generally into a state of exasperation,
by awakening within them a sense of public wrong, would not merely be
the ruin of the Society's Mission, but the desolation, if not final subver-
sion, of the Colony itself.
In deprecating suchapainful catastrophe, the Wesleyan Committee,and
the Missionaries under their direction, are actuated purely by philan-
thropic motives. They have no party-purposes to serve; no sinister
ends to accomplish.
The Wesleyan Missionaries in New Zealand are not allowed to hold,
nor do they in fact hold, any land for their own private use. In the
course of nearly thirty years, only one of the Missionaries has broken
the Society’s Standing by purchasing land and engaging in
commerce; and he was dismissed from the service of the Society. The
Wesleyan Missionaries, it may moreover be remarked, have only a mode-
rate fixed salary, and that does not depend upon their continuance in
New Zealand. They would be allowed the same salary at any other
Mission to which they might be removed.
Neither does the Wesleyan Society hold any land as public property
in New Zealand, except such small portions as are necessary for Mis-
sionary purposes; and these small portions are not held for the purpose
of any kind of emolument or gain, but solely for the sake of furnishing


facilities for the Missionary operations which have for their object the
benefit of the Natives themselves. So far from deriving any pecuniary
or commercial advantages from those plots of ground, since the com-
mencement of the Mission in New Zealand, the Wesleyan Society has
expended, in the work of instructing and elevating its interesting aborigi-
nal inhabitants, upwards of eighty thousand pounds, raised by voluntary
contributions, chiefly in this country.
In pleading for the maintenance of the Treaty of Waitangi, in its wider
interpretation, neither are the Committee influenced by any feeling of
Opposition to the rights and interests of the colonists. Although opposed
to those private schemes of colonization which were contemplated in the
first instance, when, at length, the British Government decided on taking
the work of colonization in New Zealand into its own hands; from that
period the Committee have used theiir measure of influence in promoting
the welfare of both races of Her Maajesty’s subjects in the Colony; and
they can confidently appeal to all! candid and competent witnesses
whether the Society’s Missionaries,, while watching over their Native
charge, have not assiduously endeavroured to shield their own country-
men from violence and wrong, and promote a kindly feeling among the
Natives in their behalf. In proof of the beneficial influence which their
Ministerial labours among the Natives under their care, has exerted upon
the general interests of the Colony,—the loyalty evinced by them in the
troubles which have agitated the Colony, may be triumphantly adduced.
The noble-minded Wesleyan Chief, Thomas Walker Neni, whose influence,
it has been seen, decided the meeting at Waitangi;—afterwards, at the
head of his faithful followers, hazarded his life in support of the British
Government during the war with Heke and his adherents. From his
continued stedfast attachment to the British cause, the Governor honours
him, in one of his recent Despatches, with the designation of “Our most
faithful Aliy; ” and the latest papers laid before the House of Commons,
on the 3rd of the present month, contain abundant evidence that this
distinguished man was rendering very essential service, in endeavouring
to allay the alarm which had been excited by the publication of your
Lordship’s Instructions. He had accompanied Captain Sotheby, who
was sent to assure the Chiefs in the North that their land would not be
taken from them without their own will and consent; and Captain
Sotheby reports that all the Chiefs were much pleased with the visit of
Neni Waka, (Thomas Walker Neni,) adding, “ his presence at this time
I consider has been of much importance.” To all his brother Chiefs
who were applying to him, from time to time, for information as to the
intentions of the Governnment, the Despatches show that he confidently
encouraged them to confide in the Government for the faithful ob-
servance of the Treaty of Waitangi; and, on one occasion, the Wesleyan
Missionary Hobbs, —who, it has been seen, acted as interpreter at the
second great meeting at Hokianga, when that Treaty was signed by One


Hundred and Twenty Chiefs, —is mentioned as uniting with Tomati
Waka, (Thomas Walker Neni,) in allaying the apprehension which had
been produced upon the minds of Kawiti and his people upon the same
subject. The Committee respectfully submit that the loyal attachment
to the Government evinced by the great body of the Wesleyan Natives,
ever since they became British subjects by their voluntary acceptance
of that Treaty which they regard as the pledge of their loyalty, as well as the
Charter of their rights, —is no mean evidence of the beneficial tendency
of the influence and teaching of the Society’s Missionaries.
The Committee repeat that the deep interest which they evince for
the safety of the Wesleyan Mission in New Zealand merely results from
motives of Christian philanthropy and patriotism. They are convinced
that the interests of the Mission are, in this case, identified with the
interests of the Colony, and that the calamity which threatens the one
must also involve the other. They contemplate, with the most painful
feelings, the possible ruin of a noble work of mercy, in which the Wes-
leyan Society has been engaged for more than a quarter of a century,
—the work of elevating a barbarous race to the enjoyment of the blessings
of Christianity and civilized life; and, looking at the decided impulse
which, as Governor Grey reports, has now been given to civilization,
perusing his account of the rapid increase of Native shipping, of the
results of Native industry in the making of roads, cultivation of the
ground, and various productions of the useful arts, —they recoil at the
thought that all this work of promise may possibly soon be undone, the
reign of savagisra again return, and the Colony itself be crushed beneath
its sway.
Convinced that such a result would be equally deprecated by your
Lordship, and persuaded moreover, from the tenour of your Despatches
that it is your intention that the Treaty of Waitangi should be honourably
observed, the Committee most respectfully intreat your Lordship to fur-
nish such further explanation as will explicitly direct the Local Courts
so to interpret the Thirteenth Chapter of the Instructions, “ On the Settle-
ment of the Waste Lands of the Crown,” that no part of the land
belonging to the Natives by their own laws and customs, —although it
may be in an uncultivated slate, —shall be alienated without their own
free consent. Were not this to be done, great cause of apprehension
would still remain. It is most obvious from the recent Parliamentary
Papers, that, if the excitement produced among the Natives by your
Lordship’s Despatch and Instructions has been considerably allayed by
the assurance that their land will not be taken from them, they understand
that assurance in the sense that the Treaty of Waitangi respecting their
lands will be faithfully observed; and, should the Instructions in the
Thirteenth Chapter remain without modification, the Land-Courts may,
ere long, adopt the stricter interpretation of the terms employed, and
proceed to take away uncultivated lands from the Natives, as waste lands,


notwithstanding the validity of the titles by which the Native Owners
have hitherto held them, according to their own laws and customs. And
should this take place, and the conviction, in consequence, seize hold
upon the Native mind, that even the plighted faith of the British Crown
is not a sufficient guarantee for the faithful observance of the most
solemn contract; then is there good reason to conclude, that the painful
fears expressed by the Society s IMissionaries would, to a great extent,
shortly be realized.
Encouraged by the consideration that your Lordship has already
evinced so much regard for the representative rights of the Natives, as
to submit to Parliament a measure for suspending that part of the
Charter by which those rights were affected, the Committee indulge the
earnest hope that, in this respect alsoi, you will take the requisite measures
for securing the practical recognition! of their Native titles to the land,
according to the Treaty of Waitangii, in the only sense which they will
ever be induced to admit.
Trusting that your Lordship will Ibe pleased to accept the assurance
that, whatever may be the strength otf any expressions used in this com-
munication, whatever earnestness may appear in any of the arguments
employed, nothing is intended by the Committee contrary to that feeling
of great respect which your Lordship’s high character justly claims,
We have the honour to remain, in the name and behalf of the Wes-
leyan Missionary Committee,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s
Most obedient
And humble Servants,
(Signed) T homas Farmer, i „
JOhs Scott, y Treasurers ,
Jabez Bunting, \
John Beecham, I
R. Alder, /■ Secretaries.
Elijah Hoole, J
Copy of a Letter from Mr. Under-Secretary Merivale to the Rev.
Dr. Beecham.
Downing Street , 13 th April, 1348.
Srn,—l am directed by Earl Grey to acknowledge your Letter of
2 4th February, 1848, together with the Memorial of the AVosloyan
Missionary Committee, bearing date of the preceding day, which accom-
panied it. His Lordship has given to the contents of that Memorial his
earnest attention. He has felt this to be due, not only to the importance


of the document, but to the character of the Body from which he has
received it. He fully recognizes the claims which that Body possesses upon
her Majesty’s Government in relation to New Zealand, from the important
duties which were cast upon its Missionaries, on the occasion of those
negotiations with the Natives, on which the present settlement of the
Islands is based : from the fact on which the Committee justly lay stress—
that their Missionaries stand in the position of disinterested and impartial
witnesses, owing to their abstinence from dealings in land with the
Natives; and more than all, from their meritorious and successful exer-
tions in reclaiming New Zealand from Heathenism, and disseminating
among its people the principles of Civil as well as Religious Instruction.
And it is in deference to such claims as these, that his Lordship proposes
on the present occasion, to enter a little more fully into the past and
present policy of the Government, in the New Zealand land-question,
than is, perhaps, absolutely required by the Memorialists themselves.
I am directed, in the first place, to assure you that the Committee do
Her Majesty’s Government no more than justice, in believing that they
intend, and always have intended, to recognize the Treaty of Waitangi.
They recognize it, as Lord Grey believes, in the same sense which the
Memorialists themselves attach to it. They recognize it in both its essential
stipulations; the one, securing to tliose Native Tribes, of which the
Chiefs have signed the Treaty, a title to those lands which they possessed
according to Native usage (whether cultivated or not) at the time of the
Treaty: the other, securing to the Crown the exclusive right of extin-
guishing such title by purchase. And lam directed once more to refer you
to Lord Grey’s Despatches of 23rd December, 1846, and 30th November,
1847, as shewing that Governor Grey has been throughout directed to
proceed with the utmost caution in acting upon the principles of his
Lordship’s Instructions of the 28th December, 1846, and to respect all
rights which have been secured under the stipulations of the Treaty.
Nor can his Lordship agree with the Memorialists, that there is any-
thing in those Instructions which is either inconsistent with the Treaty,
or calculated to excite anything like a reasonable alarm in those who
may be interested in maintaining it. The Protector of Aborigines is
required to transmit to the Registrar a statement of the extent of all claims
to Native lands, whether by Tribes or individuals in his District, for
Provisional Registration. But no native claim can be finally registered,
unless it be established that the right has been acknowledged by some act
of the Executive, or some judgment of a Court, or that the land has been
occupied in the manner which the Instructions go on to specify. Now
the Treaty of Waitangi is unquestiomably an Act of the Executive
Government, and it appears to Lord Glrey that the reasonable construction
of these words would be, that whereven* a claim had been made to land, on
behalf of a Tribe which had been a party to the Treaty, and it was


established that the land so claimed had belonged to the Tribe at the date
of the Treaty, the claim would be secured by final Eegistratiou. But,
clear as this may be thought, his Lordship is so anxious that there should
be no possibility of any misapprehension on this subject, that he will
specially direct the attention of the Governor, and, through him, of the
Local Authorities, to this, as the true meaning of the Instructions.
Having, as he hopes, expressed himself distinctly on this point, his
Lordship directs me further to observe, that, even if that Treaty had
never been concluded, an adherence to the policy which has been prescribed
to the Governor, would secure to the Native inhabitants of New Zealand
all that is really advantageous to them in its provisions. It is true, that
in the absence of any such stipulations as those contained in the Treaty',
the right to all the waste lands in New Zealand would have been claimed
for the Crown, from the moment British sovereignty was established.
But it is only as trustee for the whole community that the Crown would
have claimed this right, and acting in that capacity, it would have been
the first duty of the Governor, as the Crown’s representative, to take care
that the Native inhabitants of New Zealand were secured in the enjoy-
ment of an ample extent of land, to meet all their real wants. In taking
measures for this purpose their habits would have been considered; and
though it certainly would not have been held, that the cultivation and
appropriation of tracts of land, capable of supporting a large population,
must be forborne, because an inconsiderable number of Natives had been
accustomed to derive some part of their subsistence from hunting and
fishing on them, —on the other hand, the settlement of such lands would
not have been allowed to deprive the Natives even of these resources,
without providing for them, in some other way, advantages fully equal to
those which they might lose. But, after making the most ample allowance
for all their wants, there would have remained in New Zealand, land fully
sufficient for the purposes of colonization, which it would have been the
object of the Government to distribute to the settlers in such a manner
as to ensure, as far as possible, its being obtained by those who would
have turned it to the best account. With this view, it would have been
sold at a price sufficient to prevent its being acquired by those who did
not intend to make use of it, the whole proceeds of the sale being applied
for the general benefit of the community, and more especially to objects
such as Emigration, and the construction of roads, which would have
tended to increase the value of the land sold.
Such, under the Instructions transmitted to him by Lord Grey, would
have been the policy with regard to the appropriation of land, which it
would have been the duty of the Governor to adopt, had the Treaty of
Waitangi never been concluded, and had the colonization of New Zealand
been only now beginning; and I have to point out to you that under that
Treaty, had it been properly executed, there would have been no practical


difference in tlic course pursued. I need hardly remind you that while
the Treaty of Waitangi recognized the right of the Native Chiefs to their
lands, it no less distinctly recognized the right of the Crown (which
existed independently of that Treaty) to be the sole purchaser of these
lands. But as there is abundant evidence that the Natives did not wish
to prevent, but on the contrary, to promote the settlement of Europeans
among them, and were only too ready to part, inconsiderately, with their
right to land which they did not actually occupy ; the Crown, in the
absence of all competition, would easily have been put in possession, by
purchases at little more than a nominal price, of all the land that could
be required for settlers. Nor would there have been any injustice in taking
advantage of the exclusive right of purchase vested in the Crown, to
obtain land on such terms from the Natives; —the object of the Crown, in
acquiring the land, being to turn it to the best account for the whole com-
munity. The price to be paid for it to the Natives would property have
been measured, not by the value the lands they sold were capable of
acquiring in the hands of civilized men, hut by the amount of benefit they
had themselves previously derived from that which they thus surrendered:
it is hardly necessary to observe that, so estimated, the value of unoccu-
pied land would have been next to nothing.
It results, from these observations, that the conclusion of the Treaty
of Waitangi need not have opposed any practical obstacle to the adoption
of that policy with regard to land which has been prescribed to the Go-
vernor of New Zealand in the Royal Instructions, and in Lord Grey’s
Despatch.
Independently, however, of any question as to the true construction of
the Treaty of Waitangi, it appears from your Letter, that the Wesleyan
Missionary Committee are of opinion that the principles with regard to
property in land, which Lord Grey has laid down in his Despatches to the
Governor of New Zealand, would involve, in their practical application,
great injustice to the Native inhabitants of those Islands. Upon this I
am directed to remark, that it is more especially for the sake of the
Natives themselves, that a strict adherence to those principles is regarded
by Lord Grey as so important. I have already pointed out, that if the
exclusive right of the Crown to purchase land from the Natives is enforced,
it is of little practical importance whether the title to unoccupied land is
considered to reside in the Natives, or in the Crown, since, admitting it to
belong to the former, the surrender of their rights can easily be obtained
for a mere nominal consideration ; and if the Crown is regarded as the
proprietor, it is so merely in the character of guardian of the interest of its
subjects, and especially of those of the Native race, whose want of know-
ledge causes them to stand peculiarly in want of protection. The view,
therefore, of this question, which is to be contrasted with that adopted by
Lord Grey, is the one which recognizes in uncivilized Tribes an absolute


right of property in the lands over which they have, according to their
own customs, claimed dominion. But an absolute right of property
Involves the right of alienation ; that individuals or Tribes are to be recog-
nized as absolute proprietors of the soil, but at the same time as not having
power to sell it to whom they please, is a rule which might be established
by treaty and by mutual concession, but which cannot exist, independently
of some express stipulation, by virtue of any recognized principle of
law.
The question, therefore, to be considered, is whether the Natives of
New Zealand ought to be regarded as the absolute proprietors of the lands
they claim, with the unrestricted power of alienating them at their pleasure,
or whether, on the contrary, the Crown should be held to be the general
owner of the soil, as trustee for the public good, and more particularly as
guardian of the Native races. Upon this question, lam in the first place
to observe, that the last is the rule to which the general consent of all
civilized nations, for the last three centuries, has given the authority of a
recognized principle of National law, whether, by recognizing this right as
originally existing in the Crown, or as obtained through the Crown’s ex-
clusive power of extinguishing the Native title; either view leading prac-
tically to the same result. This does not appear to be denied by the
Committee of the Wesleyan Missionary Society—and has been conclusively
shown in the very important judgment of the Supreme Court of New
Zealand, enclosed in Governor Grey’s Despatch of sth July, 1847, and
printed among the papers presented to Parliament in December last.
But the Committee, without denying that such has long been the esta-
blished rule of National Law, intimate an opinion that it is one which is
not consistent with a just and humane regard for the welfare of uncivilized
Tribes, Upon this point, also, lam to refer you to the judgment already
quoted. In deciding the question brought before them, the learned Judges
rested their conclusions, not on the legal authorities only, strong as these
appear to be, but on the higher views of public justice. In the words of
Mr. Justice Chapman “To let in all purchasers, and to protect and enforce
every private purchase, would be virtually to confiscate the lands of the
Natives, in a very short time. The rule laid down is, under the circum-
stances, the only one calculated to give equal security to both races. In
this Colony, perhaps, a few better-instructed Natives might be found, who
have reduced land to individual possession, and are quite capable of pro-
tecting their own true interests; but the great mass of the Natives, if
sales were declared open to them, would become the victims of an appa-
rently equitable rule. So true is it, that it is possible to oppress and
destroy, under a show of justice. The existing rule, then, contemplates the
Native race as under a species of guardianship.” The occurrences of the
last few years in New Zealand fully justify this statement of the learned
Judge, and prove that the system which was allowed to grow up, of


recognizing sales from the Natives to individual Europeans, has produced
the most disastrous results to both races.
A few short extracts from the correspondence which has, from time to
time, been laid before Parliament, will best show how this system has
practically worked. The present Governor, in a Despatch which he
addressed to Mr. Gladstone, on the 21st of June, 1846, thus describes its
results :
“ The effect of the mode in which the Local Government has allowed
land to be purchased of the Natives, has been, in so far as the Native is
concerned, to lead him to desert his legitimate occupations, and, instead of
looking to his surplus produce as the means of acquiring European com-
modities, to resort to the more immediate source of wealth, the sale of
land. To effect this, the Native with his friends frequents the vicinity of
Europeans for weeks, neglecting his true interests; tract after tract of
land is disposed of to speculators, and, from the facility with which he
acquires European property, the Native is tempted to repeat again and
again the operation of improvident sales of large tracts of land, of which
probably he is only part owner, and to which his title is generally doubtful.
The habits of indolence thus acquired become inveterate; and as the
Natives are daring and well-armed, undoubtedly the conquest of fresh
territory from other Tribes will ultimately bo looked upon by them as the
source of further revenue. Already tlheir cupidity has been so excited, that
in some instances they have proceedced to disastrous wars among them-
selves regarding portions of territory tto which adverse claims exist.
“ The effect produced upon the Eiuropean is equally bad. Impressed
with the hope of acquiring wealth by the re-sale of these tracts of land,
he neglects the legitimate pursuits of a settler, forgetting that, even if a
valid title had been procured to these possessions, they would be really
valueless to him without an adequate supply of capital and labour.
“ The future prospects of the Colony are becoming irretrievably ruined
by this system. All hopes of the gradual improvement of Natives in the
arts of industry and civilization, are being destroyed: the progress of
the Colony in commerce and wealth is being retarded for years, and a
series of disputes are growing up between the Europeans and Natives,
relative to landed property, which it will ultimately be found impossible
to settle, except by an enormous expenditure upon the part of Great
Britain, and by the introduction of an overwhelming force into the
country; for when the Natives find that, by their improvident sales of
large tracts of country, themselves and their children have been im-
poverished, there can be no doubt they will be little disposed to respect
the bargains they have entered into.”
The Bishop of New Zealand, in a Letter to Governor Fitzroy, dated
November, 1845, gives a Statement much to the same purpose. He says:—
“ The effect upon the Native mind, has been to awaken afresh the


childish love of immediate gain, at the risk of all evil consequences to
themselves and their children. I have known a party of forty men wait
about Auckland for a month, to obtain a payment, twenty pounds, for the
sale of some lands; instead of half-a-crown a week, and the loss of then-
land, the same party might have earned each ten shillings a-week by
manual labour, and kept their land for themselves and children. In a
word, I consider this measure so fraught with mischief to both races, that
not even the fear of insurrection should have induced me to advise it.”
While the money thus received for their lands by the Natives has
been of little use to them, these irregular sales have deprived the Govern-
ment of the Colony of one of the most valuable resources for accom-
plishing much-needed improvements. In the settlement of an unoccupied
territory, it is hardly necessary to observe how much requires to be done
before it is fit for maintaining a civilized community. Eoads require to
be opened—Bridges, Schools, and other public buildings to be provided.
For these, and for similar purposes, under a sound system of colonization,
the sale of land affords the best means of raising the necessary funds; all
persons who wish to obtain land being compelled to pay for it, a security
is afforded that it will not bo acquired by those who do not really intend
to make use of it, while the money paid for it by the bond fide Settlers,
being expended in objects of the kind I have mentioned, and in adding to
the supply of labour by Emigration, is practically returned to them in the
increased value given to their lands. By allowing the irregular sale of
land by the Natives, these advantages are lost, —great tracts of land thus
come into the hands of individuals, which they either retain without im-
proving, in the hopes of future profit by selling them at a higher price, to
the extreme inconvenience of the really industrious settler, or else sell in
competition with the Government, thus obtaining the funds requisite for
the purposes above referred to, in the manner least onerous to the com-
munity.
But, perhaps the worst result of all which has followed this system,
has been the difficulty and the delay which it has occasioned in accom-
plishing the apportionment of land to individuals for improvement and
cultivation. Had the Crown been the only purchaser of land from the
Native Tribes in New Zealand, and had the price which it paid for it
been measured by the value to them of what they gave up, there would
have been no difficulty in obtaining from them, at once, the surrender of
their rights to all the land required for settlement; but when the Native
Tribes were taught, that by selling their asserted right to lands really
valueless to themselves, they could obtain from Europeans what they
naturally regarded as unbounded wealth, conflicting claims to the lands
which could thus be sold immediately sprang up on the part of different
Tribes, which required to be adjusted before any title which was con-
sidered to be valid could bo given to the European purchaser. But, as


the Native claims rested on customs frequently of the most barbarous
kind, and as the difficulty was extreme of obtaining trustworthy evidence,
either as to who were the parties whose claim to the land had originally
been the best, or as to what bargains for its sale they had really agreed to,
the adoption of this system led to investigations the most tedious and un-
satisfactory that can be conceived, during the progress of which all
improvement was at a stand. Mr. Spain, by whom many of these
investigations were carried on, thus describes the result;—
“ One fact, however, that has every day forced itself upon my obser-
vation, I think applicable to my present argument. I have travelled over
a country where I have found millions of acres of first-rate available
land, upon which the human foot had scarcely ever trod, showing the
capability of this country for maintaining a very large population; and it
does appear truly lamentable, that the present few inhabitants should be
differing on the subject of land, when there is so much more of that com-
modity available for every purpose, than can be, required for centuries to
come.
“I am clearly of opinion that at the Hutt, 'Wanganui, Taranaki, and
other places, the Natives, attracted by European settlements, and feeling
the advantages of bartering with the settlers, have come, and cultivated
land in the immediate neighbourhood! of those places, which they would
not otherwise have thought of taking possession of.
“ Again, at Taranaki, I found the Natives little disposed to abide by
my award, and offering various obstructions to the settlers, not because
they wanted the land themselves, but merely to prevent the Europeans
from making use of it.”
It would be difficult to estimate the extent of the losses inflicted on
all the inhabitants of New Zealand, by this delay in issuing valid grants
of the lands required for settlement. Some idea of the magnitude of the
injury thus sustained may be formed, from the following statement con-
tained in a Despatch from the late Governor, Captain Fitzroy, dated 30th
August, 1845 :
“ Scarcely any titles to land were then confirmed, many had not even
been investigated; therefore very little return of value could be obtained
from land; and settlers were living on the remains of their almost ex-
hausted capital. A few Commission Agents, of mercantile establishments
elsewhere, kept up a limited trade, but too much on credit. Government
payments were four months in arrear, and had been very irregular,—they
could not be otherwise under such a complicated state of affairs as the
peculiar, the unprecedented circumstances of New Zealand brought on
every interest, on every person connecfted with the country.
“ But the greatest detriment to thee progress of the settlers sent out
by the New Zealand Company, was tine absolute impossibility of obtaining
sufficient land for their location, withouit taking forcible possession of that


which the Native owners asserted had not been purchased from themselves.
This caused the energies of the finest body of colonists that ever left
Great Britain, to be frittered away in idle pastimes within the limits of
scattered wooden Towns, and the beaches near those Towns to be so strewed
with broken bottles, that it was dangerous to walk there.
‘ -4- c ß ve ) intelligent, and educated young men were destitute of profit-
able occupation, totally disappointed—perhaps ruined—and with the
world’s diameter separating them from their families.
Under these circumstances the greatest allowances should be made
for the state of feeling which prompted such constant demands, that the
settlers should be put in possession of their lands (as they considered them
to be,) by the Local Government, even by force.”
Lord Grey trusts that the preceding observations will satisfy the
Committee, that no want of a proper regard for the true interests of the
Natives of New Zealand is implied by those general views, with regard
to the appropriation of land in that Colony, which he has stated in his
Despatches to the Governor upon this subject; but lam further to call
your attention to the fact, that while Lord Grey has laid down the rules
of that policy which, for the reasons I have stated, he is convinced it
would have been most conducive to the welfare of the Natives, as well as
of the Luropean inhabitants, to have adopted from the outset ; he has
not lost sight of the danger which, in the actual circumstances of New
Zealand, would arise from any rash and violent change in the system
which has hitherto been followed. The Governor has been directed in
Lord Grey’s former Despatches on this subject, to proceed with all circum-
spection in applying the fundamental rules which are now laid down for
his guidance, to the state of things which has been allowed to grow up
under a mistaken system: and Lord Grey is happy to be able to inform
the Committee, that it is obvious from recent correspondence, that
Governor Grey has fully entered into the importance of this injunction,
and is using all necessary discretion and forbearance in the performance
of his task.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient
Humble Servant,
(Signed)
Herman Mekivale,


Tn the Right Honourable Earl Grey.
Wesleyan Mission-Horse,
B'nhopsgate-Street-Within, April 21th, 1848.
My Lord, — I have the honour to acknowledge, on the behalf of the
Wesleyan Missionary Committee, the reply to their Memorial of the 23rd
February last, with which your Lordship has favoured them, through Mr.
Under-Secretary Merivale, under date of 13th April, 1848, on the subject
of the apprehension which has been awakened in New Zealand as to the
intentions of Her Majesty’s Government in reference to the Treaty of
Waitangi.
The Committee feel indebted to your Lordship for the comprehensive
statement of the views of Her Majesty’s Government on the New Zealand
land-question which is contained in the reply, and they deem it due to
your Lordship briefly to state that, regarding themselves as pledged to the
Treaty of Waitangi as a whole, they had not, when preparing their
Memorial, any objections to offer to the arguments adduced by your
Lordship, in their bearing upon that b'ranch of the Land-Question which
relates to the method by which the oollonist shall obtain the land neces-
sary for his purpose; and they therefore confined themselves exclusively
to the other branch of the question, namely—the mode by which the
Crown shall extinguish the title by wlhich the Natives hold their lands.
Their understanding of the Treaty of Waitangi was, that, while it provided
that the Crown should have the exchusive right of procuring from the
Natives such spare lands as might be needed for the use of the colonists,
(and consequently that the colonists should purchase land, not from the
Natives, but from the Crown,) —the Native claims upon the soil of New
Zealand were, at the same time, so fully admitted, as to secure the original
proprietors from being deprived of any of their lands, without their own
free consent, and suitable remuneration for the same being made to them
on behalf of the Crown. And it was simply because it was feared that
your Lordship’s explanatory Despatch to the Governor, of the 80th
November, was not sufficient entirely to allay the apprehension of the
enforcement of a more limited interpretation of the Treaty, that the
Committee presumed upon your Lordship’s indulgence to submit their
views at length, and respectfully to request that your Lordship would, in
another Despatch to His Excellency the Governor of New Zealand, entirel v
dissipate any remaining feeling of alarm upon the important subject.
Your Lordship’s answer to this application calls for the warmest
acknowledgments on the part of the Committee. The assurance that Her
Majesty’s Government concur in their interpretation of the Treaty of
Waitangi relating to the claims of the Natives, and that such additional


Instructions shall be sent to His Excellency the Governor, and through him
to the Local Authorities, as will be sufficient to prevent all further misap-
prehension upon the subject,—satisfactorily meets the wishes which the
Committee had ventured to convey in their Memorial ; and it therefore
only remains for the Committee to express their deep sense of the kind
attention which your Lordship has devoted to the subject, and to enjoin
anew upon the Society’s Missionaries increased and persevering endeavours
to promote the best interests of both races of Her Majesty’s subjects in New
Zealand, and thus continue to justify that favourable opinion of their
character and services which your Lordship has been pleased to express.
I have the honour to remain,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient
And humble Servant,
(Signed) John Beecham.


*


\
'
■
