

NEW SOUTH WALES
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN THE
GOVERNOR OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND
THE EARL OF KIMBERLEY
RESPECTING
CERTAIN STATEMENTS MADE BY CAPT. PALMER, R.N.,
IN HIS BOOK ENTITLED
‘KIDNAPPING IN THE SOUTH SEAS.’
presented to toll) houses of parliament tg (Eommantr of 3§er Jftajestg,
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES & SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS,
FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
1 8 7 2.
[C. —479.] Price 3 \d.


SCHEDULE.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN THE
GOVERNOR OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND THE EARL OF KIMBERLEY
RESPECTING
CERTAIN STATEMENTS MADE BY GAPT. PALMER, R.N., IN HIS BOOK
ENTITLED ‘ KIDNAPPING IN THE SOUTH SEAS.’
No. 1
Copy of a DESPATCH from The Earl op Belmore to The Earl op Kimberley.
New South
Wales.
No. 1.
(No. 149.) Government House, Sydney, September 7, 1871.
(Registered, October 30, 1871.)
My LORD, (Answered, No. 100, December 16, 1871, page 5.)
I have the honour to transmit to your Lordship a letter which I have received
from Mr. John Williams, the Crown Solicitor, relative to certain imputations cast more
particularly upon him—hut also upon other officers of this Government—with respect
to the proceedings in the case of the 4 Daphne,’ by Captain Palmer, R.N., lately Com-
mander of H.M.S. 4 Rosario,’ in a work published not long since, I think in Edinburgh,
and entitled ‘ Kidnapping in the South Seas.’
2, This book has probably attracted a good deal of attention. I have no wish what-
ever to make any undue reflections upon Captain Palmer, for whose private character I
have the highest respect, and with whom I was, whilst he was on this station, on terms
of personal friendship. But I cannot allow the unsparing and uncalled-for censure which
he has passed on my Government in 1869, to remain unnoticed. Mr. Williams’s letter
is so clear and full, with respect to the conduct of the Government in the 4 Daphne ’ case,
that lam relieved of the necessity of adding much to it, as regards that subject. I need
only say in addition, that whilst the termination of the proceedings in the Water Police
Court in favour of the master of the ship relieved the Government of any further re-
sponsibility in the matter, the then Premier, Mr. Robertson, after consultation I believe
with the Attorney-General, agreed to recommend the advance of money towards the
necessary costs of the suit in the Vice-Admiralty Court from the Treasury, a proceeding
which though justifiable was, strictly speaking, illegal.
3. I beg to refer your Lordship to a correspondence between Sir William Manning
and myself, which I forwarded to you in my Despatch, No. 129, of 9th August last, and
which will explain this matter more clearly. v
4. There are two matters in the book relating more particularly to myself, which I
am quite ready to justify, should the necessity for doing so arise. One is with regard to
an official letter which I requested Captain Palmer to withdraw until the Commodore’s
arrival. The correspondence about it was of a private nature, and very properly so;
but I am quite ready to make it official if your Lordship should desire it.
5. The other matter relates to HovelTs case. The particulars of it are, I have reason
to believe, already contained in a House of Commons paper, and I have nothing to add
further than that it rested finally with me for decision, and that after consulting
Ministers, three out of four of the Judges of the Supreme Court, and the Secretary of
State, I disposed of it as seemed to me most conducive to the ends of justice and public
policy. Captain Palmer only alludes, no doubt, to the earlier stage of the case where
the capital sentence was remitted, but of the propriety of that being done I had quite
made up my mind before it was discussed in Council.
A 2


6. I enclose the copies of two letters from the Chief Justice, having reference to the
book, and kidnapping reports, which will explain themselves. I may, however, add that
it was, if I remember rightly, the feeling at the time of the unreliahleness of the sort of
reports alluded to by Sir Alfred Stephen, which caused me to suggest to Lord Granville,
in the sixth paragraph of my Despatch, No. 80, of 27th May, 1869, the advantage of
sending out a person possessed of a competent knowledge of law, to conduct an inquiry
into them. Further experience has convinced me that whilst there are very great abuses
connected with the labour question, particularly as regards Fiji, at the same time each
report ought to he carefully sifted before it can he acted on, or made the subject of
judicial proceedings.
I have, &c.,
The Earl of Kimberley, (Signed) BELMORE.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 1.
Mr. John Williams to Lord Belmore.
My Lord, Crown Solicitor’s Office, Sydney, September 6, 1871.
My attention has been called to a work recently published by Captain Palmer, E.N., entitled
4 Kidnapping in the South Seas,’ in which the case of the 1 Daphne ’ is referred to, and statements made
as to the legal proceedings taken in consequence of the seizure of that vessel, which appear intended to
convey a most unwarranted and unjust impression of the conduct of the local authorities here, of
myself in particular with reference to those proceedings; and I therefore take the liberty of addressing
your Lordship in refutation of Captain Palmer’s imputations, that the public interests in the case were
neglected.
2. With respect to the alleged dilatoriness in instituting criminal proceedings against the master and
supercargo of the ‘ Daphne,’ I found, upon the vessel’s arrival here, that Captain Palmer was unable to
furnish me with any information as to the evidence that could be adduced in support of the charge intended
to be preferred. He had not thought it necessary to take the statements of any of the crew of the
‘ Daphne’; he had no proof as to how the natives were induced to go or were taken on board the vessel,
or that when on board they were detained against their will. All that he was prepared to prove was
that the vessel came to Fiji (which was not the destination shown by her papers) with a larger number of
natives on board than she ought to have had; that some of her fittings were such as are found in vessels
employed in the slave trade on the African coast, and that he had therefore seized her.
3. Upon finding that the crew of the ‘ Daphne ’ had not been asked to state what they knew of the
voyage, and that they were the only persons in the Colony who could give any information on the subject, I
informed Captain Palmer that before criminal proceedings could be instituted it yms necessary to take
their statements, and made an appointment with him to attend on board the ‘ Rosario ’ for that purpose.^
4. I may here mention that Captain Palmer’s statement, that he informed me shortly after the ‘ Daphne’s ’
arrival in port, that the master, the supercargo, and the crew were detained on board by his orders, and
that he had directed that they should not be allowed to communicate with or receive communications from
any persons on shore, and that I told him that he had no legal right to keep these men as prisoners
on board the vessel, and that I was afraid in so acting he rendered himself liable to legal proceedings
at their suit, is correct; and that I think I was right in so advising him.
5. Upon examining the crew of the ‘Daphne,’ I found that they agreed in asserting that no force
had been used in getting or detaining the natives on board ; that the crew, some eight or nine in number,
and the natives 100 in number, lived together during the voyage; that the crew were not armed; and
that the natives were allowed to go about the vessel as they thought fit; which statements, if true, and we
had no means of negativing them, would disprove a state of slavery whilst on board the ship ; and I there-
fore suggested to Captain Palmer that it was advisable before commencing proceedings, to ascertain
whether slavery or any system of forced labour existed at Fiji, as it appeared to me that the only charge
upon which a committal could possibly be obtained, would be that the passengers by the ‘ Daphne ’
were conveyed by her for the purpose of being dealt with as slaves in that country; and that to support
such a charge it should be proved that slavery or some system of forced labour was recognized at the place
to which they were taken or were intended to be taken. Captain Palmer was unable to afford, and did not
obtain any information upon this head; and I therefore, personally, and through the police, made the
necessary inquiries, and this occasioned the delay; and when I found that no evidence of the kind could be
obtained, it was resolved to proceed with fthe evidence we had. Captain Palmer was fully informed as to
why it was that proceedings were not earlier instituted.
6. That this delay was in any way prejudicial, by allowing the witnesses to be tampered with, I do’ not
believe, as the evidence given by r them in the Police Court agreed with the statements made to me in
Captain Palmer’s presence on board the ‘ Rosario.’
7. It seems to me, that Captain Palmer himself afforded the master and supercargo every opportunity
of tampering with the crew of the ‘ Daphne.’ If immediately upon making the seizure he had adopted
the very obvious course of taking the statements of the crew, or of some of them, and had given them
passages to Sydney by the ‘ Rosario,’ I have no doubt, in the state of alarm they then were in, they would
have told all they knew of the matter, and would gladly have come on in the ‘ Rosario.’ Captain Palmer,
however, did not think it worth while to do this, and sent them and the persons against whom their
evidence was to be used, as passengers in their own vessel on a six weeks voyage to Sydney.
8. With respect to the proceedings at the Water Police Court. Mr. Windeyer was furnished on the


afternoon before the hearing, with a copy of the statements made by the crew to me, which was in sufficient
time to allow of his being prepared to conduct the case.
9. I need not offer any observations as to the failure to obtain a committal of the master and super-
cargo : the Justices were not amenable to influence by the Government, and the ruling of the Bench at the
Water Police Court was in accordance with the law as stated in the judgment afterwards given by the
Chief Justice in the Admiralty suit ;.and I surely cannot be answerable for Captain Palmers peculiar
manner of giving his evidence being turned into matter of amusement by the witty counsel for the
defence,. # .
10. Captain Palmer speaks (page 142) of his great desire to have the matter thoroughly investigated,
and of the extraordinary dilatoriness displayed in the whole transaction from the beginning. I am
astonished at this statement; Captain Palmer seemed to me chiefly anxious to get rid of all personal
liability and trouble in the matter; claiming as a right, that the Colonial authorities should take the
vessel off his hands, and themselves adopt proceedings to obtain her condemnation; and he evinced
considerable annoyance and alarm when he found that, as he was the seizing officer, it was necessary that
the suit in the Admiralty Court should be prosecuted by him.
11. As to the alleged dilatoriness, so far as the proceedings in the Admiralty Court are concerned, a
reference to the Minute-book of the Registrar of the Court will show how very ill-founded this state-
ment is.
12. Captain Palmer’s assertion that he was “ checkmated ” in endeavouring to delay further proceedings
until he could obtain evidence from Fiji, is as offensive as it is unwarranted by the facts. I merely
explained to him that the vessel being under arrest, and the defendants remaining in the Colony solely for
the purpose of defending the suit, the Court would not, I thought, grant a commission unless it were shown
that there was something more definite than a mere chance or possibility of obtaining further evidence
at Fiji.
13. It should be fully borne in mind that the ‘ Daphne ’ did not belong to any port of New South Wales;
nor were her owners or any person concerned in her trade in any way connected with this Colony. She
was brought to this port by Captain Palmer as seizing officer, and the proceedings were instituted by him
in the Vice-Admiralty Court for condemnation of the vessel as his prize. The local authorities here had
nothing whatever to do with the proceedings of the Vice-Admiralty Court; but from motives for which
Captain Palmer never appeared to give us credit, Sir William Manning acted as counsel without fee,
and I as proctor, without charging costs.
14. As regards the costs which Captain Palmer was called upon to pay, they consisted only of the fees
to junior counsel in the Vice-Admiralty case, and the amount actually expended for the maintenance of
and necessary allowances to the witnesses on account of detention for the purposes of that case. All
expenses of the criminal proceedings were defrayed by the local Government.
15. I did not send Captain Palmer a copy of the judgment which appears in the ‘Sydney Morning
Herald,’ for the very sufficient reason that he, throughout the case, persistently refused to communicate
personally with either Sir William Manning or myself, requiring, as your Lordship is aware, that all com-
munications intended for him should be sent to your Lordship; and as I had by letter of date 27th Sep-
tember, 1869 (copy herewith), informed your Lordship fully of the effect of the judgment given by the
Chief Justice on the 24th September, I did not think it necessary to forward a copy of the ‘Sydney
Morning Herald,’ in which his Honour’s reasons for such judgment were set out at length.
16. It is, perhaps, not for me to comment upon the imputations cast upon your Lordship’s Government,
which are plainly conveyed in the following paragraphs,
« Time wore on, and I heard on all sides that the whole matter would be burked if I did not take care,
as so many merchants in Sydney were closely connected with, and had interest in Queensland plantations,
together with several in the New South Wales Government, that every possible delay and difficulty would
be thrown in my way.”
“ On the other hand, I had all the sympathy of right-thinking honourable men, who were ashamed to see
the lukewarmness of the Government in a matter in which their Colony was almost as much concerned as
Queensland.'”
17. But I may be permitted to say that nothing came within my cognizance that could in the remotest
degree warrant such imputations; my instructions, other than such as I received from Captain Palmer,
either directly or through your Lordship, were received from the Attorney-General, who, though always
doubtful as to their being sufficient proofs of illegality, was from the first strongly of opinion that Captain
Palmer had reasonable cause for the executive act of seizure, and was so impressed with the necessity of
checking the improper way in which the transfer of native labourers from one island to another is conducted
by the masters of vessels trading amongst the islands, that he was determined that nothing should be
omitted that the law would enable to be done, to make an example in this case.
I have, &c.,
The Right Honourable the Earl of Belmore, t , (Signed) John Williams,
Governor of New South Wales. Crown Solicitor.
My Lord, Crown Solicitor’s Office, Sydney, September 27, 1869.
I have the honour to inform your Lordship that the case against the ‘ Daphne ’ came on for hearing
on the 24th inst., in the Vice-Admiralty Court, before his honour Sir Alfred Stephen, who pronounced
judgment against the seizure, and reserved for further consideration the question of whether he should
grant to Capt. Palmer a certificate that there was reasonable and probable cause for the capture of the
vessel, and that he ought not to be subject to the payment of damages and costs occasioned or incurred
thereby.
It is therefore necessary that the ‘ Daphne ’ should be released from arrest. Capt. Palmer, I under-
stand, left a person in charge, with instructions that he was to take his directions from Capt. Montgomerie.
I therefore take the liberty of addressing your Lordship on the subject, requesting that you will be


ew South pleased to direct Commodore Lambert to be informed that the vessel must bo handed back to Capt.
Wales. Daggett, or to any authorized agent of the owners who may claim possession of her.
I should have addressed Commodore Lambert without troubling your Lordship, but for the doubt
suggested by Capt. Palmer as to the propriety of any communication being sent otherwise than through
your Lordship, and I am afraid that my so doing would occasion unnecessary delay in the release of ttie
vessel, which now the decision of the Court has been made known must be avoided.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. the Earl of Belmore, (Signed) John Williams,
&c. &c. &c. Crown Solicitor.
Enclosure 2
in No. 1.
Enclosure 2 in No. 1.
Sm Alfred Stephen, C.J., to Lord Belmore.
My dear Lord Belmore, Orielton, September 2, 1871.
You are substantially correct in your recollection of what I said lately about kidnapping. I will
repeat it, as well as I can recollect, here; and I have not the least objection to being quoted. Before
the public meeting in 1868 or 1869, in Sydney, convened to take into consideration (if I remember
rightly) the Queensland Polynesian Labourers’ Act, as a measure stimulating the trade in Polynesian
deportations, some missionary reports and pamphlets were sent me by one of the more active conveners. I
read them with care, and found that some (1 believe several) of the instances of kidnapping were really
the same story, varied more or less in detail. I was struck with the same circumstance in reading two
letters recently from one of the best and most devoted of the missionary band, whom all men that know
him venerate, and who is incapable of intentional exaggeration. I recognize again the old tales, with
scarcely the change of one incident. In Capt. Palmer’s book I can trace the same. Almost every case
rests on hearsay. The painting out of the names of two vessels, and the story of the decoying of natives on
board one vessel, under pretence that Bishop Patteson was there, we meet with in almost every publica-
tion. In one instance, Capt. Palmer (p. 51) gives the statement to himself of a shocking case, by a
Rotumah man, interpreted by another Rotumah man, the catching of a swimming Polynesian by a boat-
hook in the cheek. The narration to Capt. Palmer, who was on the look-out for stories of the kind, was
in March, 1869, and it is evidently told of the boat’s crew of the ‘Young Australian,’ whose commander
was tried here in May of that year. Now I have read exactly the same tales in (I can undertake to say)
very nearly the same words, published in this Colony months ago, I believe about the beginning of last
year. I cannot find, or recall to my memory the particular publication, but I certainly read it before
Capt. Palmer’s book existed. This, then, is not an instance of one occurrence made into two, because the
details are such that they will be referred by every reader to the same identical transaction. And the
occurrence itself, so revolting and brutal, professes to be from an eye-witness. Yet here is a story eagerly
caught at and repeated, which, nevertheless, it requires no lawyer’s cross-examination to expose. It is to
the last degree improbable, scarcely credible on the face of it; but no cross-examination of the narrator
was of course attempted.
2. I have no doubt whatever that there have been instances (and in the course of years many instances)
of unscrupulous acts by the officers or the crews of Polynesian trading vessels ; and I earnestly trust that
ere long the assaulting of a Polynesian, and his detention against his will on board any such vessel, or in
any of the Polynesian waters, may be made felony, and that the vessel itself may be subjected to forfeiture,
or at least be seized, and the payment of all the costs of prosecution of the offender. If the passing of
wholesome laws had not, as in our own local Legislature, been postponed in favour of party strife, some-
such measure would probably have been passed in the session just closed. But I protest against the system
of exaggeration and wholesale denunciation in which so many of the missionaries and other good men have
indulged, or to which they lend ready and credulous ears, on the subject of Polynesian labour. And I
regret deeply to find that Capt. Palmer, the most jaundiced and prejudiced of the number, has been led
by his excess of zeal and impulse, suspecting everyone who is less hot-headed than himself, to calumniate,,
as he has so unsparingly done, men whose feelings of humanity, and love of justice, and hatred of wrong,,
are quite as warm as his own,
3. 1 hope that you will be kind enough to pardon my delay in answering your note.
I have, &c.,
His Excellency the Earl of Belmore, (Signed) Alfred Stephen.
&c. &c. &c.
My dear Lord Belmore, Tuesday Afternoon, September 5,
On looking through the papers in Capt. Hovell’s case, which I had nearly forgotten, I perceive-
that the account referred to by me as a mere repetition of one and the same story —the Rotumah native’s
statement respecting catching one of the islanders with a boat-hook—w r as, in fact, Capt. Palmer’s own, the
same which his book mentions. It is therefore not, as I had supposed, a second version by another hand.
But, as to the truth of the narrative, I would observe, in confirmation of my opinion of its worthlessness,
that no such occurrence was mentioned by either of the natives who were detained here as witnesses of the
capture, and of whom one was examined at Hovell’s trial. I have not commented on the case, as tending
to defeat the supposition that force has occasionally been used in this trade, but as showing the readiness
with which a story of most improbable cruelty in its pursuit is received and circulated. The tale of fraud,
in pretending that a certain vessel was Bishop Patteson’s, I have myself seen repeated in print or manu-
script a dozen times. Professor Smith brings it up again in his recent letter from Levuka. I nevertheless,
do not remember that the story rests on any reliable source.
I have, &c.,
His Excellency the Earl of Belmore, (Signed) Alfred Stephen. ;
&c. &c. &c.


No. 2.
Copy of a DESPATCH from The Earl of Kimberley to The Earl of Belmore. No. 2.
(No. 100.)
My Lord, Downing Street, December 16, 1871.
I haye to acknowledge your Lordship’s Despatch, No. 149,* of 7th September, * Pages,
forwarding a letter from Mr. Williams, the Crown Solicitor, upon the subject of certain
observations made by Captain Palmer, R.N., in his book entitled ‘ Kidnapping in South
Seas,’ on the proceedings in the case of the ‘ Daphne.’
I think that Mr. Williams’s statement shows satisfactorily that no blame attaches
to him or to the other officers who conducted the legal proceedings in that case.
I have, Ac.,
The Earl of Belmore, (Signed) KIMBERLEY.
Ac. Ac. Ac.
No. 3.
Copy of a DESPATCH from The Earl of Belmore to The Earl of Kimberley.
(No. 159.) Government House, Sydney, October 6, 1871.
(Received December 4, 1871.)
My LORD, (Answered, No. 1, January 8, 1872, page 23.)
Referring to my Despatch, No. 149 of the 7th September, in which I forwarded
a letter from Mr. John Williams, the Crown Solicitor, defending himself from certain
imputations cast upon him in Captain Palmer’s book entitled 4 Kidnapping in the South
Seas,’ with respect to the case of the ‘ Daphne,’ I have now the honour to forward a letter
with numerous appendices from Mr. Robertson, the present Colonial Secretary, written
on behalf of himself and his former colleagues in my late Government in 1869, of which
he was the First Minister, with regard to the conduct of the Government in respect to the
cases of the ‘Young Australian’ and ‘Daphne’ in that year. Mr. Robertson considered
it due to them and to the Colony itself, to address me in reply to that part of Captain
Palmer’s book which bears on these cases, with a view to his letter being transmitted to
Her Majesty’s Government.
2. These papers deal so fully with the subject, that it is unnecessary for me to trouble
your Lordship at any length. There are, however, a few points which appear likely to
be misunderstood by the readers of Captain Palmer’s book, and 1 venture to go into them
in the present Despatch.
3. At page 161, after alluding to the remission of Hovell’s and Rangi’s sentences to
penal servitude for life, Captain Palmer continues—“ Hugo Levinger, the cleverest villain
“ of the three, who ought to have had a gallows as high as Hainan’s, got off with seven
“ years hard labour. ”
4. I agree with Captain Palmer’s estimate of Levinger, and with an opinion not long
since expressed by your Lordship, that there has been an unfortunate miscarriage of
justice in his case, but I must remark that Levinger was not tried in this Colony at all.
He was convicted of manslaughter by a Melbourne jury, which conviction was subse-
quently quashed on appeal, by the Privy Council, on the technical plea that he ought
to have been tried by a mixed jury, being a foreigner. In consequence of the impossi-
bility of collecting evidence again, the Attorney-General of Victoria was compelled to
abandon further proceedings against him, and he was discharged.
5. Had he been tried in Sydney, it is reasonable to suppose that he would, equally
with Hovell, have been found guilty of murder; and as the law of New South Wales
does not allow foreigners the privilege of a mixed jury, an appeal to the Privy Council
would in all probability have been dismissed had one been made.
6. The next point I have to advert to is the reason of the failure of the prosecutions
in the case of the 4 Daphne,’ both in the Police Court and Vice-Admiralty Court. Cap-
tain Palmer, at page 133, states that “the Imperial Passenger Act, 18 and 19 Viet.,
“ cap. 119, had evidently been infringedand again, “It was proved that clauses 8,16,
“ and 20, of the Queensland Labour Act, had been broken.”
7. Whether or not the Imperial Passenger Act was applicable to the case of the
‘ Daphne,’ I cannot say. It is quite clear that the Queensland Labour Act being a purely
local Act, our Courts had no jurisdiction with respect to it. Captain Palmer should
have taken the ‘Daphne ’ to Brisbane if he had wished to proceed under it.


8. The informations in the Police Court were in fact laid as for a felony under the
sth Geo. IV., cap. 113, for a breach of the laws relating to the slave trade, and it was
the want of proof that any offence had been committed against those laws that caused
the dismissal of the case both in the Police Court, and subsequently in the Vice-
Admiralty Court.
9. In his letter of the 16th August, 1869, to the Crown Solicitor (Appendix No. 11
to Mr. Robertson’s letter), you will find that Captain Palmer expresses his inability to
ascertain what is understood in these seas as to the meaning of the term “ slave,” as dis-
tinguished from the same term when applied to the trade on the coast of Africa.
10. This distinction was, I apprehend, the cause of the failure of the prosecutions in
the Courts at Sydney. If I understand the matter rightly, the term “slave,” within the
meaning of the laws relating to the slave trade, applies to a person whom it is intended
to deal with as such in a country whose laws recognize slavery as a legal institution. Now
Fiji could not be proved to be such a country, and moreover was not at that time pos-
sessed of any recognized form of Government. Hence no amount of such evidence as
Captain Palmer might have brought, could, assuming I am correct in my view, and I
believe I am, have made the slightest difference.
11. Captain Palmer may have made out a very good case for an alteration in the
law, but none for impugning the decisions of the Courts of this Colony or the conduct of
its Government.
12. The next point I have to notice is Captain Palmer’s relations to the Crown Law
Officers : I do not think that in the first instance he could have understood the nature
of a suit in Vice-Admiralty, and for some time I admit that I was myself in error. I
supposed the proceedings to be of a criminal nature, in which the Crown prosecuted,
and that the Law Officers appeared ex officio.
13. It appears, however, that it was explained by the Attorney-General during the
proceedings to him, as it was to me, that such a suit is a civil suit, and that the seizing
officer is prosecutor. Although it no doubt lent weight to his case that the gentlemen
holding the offices of Crown Solicitor and Attorney-General appeared as his Proctor and
leading Counsel, still they appeared in their private capacities as a Proctor and one of
Her Majesty’s Counsel. They charged nothing for their services, but that was perfectly
optional on their part. From the tone of his book I should suppose he had not accepted
the explanation.
14. He is so far correct in not considering himself a private prosecutor, that the
Statute 5 Geo. IV., c. 113, defines who may “seize,” and the “seizing officer” under the
Act —whether a naval or military officer, an officer of Customs, or the of a
Colony or his deputy—alone can prosecute. In the recent case of the ‘ Challenge ’ Mr.
Consul March, who seized or detained that vessel, would, I think, have had no locus
standi as prosecutor in the Vice-Admiralty Court.
15. The last point I need allude to is the 1791. ss. s d. (costs out of pocket) which
Captain Palmer says he had to pay in the first instance. Mr. Robertson explains the
matter pretty fully, but I must add to what he says, that, having consented to be a party
to the advance of the first 100/., on the understanding that a refund was to be claimed
from Her Majesty’s Government, being at the time under the impression I have men-
tioned in paragraph 12,1 found some time after a Circular in the Navy List, prescribing
the method by which officers might obtain advances from the paymasters of their ships
towards the expenses of Vice-Admiralty suits.
16. This Circular convinced me that I had been previously in error, and that an
application by my Government for repayment to Her Majesty’s Government would
probably not be acceded to on the ground that the Admiralty would claim to deal
directly with their own officers. I therefore considered it my duty to obtain repayment
as soon as possible of the 100/. which had been first advanced, as it appears, without even
the formality of an Order in Council.
17. Subsequently Mr. Williams, not having received a reply from Captain Palmer as
I understood, to an application for the balance, 79/. ss. 5 d., which was required for the
further expenses in the suit, asked for and obtained another advance from the Treasury.
After this was received a bill arrived from Captain Palmer for the amount, drawn in
Mr. Williams’s favour. That gentleman having obtained the money elsewhere, did not
feel at liberty to cash the bill, nor was he authorized by Captain Palmer to hand it
over to the Treasury. At last, when it was found that Captain Palmer was leaving the
station, he did hand it over, having been offered, I believe, some sort of guarantee by
the Colonial Treasurer to hold him harmless, and the amount was paid to credit in
London in November last. It has not been brought to account in Sydney to this day ;
and the amount was, I believe, by some misunderstanding, included in a vote on the last


supplementary estimates, which will of course be allowed to lapse so lar as the 79£. s s. s d.
is concerned.
18. In conclusion, I must express my opinion that the conduct of Sir William Manning
and Mr. Williams, as regards the ‘ Daphne ’ suit, so far from meriting censure, was
most disinterested. There was an idea at the time that Sir William Manning would
be subjected to an attack in Parliament for going too far in pressing the case against the
owners. I cannot agree with Captain Palmer that the labour question is nearly as
much a New South Wales as a Queensland question; lor, as far as 1 know, no island
labour is employed on New South Wales sugar plantations, and very little indeed in any
other way ; and I regret that he should have given such ready credence as he appears to
have done to the amazing rumours which are so liable to be circulated in this, in com-
mon, I suppose, with other comparatively small communities.
I have, &c,,
The Earl of Kimberley, (Signed) BELMORE.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 3.
Mr. Robertson to Lord Belmore.
My Lord Sydney, October 4, 1871.
I consider it due to my late colleagues and myself, as members of your Excellency s Government of
tins Colony, during the year 1869, and to the Colony itself, to address your Excellency in reference to
certain very injurious imputations which appear in a volume recently published by Captain Palmer, R.N.
(late commander, on this station, of Her Majesty’s ship ‘ Rosario ’), entitled ‘ Kidnapping in the South
Seas.’ Being 1 assured that your Lordship’s intimate acquaintance with the facts renders it unnecessary
that we should tender to yourself any vindication of the conduct of the country and Government, I address
your Excellency, as Her Majesty’s Representative, in the hope that you will be pleased to lav my letter
before Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies, with such advice as your Excellency may
think fit. # , ~,
2. As implied in the title of Captain Palmer’s work, it is addressed largely to the subject ot the kid-
napping of South Sea Islanders and their supposed treatment as slaves under the guise of immigration;
and in "the course of the work much reference is made to the case of the schooner ‘ Daphne,’ which Captain
Palmer had seized as a slaver, at Levuka, Fiji, and to certain proceedings in the Criminal and Vice-
Admiralty Courts of this Colony, which followed upon that seizure. Allusion is also made to the case or the
‘ Young Australian,’ and to the murder of several natives on board of the latter vessel.
3. In reference to these cases, but more particularly that of the ‘ Daphne,’ I have, in the first place, to
complain, generally, that there runs through Captain Palmer’s remarks a tone of disparagement of this
Colony and its Government, which I feel sure your Lordship will concur with me in condemning as
.altogether unfounded and, in the highest degree, unjust to the country. And I shall presently take leave
to call your Lordship’s attention to particular passages in the work, which the writer has sought to place
the conduct of the “ Government ” and “ Authorities ” of the Colony in disgraceful contrast with his own.
4. There can be no question, unfortunately, that individual traders from this Colony had taken part in
some of the nefarious practices alleged (with but too much truth) to have been occasionally pursued in
connection with the conveyance of South Sea Islanders to Queensland or other destinations; but lam not
aware that such practices had ever been brought home to them, except in the ca.se ot the ‘ A oung Australian,
in which the offenders had been rigorously and successfully prosecuted; nor, it they had, could this people
and Government be held responsible for their misconduct. . .
5. The employment of commercial vessels in such a trade being perfectly legitimate, it honourably con-
ducted, it could not be prohibited,—notwithstanding its unquestionable liability to degenerate practically,
and to lead to gross crimes against humanity. But in whatever way such trade may have been conducted
by those engaged in it, this people have had but little concern in it; and I assert, with absolute confidence,
that neither 5 the people nor the Government had given the shadow of a ground for imputing to them the
scandalous sympathy with kidnapping and slavery which Captain Palmer s readers are led to inter trom his
language* # . . , c , a
6. This Colony has, indeed, had much to do with crimes committed by British subjects in the bouth beas,
in this sense, that its Courts have been resorted to under Imperial law for the trial and punishment of the
offenders, and that justice has here been frequently and faithfully administered in such cases. Such was
the case of the ‘ Daphne,’ and such also that of the ‘ Young Australian ’; and it is signally unjust that this
fact should be turned into an opportunity for associating this country with those crimes, and ot traducing it
as a participator in them. < . , .
7. Whatever may be thought of defamation by irresponsible writers, I take leave to submit to your
Excellency that this province of Her Majesty’s dominions has great cause to complain that an officer in
the Royal Navy, placed on this station by the Admiralty, should have used the weight of his position, and
the vantage ground of the Press, to degrade it and its Government in the estimation of the world. Had
Captain Palmer thought fit to make his charges in a form admitting of immediate defence, they would at
once have been negatived by the actual facts, and he would, I have no doubt, have been compelled to
acknowledge their injustice. But he has chosen to occupy a platform on which this Government could not
meet him, and where he was sure to evoke a ready sensation in its disparagement. In the name ot Her
Majesty’s Government of this Colony, I protest against such a course, especially when the officer who
adopts it purports to narrate public transactions occurring in connection with his office, and his relations
with this Government.
P


8 Captain Palmer’s more direct imputations have reference to the case of the ‘Daphne, and I shall
therefore, confine my remarks principally to that case. But I may observe in passing that it there had
been a disposition to form a fair judgment on the conduct of our Authorities in dealing with kidnappers in
the South Seas, so much credit must have been given for their vigorous measures, and for the stern justice
of our Court, in the case of the ‘Young Australian,’ as would have been little compatible with Captain
Palmer’s imputations in relation to the ‘ Daphne.’ . . .. ,
9 In adverting to this case of the * Daphne,’ I desire to express the conviction of my late colleagues and
myself that the original act of Captain Palmer was dictated by a high sense of duty, and that the seizure
of the ‘ Daphne’ was, in truth, calculated to prove eminently useful. We cordially gave him credit tor a
limb-minded desire to put a check upon crimes which were an outrage on humanity, and which were
becoming most discreditable to the British name ; and in that spirit the matter was instantly and earnestly
taken up by us. In proof of this I may refer to Sir William Manning’s first Minute of the 24th of May,
of which a copy is appended, which Minute was forwarded to your Excellency with the cordial concurrence
of such of the Ministers as had occasion to take part in the matter, and was, I believe, communicated to
Captain Palmer. It must, however, be confessed that our admiration for that devotion to duty, at personal
risk of responsibility, which was evinced by Captain Palmer’s original act, became considerably impaired
when we perceived the great anxiety, subsequently manifested, to remove the burthen of responsibility from
himself, to those who were neither concerned in the ‘ Daphne’s’ offences nor in her seizure, nor interested
in the proceedings for condemnation and penalties. But not the less was support given to Captain i aimer s
case for the sake of his cause. . „ , . t, , ,
10 I have now to call your Lordship’s special attention to the more salient passages in Captain i aUner s
book, in relation to the ‘ Daphne,’ having the effect of traducing this country and its Authorities, ihese
will be found on pages 130, 131, 142, 143, and 144, i i\r
11. In the first of these passages the writer, after mentioning the examination of the crew by Mr.
Williams (the Crown Solicitor) and himself, and their mutual expressions of doubt whether a case lor
criminal conviction could be made out, says,—“Time wore on, and I heard on all sides that the whole
“ matter would he burked if I did not take care , as so many merchants in Sydney were closely connected
“ w ith, and had interest in Queensland plantations, together with several tn the New South Wales Govern-
“ ment , that every possible delay and difficulty would be thrown in my way. i _ ~
And then, after interposing a paragraph calculated to convey the impression that a pro-slavery feeling
prevailed in the circle admitted to your Excellency’s drawing-room at Government House, he proceeds, by
way of antithesis to the above cited passage, as follows :
« On the other hand, I had all the sympathy of right-thinking , honourable men, who were ashamed to see
the lukewarmness of the Government in a matter in which their Colony was almost as much concerned as
“ At last, 14 days after the arrival of the ‘ Daphne,’ the master and supercargo were arrested and taken
before the Water Police Magistrates, having, during this time, been advised what to swear to and what not,
and thoroughly well instructed as to what they were to say, &c.
Again, in pages 143 and 144, the following passages occur v
“The following day (i.e. the day after the dismissal of the criminal charge at the Water Police Office)
I wrote a letter to Lord Belmore, protesting against the delay that had taken place before the trial, winch
in my opinion had contributed in a great measure to the result. Moreover, I had privately the opinion of
the most influential and respected firm of attorneys in Sydney, that I had established a very good case, an
that, owing to its peculiar nature, the magistrates ought to have committed the master and supei cargo o
the ‘ Daphne ’ for trial. _ , , .. . , ,
“ This letter, however, I afterwards withdrew at Lord Belmore s request, although after-events made
me reo-ret having done so. I had good reason for believing that it had the effect of wakening the
Authorities up a little, and of showing them that the affair was not a private one of mine, and that, there-
fore, nothing would stop me from having it sifted thoroughly, as until now the most extraordinary dilatori-
ness had been displayed in the whole transaction from the beginning, and, combined with the reports i
heard on all sides, I was more than ever convinced that there was no real wish on the part of the Authorities
to stop the eccentric proceedings that Sydney vessels had been for years engaged in among the islands.
The action I had taken bad seriously disturbed,” &c., &c. . .
And in pa<*e 144, after alluding to his then object to delay further proceedings in the until
“he should be in possession of overwhelming evidence that should convince the most sceptical, he says
“ But here I was checkmated by a letter, dated August 11th, from the Crown Solicitor, in which he
“ says, ‘ the Attorney-General has handed me your letter to his Excellency the Earl of Belmore, Ac.
12. Your Lordship cannot fail to see that these passages convey no light imputations 1 hey plainly
charge “several” of your Excellency’s Ministers of the day, and the “Authorities generally, with a most
disgraceful leaning towards kidnapping and slavery from motives of self-interest, and with a corrupt abuse
of their authority (in subserviency to those interests), with the object of delaying and defeating, or
“ burking ” that public justice which he, the writer, was striving to obtain from the tribunals of the
13. To your Lordship, who watched the case throughout with very great interest, I repeat that it is
unnecessary that I should repudiate these charges; but for the information of Her Majesty s impena
Government I take this means of declaring that the imputations are in the most absolute sense unti ue am
14. The only Ministers who took any part in the ‘ Daphne’ matter were myself, to whom, as Colonial
Secretary and Premier, your Lordship was pleased to refer it in the first instance—the Colonial Insurer
(Mr. Samuel), who advanced the funds that were required—and the Attorney-General (Sir William
Manning), who took charge of the case, and under whose directions the whole of the proceedings were
conducted. In truth, the action of the Attorney-General may be taken to represent that of the Govern-
ment throughout. . .
15. My own personal part in the matter was not much ; but, so far as it went, it took the single diroc mn


of sympathy for, and support to, the cause which Captain Palmer had in hand. On receiving from your
Lordship that officer’s original report of the seizure of the ‘ Daphne,’ and the expression of your wishes
upon it, I went personally and at once to the office of the Crown Solicitor, and instructed him that the
Government desired that the case should be taken in hand by the Law Department, and that no time
should be lost, nor any necessary expense spared, in prosecuting the matter. And subsequently I
arranged with the Colonial Treasurer for the advances that might be required; and we took upon ourselves
full responsibility for this course. Perhaps I here passed the bounds of my duty, in ignorance that the
‘ Daphne ’ and her trade were foreign to this Colony ; but the spirit in which I took the matter up as a
Minister of the Crown is plainly manifested by this act. Beyond these matters I did not, nor had I any
occasion to interfere, except occasionally as a medium of communication.
16. Mr, Samuel took no part whatever in the matter beyond what appears above, nor was it in his
province to do so.
17. To impute to either of us that we endeavoured to “ burke ” the proceedings, or to the Attorney-
General that he would have submitted to influence in that direction, is a gross and most unwarrantable
slander.
18. It will not be necessary for me to defend the character of the Crown Solicitor; his letter to your
Lordship is amply sufficient; but I may take occasion to state that it would be difficult to find a more able
and reliable officer in his capacity, and that it would not be possible to find in the country any person who
■would join Captain Palmer in imputing to him a corrupt dereliction of duty.
19. As regards the Attorney-General, a perusal of the series of Minutes and letters of which copies
are appended, will place beyond question the spirit in which he took up and conducted the case, and the
care and attention he bestowed on it. The promptitude with which the matter was taken In hand will be
signally manifest when it is observed that Captain Palmer arrived on the 21st May, 1869, and addressed
his first Report to your Lordship on the 22nd ; and that by the 21th of the same month that Report had
passed through my hands and those of the Crown Solicitor, and had been considered and acted on by Sir
W illiam Manning. This will be seen by his two Minutes of the latter date.
20. In reference to the blame cast by Captain Palmer upon the Law Officers touching the criminal
prosecution against the master and supercargo of the ‘ Daphne,’ and the assumption of superior anxiety on
his part to press that matter forward, I may ask your Lordship to note that Captain Palmer had not at
first contemplated any such proceedings, and that they originated wholly with the Attorney-General. The
fact that Captain Palmer entertained no such idea will become plain on perusal of his original Report of
21st May, of which a copy is appended; and might also have been inferred from his allowing the master
and supercargo to sail with those who alone could be witnesses against them, during the voyage under
capture to Sydney; and it is also confirmed by his letter to the Crown Solicitor of the sth June, of which
also a copy is appended. On the other hand, the Attorney-General’s second Minute of the 24th May,
shows that he first thought of and gave instructions for a criminal prosecution. That Minute or its sub-
stance was, I apprehend, made known to Captain Palmer soon after it was written ; and yet in his letter
of sth June, on arrival of the ‘Daphne,’ he confines his communication to the prize proceeding,
21. When, how T ever, the criminal proceedings were thus proposed, Captain Palmer undoubtedly entered
into it earnestly; but he appears to have been unable to appreciate such difficulties as arose from the want
of satisfactory evidence; and because he was himself satisfied with inferences which a court of justice could
not receive, he attributes Mr. Williams’s necessary delay to the influence of corruption.
' 22. So also, although he had himself failed to take the obvious precaution of examining the crew at the
time when the truth was most likely to be elicited from them,* and had given the master and supercargo of
the ‘ Daphne ’ the opportunity for free intercourse during the five or six weeks’ passage after seizure, and
had helped to take their statements shortly after their arrival, he does not hesitate to attribute the sworn
statements to the same effect, subsequently made by them before the Water Police Magistrates, to a
tutoring of the witnesses during the far shorter interval for which he blames the Crown Solicitor; and to
assign this as the cause of ultimate failure.
23. I need hardly add that any hesitation on the part of the Crown Law Officers as to the sufficiency of
the evidence for the criminal charge, and the decision at which the Bench of Magistrates at the Watef
Police Office arrived, were fully justified and borne out by the judgment of the Chief Justice on the same.
Facts in the Yice-Admiralty Court.
24. I beg now, with your Lordship’s permission, to notice the proceedings in the Yice-Admiralty Court;
and in doing so it will be proper first to mention that the ‘ Daphne ’ was neither owned nor chartered by
inhabitants of New South Wales, nor were any of them concerned in her trade. Her only connection with
this Colony arose out of the circumstance of Captain Palmer’s having selected the port of Sydney and the
Yice-Admiralty Court there established for procuring her condemnation as a prize. She was owned in
Yictoria and chartered in Queensland, which Colonies are as independent of New South Wales as foreign
states; and the places where the alleged offences had been committed, and where the vessel was seized,
were wholly beyond the political jurisdiction of this Colony. The only jurisdiction capable of exercise was
a judicial one held by the Courts of New South Wales in common with other British possessions, and
which may be regarded as wholly Imperial. In the case of the Yice-Admiralty Court, the tribunal is strictly
such ; and in that of the Criminal Courts, the jurisdiction is conferred in the interests of the Empire, and
outside those of the Colony, by the Constitution Act, 9 Geo. IY., cap. 83, sect. 4.
25. The Colony, as such, had nothing whatever to do with the case.
26. It may be further remarked, that not only did Capt. Palmer’s Report of the 22nd May, and his
letter to the Crown Solicitor, of the sth June, only contemplate proceedings for the condemnation of the
‘Daphne’ in the Vice-Admiralty Court, but also that the latter communication (which constituted
Mr. Williams’s retainer or authority to proceed as a proctor) directed the institution of such proceedings
“ on hehalf of the officers and crew of Her Majesty s ship 1 Rosario.’ ”
* This course was adopted by Consul March in a later case (the ‘ Challenge’), and the result was a conviction,
which it is thought would not otherwise have been obtained.
B 2


New South 27. Seeing, therefore, that this Colony was in no way concerned either in the alleged offence or in the
Wales. seizure, and that the suit was directed on behalf of the officers and crew of the seizing vessel for the
—— purpose of obtaining the ‘Daphne’s’ condemnation as a prize to the captors; it might have been'under-
stood by Capt. Palmer that the gratuitous services of the Law Officers of the Colony in the conduct of the
suit could not be claimed as matter of right, and that the fact of their being rendered gratuitously
evidenced sympathy with his cause. But instead of accepting them in this sense, and acknowledging
them accordingly, he early assumed a right to them, and anxiously sought to throw the burthen of
the case upon the Colony.
28. And during its proceeding Capt. Palmer embarrassed the Crown Officers, and created serious
difficulty and annoyance, by declining to communicate with them except through your Lordship; and,
when afterwards instructed by the Senior Naval Officer then on the station to communicate with them
directly, by claiming that all communications to the Crown Solicitor should be in writing.
29. Much difficulty appears also to have been occasioned by his inability to understand that rumours
and evidence at second hand, and unsworn testimony, would not be available in a court of justice, as they
might not unreasonably be on board of a ship of war. This will be seen on examination of his volume,
and still more clearly on reference to his letter of the 16th of August, 1869 (copy appended), and to
Sir William Manning’s remarks upon it of the 18th of that month (copy also appended).
30. This, however, did not in the least prevent Capt. Palmer’s cause from receiving, not only the
official weight, but also the professional assistance of the Attorney-General and Crown Solicitor, without
cost, to anextent at least equal to that which it would have received from a counsel or proctor retained at
the captor’s own charge; and I am sure your Lordship is fully aware that not only were much time and
great attention bestowed by these officers in the midst of a multiplicity of other duties, but that they were
given in a spirit which should have protected this Government from Capt. Palmer s imputations, even if
they failed to obtain recognition at his hands.
31. That gentleman’s course in seeking to transfer the burthen of his case to this Colony will appear
the more remarkable, though at the same time it will perhaps be explained, when it is observed that the
regulations of his own service impose full personal responsibility for captures and prize proceedings upon
the naval officers making the captures. With these regulations it may be assumed that Capt. Palmer was
conversant (as they are printed in the ‘ Navy List ’) ; and we may thence infer that he had full knowledge
that the relief which he demanded from this Colony, though comparatively a stranger to his proceedings,
was distinctly withheld from him by the Government in whose service he was engaged in the act of
seizure.
32. I rejoice for Capt. Palmer’s sake, as well as on account of the precedent established for other
naval officers who may perform like services for the prevention of kidnapping in the neighbouring seas,
that he obtained the Judge’s certificate of “ Reasonable Cause,” and that he was thus protected from
responsibility to the owners of the ‘ Daphne,’ and to the supercargo, master and crew whom he had
detained and taken from their occupations. And I not the less rejoice at it on account of its probable
deterrent effect on those whose misconduct might bring them under risk of seizure.
33. But I understand that Capt. Palmer narrowly escaped a refusal of the certificate, so clear was the
Judge’s opinion that the evidence was entirely insufficient as a legal justification of the capture. Phe
Attorney-General had throughout entertained a strong impression that Capt. Palmer had enough in the
indicia visible to himself to warrant his act as commander of one of Her Majesty s ships of war, although
always doubting whether legal condemnation could be expected. This view was, I believe, strongly pressed
by him on the Judge, and happily with ultimate success; but the Judge hesitated long, and at length
gave the certificate very doubtingly.
34. Upon the whole, I claim for this Colony that Capt. Palmer has had no cause of complaint, unless
he is prepared to impugn the uprightness of the Chief Justice s decision in denying condemnation of the
‘Daphne.’ # .
35. One further point demands notice. In page 152 of his work, Capt. Palmer alludes disparagingly
to the subject of the costs, which he in effect alleges that he had had to pay, contrary to an assurance of
protection by this Government. He there says, “ The expenses of the trial came to 179 1. ss. 5 d., which I
“ was assured at one time the Colony would not permit me to pay; but, nevertheless, I had to do so,
“ being unsuccessful in establishing my case. A few months after, however, I had the satisfaction to see
“ by the papers that the First Lord of the Admiralty bad expressed the approval of Her Majesty’s
“ Government of my conduct by ordering my expenses to be refunded, as well as giving me promotion.”
36. This statement is evidently intended to cast discredit upon this Government, in contrast with the
Lords of the Admiralty; and it even imports that faith had been broken with the writer, in respect of an
assurance alleged to have been at one time given him. It is not, indeed, expressly stated that he had been
“ assured ”on the authority of the Government that it would not permit him to pay these costs; but this
clearly is the idea conveyed. The passage, also, is calculated to convey the impression that this gentleman
had received no assistance whatever from this Government, and also that the costs mentioned represented
full costs of the proceedings, and, further, that he would have been left to defray them out of his private
purse but for the intervention of the Admiralty. # .
37. It is not within my knowledge that any such assurance was at any time given to Captain Palmer on
the authority of the Government. None was given by myself personally, nor can I learn that either of
my colleagues gave it. The Attorney-General’s views upon the subject appear to have been conveyed to
Captain Palmer in an interview which took place as early as the latter part of July, 1869 (as recorded in
his Minute of the 10th August, of which a copy is appended), and they were also communicated to your
Excellency in his letters of the 27th and 28th of August, to which I take leave to refer. These papers
strongly tend to negative the fact of any such assurance having been given up to that time; and certainly
none was given at a later date.
38. At the same time, there certainly existed an intention, of which your Lordship was, I believe, fully
aware, that the Government should protect Captain Palmer from personal loss in case of need, that is to
say, in the event of a refund being refused by the Home Government. We considered that his conduct


merited such protection, notwithstanding the probability of an adverse decision in his suit, but we also
thought that the burthen would more properly fall upon the Imperial Government than on this Colony,
and we entertained little doubt that the Admiralty would take the same view of the matter in all
respects.
39. If Ido not mistake, your Lordship fully concurred in these views and expectations; and you were
also, I believe, aware that we had not only taken the responsibility of the unauthorized advances from the
Treasury, but had determined on placing the amount of such advances on the estimates for Parliamentary
appropriation, in case Captain Palmer were not otherwise protected.*
40. This intention on the part of the Government may have reached that gentleman, although not -with
my knowledge; but if it did so reach him, he might have given us credit for our intentions, and should
not have assumed, without better grounds than he had, that the Government would have failed in ad-
herence to them if the occasion had arisen. He should also have seen that, consistently with this intention,
it would be our duty, in behalf of the Colony, to take steps for obtaining from the Home Government the
refund which was expected from it, before inviting the Parliament of this Colony to take the charge upon
itself.
41. The course taken for obtaining the refund was not designed to prejudice Captain Palmer personally,
but was adopted in the full expectation that the amount would be paid under the orders of the Admiralty
either directly or indirectly. In this matter your Lordship was good enough to take part with us; and I
am sure you will fully bear me out in saying that the idea of subjecting Captain Palmer to any personal
loss was not entertained; but that, on the contrary, no refund would have been sought at all if such a
result had been anticipated. In fact, what we contemplated was precisely what has occurred, except that
we had no expectation that Captain Palmer would have been allowed by the Admiralty to be, as he repre-
sents, even temporarily out of pocket.
42. W e were not aware that such had been the case even for an hour. One hundred pounds was drawn
on the Admiralty, as I understood, by Captain Montgomerie, R.N., as Senior Naval Officer on the station
(but in this I may be mistakenf), in accordance with the Navy Regulations affecting such cases. The
balance was paid in London on Captain Palmer’s private draft as recently as the Bth of November, 1870;
but at that time it might reasonably have been supposed that the Admiralty had decided on relieving him
from these expenses.
43. I have further to observe that the costs in question consisted exclusively of moneys actually disbursed
in the prize suit; and that Captain Palmer was fully aware that such was the case. He was informed of
the particulars and of the fact that the Attorney-General and Crown Solicitor had given their professional
services gratuitously. But for such gratuitous assistance, the costs would, as lam told, probably have
reached thrice their actual amount.
44. The expenses of the criminal proceedings were borne in this as in all other like cases (perhaps not
very reasonably) by the Colony; and I may here be permitted to add, that about the same time, this
Government, at the desire of Her Majesty’s Secretary of State, Lord Granville, that Inquiries should be
instituted, issued a commission of inquiry into cases of alleged kidnapping of natives of the Loyalty
Islands, upon which commission gentlemen of the highest character and position acted (of course without
remuneration); and that the Colony bore the expenses out of pocket, on that occasion, to the extent of
169 Z. 2s. 4:d.
45. Under these circumstances, and seeing also that this Government made every requisite advance for
expenses out of pocket, at some risk of a refund being declined, I must take leave to say that Captain
Palmer has not only made a most ungracious return for the assistance rendered to him, but that he has in
this matter of costs, as in others, done great injustice to the Colony, I cannot, however, affect surprise at
the treatment of this matter by a gentleman who, in other and far more serious particulars, has shown
himself entirely incapable of a generous or just appreciation of the Colony and its Government.
46. I have with much regret addressed these remarks to your Lordship. It would have been far more
agreeable to my late colleagues and myself to have passed by Captain Palmer’s book without notice, or to
have been able to comment upon it in terms of more respect for the writer’s treatment of the Colony.
But we have felt that the work was calculated to injure, throughout a very wide circle, the country which
trusted us with our positions; and we could not submit to the stigma of complicity with and of the corrupt
protection of crimes against liberty and humanity, which we hold in quite as great detestation as the
writer, and which, to the extent of our opportunities, we have been equally solicitous of checking and
punishing,
47. I am not aware that in offering this vindication I have transgressed the bounds of moderation or of
justice towards Captain Palmer, and should exceedingly regret to find that I had done so in any part cf
my remarks.
48. I have now only to apologize to your Excellency for the great length to which my letter has ex-
tended ; but believing, as I do, that your Lordship concurs in thinking this vindication necessary, I trust to
have your forgiveness if I have erred in trespassing too largely upon your attention.
I have, &c.,
The Earl of Belmore, (Signed) John Robertson.
&c. &c. &c.
* 4 have since been reminded that the sum of 79 1. ss. sd. was actually placed upon the supplementary
estimates for 1869 and 1870, and was voted by Parliament and included in the Appropriation Act. That sum
would consequently have been applicable for covering the advance if the Admiralty had not adopted the
charge.
t I have since writing this passage learnt that the draft was on the paymaster of the ‘ Rosario,’ with the
sanction of Captain Montgomerie.


Sub-Enclosures.
Captain Palmer to Lord Belmore.
My Lord, H.M.S. ‘ Rosario,’ Sydney, May 22, 1869.
In \he absence of Commodore Lambert I have the honour to report, for your Lordship’s infor-
mation, that I detained the schooner ‘Daphne,’ of Melbourne, John C. Daggett master, while at Levuka,
Ovalau, Fijis.
My reasons for doing so are as follows:
1. She had on board 100 natives from the Bank’s Group, New Hebrides, without any interpreter, and
quite naked. One lad (about 18) has quite lost the use of his left leg.
2. The clearance of the ‘ Daphne’ from Brisbane is only for the New Hebrides and not for Fiji.
3. Form I. of the Queensland Labour Act to be an agreement between fifty-one natives and an agent
of the name of Ross Lewin to go as labourers to Queensland, but these documents are all .signed and
witnessed by interested parties. #
4. Being licensed to carry down only fifty-eight natives to Brisbane, according to rorm C, i find this
vessel at Ovalau, Fiji, with 100 on board.
5. The master arid supercargo state that 108 natives were brought down to Tanna, and that eight were
landed there for Lewin’s own station, and the remainder (100) brought on to Ovalau, having re-engaged
at Tanna; this re-engagement is drawn up and signed by the same interested parties.
Moreover, the dates of these documents do not correspond with those of the * Daphne’s’ log, with the
exception of the first.
6. Passengers’ list irregular from Brisbane, and not signed by any port officer.
7. No clearance from the Fijis, or any passenger list.
8. A native boat’s crew on board, not on the ship’s articles, belonging to the Loyalty Islands; they
have at some period or other been taken from under the French flag. These men were placed on board
the ‘Daphne’ by Lewin, who appears to supply boats’ crews for the purpose of kidnapping. I have clear
evidence to this effect, while amongst the New Hebrides.
Taking all these circumstances into consideration, I landed all these unfortunate people at Levuka,
each of them receiving a fathom of cloth and a good meal. .
I requested Mr. Thurston, the acting British Consul, to take charge of them, until he received further
instructions from your Excellency. . , ,
I then detained the ‘Daphne’ and placed an officer and crew on board her, with orders to proceed to
Sydney, on the ground of grave suspicion that the schooner, master, supercargo, and crew have been
engaged either in actual slavery, or at least in a most irregular tending to promote and encourage
the slave trade, in violation of the Acts 5 Geo. IV., c. 113 ;6 & 7 Viet., c. 98. _
I have therefore the honour to request that, on the arrival of the ‘Daphne in this port, you vviil
cause the Queen’s proctor, or any other Proctor, to enter proceedings against her in the Vice-Admiralty
Court of New South Wales. . , „ . .
I may add that, although this vessel appears to be licensed by the Queensland Government Agents
to provide labourers, she is fitted up precisely the same as an African slaver, with the exception of leg-
irons. I found muskets and ammunition on board, and the supercargo, Mr. Pritchard, had a revolver
loaded and capped.
The ‘ Daphne’s’ log, together with her papers, are at present in my possession.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) Geo, Palmer,
The Earl of Belmore, Commander and Senior Officer present.
&c. &c. &c.
First Minute of Sir William Manning, A. G., on perusal of Commanders Report of his
seizure of the ‘ Daphne.’
May 24, 1869.
There can be no doubt of the duty of the Crown Law Officers of this Colony to act upon the instruc-
tions they have received for prosecuting this vessel to condemnation, unless they saw clearly that the facts
demanded advice on their part to the contrary. ' ... , , , , . . ,
In mv opinion the facts are not such in this case. On the contrary, I think the statements contained
in the letter of Captain Palmer show abundant grounds for the course taken by him as Commander of
H.M.S. ‘ Rosario,’ and amply suffice for requiring a submission of the case to investigation by the Court of
Whether the charge that the vessel was engaged in slavery will be capable of substantiation in the
Court is by no means so clear. The proof that the islanders found on board of her were being conveyed
and were confined “as and in order to their being dealt with as slaves will be matter of much difficulty,
both legal and practical. The former, because of the partial legislation of the traffic by the Queensland
law and by the licence held at the time for this ship, and because of the evidence that may be anticipated
as to non-slave character, in which it was intended that the men should be employed; the latter because
of the probable legal incompetency of the islanders to give evidence on oath, and of the great advantage
which the European master and crew will consequently have over them in tbs respect.
So far as the authorized number of fifty-eight men were concerned, the difficulty would be very great, as
it would be said, perhaps irresistibly, that they were being conveyed under legal sanction to a country
where the law would preclude their being “dealt with as slaves.” But as the number actually carried
was 108, of whom eight had already been landed at Tanna, 42 must have been designed for some
other place not enjoying free institutions under a recognized Government, the Judge may be able to


arrive at the conclusion that the fate of all beyond fifty-eight was intended to be that of slaves, notwith- New South
standing the sworn statements that may be made to the contrary. He will not, however, have the same Wales.
facilities as have usually been afforded in respect of the African slave trade, because the trade is not as
in that case undisguised in its character, and known to have been carried on in connection with countries
in which slavery was a recognized institution. .
The Crown Solicitor will be at once instructed to commence proceedings in the Vice-Admiralty Court
of this port so soon as the ‘ Daphne’ shall have arrived.
The Crown Solicitor is requested to proceed accordingly.
(Signed) W. M. Manning,
Attorney-General.
Immediate.
A copy of the above to be forwarded to the Colonial Secretary, and Captain Palmer s letter to be
returned so soon as the Crown Solicitor shall have made a copy of it.
(Signed) W. M.
Second Minute of Sir William Manning, A.G., on perusal of Commander Palmer’s Report of the
seizure, &c., of the 4 Daphne.’
80-alleged Slave Trading in Schooner ‘ Daphne .’
y May 24, 1869.
If this vessel is liable to condemnation for slaving, the master and crew must also be liable to be prose-
cuted criminally. The master’s offence would be piracy and felony, under section 9of 5 Geo. IV., c. Ho,
and the crew would be chargeable with misdemeanour under section 11.
I do not see that there can be any doubt of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of this Colony over
such offences by virtue of section 4 of the Constitution Act, 9 Geo. IV., c. 83.
I think, therefore, that on the arrival of the ‘ Daphne,’ the master and crew should be proceeded against
for felony and misdemeanour, respectively. For this purpose, the evidence of Captain Palmer, or one of his
officers, would be required in the first instance at the Police Office, and perhaps, if the Justices should think
fit to commit the accused, some of them may become disposed to save themselves by the avowal of the
truth as to the mode in which the islanders were got on board, &c., &c., and to give evidence for the
Crown. .
It will be advisable that the Crown Solicitor should attend at the Police Office, assisted by a competent
barrister, who should previously have been instructed to prepare himself fully.
(Signed) W. M. Manning, Attorney-General.
Captain Palmer to the Queen’s Proctor.
Sir, H.M.S. * Rosario,’ Sydney, June 5, 1869.
I request that you will, on the receipt of this, cause proceedings to be instituted on behalf of the
officers and crew of H.M.S. ‘ Rosario,’ against the schooner ‘ Daphne,’ captured on the 26th April, 1869,
on the ground of being engaged in the slave trade.
I have, &c.,
To the Queen’s Proctor, or any other (Signed) Geo. Palmer, Commander.
Proctor practising in the
Vice-Admiralty Court of New South Wales.
Minute by Sir William Manning.
In the matter of the ‘ Daphne,’ seized as a Slaver, and of the Master and Crew of that Vessel.
June 14, 1869.
I have carefully considered the notes which the Crown Solicitor has made of, his examination of some of
the officers and crew of this vessel, and am of opinion that upon the evidence of some of the persons
examined, and that of Captain Palmer of H.M.S. ‘ Rosario,’ there is enough to make it my duty to
proceed both against the vessel in the Admiralty Court and against the master criminally. _
The result of such proceedings may be very doubtful, especially in the case of the criminal charge, but
there is a broad aspect of the case apart from the express statements of the witnesses, which demands that
it should be presented by me for judicial determination in both forms. The Admiralty suit must therefore
proceed to its termination, and the master of the 4 Daphne ’ should be charged with the felony of carrying
persons for the purpose of being dealt with as slaves. It may be that the latter proceeding will not be
allowed to reach the stage of a committal, but this will rest with the Justices without, of course, any
influence being attempted on the part of the Crown. The Crown Law Officers would faihin their duty if
they neglected to bring the case under the cognizance of the magistracy. It may be proper to remark,
that if absolute reliance could be placed in the statements of the witnesses to the effect that these natives
came or remained on board willingly, and with a real appreciation of the position and engagement into
which they were entering, it would be impossible to regard them either as men who have been kidnapped
or as being prospectively slaves. They must be recognized by British law as possessing the full right to
take passages on board a ship for removal to some other country, and to enter into engagements for hired


service wherever they may think fit. But the question Is, whether they were free agents in point of fact, or
whether if they were so in the direct sense of actual consent to take passage in this vessel, they had not
been cheated or deluded into such consent, and misled as to the position into which they were to be cast
on landing. And there is the further question, whether even assuming their deliberate submission to their
destined position, the conduct of those who carry them would be any the less criminal in the eye of the
law. I apprehend not; for if the destination was slavery, in fact, whether permanent or temporary, the
spirit as well as letter of the law would be equally infringed, whether the men were willing or un-
willing to be used as slaves.
The case as now presented is altogether free from the difficulty originally noticed by me of a partial
legalization by the law and Government of Queensland, because it turns out that at the time of the
seizure of the ‘ Daphne,’ none of the natives on board were destined for Queensland. The authorized fifty
were originally intended to be taken to Brisbane, but their destination had been changed, and it was then
intended to land the whole number at Fiji.
What then is the real position of the case ? Here is a vessel officially recognized as fit to carry fifty
natives only, and receiving permission to bring that number to a country in which legal slavery is im-
possible, and in which all men have equal legal rights, and under the cloak of this sanction she cruises
amongst the islands and takes 108 natives on board, and intends to land them on another island possessing
no civilized government, and no laws prohibitory of slavery, or affording protection against the exercise of
a personal dominion incompatible with freedom. The men are induced to come on board by the per-
suasions of a hired native of their own group, one “ Charlie,” who may have been a clever and unprincipled
decoy. They would seem to have been persuaded in the first instance that they were to come to Australia
and then persuaded to change for Fiji, of which they perhaps knew nothing, and are said to have consented
to agreements, and to have gone through the form of touching a pen by way of signature upon the repre-
sentation of “ Charlie,” whose statements no one could check, as none but he and the natives knew the
language in which he spoke. And then before arriving at Fiji, he the only interpreter is landed, at Banna,
and they are brought on without one person through whom they could communicate or be communicated
with. It is impossible to feel assured that these men were free agents and fully informed of, and that they
comprehended what was about to be done with them. I pass by the diversity of statement as to whether
the natives had opportunities of returning to their homes after having once come on board, as the state-
ments of the witnesses are very contradictory on this point, and because I do not regard a consent obtained
perhaps by fraud, as at all conclusive. But I must notice, in conclusion, one feature in the evidence which
savours strongly of a practical dealing with the men as slaves, namely, the decision to land the men at
Fiji instead of proceeding to Brisbane, upon a calculation that the excess of numbers would not be noticed
at the latter place, and that 51. for their passages, without the obligation to find them in clothes before
landing, would pay better than BZ. for clothed men at Brisbane. 1 his 51. was of course to be paid by
the settlers to whom the men should be delivered over, under some agreement not originally entered into
with them, but with the captain or supercargo. The idea of untutored naked savages having any voice in
the selection of employers of a different race and language, must under the circumstances, rest upon no
substantial foundation ; of course, it must have been intended that the selection should be with employers,
who might be willing to pay the stipulated price. And when delivered over there would be no guarantee
in Fiji for evenj a semblance of the rights of freedom beyond such as the influence of the British Consul
might afford in the case of such of the men as should be hired by British subjects.
For these reasons, principally, I have arrived at the conclusions before stated, as to the duty of the Crown
Law Officers.
(Signed) W. M. Manning, A.G.
June 14, 18G9.
His Excellency the Governor will no doubt desire to see the evidence and my opinion when he returns
to town. I should wish to cast my eye over the opinion before it goes to him, for though I have thought
fully upon its subject, I have been compelled to write in haste.
* * ' J (Signed) W. M. M.
Minute by Sir William Manning.
Be ‘ Daphne .’
June 24, 1869.
I was not aware until this day that Mr. Pritchard, the supercargo, is in the Colony, or I should have
instructed the Crown Solicitor to initiate proceedings against him as well as the captain. Finding him
to be here, and believing that his conduct is as much open to criminal prosecution, and is perhaps morally
worse, I desire that an information be laid against him under section 9 of 5 Geo. IV., c. 113, for detaining
and confining the natives on board, and assisting in detaining and confining for the purpose of their being
used and dealt with as slaves. (Signed) W. M. M., A.G*
7.
Minute by Sir William Manning, A.Gr.
The Queen v. Daggett—Schooner * Daphne/
June 30, 1869.
I shall be glad if Mr. Solicitor-General will look over the depositions in this case, and let me know
what he thinks of the decision of the Water Police Magistrates that any further steps should be taken.
Of course I have power to file ex-officio information notwithstanding the dismissal of the charge, or the
case might be brought forward again before a Justice of the Peace, especially if further evidence should


be forthcoming; but I would not exercise my official authority as Attorney-General in filing an
information unless very strong grounds exist for such an exceptional course, nor would I sanction a
renewed application for a committal unless further and better evidence were obtained.
For the latter cause there is at present no ground, but it is possible that further evidence may be sent
up by the acting Consul, Mr. Thurston, which may hereafter warrant this step.
At present the only question that I consider at all open is whether I should, notwithstanding the
dismissal of the case at the Water Police Office, file an information with a view to a trial by the Supreme
Court. The strong inclination of my opinion is that no sufficient grounds exist for this cause. My
impression in fact is that the evidence does not sufficiently disclose the alleged offence to constitute a
prima facie case. But at the same time the whole transaction is so unsatisfactory that I regret that it
should not come before the highest tribunal. _
S (Signed) W. M. M., A.G.
Minute by Mr. Solicitor-General Josephson.
The Queen v. Daqnett.—Schooner ‘ Daphne.’
July 3, 1869.
I have read the depositions in this case very carefully, and think it was properly dismissed. All the
evidence brought forward to support the charge in the information that Captain Daggett knowingly,
wilfully, feloniously, and piratically received, conveyed, and removed the islanders for the purpose ot
being used and dealt with as slaves, fails in a signal manner, and in my opinion establishes to a great
degree contrary proofs, viz. that the islanders were not forced, but went there voluntarily ; that they
entered into some kind of agreement, of which the voyage in the ‘ Daphne ’ was an incident; that they
were never fettered or manacled ; that no fetters or manacles were seen on board ; that they had perfect
personal freedom ; that they were reasonably fed; and that the vessel, by its remarkable cleanliness,
excited Captain Palmers admiration. Captain Palmer admits that there was no attempt at concealment
in any way whatever ; that the ‘ Daphne ’ was open to inspection ; that the defendant gave up his papers
when requested, and answered all questions put to him without hesitation, and acted quite openly in the
matter. No witness produced established any one of the allegations stated in the information, and
therefore, without entering more largely into the merits of the case, I may state that I agree with the
Attorney-General that a renewed application for a committal should not be sanctioned unless better
evidence can be obtained, and I do not see any sufficient grounds for filing an information with a view to
a trial by the Supreme Court.
(Signed) J. F. Josephson, Sol.-Gen.
Minute by Sir William Manning.
lie ‘ Daphne.’
„ Sydney, August 10, 1869.
It is perhaps desirable that I should put on record what has taken place since the date of my Minute of
July 19. Very shortly afterwards, and before I had time to write the observations I intended to have
made upon the Vice-Admiralty Judge’s remarks and the letter of Messrs. Roxburgh, Slade, and Spain,
Captain Palmer called on the Crown Solicitor and conveyed his wish that the proceedings should be
continued, and as I had then made up my mind that it would be right to do so, notwithstanding very
serious doubts whether the case of intended slavery could be established, I caused the “libel ’ to be put
in by the day which the Judge had named; having done so, it did not appear necessary to trouble Captain
Palmer with the intended observations.
Some time afterwards I had an interview with Captain Palmer and the Crown Solicitor on the subject
of the evidence to be given, Captain Palmer having stated to His Excellency Lord Belmore, in a letter
of 12th July, that he expected soon to bring overwhelming evidence that the unfortunate natives were to
be dealt with as slaves.
It w r as then stated by me to Captain Palmer that I entertained little expectation that proof would be
forthcoming of an intention to deal with the men as slaves, and that anything short of that, however
unsatisfactory the state of things might be shown to be, would not support the suit for condemnation.
Captain Palmer stated that his expectation to receive proofs from Consul Thurston by a vessel then
shortly to arrive, which he anticipated would make out his case, in reference to which it was explained to
him that no proof short of such as could be supported by the sworn testimony of witnesses competent
to take an oath could be received, and that if his expected proofs were not so supported it would be
necessary to apply for a commission to take evidence in Fiji ; this, however, it was pointed out, could only
be asked for if the information to arrive from Consul Thurston gave reason to believe that the charge of
the intention that the men should be dealt with as slaves could be proved under such commission. It
was arranged that matters should stand over, as the captor was not compellable then to proceed, the
respondent’s answer not then having been put in, until intelligence should have been received from Mr.
Thurston, when we should confer together again as to whether the suit should be proceeded with, or the
release of the ‘ Daphne ’ be submitted to.
In the course of the interview I thought it right to call Capt. Palmer’s attention to the fact that the
Government of this Colony had nothing to do with the case in its own right, as the offence complained of
had occurred out of jurisdiction, as a civil suit only and not a criminal charge was now' under consideration.
I showed him that the matter came under cognizance here only because he had brought the ‘ Daphne ’
in the port of Sydney, in order to her condemnation in the Court of Vice-Admiralty here, which Court did
0


not hold its authority under the local Government but under the Imperial Statute, and the Lords of the
Admiralty. I pointed out to him, that though practically he might be assured of as much assistance in his
case as if this were a Crown Colony, and its officers direct Crown Officers, yet that the Law Officers here
could not assume for their Government any direct responsibility in reference either to this case or to the
consequences it might entail.
In reference to the criminal charges which had been initiated, and which ended in their dismissal from
the Water Police Office, it was mentioned that the courts here had full jurisdiction by the terms of their
constitution, as conferred by an Imperial Act, and that the Government therefore was responsible
accordingly, and that the Attorney-General would have had full control over the prosecutions if committals
had taken place; but that in this individual suit that officer could not be regarded as holding a corre-
sponding position, and that therefore it was necessary that he, Capt. Palmer, as captor, should be consulted
as to the steps to be taken. He, as I explained, was responsible to the parties affected for all consequences
of his acts in seizing and proceeding in Admiralty, and that it would rest with the Imperial Government
to support and indemnify him, as I presumed it would certainly do. I think I also said that this
Government also, in consideration of its relation to the Imperial Government, would, I anticipated,
be ready, in the absence of opportunities for communication, to act on his behalf in such way as it
might think would be desired by that Government. Something to this effect was intimated, but 1 am
not sure that it was so clearly expressed.
I write this Memorandum after an interval of, I think, nearly a fortnight.
(Signed) W. M. Manning,
Attorney-General.
Minute by Sir William Manning.
The 1 Daphne .’
August 16, 1869.
The defendants having now put in their responsive allegation, and to-day being appointed for fixing the
time for taking proofs, it is necessary that the Crown Solicitor be at once advised on evidence. 1 propose
to give some suggestions in this paper, but it will nevertheless be desirable that he should lay a case
to advise in evidence before the junior counsel in the cause. At present we are not in a position to
prove the captor’s charge satisfactorily, as we can obtain no evidence from any of the natives who
are supposed to have been destined to be dealt with as slaves, and have indeed no prospect whatever of
obtaining it within such time (if at all) as the Judge would allow (vide Capt. Palmer’s Letter to Lord
Belmore of the 13th inst., and my instructions for letter thereon). Nor are we in a position to lay before
the Judge such grounds as he would think sufficient for granting a commission to take evidence at Fiji as
to the existence of slavery in that country, or as to the mode of dealing with imported natives there. We
can only, therefore, make the best of such evidence as is within reach ; and as Her Majesty’s ship
‘ llosario ’ is required in New Zealand, the Crown Solicitor should ask his Honour to name as early a day
as the rules of the Court will permit for taking the evidence of Capt. Palmer and Lieut- Bingham, and
that of the carpenter of the ‘ Rosario,’ and any other witnesses from that ship whom Capt. Palmer may
wish to have examined. And in order to enable us to dispense with the further detention of the men
belonging to the crew of the ‘ Daphne,’ whom the Government is supporting, their evidence should
also be taken as early as practicable. The main element will still be wanting, namely, proof that the
natives were intended to be dealt with as slaves; and as this is probably not provable by testimony at
present within reach, we may yet have to ask for a commission. In view to this, I would suggest that if
Capt. Palmer should leave before receiving such information from Consul Thurston upon this matter, as he
referred to in his letter to Lord Belmore of 12th July, and as he told the Crown Solicitor and myself
would probably soon arrive, he should give authority for the opening of any letters that may come from
Mr. Thurston, and for their being placed before the Crown Solicitor. In the meantime I must throw out
for consideration by Capt. Palmer, whether it will not be advisable to make the master of the ‘ Daphne,’
and even Mr. Pritchard, witnesses in the case. They probably will be compelled to give true evidence as
to facts, wffiich would be open to contradiction from Fiji, such as the course of disposing of the natives to
planters or speculators on arrival, and as to course of dealing with them in the hands of the planters and
speculators, so far as such matters would come within their cognizance. I should have little hesitation in
taking the evidence of Mr. Daggett, the master, as he w'as reported by Capt. Palmer to have been open in
all his statements, and as, perhaps, he was almost an innocent instrument in the hands of the supercargo.
Moreover, whatever he proves to have been understood by himself as to the course of dealing, especially
in the original disposal of the men from the ship, w r ould be direct evidence of the intention. If, as I think
probable, he will prove that the course was to hand over all the men, without their having any voice in
the selection of employers, to those who would pay the highest price, and especially of the disposal of them
to speculators (themselves looking to retail profit on sub-disposal), was contemplated as an event open
to the supercargo, his testimony would go far to establish the worst that I expect will ever be proved in
reference to the prospective condition to which the natives were destined. The same remarks apply to
Mr. Pritchard, except that as he is perhaps more directly concerned in the traffic than the master ot the
vessel, his testimony may prove less reliable. If the matter is left to me, I shall be disposed to call both
those persons, in the absence of more satisfactory testimony, and to take the opinion of the Court upon
their evidence in connection with that of Capt. Palmer, Lieut. Bingham, the carpenter, and the so-called
agreements ; and the letter of authority given by Ross Lewin to Pritchard, which letter Mr. Pritchard
should in any event be subpoenaed to produce; but I think that Capt. Palmer himself should be consulted
before so strong a step is resorted to as that of calling witnesses whose interests must necessarily be so
adverse. It need scarcely be said that such a course would not be thought of if any better evidence


appeared to be obtainable, or if it were not necessary to act at once, and without waiting for the
possibility of such better evidence becoming available.
I must repeat here, to prevent misapprehension, that the question is not whether the natives w T ere
kidnapped originally (as to which, indeed, it is ascertained that no evidence is to be had), but as to the
design with which they were being carried on board the ‘Daphne,’ i.e. the intention that they should be
dealt with as slaves.
(Signed) W. M. Manning,
A copy of this to be sent to Capt. Palmer without delay. Attorney-General.
August 16.
I think, also, that it will be advisable to send a copy of this and of the Crown Solicitor’s two recent
letters to his Excellency Lord Belmore, as V ice-Admiral.
J W. M. M.
Captain Palmer to Mr. Williams.
g IR) H.M.S. ‘Rosario,’ Sydney, August 16, 1869.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 14th inst, and beg to inform
you that owing to my inability to ascertain what is understood in these seas as to the meaning of the term
“ slave,” as distinguished from the same term when applied to the trade on the coast of Africa, I am not
prepared to bring forward any further proof that the natives landed by me from the ‘Daphne ’ were to be
“ dealt with as slaves.”
I would wish, however, to call the Attorney-General’s attention to the following facts; whether or not
they will be deemed of any use in the present case it will be for him to determine.
1. No regulations exist, or have existed at Fiji, for the proper treatment of any natives landed there,
which is sufficiently proved by the deputation of planters that waited on me upon that subject when I was
at Levuka, consequently the ‘Daphne’ was taking these people under cover of a licence from a recognized
Government like Queensland, to a place where no Government existed, and where the natives could be
« dealt with as slaves,” as every planter was and still is doing what is right in his own eyes.
2. No interpreter having been brought with the ‘ Daphne ’ natives to Fiji, it was a moral impossibility
•that they could hire themselves out to the planters on those islands as free labourers, consequently they
could only be “ dealt with as slaves ” by the supercargo of the ‘ Daphne.’
3. It was stated in the evidence of D. Foster, mate of the ‘ Daphne,’ that a man named Brown, who
piloted the ‘ Daphne ’ into Levuka, wanted to take “ the whole lot” ; and as he had no plantation or establish-
ment on that, or any other island in Fiji, he could only have intended to sub-let these natives to those of
the planters who would give him the most money for them, and it was well-known that that was his intention.
4. It is proved by the document handed into court, that Pritchard, the supercargo of the ‘ Daphne,’ is
or was a partner of*Eoss Lewin, and who I heard of at every island I visited as a notorious man-stealer.
5. Mr. Thurston states in his letter to me that the statement made in the ‘ Melbourne Argus,’ February,
1869, about the diabolical proceedings of Messrs. Burt and Underwood, are “ strictly true These men
are Fiji planters. Mr. Thurston has just taken away 20 of their men, and intends taking the whole lot if
he can lay his hand on them.
He also informed me of the difficulty he experienced in getting certain planters at the different islands
of the Fiji group to return the natives to their homes after their so-called engagements had terminated,
and I had ample proof that many of these engagements had been drawn up in Fiji after the natives had
been kidnapped. #
6. I examined some natives myself when at Ovalau, who had been brought in the English vessels ‘lda’
and ‘ Mary Smith ’ to the island of Makongai, Fiji, and then distributed to different other islands of the
group ; and they stated that they and their people, over 100 in number, had all been kidnapped and
brought to Fiji from the Kingsmill Islands.
7. Clarke, late master of the ‘Anna’ (owner B. M. Latin, Melbourne), was dismissed his ship
because he refused to allow kidnapping for Fiji plantations. I brought him down to Sydney, at the Con-
sul’s request, as a distressed British subject.
8. It will also be seen that the slave fittings of the * Daphne,’ although legalized by the Queensland
Government, are not so by the Imperial Passenger Act (18 and 19 Viet., cap. 119).
This is all the information I can give as to the existence of slavery in the Fiji Islands; it will, however,
I trust, be deemed sufficient.
I have, &c.,
The Crown Solicitor, (Signed) Geo. Palmer,
&c- &c. &c. Commander.
Minute by Sir William Manning.
The ‘ Daphne.’
August 18, 1869.
• Some of the facts stated in Captain Palmer’s letter of the 16th instant, would go far to establish the
case against the ‘Daphne,’ and might satisfy the Judge; but the difficulty is that in a court of justice
the facts must be established by the sworn testimony of those who possess the actual and personal know-
dedo’e of them, and cannot be proved at second-hand, however reliable the information may be for all other
than that of legal proof.
As Captain Palmer apparently does not appreciate the legal difficulties of the case, I am very desirous
C 2


that he should be made aware that they arise from the fact of judicial tribunals requiring other and very
different modes of proof from such as might be satisfactory to himself as a naval officer, or to any intelligent
person outside of a court of justice.
For this reason I propose to go through the several paragraphs of his letter of the 16th, and to point
his attention to the difficulties that apply to each.
1. As to the first, we have not at present any proof of the absence of proper regulations at Fiji; and
it is certain that Captain Palmer’s evidence of the representations made to him by the deputation of
planters at Levuka, would he rejected by the Judge, and that his statement upon report as to the planters
exercising an uncontrolled dominion over the natives would also be inadmissible.
2. This is a matter of inference which the Judge might have drawn from evidence already received, but
which he has certainly not thought sufficiently clear for adoption. It will still be open to him.
3. The statement of D. Forster that the man who piloted the ‘ Daphne ’ “ wanted to take the whole lot
“ of natives,” would not be proof against the ‘ Daphne ’ that the master or supercargo was prepared to deal
with them accordingly. The intention to dispose of them at the best price, whether wholesale or retail,
may be suspected, and may be inferred from the other evidence which the Judge will have before him,
but not from Brown’s offer without acceptance or negotiation by the supercargo on the basis of that offer.
4. The fact of Pritchard being shown to be a partner (or agent) of Lewin would avail nothing if the
only evidence of the latter being a “man stealer” consisted of Captain Palmer’s evidence (which would
indeed be rejected) that he heard of him as such at every island he visited. However convincing may be
the accumulated statements received at many islands, yet in the Court such statements could only be
received on oath from men to whom the facts were personally known.
5. Of the proceedings of Messrs. Burt and Underwood I know nothing ; nor would evidence of wrong
by them be admissible to influence the decision of the Court against the ‘ Daphne.’ Nor would Mr.
Thurston’s letter stating facts affecting them be within the rules requiring testimony upon oath and subject
to cross-examination. The further facts stated in the letter of Mr. Thurston as to the difficulty of getting
planters to return the natives to their homes, might bear upon the general question as to the condition of
imported natives in the Fiji group, but could certainly not be proved by the production of Mr. Thurston’s
letter. If not inadmissible on the ground of such facts bearing too remotely on the ‘ Daphne’s ’ case, this
proof would be rejected as being without oath, and not open to the test of cross-examination.
6. The statements made to Captain Palmer by natives of Ovalau, though well calculated to produce
conviction in his mind, could not be received in evidence, because they were not made upon oath subject
to cross-examination, and would be offered to the Court at second-hand instead of by the persons asserting
these facts.
7. This matter could not be allowed to affect the ‘ Daphne ’; nor is it said that any witness is here to
prove the fact.
8. If the fittings of the ‘ Daphne ’ were legalized by the Queensland Government, they cannot be
treated as “ slave fittings.”
Note. —However desirable It may be to put down or place under proper control a system of so-called
emigration which is likely to degenerate, and probably has sometimes degenerated, into a practice
approaching a slave trade, and perhaps actually amounting to it, yet it is certain that if resort be had to
courts of justice for the punishment of offenders, the rules of law on the subject of evidence must be rigidly
observed. If the nature of the case renders such proof at once impossible or difficult, and morally unneces-
sary to sound justice, the course must be to make special provisions by legislative enactment. As the law-
stands, I cannot propose to the Court, nor would the Court receive, evidence otherwise than in accordance
with the established rules of law.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) W. M. Manning,
Attorney-General.
Reply to a Note from His Excellency the Earl of Belmore, dated 16th August, 1869, on the question
whether the communications of Commander Palmer and Naval Officers in General should be
through the Governor only.
Dear Lord Belmore, August 19, 1869.
The papers on military correspondence which you were good enough to send me may certainly
be regarded as equally applicable to that of Naval Officers, but I cannot think that the rule laid down
should be extended to communications necessary on Captain Palmer’s part in the course of the proceedings
against the ‘ Daphne.’ The papers do not define either the objects of the rule or its extent; but I should
myself infer that its application w-as Intended to be to the government or discipline of the forces, their
employment and requirements, and other matters (if any) which the prerogative and dignity of the Crown
and the relative position of the services to the Home and Colonial Governments respectively, require to
be kept independent of and superior to the control of Colonial Ministers and Civil Officers. The case ot
the ‘ Daphne ’ proceedings can hardly be regarded in this light, although the seizure was made by Captain
Palmer as the commander of one of Her Majesty’s ships of war. Such seizure was made outside the
jurisdiction of the Colonial Government, and although the alleged act of slave trading as a criminal
offence was within the jurisdiction of the Colonial Courts by virtue of an Imperial Act, neither those
Courts nor the local Government has any authority whatever in respect of the seizure of the vessel, or the
suit for its condemnation and for penalties. The matter is only entertained here because Captain Palmer
has brought the vessel into the port of Sydney, and avails himself of its Court of Vice-Admiralty. That
Court is independent of the Colonial Government, being an Imperial Court established in connection with
the Admiralty jurisdiction of Great Britain. It may well be that at the outset Captain Palmer’s course
was to ask your Lordship as Vice-Admiral of these parts ; but (without raising any question as to whether
the services of the Law Officers of this Colony could be commanded in such cases, if not as in this ‘ Daphne ’


-matter freely given by them) I may point out that it would be in a high degree inconvenient if Captain
Palmer should'not communicate direct with the Crown Solicitor upon incidental questions as the
evidence obtainable arising in the course of the proceedings, or if, as hitherto done, his communications are
to be sometimes direct, both in writings and by interviews, and sometimes by letters to your Lordship.
It would be almost impracticable to conduct a suit upon such terms; and I venture to say that the
question whether it is a part of the official duty of the Law Officers of this Colony to conduct such cases
will probably be raised on some future occasion, if, in addition to the general charge of the case, they are
inconvenienced by the complications and inconveniences which such a course must inevitably occasion. I
am myself most unwilling to raise any question which may embarrass any branch of the service, and in
this particular matter I have readily entered into the case on the assumption that it belonged to my
office of Attorney-General ; but I shall certainly be obliged if your Lordship will preclude further
difficulty by the course you propose of requesting the Senior Naval Officer to instruct Captain Palmer to
communicate directly with the Crown Solicitor in regard to future proceedings in this case.
I have, &c.,
The Right Hon. the Earl of Belraore, (Signed) W. M. Manning.
&c. &c. &c.
Reply to a Note from His Excellency the Earl of Belmore to Sir William Manning, Attorney-General,
dated August 25th, 1869, having reference also to an earlier Note from His Excellency, dated
August 19th, as to the right of the Governor to command the services of the Law Officers of the
Colony in reference to the ‘ Daphne ’ case and other like cases.
Dear Lord Belmore, _ August 27, 1869.
The conclusion at which I have arrived is that, in point of law, the Governor of the Colony has
not any duty or authority whatever, either as Her Majesty’s Representative, or as Vice-Admiral, in respect
of the instituting or conducting of suits for the condemnation of vessels supposed to have been engaged in
slaving, or for the penalties consequent thereon.
It follows therefore that he cannot “ command ” the services of the Law Officers in relation to such
suits.
Suits of this kind belong to and are at the cost and risk of the captor, who informs the Court of his
seizure, and demands the condemnation and penalties. This is evident from the legislative enactments of
which I enclose a copy, and from the terms of the Admiralty Circulars published in the Navy List, to which
you have been good enough to refer me.
My impression has been clearly to this effect from the commencement of the ‘ Daphne suit, and I have
acted upon it in requiring that Captain Palmer should be consulted at each step, as if he were the Crown
Solicitor’s client. This was done deliberately, because of what appeared to be a plain assumption on his
part that the case was out of his hands, and that the responsibility rested upon the Crown Law Officers of
this Colony.
But though such was my impression, I did not care to raise any question on the matter, nor, therefore,
to examine it closely, because it appeared to me that, in the interests of humanity, and for the honour of
the nation, it was right that the case should be taken in hand by the Crown or public. Because, also, I
had a strong conviction that the case itself would go against Captain Palmer, yet that its prosecution to
the end would, by leading to the judicial exposure of a nefarious practice, become the foundation for some
special legislation on the subject. It seemed to me, therefore, impossible that the cost and consequences of
the proceeding could be permitted to fall upon an officer who certainly had acted upon a high sense of duty,
and not for the sake of the proceeds of condemnation, &c., and whose act was likely to prove in many
ways beneficial to our common country. I acted therefore on the conviction that the Imperial Government
would hold him harmless, and that it became ray duty morally to give him all the assistance in my power
as Attorney-General. ’ •
This feeling was concurred in by the Premier, who expressed to me privately his readiness take the
responsibility (in case of need) of protecting Captain Palmer in respect of the consequences of his seizure
and suit, in reliance that any expenditure by this Government would be refunded from home, and that if
not, the local Parliament would indemnify him.
And still although it has become necessary to enter upon an inquiry which has put it beyond doubt that
the whole responsibility of the case rests in law with Captain Palmer, I cannot believe that he will be left
exposed to personal loss in the not improbable event of the suit being decided against him. In the con-
trary event, the proceeds of condemnation might pay all costs, unless the Government should think fit to
regard the interests of the innocent mortgagees of the ‘ Daphne.’
For myself I must be permitted to say that 1 cannot for a moment entertain the suggestion that my
services should be remunerated in any way.
Should cases of this sort recur it will, however, be necessary that they should be carried on independently
of the Crown Officers in their official capacities; and in this particular case I have no right to relinquish
the just claim of the Crown Solicitor to some consideration for his valuable services, nor can I assume for
this Colony the burthen of such actual outlay as has been occasioned either by the criminal or civil pro-
ceedings.
In the case of the ‘Young Australian’ there are considerations which should, perhaps, be regarded as
distinguishing it from that of the ‘Daphne,’ and of the prisoner lately brought up by the ‘ Blanche,’ The
proceedings were criminal only, and clearly within the jurisdiction of our ordinary Courts, and the vessel
was owned by people of this Colony and came to this port spontaneously with the persons on board, whose
crime formed the subject of prosecution. Whereas the * Daphne ’ did not belong to owners here resident,
and was brought up to Sydney by officers of Her Majesty’s navy; and in the case of the man brought up
by the ‘ Blanche ’ the offence would not have come under the cognizance of our Courts, but for the direction


of a Consul beyond our jurisdiction and the compulsory removal of the prisoner to Sydney by another
officer in Her Majesty’s navy. In such cases it may be very convenient that the jurisdiction possessed by
our Courts should be taken advantage of from all parts of the Pacific ; but the Government of the Colony
can hardly be expected to beat the expense of prosecution, nor can it be reasonably expected that the Law
Officers should perform the extra duties occasioned by such cases without special retainers and remuneration.
It may be doubted whether the Parliament of this Colony would sanction such an expenditure if made
by the Government; and it may be regarded as certain that its votes hitherto have not had such outlays
in view.
I have, &c.,
The Earl of Belmore, (Signed) W. M. Manning, A.G.
&C. &C. &c.
By sect. 44 of 5 Geo. IV., 113, it is provided that the proceeds of all ships and goods seized, prosecuted,
and condemned for any offence against this Act, exept in such seizures as shall be made at sea by the
commanders or officers of His Majesty’s ships or vessels of war, shall be divided and paid as follows
And in cases of seizures made at sea by the commanders or officers of His Majesty’s ships or vessels of
war, one moiety of the said nett proceeds, after deducting the charges of prosecution as aforesaid (i. e.
from the gross amount thereof) shall be paid into the hands of such persons as His Majesty, his heirs and
may please to appoint, for the use of His Majesty, his heirs and successors; and the other
moiety to the commanders or officers of His Majesty’s ships or vessels of war who shall have made the
seizure and prosecuted the same to condemnation, subject nevertheless to such distribution in the seizures
made by the commanders or officers, whether at sea or otherwise, as His Majesty, his heirs and successors,
may think fit to order and direct, by Order in Council, or by proclamation to be made for that purpose.
By sect. 51 all seizures of ships, vessels, or boats, slaves or persons treated as slaves, &c., shall, and
may be sued for, prosecuted, and recovered in any Court of Record in Great Britain, or in any Court
of Record or Vice-Admiralty in any part of His Majesty’s dominions in or nearest to which such seizures
may be made, or to which such ships, vessels, or boats, slaves, &c. (if seized at sea, or without the limits
of anv British jurisdiction) may most conveniently be carried for trial.
Jn the same clause it is provided amongst other things that all such penalties, forfeitures, and seizures
may be sued for, prosecuted, tried, recovered, &c., in like manner, and by the same ways and means, and
subject to the same rules and directions as provided by a certain Act of 4 Geo. 111., c. 15, by which Act
it is provided in sect. 46 that, where a verdict or sentence shall go for the claimer of the goods or chattels
(i. e. as contrasted with the seizer), and it shall appear to the Court or Judge before whom the cause shall
be tried that there was a probable cause of seizure, the Judge or Court shall certify on the record or other
proceedings that there was a probable cause for the prosecutor’s seizing the said ship or goods, and in
such case the defendant shall not be entitled to any costs of suit whatsoever, nor shall the persons who
seized the said ship or goods be liable to any action or other suit, or prosecution on account of such
seizure, &c.
Reply to a Note from His Excellency the Earl of Belmore to Sir William Manning, Attorney-
General dated 27th August, 1869, with reference to’ the case of the ‘ Daphne, and future prize cases
and prosecutions, instituted in this Colony, and the Costs which they might entail on the Colony.
Dear Lord Belmore, ~ . , Sydney, August 28 1869.
The Captain of a ship of war who may arrive in this port with a vessel which he has seized, would
of course report to his superior officer, if in port, and if not, I presume he would, as a matter of informa-
tion, report to the Governor. But for the purpose of proceeding against his prize, he Mould have to
employ a proctor (i. e. a Solicitor in Vice-Admiralty), and I think he would do well to place himself in the
hands of the gentleman acting as Crown Solicitor. That officer would be able to conduct his case with
more authority or weight, and would, I have no doubt, in fitting cases be indisposed to pu the captor
to expenses which would be expected by an ordinary solicitor; I may venture to say that in all probability
an officer of the Navy who was felt to have done no more than his duty, would, although he should prove
unsuccessful in Court, not be himself personally expected to pay for the services of the Crown Solicitor or of
the Attorney or Solicitor General whom he might consult.
As regards the ‘ Daphne,’ I have already stated that I can accept no remuneration for my services and
lam glad to be able to say that Mr. Williams is equally indisposed to accept any. He says that he took
the case in hand believing it to be a part of his official duty, and he is prepared to carry it on to the end as
if it were such. The only expenses to be provided for will be costs and expenses out of pocket, such as
Court fees! expenses of witnesses including their detention in the Sailors’ Home, and fees to the junior
COl As 6 tQ W crimffial proceedings, you/Lordship is right, in one sense, in supposing that the Crown is
always prosecutor m this Colony, but in the true sense it is not more so than in England. Here the
Attorney-General appears more prominently, because he is the Grand Juror of the Colony, and prosecu-
tl°But the true § prosecutor is the person who gives information of the crime, whilst the duties of the Attorney-
General as public prosecutor, commence on the committal of the accused by the Justices of the Peace.
ThaUs to say, it ordinarily does so; for Ido not mean to say that he cannot exercise the extraordinary
nnwer of indictment or information ex officio. ~ . n t ,
By reason of the Attorney-General’s character of Grand Juror, I cannot think that he ought in general


to have anything to do with the initiation of proceedings, I would therefore suggest that in the event of
criminal charges, from places out of the jurisdiction of the police of this Colony, being brought under
your Lordship’s attention, the informants should be at once referred to the Crown Solicitor, by whom the
police may be set in motion, or the prosecutor be advised.
With reference to the expenses attendant on such cases as that of the prisoner brought up in the
* Blanche/ I wish to modify what my former words seemed to convey. So far as lam myself concerned,
I should not think of taking special remuneration for my services as Attorney-General, and I wish to
decline advising for my successors. And in the case of Mr. Williams, lam able now to say that he also
would decline such remuneration, unless cases of the sort should become numerous and burthensome, in
which case the matter may come under re-consideration. But the expenses of witnesses are apt to be
serious in these cases, and cannot very reasonably be expected to fall on the Colony. For example, in the
case of the man last mentioned, the witnesses whom the ‘ Blanche ’ also brought up have to be maintained
for full two months before the trial can come on. And the prisoner also will be a burthen on the Colony
until trial, and may become chargeable on it "as a convict for many years to come.
As regards your Lordship’s right to “command ” the services of the Law Officers, I think you will find
that what I have said as to this, had reference only to cases in the Admiralty Court for condemnations and
penalties at the suit of captors. AH criminal matters devolving upon the jurisdictions of the Colony under
the New South Wales Act, will of course be attended to by the Law Officers, according to their several
duties, and will not, I may be permitted to say, come within the category of “ commands” by the Governor
of the Colony. Your Lordship need not, lam sure, he under any apprehension that such matters will not
be duly attended to, nor need there be any doubt as to the readiness of the Law Officers to give their best
advice to the Governor in matters of this kind, —or I may perhaps add, of any kind which he may be called
upon to consider, in the widest view of his official position I may speak, at least for myself, for such brief
time as the office of Attorney- General may remain in my charge.
In the possible contingency of some difficulty in this respect hereafter arising, means wall no doubt be
found for overcoming it. At present, I venture to say that there is no occasion for anticipating and
providing for such a contingency.
I have, &c,.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Belraore. (Signed) W. M. Manning.
P.S. —In cases brought for trial from remote places, it may not unfrequently become necessary to send
for witnesses from the place at which the crimes were committed; and even on the side of the accused
such witnesses as justice may appear to require, should equally with Crown witnesses be sent for. It would
be highly unjust that the accused should be taken by force to a remote place and be left without the means
of proving his innocence by evidence which would have been available on the spot.
(Signed) W. M. M.
No. 4.
Copt of a DESPATCH from The Earl of Kimberley to The Earl of Belmore.
(No. 1.)
My Lord, Downing Street, January 8, 1872.
I haye to acknowledge your Lordship’s Despatch, No. 159,* of 6th October, for-
warding a letter from Mr. Robertson, the Colonial Secretary, on the subject of that part
of Captain Palmer’s work, entitled, ‘Kidnapping in the South Seas/ which relates to
the cases of the ‘ Daphne’ and ‘ Young Australian.’
I have read with satisfaction the statement made by Mr. Robertson on behalf of
himsell and the other gentlemen who were members of the Government of New South
Wales in 1869, and I request that your Lordship will inform Mr. Robertson that in my
opinion his statement completely exonerates the Government of the Colony from the
charges brought against them by Captain Palmer in the work in question.
1 think it due to the Colonial Government and to the officers w hose conduct in these
cases has been impugned, that the statement of Mr. Robertson and my reply should be
made public ; and I shall therefore take an early opportunity of laying these papers
before Parliament.
I have, &c.,
The Earl of Belraore, (Signed) KIMBERLEY.
&c. &c. &c.


CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE ADMIRALTY,
No. 5.
Admiralty to Colonial Office,
Sir, Admiralty, February 2, 1872.
With reference to your letters of the 23rd November and 27th December last,
respecting the complaints made by the late Prime Minister and other Officers of the
New South Wales Government against certain passages in Captain Palmer’s book,
‘ Kidnapping in the South Seas,’ I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty to acquaint you, for the information of the Earl of Kimberley, that my Lords
thought it right to permit Captain Palmer to see this correspondence in order that he
might have an opportunity of reconsidering those statements to which objection had
been taken.
2. My Lords have now the pleasure of informing Lord Kimberley that Captain Palmer,
upon reading the statements forwarded in Lord Belmore’s Despatches, immediately
addressed to their Lordships a letter, dated 27th instant, a copy of which is enclosed, in
which he states that he can now, with feelings of deep satisfaction, withdraw all the
expressions in the book complained of in the correspondence, and trusts that this will be
deemed satisfactory by all the gentlemen concerned.
3. Captain Palmer also requests that his letter may be printed with the correspondence
which is to be laid before Parliament. My Lords entirely approve of this request, and
would propose, therefore, to Lord Kimberley, that Captain Palmer’s letter, together with
their Lordships’ reply and this letter, should be printed accordingly as part of the
correspondence.
4. My Lords would observe that while they much regret that Captain Palmer should
have published strictures on the conduct of the Officers of the New South Wales
Government which were altogether unfounded, they are satisfied that in all his proceed-
ings in that Colony when he was in command of H.M.S. ‘ Rosario,’ and in his subsequent
publication of his account of what had taken place. Captain Palmer was actuated with
an honourable zeal for the public service.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) VERNON LUSHINGTON. '
The Under-Secretary of State
for the Colonies.
Enclosure in No. 5.
Sir, Plymouth, January 27, 1872.
I am much obliged to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty for their kindly allowing me to
read the correspondence from the New South Wales Government and the Colonial Office, in which certain
passages in my Book, ‘ Kidnapping in the South Seas,’ are complained of.
I find there are amongst these papers Minutes of the Attorney-General under the following dates :
June 14th, 1869 (Enclosure No. 5).
June 24th, 3869 (Enclosure No. 6).
June 30th, 1869 (Enclosure No. 7).
August 10th, 1869 (Enclosure No. 9).
Also a Minute of the Solicitor-General, dated July 3rd, 1869 (Enclosure No. 8), of the existence
of which I was ignorant up to the present moment, and which enlightened me very considerably upon the
earlier proceedings taken by the Crown Law Officers in regard to the prosecution of the master and
supercargo of the ‘ Daphne.’
By these letters I see I was mistaken in my views as to the Attorney-General’s action in the matter,
and I am at a loss to understand why I was kept in ignorance of them by the Crown Solicitor, as he sent
me many others of a later date; but lam quite ready to suppose that pressure of work was the cause.
How strongly I felt upon what to myself and many others seemed a miscarriage of justice at the Water
Police Court, is proved by the letter 1 wrote Lord Belmore (which I afterwerds withdraw at his request),
besides those to Commodore Lambert, then in New Zealand.
The misunderstanding between myself and the Crown Law Officers would never have taken place had
I known at the time how mueh trouble the Attorney-General was taking in the matter; hut of which I
was, from some unknown cause, never informed.


I exceedingly regret to perceive from the tone of Lord Belmore’s Despatch in forwarding these papers
to the Colonial Office, that he imagines I ever intended to make any reflection on his conduct.
It is with feelings of deep satisfaction that 1 can, having read these documents, now withdraw all
the expressions in my bn ok complained of in this correspondence, and 1 trust this will be deemed satis-
factory to the gentlemen concerned.
I am also glad to hear that the New South AVales Government would have reimbursed me the expenses
of the prosecution if the Imperial Government had refused to do so.
As 1 understand the correspondence is to be laid before Parliament, I have to request that this letter
may also be printed, if their Lordships approve, and I have only to add that the paragraphs alluded to
shall be expunged if my book should go through another edition.
I have, &c.,
The Secretary of the Admiralty. (Signed) Geo. Palmer, Captain.
No. G.
Admiralty to Captain George Palmer, R.N
Sir, Admiralty, February 2, 1872.
1 am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to communicate
to you the satisfaction with which their Lordships have received your letter of the 27th
ultimo, unreservedly withdrawing the expressions in your book which had been com-
plained of by the late Prime Minister and other Officers of the New South Wales
Government.
2. My Lords have forwarded your letter to the Colonial Office, with a request that it
may, together with this reply of their Lordships, and their covering letter, be printed in
the correspondence to be laid before Parliament.
3. My Lords have observed to Lord Kimberley that whilst they much regret that you
should have published strictures on the conduct of the Officers of the New South AVales
Government which were altogether unfounded, they are satisfied that in all your pro-
ceedings in that Colony, when you were in command of H.M.S. ‘ Rosario,’ and in your
subsequent publication of your account of what had taken place, you were actuated by
an honourable zeal for the public service.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) VERNON LUSHINGTON.
Captain George Palmer, R.N.,
2, Leighton Terrace, Plymouth,
• '■ ■- i. .■...Afawt
LOX D 0 N
PRINTED nr WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CftOSS,
FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.


- / : !; L } .
> IM », ff 107
ixj Ul
