

CORRESPONDENCE
PUBLIS HED BY
ARCHDEACON REIBEY
FOR CIRCULATION.
Skamania:
HAEEIS AND JUST, MACHINE PEINTBES, LAUNCESTON.
\£lo
rn+vKi




CORRESPONDENCE.
“ The man that dares traduce because he can
With safety to himself, is not a man.”
It has gone forth to the world, through the public press, upon the
testimony of Mr. H. W. Blomfield, that his delay in taking action
against me for a criminal offence, said by his wife to have been com-
mitted by me in July, 1868, was in consequence of my having “pre-
mised him to resign the office of Archdeacon, and leave Tasmania. *
My Bishop has also said that it “ was unfortunate that my
resignation was sent to him three days after my interview with Mr.
Blomfield in July, 1868.”
In self-defence I now publish the following correspondence
connected with my resignation of the office of Archdeacon, which
must prove the utter falsehood of the former statement, and the ab-
solute incorrectness of the latter :
On the 10th of July, 1868, I wrote to the Bishop, resigning my
office. On Tuesday, the 14th of July, 1868, Mr. Blomfield rode to
Entally and made the false and foul charges against me. On
Thursday, the 16th, I answered Bishop Bromby’s letter of the 13th,
consenting to hold office.
The letters and their dates will speak for themselves.
There is no wound so sore as the poisonous sting which the
slanderer can inflict—there is no remedy for such hurts “Such
hurts are hellish pain.” I can never stop the consequences of the
cruel words which have been uttered against me—though I may
publicly prove the falsehood of the slanders—sift every atom
explain and annihilate them. Yet the sore can never be healed on
earth—it will poison and burn until death shall come.
“ Envy feeds upon the living » after death it ceases; then every
m an’s well-earned honors defend him against calumny.”
Entally, March 31, 1870.
Eostella, May 5, 1868.
My Dear Archdeacon, —At our meeting on Friday, it was de-
termined that the Archdeacon be requested to commence the work
of the “ deputation scheme ,” by holding the first meeting at West-
hury—to be followed by others at Deloraine and Hagley ; that the
Archdeacon be requested to select another member of the Finance
Committee to accompany him, &c,, &c.
In fact the Committee very handsomely give you “ carte
hlanche, ” and evidently intend to get at least a hundred pound’s
worth of work out of you during the year. I suppose you will


therefore see Irwin and Williams. I should be glad to help you if
I could, but I know so little of the Westbury and Hagley people,
and I don’t think they like me. lam not popular to the West-
ward. Eastward I think lam either better, or not so well known.
“ Utrum novum mavis accipe .” In spite of some handsome Easter
subscriptions we have only just been able to pay the quarter, and are
still going on in the wretched system of half months. We want, at
least, £3OO between this and October—and we must get it. If
the Deputation work well there ought to be no difficulty, but I fear
the Deputation will not do what is expected. We shall see. Of
course you have seen the last issue of the Church News. The Ho-
bart Town Lights do not allow themselves to shine, save under
bushels of self-praise and commendation. It almost makes me sick
to read it all. I think our quiet and useful work stands out in
good contrast. You will have heard of Dr. Browne. Have you de-
termined to allow your name to be brought before the Patronage
Committee. I think the whole affair is pre-determined and pre-
arranged—if your claim should be ignored and slighted, it would
put you in a false position.
Yours always sincerely,
(Signed) HENRY P. KANE.
Entally, May 7th, 1868.
Mv Dear Mr Kane, —I am unwilling to take upon myself
the whole responsibility of the work of the deputation scheme, and
to call meetings at Westbury and Deloraine. With the co-operation
of others, named by the Finance Committee, I shall be glad to
work heartily in this matter. It is desirable, lam sure, that some
of our earnest laymen should take part in such work. The presence
and support of men like Mr Richard Green, 0. M‘Arthur, and
others I could name, are needed, and would do much to stir up a
spirit of action in other laymen in the country districts. The
Archdeacon is looked upon as a mere machine in such matters, and
what he says goes for little in getting monies from the people,
whilst the advocacy of such good men as Mr. Green would tell in
more ways than one.
I do not understand what you mean by asking “ if I intend to
let my name be brought before the Patronage Committee of St.
John’s.” You know my mind fully, I believe, on the subject; and
you know that I would not, upon principle, move one hair
to obtain a cure of souls. I believe that such a responsibility is not
to be sought , if God’s blessing is to be looked for; it must come
without being asked for or sought for ; and then comes the awful
responsibility of accepting or refusing. At the same time, lam
bound to say that I think the Archdeacon of Launceston should be
the incumbent of the mother church in Launceston, and that it is
necessary for the general good of the Church, and the convenience


of the Bishop and clergy, that he should reside in Launceston.
With this impression, I should feel it my duty either to accept the
incumbency if offered to me, or to resign the office of Archdeacon,
so that the Bishop could offer it to the incumbent, whoever he may
be. On this question my mind is fully at rest, and upon this prin-
ciple I intend to act.
And now comes the question which must naturally arise to a
man who desires to act so as to hope for God’s blessing and guidance
in such an important matter. As to the claim which I may have
for the appointment in question I desire not to speak—with the
Church at large this must rest—but I have a right to ask myself
why I determine to accept St, John’s if offered to me, and why, if not,
to retire into private life ? —l. As I have said already, I believe
that the Archdeacon ought to be the incumbent of St. John’s; and
if I am not worthy of the incumbency, it is my bounden duty to retire
in favor of a better man. The distance I reside from town involves
much travelling and many expenses. The want of an office in town,
and the necessity of always going to a public inn, has been a great
inconvenience and annoyance for years. 2. It is impossible for the
Archdeacon residing here, without a house or office in town,
satisfactorily to himself to conduct the work of his office—to convene
meetings of the clergy—to show hospitality to the clergy and lay-
members of the Church—and to rally around him for all good pur-
poses, social and religious, the best and most earnest members of
our Church. If the acceptance of St, John’s would be a pecuniary
advantage to me, I might pause and say, “ Am I not influenced by
sordid motives ?” But any man must know that this cannot be.
What is there to make St. John’s a desirable post ? The church is
old and in semi-decay ; there is a heavy debt in existence ; the
congregation is not large, wealthy, nor united; there is no par-
sonage, and the stipend uncertain. By the time I have paid a good
curate, provided a residence for myself, what shall I gain by moving
into Launceston ? 1 give up a pleasant home, sacrifice much per-
sonal ease and freedom, and throw myself into harness—hard,
never-ceasing parochial work.
If therefore, being willing for conscience sake to make the
sacrifice, the incumbency is given to another, and at the bidding of
a few who, either from personal or political motives, desire not to
see me the pastor of St. John’s, I am rejected by the Patronage
Board, I shall not feel that a I am put in a false position ,” but
clearly see my way, without having shrunk from the labor and the
cost, to retire into private life. The attempt to damage my usefu 1 -
ness by the secret and unjust insinuations that I am “ too High
Church” or “ too much of a Kitualist” for St. John’s, is only worthy
of the ungenerous and untruthful.
I am, sincerely,
(Signed) THOS. REIBEY.


June 8, 1868. Boslella.
51 y Dear Archdeacon —l was much disappointed at not
seeing you on Friday last, as I had much to say to you. However,
I hope to see you before long. The business of the fund is
much as usual—weary and trying work. Were it not for a sense of
duty to the Church and to the clergy I should be glad to resign a
thankless office. You may feel yourself, with justice, hardly used;
but look at my case ! with no hope of promotion, no chance of get-
ting even bread to eat from the Church, and it is very likely to be
my lot to seek for employment amongst strangers, after spending
the best years of my life in the service of the Church in Tasmania.
We have a difficult task to deal with—a laity almost devoid of charity
and church feeling. There is no feeling nor gratitude for long and
faithful service ; the stranger is preferred before us, and cant has it
all its own way. I hope you have thought over your idea of resig-
nation of the work in which you are useful amongst us. I might
quote Shakspeare and say—“ To have done, is to hang quite out of
fashion, like a rusty nail in monumental mockery.”
The business of St. John’s Patronage Board is now again com-
plicated by Mr Brownrigg and the congregation. You will have
heard, no doubt, of what they did on Wednesday night. The con-
gregation has three delegates on the Board, and they can do just as
they please. If Mr Brownrigg is appointed it will be a very serious
matter, and I think the Bishop would be justified in refusing bis
sanction. The injury to the General Church Fund would be serious
—at least, so I think—and this is to me a matter of some concern ;
I think, too, it will discourage wealthy men and parishes from pay-
ing passages, furnishing houses, and giving liberal incomes to
popular clergymen from other dioceses.
Believe me to remain,
Yours very sincerely,
H. P. KANE.
Entally, June 12, 1868.
My Dear Mr Kane. —ln answer to your question put to mein
your letter of the Bth instant, I have simply to say, that it is my
determination to resign the office of Archdeacon of Launceston, in
the event of St. John’s not being offered to me.
In October next I shall have worked for 25 years in this diocese,
as one of the clergy of the Church of England ; and since the 23rd
of April, 1858, I have held the office of Archdeacon of Launces-
ton—lo years and more—without stipend or any remuneration.
It was the opinion of Ihe late Bishop, and also of the present
metropolitan, that when St. John’s became vacant, the Archdeacon
of Launceston ought to be placed there. It is the opinion now of
the great bulk of churchmen in the diocese, and also of very many
not connected with the church, that as the vacancy has occurred,


the Care ought to be offered to me ; that if it is not—l quote the
words of others —“ An act of injustice will be committed, and an
insult offered to me.” Under these circumstances it is my duty t
retire—l cannot do otherwise.
The opposition to my appointment does not proceed from the
parishioners of St. John’s, or from the whole of the present seat-
holders. It proceeds, I believe, from a few seatholders who have
been active in their opposition. There is a great principle involved
in this question, and the future interests of the Church are deeply
involved. If the long services of the clergy are to be passed over,
and strangers hoisted into the chief parishes of the diocese, to suit
the wishes of party, I can conceive nothing which will more
effectually destroy the energies of the clergy, and prevent men of
independent character from entering into the ministry.
I am sincerely,
(Signed) THOMAS REIBEY.
Rostella, May 11.
My Dear Archdeacon. —You have the power of nominating
any member of the Synod you please, lay or clerical, to make up a
deputation. You mention Green and M‘Arthur as desirable ; there
are no better men, save that I believe they have not the power of
persuasive speech, and have much business to attend to in Launces-
ton, hut you may call upon whom you please, and I hope you will do
so. I see that yon will not be able to form one of the deputation
for Launceston, They have called upon me to open the meeting,
and I must do my best. I have no faith in the “ Deputation
scheme,” and expect but little from it. Your letter gave me some
pain. I think yon know that when you first told me of your claim upon
the Bishop when he was patron of St. John’s, lat once acquiesced.
Any wishes I may have had myself upon the subject were put on
one side, and I gave way at once to your undoubted claim to this
preferment, I have prevented my name being mentioned in con-
nection with the case, having told one of the Churchwardens, a
dear friend of my own, that I did not wish it. The election of a
Patronage Committee no longer leaves your claim to be considered
by the Church at large—on the contrary, it leaves the matter
almost entirely to the congregation, who having “ itching ears”
have held a meeting of the principal seat-holders at Dr. Ozanne’s,
and have determined on offering the cure to Dr. Tucker ! ! of Syd-
ney, and to Mr. Wollaston, of Melbourne, utrum novum mavis
accipe. Mr. Brownrigg, of Ross, has refused. I know nothing
more of this committee’s doings save that Green and two other
members of the Board of Patron age were present. They canvassed
your appointment, I believe, and am only too thankful to think that
I have escaped the indignity. Ido not profess to know all that
they did or said, but so many having been present no doubt it is


well known in Launceston what took place. I still think that un-
less the way can clearly be seen, it would be better not to bring
forward your name, but it would be well for you to hear what others
think. For my own part I am strongly inclined to take no part
in the proceedings of the committee. I think your determination
of making your retention of the important office of Archdeacon
dependent upon the fickle voice of a congregation —for it is really
so —much and deeply to he deplored. It would weigh much with
me, but I think very little with other members of the Board, who
take little interest in the Church’s work. lam no convert to your
reasoning, which is illogical. I agree heartily that the clergyman
holding the office of Archdeacon should have the first claim to the
preferment to any cure, and especially to that of the Mother Church
of the Archdeaconry, but it does not follow as a consequence, that
whoever may be selected by a Patronage Committee for the cure of
St. John’s, ought to be Archdeacon. This would be to invest the
Patronage Committee with the duties of the Episcopal office alto-
gether. It is bad enough to deprive the Bishop of his right to pre-
fer men in the Diocese, but to take from him all freedom of action
in the choice of his Archdeacons, would be worse. You know my
opinion : I do not think you would be justified in resigning the
Archdeaconry and retiring into private life here. Did you deter-
mine on leaving for England, it would be different. You have laid
your hand to the plough. You would not be a happy man did you
resign it for the reason of your non-appointment to St. John’s.
For my own part, and more for the Church’s sake, I should regret
it. We have got on so well together, and I have learned to esteem
you. I am getting too old to make new friends, and I dislike hav-
ing to do business with new faces. lam very jaded after a hard
day’s work, and no sleep last night, or I could express myself and
perhaps quote a little better. I have written to the Bishop on the
subject, and I hope we may trust in the mercy of God for a satis-
factory issue.
Yours truly and affectionately,
H. P. KANE,
Eostella, June 15, 1868.
My Dear Archdeacon, —Since receiving your last I have
had a long conversation with Mr. Harrap (Churchwarden of St.
John’s). He is a staunch friend of yours, and a good churchman.
I took the liberty of showing him your letter, and we had much
serious thought over the whole subject. I know very little of the
secret springs which move the present agitation, and had given Dr.
Ozanne credit for much of it; but Mr. Harrap assures me that
party feeling has nothing to do with the strong desire which the
congregation has expressed for the ministry of Mr. Brownrigg.
Harrap has promised to explain the matter to you fully when he


has an opportunity of seeing you, and I need scarcely say that he is
a man upon whom you may thoroughly rely. There have been many
meetings of the congregation, it seems ; and Harrap, who was
present at them, can tell you what was done. He regrets, as I do,
the unfortunate state of matters, and the injustice done you; but he
declares that the seatholders are almost unanimous in their desire
for Brownrigg’s services. It now appears that the parishioners of
Boss are willing that he should accept St. John’s, and there is not
the slightest doubt of his presentation. The congregation have
three delegates on the Board, which is a majority.
Ido not think it desirable, or right, that Mr. B. should be
moved from his present post, even for his own interests ; as for the
interests of the Church at large, people seldom think of consulting
them; but it will leave Boss vacant, a very difficult post to fill, and
will be the cause of the loss of your own services to the Church.
Boss has, after long isolation, come into the work of the General
Church Fund, and supported it liberally. This work, I suppose,
will fall to the ground. I have spoken my mind very plainly about
your resignation, for I feel it to be a serious affair. The union and
good feeling of the whole archdeaconry will be affected ; the
business of our Church Fund, I greatly fear, much in-
jured. However, nothing I can urge has any effect in turning you
from your determination, and I have been wrong in my persistence
—my counsel has been unwelcome, and lam afraid I have perilled
the continuance of our old friendship. I can say very sincerely that
in the whole of this painful business, I have had a sincere desire to
do my duty by the Church, and to serve you—to consult your dig-
nity and usefulness in the Church —and to prevent your being
placed in a false position (as I supposed, but you will not allow).
Urgent and painful family matters will, I am afraid, oblige me to
go to Melbourne in the beginning of the next week, or at the end of
this ; but I am not yet certain. I hope to be able to supply St. John’s
next Sunday, and will not fail to give you notice as early as I can, if I
be obliged to go. I shall not be able to return in time for the
quarterly meeting of the General Finance Committee for Friday,
July 3rd. I wish to know whether you will give me leave to post-
pone the meeting for ten days or a fortnight ? Ihere will be im-
portant business, and I ought to be present. If you will not take
upon yourself to give the authority, had I better write to the
Bishop ? or shall I arrange for Mr Hales to take my work ?
which he is sure to make a mess of, I fear. As for the Board of
Patronage meeting on the 30th, my presence will be of little use.
If it be thought desirable, I would make an effort to be present,
but I had made up my mind to have nothing further to do with an
ungrateful and thankless task. There is a foregone conclusion, and
no arguments I could use would prevent it.
Very sincerely yours, H. P. KANE.


Rostella, Monday evening.
My Dear Archdeacon, —Your kind note I found waiting
for me at St. John’s, and it was very grateful—for what with men-
tal disquietude, and the wretched morning, being nearly wet through.
I had need of something to invigorate me for a service in a damp,
cheerless, and almost empty church. As to St. John’s people—as
one of them told me—they are “ mad” for Brownrigg, he is a
popular idol—they think him gold—they will find as much clay in him
as in any other man. Stackhouse has changed his opinion about the
undesirability of B. leaving Ross—as I supposed he would. You
will be glad, however, to know that Stackhouse will regret deeply
the loss of your services as Archdeacon. He gives cheerful
testimony in agreeing with me as to your value to the
Church and your invariable courtesy to the clergy.
He does not consider that your place can be filled ; he agrees with
me, in fact. But he holds, as you may suppose, that the voice of
the congregation, and the work of Providence, is for Brownrigg’s
nomination. Now we know that Providence works by vile instru-
ments sometimes, and perhaps Ozanne has been a wretched means
of bringing this about. He is certainly a miserable example of
what tortuous under-ground work is able to effect. You must not
think that the very people who are agreed to have Brownrigg have
much respect for Ozanne. Ido not consider him to be a true
member of our Church, and I have stated my opinion of him very
plainly. God grant that all may end well, but I fear it will have a
disastrous effect upon our Church Fund. I intend, when in
Melbourne, to apply to the Bishop in the hope of finding something
to do, but I have not much hope of getting anything. lam very
sick of things as they are, and I feel that I may work for years
without getting bread to eat. Our Bishop would, lam sure, act
fairly and honorably ; but the people are fickle, inconstant, and
ungrateful : and Synod has taken upon itself to grant episcopal
powers to congregations unfit to use them : the end must be
confusion —men will be disgusted, and with good reason. There is
one good will spring out of this, however. It will be that such
men as Barnes, and others who have signed the requisition to
Brownrigg, will now be obliged to put their hands into their pockets
to pay him. Barnes, for instance, gives the Church ostensibly
twenty shillings to the Fund every year ; and of the whole of St.
John’s congregation, I verily believe that none save Green,
Harrap, and Campion, have ever given more than
their weekly sixpences and shillings. They will now
have to make up £SOO a year, and from the Church Fund are only
entitled to £2OO stipend—£6o for a house, and no forage. If any
attempt is made to insist upon a larger stipend from the Church
Fund, it ought to be resisted, and this is one of the reasons which
made me write to put off our meeting. As I have not heard from


the Bishop, I cannot do so. I hope that you will be present, and
have written to Hales to ask him to act for me. There will be some
very important questions to be considered ; i.e., the Glebe of St.
John’s, and its future management—the question of raising money
for stipends. If people lose heart how can they work ? For my
own part I am much discouraged and disheartened by your idea of
resignation—God grant that your mind be changed in this ! I
confess to you that I am not willing to work again with any man
who may be chosen to succeed you. I dislike new faces, and I can-
not easily give my confidence. I feel that it will be a sore trial to
lose you in the work of the Church, and would rather get away
from it myself in a lawful manner, than have to transact business
with men whose mind I do not know, and for whose intimate friend-
ship Ido not care. Writing this makes me forget my cares, but
causes me to think of what yours must have been for years. I hope
Mrs. Eeibey is better, and with my kindest regards to her, believe
me to remain yours obliged and sincerely,
H. P. KANE.
Hobart Town, June 8, 1868.
Mv Dear Auchdeacov, —No doubt the movement of the people
of St. John’s is strictly a popular one, and the object is not personal
towards yourself, but theological. You are too independent, nor
sufficiently pronounced to suit the party tendencies of a majority of
the congregation, and the bare majority of the Board. My impres-
sion is that the puppets are there pulled by strings, but for which,
your appointment, or offer of the appointment, determined by the
better judgment of the greater number, would be certain. When
men make party identical with truth, no wonder so much is sacra-
ficed to it. We should do the same if in bondage to the same
delusion. Brownrigg has had a hard part to perform. No doubt
his feeling is in favour of moving, but he owes much to the Ker-
mode’s, and such move could not be made honourably without
leave. If he has coquetted with St. John’s, it must be
remembered that the latter have been offering service to him for
some time past. All you have to do is to stand quietly by, pitying
narrow-mindedness and waiting results. I would infinitely Brown-
rigg went than Dr. Tucker or Wollaston. The secretaries of
societies are wretched parish priests ; if the theology of the latter
is what I hear of it, I doubt whether I could accept the
nomination. We ought to have at St. John’s a man of liberal
education, who would carry weight in the counsels of the town clergy,
though as Archdeacon, living so near, you are able to correct any
great evil arising from real shortcomings. Ido not see any irre-
gularity in the adjournment of the Board; the same course baa
been adopted in many other cases. I conclude that you were not
present at the meeting. As your name is now not formally before


them, whatever may be the case, if yon learn privately that there is
equality of votes in regard to these foreign candidates, would it not
be your duty to be preseni ? All personal considerations are out of
the question.
I am, very sincerely yours,
C. H. TASMANIA.
Entally, July 10, 1868.
My dear Lord, —I have waited until I heard of your action
in the matter of Mr Brownrigg’s nomination by the Patronage
Board to the cure of St. John's—not wishing in any way to appear
to have a desire to influence your judgment; but now that I gather
from the copy of your letter to the churchwardens that you have
accepted the nomination, and appointed Mr Brownrigg, I am
relieved from all feelings of delicacy, and hasten, with the utmost
respect, to resign into your hands the office of Archdeacon of Laun-
ceston.
“ Waiting time is of the utmost moment to scrutinize the real
principles of the heart which hare dictated the abandonment of the
calling, to which it was presumed that the Providence of God
originally directed the decision, and in which it is the will of God,
in ordinary cases, that we should ‘ abide ” and, my Lord, I can
assure you that I have not come to the decision to resign the office
of Archdeacon without seeking light and guidance from God—
without much caution against “ the influence of natural inclination”
-—without earnest and persevering prayer —and without satisfactory
evidence that I am not influenced by motives of personal ease,
indulgence, or interest.
The enclosed letters will convey to you the motives which
influence me; and the few friends I have, upon whose judgment
and counsel I rely, fully concur in feeling that duty to the Church,
and respect for my own character, demand that I should retire.
Until I am able to leave the colony, I shall be glad, with your
permission, to assist my nephew in the discharge of his duties, and
I shall be prepared at any time to hand over to my successor all the
public papers and accounts connected with the Archdeacon’s office.
I remain, my dear Lord,
Sincerely yours,
THOS. REIBEY.
I will arrange for the services at St. John’s on Sunday next.
Hobart Town, July 13, 1868.
My Dear Friend, — I am grieved by the letter which you have
sent me, and the decision which it conveys. I cannot feel the weight
of the arguments you advance. They are all valid as far as they
illustrate the working of the principle which Synod, as the voice of
the Church, has adopted in the appointment of Incumbents. The


question, however, is not, ought the popular votes to determine
such appointments in general'? nor ought St. John’s,Launceston, to
be withdrawn from the general rule on the ground that its endow-
ments are large and provided from public sources ? Had these
been questions discussed in Synod, the arguments urged in your
letter would carry great weight, and might lead in future to the
union ot the office of Archdeacon with the Incumbency of this
Church. But I confess that there is no natural connexion between
the two offices, notwithstanding the opinions 'of the metropolitan
and my predecessor. If Bishop Nixon thought there was, why did
he not act upon his conviction and appoint Dr. Browne ?He
thought another better fitted I suppose ; would ho then bind his
successor by a rule which he would not himself adopt ? Suppose
you had been now nominated to St. John’s, on the next vacancy,
does it follow that the man best fitted for St. John’s would be best
fitted to be Archdeacon ? The fact is that the Board have exercised
a constitutional right, being appointed in a constitutional manner ;
and having solemnly pledged themselves to act with a sole reference
to the glory of God, and the welfare of souls, I am bound to accept
the result as of God’s appointment, I should be wrong to feel ag-
grieved by the withdrawment of the patronage from my hands, and
I think that you are wrong to feel aggrieved by such exercise of
constitutional liberty. Again, the Diocese is of opinion, and I, as
Bishop, am of opinion that apart from the advantage arising from
independent means, my predecessor showed his sagacity in electing
you for an office which involves rarer qualifications than are re-
quired in an ordinary Incumbent, especially those of a cultivated
mind, personal influence over the Clergy, a high-toned unselfish
devotion to the interests of the Church. Many, lam told, were
aggrieved by your appointment, but were soon won over by your
wise, tolerant, and earnest administration. You smart under a
sense of injury inflicted by, you say, a few. These few ought, or
ought not, to have their own way in this matter. If they ought,
there is no reason to be aggrieved. If they ought not, is the whole
Archdeaconry to suffer, which you believe, and rightly believe,
would have rejoiced in an appointment, the acceptance of which
must have involved nothing but self sacrifice on your part ? Once
more, your place as Archdeacon cannot be supplied ; it must re-
main vacant, and the vacancy will remain as a reproach either to
the evil system of popular elections, if it be evil, or to the injudi-
cious advice of your friends. Had the Synod or the Archdeaconry
preferred a stranger to you, I could understand your indignation,
but a single parish elects a Board which it believes will represent
its own views, and your strong feeling seems to me thrown away.
That Board has no power to hurt you, but we all have power to
hurt ourselves. You will see that I cannot accept your resignation
until I hear again from you, and know that you have well weighed


what I have ventured in the interests of the Church to say. Believe
me, my dear friend and Archdeacon,
Yours ever sincerely,
(Signed) C: H. TASMANIA.
Entally, July 16, 1868.
Mr Dear Lord, —I am sorely tried in knowing how to answer
your letter, in which you urge me to re-consider the question of my
resignation. I admit the force of much that you say, and I hope I
am sensible of the very kind feeling evinced towards me in all that you
have written ; therefore I shrink from seeming to be unwilling to bury
any personal feelings of my own, when you tell me that the archdea-
conry must suffer—and that the office must remain vacant for a
time.
lam most earnestly anxious to retire from office. The matter
of St. John’s is not the only reason. There are reasons many and
deep why I desire to quit public life, and I hope you believe me
when I state they are not those of personal ease or indulgence.
The long, and deep, and creeping sorrow of my wife’s health has
told heavily upon my physical and mental exertion—the great
decrease in the value of my property, and the consequent loss of
income has made the expenses of my office heavier to bear—and
the constant absence from my home in no way diminishes my loss
of means.
Again, I am very anxious to part with my estates and settle
somewhere in the mother country for the remainder of my days.
The preparation for such a step will require thought, care, and work,
therefore I wish to retire in order that I may be free to act and depart.
I have now told you all my mind. Still, rather than injure in any
way the interests of the Church in this Archdeaconry, I will hold
the office until you can relieve me from the anxieties and expenses
attached to it. When you can do this, and in your heart feel that
you can relieve me without damage to the work of the Church, I
shall feel grateful for your doing so.
With thanks for the spirit of your letter,
I remain,
My dear Lord,
(Signed) THOS. REIBEY.
Longford, 30th June, 1868.
Dear Archdeacon,-- I have just returned from Launceston,
and write in haste so that you may receive, at least, a few lines immedi-
ately after, if possible at the same time, with the information re-
specting the election for the cure of St. John’s —a few lines earnestly
deprecating a step which would be most injurious to the Church,
and I must add, to your own reputation—the resignation of the
Archdeaconry, which I understand you have had in contemplation.


You are mistaken about any personal feeling and party spirit be-
ing asssociated with the movement respecting Mr Brownrigg. This
movement has been conducted by persons who esteem you highly,
and no one, as far as I can learn, has anything like antipathy or
unkindly feeling towards you. The fact is the whole parish, and
the town, as far as people are interested about such things,
or with very few exceptions, are desirous of having Brownrigg
in the town—we could not do otherwise, therefore, than
elect him unanimously. There was presented to us to-day a memo-
rial signed by some I should think 200 respectable names. But the
same persons would I am sure be much grieved if the result should
be your resignation of the Archdeaconry—grieved for themselves,
for the Church, and for you—for in one sense you would suffer as
much as anyone. I write now as a sincere friend and brother; your
place in the Archdeaconry cannot be supplied, at least, suitably; it
is the proper place where you may serve the Lord and His Church
acceptably and profitably. Do not therefore vacate your proper
place because in the Providence of God it has been ordered that you
should manage the Archdeaconry, as you have done, instead of hav-
ing parochial duties in one town parish connected with it. Believe
me in great haste,
Yours very sincerely,
ALFEED STACKHOUSE.
Entally, July 2, 1868.
My Dear Mr. Stackhouse,— -I thank you for your kind note,
and assure you that your expressions of respect and affection are
grateful to me. It is more than ten years since our late Bishop
appointed me to the Archdeaconry of Launceston, and if in the
performance of the duties I have gained the confidence and respect
of the clergy and laity, I feel that I have great reason to be thank-
ful. My first object has been to gain the approbation of God,
then that of my own conscience—and having done this, I have
willingly conciliated the good opinion of ray fellow men. It is a
comfort, beyond power to express, that I have never sought the
popular praise in any public act.
When my late Bishop offered me the Archdeaconry he wrote as
follows ; “To offer you the Archdeaconry of Launceston —so far
as mere money is concerned, is an empty honor—but it is a position
in which a man of your easy means, abilities, active mind, and
business like habits, may do much good for the Church. It would
be idle, I know, to offer you the chaplaincy of Longford, but should
St. John’s become vacant, by the resignation or death of the present
chaplain, I should like to see you placed in Launceston, and in
charge of that parish. It is the proper place for the Archdeacon of
the North still there is no necessity whatever that the Archdeacon
should be tied to a particular chaplaincy. It ought to be an office


held by him who, in an honest point of view, is most calculated to
fulfil its duties efficiently, without reference to the locality in
which he may be placed. Now, in conclusion, let me
express my earnest hope nay, more —my confidence, that
the new relations in which we stand to each other may cement
more and more the bond of affectionate union, which, so far as I
am concerned, have for fifteen years existed between us.” When
the Metropolitan visited Tasmania, he expressed the hope that, in
the event of St. John’s becoming vacant, I would be willing to
remove into Launceston, as he thought it desirable that the Arch-
deacon should be placed in the northern capital in charge of the
mother church of the town. When you were last here, and I men-
tioned to you the fact that, in the event of Mr. Cox refusing to
accept St. David’s, the present Bishop had intimated to me his
intention of offering the Cathedral to me, with the office of Dean,
I can remember you saying, “ If you move, I should like to see
you at St. John’s ; that would be your proper place”—-or words to
the same effect. It is the opinion now of the clergy generally, and
of the great bo 1y of the laity, that St. John’s, upon Dr. Browne’s
resignation, ought to have been offered to me ; and that to place
a stranger there, of whom little is known, to please the popular cry
for something new, is an act of injustice to me, to the clergy who
have worked for years in the diocese, and to the Church in Tas-
mania. The petition to which you refer was not the spontaneous
act of the parishioners or the seatholders of St, John’s. It was, in
the first instance, the act of one active man—the personal friend
aud admirer of Mr. Brownrigg—who left not a stone unturned to
solicit and obtain subscriptions. Some of the most influential
seatholders stood aloof ; some refused to unite in the work; whilst
the great body of the poor, ignorant, and neglected parishioners
were neither represented nor canvassed.
I cannot but feel that such a petition ought not to have been
received by the patrons. The solemn duty of selecting and nomin-
ating a clerk in holy orders for presentation to the Bishop, having
been committed to a body of patrons by the seatholders , the whole
responsibility rested then with them, “to exercise their office to the
best of their judgment, to the glory of God, and for the well-being
of the Church.” Any outward pressure should have been, I think,
carefully—religiously—avoided.
The patrons of such a cure, I think, were bound to consider
the Church— i.e., the Bishop, clergy, and laity of the Archdeaconry
—more than the prayer of two hundred and twenty seatholders and
others. Was St. John’s erected at the cost of the seatholders ?
Was the glebe given by the seatholders as an endowment? No,
the Church was erected with the public monies of the country, and
the glebe was the gift of the country. St. John’s, the mother
church of the Northern Archdeaconry, is the natural centre point


of churchmen ; and its pulpit should have been considered one at
the command of the chief pastor, through his representative the
Archdeacon —and one in which the clergy of the Archdeaconry
might feel that they had periodically, and on all solemn occasions, a
right to be heard.
Personally, I had no desire to hold the cure. It would have
been a great trial to leave this sweet home whilst I resided in Tas-
mania, and I should not have gained one iota by the move. Still I
feel deeply, more deeply than I could tell any human soul, that a
wrong has been done, a wrong to the Bishop and clergy, and to me.
I am well aware that it is an awful _ responsibility to resign any
important work, or office. The conscience alone must guide a man
under such a trial, and the only thing to be assured of is, shall I sin
against God by retiring ? If so, at any cost the work must be carried
on until it shall please Him to end it. If not, if I feel that I shall
not so sin —if after years of work, incurring heavy expenses, much
mental and physical exertion, the Church has chosen, by her system,
to let the first opportunity which has occurred of putting me in the
right place, pass by, and given to a stranger, of whose real worth
little is known, the cure and post, which the great body of men,
churchmen and others, consider ought to have been offered to me,
then why should my “ character suffer” if I desire to retire ? My
desire now will be to leave the colony as soon as I can arrange my
affairs, and to obtain work in the mother country. In 1855 I re-
fused preferment in England, and again, when last at home I could
have received immediate employment if I had resigned my present
office. I felt duty called me back to my native land on both occa-
sions,' although sorely tempted, for my inclinations led me to desire
an English residence.
I enclose you copies of my letters to Mr Kane, as 1 presume
he has informed you of my desire to retire. God grant me power
to act according to His will in this step ; if my mind is at rest on
this point I shall never care what man thinks. I thank you again
for your warm hearted and kind letter ; it has been some comfort
to me; and when the soul of man is weighed down by a long and
heavy sorrow, it is only the man himself and his Heavenly Father
who know how grateful anything like sympathy is. Excuse this
I remain, mv dear Mr. Stackhouse, sincerely yours,
’ * THOS. REIBEY.
Longford, 18th July, 1868.
Mv Dear Archdeacon.— l regret that I did not write again
at once after receipt of your last communication, in reply to one of
mine relative to St. John’s parish and the archdeaconry ; but other
things have come in—a host of things bringing their own peculiar
difficulties, and I have put it off from day to day. I have, however,


thought of the subject, and thought of it most seriously, and with
some anxiety. It has been brought to my mind now still more
forcibly, by a report which has come with some sort of authority,
that you have actually placed your resignation in the hands of the
Bishop. I hare a bad cold. I have been preparing for Sunday,
and it is Saturday evening, but I cannot lose another moment upon
this point, but hasten to exert the best persuasion in my power, so
that you may be induced to withdraw such a document, if, indeed,
you have written to this effect to the Bishop. What can I say,
wln’ch may have most weight to induce you to retain
office among us ? Most weight -did I say, as if it
were difficult to adduce arguments in favor of it ? My
belief is that almost every reason leans on this side, and only one,
and that one of little importance, on the other.—The welfare of the
Church—your own character as one who seeks not his own —the
glory of God whom you wish to serve. How much might be said
upon all these points, and all that could be said adds weight to the
scale, which determines that it is your duty to retain the archdea-
conry. If you believe that you were called to this important office
by the great Head of the Church, I cannot see how you can justify
your resignation of it for such a cause. Some time since I held the
same feeling with respect to St. John’s. I spoke of it to you,
and also to the Bishop, and if it had been practicable, I
should have pressed for its adoption still. But I found by experi-
ence that it would not be practicable—that is, that if put in practice
it would be injurious rather than profitable, injurious to yourself as
well as to the Church whose best interests you desire to promote.
It was indeed determined by this that another clergyman, and he a
junior in the diocese as well as in years, would be more acceptable
and more useful as the incumbent of that particular parish (I can-
not allow that he is an untried man); but no opinion was pro-
nounced by this, still less any condemnation with reference to the
Archdeaconry. If it were desired, lam persuaded the clergy would
unite in a memorial expressive of confidence and satisfaction with
respect to your administration of the office—you know what we said
when you were leaving for England. We are all, I believe, prepared
to repeat the same expressions, that is, if thereby you could be induced
to remain. But what shall we say—how shall we excuse or justify
the step, if it must be said that you resigned the Archdeaconry,
the duties of which require you to overlook in some sense all the
congregations, and all the Churches in the Northern part of the
diocese, because it was not thought desirable that you should be
appointed to the special charge of the chief church in Launceston.
If I were in your place, I should be afraid to fly from duty on such
a plea—or, if I ventured to embark for England, I should think of
Jonah’s sin, and Jonah’s experience, whenever I heard the sound of
a freshening gale. 0, you must withdraw that resignation—there


is no one who can supply your place. The Archdeacon’s office is
one to which you have been called of God. Its duties you have
fulfilled efficiently, and there is no reason whatever why you should
not continue to do so. It is the lowest reason, but not an unim-
portant one—that your retirement, under such circumstances, will
be most injurious to your own reputation. I alluded to this before—
you must allow me to repeat it. Ido hope that you will be enabled
to maintain your character as one who seeks not his own, but the
things that are Jesus Christ’s. You say, in reply to this, that the
acceptance of St. John’s would involve much self-denial on your
part—still your resignation of the Archdeaconry, because you were
not nominated for that parish, would have the appearance, if not the
reality, of selfishness. You must not be offended by my earnestness
and plainness ; the importance of the subject must be my excuse,
I have written now in haste, though not without thought. Ido
hope that you will re-consider the point—that re-considering will
lead you to withdraw your letter from the Bishop, and that, having
withdrawn that document, you will settle down calmly and faith-
fully in that which I believe is your proper sphere of duty.
Believe me to remain,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) ALFRED STACKHOUSE.
The following is a copy of the document referred to by the
Rev. A. Stackhouse, in his letter dated the 18th of July, 1868.
To the Venerable, the Archdeacon of Launceston.
Dear Mr. Archdeacon, —We cannot allow you to leave Tas-
mania for England, without making known our sympathy with you
under the painful circumstances which render your journey neces-
sary, while we at the same time, express our acknowledgments of
your manner, and bearing, in the dignified office you fill.
The courtesy exhibited in your intercourse with us, your con-
stant willingness to oblige, and assist, —your unwearied efforts to
continue the public services of religion whenever a parish was from
any cause left vacant, as well as to extend them to new places, your
frequent journeys in the cause ot the Church, though your office
of Archdeacon is but honorary, have won our respect and esteem.
We earnestly hope that your visit to England may be the means
of restoring Mrs. Reibey to health, and that we may be able, at no
distant time, to welcome you both on your return to take up your
position once more among us. Accept these, our very hearty sen-
timents, and believe us to be your faithful friends, and fellow ser-
vants in the Church of Christ,
W. H, Browne, L.L.D., St. John’s, Launceston.
Francis Hales, A. M., Trinity, Launceston.
Augustus Barkway, St. Paul’s, Launceston.
H. 0. Irwin, Hagley.


The names are—
H. E. Drew, Circular Head
John Dixon, Windermere
John Fereday, George Town.
Your faithful friend and brother,
The Eev. W. H. Browne, LL.D.,
and the other Clergy signing
the address.
Harris and Just, Machine Printers , Launceston.
Wm. Eichardson, Avoca.
John Chambers, Cullenswood and Fingal.
Montague Williams, Westbury.
E. P. Adams, Deloraine.
Alfred Stackhouse, M.A., Longford.
James Norman, Bishopsbourne and Cressy.
Francis Brownrigg, A.M., Patterson’s Plains.
Alfred N. Mason, Garrick and Hadspen.
H. P. Kane, Secretary of Finance Committee of Launceston
Launceston, Sept. 24, 1868.
To the Yen. the Archdeacon of Launceston.
Dear Mr. Archdeacon, —I have much pleasure in for-
warding three names to be attached to the address of the clergy to
you on the eve of your departure for England.
Perhaps the best way will be to attach this note to the address;
as I forgot to date the address, will you please to do it for me ?
Sincerely yours,
F. HALES.
Entally, Sept. 4, 1863.
Eevbrend and Dear Brethren, — I thank you very sincerely
for your sympathy with me under the painful circumstances which
render it necessary for me to leave my work and home. Your
expressions of esteem and respect are most gratifying, and with
grateful thanks for the ready help which I have always received
from you during the time that I have held the office of Archdeacon,
and with the hope that I may soon be permitted to return and re-
new my duties amongst you,
Believe me to remain.
THOS. EEIBEY.
