









FIJI ISLANDS.
CORRESPONDENCE
RELATIVE TO
THE FIJI ISLANDS.
Drmnteti to fiotf) Plouae# of (ftommantr of ifter
PRINTED BY GEORGE EDWARD EYRE AND WILLIAM SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.
1862.
y 100 0


- , mi
. ;
.5: ! : ■... ,
'StMiftta 3»fK Jo OwimnioT* gtf )nw«ifr»Ml Jo »i«uo
•toil ti


m j
~f if-. I^
Number
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE FOREIGN OFFICE, ADMIRALTY, AND
COLONIAL OFFICE.
From whom.
Series.
E. Hammond, Esq., to
Herman Merivale,
Esq., C.B.
H.Merivale,Esq., C. 8.,
to the Secretary to
the Admiralty.
Number and Date.
SUBJECT.
The Right Honble. H,
Corry, to H. Meri-
vale, Esq., C.B.
E. Hammond, Esq., to
H. Merivale, Esq.,
C.B.
18 Feb. 1859 j Enclosing despatch from Mr. Pritchard, Her Ma-
jesty’s Consul in the Fiji Islands, reporting the
; proposal of the King of that group to cede his
territories to Great Britain, and enclosing a
statement of the advantages to be derived from
the possession of those islands. Transmits also :
extract of a despatch from Capt. Loring of
H.M.S. “Iris” respecting the Fiji Islands.
Requests the opinion of Secretary Sir E. B. Lytton
on the subject -
9 March 1859
14 March 1859
Forwarding copies of the above papers and re-
questing the opinion of the Lords Commissioners
on some parts of the question which appear to
have a naval bearing:—lst. Whether by gaining
possession, of the Fiji Islands Great Britain ob-
tains all the available harbours in that part of
the Pacific. 2ndly. Whether the natural har-
bours now existing require much, if any, artificial
development for naval purposes, &c., and whe-
ther the possession of them would involve any
considerable expense in erecting lights or im-
proving the navigation; and, Srdly, whether the
Islands lie in the most convenient line of passage
between Australia, New Zealand, and Panama;
and if so, whether an intermediate station be-
tween those points is a naval requirement
5 March 1859
H. Merivale, Esq., C. 8.,
to E. Hammond,
13 April 1859
E. Hammond, Esq., to
H. Merivale, Esq.,
C.B.
13 April 1859
Enclosing, in reply to the foregoing letter, a copy
of a report of the Hydrographer of the Ad-
miralty, stating several reasons which would
make it desirable to obtain possession of the
Islands - - - -
Transmitting for the information of Secretary Sir
E. B. Lytton, copies of a letter, with its enclo-
sures, from the Manchester Cotton Supply As-
sociation, reporting upon the value of certain
samples of cotton grown in the Fiji Islands
With reference to former correspondence, requests
the opinion of Lord Malmesbury, whether, sup- |
posing on other grounds, it is found to be de-
sirable to accept the sovereignty of the islands, j
their occupation by Great Britain may not lead
to embarrassment or complication with Foreign
Powers who have rights or claims in that part
of the Pacific
Enclosing copy of a despatch from Mr, Pritchard
stating his views as to the mode in which the
Fiji Islands might be governed if their cession
should be accepted by Her Majesty’s Govern-
• ment - - - - -


Number
Series.
E. Hammond, Esq., to 21 April 1859
H. Merivale, Esq.,
C.B.
Lord Wodehouse to
Sir F. Rogers, Bart.
2 July 1860
Sir F. Rogers, Bart., 31 July 1860
to Lord Wodehouse.
James Murray, Esq.,
to Chichester Fortes'
cue, Esq., M.P.
31 Ang. 1860
Sir F. Rogers, Bart.,
to E. Hammond,
Esq.
16 Dec. 1861
James Murray', Esq.,
to Sir F, Rogers,
Bart.
31 Dec. 1861
Sir F, Rogers, Bart., to
E. Hammond, Esq.
7 Sept. 1861
E. Hammond, Escp, to
the Under Secretary
of State.
19 Sept. 1861
Sir F, Rogers, Bart., to
the Secretary to the
Admiralty.
9 Dec. 1861
SUBJECT.
Stating, in reply to Mr. Merivale’s letter of the
13th April, that Lord Malmesbury is not aware
that the occupation of the Fiji Islands by Great
Britain would involve the violation of any rights
or claims belonging to Foreign Powers in that
quarter of the world -
Enclosing four despatches from Mr. Consul Pritch-
ard, in which it is stated that the chiefs continue
to press very urgently for the acceptance by Her
Majesty of the cession of the Islands, and re-
questing the decision of the Duke of Newcastle
on the subject -
A nnounces the appointment of Colonel Smy the, R, A.
as a Commissioner to visit the Fiji Islands for
the purpose of inquiring into the reasons for
and against accepting the offer to cede to Her
Majesty the sovereignty over the islands, and
encloses copy of the instructions with which he
was furnished. -
Transmits copy of a despatch from the Governor
of New South Wales reporting the arrival at
Sydney of Colonel Smythe en route for his des-
tination, and drawing attention to the danger of
becoming involved in a war with the native in-
habitants by an attempt to settle a large white
population among the islanders. States that
until the arrival of Colonel Smythe’s report no
final opinion can be expressed as to the accept-
ance of the sovereignty of the islands, and trusts
that Lord John Russell will not approve of any
subordinate agents taking steps that may commit
this country to serious enterprises
Encloses copy of a despatch addressed by Lord
John Russell to Mr. Consul Pritchard relative
to his proceedings with regard to the offer to
Her Majesty’s Government of the sovereignty
of the Fiji Islands - - -
Transmitting copy of a letter from Commodore
Seymour, of Her Majesty’s ship “ Pelorus,”
reporting on the state of affairs in the Fiji
Islands, and furnishing an account of the mea-
sures adopted by him in concert with Mr. Con-
sul Pritchard, for terminating the Avars between
the Fijians and Tongans -
Acknowledging the above, and stating that Earl
Russell had learnt with satisfaction the steps
taken by Commodore Seymour for terminating
the wars betAveen the Fijians and Tongans
Enclosing Colonel Smythe’s Report, the effect of
which is to establish, conclusively, the impolicy
of appropriating these Islands. ConA r eys the
expression of the Duke of Newcastle’s opinion,
that any civilized power who may make itself
responsible for the Government of the Fiji
Islands must be willing to incur a large and
immediate expenditure -
States that Earl Russell concurs with the Duke
of Newcastle in opinion that it would not be
expedient to accept the Sovereignty of the
Fiji Islands -
States that in the event of a steam route being
adopted by Panama to Australia, it is essential
somecoalingstation midway should be established,
and that Colonel Smythe represents that Oparo
Avould best answer that purpose, as having a
good harbour and anchorage, and requests that
the Lords Commissioners would direct one of
their ships to examine its capabilities
19 / v


INSTRUCTIONS ADDRESSED TO COLONEL SMYTHE, R.A.
From whom. Number and Date. SUBJECT. Page.
Instructions addressed to Colonel Smythe, R.A.
The Duke of New- 23 Dec. 1859 Instructions to Colonel Smythe to report whether
castle, K.G., to Co- it would be expedient that Her Majesty’s Go-
lonel Smythe, R.A. vernment should accept an offer which had been
made to cede to Her Majesty the Sovereignty
over the Fiji Islands, and also on the advantages
and disadvantages which would attend such
acceptance, &c., and to advise on what terms,
and in what manner, the acquisition, if decided
on, had better be effected, &c. - - 24
LETTERS FROM COLONEL SMYTHE, R.A.
_
Colonel Smythe, R.A., 9 August 1860 Reporting his arrival at Levuka on sth July iB6O,
to the Under Secre- and having commenced a tour of the group,
tary of State. accompanied by Mr. Pritchard and Dr. Seemann.
Reports having visited Bau, Viwa, and Rewa,
and that he was about to proceed to the Island
of Kandavu. States that Thakombau, the Chief
of Bau, although probably the most influential
Chief in the group, has no claim to the title of
Tui Viti, or King of Fiji, nor would the other
Chiefs submit to his authority - - - 27
Colonel Smythe, R. A., 25 Sept. 1860 Reports having visited Kandavu, and completed
to the Under Secre- | the circuit of the Island of Viti Levu, that he
tary of State. \ had had interviews with the principal Chiefs of
Vanua Levu, and that he had been accompa- '
nied by the Rev. J. Waterhouse, who afforded ;
valuable aid as interpreter. States that the j
group is composed of a number of independent i
kingdoms - - - - -j 27
Colonel Smythe, R. A., 9 Nov. 1860 Reports that he had completed his tour of inspec- !
to the Under Secretion, and that the conclusion he had arrived at,
tary of State. as the result of his inquiries so far, was, that it i
would not be expedient for Her Majesty’s Go-
vernment to accept the offer made to cede to
Her Majesty the sovereignty of the Fiji Islands 28
Colonel Smythe, R.A:, 1 May 1861 Forwarding his General Report on the Fiji Islands,
to the Duke of New- and encloses pamphlet by Captain Dunn. - . 28 *
castle, K.G.
Colonel Smythe, R.A., 28 Nov. 1861 Suggesting that in the event of Her Majesty’s I
to the Under Secre- Government declining the sovereignty of the ;
tary of State. Islands, the decision of the Government should j
be conveyed to the Chiefs in a formal way,
accompanied by such expressions of friendly
interest as would remove any painful feelings
caused by the offer being declined - - 41
Number
Series.
MEMORANDUM BY COLONEL
SMYTHE
ON OPARO OR RAPA ISLAND, 41.
APPENDIX.
Dr. Seemann to T. 17 June 1861 Forwarding his Report on the “ Vegetable Produc-
Fredk. Elliot, Esq. tions and Resources of the Vitian or Fijian
Islands.”
MAPS.
The Fiji or Viti Group, surveyed by Commander Wilkes, U.S.N, 1840, with additions by Captain
Denham, R.N., 1857 ------- Facep. 29
Pacific Ocean, showing the shortest lines between Australia, New Zealand, Fiji Islands, and Panama Facep. 29




CORRESPONDENCE
RELATIVE TO
TII E F 1 J I ISLAI DS.
Correspondence between the Foreign Office, Admiralty, and
Colonial Office.
No. 1. Fiji Islands.
Copy of a LETTER from E. Hammond, Esq., to Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B. No. 1.
Sir, Foreign Office, February 18, 1859-
I am directed by the Earl of Malmesbury to transmit to you herewith, to be laid
before Secretary Sir Edward Lytton, the enclosed Despatch from Mr. Pritchard, Her
Majesty’s Consul in the Fiji Islands, reporting the proposal of the King of that group to Mr, Pritchard,
cede his territories to Great Britain, and enclosing a statement of the advantages accruing y °-
from the possession of those islands. ■ Feb ‘ B> 1859,
I am to request that you will move Sir Edward Lytton to favour Lord Malmesbury
with his opinion on this subject.
I am, &c.
(Signed) E. Hammond.
P.S.—I also enclose an extract of a Despatch communicated to this office by the
Admiralty, from Captain Loring, of H.M.S. “ Iris,” respecting these islands.
Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No 1.
Enel. 1 in
No. 1.
Office of Messrs. Lloyd, Bellby, and Co., Royal Exchange Buildings,
My Lord, London, February 8, 1859.
I now proceed to lay before your Lordship the circumstances which induced me to assume
the responsibility of leaving my post, and waiting personally upon your Lordship.
The great importance attaching to the possession of the richest and most extensive group of islands
in Western Polynesia, and the weight of the British interests there at stake ; together with the measures
adopted by other Governments, I conceived required the promptest attention, and as delay in com-
municating with your Lordship would be detrimental to any action Her Majesty’s Government may
deem wise to take in reference to the islands in my consular district, I venture to hope my conduct
will be honoured with your Lordship’s approval.
Ihe document which I have the honour to lay before your Lordship is the voluntary act of the
King of the Fiji Islands. By it, he cedes his territories and sovereignty to Her Majesty, for certain
considerations. I was careful to ascertain whether the King’s title is unquestionable, and whether
his subjects would willingly acquiesce in the cession. With regard to the former points, Thakombau
has been acknowledged by the commanders of English, French, and American vessels of war as King
of Fiji; and the French and the American Governments have treaties with him as such. With
regard to the latter point, I can assure your Lordship that the people are anxious to become British
subjects.
Your Lordship will observe that Thakombau and his people do not seek merely a protectorate;
they cede the “ full sovereignty and domain in and over ” Fiji to Her Majesty; their object is to
become a part of the British Empire, and bona fide British subjects.
A


Fiji Islands.
It is necessary for me to inform your Lordship that the period named for the settlement of the
American claims is October of the present year; and hence the necessity for the immediate action
to which I have already adverted.
With your Lordship’s permission, I shall now advance the political importance of Fiji, and secondly
the commercial advantages it offers.
The political importance of Fiji arises from its geographical position. Situated on the highway of
commerce between Australia and Panama, its capacious and secuie haibouitj, in the possession ot an
enemy, would afford shelter to an imposing fleet, and a basis for offensive operations against our
commerce in the southern seas, and the coast of Australia.
In prospect of the immediate establishment of a line of mail steamers from Sydney to Panama, the
importance of Fiji as a naval rendezvous is greatly increased.
The commercial advantages offered by Fiji originate in its internal and latent resources; its salu-
brious climate and fertile soil. I would bring most prominently under your Lordship’s notice the
capability of this group to produce Cotton. In compliance with instructions from Lord Clarendon,
dated Foreign Office, No. 1, July 20, and No. 2, September 12,1857, I instituted inquiries and made
personal observations, in search of information respecting the production of this invaluable article;
and I am convinced, my Lord, that as a cotton producing country, Fiji is of the utmost value to Great
Britain. Your Lordship will, I doubt not, be surprised to learn that the largest island in the group
is about 360 miles in circumference, containing some 8,000,000 of acres of rich land, and several large
rivers varying from 50 to 200 feet in width, and navigable by small vessels. One of these rivers,
named by Commodore Wilkes, of the United States exploring expedition, « Peak’s River,” was followed
in its windings through a fertile country, by the boats of that expedition for a distance of 80 miles.
And in passing I would remark, that I am of opinion it is from the report of that officer to his Govern-
ment that the attention of the United States has been directed to these islands. The island next in
size to the above is some 300 miles in circumference, having also its large rivers and good harbours.
There are in all 211 islands.
It may be interesting to your Lordship to know that, in Fiji, 9 months after planting, the cotton
tree shows its first pod, and then continues to yield without intermission for, 10, 12, or 15 years, as
the plant may live. At the same time, and on the same tree, is seen the blossom, the green pod, and
the ripe cotton.
1 have brought with me a sample of the cotton, at present growing at Fiji, which, of course, would
improve with attention. The sample I have is at your Lordship s disposal.^
An important consideration in connexion with the cultivation of cotton in these islands, is the fact
that there will be no scarcity of labour, for the 200,000 natives, estimated as the population of Fiji,
will afford a large supply. Nature contributes every requisite to make its cultivation easy^its growth
rapid, and its produce prolific. And since neither mechanical skill nor hard manual labour is required
my knowledge of the native character and habits persuades me the Fijians will turn their whole atten-
tion to cotton, in preference to every other employment. But, my Lord, I would observe that not-
withstanding all these great advantages, it is only in the security of British protection, that cotton
will be cultivated in Fiji.
I will refer, for one moment, my Lord, to the present state of trade in this group. I can conceive
that it will hardly be credited that in American vessels only, from September 1857 to September 1858,
the imports amounted to 100,000 dollars, and the exports to 160,000. The imports consisted chiefly
of dry goods, and hardware, and muskets and powder, and the exports are cocoa-nut oil, turtle-shell, and
beche-de-mer. This information I obtained from the American Consul. Had there been any one
to note the imports and exports in English vessels, during the same period, I am satisfied the amounts
would equal, if not exceed, the American trade. There is also a large business done by some German
merchants in connexion with Hamburgh.
I would mention for your Lordship’s information, that coffee, sugar-cane, nutmegs, turmeric,
ginger, and indigo are indigenous to the islands.
Antimony is found in the interior; and lam inclined to give credence to the opinion that coal
exists on the largest island. In enumerating the productions of Fiji, I should not omit to name the
“ Kaurie,” so well known as the valuable New Zealand pine. It grows to a large size and in extensive
forests.
There are also many other kinds of timber, available both for house building and ship building, as
well as for furniture and ornamental work.
Several of the harbours have been surveyed by Captain Denham, of Her Majesty’s ship “ Herald,”
and the surveys forwarded to the Admiralty.
It was to bring the subject thus prominently, and in these various bearings, under your Lordship’s
notice, and to be at your Lordship’s command to render information, that I ventured to leave my post.
With regard to minor details, and the force necessary to govern the natives, and the possibility of
immediately raising a revenue equal to the cost of such Government, I am prepared to tender my
estimates whenever your Lordship may deem it proper.
To explain more explicitly the position of Thakombau, and the claims of the United States Govern-
ment as set forth in the deed of cession, I should feel honoured by your Lordship granting me an
interview.
Again expressing the hope that my conduct will be honoured with your Lordship’s approval, and
awaiting instructions.
I have, &c.
To Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for (Signed) Will. T. Pritchard,
Foreign Affairs, Foreign Office. H. B. M. Consul at Fiji.


Sub-Enclosure in Enclosure No. 1.
Ebenezer Thakombau, by the grace of God, Sovereign Chief of Bau and its Dependencies,
Vunivalu of the Armies of Fiji and Tui Viti, &c., &c., to all and singular to whom these presents
shall come, greeting
Whereas We, being duly, fully, and formally recognized in our aforesaid state, rank, and sovereignty
by Great Britain, France, and the United States of America respectively, and having
exclusive sovereignty and domain in and over the islands and territories constituting, forming, and
being included in the group known as Fiji, or Viti; and being desirous to procure for our people
and subjects a good and permanent form of government, whereby our aforesaid people and subjects
shall enjoy and partake of the benefits, the prosperity, and the happiness which it is the duty and the
right of all sovereigns to seek and to procure for their people and subjects; and being in ourselves
unable to procure and provide such good and permanent government for our aforesaid people and
subjects; and being, moreover, in ourselves unable to afford to our aforesaid people and subjects the
due protection and shelter from the violence, the oppression, and the tyranny of Foreign Powers,
which it is the duty and the right of all sovereigns to afford to their people and subjects.
And. being heavily indebted to the President and Government of the United States of America,
the liquidation of which indebtedness is pressingly urged, with menaces of severe measures against
our person, and our sovereignty, and our islands and territories aforesaid, unless the aforesaid indebt-
edness be satisfied within a period so limited as to render a compliance with the terms of the contract
forced upon us utterly impossible within the said period, this said inability not arising from lack of
resources within our dominions, but from the inefficacy of any endeavours on our part under the
existing state of affairs in our islands and territories aforesaid to carry out such measures as are
necessary lor, and would result in, the ultimate payment of the aforesaid claims; and having maturely
deliberated, well weighed, and fully considered the probable results of the course and the measures
we now propose, and being fully satisfied of the impracticability, by any other course and measures
to avert from our islands and territories aforesaid, and our people and subjects aforesaid, the evils
certain to follow the non-payment of the sum of money demanded from us by the Government of the
United States of America; and being confident of the immediate and progressive benefits that will
result from the cession herein now made of our sovereignty and our islands and territories aforesaid.
Now know ye, that we do hereby, for and in consideration of certain conditions, terms, and
engagements herein-after set forth, make over, transfer, and convey unto Victoria, bv the orace of
God, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, &c. &c. &c., Her heirs and successors for ever, & the full
sovereignty and domain in and over our aforesaid islands and territories; together with the actual
proprietorship and personal ownership in certain pieces or parcels of land as may hereafter be
mutually agreed upon by a commission to consist of two chiefs from Great* Britain and two chiefs
from Fiji, the said commission to be appointed by the representative of Great Britain in Fiji,
who, in cases of dispute, shall himself be umpire; the said pieces or parcels of land to be especially
devoted to Government purposes, and to be applied and appropriated in manner and form appertain-
ing to Crown lands in British Colonies, or as the local Government of Fiji, appointed by commis-
sion from the aforesaid Victoria, Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland afore-
said, may deem fit, proper, and necessary for the uses and requirements of the said local Government.
Provided always, and this cession of our sovereignty and our islands and territories is on these
conditions, terms, and considerations; that is to say,
That the aforesaid Victoria, Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland aforesaid,
shall permit us to retain the title and rank of Tui Viti, in so far as the aboriginal population is
concerned, and shall permit us to be at the head of the department for governing the aforesaid
aboriginal population, acting always under the guidance and by the counsels of the representative of
Great Britain, and head of the local government appointed by commission from the aforesaid Victoria,
Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland aforesaid; that the aforesaid Victoria,
Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland aforesaid, shall pay the sum of forty-five
thousand dollars ($45,000) unto the President of the United States of America, being the amount of
the claim demanded from us; procuring for us and for our people a full and absolute acquittance from
any further liabilities to the said President or Government of the United States of America aforesaid.
For and in consideration of which outlay, not less than two hundred thousand (200,000) acres of
land, if required, shall be made over, transferred, and conveyed, in fee simple, unto Victoria aforesaid,
Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland aforesaid, the selection of which said land
shall be made by the commission herein-before named and referred to, to reimburse the immediate
outlay required to liquidate the aforesaid claim of the President and Government of the United States
of America.
And we, the aforesaid Ebenezer Thakombau, by the grace of God, Sovereign Chief of Bau and its
Dependencies, Vunivalu of the Armies of Fiji, and Tui Viti, &c. &c. &c., do hereby make this
cession, transfer, and conveyance of our sovereignty, and of our islands and territories aforesaid, unto
the aforesaid Victoria, by the grace of God, Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, &c. &c. &c., aforesaid, Her heirs and successors for ever; on behalf of ourselves, our heirs,
and successors for ever; on behalf of our chiefs, their heirs, and successors for ever; on behalf of our
people and subjects, their heirs, and successors for ever; —hereby renouncing all right, title, and
claim unto our sovereignty, islands, and territories aforesaid, in so far as is herein stated.
In witness whereof, we have hereunto set our hand and affixed our seal, this twelfth day of October,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight.
(Signed) Tui Viti, (his x mark.)
A 2
Fiji Islands.
Sub-End. in
End. No. 1.


Fiji Islands. Signed, sealed, and ratified by the aforesaid Tui Viti, and by him formally delivered, in our
presence, unto William Thomas Pritchard, Esquire, Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul in and for the
aforesaid Fiji ; the said Tui Viti at the same time affirming and admitting to us personally that
he, the said Tui Viti, fully, wholly, perfectly, and explicitly understands and comprehends the mean-
ing, the extent, and the purpose of the foregoing document or deed of session; and I, the undersigned
John Smith Fordham, formerly of Sheffield, England, but now temporarily resident at Bau, Fiji
aforesaid, do hereby solemnly affirm that I myself fully, wholly, and explicitly translated the said
foregoing deed of cession unto the said Tui Viti, in the presence of the aforesaid William Thomas
Pritchard, Esquire, Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul in and for the said Fiji; Robert Sherson
Swanston, Esquire, his Hawaiian Majesty’s Consul in and for Fiji aforesaid; and John Binner,
formerly of Leeds, England, but now resident at Levuka, island of Ovalau, Fiji, aforesaid.
In witness whereof, we have, each and all, set our respective names and seals, this twelfth (12th)
day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight aforesaid.
(Signed) John Smith Fordham, ,g
Wesleyan Missionary. '
John Binner, n
Wesleyan Mission. Trainer, f _ ea.;
Robt. S. Swanston, .
Hawaiian Consul, Fiji. f^ea.j
Will. T. Pritchard, .
Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul. ea ''
Recorded in the archives of Her Britannic Majesty’s Consulate, and designated “ Register No. G,
folio 14.”
(Signed) Will. T. Pritchard,
Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul.
Enclosure 2 in No. 1.
Enel. 2 in
No. 1.
Mr. Pritchard to the Earl of Malmesbury.
My Lord, March 8, 1859.
I beg to bring under your Lordship’s notice a statement of a few facts I have collected
" respecting Fiji, referring to the climate, soil, productions, harbours, people, and the general capacity
of the group for commercial purposes.
, I have also inserted returns showing the trade between Sydney and the South Sea Islands from
the year 1848 to 1857, inclusive. Though these returns refer to the South Sea Islands generally,
the principal trade is with Fiji, and the groups immediately surrounding it.
I should inform your Lordship that these returns are taken from the “ Statistics of New South
“ Wales from 1848 to 1857, presented to the Colonial Parliament by command of his Excellency
“ the Governor-General.”
Some portions of this statement I have taken the liberty to extract from my former communications
to your Lordship.
I have, Sec.
(Signed) William T. Pritchard,
H.B.M, Consul at Fiji.
Fiji.
The Fiji Islands are situated between the latitudes of 15° 30' and 20° 30' south, and the longitudes
of 177° east and 178 west, and cover about 40,000 square miles of the South Pacific.
There are not less than 211 islands, of various sizes and formations. The largest, Viti Levu, is
y about 360 miles in circumference, and two-thirds of its superficial area are available for cultivation.
Another island, Vanua Levu, is some 300 miles in circumference.
Of these 211 islands, but 80 are inhabited.
Their distance from Sydney is about 1,500 miles, and from New Zealand about 1,000 miles.
Harbours and Bays.
There are many excellent harbours, free from shoals, well sheltered, with good holding ground,
easy of ingress and egress, and with an abundance of wood and water. Several of these harbours
have been surveyed "by Captain Denham in H.M.S. ‘"Herald,” under instructions from the
Admiralty.
Besides these harbours there are bays indenting the coasts of the large islands, -which afford good
anchorage, and which vary from two to 30 miles from the entrance to the head of the bay.
A peculiarity of these harbours and bays is, that there is a river of greater or less extent in each.
Climate and Temperature.
The climate is salubrious and healthy. The mean temperature at Ovalau (the most central island)
during September and October of last year was 77°.
The barometer stood at 30*110 inches. The lowest temperature I have observed is 60°, and the
highest 98°.


Soil.
The soil consists principally of a dark red or yellowish loam and a brown or black mould, deep,
rich, and containing much decayed vegetable matter. The union of decomposed volcanic matter
with deposits of vegetable mould forming the most productive lands, no soil more fertile or prolific
than that of Fiji can anywhere be found. It yields spontaneously all the tropical productions : coffee,
nutmeg, ginger, turmeric, pepper, sugar-cane, indigo, and cotton are indigenous.
Timber.
There is a large abundance of timber, suitable for all purposes. The New f Zealand pine (or kaurie)
exists in forests. There is a tree, called by the natives dilo, which, made into furniture, is not inferior
to rosewood or mahogany. I have seen trees that would make round tables of not less than four feet
in diameter. For house and ship-building there is a very extensive choice.
In a paper by Mr. Macdonald (of H.M.S. “Herald,”) which was read before the Royal Geo-
graphical Society on the 22d of June, 1857, are these words: f< We were credibly informed that
“ forests of dammaras (kaurie pine) occur along the banks of the Navua river, which opens on the
<{ southern coast about 30 miles from Matai Suva (where the Rewa river disembogues); so that
timber to almost any amount might be felled and rafted down the river by native labour at a
“ trifling cost.”
Again, the same gentleman says, “ Forests of dammaras and other valuable woods abound between
<c Namuka and Serua on the southern coast. Although the following list gives a general summary
“ of trees available as timber, it cannot profess to include all.” This list, incomplete as it is, gives no
less than 74 names of trees.
Rivers.—Antimony.—Pottery.
There are several large rivers, varying from 50 feet to 120 feet in width, and navigable by small
craft.
The Rewa river, in Viti Levu, has been followed in its windings a distance of 91 miles, by a partv
detached from H.M.S. “ Herald.”
There are other rivers, described by the natives to be as large as the last-named, but which have
not yet been explored.
Antimony exists, and samples have been forwarded to this country by some of the gentlemen in
the “ Herald.”
There is also a very adhesive clay, from which the natives manufacture drinking pots, cooking
utensils, &c. The manufacture of pottery is very extensively carried on. This clay bears the action
of fire and water without the least injury.
Inhabitants.
There are 200,000 inhabitants, who seem to be a race readily distinguished from the Malayan,
while not allied to the Negro. The average height I would place at five feet ten inches. The
prevailing physical characteristics are, broad chests, sinewy arms and legs, and stout limbs, and great
muscular strength. In mental capacity, though hitherto known to the world only as ferocious' can-
nibals, the Fijians are by no means deficient. They are active, energetic, ingenious, and not devoid of
tact, and under proper management they are docile and tractable. One third of the population has
embraced Christianity, while nearly an equal number have merely renounced their heathenism
without attaching themselves to any creed.
Labour.
The Fijians will work, if the produce of their labour can be secured to them. Under the existing
system the ruling chiefs absorb all the energies of their respective clans, and therefore there is no
incentive to industry. The removal of this evil, and the consequent stimulus to industry, are the
great boons anticipated by the natives to result from their becoming British subjects.
The fact that labour, sufficient for all ordinary purposes, is on the spot, is one of the great induce-
ments offered by Fiji.
Importance.—Geographical Position.
Ihe geographical position of Fiji entitles it to serious consideration and commands the especial
attention of all interested in Australia and New Zealand. Situated as it is on the highway of com-
merce between Australia and Panama, its capacious and secure harbours in the possession of an
enemy, would aflbrd shelter to an imposing fleet, and a basis for offensive operations against our
commerce in the Southern seas and the coasts of Australia,
And in prospect ot the immediate establishment of a line of mail steamers from Sydney to Panama,
the importance of Fiji as a naval rendezvous is greatly enhanced. With respect to the other groups of
Western Polynesia, Fiji commands the first position. Its central situation gives it a commercial pre-
eminence amongst its neighbours. On the east are the Tonga and Friendly Islands; northward lies
the Samoan group, and on the w'est extend the New Hebrides and New Caledonia; all these groups
are within a few hundred miles of their centre. Fiji must therefore naturally take the lead in
Western Polynesia, and at once become the depot of its trade.
In all the groups of Western Polynesia are latent resources for an extended trade, even if limited
to cocoa-nut oil.
A 3
Fiji Islands.
Rivers,
Antimony.
Pottery,


Return of the Value of Imports into the Colony of New South Wales, from the Year 1848 to 1857
inclusive, from the South Sea Islands.
Year.
Amount.
Year.
Amount,
£
£
1848
2,642
1853
29,702
1849
3,202
1854
47,065
1850
31,827
1855
59,334
1851
6,771
1856
59,029
1852
4,501
1857
41,804
Fiji Islands.
Sub-End. 2
Sub-Enclosure 2 in Enclosure No. 1.
in Enel.
No. 1.
Trade.—Sydney and South-Sea Islands.
Imports.
Exports.
Importance to Sydney.
Not less than the advantages that would accrue to Fiji by becoming a British dependency are the
advantages that would be gained by Sydney. A stimulus would at once be given to trade amongst
the islands, and a supply must meet the increased demand. It is from Sydney that this supply will
be obtained, and it is to Sydney that the produce will be shipped, as remittances. Thus the colonial
merchant will reap a double profit—his first profit on the outward merchandize, and his second on
the imported produce.
Under the wholesome protection of British law, and with proper encouragement, it is a trade that
cannot fail to grow rapidly, and to yield lucrative profits. For every yard of cloth a native gets
to-day, to-morrow he must get two, and that which to-day is a luxury to-morrow becomes a vital
necessity, and every want is itself the parent of another. To procure these necessaries, to satisfy
these wants, the Fijian will turn to his groves and his reefs, and sell his cocoa-nut oil, his cotton, his
tortoise-shell, his beche-de-mer, and the thousand other products of his islands.
But, as already intimated, not only will this extensive and yet undeveloped group be opened as a
market for Sydney, but, through it, all Western Polynesia will become an eager consumer.
To convey any idea of the extent of the trade already carried on between Sydney and the South
Sea Islands, I have collected the accompanying returns from the “ Statistics of New South Wales
“ from 1848 to 1857, presented to the Colonial Parliament by command of his Excellency the
“ Governor General.” Though these returns include all the islands of Polynesia, the chief seat of
trade is Fiji, and the groups immediately surrounding it. In examining these returns it should,
however, be remembered that there are many vessels fitted out from Sydney for trading voyages
among the islands, which are cleared at the customs for other parts, and not for the islands, in order
to deceive rival traders. The exports from Sydney to the islands are, therefore, actually greater
than shown by the returns. With regard to the imports, much of the merchandize from Sydney is
sold among the islands for cash, which, not appearing on the ships" manifests, is not included in the
returns. If business to such an extent as is shown by these returns is carried on under the present
system of insecurity and in the total absence of law, the result of the establishment of British
authority in the finest and largest of these groups may readily be predicted.
EXPORTS.
Return of the Value of Exports from the Colony of New South Wales, from the Year 1848 to 1857
inclusive, to the South Sea Islands.
Year. Amount. Year. Amount.
£ £
1848 6,944 1853 10,928
1849 10,160 1854 61,025
1850 17,537 1855 26,373
1851 15,334 1856 53,624
1852 6,271 1857 42,436


Articles.
1
Quantities,
Articles.
Quantities,
Apparel -
Arrowroot and sago
f Guns
Arms and Ammunition < Powder -
L Shot
Alkali -
Ale and beer - - -
Butter and cheese
Bran -
Coals - - - -
Confection - - -
Candles -
Cement -
Canvas -
Corks and bungs -
Coffee - - - -
Drapery -
Drugs and medicines
Earthenware -
Fruits, dried, &c. -
Furniture - - -
Flour and bread -
Grindery -
Glass -
Glassware -
Glass bottles -
Grain, maize -
„ oats - - -
Hardware -
Hemp and flax - - -
Hats and caps -
Haberdashery -
Iron -
Jewellery - - -
Leather boots and shoes -
Lucifers -
Live stock, sheep
„ cattle
Molasses -
Machinery -
Nails - - - -
„ copper - - -
Oil, linseed -
„ olive -
Oilmen stores -
27 cases.
2,260 lbs.
14 cases.
108 packages.
16
2 cases.
2,324 gallons.
6,234 Jbs.
72 bushels.
100 tons,
23 cases.
81 boxes.
33 casks.
80 bales.
3 packages.
532 lbs.
674 cases.
17 „
10 crates.
404 lbs.
55 cases.
1,951 cwt.
7 cases.
3 „
24 „
3 „
88 bushels.
172 „
734 packages.
1 package.
9 cases.
2 „
296 cwt.
7 cases.
104 „
12 „
1,137.
295.
6 cwt.
1 case.
42 kegs.
1 case.
603 gallons.
4 cases.
776 „
Oatmeal -
Pipes and tobacco
Provisions, pork
„ beef
„ hams
Plants and seeds
Pitch, tar, and rosin
Pepper and spices
Peas, split -
Paint -
Perfumery -
Potatoes -
Rice -
Sugar, raw -
„ refined -
Sundries -
Starch and blue -
Stones -
Soap - - - -
Stationery -
Shooks and staves
Slates and tiles -
Salt -
Spirits, liqueurs -
„ whiskey -
„ brandy - - -
» gin -
„ Geneva -
„ rum -
Timber, cedar -
„ pine -
Tea -
Tobacco -
„ cigars -
„ snuff -
Tallow -
Tinware -
Toys -
Twine and thread
Trunks -
Vinegar -
Wooden ware -
Wine -
Zinc -
74 casks.
154 cases.
32 barrels.
166 casks.
5 cases.
2 „
7 barrels.
427 lbs.
10 casks.
66 kegs.
6 packages.
150 cwt.
993 „
420 „
160 „
39 cases.
5 „
40 „
941 boxes.
48 cases.
536 package*.
4.000 cases.
7 tons.
242 gallons.
54 „
542 „
296 „
2,281 „
2,219 „
3,139 feet.
1.000 „
2,633 lbs.
55,714 „
3,325 „
114 „
1 cwt.
4 cases.
2 „
1 case.
17.
70 gallons.
5 cases.
5,824 gallons.
5 cases.
A 4
Return of General Imports into
the Colony of New South Wales in the Year
1857
from the South
Return of General Exports from the Colony of New South Wales in the Year
Sea Islands,
Sea Islands,
1857
to the South
Fiji Islands.


1st
voyage, 617
piculs.
cost # 1,100,
sales # 8,021
2nd
» 700
53
„ #1.200,
„ #17,500
3rd
„ 1,080
33
„ #3,396,
„ #15,120
4 th
» 840
„ # 1,200,
„ #12,600
oth
„ 1,200
33
„ #3,500,
„ # 27,000
I'm Islands. Return of the
Number and Tonnage of Vessels entered inwards
from the Year 1848 to 1857 inclusive, from the
in the Colony of New South Wales
South Sea Islands.
Return of the
Number and Tonnage of Vessels entered outwards in the
to the South Sea Islands.
Tonnage.
Year.
Colony of New South Wales
Number.
Tonnage.
5,316
3,706
4,018
5,513
1853
1854
3,872
1855
1856
1857
Present Trade.
7,939
9,616
9,708
6,155
5,394-
I will refer for one moment to the present trade of Fiji. From September 1857 to September 1858,
in American vessels only, the imports amounted to 100,000 dollars (about 20,000/.), and the exports
to 160,000 dollars (about 32,000/.). The imports consist chiefly of dry goods and hardware, muskets
and powder, while the exports are, cocoa-nut oil, tortoise-shell, and beche-de-mer. This information
I obtained from the American Consul. Had there been any one to note the imports and exports in
British vessels during the same period, I am convinced, from data collected after arrival there,
that the amounts would at least equal the American trade. There is also a large business done by
some German merchants, in connexion with Hamburgh. The quantity of cocoa-nut oil at present
made by the natives is not one-fiftieth of what the trees already growing could yield. The quantity
exported during the period before quoted, in American vessels only, was nearly 700 tuns. Under
the same auspices over 4,000 pounds weight of tortoise-shell were collected (worth some 4,000/.), and
2,500 piculs of b6che-de-mer, valued in the American Consul’s tables at $38,000 (equal to about
7,500/.) These are the local valuations.
B£che-de-mer.—Profits of the Trade.
To show the profits of the beche-de-mer trade, I extract from Wilkes, of the United States Ex-
ploring Expedition, the following costs and returns of five cargoes obtained by an American,
Captain Eagleston :
A further profit also arises from the investment of the proceeds in Canton. This same trader
obtained also 4,488 pounds of tortoise-shell at a cost of $5,700, which sold in the United States for
$ 29,050 net.
Cotton.
In speaking of the great capacities of this extensive and valuable group, the production of cotton
should not be omitted. In no country is the cotton tree more rapid in its growth, more prolific in its
yield, or more permanent in its supply. To make its cultivation easy and profitable, nature con-
tributes every requisite in a salubrious climate and fertile soil. And since neither hard manual
labour nor great mechanical skill is necessary, I take it to be the natural produce of Fiji, and its
cultivation the natural employment of the natives. From nine to twelve months after planting, the
cotton tree shows its first pod, and then continues to yield for 10, 12, or 15 years, as the plant may
live. At the same time, and on the same tree, may be seen the blossom, the green pod, and the ripe
cotton.
The very favourable opinion expressed by the best judges, of the quality of this cotton, is well
known.
Whale Fishery.
It is also to be borne in mind that Fiji is in the track of the great whale fisheries of the South
Pacific.
From the shore are frequently seen whales playing close to the reefs; and it is not an uncommon
thing to see a vessel come into port for wood and water and the usual recruits, with the carcase (or
blubber) of a whale still fresh on its decks.


The following returns (compiled from the same “statistics of New South Wales,” to which reference Fiji Islands.
has already been had) will show the interest of Sydney in these fisheries. *
Return of Colonial Vessels
engaged
in the Whale Fisheries, sailing from the Port of Sydney, from
1848 to 1857.
1848
6,103
1853
1849
4,023
1854
1850
3,313
1855
1,338
4,556
1856
2,504-
1852
5,676
1857
4,883
Return
of Foreign
Vessels engaged in the Whale Fisheries that have visited
4,417
Port Jackson
the Ten Years from 1848 to 1857 inclusive.
Summary.
during
From these facts will appear the importance of Fiji, first—
Politically, its close proximity to Australia and New Zealand, and to the line of communication
between Sydney and Panama, and its intermediate position with reference to the possessions of other
European Powers in the Pacific.
Commercially, its latent and yet undeveloped resources; its soil of unequalled fertility; its
climate of unsurpassed salubrity; its secure and capacious harbours; its possession within itself of a
source of labour; its central situation with respect to the neighbouring groups of Western Polynesia.
Its importance to Sydney as a market for an immense trade, the large amount of manufactured
merchandise it will take from Sydney ; the large amount of produce it will send to Sydney, Under
American influence instead of a market being opened for Australia, the merchandise required will go
from the United States, and the produce sent there in return. At once there would be a depot for
American whalers; its consequence—the immediate withdrawal from Sydney of the business now
done with the many American whalers that flock to that port; and the monopoly by these American
whalers of the whale fisheries of the Pacific (an item of no trifling moment to the interests of the
Colony).
At the present moment French influence preponderates in the Pacific, by means of their establish-
ments at Tahiti and New Caledonia, both of which places are held as naval and military depots, the
superior nature of the latter being its proximity to the Australian coast and New Zealand. The
possession of Fiji would afford a very plausible pretence for an addition to their already lar<re fleet in
the South Pacific.


Fiji Islands.
Enclosure 3 in No. I.
Enel. 3 m Extract from a Letter of Captain Lorino to the Secretary of the Admiralty, dated “ Iris” in
L Sydney, December 7, 1858, No. 20.
Their Lordships will no doubt learn from the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the British Consul
to the King of the Fijis has taken home a deed of cession of those islands to Her Majesty the Queen
of England. I have not as yet had time to visit these islands, but I have reason to believe that from
position and other advantages they are very important, and the common belief in these seas is, that
they must soon fall into the hands of one of the Great Powers.
No. 2.
No. 2.
Copy of a LETTER from Herman Merivale, Esq., C. 8., to the Secretary to the
Admiralty.
Sir, Downing Street, March 9, 1859.
I am directed by Sir Edward Lytton, to request that you will lay before the
Lord Commissioners of the Admiralty the enclosed papers relating to the proposed
Feb, is, 1859. cession by the King of the Fiji Islands of his territories to Great Britain.
Page 1. The proposal has been brought before Sir Edward as one likely to be of material
advantage to this country, but previous to coming to any decision on the subject, he is
desirous of obtaining the opinion of the Lords Commissioners on some parts of the
question which appear to have a naval bearing, and on which the experience of no other
Department of State could equally furnish an answer.
In the first place, it is essential to know that if we obtain the Fiji Islands, we thereby
obtain all the available harbours in that part of the Pacific. Sir Edward Lytton is
inclined to believe from the papers which have been submitted to him, and which are
herewith enclosed, that there are many other islands not included in the Fiji group which
would afford equal facilities as regards harbour and anchorage.
In the next place, Sir Edward Lytton requests to be informed whether the natural
harbours now existing require much, if any, artificial development for naval purposes;
whether such harbours are few T or many; whether there are peculiar tides and currents
which render entrance into or egress from them dangerous ; and whether our possession
of them would involve any considerable expense in erecting lights or improving the
navigation.
Lastly, it is important to know whether the Fiji Islands lie in the most convenient line
of passage between Australia and New Zealand and Panama; whether an intermediate
station between those points is a naval requirement, and if so, whether, taking winds and
tides into account, the Fiji Islands form the most advantageous station.
I am, &c.
The Secretary to the Admiralty, (Signed) Herman Merivale.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 3.
No. 3.
Copy of a LETTER from the Right Honourable H. Corry, to Herman Merivale,
Esq., C.B.
Sir, Admiralty, March 14, 1859-
Having laid before my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty your letter of the
9th instant, and its enclosures, relating to the proposed cession by the King of the Fiji
Islands of his territories to Great Britain, and stating that Secretary Sir E. Bulwer
Lytton would be glad, before coming to any decision on the subject, to have the opinion
of my Lords on certain parts of the question which appear to have a naval bearing; I
am commanded by their Lordships to enclose you a copy of a report from their Hydro-
grapher on the subject of the Fiji Islands, from which report it will be perceived that
there are several reasons which, in their Lordships’ opinion, would make it desirable to
obtain possession of the islands.
The chart referred to by the hydrographer and the original papers forwarded in your
letter are herewith transmitted.
I am, &c.
Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B. (Signed) H. Corry.
&c. & c. &c.


Enclosure in No. 3.
On the Fiji Islands.
In accordance with the Board Minute, to report upon the Colonial Office letter of the 9th
instant, I have to state that—
The Fiji, or more properly the Viti group, in the south-western Pacific, consists of some 200
islands, islets, and rocks, lying between latitude and 191° south, at about 1,900 miles N.E.
of Sydney, and 1,200 miles north of Auckland, at the north end of New Zealand. The two largest
islands may be some 300 miles in circumference, or each is about the size of Corsica; 65 of the
islets are said to be inhabited, and the whole population of the group may be 200,000.
I propose to reply categorically to the queries contained in the Colonial Office letter :
Q. 1, If the Fiji Isles be obtained, are all the available harbours obtained in that part of the
Pacific ? <
A. 1. Certainly not all, but a great part of them. The Friendly or Tonga Islands, only 400 miles
to the south-east, possess good harbours, as Tonga-tabli and Vavau. The Samoa or Navigation
Isles, the same distance to the north-east, have good harbours, as Sangopango and Apia. Some of
the Society Islands also may be available, but lying 1,800 miles to the eastward they may not be
considered as within the limits named; none of the harbours, however, are superior to those of the
Fiji Islands.
Q. 2. Do the natural harbours now existing require much, if any, artificial development for naval
purposes ? Whether such harbours are few or many ?
A. 2. There are several roadsteads and harbours in the Fiji group, the principal of which is the
extensive harbour of Levuka, on the eastern side of Ovalau ; this harbour has good holding ground,
is easy of access, and has every facility for the supply of fruit, vegetables, wood, and water.
Angau, on its western side, has a sheltered roadstead of large extent.
Totoga is surrounded by a coral reef, within which is a spacious sheltered anchorage, with good
holding ground and an entrance for ships.
All the above harbours have been thoroughly surveyed by order of the Admiralty, and plans of
them on a large scale are available when required. These natural harbours will not require any
artificial development for naval purposes.
3. There is nothing unusual in the tides and currents around the Fiji group; they depend chiefly
on the prevailing winds; nor are they of sufficient strength to render the entrance into or egress
from the harbours dangerous. There is no present necessity for buoys, beacons, or lights, but
should trade greatly increase, or should mail steamers call by night, a light would become
necessary.
4. The Fiji Islands lie nearly in the direct track from Panama to Sydney, as will be seen by the
annexed chart of the Pacific Ocean, on which I have shown that track, as also one by calling at
the Fijis, whence it appears that the steamer, if she touched at one of the Fiji isles for coal, would
lengthen her voyage only about 320 miles, or one day’s run out of 32 days, on a distance of 8,000
miles. In like manner it appears that on the voyage from Vancouver Island to Sydney, the
touching at Fiji would lengthen the distance 420 miles in a voyage of 7,000 miles.
An intermediate station between' Panama and Sydney will be most desirable, indeed if the
proposed mail route is to be carried out it is indispensable ; one of the Society Islands, as lying half
way, would be a more convenient coaling station, but as they are under French protection it seems
doubtful if one could be obtained.
The Consul at Fiji, in the enclosed papers, hints at the possibility of coal being found in
one of the islands; if this should prove to be the case it would at once double their value as
a station.
In the above statements I have confined myself to answering the questions in the Colonial Office
letter, but on looking into the subject 1 have been much struck by the entire want by Great
Britain of any advanced position in the Pacific Ocean. We have valuable possessions on either side,
as at Vancouver and Sydney, but not an islet or a rock in the 7,000 miles of ocean that separate them.
The Panama and Sydney mail communication is likely to be established, yet we have no island on
which to place a coaling station, and where we could insure fresh supplies. ***** And it
may hereafter be found very inconvenient that England should be shut out from any station in the
Pacific, and that an enemy should have possession of Tonga-tabu, where there is a good harbour,
within a few hundred miles of the track of our homeward bound gold ships from Sydney and
Melbourne. Neither forts nor batteries would be necessary to hold the ground, a single cruizing
ship should suffice for all the wants of the islands ; coral reefs and the hearty good will of the natives
would do the rest.
1 have, &c.
(Signed) John Washington,
Admiralty, March 12, 1859. Hydrographer.
B 2
Fiji Islands,


Fiji Islands.
No. 4.
No. 4.
Copy of a LETTER from E. Hammond, Esq. to Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B.
Sir, Foreign Office, March 5, 1859-
I am directed by the Earl of Malmesbury to transmit to you herewith, for the
information and consideration of Secretary Sir Edward Lytton, copies of a letter and of
Cotton Associ- its enclosures which have been received from the Manchester Cotton Supply Association,
March TtsVT re P ort i n g upon the value of certain samples of cotton grown in the Fiji Islands, and
arc ’ ' brought to England by Mr. Pritchard, Her Majesty’s Consul in those islands.
I am, &c.
Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B. (Signed) E, HAMMOND.
&c. &c. &c.
Enel. 1 in
No. 4.
Enclosure in No. 4.
Cotton Supply Association Offices, No. 1, Newall’s Buildings,
My Loud, Manchester, March 1, 1859,
I AM desired by the Committee of this Association to acknowledge the receipt of your
Lordship’s letter of February 1859, and to forward to your Lordship the enclosed valuation of
the samples of Fiji cotton, transmitted to this Association. lam also desired to call the attention
of your Lordship to the enclosed series of resolutions, which it is hoped will meet with your
Lordship’s approval.
I am also to request that your Lordship will inform the Association what steps Her Majesty’s
Government may be disposed to take for ensuring to this country abundant supplies of cotton from
the Fiji Islands.
I have. Sec.
The Right Honourable the Earl of Malmesbury, (Signed) G. R. Haywood,
&c. &c. &c. Secretary,
Sub-End. 1
in Enel.
Sub-Enclosure I in Enclosure No, 1.
No. 1.
Cotton Supply Association Offices, No. I, Newall’s Buildings,
Manchester, February 25, 1859.
Valuation of samples of Fiji cotton forw'arded by the Earl of Malmesbury to the Cotton Supply
Association,
No. I.—Sample of Brazil kidney furred cotton in the seed, valued, when cleaned, Id. to l\d.
per lb.
No. 2.—Excellent clean cotton, worth 9c?. per lb.
No. 3, —Cleaned cotton, rather brown in colour, not so clean as No. 2 and not so good, worth
B d. per lb.
No. 4.—Very beautiful cotton, worth Is. to Is. o \d. per lb.
No. 5. —When cleaned ( i.e . free from seed) worth 11c?. per lb.
(Signed) Edmund Ashworth,
Vice-President.
G. R. Haywood,
Secretary.
Sub-End. 2
in End.
Sub-Enclosure 2 in Enclosure No. 1.
No. 1,
Resolutions passed at a Meeting of the Executive Committee of the Cotton Supply
Association held February 25th, 1859.
Resolved, — That the samples of Fiji cotton which have been submitted by the Foreign Office to
the Committee of the Cotton Supply Association for examination are found to be of qualities most
desirable for the manufactures of this country, and the Committee have formed an opinion in all
respects favourable to these samples, and believe that such a range of excellent cotton is scarcely now
received from any cotton growing country which supplies this requisite raw material to Great
Britain.
Resolved, —That whilst this Fiji cotton ranges in value from 7 \d. to Is., the great supply received
from the United States does not realize nearly so high an average value at present.
Resolved, —That the Committee of the Cotton Supply beg to thank the Foreign Department for
the attention evinced to the interest of the cotton trade of this country by the samples now submitted
for the inspection of this association.


Resolved, —That if the representations made by Her Britannic Majesty’s consul, Mr. Pritchard, Fiji Islands.
as to the probable quantity and quality of cotton which can be produced in the Fiji Islands be correct,
the attention of Her Majesty’s Government ought to be directed to securing for this country the
means of obtaining those supplies.
(Signed) Edmund Ashworth,
Vice-President.
G. R. Haywood,
Secretary.
No. 5.
No. 5.
Copy of a LETTER from Herman Merivale, Esq., C. 8., to E. Hammond, Esq
Sir, Downing Street, April 13, 1859-
Sir E. Lytton has had under his consideration the proposal made for the cession
of the Fiji Islands to this country, and discussed in your letters of the 18th February, and
sth of March.* * Pages 1,
The question is one not hastily 7 to he decided, as involving various considerations of 12 *
importance and expense; bat before proceeding further in the matter, Sir E. Lytton
would be glad to be informed whether, in Lord Malmesbury’s opinion, supposing that on
other grounds it is found to be desirable to accept the sovereignty of these Islands, their
occupation by us may not lead to embarrassment or complication with Foreign Powers
who have rights or claims in that part of the Pacific.
I have, &c.
E. Hammond, Esq. (Signed) H. MERIVALE.
&c. &c.
No. 6.
No. 6.
Copy of a LETTER from E. Hammond, Esq., to Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B
Sir, Foreign Office, April 13, 1859-
I am directed by the Earl of Malmesbury to transmit to you herewith, to be laid Mr. Pritchard,
before Secretary Sir Edward Lytton, a copy of a Despatch from Mr. Pritchard, Her NoT -
Majesty’s Consul in the Fiji Islands, stating his views as to the mode in which those March 28 > 1859 '
islands might be governed, if their cession should be accepted by Her Majesty’s
Government.
I am, &c.
Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B. (Signed) E. HAMMOND.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure in No. 6.
My Lord, London, March 28th, 1859. Enel, in
With reference to the plan of Government which my intercourse with the various tribes of
Polynesia has induced me to deem most suitable for Fiji, and upon which subject your Lordship
inquired on the occasion of the interview with which I was honoured on the 16th instant, I would
respectfully submit the following remarks :
I should, however, premise that my observations are based on the supposition that the aboriginal
population of Fiji is the class to whom legislation is, in the first instance, especially directed.
As this population becomes mixed, and the foreign element more numerous, a more complex and
comprehensive system than that which I now purpose, with your Lordship’s permission, submitting to
your notice, would necessarily be required and would naturally result.
To manage a Polynesian easily and successfully, it is necessary to gain a moral ascendancy over
him; by such power he is influenced at will. To win his full confidence it is necessary to convince
him that his individual good is sought to be promoted, and that one’s motives are disinterested.
Caution is requisite to guard him from thinking that the efforts for his advancement are selfish and
dependent only upon a reciprocal advancement of interests.
It is to the moral power which our missionaries, whatever their creed or denomination, invariably
attain over the islanders by their conciliatory teachings and uniformly disinterested conduct, that I
attribute the unparalleled influence and deep-seated hold they possess throughout Polynesia.
B 3


Fiji Islands
Direct and ready access to some one in authority should be secured to every native, for the bare
fact of stating his complaint and disburdening himself of his trouble, though there may be no imme-
diate prospect of redress, at once relieves his mind. To allow a savage or even a semi-civilized
native who has abandoned his heathenism, to brood over wrongs, imaginary though they may be, is
only to create a feeling of distrust, which in turn engenders a desire for revenge.
On the other hand, my Lord, the more quickly after conviction retributive punishment follows
the commission of crime on the part of the native, the more salutary is the effect, and the more
lasting the impression. Every Polynesian, per force of the barbarous training received from infancy,
looks upon promptitude apart from the justice with which it may be accompanied as indicative of an
irresistible power to punish or to protect, as the case may be.
It is no difficult task to lead the Polynesian, while to drive him is sometimes an impossibility. By
persuasive means he generally can be induced to follow wherever directed. But by peremptory and
harsh measures, without taking the trouble to show him the propriety of your proceedings or the
injustice of the act with which he stands charged, he becomes stubborn and sullen, and even while
acknowledging his inferiority and impotence, he will not submit.
And the ill success commercially of the French establishments in Oceania originates, I think, in the
fact that no attempt whatever is made either on the part of the civil power to conciliate by protecting
the native tribes from the aggressions of the foreigner, or on the part of their missionaries effectually
to induce the renunciation of heathenism, and the adoption of more civ.lizing practices. While
advocating a policy which shall tolerate the general customs of the people, great discretion is necessary
to discriminate between those customs whose observance might tend to retard the progress of the
natives, and those which may be with propriety permitted.
With these observations, then, I would respectfully submit to your Lordship that should Her
Majesty’s Government accept the cession of Fiji, the only officers required for the governance of the
country, under existing circumstances, are—
A Superintendent or Governor.
A Colonial Secretary , with the superintendence of commercial and financial affairs.
A Judicial Secretary, with the supervision of all legal proceedings.
Two steam gun-boats permanently stationed in the group would be a competent force to control
the whole of Fiji, and to repress the local troubles that may occasionally occur. The most fruitful
source of these local troubles, I apprehend, to exist in the ancient feuds maintained by the families of
some of the chiefs. Such an establishment as this which I have now submitted to your Lordship can,
I think, within a very limited period, be maintained by the present population, and if their resources
are judiciously appropriated, a surplus revenue obtained.
The production of a large and continuous supply of cotton being the great commercial prospect for
Fiji, I would submit the expediency of prizes on a graduated scale being awarded to those chiefs whose
clans or districts excel in the cultivation of cotton, and produce the largest quantities within stated
periods. I limit the distribution of these prizes to the chiefs, because the enjoyment of the produce
of their labour will be appreciated as an incomparable boon by the people, and prove an irresistible
incentive to their industry, while the prospect of these prizes would tend to attach the chiefs to us as at
once their rulers and the source of their wealth, and to implant a feeling of inseparable dependence,
which it is well to promote as early as possible. Such prizes would also have a conciliatory tendency
by compensating for the loss of the undisputed privilege the chiefs at present enjoy, of absorbing the
entire labour of their respective clans. . . . :
Though the simple establishment and the small force which I have ventured to submit to your
Lordship may at first sight appear altogether so inconsiderable to govern and keep in peaceful sub-
jection 200,000 people, still 1 have not the least hesitancy, my Lord, in adhering to my position, that
the plan is quite feasible if the requisite knowledge and tact to manage the natives are possessed by
those engaged in the enterprise.
Putting out of view the strategical importance of the group in case of war with any Naval Power,
and the military measures which that would render necessary, I would lay down as the principal
object of our occupation the creation of a large and unfailing supply, at as little cost as possible, by
the aboriginal population of a given raw material essential at once to the development of English
manufactures and the natural resources of Fiji, rather than the opening of a field for general immigra-
tion. With this design the simpler the form of Government the less will be the danger of diverting
the natives from the industry to which quiet and confidence conduce.
While Fiji is capable of maintaining a population of several millions, the only addition to its present
inhabitants necessary to facilitate the supply of cotton is a limited number of purchasers. And lam
inclined, my Lord, to believe that to protect the native race, to whom alone we can look for labour to
compete with the slaves of America in the production of cotton, it will he politic not to encourage too
rapid or too indiscriminate an ingress of settlers. The natives will, I think, work more regularly and
more effectually for the production of cotton without too great an admixture of a foreign population.
For in the presence of a numerous while community the aborigines will sink to the place of menials
instead of retaining their position as cultivators of their native soil. And I would then infer a
necessary failure in their supply of cotton, for in these tropical islands I have seen that white labour
cannot compete permanently with the native labour.
With these suggestions, my Lord, based as they are upon personal observation and notes taken
during my official residence in Polynesia,
I have, &c.
The Earl of Malmesbury, (Signed) Will. T. Pritchard,
&c. &c. Her Majesty’s Consul at Fiji.


No. 7.
Copy of a LETTER from E. Hammond, Esq. to Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B.
Sir, Foreign Office, April 21, 1859.
I have laid before the Earl of Malmesbury your letter of the 13th instant, referring
to the cession to Her Majesty of the sovereignty of the Fiji Islands, and requesting to be
informed whether the occupation of those Islands by Great Britain might not lead to
embarrassment or to discussion between Her Majesty’s Government and Foreign Powers
who have rights or claims in that part of the Pacific ; and I am directed by Lord
Malmesbury to acquaint you for the information of Secretary Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton,
that his Lordship is not aware that the occupation of the Fiji Islands by Great Britain
would involve the violation of any rights or claims belonging to Foreign Powers in that
quarter of the world.
* * # * * # * ❖
I am, &c.
(Signed) E. HAMMOND.
Herman Merivale, Esq., C.B.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 8.
Copy of a LETTER from Lord Wodehouse to Sir F. Rogers, Bart.
Sir, Foreign Office, July 2, 1860.
With reference to my letter of the 29th of November last, and to previous corre-
spondence respecting the cession of the Fiji Islands to Great Britain, I am directed by
Lord John Russell to transmit to you, to be laid before the Duke of Newcastle, four
Despatches and their enclosures from Mr. Consul Pritchard, by which his Grace will
perceive that the Chiefs of those Islands continue to press very urgently for the acceptance
of the cession by Her Majesty.
I am to request that you will call the Duke of Newcastle’s attention to this matter,
upon which the Colonial Office do not appear to have yet decided,
I am, &c.
Sir F. Rogers, Bart. • (Signed) WODEHOUSE.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 8.
Consul Pritchard to the Secretary of State
No. 20.
My Lord, British Consulate, Fiji, December 31, 1859.
With reference to the cession of these Islands to Great Britain, I have the honour to report
for your Lordship’s information that on the 14ih instant in a council representing all the districts of
Fiji, the chiefs unanimously ratified and renewed the act of cession of Thakombau of 14th October 1858,
and they have begged me again to bring the question under the consideration of Her Majesty’s
Government.
I now therefore have the honour to enclose a copy of the document delivered to me by these assem-
bled chiefs. The original, which was signed in presence of Commander Campion and myself, 1 have
retained for the present, at the request of the chiefs, as there are one or two more (prevented from
attending on the 14th instant) to add their names.
Candidly, my Lord, as far as I can ascertain, it seems a settled question in the minds of the Fijians,
that they cannot resist the encroachments of the white race; and their act of cession to Great Britain
they view as a choice of the least of many evils. They believe that Britain will prove a better master
than any other nation ; and hence I conceive they are sincere in offering the sovereignty of their islands
to Her Majesty.
I have, &c.
To Her Majesty’s Secretary of State. (Signed) Wm. T. Pritchard,,
B 4


Fiji Islands.
Sub-Enclosure in Enclosure No 1.
Sub-End. in
Enel. No. 1.
(Signed) Rambithi, Roko Tui Dreketi (his x mark), of Rewa.
Giogi Nanovo (his x mark), of Nadroga.
Na Waqualevu (his x mark), of Rakiraki.
Yui Levuka (his x mark), of Ovalau.
that they thoroughly understand its meaning.
I hereby certify the foregoing to be a true copy.
December 31. 1859.
Enel. 2. in
Consul Pritchard to the Secretary of State.
No. 8
Enclosure 2 in No. 8.
No. 21.
Sub-End. in
End. No. 2.
Sub-Enclosure in Enclosure No. 2.
We hereby acknowledge, ratify, and renew the cession of Fiji to Great Britain made on the 12th
day of October 1858, by Thakombau.
In witness whereof we have hereto affixed our names, this 14th day of December 1859.
Koroi Thokanauto (his x mark), of Bau.
Koroi Tumbuna (his x mark), of Tavua.
Naimbuka Koroikasa (his x mark), of Nakelo Ratu Isikeli, of Veiva.
Tukana (his x mark), of Notho.
Tumbavivi (his x mark), of Rakiraki.
Thuruitha (his x mark), of Korotumu Ra.
Sesembualala (his x mark), of Korolumbu.
Tundraw (his x mark), of Dravo Samisoni, of Vewa.
Na Galu (his x mark), of Namena.
Koroi Kaiy-anuyanu (his x mark), of Lasakau.
Dabea (his x mark), of Kuku (Yiti Levu).
Komai Vunivesi (his x mark), of Nakelo.
Pita Paula (his x mark), of Yewa.
Tui Bua (his x mark), of Bua.
Thakombau (his x mark), of Fiji.
Retova (his x mark), of Mathuata.
Tui Thakau (his x mark), of Taviruni.
We hereby certify that the foregoing chiefs signed this document with a full understanding of its
meaning, in our presence, this 14th day of December 1859.
I have, &c.
(Signed) H. Campion,
Commander R.N., H.M.S. “ Elk,”
(Signed) Will. T. Pritchard, H. B. M. Consul.
We hereby certify that we translated the foregoing document to the chiefs who have signed, and
(Signed) W, Collis,
Wesleyan Mission Training Master.
(Signed) E. P. Martin,
Wesleyan Mission Printer.
(Signed) Will. T. Pritchard,
Consul.
My Lord, British Consulate, Fiji, December 31, 1859.
Enclosed I have the honour to transmit the copy of a general treaty which has been signed by
the chiefs of Fiji and myself, subject to your Lordship's approval.
The original is retained for the signatures of chiefs who were unable to attend on the present
occasion, after which it will be duly forwarded.
By this treaty I hope to define the intercourse of Her Majesty's subjects with this people. Hitherto
there has been no rule by which to regulate their commercial transactions, and to adjust the differences l
more or less arising therefrom.
Each article in the treaty was fully discussed and explained, and then formally put to the vote by
Thakombau, and a show of hands duly required ; and I must add each article was carried unanimously.
I trust to obtain your Lordship’s approval of my proceedings on this occasion, and to be favoured
with instructions for my future guidance.
I have, «fec.
(Signed) Will. T. Pritchard,
Consul.
At a meeting held this day at the British Consulate, Levuka, Fiji, the parties present being William
Thomas Pritchard, Esquire, Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul for Fiji, Ebenezer Thakombau and his
chiefs representing the various districts of Fiji:—


It is hereby enacted and agreed to:—
Article I. That the full, supreme, and entire jurisdiction over British subjects in Fiji, is hereby
delegated and ceded to Victoria, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, to hold, exercise, and enjoy such
jurisdiction in manner and form as Her Majesty may deem most effectual.
11. That British subject shall have full and unrestricted right and liberty to engage in all legal and
proper commercial transactions and trading operations in all Fiji, and may have factories and houses
therein, and may hold lands; and every favour or privilege which may be granted or shown to the
subjects or citizens of any other nation shall be equally granted and shown to British subjects,
HI. That in the event of any chief or other Fijian making an agreement to take goods from a ship
at a certain rate, such agreement, if the sum contracted for shall be ,$250 or upwards to ,$5OO, shall
be recorded in the archives of Her Majesty’s Consulate, and shall be binding on all the parties
thereto.
IV. That should any merchant, trader, or vendor give trust to any Fijian over and above the sum
of $5OO, such trust shall be at the risk of the merchant trader or vendor.
V. That should any Fijian take trust within the limits of the fouth article of this enactment or
agreement from any merchant, trader, or vendor, and be unable to pay the debt, his house and
property shall be sold by Her Majesty’s consul, after fourteen (14) clear days’ notice; and the proceeds
of the sale shall be applied towards the liquidation of the debt.
VI. That should any British subject w r rong a Fijian, or take trust from a Fijian, and be unable to
pay the debt, the case shall be duly represented and referred to Her Majesty’s consul, who shall take
proceedings for the punishment of the offender according to British law, or to the local law, as the
case may be.
VII. That the ministers and teachers of the Christian religion shall be permitted to reside and
exercise their calling in all Fiji, and full liberty and protection is hereby guaranteed to them; and
any Fijian who may embrace the Christian faith shall not on that account, or on account of his
teaching or exercise thereof, be molested or troubled in any manner whatsoever.
VIII. That within a convenient distance of all the principal towns and ports of Fiji there shall be
set apart a piece of land of suitable extent, for a burial ground for all Christian persons; and the
funerals and sepulchres of the dead shall not be disturbed in any Avay or upon any account whatever.
IX. That no human beings shall at any time be sacrificed on account of religious or any other
ceremonies, and cannibalism and infanticide shall altogether and for ever cease; and any person or
persons who may hereafter be convicted of cannibalism or infanticide shall forfeit to the Stale all his
or their property and land, and shall be made to labour on the public works.
X. That the infringement of any of these articles shall subject such offender to any punishment
Her Majesty’s Government may deem proper in the case.
XI. That it shall be open to add to or substitute any article or articles of this enactment or
agreement which may hereafter be deemed expedient or necessary.
In witness whereof we have this 15th day of December 1859 affixed our names hereto, as well as
to a Fijian copy hereof, fully understanding the purport and force of the same.
(Signed) Thakombau (his x mark), Vunivalu Tui Viti.
Rokotuiveikau of Nainara (his x mark).
Ratu Isikeli of Vewa.
Tundrau of Dravo (his x mark).
Komaimataiovea of Namata (his x mark).
Koroi Ravelita of Buretu (his x mark).
Mangala of Verata (his x mark).
Dambea of Kuku (his x mark).
Kowi Ravusa of Nakalauatha (his x mark).
I. Nanovo of Nandroga (his x mark).
Rambithi Rokotuidreketi of Rewa (his x mark).
Liloma of Verata (his x mark).
Rangata of Xakelo (his x mark).
Nawangalevu of Rakiraki (his x mark).
Rokotuikuiva of Kuiva (his x mark).
Tukana of Notho (his x mark).
Torodreketi of Tokatoka (his x mark).
Koroikainamalu of Thautata (his x mark). •
Koroikauyanuyanu of Lasakau (his x mark).
Sesebualala of Korotubu (his x mark).
(Signed) William T. Pritchard,
H.B.M. Consul.
We hereby certify that we have translated the foregoing document to the chiefs who have signed
the same, and that they fully understand the meaning thereof.
(Signed) W. Collis,
Wesleyan Training Master.
E. P. Martin,
Wesleyan Mission Printer.


Fiji Islands.
Consul Pritchard to the Secretary of State.
Enclosure 3 in No. 8.
Enel. 3 in
No. 8.
No. 22.
My Lord, British Consulate, Fiji, December 31, 1859.
In the absence of native courts competent to hear causes wherein British subjects are litigants,
I applied to the chiefs of Fiji, when assembled in council on the 15th instant, for a commission
authorizing the constitution of a court in this consulate for that purpose,
i Enclosure. This commission I have the honour to transmit herewith, and if approved by your Lordship I beg
for the necessary authority and instructions to rule the proceedings of the court, and for directions as
to the reports to be forwarded to the Foreign Office.
In the meantime, with your Lordship’s permission, I shall endeavour, basing my action on the
broad principles of justice, to satisfy the many complaints which are preferred before me, keeping a
record of the particulars in the archives of this office,
I have, &c.
To Her Majesty’s Secretary of State, (Signed) William T. Pritchard,
&c. &c. & c. 1 Consul.
Sub-End. in Sub-Enclosure in Enclosure No. 3.
Enel. No. 3. Know all men by these presents, that I, Thakombau Vunivalu and Tui Viti, do hereby, in virtue
of the enactments or agreements of 14th and 15th December 1859, delegate and cede to and vest in
William Thomas Pritchard, Esquire, Her Britannic Majesty’s consul in and for Fiji, full, all, and
every power and authority, to form, constitute, and hold a court or courts for the hearing and
adjudging of all cases or causes wherein British subjects, or their property or interests, are in any
way affected or concerned; and to carry out, enforce, and direct all and every judgment, finding, or
decision of the said court.
Thakombau (his x mark) Vunivalu.
Done at a meeting of my chiefs this 15th day of December 1859, in the British consulate, Levuka.
Thakombau (his x mark) Vunivalu.
We hereby certify that the foregoing commission was duly translated by us to Thakombau, who
thoroughly understands the same, and signed in our presence.
(Signed) W. Colli s,
Wesleyan Training Master and Interpreter.
E. P. Martin,
Wesleyan Mission Printer, Interpreter.
Enel. 4 in
No. 8.
Enclosure 4 in No. 8.
Consul Pritchard to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
No. 23.
My Lord, British Consulate, Fiji, December 31, 1859.
I have the honour to report that on the 16th inst. the chiefs of Fiji, in council assembled, have
unanimously and urgently requested me to assume the management of their political and commercial
affairs; and that to give effect to their request the enclosed enactment has been passed,
i Enclosure I transmit on this occasion a copy of the original document, as there are several chiefs anxious to
sign who were unable to attend on the 16th.
In reply, I have informed the chiefs that I cannot pledge myself to any action other than provision-
ally until your Lordship’s pleasure be known.
In all the native cases which have thus been brought before me, as well as the cases where
foreigners have been concerned, the parties thereto have promptly submitted to my decisions. This
tractable temper I attribute to the frequent visits of Her Majesty’s ships; though, of course, as the
white population increases, they will be more difficult to manage, and a permanent local force will
become necessary.
For the present, however, if it be possible for one of Her Majesty’s vessels on the Australian station
to visit this group at intervals not exceeding six months, and to remain three or four weeks, British
influence and British interests will continue to preponderate; and while the general trade with the
Australian colonies will rapidly increase, the production of cotton will be especially forwarded, the
presence of the commander adding weight to my representations on this subject.
The foreign population has latterly increased so rapidly that the chiefs feel their inability to control
and guide their state affairs; and while they profess to be conscious that if abandoned to themselves
they must inevitably sink under the weight of that foreign population, they conceive that if the
political power be vested where there is ability and competence to manage and control the foreign
element, they have still a fair prospect of maintaining their status socially and commercially, as well
as politically.
Hence, my Lord, the extreme and restless anxiety manifested by the chiefs to place themselves
under British rule.
I have, therefore, to beg your Lordship’s instructions in this matter.
I have, &c.
To Her Majesty’s Secretary of State (Signed) Will. T. Pritchard,
for Foreign Affairs. • Consul.


Sub-Enclosure in Enclosure No, 4,
At a meeting held this day at the British Consulate, Levuka, Fiji, the parties present being
William Thomas Pritchard, Esq., Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul; Thakombau and his chiefs repre-
senting Fiji. Being deemed expedient for the effectual protection of trade, for the development of
Fiji, for the progress of civilization, and for the maintenance of amicable relations with all countries,
it is hereby enacted and agreed to—
I. That all transactions, communications, and intercourse of every nature soever between Fiji and
all Foreign Powers shall be conducted solely through and by William Thomas Pritchard, Esq., Her
Britannic Majesty’s Consul for Fiji.
11. That we hereby delegate, cede, and make over to, and vest in the said William Thomas
Pritchard, the full, unreserved, entire, and supreme right, authority, and power to govern Fiji,
according to the .broad and plain principles of justice and morality; and to make, enact, and decree
whatever and all laws, regulations, and measures he may deem necessary, proper, and expedient
therefor, and to summon, convene, and assemble us and our chiefs, each and all severally and per-
sonally, to appear and present ourselves at his office; and such meeting or assembly shall have the
right, authority, and power to constitute itself into a council of advice and reference under the
presidency of the said William Thomas Pritchard; and we hereby bind and pledge ourselves, and
our chiefs, and our people to obey all and every such summons.
HI. That all just and lawful acts which the said William Thomas Pritchard may perform or do,
or cause to be done on or for our behalf and name, we hereby bind and pledge ourselves thereunto to
acknowledge, obey, and support; and any and every contract, engagement, transaction, treaty, or
law the said William Thomas Pritchard may deem necessary, proper, and expedient for the benefit,
progress, development, and civilization of Fiji, to do, make, enter into, perform, contract, or promul-
gate on or for our behalf and name, we hereby bind and pledge ourselves and our chiefs, each and
all, thereunto, as if we did severally and personally do, make, enter into, perform, contract, or pro-
mulgate the same.
IV, That this enactment or agreement shall be in force and valid until the final answer of the
Queen of Great Britain to the cession of Fiji made on the 12th day of October 1858, and duly ratified
and renewed by us in council assembled on the 14th day of December 1859.
In witness whereof we have hereunto affixed our names this 16th day of December 1859.
(Signed) Thakombau (his x mark), Tuiti Viti and Vunivalu.
Rokotuiveikau (his x mark), of Namara.
Tudrau (his x mark), of Dravo.
Koroik Raivelita (his x mark), of Bureitu.
1. Nanovo (his x mark), of Nadroga.
Sese Thualala (his x mark), of Nakorotubu.
Rambithi Rabici Rokotuidreketi (his x mark), of Rewa.
Matauloki (his x mark), of Nandroga.
Rangata (his x mark), of Nakelo.
Liloma (his x mark), of Verata,
Samisone (his x mark), of Vewa.
Rokotui Kiuva (his x mark), of Kiuva.
Ratu Isikeli (his x mark), of Vewa.
Manquala (his X mrak), of Verata.
Komaimataiovea (his x mark), of Namata.
Koroikonamalo (his x mark), of Thautata.
Tukana (his x mark), of Notho,
Dambea (his x mark), of Kuku,
. Koroikaiyanuyanu (his x mark), of Lakemba.
Tui Bua (his x mark), of Bua.
Bete (his x mark), of Mathuata and Vanua Levu.
Tui Thakau (his x mark), of Somosomo,
Retova (his x mark), of Vanua Levu,
1 hereby certify the foregoing to be a true copy.
Will. T. Pritchard,
December 31, 1859. Consul.
We hereby certify that w r e translated the foregoing document to the chiefs who have signed, and
that they thoroughly understand its meaning.
(Signed) W. Collis, Wesleyan Mission Trainer.
E. P. Martin, Wesleyan Mission Printer.
No. 9-
Copy of a LETTER from Sir F. Rogers, Bart., to the Lord Wodehouse.
My Lord, Downing Street, July 31, 1860.
In reply to your Lordship’s letter of the 2nd instant,* I am directed by the
Secretary of State to express his regret that by some inadvertence no official intimation
was conveyed to the Foreign Office of the appointment of a Commissioner to visit
C 2
Fiji Islands
Sub-Enel, in
Enel. No. 4.
No. 9
Page 15


Fiji islands, the Fiji Islands, for the purpose of inquiring into the reasons for and against accepting
the offer which has been made to cede to Her Majesty the sovereignty over those
Islands
End. 1. 1 am now to request that you will inform Lord John Russell that Colonel Smythe,
Dec. 23. 1859. r a } j s the person who has been selected for this important duty, and I am to enclose a
* vide P . 24. cQ py 0 f the instructions for his guidance with which he was furnished.*
End. 2. x am a | so to transmit a copy of a Despatch from the Governor of New South Wales,
A --' 1 reporting the arrival at Sydney of Colonel Smythe, en route for his destination, and to
request that you will draw the attention of Lord John Russell to the opinion expressed
by Sir W. Denison, of the danger to this country of becoming involved in a sanguinary
war with the native inhabitants, if an attempt be made to settle a large white popula-
tion amongst these islanders.
With regard to the communications contained in Mr. Consul Pritchard’s Despatches
which accompanied your letter, and which are herewith returned, I am to state that, until
the receipt of Colonel Smythe’s report, no final opinion can be expressed upon the
proposal made last year for accepting the sovereignty of these Islands.
It seems, however, that in anticipation of this acceptance, Mr Pritchard has procured a
provisional cession of the country to Great Britain, and the enactment of a law giving to
himself “ full, unreserved, entire, and supreme authority and power to govern Fiji according
“ to the broad and plain principles of justice and morality,” and to make what laws he
pleases. Whether the persons making this law are competent to bind the other natives,
or whether they understood themselves the real import of what they were doing, are
questions on which it is impossible here to form any opinion, but on which the future
peace of the Fiji Islands may in no slight degree depend.
Not satisfied with these steps, which may be undone by the disavowal of Her Majesty’s
Government, Mr. Pritchard seems (not indeed from his own letters, but from the
Despatch of Sir W. Denison) to have issued advertisements, in order to attract white
settlers to the Islands.
If unhappily he should have succeeded in this object, it may not be easy to foretel or
to prevent the mischief which might ensue from the unauthorized action of Her Majesty’s
Consul in such a matter.
The Secretary of State is persuaded that Lord John Russell will not approve of any
subordinate agents taking steps that may commit this country to serious enterprises, for
which he may "himself be anxious, but which he must well know not to have been sanctioned
by his superiors. The experience of this Department has proved that it is difficult to
exaggerate the importance of the consequences which may flow from such steps as
Mr. Pritchard seems to have thought proper to adopt on his own authority.
I have, &c.
The Lord Wodehouse, (Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
&c. &c.
End. I in
No. 9.
Enclosure 1 in No. 9.
This enclosure will be found printed at p. 24.
Enclosure 2 in No. 9.
Enel. 2in My Lord Duke, Government House, Sydney, April 10, 1860.
No. 9. 1 have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Confidential Despatch, dated January
12, 1860, enclosing a copy of the instructions issued to Colonel Smythe, R.A., for his guidance
in the performance of his duty in his mission to the Fiji Islands,
Colonel Smythe arrived here in the mail steamer, and I at once introduced him to Commodore
Loring for the purpose of making arrangements for his conveyance to the Fijis, and also to the chief
of the Wesleyan missionary establishment at Sydney, from whom he w r ould be enabled to procure
such information as might guide him in the inquiries he would have to institute.
The disturbed state of New Zealand has unfortunately compelled Commodore Loring to con-
centrate all his force at that Island. Colonel Smythe will therefore proceed from hence to Auckland
in the mail steamer, and when there will be able to arrange with the Commodore for his conveyance
to the Fijis, either in a ship of war, or some vessel which can be procured on the spot.
I may, perhaps, without presuming too much on your Grace’s patience, or in any way attempting
to forestal Colonel Smythe’s report, call the attention of Her Majesty’s Government to the present
state of affairs in New Zealand, as indicative of the results which are likely to follow, should induce-
ments be held out to a white population to occupy the land which it is proposed to cede to Her
Majesty, in consideration of the liquidation by the British Government of the debt due to the
Americans, or should permission be given to individuals to purchase land from the natives.


I lay more stress upon this, as I see by advertisements in the Sydney newspaper that the Consul
at the Fijis is trying to attract white settlers to occupy land in the vicinity of the Consulate, which
he has transferred from the former site to one, I suppose, more favourable for settlement.
The inevitable result of the introduction of a white population, except under the strictest possible
regulations, will be a war of races, and although the ultimate success of the European element would
be certain, yet as the Fijians are more numerous than the New Zealanders, and more concentrated,
as the climate is less adapted to Europeans, the cost of an attempt to maintain the supremacy of the
white population will be comparatively great, and the loss of life enormous.
I have, &c.
His Grace the Duke of Newcastle, (Signed) W. Denison.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 10.
Copy of a LETTER from James Murray, Esq., to Chichester Fortescue, Esq., M.P.
Sir, Foreign Office, August 31, 1860.
With reference to SirF. Rogers’letter of the 31st ultimo,* I am directed by Lord
John Russell to transmit to you, to be laid before the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
a copy of a Despatch which his Lordship has addressed to Her Majesty’s Consul at Fiji,
relative to his proceedings with regard to the offer made to Her Majesty’s Government of
the sovereignty of the Fiji Islands.
I have, &c.
Chichester Fortescue, Esq., M.P., (Signed) JAMES MURRAY.
&c. &c. &c.
j Enclosure in No. 10.
Sir, Foreign Office, August 20, 1860.
Her Majesty’s Government have had under their consideration your Despatches Nos. 20, 21,
22, and 23 of 31st December last, reporting your proceedings with regard to the offer which the
chiefs of the Fiji Islands have made to Great Britain of the sovereignty of those Islands, and I have
to inform you that Colonel Smythe, R.A., was selected in December last to proceed to the Fiji
Islands as Commissioner on the part of Her Majesty’s Government, for the purpose of reporting
whether it would be expedient to accept the offer of the chiefs, and until Colonel Smythe’s report is
received Her Majesty’s Government can express no final opinion with respect to that offer.
It appears, however, from the general treaty which you concluded with the chiefs on the 15th
December last, that you have, by anticipation, not only procured a provisional cession of the Fiji
Islands to Great Britain, but that you have likewise procured the enactment of a law, giving to
yourself “ full, unreserved, entire, and supreme authority and power to govern Fiji,” and to make
what laws you please.
Whether the persons making this [aw are competent to bind the other natives, or whether they
understood themselves the real import of what they were doing, are questions on which it is impossible
for Her Majesty’s Government to form any opinion, but on which the future peace of the Fiji Islands
may in no slight degree depend.
It further appears, from a Despatch received from the Government of New South Wales, that you
have issued advertisements in order to attract white settlers to the Islands. If you should have
succeeded in this object, it is not easy to foretel or to prevent the mischief which may ensue from
your unauthorized action in such a matter. I have to desire that you will furnish me with an ex-
planation of your conduct, and of the reasons which led you to take measures which may be the cause
of serious embarrassment to Her Majesty’s Government.
I have, &c.
Consul Pritchard. (Signed) J. Russell.
No. 11.
Copy of a LETTER from Sir Frederic Rogers, Bart., to E. Hammond, Esq.
Sir, Downing Street, December 16, 1861.
1 am directed by the Duke of Newcastle to transmit to you, for the information of
Lord Russell, a copy of a letter from Commodore Seymour, of Her Majesty’s ship
“ Pelorus,” reporting on the state of affairs in the Fiji Islands, and furnishing an account
of the measures adopted by him, in concert with Mr. Pritchard, Her Britannic Majesty’s
Consul, for terminating the wars which have been raging between the Fijians and
Tongans.
I have, &c.
E. Hammond, Esq. (Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
&c. &c.
C 3


Fiji Islands,
H O , 59 Enclosure in No. 11.
Between Ritova
and Bonavei-
dage, chiefs of
Fiji.
Between Ritova
and other chiefs
of Fiji and
Maafu, chief of
Tonga.
jg IR “ Pelorus,” Auckland, September 2, 1861.
I have the honour to report for the information of my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
that Her Majesty’s ship, under my command, sailed from Coromandel harbour, east coast of New
Zealand, on the Bth July, and arrived at Levuka harbour, island of Ovalu, Fiji group, on the 15th,
after a favourable passage made under sail.
2 I was Mad to find that affairs in the Fiji group generally were progressing satisfactorily, and
that the only complaints laid before me by British residents at Levuka were of a nature which it was
more the province of an attorney to settle than lor a naval officei to interfeie in.
3 Having been informed bv Mr. Pritchard that the trade in “ beche-de-mer ” and sandalwood on
the north-west coast of Yanua Levu was entirely stopped in consequence of a war which was being
carried on there between two rival chiefs, one of whom was supported by a bocjy of Tongans, whose
usual residence is on Lakemba, one of the Windward Islands, I decided on endeavouring to put a
stop to a state of affairs so prejudicial to British interests, and in order that my measures should be
backed by the highest native authority in Fiji, I requested Mr. Pritchard to propose to Thakombau,
King of Inbau, and Maafu, the principal chief of the Tongans resident in Fiji, to accompany me to
the Mathaata district in the “ Pelorus.” , . , ,
4. This, after a little diplomatic shuffling, they consented to do; and having received them,
Mr Pritchard, Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul, and the consulate interpreter on board, we left
Levuka on the morning of the 18th, entering the great reef which encircles Vanua Levu by a pass
a little to the northward of the Nandi passage, after which our course lay through a very intricate
channel formed by sunken reefs and patches of which no regular survey exists, but through which we
were piloted in the most able manner bv one of the English residents at Ovalau, a person named
■Christopher Carr, the owner of a small “ beche-de-mer ” trader. Under his direction we reached an
anchorage off Levuta, about 20 miles from our destination, Mathuata, that evening, and the following
mornino', having weighed as soon as the sun was sufficiently high to enable us to distinguish the
shoals, we anchored in Maduri Harbour, Mathuata Bay, about 1,500 yards from where some houses
were visible on the beach at 9.45 a.m. . . 1 . ,
5. On sending on shore to ascertain the state of affairs, we found, as I had anticipated would be the
case, that the combined force of Tongans and Fijians had driven their opponents off the mam land,
and that the latter had taken refuge on Kea Island, about 10 miles from our anchorage. Since their
expulsion their enemies had committed great havoc amongst their plantations, had destroyed nearly
all the laro-e canoes for which this district was formerly famous, and almost daily put one or more
persons to death whose only crime was being related to the vanquished party. In these outrages
the Toucans were the most prominent actors, and I may here state my opinion, that in the event ot
Her Majesty’s Government accepting the protectorate of the hijis, it will be necessary, from
very first, to put a stop to the raids which the Tongans have for the last five years been in the habit
of carrying into the various islands lying to the west of Lakemba. .
6. On the morning of the 20th I sent over to the island of Kea for Bitova, the chief of the tribe
which had been driven out of Mathuata, and in the afternoon he came on board in a cutter of the
“Pelorus,” followed by 15 canoes filled with his retainers. After he had had an hour’s conversation
with Thakombau and Maafu, we made a preconcerted signal, on seeing which Wainiongolo, chief of the
Tongans in Mathuata, but subject to Maafu, and two Fijian chiefs came on board, and after they and
their opponents had discussed matters for an hour, I told them, through the consular interpreter,
that we had no wish to injure or interfere with either the Fijians or longans in any way, but that,
owing to the senseless quarrels of the former, fomented by the latter, the interests of the white liadeis
in Fiji were compromised, and that I was determined on putting a stop to a state of affaiis which
was equally prejudicial to their own and to British interests. I should leave them to
settle by what means they could arrange matters a.mongst themselves, and any advice I could give
them was at their service. My observations were listened to with attention by both paities of Fijians,
but were evidently unsatisfactory to the Tongan chief, who, throughout the entiie business, was less
manageable than either his associates or his enemies, .
7. The discussion, which terminated at sunset, was renewed the next day, when the following
terms were agreed to by the chiefs of Fiji and Tonga present, being those which, with Mr. Pritchard’s
concurrence, I had decided from the first on seeing carried out:
Ist. To forget all past grievances and causes of quarrel
2nd. To commence from this date an era of peace and friendship.
3rd. To receive and protect the teachers of the Christian religion.
4th. To encourage trade and commerce throughout the Mathuata territories and to protect all
legitimate traders and settlers. ..
sth. To dissolve all political connexion and to confine themselves to legitimate and friendly
intercourse with the Tongans. _ .
Ist. That Mainiongolo shall within 14 hours retire for ever from the Mathuata territories,
and shall not again appear within the line of country from Natewa Bay on the one side, to Bua Bay
on the other. .... , ~. .
2nd. That no Tongans shall visit the Mathuata territories or appear within the above-named limits
for 12 months from this date.
3rd. That Tongans in the service of the Yfesleyan or other missions are exempted from the above
restrictions. ~ . .
resiriuuuiia. .
4th. That if any of the above articles are infringed, Maafu agrees that Mainiongolo shall be sent
from Fiji to his native country.
The three last articles were inserted in the treaty at my recommendation, as I foresaw that if the
Tongans were allowed to remain on Yanua Leon any good effect which might otherwise result from


our visit would be completely done away with, and in compliance with them at dawn on the morning Fiji Islands.
of the 22nd of July, the two large double canoes, in which Mainiongolo and his followers had come
to Mathuata, were launched, and by 8 a.rn. were under weigh with a strong and fair wind for Lakemba,
a more picturesque scene than their departure, as they crossed the “ Pelorus’s ” bow, beating their
drums and cheering most lustily, I have seldom witnessed. In the course of the same day Thakombau
and Maafu quitted the ship, and sailed for Levuka in Thakombau’s large canoe, and in the afternoon
I landed at Mathuata, accompanied by Ritova, and saw him and many of his people re-established in
their former habitations.
8. The Fijians in this district are still heathens, but at their earnest desire, Mr. Calvert of the
mission of Levuka, had promised to send some native teachers among them, and they were anxiously
awaiting their arrival. As far as I could learn, there was a general feeling throughout the island in
favour of their being taken under the protection of Great Britain, but though often asked, I studi-
ously abstained from giving an opinion on the subject. There is no doubt that cotton of superior
quality can be grown on the islands, but it is out of the question to expect native labour, and conse-
quently we must look to the same source that supplies Demerara to furnish the requisite colonists for
Fiji, should their protectorate be accepted by Great Britain.
9. Having thus seen tranquillity re-established in YanuaLevu, I quitted Mathuata on the morning
of the 23rd July, having Ritova and two of his retainers on board, they being desirous of seeing the
working of the engines, and on getting clear ol the Mali passage we discharged them and Mr.°Prit-
chard to the latter’s schooner, after which we made sail, by noon were clear of Kea Island, and
steering a course for Aneiteum.
10. I cannot conclude this letter without expressing the obligations I am under to Mr. Pritchard,
whose manner with the native chiefs (being neither too deferential nor the reverse) seemed to me to
be exactly what it should be. Bespeaks the language and is evidently liked by all parties of Fijians,
and without his ready assistance and the presence of Thakombau and Maafu, it would have been
impossible to have arrived at so speedy a settlement of affairs in the north-west of Fiji as our visit
effected.
I have, &c.
(Signed) J. Beauchamp Seymour,
Commodore.
No. 12. No. 12.
Copy of a LETIER from Jas. Murray, Esq., to Sir Frederic Rogers, Bart.
Foreign Office, December 31, 1861.
With reference to your letter of the 16th instant,* I am directed by Earl Russell to * Page 21.
request that you will state to the Duke of Newcastle that his Lordship has learnt with
satisfaction the steps taken by Commodore Seymour for terminating the wars which have
been raging between the Tongans and the Fijians.
I have, &c.
Sir F. Rogers, Bart. (Signed) JAMES MURRAY.
&c. &c. r , r
No. 13. No. is.
Copy of a LETTER from Sir Frederic Rogers, Bart., to E. Hammond, Esq.
S JR > Downing Street, September 7, 1861.
I am directed by the Duke of Newcastle to transmit to you, to be laid before Earl
Russell, the copy of a letter from Colonel Smythe, together with his report,* on the * Colonel
expediency of accepting, on the part of Her Majesty’s Government, an offer which has Bmythe’s
been made to cede to Her Majesty the sovereignty over the Fiji Islands in the Pacific ™ ndre “
, . . printed at
lhe statements made by Colonel Smythe, in his clear and interesting report, together pages 28 and
with other considerations suggested by the native war in which this country is now 30 *
menaced in New Zealand, appears to his Grace to establish conclusively the impolicy of
appropriating these Islands.
His Grace is of opinion that any Civilized Power who may make itself responsible for
the government of the Fiji Islands must also be willing to incur a large and immediate
expenditure, with the possibility before long of finding itself involved in native and
possibly, disputes with other civilized countries. It would also appear very uncertain
whether the welfare of the natives would not be better consulted by leaving their
civilization to be effected by causes which are already in operation.
******* *
I have, &c.
(Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
E. Hammond, Esq.,
&c. &c.
C 4


Fiji Islands,
No. 14.
No. 14
* Page 23
No. 15.
No. 15
• Vide Memo.
No. 5, Page 41
Instructions addressed to Colonel Smythe, R.A.
Copy of a LETTER from E. Hammond, Esq., to the Under Secretary of State.
S IRj Foreign Office, September 19, 1861.
I have laid before Earl Russell your letter of the 7th instant * enclosing Colonel
Smythe’s report on the Fiji Islands, and I am directed by his Lordship to request that
you will inform the Duke of Newcastle that Lord Russell concurs with his Grace in
opinion that it will not be expedient to accept the sovereignty of those islands.
I am, &c.
The Under Secretary of State. (Signed) E. HAMMOND.
Copy of a LETTER from Sir Frederic Rogers, Bart., to the Secretary to the
Admiralty.
g IR Downing Street, December 9> 1861.
I am directed by the Duke of Newcastle to request that you will state to the
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that it appears to his Grace that in the event of
a steam route being established by Panama to Australia, some coaling station midway
would be essential. .
It has been represented to the Secretary of State by Colonel Smythe, whom his Grace
sent on a mission to the Fiji Islands, that Oparo* would best suit that purpose as having
good harbour and anchorage, and few inhabitants.
I am, therefore, to request that you will move their Lordships to direct one of their ships
to examine its capabilities at the first convenient opportunity.
I have, &c.
The Secretary to the Admiralty, (Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
&c. &c. &c.
Copy of INSTRUCTIONS addressed to Colonel Smythe, Royal Artillery, by
his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, K.G.
g IR Downing Street, December 23, 1859-
You are aware that you have been selected by me for the delicate and important
duty of reporting whether it would be expedient that Her Majesty’s Government should
accept an offer which has been made, to cede to Her Majesty the sovereignty over the
Fiji Islands, in the Pacific Ocean. , , Al
2 : It will be requisite that you should state in full both the advantages and the
disadvantages which, in your view, would attend such acceptance, and that you should
also advise on what terms and in what manner the acquisition, if decided on, had better
be effected.
3. In order to make the necessary inquiries, you will repair to the Islands without
delay for which purpose Her Majesty s Government will cause you to be furnished with
every facility. I have entrusted to you this commission, confiding in your power to
brino- to it the requisite knowledge, discretion, and resolution to report, without regard
to any preconceived wishes or opinions, the result of your own investigations.
j qq,g Fiji tr ro up in the Pacific consists, according to a description iuinished by the
Hvdroorapher to the Admiralty', of some 200 islands, islets, and rocks, lying between
latitude 15i° and 19i° south, 'at about 1,900 miles N.E. of Sydney, and 1,200 miles
north of Auckland, near the north end of New Zealand. The two largest islands may
be about 300 miles in circumference; 65 ot the islets are said to be inhabited, and the
whole population of the group has been estimated at 200,000. _
The chief, Thakombau, is said, by Mr. Pritchard, Her Majesty s Consul in the Fijis,
to be the recognized king of these islands, and his people are stated by the same
authority to be prepared willingly to acquiesce in the cession which he proposes to make
to this country.


6. The conditions on which this chief offers to transfer the sovereignty over the
islands to Her Majesty are the following, that he, Thakombau, should retain the title
and rank of Tui Viti or King of the Fijis, in so far as the aboriginal population is
concerned; that Her Majesty should pay for him the sum of 45,000 dollars, demanded
of him by the Government of the United States, and that in consideration of such
payment not less than 200,000 acres of land shall be made over and conveyed to Her
Majesty by him, Thakombau.
7. This may be the proper place to mention to you that a communication has been
addressed to Sir William Denison, Governor of New South Wales, by an American
merchant named J. W. Williams, residing in that colony, alleging that he has for several
years been in possession of the sovereignty and domain of the island of Namuka, in the
Fiji group. Notice has also been given by the Government of the United States to
Her Majesty’s Minister in that country, that some American citizens claim the owner-
ship of large tracts of land in these Islands. You will be put in possession, separately,
of the particulars of these communications.
8. I proceed to mention a few particulars of such information respecting these Islands
and their inhabitants, as has reached Her Majesty’s Government or is attainable to the
public.
9. The people of the Fijis are said to be of large stature, and are described as being
amongst the fiercest and most powerful inhabitants of the South Sea Islands. Canni-
balism has prevailed amongst them to an extent scarcely equalled, perhaps, in any other
community of which we have authentic knowledge. But that this practice has greatly
abated of late years under European influence is confidently asserted, and the correctness
of the assertion you will have ample means to investigate. Polygamy is also largely
practised amongst the chiefs, and it is added that the practices followed on the death of
chiefs, such as the murder of wives and dependents, are or have been of a very fearful
character. On the other hand, it is reported that this savage people possess in rather a
high degree those corresponding qualities which may be turned to good. They are said
to be not only strong and active, but of a more energetic disposition than is common
among South Sea Islanders, and with more disposition as well as more capacity for
labour.
10. The Missionaries, who have been for many years established in the islands, chiefly,
as I am informed, of the Wesleyan persuasion, have contended against the evil practices
of the people with their usual courage and devotion ; and it is satisfactory to know that
their efforts have been successful to a far greater degree than many would have expected.
Mr. Pritchard states that one-third of the population has embraced Christianity, while he
estimates that nearly an equal number have renounced their heathenism, but without
as yet definitively attaching themselves to the Christian congregation.
11. The services of these Missionaries cannot be too highly appreciated; they have
brought the truths of religion within the reach of this wild and distant people, they have
abated inhuman customs of very inveterate power, and. they have, in addition, secured an
amount of safety and freedom previously unknown for the Europeans who traffic or settle
amongst these Islands; these are benefits which all must acknowledge, and which Her
Majesty’s Government, who have it in contemplation to avail themselves so largely for
the advantage of the public, of the results of the labours of these devoted men, are
especially bound to acknowledge ; but I must caution you not to suffer your sympathy
with the Missionaries or your admiration of their achievements, to affect your judgment
upon the questions of policy into which you are commissioned to inquire; these must be
treated as wholly distinct. Her Majesty’s Government must continue to entrust the
propagation of the Gospel in the distant parts of the earth, as their predecessors have
entrusted it, to the piety and zeal of individuals. The hope of the conversion of a
people to Christianity, however specious, must not be made a reason for increasing the
British dominions. The question, therefore, whether or not the Fijis ought to be added
to the numerous Colonial Possessions of this country must be determined by the same
motives of ordinary expediency which direct the genera,! national policy.
12. The principal reasons of this class which have been urged for accepting the
sovereignty of the Fiji Islands are these: Ist, that they may prove a useful station for
any mail steamers running between Panama and Sydney ; 2nd, that they may afford a
supply of cotton; and 3rd, and in close connexion with the first reason, that their
possession is important to the national power and security in the Pacific Ocean. On
these heads I shall make a few remarks, not with the view of forestalling your judgment,
but in order to guide your mind to some of the topics which have to be weighed in
arriving at a conclusion.
D
Fiji Islands,


Fiji Islands. 13. The Fijis are said by some to be situated too far to the eastward to form a central
position in crossing the Pacific ; how far this may practically be the case those who
navigate that ocean can best inform you. If they were to be used for this purpose it
would be requisite to consider both whether the anchorages are good, and whether they
are sufficiently accessible.
14. It would be necessary, also, to ascertain whether the intricacies of navigation among
these Islands (which would appear from the works of Admiral Erskine, of the British
Navy, and of Commodore Wilkes, of the United States Navy, to be considerable) are
such as to present serious obstacles to their use by the rapid mail steamers now required,
whose transit must be subject to as little delay as possible by day or night. You will
also have to inquire whether if a line of steamers should ever be established from Panama
to Australia, the Fiji Islands or Auckland would be the more natural and convenient
point to be touched at on the way.
15. Secondly, with regard to the supply of cotton. There is no question of the present
day affecting the use to be made of our Foreign Possessions for encouraging and sup-
porting the industry of our country, in which the community in general feel so great an
interest as this. To add to the fields from whence that supply is now derived is one of
the highest economical objects to which Her Majesty’s Government can apply them-
selves. Any indication of such a field is to be carefully followed up. To this branch of
the subject, therefore, you will devote your especial and most solicitous attention.
There seems to be no doubt that the Fiji Islands produce a good specimen of the cotton
plant; there is every reason to suppose that their climate is highly favourable to its
development. But these are by no means the only considerations which the subject
embraces. The West African coast, the new colony of Queensland in Australia, Natal,
and other dependencies of the Crown, have been at various times pointed out, as regions
in which the cultivation of cotton ought to be sedulously encouraged. But hitherto no
results of importance have been obtained, partly from the novelty of the undertaking,
partly from the want of continuous labour, partly from other reasons into which it is not
necessary now to enter.
16. You will therefore examine, not merely the capacities of the soil and climate of the
Islands, but the condition of labour and social economy under- which the cotton can now
be raised, or may in future be raised. The number of the labouring class; their probable
fitness and willingness for continuous labour; their circumstances, how far independent
and open to the European hirer, and how far dependent on their chiefs ; the mode in
which adherence to agreement may best be procured from them, without that servile
restraint which is as contrary to British policy as to expediency; their fitness for those
parts of the process which require some amount of skill and attention; the amount of
probability that regularity of production, which is so essential to commerce, may be
counted on; all these are among the elements of the problem which your assistance is
required in solving.
17- These inquiries will be the more necessary since the acquisition of the Fijis will be
something different from the occupation of new territories vacant for the use of European
settlers. Although we have not full information regarding the native usage of property,
yet it would appear from Mr. Pritchard’s evidence that a kind of private ownership is
recognized over almost all the soil, insomuch that the presumed sovereign has little land
at his disposal. The utmost, it is said, which the king of the group can offer to convey
to the Crown of England, if the sovereignty over the Islands be accepted, is a tract of
200,000 acres, which would, of course, be very inadequate for purposes of European
settlement. But it remains to be ascertained how much of the soil, said to be owned by
individual natives or native families, is in reality unoccupied, what right and what dis-
position the so-called owners of unoccupied land might have to part with it, to European
settlers, or to the Crown, in trust for purposes of colonization; how far the settlement of
Europeans, especially on scattered districts, among a people such as the natives of Fiji
might be advisable. ’
18. Information on all these subjects is essential towards determining (if the acquisition
is resolved on) whether the islands will afford attraction to European settlers, or whether
they will continue to be occupied by natives, and will merely require the development of
native industry.
IQ. There is another point which it is necessary that you should not overlook. Public
opinion in England will never consent to the toleration in any British territory of any of
those inhuman practices among the natives to which I have already referred. It will
therefore be necessary to consider, with the care which so important a question demands,
whether the local Government, if constituted, can at once interpose its authority, in aid
of the efforts of the Missionaries, to suppress these practices.


20. You will also have to consider what the first expenses of the Government are
likely to be, especially if some display of force is requisite for the above purpose, and
also for keeping order between Europeans and natives, and how soon, and in what manner,
the local resources may be expected to afford a revenue for these and other purposes.
21. The arguments in favour of occupying new sites as necessary to the national honour
and security hardly come within the province of your inquiry, but you will be at libertj r
to make any remarks on this subject that may occur to you, or may be urged upon you
by others.
22. With these remarks I intrust to you the duties of your mission, confident, as I said
at the outset, that you will fulfil them with the intelligence, fidelity, and firmness which
it demands.
I have, &c.
(Signed) NEWCASTLE.
No. 1.
Copy of a LETTER from Colonel Smythe, Royal Artillery, to the Under Secretary
of State.
Fiji Islands, Pacific Ocean, August 9, 1860.
SIR, (Received November 13, 1860.)
I have the honour to report for the information of the Secretary of State that I
left Auckland, New Zealand, for these islands on June 14th, and reached Levuka, the
principal port of the group, on July sth. Levuka has been until recently the residence
of the British Consul. A few months ago Mr. Pritchard removed the Consulate to
another part of the island of Ovalau, where he has purchased lands from the natives.
He was absent on an excursion with Dr. Seemann to the island of Viti Levu at the time
of my arrival. On his return, in pursuance of my intention of visiting in succession the
principal chiefs, I commenced a tour of the group, accompanied by him and Dr. Seemann.
We have visited Bau, Viwa, and Rewa, and are about to proceed to the island of
Kandavu.
In one important point I have ascertained that the information supplied to Her
Majesty’s Government, and embodied in my instructions, is inexact. Thakombau, the
chief of Bau, although probably the most influential chief in the group, has no claim to
the title of Tui Viti or King of Fiji, nor would the other chiefs submit to his authority
except through foreign compulsion.
After visiting Kandavu I purpose making the circuit of the large island of Viti Levu,
and then taking in succession the remaining islands of importance.
It will be necessary for me to retain the services of the small vessel which I chartered
at Auckland, until I have completed my inquiry.
I have, &c.
To the Under Secretary of State, (Signed) W. J. SMYTHE, Colonel.
Colonial Office.
No. 2.
Copy of a LETTER from Colonel Smythe, Royal Artillery, to the Under Secretary
of State.
Ovalau, Fiji Islands, September 25, 1860.
SIR, (Received January 21, 1861.)
In my last communication, dated August 9, 1860, I had the honour to inform you
that I had commenced a tour of inspection of the Fiji group, and had got as far as
Rewa. I have since visited the island of Kandavu, completed the circuit of the large
island of Viti Levu, and had interviews with the principal chiefs on the western and
northern coasts of the other large island, named Vanua Levu. During the greater
portion of this tour I have had the valuable aid, as interpreter, of the Rev. Joseph
Waterhouse, Wesleyan Missionary, and Chairman of the District.
I have held eleven public meetings of the chiefs and people, and found everywhere an
earnest desire to be placed under British rule. A further acquaintance with the power
and position of the chiefs confirms the statement made in my last letter, that the
Vunivalu of Bau (Thakombau) has no claim to the title of Tui Viti, or King of Fiji.
The group is, in fact, composed of a great number of independent kingdoms, the rulers
of which are moved, not less by jealousy of one another, than by fear of foreign
aggression, to solicit the domination of England.
D 2


Fiji Islands,
No. 3
No. 3.
No. 4,
No. 4.
I arrived here on the evening of the 22nd instant, and shall proceed on to the wind-
ward islands of the group as soon as the wind permits.
I have, &c.
To the Under Secretary of State, (Signed) W. J. SMYTHE,
Colonial Office. Colonel.
Copy of a LETTER from Colonel Smythe, Royal Artillery, to the Under Secretary
of State.
Levuka, Fiji Islands, November 9, 1860.
ir j (Received February 18, 1861.)
In my communication of the 25th of September last I had the honour to report
that I had completed a tour of inspection of the central and leeward islands of the group,
and that I was about to proceed to the islands lying to windward. I have now returned
from this inspection, in which I also visited the chief of Taviuna at Thakondrove, and
examined the harbour of Suva on the south-east coast of Viti Levu.
Having therefore finished a general examination of the islands, I have discharged the
ketch “ Pegasus ” which brought me from New Zealand, and which I have hitherto
employed, as there is no part of the group that I may have occasion yet to visit which
I cannot readily reach in one of the small island schooners.
I am desirous to complete my Report as far as possible before leaving the group, but
as its preparation will probably occupy several weeks, I will now state that the con-
clusion I have arrived at, as the result of my inquiries so far, is, that it would not be
expedient for Her Majesty’s Government to accept the offer made to cede to Her
Majesty the sovereignty of the Fiji islands. The state of the islands is, however, such
that it would not be right, in my opinion, to leave matters as they now are, and some
alterations should be introduced in the powers and the establishment of the British
Consul, as I shall explain at length in my Report.
I have, &c.
To the Under Secretary of State, (Signed) W. J. SMYTHE
Colonial Office. Colonel.
Copy of a LETTER from Colonel Smythe, Royal Artillery, to his Grace the Duke of
Newcastle, K.G.
Fiji Islands, Pacific Ocean, May 1, 1861.
My Lord Duke, (Received August 17, 1861.)
Having, in obedience to your Grace’s commands, left England by the Australian
mail packet of January of last year, I reached Sydney on the 14th of March following.
I immediately applied for a passage to the Fiji islands to the Naval Commanding Officer.
He stated in reply that the threatening posture of affairs in New Zealand rendered it
desirable to await further information from that colony before detaching a vessel of the
squadron.
Shortly after news reached Sydney of a collision having taken place between
the Maories and Her Majesty’s troops ; and the whole of the naval force was in conse-
quence ordered to assemble at New Zealand. As it was uncertain how long or to what
extent the presence of the squadron might be required there, at the suggestion of the
Commodore, I proceeded from Sydney to Auckland, so as to be in readiness to embark
for ray final destination at the earliest moment.
It was soon evident that the operations against the natives would be of a protracted
nature, so, on being informed by the Commodore that he saw no prospect of being able
to place a vessel at my disposal, I advertised for tenders for the charter of a small vessel
to take me to the Fiji islands, and to be employed there for a limited time if required.
I finally engaged for this service the ketch “ Pegasus,” in which I left Auckland on
the 13th of June, and reached Levuka, the principal port of the Fiji group, on the sth
of July.
After a short stay at Levuka to refit and to await the arrival of Mr. Pritchard, the
British Consul, and Dr. Seemann, the botanist, who had gone on an excursion to a
distant part of the group, I started, accompanied by them, to visit in succession the
principal chiefs and to examine the country.






Islands.


or
JTniurmJ) icb


At the residence of each principal chief I held a public meeting, in general in the open Fw* Islands.
air. Previous notice having been given of these meetings, they were usually largely
attended. At them I explained the nature of my commission, and made inquiries
regarding the cession, the existence of cotton, the sale of land to whites, the extent of
the territories of the tribe, &c., inviting questions in return, and pressing on the chiefs
and people the advantages of peace and industry, and especially the cultivation of
cotton.
The satisfactory reception which I everywhere met with, I attribute, in a great
measure, to the favourable impression of England and its government made upon the
minds of the natives by the conduct of the Missionaries. From them I received most
ready and efficient assistance in the prosecution of my inquiry ; they acted as ray
interpreters at those places where they resided, and their chairman, the Rev. Joseph
Waterhouse, accompanied me round the coasts of the two large islands, Yiti-levu and
Vanua-levu.
The accompanying chart of the Fiji group, upon which I have marked my track, will
show the route which I pursued. Dr. Seemann, fearful of missing an opportunity of
returning to Sydney by a vessel expected to call at Levuka on her way through the
group, left me at" Namusi, and Mr. Pritchard turned back at the next station,
Nandronga.
Having completed the examination of middle and western Fiji, 1 returned to Levuka
on the 22nd of September, and a few days after sailed for the windward islands of the
group, from which I got back to Levuka on the 26th of October. Perceiving that I
should be detained some time in the preparation of my Report, and having ascertained
I could reach any part of the group yet unvisited by me in one of the small island
schooners, I here discharged the “ Pegasus,” trusting to some opportunity of getting
away from the islands on the completion of my inquiry.
In several important points I have found the information furnished by Mr. Pritchard
to Her Majesty’s Government and embodied in my instructions incorrect. Thakombau
(the Yunivalu of Bau) has no claim to the title of king of Fiji. There is, in fact, no
such title. He is only one, although probably the most influential, of the numerous
independent chiefs of Fiji, and has consequently no power to cede the sovereignty of
the entire group to Her Majesty. He is of an ambitious disposition, and his object
seems to be, through the assistance of England, to become the ruler of Fiji, and to be
protected at the same time from France and the United States of America, of both
which Powers he has great apprehensions. He is most desirous to get quit of the claims
of the government of the latter country, for which the United States officers, for their
own convenience, have made him responsible, although the amount of the claims has
been apportioned by them among several tribes. He could not convey to Her Majesty
200,000 acres of land as consideration for the payment of these claims for him, as he
does not possess them, nor does he acknowledge to have offered more than his consent
that lands to this extent might be acquired by Her Majesty’s Government for public
purposes in Fiji. Although, in offering to cede the sovereignty of the islands, Thakom-
bau offered what was not his to bestow, the cession may be considered valid as being
acquiesced in by the other chiefs.
The claim of the sum of 45,000 dollars made on the chiefs of a part of Fiji by the
Government of the United States of America rests upon an award of Commander
Boutwell of the United States navy, in 1855. This officer, then in command of the
United States ship, “ John Adams,” was directed by his government to inquire into
certain complaints of loss and damage said to have been inflicted by the natives on
citizens of the United States. His original award w T as 30,000 dollars, which he after-
wards increased to 45,000 dollars, on account, he said, of the interference of the English
Missionaries, in his decisions, he appears to have been entirely influenced by the repre-
sentations of the United States consul, J. B. Williams (since deceased), who was
himself the largest claimant; and whose claim, originally 5,000 dollars, was finally set
down at 18,331 dollars.
The native chiefs have always protested against the justice of Commander Boutwell’s
award. They have as yet only paid a very few dollars of it.
The so-called interference of the English Missionaries was simply an attempt by
them to obtain a fair investigation, and in no way to screen the guilty parties.
For further details on the subject of these claims I beg leave to refer to the printed
extracts from the “ Sydney Morning Herald,” and to the pamphlet by the American
Captain, T. C. Dunn, enclosed. Captain Dunn is a person of much intelligence and
integrity, and intimately acquainted with Fiji.
D 3


Fm r S L«ros. From all I can learn, one-third of the sum demanded by the United States Govern-
— ment would be amply sufficient both as compensation for the loss of property and as
ci fine* •
With these preliminary statements I lay before your Grace my Report on the subjects
embraced by the inquiry which your Grace did me the honour to intrust to me.
I h.B»VC &c
His Grace the Duke of Newcastle, K.G., (Signed) W. J. SMYTHE,
&c See. Colonel, Royal Artillery.
Enclosure 1 in No. 4.
Enel. 1 in
No. 4.
Report.
„ ■ , The Fiii <rrot.p of islands is situated in the Pacific Ocean between the meridians of 176° and
SSraS. 178° west longitude, and between the parallels of 15° and 20° south latitude. It is composed of about
200 islands and islets, of which less than one-half is inhabited. Iwo of the islands (Yiti-Levu and
Vmua-Levu') are of unusual size for the Pacific Ocean, having each a circumference of 250 miles.
The islands rise, in general, abruptly from the sea, and present in their bold and irregular outlines
the neculiar characters of the volcanic formation to which they belong. With the exception of some
tracts on the two larger islands, but little level land is anywhere to be seen. Almost every island is
surrounded by a coral reef, either fringing the shore, or separated from it by a channel more or less
The inhabitants belong to the darker of the two great Polynesian races, but living on the confines
Inhabitants. lighter _ c()loured race> have reC eived from it some admixture. One language, with some varieties
of dialect, prevails throughout the group. The population is estimated at 200,000, of whom 60,000
are numbered as Christian converts. rp, .... .
The men are o-enerally above the middle height, robust, and well built. Their principal occupation
is the cultivation of their yam and taro plots, which affords periodical hut easy employment; sailing
in their canoes, fishing, and frequently fighting. , f ~
The chief articles of food are yams, taro, fish, and cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit, bananas, and other units,
the spontaneous productions of the soil. ,
Their clothing is extremely scanty, consisting of a narrow strip of cloth or rather papei piepared
from the bark of the paper-mulberry. . i
Their houses are constructed of reeds and grass on a frame-work of poles. The floor is the natural
anil covered with fern leaves and mats; in the middle is a sunken hearth, the smoke from which
escapes through the walls and roof. Apertures for light other than the door-ways are very rare.
The houses are never isolated, but are crowded together in towns or “ koros, which are frequently
surrounded by a ditch and an earthen mound. The natives have raised no permanent structures
Although the coral reefs present an inexhaustible supply of lime, and they have discovered the art of
burning it, they make no use of it except as paint and to plaster their hair with.
There are no beasts of burden or draught, and consequently no roads. The usual mode of moving
about and of carriage is by canoes. .
The only mechanics among them are the carpenters or canoe-builders, who form an hereditary caste.
The women in a few favourable localities manufacture a rude kind of pottery.
There are in the oroup probably not less than 40 independent tribes, twelve of which, from their
P ° lity - superior influence, mav be considered as virtually to govern it. The names of these are—Bau, Rewa,
Navua Nandronga, Vunda, Ba, Rakiraki, and Viwa, round the coast of the largest island (Viti-levu);
Bua, Mathuata, and Thakandrove, or the other large island (Vanna-levu); and Lakemba, among the
Government. The rule of the chiefs is absolutely despotic; the lives and goods, and to some extent the lands of
their people are at their merev. The number of chiefs is very great, almost every ‘ koro has one or
more They differ greatly in rank and influence. In many instances there are two great chiefs at
the same place, as at Bain Here one of these is called “ Rokotnembau,” or “ Great Chief of Ban
and the other “Na Vu-ni-valu,” or the “ root of war.” They are both consecrated to their office. At
Ban the “ Vu-ni-valu ” is the principal personage; but in other places, where similar titles exist, the
« Vu-ni-valu,” although charged with special duties in the conduct of war, has but little power.
Tonga or South-eastward of Fiji, at a distance of 250 miles, lie the Friendly or Tonga Islands. _ The mhabi-
Friendly t ants belong to the lighter-coloured Polynesian race. They have long had intercourse with the nearer
Islands. islands of Fiji attracted by the fine timber for canoes which they afford. Canoes are built on the
~r * • 1 • rt ■» . 1 i < * r _ 1 „ O I TlliQ I*o
JSIcIUUS U 1 1 i)i, a ~ i
Intercourse SD ot where the material is found; the construction of a large one occupies several yeais.
with Fiji- * T -.009 the Eno-lish Wesleyan Methodist Society commenced a mission in longa, which led at a
SSL later period to the "introduction of Christianity into Fiji. This event took place in 1885 when two
Tonga. Missionaries from Tonga landed at Lakemba, the principal of the eastern islands, and where_many
Tono-uese were located. The success of these Missionaries was so encouraging that their Society
gradually added to their number, and eventually formed the Fiji group into a separate Missionary
The number of Tonguese in Fiji fluctuates considerably, but may be taken at an average at from
Tonguese m 400 Qf late years they have taken an active part in Fijian wars, sometimes helping one chief,
1J sometimes another, and invariably with success. They are distinguished by daring, coupled with unity


and discipline,—qualities in which the Fijians are most wretchedly deficient. They possess strong Fiji Islands.
feelings of nationality, and own ready obedience to their chief Maafu, a near relative to the king of
Tonga. Native agency is largely employed by the Missionaries in Fiji, and many of the most effic?ent £ cMef
teachers are Tonguese. In cases where Tonguese teachers have been ill-treated by the heathen ’
natives, Maafu has interfered as the protector of his countrymen. In this manner, while extending
his own influence, he has rendered safer the position of the native teachers.
The presence of the Tonguese in Fiji has been far from an unmixed benefit. Their conduct has
often been in direct contradiction to their profession of Christianity, and the help which they have
afforded to the chiefs has occasioned much oppression to the people in the contributions levied to
recompense their services.
The population of the Tonga group does not exceed a tenth of that of Fiji ; yet from the mental Superiority of
and physical superiority of the Tonguese, their courage and discipline, and the dread of them established Tonguese to
among the Fijians, there is little doubt that they could easily make themselves masters of Fiji, an I'ijiaDs-
- which George, King of Tonga, has been said to meditate.
The permanent white residents in Fiji amount to about 200, composed chiefly of men who have white residents
left or run away from vessels visiting the islands. They are principally British subjects, citizens of in Fiji,
the United States, with a few French and Germans. The two former are the most numerous. They
traffic with the natives for produce, which they dispose of to vessels. They do nothing to civilize General cha-
or improve the natives ;on the contrary, they have in many instances fallen to a lower level. When- racter-
ever they can obtain spirits, most of them drink to excess.
From false information given in the Colonial journals regarding the acceptance by Her Majesty of
the sovereignty of the islands, and their advantages for spttlers, a considerable number of people were
induced to visit them during last year. Discovering on their arrival the true state of affairs, many of
them hastened to return to the Colonies, and the greater number of the remainder will probably
follow. They were generally of a much superior class to the old white residents.
Besides the British Consul, there is a Consul for the United States of America residing in Fiji. Foreign con-
The principal articles of produce are cocoa-nut oil, tortoise-shell, pearl-shell, and arrowroot. suls in Tiji.
Formerly considerable quantities of sandal wood and beche-de-mer were carried to China, but this Produce,
trade has now nearly ceased. The staple article of produce is cocoa-nut oil, of which about 200 tons
are annually exported.
The sugar-cane and coffee tree both grow well, and may in time contribute to the exports from
Fiji.
The climate of Fiji is not unhealthy. Fevers are almost unknown. The most fatal disease to Climate
Europeans is dysentery. The mean temperature of the whole year is probably about 80°. Much rain
falls, especially during the summer months of January, February, and March. At this season thunder
storms are frequent. Hurricanes scarcely ever occur except in these months, and frequently several
years in succession pass without any. During the remainder of the year easterly winds prevail. Of
the meteorology of Fiji, more precise information will soon be obtained, as I brought out with me
fiom the Meteorological Department of the Board of Trade a complete set of instruments.
The three principal reasons stated in my instructions as having been urged for accepting the Reasons nr<md
sovereignty of the Fiji islands are— for acceptance
Ist. lhat they may prove a useful station for any mail steamers running between Panama and °* sovereignty.
Sydney.
2nd. That they may afford a supply of cotton.
3rd. And, in close connexion with the first reason, that their possession is important to the
national power and security in the Pacific.
On the first head I beg to refer to the accompanying chart of the Pacific Ocean, on which I have
traced the great circle lines joining Sydney, Panama, and Fiji, or, in other words, the lines of shortest ing station be-
distance on the globe between these places. The line from Sydney to Panama, it will be seen, crosses tween Sydney
the northern island of New Zealand almost in the latitude of Auckland, and passes to the south of the andPanaraa-
great field of the Pacific Islands. The distance by this line from Sydney to Panama is 7,626 nautical
miles. The distance from Sydney to Fiji is 1,735 miles, and from Fiji to Panama 6,250, making
the distance from Sydney to Panama by way of Fiji 7,985 miles, or 359 miles longer than by the
direct line. Ihe latter line would be augmented by about 100 miles, by the necessity of havin<>- to
round the northern extremity of New Zealand. There would still remain a difference of 260 miles
in favour of the Auckland route.
Jhe route by Fiji, besides being the longer, traverses the Pacific Archipelagoes, the navigation
among which is undoubtedly difficult and dangerous, from the reefs and shoals in which they abound,
and the occurrence of hurricanes at certain seasons.
2ndly. Regarding the supply of cotton. The cotton plant is not indigenous in Fiji. From the 2nd. As regards
concurring evidence of the natives in all parts of the group, its first introduction may be fixed at 25 the su PP l y of
years ago. As six different varieties are now found, it is probable that since its first introduction cotton ‘
tresh seeds have from time to time been brought by vessels visiting the islands. The natives do not
cultivate it, and make scarcely any use of it.
Dr. Seemann brought out with him last year some cotton seed, presented by the Manchester Cotton Climate of Fiji
Supply Association, lor distribution in iiji. It was of two kinds, “ Sea Island,’* and “ New Orleans ” favourable to
None of the former kind germinated, but the New Orleans proved very good. In an experiment th ‘‘ e rowth of
made under Dr. Seemann’s own direction, the seed was sown on the 9th of June, and when he visited
the plot again on the IBth of October, the plants were from 4 to 7 feet high, and had some very fine
ripe pods upon them. & J
4
D 4


Fiji Islands. Since Mr. Pritchard’s return from England at the end of 1859, some of the native chiefs have been
induced to encourage the growth of cotton, and a few young plants are now to be seen in the native
Cultivation of gardens in various places. Very little, however, can be expected for some time from the natives,
cotton by the They will only be induced to raise cotton by meeting with a ready sale for the small quantities which
natives. they will bring in at first.
Cultivation of The cultivation of cotton by white settlers is principally a question of land and labour. In a
cotton by white o. enera i wa y it may be said that there is not an acre of land in Fiji which is not private property.
Land 18 the ownership resting either in families or in individuals. A small portion of the land only at any one
time is under cultivation, as a narrow patch of ground supplies the wants of a Fijian household, and
the custom is to break up frequently new ground and abandon the old.
On the subject of the purchase of land by whites, I made particular inquiry of the chiefs at each
of the public meetings; the general reply was that an agreement made with the owners, if
approved by the chief, would hold good.
In the older purchases of land by whites, when the quantity exceeded what was required for a
house, the native residents were not interfered with, as no cultivation of land was attempted. In a
few recent cases, where purchases have been effected by the whites who came last year to the islands,
and who, with the view of forming plantations, wished to remove the natives from the land, opposition
from the latter has been met with. By a clearer understanding with the owners before the purchase
was concluded, these difficulties would probably have been avoided.
Native labour. The only mode hitherto of obtaining labour has been through the instrumentality of the chiefs,
who send a party of their people to perform the work agreed upon, and receive the payment, which
they distribute at their pleasure. This system would not meet the daily demand of labour required
in a cotton plantation.
The general habits and sentiments of the Fijians are opposed to the acquisition of property by
individuals. The chief seizes-anything belonging to his people that takes his fancy, and as readily
gives it away, and the people are equally ready to beg and to give. As the influence of Christianity
Indolent habits increases, the rule of the chiefs will become more mild, and private rights will be more respected. It
of natives. j s very doubtful, however, whether the people will become more industrious, their wants being so
few, and being so easily supplied. Although capable of making a considerable exertion for a short
period, the natives dislike regular and continuous employment.
Opinion on On the whole, I am of opinion that whether by natives or by white planters with native labourers,
cotton culti- the supply of cotton from Fiji can never be otherwise than insignificant.
vation - 3rdly. Regarding the importance of the possession of the Fiji Islands to the national power and
cab' "important security in the Pacific. Influence of a great power in the Pacific is dependent entirely on its naval
to England. force. *By the possession of Australia and New Zealand England completely commands the western
portion of the Pacific. In these colonies naval armaments can be recruited and equipped, and
perhaps in a few years may even be created. No group in the Pacific can ever offer these advantages,
and the possession of one, in the western section more especially, is not only not required, but would
be a source of embarrassment in the event of war.
The Fiji Islands do not lie in the path of any great commercial route. The whole of the Pacific
archipelagoes lie to the north of the direct line from the Australian colonies to Panama and South
America, and south of the line from Panama and North America to China and India.
Requisite for All that it seems necessary for England to possess in the Pacific is an island with a good harbour,
England in the midway between Auckland and Panama, in the steam-packet route. Pitcairn s Island is nearly in
Pacific. t h e re q U i r ed position, but it has no harbour. If a suitable island in its neighbourhood could be
found, it would become, in addition to a coaling station for steam vessels, the entrepot of the pearl-
shell and other trade which now centres in Tahiti, and afford a very favourable place of rendezvous
for a squadron to protect our shipping homeward bound from Australia and the Pacific.
* * * * * * * *
Should sove-
reignty be
accepted,
amount of force
required.
Of the native population of Fiji, less than one-third profess the Christian religion; among the
remainder cannibalism, strangulation of widows, infanticide, and other enormities prevail to a
frightful extent. Should the sovereignty of the islands be accepted by Her Majesty, the suppression
of These inhuman practices would be put into immediate execution. For this service, and for the
general support of the Government, a force of not less than the wing of a regiment would be
required, in addition to a ship of war, with a tender of light draught, both steamers.
The expenses of a Civil Establishment composed on a sufficient scale to act efficiently on the
condition of the natives would probably not fall short of 7,000/. a year.
Expense of
Civil Establish-
ment.
The only mode of raising a revenue would appear to be by a capitation tax; customs duties would
be so small as not to cover the cost of collection, if the importation of ardent spirits were prohibited,
as a regard for the welfare of the natives would imperatively demand. For many years the Govern-
ment would be necessitated to accept the tax in kind, as the natives have no circulating medium of
exchange ; and a still longer period would elapse before the islands became self-supporting.
Looking solely at the interests of civilization, the forcible and immediate suppression of the
barbarous practices of the heathen portion of the population might appear a very desirable act; yet,
in beneficial influence on the native character, it might prove less real and permanent than the more
oradual operation of Missionary teaching. The success which has attended the Missionaries in Fiji
has been very remarkable, and presents every prospect of continuance. r I he principal tribes at
present without Missionaries or Native Teachers are willing to receive them, and there appears nothing
wanting but time and a sufficiency of instructors to render the whole of the inhabitants professing
Christians.
Revenue.
Teaching in
comparison
with force.
Missionary
success.


Judging from the present state of the Sandwich Islands, and the former condition of Tahiti, it Fiji Islands.
would seem that the resources of the Pacific Islands can be best developed, and the welfare of their
inhabitants secured, by a native government aided by the counsels of respectable Europeans. Sandwich ° f
Islands and
On a review of the foregoing considerations, and the conclusions derived from a personal examina- Tahiti.
tion of the islands and the people, I am of opinion that it would not be expedient that Her Majesty’s Opinion on the
Government should accept the offer which has been made, to cede to Her Majesty the sovereignty
over the Fiji Islands. the sovereignty
of Fiji.
Having thus stated the conclusion to which my inquiries have led me regarding the offer to Her Suggestions
Majesty of the sovereignty of the Fiji Islands, I would beg leave to add a few suggestions towards our
the improvement of our relations with them. relations -with
The great hindrance to the progress of civilization and Christianity among the inhabitants of the the Fiji islands.
Pacific Islands, is the conduct and example of the whites residing or roving among them. Of the a t ra^ d f nt3
general character of these men in Fiji I have already spoken. During the few months I have been i n Fiji,
in the group, a case of arson, one of theft, one of burglary, and one of aggravated assault have
occurred among them. The great difficulty in these cases is the want of legal authority to arrest
suspected persons, and of a proper and safe place in which to keep them. The only British functionary
is the Consul, and he is powerless in these respects.
To remedy these evils I would suggest that the Consul have conferred on him some of the powers Remedies pro-
of a magistrate; that two constables (married men selected either from the police or the army) be P OB6 * 1 ’
sent out from England; and that a stone lock-up house be erected for the safe custody of offenders
until there is an opportunity of sending them to the Colonies for trial, or they are otherwise
disposed of.
The place of residence of the Consul is a matter of considerable importance. The principal white
settlement in Fiji at present is at Levuka, on the island of Ovalau. It owed its selection to political onsu '
causes in disturbed times. Its harbour may be considered good, but the hills rise abruptly from the
beach and shut it in, and it is dependent on other places for much of its supplies. The present
British Consul has an office at Levuka, but he resides at a further part of the island of Ovalau.
The locality best adapted in Fiji for a white settlement is the country round the harbour of Suva
in Viti-levu, the largest of the islands. It is rich, level, and well watered. The harbour is, perhaps, f o r a white* 1
the best in the group, it is easy of access, can be entered and quitted with all the prevailing winds, settlement and
and hag communication within the reef with a great extent of coast. If the British Consulate were ceof
permanently established in this locality, a white settlement would spring up near it, which, if the consul.
Consul were armed with the powers suggested above, would not be disgraced by the scenes of
drunkenness and rioting so prevalent at Levuka, and would be of eminent service in developing the
natural resources of the Fiji Islands.
W. J. Smtthe,
Fiji Islands, May 1, 1861. ' Colonel, Royal Artillery.
Enclosure 2 in No. 4.
Letter by Captain Thomas C. Dunn, of the barque “ Dragon,” Salem. (From the “ New York
Herald” of November 9, 1856.)
To the Editor of the “ New York Herald.”
Salem, November 2, 1856.
Having lately returned from a trading voyage to the Fiji Islands, my attention has been called
to a communication, published in the columns of the “ Herald ” of the 16th February last, purporting
to have been written at those Islands, and signed “ David Stuart,” giving a long list of massacres
and crimes committed by the natives against the whites residing there: and also charging the English
Wesleyan Missionaries with being accessory to and instigating many of the atrocities so minutely
detailed. Feeling assured that such a communication would never have found admission to the
columns of your paper had you been aware of the errors it contained, I take this the earliest oppor-
tunity afforded me of replying to it, and of vindicating the character of a body of noble-minded and
self-denying men. I have been engaged in trading among those Islands for the past ten years, and
every white resident is well known to me. There is no person living there of that name. lam well
assured in my own mind as to the identity of the writer. But since he has chosen to shield himself
under a false signature it is not for me to publish his name.
After some preliminary statements regarding the wars between the natives and the massacres of
shipwrecked mariners your correspondent says:—
“ About this time a few English strangers arrived at these Islands from Sydney, and finding that
a good field here presented itself for enterprise and speculation, remained amongst us. There being
no one amongst them who was a scientific man or mechanic (except one, a shoemaker), and being
apparently men of some education, we retained them to teach our children and to instruct and
endeavour, as far as possible, to convert the natives.”
He then goes on to state, in substance, that soon having the satisfaction of seeing beneficial results
flow from this incipient missionary scheme, and believing that the natives would readily embrace
Christianity if properly instructed, they (the white residents) did what lay in their power to procure
E


Fiji Islands
Missionaries to reside at the Islands, and soon had the pleasure of welcoming three holy fathers of
the Catholic church from France, whose subsequent arduous and indefatigable efforts had been
productive of much good. „ . . , T i ■. -n v. +
The error of this statement regarding the establishment of missions at the Islands will be apparent
when I state that those persons 1 whom your correspondent describes as “ adventurers from Sydney
seekino- and accepting employment from the white residents as teachers for their children, came
from London in 1834 as accredited missionaries from the London Wesleyan Missionary Society, which
Society has continued to support and steadily increase their missionary establishments there. At the
time of their arrival there were but four or five whites residing at the group, and they were living in the
houses of the native chiefs. There was scarcely any trade there, owing to the cannibalism and ferocity
of the natives; for, however exaggerated the statements of your correspondent regarding the cruelties
and crimes of the natives at the present day, they were undoubtedly too true at that time; and it is
principally owing to the civilizing and Christianizing influences of the Wesleyan Missionaries for the
space of twenty-two years that the present trade has grown up there, or that white persons have been
able to resort there in such numbers as to call themselves a community.
The writer of the letter referred to did not go to the Islands for many years subsequent to the
establishment of the Wesleyan Mission, and there are now but three persons living there who came
prior to their settlement. Thus it will be seen that the assertions of your correspondent of their
having come there as adventurers from Sydney, and of their having been employed by the whites to
teach their children, are incorrect. The children of the whites never had any regular instructors until
1850, when, in answer to a request from some of the leading white residents, a teacher was sent out
from London by the Wesleyan Missionary Society for that purpose, and is now performing that duty
solely at the expense of the Society, the whites having contributed very little, if anything, towards
the support of the teacher. , , .. . . . ,
The statements of your correspondent regarding the French Catholic missionaries having come to
the Islands at the request of the whites, and of the favour and estimation in which they are held, are
equally erroneous. They arrived at the Islands in 1846, twelve years subsequent to the establish-
ment of the Wesleyan Missions; and, however estimable they may be in their private character, they
have had very little success in making converts to their Roman Catholic doctrines While the Wes-
leyan Society has mission stations at nearly all the principal towns in the group, the I rench priests
have but one station, which is upon the island of Ovalau. I believe they have also a lay teacher at
Rewa. The assertion of your correspondent, that the whites preferred to entrust the education ot
their children to the French priests is also an error. With the exception of two or three, among
whom is the author of the statement, their religion is decidedly unpopu ar with the mass ot the
whites, and the school at Levuka (the town where the whites reside) is still under the control ot the
Weslevan tGcichcr. •
And now follows a series of statements from your correspondent regarding the character and actions
of the Weslevan Missionaries so utterly unfounded that it must excite the indignation of every well-
principled mind. He accuses them as the instigators of many, if not all, the crimes of the natives
inciting them to plunder and massacre the whites, particularly the Americans ; the causes assigned
beino - revenue for having been dismissed from among the whites, hopes of gain from monopolizing the
traffic with the natives, and hatred of the French priests, and jealousy of their influence.
My previous remarks regarding the first and last of these reasons were sufficient to show that no
such feelings could exist. ‘ I will speak of the charge of hostility to Americans, and trading and
trafficking with the natives,—the whole of which statements are as unfounded as those which I have
previously noticed. I have enjoyed an intimate acquaintance with nearly all the members of the
mission establishment at the Islands for the past ten years, and I take pleasure in saying that I never
met with any body of men who appear to hold Americans and American institutions in such high
estimation as the gentlemen in question. They uniformly speak well of them, and are always ready
and willing to assist any and all Americans who go there to the full extent of their power. I, for
one, as an American shipmaster, have to acknowledge many acts of courtesy and kindness at their
hands ; and it is well known and acknowledged by the whites at these Islands that the missionaries
are ever ready and willing to accommodate and oblige them when in their power to do so. And
should the paper containing the statement of your correspondent find its way to the Islands, as it
probably will, it will nowhere cause a greater indignation than among that very community of w ite
residents in whose behalf your correspondent pretends to write; for although some ill-feeling has
been felt and expressed by some of their number, yet none of them would be guilty of endorsing
statements of this character. . . . ,
I have always found the Wesleyan Missionaries, one and all, evince the greatest interest in the
prosperity of the American trade at the Islands, and have often heard them express the hope, that it
mi-ht prove sufficiently profitable to insure its continuance, as they believed and hoped that the
prospect of acquiring property might stimulate the natives to exertion, and tend to promote habits of
Civilization and industry among them. The truth of this statement™!! be readily corroborated by a
number of respectable shipmasters, and others, in Salem and its vicinity, who have at vanous times
been engaged in the island trade. I appeal to them all to say, if any one among them ever knew any
Missionary at the Islands to endeavour to influence any of the natives against Americans or the
American trade; and if they have not, on the contrary, endeavoured, to the extent of their means,
to promote it Your correspondent styles himself an American merchant doing business at the Islands.
I know the writer; he does not, and for some years has not, done any business there. There re a
number of the whites residing there, who, with praiseworthy industry and exertion, have built for
themselves several decked boats; with these they visit the different islands of the group, for the
purpose of trading with the natives, selling the produce which they procure to the vessels trading


there, and thus earn for themselves an honest and respectable livelihood. But so far are the Islands
from affording those splendid avenues to fortune which your correspondent so graphically describes,
there is not one of them at the present day, after years of exertion, who can call himself worth 5,000
dollars. If this is true ot those who have devoted their whole time and exertion to the accumulation
of property, what becomes of the statements of your correspondent regarding the rapid fortunes
acquired by the Missionaries ? Nor are the small profits of the traders at all owing to the danger of
trading among the natives, or the insecurity of property, the fearful tales of David Stuart to the
contrary notwithstanding. I will not speak of affairs which took place 20 or 30 years back,
when cannibalism and crime were rife among the natives, and before the influence of the Wesleyan
Missionaries had begun to produce a beneficial effect upon the native character. Of the occurrences
of that period I have no personal knowledge; but with the whole course of affairs during the past 10
years lam well acquainted. During this period there have been on the average from 40 to 50 whites
residing at the Islands, mostly all at the town of Levuka, on the Island of Ovalau. They have
about 15 decked boats, built by themselves, varying from 3 to 15 tons' capacity, which are
generally manned by three persons, sometimes by only two. With these boats they visit every part
of the group, trading with the natives, sometimes being absent from their homes over a month.
In view ot the statements of your correspondent regarding the hostility and ferocity of the natives,
one would wonder how men can venture to go among them, having property to excite their cupidity,
and no power to protect it. W hat can two or three persons do if attacked by a crowd of natives ?
Yet, during the period referred to of 10 years, there have been but three cases where boats have
been attacked and robbed by the natives, and in which five whites were killed. This is certainly bad
enough, and it is right that the perpetrators of those acts should be punished, and that severely. But it
is not at all according to the representations of your correspondent. He gives a long list of massacres
and robberies, artfully representing them as of recent occurrence, while, in fact, most of them took
place upwards of 20, and some of them 30 years ago. Of the whale ship “ Oneo,” which, he says,
was wrecked at lurtle Island, and 28 of her crew murdered, I never before heard. If such a ship
was wrecked, it must have been full 30 years ago. The “ Charles Doggett ” affair took place in 1834.
The massacre of the captain and two men of the French schooner, “ Amiable Josephine,” was also in
1834. The killing of the captain and mate of the “ Tahiti ” scooner was in 1837. Of the affair of
the “ Juno” I never heard. That, also, if it ever took place, must have been a good while before I
ever went to the Islands. The other cases named by your correspondent were all trading boats
belonging to the Islands, and all took place before I went there. Since 1828 there have been 12
vessels wrecked at the Islands, whose crews have been in every instance well treated by the natives.
Their names were the “ Glide," “ Fawn,” “ Niagara,” and “ Tim Pickering,” of Salem, the
“ Shylock,” American whaler, the « Active,” “ Yaladness,” “ Lady Howden,” “ Fanny,” “ Opalia,”
“ Emma Sherritt,” and “ Solomon Salters,” of Sydney. Of these your correspondent makes no
mention.
Ido not wish to palliate any of the atrocities committed by the natives. On the contrary, I consider
it the duty of our Government to protect the lives and interests of its citizens, wherever they may
be scattered, and to investigate and punish all crimes committed against them. But no commander
of a national ship should receive as truth such wholesale charges against the natives, and also against
a body of men so respectable as the Wesleyan Missionaries, no matter by whom preferred, without a
candid and cautious investigation into their truth. This, I regret to say, was not done by Com-
mander Boutwell, of the United States ship “ John Adams,” in his recent visit to Fiji; and whose
action in those matters your correspondent evidently wishes to hold up through the columns of the
“ Herald,” to the admiration of the American public in general, and as an example to the com-
manders of our navy in particular. How far that admiration and the eulogiums of your correspondent
are deserved by the gallant commander, your readers will be able to judge when I come to speak of
his doings there.
Your correspondent states, that it was reported to Commander Boutwell, that each and all of the
English Missionaries had engaged in the commerce of the Islands, to the neglect of their spiritual
affairs; and by means of levying upon the natives for large quantities of beche-de-mer, cocoa-nut oil,
and tortoise-shell, which they export to Sydney for sale on their own account, were rapidly acquiring
fortunes, —thus preventing American vessels from obtaining those articles, except through the English
Missionaries. It is very true that this absurd tale was communicated to Commander Boutwell, (most
probably by the correspondent of the “ Herald/’) and it certainly does not reflect any great credit on
the sagacity or motives of that individual, that such a statement should have been so readily credited
without question. By a very slight inquiry he might have satisfied himself of its entire incorrectness.
I am, and have been for the last six years, more largely engaged in that trade than any other person,
and it is impossible that any of the Missionaries should have become engaged in traffic with the
natives without my knowlege. It is true that lately a small quantity of cocoa-nut oil has been sent
to Sydney in the Mission-brig “ John Wesley,” and there sold “on account of the Society.” But that
has been a voluntary contribution by the native members ot the church, towards the support of their
teachers, and the proceeds are devoted to the Mission cause. This is what your correspondent
terms “ levying contributions upon the natives.’ Do not the members of every religious community
contribute something towards the support of their Ministers? and why should the Missionaries
be censured for receiving these voluntary gifts from those people whom they have so largely bene-
fited ?
from what I have here stated, your readers will perceive how utterly unfounded are the accusa-
tions of your correspondent; and every upright mind will be ready to do justice to those noble-hearted
men, who, from motives of religion aud philanthropy, voluntarily expatriate themselves and their
families from all the comforts of civilized society, and spend their lives in those far-off and barbaric
E 2
Fiji Islands


lands, labouring for the enlightenment and conversion of those who otherwise would be left to perish
in their darkness and heathenism. What shall compensate them for the injury already done them by
the publication of the statements of your correspondent, through the columns of the press of a distant
country, to which they have hardly any means of replying ? They have been held up as monsters of
iniquity, as men stained by crimes of the blackest dye, instigators of the most atrocious crimes,
from pecuniary motives, —and all under the garb of sanctity and religion. This tale has gone forth
to the public through the columns of the “ Herald/' It has been read, and most probably believed,
bv many who were but too ready to believe anything to the discredit of ministers of religion, and who
will never read, or if they do, will pay but little attention to this vindication of them. Unfortunately,
human nature is ever too ready to believe evil of its kind, as if it therein found excuse for its own
inherent depravity.
There is one other charge against one of the members of the Mission, which 1 will notice before
I proceed to comment upon the action of Commander Boutwell regarding the enforcement of claims
of American citizens upon the native chiefs. Your correspondent states, that “one of the Mission-
aries, having previously dishonoured the wife of one of the principal chiefs, found it necessary to take
passage to Sydney, his career as a Missionary being gone for ever/' This statement is of a piece
with those already disposed of. The gentleman referred to has been a Missionary at the Islands for
seventeen years, (the last four years being Chairman of the District,) and is held in high estimation
by all the members of the Mission. Having translated at large portion of the sacred Scriptures
into the Fijian language, he sailed, in October last, for Sydney, in the Mission-brig, “ John Wesley,"
on his way to England, for the purpose of superintending the issue of an edition of the Bible
in the native language; after which, it is expected, he will return, and resume his labours at the
Islands.
I will now' proceed to remark upon the style of investigation pursued by Commander Boutwell,
in his recent examination of the claims of American citizens against the native chiefs, and which
is so much lauded by your correspondent. Before doing this, it will be necessary to state some
particulars regarding affairs at the Islands. For some time previous to Commander Boutwell’s
arrival there had been, as your correspondent states, a sort of civil war existing between the several
chiefs of Fiji; but as the American public are probably very little interested in the contests of
savages, I will confine myself to the recital of events in which the foreign white residents were con-
cerned.
In 1849 the whites, to the number of about fifty, resided at the town of Levuka, upon the
island of Ovalau, the chief of which, Tui Levuka, was upon friendly terras with Thakombau, one
of the principal chiefs engaged in the war. Though not actually subject to Thakombau, Tui
Levuka frequently assisted him in his wars, and was considered throughout the Islands as being
one of his party. The whites, also very generally espoused the cause of Thakombau in opinion,
although none of them took any active part in the war. The American Consul, John B. Williams,
Esq., resided upon a small Island, called Nukulau, which, I believe, he had purchased from Ngar-
rengeo, a chief of Rewa, who was the principal chief opposed to lhakombau. Upon the 4th of July,
1849, while he was celebrating the day by firing cannon, the house of the Consul accidentally took fire,
and was burned to the ground. During the progress of the fire, a crowd of natives collected, and in-
dulged their thievish propensities by seizing and carrying ofi whatever they could lay their hands
upon. In such a case it was, of course, impossible to say how much was stolen and how much
destroyed by the fire. But as the natives were pretty expert in saving articles where there was
such a prospect of their securing them for their own use, it is probable that a good deal was
stolen. Soon after, in 1851, the United States ship “St. Mary’s," Captain .Magruder, visiting
the Islands, Mr; Williams applied to that officer for compensation to be required of the chiefs,
and handed in a schedule of goods stolen, amounting to 5,001 dollars 38 cents, (it seems sin-
gular that he could know the exact articles stolen, so as to charge such an exact account, even
to the thirty-eight cents,) the truth of which, that officer not being able (as his time was limited)
to satisfy himself concerning its accuracy, left in the hands of the Rev. Mr. Calvert, one of the
Missionaries, and Mr. David Whippy, United States Vice-commercial Agent, requesting them to
examine Mr. Williams's claim, and also several other small claims preferred by Mr. Wil-
liams against native chiefs on behalf of American citizens; to arbitrate upon the same, and
to report to the commander of the next United States ship-of-war which should visit Piji, and
to the Secretary of State at Washington. Mr. Calvert accordingly wrote to Commander Bout-
well, upon his arrival at Fiji, upon the subject. But as his report did not at all agree with the
notions of Mr. Consul Williams, being rather unfavourable to the justice of his claim, he was very
coolly informed by that gentleman that, —
«It was considered a piece of presumption for him to interfere in matters concerning American
citizens or their interests, as he (Mr. Williams) and Commander Boutwell were fully competent to
settle all such affairs without any of his assistance/’
In 1853, a boat belonging to some of the white residents of Levuka was taken and robbed by the
natives of a place called Malaki. The three men composing her crew escaped in their dingy,—a small
boat, —came to Levuka, and reported the outrage. The whites, exasperated at the story, determined
to punish the offenders. They accordingly organized an expedition, and, accompanied by the chief
of the town where they resided, with a number of his native warriors, went to the place, which they
captured and burned; and the native force which accompanied them killed a number of the people of
the town, although no resistance was made. That the whites did right in this affair is unquestioned,
as it was requisite for them to show the natives that they would not allow any of their number to be
robbed with impunity. The people of the destroyed town were subject to the chief of an island
called Viwa. They carried complaint to him of the destruction of their town by the whites; and it is


asserted by the whites that lie, the Viwa Chief, applied to Thakombau for permission to avenge
himself by destroying Levuka. Although Thakombau positively denies all knowledge of the matter,
rumours of the meditated burning of their town coming to the ears of the whites, they organized and
kept a regular night-watch to guard against treachery. Notwithstanding this precaution, the town
was fired in the night, and most of it reduced to ashes. As there was a native teacher belonging to
Yiwa living in the town at the time, the exasperated whites at once fixed upon him as the incendiary,
for no other reason, so far as I have been able to ascertain, than that, being a native of Yiwa, he must
have been ordered by his chief to set fire to the town. Although at no subsequent investigation
could any reliable proof be adduced to fix the fact upon him, the impression becoming general among
the whites that Thakombau had authorized the destruction of their town, the Chief Tui Levuka
declared against him, and was joined by all the whites. They immediately constructed a few tem-
porary dwellings, around which they built a fence, which they fortified with several pieces of cannon,
against any anticipated attack of Thakombau. But he never went near them, although your corre-
spondent states, that several ineffectual attempts were made to carry the town. He sent several
peaceful messages, assuring them that he had nothing to do with the burning of their town ; that he
was very sorry for the occurrence ; and that he would do all in his power to discover and punish the
perpetrators of the outrage. All this 1 state as facts. Having had considerable property in the hands
ol an agent living in the town, which was all destroyed by the fire, I have taken considerable
pains to investigate the matter with a view of demanding indemnity, if the destruction could be
traced to any responsible party. But it is still shrouded in mystery ; the native teacher and the
Yiwa Chief, who were charged with the act, having been killed a few days after by the mountain
tribes of Ovalau.
It was right that Commander Boutwell should have endeavoured to examine into the matter, as con-
siderable American property had been destroyed: but he should have done so in an impartial spirit,
according to the instructions of Commodore Mervine, Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific squadron,
by whom he was despatched upon this business. I quote from those instructions;—“ You will not take
it for granted that all the allegations against the supposed offenders are true, simply because claimants
have filed their reports at the state department. In prosecuting the important duty entrusted to your
management and discretion, sound policy dictates that a close and thorough examination, upon the
strictest principles of justice, should be made into every case presented for adjustment.”
To show how far these wise and equitable instructions of Commodore Mervine were carried out by
Commander Boutwell, I will here insert some of the correspondence which passed between him and
the native chiefs upon the subject. The first is a letter from Commander Boutwell, dated a few days
after his arrival at the Islands, and addressed to Thakombau. I give it entire; —
“To Thakombau Tui Viti, or the Presiding Chief in his absence.
“I have been directed by the Government of the United States to visit the Fiji Islands in the
United States ship ‘John Adams/ for the purpose of inquiring into and redressing the wrongs which
American citizens have received at your hands. The great Chief who has charged me with this
mission presides over a country whose resources are inexhaustible, and whose power to punish her
enemies are beyond the comprehension of those who have never visited her empire. It is charged
against you, that you have caused American property to a very large amount, and valued at many
thousands of dollars, to be taken from the island of Nukulau and other places, and appropriated to
your own purpose and to that of your friends. You have treated the persons who came here in ships
bearing the same flag that you now see floating over the ‘John Adams’ in a manner that will not be
submitted to by the Government of the United States of America, You are, therefore, required to
restore that, or its value, with interest, to ask pardon of my nation, and to promise to respect its
for the future.
“ E. B. Boutwell,
“Commanding U. S. ship ‘John Adams.’ ”
The following day, and before any answer to the above had been received, another letter in the
following style was sent, accompanied with the appended agreement for the Chiefs of Bau to sign.
United States Ship, ‘John Adams,’ Levuka,
Ovalau, Sept. 27, 1855.
“I Commander Boutwell do, on behalf of the Government of the United States of America,
demand of the chief of Bau thirty thousand dollars, or that amount to be paid in fish, cocoa-nut oil,
gum, pigs, and yams, within twelve months from this date; the money or its equivalent to be paid
into the hands of John B. Williams, Esq., United States Commercial Agent at the Fiji Islands, and
to be distributed in the following manner:—ls,ooo dollars to John B. Williams, Esq., for the loss of
property on the island of Nukulau; 3,000 dollars to James H. Williams, Esq., for the loss of property
on the island of Namuka; 4,000 dollars to Messrs. Chamberlain and Co., of Salem for the loss of
property at the burning of Levuka ; 4,000 dollars to Mr. Whippy, United States Vice-Consul at
Levuka, for the loss of his property at Ovalau; 1,500 dollars to Shattuck and M‘Comber, each as
compensation for the loss of their property, and for being clubbed by the natives of Namuka, at the
time they robbed Mr. W r illiams of Sydney; and 1,000 dollars for the robbery of the barque
‘ Elizabeth ’ at Totonga.
“ As I have many claims on these and other islands to settle, and my time being limited, I must
urge the authorities of Bau to act speedily, and not compel me to go after the so-called Tui Yiti, or
approach nearer Bau, as my powder is quick and my balls are round.
“ E. B. Boutwell, Commander.”
E 3
Fiji Islands,


Fiji Islands. Appended to this was the following document:—
“ To E. B. Boutwell, Esq., commanding U. S. Ship ‘ John Adams,’
Bau, Sept. 28, 1855.
“We, the undersigned, chiefs of Bau, admit the justice of John B. Williams claim, as also that of
the other American citizens, and promise on our part to pay the amount demanded by Commander
Boutwell within twelve months from this date.”
Thakornbau, the principal chief of Bau, being absent from his town at the time the above letters
were received, Yagodamu, the second chief, replied to the demand of Commander Boutwell, by the
following humble remonstrance against the unjust proceeding.
Sir, Bau, Sept. 29,1855.
I beg most respectfully to inform you that the claim now made on us by John B. Williams,
Esq., is unjust; first, because we were not accessories in any degree whatever to the seizure of the
property belonging to J. B. Williams, James H. Williams, and Messrs. Shattuck and M‘Comber;
secondly, because the place where these outrages were committed, the islands ot Nukulau and Namuka,
were not included in our dominions at the time, neither are they now. In proof of this we refer to
the statements of Commodore Wilkes, of the United States Exploring Expedition, in 1840, and of every
commander in the naval and merchant service who have visited these parts. We refer to the record
of the inquiry lately instituted on board H. B. M. ship ‘ Herald,’ at which Mr. Whippy, United States
Vice-Consul at Levuka, Ovalau, was present. We refer to those American citizens at Ovalau who are
acquainted with the subject. Lastly, we refer to the claims which John B. Williams himself made on
Phillips, the late chief of Rewa, and which that chief admitted, and engaged to discharge. With
reference to the claim of Messrs. Chamberlain and Co., we can only inform you, that the burning of
Levuka is still involved in mystery. We maintain that we were not accessories, and would again most
respectfully refer to the evidence given on the subject by the whites on board the 4 Herald.’
“I am, &c.
(Signed by a mark) “ Yagodamu.
“ On behalf of himself and the other chiefs now present in Bau/’
To this letter of Yagodamu, Commander Boutwell, who had been instructed by his Commander-in-
Chief to “institute a close and thorough inquiry, upon the strictest principles of justice, into
“ every case presented for his adjustment,” replies in the following unique specimen of quarter-deck
judgment:—
“United States Ship, 4 John Adams’,
“Levuka, Ovalau, Oct. 2, 1855.
“ When I made the demand on the chiefs of Bau for indemnity, I expected an acknowledgment of
your indebtedness and willingness to pay, and not a letter of explanation. My officer had no authority
from me to enter into any agreement with you or the head of your nation. lam satisfied of the guilt
of Tui Yiti, as the chief of Bau. I know that his influence prevented Phillips from paying
Mr. Williams for his losses on Nukulau. I know that a whale’s tooth was sent to Suva, from Bau,
with orders to club Shattuck and MUomber. I know that the Yiwa people robbed Americans at
Levuka, and that Bau sanctioned it; and lam satisfied in my own mind that the Native Teacher set
fire to the town of Levuka, and that Tui Yiti sanctioned it. The Chief, Tui Levuka, states that the
Bau people robbed the whaleship ‘ Elizabeth/ at Ovalau. Mr. Williams and Mr. Whippy both testify
to the same fact. lam well aware that there are other chiefs and their people guilty of having injured
Americans ; 1 will in time call them to account, but at present lam in pursuit of Bau or her principal
chief. I have to request that you will write me no more letters, but forthwith pay the money, or give
me ample security that it will be paid in twelve months. The brave never threaten, nor do the
virtuous boast of their chastity. I therefore do not tell you of the consequences of a non-compliance
with these requirements. I would, however, remind your teachers of ethics, that the golden rule is too
often forgotten, and that the eleventh commandment has, by general consent, become binding on all
those whose keep the other ten.
“ I am, &c.
“ To Yagodamu, Chief.” “ E. B. Boutwell,
“ Commander,
From the above letter may be seen the manner in which Commander Boutwell commenced to carry
out the instructions of Commodore Mervine, in which he is ordered “ not to take for granted that all
“the allegations against the supposed offenders are true,” but to “make full inquiry, upon the
“ strictest principles of justice, into every case presented to him for adjustment. He arrives at the
Islands, and is immediately waited upon by Mr. John B. Williams, United States Commercial Agent,
one of the principal claimants for indemnity, and by several others, who also have claims upon the
chiefs. These persons tell their own story. (And your correspondent, David Stuart, in his letter,
gives us a pretty good idea what kind of a story that was.) Commander Boutwell, without inquiring
into the truth of the charges from any but the avowed enemies of the Bau Chiefs, immediately becomes
“assured in his own mind of the guilt of Thakornbau,” and without giving him any opportunity of
defending himself, demands compensation to the amount of thirty thousand dollars —fifteen thousand
of which is awarded “ to John B. Williams Esq., for the loss of property on the island of Nukulau,”
when the original claim, as presented to Captain Magruder, two years after the fire, was only five
thousand. The poor chiefs, not feeling quite so assured of their guilt, ventured to remonstrate against
this summary proceeding, and to ask to be allowed opportunity to endeavour to justify themselves.
But the gallant commander did not want any letters of explanation, but an “ acknowledgment of their
indebtedness and willingness to payand though the “ brave never threaten, yet he just intimates


that his “ balls are round, and his powder quick.” He then goes on to say, “ I know,” “ I know,” Fiji Islands,
« I know,” this, that, and the other : and “ I therefore request that you will write me no more letters,
“ but forthwith pay the money, or give me ample security that it will be paid in twelve months.” In
their extremity, the chiefs applied to the Wesleyan Missionaries to write to Commander Boutw-ell on
their behalf; which they did, but were politely informed by that gentleman, that he could settle the
matter without any of their assistance. At this juncture, another American ship of war, the “ St.
Mary’s” Commander Bailey, arrived at Ovalau, to whom Mr. Calvert, the chairman of the Wesleyan
Mission, addressed the following letter.
“ Sir, Viwa, Fiji, Oct. 9, 1855.
“ I hail with great pleasure your arrival in Fiji, which I deem most opportune, as intricate
affairs are now pending between Bau and J. B. Williams, Esq., United States Commercial Agent.
Having been requested by G. A. Magruder, Esq., of the United States navy, to arbitrate, in connexion
with Mr. Whippy, respecting claims said to be due to J. B. Williams, Esq., and also respecting the
barque ‘Elizabeth/ and after having with reluctance (after objecting to do it) undertaken to do what
I could in the complicated affairs, I thought it right to report what had been done in the matter to
E. B. Boutwell, Esq., Commanding United States ship ‘John Adams.’
“To my letter I have received two replies : one from Mr. Williams, who complains that my inter-
ference is uncalled for, &c.
“ A copy of my letter to Commander Boutwell, with the replies thereto, I enclose, begging you
will peruse and consider the same, as I think it unfair that I should be represented to your Govern-
ment as ‘ presumptuous/ after I had been requested to do what I have done by a naval officer in the
United States service. Herewith I beg to enclose to you a copy of a letter addressed to the Honourable
Secretary of State, United States of America, respecting a levy which Mr. Whippy and I, after due
deliberation, in virtue of Commander Magruder’s request, conjointly made, as being the only claim
we could fairly make out for depredations on the property of the ‘ Elizabeth/
“ I forward this by the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, who has had the honour to be the first missionary
at Bau, and who has been the means of bringing about a great change on that island. He was at
Levuka at the time it was burnt; with reference to which lam shocked to find Commander Boutwell
writes, —‘ lam well assured in my own mind, that the native teacher set fire to the tow r n.’ This is
indeed a most grave implication, and which I hope Mr. Waterhouse will have the opportunity of
proving as without foundation.
“ Hoping that these matters may now at length be fully investigated and properly settled, so that
Fiji, after its wars, heathenism, and cannibalism, may begin afresh, on better principles, and become
enlightened, honourable, and religious,
“ I am, &c.
“To Commander Bailey, “James Calvert.
“ United States ship ‘ St. Mary’s,’ ”
A letter was also addressed by John B.'Williams, Esq., to Commander Bailey, in the following
style:—
“ To Commander Bailey, commanding United States ship, ‘ St Mary’s/
“Sir, United States ship ‘John Adams/ Oct. 6, 1855.
“The United States ship ‘John Adams/ Commander E. B. Boutwell, having arrived some
weeks previous to yourself, and having made himself acquainted with the subjects of complaints of
American citizens, and having made his demands on Bau and other places for indemnity, it may be
safe to leave the affair in his hands, as they are now in a fair train for settlement. And in my opinion,
any change in the demands or requirements made on them (the natives) by the commander of the
‘John Adams/ might be injurious to American citizens.
“I have, &c.
“ John B. Williams,
“ U. S. Commercial Agent.”
Commander Boutwell, hearing that Mr. Calvert had written to Commander Bailey, and that
the latter gentleman was displeased with his (Commander Boutwell’s) summary mode of procedure,
wrote to Commander Bailey, requesting him to remain in Fiji and settle the affair himself; to
which Commander Bailey replied, that as he (Commander Boutwell) appeared to be pursuing a course
involving a deviation from his instructions, he should have felt compelled to remain and settle it
himself, were it not that Mr. Williams, the principal claimant, and also, as United States Commercial
Agent, representative of the other American claimants, had expressed a decided preference for his
(Boutwell’s) adjustment. He therefore left it in his hands, with a caution as to his deviating in the
slightest degree from his original instructions, and an express order “to afford the accused everv
“ opportunity upon all formal occasions to appear in person, as well as by respectable counsel,
“ without regard to their nation or religion.” This order from Bailey, Boutwell, as junior, was bound
to obey, but he chose to obey it after his own fashion. He sent a notice to Thakombau to appear on
board his ship, upon a certain day, to answer the charges preferred against him. He also notified the
Rev. Joseph Waterhouse that he would be permitted to act as counsel for the accused, and appointed
a board of arbitration, consisting of two of his own officers, who had already made up their minds, to
decide upon the matter. On the day appointed, Mr. Waterhouse, with Thakombau, repaired on
board, and was permitted to speak in his behalf; but he was treated with insult and contempt, and
was not permitted to call in any witnesses as evidence against the allegations of John B. Williams,
The board of arbitration therefore decided that all the claims were just, and Commander Boutwell
added on fifteen thousand dollars more, on account, as he informed Mr. Waterhouse, “of the inter-
“ ference of Commander Bailey and the representations of the Rev. Mr. Calvert.” The award now
.. . . ... E 4


Fui Iblakpb. stood thus: “To John B. Williams, Esq,, 18,331 dollars; Chamberlain and Co., 7,300 dollars • David
Whippy, 6,000 dollars; owners of barque “Elizabeth,” 1,000 dollars; owners of brio- ’« Tim
Pickering," 2,800 dollars; Thomas Ryder, 1,500 dollars; Wilkinson, Brothers and Co °Svdn P v
4,000 dollars; Messrs. Shattuck and M‘Comber, 2,600 dollars. * ’ J y ’
Here, then, is the final decision of Commander Boutwell. The claim of John B Williams
originally 5,000 dollars, has, through this beautiful system of investigation, grown to 18 331 dollars'
upon what grounds we are not informed. Having arrived at this satisfactory conclusion,’a paper was
drawn up, which was called a treaty, and which Thakombau was compelled to sum—by which he
agreed to discharge the sum in two years—under the heaviest threats if lie refused"' to comply and
the “promise, on the arrival of a ship of war belonging to the American nation, to resign the go’vern-
" ment of Ban, and to go voluntarily on board that ship, and submit to any punishment which it may
be the pleasure of the Commander to inflict. This was the prompt justice which your correspondent
so much lauds. He says—“ Omnipotence had heard our prayers, and Commander Boutwell was the
“ chosen o * e t 0 S lve us aid ” In “7 opinion, David Stuart would be the one most laro-ely benefited
if the award of Commander Boutwell should be enforced by the American Government ; but I cannot
believe it will be. Our Government has always been just in its dealings with the Polynesian com-
munities ; and the partial, harsh, and unjust proceedings related above, will, I am persuaded undergo
a severe scrutiny at Washington. That there were claims which it was Commander Boutwell’s duty
to examine and enforce, was undoubted. The loss of 7,000 dollars of Messrs. Chamberlain and Co
of Salem, was real ; it was property left by me in the hands of an agent at Levuka, on their account’
which was all destroyed by the fire. Other Americans residing at the place lost their all It is not
at present clear by what chief’s orders the place was fired. This was a question for Commander
Boutwell to inquire into; but it would seem that Mr. John B. Williams took advantage of these real
and just claims to introduce his original claim of 5,000 dollars, now, by some species of mercantile
legerdemain, increased to 18,000 dollars; and crushing all fair inquiry, by endeavouring to blacken
the characters of the Wesleyan Missionaries, whose truthful testimony, he feared, might defeat his
deep-laid plans to get Commander Boutwell to enforce the whole amount against Thakombau who for
some years has been the object of his special enmity. That Commander Boutwell listened to ’his tales
and imbibed that prejudice they would so naturally engender, is but too evident from his subsequent
proceedings. 1
Immediately upon returning to Bau from the “John Adams,” where he had been compelled to smn
the so-called treaty, acknowledging the justice of the claims, and promising to pay the 45,000 dollars
in two years, Thakombau addressed the following protest to the United Consul at Sydney
New South W ales, requesting it might be forwarded to the Government of the United States
(( r rp , f -p -p,... . , “ B au, Fiji, Oct. 29, 1855.
“I, 1 hakombau, the Yumvalu of Bau, Fiji, do humbly make known my protest against the
oppressive conduct of Captain Boutwell. I do hereby declare and make known to yoS Sir the
United States Consul nearest Fiji, that I did not sign the treaty with Captain Boutwell of my own
accord, but under the greatest fear. He threatened to take me away to America, and stamped on the
floor right in my face, because I objected to give my signature, and then I was afraid and signed it
I make known that 1 now protest against that treaty, and declare it to be unrighteous, tymnnical
unwarrantable, and unworthy of the Government of America. It is not my deed. J *
“ I also make known. Sir, that he told another chief that he would hang me; but there is nothing
for which he should hang me. I besought him to investigate the charges made against me by the
whites of Ovalau, but he refused.
“I beseech you, Sir, to inform the Government of the United States of America of these
transactions. lam continually in fear lest this Captain kill me, whilst lam innocent. I had hoped
that my profession of Christianity would have prevented such arbitrary conduct. I cannot believe
that it will be sustained by the American authorities.
(Signed by a mark) “ Thakombau
“ Witnesses—William Moore and Joseph Waterhouse, Wesleyan Missionaries.”
Copies of the above protest, duly authenticated, have been forwarded by the United States Consul
at Sydney to the authorities at Washington, and also to the Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific
squadron. There is, therefore, no doubt that the affair will undergo a more thorough and just
investigation by the orders of the American Government, ° J
I have here given a true account of the proceedings of Commander Boutwell in relation to these
affairs, taken from authenticated copies of all the correspondence that passed upon the subject now
in my possession. Your readers, no doubt, will be surprised, upon referring to the “ Herald ”of the
16th of February last, to find your correspondent, David Stuart, so highly applauding Commander
Boutwell. He says, speaking of the action of preceding commanders, “ This course has, however
been changed by Commander Boutwell; and the truly republican conduct of that officer, and his
“ praiseworthy resistance of all attempts to induce him to abandon his countrymen to the power of the
English missionaries, has, it is well known here, incurred the manifest displeasure of the missionaries *
but he has the consolation of knowing that he left us with the united and heartfelt thanks of our youn<r
islandic lepublic; and after the tedious and unpleasant task he has accomplished he will return to a
countiy and a people whose motto is ‘Liberty and Justice,’ and whose approbation will in this
“ instance be no less deserving than just.” It is to be hoped that the Government of the « people
“ whose motto is ‘ Liberty and Justice,’ ” will visit upon Commander Boutwell that censure and
displeasure which his unjust and oppressive proceedings are so justly calculated to inspire.
Hoping that you will not fail to give the aboye an early insertion in your paper,
I am, Sir, yours, &c.
Thomas C. Dunn.


Copy of a Letter from Captain Magruder.
•Fiji Islands.
“ United States Frigate, ‘ Congress/
“ My dear Sir, “ Gibraltar, July 24, 1856.
“ Your letter, dated at Sydney in January last, and directed to me at Washington City, has
just reached me at this place. I have been attached to this squadron, as Captain of the Fleet, for a
year past, which accounts for the delay in its receipt. I heartily congratulate you and your fellow-
labourers in the success of your efforts among the Fijis. I thought 1 saw indications of a favourable
change when I had the pleasure to see you there; but the magnitude of the work you have described
as accomplished I was by no means prepared for. 1 heartily wish you continued success. It is a
work over which the Christian and philanthropist may rejoice with thanksgiving to the Most High.
“ 1 am sorry to hear of further difficulties between our Agent, Mr. Williams, and the Chief of Mbau •
and especially that it has resulted in the punishment of innocent people. Ido not know what has
happened since I investigated the claims of Mr. Williams against the Chief; but I well remember
that I considered some of the claims preferred unjust, and thought Mr. Williams in the wrong, and so
reported to the Government. My official letter is on record on the files of the Navy Department. It
was dated, ‘ U. S. S. “St. Mary’s,” Valparaiso, Sept. 28, 1851/and was addressed to Commodore
Ch. S. M‘Cauley, commanding Pacific squadron. In the letter I stated that ‘ I was sorry to find a
bad state of feeling existing between our Agent and the King. They had had business transactions
together, in some of which I thought Mr. Williams in the wrong, and that it was unfortunate for our
commercial interests that this state of things should exist.’
“ I did not state, in the report above referred to, the particulars of my investigation of the claim of
Mr. Williams; but I well remember that in the inventory of articles said to have been stolen by the
natives and not returned, charges were made in some instances for articles which it was ascertained
afterwards had been received by Mr. Williams.
“ I f ‘ it is necessary to refer to my letter in any investigation before the Department it can be easily
done. Were lat home I would cheerfully aid you in having the matter fully investigated and justice
done to any parties who may have been injured. ° J
“ I am, my dear Sir, very truly yours,
„ w “Rev James Calvert, “G. A. Maohudek.
Wesleyan Mission House, London.
No. 5.
No. 5.
Copy of a LETTER from Colonel Smythe, Royal Artillery, to the Under Secretary
of State.
SlR ’ , London, November 28, 1861.
Her Majesty’s Government decide on declining the offer of the cession to
Her Majesty of the sovereignty of the Fiji Islands, I have the honour to submit that, in
consideration of the manner in which the offer has been made, and the careful inquiry to
whicn it has led, together with the interest taken in the question by the Australian
coiomes and by other groups in the Pacific, the decision of Her Majesty’s Government
should be conveyed to the chiefs in a formal way accompanied by such expressions of
friendly interest m the welfare of the natives as would remove any painful feelings caused
by their offer being declined. Instructions might be sent to the Commodore on the
Australian station to proceed himself, or despatch one of Her Majesty’s ships under his
command, to the islands to communicate to the chiefs, assembled for the purpose the
decision of Her Majesty’s Government. ’
I have &c.
To the Under Secretary of State, (Signed) V. J. SMYTHE
Colonial Department. Colon el, Royal Artillery.
Memorandum by Colonel SMYTHE, Royal Artillery.
~ ~ - . Tr Oparo, or Rapa Island.
Oparo was discovered by Vancouver on the 22nd December 1791. He did not South Pacific
land but saw nearly round it: he considered that anchorage might probably be found t-
on both sides of its north-west point. To the southward of that point is a small bav long ‘ 144 ° 15 '
with a stony beach through which there was the appearance of a considerable stream of W ’
water falling into the sea. The shores in most parts were so perfectly smooth that
landing might be effected without the least difficulty. Round to the north of that
F


Fiji Islands, point is another small bay in which are an islet and some rocks: behind these the shore
may be approached with great ease at any time. Indeed there was not any part of the
island which appeared to have been acted upon by heavy violent surfs, as the verdure in
many places reached to the water’s edge.
Its greatest extent, which is in a north-west-south-east direction, is about 6J miles,
and it may possibly be about 18 miles in circuit.
Its principal character is a cluster of high craggy mountains, forming in several places
most remarkable pinnacles, with perpendicular cliffs nearly from their summits to the sea.
The valleys, or rather chasms between the mountains, were chiefly clothed with shrubs
and dwarf trees.
The natives, who appeared not to have seen Europeans before, resembled other of the
great Polynesian natives. They are estimated to amount to above 1,500.
Extracted from the “ Directory for the Navigation of the Pacific Ocean.” By
Alexander Findlay. London: Laurie, Fleet Street,
APPENDIX,


APPENDIX.
Copy of a LETTER from Dr. Seemann to T. Fred, Elliot, Esq.
Sir, 22, Canonbury Square, London, June 17, 1861.
I have the honour to forward for the information of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle a
e< Report on the Vegetable Productions and Resources of the Vitian or Fijian Islands,” drawn up since my
return to this country in March last. As a consultation of the great London libraries and
museums was absolutely necessary before my notes and specimens obtained a permanent value, I trust
the delay necessarily caused before this report could be brought to a conclusion may not have been
attended with inconvenience to Her Majesty’s Government.
Besides the information now submitted, I have collected a vast amount of notes and remarks on the
history, politics, social institutions, and geography of Fiji. Most of these subjects will doubtless be
fully treated upon by Colonel Smythe, and I have therefore refrained from entering upon them. But
if Her Majesty’s Government should require any information on any of these subjects, either now or
at a future time, when the Fijian question approaches a solution, I shall be proud to be allowed to
supply it.
T. Fred. Elliot, Esq., I have, &c.
&c. &c. &c. (Signed) Berthold Seemann.
Report on the Vegetable Productions and Resources of the* Vitian or Fijian Islands,
addressed to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle by Berthold Seemann, Ph.D., F.L.S.
CONTENTS.
I, —General Remarks on the Aspect, Climate, Soil,
and Flora of the Vitian or Fijian Islands, p. 45.
ll.—Colonial Produce, p, 47 :
Sugar cane (Saccharum officinarum, Linn.)
Coffee (Coffea arabica, Linn.)
Tamarind ( Tamarindus Indica, Linn.)
Tobacco (Nicotiana Tabacum, Linn.)
Oils and Fats, p. 47.
Dilo oil ( Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn.)
Candle-nut oil (Aleurites triloba, Forst.)
Croton-oil plant (Curcas pur pans, Med.)
Castor-oil plant (Ricinus communis, Linn.)
Cocoa-nut oil (Cocos nucifera, Linn.)
Starch, p, 49,
Roro ( Cycas circinalis, Linn.)
South Sea arrow-root or Yabia ( Tacca, sp. plur.)
Cassava plant or Tapioca (Manihot Aipi, Pohl).
Niu soria or Sago (Codococcus Vitiensis, Wendl.)
Spices, p. 50.
Turmeric or Cago (Curcuma longa, Linn.)
Ginger or Beta (Zingiber Zerumbet, Linn.)
Nutmeg (Myristica castaneafolia, A. Gray).
Bird’s-eye pepper (Capsicum frutescens, Linn.)
lll.— Staple Food, p. 51 :
Edible Roots, p. 51.
Yam or Uvi (Dioscorea alata, Linn.)
Kawai (Dioscorea aculeata, Linn.)
Tivoli (Dioscorea nummularia, Lam.)
Kaile (Helmia bulbifera, Kunth.)
Taro or Dalo (Colocasia antiquorum, var. esculenta,
Schott.)
Via mila (Alocasia Indica, Schott.)
Via Kau or Via Kana ( Cyrtosperma edulis, Schott.)
Daiga (Amorphophallus sp.)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum, Linn.)
Sweet-potato or Kumara (Batatas edulis, Chois.)
Masawe or Vasili Toga ( Draccena, sp.)
Yaka or Wa yaka (Pachyrhizus angulatus, Rich.)
Kitchen Vegetables, p. 54.
Ota (Angiopteris evecta. Hoffm.) ; and other ferns.
Boro ni galato ni gato (Solanum oleraceum, Dun.)
Vaulo (Flagellaria Indica, Linn.)
Taukuru ni vuaka ( Portulaca, sp. plur.)
Bete or Vauvau ni Viti (Hibiscus Manihot, Linn.)
Boro dina (Solanum anthropophagorum, Seem.)
Tomato (Lycopersicum esculentum, Mill.)
Cajan or Pea tree (Cajanus Indicus, Spr.)
Dolichos, sp.
Sila ni papalagi or Indian corn (Zea Mays, Linn.)
Cabbage (Brassica oleracea, Linn.)
Turnip (Brassica Rapa, Linn.)
Parsley ( Petroselinum sativum, Linn.)
Shallot (Allium Ascalonicum, Linn.)
Edible Fruits, p. 54.
Banana (Musa, sp. plur.)
Plantain (Musa, sp. plur.)
Soaqa ( Musa Troglodytarum, Linn.)
Vudi ni papalagi or Foreign Banana ( Musa Chi-
nensis, Sweet),
Uto or Breadfruit ( Artocarpus incisa, Linn.)
Wi or Vi-apple ( Evia dulcis, Comm.)
Dawa ( Nephelium pinnatum, Chamb.)
Kavika or Malay apple ( Eugenia Malaccensis, Linn.)
Ivi or Tahitian Chestnut ( Inocarpus edulis, Forst.)
Tavola or Fijian almond ( Terminalia Catappa, Linn.)
Tivi ( Terminalia Moluccana, Lam.)
Oleti or Papaw tree (Carica Papaya, Linn.)
Guayava ( Psidium Guayava, Raddi).
Custard Apple ( Anona squamosa, Linn.)
Loquat ( Eriobotrya Japonica, Lindl.)
Grape Vine ( Vitis vinifera, Linn.)
Shaddock ( Citrus Decumana, Linn.)
Orange ( Citrus Aurantium, Linn.)
Seville Orange ( Citrus vulgaris, Risso).
Lemon ( Citrus medica, Risso).
Pomegranate ( Punica Granatum, Linn.)
Balawa ni papalagi or Pine-apple (Ananassa saliva,
Lindl.)
Water-melon ( Citrullus vulgaris, Schrad.)
Melon (Cucumis Melo, Linn.)
Cucumber ( Cucumis saliva, Linn.)
Pumpkin or Squash (Cucurbita Pepo, Linn.)
Tarawau ( Dracontomelon sylvestre, Blume).
Kura ( Morinda citrifolia, Linn.)
Balawa ( Pandanus odoratissimus, Linn.)
Wa gadrogadroga or Native Raspberry ( Rubus tilia-
ceus, Smith.)
Bokoi ( Eugenia Richei, A, Gray).
Sea ( Eugenia, sp.)
Nawanawa ( Cordia subcordata, Lam.)
Vutu kana or Vutu kala ( Barringtonia excelsa, Bl.)
Somisomi or Tomitomi ( Ximenia elliptica, Forst.)
IV—Vegetables eaten with human Flesh, p. 58 ;
Malawaci ( Trophis anthropophagorum, Seem.)
Tudauo (Omalanthus pedicellatus, Benth.)
Boro dina (Solanum anthropophagorum, Seem.)
Kurilagi (Colocasia antiquorum, Schott, var.)
V.—National Beverages, p. 59 :
Yaqona or Kava (Piper methysticum, Forst.)
“Water” of Cocoa-nut (Cocos nucifera, Linn.)
Matadra or Fijian tea (Missiesya corymbulosa,
Wedd.)
Vl,—Vegetable Poisons, p. 60 :
Strychnos Colubrina, Linn.
Mavu ni Toga or Upas tree (Antiaris Bennetti, Seem.)
Kau karo or Itch wood (Oncocarpus Vitiensis, A.
Gray ■, = Rhus atia, Forst.)
Sinugaga (Excoecaria Agallocha, Linn.)
Vutu rakaraka (Barringtonia speciosa, Linn.)
Duwa gaga (Derris uliginosa, Bth.)
Salato (Laportea, sp.)
Salato ni coro (Fleurya spicata, Gaud. var. inter-
rupta, Wedd.)
Malawaci ( Trophis anthropophagorum, Seem.)
Fiji Islands.


Fiji Islands.
Vll. —Medicinal Plants, p. 62 :
J)ilo ( Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn.)
Kura (Morinda citrifolia, Linn.)
Danidani (Panax fruticosum, Linn.)
Wa nisi or Sarsaparilla ( Smilax, sp.)
Vasa or Rewa (Cerbera lactaria, Ham.)
Laca (Plcctranthus Forsteri, Benth.)
Tamoli (Adenosma triflora, Nees.)
Vulokaka ( Vitex trifoliata, Linn.)
Sinn mataiavi ( Wikstrcemia Indica, C. A. Meyer.)
Kalakalauaisoni (Hibiscus diversifolius, Jacq.)
Wakiwaki (Hibiscus moschatus, Mcench.)
Siti (Grewia prunifolia, A. Gray.)
Wa Vuti (Pharbitis insular is, Chois.)
Tikula or Tekula (Dracaena ferrea, Linn, var.)
XIV. — Palms, p. 70 :
Vlll.— Scents and Perfumes, p. 63: —
Yasi or Sandal-wood (Santalum Yasi, Seem.)
Macou or Cassia bark (Cinnamomum, sp.)
Uci (Evodia hortensis, Porst.)
Makosoi ( Uvaria odorata, Lam.)
Balawa (Pandamus odoratissimus, Linn.)
Bua (Fagrcea Berteriana, A. Gray).
Makita (Parinarium laurinum, A. Gray).
Leba (Eugenia neurocalyx, A. Gray).
XV.— Sacred Groves and Trees, p. 72 :
Grove near Bau.
IX.— Materials for Clothing, p. 64 ;
Malo or Paper Mulberry (Broussonetia papyri fera,
Vent.)
Baka (Ficus sp.) •
Plantain ( Musa, sp. pi.)
Banana (Musa, sp. pi.)
Vono (Alyxia bracteolosa, Rich.)
Wa loa (Rhizomorpha, sp.).
Vau dina (Paritiurn tiiiaceum, Juss.)
Vau dra (Paritiurn tricuspis, Cas.)
Vau damudamu (Paritiurn purpurascens, Seem.)
XVl.— Ornamental Plants, p. 73 :
X.— Materials for Mats and Baskets, p. 65 :
Balawa (Pandanus odoratissimus, Linn.)
Voivoi or Kiekie (Pandanus caricosus, Rumph.)
Kuta (Elceocharis articulatus, Neesab Esenb.)
Niu or Cocoa-nut (Cocos nucifera, Linn.)
Vaulo or Tui (Flagellaria Indica, Linn.)
Xl.— Fibres used for Cordage, p. 66 ;
Vau dina (Paritiurn tiiiaceum, Juss.)
Vau dra (Paritiurn tricuspis, Cav.)
Vau damudamu (Paritiurn purpurascens, Seem.)
Yaka or Wa yaka (Pachyrhizus angulatus, Rich.)
Kulakalanaisoni (Hibiscus diversifolius, Jacq.)
Sinu mataiavi ( Wikstrcemia Indica, Mey.)
Cocoa nut ( Cocos nucifera, Linn.)
Xll.— Cotton, p. 66 :
Kidney Cotton (Gossypium Peruvianum, Cav.)
Gossypium, sp. nov.
Gossypium Barbadense, Linn.
Gossypium arboreum, Linn.
Nankin Cotton (Gossypium religiosum, Linn.)
Honeysuckle (Lonicera, sp.)
XlH.— Timber, p. 68 :
Dakua or Kowrie pine (Dammara Vitiensis, Seem.)
Kau solo (Gen. Nov. Coniferarum.)
Gagali (Podocarpuspolystachya, R. Br.)
Kuasi (Podocarpus data, R. Br.)
Kau tabua (Podocarpus cupressina, R. Br.)
Leweninini (Dacrydium datum, Wall.)
Nokonoko (Casuarina equisetlfolia, Forst.)
Velao (Casuarina nodiflora, Forst.)
Dilo (Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn.)
Damanu (Calophyllum Burmanni, Wight.)
Tivi (Terminalia Moluccana, Lam.)
Tavola ( Terminalia Catappa, Linn )
REPORT.
I.— General Remarks on the Aspect, Climate, Soil, and Flora :
Mulomulo ( Thespesia populnea, Corr.)
Mamakara (Kleinhovia hospita, Linn.)
Marasa (Storckiella Vitiensis, Seem.)
Sagali (Lumnitzera coccinea, W. et A.)
Logo (Ithizophora mucronata, Lam.)
Vuga (Metrosideros collina, A. Gray).
Yasi dravu (Eugenia rubescens, A. Gray.)
Tatakia (Acacia laurifolia, Willd.)
Qumu (Acacia Richei, A. Gray).
Vaivai (Serianthes Vitiensis, A. Gray.)
Yesi (Afzelia bijuga, A. Gray).
Balabala (Alsophila excelsa, R. Br.)
Kin dina or Cocoa-nut (Cocos nucifera, Linn )
Niu sawa (Areca? exhorrhiza, Wendl.)
Kin niu (Ptychosperma filiferum, Wendl.)
Niu soria, Sogo, or Sago palm (Ccdococcus Vilien-
sis, Wendl.)
Niu Masei, Sakiki or Viu (Pritchardia pacifica,
Seem, et Wendl.)
Balaka (Ptychosperma Seemanni, Wendl.)
Grove at Na vadra tolu, near Mataisuva (Rewa).
Baka (Ficus, sp.)
Vesi (Afzelia bijuga, A. Gray).
Tarawau (Dracontomelon sylvestre, Bl.)
Danidani (Panax fruticosum, Linn.)
Croton pictum, Hort.
Kalabuci damu (Acalypha virgata, Forst.?)
Variegated grasses (Panicum, sp.)
Kauti or Shoe-black plant (Hibiscus Rosa-sinensis,
Linn.)
Kaumoce or Mocemoce (Cassia oblusifolia, Linn. ;
et Cassia occidentulis, L.)
Pride of Barbadoes ( Poinciana pulcherrima, Linn.)
White trumpet-flower (Brugmannsia Candida, Pers.)
Balsam (Impaliens Balsamina, Linn.)
Sweet William (Quamoclit vulgaris, Chois.)
Scented Acacia (Acacia Farnesiana, Willd.)
Clitoria Ternatea, Linn.
Gomphrena globosa, Linn.
Vinca rosea, Linn.
Calendula officinalis, Linn.
Four o’clock (Mirabilis Jalapa, Linn.)
Princess’ feathers or Driti (Arnarantus cruentus,
Linn.)
Driti damudamu (Arnarantus tricolor, Linn.)
Carnation (Dianthus Caryophyllus, Linn.)
Roses (Rosa, sp. plur.)
Dahlia
Flowers for necklaces, Sfc., p. 73.
Passion flowers (Passijlora, sp.)
Bua (Fagrcea Berteriana, A. Gray).
Buabua (Guettarda speciosa, Linn.)
Vasa or Rewa (Cerbera lactaria, Ham.)
Sinu dina (Leucosmia Burncttiana, Benth.)
XVll.— Miscellaneous, p. 74 :
Walai (Entada scandens, Benth.)
Sila (Coix Lacryma, Linn.)
Diridamu, Qiridamu or Leredamu (Abrus precato-
rius, Linn.)
Bitu or Bamboo (Bambusa sp, plur.)
Qanqawa, or Wankawa (Piper, sp.)
Moli Kurukuru (Citrus vulgaris, Risso.)
Wa Roturotu (Vitis saponaria, Seem.)
Vaqo or Bottle-gourd (Lagenaria vulgaris, Ser.)
Viti or Fiji is an archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, midway between the Tongan islands and
the French colony of New Caledonia, having, according* to Dr, Petermann's recent calculation, a
superficial area equal to that of Wales, or eight times that of the lonian Islands. The exact number
of islands and islets comprising it is merely approximately known, only a partial hydrographical
survey of the whole group having as yet been made ; 230 would probably be rather below than above
the number. Yiti Levu, Kadavu, Vanua Levu, and Taviuni are of primary,—Rabi, Koro, Gau, and
Ovalau of secondary magnitude. Situated between latitudes 19° 47' S. and 15° 47' S., and longi-
tudes 180° 8' W. and 176° 50' E., the climate is tropical, but the heat is moderated, in the winter
season by the south-east, in the summer by the north-east trade wind. 62° Fahr. is the lowest
temperature observed in Lakeba by Mr. Williams, in Kadavu by Mr. Royce; but though the mean
temperature of the whole group may be stated to be 80° Fahr., the thermometer has been known to
rise to 121° Fahr. The country is remarkably free from fever, —that curse of the Samoan group,—


and the only disease Fijians and Europeans have reason to fear is dysentery, unknown, if a current Tux Islands.
belief may be relied upon, before the visits of foreigners to these shores, and hence often termed “ the
white man’s disease” by the natives.
The time from October till April is the hottest, that extending over the other months the coolest
part of the year. It is during the former when the most rain falls, but the dry and rainy seasons do
not strictly correspond with this division, nor is the difference between the wet and dry very marked.
There are occasional showers during the so-called dry season in all parts of the group, and in localities
like the Straits of Somosomo they may even be termed frequent. The fine weather is expected to set in
about May. June, July, August, September, and October are generally dry, and from their low
temperature looked forward to by European settlers. Ko rain gauge has ever been kept; nor would
a series of observations made in a single locality only give a fair approximate result of the average
amount of rain, since the difference of the meteorological conditions existing between the Leeward and
Windward islands, the lee side and the weather side of the larger islands, are too great.
Speaking generally, the Vitian islands may be said to owe their origin to volcanic upheavings and
the busy operation of corals. There are at present no active volcanoes, but several of the highest
mountains, for instance, Duke Levu, in Kadavu, and the summit of laviuni, must in times gone by
have been formidable craters. Hot springs are met with in different parts, earthquakes are occasionally
experienced, and between Fiji and ionga a whole island has of late years been lilted above the level
of the ocean, whilst masses of pumice stone are drifted on the southern shores of Kadava and Viti
Levu; all showing that Fiji, though not the focus of volcanic action, is not secure against plutonic
disturbances and their effects. The deltas and alluvial deposits of the great rivers excepted,
there is little level land. Most of the ground is undulated, all the larger islands are hilly,
and the largest have peaks 4,000 feet high; Voma, in Viti Levu, and Buke Levu, in Kadavu (both
of which were ascended by us) being the most elevated, Ihe soil consists in many parts of a dark
red or yellowish clay or decomposed volcanic rock which soon becomes dry, but being plentifully
supplied with water proves very productive. There is hardly a rod oi land that might not be
converted into pasture or be cultivated. Almost at every step one discovers that most of the land has at
one time or other produced some crop. Though on the weather side dense and extensive woods exist,
few of them can be regarded as virgin forests, most having re-established themselves after the
plantations once occupying their site had been abandoned. Kadavu does not appear to have an acre
of virgin forest beyond what is clustered around the very summit of Buke Levu. The re-establish-
ment of the woods on ground at one time under cultivation can scarcely be adduced as a proof that
the population has seriously diminished, but rather that the Fijians have for ages followed the same
system of agriculture as they do at present, that of constantly selecting new spots for their crops when
the old ones, which their ignorance prevents them from fertilizing by the introduction of manure
become exhausted. The displaced vegetation quickly resumes its former sway, until perhaps after
the lapse of years it has once more to make room for cultivated plants.
The aspect of the weather side of the islands is essentially different from that of the lee side. The
former teems with a dense mass of vegetation, huge trees, innumerable creepers, and epiphytical
plants. Hardly ever a break occurs in the green mantle spread over hill and dale except where
effected by artificial means. Rain and moisture are plentiful, adding ever fresh vigour to, and
keeping up the exuberant growth of, trees, shrubs and herbs. Far different is the asp-st of the lee
side. Instead of the dense jungle, interlaced with creepers and loaded with epiphytes, a fine grassy
country, here and there dotted with screw-pines, presents itself. The northern shores of Viti Leva
and Vanua Levu bear this character in an eminent degree, and their very aspect is proof that rain
falls in only limited quantity, the high ridge of mountains, which form as it were the backbone of
the two largest islands, intercepting many showers, but sending down perpetual streams to fertilize
the low’ lands of the coast. The lee side would therefore more readily recommend itself to the white
settler, as it requires hardly any clearing, and would be immediately available for cattle-breeding and
cotton growing.
The coast line of most of the islands is enriched by a dense, more or less broken belt of cocoa-nut
palms. White beaches, formed of decomposed corals, may be traced for miles, whilst good soil in
many instances extends quite to the water’s edge, and trees, not numbering amongst the strictly littoral
vegetation, overhang the sea. Mangrove swamps are limited, and chiefly confined to the mouths of
the rivers, hence the almost total freedom of the country from malignant fevers. In the windward
islands, Lakeba and its dependencies, the weeping iron-wood ( Casuarina equisetifalia, Forst.), inter-
mingled with screw pines ( Pandanus odoratissimus , Linn.) abounds, and considerable tracts of country
are covered with the common brake and other hard-leaved ferns. Ihey prefer an open country, and
have taken possession where little else will grow. Wherever these forms of vegetation occur on the
weather side of the group, the soil may be expected to be rather poor. It would, however, be
erroneous to apply the same rule to the leeward side, where they are also tolerably abundant, not
because the soil is too poor to support a dense herbaceous or woody vegetation, but because the air
is destitute of that excessive moisture, and the country ess visited by numerous show'ers o rain,
promoting the luxuriant growth on the weather side.
The general physiognomy of the flora is decidedly tropical; tree-ferns, branching grasses, six or
seven different kinds of palms, scitamineous plants, epiphytical orchids, ferns and pepperworts, fully
accounting for this fact. Whole districts, however, possess a strictly South Australian look, owing
to the presence of two phyllodineous Acacias (A. laurifolia, VVilld, and A. Richei, A. Gray), two
Casuarinas, several kinds of Mctrosideros , with either scarlet or yellow blossoms, a climbing Rubus,
Smilax , and Geitonoplesium * and Flagellaria , as well as the peculiar habit of various other species.
* The natives term this plant Wa Dakua, from Wa, creeper, and Dakua, Kowrie pine, because its leaves closely resemble those
of the Fijian Dammara.
F 3


Fiji Islamm. There is little change in the nature of the vegetation until one reaches about 2,000 feet elevation,
_ * where the plants peculiar to the coast region are replaced by mountain forms. Hollies, Myrtaceous,
Melastomaceous, and Laurinaceous trees, Epacridaceous and Vacciniaceous bushes, for mingthe bulk, scarlet
orchids, Astellas, delicate ferns, mosses, and lichens crowding their branches. None of the explored
peaks have as yet disclosed any genuine alpine vegetation,—perennial herbs forming cajspitose
masses and prostrate shrubs, generally bearing large and gay coloured flowers. Should it ever be
met with, there would indeed be a rich botanical harvest.
Nature has been truly bountiful in distributing her vegetable treasures to these islands; but
perhaps the best proof of their extreme fertility and matchless resources is less furnished by the fact
that a country with a population of at least 200,000 souls, constantly supplying provisions to foreign
vessels, having an immense number of cocoa-nuts withdrawn from consumption by a primitive and
wasteful method of making oil for exportation, and cultivating, comparatively speaking, only a few
acres of ground, than by the almost endless series of vegetable productions, an enumeration of which
forms the subject of the succeeding pages.
ll, —Colonial Produce.
Colonial produce, properly so called, such as sugar, coffee, tamarinds and tobacco, may be expected
from Fiji in considerable quantities, as soon as Europeans shall have devoted their attention to the
subject, since the plants yielding them, long ago introduced, flourish so well that a judicious outlay
of capital might prove a profitable investment. The Sugar-cane ( Saccharum ojfcinarum, Linn.), called
Dovu in Fijian, grows as it were wild in various parts of the group, and a purple variety, attaining
16 feet in height and a corresponding thickness, is cultivated to some extent. No foreigners have
as yet set up mills, nor are the natives at present acquainted with the process of making sugar;
they merely chew the cane and employ the juice for sweetening their puddings. In the greater part
of the group the leaves are used for thatching the roofs of houses ; it is only in Lakeba and others
of the eastern islands where those of a Screw-pine ( Pandanus odoratissimus, Linn.) are preferred,
whilst those of the Bored ( Acrostichum aureum, Linn.), a common sea-side fern, are still less frequently
used, though in the central islands they, in common with those of the Makita ( Parinarium laurinum,
A. Gray) supply the chief materials for covering the side walls of houses, churches, and temples.
Coffee ( Coffea arabica, Linn.) will one day rank amongst the staple products of the country, the moun-
tain slopes of the larger islands, especially those of Yiti Levu, Yanua Levu, and Kadavu, and above
all those of the valley of Namosi seeming well adapted for its growth. Several old Coffee trees are
to be found in the Rewa district, showing the plant to be not of recent introduction. Dr. Brower,
American Yice-Consul, has established a plantation on his estate at Wakaya, which gives fair
promise, and Mr. Binner, of Levuka, has in his garden a number of thriving seedlings. The
Tamarind ( Tamarindus Indica, Linn.) was intoduced about 18 years ago, and there is a fine tree,
30 feet high, and of corresponding dimensions, on the Somosomo estate of Captain Wilson and
M. Joubert, of Sydney.
Tobacco (. Nicotiana Tahacurn , Linn.), a pink-flowering kind, is grown about towns and villages in
patches never exceeding a few rods in extent, but in sufficient quantity to keep the bulk of the popu-
lation supplied. Both men and women use it for smoking only, either out of pipes or made into
cigarettes (saluka) with dry banana leaves ; the filthy habit of chewing or taking snuff does not seem
to be practised by them, though, had they been so inclined, they might have learnt it from the lower
class of white settlers. Being unacquainted with the process of curing the leaf successfully, the
natives greatly prefer our tobacco to their own, and are thankful for the gift of a piece, however
small, but rather loth to regard it in the light of payment for goods or services rendered, preferring
any other article of barter, inferior though it may be in value to the tobacco offered.
Oils and Fats.
Oil and vegetable fat next claim our attention. The most valuable oil produced in Fiji is that
extracted from the seeds of the Dilo ( Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn.), the Tamanu of Eastern Poly-
nesia, and the Cashumpa of India. It is the bitter oil or Woondel of Indian commerce. The
natives use it for polishing arms and greasing their bodies when cocoa-nut oil is not at hand. But
the great reputation this oil enjoys throughout Polynesia and the East Indies rests upon its medicinal
properties as a liniment in rheumatism, pains in the joints, and bruises. The efficacy in that respect
can hardly be exaggerated, and recommends it to the attention of European practitioners. The oil
is kept by the natives in gourd flasks, and, there being only a limited quantity made, I was charged
about 6d. per pint for it, paid in calico and cutlery. The tree yielding it is one of the most
common littoral plants in the group, and its round fruits, mixed with the square-shaped ones of
Barringtonia speciosa, the pine cone like ones of the sago palm, and the flat seeds of the Walai ( Entada
scandens, Bth.) are found densely covering the sandy beaches, a play of the tides. Dilo oil never
congeals in the lowest temperature of the Fijis, as cocoa-nut oil often does during the cool season. It
is of a greenish tinge, and a very little of it will impart its hue to a whole cask of cocoa-nut oil.
Its commercial value is only partially known in the Fijis, and was found out accidentally. Amongst
the contributions in cocoa-nut oil which the natives furnish towards the support of the Wesleyan
missions, some Dilo oil had been poured, which, on arriving at Sydney, was rejected by the broker,
who purchased the other oil on account of its greenish tinge and strange appearance. On being
shown to others, a chemist, recognizing it as the bitter oil of India, purchased it at the rate of 60/.
per tun ; and he must have made a good profit on it, as the article fetches as much as 90/. per tun.
The Dilo grows to the height of 60 feet, and the stem is from three to four feet in diameter, gene-
rally thickly crowded with epiphytal orchids and ferns. The dark oblong leaves form a magnificent
crown, producing a dense shade, and when, during the flowering season, they are interspersed


with numerous white flowers, the aspect of the whole tree is truly noble. The exudation from Fiji Islands.
the stem is, according to Bennett, the Tacamahaca resin of commerce, used by Tahitians as a
scent. Carpenters and cabinet makers value the wood on account of its beautiful grain, hardness,
and red tinge. Boats and canoes are built of it, and it is named with the Vesi (Afzelia hijuga,
A. Gray), as the best timber produced in Fiji. In order to extract the oil the round fruit is allowed
to drop and the outer fleshy covering rot on the ground. The remaining portion, consisting of a
shell somewhat of the consistency of that of a hen’s egg, and enclosing the kernel, is baked on hot
stones in the same way that Polynesian vegetables and meat are. The shell is then broken and the
kernel pounded between stones. If the quantity be small the macerated mass is placed in the fibres
of the Vau (Paritium tiliaceum and tricuspis), and forced by the hand to yield up its oily contents; if
large, a rude level press is constructed by placing a boom horizontally between two cocoa-nut trees,
and appending to them perpendicularly the fibres of the Vau. After the macerated kernels have
been placed in the midst, a pole made fast to the lower end of the fibres, and two men taking hold of
its end, twist the contrivance round and round till the oil, collecting into a wooden bowl standing
underneath, has been extracted. Of course the pressure thus brought to bear upon the pounded
kernels is not sufficiently great to allow every particle of oil to escape, and with proper machinery
the waste would amount to little indeed.
The candle nut ( Aleurites triloba, Forst.) termed “ Lauci,” “ Sikeci,” and “ Tuitui ” in the
various dialects of Fiji, contains a great deal of oil, of which, however, the natives make only
a limited use for polishing, though in other parts of Polynesia lamps are fed with it, and in the
Hawaiian islands the entire kernels are strung on a stick and lighted as candles. The fruit is better
known as a dye, and plays an important part at the birth of a child, for no sooner is a baby born than
the midwife rushes to the Lauci to gather a fruit fresh from the tree, which she places in the mouth
of the interesting young stranger, with the conviction that its milky juice will clear the throat, and
more effectually enable it to announce its welcome arrival. Mr. Wilson, the managing director of
Price’s Patent Candle Company at Vauxhall, writes to me:—“ The oil of the Aleurites tribola is fine
fe and hard; worth at least as much as sesame, or rape oil, in this market. It is held very lightly in
“ its matrix, and should be pressed where grown. If the ‘ nuts ’ were brought home in their shells
“ the freight would be expensive, and if shelled insects would eat them.” The candle-nut tree is of
middle size, common throughout Fiji, and rendered a conspicuous object by the whiteness of its
leaves, produced by a fine powder easily removed. The ground underneath is always densely covered
with “ nuts,” and large quantities might be collected.
The Croton-oil plant ( Curcaspurgans, Med.), introduced from the Tongan islands, is employed for
living fences in Lakeba and other parts, but the oleaceous properties of its seeds have as yet been
turned to as little account as those of the Castor-oil plant ( Ricinus communis, Linn.), named “ Uto ni
“ papalagi ” by the natives, and naturalized throughout the group.
The oil of the cocoa-nut palm, or Niu dina ( Cocos nucifera, Linn.) has long been one of the articles
of export; nevertheless, it is difficult to arrive at any definite result about the average annual
quantity. The Wesleyan mission in negociating with an island trader for the purchase of the oil
received from the natives as contributions to its funds were ready to guarantee that at least 60 tuns
should pass through his hands. This at the rate of 20/. per tun, the average value of the oil on the
spot, would give 1,200/. per annum, a sum tolerably well agreeing with that usually advertised on the
wrapper of the “ Wesleyan Missionary Notices ” as the Fijian share towards the support of the society.
Exact data for forming an opinion of the quantity shipped by the actual traders are altogether
wanting. On consulting with several about this subject, they pretty nearly agreed in fixing 300 tuns
as the utmost limit of the annual export of the whole group, = 6,000/. on the spot. Hitherto there
has been great waste in the making of oil, the native process being of a primitive description.
To remedy this evil, Captain Wilson and M. Joubert of Sydney have set up proper machinery on
their estate at Somosomo, after one of the partners had familiarized himself with the latest improve-
ment in that branch of industry in Ceylon; and it is their intention to take advantage of the
luxuriant manner in which Coboi, or lemon-grass (Andropogon Schcenanthus, Linn.) grows in Fiji by
cultivating it for the purpose of making citronella oil. Cocoa-nut oil congealing at a temperature of
about 72° Fahr., and the thermometer during the cool months often falling far below that degree, a
proper amount of warmth will be kept up whilst the operation of pressing the pulverized kernels is
going on, and thus another step be taken towards the making of the largest quantity of oil from the
least number of nuts. Wilkes, upon the authority of one of the scientific men attached to his
expedition, states that there were only two varieties of cocoa-nut, a green and a brown. Closer
attention to the subject would have shown this to be a mistake; not only the colour, but also the
average size and shape of the fruits, the height of the trees, and the insertion of the leaflets, or rather
segments, offer marks of distinction between the numerous varieties with which the islands are studded.
The most striking kind is the one having fruits not much larger than a turkey’s egg, and bearing more
than a hundred of them in each bunch. Several trees were noticed at Kadavu, about Yarabale,
a narrow isthmus where canoes are dragged across from sea to sea. The curious phenomenon of a
cocoa-nut palm becoming as it were branched by the division of the trunk, has occasionally been wit-
nessed in Fiji, and two interesting instances of it are given in Williams’ “Fiji and the Fijians,” where
one of the trees is described with five branches. In Samoa Mr. W. Pritchard saw a tree with two
heads, regarded with just pride by the natives who possessed it, and cut down during a war by their
enemies. - As in other parts of Polynesia the trunk is made into small canoes, or supplies materials
for building and fencing ; stockades of it are impenetrable to bullets. The leaves are made into
different kinds of mats and baskets; yam houses are occasionally thatched with them, but these roofs
do not last much longer than a year. The spathe enclosing the flowers is used for torches; the fibres
surrounding the nut are made into u sinnet,” used for fastenings of all kinds, The young flesh is
delicious eating, and the " water ” contained in the nuts a refreshing drink, which, as the fruit
F 4


Fiji Islands.
Starch.
advances, undergoes a gradual change, for all of which there are distinctive names. New comers soon
fix upon a certain stage most agreeable to their palate, and on indicating it to the natives they will
readily pick it out by knocking with their fingers on the outside of either the husked or the unhusked
nut, and be guided by the sound. This process requires long practice, and though I tried hard to
learn at least the sound of that stage I preferred, I did not succeed in accomplishing it. The ripe
nuts are grated and used for puddings, or given to fowls and pigs. Some persons have a predilection
for nuts when just in the act of germinating, a taste which the Asiatic shares in eating the young
Palmyras, and the Africans in consuming the seedlings of the Borassus{?) JEthiopicum , Mart. It is
to be regretted that so few plantations of cocoa-nut trees are formed by white settlers. The annual
value of a fruit-producing tree is never less than one dollar; and how easily might 10,000 nuts be set
in the ground, and the value of an estate be permanently raised. Every part of the smaller islands
and the sea borders of the larger are suitable localities. Only Bau, Viwa, and the districts adjacent
form an exception : the trees as soon as they have reached a certain height become diseased; their
leaves look as if dipped in boiling water, and their fruits are few in number, poor, and often drop oft'
before thev arrive at maturity; a thick layer of marl forming the subsoil of those districts, seeming to
oppose that ready drainage the cocoa-nut tree requires, and which it enjoys in so eminent a degree on
the white beaches of sand and decomposed corals.
Starch is produced by four indigenous plants, viz. Roro ( Cycas circinalis, Linn.), Yabia dina ( Tacca
pinnati/ida, Forst.),Yabia sa, {Tacca sativa, Humph.), and Niu soria or Sogo ( Coelococcus Vitiensis, Wendl.)
to which of late years, has been added the Cassava root of Western America {Manihot Aipi, Pohl.),
commonly termed by the Fijians “ Yabia ni papalagi,” (i.e. foreign arrowroot). The lloro ( Cycas
circinalis, Linn.), a tree 30 feet high, is by no means a common plant in the islands, having been
encountered only at Yiti Leva and Ovalau in isolated specimens; and as the pith-like substance
contained in the trunk was reserved for the sole use of the chiefs and forbidden to the lower classes,
no inducement existed on the part of those debarred from it to extend it by cultivation, as is done in
the Tongau islands. The two kinds of Yabia are the arrowroot of Fiji, erroneously stated by
Wilkes and others to be the Maranta arundinacea, Linn. They are both species of Tacca, their
foliage springing up in great abundance in the beginning of the warm season, and their tubers
ripening about June, when leaves and flowers die off. The most common is that kind termed on the
Macuata coast Yabia dina (genuine arrowroot), the Tacca pinnati/ida, Forst. It delights in light
sandy soil, and is therefore most frequently encountered on the sea-shore; whilst the second species,
known in Macuata as “ Yabia sa,” is almost entirely confined to the sides of hills and heavy soil.
The natives prefer the first-mentioned species for the purpose of making arrowroot, though they own
that there is no difference in the quality of the farinaceous substance prepared from either. In most
parts of Fiji there are no distinctive names for the two kinds, both being called “ Yabia;” yet the
natives are perfectly well acquainted with their various characters and peculiarities of habitat.
The leaf, stalks, and scape of the sa is prominently speckled, and the segments of the leaves
are long and narrow, by which it is at once distinguished from its ally. The tubers when quite ripe,
are dug out of the ground and rasped on the mushroom coral {Funr/ia, sp .). The fleshy mass thus
produced is washed in fresh water, to enable the starch to settle at the bottom of the vessel in which
the operation is carried on. By pouring off the dirty water, and repeated washings, the starchy
sediment may be made to assume any desired degree of whiteness. Since Fijian arrowroot has
become an article of foreign demand, it has been pointed out to the natives that the impurities
imparting a greyish colour to the production, caused partly by not peeling the tubers previous to
rasping them, partly by not washing the sediment a sufficient number of times, must be removed in
order to raise the marketable value of the article. When a satisfactory degree of whiteness has been
attained, the starch is dried in the sun. For their own consumption the Fijians do not dry their
arrowroot, but tie it up in bundles of leaves and bury it in the ground, when it speedily ferments,
and emits a rather disagreeable odour. South Sea arrowroot fetches from 3 hd. to 4 d. per pound in
London ; and as it is invaluable when taken in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea, the bane of the
South Seas, it is necessary to have it genuine. The Tonguese have of late years been known to
adulterate it to a great extent with lime in order to increase its weight and volume, but this fraud
may readily be detected by watching the arrowroot when it first comes in contact with water, if
adulterated with lime it will fizz. Care should also be taken to guard against the starch of the
Cassava or Tapioca plant being passed off for Polynesian arrowroot, which from its slightly purgative
tendency and poisonous properties is ill adapted for bowel complaints. It is much whiter than the
arrowroot made of Tacca, sticks to the hands like flour, and when a little water is allowed to act upon
it assumes a pinkish colour, whilst the arrowroot made of Tacca has a granulated feel, does not adhere
to the hand like flour, and is not changed in colour by contact with water. The Cassava root has of
late years been introduced into Fiji, and grows remarkably well.
The Niu soria or Sogo ( Coelococcus Vitiensis, Wendl.) is a genuine sago palm, growing in sw amps on
Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Ovalau ; and w r as first discovered by Mr. Pritchard and myself, when on
our first visit to Chief Kuriduadua. By asking the natives respecting the various palms of the islands,
they described one which I was led to consider as the sago yielding tree, and hence we made
inquiries at all the places we called, but did not obtain a sight of it until we reached Taguru, on the
southern coast of Viti Levu, and thence westward it was encountered in abundance. Fine groves,
several miles in extent, were seen by us on the various branches and deltas of the Navua river. It
was afterwards ascertained to grow on Ovalau ; and Mr. Waterhouse, when accompaning Col.
Smythe, found arc extensive grove on the north-eastern parts of Vanua Levu. The natives of Ovalau
term this palm Niu soria, those of Viti Levu Sogo (pronounced “ Songo”); the latter name reminding


one of “ Sago” or “ Sagu,” by which some species of Metroxylon are known in other islands inhabited
by the Papuan race; and rendering the discovery of this palm ethnologically as interesting as it is
important commercially, by adding another raw product to the export list of the islands, and
botanically, by extending the geographical range of sagoyielding plants 1,500 miles further south-east
than it was previously known to exist. The natives of Fiji were unacquainted with the nutritious
qualities residing in the trunk, until Mr. Pritchard and myself extracted the sago from it.
The Sogo growls in swamps, and the natives occasionally take advantage of the open places among
the groves to plant taro, or even clear Sogo land for that purpose. The dimensions of the finest
specimens were accurately measured. The largest trees felled were from 40 to 50 feet high, and
their trunks in the thickest parts from three feet nine inches to four feet four inches in circumference.
The trunk is very straight, and densely covered with aerial roots, six to 12 lines long, all having the
peculiarity of being directed upwards. The crown generally consists of about 16 living leaves in all
stages of development, and there are mostly five or six dead ones still adhering to it. The
pinnatifid leaves are of a dark green, 17 feet long; whilst the leaflets, gracefully drooping at the tips,
are from three and a half to four feet long, and three and a half inches broad. The petiole is covered
with spines, which at its base are arranged in connected rows extending from side to side, and towards
the top in horse-shoe shaped collections. The spines are brown, and from one and a half to two and
a half inches long. When the tree has attained maturity there appears a terminal panicle about
12 feet high, and divided into 20 or more branches. These branches measure eight feet in length,
and are again divided into about 14 branchlets (each averaging from 14 to 16 inches). The
fruit, in outer appearance resembling an inverted pine-cone, is beautifully polished and of a
yellowish brown, much lighter than that of Metroxylon Rumphii, Mart. This palm forms a
prominent feature in the landscape, the foliage fluttering like gigantic plumes in the wind, and
outbidding the cocoa-nut in gracefulness of outline and movement, the bold look of the flowers
suddenly starting from the extremity of the trunk, and proclaiming as it were by signal that the
time has arrived when nature has completed her task of laying up stores of nutritious starch, and
that unless the harvest is at once gathered in, nothing will remain of the produce of years save
the receptacle in which it was treasured up. Even the old dead trees, standing like so many
skeletons amongst a host of young plants, present an interesting appearance, reminding one of the
posts with their many arms over which the wires of electric telegraphs are carried. Mr. Pritchard
and myself felled six trees, and carried two logs to Lado, where we made sago of one of them by
grating and washing the yellow-white substance with which the inside was filled. The term
“ spongy ” does not well apply to this substance; it has rather the consistency of a hard baked loaf,
and that taken from the base of the tree has a sweet and pleasant taste; towards the top it was more
insipid. For the purpose of collecting sago it is of the highest importance that the tree should be
cut down just at the time when the flowers begin to show themselves ; if felled sooner the tree has
not attained its proper development, and the quantity of farinaceous matter will not be so great as at
the period indicated; if, on the other hand, the cutting down is deferred until the fruit has been
formed a considerable diminution of the quantity of sago meal will be observed, and the longer such
a postponement takes place the less chance there is of collecting a remunerative amount, as the tree,
when it has borne flower and fruit, which, unlike the cocoa nut palm, it does only once during the
term of its existence, speedily dies and crumbles into dust. The trees are easily felled, only the outer
layers of wood possessing any hardness, the central parts being as soft as bread, so that a Vew strokes
with a good axe will bring the largest tree to the ground.*
Spices.
Several kinds of spice are indigenous, or have become naturalised. Turmeric ( Curcuma longa, Linn.),
termed “ Cago” by the Fijians, grows abundantly in all the lower districts. The whites use the
rhizome in the preparation of curry, and the natives the powder of it as food, or more commonly to
daub over the bodies of women after child-birth and those of dead friends, a custom also prevailing
in the Samoan group, according to Mr. Pritchard. In the few districts that have as yet not been
brought under the immediate influence of the British Consul or the missionaries, the heathen widows
are painted with it before strangulation. In fact, turmeric powder is with the Fijian what rouge
and Howland’s preparations are with us, a cosmetic. Promoting in their opinion health and beauty,
it is put on with no sparing hand by the women, and pointed remarks are made about too great a
proximity if a man be unfortunate enough to have some stains of turmeric on his body or scanty dress.
The manufacture of turmeric is similar to that of arrowroot, and is generally managed by the women.
The receiving pits dug in the ground are lined w ith herbage, so as to retain the juicy parts. The
grated rhizome is aftemards placed in the body of a canoe, and rolled up aud strained through a fine
basket lined with fern leaves. It is then carried away in bamboos, and for several days exposed to
the air, when the fluid is gently poured off, and a sediment, the Rerega of Fiji or turmeric of
commerce is found at the bottom. A species of ginger ( Zingiber Zerumhet, Hose.) also abounds in the
lower districts of the group, where it is called “ Beta.” The rhizome, though less pungent than that
of the species exported from China, has been found to make tolerably good preserves, and answers
all the other purposes for which genuine ginger ( Zingiber officinale, Linn.) is commonly employed.
During our journey we often used it with turmeric, a few leaves of an aromatic Zingiberaceous plant
termed “ Cevuga ” ( Amomum sp .), and a few fruits of the Bird’s-eye pepper for making curry, which, all
the ingredients being fresh, proved of excellent flavour. A species of Nutmeg ( Myrislica castanecrfoLia ,
A. Gray) termed “ Mala” is found in the larger islands, forming trees sixty to eighty feet high, but
• Dr. Bennett of Sidney found a Sago palm on Eotuma, north of Fiji, possibly identical with tire Fijian, but there are no specimens.
G
Fiji Islands.


Fiji Islands,
111. —Staple Food.
Edible Roots.
Fijian Calendar.
According to Seemann.
According to Wilkes.
i. Vula i were were = June, July, clearing 1. Vulai were were, weeding month,
month; when the land is cleared of weeds
and trees.
yielding a very inferior kind of timber, which rapidly decays when exposed to the influence of the
weather. Both its mace and nut prove a good substitute for those of the genuine nutmeg ( Myristica
mnschata, Linn). The “nut” was turned to no account until the whites pointed out its valuable
properties. It is about the size of a pigeon’s egg; the mace ( arillus) is of a fine pink colour, and the
shape of the nut it encloses is too oblong to allow this kind of nutmeg ever to be passed off for the
genuine and best sorts of the Indian Archipelago, though the Fijian produce may resemble them
in every other respect. Bird’s-eye pepper ( Capsicum frutescens, Linn.) is met with in every part of
the islands, especially in places under cultivation, producing rich harvests of red pungent fruits.
The Fijians call it “ Boro ni papalagi,” (i.e. foreign Boro), in contradistinction to “ Boro ni Viti ”or
Fijian Boro ( Solarium anthropophagorum, Seem., and S. oleraceum, Dun.), thus indicating that the
bird’s-eye pepper has been introduced by the white man, and is merely to be looked upon as natural-
ized, not wild.
The staple food is the same all over Polynesia, being derived, with the total exclusion of all grain
and pulse, from the yam, the taro, the banana, the plantain, the bread-fruit, and the cocoa-nut;
but the bulk of it is furnished in the different countries by only one of these plants. In the Hawaiian
group the Taro takes the lead, whilst the cocoa-nut is looked upon as a delicacy, from which the
women w r ere formerly altogether cut off. In some of the smaller coral islands the inhabitants live
almost entirely upon cocoa-nuts. The Samoans place the bread-fruit at the head of the list. Again,
the Fijians think more of the yam than of the others, though all grow in their islands in the greatest
perfection and in an endless number of varieties. A striking proof of how much the yam engages their
attention is furnished by the fact of its cultivation and ripening season being made the chief founda-
tion of their calendar; and that only such of the eleven months, into which the year is divided, bear
no names indicative of it, in which the crop requires no particular attention, or has been safely
housed. A version of this calendar has been published by Wilkes in the “ The Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition,” and is placed in juxtaposition with one dictated to me by
an intelligent Bauan chief, and the Consular interpreter, Mr. Charles Wise. Ihe names given by
me, as well as their succession, do not quite agree with those given by Wilkes. This discrepancy is
partly explained by Wilkes having taken down his list upon the lips of Europeans imperfectly versed
in Fijian and by his adopting a loose way of spelling. The names of the months may also be different
in different parts of the group. The subject, however, requires till further investigation. If, as has
been averred, the Fijians invariably commenced the months with the appearance of the new moon,
there would soon have been a vast difference between the lunar and the solar year. To guard against
the irregularity that would thus have been introduced into the seasons, and to make the lunar year
correspond with the solar, it would have been necessary either to intercalate a moon after every
36th moon, or to allow a greater period of time for one of the eleven months into which the Fijian
year is divided. The latter seems to have been effected by the Vula i werewere (clearing month).
Hazelwood (Fijian and English dictionary, Viwa, 1850, p. 180) allows four months, May, June,
July, and August, for it, but this cannot be correct, as it would derange the others. By restricting it
to two or thereabouts, June and July, a proper arrangement is effected. I place the Vulai werewere
first in my list instead of the month answering to January, because it is in the spring of the year
(June and July), and the commencement of the agricultural operations and natural phenomena upon
which the calendar is based.
2. Vida i cukicuki = August; when the yam- 2. Vulai lou lou, digging ground and planting.
fields are dug and planted.
3. Vula i vavakadi = September; putting reeds 3. Vulai Kawawaka.
to yams to enable them to climb up.
4. Vula i Balolo lailai = October; when the 4. 801010 vava Konde.
balola ( Palolo viridis, Gray), a remarkable
Annelidan animal first makes its appear-
ance in small numbers.
5. Vula i Balolo levu = November; when the 5. 801010 lieb.
balolo {Palolo viridis , Gray) is seen in great
numbers; the 25th of November generally
is the day when most of these animals are
caught.
6. Vula i nuqa lailai = December; a fish called 6. Numa lieb, or Nuga lailai.
“nuqa” comes in in isolated numbers.
7. Vula i nuqa levu = January; when the nuqa 7. Vulai songa sou tombe sou, or Nuga levu; reed
fish arrives in great numbers. blossoms.
8. Vula ni sevu = February; when offerings of 8. Vulai songa sou seselieb, build yam houses.
the first dug yams (ai sevu) are made to
the priests.


Fijian Calendar —continued.
According to Seemann.
According to Wilkes.
9, Vula i Kelikeli = March ; digging up yams 9,
and storing them in sheds.
Vulai Matua, or Endoye doye; yams ripe.
(N.B. —Vulai Endoye doye, probably is
meant for Vula i doi; the Doi is a tree
(,Alphitonia zizyphoides , A. Gray), B. See-
mann.)
Vulai mhota. rnhota.
10. Vula i gasau = April; reeds (gasau) begin to 10
sprout out afresh.
11. Vula i doi = May; the Doi ( Alphitonia 11
zizyphoides, A. Gray), a tree plentiful in
Fiji, flowers.
Vulai kelekele, or Vulai mayo mayo ; digging
yams.
The yam principally cultivated is the Dioscorea alala, Linn., having a square climbing stem without
prickles. The natives distinguish a number of varieties, all of which are known by the collective name of
“ Uvi.” Some have large, some small roots, of either a white or more or less purplish tinge; and upon
these differences, as well as their shape and time of maturity, the distinctions are founded* AtNavua,
in Viti Levu, Chief Kuruduadua showed us a lot of yams six feet long and nine inches in diameter, per-
fectly mealy and every part good eating; and specimens eight feet long and weighing 100 pounds are by
no means rare in the group. Skilful growers maintain that in order to produce large and abundant roots
the settings ought to be put into hard and unprepared soil. According to their notion the yam ought to
meet with resistance ere it will put forth its whole strength, or, as they sometimes express themselves,
it must get angry before it will exert itself. I even heard of a bet won by a woman who pursued this
simple plan, and who fully made good her word, that she would produce a root large enough to feed
twenty people, whilst the man who bet with her could only raise one that would not have fed one-
third of that number, though he took great pains to pulverize and prepare the soil for the reception
of the setting. The general signal for planting is the flowering of the Drala ( Erythrina Indica, Linn.).
As soon as its blossoms begin to appear, which happens about July and the beginning of August, all
hands busy themselves about it. The land having already been cleared during the previous months,
hillocks about 2 feet high and 4or 5 feet apart are thrown up; these hillocks are known by the name
of “ Buke,” whence the highest mountain in Kadavu, for the first time ascended on the 6lh of September
1860, by Mr. Pritchard and myself, and resembling them in shape, takes its name of Buke levu, or large
yam-hillock. There are no spades or any other iron tool for digging ; all is done with staves made of
Mangrove wood, and the bare hands. Pieces of old yams are set on the top of these hillocks, and
within a short space of time they begin to sprout out. In less than a month they require reeds for
climbing, after which little else is needed than keeping the plantations free from weeds. About
February the first yams begin to ripen; and in the heathen districts offerings of them are made to
the priests. In March and April the principal crop comes in, and is stored in sheds thatched with
cocoa-nut leaves. As the season advances fhe contents of these sheds require at least a monthly
overhauling; the roots exhibiting any signs of decay have to be removed to prevent their contami-
nating the healthy ones. Yams are eaten baked, boiled, or steamed, and the natives can consume great
quantities of them. Whole cargoes have occasionally been taken with profit to New South Wales and
New Zealand, and whaling and trading vessels never touch in the group without laying in a good supply.
There is another esculent root, the Kawai (. Dioscorea aculeata, Linn.), also planted on artificial
hillocks, though not so high as those of the yam. The stem of this creeper is round, and full of
prickles, but it is not accommodated with reeds as that of the last-mentioned species. It ripens about
June; on the 27th of that month all the leaves were dead. According to the natives it never flowers
nor fruits, and I looked in vain over many a field in hopes of being able to disprove the statement.
It is propagated by planting the small tubers or roots, which, like the old ones, are oblong, of a
brownish colour outside and a pure white within. When cooked the skin peels off like the bark of
the birch tree, as Wilkes expresses it. The root is very farinaceous, and when well cooked looks like
a fine mealy potato, though of superior whiteness. The taste recalls to mind that of the Aracacha
of South America ; there" is a slight degree of sweetness about it which is very agreeable to the
palate. Altogether the Kawai may be pronounced one of the finest esculent roots in the world, and
1 strongly recommend its cultivation in those parts of the tropics still deprived of it.
Several species of wild yam, such as the Tikau, Tivoli, and Kaile trail in graceful festoon over
shrubs and trees of nearly every wood. The Tivoli ( Dioscorea nummularia, Lam.) has a prickly stem
like that of the cultivated Kawai, and climbs very high; its roots are long, cylindrical, and as thick
as a man’s arm. When engaged in the forest the natives will often dig up these roots with a stick,
roast and eat them on the spot", when they taste extremely palatable. The Kaile (Helmia hulhifera, Kth.)
somewhat resembles the Tivoli in look, and is often found entwined with it, but its stems and
branches are round and unarmed, and its roots being acrid require to be soaked in water previous to
boiling. The dish prepared from them has the appearance of mashed potatoes, and is made so thin
that it can only be eaten with spoons, which are either furnished by the leathery leaves of the spoon-
tree, or Tatakia ( Acacia laurifolia, Willd.), or any other substantial leaf that happens to be at hand.
The Taro, or as the Fijian language has it, the Dalo ( Colocasia antiquorum, var. esculenta, Schott) is
crown on irrigated or on dry ground, perhaps more on the latter than on the former. The water is never
allowed to become stagnant, but always kept in gentle motion. When planted on dry ground,
generally on land just cleared, a tree or two with thick crowns are left standing in every field, which,
as the natives justly conclude, attracts the moisture and favours the growth of the crop. A con-
* These varieties are called Dannini, Eea, Karokaso, cr Kasoni, Vo’i, Sedre, Lokaloka, Moala, Uvi ni gau, Lava, Namula,
Rausi, Balebale, &c.
G 2
Fiji Islands.


Fiji Islands, siderable number of varieties are known,* some better adapted for puddings, some for bread
(madrai), or simply for boiling or baking. The outer marks of distinction chiefly rest upon
the different tinge observable in the leaf, stalks, and ribs of the leaves—white, yellowish, purple.
When the crop is gathered in the tops of the tubers are cut off, and at once re-planted. The young
leaves may be eaten like spinach, but like the root they require to be well cooked in order to destroy
the acridity pecidiar to Aroideous plants. The Fijians prefer eating the cooked Taro when cold, a
taste which few Europeans share with them; on the contrary, the latter relish them quite hot, and if
possible, roasted.
Besides the Taro, which is occasionally seen wild on the banks of rivers, there are three other
indigenous Aroideous plants, the corms of which are used as articles of food, the Via mila, the Yia
kana, and the Daiga. The Via mila {Alocasia Indica, Schott), always growing in swamps, is a gigantic
species, often 12 feet high, the trunk or corm of which—the edible part —is, when fully developed, as
large as a man’s leg; a single leaf weighed 3| lbs. The petiole was found to be 4 feet long and
10 inches in circumference at the base; the blade of the leaf 3 feet 2 inches long, 2 feet 6 inches
broad, and 13 feet 6 inches in circumference ! The plant emits a nauseous smell, amply warning, as
well as the various popular names it bears, against an incautious contact with it. Besides the name
of Yia mila, which signifies “acrid Via,” we have that of Yia gaga, or poisonous Yia. What may be
the meaning of Yia sori and Dranu, occasionally applied to it, I have not been able to find out. In
order to remove the acrid properties the trunk is baked, or first grated, and then treated as madrai
(bread) in the manner to be explained below ; yet, notwithstanding all precautions the natives are
frequently ill from eating it. The Yia kau, or Yia kana ( Cyrtosperma edulis, Schott.) is in every
respect a similar species, also growing in swamps, not only wild but frequently cultivated like Taro.
It requires fewer preparations to render its root fit for food than that of the Yia mila, and its flavour
is considered more agreeable.
The Daiga ( Amorphophallus , sp .) differs from the three preceding Aroideous plants both in habit
and mode of growth. It is always found on dry ground, and appears in the spring of the year,
together with arrowroot, turmeric, and ginger. Its foliage consists of a single leaf, which rises
from a roundish tuber to the height of from two to four feet, having a petiole full of soft prickles,
and a blade spreading out somewhat like an umbrella, and divided into numerous deeply cut
segments. The flower, or rather the spatha, is of a dull colour, not put forth until the leaf is
beginning to die off, and emits an offensive carrion-like odour. In the cosmogony of the Samoans,
the office of having by means of its singular foliage lifted up the heavens when they emerged from
chaos, is assigned to this plant, and the Fijians recommend it as a safe place of refuge when the end
of the world approaches, the Daiga being in their opinion a “ Yasu ” to heaven (Vasu kilagi). A Vasu,
it should be added in explanation, is, according to widely-spread Polynesian custom, a nephew who
holds the moveable property of his mother’s brothers at his almost absolute disposal, having the
power to do whatever he pleases with it. Some Vasus even venture so lar as to dispose of the very
lands belonging to their maternal uncles. There are Vasus to every family, town, and kingdom. A
Vasu to heaven is the climax of the whole system, cleverly employed in the charming Fijian story of
the Princess Vilivilitabua. The root of the Daiga is acrid, but after being freed from that property
esteemed on account of its nutritious qualities. Being thought to assist fermentation, some of it is
mixed with the leaven of bread ; for the Fijians, though not growing any grain or importing flour,
prepare what they call “Madrai,” or bread, from the fruits of the Ivi {lnocarpus edulis , Forst.),
Kavika ( Eugenia malaccensis, Linn.), Banana, Plantain, Bread-fruit, Dogo kana or mangrove, and the
roots of the Taro ( Colocasia antiquorum, Schott., var. esculenta, Schott), Kawai {Dioscorea aculeala,
Linn.), Yia mila ( Alocasia Indica, Schott), Via kana, and the Daiga. A hole, having the shape of
an inverted cone, is dug in the ground, and having been lined with leaves, the different materials
are put in, covered with leaves, earth, and stones, to undergo fermentation and become fused into
a homogeneous mass. Two or three, aye, even nine months are allowed for that process. When
taken out the dough emits a sour foetid smell. It is then either baked on hot stones or steamed in
large earthenware pots; but the taste is such that few foreigners acquire a partiality for it, and the
natives themselves infinitely prefer our bread and biscuit to their own madrai. Yet it is most
fortunate that in a country where numerous kinds of fruits and edible roots, however abundant at
certain seasons, are subject to such rapid decay, the natives are acquainted with a simple process
by means of which they are able to store up their provisions, and thus effectually guard against
extreme want in a land of plenty.
A few other esculent roots remain still be mentioned. Potatoes ( Solatium tuberosum, Linn.) grown in
Mr. Moore’s garden at Mataisuva I found tolerably good. An attempt made by Mr. Carey at Wairiki
to raise radishes did not succeed. Shalots are cultivated to a considerable extent by the natives.
Turnips have been produced from imported seeds. The Sweet Potato ( Batatas edulis, Chois.) is an
introduction probably from New Zealand, as the Fijian name (Kumara) proves identical with that
given by the Maoris. It succeeds well, but does not seem to be much valued. The Masawe
or Vasili Toga {Dracaena, sp.), is a shrub with obovate leaves, cultivated, and perhaps, judging
from the name Yasili Toga (= Tonga) it bears in some parts of the group, an importation from
the Tongan islands. Its root is large, weighs from 10 to 14 pounds, and when baked resembles in
taste and degree of sweetness as near as possible that of stick liquorice. The Fijians chew it, or
use it for sweetening puddings. They were ignorant of the art of extracting an intoxicating
liquor from it, known to the Hawaiians at the time of Captain Cook’s visit. There is a species of
Dracaena [D. sp.) closely resembling the Masawe, and employed for making fences. It grows wild
in the woods, and bears in Viti Levu the name of Yasili Kau. It is as much as 14 feet high,
* The different kinds of Dalo (Taro) are, Basaga, Bega, Dalo ni Vanua, Karakarawa, Keri, Kurilagi, Mumu, Quiawa, Sikaviloa,
Sisiwa, Soki, Toakula &c.


and has lanceolate leaves, which in common with those of its allies are good fodder for sheep, goats, Fiji Islands.
rabbits, and cattle. Its root is small and thought unfit for food. The Yasili damudamu or Ti Kula
(Dracaena ferrea , Linn.), has leaves similar in shape, but the idea of its being possibly a variety of
the preceding is precluded by the fact of its having large and edible roots.
Amongst the esculent roots growing wild, and eagerly sought for just before the regular crops
come in, or in times of scarcity caused by intratribal wars during the planting season, or by unfa-
vourable weather, may be named the Yaka orWa yaka ( Pachyrhizus angulatus , Rich.), a Papilionaceous
creeper, with trifoliated leaves and whitish flowers tinged with purple. In September and October
its tubers send forth new shoots, which grow with rapidity and yield a tough fibre, invaluable tor
fishing nets. The plant delights in open exposed places and a rich vegetable soil, where the roots,
which generally assume a horizontal direction, often attain from six to eight feet in length and the
thickness of a mans thigh. When cooked they have a dirty white colour, and a slightly starchy but
Otherwise insipid flavour, much inferior, I thought, to that of wild yams. However, Mr. Charles
Moore, of Sydney, ate them in New Caledonia, and is induced to pronounce more favourably upon
their taste. Living plants were brought by him to the Sydney botanic garden, where they are now
growing with native vigour in the open air.
Kitchen Vegetables.
Kitchen vegetables are supplied by a number of wild and cultivated plants, 'The natives boil the
leaves of several ferns, among them those of the Litobrochia sinuata, Brack., and in times of scarcity
those of the Balabala (Alsophila exce/sa, R. Br.); those of the Ota [Angiopteris evecta, Hoffin.), a species
with gigantic foliage, are peculiarly tender, and their taste not unlike that of spinach. The common
brake ( Eteris uquilina , Linn., var. esculenta , Hook, fil.), though plentiful, does not seem to be used as
it is by the Polynesian tribes of New Zealand. The leaves of the Boro ni yaloka in gata (i.e.,
serpent’s-egg-boro), our Solanum oleraceum, a spiny kind of herbaceous nightshade, serve as “ greens ”
to both the natives and foreigners. The young shoots of the Yaulo of Viti Levu ( Flagellaria indica ,
Linn.), known also, if am not misinformed, by the names of Tui, Vico, Turuka, and Malava in
different districts, after having been boiled, are eaten with taro and yams, but only by Fijians.
Two kinds of purslane, termed i( Taukuku ni vuaka” in Taviuni ( Portulaca oleracea , Linn., et Portulaca
quadrijida , Linn.) are common weeds which during my stay at Soraosomo were frequently brought to
table. The natives sometimes grow whole fields of the Bete or Yauvau ni Viti ( Hibiscus \_Abclmoschus~\
Manihot, Linn.), an erect shrub attaining six or eight feet in height, bearing yellow flowers and lobed
leaves, which, especially if not quite developed, are tender eating, relished even by Europeans. The
Boro dina ( Solanum anthropophagorvm , Seem.), a straggling shrub with glabrous leaves and scarlet or
yellow berries, possessing a faint aromatic smell, and resembling tomatos in shape, has also edible
leaves and fruit. The Tomato ( Lycopersicurn esculentum, Mill.) as a tropical production is quite at
home. The Cajan, pigeon pea or pea tree ( Cajanus Indians, Spr.), introduced from the United States,
is cultivated successfully. Its seeds, when young, make a tolerably good substitute lor green peas, a
delicacy desired in a country well supplied with both wild and tame ducks. The Dralawa ( Lablab
vulgaris, Savi) grows in great abundance about Somosomo, covering whole acres ol ground, and il not
indigenous, has at all events become perfectly naturalized in that and various other parts ol the group.
It seems to bear without interruption throughout the year, its numerous white flowers being always
seen wherever the plant has established itself. The beans are extremely tender, and after having been
boiled in water and salt, oil and vinegar will convert them into an excellent salad. A species ol
Dolichos was noticed at Levuka, in the garden of a French settler. Indian corn ( Zea Mays, Linn.),
termed “ Sila ni papalagi,” (i.e., foreign sila) from its resemblance in habit and foliage to the
indigenous Sila ( Coix Lachryma, L.) has as yet been raised sparingly, as the Fijians and Polynesians
in general have never been accustomed to grow any grain whatever, and most ol the white settlers are
English, ignorant of the innumerable uses to which the Americans apply it. There is only one
rather inferior kind, a small yellow grained one, and the introduction of the larger and better sorts
would be a boon easily conferred upon the islands. The settlers sadly complain that their domestic
fowls (toa *) become wild, and instead of keeping near the houses take up their abode in the woods,
where they have to be shot when required. If more Indian corn were grown, and these birds fed with
it regularly, they would probably preserve their domestic habits as thoroughly as they do in other
countries. Hitherto no attempts have been made to cultivate our so-called European vegetables in
the cooler regions of the mountains, where they would doubtless thrive well. None have been raised
except on the coast, where the heat of the tropics is not moderated by elevation, and the unchecked
influence of the sea air proves destructive to many kinds. Yet even here cabbages and turnips have
been produced from foreign seeds, and parsley may be looked upon as a permanent acquisition.
Edible Fruits.
Bananas and plantains—understanding by the former those Musas the fruit of which may be
eaten raw, by the latter those which have to undergo some process of cooking before eating—are
known by the collective name of “ Vudi.” There are about eighteen different species, or rather say
kinds (for the boundary between species and variety has never been determined with accuracy in this
genus)—all of which bear distinctive names.f With the exception of one, the Soaqa ( Musa roglo-
* Toa is the Fijian form of the •word “ Moa,” applied throughout Polynesia to domestic fowls, and by the Maoris to the most
gigantic extinct birds (Dinornis sp. plur.) disentombed in New Zealand. The Polynesian term for birds that fly about freely in the
air is Manu or Manumanu, and the fact that the New Zealanders did not choose one of these, but the one implying domesticity and
•want of free locomotion in the air, would seem a proof that the New Zealand Moas were actually seen alive by the Maories, about
their premises, as stated in their traditions, and have only become extinct in comparatively recent times.
f The following are the different kinds known to me : —Vudi ni papalagi (Musa Chinensis, Sweet [ Cavendishi , Paxt.]), Soaqa
(A/wsa Troglodytarum , Linn), Balawa ni Bakiraki, Bati Dreli, Buli, Droledrole, Gonegone, Leve ni Ika, Mudramudra, Soqo,
Tuxnoutala, Ura, Vudi dina, Vudi Kalakala, Vudi ni Toga, Waiwai Leka, Waiwai salusalu, Waiwai Vula, and Sei.
G 3


Fiji Islanib.l dytarum, Linn.), none are found wild, and this wild one even is occasionally met with in plantations.
lt grows spontaneously in the depth of the forests, often in ravines, and is distinguished from all
congeners by its bunches, instead of hanging down, being perfectly upright, and presenting a dense
collection of orange coloured fruits. The Polynesians, always ready to account for any deviation
from a normal type, have not failed to exercise their ingenuity here. The Samoans assure us that
once upon a time all the bananas and plantains had a great fight, in which the Soaqa (their Fae) came
off victorious, and proudly raised its head erect, whilst the vanquished became so humiliated by the
defeat sustained, that they were never able to hold up their heads again. An important addition
to their stock the Fijians received in the Yudi ni papalagi, (i.e., foreign banana), our Musa chiniensis,
which the late John Williams, better known as the Martyr of Eromanga, brought from the Duke
of Devonshire’s seat at Chatsworth to the Samoan or Navigator islands, whence again in 1848,
Mr. George Pritchard carried it to the Tongan or Friendly Islands, as well as to the Fijis. Its
introduction has put an effectual stop to those famines which previously were experienced in some of these
islands. Never attaining any greater height than six feet, and being of robust growth, it is little affected
by the violent winds which cause such damage amongst plantations ol the taller kinds, and this advantage,
coupled with its abundant yield and fine flavour, have induced the natives to propagate it to such an
extent that, notwithstanding its comparatively recent introduction, the Vudi ni papalagi numbers
amongst the most common bananas of the country. The fruit of the different Musas is variously
prepared by the native cooks. Bananas split in half, and filled with grated cocoa-nut and sugar cane,
make a favourite pudding (vakalolo), which on account of its goodness and rich sauce of cocoa-nut
milk, has found its way even into the kitchen of the white settlers. Wilkes has already mentioned
that the natives instead of* hanging up the fruit until it becomes mellow, bury it (occasionally it
should be added) in the ground, which causes it to appear black on the outside, and impairs the flavour.
The fresh leaves are used as substitutes for plates and dishes in serving food or for making temporary
clothing, the dry instead of paper for cigarettes (suluka). In place of the finger basins handed round
at our tables after dinner, Fijians of rank are supplied with portions of the leafstalk of the plantain,
—not a superfluous luxury when forks are dispensed with except at cannibal feasts.
The Breadfruit is seen in regular forests, and in a great number of varieties, which a new' comer
has some difficulty in distinguishing until he has learnt to observe that in the shape of the leaves—
which are either entire, pinnatisect or bi-pinnatisect—their size and their either bullate or even
surface, the shape and size of the fruits, the time of its maturity, the absence or presence, as well as
the length of the prickles on its outside, and the abortion of its ovules or their development into
seeds, offer good marks of distinction. The general Fijian name for the breadfruit is “ Uto,”
signifying “ the heart,” from the resemblance of the form of the fruit to that organ, whilst the
varieties are distinguished by addtional names. Those less frequently cultivated arc*, however, not
known by the same names throughout the group, but bear different ones in different districts. Hence,
the exact number of varieties cannot be accurately determined, until there shall be a botanic garden
in Fiji, where a complete collection of breadfruits is cultivated. 1 have identified several names of
the most prominent varieties, but hesitate about others, as I could only take the leaves with me from
place to place, and often did not see the fruit, or had to carry it in my mind’s eye. The principal
breadfruit season is in March and April, but some kinds ripen considerably later or earlier, whilst
in some districts the season itself is altogether later. It may thus be said, speaking generally, that
there is ripe breadfruit, more or less abundant, throughout the year, in either one part or the other.
The fruit is made into puddings or simply boiled or baked. Quantities of it are preserved under-
ground to make madrai or native bread. Some kinds are best adapted for puddings, some for bread,
or culinary purposes of a still more simple description. Besides the fruit, the wood of the breadfruit
tree is useful. The bark is not beaten into cloth as in other parts of Polynesia, but the gum (drega),
issuing from cuts made into the stem, is used for paying the seams of canoes.
The two most common sorts are Uto dina and Uto buco. The Uto dina, or true breadfruit, has
pinnatisect leaves, the surface of which is even, and destitute of that bullate appearance which imparts
to the Koqo and other varieties an almost sickly look ; the fruit, bearing abortive ovules, is nearly
round, smooth on the outside, and supported on stalks four to five inches long, which from the very first
are bent downwards. It is this variety which most botanists consider as the type ol the species, and the
adjective <c dina,” true or genuine, given by the Fijians may be cited as a proof of the correctness of
this surmise. But if we have to look for an original stock from which all other sorts have sprung, we
ought not to select one which like the Uto dino has invariably abortive ovules, and can therefore not
produce seeds from which new' varieties can be raised. The Uto sore, Uto vaka sorena,or Uto maliva,
as it is termed in different districts, has not that deficiency, but does yield ripe seeds in abundance,
and has, therefore, greater claims to be regarded as the type from which all the other varieties may
have been raised. The name of Uto dina (true or genuine breadfruit) may perhaps have been applied
on account of its goodness, which, I believe, is undisputed. The Uto buco also has pinnatisect leaves
with an even surface as opposed to the bullate one of other sorts, and an obovate obtuse fruit of
larger size than that of the Uto dina, and quite free from any prickles on the outside when fully ripe.
In order to obtain a clearer insight into the varieties it will be best to subjoin a synopsis of the
breadfruits cultivated in Fiji:—
§ I. Leaves entire or quite entire.
1. Uto 1010 bears this name in the straits of Somosomo, and is called Uto cokocoko in the Rewa
district. Perhaps also identical with the Uto dogodogo and Uto draucoko mentioned in the Fijian
dictionary. It looks different from all others, the leaves, especially when the tree gets older, being
quite entire; in young plants they are sometimes obscurely lobed. The fruit is without seeds.


§ 11. Leaves pinnatisect.
2. Uto dina. Known by that name, and that name only, throughout Fiji. Leaves with an even
surface; fruit without seeds, nearly spherical, with a smooth surface, and supported on stalks, four
or five inches long, nodding from the first.
3. Uto huco. Known by that name throughout the group. Leaves with an even surface. Fruit
ovale obtuse, larger than that of most sorts, destitute of seeds, and with a smooth surface when ripe
4. Uto koqo. Known by this name throughout the group, but in some dialects called Oqo and
Qoqo. Leaves bullate; fruit without seeds, and as large as that of Uto dina, smooth on surface.
5. Uto votovoto. Known under this name throughout the group. Leaves with an even surface;
fruit oblong without seeds, and covered with prickles three-quarters of an inch long.
6. Uto varaqa. Known by this name in Rewa and Bau ; Uto varaka in some dialects. Leaves
larger than those of any other kind; fruit roundish, of middle size, without seeds, and with a rough
surface.
7. Uto bokasi. Known by that name in Rewa and Ovalau, Leaves with even surface; fruit
obovate, with a smooth surface, without seeds, erect when young, nodding when ripe, and arriving at
maturity early in the season.
8. Uto sore. Known by that name in Rewa, by that of Uto vaka sorena in Ovalau, Uto asalea in
the Straits of Somosomo, and Uto maliva at Nukubalaon. Uto sasaloa may also prove a synonym.
“ Sore,” or “ Sorena” signifies a seed; hence Uto sore, or Uto vaka sorena, is the seed-bearing bread-
fruit, the only kind in which the ovules develop into seeds, rendering it probable that this kind is
the parent of all the others. Leaves with even surface.
9. Uto rokouta. Known by that name at Namara, near Bau. Leaves bullate, giving the tree a
sickly look.
10. Uto balekana. Known by that name in the Straits of Somosomo and at Ovalau, Leaves
with even surface; fruit small but of superior quality, according to the natives.
11. Uto qio. Known by that name in Ovalau. Fruit almost as large as that of Uto buco. “ Qio”
is the name for shark, and was probably given to this fruit from the surface of the latter resembling
in roughness that of the fish.
12. Uto vonu. Known at Somosomo. Leaves . . . . ; fruit largish.
§ 111. Leaves bi-pinnatifid.
13. Uto kalasai. Known by that name ip Rewa, and by that of Uto sawesawe in the Straits of
Somosomo. The leaves, especially when the plant is young, are distinctly bi-pinnatifid, in which respect
this kind differs from all others ; fruit, according to natives, rather oblong and covered with prickles.
Of the following I know nothing, save the names, partly taken from Hazelwood’s Dictionary,
partly from a list of breadfruits known at Ovalau, and kindly communicated by Mr. Binner, of Le-
vuka. Most of them will doubtless prove synonyms of those enumerated above : —Draucoko
(= Cococoko?), Bucotabua, Utoga (= Koqo), Waisea, Utoloa (= Uto 1010 ?), Matavesi, Drega-
drega (N.B. Drega is the name of the gum issuing from the stem), “ Buco uvi.” The “ Bucudo”of
Wilkes’ “ [Narrative ” and is probably identical with Buco, though he mentions the latter name spelt
“ Umbuda;” but what can be meant by his “ Botta-bot ?”
Other edible fruits, some of delicious flavour, are met with throughout the group, either perfectly
wild or in a state of cultivation, Most of them have been in Fiji from time immemorial, and only a
few, such as the pine-apple, the papaw, the custard-apple, and the Chinese banana, have been intro-
duced of late years. The most prominent place among the native fruits undoubtedly belongs to the
Wi ( Evia dulcis, Comm., = Spondias dulcis, Forst). The tree appears to be self-sown, and is met
with in abundance about towns and villages. It is often 60 feet high. The bark is smooth and
whitish, the leaves pinnate, glabrous, and of a dark green, forming a fine contrast with the yellow
oval-shaped fruits with which the tree is heavily laden. The fruit has a fine apple-like smell, and a
most agreeable acid flavour, rendering it highly suitable for pies; indeed the Wi is the only Fijian
fruit which recommends itself for that purpose. At Rewa I weighed and measured several highly
developed ones, and found the largest to be exactly one foot in circumference and ] lb. 2 oz. in
weight. The natives are as fond of W 7 is as the white settlers, and quite content to make their
dinner of Taro and Wis. The Dawa {Nephelium pinnatum, Chamb., = Pometia pinnata, Forst.) is
more plentiful than the Wi; entire forests of it are frequently encountered, and there appears to be
several varieties. It is 60 feet high, and shares with most Fijian fruit trees the peculiarity of yielding
a useful timber. The leaves are pinnate, the leaflets serrate, and when first opening display a
brilliant red tinge, which at a distance looks as if the tree were in bloom. The flowers, arranged in
terminal panicles, are whitish and of diminutive size. The fruit, ripening in January and February,
has rather a glutinous honey-like taste, and attains about the size of a pomegranate. The Fijians
deem the Dawa peculiar to their islands. It certainly does not occur to the eastward in a wild state,
as the Tonguese are said to have obtained it from Fiji, but it seems to be quite common in all the
groups lying westwards, the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, and others. A native of Were assured
me it was plentiful in his island, and Dr. Bennett, of Sydney, found it cultivated under the name of
“ Thav” at Rotuma, a little island to the north of Fiji, as recorded in his “ Gatherings of a
Naturalist.” I succeeded in carrying living plants to the botanic garden at Sydney, where they
were left in charge of Mr. Moore, and whence they may perhaps find their way to the new colony
of Queensland, and prove acceptable additions to the fruits of that country.
The Kavika or Malay apple ( Eugenia Malaccensis, Linn.) abounds in all the forests. As in the
Hawaiian and other Polynesian islands there are two varieties, the purple (Kavika damudamu) and
the white (Kavika vulavula). When the tree, which attains about 40 feet in height, is in flower, the
G 4
Fiji Islands.


Fiji Islands
ground underneath is densely covered with petals and stamens, looking, especially if the two varieties
grow together, like a fine Turkish carpet. I have often seen the natives gathering handfuls of them
to strew on their heads. In their idea there is scarcely a finer tree than the Kavika, and when in their
fairv tales the imagination runs riot, and describes all that is lovely and beautiful, the Kavika is rarely
omitted. The Hawaiians, as I have slated elsewhere (Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.S. Herald,
vol. it. p. 83), thought this tree worthy of supplying materials for their idols, and thus like the Fijians
recorded their veneration for it. A botanist, himself more than half-a-tree worshipper, can fully
sympathise with them. The fine oblong leaves, their smooth shining surface, the deep purple or pure
white flowers, and afterwards the large quince-shaped fruits, with their apple-like smell and delicate
flavour, are well calculated to justify much of the praise Polynesians bestow upon the tree. Thelvi,
or Tahitian chestnut, as it has been called by voyagers ( Inocarpus edulis, Forst.), is one of the most
common trees, and when fully grown has a most venerable aspect. I still see in my mind’s eye a fine
group on the banks of a rivulet between Wairiki and Somosomo, diffusing a dense shade. Sixty, often
80 feet high, the Ivi bears a thick crown of oblong leathery leaves, small white flowers emitting a
delicious perfume, and kidney-shaped fruits which contain a kernel resembling chestnuts in taste. The
kernel is either baked or boiled, and eaten without further preparation, or grated on the mushroom
coral ( Funqia ) and made into puddings or bread (madrai). The stem is most singular. When young it
is fluted like a Grecian column ; when old it has regular buttresses of projecting wood. Ferns, orchids,
and Hoyas frequently take up their abode on the soft spongy bark. The roots of old trees appear
above the ground somewhat like those of the Bald Cypress of North America [Taxodium distichum ,
Rich.). Thousands of seedlings are continually springing up around the old plants, and nothing save
the dense shade of their parents, and the close proximity in which they grow to each other, exercise
a check upon their engrossing all the adjacent ground. If the fruit of the Ivi is compared with the
chestnut, that of the Tavola( Terminalia Catappa, Linn.) may be likened to the almond, both in shape
and whiteness, though not in taste, the Tavola having none of the flavour imparted by the presence of
the essential oil of almonds; hence the name of “ Fijian almonds” given by the white settlers must
be received “ cum grano sails.” The natives are extremely fond of the Tavola as a tree, and frequently
plant it around their houses and public buildings. The branches, arranged in whorls, somewhat like
those of pines, though perhaps not quite so regular, have a horizontal tendency, upon which the
natives improve by placing weights upon them. The large obovate leaves are deciduous, and before
falling off assume a variety of tints, —brown, red, yellow, and scarlet, such as one is wont to behold in
a North American forest before the approach of winter. The flowers are white and small; the wood
hard and applicable to a variety of purposes. A close, ally of the tavola is the I ivi {Terminalia
Moluccana, Lam.), a timber tree, always growing on the sea-beach, and bearing seeds sometimes eaten
by children. Like its congener it changes the colour ol its foliage, but the tints are neither so rich
as those of the former, nor is the general habit of the tree so striking. The Oleti or papaw-tree
(Carica Papaya , Linn.) has been introduced in the early part of this century, and has spread with such
rapidity that there is hardly a part of the group in which it is not to be found; neither the natives
nor the white settlers (who sometimes will persist in calling it mamey-apple, a very different fruit !)
seem to care much for it. Only a few seem to be aware that saponaceous properties reside in the
leaves, which in the absence of soap may be, and in tropical America are, turned to advantage ; that
both the leaves and the fruit act in an hitherto unexplained way upon the animal fibre, and make
the toughest meat tender, if either boiled with portions of them, or even wrapped up in the leaves;
that the fruit is very good eating, either raw or boiled, and that the seeds, distinguished by a
mustard-like pungency, are an efficacious vermifuge for children. The Guayava ( Psidium Guayava ,
Raddi) is another fruit of recent introduction that has spread rapidly over the country, and is eaten
either raw or made into sweetmeats. One of the custard apples {Anona squamosa, Linn.) has not made
such progress. I met a few trees on the Somosomo estate of Captain Wilson and M. Joubert,
of Sydney, and a few at Levuka in the garden of a French settler. The loquat ( Eriohotrya Japonica ,
Lindl.) is of recent introduction, and seems to promise fair results. A number of healthy looking
plants grow in the garden of Mr. Binner of Levuka, where the grape vine ( Vitis vinifera, Linn.) and
various other useful plants recently brought to the islands are also to be met with. The different
species of Citrus, shaddocks, oranges, lemons, and Seville oranges, are known collectively as “ Moli,”
and distinguished from each other by additional names. The shaddock {Citrus Decumana , Linn.), or
Moli kana {i.e., edible moli) is extremely common, and thickly lines the banks of rivers; as for
instance that of Namosi in Yiti Levu, where, during our stay in August 1860, the stillness of night
was frequently broken by the heavy splash of the falling fruits. 1 here is a variety with white,
another with pink flesh, both of which are much liked by the natives. The Moli kurukuru ( Citrus
vulgaris, Risso) is equally common, but the Fijians do not make use of it as an article of diet. The
Moli kara or lemon ( Citrus medica, Risso) has been brought from Tahiti about 1823 by Mr. Vauder-
ford, and is almost exclusively confined to the neighbourhood of present or former habitations of
white settlers. The Moli ni Tahaiti {Citrus Aurantium, Linn.) is the common variety of the orange,
also derived, as the native name indicates, from the Society Islands, whence it was introduced
simultaneously with the lemon by Mr. Yanderford. Like the other species of Citrus just mentioned, it
succeeds well, and small cargoes of it have occasionally been shipped to New Zealand. The Pome-
granate {Punica Granatum , Linn.) is a recent acquisition. The pineapple {Ananassa sativa, Lindl.),
vernacularly termed “ Balawa ni papalaqi,” or foreign screw pine, thrives well, especially near the sea.
There is, besides the common variety, a proliferous one, having many different sprouts emerging from
the top of the fruit. The water-melon {Citrullus vulgaris , Schrad.) is as plentiful as the Yaqo, or
bottle-gourds {Logenaria vulgaris , Ser.), which supply the natives with vessels for their oil. Melons
{Cucumis melo, Linn.), cucumbers {Cucumis sativa, Linn.), and pumpkins or squashes {Cucurbila Pepo ,
Linn.) have also found their way to the islands, and in common with indigenous Cucurbitaceous
plants are collectively called " Timo.” There is besides a number of fruits eaten and even esteemed


by the natives, but most insipid to an European palate. Foremost amongst them stands the Taranwau FIJI IsLANDS
{Draconto melon sylvestre, Blume), mentioned in another place as connected with native supersti-
tions. There is also the loselose {Ficus, sp.), the Kura {Morinda citrifolia, Linn.), the Balawa
{Pandanus odoratissimus, Linn.), the Wa gadrogadro ( Rubus tiliaceus, Smith) having a fruit resembling
the raspberry in appearance, and being occasionally used by white settlers for pies; the Bokoi
{Eugenia Bichei, A. Gray), with a fruit somewhat like the Kavika {Eugenia Malaccensis, Linn.),
but inferior in flavour; the Sea {Eugenia, sp.) still more insipid, if possible, than the last men-
tioned, and the Nawanawa {Cordia suheordata , Lam.) producing an edible kernel, a tree 25 feet high,
often mistaken for the Cordia Sehestena, Linn., of the West Indies, which it closely resembles in habit,
but its orange flowers are neither so brilliant nor so numerous. Nor must the Yutu kana, or Vutu
kata {Barringtonia excelsa, Blume) be forgotten. It is a tree 40 feet high, cultivated about Bau, and
distinguished from the other Barringtonias of Fiji by its egg-shaped, not angular, fruit, eaten either
raw or cooked. Another species of Barringtonia, closely resembling the foregoing, is the Vutu dina,
which is also edible, but whilst the fruit of the Yutu kana {ie., edible vutu) has a soft outside, that of
the Vutu dina has a hard one, requiring the application of a knife before the edible portion can be
got at. Finally must be mentioned the Somisomi, Sosomi, tomitomi, or Tumitumi, as the different
dialects have it, —the Ximenia elliptica, Forst. It is a sea-side shrub having simple leaves, and
a spherical fruit containing a kernel like a cherry-stone, and emitting, especially when green, a most
powerful smell of essential oil of almonds. The fruit when quite ripe is orange-coloured, and has,
though a tart, not a disagreeable flavour. The natives share a partiality for it with the wild
pigeons, which flock to it in numbers. The wood of the shrub is verv hard, and used for
making those peculiar pillows (kali) of the country, which the Fijians doubtless invented in order
to prevent the derangement of their enormously large heads of hair, curled and dressed as they
are with infinite care.
IV. Cannibal Vegetables.
The vegetables eaten with human Jlesh, it may be ethnologlcally important to notice since,
thanks to the influence of commerce, Christian teaching, and the presence of a British Consul,
cannibalism survives only in a few localities, and is daily becoming more and more a matter of
history. Human flesh, Fijians have repeatedly assured me, is extremely difficult to digest, and even
the healthiest suffer from confined bowels for two or three days after partaking of it. Probably in
order to assist the process of digestion, “bokola/’ as dead men's flesh is technically termed, is
always eaten with an addition of vegetables. There are principally three kinds which in Fijian
estimation ought to accompany “bokola,” —the leaves of the Malawaci {Trophis anthropophagorurn,
Seem.), the Tudano {Omalanihus pedicellatus, Benth.), and the Boro dina {Solanum anthropophagorurn,
Seem.) The two former are middle-sized trees, growing wild in many parts of the group, but the
Boro dina is cultivated, and there are generally several large bushes of it near every bure (or stranger’s
house), where the bodies of those slain in battle are always taken. The Boro dina is a bushy shrub,
seldom higher than six feet, with a dark glossy foliage, and berries of the shape and colour of
tomatoes. This fruit has a faint aromatic smell, and is occasionally prepared like tomato sauce. The
leaves of these three plants are wrapped round the bokola, as those of the taro are around pork,—
and baked with it on heated stones. Salt is not forgotten. Whilst every other kind of vegetable and
meal are eaten with the fingers, cannibal food is touched only with forks, generally made of the wood
of the Nokonoko {Casuarina equisetifolia, Forst.), or the Vesi ( Afzelia bijug a, A. Gray), bearing curious,
often obscene names, and having three or four long prongs. The reason given for this deviation from
the general mode of eating is a widely-spread belief that fingers which have touched “ bokola ” are apt
to generate cutaneous diseases when coming in contact with the tender skin of children, and, as the
Fijians are very fond of their offspring, they are most scrupulous in using forks on the above occasions.
Besides these three plants some kinds of yams and taro are deemed fit accompaniments of a dish of
bokola. The yams are hung up in the bure for a certain time, having previously being covered with
turmeric, to preserve them, it would seem, from rapid decay,— our own sailors effecting the same end
by white-washing the yams when taking them on board. A peculiar kind of taro (C 'alodium esculentum,
Schott, var.), called “ Kurilagi,” was pointed out as having been eaten with a whole tribe of people.
The story sounds strange, but as a number of natives were present when it was told, several of whom
corroborated the various statements or corrected the proper names that occurred, its truth appears
unimpeachable. In Viti Levu, about three miles N.N.E. from Namosi, there dwelt a tribe known by
the name of Kai na loca, who in days of yore gave great offence to the ruling chief of the Namosi
district, and as a punishment for their misdeeds, the whole tribe was condemned to die. Every year
the inmates of one house were baked and eaten, fire was set to the empty dwelling, and its foundation
planted with Kurilagi. In the following year, as soon as this taro was ripe, it became the signal for the
destruction of the next house and its inhabitants, and the planting of a fresh field of taro. Thus
house after house, family after family, disappeared, until Butuibuna, the father of the present chief
Kuruduadua, pardoned the remaining few, allowing them to die a natural death. In 1860 only one
old woman, living at Gagina, was the sole survivor of the Na Loca people. Picture the feelings of
these unfortunate wretches as they watched the growth of the ominous taro ! Throughout the
dominions of the powerful chief whose authority they had insulted, their lives were forfeited, and to
escape into territories where they were strangers would in those days only have been to hasten the
aw T ful doom awaiting them in their own country. Nothing remained save to watch, watch, watch the
rapid development of the Kurilagi. As leaf after leaf unfolded, the tubers increased in size and
substance, how their hearts must have trembled, their courage forsaken them; and when at last the
foliage began to turn yellow, the taro was ripe, w hat agonies they must have undergone—what torture
could have equalled theirs ?
H


Fiji Islands,
Y. National Beverages.
The national beverage is the Kava, or, as the hijians term it, “"S aqona, prepared from the root of
the Piper methysticum. Forst., a species of pepper, of which there are six distinct varieties, distin-
guished by the height of the entire plant, the length and thickness of the joints, and the more or
less purplish or greenish tinge of the stem anti leaves. The best Yaqona, for this name applies to
the plant as well as to the beverage extracted from it, grows from 500 to 1,000 feet above the sea
level, and in the islands of Kadavu and Yili Levu. The plant is cultivated throughout the group
in small patches, and isolated specimens are frequently noticed around public and private houses.
It is propagated by offshoots. The highest shrubs are about six feet, and their stem from one to
one and a half inches in diameter; the leaves are cordate, and either green or more or less tinged
with purple. The root and extreme base of the stem are the parts of which the drink is prepared;
they are preferred fresh, but are nearly as good when dry. After the roots have been dug up they
are" placed in an airy spot, generally on a stage over the fire-place. In order to prepare the
beverage, it is necessary to reduce the roots to minute particles, which, according to regular Poly-
nesian °usage, is done by chewing, a task in Fiji devolving upon lads who have sound teeth, and
occupy a certain social rank towards the man for whom they perform the office. In other Polynesian
islands it is done by young women. When a sufficient quantity has been chewed, the masticated mass
is placed, in a bowl made of the wood of the Yesi (, Afzelia bijuga, A. Gray), and having four legs and a
piece of rope attached to it, which, when the bowl is brought in, is thrown towards the greatest man
present, and guides those who happen to arrive in ignorance of his rank in observing the ceiemonies
required from them. Some Fijians make it a point to chew as great a quantity as possible in one
mouthful; and there is a man of this sort at Yerata, famous all over the group, who is able within
three hours’ time to chew a single mouthful sufficient to intoxicate 50 persons. Fortunately kava,
unlike distilled spirits, does not render people quarrelsome, and Fijians on extolling the virtues of
their national beverage often make this observation. On public occasions or at convivial meetings,
when the chewed root is placed in the bowl and water is poured on, the whole assembly begin to
chant appropriate songs, accompanied by the beating of little sticks on a bamboo or log of wood,
and this is kept up until the dregs of the root have been strained through the fibres of the
Yau (different species of Parifium ), or in the absence of them, through fern leaves. When the
beverage is ready the chant is discontinued, and the priest or any head man present pronounces a
toast or prayer over it, after which the first cup —a cocoa-nut shell—is handed to the person of
highest rank in the company. The kava is taken out of the bowl by means of the strainer, which is
dipped into the fluid and then squeezed. Although both bowl and cup are always carefully dried and
cleaned after having been used, a crust invariably forms at the inside, giving them the appearance
as if they had been enamelled. This crust, after a lapse of three or four months, is carefully scraped
olf, and makes the strongest of all Yaqona. The beverage has the look of coffee with plenty of milk
in it, and an aromatic slightly pungent taste, which when once acquired must, like all acquired tastes,
be perfectly irresistible. Drunk in moderation it has probably no bad effect, and acts upon the
system somewhat like betel-nut, but taken in excess it generates all sorts of skin diseases and
weakens the eve-sight. Nearly all the lower class of whites in the Fiji are kava drinkers, some
regular drunkards, and it is generally accepted as a proof of a man belonging to the more respectable
portion of society if he refrains from touching this filthy preparation. Most of these whites prefer it
prepared in true Polynesian fashion ; only a few have the root rasped on a grater, a process said to
impair the flavour considerably. Roots of Yaqona are presented to visitors as tokens of good will,
and to the temples as offerings. 1 have also seen the leaves of the plant hung up in the temples,
together with little twigs of the Waltheria Americana. As we in Europe, when engaging soldiers or
servants, hand a small coin in proof that the bargain has been accepted, so the Fijians when effecting
a bargain or sale give or take a small deposit, which is called the “ yaqona,” and either consists of a
piece of kava root or any other article that may prove acceptable. Drinking kava being peculiar to
all Polynesian tribes, Thomson (Story of New Zealand. London, 1859. \ol. 1., p. 193)expresses
surprise that the Maoris of New Zealand should have forgotten the art of extracting it, “seeing that
“ the plant {Piper Methysticum, Forst.) grows abundantly in the country.” But the Piper found wild
in New Zealand is not, as Dr. Thomson supposes, the Piper methysticum, Forst. (the true kava
plant), but the Piper excelsum of the same author ( Macropiper excelsum, Miq.). Hence it can form
no surprise that a genuine Polynesian people should have forgotten the art alluded to during the
lono- lapse of time intervening between their departure from Samoa and their discovery by Euro-
peans. They have, however, preserved the name of “ Kava,” which they have transferred to their
indigenous pepper (Kawa Kawa), and also to a beverage (Kawa) made of the fruits of the Coriaria
myrtifolia, Linn., by them termed Tupa-Kihi, Tutu, or Puhou. Kawa-Kawa, according to Colenso’s
statement in J. D. Hooker’s Flora of New Zealand, signifies “ piquant.” Thomson attempts to
trace Kawa, Kava, or Ava, as the various Polynesian dialects have it, to the Sanscrit “ Kasya,” which
seems to be a general term for intoxicating beverages.*
* ]y o te.—The medicinal properties of the Kava-plant have of late claimed some attention. In the French translation of Golding
Bird’s work on Calculous Affections, Dr. O’Rorke has inserted, amongst others, the following remarks:—“The Kava-plant is
the most powerful sudorific in existence, and its stimulant qualities render it applicable in those cases in which oolchicum is
prescribed The intoxication it produces is not like that caused by spirituous liquors, but rather induces a placid tranquillity,
accompanied by incoherent dreams. Kava is as powerful in its therapeutic action as lignum vitas or guaiacum, sarsaparilla, etc.,
and the islanders use it as a specific against, the diseases brought over to them by foreign vessels. On the other hand, this drug
used to excess as an intoxicating agent, over excites the skin by its sudorific effects, and eventually even occasions elephantiasis. . .
The chemical constituents, according to Gobley, are as follows: Carbon, 62-03; hydrogen, 6-10; nitrogen, M 2;
oxygen, 3075. It contains 26 per cent, of cellulose, 49 per cent, of starch, one of methysticine, a crystallizable principle, two of an
acrid resin, called Kawine, and about 7 per cent, of gum, iron, and magnesia, and a few substances of minor importance.” In a
paper which M. Cuzent laid before the Academy of Sciences at Paris, in 1861, the chemical composition of the Kavahine (thus it is
spelt ’in the report at hand) the active crystallizable principle of the Kava, identical, it would seem, with what Gobley terras
“ Methysticine,” is thus given ; no nitrogen, 66 per cent of carbon, 6 of hydrogen, and 28 of oxygen.


Besides their favourite yaqona, the Fijians drink the natural liquor of young cocoa-nuts; but they
had absolutely no other beverage save water. They were ignorant of extracting an intoxicating
drink from the saccharine roots of their Masawe [Dracaena terminalis, Linn.), so much employed for
that purpose by the Hawaiians and other Polynesians. They were even strangers to infusions and
decoctions made of aromatic leaves, and the so-called Fijian tea, vernacularly termed Matadra, was
never used by the natives. Ihe European settlers, who first employed it as a substitute for Chinese
tea, by drying and then boiling the leaves, brought the custom from the eastern groups of Polynesia,
The Matadra (Missiesga corymbulosa , Wedd.) is a straggling shrub, belonging to the nettle tribe,
having slender branches, and generally growing as underwood. It attains from six to eight feet in
height, has leaves somewhat resembling those ot the elm, but white underneath, and minute flowers
and fruits arranged in corymbs. Some people have drunk a decoction of its leaves without perceiving
it to be different from Chinese tea.
I here is another negative fact of singular ethnological importance connected with this subject.
Neither the Fijians nor the Polynesians in general were acquainted with the art of extracting toddy
from the unexpanded flowers of the cocoa-nut palm. It is only in quite recent times that Europeans
have instructed them in it. 1 his, in a great measure, seems to strengthen the position of those who
maintain that the Polynesians did not come from the Malayan or any other district of Asia, that
they would never have migrated contrary to the direction of the prevailing trade winds, and that the
identity of certain Malayan and Polynesian words, thought to bean overpowering argument in favour
of that exodus, cuts both ways, arid may be made to prove either that these words came from purely
Malayan to Polynesian districts, or from a genuine Polynesian to a Malayan ; and exactly the same
dilemma is encountered in dealing with the geographical distribution of Polynesian plants and animals.
Passionately fond as are the Polynesians of intoxicating drinks, they would never have discontinued
making toddy, if they had ever known the way to make it, especially as a tree yielding it, the cocoa-
nut palm, is common throughout Polynesia. In order to reconcile this fact with the hypothesis that
the Polynesians are ot Malayan origin, it might be assumed that they left the cradle of their race
before the extraction of toddy from the cocoa-nut tree, or even the cocoa-nut tree itself, was known
there. Iradition, historical evidence, and observed facts, all agree in showing the progression of the
cocoa-nut tree from west to east. Numerous cocoa-nuts are annually drifted on the eastern shores of
New Holland, where they often germinate and grow, until the seedlings are killed by the low tem-
perature of the winter months. Ceylon, now covered with immense forests of cocoa-nut palms, has
a distinct tradition that at one time the tree was unknown there, and there is even a statue not far
from Galle, recording the event of its becoming known there, whilst the oldest chronicles of the
island, known by the name of the Marawansa, and the historical value of which is now fully admitted,
are absolutely silent on everything relating to the cocoa-nut, while they never fail to record every
accession to the plantations of other fruit trees made by the native princes. This seems to prove that
the cocoa-nut was not always known, and that it would have much sooner found its way there than it
did if it had been indigenous to India proper, whilst the fact that all other species comprising the
genus Cocos are strictly confined to the interior of tropical America, and only this one species ( C .
nucifera , Linn.), a sea-side plant, unaffected by drifting on sea-water, is spread over Polynesia and
the Old World generally, offers another important consideration. But even if the introduction of the
cocoa-nut tree to Asia took place after the assumed departure of the Polynesian tribes, the latter
must have been well acquainted with the art of making toddy, as there is a number of palms in Asia,
about the true native country ot which there is no doubt whatever, yielding toddy a beverage of so
ancient a date that even the oldest language of that continent has a name for it, toddy being only a
corruption of the Sanscrit word c ‘ tade.” Had, therefore, the Polynesians once known the process
by which they might have obtained, not only a strong liquor, but also sugar, vinegar, and yeast, they
would have operated as readily upon the cocoa-nut tree in the South Sea, as the people of Southern
Asia did when the cocoa-nut tree came to their shores. Taking, probably, its departure from
Western America, the cocoa-nut vvas drifted by prevailing winds to Polynesia, where its toddy-
yielding properties were not suspected; thence it drifted on towards Asia, and there was perceived
to be as capable of yielding a favourite beverage, as the Palmyra, the wild date tree, the Arenga sac-
charfera, and the various species of the singular Canjota palms had done from time immemorial.
Vl.— Vegetable Poisons.
Vegetable poisons are extracted by certain natives who make a profound secret of their art, and it
would require an intimacy of years before any reliable information on this point could be elicited. I
was ready to make presents of hatchets, knives, and other valued articles, to get some insight into
their toxicology, but Mr. Pritchard begged me to abstain; the natives would take alarm at my
inquiry, and if perchance any great man should be taken ill or die during my visit, it would at once
be said that I, availing myself of the knowledge acquired, had administered a fatal dose, —a most
undesirable thing in the present state of political transition. The Fijians have both slow and acute
poisons, and when a man is gradually sinking (often, no doubt, from a very different cause) it is
readily believed tnat “he has a dose/’ He will then seek the advice of some skilful native physician,
if possible one at Bau, the capital, to administer the necessary antidotes, and restore him to health.
However, very often, there is no time to interpose between the fatal dose and its consequences, the
effect being almost instantaneous. When, in October 1860, I revisited Cakandrove, a poisoner had
just been strangled by orders of the ruling chief, he having been detected in putting a certain drug
into a cigarette which proved fatal to the smoker. The poisoner on finding himself condemned to die,
not only pleaded guilty to this crime, but also confessed to having been instrumental in bringing
about the death ot no less than three hundred people, all victims to his infamous art.
There being no chance of gaining any direct information about the more subtle poisons from the
H 2
Fiji Islands


Fiji islands, lips of the natives themselves, an examination of all plants possessing narcotic properties would supply
the deficiency, if it were not for an anomaly, as yet insufficiently explained, that certain species
shunned as poisonous in one country, are eaten with impunity in another. There are mushrooms
which in England are absolutely noxious, and on the continent wholesome food. In Fiji the leaves of
the Boro yaloka ni gato ( Solarium oleraceum. Dun.), a spiny species closely allied to Solarium
nigrum, Linn., and those of the Boro dina ( Solarium anthropophagorum, Seem.) as" well as the fruit of
the latter and that of the Bora Sou or Sousou ( Solarium repandurn, Forst.) are eaten; the latter in
soups or with yam. I was in some measure prepared for this, having seen quantities of the first named
species, as well as the deadly nightshade itself ( Solarium nigrum , Linn.) exposed for sale in the market
of Port Louis, Mauritius, and learnt on inquiry that they were common pot-herbs, eaten both by the
white and coloured population, as intimated by Bojer in his Hortus Mauritanus. Strgchnos colubrina,
Linn., is met with in Viti Levu, but 1 have not been able to learn whether the natives are aware
of its containing strychnine. A kind of Upas tree ( Antiaris Henrietta, Seem.), commonly termed
“ Mavu ni toga,” probably because it has been introduced from the Tonga islands, was formerly
planted about heathen temples, and is even now to be found in towns and villages. It is a middle
sized tree, with a thick crown of dark foliage, oblong glossy leaves, and a fleshy fruit of the size of an
apricot, covered with a velvety skin of a most beautiful crimson colour. A gum exuding from the
stem and branches is used for arrows. The exact nature of its poisonous properties has not yet been
ascertained. That they are not equal to those ascribed to the true Upas tree of Java ( Antiaris
toxicaria, Leschen.) is proved by the manner in which the natives handle it; but it is impossible to say
whether one of the reasons for its cultivation near temples and its probable introduction from
Tonga, may not be found in its yielding a poison of which the heathen priests may have occasionally
made use. Dr. Bennett of Sydney found it cultivated in Tucopia for making bark cloth.
Amongst the trees most dreaded by the natives on account of their noxious qualities, the Kau
Karo, literally itch-wood, occupies a prominent place, and seems to act somewhat like Rhus venenata
or Semecarpus Anacardium. Mr, Pritchard and myself first heard of its existence during our visit to
the southern shores of Yiti Levu, in July, 1860, and on the banks of a river were fortunate enough to
obtain specimens of the tree, proving it to be the Oncocarpus Vitiensis, A. Gray, Rhus atra, Forst., an
Anacardiaceous plant. The tree, when fully developed, is about 60 feet high, bearing large oblong leaves
and a very curious corky fruit, somewhat resembling the seed of the walnut. On handling the specimens
a drop of the juice fell on the hand of one of our party, and instantly produced a pain equal to that
caused by contact with a red-hot poker. Mr. E. A. Egerstrcim, a Swedish gentleman, residing on the
Island of Naigani, had been still more unfortunate in his accidental contact with the Kau Karo, and
on visiting his hospitable root on the 2nd July 1860, he was just recovering from the effects of the
accident. Having desired a native carpenter to procure him a spar suitable for a flag-staff, one was
brought of Kau Karo, about forty-two leet long, and twenty-two inches in girth at the foot, having a
white wood and a green bark, not unlike that of the Vau dina ( Paritium tiliaceum, Juss.) and li°ht
coloured when peeled off Ignorant of the poisonous properties of the tree, Mr. Egerstrdm himself
peeled off the bark, and found the sap beneath it very plentiful. “In the evening,” 1 quote
Mr. Egcrstrom’s own words, in a letter to the British Consul, “I was troubled with considerable
itching about my legs, and every part of my body which had come in contact with the spar, especially
about the abdomen and lower parts, having sat across the tree when barking it. All the parts affected
became red and inflamed, breaking out in innumerable pustules, which emitted a yellowish matter
with a nauseous smell. The itching was exceedingly painful and irritating, and my arras havin«- been
bare when operating upon the tree, also became inflamed and broke out as already described. 0 The
neighbouring natives, who came to watch my proceedings, now warned me, too late, not to touch the
tree, as it was a poisonous one, and advised my keeping quiet and not to touch or scratch the parts
inflamed. 1 his advice, however, I could not follow, the irritation for several days being excessive.
I employed no remedy but bathed daily, as usual, in fresh water, although advised to the contrary,
but did not get rid of the injurious effect of the itch-wood for nearly two months.”
Another tree, the contact with which is avoided by the Fijians, is the Sinu gaga ( Excwcaria Agal-
locha, Linn.) or poison Sinu, called so in contradistinction to the Sinu damu ( Leucosrnia Burncttiana,
Bth.) and the Sinu mataivi ( Wikstroemia Indica, C. A. Meyer), both of which, like the Sinu gaga, are
littoral plants. The Sinu gaga is found in mangrove swamps or on dry ground, just above hmh-
water mark. It is 60 feet high, has a glossy foliage, oblong leaves, and minute green flowers
arranged in catkins. It is difficult to exterminate, for unless the stumps are taken up, innumerable
young shoots spring up the moment the main stem is felled. When the tree is wounded abundance
of white milky juice flows, which causes a burning effect on coming in contact with the skin. Some
natives, however, can handle this poisonous juice with perfect impunity ( era sinu dram), analogous
to what 1 witnessed in the Manzanillo or Manchineel tree of tropical America, the sap of which
caused me the greatest agony after it had accidentally entered ray eyes, and never raised even as
much as a blister on being allowed to dry on the hands of a travelling companion. The smoke of
the burning wood affects the eyes with intolerable pain, exactly as does that of the Manchineel tree,
of which I gave an instance in the “Narrative of the Voyage of iI.M, Ship Herald,” Yol. 1., p. 141,
one of our boat’s crew becoming blind for several days after lighting a fire with Manchineel wood.
None, save those who have been sufferers from the effect of these poisons, can form any adequate con-
ception of the agonies endured and the courage displayed by a Fijian who voluntarily submits himself
to being cured of leprosy by the smoke of the Sinu gaga wood. The Rev. W. Moore, of llewa, was
well acquainted with a young man of the name of Wiliami Lawaleou, who underwent the process of
being smoked. Mr. Moore gave me the full particulars of this remarkable case when I was his finest
in 1860, and he has also published a full account of it in “ The Wesleyan Missionary Notices,”
Sydney, 1859, p, 157. After stating that he knew Wiliami as a fine healthy young fellow, Mr. Moore
was surprised to find him one day so much altered by the effects of leprosy. Some time after he


The Nettles, —those mosquitoes of the vegetable kingdom, irritating but never killing as they do,
are collectively termed “ Salato,” a name also including those animals familiarly known as sea
nettles. There are two kinds. The Saloto ni coro is an annual weed {Fleurya spicaia, Gaud., var.
interrupter, Wedd.), which abounds about towns and villages (hence the specific appellation of
“ ni coro ”) ; and although the virulence of its sting is not to be compared with that of our European
nettles, the natives so carefully avoid all contact with it, and ran away in such fright when I gathered
specimens of it for the herbarium, that one is tempted to fancy their skins more keenly affected by
it than ours. Still greater is their dread of an (Micaceous tree {Loportca, ftp. .....),
40 to 50 feet high, which they simply term “ Salato ” (nettle), and which, when touching the skin,
produces a burning pain similar to that ascribed to the sap of Malawaci ( Tropins anthropopharjorum,
Seem.). Milne (Hook. Jour, and Kew Misc. IX., p. 110), states, that “if you should be so unfor-
“ tunate as to sting yourself, you will feel the effects for some months. I am suffering at this
t( moment,” the writer continues, “ from an accident which occurred a month ago. There is no
“ eruption, but it is most painful when exposed to the influence of water.”
VII. — Medicinal Plants.
The medicinal plants employed by the natives are as difficult, perhaps more difficult, to find out
than the poisonous ones used for illegal purposes. Those who profess to be acquainted with their
properties often women, and answering to our herbalists —cannot be tempted by any presents to
disclose secrets which to them prove a lucrative source of income for life. It is only the virtues of
plants generally known that a casual inquirer has any chance of learning. The high estimation in
which the oil of the Dilo ( Calopkyllum inophyllum, Linn.) is held by the whole population, as an effi-
cacious remedy for rheumatism and other pains, has been mentioned in another place. The leaves of
the Kura ( Morinda citrifolia, Linn.), a middle-sized tree, with shining leaves and white flowers, not
unlike those of the coffee shrub, are heated by passing them over flame, and their juice squeezed into
ulcers, whilst the leaves themselves are put on the wound, as a kind of bandage. The bark of the
Danidani ( Panox fruticosum, Linn.), a shrub about eight feet high, and cultivated about the native
houses, on account of its deeply-cut, ornamental foliage, is scraped off, and its juice taken as a remedy
for macake, the thrush—ulcerated tongue and throat. The properties of the Sarsaparilla (Smilax,
S p ), as a means of purifying the blood, are w r ell known. The creeper is
found throughout the group, especially on land that has at one time been cleared, and might be
gathered in quantities if there any demand for it. In the London market it would at present
be unsaleable. It belongs to that section of sarsaparillas distinguished by pharmacologists as the
«non-mealy,” the most valued representative of which is the Jamaica sort. Moreover, it has no
“beard,” or little rootlets. The natives of Ovalau, Viti Levu, and Vanua Levu, name it Kadragi
and Wa nisi; those of Kadavu, “Na kau wa,” literally, “ the woody creeper.” I met with it years
a <To in the Hawaiian group; it is said to be also common in the Samoan and Tongan groups, and
prepared sarsaparilla occasionally imported to the two last mentioned has found no market, the indi-
genous beino- preferred to the foreign production. Curious to add, in Fiji it is not, as with us, the
rhizome that is used, but the leaves, which are chewed, put in water, and strained through fibre, like
H 3
again met him full of health, and on inquiry learnt the treatment adopted to bring about this change. Fiji Islands
Taken to a small empty house, the leper is stripped of every article of clothing, his body rubbed all
over with green leaves and then buried in them. A small fire is then kindled and a few pieces of
the Sinn gaga laid on it. As soon as the thick black smoke begins to ascend the leper is bound
hand and foot, a rope fastened to his heels, by means of which he is drawn up over the fire, so that
his head is some 15 inches from the ground, in the midst of the poisonous smoke. The door is then
closed and his friends retire a little distance, whilst the poor sufferer is left to cry and shout and plead
from the midst of the suffocating stream; but he is often allowed to remain for hours, and finally
faints away. When he is thought sufficiently smoked the fire is removed, the slime scraped from the
body, and deep gashes cut into the skin until the blood flows freely. The leper is now taken down
and* laid on his mats to await the result. In some cases death—in many life and health. Wiliarni
had undergone this fearful process. He had taken some of the youths of the place, and mi his way
to the smoking house told them his pitiable condition, his shame as an outcast, and his willingness to
suffer anything to obtain a cure, and much would depend on their firmness. They were not to be
moved by his groans and cries, and for the love they bore him he begged them to do the operation
well, and'threatened to punish them if they performed it only half. Imagine the scene ! They pro-
ceed to the lonely house. Wiliami’s companions, as much afraid of overdoing as underdoing their sad
task, leave the poor leper drawn up by his heels in the midst of a thick black smoke ; they retire
to some distance, and presently are horrified by his piteous cries and groans. Some weep, some run
home, others rush into the smoking house to take him down ; but with Spartan-like endurance he
commands them not to terminate his suffering until the process is complete. At last they take him
down he is faint and exhausted—the operation has been successful. Wiliarni is no longer a leper,
but again walks God’s earth, a healthy man.
The materials employed by the natives for poisoning or rather stupifying fish, a custom as pre-
valent all over Polynesia as it is amongst the Indians of America, are the square fruit of the Vutu
rakaraka {Barringtonia speciosa, Linn.) and the stem and leaves of the Duva gaga {Derris uliyinosa ,
Benth.), both plants growing in abundance on the sea-beach, just above high-water mark. As soon as
these materials, —pounded to render them more efficacious, —are thrown into the water or drawn
through it by means of a line or creeper to which they have been attached, the fish turn on their
back and appear on the surface. They are perfectly stupified, and are thus easily taken; but they
soon recover their lost activity, and are believed not to die from the effects of the treatment they
have received.


tie Yaqona or Kava [Piper met/iysticum, Forst.), before being taken. Strong purgative properties
leside in the \ asa 01 Rewa ( Cerbera lactario, Mam,), a sea-side tree, twenty-five feet high, with soft
wood, smooth shining leaves, and white, scented flowers, used for necklaces by the natives. The
aromatic leaves of the Laca ( Plectranlhus Forsteri, Benth.). a weed abounding in cultivated places, and
having pmple bracts supporting pale blue flowers, cure, it is said, « bad eyes' 1, and headaches on being
brought in contact with the affected parts. It is also recommended for coughs and colds, in common
with an Acanthaceous herb inhabiting swamps (Adenosma tr flora, Nees.), which shares its aromatic
properties. The people of Somosomo declare that the leaves of the Vulokaka (Vitex trifoliata, Linn.),
with which their beach is thickly lined, when reduced to a pulp by chewing, are employed by them
for stuffing hollow' teeth. Ihe leaves and bark of another sea-side shrub, the Sinu mataiavi (Wiks-
treemia Indica, C. A. Meyer), are employed for coughs, the bark alone for sores.
Through a native connected with the Wesleyan mission, I succeeded in purchasing a knowledge of
the drugs employed about Bau for procuring abortion. It appears there are five plants which furnish
them, two Malvaceae a Buttneriacea, a Convolvulacea, and a Liliacea—namely, the Kalakalauaisoni
(Hibiscus cliversifalius, Jacq.), a spiny shrub, growing in swamps ; the Wakiwaki (Hibiscus [.Abelmoschus l
moschatus, Moench.), closely resembling the latter, and bearing large yellow flowers like it, but bein«’
destitute of spines, and invariably preferring dry ground; the Siti (Grewia prunifolia, A. Gray), a
small tree, abounding in the groups, and producing a fruit eaten by the Fijian bat; the Wavutl
Pharbitis insularis , Chois), a blue flowering sea-side creeper, and the Ti Kula, Te Kula, or Va sili
damudamu (Dracama ferrea, Linn., var.). Of the Kalakalauaisoni, Wakiwaki, and the Wa buti, the
juice of the leaves, —ot the Ti kula, that of the heart of the leaves and surface of the trunk, are used.
The li kula is held to be the most efficacious, and only administered when the foetus is far advanced,
or the other drugs have failed to produce their murderous effects.
Vlll. —Scents and Perfumes.
Perfumes for scenting Cocoa-nut oil, which the natives profusely apply to their hair and naked body
are supplied by the wood of the Yasi (Santalum Yasi, Seem.), the bark of the Macou (Cimamomum
sp), the flowers of the Uci (Evodia hortensis , Forst.), the Makosoi (Uvaria odorata , Lam.), the Balawa
(Paudanus odoratissimus, Linn.) and the Bua (Fagrcea Berteriana , A. Gray), and the fruit of the
Makita (Parinarivm laurinum , A. Gray), and the Leba (Eugenia [Jambosa] neurocalyx , A. Gray.)
The Yasi or sandal-wood (Santalum Yasi, Seem.) is confined to the south-western parts of Vanua
Levu, and formerly abounded near Bua or Sandal-wood bay. The high estimation in which it was
held by the 1 onguese early induced them to undertake regular trading voyages to Fiji, long previous
to those attempted by ourselves. It does not seem that Europeans engaged in this trade urUil towards
the close of the 18th century, when it was taken up by Manila vessels. However, so great was the
demand lor this article, both in the Chinese and Polynesian markets, that about the year 1816 there
was scarcely enough left for home consumption. In 1840 the United States exploring expedition
with difficulty obtained a few specimens for the herbarium. To save the tree from utter destruction
in the islands, the Rev. Mr. Williams planted one in the garden of the mission station, at Bua, which,
when I visited the place, in 1860, was in full vigour and bloom. When sandal-wood was still
plentiful a butcher’s knife was usually exchanged for ten sticks of three feet long. At present fancy
prices are readily given for the little that now and then turns up. In 1859, Tui Levuka, a chief of
Ovalau, had nearly half a ton of it in his possession, but that seems to have been the largest quantity
of late years brought together; a year later Mr. Hennings, a German, trading in Fiji, could only
succeed in obtaining a few pieces. On visiting Bua, in October 1860, a log, six feet long and two or
three inches in diameter, was presented to me, and thought quite a valuable gilt by my native atten-
dants. The Yasi has very much the appearance of a Myrtaceous plant, and the Fijians who possess a
quick eye for discerning natural affinities, class it with several species of Eugenia, which they respec-
tively distinguish as Yasi ni wai, Yasi dravu, &c. The leaves are opposite and lanceolate, and the
floweis very minute, and on first opening they are white, but gradually change to pink, and ultimately
to a brownish purple. The Iruit is in shape, size, and colour like that of the black currant. The
wood is of a light brown, and especially in the central parts of the stem, highly charged with aromatic
particles. It is grated on the mushroon coral (Fungia) and mixed with cocoa-nut oil by the Fijians
as well as by all the Polynesian tribes who are fortunate enough to obtain possession of it. In China
the larger pieces were used for ornamental work, and the sawdust and other remnants made into joss-
sticks, burned before idols and images.
The bark of the Macou, as it is termed in the Bau dialect, “ Mou ” in that of Kadavu, and “ Maiu”
in that of Namosi, is a kind of Cassia bark, which may prove of commercial importance, and is used by
the Fijians for scenting cocoa-nut oil. The tree yielding it, —a species of Cinnamomum, — is about
thirty feet high, four to five inches in diameter, and is met with above an elevation of 1,500 feet, in
dense virgin forests. I met it on Buke Levu, island of Kadavu, and on Yoma peak, Viti Levu ; and
Mr. Pritchard received fine specimens from the island of Gau, where they had been collected by
W. Berwick, a coloured man, residing there. The bark lias a fine aromatic smell and flavour, a light
brown colour, is thicker than that of the Cinnamon of commerce, and resembles some of the
•Jaurineous barks, such as the Sintoc and Culilawang, brought from the Moluccas. In Namosi it is
used as a sudorific. Unfortunately I did not see the tree in flower, and hence am unable to determine
whether the “ buds are equal to the best ‘‘Cassia buds” of commerce. The resemblance of the
lijian names to that of “ Massoy,” given to a fine quality of Cassia bark, from New Guinea, deserves
in\ est’g uion.
Ihe flowers ol the Uci or Sacasaca ( Evodia hortensis, Forst.) diffuse like those of most Diosmacece,
an overpowering, rather sickly odour, highly esteemed by the natives, but only appreciated by those


Europeans who can enjoy patchouly, musk, and scents of a similar category. The perfume emitted
by the flowers of the Makosoi ( Uvaria odorata , Lam.) and of the Balawa (Pandanus odoratissimus,
Linn.) commands a greater number of European admirers, whilst that of the Bua ( Fogrcea Berteriana,
A, Gray) may be said to be universally inhaled with delight. The Bua blossoms in September and
October, and one of the mouths of the Fijian calendar is occasionally called the Vulai Bua, or Bua
month. The flowers, or rather corollas, are gathered after they have dropped on the ground, and
brought home in baskets. They are tubular, white, and fleshy, and are either strung into necklaces,
which retain their delicious and powerful perfume long,after they are dry, or they are placed while
still fresh in Cocoa-nut oil in order to impart scent to it. Sandal-wood and Bua flowers are often put
into the same vessel of oil. The abundance of the tree (which yields a hard, white wood), at Sandal-
wood bay, may have given rise to its native name “ Bua/’ a form of “ Pua,” by which the plant is
known in the Society Islands.
Another perfume largely employed in scenting oil is furnished by the Makila (. Parinarium laurinum ,
A. Gray), a tree about fifty feet high, supplying tough spars for canoes, and having oblong leathery
leaves, formerly used exclusively in thatching heathen temples, but now also for common dwelling
houses. The flowers are small and white, slightly tinged with purple, and the fruit has a rough,
woody outside, of a light brown colour, containing a large kernel, which possesses a scent much
esteemed by the Fijians, but in which we detect nothing remarkable either as regards strength or
beauty. The fruit of the Leba ( Eugenia \Jambosa\ neurocalyx, A. Gray), a middle sized Myrtaceous
tree, with large flowers, considering the natural order to which it belongs, has much more to recom-
mend it to the notice of Europeans. It ripens about September, and its odour gravitates between
that of the apple and the melon. It is roundish, strongly ribbed, often three inches long, and eight
inches in circumference, of a dark purple, and contains five large seeds, of an angular shape, and a
beautiful crimson colour. The natives wear a whole fruit, or part of it, suspended around their necks,
and also use it for scenting cocoa-nut oil.
IX. —Materials for Clothing.
Materials for the scanty clothing worn by the Fijians are readily supplied by a variety of plants,
foremost amongst which stands the Malo, or Paper Mulberry ( Broussonetia pnpyrifern , Vent.), a
middle-sized tree, with rough trilobed leaves, cultivated all over Fiji. On the coast the native cloth
(tapa*) and plaitings are gradually displaced by cheap cotton prints introduced by foreign traders,
a fathom of which is considered enough for the entire dress of a man. In the inland heathen districts
the boys are allowed to run naked until they have attained the age of puberty, and publicly assumed
what may be termed their toga virilis. A narrow strip of native cloth (malo) passing between the
legs, and fastened either to a waistband of string or to a girdle formed by one of the ends of the cloth
itself. The length of the tapa hanging down in front denotes the rank of the wearer, the lower
classes not having it longer than is absolutely necessary for the purposes of securing it to the waist-
band, whilst the chiefs let it dangle on the ground, and when incommoded by it in walking playfully
Swing it over their shoulder. In the christianized districts of the coast a piece of tapa at least two
} r ards long and one yard broad is worn around the loins, and distinguished persons envelope their
body in pieces many yards long, and allow long trains to drag after them on the ground. A fine kind
of tapa (sala) is worn in the shape of a turban by those who still adhere to the old custom of letting
their hair grow long. From a laudable desire to promote cleanliness the missionaries have pro-
nounced against long hair and the use of the sala, but in doing so they deprived the natives of a
capital protection against the sun ; the immense mass of hair curled and frizzled to make it stand off
many inches, and covered by a piece of snow-white tapa must have kept the head cool. Now most of
the Christian natives move about without any covering for their head, and with their hair cut short,
which in a tropical climate cannot improve their intellect. The abolition of the old custom might
have proved more beneficial if immediately followed by the institution of some kind of head-dress.
The manufacture of native cloth is entirely left to women of places not inhabited by great chiefs,
probably because the noise caused by the beating out of the cloth is disliked by courtly ears. The
rhythm of tapa-beating imparts therefore as thoroughly a country air to a place in Fiji as that of
thrashing corn does to our European villages. The masi tree is propagated by cuttings, and grown
about two or three feet apart, in plantations resembling nurseries. For the purposes of making cloth
it is not allowed to become higher than about 12 feet, and about 1 inch in diameter. The bark, taken
off 1 in as long strips as possible, is steeped in water, scraped with a conch shell, and then macerated.
In this state it is placed on a log of wood and beaten with a mallet (ike), three sides of which have
longitudinal grooves, and the fourth a plain surface. Two strips of tapa are always beaten into one
with the view of strengthening the fibres, an operation increasing the width of the cloth at the
expense of its length. It is easy to join pieces together, the sap of the fibres being slightly
glutinous; and in order to make the junction as perfect and durable as possible a paste is prepared
of arrowroot, or a glue of the viscid berries of the Ton ( Oordia Sprengelii, De Cand.). I have seen
pieces of native cloth intended for mosquito curtains and screens, which were nearly 100 feet long
and 30 feet broad. Most of the cloth worn is pure white, being bleached in the sun as we bleach
linen ; but printed tapa is also, though not so frequently, seen, whilst that used for curtains is always
coloured. Their mode of printing is by means of raised forms of little strips of bamboo, on which
the colour is placed, and the tops pressed; indeed the fundamental principle is the same as that of
our printing books, the little strips of bamboo standing in the place of our types. The chief dye
employed is the juice of the Lauci ( Aleurites triloba , Forst.), and the pattern, though rudely executed,
* Tapa = Kapa of some dialects, I take to mean originally “ coveringatap, the name for thatch in the Indian Archipelago
doubtless belongs to the same set of words.
H 4
Fiji Islands


iji Islands’, often displays much taste. It Is stated that in times when the malo plantations have failed to produce
•’— a sufficient quantity of raw material, recourse is had to the Kaka (Ficus sp. ... ); but this is
only a make-shift, whilst the bark of the bread-fruit tree seems never to be resorted to as in other
parts of Polynesia.
When the men have no native cloth of any sort, they make a dress by splitting a cocoa-nut
or plantain-leaf in halves, and tying one of these parts around their waist. There is an old monkish
tradition that our first parents when adopting dress in the garden of Eden availed themselves of the
leaf of the plantain, hence called Musa paradisaica; and it must be owned that a Fijian, having
assumed this dress presents a most primitive appearance, the more striking because his movements
are entirely free from any approach to indecency, which an European who has never lived amongst
races <roing naked would naturally fancy associated with so scanty a garb. It is, perhaps, the most
simple form of an article of dress much worn in Fiji, and called “ liku,” consisting of a number of
fringes simply attached to a waistband. The length of these fringes is subject to certain rules of
custom. Men can wear them very long; but women, particularly young unmarried ones, must not
have them longer than two or three inches. Liku is made of many different plants, and might be
classified into temporary and permanent. Amongst the temporary likus ought to be placed those
made of plantain and cocoa-nut leaves, or those made of a climbing plant, the Vono ( Alyxia hracteolosa,
Rich., A. Gray), the stem of which is partially broken to give it greater flexibility, and also to
bring out an agreeable smell, peculiar to the Vono, on account of which it is also worn as garlands
around the head. Amongst the permanent likus is one termed “ sausauwai,” the long black fringes
of which playing on the white tapa, or on the fine limbs of the natives, has a most graceful appear-
ance. Both on account of the scarcity of the materials of which it is composed, and its being
unaffected by water, especially when greased with cocoa-nut oil, the sausauwai is highly valued by
fishermen, and all people living on the coast of Fiji; they will give twenty fathoms of white tapa,
and the Tonguese and Samoans as much as one pound sterling for a single one of these elegant articles
of dress. The fringes of which it is composed are of the thickness of a common wire, rather flexible,
and occasionally ornamented with small beads. Placed under the microscope the vegetable origin of
these fringes becomes at once evident, and they are found to be composed of glossy black joints, of
unequal length. None, save a few natives, had ever seen the plant producing them, and it was the
general belief of all the foreign residents in Fiji that they were the roots of a certain tree, until
Mr. Pritchard and myself made the subject a point of special inquiry during our first visit to Navua.
A few words from Chief Kuruduaclua, and two large knives held out by us as a reward, induced two
young men to procure a quantity of this singular production sufficient for scientific examination,
proving it to be, not the root of a tree, as had been believed, but the entire body of a species
of Rhizomorpha. The plant is vernacularly termed “Wa loa,” literally, black creeper, from wa, creeper,
and loa, black, a name occasionally applied to the liku make of it also. The Wa loa is confined to
the south-western parts of Yiti Levu, where it grows in swamps on decaying wood fallen to the
ground ; the threads of which it consists are several feet long, leafless, not much branched, and they
are furnished here and there with little shield-like expansions, acting as suckers, by means of
which the plant is attached to the dead wood upon which it grows. The threads, having been
beaten between stones in order to free them from impurities adhering, are buried for two or three
days in muddy places, and are then ready for plaiting them to the waistband.
The liku worn by the women, always speaking of those who have not as yet adopted foreign
calico, are principally made of the fibres of the different species of vau, the Yau dina ( Paritium
tiliaceum, Juss.), the Yau dra ( Paritium trienspis, Guill.), and the. Vau damudamu ( Paritium
purpurascens, Seem.). The bark of these trees is stripped offi steeped in water to render it soft and
pliable, and allow the fibres to separate. The fibres are either permitted to retain their original
whiteness, or they are dyed yellow, red, or black. The yellow colour is imparted with turmeric, the
black with mud, and the leaves of the tavola ( Terminnlia Catappa, Linn.), and the red with the bark of
the Kura ( Morinda citrifolia, Linn.), and that of the Tiri ( Gutliferce?). The liku worn by the common
women always consists of one row of fibres, all of the same colour, whilst those worn by ladies of rank
are often composed of two or three row's or layers—flounces I suppose would be the proper term —
every one of which exhibits a different colour.
X.— Materials for Mats and Baskets.
Mats, with which the floors of houses and sleeping places are thickly covered, are made of two
kinds of screw pines: the coarsest of the leaves of the Balawa {Pandanus odoraiissimus , Linn.), the
finest of those of the Voivoi ( Pandanus caricosus, Humph.). The Balawa, or Yadra, as it is termed
in some districts, is a tree twenty-five feet high, indicative of poor soil, growing hi exposed positions,
and being one of the first plants appearing on newly-formed islands. Its singular habit lias often
been dwelt upon. The smooth white branches, with their dense heads ol foliage, not inaptly compared
to the arms of a huge candelabra, the strong terial roots, covered with minute spines, and serving as
so many props, the curious corkscrew-like arrangement of the leaves, the leathery, sword-shaped
leaves themselves, and their spiny edges, the long spikes of male, and the shorter branches of female
flowers, their delicious perfume strongly recalling to mind that of the Vegetable Ivory of South
America; finally, the bright orange-coloured drupes, formed into larger heads of fruit, to say nothing
of their insipid taste, appreciated only by natives, are all so essentially different from what an European
traveller is accustomed to in his own country, that his attention is involuntarily arrested, and he hardly
ever fails to record it. The Voivoi, or Kiekie ( Pandanus caricosus, Humph.), is a stemless species,
with leaves ten to twelve feet long, which delights in swampy localities of the forests, and is occasionally
cultivated to meet the demand. Fans, baskets, and the finest mats—even those on which newly-born
babes, nakedas they are for more than a twelvemonth, are carried—are made of its bleached leaves.


Occasionally neat patterns are worked in, by introducing portions of the material dyed black, whilst the Fui Islands.
borders of highly-finished mats are tastefully ornamented with the bright red feathers of the Kula, a par- —“
roquet not found in the groups eastward of Fiji, and, therefore, highly esteemed by the inhabitants of
those islands. The bleached leaves are also employed for decorating the body, being tied by the men
over their head-dress (sala), around their breast, upper part of the arms, wrists, and above the calves.
The custom is not restricted to any particular class, but freely practised by all, serfs, commoners, and
chiefs, when they go to war or wish to look smart. The bright-coloured leaves of the Ti kula {Dra-
caena ferrea , Linn., var.), and a number of flowers, ferns, and leaves, are used by both sexes as wreaths,
garlands, necklaces, and similar ways, evidently showing their great love for flowers and graceful
foliage. A certain kind of mats, worn as articles of clothing, are called “ Kuta,” from a species of
sedge ( Elceocharis articulata , Nees ab Eseub.), supplying materials for them, growing in swamps to the
heioht of six feet, or more, and going either by that name or by that of Ya. Baskets are also made
of the leaves of the cocoa-nut palm, and the stem of the Flagellaria Indica , Linn., split up in narrow
strips; those of the former are the most easy to make, but they do not last long, whilst those of the
latter are the neatest and last the longest.
Xl.—Fibres used for Cordage.
Fibre used for cordage is derived from three species of Vau {Paritium tiliaceum, P. tricuspis, et
P. purpurascens), the cocoa-nut palm, the Yaka, or Wayaka {Pachyrhizus angulatus , Rich.), the Kala-
kalauaisoni {Hibiscus diversifolius, Jacq.), and the Sinu Mataiavi ( Wiksircemia Indica, Meyer). Plaiting
cocoa-nut fibre into “ sinnet,” afterwards to be made into rope, or simply used for binding material,
and as such a good article of exchange in the group, is a favourite occupation of the men, even of
hio-h chiefs, when sitting in bures and discussing politics or other topics of the day. According to
Mr. Pritchard, none of the Polynesians produce so great a quantity of this article as the Fijians,
though the Tonguese excel them in colouring it. I have seen—he continues in the memorandum
from°which I quote —a ball of “ sinnet ” six feet high, and four feet in diameter. Some heathen
temples, Bure ni Kalou, used to be entirely composed of such plaiting, and their completion must have
been a task extending over a considerable period, since a model of them, four feet high, ordered for
the Museum of Economic Botany at Kew, could not be finished in Jess time than six weeks, and at a
cost of The fibre of the Yaka or Wayaka {Pachyrhizus angulatus , Rich. = Dolichos bulhosus,
Linn.) is principally sought for fishing nets, the floats of which are the square fruits of the Vutu
rakaraka {Barringtonia speciosa, Linn.), The Sinu Mataiavi {Wiksiroemia Indica, Meyer), a sea-side
shrub, perhaps identical with the Sinu ni vanua, serves the same purpose, its bark, like that of other
Thymeleoe , containing a readily-available fibre—a fact also known, according to Mr. Pritchard, in the
Samoan islands, where the plant is termed “ Mali.” Only a limited use is made of the fibre of the
Kalakalauaisoni {Hibiscus [Abelmoschns] diver sifolius, Jacq.), a plant abounding in swamps all over Fiji.
Xll.— Cotton.
Cotton was one of the subjects to which attention was principally directed by my instructions, and
I have endeavoured to collect every information which might prove useful in forming a correct
estimate of the Fijis as a cotton-growing country. If I understand the nature and requirements of
cotton aright, the Fijis seem to be as if made for it. In the whole group there is scarcely a rod of ground
that might not be cultivated, or that has not at one time or other produced a crop of some kind, the
soil being of an average amount of fertility, and in some parts rich in the extreme. Cotton requires
a o-ently undulating surface, slopes of hills rather than flat lands. The whole country, the deltas of
the o-reat rivers excepted, is a succession of hills and dales, covered on the weather side with a
luxuriant herbage or dense forest, on the lee side with grass and isolated screw-pines, more immediately
available for planting. Cotton wants sea air. What country would answer to this better than a
group of more than two hundred islands surrounded by the ocean, as a convenient highway to even
small boats and canoes, since the unchecked force of the winds and waves is broken by the natural
breakwater presented by the reef which encircles nearly the whole ? Cotton requires further to be
fanned by gentle breezes when growing, and rather a comparatively low temperature ; there is scarcely
ever a calm; either the north-east or the south-east trade wind blowing over the islands, keeps up a
constant current, and the thermometer for months vacillates between 62° and 80° Fahrenheit, and
never rises to the height attained in some parts of tropical Asia, Africa, or America. In fine, every
condition required to favour the growth of this important production seems to be provided, and it is
hardly possible to add anything more in order to impress those best qualified to judge with a better
idea of Fiji as a first-rate cotton growing country.
Cotton is not indigenous in any part of the group. Independent of its introduction being alluded
to in various works as having taken place in the early part of this century, there is no proper
vernacular name for it. In all such cases the Fijian language borrows that of an indigenous plant
resembling the introduced one as closely as possible; thus the Cassava root received the name of
« Yabia ni papalagi ** (i.e., foreign arrow-root), the Bird’s-eye pepper that of “ Boro ni papalagi ”
(i.e., foreign night-shade), and the" Pine-apple that of “ Balawa ni papalagi” (i.e., foreign Screw-pine).
By the same rule cotton became known as “ Vauvau ni papalagi” (i.e., foreign Vauvau), from its close
resemblance to the “ Bele ” or “ Vauvau” {Hibiscus [ Abelmoschus ], Manihot, Linn.), a cultivated
species, the leaves of which are 'eaten as a potherb. It is true that when foreigners speak about
« Vauvau,” the natives of the coast know cotton is meant, but in districts where cotton has not yet
penetrated, as for instance at Namosi, Viti Levu, one is sure to get the edible Hibiscus, if Vauvau,
without adding “ ni papalagi ” (foreign) be asked for.
Yet, notwithstanding cotton being undoubtedly an introduced plant, and although until lately no
attention whatever was paid to its cultivation, it has spread over all the littoral parts of Fiji, and
T


ui Islands, become in some localities perfectly naturalized. Six different kinds have come to my knowledge, all
of which are shrubby, and produce flowers and fruits throughout the whole year, though the greater
number of pods arrive at maturity during the dry season, from June to September. There are two
kinds of kidney cotton, one (Gossypium Peruvianum , Cav.) having naked, the other (Gossypium sp.
nov. 'i) mossy seeds. A third kind {Gossypium Barbadense, Linn.) has disconnected naked seeds; a
fourth ( Gossypium arboreum, Linn.) disconnected seeds covered with a greenish moss and long staple;
a fifth is probably an inferior variety of the preceding, and only differs from it in the length of the
staple, and a sixth (Gossypium religiosum, Linn.) being the Nankin cotton, valuable only in certain
foreign markets. The four first-mentioned kinds, especially Gossypium Peruvianum and G. arboreum,
are the most frequent in the group; the fifth seems confined to Laselase, some miles from Namosi,
and the sixth (Nankin) has been met with on Kadavu by Mr. Pritchard, and on the Rakiraki coast
by Colonel Smylhe.
There is scarcely any difference in the look of the four first-mentioned kinds which a person not
botanically trained could readily detect. Left to themselves, and never subjected to the pruning
knife, these cotton shrubs become as high as a tall man can reach, and each shrub spreads over a
surface of about 14 feet square. I have had no opportunity of counting the number of pods produced
throughout the year by a single specimen, but that found in July was on an average 700 per plant.
Twenty pods of clean cotton weighed one ounce; thus each plant would yield two pounds three ounces;
allowing 14 feet square for each plant, an acre would hold 222 plants, yielding at the rate of two pounds
three ounces per individual plant, 485 lbs, 10 oz. Even fixing the price of sorts worth more than
12 d. at Manchester, as low as Qd. per pound on the spot, an acre would realize 12/. 2s. 9|d. When it
is borne in mind that Fijian cotton brings forth ripe fruit without intermission throughout the
year, but that this calculation is based solely upon the number of pods found at one time only , and that
the pods were gathered from plants upon which no attention whatsoever had been bestowed, the result will
be still more striking; double, even treble the above quantity may safely be calculated upon as their
annual crop. When it is further remembered that Fijian cotton is not an annual, and that the plants
will continue to yield for several years without requiring any other attention than keeping them free
from weedy creepers and pruning them periodically, the encouragement held out to cultivators will be
pronounced very great.
Until the excellence of Fijian cotton had been acknowledged at Manchester, and the mercantile
value of the different sorts been ascertained to be 7 d. to Bd., 9 d., 11c?. and even 12c?. to per
pound respectively, no attempt had been made to cultivate the plant. It was almost entirely left to
itself, and perhaps only here and there disseminated by the natives in order to furnish materials for
wicks. But when in November 1859, Mr. Pritchard returned from England to Fiji with the valuation
printed in the “ Manchester Cotton Supply Reporter ’’ for March 1859, he induced the most influential
chiefs to give orders for planting it, and the Wesleyan missionaries, without any exception, zealously
aided in these endeavours by recommending the cultivation both personally and through the agency
Oi their native teachers. Thus cotton has been thickly spread over all the christianized districts, and
imparts to them a characteristic feature, occasionally very striking in places having a mixed religious
population. In Navua, for instance, that part of the town inhabited by Christians is full of cotton,
whilst that inhabited by the heathens destitute of it.
To guard against misconceptions, it must be stated that cotton has as yet been cultivated by the
natives in their peculiar style. Those who would look for broad square acres covered with any given
produce will be seriously disappointed. The Fijian cultivator has such an abundance of good land
at his command, and holds such stringent notions about the fallows to be preserved, that he selects
patches here and there only, which, after an annual or biennial occupation, are deserted for others
cleared for the purpose. When cotton was recommended to him, he followed his old cherished system,
and the isolated patches now beheld are the result. These patches are of various sizes, but 1 have
not seen any containing more than fifty plants. In Namara and other districts subject to Bau,
isolated specimens, often as many as twenty, are met with on the margins of every taro, banana, and
yam plantation. On the small island occupied by Bau, the Fijian capital, Mr. Storck, my assistant,
counted four hundred shrubs growing in the streets and squares. The number of plants thus dis-
persed all over Fiji must be considerable, though nobody could venture to give any approximate
estimate of them; and their aggregate produce, if attentively collected, would doubtless amount
to a quality scarcely expected from such sources. Mr. Pritchard, in order to open the trade, pledged
himself, before leaving England, to his Manchester friends to send home 1,000 pounds of cleaned
cotton within twelve months’ time, and he experienced no difficulty in obtaining from Kadavu,
Nadroga, and Bau an amount exceeding that promised before the time fixed for its despatch. Now,
that a demand has been established, there will be a marked increase in the crops of the natives, when
the numerous young plants, added to the old stock at Mr; Pritchard’s instigation, begin to produce
their harvest.
On leaving England in February, 1860, the “Manchester Cotton Supply Association,” through
their able secretary, Mr. Haywood, furnished me with a large quantity of New Orleans and Sea
Island cotton seeds, together with printed instructions for their cultivation. Distributing a fair share
of ihe seeds and papers amongst white settlers who I felt persuaded would make use of them, I
myself was enabled to establish a small cotton plantation on the Somosomo estate of Captain Wilson
and M. Joubert of Sydney, in the island of Taviuni. None of the seeds of the Sea Island sort
possessed any germinating power, but those of the New Orleans cotton were very good, and readily
grew. Sown on the 9th of June, they began to yield ripe pods within three months, and I was thus
enabled to take home a crop from the very seeds I brought out, though my absence from England
only amounted to thirteen months altogether. This may truly be termed growing cotton by steam.
When I paid a second visit to Somosomo, on the 18th of October, my plants were from four to seven


feet hio-li full of ripe pods and flowers, which in the morning were of a pale yellow, but towards evening Fm smroe
turned pink. A Rotuma native, whom I had begged to look after the plantation, said that the field
only required weeding once; after that the cotton plants grew so rapid that they kept down the weeds,
and he had no further trouble. Simultaneously Dr. Brower, United States Vice-consul, had suc-
ceeded in raising New Orleans cotton on his estate in the island of \\akaya, twelve pods of which
weighed an ounce, whilst the seeds distributed by me amongst various people had evidently not
fallen on barren soil. Of course my plantation could only be a small one, but nevertheless it pioved
c 0 far beneficial that it convinced those white settlers who had lately repaired to the group, what
quick returns cotton would yield, and some of them resolutely set about establishing plantations.
The last mail brought the news that some of them had as many as fifteen acres planted. Mr. fetorc
mv assistant, who went from Sydney with me to Fiji’s, made up his mind to remain behind when I
came away, in order to devote his energies to cotton growing. Mr. Pritchard supplying him with
fifty acres of land, he commenced a plantation on the island of Motunki, in Port Kinnand, setting
about to clear, fifty acres, and if the experiment should prove remunerative, as many more will
speedily be brought under cultivation. The fact that cotton will grow, and will grow well, being
established, the success of this and similar attempts will chiefly depend upon the supply of manual
labour Those best acquainted with the condition of the group, and the character of its people,
confidently look forward to a steady supply of it. In Rewa, Ovalau, and other districts longest
frequented by whites, the natives go round asking for employment. This is quite an innovation, and
shows that the Fijian is becoming gradually accustomed to labour for fixed wages, and when the
chiefs shall have either voluntarily relinquished, or been compelled to give up their claim to all the
property accumulated by the Wr classes, a favourable result will be the immediate consequence,
and a fresh impulse be imparted to all branches of industry. Let the common people once be assured
that nobody can legally take their fair earnings away from them, and that the little comforts with
which they have managed to surround themselves may be openly displayed, without the danger of
being coveted by the chiefs and their favourites, and they will doubtless be eager to engage in any
work* that does not require any great mechanical skill or violent exertion, and at the same time will
yield them reasonable returns.
XIII. —Timber.
Timber of excellent quality , both for house and ship-building purposes, abounds on the large 4"
•/ , • • . 1 1 1 . .. A .mfwftlinn nnlAmne TllO flTYiriOT* frPPC!
islands and a trade in it has already sprung up with the Australian colonies. The timber trees
belong principally to the natural orders, Conifer(2, Casuarinecc , Guttiferce , Myrtacei e, and Leguminosce.
The most valuable woods are those produced by the Dakua, Yesi, Dilo, and Yaivai, and a list of
nearly one hundred useful kinds might be drawn up. c
The Dakua or Fijian Kowrie-pine (fDammara Vitiensis , Seem.) is a noble addition to a genus ot
Conifers of which several species are known, scattered over New Zealand, Southern Queensland, New
Caledonia, Aneitum, the Moluccas, Java, and Borneo. Dakuas have been found in Yanua Levu,
Viti Levu Ovalau, and Kadava, but European sawyers have already made such sad havoc amongst
them that it is only in the two former islands where they are still abundant. vYilkes alludes to a
fine one near Levuka, Ovalau, which measured five feet in diameter, or 15 feet in circumference.
Those which I saw at Korovono, Yanua Levu, displayed greater dimensions, the largest stem being,
at four feet above the base, 18 feet; and another, also four feet above the base, 16 feet in circum-
ference. Milne (Hook. Jour, of Bot. and Kew Misc. IX., p. 113) gives from 18 to 27 feet circum-
ference as the maximum, but he does not state at what height above the base his measuicment was
taken Some of the trees at Korovono were from 80 to 100 feet high, and up to a height of 60 feet
free from branches. The bark was whitish on the outer, red on the inner surface, peeling off 1 like
that of Australian gum-trees. Old specimens did not have regular whorls of branches, as is the case
with most Conifers. The wood of the Korovono tree was white, but there is said to be also a
red-wooded kind, which may perhaps prove distinct from this plant. Dakua is used for masts, booms,
and spars, for flooring houses, and for all those purposes for which deal is usually employed by us.
Spars from 60 to 80 feet long, and two to three feet thick, were seen at laguru, Yiti Levu. Ihe
Dakua is not gregarious, but found always isolated in forests of a mixed composition. Like other
Kowrie-pines, the Fijian exudes a gum or rather resin, called “ Makadre. Lumps weighing 50 lbs.
have occasionally been found under old rotten stumps, and a good deal might be collected in districts
whence these trees have disappeared, if the natives could be made acquainted with the peculiar way
in which the New Zealanders sound the ground for their kowne-gum. There has never been any
foreio-n trade in this article, because the Europeans in Fiji, ignorant of its average market value, re-
acted the offer of the natives to collect it. Captain Dunn, an American, is said to have taken away
half a ton of it, but it has not transpired whether he washable to dispose of it to advantage. New
Zealand kowrie has for years past fetched at public sales in London from 14s. to 16s. the cwt. In
consequence, however, of the rebellion in New Zealand, it gradually advanced in 1860 to from ~os.
to 28s • in the spring of 1861 it was quoted at from 18s. to 205., and it will no doubt ultimately be
sold at its former prices. The Fijians principally use the gum for glazing pots (vakamakadre-
taka),—the substance being put on while the vessels are yet very hot,—and for burning. The older
it gets the better it burns. At first it is of a light whitish colour, but becomes more and more
that of amber, as well as transparent with age. The natives, fearing demons, ghosts, and other
creations of their wild fancy, are always anxious to be housed before sunset, and when compelled to
venture out in the dark or when benighted, set up loud yells to drive away evil spirits, and light a
torch made either of the resin of the Dakua (bound round with rushes'), the stem ot the Wavuwavu
( Erigeron albidum, A. Gray.), the trunk of the bamboo, or the flower stalks ot the cocoa-nut palm. In
the smaller islands and certain coast districts of Yanua Levu and Viti Levu, lamps ted with cocoa-nut


IsLAjofl. oil are common, but in the interior of the principal islands, where that oil is an imported article diffi-
cult to obtain, the resin of the Dakua is burnt, either in the form of pastiles about two inches Jong,
or in ribbon-like strips surrounded by slips of wood, so as to constitute a kind of candle. When
burnt in the fii st-mentioned way the resin is protected by crocks from running about and igniting
the pandanus matting or other inflammable materials of the houses. A dye obtained from the smoke
of the burning resin is used for the hair and for painting native cloth black, or mixed with a certain
red eai th to make a brown pigment. Amongst the lower classes it is employed for tatooing women
instead of the juice of the Lauci fruit {Aleurites triloba , Forst.), resorted to by ladies of rank, & the skin
being punctured with thorns of the shaddock tree.
Besides the Dammara Vitiensis, Seem., there are five other cone-bearing trees, all of which yield
valuable timbei, viz. the Kau solo, the Gagali, the Kuasi, the Kan tabua, and the Leweninini, The
Kau solo represents a new genus peculiar to Fiji, and growing abundantly in the Southern parts of
Viti Levu, where it attains from sixty to eighty feet in height and nine feet in girth. It has the
appearance of the Yew, dark, lanceolate leaves, about one inch long, and solitary nuts at the ends of
the branches. The Gagali {Podocarpus polystachya , R. Br.) is common on the banks of rivers. It is
never seen higher than thirty or forty feet, and on the Navua I noticed that during the season when
the river overflows its banks, the trees must often be under water, as dead twigs, leaves, and herbage
carried down by the tide were lodged in their crowns. The wood is peculiarly elastic, and would
probably do well for keels of boats and schooners. The Kuasi ( Podocarpus data , R. Br.) is confined
to the summits of mountains, and forms the chief vegetation of Yoma peak, Viti Levu. Its wood is
used for outriggers of canoes. Another cone-bearing tree is the graceful Kau tabua {Podocarpus
cupressina, R. Br.), common in the mountains of the Indian Archipelago, and in Aneitum. Milne
found it in Viti Levu. Its native name is derived from the wood (Kau), resembling in its yellowish
tinge a well-oiled whale’s tooth (tabua), formerly esteemed the most precious article in the group.
The tree is from fifty to eighty feet high, with spreading pendulous branches presenting a beautiful
appearance. The Leweninini {Dacrydivm datum, Wall.) is found in mixed forests from the sea-shore
to the highest peaks. The branches are very delicate, and the youngest hang down in graceful
fringes, clad with needle-shaped leaves of about half an inch in length. The slightest breeze—and
there is scarcely ever a calm in Fiji—causes the branchlets and foliage to tremble (ninini), somewhat
like our aspen; hence the natives of Ovalau have given it the name of “ Leweninini.” When coming
from Somosomo to Levuka, the crew on board the ‘‘Paul Jones” gave me an account of a moving
plant, which they assured me grew in the mountains of Ovalau, and which excited my curiosity in an
eminent degree. No sooner had I landed than two boys were despatched for specimens of the
Leweninini; but instead of bringing this Dacrydium, they brought a club-moss, common in the tropics
{Lycopodium cernuum , Linn.), and which I found was termed Leweninini sa, on account of a certain
resemblance to it. Macdonald (Jour. Geog. Soc. Lond. xxvii., p. 247) fancied this Dacrydium
identical with the New Zealand Dacrydium cupressinum , Sol.; but this is a mistake. He also expresses
his belief that the wood called Dakua salusalu is the produce of this tree. My inquiries respecting
the last-mentioned point have not been attended with success. Nearly every native consulted pointed
out a different tree as the source of that timber, but in no instance the Dacrydium in question,
Mr. Pritchard also took some pains about it, as the subject was brought before him in his consular
capacity. A resident in Ovalau had made a contract with a man for a supply of Dakua salusalu.
When the timber was delivered, cut on Vanua Levu, it was found to be that of the common Dakua
(Dammara), quite unlike the wood going by the name of Dakua salusalu in Ovalau. Payment being
refused, the consul’s interference was invoked. There being no scientific work to which an appeal
could be made, Mr. Pritchard solved the difficulty by deciding that, although the wood tendered
might bear or bore the name of Dakua salusalu in Vanua Levu, it was not the one recognised by
that name in Ovalau; and whereas the contract had been entered into in the latter island, only such
wood as was called “ Dakua salusalu ” there need be paid for.
The Nokonoko {Casuarina equisetifolia, Forst.) produces a wood much used for clubs and all purposes
in which hardness and heaviness is an object. It is most frequent in the eastern parts of the group,
its prevalence indicating a poor soil. Its sombre aspect and the wailing sound caused by the playing
of the breezes in the branches forcibly appeal to the poetical sentiment; hence the Nokonoko is
planted in masses about tombs, and a fine grove of that kind is seen at Lakeba, surrounding the
burial place of a departed chief. The young branches are drooping, imparting to the tree a
peculiarly graceful look, and forming a beautiful contrast to the erect and rigid growth of its
congener, the Velao {Casuarina nodiflora, Forst), which is occasionally met with in its company, and
also yields a useful timber. Whilst the Nokonoko assumes a more or less pyramidal form, is scarcely
ever higher than forty feet, and has a greyish hue, the Yelao is often sixty feet and even more in
height and three feet in diameter, and has a green mossy looking crown, which, by its flatness on the
top, reminds one of the stone pine so characteristic of the Italian landscape. The Yelao almost
invariably grows in good soil, generally in mixed forests, whilst the Nokonoko shuns, as it were, a
close contact with other kinds of trees, and it scarcely ever associates with any save the Balawa or
Screw-pine { Pandanus odoratissimus, Linn.)
The Dilo ( Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn.), a sea-side tree, grows to a large size, and its wood is
used for canoes and boats. Several of the little coasting vessels, cruizing about Fiji, are almost
exclusively built of it and the Yaivai {Serianfhes Vitiensis, Gray); their masts being supplied by
the Dakua {Dammara Vitiensis, Seem.). Dilo wood has, besides, a beautiful grain and takes a fine
polish. Allied to the Dilo is the Damanu {Calophyllum Burmanni, Wight), a large inland forest tree,
also furnishing materials for boats, canoes, masts, and all kinds of carpentry. The Tivi {Terminalia
Moluccana, Lam.), a littoral tree, and its congener, the Tavola ( Terminalia Catappa, Linn.) add their
share to the Fijian woods. That of the Tavola is made into drums called “ Lali,” the beating of


which is resorted to when distinguished guests arrive, on festive occasions or to call the Christians to Fiji Islands.
divine service; and it is a curious coincidence, but certainly nothing more save a coincidence, that
the ancient Egyptian term for rejoicing was “ lali,” as in the Arabian song of “ Doosya-lel-lee” These
drums are beaten with two short and thick pieces of wood, and the sound produced can be heard within
a circle of several miles. Great praise is bestowed on the Mulomulo { Thespesia populnea, Corn), a
tree common on the sea-beaches of the Eastern hemisphere, on account of the almost indestructible
nature of its wood whilst under water. When fully developed it is about fifty feet high, and the stem
from one to two feet in diameter, bearing heart-shaped leaves and flowers somewhat resembling those
of the hollyhock, but changing their colour as the day advances, —a peculiarity share in
common with those of several other Malvaceous plants. Its thick foliage renders it suitable
avenues, and I have seen it planted for the sake of its shade both in Ceylon and the Hawaiian
islands. The centre of old stems generally decays in the way our European elms do, and the wood
towards that part presents a deep claret colour. The Mamakara ( Kleinhovia hospita, Linn.) and the
Marasa [Storckiella Vitiensis, Seem., so called in honour of my able assistant in the botanical explora-
tion of Fiji, Mr. Jacob Storck) should not be omitted in a list of timbers. The Mamakara is from
forty to fifty feet high, and rather a social tree, indicating its presence during the flowering season by
its numerous and large panicles of pink blossoms. The Marasa, first discovered on the southern side
of Ovalau by Mr. Storck, is a noble object, attaining 80 feet or more in height, nine feet in girth,
having a remarkably straight stem, a dense, dark green foliage, pinnate leaves, flowers of a bright
yellow colour, arrayed in terminal panicles, at first sight easily mistaken for those of a Cassia , and
a curious cultriform fruit (legumen). A hard and durable timber is produced by the Sagali
{Lumnitzera coccinea, Wight et Arn.), a tree with blackish wood, glossy foliage and bright^scarlet
flowers, abounding in maritime swamps, as well as by another inmate of the same localities, the
Dogo or mangrove ( Rhizophora mucronata , Lam.) The sap of the latter has a blood red colour, much
employed by the natives, amongst whom it is almost as fashionable to dye their hair red as it was
amongst the ladies of ancient Rome, after their roving husbands and brothers had become acquainted
with the fair locks of the Teutonic race. When first put on, the sap is allowed to run freely over face
and neck, producing an effect much like that a crown of thorns is represented to do. On Nukubati,
on the Macuata coast of Vanua Levu, I saw it employed by potters for painting their crockery.
Just after the pots had been baked and were still quite hot, a mixture consisting of this fluid and the
sap of the Wakiwaki ( Hibiscus [Abelmoschus] moschatus, Linn.) was used for that purpose, the colour
of the paint remaining almost unchanged after the vessels had become cool and dry. The aerial
roots of the Dogo being very elastic, offer good materials for bows, of which the Fijians avail
themselves; whilst the fruit is made into bread (madrai) in times of scarcity.
The Vuo-a ( Metrosideros collina, A. Gray), a tree with glossy foliage and scarlet flowers, yields a hard
wood of good grain; and several other Myrtaceous plants, among them the Yasi dravu [Eugenia
rubescens, & A. Gray), are esteemed for. their durable timber. A sea-side tree of middle size, the
Tatakia ( Acacia \sPhyllodinece\ laurifolia, Willd.), has a hard wood, useful for axe-handles and smaller
pieces of carpentry. The Qumu ( Acacia Richei, A. Gray), another phyllodinous species, also yields
a hard wood, even more useful, as the tree is larger than the last mentioned, and supplies the paint
with which the heathen natives blacken their faces, when they dress for war or wish to look particularly
smart hence “ Qumu ” paint. The Yaivai ( Serianthes Vitiensis, A. Gray), often seen in company
with the Qumu, produces one of the most valued of all Fijian woods; but the Vesi [Afzeliabijuga,
A Gray), which in outward appearance is not unlike our beech ( Fagus sylvatica, Linn.), having the
white smooth bark, the colour, and somewhat the shape of the leaves of that familiar forest tree, is
held in the highest estimation. It is used for canoes, pillows, kava bowls, clubs, and a variety of
other purposes, and seems almost indestructible. One of the most common tree-ferns, the Balabala
( Alsophila excelsa, R. Br.), is much used for building purposes by the natives. Its trunks make
excellent posts, lasting an incredibly long time, and possessing moreover the advantage of being
almost fire-proof. After a house has been burnt down, these posts are almost the only trace that
remains; It is also customary to make the ridge pole of houses and temples of this tree-fern,
and to surround it with the Wa-Kalou (holy creeper), a species of that curious genus of climbing
ferns ( Lyqodictyon ), partially no doubt from some superstitious notions, but partially also to keep out
the wet J The trunks of the Balabala, cut into ornamental forms, are frequently observed around
tombs temples, churches, and bures (or strangers' houses), presenting a pretty effect. The little
sticks which the chiefs carry, stuck under their turban, and with which they scratch their heads, are
also made of Balabala. The young leaves are eaten in times of scarcity, while the soft scales
covering the footstalks, or more correctly speaking the stipes, of the fronds, are used for stuffing
pillows'and cushions by the white settlers, in preference to feathers, because they do not become so
heated and are a real luxury in a sultry tropical night. The Balabala is common all over the group,
especially on the weather side, and its trunk attains the height of about 25 feet and 8 or 10 inches
in thickness. The fronds form a magnificent crown of gigantic dimensions, rendering the plant a
noble feature in the landscape.
XlV. —Palms.
Palms play an important part in the domestic economy of the natives. The Fijians are the only
people who in their barbarous state had a collective term for the great natural order of palms, applying
that of “ Niu ” to all those inhabiting their islands, and adding specific names to distinguish the one
from the other, viz:— . .
Niu dina = Cocos nucifera , Linn. Niu sona = Sogo = Ccelococcus Vitiensis, VV end!.
Niu sawa = Areca ? exhorrhiza, Wendl. Niu mase = Sakiki = Viu = Pritchardia pacifica,
Niu niu = Cagicake = Ptychosperma Seem, et Wendl.
iiliferum, Wendl. Niu Balaka = Ptychosperma Seemanni, Wendl.
K 2-


tji Islands.
The word “Niu” is common to most Polynesian languages, often taking the form of “Nia” and
“ Niau;” the New Zealand “ Nikau/’ by which tbe Maoris designate their indigenous palm (Areca
sapida, Sol.) does belong, and perhaps even “ Nipa/ 5 the Philippine name of Nipa fruticans, may belong,
to the same group of words. We farther trace tbe Fijian “ Niu/ 5 or with the article “a” (a niu)
before it in the Anao, Anowe, Anau, and Nu, by which names a sugar yielding palm, the Arenga
saccharifera, is known in different parts of the Indian Archipelago. The existence of a collective term
for “palms 5 " never having been pointed out, the passage in John xii. 13, — “Took leaves of the palm
trees, 55 is rendered both in the Yiwa and the London edition of the Fijian Bible. “ Era sa kauta na
drau ni balabala/ s—literally 5 —literally “ Took leaves of the tree-fern, 55 for Balabala is a tree-fern (Alsophila excelsa,
R. Br.) ; “ Niu 55 is the term that ought to have been used, there being two kinds of real palms in Syria,
but no tree-ferns.
Only one of all the palms as yet discovered in Fiji is a fan-palm, the rest having pinnatifid leaves.
This is the Niu Masei, Sakiki or Viu, a new genus of Coryphinoe {[Pritchardia pacifica, Seem, et Wendl.),
differing from all described ones in several important characters. The blades of the leaves are made
into fans “Iri masei 55 or “ai Viu/ 5 which areonly allowed to be used by the chiefs, like those of the Talipot
(Corypha umbracul}fera,TA\\u.) formerly were in Ceylon. The common people have to content themselves
with fans made of Pandanus caricosus. Hence, though there is not a village of importance destitute of
the Sakiki, or, as it is termed in the Somosomo dialect which suppresses the letter “ k/’ Sail, there are
never more than one or two solitary specimens to be met with in anyplace, the demand for the leaves
being so limited, that they prove sufficient to supply it. The fans are from two to three feet across,
and have a border made of a flexible wood. They serve as a protection both from the sun and rain; in
the latter instance the fan is laid almost horizontally on the head, the water being allowed to run down
behind the back of the bearer. From this the Fijian language has borrowed its name for “ umbrella,”
a contrivance introduced by Europeans, terming it “ai viu/ 5 that being one of the names by which
fans are known. The leaves are never employed as thatch, though their texture would seem to
recommend them for that purpose ; the trunk, however, is occasionally used for ridge-beams. The
palm seldom attains more than 30 feet in height. Its trunk is smooth, straight, and unarmed, and
from 10 to 12 inches in diameter at the base. The crown has a globular shape, and is composed of
about 20 leaves, the petioles of which are unarmed and three feet four inches long, and densely covered
at the base with a mass of brown fibres. The blade of the leaves is rounded at the base, fan-shaped,
four feet seven inches long, three feet three inches broad, and when young, as is the petiole, densely
covered with whitish-brown down, which, however, as the leaf advances in age, gradually disappears.
From the axil of every leaf flowers are put forward, enveloped in several very fibrous flaccid spathes,
which rapidly decay, and have quite a ragge dappearance even before the flowers are open. The inflo-
rescence never breaks out below the crown, as it does in the Niu sawa ( Areca ? exhorriza , Wendl.). The
spadix is three feet long, stiff and very straight, bearing numerous minute hermaphrodite flowers, of a
brownish yellow colour. The fruit is perfectly round, about half-an inch in diameter; and, when quite
matured, it has exactly the colour of a black-heart cherry, the outside having a slight astringent taste.
The seeds germinate freely, and out of a handful thrown carelessly into a Wardian case in Fiji, more
than 30 had begun to grow when they reached New South Wales, where they were taken care of in the
Botanic Gardens, and will duly be distributed amongst the various establishments forming collections of
rare and beautiful palms—for such this species certainly is.
The Niu sawa ( Areca ? exhorrhiza, H. Wendl.) is a pinnatifid palm of considerable beauty, of which
there is a characteristic sketch, representing the vegetation of the Rewa river, in “ The Narrative of
the United States Exploring Expedition.” This palm is found all over Fiji, ascending mountains to
the height of 2,000 feet. Mr. Charles Moore, of Sydney, met with it in New Caledonia; and there is
reason to believe that it is also found in the Tongan group, where, as in Fiji, it is known by the name
of “ Niu sawa,” lam told; “ sawa,” signifying “ red 55 in Tonguese (and having no meaning in Fijian),
being doubtless given on account of the fruit which merges from bright orange into red. This palm
is remarkably straight, and often more than 60 feet high. The trunk is unarmed, smooth, and of a
whitish colour; it is a couple of feet above the base, from two to three feet in circumference. When
the tree gets old numerous aerial roots, all covered with spines begin to appear, forcibly reminding
one of the Iriartea exorrhiza in tropical America. The leaves are from 10 to 12 feet long, pinnatifid,
and the segments 4 feet long and 2 inches broad. Before expanding they are perfectly erect, looking
like a pole inserted into the heart of the foliage; their petiole, and midril, and veins are in that stage
densely covered with a very short brown tomentum, which more or less disappears as the foliage
advances in age. The flowers appear beloxo the crown of the leaves, growing out of the old wood; they
are enveloped in thick coriaceous boat-shaped spathes, which, unlike those of the Sakiki [Pritchardia
paci/ica , Seem, et Wendl,), are not subject to rapid decay. The spadix, on which the minute monoecious
green flowers are sitting, is much branched, and the branches are “yarring/ 5 forming large bunches,
which, when loaded with ripe fruit, are rather weighty. As many as eight of these bunches are often
seen on a tree at onetime in various stages of development. The fruit is ovate, acuminate, and about
the size of a walnut. At first green, it gradually changes into bright orange, and ultimately merges
into red at the base. The kernel has a slight astringent taste, and is eaten by the natives, especially
by the youngsters. The wood is used for spars. Fine specimens of the tree, brought by Mr.
Moore from New Caledonia, and by me from Fiji, are cultivated at the Sydney Botanic Garden.
The Niu Niu, or as it is more commonly termed, Cagicake ( Ptychosperma Jiliferum, Wendl.), is found
in the depth of the forest, where it shows its feathery crown above the surrounding trees, forming
wffiat St. Pierre poetically called “a forest above a forest,” and what the Fijians less skilfully wished
to express by the name of Cagicake, literally “above the wind. 55 Before I had seen the truit
the natives described it to me as being exactly the same shape and colour as that of the Niu sawa, but
only very much smaller in size; and in this they were pretty correct. Whilst the fruit of the


Niu sawa is as large as a walnut, that of the Cagicake is about the size of a coffee berry. The bunk-
is smooth, unarmed, and about eight inches in diameter, furnishing capital material for rafters, which
the natives declare are so durable that they last for ever. The leaves are pmnatind, 10 to L feet
long, and the lowermost segments being narrower, and at least three or four times as long as
the uppermost, hang down in long fringes. When in the dusk oi the evening I first encountered this
singular palm on the Macuata coast of Vanua Levu, it was this peculiarity that first attracted my
attention, otherwise 1 should have taken it to be a Niu sawa. It was pitch dark before the tree was
felled and dragged out of the thick jungle in which it grew, when passing my fingers over the surface
of the segments I felt a thick marginal and elevated vein, which at once assured me that an
undoubtedly new addition had been made to my collection. The disproportionate length ot the
lower segments, and the thick marginal vein pointed out, though they had been first discovered in the
absence of regular davlight, are amongst the most striking peculiarities, and ought to be seized upon
by those giving a popular description of this palm; the upper segments are four feet long and three
inches broad. The spadix, like that of the Niu sawa, is much branched, and may be said to
be a miniature imitation of it. The palm is found both in Vanua Levu and Ovalau, and doubtless
also in Viti Levu, for a palm which grows in the interior of the latter islands, and is termed about
Namosi “ Tankua,” must, from the description given to me by natives, be identical with the Cagicake.
According to the superstitious notion of the inland tribes of Viti Levu, the diminutive fruit of
the Tankua and those of the Boia {Hcliconia ? ), a plantain-like species, is the chief food
of the Veli, spirits half fairy, half gnome, with a fair complexion and diminutive body, ihe iankua
is their cocoa-nut, the Boia their plantain, and the \agoqagona {Macropiper puherulum, Benth.), their
kava plant, none of which mortals can destroy or injure without exposing themselves to the Ganger
of being severely punished by those dwellers in the forests, the Veli. _
The Balaka {Ptychosperma Seemanni, Wendl.) is a diminutive palm, growing as underwood m dense
forests. It was met with both in Vanua Levu, on the southern side, and on the mountains of l avaim.
The trunk is remarkably straight, ringed, and about an inch in diameter when fully developed. On
account of its strength and straightness it is used for spears by the natives, and would make good
walking sticks. The leaves are pinnatisect, about four feet long ; and the segments are eroso-dentate
at the point, like those of Caryota and JVallichia. The flowers appear below the few leaves, forming
the crown of this, the smallest of all Fijian palms. > . r _
In Wilkes’ “ Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition ” mention is made ot a Caryota as
o-rowino 1 in Fiji, and being used for rafters in building. “Its straight stem, with its duiable, hard,
“ and touodi qualities, render it well adapted for this purpose.” No one has subsequently met with
a true Caryota, one of the most remarkable genera; and I fancy that the botanists of v\ likes
expedition may have mistaken the eroso-dentate leaves of a timber-yielding palm, probably I tychosperma
Vitiensis , Wendl., abounding in some parts of Viti Levu, for those of a Caryota. It is about 40 feet
high, has a smooth trunk, pinnatifid leaves, and was seen by me at Nukubalavu. I have not been able
tolearn its native name. Two other species, the sago and cocoa-nut palms, already treated of above,
augment the list of Fijian palms to seven.
XV.—Sacred Groves.
Sacred groves and trees formed as prominent a feature in the paganism of the lijians as they did in
that of the old Indo-Germanic nations. Several celebrated groves were destroyed on the introduction
of Christianity, and a large one, near Bau, was felled the day after Chief Cakobau had embraced the
new faith, the native carpenters trembling when they had to lay the axe on objects so long sacied to
them by all the laws of “tabu.” A fine grove of this kind still exists in the Kewa district, near the
mission station of Mataisuva, and at a point of the coast termed “ Na vadra tolu, ’ (the three screw-
pines), probably from three specimens of Pandanus odoratissimus, still a common plant in that locality,
having stood there. Leaving the mission premises, and keeping along the sandy beach, an enormous
Yevuyevu (Hernandia Sonora, Linn.) presents itself, forming a complete bower, which leads to a curious
croup of vegetable giants. A venerable Vatu rakaraka {Barringtonia speciosa, Linn.) more than sixty
feet hio-h, has thrown out several huge branches, two of which form, in connexion with the stem,
bold arches. The large aerial roots of epiphytal fig trees are holding the monster in close embrace.
Several kinds of fern and climbing Aroideae and wax-flowers (Hoya’s) interlace the straggling masses,
and tend to increase the wildness of this fantastic scene. The dense foliage of surrounding V esi, Ivi,
and other fine trees, insures a constant gloom and sombreness to the place, and only through the
bower serving for an entrance, does the eye obtain a glance at the open sea, and pei chance the sight
of a passing canoe, with its large triangular sail. It was at this lonely spot, lar away bona human
habitations, where, in the depth of night, the heathen priest used to consult the gods whether it was to
be war or peace. If at dawn of day blood was found on the path, more blood was to be spilt, it no
such sign was discovered peace was the watchword. .
Besides these groves there were isolated trees which were held sacred, and in days of yore,
European sawyers came occasionally in unpleasant contact with the lijians, when, unknowingly,
they had cut them down for timber. Vesi {Afzelia hijuga, A. Gray) and Baka {Ficus . . . • •• )
seem to have been those principally selected. The Vesi furnishes the best timber of the islands, and
may, as the most valued tree, have been thought the fit residence of a god, as there is nothing in its
appearance that is extraordinary; our beech ( Fagus sylvatica, Linn.) most nearly resembling it in
look. The Baka is not famous for its timber, but its habit is as remarkable as that oi the banyan
tree of India, aerial roots propping up its branches, and forming a fantastic maze which no words can
describe. At first living as an epiphyte on other trees, it soon acquires such dimensions, that, as m
the fable of the goose with the golden eggs, it kills its supporter, and henceforward must draw its
nourishment from the soil. There are fine specimens of the Baka on the Isthmus of Kadavu, and on
K 3


IfILAKPg, an islet belonging to Mr. Hennings. The aerial roots of the latter formed a cabin, in which Mr.
Pritchard and myself, and all our boat’s crew, took shelter during a heavy tropical shower, and twenty
persons might have found room there. The crown of this tree was 152 feet in diameter, or 456 in
circumference. The horizontal branches, and large roots, issuing from all parts of the stem, and more
sparingly from the branches, rendered this tree a noble object, well calculated to inspire pleasure or
awe. The Rev. W. Moore lamented the destruction of one of these fine trees near llewa, committed
by a sick man, in hopes that it might be pleasing to the Christian God, and incline him to favour his
convalescence. These sacred groves and trees were not worshipped as gods, but as in the Odin
religion of our ancestors, looked upon as places where certain gods had taken up their abode. There
were sacred stones on the same footing, and one near Bau, the abode of a goddess, gave birth to a
little stone whenever any woman of rank was confined at the Fijian capital. The large stone has been
taken away at the introduction of Christianity to those parts, but the numerous little offsprings still
remain in the once sacred spot to testify to the reality of Fijian mythology.
The Tarawau {Dracontomelon sylvestre , Blume) does not seem to be regarded as a sacred tree in the
light of those just mentioned, but it is held to be the business of the dead to plant it, and believed to
grow not only in this world, but also in Naicobocobo, the Fijian nether world. Hence arose the
expression “Sa la’ki tei tarawau ki Naicobocobo,” literally, “He has gone to plant Tarawaus at
Naicobocobo,” i.e. he is dead. It is difficult to guess why these trees should have been deemed worthy
of a place in the abode of their future state, where the souls amuse themselves with canoes and arms
and yams, taros, and all kinds of fruits are plentiful. The Tarawau grows to the height of sixty feet*
has flattish. branches, pinnated leaves, insignificant whitish flowet's, and a tough insipid fruit, only
palatable to the natives. Fancy places Naicobocobo on the westernmost part of Yanua Levu, under
water, where also the place of departure (ai Cibicibi) is situated. The Maoris have a similar place at
Cape Maria Yan Diemen; and the Samoans, Tahitians, and Tonguese, agree with the Fijians and
New Zealanders, in fixing the road to their future state of bliss on the lee or west side of their country,
a coincidence, if nothing more, which to my knowledge has never been pointed out. The Tarawau is
also regarded as the emblem of the truth-speaking man, not having, as so many others, a number of
false or sterile flowers.
XVl. —Ornamental Plants.
Ornamental plants are highly appreciated by both natives and white settlers, especially those having
either variegated leaves or gay-coloured flowers, since the Fijian flora shares with that of most
islands the peculiarity of possessing only a limited number of species displaying gay tints. Those
most frequently seen about the native houses are what gardeners call “ leaf plants,” including the
Danidani {Panax fruticosum, Linn.), with its deeply-cut foliage, several beautiful varieties of the 7>a-
cffiwa ferrea, some of which have been introduced from various Polynesian islands, the Croton pictum ,
the indigenous Acalypha virgata , Forst., termed Ivalabuci dama, the foliage of which changes from
dark green to brown, yellow and scarlet, and two kinds of ornamental grass ( Panicum ), the one having
purple, the other variegated leaves. The couch grass is also spreading fast through the islands, and
there is a fine lawn of it in front of the king’s house at Bau, blending well with the number of fine
shrubs and trees which, at Mrs. Collis’s instigation, were planted around the royal residence. Of
the Kauti, Senitoa, Senicicobia, or Shoe-black plant (Hibiscus Rosa sinensis, Linn.) a single pink and
purple as well as a double variety are cultivated. When the Cassia obtusifolia and Cassia occidentalis
were first brought to Fiji, the natives took them under their special protection, and disseminated them
freely, being highly pleased with their leaves “going to sleep” at night, whence the names of Moce-
moce and Kaumoce, i.e. sleeping plants. But they became weary of their pets when they found that
they speedily proved two most troublesome weeds, which in common with the Datura Stramonium,
Euphorbia pilulifera , Plantago major, Erigeron alhidum, and other foreign intruders, caused them a deal
of additional labour.
Most of the white settlers have little gardens in which all flowers derived from warm countries are
grown with great success. The pride of Barbadoes (Poinciana pulcherrima, Linn.), both the red and
yellow variety, may be seen in perfection; the same may be said of the white trumpet flower (Brug-
mannsia Candida, Pers.), the balsam (Impatiens Balsamina , Linn.), the sweet William (Quamoclit
vulgaris, Chois.), the scented acacia (Acacia Earnesiana, Willd.), the blue Clitoria Ternatea, Linn.,
the Gomphrena globosa, Linn., Vinca rosea, Linn., Calendula officinalis, Linn., and the well-known “four
o’clock (Mirabilis Jalapa, Linn.). Princess’s feathers (Amarantus cruentus, Linn.), and its congener
Driti damudamu (Amarantus tricolor, Linn.) have become perfectly naturalized in some districts.
Attempts to grow the flowers of colder regions have not been so successful. Carnations are kept
alive with difficulty ; roses, though growing and blooming freely, possess little or no scent, and are
chiefly valued from the pleasing associations connected with them; dahlias were introduced in 1860,
by Dr. Brower, but I have not yet learnt the fate that attended them; a species of honey-suckle
(Lonicera), noticed on the mission premises at Yiwa and Bau, concludes the limited list of foreign
garden plants cultivated in Fiji, a list for any additions to which the inhabitants would feel very
grateful.
Flowers for Necklaces, Sfc.
The natives do not content themselves with merely looking at or smelling plants, but profusely
decorate their persons with them: elegant formed-leaves, passion flowers, the bright red leaves of the
Dracaenas, or the bleached ones of the stemless screw pine, are made to grace their heads or turbans.
Great aptitude is displayed in making necklaces (taube or salusalu), the materials for which are


principally furnished by monopetalous, white, and odoriferous flowers, strung upon a piece of string. Fiji Islands,
I noticed those of the Bua (Fagrcea Berteriana, A. Gray), Buabua (Guettarda speciosa, Linn.), Vasa
or rewa (Cerbera lactaria, Ham.), and Sinu dina (. Leucosmia Burnettiana, Bth. = Dais disperma,
Forst.) The flowers of the Sinu dina, or as it is also termed Sinu damudamu, are capitate, and the
necklaces made of them are called “ sinucodo,” a term also applying to a chain. The shrub is about
fourteen feet high, has fine dark green shining foliage, odoriferous flowers which on opening are pure
white, but gradually change to cream colour, and bright red drupes, about as large as a hazel-nut.
XVll.— Miscellaneous.
Numerous plants serve for miscellaneous purposes. The flat round seeds of the Walai (Entada scandens ,
Bth. = Mimosa scandens , Linn.), called “ai Cibi,” or “ai Layo,” have suggested to the Fijians a
comparison with our coins, and supplied a word for money (ai Lavo), of which their language was
formerly destitute, because that article was entirely unknown to them, all commercial exchange being
carried on by barter. The Walai or Wataqiri is a creeper, always associated with mangroves and
other maritime vegetation. Its stem, when young used in place of ropes for fastenings, occasionally
attains a foot in diameter, and forms bold festoons, whilst its pods arrest attention by their gigantic
dimensions, measuring as they do several feet in length. The greyish long inflorescence of the Sila
(Coix Lacryma, Linn.), a grass growing in swamps and having the aspect of Indian corn, as well
as the seeds of the Diridamu, Qiridamu, or Leredamu (Abrus precatorius , Linn.), which resemble
those of the Dr ala (Erythrina Indica, Linn.) in having a bright red colour and a black spot, are
affixed with breadfruit gum to the outside of certain oracle boxes, of which Wilkes has given fair
illustrations in his “ Narrative of the U.S. Exploring Expedition/' These boxes have a more or less
pyramidal shape, and are kept in the temples, as the supposed abode of the spirit consulted through
the priests. Toys, consisting of cocoa-nut shells, and covered with these materials, are occasionally
seen in the hands of native children, and they have rather a pretty effect. The bamboo, vernacularly
termed “ Bitu,” is represented by two species, a large and a small one, both of which are rather local
in their geographical range. The trunk of the larger is in general use for vessels to contain water,
some of which are six feet long. It requires a certain knack, with some difficulty acquired by
foreigners, to pour the water out of the small hole on one side of the upper end without spilling
somcTof the contents. The natives drink out of these vessels by pouring the water in their mouth
without allowing their lips to touch them; sipping the fluid as we do would be considered an act of
impropriety. Bamboo split up in narrow strips makes capital torches, which do not require, as has
been stated, to be dipped in cocoa-nut oil in order to make them give a clear and bright light.
Fishing rafts, pillows for sleeping, instruments for beating time to national songs, pan flutes, fences
for wardens and courtyards,—all are constructed of these giant grasses. At Nagadi, in Viti Levu, I
visited a heathen temple surrounded by a bamboo fence, some of the sticks used being the young
shoots entire, with unexpanded leaves', and looking like so many fishing rods. The priest in charge
of this building exhibited a bundle of bamboos, which on being struck on the ground with the
opening downwards produced a peculiarly loud and hollow sound. Two single bamboos of different
lengths are beaten contemporaneously with this large bundle in religious ceremonies. An amusing
sight is presented by a grove of bamboos on fire. When returning from Namosi, I passed several
places where, to clear the land, fire had been set to these groves. As soon as the flame fairly
embraced the canes a loud explosion succeeded, the general effect of which being that of a well-
sustained skirmish between two hostile parties of sharp-shooters. In Ecuador I once saw a sugar-cane
plantation on fire, but the noise of the bamboo by far exceeded that caused by the former. The
leaves of the Qangawa or Wankawa, a species of pepper, climbing and rooting like our ivy, and, if
report may be trusted, those of the Vusolevu ( Colubrina Asiatica , Brogn.) are used for washing the
hair, to clean it and destroy the vermin. The Moli kurukuru (Citrus vulgaris , llisso) serves the
same purpose, a remark also applying to the vine called Wa roturotu (Viiis saponarin, Seem.), the
stem of which, especially the thicker part, is cut in pieces from one to one and a half feet long,
cooked on hot stones, and when thus rendered quite soft produces in water a rich lather almost
equal to that of soap. The fruits of the Yago or bottle gourd ( Lagenaria vulgaris , Ser.) are
readily converted into flasks for holding oil and other fluids, by allowing their pulp to undergo
decomposition.
Conclusion:
This enumeration by no means exhausts the catalogue of the useful products in which a Flora
of about a thousand different species, such as the Fijian is, abounds. Enough, however, has been
stated to show how bountiful nature has been in supplying these islands with edible roots and fruits,
with drugs, spices, fibres, timber, dyes, vegetable fats, and other articles of commercial importance.
The lon list of cultivated plants show's that the natives are not ill prepared for entering on agricul-
tural operations on a large scale, whilst the fact that the varieties of the different products grown are
almost endless, furnishes a striking proof of their succeeding to perfection. The numerous plants
introduced from every direction of the compass, and their successful naturalization, may justly be
regarded as indicative of the climate being of that happy medium which, in a similar way, enables
the English gardener to assemble in his domain a far greater collection of species than his conti-
nental rival. _ _ .
The Australian colonists, independent of the consideration that it would not be desirable to have a
chain of French or other foreign colonies encircling their western shores, which at any moment might
expose them to the inconvenience of interrupting their traffic with Eastern Polynesia and the west
coast of America; and independent of the advantages which Fiji offers as an intermediate station
K 4


Fiji Islakcs. between Australia and the central parts of America, when the line of steamers shall have sprung up
which eventually will connect the continents of America and Australia, —the Australian colonists, by
frequent intercourse, are so far acquainted with the commercial importance of Fiji, that they have
V already commenced to form associations for turning this new field to advantage. The favourable
results which I have arrived at in regard to the rearing of cotton in Fiji, combined with the less
cheering ones caused by the political troubles in the United States, have already led in Melbourne
to the projection of a company, which, with a capital of £lOO,OOO, is to begin in Fiji the cultiva-
tion of cotton on a large scale. Minor speculations for the development of the cocoa-nut oil trade in the
oroup have been entered into by several great commercial houses in Sydney. As soon as the
additional facts expected from Colonel Smythe’s and my own reports become known, a fresh stimulus
will be imparted to these and similar enterprises, and commercial combinations will be created, which
could have no existence in the absence of all reliable sources of information on the capabilities of the
group, on which we were directed to report.*
BERTHOLD SEEMANN, Ph.D., F.L.S.
22, Canonbury Square, London, N.,
I2th June 1861.
* Throughout this Eeport I have spelled the Native names according to the orthography laid down in Ilaselwood’s Fijian
Dictionary. (Viva, 1850.)
LONDON:
Printed by George E. Eyre and William Spottiswoodb,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.




FIJI ISLANDS.
, •: . ' ’ ,y.', . , ' . • • •.. ' ■ .. .
■ . ■■ . ■ . >• ■ ■ ■
CORRES PONDEN CE
r* - *■» 7 • 14 ' ■ 1 i’-. v*; .*■ • r,, • „7 V „ , ; : . ; .'J 'M '-- *?*■:
RELATIVE TO
THE FIJI ISLANDS.
