

Presbyterian Church of Tasmania .
ST. ANDREW’S, HOBART.
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN
THE HEY. JAMES SCOTT,
Who occupies St. Andrew's Church and Manse, in the face of the
solemn protest of the Old Congregation, numbering 70 families,
and representing 250 souls,
MR. JOHN GELLIE,
ELDER OF ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, HOBART.
) I (•
JfcCi • Car. JMC
1882.


f r%(o !L


n l 55 S5!v9R
TO THE
MEMBERS AND ADHERENTS
OF ST. ANDREW'S CONGREGATION,
HOBART.
Dear Friends,
Having been elected by you to the office of the Eldership, now
nearly twelve years ago ; having then accepted ordination, and
being now your only legal Elder, and having since, so far as lay in
my power, raised my voice against many unrighteous acts towards
you, and especially the last and most lawless one, of forcing a
minister into the church against your united voice; and as the
“trumpet has given forth no uncertain sound” from me in the
past, I take the opportunity of placing before you another Appeal
to me by the Hev. James Scott to accept him as the legal minister
of St. Andrew’s, and thereby cast to the winds my solemn convic-
tions of right—to compromise myself and you: in fact, to say by
such act, that what we have contended for in the past was no
principle, but mere moonshine ; that we are so craven in heart,
after a few months, we will quietly accept the man forced into our
pulpit, sit under him, and make-believe we can profit by him.
Our motto has been, “St. Andrew’s Church for St. Andrew’s
people, with the minister of their choice” : and now after the lapse of
years, I feel more proud of my people than ever. That pride
warms into sincere affection when I think of the hallowed associa-
tions the old church has to you; that you have stood by the motto
above ; that you have not been so lost to what is right; that you
have not been so lost to what is due to our church in the colony ;
that you have not been so lost to what is due to the memory of dear
old Scottish ancestry, as to stifle conscience and yield up your
solemn convictions of right, by worshipping under one who was
placed in our pulpit by a high-handed injustice. And I leave you
to judge, by my reply, whether the “Trumpet” has given forth
on this occasion, any more than in the past, a sound of uncertainty.
Upon those who now profess to worship in our church, neither
you nor I would wish to cast an indignity, but so long as they con-
tinue to occupy our pews, to them the scandal belongs of keeping


ns from our church, and upholding a system which is sapping the
very foundations of Presbyterianism, and the law and order of the
land. What would they have said, if a few years ago, we had
violently taken possession of St. John’s, and let St. Andrew’s as a
source of revenue to maintain us there; taken their share of the
Debenture fund, and used their endowments ; forced them to wor-
ship with us, or wander to some other denomination ? Would they
not have denounced the act—as we now do —as one of plunder and
impudent robbery ?
The Great God has said, “ I hate robbery for a burnt offering,”
and can He accept the worship of a people who by an act of clerical
violence occupy our church ? Can they not cast off the clerical
fetter which appears to bind them ? —acquit themselves like men
and say, We will no longer occupy another people’s church to their
detriment; we will not have the souls’ blood of this people upon us.
Faithfully yours,
JOHN GELLIE.
Jan. 10th, 1882.
CORRESPONDENCE, &c.
Hobart, Dec. 21st, 1881.
Mr. John Gellie,
My Dear Sir, —As we are at present in the midst of arrangements
for the re construction and extension of St. Andrews Session, I
desire to write a few lines concerning your relationship thereto.
I am authorised by Mr. Charles Miller to say that if you see your
way to act in the Session, he will also be prepared to do the same.
It will therefore be for you to say whether the time has come for
you to use the influence which you possess in promoting the peace
and concord of the Presbyterian cause in Hobart.
So desirable an end seems deserving of consideration, and if need
be, of mutual concession.
I am at liberty to assure you, on the part of the present congrega-
tion, that there will be no want of cordiallity or good-will towards
yourself. Every effort will also be made to render it easy for you
to discharge the duties of the Eldership, and continue the work
of the S. School in which you have so long held the office of
Superintendent.
I need not say that I will very willingly meet with you personally,
or along with others, to speak on any matters which you may think
require explanation.
Trusting that you may see your way to giving the subject your
consideration, and trusting to hear from you at your convenience, —
I beg to remain, yours very truly,
JAMES SCOTT.


Hobart, Jan. 10th, 1882.
Hey. James Scott,
Sir, —Haying acknowledged your communication bearing date the
21st Tilt., I now proceed to deal with it more at length. The first
paragraph of your letter informs me that "We are in the midst of
arranging for the re-construction and extension of St. Andrew’s
Session, and desire to write a few lines concerning my relationship
thereto.”
If the we you refer to is yourself and the three Elders from
St John’s, two of whom were manufactured for the occasion, and the
third, who as you knew, or ought to have known, was unfit for the
position for Elder ; if this be so, by all means continue the set task.
I suppose that with new associations, and the tinselling being done,
an air of respectability is required to enshroud the future Session
over which you desire to moderate; but I must first be convinced
of your right either by the law of God, or the law of the Church, to
reconstruct and extend a Session, which in your present position
you have no more to do with than the man in the moon ; however,
a man will, under certain circumstances, assume a great deal, and
especially when he has been “ given over to work his own devices.”
I acknowledge with pride, my connection with St. Andrew’s
Church and Session, and my connection therewith is beyond cavil,
but to acknowledge any connection with a man who forced himself
there as minister, and who used the means which you have done to
acquire that position, my whole soul revolts at your proposition.
2. Upon Mr. Charles Miller I have the claim of deference to my
judgment before he decides to act as an Elder with you; but if he
had weighed the matter and considered your past relationship to
him, he would have given you an unhesitating no. You know that
Mr. Miller was ordained to the Eldership by the Hev. Mr. Storie
and myself only, because you prevented the assessor who was
appointed being present. You know that you were a party to
expunging, or in the words of His Honor the Chief Justice,
“ Mutilating” official records referring thereto. You know that
in every way you strove to make that ordination invalid, and how you
succeeded, and now, “as a nursing father,” you would take Mr.
Miller to your bosom, and give him a place you once spent treasure
and every effort to keep him from. Were Ito cast aside my self-
respect, and connect myself with you, surely Mr. Miller would have
good grounds for maintaining his integrity, and saying, “ Though
hand join in hand, I will be no party to iniquity.”
3, The influence that I had and possess I trust have, and will be,
used for the benefit of my Church and people, and establishing its
peace. My voice will never be heard to cry, “ Peace, peace, when
there is no peace.” How aptly, it may be unconsciously, you fill
the place of Ahab in Scripture history. After slaying Naboth and
taking possession of the vineyard —with an assumed virtue when
Elijah confronted him, he said, Art thou he that troubleth Israel?
I am not aware that my influence has been exerted in any channel


but that of promoting the better interests of the Presbyterian cause :
not so with you. From the time of your arrival in Tasmania I
have been an observer of your tactics, and I must confess that in my
observance of the ministers of our Church for the last thirty years,
I have found none who have acted in a manner so detrimental
to the best interests of our Church as you have done. You
can call to mind a castigation I gave you soon after your arrival
here when you attempted to rob my school of one of its teachers'
It is fresh in your memory, when my commission as an Elder was
laid on the Presbytery table at Campbell Town, and through your
intrigue was not even dealt with. At that meeting no doubt you
were gratified in the extreme, while a strange minister was invited
to be present and take part in the various discussions ; by your own
persistent action, the business was not even proceeded with until I
was put out of the place of meeting.
I need not remind you of the time when I wrote a polite note
asking an explanation in reference to the heavy debt for current
expenses upon your own Church, and of the course you took
to enshroud the matter in mystery, and how you paraded the
virtues of those around you. It will be fresh in your recollection,
when I and others waited on you in St. AndreAv’s Yestry, and asked
your reason for not intimating, after being requested , that Mr. Wardrop
would preach on the following Sunday, that you did not exhibit the
meekness you are now aping, but lost your temper and rudely
dismissed us.
Had you upon those occasions, instead of now, presented your
mess of pottage, one might have been tempted to sell their birth-
right, but as it is, either the craft of Jacob is not cunning enough,
or the temptation is not sufficient for Esau. I need not remind you
of the part you took in getting up the petition to the Synod, said to
be signed by 350 Presbyterians, and among them a great number
of St. Andrew’s people, praying for the amalgamation of St. John’s
and St. AndreAv’s. You knew, or you ought to have known, that
some of these signing that petition were not connected Avith any
Church. You also best know how one or two of St. Andrew’s
people, and even some of your own congregation, were induced to
sign the petition. Hoav is it that Mr. F. C 1 and family,
Mrs. Q- n and family, Mrs. AY n and family, Mr. H y
and family, Mr. and Mrs. C n, Mr. McL ——n, Mrs. AY r
and family, Mr. C k, Mr. J n, Mr. H e, Mr. M -1 and
others, all members of St. John’s, are noAV not found worshipping
under you ?
It strikes me that “ mutual concession” is as much a misnomer as
“ amalgamation.” It is not my opinion only, but that of old St.
Andrew’s people, and the public at large, that what will tend to the
peace and concord of the Church is, your retirement from a position
you were never asked, with the consent of St. Andrew’s congrega-
tion, to fill; but in its assumption, you appeared to be blind to
to the opinion of others, and to consequences which may


naturally follow. If matters had prospered, as you and a few
others anticipated, any solicitations for my co-operation would
never have "been made, but as the ship approaches the shoals, and
the rats are deserting, it has been resolved to plead “mutual
concession !” I have no concessions to make, and am not by any
sentimental advances on your part to be entrapped into making any.
Were your cause a righteous one, my aid would readily be given,
but under existing circumstances it is my bounden duty to myself
and to my Church to reply to one so tempting me, “Get thee
behind me, Satan.”
4 You give me the assurance on the part of the present congrega-
tion of cordiality and good will. Well, may I compare it to the
Municipal supply of water ? will flow while the cracked pipes hold
together; but then there may be a burst up any • moment, and at
caprice I would be left in the icy cold. For some of the present
congregation I have a sincere regard, and among them personal
friends, but I am confident that towards me pure affection does not
dwell in every breast; if otherwise, when I resisted your forcible
entry into St. Andrew’s, why was I consigned by some of them to
that tropical clime to which the Pope has been audibly consigned
from time immemorial ? And why have others, professing to be
your mouth-piece, said, That my statements referring to you have
not always been characterised by truth ? To hold office over such
could not result in either affection or respect. What is a matter of
surprise to myself and people in reference to the present congregation
is that they—many of them otherwise honorable in ordinary life —
can sit in a church from which they have ejected another congrega-
tion —can use its endowments, and its share of debenture fund to
save their own pockets ; can in reality worship God there ; can ask
for His blessing, or expect their souls to be fed by the bread of
divine truth, and the water of eternal life.
I fully appreciate the promised “ efforts” to make duty less
irksome, nay, even the assurance “ that it shall be easy.” It may
prove what the hon. the Premier recently said of some officials,
“ That they made it hard for the public to do the right, and easy to
do the wrong.”
With your expressed desire to have a conversation on matters
which I think require explanation, I readily comply ; and while at
present it may be regarded as a little one-sided, yet the opportunity
to “mark and inwardly digest” will be the greater
Ist. As to debenture fund:—The Pev. Mr. Storie saved and
invested in the names of two trustees now living £llBO. What has
become of it ?
2nd. By a document recently published, and (privately circu-
lated) by authority of Mr. Lyle, the Moderator of Synod, it appears
that the Pev. James Scott and the Pev. Alexander Doctor are
responsible for an overdraft of the Debenture Fund to the extent of
£SOO. Is this overdraft for their own private use or for the church,
and are they paying the interest ? and should they remove from the


colony, or death remove either one or both, who would the bank
manager look to for the amount ?
I now want to put a few questions upon the amalgamation
petition, and financial statement appended, and in order that I may
not misquote or you misunderstand, I think it wise, especially as
these documents have not seen much of the light of day, to give
them in full.
Petition for amalgamation of St. John’s and St. Andrew’s Churches,
presented to the Synod Oct. 6th, 1879 :
To the Reverend the Synod of Tasmania.
The Petition of the undersigned Presbyterians, residing in Hobart Town
and its vicinity,
Respectfully Sheweth ;
That St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town, having been closed for about twelve
months, and an endeavour being now about to be made to settle a Minister therein,
the whole question of the position of our Denomination in this City and adjoining
Districts, demand the serious consideration of your Reverend Court, and in coming
to a decision we respectfully request you to bear in mind the following facts
1. The Stipend of the Minister of St. Andrew’s, the first charge established by
our denomination in this Colony, has from the commencement until the retirement
of the Rev. John Storie, in July, 1879, been provided for by the State.
2. In 1840, the Presbyterians of this City, in order to meet the convenience of
residents in the southern and western portions of the town, erected St. John’s
Church, Macquarie-street, but your Petitioners believe that they would not have
done so but for the State furnishing the Minister’s Stipend.
3. In 1869 the Rev. John Service, having resigned the position he held in the
Ministry of St. John’s,—and the Rev. R. M‘Lean, the senior Minister, having
retired on a pension,—the Congregation of St. John’s have from that date sup-
ported ordinances by the voluntary contributions of its Members and adherents,
supplemented by the proportion of interest granted by the Presbytery from the
Debenture fund.
4. The suburban district of O’Brien’s Bridge, where there is an excellent Church,
has been deprived of regular ordinances since the retirement of the Rev. C.
Simson, on his pension, in 1871; and the district of New Norfolk contains many
Presbyterians, who have not up to this date enjoyed the privilege of worshipping
in a Presbyterian Church of their own.
5. Your Petitioners are strongly of opinion that it is not desirable, in the altered
circumstances, through the cessation of State-aid, to support two separate con-
gregations in Hobart Town, more especially as there is another Presbyterian
congregation in the centre of the City.
6. Your Petitioners are further strongly of opinion that the best interests of our
Church would be served by the amalgamation of the Congregations of St.
Andrew’s and St. John’s.
7. The adoption by your Reverend Court of your Petitioners’ views will render
it easy to provide, by means of two Ministers, religious ordinances once every
Sabbath at O’Brien’s Bridge, New Norfolk, and Sandy Bay, in addition to regular
services, morning and evening, in St. Andrew’s, as shown by a financial statement
appended to this Petition.
8. Your Petitioners, having given great and most anxious consideration to this
question, are firmly of opinion that to settle a Minister in St. Andrew’s, thus
making three Presbyterian Congregations in the city, must eventuate in at least
two of them languishing, while by adopting the plan proposed in this Petition the
Presbyterian cause in Hobart Town and its vicinity would be greatly invigorated,
and made to grow to the proportions and influence of former years.
9. While many of your Petitioners would suffer inconvenience by the plan pro-
po*ed, they cheerfully set that aside, in view of the advantages to be gained by our
Church and cause if the scheme submitted is approved by your Reverend Court.


Your Petitioners therefore respecttully request your Reverend Court to take all
the above matters into consideration, and grant the amalgamation of the Congre-
gations of St. John’s and St. Andrew’s.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
[Said to be signed by over 350 Presbyterians !]
Proposed Amalgamation of Congregations of St. John’s and St. Andrew’s,
and the formation of a new charge, viz., —O’Brien’s Bridge and New
Norfolk, with assistance occasionally by the Minister of Sorell.
Probable Income from St. Andrew’s and St. John’s.
Rents — £ s. d. £ s. d.
St. John’s Manse (nett) 65 0 o
~ Schoolroom 30 0 o
„ Hall 25 0 0
St. Andrew’s Glebe 25 0 0
145 0 0
Debenture fund (one Minister) 44 8 0
Sustentation Fund 175 0 0
Sunday Collections 175 o o
Annual Tea Meeting (nett) 12 10 0
12 10 0
Four Entertainments during the year .. 20 o o
Seat Rents 100 0 o
526 18 0
Probable Annual Income ,£671 18 0
Expenditure. £ s. d.
Minister 4 00 0 0
Organist 4° 0 0
Church Officer 20 0 o
Clock 5 0 0
Gas 15 0 0
Organ-blower and Sundries 20 0 0
£S™ 0 o
Probable surplus 18 0
O’Brien’s Bridge, New Norfolk, and Sandy Bay.
Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d.
Minister 3 00 0 0
House 30 0 0
Payment of Supplies and Travelling
Expenses, in consideration of services
to be rendered by Minister of Sorell.. 50 0 0
Travelling Expenses, Ministers O’Brien’s
Bridge, New Norfolk, and Hobart
Town 5° 0 0
430 0 0
Probable Income. £ s. d.
To be contributed by New Norfolk .... 100 o 0
Ditto O’Brien’s Bridge 100 0 o
100 0 o
Ditto Sandy Bay 30 0 0
Ditto Debenture Fund 44 8 0
274 8 0
Estimated Deficiency £ 1 55 12 0


But, as it is proposed to work the Amalgamated )
Congregations and the Rural Districts together, >
18
0
take the probable surplus, as above )
Deduct Estimated Deficiency above.
155
12
0
Leaving estimated probable Surplus
■ £16
6
0
Note.—lt is proposed that the Ministers of St Andrew’s, Sorell,
O’Brien’s Bridge, and New Norfolk, shall jointly supply the
pulpits named, on a plan to be hereafter arranged.
When you assisted to concoct this visionary scheme, no doubt the
fervent desire went forth, “ Yisions of brightness, stay, Oh stay”—
but have they not been like the morning cloud and as the early
dew ? However to proceed —
3rd. In this scheme you promise that O’Brien’s Bridge, New
Norfolk, and St. Andrew’s —besides having your kindly supervision,
and the bland smiles and witty jokes of the Incumbent of Sorell—
were to have a third Minister. Has this been so ? The third party
you have employed during the last twelve months, has he been
performing baptisms, solemnising marriages, administering the
sacrament; and if not, why not ? Is it not because he is not a
minister, but a lay-help, gathered up because an ordained Minister
who was first tried said, —“ No Minister of any self-respect would
hold such a position ? ”
4th. Have you paid Mr. Shallberg, who is now leaving you, and
who has been styled Reverend in order to give eclat to the surround-
ings, £360 or £3BO for salary, house, and travelling expenses, as
your scheme promised ? If not, what becomes of the schemes
upon the faith of which you obtained your present position?
Has the revenue reached the £671 18s., as anticipated? Have
you yourself received £4OO as salary ? Has the Organist received
his promised £4O ? Has the Church-ofiicer and organ-blower
each received their £2O ? Now, to use an Americanism, I think
there has been an immense amount of “ blow,” and the “ blower ”
ought to get more than £2O. In fact, the beginning is “ blow,”
the middle is “ blow,” and the end is “blow,” —and I say the
“Blower,” instead of being put down among the sundries, his salary
should be fixed at £4OO !
sth. You also promised in the “ Presbyterian Magazine,” to
superintend the Huon district. Oh, if these Millenial days had
dawned sooner, what a paradise that electorate would have been!—
Instead of being temporarily disfranchised, and held up as a beacon
to the briber and the corrupter, it would have been the model con-
stituency : in fact, it would have been too pure to find a representa-
tive outside the amalgamation circle. Solomon might show his
gold; great Evans might thunder out his praises; the gallant
Captain tell of a market for her produce, and her future mighty
commerce, —but “ no charm would the charmer have,” their choice
would have been from the pure and undefiled circle.
Twelve months have gone by, and neither from the Mercury' s


correspondent, or by tbe voice of that truthful publication, the
“ Tasmanian Presbyterian Magazine,” have I beard that you have
done anything for these political heathens ! How nice it would be
to rear up an edifice there, say a school-house, and then let it as a
source of revenue to maintain St. Andrew’s !
6th. I find in your scheme no provision for the leviathan coach
that was engaged on Sundays to wheel St. John’s people to St.
Andrew’s. Some of those who patronized the coach evidently thought
there would be, or they never would have refused to pay the quar-
ter’s coach-hire rendered by the Church Managers. Why not have
adopted the “Juggernaut” principle, and put St. Andrew’s upon
wheels ? If a congregation could not thus have been obtained, it,
at least, would have been a novel advertisement! And by a lucky
accident, some one of the old congregation might have approached
so closely as to be crushed under the ponderous wheels —and then
the song could be raised, “We have triumphed gloriously.”
Do you think it creditable, in a populous city like Hobart, with its
population spreading south and west, to shut up a church in that
quarter like St. John’s—that was built partly by private and partly
by Giovernment contributions, and for ever dedicated to the worship
of God. Shut up not because there is not a people willing to attend
—not because it is badly situated —but because its Minister failed,
those conducting its affairs being urged on recklessly, and when
their financial position was irretrievable, seized upon another congre-
gation’s property and let their own, in order to recover their embar-
rassment.
In ancient Scripture history there is a parable called the “Parable
of the ewe lamb.” I will quote it:—“ There were two men in one
city; the one rich, the other poor. The rich man had exceeding
many flocks and herds; but the poor man had nothing, save one
little ewe lamb, which he had brought and nourished up, and it
grew up together with him and with his children ; it did eat of his
own meat and drink of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was
unto him as a daughter. And there came a traveller unto the rich
man, and he spared to take of his own flock and his own herd, to
dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him, but took the
poor man’s lamb, and dressed it. for the man that was come to him.”
I have no desire to assume the role of preacher, although we are
sometimes told that preaching is not to be confined to the pulpit,—
yet having been invited by you to this discussion, let me press home
the application of this parable, by asking my hearer—if conscience
is not seared, and if there is still any of its original light remaining
—What is the difference between taking and appropriating this
man’s ewe lamb, and violently taking our Church from us ?
Would it not be more honorable, would it not be more consistent
with the Divine and civil law, to say,—This is my neighbour’s;
position and a living thus acquired can bring me no blessing. Can
you look for the blessing of the old congregation, and how can you
expect the blessing of the Almighty ? Has He not said —Woe unto the


pastors who scatter the sheep of my pasture ! If the law of God and
man is thus violated by the preacher, what can be expected from the
hearers ? What does it avail having a comfortable manse and a
tinselled church, if the circumstances are such that a spiritual blight
may rest upon on the whole, and the few who attend may
possibly go away with their souls unfed ? Is it any wonder
that the average evening attendance at the old church for the last-
twelve months is only 66 all told ; St. John’s closed up, St. Andrew’s
flaunted before the public mind as a Cathedral charge—the “ great
Sun” around which so many minor ones are to revolve —and the
attendance only 66 !
Trusting that I have not been wearisome, and trusting that I
have dealt with the subject as exhaustively as you would wish,
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN GELLIE.
~7Ar^
fq'H z.
,4/
