

CORRE SPONDENCE
ON THE
REAL PROPERTY ACT.
&EATXS.
ADELAIDE:
CAREY & PAGE, PRINTERS, WAYMOUTH STREET.
1 88 2.




CORRESPONDENCE
ON THE
REAL PROPERTY ACT
GEATIS.
ADELAIDE:
CAREY & PAGE, PRINTERS, AVAYiIOUTH STREET.
1 88 2.




PREFACE.
?to.s
1
The late Sir James Hurtle Fisher, in the early days of the Colony, introduced to
Governor Hindmarsh the desirability of some simple way of dealing with landed
property, but Sir James said the proposal was neglected till vested interests had
■sprung up, and then he did not like to interfere.
Sir R. R. Torrens, less careful of the vested interests of the lawyers than Sir
Hurtle Fisher, listened to the various petitions for relief sent from the country
to the Parliament about 1856-7, and, with the aid of Dr. Hiibbe, and others conver-
sant with the Herman and other European methods of conveying land, succeeded
in carrying the first Real Property Act in 1858.
This was followed by the enactment of 1860, which, owing to some clerical
oversight, had to be corrected by the Act of 1861.
The control of the newly-created Lands Titles Office had, very absurdly, been
placed under the department of the Attorney-General,— the powers that then were
not noticing how cruel it was to make the Attorney-General, himself a lawyer, cut
•off to so large an extent the income his profession had derived from their
conveyancing business.
In self-defence, the lawyers made every possible opposition to land being
placed .under the Act, and their cry was that “ it (the Real Property Act) was not
worth the paper it was written upon.” But as this did not deter the public from
availing themselves of the advantages the new legislation afforded, the only course
left was to harass and perplex where the profession could not openly oppose, so, as the
business of the Lands Titles Office increased, the policy was to keep it short-handed,
till the cry arose of “ the delays ” in getting the work done there. Collaterally with
the masterly inactivity of the Attorney-General’s control of the Lands Titles Office,
the Judges, as the following letters will show, took every opportunity, as cases
-came before them, to strain the provisions of the Real Property Act, so that the decisions
given were not only contrary to the intentions of the promoters of the Real
Property Act, but also to justice and common sense ; they even conflicted with
one another. By this means many of the people were prompted to believe that the
Real Property Act itself was in fault.
Having brought things to such a pass, Parliament was asked for a Commission
composed of three lawyers and two laymen ; certainly a concession that two of the
one were supposed to be a match for three of the others, but the compliment must
here be read the other way, since this arrangement of the personnel of the
Commission secured that the voting should go whenever it was desirable in favour
■of the profession, for how could two laymen out-vote three lawyers ? After the
Commission came a new Real Property bill,and many say two bills, one for the costs of
the Commission, and the other for another Act of Parliament, into which a host of
•provisions were introduced, under pretence of preventing injustice in many imaginary
cases. Till—as„'a learned English Judge avers, lawyers are prone to do —the legal
profession once more contrived to sink the ship they sought to save, with the weight
of the armour they encumbered her with. Into this pamphlet, the result of great
research and trouble on the part of Mr. Opie, a summary of some of the steps by
which the Real Property Act has been brought into its present mutilated condition
lias been put into readable compass. It now remains to be seen whether the country
will uphold the independent members of Parliament in restoring the Act to- its
original intention of making dealings in land as simple and easy as the trapgfer of (
Bank and other scrip, of shipping or any other valuable commodity. We shall Sbe7




CORRESPONDENCE
ON THE
REAL PROPERTY ACT.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT AND THE SUCCESSION DUTY
AMENDMENT ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, December 12, 1881.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, I purchased a piece of land a few days ago, receiving in exchange for the
cash the clean certificate of title and a proper transfer, feeling quite sure that I had
nothing more to do than present the documents at the Real Property Office, and
then obtain my title as heretofore, but, to my astonishment and vexation, I had
all returned to me, with the following requisition written upon the transfer
“ A certificate as to succession duty must be endorsed hereon. —(Signed) F.F.T.”
It turns out that the vendor is an executor, of which fact there is, of course,
nou the slightest evidence on his certificate of title, and by the “ Succession Duty
Amendment Act of 1881 ” I am deprived of the benefit of the registration of my
title until the vendor has proved to the Real Property Office that the duty on the
land in question is paid a fact that I can have no prior knowledge of, one way or
other, because the Real Property Act makes no distinction as to the
registered proprietor being an executor or otherwise, nor can I either make the
vendor pay the duty or pay it myself. I therefore submit—That the Act referred
to is repugnant to the Real Property Act; that the Government should collect its
succession duty without thus stopping the machinery of a very much more
important Act, that was passed expressly to prevent the grievous loss, costs and
delay of the old system of registration, and if South Australians would first erect
a marble monument to Sir R. R. Torrens for his incalcuable boon —the Real
Property Act they would I think be doing the right thing in the correct order
of merit. However, to return to the question, I contend that the Government
has no more right to cause the inconvenience complained of for the protection of
its small claims than have private claimants (on the estate of a deceased), who
might also absurdly ask for legislative protection in the extension of the ridiculous
practice to prohibiting registration of transfers until they evidenced payment of
“all just debts, funeral and testamentary expenses!” Dealings in land are in
these colonies reduced to commercial transactions, and the great Act giving prompt
effect to such dealings, as well as the many efficient, careful and business-like
gentlemen who carry out the Real Property Act, should not be thus lightly
interfered with, and made sub-collectors of inland revenue and detectives ex officio.
I am, Sir, etc.,
PETER PARLEY.
P.S. The duty in the instance referred to was all paid months ago.


THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
[From the S. A. Register , December 24, 1881.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —“ Whereas the inhabitants of the Province of South Australia are-
subjected to losses, heavy costs, and much perplexity by reason that the laws
relating to the transfer and encumbrance of freehold and other interests in land are
complex, cumbrous, and unsuited to the requirements of the said inhabitants, it is
therefore expedient to amend the said laws,” —such is the preamble to Torrens’s Real
Property Act.
That Act effected a change, and for some time the grievances mentioned were
done away with, but as the result of judicial decisions and Legislative enactments
to cure supposed defects in the Act, what can we say now ? Is not every word of
the above quotation as applicable now as when it was written twenty-three years
ago ?
A recent letter in your paper relating to the antagonistic working of the
Probate and Succession Duty Act to the Real Property Act has made me think that
it is time for some one to call attention to the manner in which the Real Property
Act has been murdered since it was delivered over to our keeeping by its author,
and in default of some abler writer taking up the cause, I will, with your permission
do so.
I need not enter into an enumeration of its merits, —merits which have not
only been admitted by ourselves, but have been acknowledged by our sister colonies
copying our reform, by the writings of more than one leading writer in England,
and by the British Government applying our Act almost without alteration to the
dealing with titles in Ireland ; but I will for the purpose of my letter lay down the
great and leading principle of our Act as Sir R. Torrens meant it, and as no doubt
all South Australians, lay and legal, understand it; that is, that a Certificate of
Title once issued should vest in the registered proprietor the fee of the land, that
for dealing with the same he should have absolute control over it, and that a
purchaser or mortgagee from such registered proprietor should not be called upon
to recognise any trusts or encumbrances, save what appears on the Certificate of
Title. This is the tenor of the whole of the Act of 1861, but how the intention
of the author has been defeated remains to be seen.
The practising members of the legal profession, although they were no doubt
as a body opposed to the Act when it first passed, have since accepted it, and lent
their aid to —as they consider —amend it, but the greatest enemies of the Act, and
those who have done their best to render it unworkable, have been from time to
time our Judges of the Supreme Court. These functionaries, paid servants of the
people, placed in their positions to enforce the laws their masters make, seem to
take a delight in driving their coach-and-four through every Act that is passed. So
far as any person who has the misfortune to be dragged into law, or to become the
owner of any interest in land is concerned, they are almost as absolute rulers of
South Australia as the Czar of Russia is reputed to be of his subjects. To show
what is meant, it is only needful to point out how they are year by year practically
abolishing that great boon to Englishmen trial by jury. The Judge is fast
arrogating to himself all the powers of the jury. He tells them the law of the
case is so and so, you must find such a verdict, or he stops the case before it comes
to the jury, and says that there is not sufficient evidence to go to them, or when
they have found a verdict, he quashes it by reporting that it is against the weight of
evidence.
So far as concerns judicial decisions adverse to Acts of Parliament, the true
cure is not, to pander to these our latter day emperors by passing amending Acts,
but promptly as each adverse decision is given to pass an Act declaring what was
the intention of the Parliament when the Act was passed, and insisting that such
should notwithstanding Supreme Court decisions-—-be the effect of it.
Understand that I do not accuse the judges of wishing to make dealing with
land costly, yet as they almost seem to look upon themselves as the makers of the
law instead of the administrators of it, and the only channel by which they can be


approached is their brethren below, the effect is about the same. As an illustration,
a few months since I was interested in a case where it was desirable to authorise the
division of a deceased’s property. I certainly had nearly all the work to do, but of
course had no chance (being only an agent) of appearing in Court, so had to employ
a solicitor. I shepherded the whole affair, attended at the Supreme Court when he
lodged his petition, and paid his fees —somewhere about £5 —when the case was
heard. He was I should think about two hours in the Court, was occupied about
ten minutes in reading over his case to the Judge, the prayer was granted, and I
had on behalf of the parties concerned to pay the solicitor £SO, of which about £5
went in Court fees and the rest into the solicitor’s pocket. All this was done, and the
whole purport of the testator’s will altered, without, so far as the Judge could tell,
a signature or consent being obtained from any one of the parties interested.
This, so far as the relative amount? of costs going into the Court’s coffers and
the pockets of legal gentlemen, is not an exceptional case, but an example of what
occurs nearly every day of my experience.
I and my partner try to steer clear of law, but cannot help ourselves so far as
relates to the proving of wills and obtaining letters of administration. These
consist of mere routine work, a few forms to fill in, that any schoolboy could do, the
Court fees are light, and yet a transaction of this nature costs from £5 to £4O, in
addition, of course, to the duty. Ho doubt if principals or agents were allowed to
approach the august presence instead of solicitors, the public would not have such
cause for grumbling. I said just now that our legal brethren had, as they
considered, lent their aid to amend the Act, but what they consider amendments
the majority of the public will consider as something opposite. I do not for a
moment impugn their motives or their wish now to improve the Act; but Ido say
they are, as a class, incapable of doing so. Their necessary education in the study
of their profession unfits them for it. The lawyers here will say this is nonsense?
will thev let me ask them one question ? AVould they think it advisable to abolish
the registry office altogether, both old and new systems ? I suppose none would
say yes, and vet, as showing the effect of the education referred to, when
unadulterated by the Real Property Act, bear what Lord St. Leonard says My
settled conviction is that a general registry is not advisable. A general registry
wantonly exposes the affairs of all mankind.”
As to judicial decisions adverse to the Act. I will mention two recent cases—
EIRST —Neill v. Lindsay, in which the Judge, after giving a verdict for the party,
who was no doubt entitled to it, went out of his way for apparently no other object
than to upset a Real Property Act title. He held that because the District
Councils Act states that in case of a sale for rates, the Master should ‘ convey ’ the
land, and that there was no such thing as conveying under the Real Property Act ;
but transferring (Walker’s dictionary says transfer means to convey, and convey
means to transfer), therefore the intention of the Parliament was that in case of
sale of land under the Real Property Acts for rates, the Master should execute a
conveyance, and by so doing take the land back from the new to the old system.
SECOND—The case of Eormby and another against the Corporation. Notwith-
standing that the Act of 1861, in its interpretation clause, declares that the word
“ land ” shall extend to and include all passages, ways, etc., the Judge decided that
a Certificate of Title for land with an appurtenant right-of-way was void so far as it
related to the right-of-way. Nobody but a lawyer will admit that he administered
the law as he found it, but will rather think he made his law for the occasion.
This decision eventuated in the Rights-of-way Act of 1881, an Act which perhaps
does not do much harm (though that has yet to be proved) beyond throwing a good
deal more work on the Lands Titles officials.
One of the greatest blessings established by the Act has been practically
snuffed out. I refer to the lay tribunal of the Lands Titles Commissioners.
Under the Act of 1861, it was their duty to consider all applications for trans-
mission from the heir or devisee of deceased proprietors of land. This lay tribunal
had long been looked upon by the Judges jealously, for they really settled questions
of title which now have to go before the Supreme Court. After nearly twenty
years’ experience, I can say that the services of the Commissioners in the above
mentioned capacity were of inestimable value; they require proof, and far more


strict proof than the Supreme Court, in granting probate or administration lias ever
required, but the process was prompt and cheap, and there are very few instances
that the most adverse can mention where they have done wrong ; and moreover, to
guard against such possible wrong-doing there is the assurance fund in existence —
one advantage at any rate over the Supreme Court. Now, under the Amending
Act of 1878, the executor or administrator produces his probate or letters of
administration, and is registered in virtue of such document as proprietor of the
land of the deceased, but what the effect of such registration is no one knows,
though many suspect that when a case is brought before the Supreme Court the
executor or administrator will be held to have been only a trustee, and that all
purchasers or mortgagees from him will be bound to look into the trusts of the will.
Surely if this is so it is legislation adverse to the leading principles of the Real
Property Act. I have heard many remarks from legal gentlemen criticising the
Lands Titles Commissioners and their former duty of investigating titles, but I
cannot see why a lay tribunal should not be competent to deal with matters under
"the Real I roperty Act as well as a similar one that has been in active operation for
some time, can deal with matters under the Crown Lands Act, especially as the last
•one may with more reason be said to usurp the functions of a law court. It
receives evidence, examines ■witnesses, and generally conducts its business —minus a
few technicalities—-in a very similar manner to ‘the Supreme Court, and all that
without the advantage of legal advice, while on the other hand the Board of
Commissioners of the Lands Titles Office never did decide any question of title
until the matter had been thoroughly investigated and reported upon by their two
solicitors.
There are other clauses in the Amending Act of 1878 which are certainly not
in the spirit of the original Act; for instance, Clause 68, under which we have yet
to have a decision from the Bench, opens up and establishes all the evils of the old
system as to equitable interests. Clause 63 declaring equitable mortgages valid is of
the same gender, and is entirely against the principle of registration being the
essence of the title. It also appears to me to be a useless provision, as everybody
who lends money on deposit of a Certificate of Title should take care to get a
mortgage signed, which could at any time, when necessity called for it, be converted
into a legal security by registration. Then again, the regulations for procedure in
the matter of caveats, instead of leaving the deciding of adverse claims, no matter
how simple, to the Registrar-General, throw every case into the Supreme Court,
and provide a rather tortuous method of proceeding when it gets there. Clause 74
cannot be reconciled with the Act, it makes it legal to go behind the Certificate of
Title and inspect any transfer or other instrument to determine whether the
proprietor obtained his interest for valuable consideration. Torrens in his handy-
book shows, in many places, that his idea was that no document prior to the
Cei tificate of Title should be of any value ; he goes so far as to say that the
cancelled Certificates and other documents should be withdrawn from the Register
Book, and destroyed.
I now come to the Probate and Succession Duty Act, and this is truly a
vexatious one. Surely the public cannot be generally aware that by it the Duty is
made a first charge or debt to Her Majesty, and that this means, no matter how
many hands the land has passed through, investigating the title right back to 1876,
when the Act was carried, to make sure that the duty in every case of death has
been paid and last month we have an amendment of the last named Act forbid-
ding the Registrar-General, in case of death of a registered proprietor, to allow
any dealing with the land until there is produced to him a certificate from the
Commissioner of Inland Revenue that the duty is paid. One would think the
proper way to protect the interests of the Crown would have been, not to make the
an s titles authorities tax gatherers, and also throw responsibility on innocent
purchasers, but that on issue of probate the Registrar of Probate should take a
statement of the deceased’s real property, and protect the duty by lodging caveat
against the land on which it was not paid. Or, if the Lands Titles Department
inns oo k after this, then that when once a dealing were registered, the charge in
bTliable should lapse, and in case of mistake the Assurance Eund


Although I have no particular desire so see my name in print, and would much
rather use some nom de flume, still, in hopes that by signing my name I shall pro-
voke some discussion on this subject, I subscribe myself,
Yours, etc.,
E. A. D. OPIE.
ROT TORRENS’S ACT.
{From Adelaide Punch, December 31, 1881.)
According to Mr. Opie, there is a pretty general inclination among
judges and the legal profession to undermine the prime principle of simplicity on
which the Real Property Act is founded. It has been tortured out of its original shape
into something which is not Torrens’s Act. Lawyers are only too anxious to re-impose
the grievous burthens, too heavy to be borne, which Sir R. R. Torrens, after many
struggles, was able to remove. Mr. Opie knows his subject. He has had many
years’ experience as a practical worker under the Real Property Act, and such
words from such a man deserve immediate attention. Mr. Punch looks on Mr.
Opie’s letter as a timely warning. If there exist any colonial solicitor really
anxious that law shall be deprived of its terrors, Mr. Punch has not met him.
There are many who profess themselves in favour of simplification, and one or two
who absolutely pose before the public as reformers. When it comes to the
practical matters of fees no pains are spared to make bills of cost as heavy as
possible. It is notorious that these bills are built up to suit circumstances, and
bear little proportion to work done. Horse-racing is supposed to improve the breed
of horses ; the law is supposed to furnish justice to the people. Stripped of
conventional ornament, horse-racing exists for the betting man, and law exists for
the lawyer. These latter gentry naturally resent anything which threatens a
breach in their close preserve. Torrens’s Act, in making the transfer of real estate
easy and clear, struck a deadly blow at legal monopoly. Other men, not practitioners of
the Supreme Court, could complete all operations under the Act, or, at least,
nearly all operations. The scale of fees adopted had no savour of the high and
dry extortion to which people have been compelled to yield for centuries. It was
detestable that ordinary business people, with no special qualifications beyond
common-sense and integrity, should be permitted to labour within what was
practically the same arena. Hence, every professional wile was exerted to bring
Torrens’s Act within the charmed circle of inaccessible, vexing, ponderous, ruinous
law. These efforts have been fairly successful to date. Lawyers always bring strong
influence to hear in Parliament. They are ready members, glib speakers,
plausible reasoners, and work steadily with one aim, and one aim only, before
t| iem their own benefit. Mr. Opie is perfectly right when he says, in effect, that
our judges act on the bench more after the fashon of lawyers than of judges.
They help the “honorable” profession ; in fact, they are simply promoted lawyers
political accidents more often than not, —even self-appointed, and unlikely to help
the outside public against their “ learned brethren.” As colonial populations
become more refined this evil will be lessened; for, that it is an evil at the moment,
Mr. Punch firmly believes, In any case those of our legislators who do not happen
to be lawyers may well bear the matter in mind. They must never lose sight of
the grand principles which underlie Torrens’s Act, and by every means in their
power stay its rapid metamorphosis into Head Sea fruit —fair in its outside promise,
but containing nothing beyond disappointing dust and ashes.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT AND THE LEGAL PROFESSION.
{From the S.A. Register, January 5, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOB.
Sib,, —Having waited in vain for some able pen to reply to Mr. Opie’s letter in
your issue of the 24th ult., I now endeavour to explain to your correspondent what
he seems to have entirely overlooked, and I trust these remarks will be equally


approved by all who think as Mr. Opie does. Many years ago Mr. Strangways,
speaking of the Real Property Act in the House of Assembly, said that in the
hands of a respectable solicitor the cost of dealing with land was about the same
under the new Act, as it was under the old system. Now, as Mr. Strangways in
the matter doubtless spoke of himself, and he being confessedly one of the most
clever men in the colony, it was not to be expected that all the legal profession
could attain to the proficiency he spoke of in producing a bill of costs at once, or
even at all, without several amending Acts of Parliament to adapt the process so-
that the true standard of respectability in the matter of costs might be reached in
the natural course of his practice. As Mr. Opie very pointedly shows, this matter
of respectable costs has now been brought fairly within the reach of any lawyer
of ordinary capacity. In fact, so simple is the operation rendered, that the pro-
fession themselves have considerately closed the door, lest too many persons should
be admitted to share in this respectability. Now, with all due respect to your
correspondent, any reasonable person ought to see that human nature craves
for an aristocracy in just the same manner that a horse knows it ought to have a
rider. And as South Australia has no hereditary privileged classes, the want is as
a national sentiment severely felt, and to get them no other way appears than to let
things take their course by natural selection and the survival of the fittest. Of
course it takes more money to maintain the rider than it does to keep the horse.
And a class to be looked up to both for its learning and its high social status must
have a deal of money to spend. As most people propose to get along without
going to law the public do not much object to legal charges, because each man con-
cludes that he himself will not have to furnish the funds, while he will, with the
rest of the colony, share the great honor of having some Mr. Justice —by-and-by to
be called “ My Lud ” —and Q.C.’s in strong force, with plenty of aspiring young
men who will afford a reasonable chance for each rising citizen to gratify his
laudable ambition of having a son-in-law whose wife may be the “My Lady ” of
some future Chief Justice; or, at least, may, as the wife of an Attorney-General or
of a respectable solicitor, have a right of entree among the notables of the land. All
these things and a great many more that Mr. Opie seems to have sadly overlooked,
sensible colonists will be sure to think of. No simple-minded citizen would ever
trouble himself about the expensiveness of maintaining this high lawyer class in
the way your correspondent does. That citizens do not mind it is abundantly
testified by the sweeping majorities by which respectable solicitors are sent into
Parliament —for the very reason that they may duly provide for the dignity and
proper respect the country is entitled to receive at their hands. Then, as to pro-
bates and administrations, the more I think of it the more does your correspondent’s
narrow-mindedness appear. When a man dies, what is more reasonable than that
some adequate share of his property should go to the support of such an ennobling
institution as the legal profession, capped by the judicial ermine P It is clear the
deceased cannot need the money himself. His widow and family having been used
to hardships and economy will be able to provide well enough with what is left for
themselves : at any rate, they as plebeians will thrive much better under the shade
of a firmly-rooted patrician legal oak than if left to the mercy of the wide wide
world without such a protection. Let not some inappreciative citizens say that
plants under large trees are robbed of the nutriment of the soil and of their proper
share of the sunlight and fresh air by the overshadowing tree. The advantages of
protection and the sturdy growth induced by exposure cannot both exist together.
So South Australians, like prudent men, of two evils choose the lesser, and show
their wisdom by fostering the mighty growth of that profession which adds dignity,
if not ease, to an industrious and dependent people.
I am, Sir, Ac.,
PLEBS.


THE REAL PROPEETY ACT.
{From the Northern Argus , January 6, 1882.)
We have received a circular from Mr. E. A. D. Opie, in which he shows that
the Real Property Act has been greatly mutilated since it was first delivered over to
South Australia by its author. The writer lays down the great and leading
principle of the Act, as Sir R. R. Torrens meant it, and as he had no doubt, all
understood it. He refers to the opposition which the practising members of the
legal profession gave to the Act when it was first passed, but he considers that the
judges of the Supreme Court were the greatest enemies to the Act, as they had
done their utmost to render it unworkable. The writer contends that the judge is
fast arrogating to himself all the powers of a jury. He tells them that the law of
the case is so and so, and they must find such a verdict; or, he stops the case before
it goes to the jury ; or, when they have found a verdict, he quashes it by reporting
that it is against the weight of evidence. The cure urged by the writer is not to
pass amending Acts, but to promptly, as each decision is given, pass an Act
declaring what was the intention of the Parliament when the Act was passed, and
by insisting that such should, notwithstanding Supreme Court decisions, be the
effect of it. He does not accuse the judges of wishing to make dealings with land
costly, but the mischief is that they look upon themselves as the makers of the law
instead of the administrators of it. He cites cases in support of what he advances.
The writer asserts that one of the greatest blessings established by the Act has been
practically snuffed out, meaning the lay tribunal of the Lands Titles Commissioners.
He refers to clauses of the amending Act of 1878, which are not in the spirit of the
original; and the last matter which the writer brings before the notice of the
public is the Probate and Succession Duty Act, which he declares is a most vexatious-
one. He says :—“ Surely the public cannot be generally aware that by it the duty
is made a first charge or debt to Her Majesty, and that this means, no matter how
many hands the land has passed through, investigating the title right back to 1876,
when the Act was carried, to make sure that the duty in every case of death has been
duly paid, and last month we have an amendment of the last-named Act forbidding
the'Registrar-General, in case of death of a registered proprietor,to allow any dealing
with the land until there is produced to him a certificate from the Commissioner of
Inland Revenue that the duty is paid. One would think that the proper way to
protect the interests of the Crown would have been not to make the Lands Titles
authorities tax-gatherers, and also throw responsibility on innocent purchasers, but
that on issue of Probate the Registrar of Probate should take a statement of the
deceased’s real property, and protect the duty by lodging caveat against the land on
which it was not paid ; or, if the Lands Titles Department must look after this,
then that when once a dealing were registered, the charge in favour of Her Majesty
should lapse, and in case of mistake the Assurance Fund be liable.”
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
[From the S. A. Register, January 10, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sib, —Spite of your half apology in giving publicity to my views as to the
Judges of the Supreme Court being responsible for most of the difficulties that
have arisen in the administration of the Real Property Act, the more I consider
the subject the more convinced I am that I have hit the right nail on the head;
and I am further fortified by the receipt of letters from several of the country
readers of your paper, and by many conversations with others whose immediate
presence did not call for letters. Indeed, I can say that although eveiy body
seems afraid to speak their mind, it is a widespread opinion that (not in Real
Property Act matters alone) the tendency of our Judges is to assume more power
than they are entitled to.


I was in hopes that my letter would hare provoked a discussion from winch
good would have arisen, and that, at any rate, the land agents, who almost owe
their existence to the Act, would have supported me in the matter ; but it seems
I was mistaken, and I am, therefore, constrained to continue the subject myself,
I have been accused of interested motives and Jesuitism in respect of my remarks
about obtaining probate and administration, but I fancy very unfairly. I
certainly think, and never denied my opinion, that agents are quite as competent
to act in these matters as solicitors ; but I was not then arguing to that end, but
merely mentioned the matter to show the effect of a monopoly. Although these
transactions, thanks to the Amending Act of 1878, are closely connected with the
Real Property Act, I will turn from them to the Act itself. It—that is the Act
of 1861 was, I believe, nearer perfection than we shall ever get again, and it
does seem a thousand pities that instead of being further perfected—l do not
mean by amendments, but by judicial decisions given in the spirit of the Act —it
has been so clouded by the adverse judgments of our Courts that no one now knows
exactly what it means. The letters I mentioned that I have received, one and
all, admit that I am correct in my allegation as to the Act having been mutilated,
and some ask what remedy I can propose. Well, no Rill that the Government
introduces will ever mend matters, for it will be left to the care of a lawyer, the
Attorney-General for the time being; and, as I stated before, and now r reiterate,
no legal mind is competent to deal with this matter. A lawyer, however
honest, cannot realize the fact that what the public cry for is that real property
should be dealt with in the same ready and simple manner as personal property
is. Some private member should bring forward a Bill for repealing the amending
Act of 1878, or, at any rate, the most objectionable parts of it, but taking care
that all the adverse judicial decisions to date should be nullified, by declaring in
other words, though perhaps not plainer ones, what was the meaning of the
Parliament when the original Act was passed. Such a Bill would, of course, need
legal help in looking up the records of the cases tried; but surely some member
could be found who has business education enough to revise the Bill and firmness
of character enough to take care that the desired end is gained.
One of the chief alterations which would be made by repealing the Act of
1878 would be the re-establishing the Board of Commissoners in their full powers
as started by Sir R. Torrens. They acted as they were intended to do for nearly
twenty years, and in their limited capacity for about four years. As I brought out
in my last, they were of great service while they filled their proper position, but
the last four years seem to have caused the authorities to think it much better
to go on as they are now—wrapped up in bands of red tape —than to render
the service to their country they were called into being for. I have been told
that it is not proper that laymen should be called upon to deal with the
■constituting of wills and the many complications that arise thereunder, and
I know that this was the strong argument used when the last Commission
was sitting just before the passing of the Amending Act of 1878 ; and yet those who use
this argument seem to lose sight of the fact that the Board does, even in its present
limited condition, deal with many complicated wills in receiving applications
to place land under the Act, many of such applications operating to all intents
and purposes as transfers; that the Board in such matters always had the
advice of two professional gentlemen of at least quite as extensive a practice
in conveyancing as anj r Judge we have ever had on our Bench; and that the
responsibility of the Board—of which so much has been made —is no more than
is _ thrown on every private conveyancer almost every day of his existence,
with these very important differences, that so far as the Real Property Act
is concerned Eirst, there was always, is case of mistake, the Assurance Fund
to fall back on; and second, the rights of parties interested were guarded by adver-
tising the claims made for titles for periods extending from one to six months.
Ihe vulgar idea of the Act, and that which is most simple and forcible,
is that the titles are a constant succession of grants from the Crown —that
when a man dies or sells his land his grant is given up and a new grant issued to his
successor. Like many other common' ideas, this is the correct one. A certificate
of title should always be held simply to mean what it says: that the person


named in it is possessed of the estate described, and that to look further back would
be as useless as to look behind a land grant.
Some think the succession duties which I hare previously mentioned are a light
matter. Perhaps, when it is pointed out that in some cases the duty amounts to
one-tenth of the value of the land, they will liter their opinion, especially as the
probability is that many who believe from whit they see written on their certifi-
cate that they have unencumbered titles will hereafter discover that their lands are
still charged with the duty.
The case of Brady v. Brady seems to have settled that in the case of forgery
all entries in the Register-book in consequence of such forgery should be void. I
do not say that this finding was against the wording of the Act, but mention it as
an illustration of which way the amending of the Act should, in my judgment, have
gone, viz., to let the Lands Titles authorities teke every precaution before making
their entries against forgery, but to throw the responsibility on them (i.e., on the
Assurance Fund), and that an entry once made should stand for what it purported
to be.
I have had exception taken to my remarls about clause 35 of the Amending
Act (relating to transmissions of freehold), and I would fain believe as those who
do not see with me, but I cannot. Although there are many clauses in the
original Act, and some in the amended one that, fairly read, would
show that the executor or administrator, on being registered is, so far as
the public are concerned, the absolute proprietor of the land, yet,
considering that the Registrar-General in every iistance gives him a qualified estate
describing him as being seised in fee as executer of the will or as administrator of
the estate of the deceased, and that the clauses 36 and 38 declare in effect that the
object of his being registered is to convey to the parties entitled to the land, the
conclusion I have come to is, as I stated before, that he will, by the Supreme
Court, be held to be only a trustee, and the trusts of the will will be binding on
purchasers and mortgagees.
Finally, if we proceed with amending our Act in the same manner as we have
done in the past, I believe the public will eventuilly find it worse, a thousand times,
than the old system; that the Act will be repealed, and we shall return to the
former style of conveyancing, taking the last issued certificate as a starting-point;
for under the old system a man can exercise his own judgment and take and register
what he considers a sufficiently good title, while under the Act he must necessarily
conform to the regulations of the Lands Titles Office, and if he cannot or w r ill not
fulfil its requirements he must do without a title, and has practically no appeal.
I im, Sir, etc.,
Adelaide, January 7. E. A. D. OPIE.
REAL PROPERTY LEGISLATION.
(From the S.A. Register, Jamary 12, 1882.)
Two letters have recently appeared in our columns calling attention to the
present unsatisfactory condition of the Real Property law. The writer, Mr. E. A.
3). Opie, has evidently given a very large amouat of attention to the subject, and
his remai’ks are therefore entitled to notice. In to-day’s issue appears a letter from
another correspondent dealing with the same question. We appended a footnote
to Mr. Opie’s first letter, which was printed in tie Register of December 24, to the
effect that we did not endorse the views expressed by him in such general and
vigorous terms respecting the Judges of the Supreme Court. Thus, it appears to
us to be very unfair to say that “ the greatest enemies of the Act, and those who
have done their best to render it unworkable, lave been from time to time our
Judges of the Supreme Court.” It is certainly no fault of the Judges if an Act is
imperfectly worded, nor can they be expected o come to a conclusion as to the
intention of the Act, except from its language. Mr. Opie’s suggested remedy, when
a decision of the Court is given which reveals some flaw in the legislation, is open to
very grave objection. If a clause does not express the meaning which it was
intended to convey it would be simply absurd fer Parliament to pass an Act saying


what its intention was meant to be. The obvious course is to pass an amending
Bill which sets forth in plain unambiguous lauguage the provisions which it is
deemed necessary to enact. No doubt these amendments open the door to all kinds
of insidious alterations of the letter and spirit of the Real Property law, but not
more so than the plan suggested by Mr. Opie would.
But though in one or two minor matters Mr. Opie is, in our judgment, hardly fair,
yet in his main contentions he is undoubtedly right. The tendency of the amendments
of the Real Property Act has been to introduce complications into the law ; to give
to the Supreme Court a power which in most cases might have been allowed to
remain vested in the authorities in the Real Property Office ; and thus to neutralise
to a considerble extent the beneficial effects of the important reform inaugurated by
Sir R. R. Torrens. There are two distinct classes of cases in which difficulties may
occur in the administration of the Real Property law. The first class includes all
cases in which some error has been made in first bringing land under the operation
of the Act, and the second includes those which may arise in consequence of the
operation of the Real Property Acts and Statutes affecting them. Unquestionably
it is important that on questions of title the Real Property Office authorities should
be the judges, and that the certificate of title should be the absolute evidence of
ownership ; that, in fact, except in case of fraud, there should be no power to go
behind the certificate, and that in all cases where innocent holders of a certificate
suffer loss through the operation of the law, they should be recouped out of the
Assurance Fund. The Municipal Corporations, the District Councils and other
Acts bring in one set of complications by making the land liable for certain rates,
and by giving a power of sale in the event of the rates being unpaid for a certain
period. In practice, however, these provisions need not lead to any difficulty. A
buyer knows the different rates to which the property he is purchasing is liable, and
he has only to find out whether all that are due at the time the purchase is settled
have been paid. The evidence is readily obtainable, and the matter can be decided
in a few minutes. But the case is very different in regard to the Probate and
Succession Duties Acts. The succession duty is made a first charge on real property
liable to it, and on property which may be taken in exchange. It is quite possible,
therefore, that it may yet turn out that land which has been transferred since 1876
is liable to succession duty, though the present owner has no knowledge of the fact.
The Probate and Succession Duties Act passed last year introduced fresh provisions
which, though they were intended to protect the revenue, and may possibly have
that effect, will, we fear, create further difficulties in the operation of the Real
Property law.
The questions which Mr. Opie has raised will certainly have to be very
carefully dealt with before long. The Amending Real Property Act of 1878 was
intended to remedy certain defects which had been found to exist in the Act of
1861. But it is notorious that in regard to some of the leading principles of the
Amending Bill there was a great diversity of opinion. The extent to which the
Assurance Fund should be made liable ; the recognition of equitable interests ; the
propriety of rendering equitable mortgages valid; and other matters w r ere discussed
while the Bill was under consideration, and in some instances the decision of
Parliament, as embodied in the Bill, could not easily be reconciled with the
principles which were understood to lie at the foundation of Sir R. R. Torrens’s
Act. The Rights-of-Way Bill passed last year will also be found, we fear, to create
fresh difficulties. It is not very easy to suggest the best remedy. If there was a
layman like Sir. R. R. Torrens who would take the whole subject in hand we might
hope to get an Amending Act in substitution for the Statute of 1878, which would
accomplish all that is needed. It seems pretty clear that it is of little use looking
to the legal members of the House, wdiether they belong to the Government or the
Opposition, for a satisfactory solution of the problem. It is well, however, that
public attention should be aroused to the fact that the effect of recent legislation is
to imperil the integrity and effectiveness of the principles of the Real Property Act,
and when this is clearly understood we may hope the strong expression of feeling
created will lead to such a revision of the present law as will remove the objection-
able features pointed out by our correspondents, and remedy in a simple manner
the defects in the Act of 1861.


R.P.A. AND THE PROBATE AND SUCCESSION DUTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, January 12, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir,—l hare with pleasure read in the Register of December 24 and January 7
the letters of your correspondent “E. A. D. Opie,” and think that Mr. Opie
deserves the thanks of the public generally for placingthis very important matterinso
clear a light before them. There can be no doubt that with the decisions of the
Supreme Court (adverse to the spirit of the Act) and the several unfortunate
attempts to perfect the Act, that in the course of a very short time dealings
under the Real Property Act will, as your correspondent avers, be worse than
under the old system. Parliament will not take the initiative; the lawyers
certainly won’t (they are well pleased with the complications that have arisen) •
the brokers as a rule think the Act will last their time; and unless the press
and popular feeling make itself felt the consequence undoubtedly will be as
stated by your correspondent, and ultimately the Real Property Act will be
u. thing of the past. I think, with Mr. Opie, the sooner the Board of Commissioners
with the powers intended by Sir R. R. Torrens, are re-established the better it will
be for the public. If this Board were composed of mercantile men (not
solicitors or brokers) of good business ability, with greater powers than at present,
full control of the Assurance Fund, full power to deal with all cases, except
laud, brought before them, thus doing away with the cumbrous machinery
and expensive costs of the Supreme Court, the benefits derivable from such
a tribunal would be invaluable. One of the first principles to be that the
certificate of title shall mean what its author intended, viz., an indefeasible title •
that the Board shall not look behind such certificate of title, except in cases of fraud 5
when, of course, the aid of the Supreme Court should be invoked, and only in such
cases, for the purpose of punishing the criminal.
As regards the new rule lately brought into operation at the Lands Titles
Office wdh reference to the production of the warrant of the Commissioner of
inland Revenue, that all duties have been paid under the Probate and Succession
Duty Act, is unquestionably a very vexatious one. The two Acts should be kept
separate and apart from each other. This complication was certainly never
intended by Parliament, It is very annoying to honourable surveyors and brokers
to be compelled to obtain such warrants before transfer can be registered. Unscrupu-
lous persons, of course, hail it with delight, as such will be a source of
great wealth to them. I urn sure the general public have no idea of the enormous
costs inflicted upon the urfortunate widows and orphans of the middle and poorer
classes under the Probate and Succession Duty Act. The Legislature last
session partly repealed this Act by fixing the lowest sum on which succession duty
shall be paid as £I,OOO, probate duty being still enforced in all instances. I quite
agree with Mr. Opie that agents can, if the law allowed, obtain letters of adminis-
tration and probates as efficiently as members of the legal profession. The cost of
the former would be about one-fourth those of the latter—a great boon to poor
people. That land agents have in times past prepared letters of administration
and probates, and that lawyers have for a small fee endorsed their names on back
ot same, and that the same have been duly passed at the Supreme Court I believe
tew can deny. Estates under £I,OOO now pay probate duty, Supreme Court fee*
and the solicitor s charge for preparing same, the solicitor’s charge in small estates
always being greater than duty and office fees together.
1 suggest that probate duty in estates under £I,OOO be done away with; that
neither broker nor solicitor prepare letters of administration or probate, but that the
Supreme Court, on application by the deceased’s widow, or representative, prepare
everything requisite, and grant letters or probate to such representatives direct
J.fie cost ot obtaining the necessary documents for the effectual dealing with reai
estate presses very heavily on the working classes of this province. It frequently
fiappens that a working man dies possessed of a small property worth say £2OO or
.-jO perhaps mortgaged to half or two thirds its value—it costs his strmr e lin<*
widow and children, in addition to probate duty, Supreme Court fees, some £4 to


£ls for solicitor’s costs for preparing the necessary documents —documents that
could be prepared as efficiently by any land agent for £l.
It is not the rich widow or heir who feels this heavy charge, but the unfortu-
nate struggling widow with her young family. A young man may squander away
his birthright without let or hindrance, but to make a copy of his father’s will and
prepare the necessary formal documents (not requiring any legal skill or special
ability) for proving such will would be monstrous in the eyes of the legal profession.
No doubt the legal profession would strongly object to the Supreme Court
issuing (for one-half the present total cost) to the widow direct the necessary
documents to enable her to deal with her husband’s small estate, but I would
point out that we have not to consider the solicitors in so important a matter as
this. We have to pass such laws as will confer the greatest benefit on the greatest
number, irrespective of the opinions of judges or lawyers ; and the legislator who
pilots this matter to a successful issue will not only gain for himself a reputation
second only to that of Torrens, but will also receive the heartfelt thanks of the
whole of the middle and poorer classes of this community. Trusting so important
a matter will not be allowed to drop,
I am, Sir, etc.,
A. S. C.
(From the S. A. Register, January 13, 1882.)
“ Probate ” calls attention to the fact that “A.5.C.,” whose letter appeared
in yesterday’s Register, is inaccurate in stating that probate duty is still enforced
upon estates sworn under £l,OOO, as since 18th November last (the date upon
which the Amending Probate and Succession Duties Act came into operation) that
duty has been done away with upon the estates in question.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the Mount Barker Courier, and Onkaparinga and Gumeracha Advertiser,
January 13, 1882.)
We have received a circular from Mr. E. A. D. Opie (of Messrs. Cotton &
Opie, land agents,) with the above title, from which we take the following extracts: —
‘ Whereas the inhabitants of the Province of South Australia are subjected
to losses, heavy costs, and much perplexity, by reason that the laws relating to
the transfer and encumbrance of freehold and other interests in land are complex,
cumbrous, and unsuited to the requirements of the said inhabitants, it is therefore
expedient to amend the said laws,’ —such is the preamble to Torrens’s Real
Property Act. That Act effected a change, and for some time the grievances men-
tioned were done away with, but, as the result of judicial decisions and Legislative
enactments to cure supposed defects in the Act, what can w r e say now ? Is not
every word of the above quotation as applicable now as when it was written
twenty-three years ago.
“ The practising members of the legal profession, although they were no doubt
as a body opposed to the Act when it first passed, have since accepted it, and lent
their aid "to—as they consider —amend it, but the greatest enemies of the Act, and
those who have done their best to I’ender it unworkable, have been from time to
time our Judges of the Supreme Court. These functionaries, paid servants of the
people, placed in their positions to enforce the laws their masters make, seem to take a
delight in driving their coach-and-four through every Act that is passed. So far as
any person who has the misfortune to be dragged into law, or to become the owner
of any interest in land is concerned, they are almost as absolute rulers of South
Australia as the Czar of Russia is reputed to be of his subjects. To show what is
meant it is only needful to point out how they are year by year practically
abolishing that great boon to Englishmen trial by jury. The Judge is fast


arrogating to himself all the powers of the jury. He tells them the law of the case
is so and so, you must find such a verdict; or, he stops the case before it comes to
the jury, and says that there is not sufficient evidence to go to them; or, when they
have found a verdict, he quashes it by reporting that it is against the weight of
evidence.
“As to judicial decisions adverse to the Act, I will mention two recent cases.
—lst. —Neill v. Lindsay, in which the Judge, after giving a verdict for the party,
who was no doubt entitled to it, went out of his way for apparently no other object
than to 'upset a Real Property Act title. He held that because the District
Councils Act states that in case of a sale for rates the Master should ‘ convey ’ the
land, and that there was no such thing as conveying under the Real Property Act;
but transferring (Walker’s dictionary says transfer means to convey, and convcv
means to transfer), therefore fihe intention of the Parliament was that in case of
■sale of land under the Real Property Acts for rates the Master should execute a
conveyance, and by so doing take the land back from the new to the old system.
2nd —The case of Eormby and another against the Corporation. Notwithstanding
that the Act of 1861, in its interpretation clause, declares that the word ‘ land ’
shall extend to and include all passages, ways, etc., the Judge decided that a
Certificate of Title for land with an appurtenant right-of-way was void so far as it
related to the right-of-way. Nobody but a lawyer will admit that he administered
the law as he found it, but will rather think he made his law for the occasion. This
•decision eventuated in the Rights-of-way Act of 1881, an Act which perhaps does
not do much harm (though that has yet to be proved) beyond throwing a good deal
more work on the Lands Titles officials.”
Stet 2lct tmb feme dkfaljretu
(Slug „suftraltfdje gettuug", 17* sanuar 1882.)
SSom erften fftnfange beg (Snttrmrfg beg Steal srofjertt) ffteteg an
|at biefe Ijeilfamfte after ©efe|reformen mit cntfdjicbenen nnb jafjeu
fjeinben ju fdmipfen gefyabt nnb biefen ift eg felbft in letter geit
nod) getungen, nad)bem bie SBercfyrer beffelbeu ifyn in ©idierfteit
glaubteu, bemfelben ernftc ©d)dbignngen beijnbrtngen, bie an=
fdnglid) alg fotd)e ganj nnb gar nidjt erfannt, oietmeljr alg 35er0effe=
rnngen anggegeben untrben. 2)urdj biefe 9tenberungen ift ber noai>re
©cift biefeg QXcteS, nrie ©it fTorreng ibn binfteftte, bie ©in*
fad)()cit beg fperfabreng anfgeljoben nnb bamit finb bie Soften ber
Skrloaltung abermalg bebentenb oermet)rt, inbent biefe SSeranberungen
ben Stidftern beg ©bcrgeridjtg bie SDtadjt gaben, fid) in bie fßerioiftt*
nng einjumifdjen, bie aftein nnb ooftftdnbig nur bnrd) bie trenigen
23eamten beg Steal sro)pertt) @efe|eg toerben foftte. 2Die
im fiber biefe mel)r nnb benttid)er l)erOortretcnben
Seller mef)ren nnb man fann fid) nur nnmbern, baft fie nid)t
Xangft einen Sturm beg Untoifteng t)erOorgernfen I)abcn, bem aftein
bie nenen, loacftfenben ©efaftren jn loeid)en Oermbgen. (Sin Qlgent
in Sibetaibe, §r. Opic, ber grofte (Srfabrnngen in ber SBerloaltung
biefeg 3'tcteg befitjt, bat enblid) bnrd) cine 23eteud)tnng im „9tegifter‘
biefen ©tnrm erregt, ber feljr balb bie fOtacftt errcid)en mirb, bie
fdl)ig ift, afte ©efabren, line ©!pren Oor bem SBinbc, jn oeriuebcn,
fobalb er babei bie Unterftn|ung beg SJSublitumg finbet. Sir finb


baft bteft auf’B after ©ntfcftiebenfte gefdjetyen ftirb, [oßalb
bet SSrtef be§ srn. ben ttrir in Ueßerfe|iing unten folgcn laffen,
Befannt geworben unb genugenb crtoogen fein nnrb. ©er ed)te ftieal
property 9lct ift al§ £tnb ber Colonic fo Boftftdnbig ein unfcerdufter*
lidjeS unb fo I)od) gefcßd|te§ ©{gentium ber iboftmie getoorben, baft
fie burdj teine ber @rbc e§ fid) ioitrbe laffen. sla*
ntentlid) foftten bie beutfdfen red)t entfcftieben fur biefe
ttridjtigc ®efe|reform, beren unb ©egen fur ba§ £anb fie
I'on Bngenb auf JEenncn gclcrnt i)aben, eintreten, auf bie fid) Be*
fanntlid) ber ©djityfcr biefe§ sXcte§, ©ir £crren§, Bei ber Beaßfidftigten
(Sinfuftrung beffelßen ganj Befonber§ unb bie if;m bamot§ ba§
grcftartige seft in ©anunba gaßcn, ba§, d)ne jeben Btteifel, non
cntfd)iebener SBirlung ioar unb ben ©ieg fid)ern f)alf. ©ie grabe
foftten bamit Beginnen, oor bem Bufammentritt be§ sarlament§
offentlid)e SSerfammlungen in alien bcutfdjen ©iftricten ju fatten, in
Setrcff be§ seal slcte§ ju faffen unb biefe ißren
©iftrictSoertretern init bem Qhiftrage jn üßergeßen, fie im Sparlaniente
burd)jnfe|en. ©Heft nmrbe ein anfmnnternbe§ 23eifyiel fur bie Briti*
fcßen TOMoniften toerben, bem fie feß>r Bereitmidig folgen miirben.
sur bie nnOerfdlfcßte (Srljaltung fold) einer groften @inrid)tnng foftte
fein ©f)f er S u 9 ro f> fein, ba§ nid)t bie ©inftoßner freubig jn Bringen
Bereit todren, unb oor adem ift e§ ber sreffe SPjUdjt, bap recßt
bringenb unb unaßlaftfid) jn ermnntern. SBerben nnr Die genngtßuenbe
srcube Baßen, baft bieft unfer ermunternbcS SOBort eine geneigte (Sr-
iodgung unb SBeacßtung finbet?
[Teansxation.]
“ The draft of the Real Property Act, which is really the best of all law
reforms, had to battle from its earliest beginning with the most decided and tough
enemies, and they have succeeded lately, notwithstanding the admirers of this said
Act believed it to be thoroughly safe, to damage it considerably. The alterations
introduced were not at first recognised as of a damaging character; but it was
pretended that they were improvements. The real spirit of the Act, as Sir R.
Torrens framed it, has been injured by these alterations ; the simplicity of the legal
procedure has been done away with, and through that the expenses of transaction
under it have been much increased, for these alterations have given the power to
the Judges of the Supreme Court to meddle with the working of the Act, and do
those things which it was intended should be solely and completely performed by
the few officers of the Real Property Act. The complaints of the people over these
more and more distinctly striking faults are increasing, and it is only surprising that
they have not long ago created such a storm of indignation that these new and
manifest dangers have not been removed. An agent in Adelaide, Mr. Opie, who
has great experience in the working of the Act, has at last raised this storm through
a correspondence in the Register. We do not doubt it will increase to such a
power as to be able to blow away all dangers as chaff before the wind, as soon as
he gets the support of the public. We are convinced that such will be most
decidedly the case as soon as the letter of Mr. Opie, which we give in translation,
has got known and has been sufficiently thought over. The Heal Property Act is a
child of the colony ; it has become so completely a not-to-be-bartered away and
highly valued property of the colony that the community would not like to see it
taken away by any person on earth. The German colonists especially should make


a most decided stand for this most important of all law reforms, the importance
and blessings of which they have learned to value and esteem from their youth.
They gave the author of this Act, Sir R. Torrens, on the intended introduction of
it, their especial support, and tendered to him a largely attended reception and
banquet at Tanunda, which, without doubt, made a marked impression, and helped
to secure the victory. It is the G-ermans especially that should begin to hold
public meetings in all German districts before the reassembling of Parliament, and
pass resolutions in reference to the Real Propert Act, and hand them over to their
representatives with the instructions to see them passed in the House. It would
give an encouraging example to their English fellow-colonists, who would soon and
readily follow. Yo sacrifice should be too large for the preservation without altera-
tion of such a grand institution, and every colonist should be ready to bring his aid
to accomplish this object.”
t @in Slgent in 9lbelaibe, .§err (S. 31. 2). £tyie, Ijat oerfd)iebene
3irti!el fiber ben fßeal property 3kt in ber englifdjen sreffe erfcJ>etneu
Xaffen, bie meiiren unferer beutfd)en sreunbc fa gefatten baben, unb
bie fie fiir fo miditig batten, bap fie un§ bringenb erfud)ten, biefelben
in Ueberfe|ung mitjutbeilen, nub ba and) mir oiete ber barin au§ges
f!prod)eneit 3lnfid)ten tbeilen, fommen loir biefcm 3Bunfdje gern nadj.
lauten:
„2)a bie CSinmobner <Sub*3iuftratten§ baburd) SBcrlujtcn, gropen
Hlcften nub mandjen Unamtel)mlid)feitcn au»gefe|t finb, bap bie ®e*
fe|e fur Uebertragungen unb 9ser:pfdnbungen oon (Sigentbum nub
anberen Sanbiutereffen untfangreid), befd)ioer(id) unb fiir bie (Srfor*
bcrniffe ber gcnannten ©nioobner uugeeignet finb, fo ift e§ rdtblid),
bie genannten ®efe|e 511 oerbeffern;" fo lautet bie SSorrebe ju bent
2orren§ fßeat 3(cte. 2)iefer 3lct beloirlt eiue 3lenberung,
unb fiir einige Beit murben bie ermabnten ©djmierigleiten abgcfdjafft,
inbep ma§ fbnnen loir je|t bariiber fagen, feitbem rid)ter(id)e ©nt-
fd)eibungcu unb 3serfiigungen angeblidje SMngel im
3lcte &u oerbeffern meinten? Bft uid)t )ebe§ 3Bort ber obigen 3ln=
fifarung je|t ebeufo anmenbbar, al§ loenn e§ oor 23 Babren gefd)rieben
metre? 3sor furjem fdiilberte ein 33rief in Bbeer Beitung bie
ftnnige SBirlung be§ 2eftament§=!Steueo=®efe|e§ in SBetreff be§ 9ieal
s£ro!pertt) 3tct§, unb biep brad)te mid) ju bem ®ebanfcn, bap e§ Beit
fei, loenn Bemanb bie 3lufmerffamfeit auf bie 3lrt unb 3Seife rid)tete,
in welder ber Steal proper*!) 3lct gemorbet loorbeu ift, feit er un§
oon feiucm @d)ifafer jur Sermattung iibergeben mar, unb ba fein
fabigerer @d)reiber biep aufnimmt, fo mid id) e§, mit ©rlaubnip
tbun. Bd) mill uid)t in eine 3lufjdbtung feiner SSerbienfte eingeben,
SSerbienftc, meldje uidjt Hop oon un» felbft, fonbern and) oon
unfereu ©d)ioefterfotonien, bie unfere Reform tofpirten, oon oielcit
bebeutenben (Sdjriftftettern in (Sngtaub unb oon ber britifdjen Stegior*
ung ancrfannt murben, bie unfer ®efe| faft ot)ne 3lenberung in
Brlanb einfifartc; fonbern mitt a(§ Btoecf meiue§ 33riefe§ ben gropen.


Icitcnbcn ®runbfa| unfereg ®efc|eg, tt>ic ©it ©orreng il)n meintc,
barlegen, unb ioie dp cl>ne 3ioeifet afle ©iMuftratier, ®efe|!unbigc
ober nidjt, it>n Oerftcben. Unb Dag ift, bajj cm (Certificate of ©itte
(§Bejtititcljcugni§) einmat erlaffen, bem regiftrirten S3efi|er bag ®d
gentium beg £anbcß iibcrtragcn fottte; bag biefcr abfolute ©outrode
fiber baffetbe, bamit p ocrfaljren, loie er eg lounfd)t, befi|en, unb
bafi ein Mufer ober 0011 fotd)em regiftrirten
nid)t aufgeforbert loerben biirfc, irgcnb eiuen ober ein
anperfennen, anffer bem, loag anf bem ©efiijtitet einge*
tragen ift. ©ag ift bag SBcfcn beg ganjen Idcteg oon 1801; trie
aber bie Übfid)t beg ©dppferg oereitelt loorben ift, bag muffle eingc*
fetjen roerben.
©ie praftifirenben SOZitglieber beg slbOo!atenftanbeg, obfd)on fie
ot)ne JBtoeifcl atg bem Slctc, atg er angcnommen lourbe
opponirten, b a^eit ib u fcitbem angcnommen nub Jeiben igre §nlfe,
nm it)n, mie fie ntctncn, p oerbeffcrn; inbcg bie grbfden ©einbe
beffetben nnb bie, loeld)e igr Ssefte§ gettpn baben, dp nnioirffam p
tnadjen, loaren oon Scit p Beit nnfcrc SRidjter beg £)bcrgcrid)teß.
2>iefe SBeamtcn, bie Wiener beg SSotfcg, angcftcflt, bie oon
ibren §errn gegebenen ®efe|e p ooflftreden, fd)einen d)r ©ergniigen
baran p finben, ibre oierfpdnnige £ntfd)e_ burd) jebe§ ®efe| p
ireiben, bag angcnommen ift. ©ie finb fur jebe ©erfon, loetd)e fo
nnglMid) ift, oor ®erid)t gejogcn p roerben ober ein ©ntereffe in
©anb p ertptten, faft abfolute S3et)errfdjer in ©iMtuftralien ioie
ber sar Oon fftnfdanb fiber feine Untertlpnen. Urn pjeigen, mag
biefs t)eifd, ift eg nur nbtbig, anpfiibren, ioie fie 3abr file 3abr be*
miigt finb, bie groge ©Sobtttpt beg engtifd)en ®efd)loornemoefeng
praftifd) anfpbeben. ©er ©idUer inapt fid) entfdjieben aUe 3J?ad)t
ber ©efdpornen an. ®r fagt ibnen, ba§ bag ®efe| in bem ©atle fo
nnb fo fei, bag fie fold) ein Urtbeil fatten muff ten, ober er l>ebt bie
ittage anf, ege fie oor bie ®efd)loornen fommt, inbem er fagt, baft
nid)t geni'tgenbe ©tjatfadjen oortagen, fie Oor bie ©efdpornen p
Btingcn; ober, menu fie ein Urtbeil abgegeben, gebt er eg nnter ber
ftngabe anf, bafi eg gegen bag ©eioicpt, ber ©eugenaugfage fei.
©ofern atg eg ridjterticfye, ben ©artamentgacten ploibertanfenbe @nt=
■fdjcibnngen betrifft, fann eg feine trenc Enr fein, in unferen fpdteu
©agen eg ioie Staifer p madjen, loetd)e bie ©efebe oerdnberten, fom
bent fofort, fo ioie eine ben @efe|en ploibertanfenbe ©ntfct)eibung
gegeben ift, ein ©efe| p erlaffen, bag erltdrt, iveldjeg bie sfbfidjt beg
©artamentg loar, atg eg bag ®efe| ertieg nnb baranf p bcfteljcn,
bap fotd)e, tro| ber ©ntfdieibnngen beg £>bergerid)teg, feine Sirfnng
fein fotte. SSerfteben ©ie loobt, bap id) bie Diid)tcr nid)t befdjnlbige,
atg loiinfcbten fie ©anbgefcbdfte toft) pie tig p mact)en, unb bennocb
ift it)r SSerfagren etioa baffetbe, inbem fie fid) atg bie (Cntioerfer ber
®efe|e, ftatt beren SSerloalter unb atg ben einjigen anfet)en,
auf ioetd)em fief) ibnen nur ibre untergeorbneten S3riiber udt)ern
biirfen. Urn ein p geben, fiit)re id) ©otgenbeg an: ©or


eintgen Sdtonaten ii?ar id) in einem gade intereffirt, in bent eg
toiinfcbengroertb erfcbien, bag bmterlaffene ©igentbum eineg SSerftor**
Beneu t£)eilen gu bur fen. gd) i)atte fidferlid) faft affe Arbeit babei
S'W tfyun, inbe§, ba id) nnr 2fgent bin, burfte icb nidrt nor ®erid)t
erfdjeinen nub innate einen 9ted)tganroalt annetymen. gd) bie
ganje slngelegent)eit burdj, roar im Dbergeridjt gttgegen, atg biefer
feme petition unb begabtte bie toften, ungear £5, atg
ber gad oorfanu ®r roar ungefdbr 2 ©timben im (Script, etroa 10
3J2inuten banerte eg, [einen gad bent 9M)ter oorgutefen, bag ©efudj
rourbe genebmigt, unb id) I)atte feiteng ber betbeiligten sartei bem
9ted)tganroalte £6O git gablen, bon benen etroa £5 al§ Soften bem
@erid)te gufamen, rodbrenb bag Uebrige in bie Safdre beg rdnioattg
fto|. sld bteg gefd)ab unb ber gauge ©inn beg ©rblafferg rourbe
gednbert, obne bag, fofern ber 9tid)ter roujtte, eine Untcrfd)ri[t ober
erne Buftimmung bon irgenb (Sincr ber babei interffirten
borgebrad)t rodre. 2)iefcß Settyiel, rote bie betreffenben toften, bie
in ben toffer beg ®erid)t§ unb in bie Safdjcn ber slbbofaten get)en,
ift feine Slugnabme, [onbern ipaffirt faft ade Sage in meiner
fanning, _ gd), roie mein @efdjdftg=®om£agnon bemufjen ting, fern
bom ®erid)te gu bleiben, fbnnen un§ aber nid)t I)elfen, roo eg fid)
urn bie srufung bon Seftamenten unb 2Xti§itaf)nte bon Serroattungg-
red)t[amen (letters of administration) I)anbelt Step beftel)t aug nicbtg
aig I)ergebrad)tem Serfabren unb 2tu§fuden roeniger gornten,
toa§ jeber ©d)ul!nabe gu tt)un bermag, bie ©eridjtgfoften finb gering,
unb trofc adebem foftet ein Serfabren biefer 2lrt in ber 9tegel £3O
big £4O mebr. SOSenn eg ober 9tg on ten geftattct rodre,
fid) anftatt ber Slnrodtte bem erljabenen 9tid)ter git naben, rourbe
ot)ue groeifel bag Spublifttm feincn ®runb gur Hlage baben. gob
fagte foeben, „bap bie Slbbofaten, roie fie eg anfeben, d)re §itfe gur
Serbefferung beg Stfteg geliel)en baben, jebodj, roal fie fur Serb effete
ung anfeben, bait bie SJcebrgabl beg Sublifumg fur grabe bag @nt*
gegengefe|te* gd) _ toid babei feincn Sugenbticf ibre ©riinbe ober
SMnfdjc, ben Set je|t gu Oerbeffern, angreifen, inbeft id) [age, baft
fie alg eine Piaffe unfdbig finb, bieg gu tt)un. gl)re notbroenbige
©rgiebung im ©tubiuni ibrer SJSrofcffion mad)t fie unfdbig bagu.
SEBurben fie eg fur rdtbddj batten, bag 9tcgifteramt, foloobl nadj bent
alien ioie nad) bem neucn ©bfteme, abgufcbaffen? gd) oermutl)e,
bap Seiner btergu ga fagen ioirb, unb bennod) fagt Sorb ©t. Seonarb:
„SO?eine bcftimmtc IXebergeugung ift, baft eine adgemeinc Scgiftrirung
nicbt rdtt)tid) feu (Sine odgemeine Segiftrirung mad)t fdronungglog
bie Sngetegenbeiten ader 9£enfd)en betannt." (©d)luft folgt.)


Qcv SRcal property 3tct*
(3lu§ „2tu[traliidje Seitung", 24. saituar 1882.)
(Sdjlujj.)
3n SBctrcff rid)terlid)er Cntfd)eibungen, bie bem 21cte pmiber
finb, miff id) jmeier gaffe crmctyncn, Die fid) fiirjlid) crcigncten.
®tfteng 97eiff gegen £inbfal). gn ibm gel)t ber bidder, nad)bem er
ein Urtijeil fur bie gefdfft, meldje obne gmeifel beredjtigt 'max,
gaits aug femem 3Bege bcraug, erfidffltd) jit fcincm anberen gmede,
a(§ cinen 33efi|titel untcr bem seal 51cte umjuftofcen. Cr
bait bafiir, ba§ ber Siftrictg Council Slct beftimmt, baft im gaffe
beß SSertaufS Don £anb fiir fdffige ©tcucrn, ber (beg £)ber=
geridffg) baffelbe „convey“ (iibertragen) miiffe, bag aber ber [Real
~transfer”, inbejj nad) SBalferS 2Bbrterbud)e bebeutet convey [oDiel
al§ transfer, nnb transfer [ooiel alg convey, (beibeg iibertragen),
unb [omit mar bie slbfid)t beg bafc im gaffe beg ser*
fau[§ Don &mb untcr bem [Real property Qlcte megen ©tcucrn ber
Rafter cine conveyance angfertigen [off, Dercitclt unb [omit bag
-anb oom ncuen ©tyftemc jnriid unter bag alte gebradff. Ser jmeite
gaff ift gormbt) unb ein Stnberer gegen bie Corporation. 9Ud)tg*
beftomeniger ber slct Don 1861 in bem erftdrten § ejpref; bemerft,
ba§ bag -ffiort ~land“ ttcf> an[ affe SBege, Uebergange tc. erftreden
nnb fie ein[d>liegeu [offe, cntfdjicb ber 9M)ter, ba§ ein Certificate of
fiir £anb mit eincm jugebbrigen 9Begered)te in[ofern ungultig
fei, alg er fid) auf bag 3Begered)t bejiebt. SUemanb [onft alg ein
mirb pgeben, ba§ er bag @e[e| Dermaltete, mie er eg finbet,
fonbern toirb benfen, bag er fid) [ein ©cfcfc fiir bag £onb fclbft madjt.
.. ®iner ber grbfden ©egen, ben ber let fyinfteffte, ift praftifd)
prudgemgen. 3d) bejiefye mid) auf bag £al) tribunal ber Banbg
Sitleg Commiffionerg. Unter bem 51cte Don 1861 mar eg beren
Wid)t, affe ®e[ud)e fiir Uebertragungen Don bem Crbe ober ber
Dlad)(a[[en[d)a[t beg Derftorbenen £anbbefi|erg jit ermdgen. Siefe
tribunal Don &al)en ift feit lange Don ben 9Ud)tern eiferfiidjtig an=
gefeben, benn fie entfd)ieben tbatfdcblid) gragen in SSetrcff ber 93e[i|titel,
bie Dor bag Sbergerid)t gebracbt merben miiffen. [ffad) belnabe
20]at)riger Crfal)rung faun id) fagen, bajj bie Sienfte biefcr Com*
mtflionerg in bem oben genannten Umfangc Don nn[d)d|barem SBertbe
jparen. j2ie forberfen S3emei[e, unb jmar Diet ftrengerc SBcmeife, alg
fte bag £)bergerid)t bet 23emiffigung Don Se ft amen ten ober slbmini*
ftoationen femalg geforbert bat) [enter toar bag SSerfabren !prom!pt
nnb Infftg, nnb eg finb toemge gaffe Dorbanben, in benen ber grbffte
(oegner anjnfubren Dermbd)te, baft fie Unredjt getban fatten, nnb
mare bieg tennocb ge[d)eben, [o beftebt bagegen ein ©icberbeitgfonb,
unter alien Umftdnben ein 25ortbeil Dor bem £)bergerid)te. 9iun
unter bent Derdnberten Slct Don 1878, legt ber Mftreder ober 2?er*
matter [ein Seftament ober [cine letters of administration (Urfunbe


tier SSerinattnng) nor nub ift toft feineS 3)o!umenteS af§ S3efi|er
beS EanbeS be§ (CrblafferS regiftrirt; ina§ aber bie SBirfnng foid)er
ift, ineijt Seiner, obfdjon SJtandjc arginbbnen, ba§, menu
ein nor baS £)bergerid)t gebrad)t inirb, ber Ssodftrecfer ober 95er*
tatter angefef)en it)erbe aIS fet er nur Srnftee nnb baft ade totfer
nnb non dpt inerben ner!pffid)tet fexit, felbft bte
S3eftimmnng (trust) be§ SeftamenteS einpfeben. @idter, inettn bent
fo inure, fo iniirbe bie @efe|gebnng ben leitenben @rnnbfd|en beS
Steal sro!pertb sXcte§ piniber fein. 3d) mand)e S3emer!ungen
non Slbnofaten get)brt, inetd)e bte S3efi|titeUCommiffionerS nnb beren
friif)ere sftid)ten ber ber S3efi|titel fritifirten, fann jebod)
nid)t einfeben, inarum ein tribunal non £ai)en nid)t befdbigt fein
foflte, Slngefegenbeiten nnter bent Steal Sfcte fo gut p ner*
banbefn, al§ ein df)nlid)e§, baS feit einiger Brit in Sljdtigfrit beftebt
unb Slngelegenbeitcn nnter bent tonlanb=Sfcte nerbanbelt, urn fo
mebr, ba nom leftteren mit mebr ©runb gefagt inerben fbnnte, baft
e§ fid) 3}tad)tnodfomment)eit beS ©erid)te§ anmafte. (CS nernimmt
Bengen nnb epminirt fie nnb nerinaltet im adgemetnen feine ©e-*
fd)dfte, mit SlnSnabme incniger ted)nifd)er (&ad)en, in fef>r abnlidjer
Sffieife inie baS £jbergerid)t, nnb ba§ SldeS obne ben cineS
SteddSaninafteS, md()renb onbererfeitS ber S3oarb of (CommiffionerS
beS £anbtitel4(mteS mentals eine S3efi|titelfrage entfd)eibet, inettn fie
nidjt non feinen beiben Stbnofaten griinbtid) unterfiid)t nnb bariiber
bericbtet inorben ift*
(CS beftnben fid) nod) anbere §§ im nerdnberten Sfcte non 1878,
bie ganj beftimmt nicbt mit bent ©eifte beS nrfprnnglid)en SlcteS
übcreinftimmcn, j. S 3. § 68, nad) bent inir je|t cine (Cntfd)eibnng
ber 9tid)ter I)aben miiffen, erbffnet nnb begriinbet non nenem ade bie
Uebel beS alien <Si)ftemS bepglid) ader gered)ten Slnfprndfe. § 63,
ineldjcr equitable SJtortgageS fur nngiiltig erfldrt, ift non berfelben
Slrt nnb nodftdnbig gegen bie @rnnbfd|e ber Stegiftration afS baS
dßefen beS S3efi|titefS. @r erfdfeint mir ferner eine nu|lofe S3eftim=
mnng p fein, ba Beber, metier ©elb anf eineS S3efi|titelS
leibt, beforgt fein fodte, eine §i)pod)ef ptdpen p faffen, _ineld)e jeber
Beit§, Pennies notbtneiibig inerben fodte, bnrd) Stegiftration p einer
(jcfcfctidjcn gemad)t inerben fann. Renter ineifen bie S3e=
ftimmungen iiber baS SSerfaf)ren in non _ (CaneatS
(S3efd)lag), ftatt bie ©ntfdjeibnng gegncrifdjer Borbernngen, inie einfad)
fie and) feien, bent Stegiftrar-@eneral p tiberlaffen, jeben nor baS
£>bergerid)t nnb fdjreiben eine gerabep nad)t()eilige SBeife be_S Skr=
fabrenS barin nor. §74 fann nid)t mit bem Sfcte in ©inftang
gebradft inerben nnb maibt eS gefepcf), ba§ (Certificate of Slitle p
nmgeben nnb jebe Uebertragnng ober Sserl)anbfnng p infpeiren, tint
p entfdfeiben, ob ber Ssefi|er feine Bntereffen fur inertl)Oode @rinag«
nng erbaften bribe. SorrenS pigt in feinem an mebren
(Steden, inie feine Bbee bte tnar, baft ein frit ber e§ Sofnment nor bent
(Certificate of Side non feinem Sertf)e fein fodte; er gef)t fogar fo


meit, p fagen, baft anfgebobene Certificate bber anbcre ©mlnmente
an§ bem SRegifterbndje entfernt imb bernid)tet merben foftten.
Sd) femme nun auf ben probate nub ©ucceffbn 2)ntl) 3tct r
unb ber ift fid)erM) ein drgerlid)er. -3n ber baS
lann nidjt aflgemein nriffcn, baft bnrdj it)n bie ©tener p einer erfteu
gorbernng obev ©djnlb an 3sre EXiajeftdt gemad)t ift, nnb bieft
meint, ganj gletd), bnrdj mie btele §dnbe ba» £anb gegangen ift,
eine Unterfucbnng be§ £itefred)te§ bi§ pm Sabre 1876 priid, in
bem ber 3lct angenommen mnrbe, nm fid)er p fetn, eb bie ©tener
in einem jebcn 2mbe§falle mirffid) gepl)lt ift, nnb bergangenen SDtomat
batten mir einen Sufafc pm plefct genannten 9lcte, mcldjer bem
9iegiftrar berbietet, im saffe be§ 2mbe§ eine§ regiftrirten S3efi|er§-
irgenb ein SBerfat>ren mit £anb 311 geftatten, elje it)m nidjt ein Seng*
nift bom Commiffioner ber bariiber borgefegt ift, baft
bie ©tener bcjatyU loorben fei. SOtan foflte benfen, baft ber red)te
2Beg, bie Sntereffen ber tone p fdjn|en, ber fein nnirbe, bie 9lnto-
ritat nidjt p ©tenereinnebmern p mad}en, nnb ebenfo, teine 23er*
antmortlidjfett anf nnfdplbige toifer p legen, fonbern baft ber
bKegiftrar of probate bci 2ln§gabe eine§ probates cine 3lngabe bom
Cigentt)nme be§ Sserftorbcnen anfnel)mcn nnb bie ©tener babnrd)
fdjufcen foflte, baft er ein Cabeat gegen ba§ £anb erb>ebt, bon ioeldpn
fie nidjt gejat)lt mnrbe; ober, menu ba§ £anb 2at(e§ 2)e!partement
fjteranf feben muft, baft, menu einmat eine SSerbanblung regiftrirt
loorben ift, bie gorbernngen p ©nnften 3l}rer SQtaieftdt fatten, nnb,.
menu cm 23erfet)en borgefommen mare, ber bafur
anffommen foflte.
CbfdjoH id) lein befonbereb 23erlangen banad) babe, meincn
Stamen gebrndt 511 feben nnb tteber eine§ anontymen mid)
bebient bdtte, nnterjeidjnc icb mit meinem boflen Stamen in ber
baft eine S3efpedjnng fiber biefen ©egcnftanb beroorgernfen
merbe." C. st. 2). ©pie.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, January 26, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sm, —Your correspondent, Mr. Opie, deserves more thanks than ever he will
get for taking in hand the thankless task of showing how everything that was won
for the public by the strenuous efforts of Sir R. R. Torrens,assisted by the newspaper
Press, has been torn to shreds by subsequent tinkering of the Act of 1861.
That Act, being carried through Parliament under the vigilant and experienced eye
of Mr. Torrens, kept to its original intention so firmly that, under cover of two or
three minor improvements in details being wanted, the lawyers succeeded at last,
with the astute Mr. Strangways for their leader, in introducing an Amending Act,
which was to have had the effect of the Act of 1878, i.e., of subverting not only the
simplicity but the very principles of the original Act, viz., that each certificate of
title should be, as Mr. Opie so well points out, as good as a new grant from the
Crown. In this project Mr. Strangways was happily defeated. Two out of three
of the alterations that were really required were provided for in the new Act; and


when a broker submitted to one who bad sat as a member of the Commission to
report on the working of the Act that an effort should be made to get the other
small matter included also, the reply was —“ After a great effort we bare kept the
lawyers from destroying the Act. Let us not put it back before Parliament again,
lest they should gain their point.” The aim of the legal profession not being
gained, they did not long rest. A Rill was again introduced in 1874-5 to consolidate
the Act of 1861, and of 1869. The friends of the principle of Real Property
reform as introduced by Torrens, knowing what to expect, managed to shelve that
Bill, till at length this last Bill became law in 1878. Contemporaneously with this
the succession and probate duties came to the fore, and afforded a further opportunity
for legal dust being thrown into the eyes of the non-legal membei’s of Parliament and
the public, so that now, as Mr. Opie points out, the indefeasibility of land under a
certificate of title is gone, and the door opened to all kinds of litigation. The
issuing of a new certificate of title to parties interested under a will, however plain
the intentions of the testator may be, is removed from the inexpensive, safe conduct
of the Commissioners at the Lands Titles Office to the very expensive decision of
the Judges of the Supreme Court. The protection of the public is interfered with
by the deposit of a certificate without registration forming an equitable mortgage,
so that a man can borrow from a friend the full value of his property, while his
unsecured creditors suppose his freehold estate is unencumbered. The system of
caveats, which w r as at first plain and simple, has been also relegated to the Supreme
Court. One thing should be noted by the public. Notwithstanding the correspon-
dence of Mr. Opie and of “A. S. G.,”'and also your leader, not a word is said by the
members of the legal profession; they have gained their ends, and silence is golden.
Speech would only shed light on a subject that is now settled to their satisfaction,
so “let it rip” is in their case an appropriate expression. For myself, I much
doubt whether for some time the public will concern themselves about the matter
till their supineness has emboldened some rash step of unbearable hardship to be
taken which like a spark in gunpowxler, will arouse public indignation.
I had intended to notice the well-understood duty of Judges to supply the
gaps which usually require filling up in all Acts of Parliament as cases under them
come before the Courts. To do this it is necessary for the Judges to grasp the
intent and meaning of the framers of the Acts, which may be gained from a
perusal of the debates in passing the Bills through the Houses of Parliament.
As to whether the Judicial Bench of this colony has not rather shown a disposition
to improve after their own fashion than to administer the law as laid down by our
legislators is the question the electors who send them as their representatives to
Parliament should be very jealous of; and I close this letter by asking all who
have a respect for the dignity of Parliament whether the law r should rule in the
Courts, or whether the Judges by their own interpretations both make the law and
administer it at the same time.
I am, Sir, &c.,
LEX.
REAL PROPERTY ACT.
{From the S. A. Register, Jan. 28, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —In reference to the letters that have lately appeared in your columns on
this matter, would it not be well for some of the legal faculty to answer the follow-
ing questions ? _
Ist. Why cannot every certificate of title issued by the Lands litles Office
have the same validity as a land grant ?
2nd. For what purpose w r as the Assurance Eund established but to protect the
Government in issuing indefeasible titles ?
3rd. What is the amount standing to the credit of the said fund, and what
amount has been paid in respect to claims made thereon ?
I am, Sir, etc.,
REFORM.


THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register , March 2, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —Your leader hardly deals fairly with me in respect to the remarks I made
about the Judges. You will recollect that you did not print all that I wrote on
this head, and that if my letters were read as I wrote them it would not, as from
your article it does, appear that I accused the Judges of singling out the Real
Property Act to pick holes in ; hut that my belief could he seen to be that they
fight against all Acts of Parliament. I think it is the battle between
“ The lawless science of our laws,
That cofleless myriad of precedent,
That wilderness of single instances,”
and, what must eventually come, if the world and our Paliament last, a second
Code Napoleon, of which every Act of our senators will form a part. Our John
Bull bringing up makes us think that we are perfect in all things, law included, and
any foreign adaption is repugnant to our taste. I would be one of the last to
advocate the introduction of any French nastiness, which I know is subtle and
powerful; but when I see a nation that we generally despise, as being something
below ourselves, in possession of that, in its entirety, which we want and are
making piecemeal, I think we should for the time put aside our national prejudices
and take a lesson from them. We feel pride in our privileges and the freedom we
enjoy, and no doubt to a great extent justly, but, notwithstanding our pride, in legal
matters we are certainly behind almost every other nation. Taking only, for
example, the question of registration of title for land into consideration, England
has it in force in only two or three of her counties, and I think I may say is not so
far ahead as any other European State, not excepting poor, despised, purblind
Turkey. France, Germany, and some other countries have systems similar to our
Real Property Act, with the additional advantage of having legal functionaries who
administer the law as they find it written.
An absolute monarchy, strange as it may seem to some people, is far and away
better than our form of government, if you can only get a moderately good man as
ruler. So in law matters. I look upon a code of laws as an absolute monarchy,
having the required moderately good ruler, and on every Act of Parliament as one
of the bricks used to erect his palace ; while our legal system, with all its refine-
ments to attain perfect justice, bears a close resemblance to our limited monarchy.
Our lawyers would argue that our legal system is our government, but “the
ignorant and prejudiced public,” as I think Judge Gwynne called them, have got,
with some reason to look upon the lawyers and all their learning as something
distinct from the government, a burden imposed upon them, they don’t know how,
and to be borne with as much patience as possible until it is got rid of.
Our Judges, however, do not regard things in this light, but seem to think that
our laws, as framed in Parliament, are to be set at nought by their violent applying
of their store of precedents to them, when they come before the Court. These same
Judges may be thankful that their lot has not been cast in the time of some of the
old Pharaohs, or half of them would have gone to their rest nine inches shorter
than they did, and then their toes would have been left where their fathers placed
them.
One of the strongest contrasts I can think of, at the moment, is that between
our Local Court and Police Court—the former with a “ promoted lawyer ”at its
head, and all its paraphernalia of counsel for the plaintiff, counsel for the defendant,
and the rule of precedent for its guide, and the other with only its Pasha with two
tails, no lawyers, no precedents, only a stock of common sense. I suppose both
Courts deal with matters of about equal importance, and, despite all its defects in
legal machinery, most people will admit, that the Police Court deals out more
substantial justice, although in a rough and ready manner, than does the Local
Court. I have read a few law books in my time, and have admired the beautiful
manner in which it is all worked ont, like a proposition in Euclid, showing how
strict justice is to be done to everybody; but when I have thought how far°short


the practice falls of the theory, how the man with the longest purse can weary out
liis opponent, I have been tempted to cry for the reign of the rulers described in
the “ Arabian Nights Entertainments.”
The fact is, the Real Property Act was a departure from the existing form ot
law, and it was never meant that old musty judgments of the dead and gone past in
conveyancing should be applied to Real Property Act titles. Indeed, I consider
Justice Boothby, who in his day caused so much trouble in these matters, was, at
any rate, conscientious and open in declaring his opinion that the Act was re-
pugnant to English law ; and I believe this sums up the whole question : the legal
education that °led him to this opinion and his consequent adverse judgments has
been passed through by our other Judges, and with the same result, although they
do not speak so plainly, and I maintain that the only cure is as suggested in my
first letter, to teach them something else, namely, that they are placed in their
positions to administer and to obey the laws the Parliament makes. The remedy
would not have to be applied very often; and I really cannot see the serious
objections to it that you do. For example, in that case of glaring injustice to the
Act, Neill v. Lindsay, if the Parliament had passed an Act declaring that the Judge
was’ mistaken in his reading of their intentions, and that they never meant that
land once put under the Act should be taken back to the old system, do you think
His Honor would have ever given a similar judgment again ?
I affirm, most strongly, that the Act of 1861 was a clearly drawn Act, and that,
as to its meaning, no unprejudiced person could have any doubt, but that the
amendments of it are the reverse. Take, for instance, the working of the Acts in
the hands of the officials. There have—at least during my time—always been two
solicitors connected with the Lands Titles Office. Occasionally one or other of
them has ffieen absent, sick or on leave, necessitating one man taking the other s
duties. Under the Act of 1861 things went on in the same channel whichever of
them viseed the documents for registration; now, whenever a similar alteration of
duties is made, it means alteration in the practice, in very many important matters,
before registration can be effected. I need not give instances, as every broker can
bear out what I say from his own experience.
The adverse judgments themselves have been almost forgotten by the public,
although many of them caused a feeling of disgust when given, and although the
effect of such decisions remains; but, if they were only again laid en masse before
the public, I am sure they would show that I am correct, when I insist that these
decisions have not been fairly given, and that they have above everything else
conduced to the present state of affairs, and, if you will give me space for further
letters on the subject, I will try to prove that I am right, by comparing the
decisions with the Acts in force at the times when they were respectively
pronounced.
I am, Sir, &c.,
Adelaide, February 11. OTIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
{From the S. A. Register, March 22, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir,—The first case tried in the Supreme Court bearing on the Real Property
Act, that I have a note of, is Johnson v. Torrens, heard on April 7, 1809. before
Judges Cooper, Boothby, and Gwynne. The Real Property Act came into force on
July 1, 1858. On October 21, 1858, a land grant for a closed road was granted to
Johnson. His solicitor tried to register the grant by memorial under the old
system, and the Registrar-Greneral refused to allow him to do so, as by clause 14 of
the Act, the land should have been granted under the Act, and the plaintiff applied
for a mandamus to compel the Registrar-General to register the grant under the old
system. The Chief Justice was of opinion that clause 14 did not include grants
such as that in question, and that it was optional with the proprietor to bring it


under the Act or not. Judge Roothby believed the Governor was merely acting in
a ministerial capacity for the Commissioners of Roads. Judge Gwynne said the
land was not alienated from the Crown in the meaning of clause 14. The same law
applied to that land as had been applied to the Corporation acre, and there it was
held that land appropriated for the use or pleasure of the public could not be open to
appropriation by land grant. Then land alienated by the Roads Commissioners and
the Governor, acting jointly, was not alienated in the same manner as the waste
lands of the Crown. The transaction was that of the Commissioners, and the
■words of the Governor merely clothed the grantee with the legal estate. The
mandamus was of course granted.
Ihe exact words of the clause 14 in the Act of 1858 are —“ All land alienated
from the crown within the said province from and after the first day of July, 1858,
shall be subject to the provisions of this Act.” If the Judges had tried to
get at what the general purport of the Act was—if Judge Gwynne had thought
it worth while to quote such words as he did in 1874 (Ruekert v. Knobbe), viz.—
“In constructing Acts of Parliament Judges are to look at the language of
of the whole Act, and if they find in any particular clause an expression
not so large and extensive in its import as those used in other parts of the Act,
and upon a view of the whole Act they can collect from the more large and
extensive expressions used in other parts the real intention of the Legistature,
it is their duty to give effect to the larger expressions”—l say if the Judges had
tried to get at the meaning of the Parliament they would not have gone so far
out of their way to give their first dig at the Act. However, Judge Gwynne’s very
sensible quotation was given under very different circumstances, when his object
was to show that the Act was intended to do away with all equities, and had the
effect of making the Act appear to be incapable of protecting lessees for a less term
than three years. The Judges in the above case seemed to overlook the fact
that all their store of precedents was set at naught by clause 2 of the Act
which decla.res that all laws, rules, regulations and practice inconsistent with the
Act are repealed; and though even the Judges did not seem to think a proprietor
could not, if he choose, place his land under the Act, they seem not to
have realised the fact that the effect of their judgment was to debar Johnson
from ever placing his land under the Act, as the only property that can be under
the Act appears, from clause 15, to be that included in land grants signed before
Jidy 1,1858.
I do not think this case requires muclPdiscussion, the animus of the Judges is so
apparent; but there are some later judgements so subtly given against the Act that
they would require much more careful consideration.
I am, Sir, etc.,
March 20. E. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, March 27, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, — On the 17th and 24th March, 1860, the case Hutchinson v. Torrens was
heard before Judges Cooper, Roothby, and Gwynne. A certificate of title for a
section of land 144, Survey E, had been issued to Retty Leeworthy, pursuant to her
application. The plaintiff, averring that such section was really part of Section
121, previously granted by the Governor to him, part of which Section 121 had been
erroneously resurveyed by the Government and given a new number, wished
(through his solicitor) to inspect the application *made by lee worthy and her
previous title deeds. The Registrar-General refused to produce any document
prior to the certificate of title without Lee worthy’s written order, and the plaintiff
now applied to the Court for a mandamus to compel production. The Chief Justice
gave the judgment of the Court, stating that the Court gave no opinion as to
whether the public had any right to inspect instruments of title surrendered by


applicants, Rut they were of opinion that the application and the record of the
proceedings to place land under the Act, should be open to the public, as they con-
sidered the validity of a certificate of title depends upon the due performance of
the various acts prescribed by the Act to be done. The mandamus was granted.
You at the time could hardly account for the rejoicings of the lawyers over
this decision, but the judgment was clouded in a good deal of verbiage that I have
left out, and it wanted the next case (Hutchinson v. Leeworthy) to show what end
the Judges were working for. That end was to make a certificate void if any of the
proceedings ordered by the Act in placing land under the Act could not be proved
to have been done. The strong point adverse to the Act in this finding was not the
ordering of the production of the piece of paper, the application, which on allega-
tion of forgery, or other fraud no one would object to, but the principles laid down
by His Honor that it was necessary to establish the validity of a certificate of title
by showing that all the formalities required had been gone through with by the
applicant and the Lands Titles Department before the issue of title, and this judg-
ment was given, notwithstanding that the Judges might have found by searching
in clause 39, that it is declared that notwithstanding “ any error or omission in the
observance of any formality prescribed to be observed in bringing land under the
operation of the Act every certificate of title shall absolutely vest the estate or
interest described in the manner expressed in such certificate.”
This case was, however, only an introduction to one that was heard a month
after, and was only meant to show the steps to be taken by the lawyers to enable
them to give a heavy blow to the infant Act.
Wo know, well' enough, what was the intention of Mr. Torrens, which inten-
tion the Parliament did their best to give effect to, and it does seem strange that,
when our law-makers say a thing, the nominal administrators of the law, will have
it that the words of the Parliament do not mean what was intended, but some-
times things directly opposite. I shall in my next deal with Hutchinson v. Lee-
worthy, a monstrous case, which, necessitated the repeal of the original Act and the
passing of the Act of 186 U.
I am, Sir, etc.,
March 21. E - A - OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
From the S. A. Register, March 30, 1882,
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —The case of Hutchinson v. Leeworthy heard before Judges Cooper,
Roothby, and GfWynne on April 3 and 13 and May 29, 1860, Avas an action of
ejectment to recover fifty-six acres of land. On October 2, 1839, George Gawler
granted to plaintiff Section 121 e as 134 acres, shown in the plan then in Land
Office as bounded on one side by the Hindmarsh River, and on the other by Section
122. The land extending from the Hindmarsh to Section 122 really comprises 186
acres, and on the error being discovered, the Government made a resurvey, cutting
off 51 acres, for Avhich a grant was issued, as Section 144 to Henry Field.
Defendant purchases this and obtains a certificate under the Act.
Judge Cooper said that “ the wdiole of Section 121, as per the original
Government Map w'as vested in plaintiff ; any subsequent grant would be void, and
a certificate given in exchange for such grant Avould also be void, inasmuch as it
could not be founded on the original grant which was made to plaintiff and seems
to be unaffected by it. To understand the effect of a certificate it is desirable to
consider what is' the proposed object of the Real Property Acts, and ivhat is
required to he done in order to gain a title under them. By Section IS land may
be brought under the Act by the person, claiming to be the person, in whom the
fee-simple is vested in possession, at law' or in equity. When the required notice
has been giA'en, the Registrar-General is, by notice in the Gazette , to bring the land
under the Act, and, so soon as under, to issue certificate, containing reference to


original grant. _ Now, it appears that land granted prior to the Act is to be placed
in the same position as land granted since, but the origin of the title is the same in
each case. Land grants and certificates being ordered to be bound up in the
register-book appear to be on the same footing, and it has never been contended
that a land grant made since 1858 is of more force than one made before. In each
case the grant must be surrendered in order to obtain a certificate, and if a second
grant has been made of land previously granted, it is certainly the first grant that
must be surrendered to obtain a valid title. On looking at the Act of Parliament
under which the colony was established, I find His then Majesty was authorised to
appoint Commissioners, who were to declare all public lands open to purchase, and
to make rules and regulations for survey and sale. The Act does not give a form of
conveyance, nor, as in a later Act, does it say that conveyances or dedications shall
be valid and effectual to vest the land in the purchaser. Rules and Reguations
were made by the Commissioners, and I never heard that the efficacy of their land
grants has been disputed. As to the expression in the Real Property Act that the
certificate shall absolutely vest the estate or interest in the land, &c., this can have
no greater effect than the beforcraentioned words of the Waste Lands Act, 5,6,
Tie.; and as to being secure from adverse claim not declared in certificate, this will,
no doubt, be useful in protecting land properly brought under the Act, but cannot
have the effect of rendering valid a certificate or grant rendered void by the
existence of a former grant. Section 77 of the Amending Act prohibits any action
of ejectment (except in certain cases,) as against a registered proprietor. Looking
at the definition of a proprietor in the Act —‘ a person seised or possessed of an
estate at law or in equity in possession or expectancy,’ and keeping in mind the
imperfections of defendant’s title, I think it will appear she does not properly come
within the definition of a registered proprietor. There is another reason why
plaintiff should not come within the prohibition of clause 77 ; he does not appear to
have any other remedy than this action —In case of fraud or error by the
Registrar cei'tain remedies are provided for the person damnified, but plaintiff does
not accuse defendant of fraud, nor accuse the Registrar of any omission or
mistake. Although the certificate cannot transfer land, for that is not its object, it
might, if the required notices have been served, operate as a bar to this action ;
but to assume this it must be necessary for some one to give the notice. Rut, by
the Amending Act, the service of notice is, if no dealing is registered, not required,
so that it appears to bo a mattef confined to the party who seeks the benefit of the Act,
but cannot effect a person who has had no notice. It might be advantageous for a
person to have his title looked into, and obtain an ex parte declaration of title, but it
would be unjust that he should have the right of another person tranferred to him.”
Judge Boothby said “the grant to plaintiff is good, and defendant can only
answer by title paramount, which was attempted by putting in a document purpor-
ting to be a certificate of title. This does not, however, comply with many of the
requisites of the form in the Act, and the Registrar is forbidden to register unless
the instrument is in the form provided. It was not therefore, a certificate, and was
not evidence of the particulars therein set forth, so did not remove the necessity to
produce lield’s land grant. This would, however, not have availed, as it is
admittedly a second grant, and had the certificate been free from the objections
named, it would have been invalid, as resting on a land grant which conferred no
title. A broader question is whether the Act has any legal force, as it contains pro-
visions repugnant to the law of England. This Court has power to enquire into and
determine the legality of the legislation of the Parliament. A certificate is an
answer in ejectment, provided the registered proprietor is the true owner, i.e., was
registered in accordance with the Act and by force of a good title. But the
validity of a certificate requires to be enquired into, to ascertain that all the
requisites of the Act have been compiled with in its creation, and as to the title on
which it rests. The Court has power to revise the opinions of the Lands Titles
Commissioners, either in rejecting or passing a title, and, in this view only, the Act
is not repugnant to the law of England.”
Judge Gwynne said —“The grant to, and possession by plaintiff was legal. As
to the certificate produced, it was not proved that all the proceedings necessary to
be observed had been performed. The Act declares that a certificate shall be


received as evidence of the particulars set forth; but that is one thing, and evidence
of the proceedings under the Act another. The power to grant a document having
such extraordinary effects as attributed to a certificate by the Act, should be jealously
watched by the Court. The Registrar has power to grant a certificate only after
the land is brought under the Act, and it has not been shown that this land has
been brought under, therefore he had no power to grant the certificate. But, if
the certificate had been properly issued, it does not express that any estate or
interest is vested in defendant. The leading principle of the Act is to give a new
evidence of title in exchange for the title conferred by the Crown grants.”
Judgment was given in favour of Hutchinson.
If the Court had been desirous, simply to do right between the plaintiff and
the defendant, they could easily have given effect to their desires, without so-
deliberately venting their spleen on the Act. They might have held that the
Section 144 had in fact no existence. If they had asked themselves—now, what is
the intention of the Parliament, and how are we to give effect to their wishes as-
expressed in this Act P they would not have left on record the petulant judgments
pronounced in this case. The whole of the judgments —which extend over about
four columns of your paper —teem with vindictiveness against the Act, and the
subterfuges the Judges were driven to, to twist the various clauses of the Act out
of shape, are enough to disgust anyone. Their deliverances as bearing on the Act
seem to divide into two parts. First, they say that a certificate of title is not a title,
but merely an expression of opinion by the Registrar as to the title of the person
named, and, that when such a document comes before the Court, it is of no value,
as the function of the Court is to see that the Registrar’s opinion was correct, by
investigating the anterior title. How could the Court pretend it was giving effect
to the law when Clause 35 of the original Act declared that “ every certificate shall
be received in all Courts as evidence of the particulars therein set forth ?” Second,
they held that, whatever might be the effect of a certificate, it had not in itself got
that effect, inasmuch as it was necessary to prove that all the formalities prescribed
by the Act had been duly observed before its issiie. Clause 20 of the Act of 1858
says :—“Notwithstanding any error or omission in the observance of any formality
in bringing land under theAct,every certificate shall absolutely vest the estate therein
mentioned.” Can words be plainer ? And yet any person reading the Judge’s
deliverances, without having the Act before him, would think it imperative to in-
vestigate all the actions of the Registrar before granting a certificate. The Chief
Justice’s argument, about the effect of a land grant issued by the Commissioners-
under the English Act by which the colony was founded, appears to be a deliberate
attempt to throw dust in the eyes of the public. He quotes from our local Waste
Lands Act, which was passed after the grants in question were issued, to show the
effect of grants under the former Act, and instead of bringing his argument and
conclusion together, as I have done in my abstract above, he separates them by
nearly the wdiole length of his judgment, so that the fallacy of his reasoning may
not be too apparent. Judge Grwynne makes more extraordinary statements than
either of his colleagues. He argues (the so-called judgments are nearly all
arguing) that because it had not been shown that the land had been brought under
the Act, therefore the Registrar-G-eneral had no power to grant a certificate, and
that the certificate did not express any estate or interest as vested in the plaintiff.
The certificate was in the usual form, and expressed that Betty Leeworthy was
seised of an estate in fee-simple in the Section 144; so that what the Judge meant
was to the uninitiated a mystery, and is likely to remain so, unless the author of the
riddle should some day see fit to give the answer.
I am, Sir, etc.,
E. A. D. OPIE.


REAL PROPERTY ACT.
( From the S.A. Register, March 30, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sie ; —As pointed out by several correspondents of late, the above Act is
becoming increasingly complex, and drifting away from the simplicity of Sir R. R.
Torrens’s Act. I believe the remedy for all this is very simple. Let the whole of
the Real Property Acts be consolidated, and the working of them and all decisions
under them be entrusted entirely to the Lands Titles Commissioners and their
solicitors. This will have the effect of removing from the Supreme Court much of
that business upon -fthich Judges and Q.C.’s flourish. If errors should be dis-
covered, let injured persons be compensated by the Commissioners from the
Assurance Fund, without having to contest the matter in the Supreme Court, where
in land transactions fraud alone ought to be dealt with. Should the Real Property
Acts be consolidated, it is to be hoped the new Act embracing them will be arranged
under heads similar to the existing Act of 1878, and also be furnished with a care-
fully compiled index. That there is some need for consolidation appears evident
from the fact that the Act of 1878 repeals nearly forty clauses or sections of the
Act of 1861. Whilst writing on this subject, 1 would also ask why cannot the
Lands Titles Office make a small charge on each application or transfer, or both,
and attend to its own surveys as required, thus securing uniformity, instead of
frequently referring persons to licensed surveyors ? Other phases of this import-
ant subject I may refer to, with your kind permission, in future correspondence.
I am, Sir, &c.,
March 29. ICONOCLAST.
&ic Siidjtev isttb bet* 9icat SCct*
(3tu3 „9luftralij'd)e Settling", 28. 9JMr§ 1882.)
9Bir brudftc.n bor einiger Beit elite stbfycmbhtng be§ |?rn.
3). £)!pte in Qlbelatbe fiber ba§ fcinblidjc SSerfaf>reit ber 9fid)ter gegen
ben Steal 2tct ber Eolonte in uuierer Settling ab, bie er
im „9fegi[ter" l)atte erfdjeinen laffen, unb in ber er bie @efal)reit
fdnlberte, ioctdjen biefe§ befte after @cfc|e burd) ba§ feinbfelige
©treben ber 9fid)ter, e§ grunbtid) ju berberben, au§gcfe|t ift. 9Bir
forberten jugleid) bie 2Bdt)ler bringenb auf, bffentlid) I)iergegen ju
unb ifyre 2Sertreter im sartamente aufjuforbcrn, entfd>ie=
bene ©d)ritte jn tf)un, baffclbc in feiner urfyiinglidjcn Oeftatt mieber
unb bie 9fid)ter ju jlbingen, e§ tin ©inne ber ®efe|*
gebung *u betroaltcn. ©oloobl biefe Slufforbcrung be§ srn. in
ber englifd)en fpreffe al§ bie ttnfere in ber [d)einen feinen
©rfotg gebabt ju baben, benn mir tyorten feitbem and) bon
einein ©dnitte, ben bie SEBdbter in biefer )bid)tigen 2tugelegenl)eit
getban X)dtten. 2)ie ben 2Bdbtern, namentlidj ben garment,
(Skbote [tebenbe geeignete Beit bor bent nabenben Bufummentritte
be§ iparlamento get)t fdmeft boruber, unb ge[d)iebt fcitcnS ber SBaJlcr
)e|t nid)t§, [o get)t abcrmalS etn Bat)r f)in, obne bap in biefer §infid)t
etvoa§ 311 m <Sd)u|e unfereS tbeuerften ®e[e|e§ gefdfiebt, unb ben
9tid)tern unb ibren loirb none, reidie (Megenbeit geboten,


ibre Slngriffc barauf fortjufefccn unb fdjon erreidjten unbetlooden
©rfolge gegen baffeXbe ]u befeftigcn. §r. £)pie bat beftbalb oor
einiger Beit eine neue Slbbanblung burdj ben ~Stegifter" befannt ge*
mad)t unb toir bate & fur geboten, and) mit ibr unfere beutfdjen
£efcr befannt ju mad)en; benn e§ todre ja bodj mbglid), baft
fte bet bem einen ober anberen SB abler bie SBirfung bdtte, il)in bie
Slugen bffnen ju belfen unb ibn ju ermuntern, fetne ftaat§biirger*
ltdjen sflid)ten *u erfitden.
£>r. ©pie fame!)* fid) in biefem feinen SBriefe an§ „Stegifter“
babtn au§, baft bie nidjt bloft gegen ben Steal SjSrofpcrtb Slct,
fonbern and) gegen anbere Slcte be§ sarlamente§ feinblid) auftreten
unb bait e 8 barum fur geboten, baft ein adgemetneS Banbred)t auf*
geftedt ioerbe, in toeldjcS ade @efe|e be§ sarlamente§ eingetragen
toerben unb einen baoon einnebmen, fo ettoa, trie in
ber ©obej Stapoleong, unb, fe|en toir biuju, in ba» adge=
meine £anbred)t. Unfere Befer toiffen, tote toir biefe ftetS
unb oft geftedt betben, unb bie ©ritnbe angaben, toarum ber S3rite
ficb nur fel)r langfam jur ©rfenntnift ber Stotbtoenbigfeit foldjer Ste*
formen ju erbeben oermag. Unfere auf etn S3effertoerben
bierin toirb baburd) geftdrft, toenn toir mit Sreuben feben, baft unter
ibnen feXbft ficb foldjc ©rfenntnift anbabnt unb fi dj toie e§
£>!pie in biefem feinen QXrtifeX tbut. ©r fagt barin ioortlid):
ff Unjere Sobn S3ud ©rjiebung bringt un§ ju bem ©ebanfen, baft
toir in aflen2)ingen oodfommen feien, ba§ ®eridjt§toefen eingefd)loffen;
unb oom gremben ettoa§ anjunebmen. toiberftrebt unferem ©efidjle.
SBenn icb eine Nation febe, bie toir im ©anjen oerad)ten, toeil toir
meinen, baft fte ettoa§ unter un§ ftebe, toe!d)e aber im ooflen S3efi|e
beffen ift, toa§ toir bebiirfen, fo benle id), fodten toir unfere nationals
SSorurtbeile beifeite fcfccn unb eine Bebre oon ibr annebmen. SBir
fitblen unB ftolj itber unfere unb bie gredjeit, berer toir
un§ erfreuen, inbeft tro| ade§ biefe§ 'Stolje§ fteben toir in aden
gefe|lid)en 3lngeXegenX>eiten ganj beftimmt faft jeber anberen Nation
nad); fo 5. S 3. in ber Stegiftrirung ber S3efifctitel oon Banb ftnb toir
toeiter pritd aIB jeber anbere euroipdifdjer ©taat, feXbft bie arme,
Oerad)tete, furjfid)tige Smrfct nidjt au§gefd)loffen.‘‘
SGBie fdjtoer e§ aber fur ben einfid)t3oodften SSriten ift, ficb oon
fotiben tßorurtbeden ganj frei ju mad)en, jeigt §r. £)!pie feXbft, inbem
or fortfdbrt: „sranXreidj, 2)eutfcbtanb unb einige anbere Bctnber buben
dbnltcbe ©bf^ eme a l§ unfer Steal sto!pertb Slct. jebocb mit bem 33or*
pge, ba§ fie SSeamte beft|en, toeXcX)e ba§ @efe| fo Oerioalten, toie
fte e§ gefd)rieben finben." fann §r. £))pie ficb nid>t übertoinben,
einjugefteben, ber SSater be§ Steal SlcteS in
SXuftralien e§ au§ ©eutfcblanb im ©anjen eiitfitX>rte unb nur
in unbebcutenben ©injelbeiten e§ oerdnberte, toabrXicX) nidbt ju feinem
25ortbei(e, unb grabe in btefen SXenberungcn Xiegt ein toidjtiger ©runb,
baft bieft Steal ficb uodj immer obdig einge*


biirgert bat, fb baji eg jeber Stidter bermag, baran r
p mdfeln nnb eg 511 befdneibcn.
Unb grabe pterin, baff bie Stidter bag bbm gegebene
©efefc nidt in bem ©eifte bermalten, in bem eg entftonben ift, [oils
bent eg in bie alien l)ergebrad)ten barmen beg englifden
tbnfteg fjineinipreffen mbd)ten, fiefyt er bie grille ©efabr nnb ttmnfdjt,
bas bag grabep bei bbrgetbmmenen fallen erfldre, ba{s
bie Richter bag gegebene ®efe| im beg Den
tpaltet baben.
Iqx. ©Die fagt ferner: „(siner ber ftdrfften Gfbntrafte, bte ic£> p
benlen bermag, pnfd)en nnferem ©tabtgeridte nnb bem sbli=
pigeridte, bag erftere nnter einem befbrberten SlbDofaten alg OHjef
unb adcn SSerflaufelnngen pineg Sted)tganibalteg fiir ben stldger nnb
eineg eben [eleven fur ben SSerflagten nnb bem SDtnfter bon fritter
fallen 311 il)rer Settling; bag anbere bagegen nnr nnter
einem r ,safd)a mit pei Sbbfen", teine 2lbbb!aten, feine
fade, nnr mit einigem SSbrratbe eigenen gefunben SJtenfdenberftanbeg!
Sd nefyme an, ba| beibe ®erid)te slagen bon gleid)er 2Bid)tigteit p
entfdeiben b)aben nnb trbfc beg SJtangelg ader 2Dtafd)inerie,
tberben bie meiften Sente pgeben, baff bag sclijeigerid}t mel)r tbirf=
licbeg Sted)t fped)en tbirb, alg bag ©tabtgeridp 2Die
feft, baff ber Steal SSppertt) sXct ein 2lbmeid)en ben ben beftebenben
@efe|egformen ift, nnb baj; eg niebt gemeint mar, bie alien berfd)im=
melten llrtbeile ber Sdbten nnb berfdmunbenen ileiten bei ber Ssen
maltung beg Steal 51cteg in slnlbenbung Ibinmen p laffen.
Sd) bede", fdbrt er fort, fr eintge tbenige @efe|biid}er meiner Seitg
gelefen nnb bie Slrt nnb SBeife bemunbert, tbie barin adeg fo febon
angeinanber gefe|t ift nnb gejeigt tbirb, tbie ftrenge @ered)tigfeit
•Sebem tberben fodtc: aber menu id) an bie srajig tbie fel)r
fie binter ber prudbleibt, nnb tbie ein SJtann mit bem bidften
©elbbentel feinen ©egner fd)ad)matt mad)en lann, bann bin id) ber=
fmbt morben, nad) Stid)tern p rufen, tbie fie in Saufenb nnb (Sitter
Stad)t gefd)ilbert finb." slufg entfd)iebenfte tabelt er bag SSerfabren
ber Stegiftratibn ber S3efi|titel, bei benen tbeniger bag @efe| alg bie
slnficbt beg SBeamten maftgebenb tbirb nnb moruber bie Sanbbrbler
bie reicbften nnb bitterften (Srfabrnngen gemadt baben. (Siner ban
ibnen, ber febr langjdbrige (Srfabrungen bierin befi|t, fpad) fid* bar
tnrjem bal)in oug, r ,baf3 ber Steal srb!pertt) sct grimblid) berpfufd)t
iberbe."
3)ag im grbffen (Sanjen lann fid tbobl nid)t mebr
beflogen, ba§ eg an beratbenben nnb tbarnenben ©timmen gefebjt
babe, il)in bie Slngen p bffnen nnb bie @efal)ren anpbenten, in bie
tbir burd) bie gritnblidje SSerbfnfdnng unfereg geibid)tigften ®efe|eg
getrieben tberben; feine sfiid)t ift eg nun, feine SOteimtng lant
nber augpf!pred)en, ob eg ein bffeneg, ebrlid)eg nnb bidigeS 2Serfat)ren
in feinen tbidtigften ®erid)tgberibaltnngen, bber bb eg tbunfdt,
ber Steal S3tb!pertb Hct attfgel)bben nnb bag altc SSerfabren ber


fcofaten toieber etngefiiljrt fterbe, au§ bem im§ ©ir £orren§ gerettet
fyatte. ©d)fl?eigt ba§ SSot!, unb [d)fteigeu be[miber§ bie SBdljler je|t
nod), imb ttotfen le|tere fid) nicfyt ermanuen, ifyren SBtden Ijierm
often unb laut augju|>red)en: 9to, bann faljre fyin gefunbe SSernunft
unb Sreifyeit unb beKagt ba§ ©djaf nid>t ntefyr, menu e 3 fid) gebulbig,
fcfyeeren unb jut ©cfyladftbcm! fiifyren Idjjt
[Translation.]
THE JUDGES AND THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
We printed some time back in our newspaper a letter from Mr. E. A. D. Opie,,
of Adelaide, about the adverse proceeding of the Judges against the Real Property
Act of this colony, that he had published in the Register in which he describes the
dangers to which this the best of all law reforms is exposed through the hostile
efforts of the Judge, to undo it completely. We asked at the same time the
electors very urgently to protest publicly against it, to demand their representa-
tives in Parliament to take decided steps that it is restored in its original frame,
and to compel it to be administered in the sense of the legislation.
This warning of Mr. Opie in the English, as well as ours in the German,,
appear to have had no success, for we have not heard that a single step has been
taken by the electors in this serious affair. The time available to the electors, and
especially to the farmers, before the approaching meeting of Parliament will pass
very soon, and if nothing is done by the electors now, another year will pass with-
out anything being done for the protection of this our most valued law, and the-
Judges and their accomplices are offered a new and abundant opportunity to con-
tinue their attacks and to strengthen the harmful success already obtained.
Mr. Opie consequently published a short time ago another treatise in the
Register, and we consider it our duty to make our German readers acquainted with
it, because it may be likely that they might be the means of opening the eyes of
one or the other of the electors, and rouse him to fulfil his duties as a citizen and
an elector.
Mr. Opie expresses himself in this letter to the Register, that the Judges take
up a hostile position not only against the Real Property Act, but also against other
Acts of Parliament, and he thinks it necessary that a general country or land law
should be framed into which all law by Parliament are entered, and which form a
part of it similar as in France, the Code Napoleon, and we add as in Prussia, the
“ General Country Law.” Our readers know that we have made these demands
often and always, and we have given the reasons, why the Englishmen roused only
slowly to the comprehension of the necessity of such reforms. Our hopes for an
improvement are increased, when w'e learn with pleasure that amongst themselves
such a comprehension rises and expresses itself as Mr. Opie does in his article. He
says in it literally:—“Our John Bull Education leads us to think, that we are
perfect in all things, jurisdiction included; and to accept anything from a foreigner,
is opposed to our taste. When I see a nation, that we despise as a whole, because
we consider it standing beneath us, being in full possession of something that we
require, then I think we should,do away with our national prejudices and accept an
instruction from them. We pride ourselves upon our privileges and! - the liberty
which we enjoy, but notwithstanding all this pride in all affairs of jurisdiction we
are certainly behind nearly every other nation,and for instance in the registration of
Property Titles of land, we are further behind than every other European nation
even the poor, despised, shortsighted Turkey not excluded.” But how difficult it is
even for an intelligent Englishman to free himself entirely from such prejudices
is shown by Mr. Opie himself, when he continues: “France, Germany and some
other countries have similar systems to our Real Property Act, but with the advan-
tage that they have officers that administer the law as they find it written.” Hero
Mr. Opie cannot constrain himself to admit that the father of the Real Property


Act in South Australia introduced it as a whole from Germany, and altered it only
in some unimportant details certainly not to its advantage, and there is an impor-
tant reason in these alterations that the procedure of the Real Property Act is not
yet fully known to everyone, so that every Judge dares to pull at it to find fault
with it, and to curtail it.
He sees the greatest danger herein that the Judges will not apply the law in
the spirit it was produced by the Parliament, hut tries to force it into the old
accustomed forms of the English muddle of jurisdiction, and suggests that Parlia-
ment should declare directly in cases as have happened that the Judges have not
applied the given law according to the will of Parliament.
Mr. Opie continues: “ One of the strongest contrasts that I can imagine,
exists between our Local Court and our Police Court, the former having a promoted
lawyer for its chief, with all intricacies of a lawyer for the plaintiff, and the same
for the defendant, and preceding cases for their guidance. The other is only under
a Pacha with two tails, no lawyers, no preceding cases, only some store of common
sense. I presume both Courts have to decide cases of equal importance, and not-
withstanding the absence of all judicial machinery, most people will admit that the
Police Court decrees more just sentences than the Local Court. The fact is that
the Real Property Act deviates from all existing law forms, and that it was not
intended that the old mouldy sentences of the dead and gone past generation should
be applied in the administration of the Real Property Act.”
“I have read” (he continues) “during my time a few law books, and have
admired the way how everything is explained to the greatest nicety, and how it is
shown, that everyone should get the strictest justice, but when I think how far
practice is left behind theory, and how the man with the longest purse can check-
mate his opponents, I have been tempted to ask for Judges as they are described in
‘ Thousand and One Nights.’ ”
He blames most decidedly the procedure of the registration of Property Titles,
were not so much the law as the opinion of the officer prevails, and in this respect
the land brokers have had the richest and most bitter experience. One of them,
who has a great many years experience in it, expressed himself a while ago that the
Real Property Act is getting thoroughly bungled.
The public at large cannot complain that there were not enough counselling
nnd cautioning voices to open its eyes, and pointing out the dangers into which we
are drifting through the great bungling with this important law, it is his duty now
to express its opinion loudly, whether it desires an open straightforward and cheap
working of this important law, or that the Real Property Act is cancelled, and the
■old working of the lawyers is to be introduced again, from which Sir Torrens has
saved us. If the public be silent, and especially the electors also, and will not rise
like men and express their will in this respect openly and loudly. Well, then, good-
bye to common sense and liberty, and do not pity the sheep when it patiently
submits to be shorn and led to be slaughtered.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register , April 4, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —Payne v. Dench occupied the attention of the Supreme Court for some-
thing over six months. It came on first on October 1, 1860, before Justice
Boothby, and was an action brought, by a vendor against a purchaser, for breach
of contract for the defendants not completing according to his agreement the
purchase of a piece of land at Hindmai’sh. Mr. Torrens, the Registrar-General, was
examined, and showed that a certificate was issued to Payne pursuant to his
application, as purchaser from one Coulthard, whose written consent was annexed
to the application. Coulthard’s title did not appear to be questioned, but
defendant alleged that there was no evidence of the transfer of his estate to Payne.
The Registrar-General was subjected to a bullying examination, without much


interference on the part of the Judge, with a view of making it appear that he knew
very little about law as applied to real property. However, he seemed able to hold
his own. "V erdict was given for the plaintiff, with the understanding that the case
would be fully argued on appeal before the Eull Court. The case came on again
before Judges Cooper, Boothby and Gwynne, on November 3 and 7, and on
November 24 the Chief Justice gave the unanimous judgment of the Court. He
said : Ihe plaintiff alleges he was seised in fee-simple of the premises. The only
evidence upon the trial which it is necessary for us to consider, is the application
made by Payne, the written consent of Coulthard thereto, and the certificate issued
in pursuance thereof. The question arising, and which we are of opinion should be
entered for the defendant, is whether the documents mentioned showed such a title
as Dench was bound to accept; and this makes it necessary to enquire into the
effects of these documents. The certificate is issued under the Amending Act of
1858, which enacts that as soon as any land has been brought under the Act, the
Registrar shall deliver to the applicant a certificate to the effect thereinafter
described. No form of certificate is set out in the Amending Act, but there is a
form in the original Act; and, putting aside the question whether these words can
be applied to that form, and, supposing Coulthard to have been seised of the estate
of the land, and the certificate to be substantially correct, we are clearly of opinion
that there was no conveyance of Coulthard’s estate to Payne. Coulthard, indeed,
consents to the application ; but without an express enactment, and we find none,
the certificate woidd not operate as a transfer to him of Coulthard’s estate. If the
certificate were in the prescribed form, so as to show upon the face of it that all
deeds prejudicial to Payne’s estate had been delivered up and cancelled, it might
give a sufficient title. But it does not show what deeds were given up, and it was
admitted that the original land grant was not so. This appears to be not a mere
matter of form, for the whole system of title under the Act is based on the cancell-
ing of all prior instruments of title. By the Act of this session the form of cer-
tificate is altered and does not refer to the cancelling of previous title-deeds, but
still we conceive it will be the duty of the Commissioners to see that the cancellation
is done, if the system of giving a good title by certificate of title is to be carried out,
and that shows the importance attached by the Legislature to the words of reference
in the certificate.” Yerdict given for the defendant.
Plaintiff then becoming non compos (no wonder), is confined in the Lunatic
Asylum, and during one of his lucid intervals instructs his solicitor to carry his case
to the Court of Appeal. On December 24, 1860, Judge Boothby set aside the
notice of appeal on the ground of Payne’s lunacy, and stated that he was of opinion
that no Court of Appeal existed in the province. This decision was reconsidered
by the Full Court, consisting of Messrs. Cooper, Boothby and Gwynne, and was,
by the ruling of two out of the three Judges, reversed, as they held that the
plaintiff’s solicitor was sufficiently authorized to make the appeal. 1 thought this
finished the case, but on looking further I find, on April 16, 1861, it was gone into
again, though on what pretext 1 have been unable to discover. I need not bother
your readers with the learned orations of the Judges, as it is not, nominally, on the
question of the Real Property Act that they managed to at last record their finding
in favour of the defendant, and so against the Real Property Act title. Suffice it to
say that they decided our Court of Appeal had no existence, and that there was
no tribunal in the colony competent to revise or set aside the findings of the
Supreme Court, but that this was indeed the Supreme Court of the province.
The Judges seemed to lay stress on the certificate of title referring to the
cancelled instruments of title ; but I say this is bad law, but it is making the
schedule to an Act of more force than the text of the Act itself. In the body of
the Act it nowhere says the certificate shall refer to the previous titles, although I
admit, in the form of the certificate given in the schedule, there is a direction, in
italics, to refer to cancelled certificate, land grant, or other instruments of title; but
that, certainly, should be read in connection with clause 16, which provides that
an applicant must deliver up to be cancelled any instruments in his possession or
under his control. A very different thing from what one of the Judges as good as
said should be done, when he spoke about the original grant of Hindmarsh being
delivered up, by the applicant to place an allotment in the township under the Act.


Moreover, the Court only mentioned this matter to show they thought they had
another way of finding a verdict adverse to the Real Property Act title, but really
gave judgment on the ground, that there was no valid transfer from Coulthard
shown. The simple answer to this is, that it was no concern of theirs, or anybody
else’s, how Payne got his title ; there "was a certificate, in his name, produced,
which clause 35 of the Act declared should be received in all Courts of Justice as
evidence of the particulars therein set forth, and it was set forth, that he was seised
of an estate in fee in the land in question. Further, by clause 44, it is declared
that “ upon the sale or transfer of any estate, or interest in land, the purchaser
shall not be entitled to call for the production of any memo, of sale or other in-
strument dated prior to the date of the certificate of title, unless such instrument
shall be entered on the certificate as an encumbrance, lien, or interest in the
land.” Surely, if the Judges saw this clause they put there green spectacles on to
read it with.
I am, Sir, &c.,
April 3. E - A - D- oPlE -
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
{From the Northern Argus , April 7, 1882.)
Mr. E. A. D. Opie is writing a series of interesting letters to the Register anent
the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Real Property Act. Every elector
interested in the transfer of real estate should read them.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
{From the S. A. Register, April 6, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
—Jn your issue of November 9, 1860, appears the text of a document which
seemed’to cause you some fun at the time, and more still when the result of it wa,s
made public. Certain members of the legal profession got up, on the quiet, a peti-
tion to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, asking that the then proposed amend-
ment of the Real Property Act should be reported upon by the law officers of the
Crown, with the view of advising Her Majesty to withhold her consent. You see
these gentlemen of the cloth would rather have had an Australian Boston, than that
the preserves they had so long considered their own should be poached over; for what
would have been "the result if the English Government had interfered with the free-
dom of action of the colonial Parliament? It requires no prophet to say that, being
Englishmen, we should have quickly shown in a practical way that we meant to have
our rights. Sir R. Mac Donnell, who appears to have been one of the stanchest sup-
porters of the Act, did not seem, however, to fancy being made the tool of the me-
morialists in transmitting their missive secretly ; so published the whole affair in the
Government Gazette , from which you copied it.
It is long enough in all conscience, but after wading through it two or three
times I can discover very few points in it. The gist of its argument is that by the
Constitution Act, to which our Parliament owes it birth, it is declared that
our Parliament may not make laws repugnant to the law of England ; that it
could not appropriate any part of the revenue that had not been previously
recommended by the Governor to the House of Assembly; that ceitain paits
of the Act were repugnant to English law; that there was a provision for
making good out of the revenue any deficiency in the Assurance Fund, which
appropriation of revenue had not been previously recommended by the Governor
to the House; that certain ministerial and judicial functions were vested in
the Lands Titles Commissioners, and Mr. Strangways had said in Parliament that
the one qualification for a Lands Titles Commissioner was that he knew nothing


about the matter in which he was engaged, and that six members of the legal
profession had offered their gratuitous services to the House to assist in preparing
a new Bill, but such offer was not accepted. Ha! ha! This last is une bonne houchee.
The subscribing parties to this memorial were fourteen in number, and it seems
a pity that the remembrance of them should be lost to posterity. They were
A. Bonnin, W. J. Lawrence, H. Gilbert, G. A. Labatt, C. Mann, T. B. Bruce,
C. Fenn, A. Hai'dy, H. B. James, 0. Lowe, R. Hicks, W. Bakewell, L. M. Cullen,
and N. A. Knox, jun. I would suggest that their grateful country should engrave
their names on a brass pillar, to be erected in some public place, say the centre
of the busiest part of Rundle-street.
However, the memorial came to nothing, as the Secretary of State declined
to be bamboozled, and in his letter which you published on April 19, 1861, stated
that lie saw nothing in the memorial to call for the interference of the Crown, and
that the Bill would be left to its operation. I do not give this as an example
of the tactics of the legal profession generally, for I believe they are, as a whole,
contented to accept the Act, and that they were so at the time the above precious
memorial was prepared is evidenced by the fact that the promoters of it could only
get fourteen signatures out of a roll of about fifty. Still I think it is a useful
warning. Probably the professional enemies to the Act are still in about the same
proportion, and such enemies are good workers on their own side. That this
minority lias not ceased working in an as underhand, though more effectual, manner
is proved by some of our recent Acts of Parliament. The last that has attracted
my notice is the amendment of the Insolvency Act, carried last year, which, in my
judgment will, if ever a case comes before a hair-splitting judge cause some
trouble. It is declared that the estate of an insolvent shall, on an order being
made by the Court, vest in the assignees (or trustees, as they are re-christened).
Certainly the clause goes on to say the order shall have the effect of a transfer, but
that does not seem to me to get over that awful word “ vest.” So far as our
present Judges are concerned, we have perhaps not so much reason to find fault
with them as with their predecessors, and they may take a reasonable view of
things when this Act comes before them; but who can say what the next men will
be like ?
I am, Sir, &c.,
April 1.
E. A. D. OPIE.
PROTECTION OF THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the Evening Journal, April 12, 1882.)
Our Greenock correspondent informs us that a few gentlemen resolved them-
selves into a committee, and held a meeting on Saturday, April 8, at Mr. Schulter’s
Greenock Tavern to consider the advisability of making some effort to protect
the Real Property Act. Mr. Branson, J. P., the Chairman, stated that in his own
experience land could not be registered as intended by Torrens’s Real Property Act.
Mr. Phillips, at the request of the meeting, read three or four of Mr. E. A. ll!
Opie’s letters on the subject taken from the Register. Mr. J. G.
Schache remarked upon the fact that no one had opposed Mr. Opie’s state-
ments. As an agent he could bear testimony to their truth, and that the law had
not been carried out in spirit as intended by Torrens’s Act. He thought that the
Courts had gone wrong gradually, and the public had not noticed it. The meeting
thought that the friends of the Act should be awakened, and that Parliament should
be requested to see that the law made by them was carried out. It was resolved
To hold a monster public meeting at an early date, Mr. Opie to be invited to be
present.


THE EEAL PEOPEETY ACT.
(From the Northern Argus, April 14, 1882.)
We are pleased to notice that Mr. E. A. E). Opie’s letters which recently
appeared in the Register are likely to do good. A Greenock correspondent to that
journal states that a meeting has been held at the Greenock Tavern to consider the
advisability of making an effort to protect the Eeal Property Act. The Chairman,
speaking from experience, said that land could not be registered as intended by
Torrens’s Property Act. Mr. J. G. Schache referred to the fact that no one had
opposed Mr. Opie’s statements. As an agent he could hear testimony to their truth,
and that the law had not been carried out in spirit as intended by Torrens’s
Act. The meeting thought that the friends of the Act should be awakened, and
that Parliament should be requested to see that the law made by the Legislature
was carried out. A monster public meeting will be held at an early date, when
Mr. Opie will be invited to he present.
THE EEAL PEOPEETY ACT.
{From the S. A. Register, April 19, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOE.
Sie, —McEllister v. Fenn was an action for slander, in that defendant had
accused plaintiff of conduct which, by a clause of the Eeal Property Act, was
punishable as a crime.
The proceedings before the Court commenced by Fenn demurring to the
declaration filed by plaintiff. The demurrer was argued before Judges Cooper,
Boothby and Gwynne, on June 6 and 17, 1861, and judgment given on the 17th
and 25th of same month. During the argument Justice Boothby said the Court
could not take any notice of the Eeal Property Act, as it had not received the
assent of Her Majesty, and was not an Act that the Governor had power to assent
to. If a person were charged before him with an offence under it, he certainly
would not allow a question to go to a Jury upon the supposition that that was law
having force in the colony. He attacked the validity of the Act in a judgment
occupying two and a half of your columns, and said that the demurrer ought to be
upheld. The other two Judges, declining to discuss the validity of the Act, and
holding the plaintiff’s declaration to be sufficient, dismissed the demurrer. The
case was accordingly allowed to come on for trial before Judge Boothby on June 27.
That gentleman carried out his previous threat, of not allowing such a case to go
to a Jury, by non-suiting the plaintiff, on the pretence that the alleged slander was
a privileged communication, and that there was no evidence of malice. As the
defendant had said in his pleas-—-firstly, that he was not guilty, and secondly, that
part of the words complained of were true —the questions appeared to be of matters
of fact, not law, so that the case was essentially one a Jury should have been
asked to consider.
This case, that of Payne v. Dench, and one under the Customs Act, caused such
a storm of indignation throughout the colony, both in and out of Parliament, as
has perhaps not been equalled before or since. Nevertheless, Mr. Boothby still set
himself above all authority, refusing to be bound by any Act of Parliament or by
any decision of the Pull Court, unless such decision coincided with his own opinion,,
and set the Legislative Council at defiance by refusing to attend before its Com-
mission appointed to enquire into his conduct. He was, however, condescending
enough to appear before a like Committee of the House of Assembly, and as the
report they furnished on September 3,1861, is built upon what His Honor said, and
he gave his evidence most elaborate correction before it was printed, there is no
doubt the report was an impartial statement of how affairs stood. The Committee
came to the conclusion that His Honor regarded as invalid the whole of the
administration of justice in criminal matters, whether in the Supreme Court or
Local Courts, in consequence of the abolition of Grand Juries; trial of petty
felonies by magistrates without a Jury; the whole of the Customs laws of the


colony; all Acts establishing Courts passed since 1842; the Real Property Acts;
all the Electoral Acts since 1851; the Constitution Act; and, consequent upon this,
as being at least doubtful, all Acts, of whatever character, passed by the Parlia-
ment of South Australia. His Honor’s objections to our laws were two. Some he
held were repugnant to English law, and others had been assented to by the
Governor in excess of his instructions. Judge Gwynne took the same view with
respect to the repugnancy business, but did not seem to agree with the other
objection.
Of course such a position of affairs was bad enough, but in my opinion not so
bad as what has gone on in the Court since. There could be no mistake as to what
Mr. Boothby meant. He repudiated the Act altogether, but his action did no
lasting damage to it, while other cases have been decided professedly giving effect to
the Act, but often doing much hurt to it —sometimes in a cunning way that it
required after events to bring the damage to light, and sometimes with unblushing
partiality and clumsy false reasoning.
I am, Sir, etc.,
April 10, 1882. E. A. D. OPIE.
PROTECTION OE THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, April 22, 1882.)
A public meeting, called by a Provisional Committee, was held at the Greenock
Arms, Greenock, on Wednesday, April 19, to consider the above subject. About a
hundred persons were present. Mr. J. Branson, J.P., was voted to the chair.
Mr. Schache, J.P., proposed —“ That in the opinion of this meeting the amend-
ment of the Real Property Act, passed in 1878, and the Probate and Succession Duty
Acts are subversive of the leading principles of the Real Property Act. ” From his
own experience he thought that some change should be effected in the administration
of the Act. When Torrens’s Act was introduced the mode of transferring was brief
and inexpensive, but now it took longer, and was dearer, because the lawyers had so
much to do with it. He referred to the Royal Commissioners, who were still in exis-
tence, but only in name, and were powerless to do anything.
Mr. Kriebel seconded. He had proved hy his own experience that things had
gone wrong under the amendments. He proposed that Mr. Schache act as interpre-
ter of the meeting for the German friends. Carried.
Mr. Fielding said no grievances had been stated by anyone. He objected to the
words “defend the Real Property Act” used in the advertisement. It was not in
danger. (“ Sit down. ”) They did not want to defend the Act, because it was in
force. He proposed that this meeting adjourn sine die. (Cries, “Make an amend-
ment, ” “ Out of order. ”)
Mr. E. A. D. Opie supported the proposition. He said he had been asked to
speak about the Real Property Act, and the way in which its meaning had been
gradually altered during the last twenty years, but he did not know that he could
say much more than he had said in his letters to the Register. People wondered
how it was that the country cannot have effect given to their wishes in this matter.
The intention was clear that the certificate of title should, in spite of all legal quib-
bles, mean what it said, and that if a man had a certificate in his name it should as
a rule be forbidden for any person, Judge or not, to ask how he got it. He felt quite
sure the Act of 1861 gave effect to this intention, and was, if the Judges had only
given it fair play, almost perfect. It was acknowledged by all writers on law, that
there were always in every Act of Parliament certain gaps which the Act however
carefully drawn did not cover, and that it was the duty of the Judge to get at the
general meaning of the Act, and by his decisions given in the spirit of the Act
when cases came before him to fill up such gaps. If our Judges had only
done their duty in this respect, and given their judgments in accordance with the
general tenor of the Real Property Act, it would long before this have been
a model of perfection. But instead of this they had done their very best
to make it more distasteful to the public than the old system itself. He


had lately been reading through many reports of the proceedings in Court, and had
in consequence become more fixed in his belief than ever that all the trouble
had arisen through no defect in the Act, hut simply because of the obstructiveness
of the Judges; and he thought other people were coming round to the same
opinion. When the first letter appeared he was everywhere met with the objection
that“his strictures on the Judges were unwarrantable ; that they were conscientious
men, who administered the law as they understood it, and that any failure must be
set down to the loose and uncertain way in which the Act had been framed. But
as he had gone on with the correspondence, quoting the very words of the Judges,
showing how they violently twist the plain words of the Act, people had come to
his way of thinking. Indeed, last week he was told by three different lawyers that
he was right; that the legal profession were favourable to the Act, and would much
rather do work under it, in spite of the difference in the costs, than under the old
system; but that as he had averred the fault lay with the Judges. The Parlia-
ment said in as plain words as the English language was capable of what they
meant; and yet the Judges, in pretending to give effect to the law, decided over
and over again the very opposite to what was intended. He would mention two
recent cases as instances, and all through the many years the Act has been in
operation he could cite case after case in which decisions have been given every bit
as unfair. Mr. Lindsay held a certificate of title for a section fronting the river
opposite Port Adelaide. He omitted paying the rates, because the Clerk refused to
put the correct number of his section on the receipt. The District Council sold the
land for rates, and the solicitor for the purchaser, in getting his title, did not
discover that the land was under the Act, but took a conveyance from the Master
of the Court under the old system, instead of, as he should have done, a transfer
under the Act. The Judge, when the case was tried, instead of making an order
vesting the land under the Act in the purchaser, declared that the conveyance was
good, and that the land was taken back from the new to the old system, because
the District Councils Act under which the land was sold, declared that the Master
should convey the land, and under the Real Property Act there was no such thing as
conveying, but land was transferred. It was an insult to the public to give such a
decision for everybodywitli a dictionary could ascertain that “ transfer ’ ’ and “ convey ”
mean precisely the same thing. However, those who were curious enough to hunt up the
records of the Court would find this was not a singular instance of the spirit in
which our Judges acted, not only as regards the Real Property Act, but as regarded
other Acts meant to simplify matters. Can any man say that the intention of
Parliament was that land once put under the Act should on any pretence what-
ever be taken back to the old system ? And yet this was what the Judge
distinctly ruled should be done. The Judge had no excuse for this finding, as an
order from him vesting the land in Neill would have been given effect to by the
Registrar-General; and he said, without hesitation, that his judgment was put in this
form not for the purpose of doing justice between the parties to the suit, but with the
express object of capsizing a Real Property Act title. He thought when we had
got rid of the Judges of the old school that we should have got on better, and that
a bench of what they might call colonial lawyers would have given the Act a fair
chance. But he was afraid it was not so, for the second case, he wished to mention,
was decided very recently. He referred to Eormby and Another v. the Corporation
of Adelaide. The plaintiffs held a certificate of title for a piece of land in
Adelaide, together with a right-of-way over another strap of land, which strip, it
appeared, was not under the Act, and the Court held that the certificate was void
so far as regarded the right-of-way. As an easement, they decided, could
not be placed under the Act, unless the land it affected was also under. Let
all people take a common-sense view of this case, and ask themselves what
did the Parliament mean —for it all came back to this —they said that he
word “ land ” should extend to and include all tenements, &c., together
with all paths, ways and privileges thereto appertaining; and all would say that
when Eormby’s land was placed under the Act it was not separated from the
appurtenant right-of-way, but took the same with it. The Act had been mutilated
by amendments and tortured out of its original form solely to meet the objections
of the Judges. The Amending Act of 1878 was a big sop thrown to the Judges,


for it removed all the decisions of titles of persons who claimed under a deceased
registered proprietor from the Board of Commissioners to the Supreme Court.
To make the matter worse, it had left the meaning of the issue of a title in such
case, which before was so clear, in a very cloudy state. The law was now, indeed,
most contradictory. There were two distinct courses open to the Court in case of
dispute. They could if they liked still give effect to the grand and leading
principle of the Act that nobody should be bound to look behind the certificate
of title, for there were many clauses of the Act of 1861 still unrepealed that would
bear them out in this. Or they could, on the other hand, hold, by virtue of the
Amending Act, that the purchaser or mortgagee was bound by the will or intestacy
of the deceased proprietor, so that it appeared to him that now, more than ever,
the meaning of the Act depended upon the caprice of the Judge before whom it
came. They were proposing to prepare a memorial to Parliament on the subject,
hut it appeared to him that until the members took their proper position as the
makers of the law, and insisted on the Judges administering the law as handed to
them, they had not much hope of reform. If the members would only stand on their
rights there would no doubt be a little unpleasantness at first ; but the Judges
would evidently have to give way, and do their masters’ will, as was the case in the
famous Boothby dispute. They would, it was to be hoped, never get such an
obstinate man again to deal with, but his actions should be a warning to show the
result of the thing pushed to its extreme. There was one matter that had often
occurred to him as not giving the Act room for proper working. That was the
Lands Title Department had always been under the control of its natural enemy —the
Attorney-General—and the effect so far as concerned the working of the office had
been most disastrous. There was no reason why the office should be as it was a
source of revenue to the Government, but every penny of the fees taken should be
expended in making the office efficient in all respects. But, as a matter of fact, the
■office had always been kept short-handed, and the Registrar-General was not allowed
do choose his own officers, but had to take -whoever the Attorney-General sent him.
If the office were kept fully manned the public would not have such cause to com-
plain of the vexatious delays that they now had. A mortgage or lease now took
four or five days, and a transfer, when a new certificate was issued, from a week to
fortnight; and even at this slow rate the officials complained that the work was fall-
ing further into arrears. If they petitioned Parliament he thought they should
ask them to repeal the greater part of the Amending Act of 1878, and especially to
re-establish the Board of Commissioners in their full power, as Mr. Torrens started
it. He considered this Board the backbone of the whole scheme, for it was really
a Court of laymen, who dealt with all the titles in a simple manner, free from
technicalities, and satisfied themselves that the person to whom they grant a certi-
ficate was really entitled to the land. Under the present system, if a proprietor of
land under the Act died, nothing could be done with his land until his representa-
tive went to the Supreme Court and obtained probate or letters of administration,
then on producing this to the Registrar-General the title was put into his name,
but it had yet to be decided what the effect of this registration would be, for on
one side the Registrar-General always said that he was possessed of the estate as
•executor or administrator of the deceased, and certain clauses in the Act said that
he was to convey to the persons entitled ; while, on the other side, there were the
unrepealed clauses in the original Act that he had mentioned, which, read alone,
■would certainly hold a purchaser or mortgagee harmless. He had seen a good deal
both of transmissions under the Act and of obtaining probate from the Supreme
Court, and could say the proof required by the Lands Title Office was far more
strict than the Court had ever asked for. The Succession Duty Act was another
Act antagonistic to the Real Property Act, as by it the duty was charged on the
land since 1875, and as no entry was made in the certificate, a man who thought he
had a clean title might find he had an encumbered one.
Mr. Fielding couldn’t understand what this meeting was for. What did they
want to defend ? The Act was in existence already; besides, no one stated any
complaints. Who suffered? “(Everybody.)” He would like to hear some cases
cited. He thought it was a foolish meeting. It was a hole-and-corner meeting got
up for the benefit of a few. (Cries —“Sit down;” “ Make an amendment.”) The
speaker made several other remarks in opposition to the object of the meeting.


Mr. Phillips said —“ Seeing that Mr. Fielding does not understand the subject
for want of study, and his remarks are foreign to the meeting, I propose he he not
heard.”
Mr. W. Seebo seconded. Carried with acclamation.
The proposition was then put to the meeting, and carried by a large majority.
Mr. Jas. Phillips proposed —“That a petition be presented to the Parliament,
asking them to consider the said Amending Act, with the view of repealing the same
ro the more objectionable parts of it. He then read a letter of apology from Mr. (1.
W. Cotton, sen., for non-attendance, who entirely sympathised with the objects of
the meeting. He also read a letter from Mr. R. Dixson, M.P., “ who invited his
constituents to place the facts before him in writing, with a view to secure a redress
for the grievances referred to. ” He (Mr. Phillips) thought the meeting were satis-
fied with Mr. Opie’s statements as being clear on the point, and great praise was due
to that gentleman for his plain outspoken statements in the Register. What tended
partly to confirm his mind that all the statements were genuiue, was the fact that
no one had thrown down the gauntlet and tried to prove one statement or opinion
on the matter false or wrong. Past experience showed them that nothing less than
a strong expression of public opinion would keep the Bench from getting into the old
grooves, and thus instead of administering justice in accordance with the instructions
of the law, they played into the hands of the lawyers.
Mr. Wm. Seebo seconded. He thought great thanks were due to Mr. Opie for
the manly way in which he had stuck to this subject. He thought lawyers had a
great deal too much to do with the subject, and the sooner the public returned to
the Board of Commissioners and the old happy ways of doing things, the better for
their pockets, especially for their children.
Mr. Blesing supported the resolution. He hoped the result of this meeting
would be to stir up the country, and all their representatives to do their duty in the
matter.
Mr. Fielding proposed as an amendment —“ That there be no petition sent. ”
He thought the meeting did not understand Mr. Phillips’s proposition or speech.
They did not know what they were about. The Act was all they wanted, and it did
not want mending. This meeting was only got up by a few who could influence the
rest. ‘lt was for some personal motive. No seconder.
Mr. Phillips thought that Mr. Fielding’s speech was an insult to all concerned.
It insulted the intelligence of the meeting, Mr. Schache, for his German interpreta-
tion, and his own English.
The proposition was carried by a large majority.
Mr. Phillips read the memorial to be presented, which was passed and decided
to be signed 'at once. The meeting requested Mr. Dixson, M.P., to take charge of
the memorial and lay the matter before Parliament. Votes of thanks were pissed
to the Chairman, and especially to Mr. Opie for Ins attendance and speech.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, April 27, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —One result of all the hubbub growing out of Judge Boothby’s eccen-
tricities seemed that the Bench was frightened into more reasonable behaviour
for some time, for it will be found that since McEllister v. Fenn several
cases were decided in a very fair manner, giving due effect to the act. But the
improvement did not continue very long, for on December 13, 1861, the Judges
took occasion to find another adverse judgment. This was in Tolley v. Toirens,
which was heard before Judges Hanson, Boothby and Gwynne, and was an
application for a mandamus to compel the Registrar-General to deliver up certain
title-deeds. One A. Greig, had applied in August, 1860, to place allotment 8,
of town acre 154, under the Act, but in his application had not defined the
position of the piece of land with respect to the boundary of the acre. The land
was brought under by notice in the Gazette , after being advertised in the usual


marine*, but the preparation of the certificate of title had been held over, pending
the receipt of information as to the starting-point of the land. Greig died
in September devising his land to Tolley, who now sought to get back tire old
deeds. Mr. Gawler appeared to oppose the rule, and showed in a very clear
speech that the land was really under the new_ system, inasmuch as the Act
in force at the time stated that the notification in the O-azette was the placing it
under. 4he Act of 1861 made issue of certificate necessary to complete the
transaction ; but the land in question was under before the Act was passed. He
said that it was competent for an applicant to withdraw his deeds prior to
the notification referred to appearing, but not afterwards.
The Chief Justice thought there was sufficient doubt in the matter to justify
the issuing of a mandamus. The Act of 1861 made the issue of a certificate
necessary to bring land under the Act, and that amounted to repealing any
provisims short of the issue of a certificate which brought land under the Act.
Judge Boothby was of opinion that the mandamus should issue quite independent
of the question of the validity of tire Real Property Act. He thought it would be
a favourable opportunity to test such validity if the Registrar-General would carry
the matter to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, He laid stress on the
Registrar-General receiving an application with such an imperfect description of the
land, and thought such carelessness in a public officer ought to be visited with the
cost of the suit. Judge Gwynne agreed that the mandamus should be granted, but,
considering the law was in such an imperfect state, he did not wonder that the
Registrar-General did not know how to act, and under the circumstances would not
visit him with the costs.
If the Judges had been favourably inclined towards the Act, they would have
held, without question, that the land was already under it, and the order they made
for the return of the deeds was certainly an illegal action. It seems a pity that the
Registrar-General did not, directly he was threatened with legal proceedings, issue a
certificate of title, as the land would have been sufficiently described for identifica-
tion bj calling it Allotment 8. The rule of fixing the position of every piece of
land bj distance from some original fixed point as the boundary of the section, is
not commanded by the Act, but is an instance of the care the department has
always taken in issuing its titles, and contrasts very favourably with the method of
describing land in conveyances under the old style, and it seems rather hard that
then* carefulness should be turned against the Act in the way it was done in this
case.
I am, Sir, etc.,
■Apr.l 11. E. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, May 4, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sib, Large v. Ruwoldt and Others was an appeal from the judgment of the
Primary Judge to the Full Court, consisting of Messrs. Hanson, Gwynne and
Wearing, taken on November 7 and December 6, 1872. F. Koop had entered into
a written contract with Lange for the sale of a piece of land under the Act, but
died without receiving any of the purchase-money, the whole of which had since
been paid to the executors, and Lange now sought a declaration from the Court
that he was entitled to the legal estate of the land. The defendants (the executor
and densees of the deceased) raised no objection. On the contrary, were advised
that it would be for their advantage to retain the money and allow Lange to take
the land, and submitted themselves to the ruling of the Court.
Judges Hanson and Gwynne—Wearing concurring—gave very long judgments,
the purport of which was :• —That the Real Property Act did "not recognise the'
existence of equitable interests in land under its provisions; that any instrument
not in one of the forms scheduled to the Act did not pass any estate or interest in


land, that the Court could only decree specific performance of a contract on the
ground that the contract did pass an estate or interest; that, if Koep had been
alive, Lange could not have obtained the land through the Court, because he was
not a transferee in the meaning of the Act, and that he had no better right against
Koop’s transmittee ; that, if the question had been raised, they might have had to
decide that, this being a question of transmission, the deciding of such titles being
vested in a Board of Commissioners, the jurisdiction of the Court was ousted.
If the lawyers employed had only done their duty to their dients, who were
all agreed as to what they wanted, or if brokers had been engaged instead of
lawyers, this case would never have come before the Court at all; and if the
Judges had done their duty they would never have dealt with it, for it was a matter
that the Board of the Lands Titles Office should have decided, under clause 79 of
the Act of 1861 ; and, in truth, the Board did, in exercise oi their undoubted
powers, consider many similar applications, and issued titles accordingly.
The decision given was held as law for about five years, tut as in 1877 a
similar case (Cuthbertson v. Swan) was heard, and the Judges gave a distinctly
opposite ruling, I am saved the trouble of criticising this ease or comparing it with
the Act. In this case of 1877, Judge Stow, on behalf of himsslf and the Chief
Justice (Mr. Way), in an able judgment that showed how much the Judges could
make the Act capable of if they wished, reversed the finding in Lange v. Ruwoldt,
and made clearly appear, what nobody doubted before, that the Judges were
mistaken in the previous instance, and that, except in so far as was necessary for
the maintaining of the main principle involved in the Act, viz., indefeasibility of
title in a sale to a bona-fide purchaser, trusts are not sw r ept awaj by the Act. It
may be thought that this last case militates against my belief as to the adverse
action of the Judges in respect to the Act, and 1 must own that when I first read
Judge Stowes judgment I was puzzled, but after I had looked more carefully into
the report of the trial I saw more plainly what it meant. We should never have
had such a fair ruling but for the fact that, before the case came on, a similar
matter in the Supreme Court of Sydney had been decided in the same manner as
Lange v. Ruwoldt; but on being carried in appeal to the Irivy Council, the
judgment had been set aside, and the affair was finally decided in opposition to the
finding of our colonial legal luminaries.
Some legal friends have asked me what end I am working for in my corres-
pondence, as they say I have not yet pointed out any remedy foi the ills I have set
forth. Will they allow me to say that lam now trying to show, and I believe
succeeding in showing w'hat the nature of the disease is, and tint when the public
are fully satisfied on that head it will be time to cast about for the remedy.
I am, Sir, &c.,
E. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register , May 6, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOE.
Sie, —Pannan v. Pannan was an action of ejectment, first tried on November
12, 1872, and finally decided before Judges Hanson, Gwynne, and Wearing, on
July 2, 1873. A section of land in the Hundred of English was granted, under
the Act, to one Thomas Pannan. The grantee died intestate, and, on letters of
administration being granted to his son, the plaintiff, the son applied to the
Registrar-General and obtained a certificate of title in his name, and now sought to
put his brother, the defendant, out of possession of the land. Judge Gwynne read his
judgment stating that the plaintiff claimed, as administrator o: the deceased by
virtue of the Inheritance Act of 1867; that as to the certificate of title in his name,
he asked if it could be said that he came under the description of any person
authorised by the 79th section of the Real. Property Act to apply to be registered
proprietor. He was not the heir-at-law, for that status had been abolished. He


was not a devisee, for there was no will. He was not tenant by the courtesy, the
deceased was his father. Nor did he come under the words “or other person claim-
ing any estate,” &c. At the time of passing the Real Property Act it would have
been absurd to say that the administrator could claim the real estate of an in-
testate, and it would be wrong to impute absurdity to the Parliament. In his
opinion the Board of Commissioners had acted without jurisdiction , and the whole
proceeding was null and void. By the Inheritance Act, 1867, it was declared that
all undevised land of a deceased should vest in the personal representative, and that
his title should be deemed to date immediately on the death of the owner. As to
lands not under the new system, he supposed there could be no question ; proof of
the death and intestacy, and production of the letters of administration, would
entitle a plaintiff to a verdict. Then the question was, did this Act embrace land
under the Real Property Act ? In his opinion it undoubtedly did. So it followed
that all lands coming under the operation of the Real Estate Distribution Act is
taken out of the new system and made subject to the old system, as modified by the
Inheritance Act of 1867. Under the Real Property Act no interest passes until
registration is effected, while under the Inheritance Act the estate vests immediately
on the grant of probate or letters of administration. The two Acts were repugnant
to each other, and the Inheritance Act being the latest expression of the will of
the Parliament, must rule.
If our Judges give a hundred such rulings as above, nobody will be pursuaded
that the Parliament, as representing the people, ever entertained the idea that land
once under the Act could be removed from its operation; and there is one little
clause in the Inheritance Act, by virtue of which Act Mr. Gwynne performed such
magical feats that he seemed conveniently to overlook, which, if he had found, he
would have seen sufficiently protected the Real Property Act, viz., the fourth,
which says that “ Any person who shall take any lands, by virtue of this (the
Inheritance) Act, shall so take as if the same had come to him by will of the
deceased owner; and, as Mr. Gwynne did not seek to apply his law to devised
lands, he would, no doubt, if unfortunately he had not omitted to see this clause,
have held that an administrator was required to apply to the Board of Com-
missioners, in the same manner as a devisee, to be registered proprietor. Mr.
Gwynne mentioned that the later Act must prevail over the other; but if he had
looked in a certain Act passed later still (No. 9 of 1872) he might have seen
another way to accomplish his laudable desire to carry out the will of the
Parliament, for by clause 10 thereof it is declared that “ Every Act amending
an Act shall be construed with the amended Act as part thereof ; and though the
Inheritance Act does not say it amends the Real Property Act, Mr. Gwynne made
it appear that, as he read it, he considered it a most decided amendment. How-
ever, the wish of the Parliament is shown in the amendment of the Real Property
Act, passed since the Inheritance Act, viz., in 1870, which says that “-whenever land
under the Act is transmitted in consequence of the death of the registered pro-
prietor, the Commissioners may limit a time after which certificates shall be issued
to the person entitled.” One would think the word “whenever” would be
sufficiently large to satisfy Mr. Gwynne that even land coming under the operation
of the Intestacy Act should continue to have its titles dealt with in the Lands
Titles Office.
I am, Sir, &c.,
May 5. E. A. D. OPIE.


3mit Sdmnc beg 9ical 2(ctc3*
(2lu§ „2luftralifd)e geitung", 2. 1882.)
£)effentlidje serfammlnng in ©reenocf am 19. styrif. 3.
SSranfon J.P. im SSorfi|.
-fcerr Sd)dd)e J.P. fteUt ben sfntrag, jn erffdren, baft ber bets
dnberte 91eaf skt, 1878 angenommen, nnb ber £eftamentg*
nnb ©rbfofge~slct bie teitenben ®rnnbfd|e beg Steal slcteg
nmftoften. (Seine eigene ©rfabrung jeige djm, baft in ber SBcrmaft*
nng beg 2Xcte§ eine bnrd)gefe|t merben fodte. ber
Sorreng slct eingefubrt tourbc, mar bie Uebertragnng furj nnb bidig,
je|t bagegen mare fie fdnger nnb fei tbenrer, meil bie slboo!aten babet
jn oiet ju iUjun baben. @r ermdbnt ber 9iobal ©ommifftonerg, bie
nodj beftdnben, inbeft nur bent 9lamen nadj nnb mdren febr
madjtloS, irgenb etmag Jn tbun. §err sriebel fecunbirt. (Sr fei
turd) eigene ©rfabrung überjeugt morben, baft eg nnter bem neuen
unrest bergefte. (Sr bcantragt, baft §err Sd)dd)c jnm
97u|en ber onmefenben 3)eutfd)en jnm Ueberfe|er ernannt merbe.
'3)iefer Sorfdjlag mirb angenommen.
morben, liber ben ffteaf skt nnb bie slrt nnb SBcifc, mie
feine slbfid)t adindf)lig in ben fe|ten smanjig Sabren gednbert morben
fei, in foremen, inbeft er miffe nid)t, mie er nod) mebr baruber fagen
fbnne, atg er eg in feinen SBriefcn im „9fegifter“ auggeftprod)en. So7an
munbcrt fidj, mie eg fein fbnne, baft bag Sanb feine SGBunfcbe in
biefer SSejiebung erfiidt feben fbnne. 3)ie sfbfid)t beg ©efe|eg
fei ffar, baft bag Bengnift be§ 33efi|tite(g, tro| ader gefe|fid)en
£}nibbe(eien, bag bebentet, mag eg fagf, ndmltc|, baft, menu ein
Mann fold) ein Beugnift anf feinen Sfcamen befi|t, fo fod eg gefe|fid)
jeber serfon, ob 9tid)ter ober nid)t, oerboten fein, jn fragen, mie er
e§ erbaften babe, ©r fei fibber, baft bag ®efe| Don 1861 biefe
gebabt babe nnb baft eg, menn bie 97id)ter ibm nur freieg
Spiel gefaffen batten, faft oodfommen gemefen fei. ©g mar non
aden@efe|funbigen anerfannt, baft in jebem sarlamcntggefe|e, fo
fcrgfdltig eg and) entmorfen fei, einige Unoodfommenbeiten Oorfommen
fbnnen, aber baft eg bie sftidjt beg 9tid)terg fei, anf bie adgemctne
SWcinnng bcffelben jn feben nnb feine ©ntfcbcibnngen im ©eifte beg
@efe|eg ju geben, menu jc ang folder UnOodfommenbeit eine .tfage
entftebe. fatten nnfere 9ftd)ter nnr in biefer SBejicbnng ibre
erfiidt nnb ibr Urtbeil in bem adgemeinen ©eifte beg 91eat
slcteg gegeben, fo miirbe er Idngft ein SDtufter ber SSodfommenbeit
gemefen fein; Jebod) ftatt bcffcn baben fie ibr SSefteg gctban, bieft
@efe| nod) oerdebtdd)er bem snblifo jn macben afg felbft bag alte
SSerfabren mar. ©r babe in leftter 3eit oielc SSeridjte Don
entfcbcibungen getefen nnb fei babnrd) nm fo fid)erer jn feiner stnfid)t
gefommcn, benn je jnoor, baft ade Unannebmlidjfeiten burd^


Kftdngel beg Qlcteg entftanben feien, fonbern etnfadj burd) bie
niffe, it>eld)e bie9Rtd)ter iljm bereiteten, unb er baft audjenblid)
bag ju berfelben 9lnfi d)t gelangen merbe. $Ug er fetuert
erften SSrxef Oerbffentlid)t babe, [ei ibm liberate ber 33x>rir»urf gemad)*,
baft feine Slngriffe auf bie Slitter unoerantmortlidj mdren; baft fie
gemiffenbafte banner feien, meld)e bag @efe| Oermalten, mie fie eg
oerfteben unb baft jeber burd) bie Unfidjerbeit unb Unbe*
ftimmtbeit bebingt merbe, mit ber eg entmorfen fei. Snbeft, alg er
mit feinen 21rtifeln fortfuljr unb bie gefyrodjenen SBorte ber 9tid)ter
fclbft anfiibrte, meldje bie drgfte ber Karen SBorte beg
©efe|eg bemiefen: ba gelangte man ju feinen 9lnfid)tcn. Sn SBabr*
beit, in letter SBodje murbe Kjm Don brei 51bOo!aten gefagt, baft er
Ktedjt babe, baft bie Qlboofaten gunftig fur ben Slct gefonnen feien
unb baft fie lieber unter ibm arbeiten, obf(bon bie Soften Oerfdjieben
feien, alg unter bent alten Styftcmc; baft aber bie Sd)ulb, mie er
bebauptet babe, mirflidj an ben SUdjtern liege, S)ag SJSarlamcnt
fprad) in Karen SGBorten, mie fie nur bie englifd)e Sprad)e entbalten
iann, ficb baruber aug, mag eg meine, unb tro|bem bie
9Rid)ter, obfebon fie bel)au:pten, baft fie bag @efe| erfiiKen, immer
unb immer mieber gerabe bag ©ntgegengefe|te, mag gemeint ift*
©r mode nur jmei sdKe aug ber fungften SSergangenbeit anfiKjren,
obfebon er ang ben oielen Sabren, in benen bag ®cfefc in traft ift,
gaK auf gaff fbnnte, in benen bie ©ntfdjeibung burdjaug
unrest mar. £err Sinbfal) befaft einen SScfifctitel fur eine (Section,
meld)e an ben §luft, sort Slbelaibe gegenuber, angrenjte. ©r unter*
lieft bie SBcjablung ber Steuern baoon, meil ber ©ler! ficb meigerte,
bie riebtige Summer fetner Section auf bie Ouittung ju fd)reiben.
2)er 2)iftrictg (Council oerKagte it>n fur biefe Steuer oom £anbe unb
ber 9ted)tganmalt beg sduferg, alg er ben SBcfi|titel erf>ielt, entbedte
uidjt, baft ficb bag £anb unter bem 51cte befanb, fonbern nabm eine
Slbtretung (conveyance) oom Kftafter beg ®erid)tg unter bem alten
Sbftem, anftatt, mie eg butte gefdjeben miiffen, eine Uebertragung
(transfer) unter bem slct. sllg bie Mage Dor ©erid)t fam, erfldrte
ber 9iid)ter, ftatt anjuorbnen, baft bag £anb unter bent stct anf ben
itdufer iibertragen merbe (vesting in the purchaser), baft bie ©on*
Detyance gut fei unb baft bag £anb bent neuen Sbfteme genommeu
unb bem alten juriidgegeben merbe, meil ber 2)iftrict ©ouncil 51ct,
unter meld)ent bag Sanb oerfauft mar, erlldrt, baft ber SLRafter bag
Sanb iiberfdjreibe (convey), mdt)renb unter bem Dieal 31ct
fold) ein S)ing mie conveying betannt fei, fonbern bag £anb
miirbe transferred (beibe SBorte convey unb transfer bebeuten etma
ganj baffelbe mie bie beutfcf>en SBorte: iibertragen unb iiberfiibren,
tibergeben unb iiberliefern. 2). 91.) ©g mar eine S3eleibigung beg
fold) eine ©nffdjeibung ju geben, ba Seber im SBbrterbucbe
feben fann, baft beibe SOBorte ganj baffelbe bebeuten. Unb bieft ift
oin einjelner SaK ber 51rt. ton irgenb ©iner fagen, baft eg bie
sbfid)t beg gemefen fei, baft Sanb, einmal unter ben


gebxacfyt, untex ixgenb WePent SSoxwanbe fe untex bag afte
@t)ftem pxiidgebxad)t Wexben fode? Unb gxabe biefj texfiigte bet
91id)tex. Unb leine ©ntfpdbigung ift Ijtexfiix toxbanben, inbem eine
slnotbnung ton ibm, bag £anb auf (Reid p iibextxagen (vesting)
tom (Regiftxax ©enexal befolgt woxben [ein Wiixbe, unb ex fagt, otync
SRiidbatt, bap ex (ein Uxtfyeil in bex soxm gegeben babe, in bet
@exed)tigteit pifdjcn ben bex Elage p ttyun, fonbexn
in bex Qlbfidjt, einen S3efi|titet untex bem (Real sxopxtty
2lcte umpftopen. ©x (£exx £>f)ie) babe gegtaubt, bap ioenn exft bie
(Ricbtex bex alten Sdjulc texfdpunben feien, eg l)iexin beffex Wexben
Wiixbe unb in bex ftolonic gebilbete Slbtofaten bem Stcte (Ssexecb>tigteit
Wibexfotyxen laffen wiixben; leibex fei bem nicbt fo, Wie ein
exfd)ienenex Safi biep jeigc. Sn bex slage tc. gegen bie
©oxpxation ton Sdbelaibe, befapen bie tlagex einen 23efi|titel fur
ein @tiid £anb in 3tbelaibe pgleid) mit einem SGSegexedjte iibex ein
anbexeg ©tiid £anb, Weld)eg, wie eg fid) exgab, nicbt untex bem stcte
fid) befanb, unb bag @exid)t fyielt bafiix, bap bag ©extificat nicbtig
(ungiltig, void) fei. Sn SScpg auf bag 2Begexed)t alg eine @xleicb=
texung (easement) entfcbieb ex, bap eg nicbt ebex untex ben 3lct
gebxacbt wexben tonne, big bag £anb, auf Wetd)eg eg ficb ,bept)t,
ebenfadg untex ben 91ct gebxacbt woxben. £opt bag (Bolt biefen sad
mit gefunbem (Bexftanbe betrocbten unb fxagt eg, wag bie slnfidjt beg
sjjaxlamenteg geWefen fei. ®ie ganje ©efd)id)te bxebt ficb biex urn
bag Soxt „land“. £)ex (Rid)tex fagt, bag 2Boxt „land“ fcbtiefe jebe
tc., pgleid) atte gupwegc mit alien Oexecbtfamen ein; unb
Sebex toiixbe fagen, bap, alg goxmbb’g &anb untex ben 3lct gebxad)t
touxbe, wax baton bag 20Segexed)t nicbt getxennt, fonbexn ging baffelbe
mit iibex.
3)ex 3lct ift buxd) Suffice texftiimmelt unb aug femex uxfpung*
licben ftoxm adein bepfyalb betauggefoltext, urn ben ©inwdnben bet
SRtdjtex entgegenpfommen. s>ex Bufa|4lct ton 1878 wax ein bidex,
ben (Ridjtexn pgewoxfenex Stiffen, benn ex nabm adc (sntfd)eibungen
iibex SBcfifctitcl ton ipexfonen, wel’dje ton einem xegiftxixten, texftox*
benen S3efi|ex ibx S3efi|tbum bexleiteten, ton bem S3oasxb bex ©om*
miffionexg foxt unb iibcxWicg fie bem £)bexgexid)te. Urn biep nocfy
fcblimmex p iibexlie§ eg bag iibex ben ©xlaff (issue)
beg S3efi|titelg in foid)em gade, tteld)ex fxiibex fo beutlid) wax, in
einem fel)x umwbllten Suftanbe. S)ag ®efe| wuxbe nun bocbft Wibex=
fpxed)enb. @g waxen pet beftimmte SBege bem ©exicbte offcn, Wenn
ein @txeit entftanb. @g fonnte ben gxofien unb leitenben ®xunbfa|
beg slcteg: bab (Riemanb gepungen wexbep tonne, _ ben S3e=
fi|titel pxiidpbliden, in SOSixtung txeten laffen, benn eg befinben
manege §§ in bem 3lcte ton 1861, bte nid)t wibexxufen finb, bie eg
bap bexect)tigen; obex eg fann anbexexfeitg nod) bem 3ufa|acte
annebmen, baf, bex Mufex obex buxd) bag Seftament
beg texftoxbencn 33efi|exg gebunben fei, fo bap eg exfd)eint, ba§ je|t
alg je bex ©eift beg slcteg ton bex ©apxice beg (Rid)texg abljdngt^


m ben et «ebtast wto ®ie falagcn Dor, ein SKeworwl
S ie m'fr U J 5Uf^-- n , t Uni> .? em atlamente 5“ iiberrcidien, inbefe, wemt
s » c^c£&cn 9 eei 9 nete « ©tantyunlt n?ie bie ©ntmerfer
be§ ®efe|eg nebmen unb barauf befteben, baf, bie bidder bag ©e U
terioatten, me eg ts„en übergekn ift, fo baben jene feine qrofce
an 9te ornu SBenn bie Mgtieber nur auf tyre ftecbte
ttoGten, fcjtourbe biep obne StDcifel pndcbft etioag unamU
[em, jebocb bte 9iid)ter ibiirben fcbltepcb nadjgeben unb ibrer
§erren fflitten etfuGen muften, trie eg in bem bcfanntcn S3oofc
gtrette ber gaffe tear. ©in fernereg Uebet fei, baft bag £anb mit
?o^or£ emen * Rttter ber ©ontroGe feineg naturticben
beg Stttorneb*@enerat, geftanben babe, imb biefj mar fterg febr un'
beil)am. ©g tft fein ©runb borbanben, marum bieft Stmt eine
pueGe ber ©tnnobme fur ben ©taat fein foGte, fonbern ieber 3?ennb
*>% mupte berioenbet merben, bag Stmt fc mirfunqgboG in
atg mbgtidb p macben. 2batfdd)tid) febocf) bat man
eg aGe Beit fo furj atg miJglidj gebalten unb bem 9tegiftrar=@enerat
tbar e*? nie gejtattet, feine S3eamten p mdblen, fbnbern er mufite
bie nebmen, ttel(sc ber Bttornetj s @cneral tbm fdjidte. SOSdre bag
flagen bablm^ ™ e *^ er er^e^ltn 9 en ' je|t, p he-
„ r fie eine S3ittfd)rift ang Sbartament etnreidien moGen fo
mod)ten fie forbern, bap ber grbfete Sbctt beg bon 1878
unb namcnthd), bci§ Cct SSostb of (Sotnntifftonct
mieber in feiner boGen bergefteGt merbe, toie serr Sorreng
ibn etnfe|te. £)ag fei gerabe bie £auf)tftdrfe beg ©anjen, benn er
ibar m 3Birftid)feit eine SSeborbc bon 97icbtricbtern. @r babe eine
©rfabrung fotoobl in Uebertragung unter bem Stcte, atg and)
m bor bem unb tonne eg aug-
ffpred)en, bajj bie beg Sanbtitetomteg biet ftricter feien
atg jematg bor bem ©eridite, 2)ag ©rbfdpftgfteuergefeb fei ebenfoGg
bem 9ieat Stcte fembtid), bag grofie Scbmierigfeiten barbiete
3)er Stntrag ttmrbe burd) &errn ©eebo fecunbirt unb bterauf
mit grower Gttajontdt angenommen. §r. beantraqte
bterauf, eine S3ittfcbrift mit bem ©efiube bem ctn«
geretd)t merbe. ben neuen Stct ju ermagen, um ibn, ober bie bertoerf=
licbften £ db bejfetben jurud ju net)men. §r. @eebo fecunbirte unb
auperte, baf? man §rn. Ofjie groffen S)anf fur fein mdnntid)eg
treten pm ©ibu|e beg Slcteg fd)ulbe. Seiner SKcinung nad> batten
Stbbofaten biet p biet bei bem Stcte p tbun, unb je rafdber man
unter bte gtudtid)e beg of ©ommiffionerg pruct'
tebre, um fo beffer murbe eg fur bie ©etbbeutet unb namenttid) fur
bie Shnber ftebem §r. SBteffing bofft, ber ©rfotg biefer ser*
fammtung bag Sanb ettoag aufmuntern unb aGe S>ertreter im 33ar*
tamente ibre @d)utbig!eit tbun tterben. ®er Stntrag murbe mit
groper SQtajoritdt angenommem §r. sbidif)§ tag bterauf bie S3itt*
Thrift bor, metdje angenommen unb fofort unterfdjrieben tourbe, §r


Sixfoil M.P. [oH ctfud)t toetben, fie bent Dorjitfegen.
©in 2)anfnotnm auf ben sorft|enben nub £rn. Cijpie fd)lo§ biefe
tyod) ju riifjmenbe SBcrfammlung. 3Bir erttaljnen ber Mfnmmentyett
ttegen nod)', bafe etne gtelbing, e§ oerfnd&te, ben 3tted
t>er SSctfammlung, jebod) ofyne ©rfolg, ju [tbren. Sir erlauben ung
Ijter&ct nod) bie 23emerfung, baft ber iibrige 3scil ber Eolonie ja
nid)t etioa glauben moge, bafe permit genug gcfdjcsen fei; bent if l
nid>t fo, benn tnenn nidjt nod) red)t Otele foldje Berfammlungen in
alien Sweden ber ftolonie red)t tout unb red)t gefyalten loerben,
fo bag @d)tdfal biefer SBittfdjrift bag fo older ljunberte nor
ibr, ndmlid) bag fein, ba£ fie in ben bobenlofen beg
ioanbert.
BAROSSA FARMERS’ UNION.
(From the S. A. Advertiser, May 6, 1882.)
The monthly meeting of the Barossa Farmers’ Union was held at Nicholas’s
Hotel, Lyndoch, on Wednesday, May 3. There was a good attendance of members.
A discussion then ensued with reference to Torrens’s Act, and the pro-
posed alterations as shadowed forth in a letter that appeared in the papers from Mr.
Opie. The opinion of the meeting appeared to be that the Act had lost somewhat
of its former simplicity, and that they should endeavor to return to that. Eventu-
ally the secretary undertook to write to Mr. Opie, and get an explanation of his views
on the matter. —Mr. Potter thought that they should give some portion of their time
to the consideration of the best method of dairying. There was a good deal carried
on in the neighborhood, and he considered their stock might be improved. The
Chairman thought it was a question which touched them immediately. They ought
to have improved their stock years ago, and banded together for importing suitable
cattle. All their animals were gradually degenerating, and a great improvement
might be made. It was resolved that at the next meeting this subject and that of
the Real Property Act should engage tbeir attention.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, May 15, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
—Several cases have come before the Court as to the effect of leases
granted under Ihe Act for terms less than three years—as, for instance, Manning v.
Crossman (1871), Bucket! v. Knobbe (1873), and Tranter v. Lord (1874), and in
such cases the J udges professing to look upon the Act as a formulated and
inelastic system ” of dealing with land, have held sometimes that no term for less
than three years could be created at all, and sometimes that such terms could be
granted, blit only by word of mouth, as they said the Act only provided for
registration of longer leases, and a shorter lease, being incapable of registration,
could not be an instrument capable of passing any estate or interest in land, and
such oral letting could not in any way be transferred.
The clauses referring to leases in the Act are Nos. 47 and 48. The former
enacts that “ when any land is intended to be leased or demised for a life of lives, or
for any term of vears exceeding three, the proprietor shall execute a memorandum
of lease in form' E of the schedule,” and were it not for the solemn reasonings of
the Judges, it would seem to be almost needless to point out that, as to less terms
than three years, the clause leaves it optional to the parties as to whether the lease
shall be registered or not. Clause 48 in its commencement—" Whenever any lease


or demise which is required to he registered bj the provisions of this Act,” &c. —
also clearly points out that the framers of the Act had in their minds’ eye a class of
leases which could be registered or not in accordance with the wish of the parties
besides the leases required to be registered.
There is also another class of cases in which the Judges sought to tie down the
authorities in working the Act to its strict letter, viz., transfers by the sheriff.
They admitted that the Act authorised the sheriff to make sales, but decided that
as there was no specific form of transfer provided in the schedule he was without
power to convey the land sold. The clause (93) relating to sales by the sheriff, after
directing that the Registrar-General shall enter in the Register-book the particulars
of the writ, goes on to say that “ after such entry the sheriff or other person
authorised by the Supreme Court shall do such acts and execute such instruments
as under the provisions of this Act may be necessary to transfer or otherwise deal
with the estate or interest.”
However, in spite of the rulings with respect to the two classes of dealings
named, the Registrar-General has registered many such transactions, both short
leases and transfers by the Sheriff. In the latter case, of course, the form of
transfer was varied a little to meet, the circumstances, in accordance with clause 3,
“ Any variation from such forms (in the schedule) not being in matter of
substance shall not effect their validity or regularity, but they may be used with
such alterations as the character of the parties or the circumstances of the case may
render necessary.”
I am, Sir, &c.,
Ma V n - E. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register , May 17, 1882.)
It is gratifying to find that some at least of the candidates for the Legislative
Council have stated their determination to preserve the Real Property Act in its
integrity, and to do what is necessary to lop off the excrescences which are
interfering, and threaten still further to interfere, with its beneficial operation. It
is questionable whether they could, if called upon, point out the specific injuries
that have been done to the measure, but it is something gained to know that their
suspicions have been aroused and that they are ready to assume a defensive attitude.
It is satisfactory to find that indefeasibility of title as established by the Real
Property Act is still a phrase to conjure by. The public cannot be too sensitive with
regard to infractions of this law, which is one of the most valuable results of
legislative effort in South Australia. There is no longer any danger that the
principles of the Act will be openly and malignantly attacked, as was the case in
former times. There are few who entertain towards it any feeling of vindictiveness,
or who would support its repeal if such a thing were to be seriously proposed. Judges,
lawyers, land proprietors and those who hope to become land proprietors, are, we
believe, honestly desirous of maintaining it as a portion of the Statute law of the colony.
We do not share Mr. E. A. Opie’s view that the Judicial Bench is so wedded to the
ancient traditions of the law of title to land, and so enamoured of the
venerable intricacies of conveyancing, that it is ever on the watch to deal a
blow at the Act, and we think better of the legal profession than to imagine
that while they are professing admiration of the Act; they are banded
together to effect its destruction at the earliest possible opportunity.
At the same time it is undeniable that recent legislation has tended to hamper the
operations of the law, and that the interests of the legal profession have been
studied to a greater extent than necessity warrants. Although the main citadel
—the indefeasibility of title —may be uninjured, it is certain that some of the
important outworks, such as simplicity in dealing with certain classes of land,
promptness in disposing of applications, and inexpensiveness of transactions under
the Act, have received damage. It is impossible —and would be very undesirable if
it were possible—to restore the Act to the condition in which it first received Parlia-
mentary assent; but there is need not only for the utmost vigilance in preventing


injurious enroachments upon the main principles of the measure, but also for a
recasting of provisions of existing Acts which conflict with the law, militate against
its simplicity, and reintroduce some of those elements of complexity and
uncertainty which it was meant to sweep away. Although we do not concur in all
of Mr. Opie’s animadversions upon the Judges, he is certainly doing the State good
service in calling attention to the points upon which the Act has been assailed, and
in endeavouring to arouse the country to a sense of the importance of maintaining
intact the grand principles of the law and removing those obstacles in the way of its
effective operation which, whether advertently or inadvertently, have been created
by Parliament.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, May 20, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —Your article in to-day’s issue, mentioning that possibly the candidates
for the Legislative Council could not point out the specific injuries done to the Act,
Las made me think it would be advisable for me, with your permission, to interrupt
my series of letters about the Supreme Court rulings, for the purpose of pointing
out the most objectionable parts of the objectionable amending Act of 1878. I
will, therefore, go through the different faulty clauses, and in so doing must ask
•excuses from those who have read my previous letters for some unavoidable
repetitions.
Clause 9 levies assurance (id. in the pound) on titles obtained by transmission
in consequence of the death of a registered proprietor. Under the former Act
this was fair enough, inasmuch as the Registrar-General, after investigation, granted
a guaranteed title, and if he made a mistake the Assurance Fund was liable to make
it good; but now this reason does not hold. The title is put in the name of the
-executor or administrator without any enquiry, and if he commits a breach of trust,
by which the person really entitled to the land suffers, the Assurance Fund is
•expressly and fully protected by Clause 58.
Clause 12, providing that every instrument presented for registration shall be
in duplicate, is absurd and unworkable; for instance, discharges of mortgages and
■encumbrances, surrenders of leases, extensions of mortgages and leases, probates,
letters of administration, and deeds of assignment cannot conveniently be made in
duplicate, neither, indeed, does the Real Property Office ask it, but practically
ignores the clause, and herein we shall have some trouble when the mantle of Mr.
Gwynne is found and worn again.
Clause 13, declaring that no person except the parties shall be held to have
notice of the contents of a registered instrument beyond the particulars contained
in the memorial entered in the Register-book, or to be therefrom inferred, is very
objectionable. If an instrument is registered, the instrument itself is constructively
■embodied in the book, and certainly the whole instrument should be binding, not
only the few words of reference to it in the memorial.
Clause 14. The latter part of this clause, that when land is in separate certi-
ficates in undivided shares, and one party becomes the owner of the entirety, that
the separate titles shall be cancelled and a new title issued, can do no possible good,
is awkward in working, and is not insisted on being observed by the Lands Titles
Office.
Clause 15, declares that a title in the name of a married woman shall, until her
husband be registered co-proprietor, be deemed to be for her separate use- —that is,
that she may deal with it as if she were a single woman. This is contradictory to
■clause 72, which enacts that on dealing she shall make the usual married woman’s
acknowledgement.
Clause 16. Apparently by an oversight of the draftsman, the proceedings on
transfer of leases or mortgages have got jumbled up with transfers of freehold.
Clause 23, providing for extension of mortgages and leases by endorsement on
original instrument, might as well have left it optional to the parties to carry out


their desire, either hy endorsement or by separate instruments—most often the
latter would be the mode preferred —the documents are usually sent through the
post for signature, and a mortgagee does not care to let his security leave his hands
for those of the opposite party.
Clause 25 is ambiguous. One of the solicitors in the Lands Titles Office takes
it as an authority to insert notices of trusts in the Registrar-book itself, and the
other solicitor holds that it expressly forbids anything of the kind.
Clauses 35 to 39 relate to the transmitting of the titles of deceased proprietors,
and the object of such transmission, and are, I think, the part of the amending Act
most opposed to the principles of the Real Property Act. Under the Act of 1861
it was the duty of the Board of Commissioners to consider all applications from the
heir-at-law or devisee, and on being satisfied, to grant him an indefeasible title. The
Commissioners did not insist on the will being proved in the Supreme Court, but
satisfied themselves by requiring declarations that the will was indeed the last one
of the deceased, and (before 1868) in case of intestacy took proof in the same mode
as to who was the heir-at-law, and on issue of the title if the Registrar-General saw
there was any person, other than the registered proprietor, whose interest required
protecting, he entered caveat for that purpose against the title. Now, in case of
death, the first step is for the executor, or proposed administrator, to apply to the
Supreme Court for probate or letters of administration. This document is produced
to the Registrar-General, who at once places the title in his name, without any
enquiry or restraint, except that he is described in the certificate as executor or ad-
ministrator of the deceased. The effect of this registration has never been tested in
the Supreme Court. When it is the Judges must take one of the only two views
possible —First, they may say, “ Here is a title in fee in the name of So-and-so, and
so far as concerns a purchaser or mortgagee from him, it is a good titleor second,
“ So-and-so’s title states he holds it as executor or administrator, and the purchaser
is consequently bound by the trusts on which S. held it, and should have got the
consent of all parties before taking a transfer. ” Whichever view is taken, the
present system is immeasurably inferior to that it took the place of. If the first
view is taken there is an end to the protection of beneficiaries or devisees under a
wall, whose interests were adequately protected under the Act of 1861 by the Regis-
trar-General ; while if the other view is taken, then there is no Real Property Act,
as the public understand it, in existence.
Clause 42 forms Part YU. of the Act and combined with the seventh schedule,
prescribes the mode of proceedure in the matter of caveats. It would require a
lawyer to criticise this satisfactorily, so I will content myself with pointing out that
too much mention is made of the Supreme Court for the good of the Act; that the
latter part of sub-clause 3, forbidding registration while any caveat is in force, has
had the effect of causing the Registrar to refuse registration of a document, even
when expressed to be subject to claim of the caveator, and that sub-clause 4, forbid-
ding a person to caveat more than once in relation to the same matter, is likely to
cause hardship.
Clause 67 is badly worded, and, as no doubt it is desirable its intention should
he given effect to, ought to be recast.
Clause 68, declaring that equities are not abolished, is held by many to be a very
dangerous enactment, and one that was puite uncalled for in the face of the judg-
ment given in 1877 (Cuthbertson v. Swan) “ that except in so far as was necessary
for the maintaining of the main principle of the Act, viz., indefeasibility of title in a
sale to a bona-fide purchaser, trusts were not swept away by the Act”
Clause 74 makes it lawful to go behind the certificate of title, and inspect any
transfer or other document, to determine whether the proprietor became possessed
for valuable consideration, This is decidedly contrary to the spirit of the Act, both
as to the power thereby given and the object of its being exercised.
I am, Sir, etc.,
May 17. E. A. D. OPIE,


REAL PROPERTY ACT AND THE PROBATE AND SUCCESSION
DUTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, May 22, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —In your sub-leader of this date you say “ Judges, lawyers, land pro-
prietors, and those "who hope to be land proprietors are, we believe, honestly desirous
of maintaining it as a portion of the Statute law of the colony.” There can be no
doubt that landed proprietors are honestly desirous of maintaining the principles of
the Act, but as to Judges and lawyers I think any person reading Mr. Opie’s letters
will arrive at the conclusion that such has not been the case in the past. You have
hit the right nail on the head and struck at the root of the evil when you say
“ the interests of the legal profession have been studied to a greater extent than
necessity warrants.” As a late instance of the wisdom of this remark I have only
to mention the Amending Probate and Succession Duties Act, which came into
operation last November. By this Act the Registrar-General shall refuse to regis-
ter any transfer, etc., executed by executors or administrators, unless there be
endorsed thereon a certificate from the Supreme Court that succession duty payable
in respect thereof had been duly paid, or that there is no duty payable. A short
time since I had occasion to prepare a transfer from an executor. I produced the
transfer to the Registrar of Probates at the Supreme Court, who supplied me with
two forms and a direction to present them at the Treasury. On payment of the
duty at the Treasury I obtained a receipt, which I took back to the Supreme Court
and handed to the Registrar of Probates; he then gave me the certificate. All
duties had been paid. I was then free to present my transfer at the Lands Titles
Office in the usual way.
I don’t know a more ingenious way of studying the interests of the legal
profession than this, and it proves conclusively that your remark, as above, is
amply justified. There can be little doubt that land described in a great many
transfer registers since the passing of the Probate Act of 1876, and before the
Amending Act, is still liable to the State for the whole or portion of the duty on
the estates of the late owners. The Probate Act and the Real Property Act should
be kept apart, and not allowed to clash as at present. Purchasers of land should
not be made the vehicles for collecting duties from administrators and executors,
but the officers of the Supreme Court should satisfy themselves that executors and
bondsmen have complied with the law. I may state that I had no difficulty in
obtaining the certificate for the above-mentioned transfer from the Supreme Court j
but I cannot shut my eyes to the fact that ere long transfers such as I have
mentioned will have to be prepared by lawyers, as it will be considered detrimental
to the interests of the legal profession that landbrokers should in any way have
dealings in the non-contentious work of the Supreme Court. This brings me to the
question of obtaining probate and letters of administration by brokers. And here
again “ the interests of the legal profession have been studied to a greater extent
than necessity warrants.” Solicitors endeavour to induce the public to believe that
a great amount of legal skill is required in preparing probates and letters of
administration; but such is not the case, as most brokers can prepare such
documents as efficiently as members of the legal profession, and at about one-fourth
the cost.
The heavy charges now made by the legal profession to widows and orphans
for obtaining probates and letters of administration is surely an argument members
of Parliament might use to at once put a stop to this piece of class legislation, and
either allow brokers to prepare letters of administration, &c., or provide that in
future the Supreme Court prepare and issue direct to the widow probate, &c., at a
small cost (in same manner as certificates of title are now issued by Lands Titles
Office) without the intervention of lawyer or landbroker, and thus enable the un-
fortunate struggling widow to deal with her husband’s small estate "without being
handicapped by enormous legal costs as at present.
I am, Sir, &c,,
May 17, 1882. LAND BROKER.


THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register , May 23, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sib, — St. George v. Burnett and Another was heard before Judge Gwynne, on
26th October, and 2nd and 10th November, 1875, and 30th May, 1876, and is often
mentioned to show that the Act is incapable of protecting trusts. W. St. George
died in 1863, bequeathing by his will his real and personal property to the
defendants, upon trust, to pay the income to his widow, and on her death to sell
and hold the proceeds in trust for the children. The trustees sold part of the land,
and placed it under the Act, certificate being issued to the purchaser. Afterwards,
the trustees, finding they had done wrong in selling, repurchased the property, had
it transferred to themselves, and signed a declaration that they held it upon the
the trusts of the will. The plaintiffs applied for the trustees to be compelled to
render accounts, also for their removal and appointment of new trustees. There
were other points in the case not connected with the Act. The Judge said that
it appeared not only the trustees, but also the Real Property Office lent itself to
the transaction. A grosser breach of trust he had never heard of. By the law of
England such a transaction could not have occurred, nor would it have been
attempted. But such a case could only occur under a system which veils and
allows frauds —he meant the Real Property Act—and by that system Gray (the
purchaser) had obtained an entire and indefeasible title. The trustees said they
had got the land back again; it was true they had gone through the idle form of
writing down on a piece of paper that it was held in trust; but what good was that
against an instrument he was told by the Legislature to receive as conclusive
evidence of the producer’s title ? The defendants had got back the property, the
cestui que trust had nothing. They must not reason as if it were an English matter ;
the evil deity known as the Real Property Act had been invoked and rights of
equity immolated.
The Judge’s prejudices here caused him to accuse the system of the Act,
instead of the administrators of it; for, assuming that the trusts of the will were
broken by allowing the trustees to sell, that would only amount to proving a mis-
take on the part of the Commissioners ; the Act itself fully provides for the pro-
tection of trusts. And, moreover, what does not seem to me to be put plainly
enough before the public, such mistakes are covered by the existence of the
Assurance Fund; while, as to a mistake made by the Supreme Court, who can say
where he is to get his remedy ? Clause 14 of the Act proves clearly enough that
it was through no defect in the Act that the breach of trust occurred; it says that
applications to place land under the Act may be made “by any person in whom the
fee-simple is vested, provided that when trustees have no express power to sell,
the person beneficially entitled shall consent.” The Judge cited various clauses of
the Act relating to transmissions of land already under the Act; but as they do
not seem to bear on the case in question, I have not quoted them. They have,
however, made me think of the much greater protection the Act of 1861 afforded
in matters of transmission than does the Amending Act of 1878. Under the first
Act the Registrar-General issued title to the heir-at-law or person entitled under the
will, and, if trustees were registered, protected the tx-usts by lodging caveat. Now,
the title is put in the name of the administrator or executor, who is allowed to deal
with the land without any restraint or enquiry. As I have pointed out before, there
are, in case of dispute, two courses open to the Judges —they can either hold that
the trusts of the will or administration are binding on the purchaser; or say that,
so far as respects a purchaser, the executor or administrator is the absolute pro-
prietor of the land. I should not have mentioned this matter now, except to point
out that, whichever view is taken by the Judges, the present system is inferior to
that it supplanted. If they take the first view, it does not require a prophet to
show that there is no longer such a thing as the Real Property Act, as the public
understand it, in existence; while, if they take the other view there is an end to
all protection of devisees and beneficiaries, whose interests could formerly, by the
system of caveats provided in the Act of 1861, be adequately protected. When the
alteration was before Parliament the Attorney-General astutely led the members-


off on a wrong scent, by assuming that the only objection was that all wills would
have to be proved, and he combated this by stating that even then ninety-nine out
of every hundred wills were proved; but he did not state that the mere fact of
proving did not alter the contents of a will, the trusts of which would be just as
binding after it was proved as before ; nor why, if it was proper for the title to be
put in the name of the executor, it could not be so done without sending the
parties to the Court to obtain probate.
I am, Sir, etc.,
May 15. E. A. D. OPIE.
AN APPEAL EOR MERCY.
(From Adelaide Punch, May 27,1882.)
Mr. Punch seriously puts it to Mr. Opie, that if he does not desist from his
severe course of exposition in relation to the Real Property Act administration, the
lawyers will certainly believe that he means them a mischief; and in a friendly way,
Mr. P. warns Mr. Opie that if the lawyers once begin to believe that they have lost
the absolute and unquestioning confidence of the public they will feel very distressed
indeed. Besides, Mr. Opie should remember, that, besides the present large supply
of members of an honorable and noble profession, there is an ever increasing
number of young aspirants for horsehair wigs, fame, and fees; and it must be very
discouraging to these young sucklings to see the incessant attempts made to invade
privileges which even His Honor the Chief Justice deems sacred. Mr, P. suggests
that Mr. Opie should stop and seriously consider, before he further attempts
stripping the coats off the backs of the members of this highly valuable section of
the community.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT DEPARTMENT.
(From the S. A. Register, May 29, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sib, —I have read with much pleasure Mr. Opie’s practical letters on the Real
Property Act appearing in your journal, and I would beg you to urge upon the
Hon. the Attorney-General and His Excellency the Governor, if necessary, that the
present suicidal policy of the Government in keeping the Real Property Act Office
shamefully short-handed is cruel to the present staff of efficient officers at the Lands
Titles Office, and a gross injustice to the public. From intimate knowledge I can
testify that through want of more searchers and draftsmen the most unwarrantable
and vexatious delays occur in the office, retarding, and, in fact, frequently frustra-
ting business. One would scarcely credit the amount of money held idle by auction-
eers and other stakeholders, and the grievous loss of interest thereon, because titles
cannot be obtained from the office. For expedition the old Act is now being pre-
ferred where practicable. A commission should be appointed to investigate into this
bad management. The department pays remarkably well: therefore, there is no
excuse on that ground.
I am, Sir, etc.,
•Moy 25. LANDOWNER.
THE LANDS TITLES OFFICE.
The long and vexatious delays which take, place in the Lands Titles Office
have frequently been complained of. The matter was referred to in Parliament
more than once during last session, and it was understood that the staff would be
increased sufficiently to meet the growing demands made upon it. We publish a


letter to-day signed “ Landowner,” in which, the grievance is stated in very forcible
language. We have reason to believe from statements that have reached us from
other quarters that there is still a great deal of dissatisfaction at the slowness with
which the work of the department is accomplished. The numberless dealings in
land which have taken place during the last two or three years must have increased
the work of the staff very materially, and, of course, no blame can be attached to
those officers who really understand their work and are competent to discharge it
efficiently. What is wanted is that a searching enquiry should be made into the
working of the department, that incompetent officers, if any, should be weeded
out, and that the staff should be strengthened sufficiently to be able to overtake the
work awaiting attention. It is understood that the office pays very well, and there-
fore there is no ecomonic reason why it should be undermanned. There may
possibly be a lull for a short time in land speculation, but it will be unwise to cal-
culate upon this. One of the professed advantages of the Real Property Act is
that it ensures the cheap and speedy transmission of titles. If the delays are as
wearisome as under the old system, one of the principal benefits of the measure
will be largely neutralized. It is very undesirable this should be done, especially at
a time when it is to be feared that the tendency of recent legislation will be to com-
plicate rather than to simplify the processes for ensuring a title. Some of the work
of the office is of course purely professional, but a great deal of it is merely
clerical, and there ought not to be any difficulty in securing all the assistance that is
necessary. The question is one of great public importance, and we trust it will
receive the immediate attention of the Attorney-General, who is the Minister in
charge of this particular department.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, June 6, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —Lean v. Maurice w r as heard before Judges Gwynne and Wearing on
June 6, 1873 and August 20, 1874, and was an action brought by plaintiff to
•establish a right-of-way over land vested in the defendant by a certificate of title.
In 1862, Mitchell and Tonkin, mortgagors, and Roberts, mortgagee, under the
old system, of Section 810, Hundred of Adelaide, granted a right-of-way to plaintiff
by a deed, which was not dated and never registered. Roberts re-conveyed the land
by a deed, duly registered, to Mitchell and Tonkin. They placed the section under
the Act, obtained a clean certificate, and mortgaged it to Baseby, who sold the land
to defendant. No mention was made of the right-of-way, either in the re-con-
veyance from Roberts, the application, Mitchell and Tonkin’s certificate, the mort-
gage to Baseby, the transfer from him, or Maurice’s certificate.
Judge Gwynne said that two points were raised by First, that the
grant of the right-of-way was not registered under the Registration Act of 1841,
and therefore was void as against the purchaser; and second, that the right-of-
way not being noted on defendant’s certificate the defendant was seised of the land
freed from the right-of-way. The object of the Act of 1841 was to prevent secret
conveyances. No one was compelled to register, and the effect of an instrument
was not altered by registration. It therefore came to this —Could a subsequent
purchaser, whose own deed was not registered, have preference over the first
purchaser whose deed was also unregistered ? He thought not. The subsequent
purchaser must register by memorial (under the old Registration Act) before he
could acquire any priority under that Act. Then the title of the defendant must
stand or fall by Ins certificate of title. A right-of-way was an incorporeal heredita-
ment — no t the thing corporate itself, but issuing out of, annexed to, or collateral
therewith. So far as he was able to understand the Real Property Act the evidence
the certificate afforded proved the person named to be seised of the land free from
all encumbrances, liens, estates, or interests except such as were noted, and except
the omission or misdescription of any right-of-way. A right-of-way was not an


interest in land, so the plaintiff could not have lodged a caveat to protect his right-
of-way. Judge Wearing concuned, although admitting he had had some doubts
on the main question at issue. Verdict entered for plaintiff. Not being a lawyer
I cannot pretend to understand Mr. G-wynne’s fine-drawn pronouncement, that the
proprietor of a right-of-way has no interest in the land affected, and shall remain in
ignorant belief that he has; but putting that on one side, I can see how unfairly
he treated the third clause of the old Registration Act, apparently because he had
a Real Property Act question to decide. The clause referred to enacts that the
deed through which a second purchaser claims, if registered before the deed of the
first purchaser, shall take precedence, and Mr. G Wynne held that as there was no
conveyance to Maurice registered by memorial under the old system he was, so far
as that system was concerned, in the position of an unregistered proprietor. How
His Honor got over the fact that he claimed, through the re-conveyance from
Roberts to Mitchell and Tonkin, a duly registered deed containing no reference to
the right-of-way does not appear.
I am, Sir, etc.,
May 29. E. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, June 9, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —Neill v. Lindsay and Another was a suit to compel the delivering up and
cancelling of the certificate of title of Harbour Allotment 9, opposite Port
Adelaide, which allotment had been sold for arrears of rates, and a deed of con-
veyance, instead of a transfer executed by the Master of the Court in favour of
Neill. Mr. Lindsay’s certificate was one of the first issued under the first Real
Property Act, and the proceedings in the Court seemed to have commenced while
the District Councils Act of 1858 was in force. After the filing of the petition, by
the District Council, for the sale of the land, Mr. Lindsay transferred to Mr. Ross,
the other defendant. The petition was filed July 29, 1872, the order for sale made
October 17, 1873, and the conveyance signed April 20, 1874.
Judge Grwynne delivered judgment on December 19, 1879. He said that two
questions for consideration were raised by defendant —First, did the proceedings
under section 186 of the District Councils Act, 1858, vest the allotment in plaintiff,
notwithstanding the Real Property Act and the certificate in Lindsay’s name ; And,
second, had plaintiff any equity entitling him to relief from the Court ? The first
Real Property Act was passed January 27, 1858, and as it repeals all laws inconsist-
ent with its provisions, if it had been the later Act it might have been held that the
power of selling rateable property had been repealed; but the District Councils
Act was passed nearly twelve months after. The latter Act declared that if rates
are in arrear after certain notices, the Council might apply to a Judge for an order
to sell the property, and the Judge might order a conveyance to be executed, which
should vest the property in the purchaser free from encumbrance. It was argued
that land under the Real Property Act could not be conveyed by the machinery
provided by the District Councils Act, but that might as well be said of land under
the old system, for the mode prescribed was as alien to one system as the other ; the
District Councils Act provided a new mode of transfer applicable to both systems.
As to the second question, he would ask what effect had the sale and conveyance on
defendants’ certificate ? In his opinion the answer was—it took the land out of the
Real Property Act and relegated it to the old system. If so, the certificate was void,
but in the hands of defendant a dangerous document The suit must be decided in
favour of plaintiff, the defendants to pay costs. If their desire had been merely to
settle an uncertain point, or to try a test case, he would not have given costs.
Mr. Gwynne’s judgment is founded on the supposition that the District
Councils Act overrode the Real Property Act. His knowledge of what Acts of
Parliament were in existence must have been rather defective, for it is a fact that
from the day the District Councils Act was passed to the day His Honor delivered


his judgment, there was always in force one or the other of the Real Property Acts
passed subsequently to the District Councils Acts, and each containing clauses
repealing the clause 186, as Mr. Gwynne interpreted it, The District Councils Act
was passed December 24, 1858, and is numbered 10. On the very same day there
was assented to an Act to amend the Real Property Act, and as this is numbered
16, His Honor, if he had had his attention called to its existence, would no doubt
have held it to be the later Act. By this Act (No. 16) it is enacted in section 13 that
“Every memo, of sale or other instrument transferring land under this Act shall be
executed in duplicate, and the Registrar-General, after registering, shall retain one
original of such instrument and deliver the other to the person entitled.” It is
further declared, in section 19, “ That so soon as so registered such instrument shall
be deemed to be part of the Register-book, and the estate or interest shall there-
upon pass and vest in the manner prescribed in such instrument.” Further, by
section 20—“ That every certificate or entry in the Register-book shall absolutely
vest the estate or interest in the land therein mentioned, in the manner and to the
effect expressed in such certificate or entry, and the registered proprietor shall be
secure from eviction or disturbance or adverse claim not declared in such certificate
or entry,” and by section 4 these sections are made to apply to titles issued under
the first Real Property Act. The Act No. 16 was repealed by the Real Property
Act of 1860, clause 1 of which declares “ that all laws, Statutes, Acts, Ordinances,
rules, regulations, and practice whatsoever relating to freehold and other interests in
land, so far as inconsistent with this Act, are repealed so far as regards their
application to laud under the provisions of this Act.” This Act was repealed by
the Real Property Act of 1861, which was in force during the whole of the
proceedings, and when judgment was pronounced, and after the repealing words, it
provides that “ nothing herein contained shall operate to revive any laws, statutes,
rules, and regulations by the Act of 1860 repealed.” It also declares, in section 1,
that all lands held under the previous Real Property Act should, for all purposes,
be held to be under the provisions of this Act, and by section 93 that “ whenever
any estate or interest in land under the provisions of this Act shall be
sold under any order of the Supreme Court the Registrar-General
shall enter in the Register-book the date of the order, and the person
authorised by the Supreme Court shall execute such instruments as under the
provisions of this Act may be necessary to transfer.”
It is hardly necessary to make any long comment on the paltry shift the
Judge’s bias drove him to in making the use he did of the word “ conveyance.” If
he had been liberal in interpreting the Acts he would have held that a memo, of
transfer was a form of conveyance, and if he had not most unfortunately overlooked
the Act 16 he would have been helped to this conclusion by sec. 96, which speaks of
“ conveyancing regulated by the provisions of this Act” (the Real Property Act.)
It may be interesting to some of your readers to know that, so far as the plaintiff
was concerned, he did not wish to have his land “ relegated to the old system,” for
to my knowledge he has, [since obtaining his verdict, once more placed the allot-
ment under the Act, where let us hope it will be allowed to remain.
I am, Sir, &c.,
June 3. E. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, June 10, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOR.
Sib, —Eormby and Another v. the Corporation of Adelaide, was heard on March
2 4 and 31, and April 23, 1880, and judgment delivered on December 24 of the same
year, before Judges Way, Gwynne, and Boucaut. The plaintiffs held a certificate
of title for part of Town Acres 176, 177, together with a right-of-way over the roads
laid out on Acres 134, 135, 176, 177, one of which was Gilles-arcade. The defen-
dants, in their capacity as Local Board of Health, had taken possession of and
altered Gilles-arcade, interfering with and lessening the width of the right-of-way,


and the plaintiffs sought damages, and an injunction to restrain the Corporation from
proceeding.
Mr. G-wynne delivered judgment, in favor of the defendants, on the ground that
the plaintiffs had no right-of-way as alleged. He, in many words, showed what was
the mode prescribed for creating rights-of-way under the Act, which had nothing
whatever to do with the question before the Court, as the right-of-way in dispute
was granted under the old system long before the land to which it was appurtenant
was placed under the Act. But the main point of his judgment was contained in the
few concluding words of it—that the certificate did not prove the existence of the
right, that a certificate could only prove the existence of an estate in fee or for life
in the land therein described, and that the language, most improperly introduced,
purporting to evidence the existence of the right-of-way, had no effect whatever,
except that it might raise the question whether or no the certificate was altogether
invalid.
Judges Way and Boucaut concurred. Clause 14 of the Act of 1861, declares
that “ ‘ land ’ may be bought under the Act.” Clause 3 that “the word ‘ land’ shall
extend to and include messuages, &c., and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal,
of every kind and description, whatever may be the estate or interest therein, to-
gether with all paths, passages, ways, &c. ; and clause 33 commands that “ every
certificate of title shall he received in all Courts as evidence of the particulars
therein set forth, be conclusive evidence that the person named is seised of the
land” (recollect the meaning given to this word in clause 3) “for the estate or
interest specified, and that the property” (not only land, O ye Judges !) “ has been
brought under the Act.”
I am, Sir, &c.,
June 7. E. A. T). OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From the S. A. Register, June 12, 1882.)
TO THE EDITOE.
Sie, —As I mean this to be my concluding letter, unless some ardent admirer
of our Judges feels inclined for a fight, I now ask you to allow me to thank you
for the liberal manner in which you have placed your columns at my disposal. I
wondered at this at first; but after going through your files for the past four and
twenty years I have ceased to wonder, for I find that you have not only always
been a consistent supporter of the scheme, but that you were, in fact, the originator
of it, as it was a series of articles in your paper that set Mr. Torrens to work.
I think it is a great pity that we ever commenced tinkering our Act. If (to go
no further back) the Act of 1861 had —notwithstanding the adverse findings of the
Judges —been left alone, it would have stood on its own bottom. It has always
been a fight between the Supreme Court and the new system; and as the Act, if
left unamended, would have always told the same tale —while the Judges have
decided first one way, then another (see Lange v. Ruwoldt as against Cuthbertson v.
Swan, Hutchinson, v. Leeworthy as against Smith v. Bewes, Manning v. Crossman
as against Tranter v. Lord, and both of these cases as against Buckett v. Knobbe,
e tc.) —there can be no question that the Act would have eventually proved
victorious.
I consider the true principle of the Act, summed up shortly, to be this,
viz., that registration should be paramount, but not everything —that is, if
there is conflict between an unregistered and a registered document, the latter
should take precedence. If these few words are given effect to, it can clearly be
seen that the Act is capable of at least all that the old system is, with the immense
advantage of giving an indefeasible title to a registered proprietor. One great
mistake in considering the operation of the Act I believe to be importing the
question of valuable consideration. If the transaction is registered I think that
should mean everything needed. As to beneficiaries dealing with their interests, I
can say from personal experience that it has been done all along by instruments


unregistered, indeed incapable of registration, and even in these transactions, it
seems to me, the Act gives greater protection than does the old system. I will
suppose an every day case, under the old system—A is trustee, under a registered
will, for the benefit of B and C ; B borrows money and mortgages his interest ;
what protection would it be to the lender to register his mortgage ? He could not
possibly get it entered in the indices against A’s name, but only against B. But in
a similar transaction, where the land is under the Act, the mortgagee would caveat
A’s certificate of title, and so notify A and all the rest of the world of his interest
in the land. The chief thing in dealing with unregistered transactions seems to me
to be, not to make such dealings invalid, but to make it unmistakable that an
unregistered dealing shall not stand against a registered one, valuable consideration
or not.
Compared with the number in the early days of the Act, I have found few late
adverse decisions ; but this, I am afraid, is not to be put to the credit of the Judges,
but rather to the fact that the profession have learned that there are other modes of
settling many questions under the Act besides the expensive and tedious one of a
suit in the Supreme Court; for though there have been fewer adverse decisions,
there have been fewer cases tried, and it seems to me the Judges are as ready as
ever to decide against the Act (as for instance, eighteen months ago, Eormby v.
Corporation). Whenever a Real Property Act case has come on there has always
appeared to be a defendant other than the nominal one, and that a defendant with-
out the benefit of counsel, viz., the Act itself, for anyone who has read my letters
cannot help seeing that the Judge, in many instances, has not been content with
dealing out justice to the parties to the suit, but has gone out of his way to have a
fling at the Act.
Of course, all believers in the new system think it a monstrous tiling that any
Judge should rule as Mr. Gwynne has done several times; that land once under the
Act could be taken back to the old system, and as we may some day get another
Boothb}- or another Gwynne, my first suggestion is that in the next Amending Act
there should be inserted a clause to this effect—“ Ho Act hereafter passed shall be
held to repeal or alter any part of this Act, or remove any land from its operation,
unless there be contained in the repealing or altering clause of such future Act the
following words: —‘ Notwithstanding anything contained in the Real Property
Act.’ ” My next suggestion is that the mode of transmission shall be altered to
what it was under the Act of 1861 —viz., that all applications for titles should be
decided by the Board of Commissioners. The reasons for this I have given fully.
Next, that it should be made imperative for the Registrar-General, by entering
caveat, to protect beneficiaries on issue of title by transmission. These, I consider
to be the main points; but there are many minor things in which the Act could
be improved —for instance, in case of caveat, it should (as by the wording of the
form given in the schedule it was no doubt intended) be competent for the purchaser
to take a transfer, subject to the caveator’s claim. The Land Office, Lands Titles
Office, and Probate Office should be made to go hand in hand instead of one depart-
ment being jealous of the other. If the two first offices wei’e under the control of
the Commissioner of Crown Lands things would probably work much more smoothly,
and the chance of error in both offices in describing land and roads be lessened;
while if the officers of the Lands Titles Office had as free access to the records of the
Probate Office as they have to their own, they would save much time and the public
a considerable amount in fees. Then I think the Register Book should be made the
sole title; that the loose certificates should be of no value in themselves —something
similar to and worth no more than certificates of marriage or death, evidence of the
state of the book on the day of issue. The pi’esent system of requiring the certifi-
cates to be produced on registering a second dealing leads, in addition to the delay,
to the unlucky proprietor being fleeced in the great majority of cases of a production
fee varying in amount from 10s. 6d. to L 4 4.
Before closing I should like again to point out how the Judges have tried to
tie the Registrar-General down to using the forms precribed by “ the rigid and
inelastic system” of the Act, and to say that it has always appeared to me that the
forms provided (whatever the system itself may be) are as elastic as can well be
conceived of. Their contents consist of a very few printed words, and they are


filled up as the purchaser pleases, so long as the intention is made clear, and so
long as the few operative words “ do hereby transfer,” “do hereby mortgage,” “do
hereby lease,” or “do hereby encumber” are employed. This subject was ably
treated of by Mr. Gawler in a report furnished in 1873, as follows : —“ The forms
provided by the Act can only be considered to be forms in the sense of being blank
forms, about half a dozen lines of printed matter, of which the greatest portion
would be appropriate in similar transactions under the old system, and the re-
mainder to be filled up at the discretion of the parties. This taken in connection
with section 3, which states that such forms may be used with such alterations as
the character of the parties or the circumstances of the case may render necessary,
seems to me sufficient to authorize the registration of almost any document, which
by its nature is contemplated by the Act as capable of registration, whatever the
form may be.”
I am, Sir, &c.,
June 8. A. D. OPIE.
THE REAL PROPERTY ACT.
(From Adelaide Funch, June 24,1882.)
Mr. Opie must at times fancy himself a modern St. George, and the legal
interpreters of the Real Property Act as the limbs of the great Dragon he has
devoted his energies to slay. Let Mr. Opie beware ; ’tis no small matter he is
engaged upon; but the spirit of the beatified Torrens is watching over him! That
should give him courage, whilst lots of people will consecrate their business to his
firm!
But Mr. P.’s legal adviser tells him that Mr. Opie is simply a fanatic of the
Don Quixote order ; that there is, as a matter of fact, no Real Property Act to fight
about; and that it has been so hampered and manipulated that even Sir R. R.
Torrens would pass it in the street without recognition. . . . And here comes
in Master Toby with a simile. Says that acute dog: Bless your dear heart, my
master, the Real Property Act is like one of your verandah-posts at North Adelaide,
to which the white ants have taken a special fancy; outwardly it seems all right,
and strong, and solid, and genuine (Master Toby is fond of descriptive orthography),
but within it is eaten away utterly by those pestiferous little beggars, and the post only
waits until a favorable opportunity occurs ere it crumbles into ruins. . . . And
who are the white ants, Master Toby ? . . . But the knowing canine was not
to be bought so cheaply. Putting one paw masonically near to his nostrils, he
replied Nay, good master, Toby is not the dog to libel a noble profession ; or one
that should be noble! . . . And so Mr. P. is left in doubt about the particular
persons who have made the Real Property Act a sham, a delusion, and a snare.
CAREY AND PAGE, PRINTERS, WAYMOTJXH STREET, ADELAIDE.




