

CORRECTED REPORT
OF THE
SPEECHES
OF THE
HONORABLE EDWARD DEAS THOMSON, Esq.,
COLONIAL SECRETARY OE NEW SOUTH WALES,
DELIVERED IN THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
ON THE
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF THE
BILL
FOR THE DIVISION OF THE COLONY INTO ELECTORAL
DISTRICTS,
IN THE FIRST SESSION OF 1851.




FIRST READING.
April 4th, 1851.
THE MESSAGE of His Excellency the Governor, trans-
mitting to the Council, in conformity with the Provisions
of the Act of Parliament 5 and 6 Victoria, cap. 76 : “A
“ Bill to provide for the division of the Colony of New
“ South Wales , after the separation of the District of Port
“ Phillip therefrom , into Electoral Districts ; and for the
“ election of Members to serve in the Legislative Council
having been read,
The Colonial Secretary addressed the House as follows:
Mr. Speaker, —ln rising to move that this Bill be read a
first time, —I will endeavour to detain the House for as short a
period as possible,—consistently with the importance of the
question, and the necessity for explaining with sufficient
clearness the principles upon which the measure is based.
It is not to be denied that the just apportionment of repre-
sentation to the requirements of this colony, with its vast
extent of territory, and its scattered population, is a work of
great difficulty. Whether or not the Bill now under consi-
deration has fairly accomplished this object, —I can at all
events assure the House that no pains have been spared by
the Government to arrive at such a division of the Colony,
and such a distribution of the members to be returned, as
would mete out to each district its fair share in the represen-
tation. And I feel some degree of confidence that the result
will be satisfactory not less to this House, than to the public
at large. In expressing this anticipation, lam of course
aware that the scheme propounded by the Government
cannot be * satisfactory to that section of the community (a
very small one I believe) who advocate the propriety of
basing the representation of the country solely on population.
No doubt, Sir, if the Government could have assented to
this proposition, the task of framing the Bill would have been


comparatively light. But I feel assured that all those who
look below the surface will admit that population is not the
only basis on which representation should rest. No one will
deny that population is an essential element—it may be the
principal one—necessary to a right understanding and proper
determination of this important question—but then property
not less than population has its claims—the great interests of
the colony, and more especially its productive interests, are
to be fairly represented in the Legislature;—and how is this
to be effected if population be blindly adopted as the sole
basis of its settlement? In the mother country, to whose
precedents in constitutional questions we must always look
with respect and veneration, population has never been made
the sole basis of representation. There, property invariably
enters, and enters largely, into the computation ; and so it
must here, if we desire to construct a safe and enduring
constitution.
When we come to consider what are the leading interests
of this country, we cannot fail to remark that they differ
widely from those of most countries, and especially from
those of Great Britain; firstly, by the almost total absence of a
manufacturing interest, and secondly, by the preponderance of
an interest comparatively little known elsewhere, namely, the
pastoral interest. In this colony the community is divisible
into three classes or interests. First, the town population,
representing the commercial and trading interests, and such
manufacturing interests as we as yet possess ; —then the
rural population, properly so called, which for the most part
represents the agricultural interests, although in some of the
counties pastoral pursuits are also carried on to a considerable
extent; —and thirdly, the population of the intermediate and
unsettled districts of the Colony, in which pastoral pursuits at
present, with but few exceptions, prevail.
It is a great satisfaction to me, Sir, in proposing the first
reading of this Bill to reflect, that it does not contemplate the
disfranchisement of any of the interests or electoral districts
now represented in the Legislature. On the contrary, the Act
of Parliament which this Bill is intended to supplement, by
reducing the elective franchise from a £2O to a £lO household
qualification, has largely added to the political influence of
the towns, whilst on the other hand it has strengthened the
agricultural interests, by extending the franchise to lease-
holders—and finally, it has, for the first time, provided for the
representation of the pastoral interests, by according the
franchise to the licensed occupants of Crown Lands. If we
omit Port Phillip, with a view to compare the representation


of New South Wales Proper, under the present Electoral
Act, with that proposed in the Bill now under consideration,
it will be found that the number of elective members has been
increased from eighteen to thirty-two, and the number of
Electoral Districts from sixteen to twenty* nine, whilst the
extensive tracts of territory occupied for pastoral purposes in
the Intermediate and Unsettled Districts are now included
for the first time in the electoral divisions of the colony.
Whether we regard, therefore, this extension of the franchise,
or the increase in the number of Electoral Districts, it will be
seen that the measure is one which extends, in most important
particulars, the principle of Representative Government in
this Colony.
I believe, Sir, there is a general concurrence of opinion
that those engaged in pastoral pursuits are fully entitled
to the enjoyment of the franchise, and the records of this
House bear evidence that this was the deliberately ex-
pressed opinion of this Council. In the scheme of repre-
sentation comprehended in the Bill now before the House,
it is proposed to allot to the counties fourteen members; —
to the towns ten members, and to the Pastoral Districts,
eight members, —making a total of thirty-two members,
who, with the members to be nominated by the Crown,
will compose a House of forty-eight members in all. It
will be seen that by this arrangement the counties or
agricultural interests have somewhat less than one-half of
the representation;—the towns, comprising the commercial
and trading interests, nearly one-third; —and the pastoral
interests, exactly one-fourth. In framing a scheme of this
sort it is necessary to look at the relation which the
various interests of the Colony bear to each other. The
towns, it must be admitted, grow out of the productive
interests, and are dependent upon them. This principle
was correctly and tersely expressed by Mr. Thomas Walker,
a resident of the city, himself a merchant, in his evidence
before the Select Committee of the Council on the Elective
Franchise, which sat in the year 1844. That gentleman was
asked, “ Do you not think the agricultural and grazing
interests have at present decidedly the preponderance in the
Council The answer was “ When I consider that this is
emphatically an agricultural and pastoral country , I do not
know that they have an undue preponderance . We have
no commerce arising from manufactures , there are no
manufactures , and the merchants are merely the employees
of the agricidturists and graziers .” As a test of
the productiveness of the pastoral interests, I find from


the statistical returns annually laid on the Table of the
House, that two-thirds of the live stock of the colony are
pastured beyond the Settled Districts; and as wool and
tallow constitute nearly the whole of the exports of the
Colony, it may fairly be said that these districts produce
nearly two-thirds of our entire exports. Having regard,
therefore, to the vast importance of the Pastoral Districts
with reference to the productive wealth of the colony, Ido
not think that it is unreasonable or unjust to assign to them a
fourth part of the representation, even though the population
in these districts may not be so dense as in other parts of the
colony. And whilst alluding to population,—-I must express
my regret that I am not yet in a position to lay before the
House, in a complete state, the result of the late Census. In
order that the population returns might be in the hands of
honorable members when considering this Bill, I addressed
a Circular letter, in February last, to all the Police Benches
throughout the Colony, requesting them to inform me of the
gross population of their respective districts, according to the
census taken on the Ist of March, without incurring the
delay consequent on the elaborate classification required by
the Census Act. The replies of many of the Benches have
already come to hand; and every day others are arriving by
post —so that by the time the House goes into Committee on
this Bill, I trust to be able to lay on the Table a return of the
population in the several proposed Electoral Districts, which,
although perhaps not absolutely correct in all its details,
will be sufficiently accurate for all practical purposes. I
ought not to omit to mention, that in training this Bill in the
first instance, the only population returns to which the Go-
vernment had access were those of 1846.
Recurring to the claims of the Pastoral Districts, I think,
Sir, it is not unworthy of consideration, that the largest prospec-
tive increase of population is to be looked for in these districts.
From the cursory glance which I have been enabled to give
at the Census Returns that have already come to hand, I feel
assured that a very large increase indeed has taken place in
these districts since the Census of 1846, whilst it will be
found, that although the entire population of the colony has
largely increased, the population of some of the older districts
has not only not shown any increase at all, but has absolutely,
in some instances, diminished—thus proving, beyond all
question, that there is a very considerable current of popula-
tion setting towards the remote Pastoral Districts, And not
only is this increase applicable to the general population of
the Pastoral Districts, but it must be borne in mind that


townships are springing up in those districts with unusual
rapidity, such as Gundagai, Albury, Wagga Wagga,
Armidale, Maryborough, and others, in which a large popu-
lation must be soon expected to be concentrated.
There is also another interest in these districts which must
not he lost sight of. Extensive reserves for agricultural
purposes have been made in all of them, and the interests
growing out of these will, at no distant period, assert their
influence in the representation of them. So that in assigning
representation to the population of the Pastoral Districts, it
must be obvious that w e are not the less affording it to large
nascent town and agricultural interests, which, although not
perhaps absolutely antagonistic to the pastoral interest, will
certainly not be identical with it. .
In the discussions that have taken place out of doors since
the publication of this Bill, it has been complained, that a fair
share of representation has not been given to the towns.—l do
not think the Bill is open to this objection. There is, at all
events, a greater disproportion under the existing Electoral
Act, between the amount of representation assigned to the
towns and that possessed by the other interests of the colony
than can be alleged against the present measure. In this
respect the advantage on the side of the town interests is most
markedthe proportion of representation proposed to be
allotted to them, compared with what they already enjoy,
bein o, nearlv doubled. In the report of the Select Committee
already referred to, I find the following passage in relation to
the inequality of the representation : “ The numerical amount
of the constituency that returns the eight members for. six
districts, is thus more than double that of the remaining
districts that return the other sixteen, the eight members
being returned at the rate of electors, and the
remaining sixteen at the rate of only 163§ electors
for each representative .” The Electoral Act of 1843,
allots to the entire town interest of the Colony
(inclusive of Sydney and Melbourne) only six members out
of twenty-four, or exactly one-fourth of the entire number
of elected members ; or, omitting Melbourne, for the sake of
a more strict comparison, the number of town members al-
lotted to New South Wales Proper is only five; whilst,
according to the proposition now before the Douse, the town
interests of the colony will obtain for their share no less than
ten members out of thirty-two, or nearly one-third of the
whole number of elected members. lam therefore at a loss
to conceive how this measure can be obnoxious to the charge
levelled at it in the discussions already adverted to, of dis-


franchising the urban population, seeing that it extends to
that population a much larger share in the representation of
the country than it has hitherto possessed.
But, even if it were desirable in theory that representation
should be entirely based on population, still such a principle
is clearly inapplicable to a country such as this, where the
population varies so much in density in the different districts,
and is scattered over so vast an area. The relative propor-
tion of the numbers in each of them is ever varying, in-
creasing rapidly in some, and actually decreasing in others;
so that even if a perfectly symmetrical scheme were now
proposed, it would be liable to be speedily disturbed, especially
if Immigration be carried on to any considerable extent.
A glance at the English Reform Act will shew what extreme
inequalities are to be found in the distribution of representa-
tion in the mother country, and will, I feel assured, convince
the House that whatever the principle might be on which
that representation was framed, it unquestionably was
not population alone. And, Sir, I would particularly
invite those who so loudly demand a much larger share
of representation for the City of Sydney, to recollect that
the representation which it is proposed to give to Sydney
under this Bill, is far larger than that given to London
under the Reform Act. Honorable members are no doubt
aware that the vast group of cities usually designated
London, is divided into seven different Electoral Districts,
and returns in all sixteen members to Parliament, thus : The
City of London, 4 ; Finsbury, 2 ; Marylebone, 2 ; Tower
Hamlets, 2 ; Westminster, 2 ; Lambeth, 2 ; and Southwark, 2.
Now, the population of the United Kingdom being (accord-
ing to the census of 1841) 26,702,163, and the total number
of representatives 658, London, which contained in 1841,
1,652,902 persons, should, with reference to the population
of the United Kingdom, have forty members. And, again,
the population of England and Wales being at the same
period 15,906,741, with a representation of 500 members,
London should, with reference to England and Wales, return
fifty-two members; whereas it really only returns sixteen
members in all, as before stated. The same analogy runs through
the other great cities and towns of England. Liverpool,
with a population (in 1841) of 282,656, should return seven
members, or nine members, accordingly as its population is
compared with that of the United Kingdom, or with the
population of England and Wales only ; whilst, in
fact, it only returns two members to Parliament.
Manchester, with a population of 240,367, should send six


or eight members —Bristol, with a population of 123,188,
three or four members—Birmingham, with a population of
181,116, four or six members —Leeds, with a population of
151,063, four or five members —accordingly as their popula-
tion is contrasted with that of the United Kingdom, or with
the population of England and Wales ; whereas these great
commercial and manufacturing towns return only two
members each. The same discrepancies are to be found
in the other great divisions of the Empire. The popu-
lation of Ireland being (in 1841), 8,175,328, and the
number of representatives 105; Dublin ought, with
reference to the United Kingdom, to return six mem-
bers, and with reference to Ireland, three members, its
population being 238,531 persons, —whereas it actually
returns only two members. Cork, with 106,055 inhabitants,
should have two and-a-half members in reference to the
United Kingdom, or only one-and-a-quarter in reference to
Ireland, but it returns two —Ireland, as a whole, ought to
send 200 members to Parliament, or nearly double the
number it now returns. Again, the population of Scotland
being (in 1841) 2,620,184, and the number of its repre-
sentatives 53, Edinburgh, with reference to the United
Kingdom, ought to send three members to Parliament, or
two and-a-half members with reference to Scotland alone —
its population being 132,977. Glasgow, the population of
which is 255,650, ought, viewed in the same way, to have
five or six members, accordingly as we adopt the one or the
other criterion; but both these cities return only two members.
Thus, therefore, London has only sixteen members, and
the other places abovenamed only two members each, whereas
they ought to have about three times that number
Edinburgh and Cork being the only cases in which an
approximation to the population standard takes place.
Now, Sir, let us compare the representation of London
under the Beform Act, with that assigned to Sydney under
this Bill. It will be found that if London were represented
as Sydney will be under this Bill, it would return twenty-two
members instead of sixteen; and if Sydney were represented
in the same proportion as London, under the Beform Act, it
would return only two and one-third members, instead of
four, the number proposed to be allotted to it; for it must be
borne in mind that the member given to the adjoining Hamlets
will virtually be an additional member for Sydney, as the
interests of both are identical. Under these circumstances,
I think I am justified in assuming that four members will be
sufficient for the fair representation of Sydney. I have


thought it necessary to enter into these calculations to show
that the measure has been fully considered by the Govern-
ment, and has been framed on the constitutional basis which
has regulated the representation of the mother country.
From what I have said, it must, I think, be plain to every
dispassionate mind that property not less than population had
its influence in the apportionment of representation in Great
Britain, and indeed I find the applicability of this principle
to New South Wales distinctly advocated in the Report of
the Select Committee of this Council, to which I previously
adverted. I quote the following passage from that Report:—
“ Your Committee have taken it for granted that the system of representa-
“ tion provided for the colony under the Act of Parliament 5 and 6 Viet.
“ c. 76, is based neither on property nor on population exclusively, but on
“ an equitable and judicious combination of both.”
Having said thus much as to the principles which have
regulated the proposed distribution of representation, I will
briefly advert to the particulars in wdiicli the present Bill
differs from the existing Electoral Act. The most important
of these, indeed, arises out of the Constitution Act, and has
been more than once adverted to. —I mean the reduction of
the franchise, in the case of freeholders and householders,
and its extension to leaseholders, and the licensed occupants
of Crown lands. But there are also three other important
points in which this Bill differs from the Act of 1843. The
first is the appointment of barristers to revise the Electoral
Lists, instead of imposing that duty, as heretofore, on the
Courts of Petty Sessions. This provision is taken from the
precedent of the English Reform Act. I think it will be
more desirable that this duty should be performed by non-
resident barristers than by the justices, who are more likely
to be mixed up with the politics of their respective districts.
It would have been desirable to have carried out this system
of revision throughout the entire colony; but it was feared
that the expense would be too great to admit of its being
extended to the pastoral districts. In the far interior, it is
proposed that the Revision Courts shall be held by the
Petty Sessions, as at present, with a power of appeal in
doubtful cases, to the nearest revising barrister.
In proposing this alteration in the mode of conducting the
revision of the Electoral Lists, I wish to guard myself from
being understood to express any dissatisfaction at the manner
in which the Electoral Rolls have hitherto been revised in
this colony by the unpaid magistracy. The revision by bar-
risters appointed for .the purpose has been introduced into
the Bill solely from a desire to assimilate the law of this Colony


as closely as circumstances will permit to the law of England ;
and because in principle this appeared the less objectionable
mode of revision.
The next proposed alteration consists in the mode of
issuing the Writs of Election. Hitherto the Writs have
always been issued by the Governor, and made returnable to
him. In England Writs of Election are issued by order of
the Speaker, on a resolution of the House of Commons,
except in cases of general election, when they are issued
under a warrant from the Lord Chancellor, addressed to the
Clerk of the Crown. With a view to follow the English
practice in this particular, as nearly as circumstances will
permit, it is now proposed that the writs in cases of general
election shall be issued by the Governor as heretofore, but
that in cases of casual vacancy they shall be issued by the
Speaker of the Legislative Council.
The only other important alteration in the Bill is in the
mode of appointing a Court to try disputed elections, and, in
this respect also, an attempt has been made to assimilate the
practice here to that which obtains in the British Parliament,
as nearly as possible, without encumbering it, however, with
all its technical and intricate machinery. It is proposed that
at the commencement of every Session, the Speaker shall
appoint a Committee of seven members, who shall be sworn
to try such cases as may come before them, according to the
rules of equity and good conscience, and without being
bound down by the strict forms of law. The mode of
appointing this Committee will be similar to that in which the
“ General Committee of Elections” is appointed in the House
of Commons. The Speaker will nominate the requisite
number of members by a warrant under his hand, which,
however, will not take effect for a certain number of days
after it has been laid on the table of the House. During
this interval, it will be competent to the House to disallow
the Speaker’s warrant, either wholly, or in respect of any
particular member or members named therein. And upon
such disallowance, the Speaker will issue a new warrant. No
member against whose return any petition shall have been
received, will be qualified to be on the Election Committee.
Several technical clauses, regulating the proceedings of the
Election Committee, have been borrowed from the latest Act
of Parliament having reference to contested elections, namely,
the 11 and 12 Viet., cap 98. The principle has likewise
been imported from that Act of compelling persons prose-
cuting election petitions, to pay into one of the Banks a sum
of money towards defraying the costs awarded against them,


if unsuccessful. This is a principle which it appears highly
desirable to adopt, with a view of deterring persons from
presenting frivolous and vexatious complaints against the
return of Members of Council.
Having thus explained the leading principles of this mea-
sure, the details of which will be better considered when the
House is in Committee, I now beg to move that the Bill be
read a first time.
[The Attorney-General seconded the motion, which
was put an carried.]


SECOND READING.
11th April, 1851.
[On the order of the day for the second reading of the Electoral Bill
being called, the Colonial Secretary said, that as he had on a former
occasion entered into a full explanation of the principles by which the
Government had been guided in framing this Bill, he did not feel called
upon to detain the House with any observations on the present occasion.
No new points had been started since that explanation was made, and it
would be only going over the ground he had trodden before, were he to
enter into any further explanation. He would, therefore, content himself
with moving the second reading of the Bill. The motion having been
seconded by the Attorney- General, a debate ensued, which was con-
tinued by adjournments on the 15th and 16th of April. On the latter day
the Colonial Secretary made the following reply.]
Although, Sir, I am aware that I am not strictly entitled
to reply in a debate on an Order of the Day, I must claim
the indulgence of the House, while I offer a few observations
in answer to the principal objections which have been urged
against this Bill. Previous speakers have, however, left this
task comparatively an easy one ; —for I believe that nearly all
of these objections have been already triumphantly answered
by honorable members on this side of the House, who, —con-
curring in the principles of this Bill, —are the opponents of
those who would fain make population the sole basis of our
electoral system, and thereby covertly lay the foundation of
a species of Republicanism. Avoiding these dangerous inno-
vations, —as I conceive them to be, —the measure proposed
by the Government is founded on those stable principles
which characterize the constitution of England; —and I think,
Sir, before I sit down, that I shall succeed in showing con-
clusively—^first, that population is not the sole principle of
representation recognized by the Reform Bill: and, — secondly ,
that it is an element which has not been disregarded in the
measure now before the House. I have taken the trouble to
prepare certain tables from authentic data, which I feel
assured will completely satisfy this Council on these two
main points, if indeed they have not been already fully
established by the able arguments of my honorable friends,
the member for Durham (Mr. Donaldson) and Mr. Parker.


At the outset of this debate, it was asserted by the honora-
ble member from Miller’s Point (Captain Lamb), that in
England, the diversified interests of the country were not taken
into account in the system of representation. The honorable
member defied me to produce a single instance to show that, in
the electoral system established by the Reform Bill, any parti-
cular interest had received consideration. I must say I was
somewhat surprised to hear that statement from him—a state-
ment which, I fear, only furnishes evidence that the study which
he has given to the principles of the Reform Bill, must have
been of a very superficial character. Why, Sir, the considera-
tion of the great national interests, according to their due and
respective claims to attention, forms the very basis of the
electoral system of Great Britain. What is the division of
the country into shires —-the establishment of proportionate
representation to the counties, cities, and boroughs —but a
careful consideration of the various interests of the country ?
What is the granting of the franchise to the different classes
of electors, to landholders, to leaseholders, and to house-
holders—but a distinct recognition of the same principle, in
order that each of these classes may exercise its legitimate in-
fluence, and obtain its fair share of Legislative representation.
In the representation established in Great Britain, every interest
has thus been duly considered and provision made for it—
the agricultural interest —the trading interest —the commercial
interest—the manufacturing interest —the shipping interest—
all have their proper and proportionate share of representa-
tion. Nay, more —this principle was distinctly recognised in
the speech of Lord John Russell, on the introduction of the
Reform Bill into the House of Commons in 1831. On that
occasion his Lordship said :
In the towns to be named to send members to Parliament, the property
which entitled a man to vote for the town, was not likewise to entitle him to
vote for the county; so that where the towns had representatives chosen
by themselves, they would not interfere with the county representatives, and
the two classes of voters would be kept as distinct as possible.
In this passage it will be seen that the very word “ classes”
is used, leaving little room for doubt as to what were the real
intentions of the framers of that measure. I contend, there-
fore, notwithstanding the assertion of the honorable member
to the contrary, that in endeavouring to extend a fair con-
sideration to the diversified interests of this community, the
Government is adopting not only the principle of the Reform
Act, but the only principle consistent with justice and common
sense.
It has been objected to this Bill that it partook of the


character of class-legislation—and, if my memory be correct, —
the honorable member from Miller’s Point went so far as to
say that the tendency of the measure was to create class,
interests, and to array them in antagonism against one another.
Now, Sir, I take it that what is meant by class-legislation as
applied to this Bill, is the protection or aggrandisement of
one particular interest to the prejudice of all others. But I
emphatically deny that there is anything in the Bill to justify
such a charge. It. considers not any particular interest
exclusively, but consults all interests. It does not aim at the
representation of one class, but of all classes. And, notwith-
standing all that has been alleged by its opponents, I now
repeat with confidence the assertion which I made at the
first reading of this Bill, that a division of the colony,
which will enable all its leading interests to be fairly
represented, has been arrived at. Indeed, with respect
to the alleged creation of class interests, and their
apprehended antagonism, I am not disinclined to believe
that these expressions have fallen from the honorable
and gallant member unguardedly ; for, a moment’s reflection
must convince him that the Bill does not create classes. —
These classes, —whatever they may be, —exist already, and will
exist in every community, wholly irrespective of legislation.
The measure before the House, only attempts to assign to
pre-existent interests that due share in the representation to
which they are fairly entitled.
I now, Sir, approach that branch of the subject in which I
propose to deal with the arguments of honorable members
opposite, who contend for population as the basis of repre-
sentation. The honorable and reverend member for Sydney
has very confidently stated that this was the principle of the
Reform Bill ; and in support of his statement, he quoted, at
great length, from the speech of Lord John Russell, to which
I myself have previously had occasion to refer. The passage
on which he appears chiefly to rely, is as follows ;
The part of the plan, which related to disfranchisement, proceeded on a
very plain rule, viz., to disfranchise all boroughs whose population did not
exceed a certain number. Lord John Russell allowed it would be an
extremely difficult task to ascertain the wealth, trade, extent, and popu-
lation, of a given number of places. We have therefore been governed, said
he, by what is a public record—the population return of 1821.
I do not admit, Sir, that this passage bears out the principle
contended for by the honorable and reverend member, at
least, to the extent which he seeks to carry it. It is no
doubt, true, that in the disfranchisement of some of the
smaller boroughs in England, the principle of population was


the criterion at first adopted ; —but, even this principle, though
laid down by Lord John Russell, in 1831, was subsequently,
hut previous to the passing of the Reform Act, considerably
modified. The following copy of an instruction under the
hand of Lord Melbourne to Lieutenant Drummond, one of
the Commissioners appointed to enquire into the condition of
these boroughs, will place this beyond doubt.
Whitehall, 24th November, 1831.
Sir, —The Government having determined to found the Reform Bill upon
a new basis, I request your assistance to enable them to ascertain the relative
importance of the smaller boroughs in England and Wales.
It is proposed to take the number of houses, and the amount of assessed
taxes for the year ending April, 1831, together, as the test of disfranchise-
ment. The enquiries of which you have had the direction, and the inform-
ation obtained in answers to circular letters sent from this office, will put
you in possession of the data from which such a calculation can be made.
You will have the goodness, therefore, to make a scale, containing, in
addition to ninety-seven boroughs, (the number comprised in Schedules A
and B of the former Bill) the ten or fifteen immediately above them in size
and importance. You will arrange these boroughs in such a manner that
the lowest may be first, and the highest the last on the list. I shall be
obliged to you to send me, at the same time, an account of the manner
in which the calculation has been made.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) MELBOURNE.
Lieut. Drummond, R.E.,
&c. &c. &c.
In obedience to the concluding portion of that instruction
Lieutenant Drummond wrote as follows :
The principle on which the list is founded consists in allowing equal
weight in the estimation of the relative importance of a borough, to the
number of houses which it contains, and amount of assessed taxes which it
pays ; and the method adopted for carrying this principle into effect may be
stated in the following words: Ist. Take the average number of houses
contained in the boroughs to be arranged, divide the number of houses in
each borough by this average number, and a series of numbers •will be
obtained, denoting the relative importance of the different boroughs with
respect to houses. 2nd. Take the average amount of the assessed taxes paid
by the same boroughs, and proceed in the same manner as described with
respect to the houses ; a series of numbers will result, showing the relative
importance of the different boroughs with regard to assessed taxes. 3rd.
Add together the numbers in these two lists which relate to the same
borough, and a series of numbers will be produced denoting the relative
importance of the different boroughs with regard to houses and assessed
taxes combined.
Lieutenant Drummond proceeded to explain in a very
elaborate manner how the rule had been applied, and added
as follows:
That the method now described is just in principle will probably be
admitted: and it is satisfactory to observe, that the description of the
general appearance and condition of the towns given in the report of the
Commissioners, corresponds with the position which they occupy in the
enclosed list—a result, however, which is also partly due to the principle of


allowing to the old borough all the advantage of the modern town which
may have stretched beyond the ancient limits of the borough.
It will be seen, therefore, that, with regard even to these
minor boroughs, the assessed taxes were taken as the test of
property, —and the number of houses as the test of population,
and that by the combination of these ingredients the relative
importance of the boroughs was determined. But lam pre-
pared with irresistible evidence to show that property had
entered very largely into the settlement of the electoial
system embodied in the Reform Act ; and, although it is
true that sixty boroughs, previously returning 119 members,
were entirely disfranchised, —and one member taken fiom
each of forty-seven others, —it is yet abundantly evident that
a regard to population alone had not led to this result. And
it is fitting I should here say a few words in reply to an
argument used by some honorable members who have, advo-
cated the population basis. Failing altogether to discover
anything in the provisions of the Reform Act to support
their own views, they assert that the Act was not a final
measure that it was introduced to correct great abuses
which had crept into the representative system of the
country, and that, at least as far as it went, it was based on
population. But, Sir, it was distinctly asserted by the authors
of the Reform Act, that it was intended as a final measure ;
and it may be remarked, in evidence of its finality, that no
succeeding ministry has ever attempted to unsettle the
system of representation affirmed by it. I am, therefore, I
think, fully justified in describing it as a final measure -final,
at least, as regarded the circumstances then under considera-
tion, —and final, as far as finality can be said to attach to any
political arrangement under the elastic principle of the
British Constitution, which happily and wisely adapts itself
to the progress and exigencies of society.
I freely admit that if the Government had been entirely
at liberty to propose a system of representation, untrammelled
by vested interests, in the long established constituencies
which had to be consulted, many of the extraordinary
anomalies which exist in the Reform Act would have been
avoided; —but, even in the new constituencies created by that
measure, there are considerable discrepancies in the number
of the population, to which a similar amount of representation
has been assigned, whilst I am prepared to show that in the
Bill before the House, no such excessive inequalities will be
found. Applying, then, to the Reform Act, the principle of
population, contended for on the other side, we cannot fail to
perceive the most startling discrepancies. From a return


laid before the House of Commons in 1843, I find a consti-
tuency (Bridgenorth), comprising a population of only 1931
persons, returning two members to Parliament, or at the rate
of one member for every 965 persons ; and I also find another
constituency (the Tower Hamlets) comprising no less than
419,730 persons, returning two members to Parliament, or at
the rate of one member for 209,865. It will be seen, there-
fore, that although both the Tower Hamlets and the borough
of Bridgenorth return two members, the population of the
former is to the population of the latter in the ratio of
upwards of 200 to 1!
It may be satisfactory to honorable members if I quote
some further calculations which I have prepared, showing
the inequalities which prevail in the electoral system of Great
Britain. With regard to the smaller constituencies returning
members to Parliament, I find that the borough of Honiton,
in the county of Devon, returning two members, has a popu-
lation of 3/73, or one member to 1886—the borough of
Harwich, in the county of Essex, returns two members with
a population of 3730, or one member to 1865—the borough
of Thetford returns two members, with a population of 3844,
or one member to 1922—and the borough of Bridgenorth,
already named, returns two members, with a population of
1931, or one member to 965. The largest constituencies are
as follows ; Manchester returns two members, with a popula-
tion of 240,367, or one member to 120,183 —Liverpool returns
two members, with a population of 282,656, or one member
to 141,328 —Finsbury returns two members, with a popula-
tion of 265,043, or one member to 132,521 —Mary-le-bone,
two members, with a population of 287,465, or one member
to 143,732 —and the Tower Hamlets, as already stated,
return two members, with a population of 419,730, or one
member to 209,965. With regard to the representation of
the counties, the largest share in proportion to popu-
lation is given to Buckinghamshire, which returns
eleven members, with a population (including towns) of
155,983, or one member to 14,180; Dorset returns fourteen
members, with a population of 175,043, or one to 12,503;
and Rutland two members, with a population of 21,302, or
one member to 10,651. The smallest share of representation
in proportion to population in the counties, is given to
Middlesex, the metropolitan county, which returns only
fourteen members, with a population of 1,576,636, or one
member to 112,616. Lancashire returns twenty-six members,
with a population of 1,667,054, or one member to 64,117;
and York (West Riding), eighteen members, with a popula-


tion of 1,154,101, or one member to 64,117. These figures
prove that something more than mere population entered into
the electoral system of England. It is impossible to explain
these extraordinary inequalities on any other assumption than
that the framers of the Reform Bill were influenced by a lull
consideration for old vested interests, at the same time a
they regarded the great manufacturing interests that grew up
at the close of the last century, and that have since extended
and augmented rapidly throughout the country. i
regard to the proportion of population to representation m
the three great divisions of the empire, it will be found that
England and Wales return 500 members, with a population
of 15 906 741, or one member to 31,813; that Scotland
returns 53 members, with a population of 2,620,184, or one
member to 49,437; and that Ireland returns on y
members, with a population of 8,175,238, or one member o
77,859, while the United Kingdom as a whole, returns bob
members, with a population of 26,702,160, or one mem ei o
40,580. I repeat that these tables must convince the mind ot
anv candid and impartial man that the principle of population
was not that which had entirely guided the Imperial 1 arha-
ment in distributing the representation of the country under
the Reform Act. But if there be any doubt upon the matter,
it will be set at rest by a reference to the principles enun-
ciated in many passages of the speeches of those members o
Parliament who were most nearly connected with the measure,
and whose opinions were, therefore, of the greatest authority.
In the speech of one of the members who took a part m the
discussion on the Reform Bill, a gentleman in the con ence
of the ministry, of the highest talent,—one who was known
to be strongly in favour of all constitutional concessions, and
whose opinion on such matters is calculated to exercise gieat
influence throughout the civilized world, (I mean Mr.
Macauley) I find the following striking observations
Tho nrinciule of the property-tax was, that no income below a certain
amount per annum should be taxed ; and he doubted, should he o y
the property assessed to that tax, if he should find one-haif of the Persons
who paid that tax had any votes for representatives
those persons returned a greater number of representatives thau did die other
fortv-nine parts Ours, then, was not a Government on the pimciple oi
property, it was only a Government founded on some of proper y,
and no principle whatever presided over its formation. It had been said
that it was never better than at present; hut the House was there to enquire
into whafit”igh« to he, not into what it had. been; they were patera
not They could not possibly think it right the.seat of
Government should be transferred from London to York, because York
the capital of the country in the time of Constantius Chlorus. Was the
representation of the country, adapted for two millions of lKl i«fo
now as it had been in the 13th century ? New property had been caded into


existence ; society had assumed a different form ; much wealth and much
capital, which were formerly unknown, were now unrepresented. Some
towns had sunk to villages ; others had remained stationary ; hut many had
risen from villages to be as large as London in the time of the Plantagenets.
Society had grown ; the form of the Government must be renewed to make
it accord with that on which it depended; and it was time that our old
institutions should be new modelled.
Now, Sir, throughout these observations, and indeed,
throughout his whole speech, Mr. Macauley clearly advo-
cated the measure, because he saw in it the principle of the
restoration of capital to that place in the representation of
the country which it was originally intended under the
constitution to possess, and which it always ought to fill
in every well governed state. I will trouble the House
with a passage from a work of very high authority on this
point. I allude to De Lolme on the Constitution; and I
quote from the very carefully revised edition of that work by
Mr. Western. The writer said:—
The opinions expressed in the preceding section of this chapter, are in
themselves conclusive, that universal suffrage and vote by ballot is imprac-
ticable in our constitution. Enough has also been said in this volume,
showing the effect of giving power to the people. We are at first to look at
our great population, and secondly, to look at property as the standard of
representation. What is the intent of the constitution? To promote
civilization, and to protect our liberties, our religion, and our property. Eor
these essential purposes the constitution has been established. It is said
that the constitution has gained strength by the Reform Act. Eor it to gain
strength, I apprehend that the balance of power, or as Montesquieu terns it,
the equilibrium, must be maintained in all its due proportions ;if this
equilibrium be destroyed, so also is the whole constitution. The establish-
ment of universal suffrage and vote by ballot would destroy that equilibrium,
by the return to Parliament of that portion of the commons without property,
to the exclusion of the other portion who have property, and the consequent
government by the multitude, and the establishment of a tyrannical despo-
tism, the destruction of property, and the subversion of the constitution.
The very principle of universal suffrage is characteristic of democracy, and
the principles of vote by ballot are irresponsibility and secrecy. _ These prin-
ciples are in direct opposition to the constitution, which is open and
free. The Roman republic was destroyed through making the suffrage
secret, for it was then no longer possible to direct a populace that
sought its own destruction. It is well and justly observed by a noble
writer and statesman of the present time (Lord John Russell), “ that the
Government of the states of modem Europe rests upon property. The love
of enjoying, and the fear of losing an estate, is the main principle of action
with all who have an estate to keep or lose* A democratic revolution cuts
across the grain of this pervading principle ; the well-known instability of a
single popular assembly makes every man tremble for his fortune and the
welfare of his family. Hence, all the old nobility, and all proprietors of
every degree, are the enemies of a democratic form of government; hence
they join in the intrigues of displaced courtiers, and even in the aggressions of
a foreign army; there remains no way of averting or blunting the edge of
their hostility, but death, confiscation, the scaffold, and the almshouse.
But what means are these for philanthropic reformers to employ! —to slay
thousands, to beggar millions ; not merely to take political power and the
means of advancement from the hands of one set of men to put them into the
hands of another, but to tear up society by the roots.” These are fearful
consequences, and must, in every reasonable and unprejudiced mind, establish


the principle so forcibly before laid down, that the multitude, in consequence
of their being a multitude, are incapable of coming to a mature resolution.
The same noble writer thus most expressively inquires into the consequences
attending such an evil state of society:—“ Is it nothing (he says) to banish
the most civilized of a civilized community, and to raise the dregs of society
to a place which they can only trouble by their impurity ? Is it nothing to
tear apart all the endearing dependencies, the grateful bonds that unite the
highest with the lowest, and to strike a blow, that, in throwing down a
palace, equally robs of subsistence the prince in the hall and the poor at the
gate ? Is it a trifling matter to ruin the happiness of one whole generation ?
• —to set tenant against landlord —servant against master —spread the havoc
of war not only over the fields and the houses, but in the thoughts and the
hearts of every family of a great community ?”
Such were the eloquent terms, such the noble sentiments
and high constitutional principles, enunciated by the Premier
of England; and such are the principles which the Govern
ment has endeavoured to embody in the measure now under
consideration —a measure which I feel assured will meet with
the approbation of the country at large not less than of this
House. Again, although I have been anticipated in a great
measure by my honorable and learned friend the Attorney-
General in referring to the opinion of Professor Story, I will
read a short extract from that eminent writer, which will
explain what were his opinions as to the true constitutional
principles by which a State should be governed. The learned
professor writes as follows:
In the next place, although property may not be directly aimed at, as a
basis in the representation, provided for by the constitution, it cannot, on the
other hand, be deemed to be totally excluded, as will presently be seen. In
the next place, it is not admitted, that property alone can, in a free govern-
ment, safely be relied on, as the sole basis of representation. It may be
true, and probably is, that in the ordinary course of affairs, it is not the
interest, or policy of those, who possess property, to oppress those who want
it. But, in every well-ordered commonwealth, persons, as well as property,
should possess a just share of influence. The liberties of the people are too
dear and too sacred to be intrusted to any persons, who may not, at all
times, have a common sympathy and common interest with the people in the
preservation of their public rights, privileges, and liberties. Checks and
balances, if not indispensable to, are at least a great conservative in, the
operations of all free governments. And, perhaps, upon mere abstract
theory, it cannot be justly affirmed, that either persons or property, numbers
or wealth, can safely be trusted, as the final repositories of the delegated
powers of government. By apportioning influence among each, vigilance,
caution, and mutual checks, are naturally introduced and perpetuated.
Such were the opinions of this great Jurist, —opinions so
cogent and so convincingly expressed, that they cannot fail to
carry conviction to every candid mind, and the weight and
influence of which I will not weaken by any superfluous
comment of mine The whole of the extracts from these
eminent authorities go to show, that, by a wise combination
of the two principles of population and property, in the
representation of a State, its constitutional institutions will be
placed on a firm basis ; and thus, while the claims of


population will be satisfied, the rights of property will be
protected.
I trust, Sir, I shall now be able satisfactorily to show that
in the measure which the Goverment has brought down to the
House, both these principles have been fairly and judiciously
considered. Before, however, proceeding to this part of the sub-
ject, I will briefly advert to a remark which was made by the
honorable member from Miller’s Point (Captain Lamb), and
which was echoed by the honorable member for Melbourne
(Mr. Westgarth), and the honorable and reverend member
for Sydney (Dr. Lang). These honorable members all
declared, that this measure is disapproved of by the country,
and that out of doors there is a strong opposition to it. On
this question I join issue with these honorable members, and
I would ask on what evidence is such an assertion made, and
on what evidence is this House to believe it ? What proof
have we that the principle of this measure is opposed to the
wishes of any part of the country* —and what symptom of
opposition to it has yet been evinced out of doors ? There have
been no petitions addressed to the House, except from local
interests on matters of detail. It is true that in Sydney a
public meeting was called for the purpose of opposing the
Bill, but it is equally notorious that the attempt to organise
an opposition was a most signal failure. I repeat, Sir,
that the opponents of this measure and the supporters
out of doors of those democratic principles which have been
propounded by the honorable and reverend member for
Sydney, have totally failed in their attempt. Very few
persons attended the meeting referred to, and amongst those
who did attend, there were not half a dozen whose names are
known to the public at large. But why has the measure
aroused no opposition in the country districts ? Why have
no petitions been addressed to the House by those whose
dissatisfaction is alleged to be so determined ? So far, then,
from there being any evidence in support of the assertion that
the scheme of the Government is in opposition to the wishes
of the people, I have a right to infer from the absence of all
petitions from the country, from the utter failure of the
attempt at opposition to it in Sydney, that it has the appro-
bation and support of the community at large, at least so far
as regards the general principles on which it is founded.
I w T ill now proceed to explain to the House the scheme of
electoral division proposed for the colony in the Bill under
consideration, and the principles by which the Government
has been guided in the adoption of that scheme.
The honorable and reverend member for Sydney com-


plained of the great inequality in the amount of representation
allotted to the town interests and to the Pastoral Districts
respectively. But the inequality is really very much less than
would at first sight appear. It will be seen that with reference
to the proposed Borough Electorates (exclusive of Sydney
and the Sydney Hamlets) the proportion of representation in
reference to the population, is one member to 3887
inhabitants ; in the Pastoral Districts it is one member to
3692; in the County Electorates it is one member to 6277
inhabitants ; in the Sydney Hamlets it is one member to 8000
inhabitants; and in the City of Sydney it is one member to
14,723 inhabitants. The average population for each member
for the whole of the Urban Districts is 7500, and for the
Rural Districts, both within and beyond the Settled Districts,
it is 5300. From this statement it will be seen that the
representation given to the Urban and County Districts, and
that allotted to the Pastoral Districts under the present Bill,
do not exhibit the extraordinary disproportion which is
alleged against them. But there is another consideration well
worthy the attention of the House, which has had great weight
with the Government in proposing the representation
for the Pastoral Districts, namely, the prospective increase of
population in those districts. On the first reading of this
Bill, I took occasion to remark that in the Settled and Agri-
cultural Districts of the Colony, population had not increased
in nearly so high a ratio as it had in the Pastoral Districts.
From a table which I have had prepared since the receipt of
the returns under the present Census, I find that the popula-
tion of the boroughs, not including Sydney and the Hamlets,
has increased thirteen pet cent. —in the City of Sydney it
has increased fifteen per cent, since the year 1846. In the
Sydney Hamlets, during the same period, population has in-
creased fifty per cent. —in the Settled Counties the increase has
been nineteen per cent. —whilst in the Pastoral Districts the
increase has been no less than seventy-eight per cent. But
large as is this increase over the population of 1846, as
compared with the Census returns of 1841, the result will be
still more striking. The increase in the boroughs, exclusive of
Sydney, since 1841, has been forty- one per cent. —the increase
in Sydney itself has been forty-seven per cent. —the increase in
the Sydney Hamlets cannot be ascertained, no separate returns
having been made in respect to them in 1841, as they had then
scarcely an existence —the increase in the Settled Counties
has been fifty per cent., whilst in the Pastoral Districts it has
been at the rate of no less than 193 per cent. Thus it will be
seen that in ten years the population of the Pastoral Districts


has been nearly trebled; and as it is but reasonable to anti-
cipate that this augmentation will continue in a like ratio in
those districts, the Government, if it had omitted to attach to
this consideration its due weight, would have been justly open
to the charge of having neglected a most important principle
that should be prominently borne in mind in the adjustment
of this question. With such facts before us, we should
legislate not less for the present than for the future—we
should look forward to the prospective increase of population
of these districts: and in this point of view the figures which I
have just read to the House will fully justify us in giving to a
small present population in these thinly-peopled but rapidly-
growing districts, a share of representation equal to that
allotted to the denser but comparatively stationary population
of the older portions of the colony. These observations are
made in reference to the present inequalities which exist in
the allotment of members to the several Electoral Districts,
considered only with regard to population ; and even on that
principle I feel that the explanations I have given sustain
the propriety and reasonableness of those inequalities. But,
as I have already stated, the Government does not profess to
be wholly guided by such a principle.
On the occasion of the first reading of this Bill, I referred,
in justification of the amount of representation proposed to be
given to the Pastoral Districts, to the fact that nearly two-
thirds of the entire exports of the Colony are produced in
those districts. I find that during the six years, from 1843
to 1849, the average increase, from year to year, in the
sheep of the Colony, from which its principal export is
derived, has been at the rate of sixteen per cent., the
total increase during that period having been nearly
140 per cent. The honorable member for the Northern
Counties (Mr. Jones) stated that in his opinion the increase
in the stock of the Colony was not considerable, but the facts,
founded on official data, which I have now communicated to
the House, will, doubtless, convince him that his opinion, in
this respect, was an erroneous one. The same honorable
member assured the House that it would not be possible to
find room in the Colony for the pasture of another million of
sheep. I confess that I do not participate in the gloomy
prognostications of the honorable member; but I readily
admit that if the live stock of the Colony is to continue to
increase as hitherto, it must be in the Pastoral Districts, and
not in the Settled Counties. And if this rapid increase still
continue, as I feel assured it will, it cannot fail to be attended
coincidently with a large increase of population. If, then,


honorable members will reflect upon these facts, and weigh
well the magnitude of the interests which are identified with
the Pastoral Districts, they will hesitate, I think, to assert
that the share proposed to be given to them in the represen-
tation of the country is larger than they are justly entitled to
obtain. But I think, Sir, it would not be difficult to show that
this is not merely a pastoral, but a commercial question. 1
know of no interests in the Colony so intimately concerned in
the prosperity of the Pastoral interest as those of commerce.
The trade of the Colony must depend on the amount of
exports which it produces: for it is obvious that without these,
it would be impossible for us to pay for the large amount of
imports which we receive from other countries. And this
leads me to trouble the House with a few statistics which will
be found to have an important bearing on the question under
consideration. I find that in 1850, the value of the imports
to Sydney was £1,383,413; and to Port Phillip, £744,925;
making a total of £2,078,338 ; that the exports from Sydney
were £1,357,784; and from Port Phillip, £1,041,796 ; being
a total of £2,399,580, or an excess of exports over imports of
£321,242. That in 1849, the imports amounted to
£1,793,420; and in 1850, to £2,078,338; showing an
increase last year of £284,918. The exports in 1849 were
£1,891,270; in 1850, £2,399,580: showing an increase last
year of £508,310. In 1850, the amount of wool exported
from Sydney was 14,270,622 lbs., the declared official
value of which was stated at £788,051 ; and from
Port Phillip, 18,091,207 lbs., of the value of £826,190,
making a total of 32,361,829 lbs., valued at £1,614,241.
In 1849, the wool exported from both districts
was 27,963,530 lbs., valued at £1,238,559, showing
that in 1850, an increase had taken place in the
quantity of wool exported, of 4,398,299 lbs., valued at
£375,682. With regard to tallow (and I select the articles
of wool and tallow, because they are produced from the
natural grasses of the colony, and chiefly in the pastoral dis-
tricts), I find that in the last year (1850) the quantity of
tallow exported from Sydney, was 128,090 cwt., valued at
£167,858 ; and from Port Phillip, 89,788 cwt., valued at
£132,063, making a total quantity of 217,878 cwt., valued at
£300,721. In 1849, the quantity of tallow exported from
both districts was 154,103 cwt., valued at £249,932: so that,
during the last year there has been an increase in the quan-
tity of tallow exported of 63,775 cwt., of the value of
£50,789. I confess that I never mention this latter item
°f our exports without regret; as it painfully reminds me of


the enormous waste of human food which now unfortunately
attends its production, whilst thousands of our fellow-coun-
trymen in Great Britain are absolutely in want of food.
There is one fact shown by the statistics I have just quoted
which must be peculiarly gratifying to the honorable mem-
bers for Port Phillip ; namely, that their young and recently
settled district already exports a larger quantity of wool than
the Sydney or older district, and this remarkable fact will
serve to show also how rapid has been the progress of that
Province under the successful prosecution of pastoral pur-
suits.
The honorable member from Miller’s Point (Captain
Lamb), whilst endeavouring to rebut some of the arguments
used by me on this subject, on the first reading of the Bill,
stated his belief that Sydney, with its noble harbour, even if
its export trade were destroyed altogether, would continue
to be a great and flourishing city. I must, Sir, state my entire
and emphatic dissent from such an opinion. So far from
Sydney continuing to prosper if deprived of those large
exports which, as I have already shown, are chiefly pro-
duced in the Pastoral Districts, it is my firm conviction that
not only Sydney, but almost all the other towns of the Colony,
would rapidly decline, unless supported by the great produc-
tive wealth derived from that source. The towns are the
creation of the productive interests. In this Colony they are
especially dependent on the Agricultural and Pastoral inte-
rests for their support and prosperity. They are required
chiefly for the supply of the necessities of those interests.
Deprive them of that source of profit and advantage, and
they will rapidly retrogade, and inevitably languish in
population and political importance.
The honorable member for the Northumberland
Boroughs (Mr. Nichols) also, adopting the same course of
argument, informed the House that he would rather possess
one side of George-street in Sydney, than the wealth of all the
Pastoral Districts together. But I would ask that honourable
member of what use would his bargain be to him ? —what
would be the value of the houses in George-street without
the pastoral interest ? Would the mere possession of stone
walls—tenantless houses —valueless merchandise —valueless,
because unsaleable, be really wealth to him ? And such
would inevitably be the position of his City possession, if
this interest, on which the present prosperity of the Colony
mainly depends, were destroyed. It must be borne in mind
that the character of the urban population of this Colony is
essentially different from what it is in the mother country.


Here, the population of the Towns is mainly employed in
providing for the wants of the producers in the country;
whilst in Great Britain, large productive manufactures exist—
the staple products of foreign nations are imported into the
country, which, through the manufacturing agencies of the
towns, become, like the sheep and cattle and natural grasses
of this Colony, the sources of productive wealth, and are
exported in their new form, probably to the same countries
from which they were originally received.
The honorable member from Miller’s Point has accused
me of speaking in terms of disparagement with respect to
the position which the mercantile community of Sydney
occupy in relation to the woolgrowers. But I can assure him
that I had not the most remote intention of reflecting on the
position of the mercantile class of Sydney. Indeed, Sir, the
high character which they maintain, and the respect in which
they are deservedly held, render it impossible that I could
have had any such object. It was equally foreign from my
intention unduly to exalt the pastoral interest over the com-
mercial or any other interest. In attaching to that interest the
importance recognised in the Bill before the House, I
conceive, Sir, that I am only acting on the constitutional
principle that obtains in England. In this Colony, as in the
mother country, the great productive interests must be duly
regarded in any system of representation—and this is all that
is aimed at, and I trust that it is accomplished, by this
measure. The honorable member has also accused me of a
desire to protect the woolgrowing interest, and thus to violate
the plainest principles of free-trade. But I respectfully defy
the honourable member to point to anything in the whole
scope of this measure which will warrant such an accusation.
As I stated in my first explanation of the principles of this
Bill, the aim of the Government was fairly to represent every
national interest, and not to give to one a preponderance
prejudicial to any other. My own opinion is that all these
interests are mutually dependent on, and beneficial to, each
other, —and that to give each its fair share of representation,
must be to advantage all.
The honorable member has also argued that if the popula-
tion and importance of the Country Districts increase, the
population and wealth of the Country Towns will increase in
the same ratio. If, however, he had cast his eye over
the abstract of the Census returns laid upon the table of the
House, I think he would have paused before he gave
utterance to that opinion. For that return would show him
that in many of the towns the population has remained sta-


tionary; whilst, in others, especially in the older Districts of
the Colony, it has actually retrograded. And, although
this may appear a little surprising at first sight, it is never-
theless perfectly natural. As the population removes to the
remoter districts, new towns spring up, from which the
inhabitants obtain their supplies of stores, and those comforts,
and even luxuries of life, for which they had previously de-
pended on the towns in the Settled Districts. The natural
result of this state of things will be that the urban popula-
tion of the Settled Districts will be induced to remove
to the remoter towns of the interior, which will also offer
attractions to the newly-arrived immigrant, and thus the
tendency to a rapidly growing population in the Pastoral
Districts will be still more fostered. The honorable member
(Captain Lamb) further objects to the Bill because it will, as
he conceives, introduce into the representation of the Colony
greater inequalities than those which exist in the present
Electoral Act. But I think I can satisfactorily show that this
is not the case. With regard to the city of Sydney, for instance,
what is the fact ? Under the measure before the House, it
is proposed to double its representation. It is not
necessary for me to go over the arguments again, which I
have already adduced, to show that the representation it is
proposed to give Sydney, as the metropolis of the Colony,
is much larger than that which is enjoyed by the city of
London. But there is one other circumstance to which I
think some weight should be given in fixing the representa-
tion of Sydney. Under the former Constitutional Act the
Council had a right to fix the representation generally of all
the electoral districts of the Colony, with the exception of
the City of Sydney, the Town of Melbourne, and the District
of Port Phillip. By a proviso added to a clause in that
Act, the representation of Sydney was limited to two mem-
bers, that of Port Phillip to five members, and that of Mel-
bourne to one member. Thus, it appears that at the time
when the Constitution Act was passed in 1842, it was con-
sidered by Parliament that two members would be a suffi-
cient representation for Sydney. If this was the case in
1842, I think that ample justice will be done to Sydney by
the addition of two members under the present Bill; and
that, in proportion to its population, Sydney will be more
largely represented than it has hitherto been. Again, in
reference to the present representation of the Colony, the
proportion enjoyed by Sydney is one-twelfth, while the in Bill
under discussion it will be increased to one-eighth. The
honorable member (Captain Lamb) also said that the urban


population had not been sufficiently considered; but in this
he also seems to be mistaken: for, while the proposed scheme
adds only one member to the county representation of the
colony, it actually doubles the amount of the urban representa-
tion. These charges, therefore, against the alleged inequalities
contained in the Bill do not appear to me to have been sus-
tained. I will now advert to some of the observations which
fell from the honorable member for Port Phillip (Dr. Dick-
son). That honorable member warned the Government not
to stand in the way of popular concession, and not to withhold
their rights from the people of Sydney. I think this warning
of the honorable member has been pretty well answered by
my honorable and learned friend, the Attorney-General, who
has admirably instructed the House on the nature of true
constitutional rights, and to what extent and under what
circumstances, they should be conceded to popular bodies.
But I will further state, that so far from withholding any
popular rights, this measure and the Act of Parliament on
which it is founded, make very great concessions. It reduces
the franchise one-half, which will admit a large number of
the inhabitants of Sydney into the electoral roll; —it gives the
franchise to the leaseholders in the agricultural districts, and
to the licensed occupants in the pastoral districts; —and,
added to this extention of the franchise, the number of
representatives is increased by one-third. These, it must
be admitted, are very large concessions, and such as I can-
not doubt will be satisfactory to the great body of the
community, however insufficient to satisfy the cravings of
the democratic party in the crowded cities. The honorable
member alluded in his speech to the baneful influence which
he says is exercised in the House of Commons by the
presence of the sixteen members representing London ; but
I must say that this is rather an unfortunate argument for the
honorable gentleman to use in support of his claim for
increased representation for Sydney, which, according to its
population, is already represented in a ratio of three to two
as compared with London. The honorable member for
Northumberland (Mr. Dangar) I understand to approve
generally of the principles on which the Bill is framed, but
he does not concur in some of its details —and amongst these,
he objects to the plan proposed for the revision of the
electoral lists. On this point I will make a few remarks —In
the first place, I do not apprehend that the new system
proposed in the Act will, as alleged by the honorable
member, burden the country with an expense of £3OOO or
£4OOO per annum. As many hundreds will, I think, cover


the actual expense but if the principle proposed for
adoption be a good one, I think the House ought not to be
scared by a little expense. I believe, Sir, I have already
stated that,' in proposing this alteration, the Government does
not mean to imply that the electoral lists have not hitherto
been carefully and correctly collected and revised, but in
framing a measure of this kind, which may be expected to
form the basis of legislation on these subjects for many years
to come, it appeared very desirable that all its provisions
should be settled on those principles which experience has
shown to be sound and good. It was therefore thought
prudent that the mode of revising the electoral lists in
this Colony should be assimilated as closely as possible
to the practice in England. N o imputation is intended to be
cast on the magistrates of the country on whom this duty
has hitherto fallen. I am sure they have discharged it
faithfully ; but surrounded as they must be by local interests
and local predilections and prejudices, it is not to be ex-
pected that the decisions of the magistrates in the Revision
Courts, however upright, will always escape the imputation
of partiality, and therefore it seemed to be more satisfactory,
both to the justices and the public, that this duty should
devolve on properly qualified barristers, who, not being
identified with local interests, would not be subject to those
influences to which the local magistracy are necessarily
exposed. I think this is the more necessary, for though, no
doubt, in the country districts considerable apathy prevails
as to political matters, the time may very soon come when
this apathy will give way to zeal and excitement; and it is
prudent therefore to provide against the mere suspicion of
the revising officers being actuated by corrupt influences.
From the remarks of some honorable members it would seem
that some jealousy is felt that the appointment of revising
officers should be confined to barristers, in preference to the
other branches of the legal profession. I can only say that
the precedent of the English Act has been followed; but when
the Bill is in committee, if it shall be the opinion of the House
that solicitors would be competent for this duty, I will be
ready candidly to consider the objection. The proposal to
include solicitors will be the less objectionable, as the
appointment will be vested in the hands of the Judges. And
it may be proper that I should here refer to the observations
of the honorable member for Cook and Westmoreland, who
objected to the power thus given to the Judges, as unconsti-
tutional and dangerous. I confess I cannot see how any
danger can arise from this power being entrusted to the


Judges. It surely is better that the appointment should be
vested in the Judges than in the Executive, who would
thus be made liable to the suspicion of bringing a great
power to bear on popular elections, to forward their
own ends. Nor can I see that there is anything uncon-
stitutional in giving this power to the Judges. In
England it is exercised by the senior Judge of Assize,
and surely the Judges here are equally exempt from the
operation of political influences or party motives. The
honorable and learned member for Sydney (Mr. Wentworth)
says that he generally approves of the principles of the
measure, but that he will not pledge himself to all its details.
I can assure the honorable and learned member and the
House, that when in committee on the Bill, no one will be
more happy than myself to consider every suggestion that
may be proposed by honorable members, and to adopt any
amendment which may appear calculated to make the Bill a
perfect measure. It is not to be expected that the Govern-
ment can be so well informed on every point as those living
in the various localities ; and I hope the knowledge which
honorable members will bring to bear on the measure will be
serviceable in determining the proper Electoral districts,
in fixing on polling places, and other matters of detail con-
tained in the Bill. It is not necessary for me, therefore, in the
present stage of the Bill, to advert particularly to alterations
in detail; but there is one suggestion made in this respect by
the honorable member for Murray, to which H will allude,
namely, to unite the county of St. Vincent and that part of
the county of Camden known as the district of Illawarra, into
one electoral district. This Ido not think will be advisable,
because it is desirable in all cases to preserve, as far as
possible, the permanent boundaries of the districts. In the
despatch from Lord Stanley accompanying the Constitutional
Act of 1842, this principle was particularly recommended,
and I think it is one by which the House would do well to
be guided. I now come to the remarks which fell from the
honorable member for the Northumberland Boroughs. That
honorable gentleman has somewhat broadly accused me of
having made suggestions as to the framing of the Act for the
government of the Australian Colonies, which was passed
during the last session of Parliament. He went so far as to
say that it was currently reported that I was the author of
that Bill. Now, I must distinctly say, that I had nothing
whatever to do with the Constitution Act—the honour of
framing that important Act was not entrusted to me,
nor was I invited to make any suggestions relative to


it; although I may unhesitatingly say that there is much in
that measure of which I entirely approve.
The honorable member also complained that under the
Government measure, numbers of boroughs are classed
together in an incongruous manner, and the same objection
was taken by the honorable and reverend member for
Sydney, who instanced the case of Newcastle, Clarence Town,
and Dungog. I admit that there is a considerable inconve-
nience in classing together boroughs so distant from each
other, and between which much diversity of interest may be
expected to exist ; but I cannot see how this inconvenience
can be safely avoided. The same principle is adopted with
some of the smaller boroughs of Scotland and Wales, where
the population being too small to admit of a member for each,
they are associated together, and thus obtain some share of
representation. The honorable and reverend member for
Sydney proposes to amalgamate these boroughs with the
counties in which they are situated; but this would be
directly opposed to the principle uniformly maintained in the
Reform Bill. As I before said, the aim of that Bill was to
give to all classes and all interests a fair share of representa-
tion, and the passage I already quoted from Lord John
Russell’s speech, shows that it was considered essentially
necessary in order to accomplish this object, that the borough
and county constituencies should be kept distinct. It is indeed
obvious, from the whole tenor of Lord John Russell’s speech,
that he considered that if the boroughs were amalgamated
with the counties in the election of Members of Parliament,
the representation of the agricultural interest would be nulli-
fied. The effect would be to swamp the county representa-
tion ; and I think the same effect would follow here ; and,
therefore, provision has been made to give both the boroughs
and the counties their separate constituencies—a provision
which I conceive involves one of the greatest principles of the
Bill.
I was sorry to hear the honorable member for the Nor-
thumberland Boroughs give in his adherence to the principles
of democracy, and become the advocate of universal suffrage
and vote by ballot. I regret that he has not rather shaped
his political course after the example of the honorable member
for Cook and Westmoreland, whose admirable and lucid
explanation and defence of true constitutional principles do
him so much credit. The honorable member for the
Northumberland Boroughs has also advocated increased
representation for Sydney, on the ground that the city is
doubly taxed. But I must remind him that there is


another portion of the population of the colony that is
also doubly taxed, and that portion is the population in the
pastoral districts. In those districts a large amount of assess-
ment is collected, in addition to the ordinary taxation, for
the purpose of police, education, making roads and bridges,
and other local public works. I find by the Official Returns
of the local rates raised under the Corporation Act in the
City of Sydney, that the sum contributed by the inhabitants
during the past year was £5,353 Bs. 9d., or at the rate of
2s. sd. per head of the population. By similar Returns of
the assessment on stock raised in the Pastoral Districts, it
appears that the sum contributed by the licensed occupants
was £16,715 18s. 6d., or at the rate of 11s. ljd. per head of
the population. If, therefore, local taxation be a special ground
for representation, the pastoral interests have even a stronger
claim than the city of Sydney. The honorable member also
complained that the Government had not sooner made
known their intentions with regard to the Bill, and that the
abstract of the Census had not been earlier laid upon the
table. But I think the honorable member will find it diffi-
cult to discover any precedent in the practice either of
Parliament or of this House, for the publication of a Bill
before it was officially sent down to the House ; and with
respect to the Census, I can only say, that the returns are
even now not all sent in ; and that the abstract in the hands
of rnembers is not an accurate or perfect document, although
it is sufficiently near the truth to be relied upon.
The honorable member for Cook and Westmoreland objected
to the power retained by the Government of determining the
boundaries of towns, and altering the boundaries of the pas-
toral districts, alleging that it would be an interference with
the constituencies, as fixed by the Legislature. But although
this may seem to be the case to a certain extent, it is not so
absolutely ; and I think that unless such a power is re-
tained, considerable inconvenience and injustice may arise,
particularly with respect to the more remote districts.
. So far as regards the towns, the clause in the Bill empower-
ing the Governor to define their boundaries, was introduced
less from choice, than because it was conceived to be required
oy the Constitution Act of 1842, the third clause of which is
as follows:
Hi. And be it enacted, that for the purpose of electing their several
representatives to the said Legislative Council, the towns of Sydney and
-■Uelbourne, and such other towns as shall be declared electoral districts,
1 36 deemed to be bounded and limited in such manner as the Governor
the Colony of New South Wales, by proclamation, to be published in the
ew South Wales Government Gazette , or by letters patent under the Great


Seal of the Colony, shall set forth and describe ; and such parts of any such
town (if any) which shall not be included within the boundary set forth of
described in such proclamation or letters patent, for the purposes of this
Act, shall be taken to be a part of the adjoining district, for the purpose of
being represented in the said Legislative Council.
From this clause, which I believe to be still in force, it
would seem to be imperative that the boundaries of towns for
electoral purposes should be fixed by the Governor. I con-
sider it exceedingly doubtful, therefore, whether this House
possesses any power to legislate on the subject, although of
course, it will be competent to the future Legislature to do so.
I think, however, that it is highly necessary that a power
should be reposed in the Government of altering the
boundaries of the Pastoral Districts; these districts are con-
stantly extending, particularly to the north and north-west,
and it would be unfair to those who locate themselves beyond
the limits of any existing electorate, that they should be
permanently denied the exercise of the elective franchise.
It was to provide for such a case as this that the power was
proposed to be vested in the Government of annexing any
such new country to the adjoining electorate.
The honorable member for Murray proposes to double
the number of members of the Legislature. I certainly
cannot concur in this recommendation. I think that forty-
eight members will be found as many as will be desirable.
The honorable member from Parramatta (Mr. Oakes), has also
given notice of his intention to move that the number of mem-
bers be increased to fifty-four, in order to give additional
representation to certain of the counties, and to Sydney.
Whatever claim the counties may have, I certainly will not
consent to any measure for the latter purpose. .1 believe that
the proportion of representation allotted to Sydney is fair and
reasonable, and that on every sound and safe principle,it would
be unwise and dangerous to increase it. And, therefore, so
far as Sydney is concerned, I certainly will not vote for any
increase in the number of members proposed to be given to
it in the Bill. Nor shall I vote for doubling the number of
members. I think it will be an unnecessary increase, and
that the number proposed in the Bill will be as many as will
readily be found of persons properly fitted to discharge the
important duties of legislation. The honorable member for
Murray (Mr. Murray) also objected to the association of the
various boroughs, and argued that with regard to the southern
boroughs, the interests of Yass would be swamped by the
superior population of Goulburn. The honorable member
must, however, remember that it will be in the power of the
other boroughs to combine against Goulburn. But all these


boroughs have some common interest which will make them
waive petty jealousies. At all events it is necessary to adopt
some system which shall separate the urban from the county
constituencies, and this object can only be effected by uniting
different boroughs into one constituency.
I now come to some observations of the honorable and
reverend member for Sydney. The honorable and reverend
member remarked on the stress, which in my introduction of
the measure to the House, I laid upon the labour and pains
which the Government had bestowed upon its prepara-
tion. He said, that if it had been an honest and straight-
forward measure, no such labour and pains would have
been required. I care very little for the insinuations thus
made. I believe no one in this House, except the
honorable member, entertains any doubt that this measure
has been prepared with the sincere intention of forwarding
the best interests of the country. But however honest and
straighforward the motives of the Government may have
been, still honorable members will easily see that it is a
task of no slight difficulty to arrange all the details of a mea-
sure like this, providing for the representation of a com-
munity so scattered and so peculiar in its component parts.
The honorable and reverend member has also accused me
of an attempt to bolster up a particular interest and a par-
ticular class. I peremptorily deny the charge, and I appeal
to the statistics which I adduced, to prove whether the Pas-
toral Districts, from their present population and prospective
increase, from the immense extent to which these districts
contribute to the productive wealth of the colony, have a
larger share of representation assigned to them than they
are entitled to. The proportion of representation given to
this class, the most important one in the colony, so far as
regards productive wealth, is only one-fourth, and this ought
not, cannot, be said to be a bolstering up of a class. The
honorable and reverend member, too, and the honorable
member from Miller’s Point, insinuated that I devised this
scheme with a view to assist in the renewal of transportation
to this Colony. I indignantly repudiate the insinuation.
The whole tenor of my conduct with respect to the trans-
portation question during the last session affords a direct
denial to this charge. On every question connected with it,
up to the last decision of the Council, by which a return to
transportation in any shape was formally rejected, I declined
to vote, or to exercise any official influence whatever. To
impute such an intention to me is, therefore, as uncalled for as
it is unjust. The honorable and reverend member admits that


the squatters are entitled to be represented. In the report
on the elective franchise, of which he was the principal
author, he advocated the justice of giving the squatters a
right to vote, but he seemed to wish to treat them as wild
elephants—they were not to be let abroad, unless they were
tied to tame ones; so that, while the Pastoral Districts were
to possess a show of representation, they were to be connected
with some settled districts, and thus have their distinctive
character entirely destroyed. In that report the following
passage occurs :
A large proportion of the class of squatters on the waste lands of the
Colony consist of persons of reputable character and superior intellectual
qualifications ; and their flocks and herds constitute, in great measure, the
wealth of the Colony. As far, therefore, as they are personally concerned,
your Committee could have had no hesitation in recommending the imme-
diate extension of the elective franchise to this numerous and important
class of our colonial population. But on taking into consideration the
uncertain and precarious tenure on which the whole class of squatters have
hitherto held their grazing stations, and the state of entire dependence to
which they have virtually been reduced under the arbitrary rule of the
Commissioners of Crown Lands, your Committee hesitated for some time
before giving an unqualified recommendation of such an extension of the
franchise, and delayed coming to any definite conclusion on the subject, till
the Council should have given its opinion on the proposition of the Land
Grievance Committee, in reference to the squatting interest of the colony
generally. From the favourable prospect, however, which is now enter-
tained of obtaining fixity of tenure for the squatters, in consequence of that
opinion, as well as of the establishment of some constitutional Court of
Appeal from the awards of the Crown Land Commissioners, your Com-
mittee can have no further ground for hesitation on the subject, and would,
therefore, earnestly recommend that the franchise should be extended to
every squatter possessed of not fewer than 200 head of cattle or of 1000
sheep, the possession of such stock to be ascertained from the assessment
list of the district.
Now, it has been urged out of doors as an objection to the
present measure, that the representation given to the pastoral
districts is the representation of sheep and cattle. But
whatever truth there may or may not be in such an argument,
in reference to the Bill before the House, it is quite clear
that the idea of such a representation originated with the
honorable and reverend member himself, in the passage of
the report I have just read. The report proceeds :
In the district of Port Phillip, in which the squatting stations are gene-
rally within the limits of the counties, and where the five district members
are returned by the united suffrages of the whole district, no practical
difficulty can be anticipated from the extension of the franchise to this
numerous and influential class of colonists, who, in that event, .would
immediately take their proper place among the other voters of the district.
But in this part of the Colony, where each county forms either a separate
electoral district, or an integral portion of such district, and where the
squatters are uniformly beyond the boundaries of these counties, the case is
somewhat different. In the event, therefore, of the general enfranchisement
of the squatters, it would be necessary either to constitute new electoral


districts beyond the boundaries, in this part of the Colony, or to include the
squatters, in each extensive tract of pastoral country, within the electoral
district formed by the nearest county or series of counties. To the former
of these courses your Committee conceive there are many and strong
objections ; but the adoption of the latter as a temporary measure to meet
the exigencies of the case, could occasion no practical difficulty, although it
would present a case for which your Committee conceive^ there is no prece-
dent in the constitutional history of Great Britain and her Colonies, But as
the case of a numerous body of colonists depasturing vast flocks and herds
on the waste lands beyond the boundaries of location, and thereby creating
important colonial interests, that are unquestionably entitled to their proper
weight and influence in the general legislature is a case to which there is no
parallel in the previous history of British colonization, it would be a libel
on the British constitution to affirm that it could not provide for such a case
(as is proposed to be done in the manner suggested) with perfect facility.
To extend the franchise to the licensed occupants of Crown
lands was, therefore, the proposition of the honorable and
reverend member himself, so long ago as 1844; and, according
to the views he then entertained, the right of any man beyond
the boundaries to vote, should depend upon the amount of his
possession of cattle and sheep. But whilst, on the one hand, the
Government proposes to give to the Pastoral Districts a dis-
tinct share in the representation of the country, instead of
binding them up with other interests, as contemplated in the
report of the honorable and reverend member, on the other
hand, the Act of Parliament has rested the qualification for the
franchise on a more legitimate basis than that suggested in
the same report. The honorable and reverend member also
accused the present government, and former administra-
tions, of having caused, by the impolicy of their measures
with regard to immigration, the undue population of the city
of Sydney; and he argued that because Sydney was over-
peopled, it was no reason it should not be represented in
proportion to its population. I must say that this seems to
me a very illogical conclusion. If it is found to be an
evil that Sydney is already too cumbrous on account of its
population, why add to the weight it already possesses, by
giving it a preponderating political influence in the Legis-
lature ? I think the very converse of this reasoning is cor-
rect, and that if the population of Sydney is disproportionately
large, and consequently the influence it exercises over the
social position of the community too great, this forms an ex-
cellent agument why her political power should be restricted.
I now come to the arguments of the honorable member
for Port Phillip (Mr. Westgarth), who agreed with some
other honorable members in asserting that this Bill has the
determined opposition of the colonists out of doors ; he
added, also, that it has arrayed against it the almost unani-
mous opposition of the press of the colony. Now, although


I am fully aware of the influential position which the press
occupies, and ought to occupy in every free community, as
the organ of public opinion—l still cannot admit that there
is anything in the opposition the Bill has met with from
that quarter, which should induce me to change my views
respecting it. •It is true that a certain portion of the press,
attached to a particular interest, and actuated by democratic
principles, has opposed this Bill, but I do not believe that the
journals alluded to are at all to be considered as expressing
the opinions of the great body of the people. The honorable
member (Mr. Westgarth), in commenting on previous
speakers who had alluded to the growth of democracy in this
Colony, and the dangerous consequences by which it is likely
to be attended, said, that if this was the case “ Let those who
dislike or fear democracy, go away.” In answer to this,
I say to the honorable member, “ Let those who refuse to be
governed by the constitutional principles of England, go
away from this Colony, which England has founded and
peopled.”
I have, I believe, sufficiently shown that this Bill was not
framed for the protection of any particular interests—
but for the due encouragement and representation of all
interests—that it is based upon the principles of population
and property combined, and that these are the principles
of the Constitution of Great Britain. I have gone
through all the arguments urged against the Bill, and
I have reason to congratulate myself that these arguments
are so few, and that so small a portion of those few are
tenable. It is matter, too, of great congratulation to me to
find that the principles which the Government adopted as
the groundwork of this Bill, have received the approval and
support of so large a share of the intelligence and experience
of this House, and that those principles have met with such
eloquent advocacy from the ranks of the elective members.
Thus fortified in the position which I have taken, lam
determined, so far as is in my power, to carry out those
principles, The honorable and reverend member for Sydney,
towards the close of his address, taunted me with having
missed the opportunity afforded by the preparation of this Bill,
to immortalise my name. If, Sir, that immortality is only to be
achieved by pandering to those democratic principles which
the honorable and reverend member professes—lf it is to be
gained only by the surrender of those constitutional principles
which it has always been my pride to uphold, I regret not the
loss of such an immortality. I could only have obtained it by
a gross dereliction of my duty to my Queen—to the


Government I serve and to the public at large.
Throughout the long career which I have pursued in
the public service of this Colony it has ever been my
study to promote the public welfare; to deal with every
public measure without favour or affection to any man,
to conduct myself alike to all, of whatever party, creed, or
denomination ; to do justice to the poor man as well as to the
rich. And while I believe that none will deny, and many
will attest, that these have been the principles of my past
official life, I boldly assert that these principles, and these
only, have actuated me in the preparation of this measure.


PROPOSED ELECTORAL DISTRICTS.
Population—Land under culture —Stock.
Proposed Electorates.
Popula-
tion per
Census,
1841.
Popula-
tion per
Census,
1846.
Estimated
population
1851.
Aores in
Cultiva-
tion.
1850.
Live Stock
equated as
Sheep.*
1850.
Licenses
1. Argyle
2,742
3,740
3,941
7,080
379,025
1. Bathurst
Wellington
1,745
510
2,435
970
4,802
1,620
4,001
546
446.132
172.133
2,255
3,405
6,422
4,546
618,265
1. Camden West
East or Illawarra..
2,392
3,645
3,914
3,790
3,962
5,279
6,037
7,704
9,241
14,063
278,468
1. Cook
Hunter
2,853
999
3,536
1,190
3,475
1,083
7,978
3,012
85,817
66,511
3,852
4,726
4,558
10,990
152,328
2. Cumberland
19,454
21,240
22,162
28,130
252,255
1, Durham
5,933
6,988
8,000 f
19,647
448,040
1. Gloucester
Macquarie
1,060
2,409
2,024
1,973
2,663
1,636
4,385
1,278
195,690
125,200
3,469
3,997
4,299
5,663
320,890
1. King
Georgiana
598
749
1,651
953
2,206
1,539
2,910
2,245
320,864
396,954
1,347
2,604
3,745
5,155
717,818
1. Murray
St. Vincent
1,866
1,762
2,254
1,896
2,955
2,303
4,126
4,073
401,783
237,506
3,628
4,150
5,258
8,199
639,289
1. Northumberland ..
5,200
7,292
8,066
16,310
269,419
1. Phillip
Brisbane
Bligh
453
1,497
546
641
1,237
598
674
1,701
1,108
868
1,204
157
100,611
233,751
194,316
2,496
2,476
3,483
2,229
528,678
1, Roxburgh
Westmoreland
1,067
619
1,889
1,575
2,192
1,662
2,568
1,717
335,375
161,730
1,686
3,464
3,854
4,285
497,105
*This column includes the live stock belonging to the towns situated within the respec-
tive Electoral Districts. The horses and cattle are equated as sheep, at the rate of l of
the former to 1000 of the latter.
f Wherever the quantities are stated in round numbers they are to be considered as ap-
proximations, the returns not having been all obtained.


Proposed Electorates.
Popula-
tion per
Census,
1841.
Popula-
tion per
Census,
1846.
Estimated
Popula-
tion,
1851.
Acres
in Cul-
tivation
1850.
Live Stock
equated as
Sheep.
1850.
Licenses.
1. Stanley
140
1,599
4,000
148
71,307
1. Maneroo
1,883
3,004
3,688
1,840
1,041,052
179
1. Murrumbidgee ... .
1,539
2,592
4,647
2,175
1,599,867
259
1. Lachlan
1,245
2,198
2,881
1,236
1,260,549
Lower Darling....
423
185,430
1,245
2,198
3,304
1,236
1,445,979
259
1. Wellington
935
1,199
1,478
187-
766,693
Bligh
672
788
1,286
250
593,460
1,607
1,987
2,764
437
1,360,153
335
1. Liverpool Plains ..
1,591
2,110
3,500
166
1,281,681
209
Gwydir
737
102
897,778
110
1,591
2,110
4,200
268
2,179,459
319
1. New England
1,115
2,231
4,191
2,345
1,497,119
136
M‘Leay
584
466
391
367
110,662
34
1,699
2,697
4,582
2,712
1,607,781
170
1. Clarence
416
1,225
1,605
288
528,244
Darling Downs .
658
2,156
306
855,000
416
1,883
3,761
594
1,383,244
136
1. Moreton
60
268
500
96
384,631
)
418
2
26,844
5 94
844
359,069
j
Maranoa
85
45,537
10
60
268
1,800
98
816,091
104
3. Sydney
29,973
38,358
44,168
1. Hamlets
5,399
8,281
1. Parramatta
5,389
4,454
4,293
1. Midland Boroughs:
-
Windsor
1,440
1,679
1,422
Liverpool
690
601
397
Campbelltown ..
446
541
529
liichmond
514
746
736
291
483
Pitt Town
202
229
210
Camden Village.
242
342
3,292
4,329
4,119


Proposed Electorates.
Popula.
tion per
Census,
1841.
Popula-
tion per
Census,
1846.
Estimated
population
1851.
Acres
in
Cultiva-
tion
1850.
Live
Stock
equated
as
Sheep.
1850.
Licenses.
1. Western Boroughs:—
Bathurst
Kelso
Hartley
Carcoax
720
453
39
1,883
464
62
73
2,252
339
88
303
1,212
2,482
2,982
1. Southern Boroughs:—•
Goulhurn
Berrima
Queanbeyan
Braidwood
Yass
655
249
72
173
1,171
377
208
206
274
1,525
192
372
214
653
1,149
2,236
2,956
1. Northern Boroughs: —
Morpeth
Paterson
East Maitland
West Maitland
Singleton
Muswellbrook
Scone
Murrurundi
90
1,022
1,746
431
215
63
635
141
910
2,409
565
208
117
52
1,176
86
1,040
3,118
635
204
200
88
3,567
5,037
6,500
1. N orth-eastem Boroughs
Newcastle City and 1
Suburbs )
Stockton
Raymond Terrace ....
Dungog
Clarence Town
Gosford
1,377
364
199
1,471
112
263
124
93
53
| 971
( 333
166
313
284
194
211
1,940
2,116
2,472
SUMMARY.
Proposed Electorates.
Census
Population,
1841.
Census
Population,
1846.
Estimated
Population,
1851.
14
Thirteen County Districts ,..
58,239
73,385
87,884
8
Eight Pastoral Districts
10,050
16,739
29,534
10
Eight Urban Districts
46,522
64,410
75,771
32
Members.
114,811
154,534
193,189


A COMPARATIVE VIEW of the
Proposed Representation and Estimated Population of New
South Wales.
Proposed Electorates.
Population,
1841,
Population,
1846,
Population,
1851.
Increase* of 1851,
per cent.
Proposed
number of
Members.
Proportion of popula-
tion in 1851 to each
proposed Member.
Per Census.
Per Census.
Estimated.
On 1841.
On 1846.
Thirteen Electoral Districts within the Old 1
Counties f
58,239
73,385
87,884
51
19
14
6,277
5,337
Eight Pastoral Districts
10,050
16,739
29,534
193
77
8
3,692
City of Sydney
29,973
38,358
44,168
47
15
3
14,723^
Sydney Hamlets
5,399
8,281
50
1
8,281
7,577
Boroughs
16,549
20,653
23,322
39
13
6
3,887 )
Total Colony
114,811
154,534
193,189
69
25
32
6,036
• These rates of increase differ slightly from those stated by the Colonial Secretary, in consequence of being computed on an Estimate of the Population
corrected by Census Returns, receired at a later date.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
(EXPORTS.)
KET DEN of the Value of Souxh Wi™, (Including the District of Pori
EXPORTS.
year.
Value of Articles
the Produce or
Manufacture of
New South Wales.
Value of Articles
the Produce or
Manufacture of the
United Kingdom.
Value of Articles
the Produce or
Manufacture of
other British
Dominions.
Value of Articles
the Produce or
Manufacture of
Foreign States.
Total Value.
Value per Head
of the
Population.
Population.
£
£
£
£
£
£
s.
d.
1844
864,709
119,197
64,266
79,943
1,128,115
6
10
2
173,377
1845
1,269,062
100,901
110,160
75,863
1,555,986
8
11
4
181,556
1 S4t>
1,201,433
120,424
80,499
79,183
1,481,539
7
10
8
196,704
1847
1,649,031
136,385
15,865
68,765
1,870,046
9
2
5
205,009
1848
1,621,509
127,368
22,220
59,271
1,830,368
8
6
0
220,474
1849
1,701,085
108,861
18,647
62,677
1,891,270
7
13
7
246,299
1850
2,180,922
134,044
15,595
69,019
2,399,580
8
17
9 1
270,000


NEW SOUTH WALES.
(IMPORTS.)
RETURN of the Value of the Imports into the Colony of New South Wales,
Phillip,) from the Year 1844 to 1850, inclusive.
(including the District of Port
YEAR.
IMPORTS.
Value of Articles the
Produce or Manufacture
of the United Kingdom.
Value of Articles the
Produce or Manufacture
of other
British Dominions.
Value of Articles the
Produce or Manufacture
of Foreign States.
Total Value.
Value per Head of
the Population.
Population.
Of
£
£
£
£
£
s.
d.
1844
629,510
154,572
147,178
931,260
5
7
5
173,377
1845
786,514
156,491
290,849
1,233,854
6
15
11
181,556
1846
1,111,238
88,638
430,646
1,630,522
8
5
9
196,704
1847
1,269,183
95,118
617,722
1,982,023
9
13
4
205,009
1848
1,029,926
114,900
411,724
1,556,550
7
1
2
220,474
1849
1,207,837
149,106
436,477
1,793,420
7
5
7
246,299.
1850
1,478,399
132,454
467,485
2,078,338
7
13
11
270,000


(LIVE STOCK.)
RETURN of Lite Stock in the Colony of New South Wales, (including the District of Port Phillip,) on
31st December in each Year, from 1843 to 1850, inclusive.
Tear,
Horses.
Horned Cattle.
Pigs.
Sheep.
Increase from
year to year on
Cattle, per Cent.
Increase from
year to year on
Sheep, per Cent.
1843
1844
1845
1846
1847
1848
1849
1850
62,017
71,169
82,303
88,126
104,271
113,895
121,859
133,078
1,017,316
1,159,432
1,348,022
1,430,736
1,614,967
1,752,852
1,810,213
1,740,187
57,767
56,242
60,008
45,600
62,670
70,875
58,674
61,808
5,055,337
5,604,644
6,202,031
7,906,811
10,071,625
11,660,819
12,102,540
13,058,324
13-97
16-27
6-14
12-87
8-54
3-27
*Dec. 2-76
Average increase from year to
year on Cattle, 8 per cent.
Total increase on Cattle from 1843
to 1850, 71 per cent.
10-86
10-66
27-49
27-38
15-78
3-87
7*90
Average increase from year to
year on Sheep, 14| per cent.
Total increase on Sheep from 1843
to 1850, 159 per cent.
* This decrease in the number of Horned Cattle is aoounted for chiefly from the fact that 73,105 head were, during the year 1850, converted into Tallow,
and partially from the absence of any returns from tbe Lower Darling —the Horned Cattle of which District are estimated at 20,000.
Note - —The average rate of increase in Sheep, and the total increase since 1843, as shown in the above Table, differ from the rates stated in the
Colonial Secretary’s speech, in const quence of the introduction into the Table of the Returns for 1850, which were not used in the speech.


A
STATEMENT of the Lite Stock in the Colony of New South Wales, (not including Port Phillip,) from
1843 to 1850, distinguishing the quantities within and beyond the Settled Districts.
WITHIN.
BEYOND.
Increase
or De-
Increase or De
crease from j ear
crease from
Tear.
Horses.
Cattle.
Pigs.
Sheep.
to year.
Year.
Horses.
Cattle.
Pigs.
Sheep.
year to year.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Cattle.
Sheep.
1843
43,262
334,210
51,882
1,590,560
1843
12,477
515,950
2,725
1,861,979
1844
49,420
372,847
47,569
1,714,285
I.
11-54
7*78
1844
14,673
598,712
4,627
2,029,447
16*05
8*99
1845
54,339
417,641
50,932
1,891,099
12*02
10*31
1845
18,675
698,779
5,090
2,518,405
16*70
24*09
1846
56,361
395,589
34,918
2,036,678
D.
5-27
7*70
1846
20,365
744,708
4,815
2,873,141
6*58
14*09
1847
62,395
391,262
51,220
2,040,239
D.
1-09
0*17
1847
27,367
861,391
6,145
3,615,043
15*67
25*82
1848
64,817
387,283
59,537
2,139,243
D.
1-02
4-85
1848
32,583
978,881
5,679
4,391,299
13*64
21*47
1849
70,261
427,756
47,416
2,061,138
i.
10-45
3*57
1849
34,865
1,035,895
5,486
4,723,356
5*82
7*56
1850
74,310
440,849
46,922
2,066,475
3-06
0*26
1850*
36,454
915,546)
5,428
4,889,274 \
D.
9*69
i.
4*57
20,000 }
50,000 }
I.
i.
i.
i.
Net Increase from 1843 to 1850
31*91
29*92
Net Increase from 1843 to 1850 .
81*34
165*81
* The Returns for the Lower Darling not having been received, 20,000 Cattle and 50,000 Sheep are added as the estimated quantity.


