

CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN
THE LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY
MIC W. A. BBO.DRIBB,
AND
THE BEY. WILLIAM KENKEHY BKOHBIBB.




The Correspondence between the Right Rev.
the Lord Bishop of Sydney, and Mr. W.
A. Brodribb, and the Rev. William Ken-
nedy Brodribb, —on the latter gentleman
applying to His Lordship for a License
and employment in the Diocese of Sydney,
and His Lordship’s refusal to comply with
the Rev. gentleman’s request.
Buckhurst, Double Bay,
sth April, 1880.
Me. W. A. Brodeibb to the Eight Eeyeeend the Lord
Bishop op Sydney.
My Lord, —I was very much astonished and disap-
pointed to learn from my son that you had refused to offer
Vn'm employment in your Diocese because he belonged to a
society in London named “ The English Church Union.
I feel quite certain there is not another Bishop in any of
the Australian colonies who would refuse to employ my son
for the reasons you assign. You are acquainted with my
son’s antecedents, and know also something of the different
spheres of clerical labour in which he has officiated. Docu-
ments in his possession will also prove that both in the
Diocese of Victoria and Ballaarat his services were very
highly esteemed as a working parish priest and sound
Churchman.
As to his employment in your own Diocese so recently,
the Vicar of St. Mark’s would, I feel confident, gladly tes-
tify as to his diligence and earnestness while Curate of St.
Mark’s, and to the regret with which he regarded the loss
of his services.
"When my health began to fail about six months back, 1
requested him to return for a time to the colony, and be


near me in my old age, never dreaming for one moment that
there would be any difficulty in his getting employment in
your Diocese; it now appears I am doomed to be dis-
appointed, and for what ? Because my son still belongs to the
“ English Church Union,” of which society he was a mem-
ber when formerly at work in your Diocese. This society
now includes eleven Bishops, five hundred Clergy, and fif-
teen thousand Laity. The Bishop of Gfrafton and Armidale
is a member.
I venture in closing to suggest the probable injury re-
sulting to my son’s status and official reputation through
such action on your part. Your refusal to assign to him
Parochial work in or near Sydney (should opportunities
offer) will rob my declining years of much of the comfort
and happiness which in this direction I was justified in an-
ticipating. Begging your lordship to reconsider your deci-
sion,
I have the honour to remain,
My Lord,
Your obedient Servant,
W. A. BEODEIBB.
The Eight Eev. the Lord Bishop of Sydney, to Mr. W.
A. Brodribb.
Bishopscourt, April 13th, 1880.
My dear Sir, —I regret that my absence from Sydney
has caused some delay in sending a reply to your letter of
the sth April.
I am not surprised that you should feel aggrieved at my
refusal to license your son to officiate in my Diocese, and I
can assure you that it is with extreme reluctance and great
pain that I have done so. On your own account and on
his I would gladly have complied with his request, such
as in my view of the matter very important questions are
involved, I must be faithful to my trust.
I regard “ The English Church Union,” of which your
son is a member, as a society whose avowed object is to
u unprotestantize ” the Church of England, and whose aim,
as recently stated by the Chairman, is to bring about a
union with Eome. Its most prominent members are of an
extreme party in the Church, and from it Mr. Maconochie


and other lawless and disobedient clergymen receive sym-
pathy and aid. I regard the society and its aiders and
abettors as the principal cause of the present distracted state
of the Church in England, and under this conviction am
resolved, so far as my influence extends, to resist its entrance
into my Diocese.
I am not aware that any of the English or Irish Bishops
belong to it. I know that many discountenance it, and the
eleven Bishops to whom you refer are chiefly colonial
Bishops of extreme party principles.
It may be that your son has not adopted the extreme
opinions of the party of “ The English Church Union.” I
hope he has not; but by belonging to the society, and by
taking a curacy in a well known church in Brighton where
all the curates were members of the “ Church Union,” he
has to a great extent identified himself with it.
I do not know what any other colonial Bishop would do,
but I know that in the Diocese of Oxford the tutors of
Cuddesdon College withdrew from the E. C. U. when it was
represented that their membership was a ground of com-
plaint.
I regret very much the disappointment to which my re-
fusal to receive your son must necessarily subj ect you, but
I may not allow personal considerations to exercise my sense
of duty.
Understanding from your son that it was his intention to
return to England in a year, I said that I would offer no
objection to his officiating in my Diocese during that period,
but to grant a license which in terms expresses a confidence
I do not at present feel is in my power.
Referring to your request that I would reconsider my
decision, I reply that I shall be willing to do so when your
son gives me fresh grounds for such reconsideration by fol-
lowing the example of the Cuddesdon tutors.
Believe me,
My dear sir,
Yours very sincerely,
F. SYDNEY.
[I am told on good authority that these Cuddesdon
tutors immediately after they left the College again joined
“The English Church Union.”—W. A. B.]


The Eev. Wm. Kennedy Beodbjbb to the Eight Eey.
the Lord Bishop oe Sydney.
21st April, 1880.
My Lord, —I saw the letter which my father wrote
to you with, reference to your refusal to license me, on ac-
count of my belonging to the English Church Union, and
my father has also shown me your reply.
I thank you very much for your permission that I may
officiate in your Diocese, though without your formal re-
cognition.
Without presuming to make any defence of the Union,
may I give two explanations as regards myself:—
You said you were sorry that I, who had been educated
and ordained in Australia, should have taken up different
opinions. May I venture to assure you that my opinions
have not changed since before I was at Moore College.
The members of my family could tell you that since I was
a lad I have never swerved from my attachment to the
distinctive teaching of the Church of England.
The little hook which my dear mother (who had the
honour of your Lordship’s acquaintance) gave me when I
was preparing for confirmation, viz., Bishop Wilherforce’s
“ Eueharistica ” contains all that I now hold anent the
holy sacrament.
Also, with reference to the church to which I was
attached at Brighton, and which (I think) must have been
misrepresented to you, as being identified with the Union.
This was not so; though the Vicar laid no restrictions
upon his curates in the matter, and we all three belonged
to it. Yet he, himself, rather disapproved of it, and would
not have suffered us (had we wished) to obtrude our con-
nexion with it. We constantly exchanged pulpits with the
“Evangelical” clergy of Brighton (there is, of course, no
inconsistency in members of the Union doing so).
The Bishop took pleasure in coming to our Church as
often as he could, and I may add I hold a letter from him,
in which he says he will he pleased to give me work in his
Diocese on my return to England next year.* I have never
yet asked a single person to join the “Union.” The
Sydney branch was formed without my cognizance during
my absence in England. I belong to the Brighton branch.


I have, as yet, attended only one meeting under the aus-
pices of the Union —that was in England —a public occa-
sion ; and I went with some friends who are not
and I sat with them and the general public in the body of
the Hall.
Though I had informed my friends of my joining the
Union, yet, so far have I ever been from obtruding the fact
that they had altogether forgotten it, until it was brought
forward by your Lordship. Thus lam at a loss to know
how you were aware of it. Of course, I know, that in
England there are some Protestants of extreme views who
enact the part of spies, and keep a list of those clergy who
have joined any society which is considered “ High
Church,” in order that they may watch them and excite
prejudice against them.
Deeply regretting that I should in any way have been
so unfortunate as to incur your Lordship’s disapproval,
I remain,
Your obedient servant,
WM. KENNEDY BRODRIBB.
° The Bishop of Chicester is not a member of the Union.
Mu. W. A. Brodribb to the Right Rev. the Lord
Bishop of Sydney.
22nd April, 1880.
My Lord, —I have to thank you for your courteous
reply to my letter, but will you allow me at the same time
to express my deep regret that you should still feel it to be
your duty to refuse to give my son a License to preach in
your Diocese, owing to his being a member of the “ English
Church Union.” To me, and to all his friends this is a
bitter disappointment. It is of course with feelings of
great delicacy, we speak words in praise of those who are
dear to us, but on this occasion, I will say that no clergy-
man in your Lordship’s Diocese is more faithful to the
Church of England than my son is. From a boy he has
loved the Church and taken delight in her services and his
parochial work has always been performed not as a duty,
but as a labour of love, and he has wherever he has been,
gained the love of and confidence of his people.


It was a great happiness to me to he able to educate him
for the Church and though the circumstances of his mar-
riage seem to prevent his permanently settling in the colony,
yet I had hopes that were he engaged in work here, his
stay with us might have been prolonged.
Since the receipt of your letter, I have carefully studied
the rules of the “English Church Union,” and cannot hut
think that your Lordship has been misinformed upon many
points, as I fail to discover anything there which is dan-
gerous to the Church of England.
I saw my son’s letter to you and wished him to add to it
his reasons for not leaving the “Union” ; but he said it
would perhaps he disrespectful for him to appear to argue
with you ! He assures me that the Society far from en-
couraging leanings towards home, issues numbers of pub-
lications against Eoman errors; and since joining it, he
has never been in a Eoman place of worship. And though
some members (he thinks unauthorised by the Society) may
have spoken of “ unprotestantising ” the Church, that they
wish to make prominent those respects in which the Church
differs from the Protestant sects. In such a large body
embracing so many thousands of clergy and laity of all
positions in society, and the Church, there are of course
men of very various opinions, but it appears that it is a
rule of the “ Union ” never to interfere with clergymen or
congregations in their modes of service, and thus it has
never once instituted legal proceedings against others, but
only defended its own clergy when so attacked. It would
therefore seem scarcely fair, to blame the “Union” for
the present disturbed condition of the Church, if as my son
assures me, its operations are limited to defence.
I do not write this my Lord in order to attempt to per-
suade you to alter your decision, my son may be mistaken
(in common with many men of known piety and learning),
in thinking that the E.C.U. is of use, but his connexion
with it was no bar to his getting work in England ; I know
for a fact it would not be so in other colonial Dioceses ?
And therefore I cannot but feel deeply disappointed and
surprised that this Diocese of all others should be the ex-
ception.
I remain, my Lord,
Your obedient servant,
W. A. BEODEIBB.


The Eight Eev. the Lord Bishop of Sydney, to Mr. W.
A. Brodribb.
Sydney, 26th April, 1880.
My dear Sir, —I think that both you and your son
misapprehend the nature and force of my objection to the
E.C.U., and cannot be aware of the line which those who
govern its proceedings have recently taken.
There can hardly be conceived a greater violation of
order and obedience to authority than that of which Mr.
Maconoehie is guilty. The decisions of a duly constituted
court according to the laws of England and the monitions
of his Bishop, have been contemptuously rejected and the
E.C.U. has publicly and formally upheld him in these
acts.
I regard it as the bounden duty of every true member of
the Church of England to withdraw from all complicity in
such proceedings, and consider it to be my duty to guard
the Diocese over which I am called to preside against the
introduction of principles subversive of order, and in their
consequences injurious to religion.
My refusal to license a member of the E.C.U. is my pro-
test against that Society. I have nothing to say against
the character and conduct of your son, but if he chooses to
ally himself to an extreme party in the Church, he must
take the consequences of his choice. The sanction given
by men of moderate opinions to the E.C.U. has been one of
the means of its influence.
Many such men are now withdrawing from it, and when
in this question between the Bishop of the Diocese and
your son, it is expected- that one party should reconsider
his position, it seems to me that it would only be becoming
that the young presbyter should make the change.
Believe me,
My dear Sir,
Sincerely yours,
F. SYDNEY.


The Eev. Wm. Kennedy Brodribb to the Eight Eev.
the Lord Bishop op Sydney.
31st May, 1880.
My Lord, —After our late correspondence, I think,
the information that I am por the present quitting
Sydney, ought to come to you from myself. I have been,
availing myself of your permission to officiate from time to
time; but, unfortunately, so much publicity seems now to
be attached to my name, that I thought it would be better
to retire from the Diocese.
I am sure it is needless to inform your Lordship that I
have had nothing to do with anything that has appeared
in any of the papers, anent either myself or the E. C. XL,
though this morning I have been able to stop the publica-
tion of another letter; for though it would be most un-
gracious of me not to feel very grateful for all the kind
sentiments that have been expressed to me, and for the
approval which so many accord me for remaining firm in
my convictions ; yet I feel that continued controversy is to
be deplored. lam sorry to say that by your inability to
license me, my father feels even more aggrieved than you
said in one of your letters you expected he would be ; and
he insists on making no secret of his grievance. If, my
Lord, I had had any idea that my application for temporary
clerical work here would have caused any unpleasantness
or discussion, I would never have left England.
I was never more taken aback than when you said that
my connexion with the E. C. U. would prevent your re-
ceiving me. I never had the remotest intention of bringing
the E. C'. U. before the notice of any one during my visit
to your Diocese ; for though I believe it to be doing a good
work in resisting the unconstitutional innovations made
during the last few years without the assent of the Church
and for party purposes, in our ancient Ecclesiastical Courts,
yet never felt that I was called upon to advocate the
society. You say you learned my connexion with it in
“ casual conversation,” but as my connexion with it has
been so slight and inconspicuous, how could your informant
have known, except by purposely looking up my name in
the E. C. U. Directory.


I cannot help thinking, my Lord, that the information
was given you for party purposes ; and the information has
succeeded in its intentions.
I hope that my departure may cause the cessation of
controversy, for, by the time your Lordship receives this I
shall be on my way to another colony.
I cannot express to your Lordship how very deeply I
feel the withdrawal of your confidence in me, and all the
pain and sorrow that this unfortunate occurrence has
caused me.
In conclusion,
I remain, my Lord,
Your obedient servant,
WM. KENNEDY BEODEIBB.
Mr. W. A. Brodribb, to the Eight Eev. the Lord
Bishop oe Sydney.
Buckhurst, Double Bay,
4th June, 1880.
My Lord, —I have refrained from replying to your
last letter dated the 26th April until my son had finally left
your “ Diocese.”
In my letter to you, dated the sth April, I remarked:
“ I feel quite certain there is not another Bishop in any of
the Australian colonies who would refuse to employ my son
for the reason you assign.”
This statement has been fully verified since.
My son has been offered employment by the Bishop of
Ballaarat and the Bishop of Melbourne, to whose Dio-
cese he has now gone. Within the last few days I have
received a note from an old friend, in which he says:
“Would your son like an incumbency in the Diocese of
‘ Grafton and Armidale ’ ? If so, I can offer him one.”
I can’t help thinking that the action you have taken in
this matter will do Jar more harm to the English Church
here than it can possibly do good.
All my colonial friends are constantly asking, “ What is
this between your son and Bishop Barker ?” I explain the
circumstances; they one and all (even some of your sup-
porters) condemn your conduct,


My son, though, he believes the E. C. U. to be a useful
society, never made his connexion with it conspicuous, and
had no intention of advocating it here in any way, or of
doing anything else but comply with the usual church sei-
vices in the colony.
Until my son arrived in Sydney I knew very little of
“The English Church Union.” I scarcely knew he be-
longed to it until it came out in the correspondence with
your Lordship, and then I learnt from him a,ll particulars.
I said to him, “ you are either right or wrong in belonging
to this society. If the latter, the sooner you leave it the
better ; if you are right, don’t give way under any circum-
stances, and I shall support you.”
My son then wrote you a letter dated the 21st of April
last. I then felt sure you would accede to my wish when
all the circumstances were placed before you. That letter,
in my humble opinion, ought to have drawn forth some ex-
pression of sympathy from a Bishop to a young clergyman.
In your letter to me, dated the 13th April last, you blame
Mr. Maconochie for bringing about the present distracted
state of the church in England, and under this conviction
you are resolved, so far as your influence extends, to resist
its entrance into your Diocese.
My son never had the smallest intention of introducing
the E. C. U. here. I regret to say your proceedings in this
matter will conduce to this effect. I hear that numbers of
the Church of England in the colony, in consequence of your
unfortunate proceedings towards my son, are joining the
Union, and henceforth it will certainly have my support.
In saying this I don’t myself endorse all Mr. Maconochie s
proceedings, but I protest against the unfair, dishonourable,
and disreputable means by which “The Church Association
endeavours to procure his conviction and that of other hard-
working clergymen.
Many of us laity, my Lord, are astonished you do not
perceive the extreme party to which you and Dean Oowper
have unfortunately allied yourselves is going down every
day in public influence and estimation; you may foster it
in this Diocese for a few years, but in the long run church-
men here must follow the tendency of Churchmen every
where else. lam myself old-fashioned and prefer the


quiet, plain services I have always been used to, but if tbe
younger generation have other tastes, which are the out-
come of a great religious revival, and therefore love the
brighter services of the Church, are we to think that they
are not loyal children because they dare to claim the exer-
cise of the liberty which the Church allows ?
With every respect for your Lordship’s office, and ripe
judgment, the result of long experience, I think that it is
unwise to restrict too narrowly the exercise of that right,
and I quote in support of my view the following taken
from the “ Saturday Review ” of the 27th March last, having
reference to the most recent prosecutions under ‘ ‘ the Church
Association ” to which you refer: —
“ But the tide is on the turn, and the general community
will, we are sure, recognise that the Church of England
must tolerate great variety within the limits of the Prayer
Book ; and that wherever there is real zeal and an earnest
purpose, it must not be too severe upon occasional excess or
defect, unless it desires to give comfort to that agitation of
the enemies of the Church of England, the inferential en-
couragement of which by Mr. Herbert Gladstone has been
astonishing the electors of Middlesex, when the young can-
didate informed them that ‘he would desire to maintain
the historical connexion of the Church with the State : but
if public opinion declared decisively against the connexion,
he would not stand in the way of the wishes of the majority
of the people.’ ”
I remain, my Lord,
Your most obedient humble servant,
W. A. BEODEIBB.
The Eight Eey. the Lord Bishop of Sydney to Mr.
W. A. Brodribb.
Bishopscourt,
9th June, 1880.
My Dear Sir, —I have received your letter of the
4th instant, and also one from your son of an earlier date,
and will now briefly reply to both.
I am accused of acting unjustly towards your son, by
refusing to give him a license, on the ground that he is a
member of the English Church Union.


My reason is that I regard that body as an organized
conspiracy against the Reformed Church of England.
Years ago the late Bishop of St. David’s used these ex-
pressions concerning it—“l think that no Churchman who
does not desire the subversion of our Reformed Church,
and its final absorption into the Church of Rome can too
deeply distrust or too strenuously oppose its proceedings.”
What would he now say of a body which not only up-
holds a London clergyman in his refusal to obey the deci-
sions of the highest courts of law, hut in his resistance to
the sentence of his own Bishop, by persisting to officiate
after his suspension, and by refusing to recognize or admit
the clergyman authorized by the Bishop to take charge of
the Church.
I regard this as a flagrant instance of that lawlessness
which threatens to bring about the disruption of the
Church.
Your son, in common with many other members of the
Church Union, would no doubt disavow any such inten-
tion. But in a large body of this kind there will always
be those who unconsciously follow the leaders, ignorant of
the end to which their proceedings are tending. These are
the rank and file so to speak, who, while they more or less
sympathize with some of the objects of the Church Union,
are not yet prepared to adopt all the opinions of their
leaders.
But, by their “ union” with these men of more advanced
views, they not only give their sanction to the proceedings
of the body, but add weight to the statement that the
number of its members is considerable. If they wish to
disavow extreme opinions, or to disclaim the threatened
consequences of their leaders’ actions, the only sensible and
practical way of doing so is to withdraw from the body.
I further object to the Church Union because it is in-
tended to promote a movement which the Archbishop of
Canterbury describes as one “ for the restoration of Eucha-
ristic vestments, the use of incense and lighted candles in
the day time, the offering of the Holy Sacrament as a pro-
pitiatory sacrifice, the elevation of the consecrated elements
for the worship of the people,” and generally “to obliter-
ate every trace of the Reformation.”


To this movement I am conscientiously and resolutely
opposed, and when a young clergyman seeks my license
and refuses to separate himself from an organization whose
aims and tendencies are such as I have described, I have
no other course than to refuse his request. To»give my
license expresses approval. I wholly disapprove, and I
cannot imagine how anyone who desires to maintain the
Church of England as we have received it from the Re-
formers can condemn me for using all the precautions
which the law of the Church authorizes, against admitting
into the Diocese a clergyman who is willing to take part
in a movement, the success of which would be, in the
language of the Archbishop “ to obliterate every trace of
the Reformation.”
Not only in my opinion is there no obligation upon a
Bishop to admit such an one, but if he did so he would in-
cur a very grave responsibility. With these convictions I
should be unfaithful to my trust if I acted otherwise than
I have done.
This must be my reply to those who are ready to blame
me. I cannot be surprised that your friends, on hearing
your version of the matter should agree with you. Perhaps
if they heard my statement, they might change their opi-
nion.
I do not know what other Bishops might have done in
this case ; I know one Bishop who did act as I have done,
and whose very words I have occasionally used, a Bishop
whom I regard as one of the best and ablest of colonial
Bishops—our friend Bishop Perry.
Referring to your predictions of the consequences of my
action, I must be allowed to differ from you. I have no
fear of the ultimate results of my procedure, and am pre-
pared, if necessary, to justify my conduct before the world.
I cannot now even conclude my letter without expressing
my real regret that I have felt obliged to adopt a course so
painful and distressing to one for whom I have a personal
regard, and in whose disappointment I fully sympathise.
Believe me,
My dear Sir,
Yery sincerely yours,
F. SYDNEY.


To the Rev. W. K. Brodribb, 8.A., Yice-President, St.
James’s Young Men’s Christian Association.
Rev. and dear Sir, —In view of your early depar-
ture from Melbourne to another scene of labor and useful-
ness at Coleraine, the members of the St. James’s Young
Men’s Christian Association desire to heartily thank you
for the great interest you have manifested in the Associa-
tion since its formation.
Without your valuable aid and active co-operation, they
feel persuaded that the Association -would have languished
in its infancy.
They desire, also, to express their appreciation of the
manner in which you have always sustained the interest of
their meetings, by your own personal efforts, and by en-
couraging and stimulating the members to an active course
of reading and study.
They trust you will be always able to feel a pleasure in
looking back upon the time when, during your first minis-
tration of the Gfospel, you were one of the chief instru-
ments, under a gracious Providence, of establishing an
Association, which, it is to be hoped, will be of lasting
benefit, both for this world, and for that which is to come,
to the young men who may be enrolled in its ranks.
The members desire to bid you a most affectionate fare-
well ; they will always remember you with the kindliest
feelings, and will earnestly pray that you may be greatly
blessed in all your undertakings.
Por the Association,
M. H. BEECHER, President.
Gi. T. KINGSLAND, Eon. Sec.
Melbourne, sth Eeb. 1872.
To the Rev. W. K. Brodribb, B.A.
Rev. and dear Sir, —As you are about to proceed to
Coleraine, to take charge of a district, the vestry of St.
James’s Parish, on behalf of the parishioners and seat-
holders, gladly embrace the opportunity thus afforded, to
place on record their high esteem and affectionate regard
for you.


They feel a natural regret that you are about to leave
the parish where you have endeared yourself to all with
whom you have come in contact; and where, under a
Divine providence, you have been enabled to effect much
good.
They would, also, express their high sense of the in-
defatigable and assiduous manner in which you worked
for the good of the parish, in every possible way, during
your residence therein.
They sincerely trust you may be abundantly blessed in
your new sphere of labor, and can only assure you, that
you carry with you the best wishes, both for your temporal
and spiritual welfare, of all connected with St. James’s
Cathedral.
Signed* by the Incumbent and Churchwardens.
St. James’s Vestry,
Melbourne, sth Feb. 1872.
“S. Martin’s, Brighton. Epiphany, 1880.
“ The clergy, choir, officers, and Guild of S. Martin’s.
“ To the Eev. William Kennedy Beodmbb, M.A., till
lately curate of the church.
“ Eev. and dear Sir, —We are not unmindful of your
work and labour, which proeeedeth of love towards our-
selves and others, your fellow labourers and members of
the congregation of S. Martin’s. During your brief sojourn
amongst us, we have witnessed with pleasure your zeal in
the service of our Master, and have waited—we trust not
without profit—upon your ministry; and we desire that
you may carry with you to your distant home the assurance
of our gratitude and esteem. “ Grace and peace from God
our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ,” attend you on your
voyage, and bring you safely to the ‘ haven where you
would be.’ May the new social relation in which you have
just engaged be blessed to your comfort here, and advance-
ment to the Eternal Kingdom; and when the storms of life
are over, and the voyage of this world past, may we meet


again in the abode of bliss, where the turmoil and change
of mortal life shall cease, and where ‘there shall be no more
sea.’
“ May the Lord bless you and keep you ; the Lord lift
up the light of His countenance upon you and give you
peace, now and for evermore. Amen.”
On board the s.s. “John Elder,
25th February, 1880.
To the Hey. W. Aceaman, and the Hey. W. K. Bkodeibb.
Dear Sirs, —We, the undersigned Officers and fellow
passengers on board the good ship “John Elder,” from
London to Australia, in bidding you farewell desire to
heartily thank you for the efforts that you have made
throughout the whole voyage in providing the means of
grace on Sundays and weekdays for all who wished to
avail themselves.
We trust that your united efforts have not been in vain,
and that God’s blessing will be with you in your future
labours. With every feeling of respect and esteem,
We remain, dear sirs,
Yours very truly,
ALEEED COOPEE, Commander.
[Together with 114 names of officers and passengers.]
16


RULES OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH UNION.
Of the Name, Form of Government, Objects, and Means.
Name of the Society.
1 . This Association shall be called “The English Church
Union,” and it shall be governed, as hereinafter set forth,
by a President, two Vice-Presidents (one clerical and one
lay), and a Council.
Objects of the Union.
2. The objects of “ The English Church Union ” are—
(l) to defend and maintain, unimpaired, the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England ; (2) to afford counsel,
protection, and assistance to all persons, lay or clerical,
suffering under unjust aggression or hindrance in spiritual
matters; and (3) in general so to promote the interests of
Religion as to be, by God’s help, a lasting witness in the
land for the advancement of His glory and the good of His
Church.
Means to be employed.
3. The means which the Union shall employ for effecting
its object are —(1) Meetings of the Union, of District
Unions, and of Local Branches as hereinafter provided; (2)
A solemn Commemoration in each year; (3) Petitions and
Addresses to the Queen, to the Bishops, to Convocation, to
Parliament if need be, and to other persons in authority ;
(4) Grants of Money to be made from time to time for the
objects of the Union.


