

CORRESPONDENCE
RELATIVE TO THE
INTRODUCTION OF SALMON & TROUT
AT THE ANTIPODES,
BY
E. H. MOSCROP.
London:
PRINTED BY WIGHTMAN & Co., 104 & 106, REGENCY STREET
WESTMINSTER, S.W
1879.




The following, slightly abridged, appeared in the
“Morning Post,” 23rd August, 1879.
THE INTRODUCTION OF SALMON AT
THE ANTIPODES.
TO THE EDITOR OF “LAND AND WATER "
Sir,
A new edition of Sir Samuel Wilson’s book on this
subject has just been issued, which professes to give an accurate
account of the first introduction of English salmon and trout into
the Australian waters. In chap. 4, page 18, he says the first suc-
cessful attempt to introduce salmon into Australia was made in
the year 1864 on board the ship “Norfolk,” the ova having been
packed in boxes with moss and charcoal, and then placed in ice.
Sir Samuel gives the credit for the discovery of this mode of
packing ova for transmission abroad to Mr. J. A. Youl, C.M.G.
He makes no allusion to the box of ova that at my suggestion
had been packed in this manner and sent by way of experiment
with a large consignment of ova not so packed, made by Mr.
Youl, in the ship “Beautiful Star,” in 1862. He only relates
that that consignment of ova was a failure. His book, however,
contains much very useful information, and is highly interesting.
On July 13th, 1863, the Times published my letter detail-
ing the experiments I had made upon salmon ova. I claimed the
credit in it of having discovered the process by which the rivers
in our colonies have since been stocked with salmon supplied
from this country.
As this credit is given to and assumed by Mr. Youl, I will,
with your permission, give your readers a history as to how the
discovery, if it may be so called, was brought about.
In February, 1862, Mr. Youl acting as agent for the Tas-
manian Government, was about to despatch a consignment of
salmon ova to that country. He invited me to inspect the ar-
rangements he had made for that purpose on board the ship
“Beautiful Star.” These consisted of a spiral trough suspended
by a gimbal to the roof of the compartment, by which contrivance
the ova would be less shaken by the motion of the vessel. The
ova placed in this trough were kept in a stream of running water


supplied from a tank, which was kept cool by being surrounded
with ice. As Mr. Youl had been unsuccessful in one or two pre-
vious attempts, he spared neither trouble nor expense to ensure the
success of this venture.
Having examined his arrangements, I thought the matter
well over, and afterwards suggested to him that in my opinion it
might be possible to retard their development sufficiently long to
enable the ova to be sent abroad without injury. To accom-
plish this I proposed to pack the ova in a box with moss and
charcoal, giving him my reasons for using charcoal, and then to
bury the box in ice.
This plan he said could not possibly succeed, because it
would deprive the ova of a running stream of water, which in his
opinion was absolutely essential to their existence, and to provide
which he had on this occasion made such elaborate and costly
arrangements.
Mr. Youl, however, permitted me to make the experiment,
and I had a box made and filled with moss and charcoal, into
which Mr. Youi, and I packed some ova. The box was then
placed in the icehouse of the vessel, under the care of Mr. Rams-
bottom, Jun., who was going out in charge of the salmon ova then
being dispatched by Mr. Youl.
Neither Mr. Youl nor Mr. Ramsbottom had the slightest
faith in my experiment. In fact, so little did Mr. Ramsbottom
think of it, that, as it appears from later correspondence, he forgot
all about my box of ova, and it was not until the vessel had arrived
out and was about to return that, on clearing out the icehouse, the
box was discovered, and some of the ova found to be in healthy
condition. All the ova sent out by Mr. Youl had died. Upon
Mr. Youl informing me as to the state of the ova in my box I
was satisfied that, if properly conducted, my system would prove
successful.
In December, 1862, Mr. Youl sent me a printed report
that had been presented to the Legislature of Tasmania in August,
1862, and he asked me to give him my opinion on the passage in
the report concerning the “ Beautiful Star,” “ as to the faulty con-
struction of the icehouse, and the mode in which the water was made
to pass through it.” He also at the same time asked my opinion
as to the desirability of substituting tanks lined with pure tin, in
lieu of iron tanks, for the preservation of the water in a pure state,
saying, “ Your continual experience in these matters will enable
me to decide as to whether a better plan can be adopted in any
future experiments.”


He thus clearly showed that at that time he contemplated
making experiments based on a plan involving the use of water,
but was anxious that the water used for the purpose should be kept
pure. In answer I wrote to him, and said : “ Having an idea of
my own as to the best and most economical plan for accomplishing
the object you have in view, I shall be glad to talk it over with
you,” and I made an appointment for an interview, at which I
stated to him my conviction that my idea of retarding the de-
velopment of ova was practicable, and that if he would procure
me some I would demonstrate it at my own expense.
This I afterwards did by a series of experiments, which
were fully detailed in the Times of July 13, 1863, previously
referred to.
I therein related how I had solved the important question
—could salmon ova that in a state of nature usually hatched
out in about fifty days be retarded for ninety days, the time ordin-
arily taken for a voyage to Australia ?
I preserved ova for 146 days without injury, some of which
I sent to Mr. Ramseottom, sen., at Clitheroe, a two days’ jour-
ney by rail, and these afterwards hatched, and the fry were quite
healthy. These experiments set at rest all doubts as to the possi-
bility of transporting ova to the Antipodes, and utterly refuted the
idea entertained by Mr. Youl and others that a stream of running
water was absolutely essential to preserve their vitality.
My published account of these experiments does not
appear to have reached the colonies. Evidently Sir Samuel
Wilson had not heard of them.
The ova shipped on board “The Norfolk,” by Mr. Youl,
in 1864 was the first attempt on a large scale to utilize the method
I had adopted. In this shipment he availed himself of my discovery,
the result being the successful introduction of salmon and trout into
the rivers of Australia and Tasmania, as stated by Sir Samuel
Wilson. This -was considered a matter of national importance to
the colonies, and to achieve it thousands of pounds had previously
been spent in vain.
I am aware that for many years the success of this attempt
to acclimatize our English fish in the Australian waters was held
to be doubtful. In fact it is only of comparatively recent date
that all doubt on the subject has been removed.
I claim now, as I ever have done, the credit of having
originated the idea, and to be the inventor of the process by
which this grand result has been obtained. Of course, as in the
case of other successful inventions, a host have sprung up to claim
the credit of this.


Some similar idea may have occurred to other persons.
Dr. Gaunt, of Tasmania, claimed to be the first to have suggested
the idea of transporting ova in a state of “ congelation.” The late
Dr. J. E. Gray, of the British Museum, in a letter published in
the Athenaeum of February, 1868, gave to the late Dr. J. Davy
the credit of having been the first to suggest that fish ova might
be transported in ice, and most erroneously took for granted that
the experiment made in the “ Beautiful Star” was in consequence
of a recommendation he had himself made that Dr. Davy’s idea
should be carried out.
However, up to the time I first made the suggestion, I
never read or heard of any one who had suggested or made ex-
periments to establish the fact which I succeeded in establishing,
viz., that the development of fish ova might be so retarded as to
enable them to be transported to any part of the world without
injury. If any such suggestion or experiment had ever been
made, I can only repeat that I had never heard or read of it.
For some years past I have principally lived abroad, and
have no doubt missed seeing many accounts bearing on this
subject that have from time to time appeared in the papers.
When at Nice, however, last winter, I was delighted to read
paragraphs on “ Salmon in Tasmania,” which showed how com-
pletely salmon had become naturalised in the rivers of Tasmania,
and that some had been caught weighing upwards of aolbs. Upon
my return to London, in June last, I had an interview with Mr.
Youl on the subject, when, to my very great astonishment, he
claimed the credit of being the first to suggest the idea of retard-
ing the development of ova, and the mode of packing it afterwards
adopted. Although I called to his mind the whole circumstance
connected with my first introducing the idea to him, he utterly
denied my account of it from beginning to end. I then told him
that, had he lived to become a centenarian, he would never have
thought of adopting my plan, believing so firmly as he did in the
necessity of keeping the ova in a running stream ; and I promised
him I would give him the opportunity of contradicting my asser-
tions publicly, but hinted that he must give other evidence than
that based on his own memory.
After this interview I made it my business to inquire as to
what has been written and done in the matter since I published
the result of my experiments in 1863, and I find that during the
time the experiments were going on, Mr. Youl was publishing,
unknown to me, accounts of them in the Field: also, that he
afterwards published in the Australian papers detailed accounts of
the experiments, always taking the entire credit to himself, by
which Sir Samuel Wilson and many others have evidently been


misled. The result of this has been that Mr. Youl received
public thanks, and has been made a Companion of St. Michael
and St. George, whereas, up to the present, my services have not
been recognised—in consequence, perhaps, of my having pub-
lished my discovery in the English Press only, and deferred doing
so in the Colonial Press until successful results were fully estab-
lished. I have no reason to doubt that when the Australian and
Tasmanian Governments become aware of the obligation they are
under to me for the service I have rendered them in this matter
they will fully acknowledge it.
The fact is, that beyond directing and superintending the
despatch of several consignments of ova to Australia and Tasmania
—about which Mr. Youl was certainly indefatigable—he never
rendered any real service whatever, but in all probability would,
had it not been for my suggestion and discovery, have continued
to waste money by pursuing his own impracticable notions.
I have recently submitted (and shall at a future time pub-
lish, if necessary) irrefutable documentary evidence to the Hon.
P. O. Fysh, late Premier of the Tasmanian Government, to Mr.
Frederick Young, the honorary secretary of the Royal Colonial
Institute, and to other officials.
I might add that my discovery is not only valuable in con-
nection with pisciculture, I am informed that the silk industry of
Italy and France has greatly benefited by the introduction of my
process of retarding the development of ova in breeding the
silkworm.
A species of silkworm from Japan is known to produce a
good cocoon of silk, but the period at which the ova of that silk-
worm are hatched in a natural state does not synchronise with the
time at which the plant growing in Europe upon which it feeds
produces its leaves. The importers of the ova of this silkworm
are now able, by my discovery, to retard without injury their de-
velopment and hatching until the leaves of these plants are ready
for their sustenance. Nature is thus made subservient to science
in a very interesting, remarkable, and useful manner.
Your most obedient Servant,
E. H. MOSCROP.
Royal Institution, August, iBj p.
[Up to this time Mr. James Youl has received the credit
for the invention of packing salmon eggs in boxes, the boxes being
put underneath blocks of ice. Mr. Moscrop now claim:; this
idea. We think it rather strange that Mr. Moscrop has deferred
publishing his claims till the present year, the first experiments


having proved successful many years ago. We shall, however, be
glad to hear Mr. Youl’s version of the story, as, in our opinion,
the transport of salmon to the Antipodes has not as yet assumed
that perfection which we trust future experiments will render
certain.]
The above appeared in “ Land and Water,” August 30th.
On September 6th the following—
SALMON AT THE ANTIPODES.
In commenting upon my letter of last Saturday you express
surprise that I have delayed so long to make public my claim to
having invented the process by which salmon and trout have been
successfully introduced into the rivers of Australia and Tasmania.
I thought the explanation given in my letter sufficient, namely—
that I did at the time publish in the English Press the result of
my experiments, which established the fact that it was possible to
retard the development of fish ova sufficiently long to enable them
to be transported to the Antipodes. The acclimatization of the
fish was a question of time, and for many years—even, I believe,
up to 1876 —it was doubtful if it had been accomplished. The
limes published a paragraph extraced from the Melbourne Argus
only a few days ago, “ Trout in Tasmania,” in which it was stated
that the successful acclimatization of English trout in the streams
of the colony has been now thoroughly established, and that the
time has arrived when it should be placed on official record that
the honour of initiating such acclimatization in Australia is due in
a large degree to Mr. Frank Buckland and Mr. Francis
Francis for having presented the Government some ova in 1864.
I have no desire whatever to lessen the credit due to those
gentlemen, but I wish the Tasmanian and Australian Governments
fully to understand that it was through my discovery and mode of
packing having been adopted that the ova presented to them in 1864
arrived alive. Mr. Buckland most honestly disclaims all credit
as regards being the discoverer that it was possible to retard the
development of fish ova for a lengthened period or for the manner
of packing it for transmission abroad. —E. H. MOSCROP (22,
St. George’s Square, S.W.)


\Copy of Letter fonmrded to the Governor of Victoria.\
22, St. George’s Square, London,
gth September, ißjg.
To His Excellency the Governor of Victoria.
Sir,
I beg respectfully to draw your attention to my letters
published in the London papers —the Morning Post, Aug. 23rd,
and Land and Water, Aug. 30th and Sept. 6th (copies of which
I have forwarded to you) upon the subject of “ Salmon at the
Antipodes,” in which you will see that I claim the credit of
having discovered the process by which Salmon and Trout have
been successfully introduced into the rivers of Australia and
Tasmania.
At the time I made the experiments which led to this dis-
covery, I was the proprietor of the Wenham Lake Ice Company in
London (I ceased to be so about ten years ago), from whence Mr.
Youl procured the ice used for his shipments of ova to Australia.
This explains his introduction to me, and how I came to interest
myself in the matter.
My letter of the 13th July, 1863, published in the Times,
fully recorded the result of my experiments. In it I claimed the
credit of having suggested and established, at my own expense, the
very interesting and important fact that salmon ova could be pre-
served and their development retarded a much longer period than
ever had been supposed possible.
I sent to Mr. Youl a copy of that Times, which he acknow-
ledged with thanks.
As Mr. Youl was mentioned in that letter, I submitted to
him the draft of it before sending it to the Tifnes, which, after
reading, he signed thus, —“ I approve this draft, all the facts of
which lam cognizant of. —James A. Youl.” I have shown the
original draft to the Honble. P. O. Fysh, who has read Mr. Youl’s
signature to it, and compared the draft with the letter as it appeared
in the Times.
Mr. Fysh has also seen Mr. Youl’s letter to me dated
10th August, 1863, relative to information given me by a gentle-
man to the effect that the Tasmanian Government had offered a


reward of ,£IO,OOO to any one who should succeed in introducing
salmon into the Colony. In it Mr. Youl said that my informant
was mistaken in the amount of reward offered, but intimated to
me that if 1 would make the attempt to introduce salmon to Tas-
mania at my own risk, and if successful would claim a reward and
submit iffco him in writing, he would gladly forward it to the
Governor of that Colony; and added—“that, in order to make
the money paid less, you might say you will, in addition to a fixed
sum, take 5,000 acres of land. Any advice or assistance I can
give will be at your service.”
In the london Review , of July 25th, 1863, a journal de-
voted chiefly to science, (subsequently incorporated with the
Examiner), I clearly and distinctly set forth my claim and sent a
Copy of it to Mr. Youl which he acknowledged the receipt of.
Now, during all this correspondence Mr. Youl never once
denied to me the credit of having made the discovery, nor did he
to me assume the credit of it himself. Yet, as I am informed, he
published in the Australian papers full accounts of these experi-
ments, and took the entire credit to himself, saying that he obtained
leave from the Wenham Lake Ice Company to carry out a series
of experiments upon salmon ova—ignoring me altogether.
Still, I do not wish to underrate Mr. Youl’s services, they
have indeed been great, —he did all the mechanical part, and did
it right well, and at no little personal inconvenience. He took
great pains to carry out my suggestions most implicitly, and by so
doing in the consignment of ova he made in 1864, by the ship
“Norfolk,” assured success.
Sir Samuel Wilson in his book on “ Salmon at the
Antipodes ” fully sets forth the great importance that the intro-
duction of salmon and trout is to the colonies, and the many
efforts that have been made to accomplish it. His own labours
have been incessant and happily attended with success, but it can
hardly be denied that that success has had, as its foundation, the
discovery I made, —that it was possible to retard for a long period
the development of fish ova, without injury. It was (lie know-
ledge of this fact, established by me, that encouraged the attempt
to send ova from California, and from one part of the world to
another.
I beg to add that before sending my letters for publication
in Land and Wafer , &c., I offered to let Mr. Yuul see them, but
in the presence of a third party, an offer he failed to avail himself
of..


When Your Excellency is fully satisfied that I have
established my claim to have my services suitably acknowledged, I
have no doubt it will afford you pleasure to do so.
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient Servant,
E. H. MOSCROP.
P. S.—l have just had reprinted my letters to the Times and
London Rrciew of 1863, and herewith inclose Copies of them.
I addressed a similar Letter to the above, to their Excellencies of
Tasmania and New Zealand
The following appeared in “ The Times,” 13th July, 1863
“EXPERIMENTS ON SALMON OVA.”
TO THE EDITOR OF “ THE TIMES."
Sir,
Having established the very interesting and important
fact that salmon ova can be preserved and their developement
retarded a longer period than ever has been supposed possible, I
think it may be useful to those of your readers interested in
pisciculture to know exactly what has been done.
Mr. J. A. You 1., who formerly lived in Tasmania, and
who has taken much trouble and shown much anxiety to get the
salmon introduced into that country, despatched in February, 1862,
a vessel containing salmon ova, under the charge of Mr. Rams-
bottom, Jun. Very elaborate apparatus was constructed, and
expensive arrangements made for preserving and hatching the ova
in their transit; but the experiment was unsuccessful. At my
suggestion a box containing ova packed in moss was placed in the
icehouse on board the vessel, and when opened these ova were
found to be in a healthy condition, and survived the longest, but
as the stock of ice was not sufficient to last the whole voyage, all
the ova perished. On Mr. Youl’s informing me of the result of
this experiment I was satisfied that had the ice lasted long enough


the ova would have reached their destination in good condition,
and I offered to put the matter to the test at my own expense,
and to ascertain how long the ova could be preserved alive in ice.
Mr. Youl said he thought 90 days would be long enough for all
practical purposes, because on the average the voyage to Tasmania
is accomplished in that time. Mr. Youl obtained some ova from
Mr. Ramsbottom, Senr., who, with great judgment and care, pro-
cured and brought them up from Clitheroe on the 17 th of January
ult., five days after they were taken from the parent fish.
Seven boxes, each containing about 200 or 300 eggs,
were packed with wet moss, some charcoal, and ice, and then
embedded in one of our ice vaults. Mr. Ramsbottom, Sen.,
having no faith in the experiment, expressed his decided opinion
at the time that it was impossible for the ova so buried to survive
a fortnight. However, one of the boxes were opened 67 days
after, in the presence of several gentlemen, savants in pisciculture,
and, much to their astonishment, but not to my own, the ova were
found to be quite healthy, and some of them were afterwards
hatched in running water. At the expiration of 90 days another
box was opened in the presence of Mr. Youi,, Dr. Buckland,
Mr. Ramsbottom, Jun., Mr. Johnson, and several other gentle-
men interested in the experiment. The ova were found to be in
excellent condition, and some of them were taken and hatched by
Mr. Johnson, and are still alive; some by Dr. Buckland, which
were hatched at the Zoological Gardens and at the offices of the
Field; and others yere taken to Clitheroe by Mr. Ramsbottom,
Jun., who wrote fine on the 9th June to say that “ there are 27 fish
hatched, and are now living witnesses of the success of this grand
experiment,” and he wished me to send him another box of the
ova. This I did on the 10th of June by ordinary goods train,
taking care to have the box well packed in ice. Although these
eggs were subjected to the shaking attendant on a two days’
journey, Mr. Ramsbottom, on receiving them, wrote me to say
that more than two-thirds had arrived in excellent condition.
Now, it must be remembered that these eggs had been buried 146
days in ice, and had besides been subjected to the double journey
to London and back again to Clitheroe. On the Bth inst. Mr.
Ramsbottom called upon me and gave me the pleasing intelligence
that some of these ova have hatched, and the fry are quite healthy.
The result of this experiment has established the very important
fact that it is not essential, as hitherto supposed, to keep the ova
in a stream of running water to preserve their vitality, but has
proved that they may be preserved any reasonable length of time,
if properly packed, in damp moss, with charcoal, and embedded
in ice. I hope, therefore, and have no doubt that Mr. Youl’s
anxiety and desire to get salmon ova to Tasmania may be success-
fully accomplished ; and, if so, the pleasure I shall feel in having


rendered him this assistance, and the colony this service, will
amply repay me for the trouble I have taken in conducting the
experiment.
I am, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
Office of the Wenham Lake Ice Company,
E. H. MOSCROP.
140, Strand. July nth, 1863.
Before sending the above for publication, I submitted the
draft of it to Mr. Younfor perusal. After reading it, he appended
the following —“/ approve this draft , all the facts of which lam
cognizant of (Signed) JAMES A. YOUL.”
Mr. Ramsbottom, Jun., of Clitheroe, who had charge
of the ova despatched in 1862, by the ship “Beautiful Star,” also
saw the draft, and wrote beneath it — “I quite approve the above
draft , there are now some of the last batch of ova sent me hatched ,
and the fry are in good health. (Signed) W. RAMSBOTTOM.”
I have shewn the original draft bearing Mr. Youl’s and
Mr. Ramsbottom’s signatures to the Honble. P. O. Fysh, late
Premier of the Tasmanian Goverment, to Mr. Frederick Young,
the Honorary Secretary of the Royal Colonial Institute, London,
and to Mr. Frank Buckland, Inspector of Salmon Fisheries.
“FISH HATCHING.”
TO THE EDITOR OF “ THE LONDON REVIEW.”
Sir,
As in your review last week of Mr. Buckland’s book on
“ Fish Culture” you have not distinctly stated that the successful
experiments made of packing salmon ova in ice for various periods
up to 146 days were mine, I would wish to state in your columns
that it was at my suggestion and at my expense that the experi-
ments were tried to ascertain how long salmon ova might be kept
alive, and their development retarded by burying them in ice.
Mr. Buckland knew nothing about this until some time after-
wards ; he was a perfect stranger to me, both personally and by
reputation, and was not introduced to me until the day on which
the first box of ova was opened, viz., 67 days after the com-
mencement of the experiments, and it was with some surprise


that I read in the last annual report of the Acclimatization Society
the credit taken for Mr. Buckland in the following paragraph at
p. 19:—
“ In the course of his experiments, and by the aid of facilities placed
at his disposal by the Wenham Lake Ice Company, Mr. Buck-
land discovered that salmon ova might be frozen in ice for
135 days, and yet retain their vitality. This fact serves to
solve the problem of how to transport salmon to Australia
and other distant parts of the world.”
Until these experiments were tried, at my suggestion,
neither Mr. Buckland, nor any of the savans in Pisciculture,
believed it possible that salmon ova could be preserved and their
development retarded for so long a time.
Mr. Buckland never in any way, directly or indirectly,
assisted me in the experiments ; he merely watched their results,
and no credit is due to him for the discovery.
To Mr. Youi. the credit is due of having induced me to
interest myself in the matter, and he procured the ova on which
the experiments were made from Mr. Ramspottom, of Clitheroc.
Your most obedient Servant,
E. H. MOSCROP.
Office of the Wenliam Latte Ice Company,
140, Strand. July 21 st, 1863.
The foregoing appeared iti the “ London Review,” 35th July , iB6j,
p. 108, with the folloiving remarks by the Editor.
[ln our review of Mr. Buckland’s book we have not
given credit to any individual for the idea of this experiment, but
have only referred to the results. We cannot say what knowledge
the savans in Pisciculture might have had before these experi-
ments as to the power of ice to retard the development of fish
ova, but the writer of the article on the incubation of the python
in March. 1862, in this journal, more than twelve months ago,
had certain knowledge that the action of the temperature in-
fluenced the development of fish. Mr. Moscrop’s practical
experiments are, however, the first that have ever been made to
prove a very important point—the great length of time that re-
tardation of development may, without injury to the ova, be
maintained. As Mr. Moscrop wishes for the credit of these
meritorious experiments we willingly give space in our columns
for his just claim. Ed. “L, R.”]
Mr. Buckland’s attention has been recently drawn to
the above. He honestly disclaims all credit as regards being the


discoverer that it was possible to retard the development of fish
ova for a lengthened period, or for the manner of packing it for
transmission abroad.
The following are the paragraphs alluded to in my letter to
Land and Water (page 6) :
Salmon in Tasmania. —The report of the Salmon Fishery
Commissioners of Tasmania for the year 1877-8 seems to place
beyond all doubt the question whether the samo salar has been
really established in the rivers of that country, for we have re-
corded not merely the capture of a number of small specimens of
grilse, but the spawning under natural circumstances, of adult
fish. In the month of July last year a large female fish, accom-
panied by a male, was observed in the act of spawning on a
newly-formed ridd in the river Plenty. Both fish were caught,
and weighed 2olbs. and iqlbs. respectively. They had nearly
finished spawning, and 300 eggs were removed from the gravel
beds and eventually hatched out in the artificial rearing ponds
belonging to the Commissioners. This is the first time that such
an occurrence has happened in the Plenty; but large shoals of
fish, both adult and immature, have been observed and captured
in the river Derwent which were undoubtedly true salmon, and
not, as has been frequently suggested, sea trout or merely common
trout. Numbers of smolts have been seen in the Derwent, prov-
ing the existence of prolific breeding grounds, and for some time
these fish were caught and openly sold, in ignorance of their
true character as “ mullet.” Indeed, the great difficulty of the
authorities now is to prevent the destruction of the fish. “It is
notorious,” say the Commissioners in their report, “ that fishing,
both by net and by rod and line, goes on throughout the whole
year. The enormous value of the three species of the salmonidie
and the prices paid for them prove a temptation to a breach of
the law which it will be difficult to repress, and it is not likely
that the force of this temptation will soon be allayed. For a
single fish of qlbs. or jibs. sterling is frequently paid, and some-
times twice that amount.” With salmon ( salmo salar), sea trout
(salmo truttaJ, and brown trout (salmo fario), all permanently
established in the waters of the island, Tasmania may become the
centre from which the less fortunate colonies may be supplied,
though it is hardly likely that conditions so favourable to their
existence will be found in any of the Australian Colonies or in
New Zealand as exist in the colder waters of Tasmania. — The
Times , November 20th, 1878.
Salmon in Tasmania.— Salmon acclimatization is un-
doubtedly a success. Several English salmon have been taken
in the Derwent during the month. His Excellency the Governor


succeeded in hooking a fine specimen at New Norfolk. It
weighed 61bs., and measured 26m. in length and 6in. in breadth.
Another fish of the same genus was caught at Ralph’s Bay. It
was remarkably plump, and though 2in. less in length than the
other, measured Sin. in breadth, and weighed close on 61bs. The
largest fish of the season, however, was one caught at New Norfolk
by Mr. J. Raynor. It weighed upwards of 201b5., and was 3ft. in
length. Besides this some salmon smolts came down the trough
leading from the River Plenty to the salmon ponds. This is the
fourth season that smolts have come from the river through the
same troughing, and the fact is particularly interesting, as it proves
that the parent fish must go up the River Plenty (in which river
salmon were first liberated) to deposit their ova. —Australian
Paper. — Times, 22nd January, id/’g.
The following, extracted from Sir Samuel Wilson’s re-
cently-published book, “ Salmon at the Antipodes,” shows the
importance to a country of the culture of salmon as a food-pro-
ducing power :
In 1875 i6,000,0001b5. of tinned salmon were prepared
for exportation on the Pacific coast of the United States.
At the preserving works on the Columbia River, in 1874,
about 33,000,0001bs of salmon were preserved, the produce of one
year from a single river. The value of preserved salmon exported
in 1877 was estimated at one million sterling.
An acre of water can produce more food for man than
will an acre of well cultivated land.
It is a curious circumstance that while Australians are
endeavouring to introduce the different varieties of salmon at the
Antipodes, none of which exist there naturally, this family of
fishes so valuable to the human race has been threatened with
extinction in the old world by a new disease which has attacked
the salmon and trout in some of the rivers of Scotland and in the
North of England.
The greatest triumph of pisiculture is the transfer and ac-
climatization of the salmon and trout from the Northern to the
Southern Hemisphere, through the heat of the tropics. This has
now been successfully accomplished by the aid of ice and steam.
The one to keep down the temperature, and thereby delay the
hatching process, and the other to shorten the time required for
transit.
E. H. MOSCROP.
22, St. George’s Square, S.W.
September, 1879.
