

Z
CORRESPONDENCE
RESPECTING THE
DEPORTATION
Presented to the House of Lords by Command of Her Majesty.
1869.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SONS.
SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS.
Fico67j


LIST OF PAPERS.
1. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond M ••
Four Inclosures.
2. Memorial from Mr. Kay, Convener and Secretary of Committee on Foreign
Missions of the Reformed Presbyterian Church ..
One Inclosure.
3. Mr. Murray to the Secretary to the Admiralty . . .. ••
4. Circular addressed to Her Majesty’s Consuls in islands and on shotes of the
Pacific
5. Consul Henderson to Lord Stanley
6. Consul Wilthew to Lord Stanley
7. Consul Gollan to Lord Stanley ..
8. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond ..
Two Inclosures.
9. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Murray
Six Inclosures.
10. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond ..
One Inclosure.
11. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond ..
One Inclosure.
12. The Earl of Clarendon to Consul March..
13. Mr. Hammond to the Secretary to the Admiralty
14. Mr. Otway to Sir F. Rogers
15. The Rev. E. Hoole, D.D., to the Earl of Clarendon.
16. Mr. Otway to the Rev. E. Hoole, D.D. ..
17. Consul Miller to Lord Stanley ..
One Inclosure.
18. Acting Consul Thurston to Lord Stanley
Six Inclosures.
19. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond ..
One Inclosure. _
20. Memorial from Mr. Kay, Convener and Secretary of Committee on Foreign
Missions of the Reformed Presbyterian Church ..
Two Annexes.
21. Consul-General Wodehouae to the Earl of Clarendon
Two In closures.
22. Mr. Hammond to Mr. John Kay
23. Consul Williams to Lord Stanley
24. Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond
One Inclosure.
25. The Earl of Clarendon to Consul March..
26. Mr. Kinnaird, M.P., to the Earl of Clarendon
Four Inclosures.
27. Mr. Hammond to Sir F. Rogers.
28. Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond
Eight Inclosures.
29. Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Clarendon ~
One Inclosure.
30. Mr. Murray to Acting Consul Thurston.. .
31. Sir F. Rogers to Mr. Hammond
Four Inclosures,
32. Sir F. Rogers to Mr. Hammond ..
One Inclosure.
33. The Earl of Clarendon to Consul-General Wodehouse
34* Mr. Hammond to the Secretary to the Admiralty
35. The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond ..
36. Sir F. Rogers to Mr. Hammond
Eight Inclosures.
37. Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond
Ten Inclosures.
38. Circular addressed to Her Majesty’s Consuls in the Pacific Islands
39. Mr. Otway to Sir F. Sandford .. .. ••
40. The Earl of Clarendon to Consul March..
41. Mr. Otway to the Hon. A. Kinnaird, M.P.
42. Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Otway .. .. •. • •
One Inclosure.
43. Sir F. Sambo-d to Mr. Hammond .. .. •• ••
One Inclosure.
Page
June 16, 1868 1
June 24,
July 8,
July 8,
August 15,
August 24,
September 1,
October 28,
December 9,
December 10,
January 14, 1869 12
March 19, 13
March 19, 14
March 19, 14
March 16, 14
March 24, 15
December 16, 1868 15
December 1,
April 23, 1869 21
April 24, 22
March 17, 1869 27
May 12, 29
December 9, 1868 29
May 15, 1869 30
May 20, 31
May 27, 32
June 5, 34
June 8, 35
March 23,
June 24, 52
June 30, 52
July 7, 53
July 13, 55
July 13, 55
July 16, 56
July 22, 56
July 29, 64
July 31, 71
August 3, 71
August 3, 72
August 4, 73
August 10, 73
August 10, 75


Correspondence respecting the Deportation of South Sea
Islanders.
No. 1.
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr, Hammond. —{Received June 18.)
Sir, Admiralty , June 16, 1868,
I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send you here-
with, for the information of Lord Stanley, a copy of a communication from Commodore
Lambert, dated the 14th April, forwarding copies of correspondence respecting the treat-
ment of South Sea Islanders employed in the beche-de-mer trade by British subjects
belonging to the Australian Colonies.
I am, &c.
(Signed) HENRY G. LENNOX.
Inclosure 1 in No. 1.
Commander Bingham to Commodore Lambert.
Sir, “ Virago ,” Gladstone, March 28, 1868.
I BEG to forward herewith a copy of a letter I received from his Excellency
Sir George Bowen, Governor of Queensland, together with its inclosure; also a copy of
my letter to him on the subject referred to.
I have, &c.
(Signed) H. M. BINGHAM.
Inclosure 2 in No. 1.
Sir G. Bowen to Commander Bingham.
Sir, Government House , Brisbane , Queensland , December 24, 1867.
I HAVE the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter addressed to the Postmaster
of this Colony (Lieutenant E. P. Heath, R.N.) by the Government pilot at Port Hinchin-
brook, in Rockingham Bay, respecting the importation and treatment of certain South Sea
Islanders by the b£che-de-mer traders on the north-east coast of Queensland
As you are about to visit that part of the station, it appears to me desirable that
you should take the opportunity of inquiring into the truth ol the allegation made in this
letter.
I request you to carry out, so far as you may be able, the wishes of my responsible
advisers.
1 havp Rro
(Signed) 'G. F. BOWEN.
[43B]
APR 1993
B 2


Inclosure 3 in No. 1.
Mr . Casey to the Postmaster of Queensland.
gi rj Cardwell, Port Hinchinbrook, November 20, 1867.
HAVING seen by the newspapers that the Government are making inquiries relative
to the employment of South Sea Islanders in Queensland, I trust you will not think 1 am
going beyond my province in making you aware of the following circumstances, gathered
by me from the b£che-de-mer getters during my recent visit to the Coral Sea: —
At the present time there are several vessels employed in the trade having curing
stations in the Bernard, Frankland, Fitzroy, Euca, and Sow Islands. The crews are
chiefly South Sea Islanders, who are brought direct from their homes to the reefs; in some
instances the men have been properly engaged, with the concurrence of their chiefs, but
others have been brought away against their own will, either craft or force, or both, being
used by the skippers to obtain this class of labour.
It is only a short time since the “ Active” (now in these seas) was chased by a
French man-of-war from Deefoo, and only escaped under cover of the night; yet this
vessel afterwards went to the same island during the absence of the frigate and bi ought
natives away in spite of the authorities.
With the exception of a small Queensland firm, all hail from Sydney. The barque
“Thitaris,” schooners “Telegraph” and “Blue Bell,” Captain Banners' vessels, have a
crew of eighty South Sea Islanders ; the schooners “ Edith and “ Active, with ketch
“ Isle of Thanet” and boat, of Godferey’s party, employ as many more.
The firm who hail from Bowen have two small vessels, the “Enterprise” and “North
Star,” and employ about ten South Sea Islanders, most of whom they have enticed away
from their original employers, and, of course, do not teel bound to return them to their
islands. These people, the Messrs. Walton, propose running a craft over for natives about
Christmas.
The “ Fanny Nicholson ” arrived in Bowen in July last with 200 South Sea Islanders.
She was chartered in Sydney by a Mr. Crossly for the purpose.
From statements made by one of her crew, on oath, in the Police-court here, anything
but fair means was resorted to fill the vessel up. Unfortunately, this part of his evidence
was not taken down in writing, as it was not relevant to the case before the Bench.
Mr. Crossly is again on his way to the islands for more natives.
I feel certain that most unjust and wicked means have been used to obtain South Sea
Islanders. In most instances the agreements made are mere farce, and quite different
from the ones signed before the Chiefs, which I am told are torn up on the vessels getting
out to sea, and others substituted. I have heard that Messrs. Banner and Crossly have
been warned, and their lives threatened for breaches of faith with natives they have
engaged, and for kidnapping others.
I am aware that what I have stated would be very difficult to prove, but I think these
circumstances should be known, as Captain Ince, Her Majesty s ship “ Falcon,” attributes
the murders in the New Hebrides as revenge for breaches of faith ot Queensland people
only : whereas, Sydney vessels in the beche-de-mer trade have employed South Sea
Islanders long before this class of labour was introduced into this Colony.
A man-of-war visiting the different fishing stations could easily obtain evidence to
substantiate what I have written. I am afraid by no other means could the truth be
obtained, as the men employed in these ventures are, as Captain Ince describes, rough,
reckless, and almost lawless fellows. Their occupation, as wreckers and traders in these
seas, places them almost beyond proper control and supervision.
Having no other means of making known the extent of the tiaffic in South Sea
Islands, with the means resorted to by the beche-de-mer men to obtain them, I have
ventured to address this letter to you, so that if you deem it expedient you will be able to
afford information on the subject.
1 have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. CASEY.
Inclosure 4 in No. 1.
Commander Bingham to Sir G. Bowen.
gj r “ Virago ,” Gladstone, March 28, 1868.
IN reference to your nfclosure in letter dated the 24th of December, 1867, I have
the honour to inform you that I have made every inquiry possible into the matter of the


South Sea Island labour from the schooners “ Active ” and “ Isle of Thanet,” as well as
from different individuals whom I have met on way to and from Cape York.
From Cape York I gave a passage to a Mr. Jno. de Largey to Lizard Island, who is
part owner of “ Edith,” “ Active,” and “ Isle of Thanet,” together with the fishing gear
appertaining thereto.
] closely questioned him as to the number of South Sea Islanders he had in his
emplojr, the mode of engaging them, and also as to their treatment. He stated he had
about fifty, all told, and that they were volunteers, and well treated ; generally engaged lor
a period of about two years.
On my arrival at Lizard Islands, I sought out and interrogated the man in charge of
the fishing party (Jas. Dove) in the same manner. His statement did not materially differ
from De Largey’s.
I then mustered all the people, having ascertained that none were absent: they
numbered six article men, forty South Sea Islanders, and two women. I questioned them
as to their food and manner of treatment. A number of these men understood English,
and they all appeared satisfied with what they received, viz., rice, fish, and molasses, and
flour, with a small portion of meat; and from all I could gather, they appeared to be well
cared for and happy, many of them coming up to De Largy, shaking hands warmly, and
greeting him most cordially. I landed with him. On my questioning the men as to the
length of time they had been employed fishing, they said ten months, and expected to
remain twelve months longer, when they w T ould go back to their homes.
Taking an impartial view T of the demeanour of these people, I do not imagine that
any of them were brought away from their homes against their will, or maltreated.
I have, &c.
(Signed) H. M. BINGHAM.
No. 2.
Memorial from John Kay, Convener and Secretary of Committee on horeign Missions of the
Reformed Presbyterian Church. —(Communicated to Lord Stanley by Mr. Kinnaird, M.P. ,
June 26.)
The Memorial of the Undersigned humbly showeth,
THAT at the last annual meeting of the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church
in Scotland, when the Report of the Committee on Foreign Missions was submitted, there
was brought under the notice of Synod a statement by their missionaries labouring on the
New Hebrides group of islands in the South Seas, in reference to the piratical and
inhuman practices being carried on by British and other vessels among said group of
islands; and that the Undersigned was instructed in his capacity of Convener and
Secretary of the Foreign Mission Committee to bring said practices under the notice of
Government, in the hope that your Lordship would take steps for the suppiession of a
practice which is not only injurious to the natives of these islands, and detrimental to the
interests of the mission, but which is also a renewing, under another form, of the Slave
Trade, and, consequently, so far as it is carried on under the British flag, brings a stain
upon the honour of our country.
May it please your Lordship, therefore, to peruse the accompanying document, and to
cause that an investigation be made into the working of this traffic; and should the inves-
tigation (as your Memorialist believes it will), issue in confirming the statement ot the
missionaries, to take steps for the suppression of this iniquity.
(Signed) JOHN KAY-
Castle Douglas , N. 8 ., June 24, 1868.
Inclosure in No. 2.
Statements by the New Hebrides Mission regarding the Traffic in Natives as at present
conducted among the Islands of that Group.
FOR some time back, and more especially within the last few years, this mission has
had its attention directed to the fact, that a large number of the natives ot this group are
being carried away in vessels, ostensibly as hired labourers, to Queensland, kiji, New
Caledonia, Taheiti, Torres Straits, and other parts.
With reference to the full extent to which this system is carried on, this mission is


not in a position at present to furnish accurate statistics ; but we are fully aware that a
large number of vessels are engaged in it. Within the course of the last eighteen months,
vessels directly and avowedly engaged in this traffic, have called at the one island, Fate, no
fewer than eighteen times ; and we are aware that as many as 250 natives at least, out of
seven villages of that island are at present absent from their homes, engaged in the service
of white men. We are further credibly informed, that several of the smaller islands in the
northern part of the group are almost entirely stripped of their male population.
The vessels engaged in this traffic —so far as known to us —sail under one or other of
the three flags, the British, the American, and the French. They vary in size, from ships
of 700 or 800 tons, down to small schooners of Bor 10 tons. There are various circum-
stances connected with this system as at present conducted among the islands of this
group, to which we deem it our duty to direct public attention.
1. Many of these natives are taken away fraudulently, and bv force, from their native
lands.
Instance:—Towards the close of last year, a vessel sailing under the British flag,
bound for the Fijis, having on board 1 10 natives from northern islands of this group, lay
to off Fil harbour, Fate. Some of the natives of Pango put off to her in a canoe. They
were able to converse with the natives on board, as some of them had resided on the
islands from which they came. As they neared the vessel, some of the natives on board
warned them not to leave their canoe, adding, “ We came off to her in our canoe to trade
as she lay to off our shores. While we were thus engaged, she bore away ; and when we
attempted to leave, the crew prevented us, and cut our canoes adrift. Thus they stole us
from our land ; and if you board her, you will share the same fate. Nor does she come to
anchor anywhere lest w r e escape by swimming ashore.”
Other instances, of the same kind can be given.
2. Many of these natives suffer great hardship and privation on the voyage.
Instance:—ln the beginning of this year (1867), a small schooner, bound for the
Fijis, having on board thirty-five natives, from different islands of this group, came to
anchor in the harbour of Mucityura. She then started on her voyage ; and after having
been out for a fortnight, returned, reporting that she had met with unfavourable weather,
and that her provisions were exhausted. In fact, the captain ocknowdedges that a number
of the natives were so reduced by famine that they could not come out of the hold ; and
his statement was fully borne out by their wretched appearance.
Other instances of the same kind can be given.
3. Some of these natives suffer severe bodily injury, and even death, at the hands of
those who carry them away, without any redress or any inquiry being made after their blood.
Tiiis naturally leads to their cherishing feelings of revenge, and taking opportunities of
retaliation against white men generally.
Instance:—Towards the close of last year the people of Bmel, Fate, pirated a small
vessel, and murdered the crew, consisting of three white men. When visited by Pier
Majesty's ship “ Falcon” for the purpose of investigating this outrage, they stated, in
sell-defence, that no fewer than four of their men had been barbarously murdered by
persons who had carried them away from their native island—giving names, dates, aud
circumstances.
Other instances of a similar kind can be given.
4. In the case of those who go of their own accord, the nature of the agreements
entered into with them, is very imperfectly, and in most cases not at all, understood by
them ; and there is no real security that we know of, that these agreements shall be
faithfully fulfilled by those who carry them away.
This has been acknowledged by those who carry them away, and has been stated to
us by persons in the Fijis, who have access to natives imported there. It ought to be
borne in mind, that almost every island in Western Polynesia has a distinct language of its
own. The only medium of communication between the natives and the traders is the
English language, and this is understood only by a few, and by them very imperfectly. On
most islands it is not understood at all.
5. Most of these natives, as is well known to us, are kept away from their native islands
for longer periods than they were engaged for.
This statement is fully borne out by individual instances which have come under our
own observation, and by the fact that it is the universal complaint of the natives whenever
we come in contact with them. One case out of many we may mention.
In August 1866, a small schooner of about 10 tons burthen took twenty-six natives
from the Islands of Ernon and Fate to Fiji for a term of six months. Up to this date
(August 1867) not one of those taken from Fate, at least, has been returned.
6. Many of these natives are very poorly paid. For five months’ service on board a


vessel trading in these seas, a native of Fate received four handkerchiefs, a few pipes, and
a few figs of tobacco.
7. The wives of many of those carried away, despairing ot their return, enter mto
relations with, and become the wives of other men. This dissolution of social ties is a
fruitful source of disturbance, of destruction of property, and of war.
Instance : —ln July of this year, a native of Pango, on the Island of Fate, returned
from Queensland. He had been away for about three years. During his absence the wife
he had left behind had become the wife of another man ; on account of which the village had
at the time been brought to the verge of a civil war. Immediately after his arrival in .'uly
last, hostilities began between the two parts of the village inhabited by the friends of the
respective parties. A great deal of angry talk passed between them, threats were made of
setting houses on fire, several plantations were destroyed, and the utmost confusion and
alarm prevailed for some days; when at length the matter was settled by the first husband
consenting to give up his claim to the woman on condition of receiving twenty pigs as a
solatium. But the matter did not end there. A month or so after these occurrences, the
woman, whose second marriage had been the occasion of these disturbances, fled to the
house of her former husband, and was received by him as his wife. r l his naturally led to
the renewal of hostilities between the two ends of the village. And there is every reason
to believe that, but for the presence of the missionary and the intercession of the Christian
party, the matter would not have been settled without bloodshed.
8. In almost all cases the men who are taken away are the strongest and most active
in their villages ; and by the removal of such men, a more than ordinary proportion of old
and infirm people, with women and children, remain, which materially interferes with the
raising of food, the procuring of fish, and other work necessary to the well-being of the
natives.
9. With reference to those who return, we find that those who have been oftenest
and longest away are generally the worst and most dangerous characters.
10. The whole system is, so far as we know, under no adequate supervision or
control; so that the natives of these islands are at the mercy of any man who can cajole or
force them to take a passage on board his vessel.
In these circumstances we have no hesitation in denouncing the trade in human
beings, as at present carried on among these islands, as in violation of the natural rights
of man; as calculated to be injurious to the social, moral, and spiritual interests of the
natives; as demoralizing and degrading to the white men engaged in it ; as, in short, a
revival of the Slave Trade, without that security for the temporal well-being of those who
are the subjects of it, which would be derived from the fact of their being the property of
a man who had invested a large sum of money in their purchase.
Signed on behalf of the New Hebrides Mission—
J, G. PATON, Chairman.
JOSEPH COPELAND, Clerk.
Aneitzum, New Hebrides, September 7, 1867.
No. 3.
Mr. Murray to the Secretary to the Admiralty.
Si r> Foreign Office, July 8, 1868.
I AM directed by Lord Stanley to transmit to you a copy of a Memorial from the
Convener and Secretary of the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Scotland,*
forwarding statements which had been brought to the notice of the Synod by the New
Hebrides Mission respecting a system said to be carried on in the Pacific of kidnapping
native Islanders for the purpose of providing labourers in other places.
The Lords of the Admiralty will see that, as is alleged, this system is worked to a
certain extent under the British flag; and, if so, their Lordships will doubtless concur with
Lord Stanley in opinion that the proceedings of British ships so employed should be
inquired into.
Lord Stanley will forward copies of the papers to the several Consuls stationed in
islands or on the shores of the Pacific, and his Lordship would submit to the Lords of the
Admiralty whether instructions might not be given to all commanding officers cruizing in
that ocean to take every opportunity of collecting information on the subject.
The papers will also be sent to the Colonial Office.
I am, &c.
(Signed) JAMES MURRAY.
* No. 2.


Circular addressed to Her Majesty's Consuls in Islands and on Shores of the Pacific.
Sir, Foreign Office, July 8, 1868,
I AM directed by Lord Stanley to transmit to you a copy of a Memorial from the
Convener and Secretary of the Synod of the Presbyterian Reformed Church in Scotland,*
forwarding statements which had been brought to the notice of the Synod by the New
Hebrides Mission respecting a system said to be carried on in the Pacific of kidnapping
native islanders for the purpose of providing labourers in other places.
You will make inquiry into this matter, and you will report in how far British and
other shipping is employed in this business ; and in the event of your finding the state-
ments correct, you will make the facts known to the British Commander-in-chief on the
station, or to the Captain of any British ship of war touching at the port of your residence.
I am, &c.
(Signed) JAMES MURRAY.
No. 5.
Consul Henderson to Lord Stanley. —(Received September 15.)
My Lord, British Consulate, Panama, August 15, 1868.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Murray’s despatch of the
Bth ultimo, instructing me, by your Lordship’s direction, to report how far British or
other shipping is employed in kidnapping islanders in the Pacific for the purpose of
providing labourers in other places.
I beg to report that this traffic is not carried on by the shipping of any nation at
Panama.
I have, &c.
(Signed) C. A. HENDERSON.
No. 6.
Consul Wilthew to Lord Stanley.—(Received September 30.)
My Lord, Callao , August 24, 1868.
I HAVE to acknowledge the receipt of a despatch from the Foreign Department of
the Bth of July, inclosing copy of a Memorial from the Convener and Secretary of the
Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Scotland, relative to the kidnapping of
natives of the New Hebrides for the purpose of providing labourers in other places.
After due inquiry into the matter, I have ascertained that neither British nor other
shipping is employed in such traffic on this part of the coast, neither are any parties here
aware of its being carried on elsewhere.
Had it been otherwise, it would soon have transpired, and I could not have failed
hearing of it.
The only business in human flesh carried on here, and that to some extent, is in
coolies, from China.
I have, &c.
(Signed) C. WILTHEW.
No. 7.
Consul Gollan to Lord Stanley.—(Received October 15.)
My Lord, Coquimbo, September 1, 1868.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Assistant Under-Secretary
Murray’s despatch of the Bth July, transmitting a copy of a Memorial from the
Convener and Secretary of the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Scotland,
♦ No. 2.


respecting a system said to be carried on in the New Hebrides Islands, of kidnapping the
native islanders for the purpose of providing labourers in other places.
In reply, I have the honour to report to your Lordship that, up to the present time,
I was ignorant of the existence of such a trade, and I am glad to be able to state that no
case has occurred here, since my arrival, of British or other shipping having been so
employed; I may also mention that, as Her Majesty’s ship “ Nassau ” is now in
Coquimbo, 1 had the opportunity of conferring upon this subject with Captain Richard C.
Mayne, C. 8., who informs me that, when on the Australian Station, a few years ago, a
similar rumour h d reached them, but he believed that, upon investigation, it had turned
out to be incorrect, or, at all events, greatly exaggerated.
Should, however, any case come to my knowledge of British or other shipping taking
part in this traffic, I shall immediately report the circumstances to your Lordship, and to
the British Commander-in-chief upon this Station.
I have, &c.
(Signed) ALEX. GOLLAN.
No. 8.
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr, Hammond.—(Received October 30.)
Sir, Admiralty , October 28, 1868.
WITH reference to your letter of the Bth of July, inclosing a copy of a printed
Memorial from the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Scotland, respecting a
system, said to be carried on in the Pacific, of kidnapping natives of the South Sea Islands
for the purpose of providing labourers in other places, I am commanded by my Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty to state, for the information of Lord Stanley, that
Commodore Powell, commanding Her Majesty’s ships in the South Pacific, was directed to
inquire into and report on this subject ; and 1 now inclose a copy of a letter from the
Commodore, dated the 23rd of September last, reporting that about 1,000 Chinese
and 500 natives of the Tubuai group of islands are employed as labourers at the Society
Islands, and that it is probable others will be imported to the Marquesas to clear the
ground and cultivate cotton; also, that several vessels under English colours have been
known to carry such persons to Tahiti.
I also inclose copy of a further letter from the Commodore, dated the 28th of
September, relative to natives of New Caledonia being carried in British vessels to
Queensland.
I am, &c
(Signed) W. G. ROMAINE
Inclosure 1 in No. 8.
Commodore Powell to the Secretary to the Admiralty.
Sir, “ Topaze,” at Callao, September 23, 1868.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated the 10th of
July, 1868, inclosing a Memorial from the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in
Scotland, respecting a system of kidnapping natives said to be carried on amongst the
South Sea Islands; and I beg leave to give the following information on the subject, as
regards the Marquesas and Society Islands, which I last year visited in Her Majesty’s ship
“ Topaze.”
2. Although these islands are under French protection, Nukuhiva is the only one of
the Marquesas Group in which they have any authority or settlement, and at Nukuhiva
they have no large plantations, nor is any foreign labour employed there. The valley of
Taipi has, however, been purchased by a Company, and, should they raise capital, I have
no doubt that Chinese, and natives of the Tubuai Group will be imported to clear the
ground and cultivate cotton.
3. In the Society Islands, Tahiti and Morea only are occupied by the French. In
Tahiti there are several small plantations, and one large one belonging to an English
Company, in which 1,200 foreign labourers are employed in clearing ground and cultivating
cotton. Amongst the other plantations, and at Morea, there may be 300 more, making
1,500 in all. Of these 1.000 mav be Chinese, and the rest natives of the Tubuai Islands,
[4381 * C


or, as they are termed, “ savages.” These latter are much more industrious than the
Kanaka race, and also much darker. No women are imported from China, but a great
many come with the savages.
4. They are all “engages,” that is, under contract to serve a certain number of years
for fixed pay and rations, the pay varying according to the nature of the labourer: a
Chinaman receives about \l. per month, and a “ savage” 12s.
5. I had many opportunities of observing the state of these labourers, and I believe
that they were well treated and quite contented. The French Government exercise a
supervision which is very effective, and well calculated to insure fair dealing between the
master and the labourers.
6. The engage system is so well known to their Lordships, that I need not remark
it is liable to abuse, even where the labourer is brought from a civilized country; but
where he is brought from a place that is quite uncivilized, it is nearly sure to degenerate
into Slave Trade or kidnapping.
7. There are several trading vessels under English colours employed amongst the
islands, and I know they bring “ engages ” to Tahiti, although I have never seen any ot
them on board.
From what I saw of the masters and crews of these vessels, I think it not impossible
that instances of kidnapping, such as are described in the Memorial, may have been
practised under British colours, but nothing of the kind came under my notice.
I have, &c.
(Signed) R. A. POWELL, Commodore and Senior Officer.
Inclosure 2 in No. 8.
Commodore Powell to the Secretary to the Admiralty.
Sir, “ Topaze,” at Callao, September 28, 1868.
WITH reference to my letter dated 23rd instant, I have the honour to report that I
have since been informed by Commodore Count de Marigny, Senior Officer of the French
Naval Forces in the Pacific, that the Governor of New Caledonia has written to him to
request the aid of French ships of war to suppress a traffic in natives- of that island by
British ships. These natives are said to be kidnapped, and then to be carried to the
British Colony of Queensland in Australia. The traffic is described to be a complete Slave
Trade.
I have, &c.
(Signed) ASHMORE POWELL, Commodore and Senior Officer.
No. 9.
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr.. Murray. — (.Received December 11.)
Sir, Admiralty, December 9, 1868.
WITH reference to your letter of the Bth July, relative to a system said to be carried
on in the Pacific of kidnapping natives of the New Llebrides and of other islands in the South
Sea for the purpose of providing labourers in other places, I am commanded by my Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit herewith, for the information of Lord Stanley,
a copy of a letter from Commodore Lambert, dated the sth of October, together with
copies of its inclosures on this subject.
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. G. ROMAINE.
Inclosure 1 in No. 9.
Commodore Lambert to the Secretary to the Admiralty.
Sir, “ Challengerat Sydney, October 8, 1888.
WITH reference to your letter of the 10th of July last, conveying to me the direc-
tions of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to inquire into a system said to be
carried on in the Pacific of kidnapping natives of the New Hebrides and of other islands


in the South Sea for the purpose of providing labourers in other places, I beg to inclose,
for their Lordship’s information, copy of a very full and clear statement on the subject
from Mr. Thurston, Her Majesty’s Acting Consul at Fiji, from which it will be observed
that vessels employed in transporting labourers from other islands to the Fijis are obliged
ts obtain certificates from the Consul, and that on arrival the labourers are submitted lor
examination at the Consulate ; also that when apportioned to a planter they are well
treated.
2. In my letter of the 14th April last, I forwarded a Report from Commander
Bingham, of Her Majesty’s ship “Virago,” relative to the imported labourers employed in
Queensland, and the treatment of them, from which it appears that the native labourers
are well treated in the parts of Queensland where inquiry was made.
3. Having only received your letter above referred to after my return from the
Islands, I am at present unable to answer in detail the allegations contained in the state-
ment made by the New Hebrides Mission; but I will direct the Captain of the first vessel
I am able to send to the islands to make full inquiry on all these points, and the result
shall be reported.
I have. &c.
(Signed) ROWLEY LAMBERT.
Tnclosure 2 in No, 9.
Acting Consul Thurston to Commodore Lambert.
Sir, Fiji , September 4, 1868.
IN reply to your inquirv whether any person had been improperly transported to the
Fiji Islands from other islands of the South Pacific, by British subjects or other persons, I
beg to state no such case has occurred to my knowledge.
The only persons arriving in Fiji from neighbouring groups of islands are settlers and
native labourers.
As exception has been taken in some quarters to the introduction of the latter, and
much misconception upon the subject exists, I have the honour to enclose herewith a
statement of the origin of the immigration and condition of the natives while in Fiji.
1 have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Inclosure 3 in No. 9
Report upon the Introduction of Labourers from the New Hebrides and Sandwich Islands to
Fiji, and their Condition in the last-named Islands.
IN the latter part of the year 1864, the Europeans in Fiji suffering from the want of
steady labour for their cotton plantations, turned their attention to the New Hebrides as a
source of supply.
The schooner “ Van Tromp,” of 30 tons register, was first despatched to that
group, her proprietors first obtaining from Consul Henry M. Jones a sailing certificate.
At Tanna no difficulty was experienced in hiring natives ; and the schooner returned
without delay, reporting her arrival, and submitting the labourers for examination to this
Consulate, in accordance with their instructions.
The Tanna labourers thus brought, served the proprietors of the “ Van Tromp ” lor
three years, when they were paid off, and returned to their own islands.
At the second departure of the “Van Tromp,” another sailing letter was applied for,
and received (Form inclosed). No delay occurred at Tanna, and the schooner returned
to Fiji with a second lot of labourers belonging to the same villages at which the first had
been engaged. Many of these spoke English sufficiently well to make themselves
understood.
During the interval of the first and second voyage of the “Van Tromp ” to the New
Hebrides, other island vessels had proceeded there under the same conditions.
In order to obtain information, and to invite suggestion on future representation, if
the introduction of New Hebrides labour to Fiji gave rise to evils or abuses requiring
investigation, Consul Jones wrote in October 1869 to the Protestant Mission to the
New Hebrides : a copy of the letter and reply thereto I beg to enclose.
C 2


Since the date of the above-named lettter, the Wesleyan Mission in Fiji have commu-
nicated with the Presbyterian Mission at the New Hebrides, offering to co-operate in any
way, if evils existed : no representation has been made to this office that natives have been
improperly embarked in any ship. 1 have inquired of the Mission here whether it lias
any knowledge of an improper traffic, but learn they have no information excepting of the
natives while in Fiji. . .
I regret to learn the Mission in the New Hebrides cannot co-operate with the Mission
in Fiji. »t .
It is quite possible the introduction of foreign labour into Fiji may occasionally be
attended with abuses; but up to the present time they have not been so great as to exceed
my control or power to redress. At present, and for some time past, I have had among ray
native servants intelligent men from the principal groups in the Pacific, including the
.Loyalty Islands, New Hebrides, and Solomon Islands. It is quite possible, therefore, tor
natives to make known to me their grievances, if any exist. Considering that no report
has been received by me from the Mission at the New Hebrides respecting the engage-
ment of natives and their emigration either, that the natives are examined by me on
their arrival here, that up to the present time the natives whose term of engagement has
expired have returned to their island, first, in many cases, being paid in my presence, that other
natives engage with eagerness at the same towns to which Fijian vessels first went, that there
are now in Fiji Tanna men, others who have returned for a second term of employment,
I cannot think the natives are improperly obtained, neither cheated, cajoled, or kidnapped
on board. It is equally as unreasonable to suppose that Europeans would revisit places
at which they have committed such outrages as it is to believe natives would voluntarily
return to Fiji if their services were forced and ill-requited.
Apart from the question of the propriety of importing foreign labour to hiji, I would
observe the position of the natives so introduced differs in one important respect to that of
a Polynesian emigrating to Queensland or other Australian Colony. Climate, diet, and the
manners and customs of Fiji are similar to the New Hebrides, and the New Hebridean on
landing in Fiji, surrounded by a fauna and flora• familiar to him, feels satisfied and at
home.
It has been stated in a petition to his Excellency the Earl of Belmore that the
imported labourers do not return to their islands; and again, that those who do return
are more vicious than they were prior to their emigration and contact with Europeans.
Having had some years’ experience in the South Pacific, I am aware that natives from
the New Hebrides, Sandwich Island, and Espiritu Santo, have long been employed in the
sandal wood and other island trade, subject to the control of rough and often lawless
seamen. The vices of the two races are brought in contact, and the native may sink below
the level of his first degradation ; but an unqualified assertion that contact with an
European renders a savage, very likely a cannibal, more vicious, is unworthy even oi
savage intelligence.
A body of natives arriving in Fiji, and engaged by a respectable planter, are clothed,
housed, and fed well, and taught habits of cleanliness. If, as many of them are, the
planter is a married man, the natives, observing and imitating the manners and customs of
civilized life, rapidly improve, and outwardly appear as civilized as the Fijians.
Contact with renegade wfiites, who may be considered almost on a par with the
natives, may, as I have already remarked, produce an unfavourable result to the latter;
but to assert that contact with a respectable planter, or planter and family, will produce a
like result, is equally absurd as to state that a part is greater than the whole.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON, Acting Consul,
British Consulate , Fiji, September 4, 1868.
Inclosure 4 in No. 9.
Sailing Certificate .
Description of Vessel
Name. —“ Van Tromp.” Stern. —Square.
No. of Decks.—One. Galleries. —None
No. of Masts.—Two. Head.—Broom.
Rig.—F. A. Schooner. Framework. —’Wood.
The proprietor of the above-described schooner, “Van Iromp,’ 32 tons register, of
which Robert Wilson is master and supercargo, has applied to me for this certificate, to


the effect that the said schooner is proceeding to the New Hebrides for the purpose of
engaging natives as labourers for cotton-planting in Fiji.
° The master and supercargo is hereby permitted to convey to Fiji sixty voluntary
labourers from the New Hebrides, and he is hereby warned that this certificate will only
hold good for this present voyage; that he must report his arrival at Levuka, Fiji, to this
office previous to landing any of the voluntary labourers aforesaid ; and that their
engagements must be in conformity with the rules and regulations of this Consulate.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this 16th day of September, 1867, at Levuka.
Fiji.
Inclosure 5 in No. 9.
Consul Jones to the Representative of the Protestant Mission, New Hebrides,
gj r> Fiji, October 4, 1865.
I SHALL feel obliged by your giving me some information on the subject of the
passenger traffic between the New Hebrides and Fiji, and stating it any abuses exist which
require investigation.
There is a great desire in Fiji among the planters to import voluntary labourers from
the New Hebrides, on account of their superior industry and the lower rate of wages they
require in comparison with the Fijians. We have at present about 100 natives of Tanna
and Sandwich receiving wages as labourers in Fiji; but as, on the account of the want of an
interpreter, I am unable to learn from themselves the nature and terms of the agreement
into which they have entered with their employer, and whether it has in every case been
with their own free will and consent, 1 request that you will inform me of any circumstance
which may come under your own observation tending to furnish any evidence to assist in
the examination of this question.
I am, &c.
(Signed) HENRY M, JONES.
Inclosure 6 in No. 9.
The Rev. TV. fcullagh to Consul Jones .
My dear Sir, Aneityum, New Hebrides , October 11, 1865.
IN reply to your favour of the 4th instant I beg to thank you for your kind offer to
render any assistance necessary where traffic would interfere with the mission work, but I
am glad to say that at present no occasion requires any redress. We had the “ Esk ” and
“ Curacoa” here in August, and the “ Curacoa” visited Tanna and punished the natives
at Port Resolution.
Regarding the natives of this island I am not aware of any at present who would go
from home to work ; the population is small now compared with what it was in 1858 or
1859. But I shall inquire from Mr. Inglis, who has been in this island since 1852, and let
you know by first opportunity.
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. G. CULLAGH.
No. 10,
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond. —(Received December 14,)
Sir, Admiralty , December 10, 1868.
I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit here-
with, for the information of Lord Stanley, a copy of a letter of the Ist October, from
Commodore Lambert, reporting the result of inquiries as to whether any persons have
been improperly transported to the Fiji Islands from other islands in the South Pacific by
British subjects or other persons.
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. G. ROMAINF.


Inclosure in No. 10.
Commodore Lambert to the Secretary to the Admiralty.
Sir, a Challengerat Sydney, October 1, 1868.
WITH reference to your letter of 9th December, 1867, conveying to me the
directions of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to make inquiries and report
whether any persons have been improperly transported to the T iji Islands from other
islands in the South Pacific by British subjects or other persons, I beg to state, for their
Lordship’s information, that during my recent visit to the South Sea Islands I made
particular inquiries on this subject from the missionaries, who are the only persons from
whom information can be obtained, especially at the different islands of the New Hebrides
I called at, and I found that labourers are transported from island to island, but not in an
improper manner; they are hired as labourers lor a stated time, paid regular wages, and at
the expiration of their term of engagement sent back to their native island ; several
re-engage after a short stay at their home.
2. This system is also carried on by the French, under the sanction of the Government
of the island, at New Caledonia, where labour is scarce and recourse, therefore obliged to
be had to imported labour.
3. My own impression is that amongst the islands where labour is imported there is
a bond fide contract made with the natives so imported; to Queensland, however, there
may be isolated cases of deception and even ill-treatment, but it is difficult to trace the
proceedings of every vessel trading from the various ports of all the Colonies to the
different groups of islands in the South Pacific. Of course, where missionaries or Europeans
reside, information can be obtained, but in the numberless islands where none reside, and
the want of interpreters, each group and even island having a distinct language and dialeet
of its own, it is impossible to obtain any credible information.
I have, &c.
(Signed) ROWLEY LAMBERT.
No. 11.
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond.—-{Received .January 15.)
Admiralty , January 14, 1869.
I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send you herewith,
for the information of Her'Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and with
reference to Mr. Murray’s letter of the Bth July, 1868, a copy of a letter from Commander
Nares, of Her Majesty’s sloop “Reindeer,” dated the 12th October, relative to the employ-
ment of natives of Harvey’s Group of Islands, as labourers at Malden and Caroline
Islands.
I am, &c.
(Signed) JOHN HENRY BRIGGS.
Inclosure in No. 11.
Commander Nares to Commodore Powell.
Sir, “Reindeer,” Valparaiso, October 12, 1868.
IN reply to your letter dated the 2nd instant, requiring additional information about
the Ranakas employed as labourers at the islands visited by me, I have to inform you that
at Malden they belong to two of the islands in the Harvey’s Group. I lie engagement is
for one year, and the pay 21. a-month, I/, of which they take up in clothing from the
stores on the island. Each set have their own missionary, who is also the head man, and
gets 10s. a-month extra; they are Wesleyans, and give a great deal of money to their
church. They seemed well-contented ; and I had no reason to suspect that they were
taken by force Irom their own islands.
There is a difficulty experienced in feeding them, there being no cocoa-nut trees on
the island, so they have a small vessel running to Tahiti, that brings them cocoa-nuts. I hey
formerly had natives from Penryhn Island, working here, but they did not work so well as
those they have now. At Caroline Island the labourers are also principally Irom Harveys
Group, but they have their wives and children with them ; the pay here is only 1 1- a-month


for the men, and 12 s. to Hs. a-month for the women. They seemed satisfied with their
position, so much so that Mr. Browne told me that some of them wished to settle on the
island. At Malden they have forty-seven natives; at Caroline Island only nine men, the
rest, sixteen, being women and children.
I have, &c.
(Signed) E. NARES.
No. 12.
The Earl of Clarendon to Consul March.
g* r Foreign Office, March 19, 1869-
THERE are certain points connected with the existing state of affairs in the Fiji
Islands to which I think it desirable to call your attention on your proceeding to your
post, in order, if possible, to relieve you hereafter from difficulty as to the couise which
you should pursue. . . . ~ ,
The absence of a constituted Government will deprive you of the support to which a
Consular officer w T mild in ordinary cases look, and as the quarter to which he might
appeal for redress in case of injury.to the interests which he is bound to protect. On the
other hand, the British community with which you have to deal will comprise within its
members many persons who, from their antecedents and habits, may be moie pi one to
adventure than ready to conform to authority. .
As regards the local Chiefs, it is far from ray intention to restrict you from the
exercise of such influence, in the shape of friendly communications and advice, which you
can exert for the benefit of an uncivilized race. But you will clearly understand that it
will be your duty to avoid taking part in any internal dissensions, or in any acts of
partizanship which would compromise the neutrality of your position, and place you
virtually, or even in appearance, in a position of intervention in the disputes amongst the
As regards the British community, I trust that by the exercise of tact and judgment
vou mav be able to deal with most cases when your intervention is called for. Your
powers of jurisdiction are however limited, and it may be a matter for consideration
hereafter whether they may not beneficially be extended. In the meanwhile there are
various matters which will call for your early attention, and amongst these you will find
the speculations set on foot in the Australian Colonies, involving the contemplated
acquisition, bv purchase, of large districts in the islands. As far as Her Majesty s
Government are concerned, steps have already been taken to discourage enterprises of
this description. But from the last information which has reached me the scheme has not
been abandoned, and must be dealt with both with reference to the tendency shown by
British settlers to extend their operations into the interior, and to a growing disposition to
treat the islands in the light of a Colonial possession of the British Crown.
It will be your duty, by your acts and language, to discountenance any such
erroneous notion ; and you will make it to be clearly and publicly understood that your
functions are confined to the limits of your Consular duties in watching over commercial
interests, and, as far as rnav be, contributing to the order and well-being °f the Bntish
community; but that any attempts to form establishments in the interior will be at the
sole risk of the undertakers, who, in withdrawing themselves beyond the bounds of your
legitimate influence, may expose themselves to risk.
It is mv intention to suggest to the Lords of the Admiralty that the Naval Authorities
on the Australian station should be directed, as far as may be consistent with other
requirements, to cause some of Her Majesty's vessels of war occasionally to visit the
islands, for the purpose of giving weight to your representations and supporting your
proper authority. But you will understand that the presence ol such a vessel of war is
not proposed with the view to its being made serviceable for purposes connected with
native feuds, still less that any operations should be undertaken which would be calculated
to show an intention to acquire for this country any territorial possession in the is ands.
I am, &c.
(Signed) CLARENDON.


Mr. Hammond to the Secretary to the Admiralty
gi r? ■ Foreign Office , March 19, 1869.
I AM directed by the Earl of Clarendon to transmit to you, to be laid before the
Lord Commissioners of the Admiralty, a copy of a despatch which his Lordship has
addressed to Mr. March,* who has been appointed as Her Majesty’s Consul at Fiji, con-
taining general instructions for his guidance both as regards the native Chiefs and the
British community settled in the islands.
Lord Clarendon does not doubt that the Lords of the Admiralty will concur with him
in the opinion that it will be desirable that the British Naval Authorities, as well as Her
Majesty’s Consul should, as far as may be practicable, confine themselves to matters in
these quarters where the legitimate interests of British subjects are concerned, and should
abstain, except in very extreme cases, from the employment of force, and from any
measures which could give a colour to the erroneous notions current in regard to terri-
torial acquisition in the island.
Lord Clarendon therefore desires me to request that you will suggest to the Lords of
the Admiralty that the Naval Authorities on the Australian Station should be informed
of the nature of the instructions addressed to Mr. March, and should be instructed, as far
as may be consistent with the exigencies of the service, to give to him the countenance and
support which will be afforded by the occasional visit of one of Her Majesty’s vessels
of war.
I am, &c.
(Signed) 'E. HAMMOND.
No. 14.
Mr. Otway to Sir F. Rogers.
Foreign Office , March 19, 1869.
WITH reference to your letter of the 26th ultimo, 1 am directed by the Earl of
Clarendon to transmit to you, to be laid before Earl Granville, copy of an instruction
which has been addressed to Mr. March,f on his appointment as Her Majesty s Consul in
the Fiji Islands, together with copy of a letter which Lord Clarendon has caused to be
addressed to the Admiralty in regard to the naval support which should be given to
Mr. March.f
Lord Granville will perceive that Lord Clarendon has reserved for the present his
decision as to the question wdiether it is desirable to take steps for an extension of the
powers entrusted to Mr. March, as a British Consul.
I. am to request that you will suggest to Lord Granville that it may be desirable that
the attention of the Governors of the adjacent Australian Colonies should be called to the
limits within which the operations of the British Consular and Naval Officers will be
restricted ; and that they should again be cautioned against any measures such as those
lately contemplated in Australia for the acquisition of territory in the Fiji Islands. And
this caution appears to Lord Clarendon to be the more necessary as his Lordship has
observed that Mr. Evans, one of the original speculators, arrived at the islands furnished
with a letter of introduction to Acting Consul Thurston from the Governor of
Victoria.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ARTHUR OTWAY*
No. 15.
The Rev. E. Boole , D.D., to the Earl of Clarendon. — (Received March 20.)
Wesleyan Mission House, Bishopsgate Street Within , London,
My Lord, March 16, 1869.
I AM directed by the General Committee of the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary
Society to request your Lordship*s attention to the circumstances of the settlers, subjects
♦ No. 12.
f No. 13.


of Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, in the group of islands in the South Seas,
known as the Fiji Islands. These settlers are reported to be about 1,000 in number,
chiefly emigrants from the Australian Colonies; they have taken advantage of the change
effected among the natives of the islands by the civilizing influences of Christianity to
enter on the purchase and cultivation of land, and to carry on a profitable trade. In the
pursuit of these objects they appear to be successful, and a great increase has been effected
in the export of cotton and other valuable productions of the islands. It is much to be
lamented, however, that there is no authority in Fiji to control the conduct or regulate the
transactions of these settlers. The native Governments have no authority over white men,
and the consequence is that many abuses exist for which there is no remedy. Her
Majesty’s Consul, it is understood, has no magisterial power, and in case of appeal being
made to him can afford no relief to the white settlers when they contend with each other,
or to the natives, if they happen to consider themselves oppressed. Your Lordship is
aware that the sovereignty of the Fiji Islands was offered to the British Government some
years ago, and was declined. If there was any hope of the offer being accepted it would
again be made. But if the sovereignty of these valuable inlands be declined, it is hoped
that Her Majesty’s Government will devise some method by which British subjects in the
islands may be made amenable to British law.
Your Lordship will estimate the interest which the Committee of the Society has in
those islands, when you are informed that there are now among the natives, under the
care of about twelve English missionaries, 107,000 attendants on public worship, 56,000
scholars in the schools, 24,700 members in communion, 1,400 native teachers, and
45 native ministers. The Society has expended on this work more than 120,000/., and
in carrying on the work of the mission many valuable lives have been exposed to risk and
loss. The mission is still carried on with vigour, and there is hope that the entire
population of the islands will eventually become Christian,
Under these circumstances the Committee is persuaded that the subject now brought
under your Lordship’s notice will have your kind and attentive consideration.
Requesting leave to submit to your Lordship’s judgment whether Her Majesty’s
subjects, settled in the Fiji Islands, do not require the presence of an able Consul, such as
Mr. Jones, the predecessor of the gentleman now filling that office, and perhaps also a
Commandant or Magistrate, with authority from the Home or Colonial Government for
the preservation of peace and good order, I remain, &c.
On behalf of the General Committee of the Wesleyan
Methodist Missionary Society,
(Signed) ELIJAH HOOLE, D.D., Secretary.
No. 16.
Mr. Otway to the Rev. E. Hoole, D.D.
Sir, Foreign Office , March 24, 1869.
WITH reference to your letter of the 16th instant, I am directed by the Earl of
Clarendon to request that you will state to the General Committee of the Wesleyan
Methodist Missionary Society that the question as to the best mode of providing for
jurisdiction over the British community in the Fiji Islands is one in regard to which great
difficulties exist, but the matter is receiving Lord Clarendon’s best attention.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ARTHUR OTWAY.
No. 17.
Consul Miller to Lord Stanley.—(Received April 6.)
My Lord, Papeete, Tahiti, December 16, 1868.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Murray's despatch of
the Bth of last JuW, covering a copy of the Memorial which had been addressed to your
Lordship by the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Scotland, submitting
statements from the New Hebrides Mission respecting a system said to be carried on in the
Pacific of kidnapping native Islanders for the purpose of providing labourers in other-
places.
[43B] U


Mr. Murray’s despatch furthermore brings me your Lordship’s orders to make inquiry
into this matter, and to report in how far British or other shipping is employed in this
business, adding that, in the event of my finding the statements correct, I am to make the
facts known to the British Commander-in-chief on the station, or to the captain of any
British ship-of-war touching at this port.
I have the honour to report to your Lordship, in reply, that I cannot learn that any
natives of the New Hebrides Islands have been brought to Tahiti as labourers; and with
regard to the complaints preferred by the Missionaries that kidnapping is practised by
vessels resorting to that group in quest of native labourers, I regret to say that the rareness
of the communications between this place and those distant parts has prevented me from
obtaining hitherto any positive evidence touching the accuracy of the statements adduced
by the Missionaries as to the abuses attending the traffic in question at the New
Hebrides.
But I feel it my duty to state to your Lordship that the rumours which have from
time to time reached this island afford, I think, ground for fearing that, at all events
amongst the still savage or half savage islands in the Pacific, fraud and deceit have too
often been employed both in procuring and in engaging native labourers. In some of these
cases the aid even of local chiefs has, it is said, been secured by a bribe; in others, the
opposition of authorities or relatives would appear to have been surmounted by stratagem,
and when men and women in sufficient numbers had been sent or enticed on board, the
ship, it is reported, has made sail, leaving the execution of the written contracts of service
of the deluded islanders to be accomplished at convenience during the voyage.
The absence of adequate supervision over transactions wherein the needy agents of
recruitment usually employed are in general remunerated in proportion to the number of
labourers they succeed in obtaining, renders it in fact almost inevitable that abuses must
occur in the engagement of ignorant and unprotected natives who, on arriving at their
destination, w ould seldom find themselves capable of explaining, much less of substantiating,
any act of fraud (not to say violence) of which they might have been the victims. On the
other hand, when a quarrel amongst the agents employed in this business, or with any of
the seamen serving in the ship, threatens to lead to some revelation of such misdeeds, the
credibility of the outspeaking party would probably be assailed by some counter-charge of
misconduct or insubordination.
This same want of disinterested control at the remote place of embarkation, leaves
besides much room for the overcrowding of the ship, as likewise for her supplies being
insufficiently cared for; and I consequently apprehend that there must have been cases
giving just cause for the complaint made by the missionaries that many of the natives
suffer great hardship and privation on the voyage, and that they are too much at the mercy
of any man who can cajole or force them to take a passage on board his ship.
The preceding remarks are of course not intended to apply to certain limited
operations for the recruitment of labourers for Tahiti, which have been carried out by
French Government vessels or under the immediate superintendence of Government
officers, at the Hervey Group, Penrhyn Island, &c.; neither are the remarks applicable to
instances in which natives of those places in small numbers have been engaged by private
parties under contracts to serve for short periods either at Tahiti or at Malden Island;
since in all these cases it is believed that the engagements have been regular and voluntary,
and that the natives have understood the nature of their contracts, upon the completion of
which they for the most part return to their homes, where fresh hands are ordinarily found
ready to replace them.
With respect to the labourers introduced from the remoter and so-called savage
islands, the number hitherto brought therefrom to Tahiti, has not been very considerable;
the following statement for the past two years being believed to comprise the whole,
viz:—
In the year 1867, two French barques (the “Nereid” and the “Tampico”) and one
British schooner (the “Zillah” of Auckland, New Zealand) brought, amongst them, from
the Gilbert islands about 200 natives of that group as labourers for a cotton plantation on
this island, where they still continue to be employed. But these voyages seem to have
proved unprofitable to the vessels engaged on them, either by reason of the great length of
the passages or from the small number of the passengers obtained, and no further
undertakings of the kind have hitherto been attempted between Tahiti and the Gilbert
group.
Up to this date (December 16) in the now closing year 1868, there have been
introduced—by a brig called the “ Rona,” belonging to the port of Lyttelton, New
Zealand, W. H. Hayes, master —about 150 natives of Niue or Savage Island, under
contracts of service for a term of from two to three years, and at wages averaging \l. per


month each person, besides food and lodging. These labourers, who are employed on
Tahiti and its neighbouring dependency, the Island of Moorea, have not to my knowledge
complained of having been deceived in their engagement, or ill-treated during the voyage
hither; but from the within extract of a letter written by the resident British missionary
at Niue, and recently communicated to me by the resident British missionary at this place,
it would seem that the removal of these people from Savage Island, particularly the
clandestine departure of the women, was effected against the laws of the island, and
contrary to the will of the native authorities.
It may be proper for me here to mention that, by a local regulation in force at Tahiti
relative to immigrants from islands in the Pacific, it is required that, when a vessel arrives
here with such description of immigrants on board, a Government officer shall visit the
ship, inspect the passengers, and hear any complaint they may have to prefer, and that
when the proper local authorities shall have been satisfied that the contracts of service are
regular, and that the parties fully understand the conditions thereof, such contracts shall
be sanctioned and registered.
And, generally, French and foreign vessels employed in bringing labourers to Tahiti,
are bound to comply with the provisions of the second title of the French Decree of the
27th March, 1852, concerning the immigration of labourers into the colonies of France.
But as these latter provisions apply to the conveyance of emigrants, under licence, from
countries where there is a special Government Agent or a Consular officer to superintend
their due recruitment, engagement, and embarkation, no further check, beyond that of the
verification of the contracts of the islanders on their arrival required by the previously
mentioned local regulation, is afforded by the application here of the French Decree,
against those abuses wffiich are to be apprehended so long as the recruitment, engagement,
and embarkation of the ignorant natives of the remote islands, where no regularly
constituted authority exists, shall be permitted to be undertaken by the interested parties
without immediate and efficient control.
My careful attention will continue to given to this matter, and should any case of
kidnapping or other serious proved abuse in the Traffic come to my knowledge, I shall
not fail to give prompt notice of the facts to the nearest British Naval authority.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. C. MILLER.
Inclosure in No. 17.
The Rev. W. Lawes to Rev. G. Morris.
(Extract.) Savage Island, Niue, October 20, 1868.
CAPTAIN HAYES is here (in the “Rona”) waiting for his schooner the “ Samoa,”
daily expected from Samoa. As soon as she arrives he is going to buy a lot of pigs and
send them on direct to Tahiti. The “ Rona ” is then going to Samoa and will call here
again on her way to Tahiti for a cargo of pigs—pigs are however, a secondary object, the
primary one 1 have reason to believe is a cargo of men and women.
These men-stealing vessels from Samoa, Tahiti, and Queensland, are the greatest
trouble and hindrance we have. They will be the ruin of Niue I wish you to
understand how the men and are obtained. You may be able to help us by
correcting mistaken notions in Tahiti —I do not mean to say that those taken are taken
against their will. They go of their own free will, but against the will of the authorities,
who have made laws and done everything in their power to prevent their going. Most
who go are lads who have run away from their parents. The women, Captain Hayes says
himself, he stole. The boat was sent in by appointment in the night, the women swam
off to it; many of them are mothers and wives. They have all left their children uncared
for, several of" their husbands are in Samoa. Their poor children are left to the mercy of
any who may compassionate them.
I am told the French Government have made very stringent laws respecting the
importation of coolies. It is more than likely that Captain Hayes will evade those laws
if they are any hindrance to him in his traffic. The natives say he wants 200 of them
this time; if he gets them it will be in spite of the native authorities.


Acting Consul Thurston to Lord Stanley. —(Received April 23, 1869.)
My Lord, Fiji, December I, 1868.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s despatch of the
Bth of July last, inclosing copy of Memorial from the Presbyterian Church Mission
Society touching the emigration of natives from the New Hebrides and other neighbouring
islands; and directing me to report thereon.
I beg my Lord, to state that, in consequence of a like memorial having been made to
his Excellency the Governor of New South Wales, I made, in anticipation of your
Lordship's instructions, a Report upon the subject to Commodore Lambert in September
last.
To the charge of cajoling or kidnapping natives from their homes for the purpose of
forced and ill-requited service, I have to assure your Lordship no such criminal practices
can be imputed to British subjects or others residing within this Consular district. Natives
from Tanna, Fate, and other islands, have during the past three years emigrated to Fiji,
but under circumstances which no degree of mission zeal is warranted in terming “traffic
in human beings.” The personal attention of Captains Luce, Blake, Hope, and Lyons,
while commanding on this station was directed to the system existing here, and I am not
aware either of those gentlemen observed anything to which more than trifling objection
could be made.
I beg, my Lord, herewith to forward Inclosures 1 to 6 in order that your Lordship may
be in possession of the fullest information upon the subject under notice so far as Fiji is
concerned. To the best of my knowledge and belief, no natives have been introduced to
this group of islands since the end of the year 1865, without passing before me, and in
no case did the result of my examination warrant a supposition the people had been
enticed awav or embarked with violence.
in one case some Tanna men had been engaged for two years, but on arriving in Fiji,
they were pressed to engage for three, the leading man at once demanded to be taken to
the British Consulate, where before his employers he stated his case in very fair English
and obtained the support he sought. That they will obtain every protection from this
office is well known to these people on their arrival in Fiji. If they are any way aggrieved,
ill-treated, ill-fed, or kept after "the expiration of their agreements, they troop off in a
body to lay a complaint at this Consulate, or return direct to their own islands, not
hesitating to use any boat or small vessel they can obtain possession of. On the whole,
my Lord, I have not found the natives from the New Hebrides, &c., to be, as a rule, of
that helpless class described by your Lordship’s Memorialists. In many cases the sum
to be paid as wages does not appear to be clearly understood by natives emigrating hither,
they are unacquainted with coin, and have extravagant ideas as to the value of cotton
goods and cutlery. They appear, my Lord, quite happy to exchange the miserable life
passed on their own islands, which according to mission report is one of utter privation,
fear, and savagery, for a more peaceful and better-led existence in Fiji.
Fiji lies in the same parallel of latitude as the New Hebrides, is of the same volcanic
formation and possesses the same Mora. Thus the New Hebridean on landing here meets
upon all sides natural forms familiar to him, enjoys a climate as genial but less sickly than
his own, and subsists entirely upon his native food. He also becomes acquainted with a
race having a common origin with himself, but whose present condition —the result of
Christian training and advancing civilization —is so superior that I venture to think, my
Lord, he cannot fail to be benefited by the contract.
The following remarks may tend to show your Lordship’s Memorialists have drawn
conclusions somewhat hastily ;
1. The masters of Fijian vessels proceed regularly to the same villages at the New
Hebrides from whence they first obtained voluntary labourers, and have never failed
to engage the men they require. If the masters or crews (averaging eight persons all told)
of these vessels had been guilty of a tithe of the enormities attributed to them, they would
not dare return with such confidence to the scenes of former outrages. If the natives
previously engaged never returned, or were ill-requited, treated, and fed, it is not
reasonable to suppose others would so confidingly trust themselves with Europeans
again.
2. In four or five cases men have returned to Fiji for a second term of engagement.
Three weeks ago a party of Tanna men arrived from that island, to which they had
returned last year. On arrival they requested my influence with their former employer at
this port to procure a re-engagement. They are now employed sorting, ginning, and
pressing cotton with the skill acquired in Fiji two years ago.


3. Some planters, fully confident their labourers are well satisfied with the treatment
and payment received, have sent, a month or two prior to the term of engagement ending,
one of their party back to their island by a returning ship, in order that a second gang of
men may be in readiness to embark on the return of the first party.
This is certainly not fraud, false, or in any way calculated to produce “ privation,”
“bodily injury,” or “ death but is the system —if the system be permitted at all by Her
Majesty’s Government—which will be generally followed by planters in Fiji.
In one instance adduced by your Lordship’s Memorialists it is stated certain natives
in canoes approaching a ship near their island were warned off by those on board, who,
advising them not to venture on board, declared they had been forcibly taken from their
island, since which time the ship never came to anchor, lest they should escape by
swimming.
From this, my Lord, I conclude the interlocutors were a cognate people, with no, or
little, difference of dialect, and most probably friendly. That the ship was very near the
land, perhaps within a quarter of a mile, because the boldness of the land permits the
close approach of a ship, and, further, because the natives possessing only insignificant
canoes never venture far from land. The natives might, therefore, had they chosen,
have jumped overboard. I have never yet, my Lord, after many years’ acquaintance
with Polynesian savages, including Papuans, observed it made the slightest difference to
a native whether he leapt overboard from a ship under way, or waited until the anchoring
of the ship permitted him to depart in a more orderly manner.
On the w T hole, my Lord, I venture to think most of the instances given are less fact
than a reflex of missionary fears.
While thus expressing to your Lordship my conviction no semblance to slavery can
be traced in the relations existing here between employer and employed, I would state,
for your ‘Lordship’s information, no authority exists in Fiji for the due protection of
these people, should necessity arise, or Consular authority be resisted. If magisterial
powers were conferred upon this Consulate, which from the increasing interests of British
settlers appears to be desirable, as I have already had the honour to report, it would meet
the requirements of the case, viz., power to compel the fulfilment of contracts.
Should your Lordship desire to receive personal information on this or other matters
relating to Fiji, I beg permission to name Captain Charles Webley Hope, now in England,
late of Her Majesty’s ship “ Brisk,” a gentleman who by close inquiry and examination is
better acquainted with the commercial, social, and political condition of this group of
islands than any other officer in Her Majesty’s service.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Inclosure 1 in No. 18.
Consul Jones to the Representative of the Protestant Mission , New Hebrides , October 4, 1865.
[See Inclosure 5 in No. 9. |
Inclosure 2 in No. 18.
The Rev. W. McCullagh to Consul Jones, October 11, 1865.
[See Inclosure 6 in No. 9. |
Inclosure 3 in No. 18.
Certificate.
THE proprietors of the Cutter “ Lily,” of which Arthur K. Rae is master and super-
cargo, and Benjamin Pease is sailing-master, have applied to me for this certificate, to the
effect, that the cutter before-mentioned is proceeding to the New Hebrides for the purpose
of engaging natives as labourers for cotton-planting in Fiji.
The master and supercargo is hereby permitted to convey to Fiji, forty (40) volunteer
labourers from the New Hebrides; and he is hereby warned, that this certificate will only
hold good for this present voyage, and that he must report his arrival at Levuka, Fiji, to
this office, previous to landing any of the voluntary immigrants aforesaid.
Given under my hand and the seal of this Consulate, this sth day of July 1865.
(Signed) HENRY M. JONES,
Her Majesty's Consul in Fiji and Tonga ,


Description of the Vessel aforesaid ,
Name of Ship.—“ Lily.” Stern.—Square.
No. of Masts.—One. Galleries.—None
No. of Decks.— One. Head.—None.
Rig.—Cutter, Framework.—New Zealand timber.
The cutter so described cleared for the New Hebrides on the sth day of October,
1865, and this certificate is delivered to her supercargo on the same date.
(Signed) HENRF M. JONES, Consul
(Official Seal.)
Inclosure 4 in No. 18.
Passengers from Vate or Sandwich
Ditto, Engmi, or Three Hills
Ditto, Mow, or Montague Island
Ditto, Tanna, Port Resolution
Landed in Fiji


Inclosure 5 in No. 18.
Form of Contract.
1 HAVE this day engaged as farm-labourers the men, per ship ( ), whose
names are mentioned in the margin, for a term of three years from the date hereof, paying
them, by way of wages, the sum of 6/. sterling for the term, or an equivalent in trade.
And I further agree to provide the said labourers with good and sufficient lood,
lodging, and clothing; to provide medicine, and medical attendance, in cases of sickness,
at my own expense, and at the expiration of the above term, to provide them with a tree
passage back to their own islands.
Inclosure 6 in No. 18.
List of Vessels importing Free Labourers into Fiji, &c.
From whence'.
Name of Vessel.
Official
Number.
*+* rA
O £
fc So
—O c
6 |
2 ci
£ Oh
Master.
-a
O
S
of Registry.
of Certificate.
of Return.
Van Tromp .
Lily
Ditto
Lizard
Van Tromp .
Sea Witch .
Ida
Sea Witch
Australian Maid
Sea Witch .
Reliance
Eliza Jane
Eagle
Young Australian
Unknown
Local
Ditto
Ditto
Ditto
Unknown
43 215
46,456
43.215
36,741
43.215
31,832
Local
50,972
Sydney
Sydney
Ditto .
Ditto .
Lyttleton
Sydney
Auckland
Auckland
Wilson
Rae
Ditto ..
Rebman
Summerville
Wilson .
Hovell .
Conaldo
Hovell .
Stolz ~
Hovell .
Austen .
Summerville
Frost ..
Hovell .
Nov. 11, 1864
July 5, 1865
Oct. 5, „
Oct. 26, ~
Mar. 28, 1866
July 3, „
May 22, ~
Aug. 14, „
Dec. 28, ~
Dec. 30, ~
July 15, 1867
July 14, „
Sept. 5, „
Nov. 18, ~
Aug. 11, 1868
Nov. 9, 1865
Dec. 13, ~
June 21, 1866
Sept. 17, ~
Dec. 14, ~
Nov. 20, ~
June 10,1867
Jan. 20, 1868
Oct. 5, 1807
NoV. 9, ~
Jan. 17, 1868
Nov. 28. „
* Vanua Lava,
No. 19.
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond—(Received April 26.)
gj r Admiralty, April 23, 1869.
I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to send herewith for
the information of the Earl of Clarendon, extract from a letter of Commodore Lambert,
dated 11th February, reporting his proceedings, and the movements of the ships under
his orders on the coast of New Zealand.
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. G. ROMAINE,
Tnclosure in No. 19.
Commodore Lambert to the Secretary to the Admiralty .
(Extract.) February 1 1, 1869.
ROSARIO arrived at Sydney, on the 11th January, from Auckland. 1 have sent
orders to Commander Palmer to proceed, as soon as he has finished refitting, &c., to New
Caledonia, and make full inquiry into the alleged kidnapping of natives fiom thence,
obtaining from his Excellency the Governor, all information on that subject; then to
proceed to the New Hebrides and communicate with the missionaries the different
islands, relative to the traffic in natives between island and island, endeavouring if possible
to find out the names of all the vessels engaged in this traffic, by whom commanded, under
what colours, from what ports they sail, and to what port they are bound; after which, to
proceed to Fiji, and communicate with Her Majesty’s Acting-Consul, on the subject of a


letter received from him respecting the importation of a cargo of natives from the
Kingsmill group.
No. 20.
Memorial to the Earl of Clarendon, Her Majesty’s Secretary for Foreign Affairs.
The Memorial of the Undersigned humbly showeth —
THAT, on the 24 th day "of June, 1868, he, as Convener and Secretary of the Foreign
Missions of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Scotland, did, by order of said Church
assembled in Synod, memorialize, in the following terms, Lord Stanley, at that time
Secretary for Foreign Affairs : .
“That at the last annual meeting of the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church
in Scotland, when the Report of the Committee on Foreign Missions was submitted, there
was brought under the notice of Synod, a statement by their missionaries labouring on the
New Hebrides group of islands in the South Seas, in reference to the piratical and inhu-
man pratices being carried on by British and other vessels among said group of islands :
and that the Undersigned was instructed, in his capacity of Convener and Secretary of the
Foreign Mission Committee to bring said practices under tne notice of Government, in the
hope that your Lordship would take steps for the suppression of a practice which is not
only injurious to the natives of these islands, and detrimental to the inteiests ot the
mission, but which is also a renewing of the Slave Trade under anothei foim, and, con-
sequently, so far as it is carried on under the British flag, brings a stain upon the honour
of our country.
“May it*please your Lordship, therefore, to peruse the accompanying document, and
to cause that an investigation be made into the working of this traffic; and should the
investigation, as your memorialist believes it will, issue in confirming the statements ot
the missionaries, to take steps for the suppression of this iniquity.”
Your memorialist begs to state that in consequence of the above memorial presented
to Lord Stanley, on behalf of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, by the Honourable
Arthur Kinnaird, M.P., investigations have been made as to the kidnapping of natives
from the Hervey Group and from Pcnrhyn Islands, but that no inquiry has as yet been
made as to the New Plebrides, where the system flourishes with greater vigour; and where,
through the feelings aroused among the natives through its continuance, not only are the
interests of the mission imperilled, but the commercial value of the islands, present and
prospective, destroyed.
Your memorialist begs to call your Lordship’s attention to an accompanying letter
from one of the missionaries of the Reformed Presbyterian Church, who has been for
twenty years labouring on Aneityum (Rev. John Inglis, a man or well-known probity of
character, and moderation of statement). From this document your Lordship will learn
the extent to which the iniquitous traffic is carried on.
May it please your Lordship, therefore, to adopt such measures as will effectually
repress and put down this clamant evil.
V (Signed) JOHN KAY,
Convener and Secretary of Foreign Missions to the Reformed
Presbyterian Church in Scotland.
Castle Douglas , Scotland, April 24, 1869.
Annexes.
Pamphlet entitled The Slave Trade in the New Hebrides,” by the Rev. John Inglis , one of
the Missionaries of the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland.
I HAVE recently returned from a six weeks’ voyage in the u Day-spring,” and I take
this opportunity of communicating a few facts that have come under my own cognizance,
and a few observations on the subject of the Slave Trade generally.
When we arrived at Futuna, Mr. Copeland found that, during his absence at the
Annual Missionarv Meeting on Aneityum, a vessel had been there and taken away six
natives. When we came to Aniwa, Mr. Paton told us that one Sabbath-day lately the
captain of a vessel had sent in a boat for natives ; he himself went down to the shore and
asked the name of the ship and the name of the captain; the man in charge of the boat
said he had only lately joined the vessel, and he did not know the name of either.


Mr. Paton, however, explained to the natives the object for which the boat had come, and
advised them to stay at home on their own island, which they did. Bat had he not been
there, some ot them would have been ignorantly decoyed away. W hen we came to the
south side of Tanna, I asked our Aneityum teachers if many of the natives had been
taken away from that district. “ Many ! ” they said, “ Why, they are all away ; all the
youno- men are away—there is not one left.” This, of course, was an exaggeration—their
usuaf way of putting a matter strongly. But it indicated clearly that a great number of
the young and strongest of their men had been taken away ; and we know that the same
thing has been going on round the whole of Tanna. When we came to Port Resolution,
we found two white men living there. They had been previously living on the north end
of Tanna; but a party from Brisbane, well known in the trade, had come and taken away
two sons of the Chief, at which the father was so angry, that he drove away the two
men, and they had to break up their establishment and leave the place. When we came
to Erromanga we saw a small vessel in the distance, creeping along the coast, and sending
in her boat here and there; but she did not come near the mission station. N vV e subse-
quently learned that she had got about twenty natives on the one side of Erromanga. She
got two in one hay, four in another, three in another, and so on ;; but all undei false
pretences. She had on hoard a white man, well known among these islands; he told them
that this was Captain H.’s vessel—a captain well known about Erromanga, many of the
natives having gone in his vessel to Santo and the neighbouring islands, and had been
always brought back at the time specified—generally the end of the season. When they
heard this they went unsuspiciously aboard ; but when once on board they weie kept
til 01*0
When we reached Fate, Mr. Cosh found that five or six people had been taken from
Pango while he was at the Annual Meeting ; that two of them belonged to his
catechumens’ class, and one was Mrs. Cosh’s cook, a young man she had been carefully
training to this employment. At Havannah Harbour we made inquiry as to the amount
of the population in one village, and were told by the Chief and others that there were
twenty men and fifty women ; that forty of their men were away in Queensland. Great
numbers have been shipped from this bay. Rangi, the Malay man who was lately
murdered there, was the principal agent for procuring them. We were told by the natives
that he was in the habit of arming a party of the shore natives, and going into the interior
to obtain natives for the vessels. We did not learn that he used any force to compel them
to go ; and we understood that these armed parties were rather to secure his own safety
than forcibly to capture prisoners, because any resort to open violence would, in his case,
have been impolitic.
These are instances of what is going on, of what came under my own eye, in one
short month, on five islands; not by any means the worst specimens of what we have
reason to believe has taken place. .
In defence of this system, we are told that labour cannot otherwise be obtained, or it
would not be resorted to. “ There is my land in Queensland,” says one ; “itisof no use
to me unless 1 can g.t labour. I offered to bring labourers from England, 1 offered to
bring labourers from India ; but I cannot get them.” “ There is my land which I bought
in Fiji,” says another • ‘‘ what can Ido ? I would gladly pay the natives ot Fiji to work,
but they won’t; lam obliged to get men from lanna or Sandwich, who are willing to
work. But thev are not slaves ; here is a regular contract, signed by both parties, work
and wages stipulated. The men are well fed and well cared for. 1 hey are not over-
wrought ; they are quite (ontented ; they are become fat as pigs, and merry as crickets;
they are become quite attached to me, and would not go home if I gave them liberty.
Besides, they are acquiring habits of industry that must be of great value to them when
they return home. They are living among Christians—-they are seeing Christianity both
among white people and the natives; and the missionaries in I iji are givm & tem
instruction, and they must return home much more favourably disposed towards
Christianity than when they were brought away.” .
This line of defence is set up in all quarters; but every one must see that it is the
same line of defence that has always been set up on behalf of slavery ; the very same m
kind that was always set up in defence of slavery in the Southern States ot Ameuca. u
in spite of all the plausible and eloquent defences put forth in behalf ot slave-holding, the
heart of Christianity has instinctively recoiled from the system, and, through good and bad
report, has clung to liberty and freedom for all races. ....
We are Christian Missionaries sent here to Christianize and civilize these natives, and
we feel in duty bound to acquaint the Churches that support this Mission, and through
them the Christian public, with the influences, hostile to these objects, that are come so
extensively into operation. We ernnhatically protest against the whole system, because it
[43B] L ‘ E


is essentially a system of slavery. They may be ever so well treated when they are taken :
from motives of self-interest alone, men treat their horses well. But be that as it may, in
this group the system is neither more nor less than simply a system of kidnapping. Every
plan, short of physical force, if not that also, is employed to get them on board. White
men, natives of other islands, or natives of their own islands, are employed as agents, and
sent ashore in boats, and paid so much a head for all they can bring on board. When
Rangi was killed there was great lamentation in the trade—not for Rangi, but for the trade.
The head of one party, when he heard of it, expressed his sorrow by saying, it would be
a great loss for them, as Rangi had engaged to obtain such and such a number of natives
for them. The greater number of these natives are got on board of these vessels under
false pretences. They are taken away against their will, or without their knowledge, or
under false impressions. The most of them have no idea either oi the distance of the
places to which they are going, or of the length of time they are to be kept away. Their
ignorance, their credulity, their passions, and their impulsive feelings, are taken advantage
of to get them under their power. If two tribes on Tanna have been at war, the people
that has been conquered are told that, if they go, they will get muskets and ammunition,
and then they will soon conquer their enemies. Take another case :An Erromangan is
employed as an agent. He has been away himself, and can speak a few T words of English.
He tells his own people that they are by no means to go ; but he goes to other tribes and
tells them that it will be good for them to go; that the work is very little; that the food
and the tobacco are plentiful, and the payments are very great. Such baits are too tempting
to be resisted bv a credulous, gullible people.
This is the same system —a system of pretended contracts, of pretended hired labour
—which the French attempted, several years ago, to introduce into some of their Colonies,
but which was denounced by Lord Brougham and the leading anti-slavery advocates in
Great Britain as being virtually a system of slavery, and a violation of the Treaties
entered into for the suppression of the Slave Trade ; and led, I believe, to its being
abandoned. Even if these contracts were freely entered into on the part of the natives,
which I have shown they are not, what guarantee is given that they will be fulfilled. One
of the leading Wesleyan Missionaries in Fiji wrote to us three years ago, inquiring about
the contracts by which the natives were engaged, and saying, “We cannot speak to them,
and we have no means of knowing from themselves whether their contracts are fulfilled or
not.”
We further object to this system, because, so far as it extends, it defeats the ends
contemplated by our Mission. Missionary operations have been conducted on this group
at a great expenditure of life, labour, and money. We have established all the ordinances
of Christian worship, and the means of religious and secular education, on six islands: on
two islands, the entire population are under our instruction. We have ten missionaries, and
a large staff of native agents. We have had a mission vessel for eleven years. We have
translated portions of "the Scriptures into six languages, and in three of these they are
printed. We have printed schoolbooks in all the six; and our missionary operations in all
directions are steadily advancing. But in so far as the natives are taken off the islands
they lose the benefit of these arrangements that have been made for their instruction, and
all our efforts are rendered null and void. If the natives were emigrating of their own
free will, however much we might regret it, we could not reasonably complain. But when
they are taken away either against their will or under false impressions, we consider
ourselves in duty bound to use all legitimate means to protect the interests of the natives
and the usefulness of the Mission.
It is strongly affirmed—so strongly and so frequently, that many intelligent people
believe it—that instead of being injured, the natives are greatly benefited by being taken
away to Fiji, Queensland, and elsewhere. But we know of no religious instruction of any
kind communicated to them in Queensland. If any is attempted in Fiji—and we have no
reliable information that anvhas been attempted—we know that the thing is impracticable.
The languages spoken on this group are totally different from the language on Fiji. Had
there been only one language spoken on this group, some missionary might have mastered
that on Fiji and instructed them, but among the natives taken from this group there
cannot be fewer than a dozen languages spoken; and the natives are so mixed up
together, that several languages will generally be spoken on each plantation, and the few
words of broken English which they acquire becomes the only channel between them and
their employers, and also among themselves. Our experience is that, as a general rule,
when they return, they evince as little desire to work as before they went away, and they
are greatly more averse to Christianity.
Another important consideration is this: These islands, from their fertility, and the
readiness with which all tropical productions can be reared on them, may yet be of


priceless value to the Australasian colonists. But this cannot take place unless the
natives are preserved and Christianized. It is now an established fact, fully recognized
by the medical faculty, that Colonies of the Anglo-Saxon, or any white race, cannot be
formed within the tropics, except under peculiar circumstances. They never become
thoroughly acclimated ; they may live and labour for one generation ; but they soon, as a
race, become feeble, degenerate, and die out. Now, whatever may be said of some other
groups in these seas, nothing is more certain than that the New Hebrides will never be
permanently colonized by any of the white races. Even the copper-coloured Malay races
appear to suffer from the climate as much as the whites, so that if the aboriginal races are
allowed to be exterminated, the islands will be lost to commerce and to the Colonies for
ever. They cannot be re-peopled except by robbing some similar islands equally valuable.
And if the present system of deportation go on for the next twenty years, as it has been
going on for the last five, the population will be so reduced, in many of the islands, that it
will be impossible to keep them from complete extermination. It may be a matter of no
importance, in a purely commercial point of view, whether the aborigines of Australia and
New Zealand perish or not, because their places will be supplied by a higher race, and the
loss of their labour may not be felt. But if the natives of this group be allowed to perish,
no higher race, no other race of any kind will be found to take their place. This view of
the subject has not received at all the attention which it merits. God in His providence
has peopled all these isles of the sea, and the aboriginal races are all acclimated; bullet
any of these be destroyed, and it may be no easy task to replace them. The aboriginal
inhabitants of the West Indies have long since perished. Slavery replaced them with
neo-roes. But experience has shown that the negro is acclimated with great difficulty
anywhere out of Africa, and the highest medical authorities declare that “ before a century
has passed, the negro race will almost have disappeared from the British Colonies in the
West Indies.” If the subject is looked at fairly and fully from this point of view, it is
certain that the Christian intelligence of Britain and Australasia will never allow a handful
of speculating, avaricious men, who are hasting to be rich, ignorant or regardless of
consequences, to inflict a great, certain, and permanent injury upon the Colonies for all
time to come. ... .
But if the aborigines of this group are protected, preserved, and Christianized, in due
time skill and capital will find their way to the islands, and labour will be awaiting them.
It is beginning already. For example, on Aneityum, which is wholly Christianized, there
is a whaling establishment, which will this year send up about 1,000/. worth of oil to
Sydney; and all the hired labour required, with the exception of some one man, has been
supplied by the natives of Aneityum. And as Christianity advances similar results will
follow; the resources of the islands will be developed, the raw products will find their way
to the Colonial markets, and manufactured goods will be sought for in But this
natural, healthy, and durable state of things appears to be far too slow for the impetuous,
restless spirit of avarice, speculation, and selfishness, that is so rampant at the present
time.
There is another consideration which the Christian public should not overlook. There
is scarcely any sin, except idolatry, so severely denounced in Scripture as oppression. God
has taken the poor, the helpless, the oppressed, the captive, and all who cannoi protect
themselves, under His own special care, and punishes, as well as threatens, the oppressor,
whether an individual or a community. In the late American war, God spoke terrible
things in righteousness to the whole world on this very subject. President Lincoln himself,
not a superstitious or w-eak-minded man, fully recognized the justice of God in that war,
as requiring from botli North and South a full retribution for the injunes inflicted on the
negro. American slavery grew out of very small beginnings. The spirit of slavery, which
is just one form of the spirit of selfishness, lies deep in human nature, and, under favourable
circumstances, is always easily developed.
On the other hand, scarcely any of the promises of God are more distinct than those
which refer to the defending and protecting of the oppressed. And God s providence has
been as clear on this subject as His promises are distinct. This holds specially true as
regards communities, as they can only be punished or rewarded in the present life. The
late Lord Palmerston, who was never accused of fanaticism, freely recognized this principle.
Ten or twelve years ago there was a debate in the House of Commons, on a motion of
Mr. Hutt’s to withdraw the African squadron, on the ground that it was worse than useless
expense to the nation, as it was not repressing the slave trade. After one member of the
government had shown by statistics, that in consequence of the presence of the squadron
the slave trade was virtually stopped in Brazil, Lord Palmerston rose, and, among other
remarks, spoke to the following effect: —He did not know w'hether the honourable
member did, or did not, believe in a particular Providence, watching over the affairs of
E 2


nations, and rewarding them, or punishing them, according to their merits or their crimes.
He knew that there were gentlemen in that house who did believe in this doctrine. They
might be right, or they might be wrong, in their belief; but one thing was certain, however
it might be accounted tor, that since Britain had risen in her might, paid twenty millions
as a compensation to the slaveholders, and abolished slavery in all her dominions, the
nation has enjoyed a continued and unprecedented amount of material prosperity.”
In the light of these and other considerations that might be adduced, may we not hope
that the Christian spirit in these colonies, which pronounced so unmistakeably, and with
such effect, against the Peruvian slavers, will be equally earnest in putting down the slave
trade in the New Hebrides, whether carried on under French, American, or British colours;
will be equally in earnest to prevent the slightest taint of slavery from corrupting these
rising communities, and to see that the hands of no British subject shall be polluted with
this crime, either in Queensland, Fiji, or elsewhere—a crime characterized by the venerable
John Wesley as “ the consummation of all villanies.”
Aneiteum, New Hebrides , September 1, 1868.
Alleged British Slave-Dealing in Polynesia. —Some terrible revelations are
coming out respecting the atrocities committed by Captains in the act of “ recruiting ”
these poor Islanders in the Southern Seas under the British flag and the license of the
Queensland Government. Some instances were given by the Rev. John Graham ; one
was given on the authority of the wife of a missionary well-known, he said, to many present.
She wrote ; —“The slave trade is still being carried on among these islands. We had
quite a scene here two or three weeks ago. A little schooner anchored in the bay, and a
few hours afterwards two heathen natives appeared in a great state of excitement, saying
that they had stolen nine natives, two of whom were Under-Chiefs, from their land, and
they wished to know if the missionary could do anything in the way of getting them
liberated. On the following morning a boat was sent on shore with Mare natives, from
whom Mr. M learnt the name of the Captain, the vessel, and further particulars about
the said He then sent a note to the Captain requesting him to land the
natives, stating that meantime his boat would remain here till he did so. !n a little while
a boat was seen approaching with the Captain, two white men, and a large crew of natives.
The Captain came to the house in a great rage, with a revolver in one hand and a rifle in
the other, while all who were with him were armed to the teeth. He demanded his boat.
Mr. M said he would get it whenever the Erromangans were landed. He said if he
did not get it immediately there would be bloodshed. He had come prepared to fight.
Meanwhile the heathens were gathering thick and fast, and were not only willing, but
anxious to fight for their countrymen. But Mr. M being afraid of bloodshed, got the
Captain to sign a paper promising to send them on shore. This he did rather reluctantly.
The natives w 7 ere most unwilling to let them go before seeing their friends landed ; and the
Captain, as soon as he got on board, weighed anchor and left the bay without fulfilling his
promise. As it is full time measures were taken to stop this shameful traffic, Mr. M
has written out a full statement of the case to Commodore Lambert.” A case has just
come to the knowledge of the authorities at Sydney, and compelled them to put the law
in force against the offenders. The Captain of the ‘‘Young Australian ” and one of the
crew stand committed to take their trial for the murder of three natives of one of the New
Hebrides group of islands. The supercargo, who is also implicated in the affair, has been
caught at Melbourne, and is coming up. Briefly, the particulars are as follow : —The
vessel mentioned, chartered by a Sydney firm, sailed in September last or thereabouts with
a cargo for Fiji. The cargo being discharged, a raid was proposed among the New
Hebrides Islands for ‘‘niggers,” as the Polynesians are called, to work on the newly-
established plantations at Fiji. The vessel w r as five weeks gone, and when it returned
landed 230 natives, including six women, something like 1200/. having been cleared by the
transaction. The vessel returned to Sydney. While there, intelligence was received from
Fiji which was made known to the Government. It appears that during that voyage off
the Island of Pama, three natives were forced on board, who, breaking open the hold in
which they were confined, fought for their liberty, and were shot down and tumbled over-
board by command of the Supercargo, and under the silent sanction of the Captain. The
vessel was just on the point of starting again from Sydney on another expedition when the
Captain was arrested.


Consul-General Wodehouse to the Earl of Clarendon. —(Received May 6.)
Mv Lord Honolulu, March 17, 1869.
I HAVE the honour to report, for your Lordship’s information, the sailing of the
barque “ Mauna Loa,” under the Hawaiian flag, for the Southern Islands of the Pacific
Ocean, in obedience to the following order of the Legislature, passed the 23rd day of
June, 1868: — . ,
“The Board of Immigration are hereby authorized and directed to take prompt and
efficient measures for the introduction of Polynesians, of both sexes, from other islands of
the Pacific Ocean, and to provide, by contract, for their support and employment for a
term of years; but all such contracts shall provide, as far as may be, that the employers
shall receive as many women as men, and. that suitable provision shall be made for the
support of those women.”
I herewith enclose a copy of the instructions issued to Henry English, master of the
“ Mauna Loa,” by the President of the Board of Immigration, together with a copy of the
“ Form of Contract to be entered into by Henry English, Agent of the Board of
Immigration, and native of the Island of
Your Lordship will observe, that in the instructions “ especial care is to be taken
that no pressure or force, on the part of the Chiefs, or those in authority on the different
islands, is used to induce any one to make engagements with Mr. English ; that every one
is to be left to his or her own free-will in making engagements with him.” _
The contract secures to the immigrant, subject to the due performance by him of such
lawful and proper labour as he may be called upon to perform, &c., all the rights of
citizenship under the Hawaiian law; and likewise, in case of sickness, that he shall be
supplied with proper medical attendance, and that all children shall be properly instructed
in the public schools.” .
Finally, if insisted upon by the immigrant, “ the Board agrees to give him a free
passage home at the expiration of his agreement.’’
In the arrangements made by the master of the ship for the transport of the
immigrants to these islands, he is ordered to take especial care that he does not overcrowd
his vessel.
The male and female passengers are to be separated, as far as possible, especially at
night.
I have thought it right to draw your Lordship’s attention especially to the sailing of
the “Mauna Loa,” with'the objects above alluded to, because such attempts to introduce
immigrants from China, Japan, and elsewhere, in order to develop the resources of these
have been misrepresented as “ a modified Slave Trade.”
I have, &c.
(Signed) JAMES H. WODEHOUSE.
Inclosure 1 in No. 21.
Mr. Hutchison to Mr. English.
Office of the Board of Immigration,
Sir, Honolulu , Hawaiian Islands, February 13, 1869.
I HEREWITH hand you a commission, from the Bureau of Immigration and
Agriculture of this Government, as their Agent, for the purpose of proceeding, in the
Hawaiian bark “ Mauna Loa,” on a voyage to the South Pacific Ocean, for the purpose of
making contracts with such of the inhabitants as may be desirous of emigrating, of their
own free-will and desire, to the shores of this Kingdom, for such term of years as may be
agreed on between yourself and them, on condition of a free passage, and such compensa-
tion per month as may appear reasonable. It would be desirable that the wages should be
paid, part in money, and part in food and lodging ; but this is left to your discretion, as
the Board are not in receipt of sufficient information as to the disposition of those
islanders, to enable them to lay down positive rules on this subject.
The Board desires especially to call your attention to the wmrding of the Act of the
Legislature, passed June 23, 1869, entitled “An Act to promote Immigration,” which
reads as follows : —“ The Board of Immigration are hereby authorized and directed to take


prompt and efficient measures for the introduction of Polynesians, of both sexes, from
other islands of the Pacific Ocean, and to provide, by contract, for their support and
employment, for a term of years. But all contracts shall provide, as far as may be, that
the employer shall receive as many women as men, and that suitable provision shall be
made for the support of such women.”
You will therefore perceive, that the Legislature contemplated the introduction of
female immigrants into the country, and it is highly desirable for you to carry out their
views, as far as possible. The Board is very desirous that at least as many women as men
should be brought in ; and inasmuch as it has been reported to them, that owing to the
large emigration of the men from some of those islands, an excess ot females is to be found
there, it is to be hoped that you may find no difficulty on that point.
You are at liberty, also, to make engagements with heads of families, should they
desire to come here, and give their families free passage on board your ship.
You will take especial care, that neither pressure nor force, on the part of the Chiefs,
or those in authority on the different islands, is used to induce any one to make engage-
ments with you ; that every one be left to his or her own free-will in making engagements
with you. It is desirable that the male and female passengers be separated, as far as
possible, especially at night. You have on board sufficient lumber to build a partition in
the hold of the ship; the women should be made to sleep in the after, and the men in the
forward part of the vessel; and a lamp ought to be kept constantly burning in each
compartment, from sunset to sunrise.
The number of passengers which you will take on board, must be left, very much, to
your own discretion; but you must take especial care not to take on board so many as to
endanger the health, either of them or your crew.
It is much to be desired, that you establish the best relations possible, with any
missionaries labouring on any islands you may visit. To that end, you are authorized to
take on board whatever articles they may wish to send here ; and should any wish to make
a visit here, allow them a free passage, and give them all the attention possible, on board
your ship.
The Board is of opinion, that you should avoid, if possible, making contracts to
return emigrants; but if they insist upon it, you may indorse upon the back of the
contract, a stipulation in these words : “ And the Undersigned hereby agrees, on behalf of
the Board of Immigration, that the within-mentioned —[here write the name\ —shall have a
free passage to this island, at the termination of the term of years within-mentioned,
should he at that time desire it.”
Charging you to be as expeditious as the interest placed in your charge will permit,
and wishing you a pleasant voyage, good health, and successful results for the enterprise,
and more especially charging you, once more, to remember, that your own reputation, and
that of the country which you are serving, will require the utmost circumspection, so that
no accusation of wrong may rest upon your transactions, I have, &c.
(Signed) FRED. W. HUTCHISON,
President, Board of Immigration.
Inclosure 2 in No. 21.
Memorandum of Agreement to be entered into by Master of the Hawaiian Barque “ Mauna
Loa ” and , Native of the Island of .
THIS Memorandum of Agreement, entered into this day of , in the
year of Our Lord 186 , by and between Henry English, acting as Agent for the Board of
Immigration, a Bureau of the Government of the Kingdom of Hawaii, of the first part,
and , a native of the Island of , of the second part.
Witnesseth: That whereas, the said party of the second part, is desirous of
emigrating to the Hawaiian Islands, there to be employed under the direction of the said
Board of Immigration, now therefore, in consideration of a passage to the Hawaiian
Islands, on board the ship or vessel called the , and a further undertaking, by
the party of the first part, that the said Board of Immigration will pay, or cause to be
paid, to the party of the second part, wages at the rate of for each and every month,
during the existence of this agreement, such wages to be paid at the end of each calendar
month, reckoning from the date of landing at Honolulu; and in consideration of a farther
undertaking, on the part of the party of the first part, to secure and defend the party of
the second part, in all the rights of citizenship under the Hawaiian law, as fully as the


same are enjoyed by the native-born subjects of the kingdom, and likewise in case of
sickness, that he shall be supplied with proper medical attendance, and that all children
shall be properly instructed in the public schools. The said party of the second part, will
duly and faithfully perform such lawful and proper labour as he may be directed to
perform, under the auspices of the Board of Immigration, for and during the space of
years, next succeeding the date of landing in the Hawaiian Kingdom —it being always
understood, that he shall not be compelled to labour on Sunday, or any holiday recognized
by the Government.
And the party of the first part, in consideration of the agreement hereinbefore
expressed, as being entered into by the party of the second part, hereby agrees to the same,
and undertakes that the said Board of Immigration will pay, or cause to be paid, the
wages hereinbefore set forih, and will keep and perform, or cause to be kept and performed,
all the other stipulations hereinbefore set forth.
In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands, on the day and year first above
mentioned, at
Signed in the presence of
No. 22.
Mr. Hammond to Mr. John Kay.
Sir, Foreign Office , May 12, 1869.
WITH reference to your letter of the 24th instant, regarding the alleged kidnapping
of natives in Polynesia, and specially in the New Hebrides Group, I am directed by the
Earl of Clarendon to request that you will acquaint the Synod of the Reformed
Presbyterian Church in Scotland that, on the receipt of their representations, his Lordship
has directed a report to be drawn up in this Office showing the nature of the information
on the subject which has been received from Her Majesty’s Consuls or other official
sources.
Lord Clarendon has pleasure in communicating this paper to the Synod, and whilst he
observes that the accounts circulated in this country have been somewhat exaggerated, his
Lordship fully appreciates the importance and interest which attach to the question, and
will be ready to give his attention to any statements which the Synod may hereafter consider
it their duty to make in the matter.
I am, &c.
(Signed) E. HAMMOND, j
No. 23.
Consul Williams to Lord Stanley.—[Received May 14, 1869.)
My Lord, Apia, Upolo, Samoa , December 9, 1868.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge despatch dated July 8, inclosing a memorial
from the Convener and Secretary of the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian Church in
Scotland to your Lordship.
I am happy in informing your Lordship that the Samoans do not leave their country
for labour in a foreign land. They prefer remaining at home, where they can enjoy happy
ease.
The labourers in the plantations have to be imported from Savage Island, where they
are eager to leave their own island for other parts of the world.
Their usual pay is at the rate of 5 dollars per month in trade and their rations.
Labourers have also been imported from the islands under the equator, who I am informed
came of their own free will, but the system carried on is akin to slavery. The people have
but little pay. I hear 3 dollars per month, two of which are deducted for their rations,
consequently they have one for their remuneration.
They have to work from six to six, allowing time for meals twice in the day. This is
on plantations not belonging to any British subject.
Kidnapping, by report, is carried on at the Mitchell’s Group, Kingsmills, Mulgraves
and other islands, but the islanders not knowing the names of the vessels, nothing can be
proved.
I hear that in one instance the sailors of one vessel drove a nail through the hand of


a native as soon as he put it on the rail, thus preventing his jumping overboard into his
canoe, when he fouud out the nature of the vessel or the business she was on.
The master of the schooner “ Sea Shell,” from New Zealand, was forcibly detaining
some natives on board his vessel in this port. As soon as I heard ot it I ordered their
release, threatening the master if he would not give them their liberty I should seize his
vessel under the Slave Act, whereupon he released them. I had to do this, my Lord ; for
before I could appeal to the commanders of one of Her Majesty’s ships of war, he would
have been away. ...
I will attend to your Lordship’s commands, and report to the Commander-in-chief in
the Australian Station of any outrages which may be committed by British subjects on
natives.
I 119/VG (fee
(Signed) ’ JOHN C. WILLIAMS.
No. 24.
Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond. —{Received May 17.)
Downing Street, May 15, 1869.
WITH reference to previous correspondence on the subject of the alleged kidnapping
of natives of the South Sea Islands by British subjects, I am directed by Lari Granville
to transmit to you for the information of the Earl of Clarendon, an article from the
“ Melbourne Age,” of the Ist of March, commenting on certain atrocities stated to have
been committed by Captain Lewin, by a man named Levinger, and by two settlers in Fiji
named Best and Underwood.
I am to add that the person called Lewin seems in fact to have been a captain of the
name of Ross Hovell. The case of outrage against the girl was brought before a Sydney
magistrate and dismissed. But he was also charged with being concerned with Levinger
in the murder of the three natives, and is to be tried for murder.
I am, &c.
(Signed) F. R. SANDFORD.
Inclosure in No. 24.
Extract from the Melbourne “Age,” March I, 1869.
OUR relations with the Polynesian Islanders present features which cannot be
contemplated by the humane without considerable uneasiness. A short time since a
Captain Lewin, engaged as an emigration agent for the introduction of Polynesian labourers
into Queensland, kidnapped a girl, the daughter of a chief belonging to lanna, turned her
naked into the ship’s hold, where some ninety islanders were already stowed away, and
completed his outrage by violating her person in their presence. Then we hear of two
settlers in Fiji, named Best and Underwood, flogging natives sometimes with nettles,
sometimes with the cat, and then applying the juice of the Chili plant to the raw flesh ;
also chopping off the toes and ears of their unfortunate victims, some of whom were
women. Now, there is a charge brought against a person named Levinger of having
murdered three natives of Tanna on the high seas, when he was supercargo on board a
schooner. Atrocities like these are sure to provoke retaliation. But that is not all we
have to fear as the result. They are not mere instances of individual wickedness. They are
the symptoms of a traffic which may not be evil in itself, but which, il not carefully checked
and closely watched, will inevitably degenerate into all the evils attending slavery. Hie
planters of Queensland and Fiji are competing for cheap labour, and to procure it are
importing natives from the New Hebrides and other island groups in the Pacific. Jhe
islanders are allured by the offer of wages at the rate of ten shillings a month, and the
promise of being restored to their homes after two or three years’ service. Some of these
islanders may be intelligent enough to understand the nature of the engagement, as they
have, under the training of the missionaries, made considerable advance in civilization, and
in some cases the planters may be honest enough to fulfil their part of the contract. But
the promise of restoration to their homes is one far easier to make than to perform.
Certain it is that there are complaints of husbands and fathers being separated from their
families, and not likely ever to see them again. Meanwhile, the traffic is open to


unscrupulous owners and captains of vessels who care little about the means so long as
they get their human cargoes completed, and make their profits out of them. Kidnapping,
slave trade, and slavery, are ugly words to use ; but what if the ugly system they are used
to signify be already in operation amongst us ? The matter demands serious investigation.
It will not do to trust implicitly to the instincts of modern civilization. There are philan-
thropic instincts and there are instincts utterly selfish : to which are we to trust ? It is not so
very long since—it was only when the slave-holding confederacy of America was in its
death-grapple with the republic; it was only when Eyre and his satellites were putting the
blacks of Jamaica to ruthless and wanton massacre—we had painful evidence of an attempt
to exalt the instincts of selfishness into a system of philosophy. “ The black brother,
we were told, is such a poor, helpless creature, that it is the duty of the civilized man to
put him in the way of earning his living. Quashee is too lazy to work without the whip.
He is dirty and malodorous, too, and consequently he has no rights which a gentleman is
under obligation to respect. If you want cheap labour use Quashee by all means ; it you
want women, take his wife or daughter; and if they give you any trouble on account of
your little pleasantries, polish them off without any ceremony. The weak races must go
down before the stronger ones. Such is the law of Providence. These black fellows can
never be civilized by Christian teaching, or by anything else. The missionaries who tell
you that they can are humbugs and hypocrites. “ The black brother” is a nuisance, and we
must not permit the march of civilization to be arrested by the maudlin sentimentality
that bewails his fate. Such is the philosophy most in vogue with the witlings. And since
Carlyle is their prophet, Lewin and Levinger ought to be their heroes. Quintus Curtius
tells of an interview which took place between Alexander the Great and a robber, when
the latter told the former that they were both of the same profession ; the only difference
between them being that the one robbed and murdered with an army of 10,000 men, and the
other with a gang of twenty. It was rather cheeky of the robber chief to call his Asiatic
conqueror a “ pal” of his ; but setting the cheekiness aside, there was in his argument a
logical consistency which might have won approbation from Aristotle’s distinguished pupil.
By the same logic, if Jeff. Davis and his confreres were heroes when they sought gain and
power by the sacrifice of 4,000,000 of an inferior race, why withhold the meed of praise
from Lewin and the like of him because their victims were only three men and a woman ?
No. 25.
The Earl of Clarendon to Consul March.
Sir, Foreign Office , May 20, 1869*
WITH reference to that passage in my despatch to you of the 19th of March last
in which I stated to you that it might hereafter be a matter for consideration whether
your powers of jurisdiction could not beneficially be extended, I have now to state to you
that the matter has been carefully considered by me; but it has appeared that the subject
is beset with difficulties, owing to the absence of any constituted Government in the Fiji
Islands competent to enter into engagements by which Her Majesty could hold jurisdiction
under the Foreign Jurisdiction Acts.
An Act of the American Legislature framed for the purpose of meeting analogous
difficulties, so far as the citizens of the United States are concerned, has likewise proved
practically inoperative ; and, under these circumstances, I do not see my way at present
to an arrangement for enlarging your powers.
I rely, however, on your prudence and discretion in dealing with the various cases
where your intervention may be called for; and indeed, in Mr. Thurston’s despatches, I
observe that various offences have been effectively dealt with both by himself and by the
American Consul; and I trust that, by personal influence, as well as by official position,
you may find that your present powers are sufficient for any eases which are likely to
arise.
1 am, &e,
(Signed) CLARENDON.
[438


Mr. Kinnaird, M.P., to the Earl of Clarendon. —(Received May 28.)
My dear Lord Clarendon, May 27, 1869.
HEREWITH 1 send you the documents to which I alluded a few months ago.
Yours, &c.
(Signed) A. KINNAIRD.
Inclosure 1 in No. 26.
Memorandum.
MR, JAMES MCNAIR, missionary at Errornanga, states, in a letter to Commodore
Lambert, of the Australian squadron, dated the 22nd October, 1868, that—
On the 6th of that month, the schooner “ Latona,” Captain Smith, anchored in the
Bay of Errornanga. A boat with five natives of Mare landed to procure water, and their
statement to the missionary was as follows :
The schooner “ Latona,” Captain Smith, from Queensland, came to Mard, got six
men, then to Tanna, and got fifteen men at different places, then to Errornanga, where
nine men were procured.
The missionary, having obtained this information, wrote to Captain Smith, stating that
the boat which had landed would be detained until the Erromangans were set free. Captain
Smith reobtained possession of his boat by a written promise to send on shore all the
Erromangans on board. As soon, however, as he got to his ship he set sail without landing
a single Erromangan.
Ishmael Williamson, cook and steward on board the “ Syren,” which arrived in
Moreton Bay in January with 114 South Sea Islanders, made the following statement at
Jimna:—
The “ Syren sailed from Newcastle, New South Wales, with coals for New Caledonia
in November 1867. After discharging his cargo, the captain procured four New Caledonians
whom he concealed on board. Four men were obtained at Lifu. At Tanna, a Chief
named Brown came on board, and, under the pretence of showing them the ship, brought
on board six men, who were carried off. The next island visited was Mellicolo, where
twenty-one natives were enticed on board and treated in the same way. But at Mutton
Island, where more natives were procured, they all managed to escape during the night
except two. For not having prevented their escape the watch had their coffee stopped for
two days, the captain stating that he had lost over 100 Z. by it. At Bura Bura nine
men were captured, and the number was, by this time, 110. The vessel then sailed
for Brisbane, and on the voyage lost by death about twenty-one out of the 130 natives on
baard.
The passages marked in the pamphlet are more detailed accounts of the statements
contained in the manuscript inclosure in Mr. Kinnaird’s letter.
Inclosure 2 in No. 26.
Rev. James McNair to Commodore Lambert.
(Extracts.) Dillards Bay , Errornanga , October 22, 1868.
YOU will, perhaps, remember I mentioned a case which occurred on the 2nd of July
last. On the morning of that day, a suspicious little schooner was noticed to pass the
bay, but did not call here. In a day or two some natives from the north end of the island
came to the mission premises to see if the Missionary could do anything for them, because
“ Charley” was on board the vessel in question, and had deceived them by representing
that “ Captain Joe ” (Joseph Hastings, a kind man to natives) was on board with plenty
of tobacco, powder and shot, &c. The bait took well, for the wily Sandalwooder managed
to hook a dozen or more stalwart Erromangans on the shoulders of Captain Hastings, who
were no sooner got on board that they were clapped below the hatches.
[Here follows a description of said “ Charley ” (alias Charles Hyde), with an account
of Ins antecedents.]
On the afternoon of the 6th October, 1868, a little schooner came to anchor in this


bay. The anchor was not long down when two natives of Noras, or South River, made
their appearance here, saying that “ Charley 5 ’ was on board the vessel in question and had
succeeded in decoying nine of their friends into his boat. On hearing this story there was
a good deal of excitement among even the Christian natives, as not a few of their near
relatives had been stolen in a similar manner on previous occasions. I told them to keep
very quiet, but it would be well if they could ascertain for me the name of the vessel,
captain, and where bound for. Accordingly, four or five went off at once in my boat to the
craft; but as it was now dark they could not make out the name of the vessel, neither
could they find out the name of the captain, nor where bound for, nor yet could they see
any Erromangans on board. They learned, however, that it was their intention to water on
the following day, this being a convenient place for that purpose. Consequently, early in
the morning a boat with five natives of Mard landed at this station.
Their story is as foliows: —
Schooner “ Latona,” Captain Smith from Queensland, came to Mare, got six men,
then to Tanna, took on board “ Charley” and got fifteen men at different places; next to
Erromanga, got nine men. These nine Erromangans were put below last night so that their
friends could not see them on board of the vessel —the same was done to the r lanna men.
Having obtained this information, I (Mr. Macnair) wrote to Captain Smith urging him
to send the Erromangans on shore immediately, and stating that the boat would remain here
until my request was complied with. In half-an-hour or so a boat was seen coming up
the river with three white men in it, and a number of natives. The former were armed
with revolvers and rifles.
After a lengthened and stormy discussion, during which the Erromangans were with
difficulty prevented from falling upon the white men, the following note was signed :
Dillon s Bay, Erromanga , October 7, 1868.
I hereby agree to send on shore immediately all the Erromangans I have on board.
(Signed) G. Smith, Master of Schooner “Latona.”
Rev, James McNair.
Smith proved himself ungrateful enough to me for perhaps saving his life, and faithless
enough to his own promise, by weighing anchor as soon as he got on board, and going off
without landing a single Erromangan.
I inclose a list of the names of those stolen at this time, which may assist in finding
them out in Queensland, and I shall look to you to see that these poor ignorant natives
be rescued from the iron grasp und safely returned to their native land, from which they
have been so basely and falsely snatched* by some of the lowest and most degraded of our
countrymen.
Inclosure 3 in No. 26.
Bishop Patteson to the Bishop of Sydney.
I HOPE, if it be God’s will, to sail in May or June for an unusually long voyage
among the islands, as 1 could not go last year.
1 am very anxious to what I may find going on, for I have conclusive moral (though,
perhaps, not legal) proof of very disgraceful and cruel proceedings on the part of traders
kidnapping natives and selling them in New Caledonia, to the French, and in Fiji, and, I
am informed, in Queensland.
Whatever excuses may be (and have been) made as to the treatment they receive at
the hands of planters, and the protection they may have from a Consul when landed, it is
quite certain that no supervision is exercised over the traders at the islands. All statements
of “ contracts ” made with wild native men are simply false. The parties don’t know how
to speak to each other, and no native could comprehend the (civilized) idea of a
u contract.”
One or two friendly men who have been on board these vessels (not in command),
and were horrified at what they saw, have kindly warned me to be on my guard, as they
may retaliate (and who can say unjustly or unreasonably, from their point of view) upon, the
first white men they see# connecting them, naturally, with the perpetrators of such crimes


Inclosure 4 in No. 26.
Extracts from Statement of Ishmael Williamson , Cook and Steivard of Brig “Syren.”
Paragraph 2. AVE then sailed to an island named Mallicolo, where we put off a boat to
trade with the natives, who came swimming out to meet us, bringing plenty of cocoa-nuts
with them upon sticks in the water \ some ot them came on board the boats, while others
came in their canoes to see the vessel, numbering twenty-one, many of them bringing their
clubs and implements of war with them. They were relieved of these on deck, and°taken
down to see the mysteries of the hold, when the vessel set sail, the canoes were cut adrift,
and we bore away from the island. The wives of some of these men swam after the ship
for more than three miles, crying loudly for the restoration of their kidnapped husbands.
Paragraph 3. AVe then went to Mutton Island, where we got a good many natives on
board, but as the vessel stopped over night to take in wood, they all made their escape
during the darkness except two. In the morning, the Captain called the watch, and asked
them why they had allowed the islanders to escape. The men declared they had not seen
one of them go away. For this neglect of duty the Captain stopped their coffee for two
days, as he said he had lost over 100/. by it.
Paragraph 5. After touching at many other islands, and getting men in the same
way, to the number of 110, we called at an island (the name of which I forget) where we
got six men on board out of a canoe, but the Chief immediately came off and demanded
their liberation. The Captain, on seeing the canoes assembling, and the natives, armed,
gathering on the beach, thought it best to comply with his demand. However, to chastise
them for their opposition, he manned a boat carrying six muskets and four revolvers, and
sent it to chase the natives, who retired to the beach and drew up some of their canoes on
the shore. The boat’s crew then fired into the huts which contained the women, sunk
some of the canoes along the shore, and then returned to the ship.
Paragraph 7. AVe then sailed for Brisbane. During the first part of our voyage the
islanders suffered severely from sea-sickness, the Mallicolo men in particular touched
nothing for four days. The Captain tried to induce them to eat by standing over them
with a thick stick, threatening to thrash them if they refused. Many of them were attacked
with dysentery, and after a passage of six days we came into Moreton Bay, where we
remained in quarantine for a month, and altogether losing by death about twenty-one out
of the 110 natives who left the islands with us.
(Signed) ISHMAEL WILLIAMSON.
AVitnesses to Signature:
AVilliam Castles.
David Gray.
No. 27.
Mr. Hammond to Sir F. Rogers.
. Foreign Office , June 5, 1869.
I AM directed by the Earl of Clarendon to transmit to you, to be laid before the Earl
Granville, some extracts of a letter from Mr. James Mac Nair, a missionary stationed in
the Island oi hrromanga one of the New Hebrides group—together with other papers,*
which have been placed in Lord Clarendon’s hands by Air. Arthur Kinnaird, reporting
certain acts of kidnapping, and specifically by the Captains of the schooner u Latona” and
of the “ Syren,” perpetrated against natives of the South Sea Islands.
I am to request that you will express to Lord Granville the hope that his Lordship
will take into his serious and immediate consideration the means by which an end may be
put to this system of kidnapping; and that you will suggest to his Lordship that Captain
Smith of the “ Latona,’ who is stated to have broken his written promise that the nine
natives of Lrromanga should be released, should, if possible, and supposing the circum-
stances to be correctly stated, be punished.
I am to request that the printed papers which are herein inclosed may be returned.
I am, &c.
(Signed) E. HAMMOND.
* Inclosures in No, 26,


Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond.—(Received June 9.)
Downing Street, June 8, 1869.
1 AM directed by Earl Granville to transmit to you, to be laid before Lord Clarendon,
a copy of a despatch from the Governor of New South \\ ales, with its inclosures, reporting
the circumstances connected with the murder of three South Sea Islanders on board the
British ship “Young Australian,” near Apii, in the New Hebrides, in October last.
I am deshed to request that the inclosures to the Governor s despatch, which are
forwarded in original, may be returned to this office when done with.
I am, &c.
(Signed) F. R. SANDFORD.
Inclosure 1 in No. 28.
The Earl of Belmore to Earl Granville.
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, February 26, 1869.
. HaVE the honour to forward to your Lordship the copy of a letter, and its
inclosures, which I have received from Mr. Thurston, Her Majesty’s Acting Consul at
*iJl> on subject of three murders of South Sea Islanders on board the British ship
“ Young Australian,” near Apii in the New Hebrides group, in October last.
2. 1 referred this letter to the Attorney-General, from whom I learnt that, in conse-
quence of information previously received, the Crown had already commenced proceedings,
by procuring a magisterial inquiry in the nature of a coroner’s inquest.
3. I have been furnished with a copy of the evidence taken on that occasion which
I inclose herewith.
4. The result of this inquiry was, that Albert Ross Hovell, the master of the “ Younn-
Australian, and two of the crew, natives, names Jimmy and Rangi, were on the 17th
instant, brought up at the Water-Police Court, before Captain ’ Water-Police
Magistrate, charged with participating in these murders, and two of them were, by him
committed for trial. The native, Jimmy, was discharged.
4. I inclose a copy of the depositions.
. 5 * Ha v in g subsequently seen a Melbourne newspaper telegram which stated that one
Levmger, the supercargo ot the vessel in question, had been arrested in Melbourne I
communicated with the Attorney-General about him. I inclose a copy of his reply.
6. Your Lordship will also learn from this last document that the trial of these men
has been postponed until May, as Sir William Manning wishes, if possible, to obtain
further evidence, particularly that of the declarants referred to in Mr. Thurston’s letter
7 * I^P°,!!. l1 t 0 a PPjy to Mr * Thurston to forward to Sydney, in accordance with a
Minute of Sir William Manning’s, “ the declarants, and any other witnesses whom the
Consul may find and think competent. They must be persons who, from religion are
admissible as witnesses on oath, and it will be better to select out of the many persons
who probably witnessed the whole affair, such as can be understood without an interpreter
or to send an interpreter who must himself be capable of taking an oath.” * 9
In a further Minute he adds: ‘‘The witnesses having differed as to whether at the
moment of the murder being committed, the ‘Young Australian’ was at anchor'within
a sea league of the shore, or was at a greater distance and under weigh, the information
or indictment has been prepared and filed with two counts so as to meet either alternative
One charges the offence as having been committed upon the sea, and the other places it
at an island oi place in the Pacific Ocean, not subject to Her Majesty, or to any European
rule or Power. I have not before me at this moment either the evidence or the informa-
tion, but the above is substantially correct.”
8. The proceedings in this case are taken under the Imperial Act 9 Geo. IV can 83
sec. 4, known as the New South Wales Act. ’ ’
w . 9 * , In conclusion, I beg to state that I will furnish Commander Palmer, of Her
Majesty s Ship “Rosario,” who proceeds shortly from this port for a cruize amongst the
islands, with a copy of Mr. Thurston’s letter. °
I have, &c.
(Signed) BELMORE,


Inclosure 2 in No. 28.
Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Belmore.
My Lord, January 17, 1869.
1 HAVE the honour herewith to inclose original declaration, made before me upon
the 12th instant by Tom, a native of Tanna; and Mararaya, a native of Vate, or Sandwich
Island, touching the murder of three aboriginals, names unknown, of an island called
Pama, one of the New Hebrides. The above-named declarants arrived in Fiji on or about,
the 19th November last, in the ship “ Young Australian,’’ Albert Ross Hovell, master, of
Sydney, New South Wales, on board of which vessel, while lying off the island of Pama,
they declare the three aboriginals were shot to death, having about noon of the same day
been, by a portion of the crew, under Mr. Hovell’s command, forcibly seized while fishing,
and conveyed on board the “ Young Australian.” The details of said alleged seizure and
murder are more fully set forth in the accompanying documents.
In accordance with Foreign Office instructions I have, by this mail, forwarded a
report on this matter, together with copies of the declarations, to Commodore Lambert,
Considering it not unlikely Commodore Lambert may be absent from Sydney, I have
thought it right to place the subject directly before your Lordship, for transmission to
the Colonial Secretary, or for the initiation of such proceedings as your Lordship may
deem necessary.
The informants, my Lord, are both heathens. The Tanna man speaks English very
fairly. His statement throughout was made in English. I afterwards examined him in
his own language, though a Christian Tannese, sometime resident in Tonga and Fiji. The
Vate native is far less intelligent than the man Tom. He speaks no language but his own.
There can, in my opinion, be no collusion between the informants. He evidently had no
idea of the purpose for which he was brought to this office; and, though differing from
Tom, in the general relation of the voyage, he confirms his statement most clearly, that
certain natives were seized, and finally shot on board the “ \ oung Australian.
I cannot learn the European name of Pama Island. It is, 1 believe, in sight* of
Espiritu Santo. On arrival in Fiji, Mr. Hovell reported himself from Tanna, Sandwich,
and Vauna Lava.
A few days before leaving this port for Sydney, the second mate, Robert Lennie, and
two able seamen, named respectively , were discharged
from the ship by mutual consent. These men are subjects of other countries than Great
Britain. Robert Lennie, who is most strongly incriminated, being a Frenchman. The
others are Germans. With the exception of Lennie, 1 have no knowledge of the present
residence of these men.
While most anxious, my Lord, that the interests of justice shall not suffer by any act
of omission upon my part, I find myself placed, as your Lordship will perceive, in a
somewhat difficult position. , ,
Considering that the charges of murder, et cetera , now submitted to your Lordship s
notice, have been made by heathens, whose testimony cannot be taken upon oath, should
I promote the interests of justice by forwarding them, alone, to the Colony for examination ?
Again: Should Ibe warranted in arresting (provided I could find the power in myself,
for your Lordship must be aware there is no lex loci in Fiji to which application can be
made for assistance) the persons of Lennie and others now in Tip, upon such evidence as 1
have received.
Again: Had information of the proceedings on board the “ Young Australian been
given me prior to the discharge of these men, 1 might, upon me principle that a Biitish
ship carries British law with her, have taken any action within the limits of my authority
that appeared necessary; but, considering they have been legally dischatged from their
late ship, and therefore, I presume, from any obligation to submit to my jurisdiction,
should I not be incurring a grave responsibility in placing them under arrest, and having
them conveyed to Sydney ? . T ,i . ~
After mature deliberation, I have concluded it better to forward your Lordship the
inclosed statements only of the crimes and misdemeanours alleged to have been committed
on board the “ Young Australian ” during her late voyage.
I shall endeavour to obtain the evidence of the seamen discharged here by Mr. Hovell,
and also that of two Rotumah islanders, who formed part of the boat’s crew. 1 hese latter
.are living with a British settler on Viti Leva. It is likely they are Christians ; and, from
my having resided at their island for some months, will probably be known to me.
Meantime, I submit to your Lordship the propriety of arresting, or holding to bail, the
master and supercargo of the “ Young Australian,” pending the opportunity to establish
the truth or falsity of the inclosed statements.


1 feel it imperative upon me to state the Tom 1 eiaraya, aie? irc f
stantial in their report, that I, personally, entertain nC doubt oi the genera iu u ncs
their statement. , .. ~ _
Besides the master and supercargo, who left this pd- r t °[ ’ Y *J e 3’ ei< r w
board the chief mate, one Mac Masters ; and also the cook, xv^lo ltl een 6w 0
voyage in the ship, . ' Fiii In mv
The supercargo, Hugo Levinger, a British Jew, formerly resided 111 ri J ’ Y
opinion this man would readily become a witness for the Crown, were he . 0 . en , er ai J l ?
suspicion of inconvenience or danger to himself, unless the subject-matter of tin* e fP a
being bruited abroad, as it most likely will be, through private letters, he availed hu nlse ?
as also might the others, of an opportunity to leave the Colonies.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Minute on the above by the Earl of Belmore.
The Attorney-General.
Will Sir William Manning be kind enough to consider, and inform me, what steps
can or ought to be taken in this matter, if the Young Australian ” and her crew are in
Port Jackson ; and to advise generally?
(Signed) B.
February 16, 1869.
Minute in reply by the Attorney-General.
Information touching these matters having reached me last week, I instructed the
Crown Solicitor and the Police, to take immediate steps for procuring a Magisterial inquiry
(in the nature of a Coroner’s Inquest) as to the cause of the alleged deaths. This was done,
and such evidence was obtained and submitted to me as called for the institution of
criminal charges against the captain of the vessel, and two natives who formed part of
the crew, and who appeared to have been direct participators in the crime. Informations
were accordingly laid by my direction, and the three men were arrested. The charges
were thereupon proceeded with, and they terminated yesterday in the committal of Captain
Hovell and one of the natives for murder. Bail was refused, and these persons are now
in gaol. The other native was discharged. I have also given instructions for an effort to
procure the arrest and removal to Sydney of the Supercargo, Levinger, who is said to be
Melbourne.
(Signed) W. M. MANNING.
February 18, 1869.
I have instructed the Crown Solicitor to forward to his Excellency’s Private
Secretary, copies of the depositions taken on the magisterial inquiry and the committal.
The former contains some details which do not appear in the latter, because they were
admissable in evidence against the persons under charge.
(Signed) W. M. M.
February 18, 1869.
Inclosure 3 in No. 28.
Declarations taken before Acting Consul Thurston ,
In re i: Young Australian,” of Sydney, New South Wales, Albert Ross Hovell, master,
Levinger, Supercargo, charged with the murder (or of being accessories both
before and after the fact) of three aboriginals of Pama Island, near Espiritu Santo,
New Hebrides.
PERSONALLY appeared before me, John B. Thurston, Esquire, Acting British
Consul in Fiji and donga, Hanaen, alias Tom, a heathen, and native of Tanna Island in
the New Hebrides, who stated as follows, to wit:—
I came to Fiji in the ship commanded by Captain Ross Hovell [see Consul’s Note A].


anchore t d a ‘ Port v ßeSolu the Captain came ashore and said to me,
vour men vpmn'' th* "'r" * ° d ' - -t can S° anc l see the place and return again, while
II ”™r wf e r one T ear - at "<>*■” I replied, •• Very well,” and went on board
p J r,, 3 len Y® a t Fiji, we learnt we were to remain for three years.
and nersnaJed nn tL W Lti ent * O . E ' rromaDS ?' At En ' oman g a - Bob [Note BJ went on shore,
for four mnntlis 1/ 165 ' v '^ l some difficulty, to embark for Fiji upon an engagement
anchored I f this island we " - ent to Sandwich (Vate). The ship was not
‘ w , en - on shore the first time the boat went. There was no fighting, no guns
weie c a during the time Three guns were in the boat—they®were not taken*out
°, ? bP .dt. I only went on shore once, having a bad finger. I did not hear any
s loop The g an( j w i c h raen were gammoned away by Bob to fcome to Fiji for four
( i.e ., months). The ship remained two days at Sandwich, that is the large island,
then went to Abau and anchored. A lot of mats were purchased ; but thef natives would
not visit the ship.
Thence we went to Tongoa, No natives would come to Fiji. Bob came on board,
and we sailed for Engmi. At Engmi some men came on board—they were gammoned
by Bob.
Thence we sailed to Apee, where some men came on board to go to Fiji. They came
for two months’ stay.
Thence we reached the Islandjof Pama near Espiritu Santo—the ship anchored. At
noon the boat in charge of Bob went towards the shore. Bob met some men (three)
fishing in p a canoe, and invited them by signs to come on board; the natives by signs
declined, shaking their heads. Then the Erromangans and Rotumah men with Bob seized
the three natives, and dragging them into their boat, brought them on hoard.
There was no firing from the boat. If there had been, I must have heard and seen
it. We were distant from the canoe, when the seizure was made, about 300 yards
(distance indicated by declarant upon Levuka beach). After embarking these three men,
the boat went on shore. One of these brought on board was an old man, Chief of the
Pama men, the other two were young men. The old Chief cried very much, and touching
his breasts, pointed towards the land, signifying his desire to go on shore. The Captain
told him to come to Fiji, and he should have tomahawks; but the old man could not
understand. Then a white man with one eye (Levinger) Mr. Lavager, told the Tanna,
Erromanga, and Sandwich men, to put these three below in the hold, which was done.
The Sandwich men then offered them some food, but they would not eat; they then
feigned sea-sickness, and asked to be allowed on deck; but the man with the bad eye
(Levinger) would not allow it.
Presently the old man seized some stones and began to fight all the natives down
below, who, running on deck, left the hold entirely to the Pama men. The white men
then said to the captain, “ Let these men be killed. The captain said, “ No—wait for
Bob, who took them.’’*
When Bob came on board, he said to the captain, “What’s the matter?” The
captain replied, “ The Pama men are fighting.” Bob then loaded two muskets in the
cabin, and coming forward gave them to Louis. He, Bob, then went aft. Bob and Louis
then opened little holes (ports or bullseyes) in the cabin and forecastle bulkheads, and
commenced firing. Louis shot the two young men, and Bob shot the old man. I know
who shot the men, although I was on deck. As the natives were shot, the captain was
informed by the one who fired ; and I, standing on the deck close to the captain, heard
all thatjjwas said.f
When the three were all killed, I and some others were sent below to bring them on
deck. Stones were tied to their feet, and the bodies were thrown overboard. The ship
sailed the same evening for Santo.
At Espiritu Santo men were obtained. A man, a boy, and two women were stolen.
These people were fishing on the reef by torchlight. Bob landed with his Erromanga
men, and, going round in-shore of the natives, seized and brought them on board.
At Murray Lava four women were bought. I was in the boat this day. Tomahawks
and barter were thrown on shore, and the women swam off. At Kawa (a large island)
a native was shot. Having shot some arrows at the boat, he was shot dead in return. 1
was not in the boat. Tom, an Erromanga man, told me this.
From Kawa we came to Fiji.
Before we came to Fiji, the captain and Mr. Levaga (Levinger) said to me, “ Tom,
* In addition to tins part|of Tom’s statement, being - made in very fair English, he has been closely questioned
in his own language through “John Pama,” a Christian Tanna mau,— John B. Thurston, Acting Consul.
f Same remark applies, Tom being carefully examined through ''John Pama.”— John B. Thurston, Acting
Consul.


when the the Consul comes on board at Fiji, don’t you say anything about the Pama
and Kawa men, or he will make us fast.”
When you (addressing the Consul) came on board and spoke to us, I was afraid to
speak of these occurrences.
Declared at the British Consulate, Port Levuka, Fiji, this 12th day of January,
1869.
(Signed) JOHN B THURSTON, Acting Consul,
(L.S.)
I certify to the correctness of the above in those parts which were also rendered in
Fijian through John Pama and Daniel Afu.
Memoranda by Acting Consul Thurston.
Before eliciting the aforewritten statements from Tom, he was duly cautioned to tell
the truth. In reply, he stated in English and also in Tannese, through John Pama,
a Tannese member of the Wesleyan Society, that he intended to tell what he had seen
only. _
The foregoing statement was made in the English language. Those passages scored
with red ink were given both in English and Tannese.
Note A. Albert Ross Hovell, master of the “ Young Australian,” is better known by
the name of Ross than Hovell. By the natives he is known as Ross only.
Note B. Bob is one Robert Lennie, a Frenchman, lately serving as second mate on
board the “ Young Australian.” He was discharged at Levuka on the Ist December last.
His present place of abode is uncertain.
In re “Young Australian” of Sydney, New South Wales, Albert Ross Hovell, master,
Levinger, supercargo, charged with the murder (or of being accessories both
before and after the fact) of three aboriginals of Pama Island, near Espiritu Santo,
New Hebrides.
Personally appeared before me, John B. Thurston, Esq., Acting British Consul in Fiji
and Tonga, Mararaya, a heathen native of Eukinbau, in the Island of Vate, or Sandwich,
who, being examined through Soh, a native of the same place, speaking Fijian, stated as
follows, to wit:—
I came to Fiji with Captain Ross (Hovell), We were on the beach at our town, when
the boat came in, and the crew offered to trade for tobacco. The men landed with guns.
They were white men and Rotumah men. The only one of whom 1 know the name is
Bob. They pointed guns at us and ordered us into the boat. Some of us, being
frightened, went into the boat, ten in all. Others, also frightened, ran away towards the
bush. The white men fired at them, but no natives were wounded.
On reaching the ship Captain Ross (Hovell) told us to come to Fiji and work for ten
moons. He told us we should make oil. We did not want to come. We were not allowed
to go on shore after our embarkation. The ship anchored near our town, and remained, I
think, thirteen nights. No canoes visited the ship. After we left Vate we went to Makuni.
The men of this place came on board; some came to Fiji by their own desire. Thence
we went to Engmi, where some men embarked for Fiji by their own consent; thence to
Ton goa, and anchored. Some men of Tongoa came willingly to Fiji. Thence to
Sarroway (?). Six men embarked here for Fiji: they came willingly. Thence to
Telakoro (?), whence some men came willingly. Thence to Murrilava, whence some men
also came willingly to Fiji.
Thence to a land, the name of which Ido not know. The ship anchored. The boat
went towards the shore, and met a canoe coming out with seven men on board. Those in
the boat seized three, and put them in the bottom of the boat. The remaining natives in
the canoe fled. The whites fired and shot them all. The boat brought the three taken to
the ship. One of them was an old man, a Chief, two were young men. They were taken
below in the hold. Then they began to fight. The white men then shot all three dead.
They shot from two holes, one forward and one aft. We, that is, the other natives on
board, ran up on deck and took to the rigging when the Pama men first commenced to
fight. When the Pama men were dead, stones were tied to their feet, and they were thrown
overboard. It was then night. Two fired guns, Bob and the matai *. We then went to
another island, where one man came on board willingly.
“ Matai, fijian, a mechanic or tradesman. A carpenter or cooper is most likely meant.—J. B. T.
[43B] G


Thence we went to another island. Ido not know its name, ihe natives bought
yams on the beach to sell. Those in the boat fired at the natives. I saw one fall on the
sand. I think he was dead. From this island we came to Fiji.
I did not tell these things to Joe, the Consul’s boy. I did not know him ; he is not
of ray tribe.
Declared at the British Consulate, Port Levuka, Fiji, this 12th day of January, 1862,
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON, Acting Consul.
(L.S.)
Inclosure 4 in No. 28.
Translations of Native Letters.
Levuka, December 22, 1868.
IN this letter, Sir, I write a report which I heard, and which was told to me by John
Pata, a native of Tanna, who lives with me. It was told to him by three Tanna natives
who were brought here by the large ship that was sailing with men, and which was
anchored at Levuka. The names of the three Tanna natives who told this report are
Heaneavu and Yan and Nuravu, and their report is like this: —
The great ship Young Australian”) went first to Tanna, and the Tanna men went
on board, then it went to Erromanga, thence to Sandwich, thence to Inea, thence to Tpi, and
from thence to Pama. When it was at anchor there, Papo (a white man), three Rotumans,
and two Erromangans went down into the boat, and they pulled towards the land, and met
a canoe belonging to that island, which they seized by force, and took to the great ship
(“Young Australian”), the three men, the old man being the chief, and two young men.
When these men were got on board they were strongly averse to being taken to Fiji. They
wept and refused to eat, therefore said the captain of the ship, “ Let them be taken down
into the hold and put in irons, and wait for Papo, who brought them on board, so he may
decide whether it would be well to let them go back again to their land or not.” When
in the hold these three resisted strongly, and tried to fight. They got bows and arrows
belonging to the Tanna and Erromanga men which were in the hold, and also stones, and
fought with all the black men in the ship. They shot an Erromangan in the ear with an
arrow. .The white men tried to stop this but did not. Then Papo went down into the
hold to stop it, but they hit him with stones, and he fled up again to the deck. Ihen the
white men decided that the three should be shot. Then they opened a door from the
cabin into the hold, and shot them with guns. Two men fired the guns, Papo and Lui.
The old Chief was first wounded in the thigh, but he bound up the wound and went on
fighting ; then one of the young men was shot dead ; then the other young man was shot
also, and fell dead; then the old Chief who was first wounded was shot dead. When this
was finished night had come over the land, then a lamp was taken down into the hold to
find the dead, and they were all three taken up to the deck and thrown into the sea.
Then the ship went to Sado, thence to Maleravo, thence to Ikawa, and thence to Fiji.
This, Sir, is the report which I heard, and my letter is finished.
I am, &c.
(Signed) TANIELA AFU.
Levuka, January 2, 1869.
ANOTHER letter, Sir, I write to you in confirmation of my former letter, which
contained a report told to me by John Pata, the Tanna native, who lives with me, about
the Pama men who were killed on board the great ship (“ Young Australian”) that brought
men here, and was anchored at Levuka. I was anxious because this thing was great and
heavy, therefore I sent John Pata to bring the Tanna men who told this report to him.
When they come to my house I said, “ My friends, this is a great thing which you have
told. If this be false, it is very bad. If you know that these Pama natives were really
killed, then take hold of this pen. If it be false, do not.”
Heaneavu H.
Yan .
Nuravu .
These are their own or true hands with which they made these signs, and when they
had made them they said, “ What we have seen and known we tell.” Ihe great ship went


to Tanna, and we Tanna natives went on board, then she went to Erromanga, thence to
Sandwich, thence to Inea, thence to Ipi, thence to Pama. When we got there the boat
was prepared to go ashore. Bob, the white man, three natives of Errornanga, and three
natives of Rotumah pulled towards the shore. They met a canoe belonging to the place
with three men on board, one being an elderly man, and two young men. The elderly-
man was a Chief. They were seized by force and thrown into the boat, and taken to the
great ship. When on board the ship they wept and refused to come to Fiji. They did
not wish to eat or drink, they wept only. Then said the captain of the ship, “ Let them
be taken down into the hold till Bob comes back again from the land, and decides
concerning them.” When they were in the hold they resisted, and threw stones at the
black men in the hold, and shot at them with bows and arrows. Then all the black men
fled on deck, and only the three Pama men were left in the hold. Then Bob came and
tried to speak to them, but they threw stones at him, and he fled on deck. Then was
opened a piece of the balkhead in the captain’s end of the ship, and they fired with guns.
The old man was first wounded in the thigh, but he bound it up and went on fighting.
Then the two young men were shot dead. Then the old man was shot again, and died.
Then night was over the land, a lamp was put on its stand, and taken down into the hold,
and the dead bodies were lifted up, and thrown into the sea. Two only fired the guns.
Bob and Lui. It is said that Bob lives at Wairiki. There are two Rotumans who live
with Mr, Hennings, who know about this thing, because they went about in this great
ship. One of them is named David.” These two told to Tom, a Rotuman, who has been
long here, all this affair, and Tom told it to John Pata, and John told it to me.
Tom said to John that they were commanded not to let this thing be known. This, Sir,
my letter, is finished.
I am, &c.
(Signed) DANIEL AFU.
Inclosure 5 in Ko. 28.
Evidence taken during Inquiry into the alleged Murder of Three South Sea Islanders
at Sea.
Mr. Lett: JOSEPH JOHNSON, on oath states, was cabin boy of the vessel “ Young
Australian.” I live in Cumberland Street. I was on board the “Young Australian” at
the South Seas in October; I saw three men come up in a boat. The ship was at anchor
at Apii, about a musket shot from the shore, in October last, when three islanders came
on board among the other blacks, the three men came with Rangi, about .9 o’clock in the
morning ; a boat left the ship with the second-mate, and his crew of six men, all South
Sea Islanders ; there was another with four South Sea Islanders. The second-mate’s boat
went on shore at Apii to get natives, and on their way back, without any natives, they met
a canoe with three men (natives) in it; they took the men out of the canoe and brought
them on board the vessel; they sent them down below by a man named Levinger, a
supercargo ; there were other natives below who commenced teasing these three men;
they then tried to make their escape from the hold, and the other natives knocked them
back again. Some of the other natives then came on deck and put on the hatch (the main
hatch). The three islanders came on deck and looked for spears, and some bows and
arrows that were lying in the hold ; then two Frenchmen, Antony and Louis, cried out to
the other natives that these three islanders had bows and arrows; the three natives broke
the hatch off and commenced to fire the arrow's, and throw stones and cocoa-nuts at
everybody on deck ; they struck one native in the head with an arrow, and another in the
breast, then Levinger, the supercargo, told the two Frenchmen and Rangi, who had
muskets, to shoot at these three islanders; an islander named Jem had a musket; the
second mate got some oakum and put on an iron rod, and the cook dipped it in kerosine
oil; they lit it to show light to those who were firing down the fore hatch ; the second
mate’s name is Robert, and the cook’s name is Sam, he is in Sydney ; the second mate is
at the island; Jemmy, a native, fired first, and then Louis; they both w'ent down the
forecastle and fired through the bulkhead into the hold at these three islanders Tom and
Antonio fired down the hatch at these three islanders ; a number of shots were fired; after
the firing ceased these three men w 7 ere brought on deck by the other natives, two were
dead and the other died shortly after being brought on deck ; they were bleeding; stones
were tied to the bodies and they were thrown overboard ; Rangi fired at these men, also
the names of the men who fired at Rangi, Antoni, Louis, Tom, and Jemmy; Rangi, Tom,
and Jemmy are natives; Antoni and Louis are white men ; both the cook and second mate


held the light whilst the others fired ; these three men were alone in the hold when they
were fired at.
The "‘Young Australian” is a three-masted schooner sailing under the British flag,
and commanded by Captain Hovell; the Captain was standing on the poop during the
whole of this time. I heard the Captain call out not to shoot them ; he did not endeavour
to prevent their doing so ; he also told them to let the men come out of the hold and jump
over the side; Levinger was standing forward inciting the men to shoot the natives; he
did not fire himself.
Mr. Cloete: I signed articles at the Shipping Office, in Sydney ; when these men came
to the ship’s side they came on board themselves, and were led down the hatchway by the
supercargo; they could not understand what was said to them; they did not struggle;
one of the islanders who were shot was old, another middle-aged, and the other young;
the other men we had on board in the hold were caught by the second-mate, some at
Tanna, some Errornanga, and some at Sandwich; there were about eighty of them;
Tommy, who could speak all of their language, told them yarns, that they would take
them to the Fijis and give them tobacco and muskets, and they could come back the
next day ; when they are taken to the Fijis, they are sent in smaller vessels to all parts
of the Fijis; these three men were crossing from one island to another when they were
taken ; there is not an American, French, or any flag flying on the Island Apii; it was
about 3 o’clock when these men were taken, and they were shot about dusk; we sailed
from Apii at 3 o’clock the next morning; I did not hear this affair logged ; it was not told
to anybody there. This vessel belongs to a person named Griffiths, in Sydney; payment
was made to Levinger, the supercargo, for each islander ; the supercargo is a German Jew.
Mr. Lett: I heard the cook say they were not more worth shooting than a dog;
Jemmy and Rangi are on board the schooner “ Active,” now in this port.
(Signed) JOSEPH JOHNSON.
Sworn at Sydney, this 12th February, 1869.
P. L, Cloete, W. P. M.
Robert McMaster on oath states: —
Mr. Lett: lam chief officer of the British schooner “ Young Australian.” We were
during our last voyage under British colours; I remember being off the Island of Apii during
the month of October last. I don’t remember three natives being brought on board
when lying off the Island of Apii; I remember three coming aboard the vessel at Buma,
they came aboard and sat down on the poop, and sat there all the afternoon. They put a
piece of cloth round them and towards dark they got a yam to eat, and were shown the
hold where they were to sleep; they went down into the hold, and the Tanna men
commenced teasing them, throwing cocoanuts at them, and jeering them; they commenced
quarrelling and making a great noise, I went to the hatch and sang out to a Tanna man
named Tom, and said to him, “You look out Tom Tanna man, you make plenty of fight
presently and he said, “ All right, mate, me make no fight,” and I went away to my
work, and my attention was attracted a few minutes afterwards by a great noise, and
hearing the Tanna man crying out, “ Fight! fight!” and the three islanders firing arrows
at everybody they could see through the hatches. They shot several of the crew and
natives. Rangi, a native, got a musket; Jemmy, a native, got a musket; Louis and
Antoni, Frenchmen, and Tommy, a native, each got a musket. When it was getting dark,
the captain gave instructions that muskets and ammunition should be served out to the
crew; the muskets were loaded when served out, these muskets were fired, at these three
islanders who were below—they were fired from the cabin, the forecastle, and down the
hatches, by the men Rangi, Jemmy, Tommy, Louis, and Antoni. The firing lasted from
tw 7 enty minutes to half-an-hour. I think Sam held a light down the hold to permit the
men who had a musket, to see the three islanders. The second mate, Robert, held the
light down the hold—l think they held the light to allow the men who were firing, to
see how to fire. The three men were shot, they were brought on deck dead, stones were
tied to the bodies and they were thrown overboard. The supercargo, Levinger, did not
give the men orders to fire—the captain, Captain Hovell, ordered the men to fire. Tanna
and Buma are portions of the New Hebrides, there is no protection given to that group by
any power ; it was the shooting that killed the men. These three men were pulling
towards the vessel, when they were taken into the boat and brought by the mate to the
vessel. The sixty or eighty men we had on board were taken to the Fijis, where they
were engaged under the supervision of the British Consul. When I first saw these three


men, they were in the ship’s boat; whether they were taken out of their canoe by force
or not I don’t know. I heard the captain order the men to desist from firing, but to try
and pacify these men, during the time the firing was going on. Tommy, one of the men
who were armed, was wounded with an arrow by one of these islanders, whilst he was
looking down into the hold.
The men desisted firing when ordered by the captain —the men were then wounded,
and some of the other men on deck tried to secure these men in the hold, and one of
them got wounded and the captain ordered them to fire again, which they did until the
three islanders were killed. These three men did not, by either signs or in any manner
whatever, express a wish to leave the vessel. 1 showed one of them down into the hold;
Levinger was there too, the hatches were removed by somebody, I don’t know whom, as
there was a fair meeting on board. Sam, the cook, held the light down the main hatchway.
When 1 sajr that several were shot by these three islanders, 1 mean they were wounded by
the arrows fired by these men. Neither the cook nor second mate were wounded while
they were holding the light down the hatchway.
When I say these three islanders were pulling towards the vessel, they were in the
ship’s boat. I heard the captain give orders to allow these three men to jump overboard.
We took about 230 men to Hoviloh; we discharged those men at the Consul’s Office.
We were refused any more permits by the Consuls. All the men we had were engaged at
Hoviloh, in the presence of the Consul. I don’t know that we had a permit on the last
voyage.
(Signed) ROBERT Me MASTERS.
Sworn at Sydney, this 12th February, 1869.
P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Henry Heath on oath states :
I was cook on board the “Young Australian. We were off one of the two islands
Apii and Bama in October last. The mate went on shore with two boats, we and five men
in one, and Rangi, with about the same number of men, was in the other boat. They got
no natives on shore, and on their returning they met a canoe with three islanders in it. I
saw one boat (the second mate’s) towing the canoe to the vessel, and the three islanders in
his boat. The three men came on board quietly, and the supercargo gave them a stick of
tobacco and a pipe. They remained on the poop for some time, when the supercargo
ordered them to go down below. They resisted, and by signs intimated their desire to go
on shore,- but the supercargo prevented them from going ashore, and forced them down
below. The elder man resisted a good deal. There were about 150 men already down
below, and the Tanna men commenced throwing the ballast (small stones) at these three
men, and the three islanders commenced throwing stones back ; and as soon as all the
ballast was thrown away, the three islanders got some bows and arrows, and commenced
firing at any body that showed near the hatches; then the Tanna men commenced dancing
their war dance and wanted to set fire to the vessel to burn these three men out; and
towards dark some one, I don’t know who, ordered the muskets to be brought out. The
second mate, Rangi, and Antoni brought the muskets. The captain was on the poop.
The supercargo said, “don’t shoot them if you can help it; there are 16/. 10s. lost.” I
saw Rangi fire, and saw Louis and Antoni fire. Jemmy had not a musket: he threw a
large piece of ballast at one of the three men. I saw Tom fire. The captain did not speak
during the time they were firing. I did not hear him tell them to stop firing. 1 did not
hear the supercargo tell them to fire or interfere in any way. After they had fired all their
arrows they took refuge in the fore part of the vessel. There was no attempt made to seize
them by anybody then. When they went forward the fore hatch was taken off, and a
light made of oakum and parafine oil was put down, and they were shot by Antoni, Rangi,
and Bob, the second mate, through the fore hatch and main hatch. Bob fired through the
main hatch, and Antoni and Rangi through the fore hatch. They fired from the cabin into
the main and fore hatch. I saw their bodies brought on deck. They were dead. Their
death was caused by the firing. I was ordered to hold the light by the second mate.
Antoni, Louis, and I threw them overboard. There was no French, American, or any other
flag flying on that island. We were under English colours. We sold in Levuka 230 men
and 6 women for 1,200 Z, They were sold to Englishmen who are planting cotton there,
and in three years they get a small piece of unbleached calico, a flask of powder, and a few
beads from their masters. Sometimes they get back to their own islands and sometimes
they don’t, I don’t know whether they were sold with the Consul’s consent. The way
these men are got on board is this : The vessel is tacking about, and two boats are sent
on shore with natives painted and dressed with feathers in their hair to act as decoys; they


show the natives a musket and tomahawk and other things, and when they get a number
of islanders on board the boat they put up the sail and steer for the vessel; and when they
get the islanders aboard they don’t allow them to go ashore again. At the time the three
islanders were shot, they were unarmed, and were in the fore part of the vessel. The vessel
was about five miles from land and was under sail at the time. Two men were shot in the
fore hold, and one of them in the main hold. Rangi and Tom shot the man in the fore
hold, and Antoni shot the man in the main hatch.
(Signed) HENRY HEATH.
Sworn at Sydney, this 12th February, 1869.
P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
[Adjourned till Monday next, the 15th February, 1869,]
Inclosure 6 in No. 28.
The Crown Solicitor to the Private Secretary, Sydney.
Sir, Crown Solicitors Office, Sydney , February 19. 1869.
I HAVE the honour, by direction of the Hon. the Attorney-General, to transmit
herewith copy of the depositions taken in the case of the men named in the margin,* who
are charged with having murdered three natives of one of the South Sea Islands on board
the British vessel “Young Australian,” on the high seas.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN WILLIAMS.
Inclosure 7 in No. 28.
Depositions of Witnesses.
New South Wales, City of Sydney, to wit:
THE examination of George Turner, a constable of the police force of the Colon yof
New South Wales, Richard Elliott, a constable in the said police force, Robert McMasters,
of Neutral Bay, in the district of Sydney, in the said Colony, Joseph Johnson, of
Cumberland Street, in the said city, and Henry Heath, of the said city, in the said
Colony, cook, taken on Wednesday, the 17th day of February, in the year of our Lord
1869, at Sydney, in the Colony aforesaid, before the Undersigned, one of Her Majesty’s
Justices of the Peace for the said Colony, in the presence and hearing of Albert Ross
Hovell, Rangi, and Jemmy, who are charged this day before me, For that they, the said
Albert Ross Hovell, Rangi, and Jemmy, in the month of October last, on the high seas,
feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought, kill and murder three men whose
names are unknown.
Rangi and Jemmy, charged with murder.
George Turner, on oath, states—l am a constable of water police of this
Colony; about 3 o’clock this afternoon I arrested the two prisoners on board the Colonial
schooner “Active,” lying at the Baltic Wharf in this port by virtue of the warrant I
produce, wherein they are charged with having wilfully murdered a man (name unknown)
on board the vessel “ Young Australian,” on the high seas in October last; Rangi said,
“ All rightthe other, Jemmy, can’t speak English.
(Signed) GEORGE TURNER.
Sworn at Sydney, this 12th day of February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Resworn, this 17th day of February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Prisoners stand remanded till Wednesday next, the 17th February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
* Albert Ross Hovell and “ Hangi.”


Albert Ross Hovell, charged with having murdered three South Sea Islanders on board the
“ Young Australian,” at Sea.
Richard Elliott, on oath, states —I am a constable of the New South Wales
detective police force; between 12 and 1 o’clock this afternoon I arrested prisoner at his
residence, Riley Street, in this city, by virtue of the warrant produced, wherein he is
charged with having, in the month of October last, on board the British ship “ Young
Australian, 5 ’ then on the high seas, feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought,
killed and murdered three men whose names to me are unknown. I read the warrant to
prisoner, but he made no reply ; I asked him if he had the ship’s log book or any papers
in connection with this charge; he said the log book and papers were in Mr. Roberts’, the
Solicitor’s, possession. I also asked him if he had the permit from the Consul; he said,
“No, he had not, they had to give that back to the Consul.’ 5
(Bench). —The murdered men I allude to in my evidence were South Sea Islanders,
natives, I believe, of the New Hebrides. I pray for a remand till to-morrow, to bring the
necessary evidence.
(Signed) RICHARD ELLIOT.
Sworn at Sydney, the loth February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L, Cloete, W. P. M.
Resworn, this 17th day of February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Prisoner stands remanded till to-morrow, the 16th instant, at 11 o’clock a.m.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
February 16, 1869.
Prisoners Hovell, Rangi, and Jemmy stand remanded till to-morrow, the 17th instant.
at 11 o’clock.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Robert McMasters, on oath, states—l am chief officer of the vessel “ Young Australian,”
now in this port. She sails under the British fag. I was on board her in the month of
October last. She was then at the New Hebrides. I recollect being off the island of Apii.
That island is not under any civilized Government. I remember three natives coming on
board in the ship’s boats off the island of Pama. It was in the middle of the month, a
Monday or Tuesday; the vessel was at anchor, from three-quarters to a mile from the
land. The second mate and five of a boat’s crew (natives). The first I saw of them was
in the ship’s boats. I saw no canoe with them. They sat down on the poop. This was
between 1 and 2 o’clock. They sat there for a couple of hours ; they were tying a piece
of cloth around, and amusing themselves with a pipe and tobacco; they got a yam and
went down below into the hold. About 4 o’clock they sat down, and commenced eating
their yam. 1 went away to work at the mainsail. About half an hour after they went
down I heard a row. I went into the hatch, looked down, and spoke to Tom Tanna, who
could speak good English. The two prisoners, Rangi and Jemmy, were not on board. 1
turned to my work again. The next thing I saw the Tanna men rushed out of the
hold, and singing out “Fight!” getting sticks, bolts, and anything they could. This was
about ten minutes after I spoke to Tom Tanna. The three natives I have mentioned were
throwing stones and cocoa-nuts. The three natives got hold of some bows and arrows,
and were firing at any one they could see, black or white ; they were in the hold, firing
up through the hatches.
Erromanga Tom w 7 as wounded by the arrows. A Rotumah man, David, was wounded;
a white man (Frenchman), Louis, was wounded. The captain was at this time on deck ;
he gave instruction not to shoot the three men, or hurt them, but to pacify them as much
as possible. Some of the men had muskets, which, when it was dusk, the captain said
they would have to shoot the three men who were in the hold. He said this to the
persons around him. I heard him say it. The captain said they must wound, not kill,
them. At 6 o’clock Louis and Antonie had muskets; they got them out of the cabin.
The captain was on the poop. The captain said, addressing the men who had the
muskets, “Don’t shoot them to kill them, but to wound them.” There was not any
shooting for some time. The ship’s boats came alongside at half-past 6 o’clock. The
captain went to the hatch several times, and was nearly wounded ; he made motions to
them to be quiet, and spoke to them in English. When the boats came alongside all


hands collected on the hatch to try and get down, but it was no use; every time any one
showed an arrow was fired at him. This went on for half an hour, until it got so dark
that you could not see anything.
These three men had a barricade in the hold, and we could not see them. The
second mate, Robert, got a light coat, I believe; the cook held it for him. The second
mate fired; I heard him say one was dead. The captain was at this time in the poop, and
had not said anything immediately before. Antonie fired through the cabin bulkhead, and
he said he had shot one man. There was a shot fired, I believe, by Louis, from the
forecastle; there were five shots fired. The cook held the light down the hatch whilst the
firing was going on. We had a supercargo named Levinger on board. I did not hear
any one besides the captain give any orders about firing. The captain attempted to stop
the firing in the middle of it. Rangi had a musket. I think Jemmy had a musket too,
but am not sure. I don’t know whether they fired. The captain said, they—speaking of
the three natives who were in the hold—must be shot, before they were shot, and whilst
these men had muskets in their hands. I don’t know who shot the third man. I saw the
corpses of the three men brought on deck by the other natives and the crew; stones were
tied to them by the crew, and they were thrown overboard. The captain was on the poop,
and could see what was done. I did not hear these three men, or any one of them, called
by any name; their names were unknown to me. The shooting killed these three men.
I have no doubt about the matter. There were sixty or seventy other natives on board at
this time. The three men were in the fore part of the hold, on the starboard side. The
men desisted from firing when ordered by the captain for a time, and afterwards they
commenced again, The captain, after he had ordered the firing to desist, said the men
would have to be shot, and on that the firing recommenced, which resulted in the killing
of the three men. I can’t say any more as to what the two coloured prisoners w T ere doing
than what I have said. We had 230 men on board that trip; we had that number on
board at one time; we took them to Ovalau, Fiji, where they were hired out at service.
The “ Young Australian” is a schooner of 130 tons tonnage. We left our anchorage at
4 o’clock the next morning, and went to Santo, 200 miles away; we got about fifteen men
there. We took the boat ashore, the natives came into her, and we rowed them on board.
The “ Young Australian” is a Sydney vessel, sailed from this port, and I believe her owner
is James Griffin.
(To the Bench). —There was a native who could speak the same language as these three
men on board. The captain did not have anything told to these three men as to
what was going to be done to them, or anything. From the poop, where the captain was
standing, is about 20 feet, and from the main to the fore hatch is 20 feet more.
(Mr. Williams). —Some of the men round the captain when he said the three men
must be shot had muskets. There were somewhere about five or six shots fired. I
do not know of my own knowledge that there was a person on board who could speak the
language of these three natives. The prisoner Albert Ross Hovell is the person of whom
I have been speaking as the captain through my depositions. The Island of Parna is not
under any recognized Government that I know of. I saw no flag flying there.
It is one of the New Hebrides, and is distant about fifteen or twenty miles from Apii.
(Signed) ROBERT Me MASTERS.
Sworn at Sydney, this 17th day of February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Joseph Johnston, on oath, states: I was cabin boy on board the “ Young
Australian” in October last. I was on board the u Young Australian” off the
Island of Apii, in the middle of October last. I remember three islanders coming
on board. I first saw them in the ship’s boat. The boat was coming round a point
of the Island of Apii. There was not a canoe with them. The ship’s boat came
to the ship. The three islanders came on the deck and sat on the poop. This was about
3 o’clock. They remained on the poop half an hour. They were sitting still. I
then saw the supercargo (Levinger) lead these three islanders to the main hatchway.
These three men went down into the hold. About five minutes after that I saw the other
natives who were in the hold tormenting these three islanders. Spitting on and laughing
at them. The three men then tried to come out of the hold, and the other natives tried
to shove them back. All the other natives then got hold of pieces of wood. The three
islanders had not anything just then. All the other natives commenced to rush out of the
hold and put the hatches on, keeping the three men down below. 1 heard the Frenchman
Antonie sing out that they had bows and arrows. Antonie got rope to make these three
islanders fast, but the supercargo said it was too late then. The three islanders began


then to break open the main hatch, and did break it open, and began to heave up stones
and cocoa-nuts at any one that was passing. I ran up the foremast to get away from
these three islanders. As soon as the hatches were broken oft I saw that the three
islanders had bows and arrows, and I ran up the mast to get out of their way; the other
natives had these bows and arrows in the hold ; these three natives fired the arrows at me.
I heard some one sing out, look out they are firing arrows up, but I saw them myself. I
came down the jibstay on to the jib-boon, and went and sat on the bond where the other
natives were sitting. The men were still firing arrows up. Erromanga Tom was firing
muskets to defend himself. Erromanga Tom had a musket. I saw him fire down the main
hatchway only once. The second mate, Bob, had a musket. Louis and Antonie also had
muskets. The two prisoners before the Court, Jemmy and Rangi, had muskets. It was
just getting dusk at this time. The cook, Sam, I call him, was there. I heard
Levinger say to shoot them. I heard Louis say what is the use of firing yet. I did not
hear any one say anything else about firing. 1 did not hear any one else say anything
about firing before the firing commenced, except what 1 have stated. The captain was on
the poop at the time. I heard him say, don’t fire at them, let them come up and go over
the side. The prisoner, Albert Ross Hovell, is the person I refer to as the captain. When
these three islanders attempted to come up, all the other natives commenced throwing
stones at them. I did not see either of the two coloured prisoners, Jemmy and Rangi,
fire, but both of them had muskets; it was not dark then. It was dark when the firing
ceased; it became dark whilst the firing was going on. The firing lasted about three,
quarters of an hour. After the firing ceased I saw these three islanders on deck, two
were dead, the other had a little life in him. 1 don’t know whether he was alive when
they threw him overboard. They tied stones to the bodies of these three islanders, and
threw them overboard. I don’t know where the captain was at this time ; it was dark. I
heard the captain all the time say, “not to shoot them.” The prisoners, Jemmy and
Rangi, were looking over the side when the bodies were being thrown overboard. I did
not see the captain whilst the bodies were being thrown overboard, nor did I hear him give
any instructions about it. The captain was on the poop when 1 saw him daring this
transaction. The poop is about 20 feet from the main hatch. The captain was looking
on, he did not come off the poop to where the men were firing. We sailed at 3 o’clock
the next morning.
{Bench.) —These men’s bodies were brought up through the main hatch, They were
firing arrows the whole of the time. I was down in the hold the next morning and there
were not any arrows there then.
{Mr. Williams.) —There were about sixty arrows in the hold. I was about two feet
away from the bodies of these men. They were bleeding from wounds. One had five
wounds ; one in his arm, one in his thigh, one in his leg, and one in his forehead, and the
other in the middle of his body. They were bullet wounds. This was the man that had
some life in him when he was on deck. I did not go close to the other bodies, I only went
close to this body because I saw some life in him. There were about a dozen shots fired.
The ship was at anchor. She was not tacking about. The arms were kept in the main
cabin. I don’t know who threw them, the three islanders 5 bodies, overboard, or who tied
the stones. When I say that I saw the captain on the poop during this transaction, I
mean during the firing. These three islanders were all men. One was old, another young,
and the other middle-aged. I did not hear them called by any names. I did not hear any
one of them called by any name.
{Mr. Roberts.) —The time I ran up the mast I went to get out of danger. I considered
myself in danger. Three or four arrows were fired at me in quick succession. I was on
the top gallant arm. I saw them firing at Erromanga Tom. Many arrows had been fired
at different members of the crew before I heard the report of fire-arms. The arrows were
used whilst the firing was going on, Erromanga Tom was a Chief. Rangi and Jemmy
came on board after the firing of the arrows had commenced. These three men commenced
firing about half-past 3. I heard only twelve shots fired. The firing ceased after dark,
during that time I did not hear the captain’s voice. I don’t know when these three men
were shot. It was not quite dark when the first shot was fired. These three islanders
were carrying on this disturbance for several hours before a shot was fired. I considered
mine and the lives of the other members of the crew endangered before any shot was fired.
I saw Antonie fire a shot. I did not see Rangi and Jemmy fire, but I heard the report of
the muskets.
(Bench.) —These three islanders were not armed when they came on board. When
they came on board the captain had not any intercourse with them. The boats went
ashore before the vessel anchored. We came there about 1 o’clock on the day the affair
occurred.
[43B] H


(Mr. Williams.) —We on deck could not get out of the way of these men shooting.
These three islanders put their heads up through the hatchway and looked where to aim.
(Bench.) —There were about eighty men on board, and two were wounded. These
three islanders had not any other weapons than bows and arrows. They were shooting
their arrows all the time the muskets were being fired.
(Signed) JOSEPH JOHNSON,
Sworn at Sydney, this 17th day of February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, TV. P. M.
Henry Heath, on oath, states,—l was cook on board the “ Young Australian,” in
October last. I recollect that vessel being off the Island of Apii or Paura in that month.
I know prisoner Albert Ross Ho veil; he was captain of that vessel at this time ; the
prisoners Rangi and Jemmy were seamen on board. I recollect the second-mate going on
shore in one boat with five men, and prisoner Rangi in another boat with about five men;
I saw them leave the ship and go in the direction of the shore. I noticed them when they
were returning to the ship. I noticed them when they came alongside, that the second-
mate had three Islanders, men, in his boat. There was not a canoe with them ; there was
not a canoe being tow T cd by either of the boats ; when the boat came alongside these three
Islanders walked up the ladder, and on to the poop where they sat down, and the super-
cargo gave them a pipe and some tobacco. These three Islanders remained on the poop
about an hour, and were then shown the way down into the hold. The supercargo made
signs to them to go down into the hold, and they went down. There was no ladder
leading from the deck into the hold ; there was a piece of firewood there with some of the
branches cut off, by which they went down ; they did not resist when motioned to go
down into the hold. These three men had some yams given them down in the hold.
The other natives of the other islands we had on board went below and commenced jeering
at these men. We had about 150 other natives on board the vessel at that time. The
Tanna boys commenced throwing pieces of cocoanut-shell at these three Islanders, and
the three Islanders retaliated by throwing pieces of ballast at the other natives. The whole
lot of them, excepting the three men, then came on deck by some means or other; the Tanna
men had obtained some bows and arrows, and these three men found the bows and arrows
in the hold and commenced to fire at everyone they could see. They were at this time in
the main hold ; the hatch was open, the ballast and firewood in the hold was just enough
to allow a man to put his head up on deck. The eldest man of the three put his head
through the hatchway and fired some arrows fore and aft, at anyone he could see. One
of the crew, named Davy, was wounded by an arrow in the breast; a man named Tom
wns wounded in the forehead. No one would go near this man to secure him, because
they did not know whether the arrows were poisoned. I don’t know where these other two
Islanders w r ere; they were somewhere in the hold at this time ; they shot all of their
arrows away, and it commenced to become dark. Captain Hovel was at this time on the
poop. I did not hear him say anything; I could not hear him on account of the excite-
ment on board. Just before dark muskets were handed round. The second-mate, Antonie,
Louis, Rangi, the prisoner before the Court, and a man named Tom, each got a musket;
when Louis went down into the forecastle, the prisoner Jemmy handed him the rifle.
The firing commenced just before dark from the cabin.
I can’t say who fired first; they fired two shots through an opening in the cabin
leading into the hold. These three Islanders retreated to the fore part of the hold; one
of them got behind a canoe that was in the hold ; there was then a wad of oakum tied
on to a rod of iron and dipped in oil.
The fore-hatch was taken up. The second-mate came to the galley, lit the oakum,
and ordered me to hold it down the fore-hold; one man was on one side of the hold and
the other on the other side. I don’t know where the third-mate was; as the light went
down the two men retreated into the middle of the hold. Antonie fired and shot one of
themthe man fell when shot. Rangi shot another man. The third man was behind
the canoe; the man behind the canoe was shot by a man named Tom. Altogether
there were only five shots fired; they had not any fresh muskets, and they did not load
again. At the time these three men were shot they had ceased firing their arrows. A
rope was put down the hold and the three bodies of these Islanders were hauled up and
laid on the deck. They had been killed by the musket-shot wounds. The three bodies
were thrown overboard; I can’t say by whom. Captain Hovell was on the poop all the
time the shooting was going on. I heard the captain say, “ Spare the men if you can.”
I have stated that the supercargo called to the captain, “ Don’t shoot the men if you can
help it—there is 161 lost on them.” The captain tried to put a stop to the firing, but it


was all in vain ; the excitement was too great. Jhe muskets were bi ought xrom the
cabin; I did not hear anyone give orders for the muskets to be brought from the cabin.
After these men had shot away all their arrows, and before they were shot, no attempt
was made to secure them. There was plenty of ballast there. No one liked to go down.
The vessel was under sail when the shooting was going on. The vessel was about five
miles from land between Apii and Pama. The ‘‘Young Australian’ sails under the
British Flag. I heard the captain say, “ Don’t fire if you can help it.” I did not hear
him say u Stop firing.” _ . . , , ~
(Bench.) —I did not see muskets handed round. I don t know who brought them :
the captain was present when the muskets were served out. I don t know where the
captain was when the bodies were thrown overboard. The captain and the men who had
the muskets and the natives were all mixed together on the poop.
(Mr. Roberts.) —The captain was on the poop when the shots were actually fired, i
cannot say whether the shots were fired at these three men on the motion of the men
themselves, or whether by orders from some person. I did not hear the captain older the
shots to be fired. The three islanders could be seen through the hole in the bulkhead of
the cabin, from which place the first two shots were fired ; the excitement was so great on
board at the time the two shots were fired that no orders could be heard before the
muskets were discharged. These three islanders were firing their arrows at cveiy one they
saw. These three islanders were in no degree civilized. The natives of these islands are
cannibals. Nearly twenty minutes elapsed between the firing of the first two shots, and
the firing of the third, fourth, and fifth shots. It was during the interval that the captain
said, “ Don’t shoot the men ; spare them, if you can and these men paid no attention
to it. The excitement was still great. The boats that went to the shore had muskets;
they always do. The muskets they had firing with may have been brought out of the boats
for all I know ; they were handed about on the poop. I never heard the captain order them
to fire. I was never near the captain. I never heard him say, “ These three men must be
shot,” when these men had the muskets. If he had said so I could have heaid him. The
captain could not see the third, fourth, and fifth shots fired, except by the flash and report.
The third and fourth shots were fired at once, and the fifth soon after, as soon as the light
could be shown. It was at this time that the captain said, “Spare the men if you can;
don’t shoot them.” I was close by, and distinctly heard the captain use those expressions.
I did not see the captain hand round the guns ; the muskets were handed round, and a
quarter of an hour elapsed before they were discharged. There was great excitement,
disturbance, and confusion going on at the time the muskets were handed round, as long
as these three islanders had possession of the hold. I consider the lives of the members
of the crew were endangered. Jemmy did not fire at all. I did not whether all the
arrows had been fired before the last three shots were fired. One man laid in his bunk a
month in consequence of the wounds received from one of these islanders. lam positive
that the three men were dead before they were thrown overboard; that stones were not
tied to them ; and that the vessel was under sail at the time.
(Bench.) —I did not hear the captain order the men to give up the muskets, or place
them in the cabin between the firing of the first two shots, and the firing of the third,
fourth, and fifth shots. . .
(Mr. Roberts.) —Just before the third shot was fired the captain cried out, “ Don’t
shoot the men, spare them if you can,” and they took no heed, the shots were fired in such
quick succession.
(Mr. Williams.) —I did not hear the captain say anything during the interval of
twenty minutes between the second and the third, fourth, and fifth shots. Jhe captain
was on the deck all this time, and saw the men with the muskets on deck. He did
not interfere to take the muskets from the men, nor tell them, as far as I heard, not to
shoot.
(Signed) HENRY HEATH.
Sworn at Sydney, this 17th day of February, 1869.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.
Prisoner Jemmy is discharged.
(Signed) P. L. Cloete, W. P. M.


Inclosure 8 in No. 28,
Minute from the Attorney-General for the Earl of Belmore* s information.
THE man Levinger will be tried in Sydney in the event of his being sent up. The
warrant is sent with that view; but it is not certain that it can be executed. Should
Levinger apply for a habeas corpus , and be brought before Melbourne a
question of considerable difficulty may be raised as to the application of the extradition
enactment to a case in which the offence was not committed within the ordinary limits ot
the jurisdiction of our Courts. , . . ....
I have decided not to proceed to the trial of Hovell and Rangi at the present sitting,
as I think it proper to endeavour to obtain further evidence, especially that of the
declarants, whose statements are forwarded by Her Majesty’s Consul. Ihe case will not,
therefore, be tiied until May. a\t\u\to
(Signed) W. M. MANNING.
February 23, 1869.
No. 29,
Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Clarendon.— {Received June 19.)
My Lord, March 23, 1869.
IT is my duty to inform your Lordship a most wanton outrage is alleged to have
been perpetrated by the master and crew of the schooner “ Young Australian, belonging
to Sydney, New South Wales, while upon a voyage through the New Hebrides procuring
labourers for the cotton planters in Fiji.
The circumstances, as far as they have come to my knowledge, are as follows .
The schooner “Young Australian,” Albert Ross Hovell, master, being at the end ot
November last on a cruize through the neighbouring islands, known as the New Hebrides,
made prisoners three men, natives of Pama Island, who at the time of alleged seizure
were peaceably fishing, or journeying along the coast of their island m a small canoe
The captured men were conveyed in the ship’s boat on board the vessel, and placed among
a number of other natives in the “hold.” Finding themselves entrapped, and rendered
desperate, for that, or some reasons not yet known to me, the prisoners commenced
fighting with bows and arrows found in the vessel s hold. The crew, consis mg o
Frenchmen and one German, then shot them to death, and threw the bodies overboard.
It does not appear the master gave orders to fire at the Pama men ; but he does no
appear to have prevented their action.
The “ Young Australian ” leaving the New Hebrides came to Fiji, and visited this
port (Levuka) without making any report of the circumstances above related.
Some days after her departure from this place information was given me by certain
Tanna men and others lately arrived in the “Young Australian, which led to my
making instant inquiry. The results of the investigation I immediately forwarded to
Commodore Lambert, In view of the probable absence of Commodore Lambert, i also
forwarded a Report, covering the original declarations of witnesses, to his Excellency the
Earl of Belmore. . . „„„„
A copy of the covering despatch I have the honour to inclose, with a request yom
Lordship will be pleased to furnish me with instructions as to the extent ot Consular
authority for procuring the arrest of persons other than British subjects who may lave
been guilty of murder, or other criminal offence, on board a British ship, from which, prior
to an information being laid, they have been discharged. . ~ ,
The 267th Section of the “ Mercantile Marine Act” provides for crimes committed
on the high seas and abroad,” but does not appear to reach the case which is submitted to
Earl Belmore in the accompanying inclosure. , . . , u
The French seamen, Lennie and Voller, are I learn still in this group, but, m the
absence of positive authority, I have deemed it unadvisable to arrest tiese men m 9L er
they may be forcibly conveyed within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Courts of New
South Wales. . , _ r ju- x u
I have eyery reason to suppose the case now laid before your Lordship to be, so fax
as far as Fiji has been concerned, an exceptional one ; yet the influx of population and
capital to Fiji is so rapid, and the demand for agricultural labourers so great, that an
irresistible temptation is offered unscrupulous persons to procure them from other is ands
at any risk; and, therefore, notwithstanding the people introduced are well treated by the


settlers while here, and that their condition bears no semblance to what is understood by
“ slavery,” I have the honour to recommend the traffic be at once suppressed, or placed
under authorized supervision and control. P
This recommendation, my Lord, is in no way based upon treatment or condition ot
Tannese and other Islanders while in Fiji; but upon account of the improprieties and evils
to which I fear the system, increasing and uncontrolled, is gradually drifting.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Inclosure in No. 29.
Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Belmore, January 17, 1869.
[See Inclosure 2 in No. 28.]
No. 30.
Mr. Murray to Acting Consul Thurston.
gj r Foreign Office, June 24, 1869.
WITH reference to your despatch of the 23rd of March, reporting the murder of
some natives on board the British ship “Young Australian,” and the steps you have taken
in the matter, I am directed by the Earl of Clarendon to inclose, for your information, a copy
of a despatch from the Earl of Belmore to the Secretary of State for the Colonies * reporting
the proceedings taken at Sydney , for the trial of the alleged perpetrators of this crime
It appears from this despatch that the Earl of Belmore has communicated with you
upon the subject of the further evidence which is required in this case.
r I am, &c.
(Signed) JAMES MURRAY.
No. 31.
Sir F. Rogers to Mr. Hammond. —(Received July 1.)
«• Downing Street , June 30, 1869.
’ WITH reference to the letter from this Office of the Bth instant, forwarding a copy
of a despatch from the Governor of New South Wales respecting the murder of three
natives of the South Sea Islands on board the ship “Young Australian lam directed by
Earl Granville to transmit to you, for the information of the Earl or Clarendon, a copy ot
a further despatch from the Governor on the subject, in which he incloses a correspondence
with the French Consul relating to some Frenchmen supposed to have been implicated ik
these murders. ,
Lord Granville proposes, with Lord Clarendon’s concurrence, to approve the course
taken by Lord Belmore.
1 am, occ.
(Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
Inclosure 1 in No. 31.
The Earl of Belmore to Earl Granville.
L orc j Sydney , March 20, 1869.
y WITH reference to my despatch of 26th February, 1869, forwarding the
copy of a letter and its inclosures received by me from Mr. Thurston, Her Majesty s
Acting Consul at Fiji, on the subject of three murders which had been committed in
October last on board the British ship “ Young Australian,” I now beg to inclose a copy of
mv answer to Mr. Thurstons communication. _ , ,
y 2. In framing this reply I have been advised by the Attorney-General, and on one
* Inclosure 1 in No. 28.


point, relating to natives of France who are supposed to have been implicated and to be
still at large, 1 have received a formal opinion from him, a copy of which I inclose.
3. I have also sent a copy of this opinion to Mr. Thurston for his guidance.
4. Your Lordship will see that Sir William Manning advised me that the proceedings
should be communicated to the French Consul in Sydney, M. Sentis, and that no attempt
should be made to arrest the Frenchmen without his concurrence.
5. M. Sentis, as you will find by the inclosed copy of a Memorandum received by me
from him, declines to interfere unless these men are actually in custody here, and then only
to the extent of claiming for them a mixed jury.
6. I have consequently told Mr. Thurston that I cannot advise the arrests being made,
but must leave him to act on his own judgment and responsibility. Warrants appear to
have been issued by the Water Police Magistrate here, but not at the instance of the
Attorney-General. As lam quite without instructions or authority to take action in the
matter, I trust your Lordship will approve of what I have done.
I have, &c.
(Signed) BELMORE.
Jnclosure 2 in No. 31.
The Earl of Belmore to Mr, Thurston.
Sir, Sydney, March 10, 1869.
I HAVE had the honour to receive your communication of the 17th January, 1869,
covering certain declarations made before you respecting the murders alleged to have been
committed in October last on board the British vessel “ Young Australian.”
I have sent copies of these papers to Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the
Colonies, but before doing so I referred them to Sir William Manning, Attorney-General
for New South Wales, and learnt from him that, acting on prior information, the Crown
had already commenced proceedings in the matter, first, by an inquiry in the nature of an
inquest, and afterwards by a prosecution of the master (A. R. Hovell) and two of the crew
named Rangi and Jemmy for murder.
The master and Rangi have been committed for trial and are in custody. An
information was filed against them at a recent sitting of the Supreme Court, and the trial
has been postponed till May next with a view to the procuring of further evidence if
obtainable.
Levinger, the supercargo, has, I learn, been arrested in Melbourne under a warrant
from this Colony and is now in custody. He appears to have been remanded to
Sydney.
The Attorney-General advises that you should be invited to collect such further
evidence as may appear to you calculated to throw light on the case, and that any persons
whom they may consider also acquainted with the true facts and legally competent to give
evidence in a Court of Justice, may be sent by you to Sydney in time for the May sittings
of the Court. It will be necessary that they should be persons “ sensible of the obligations
of an oath from religious sentiment and belief,” persons who believe in the existence of a
God, and that Divine punishment will be the consequence of perjury, and “ who regard an
oath as binding on their consciences.”
It will also be desirable to select, in the event of there being a choice of competent
witnesses, such as can understand and can make themselves understood in the English
language, or to send with them a competent interpreter, such interpreter being also qualified
to undertake under the sanction of an oath that he will faithfully interpret. I request that
you will be so good as to act upon the suggestions above conveyed, and I shall be glad if
you will convey to me the earliest information in your power as to the additional evidence
you may have collected.
The expenses to which you may be put in acting under my request will, I presume,
be ultimately paid by the Home Government, but of this you will be a better judge than
I can be; but in the meantime, you are at liberty (should you find it necessary), to
communicate with the Crown Law Officers of this Colony respecting them.
In view T to an inquiry whether the course said to have been pursued by the master
and crew of the “Young Australian,” in procuring labourers for service in Fiji comes
within the laws for the suppression of slavery, I shall be glad if you will give me
information as to the disposal, legal and social position, and treatment of these men when
landed in that and other islands, and as to the measures (if any) adopted to secure their
subsequent return to their native islands.


I find that the French Consul in Sydney declines to interfere farther than to
claim a mixed jury, if the men are actually brought and tried here; but I cannot take
upon myself to advise the arrests mentioned by Sir William Manning being made, and
must leave you to act upon your own judgment and responsibility with regard to them.
I have, &c.
(Signed) BELMORE.
Inclosure 3 in No. 31.
Minute by the Attorney-General.
In the matter of the participation by subjects of France in the murders on board the
British vessel “Young Australian.”
IN reference to the note of his Excellency the Earl of Belmore, of yesterday’s date.
I have the honour to report as follows
Warrants have, as 1 learn, been issued by the Water Police for the arrest
of the Frenchman and another foreigner, supposed to be of the same nation, who were
concerned in the murders on board the “Young Australian. Ihese warrants were not
applied for at mv instance, and 1 know of no authority for executing them in the Island of
Fiji, or elsewhere in those parts. The Supreme Court has jurisdiction to try cases of
this sort when the persons accused are within the limits of this territory ; but it does not
follow that our Justices of the Peace can reach the persons of the offenders by warrants
executed beyond such limits, and not within some place to which the Extradition Laws
may extend. Should the warrants he in fact executed, and the offenders thereupon be
brought within the Colony, the charges may be proceeded with, and perhaps it might not
be deemed wrong to seize these men if found on the South Sea Islands, after having
committed their offence on board a British ship, and when under articles as members of its
crew, and to convey them by force to this Colony.
But such a step would be, in a legal sense, of such a questionable character, that i
must advise that it be not attempted in the case of a subject of France, without the
concurrence of the Representative of that country.
Upon the above grounds, I recommend that the proceedings should be communicated
to the French Consul at Sydney, and that nothing should be attempted towards the arrest
of the Frenchman, or Frenchmen, said to have been concerned in this murder, without
prior consultation with him. _ w .. h.vmtmo
(Signed) W. M. MANNING.
March 4, 1869.
Inclosure 4 in No. 31.
Memorandum for Lord Belmore by M. Sentis, French Consul in Sydney.
THE French Consul in Sydney having received communication ol the Attorney-
General’s opinion on the matter of some Frenchmen, supposed to be connected with a
murder committed in high seas when articled to the ship “ Young Australian, expresses
his thanks to his Excellency for the courtesy shown to him on this occasion.
As regards his countrymen, he begs to state that he has no jurisdiction in the Fiji
Islands, and therefore could not interfere in the matter.
In the case the men would be brought to Sydney and tried before the Supreme Court
of New South Wales, the Consul would only claim what is granted by the law of the
country, i.e., that the accused might have the benefit of a jury with half ol their country-
men resident in Sydney. (Signed) W . SENTIS.
No. 32.
Sir F. Rogers to Mr. Hammond. —(Received July .)
gj r Downing Street , July 7, 1869.
I LAID before Earl Granville your letter of the 10th ot May, inclosing a copy of a
despatch from Her Majesty’s Consul-General in the Sandwich Islands, on the subject of the
introduction of immigrants from the South Sea Islands.


By his Lordship’s direction, your letter and its inclosures were referred to the Emigra-
tion Commissioners for any observations they might have to offer ; and I am desired to
annex a copy of their Report for the Earl of Clarendon’s information.
With reference to the suggestion of the Commissioners, that the Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty should be requested to instruct the Officer commanding on the Australian
station to watch this traffic, as those instructions would probably relate to the whole
emigration, so far as it is effected by British subjects, and not merely to that part of it
which is directed upon Queensland, Lord Granville has left it to Lord Clarendon to make
any requisite communication to the Admiralty.
I am, &c.
(Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
Inclosure in No. 32.
Mr. Murdoch to Sir F. Rogers.
Sir, Emigration Board, May 27, 1869.
I HAVE to acknowledge your letter of the 18th instant with the copy of a despatch
from Major Wodehouse, Her Majesty’s Commissioner and Consul-General in the Sandwich
Islands, on the subject of the proposed introduction into that kingdom of immigrants from
the South Sea Islands.
2. Major Wodehouse transmits a copy of the instructions given by the President of
the Board of Immigration at Honolulu to the master of the Hawaiian barque “ Mauna
Loa ” for the collection of immigrants, together with a copy of the agreement to be entered
into with them. There is nothing to object to in the instructions as to the collection of
the people or in the agreement. The instructions contemplate the introduction of equal
numbers of each sex, and direct especial care to be taken that no pressure or force is used
by the Chiefs to induce the islanders to enter into engagements. The agreement provides
for the monthly payment of the wages to be agreed upon for the admission of the
immigrants to all the rights of citizenship, according to the Hawaiian law, and for the
instruction of all their children in the public schools. If these provisions are carried out
the South Sea Islanders will probably be better off in the Sandwich Islands than in their
own homes; but we have no information as to the organization of the Immigration
Department in the Sandwich Islands, or the means the Government would have of
superintending the treatment of the immigrants. At the same time, as long as emigration
from the South Sea Islands to Queensland is allowed to continue, I do not see on what
grounds Her Majesty’s Government could object to a similar immigration to the Sandwich
Islands. The Commission to the master of the “ Mauna Loa ” must be considered as
equivalent to the license to be taken out by persons proposing to collect immigrants for
Queensland, and if so, we have no right to assume that precautions against fraud or
violence, which are considered sufficient in the case of Queensland, "would be less than
sufficient in the case of the Sandwich Islands.
3. The provisions for protecting the people on the voyage appear, however, defective.
The master of the ship is left to his own discretion as to the number to be embarked, being
only enjoined te not to take on board so many as to endanger the health either of them or
your crew;” and he is only recommended, not required, to keep the men and women
separate, especially at night, and to construct a bulkhead dividing the cempartments in
which they are berthed respectively. These instructions are evidently very insufficient,
■even if attended to, and there is no penalty attached to the neglect of them. The numbers
to be carried ought to be defined in proportion to space, the ration and water to be issued
ought to be prescribed, and (the duration of the voyage for which the ship should be
provisioned out to be fixed. But Ido not know how far Her Majesty’s Government may
think it right to interfere with the Government of the Sandwich Islands in regard to details
of this description,
4. Looking to the matter generally, it is, I think, impossible not to regard with anxiety
the demand which has recently sprung up for the services of South Sea Islanders. While
the whole number required was small there would be no difficulty in obtaining a sufficient
number of willing emigrants among the islands. But this will become more difficult as
the demand becomes greater, and the competition to obtain them will be likely to lead to
bargainings with the Chiefs which will end, practically, in the purchase of the people. It
would not be fair to Queensland to pronounce definitively against the emigration till a
larger experience has been obtained of it; but I think the time has come when it requires


to be very carefully watched, and that the Admiralty should be requested to issue instruc-
tions to that effect to the officer commanding on the Australian station. It must be borne
in mind that our example in recruiting emigrants among these islands is sure to be followed
by the French in New Caledonia, and by others : and if abuses are discovered in our
emigration they will neutralize any remonstrances which Her Majesty’s Government might
desire to make against abuses in the emigration to other places.
I have, &c.
(Signed) T. W. C. MURDOCH.
No. 33.
The Earl of Clarendon to Consul-General Wodehouse.
Sir, Foreign Office, July 13, 1869.
WITH reference to your despatch of the 17th of March last, I have to acquaint
you that I see no reason to object to the general character of the instructions addressed
by the Honololu Immigration Commission to the commanders of vessels engaged
in procuring immigrants from the Polynesian Islands. The provisions however for
protecting the immigrants whilst on the voyage appear to be defective. 3he master of the
vessel is left to his own discretion as to the number to be embarked, being only enjoined
“ not to take on board so many as to endanger the health of them or your crew ; and he
is also only recommended, not required, to keep the men and women separate, and to
construct a bulkhead dividing the compartments in which they are respectively berthed.
No penalty also attaches to a neglect of the instructions.
You will call attention to these points, and suggest that the numbers of immigrants to
be conveyed in a vessel should be defined in proportion to space ; the rations and water to
be issued should be prescribed, and the duration of the voyage for which the ship should be
provisioned ought to be fixed.
In making a representation in this sense you will point out the necessity for every
precaution being taken to prevent the operations of persons thus engaged in procuring
immigrants, from degenerating into what might virtually prove to be a slave trade in
disguise.
I am, &c.
(Signed) CLARENDON..
No. 34.
Mr. Hammond to the Secretary to the Admiralty.
Sir, Foreign Office, July 13, 1869.
I AM directed by the Earl of Clarendon to request that you will acquaint the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty that his Lordship has lately received from Her Majesty’s
Commissioner and Consul-General at Honololu, information as to the steps being taken to
introduce Polynesians into the Sandwich Islands.
The steps thus taken appear to be founded on an Act of the Hawaiian Legislature,
dated June 23, 1868, by which the Board of Immigration are authorized and directed to
take prompt and efficient measures to introduce these immigrants from other islands in the
Pacific.
The Lords of the Admiralty will learn from the papers herewith inclosed, 4 ’ the nature
of the instructions given by the Immigration Board to the masters of vessels employed on
this service, as also the form of contract to be entered into with the immigrants, and Lord
Clarendon sees no objection to these instructions, except as regards the points of detail
alluded to in the instruction to Mr. Wodehouse, of which copy is inclosed. Indeed, so
long as emigration from the South Sea Islands to Queensland is permitted to continue.
Her Majesty’s Government would not be in a position to object to a similar emigration to
the Sandwich Islands. The commissions granted by the Immigration Board at Honololu,
must be considered as equivalent to the license taken out by persons proposing to collect
emigrants for Queensland ; and, if so, Her Majesty’s Government cannot assume that
* Nos. 21 and 32.
[43B]


precautions against fraud or violence which are considered sufficient in the case of Queens-
land, would be insufficient in the case of the Sandwich Islands.
Looking, however, to the matter in its general aspect, Lord Clarendon considers it
desirable to call the attention of the Lords of the Admiralty to the results which may
possibly ensue from the demand which has recently sprung up for the services of South
Sea Islanders. Whilst the demand for these immigrants was small, little difficulty would
be found in obtaining in the islands, a sufficient number of willing immigrants ; but an
increasing demand might lead to competition and to bargains with the Chiefs, which would
practically end in the purchase of the so-called immigrants; and under these circumstances
Lord Clarendon would suggest that the special attention of the Admiral on the station
should be directed to the subject, and that he should be instructed to watch very carefully
the operations of the parties concerned in procuring the immigrants from the Pacific
Islands.
I am, &c.
(Signed) E. HAMMOND.
No. 35.
The Secretary to the Admiralty to Mr. Hammond.—{Received July 17.)
gj r Admiralty , July 16, 1869.
WITH reference to your letter of 13th instant, relative to the steps which are being
taken for the introduction of Polynesians into the Sandwich Islands, by the Honololu
Immigration Commission, I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
to request that you will inform the Earl of Clarendon that, in conformity with his Lord-
ship’s suggestion, they have directed the Commander-in-chief on the Pacific Station, and
the Commodre on the Australian Station, to instruct the commanding officers of vessels
under their orders to take every opportunity that may occur for watching the operations
of the parties concerned in procuring the immigrants from the Pacific Islands, and to
furnish their Lordships with any information they may obtain on the subject.
Lord Clarendon will probably be aware that visits to those of the Pacific, in
which this traffic wall be conducted, are very rarely paid by Her Majesty s ships.
1 am, &c.
(Signed) VERNON LUSHINGTON.
No. 36.
Sir F. Rogers to Mr. Hammond. —(Received July 24.)
g} r Downing Street, July 22, 1869.
WITH reference to your letter of sth ultimo, forwarding extracts from a letter from
Mr. Mac Nair, a missionary at Erromanga, one of the New Hebrides Group in the South
Pacific, in which he charges the captains of the “ Latona’ and of the Syien with the
perpetration of acts of kidnapping against natives of those islands, I am directed by
Earl Granville to transmit to yon, for the information of the Earl of Clarendon, a copy of
a despatch from the Governor of Queensland, with copies of such ot the inclosures to that
despatch as relate to Mr. Mac Nair’s letter, from which Lord Clarendon will perceive that
considerable doubts are thrown on the correctness of Mr. Mac Nair s statement.
I am also desired to inclose, for Lord Clarendon’s information, a copy of a Report
from the Emigration Commissioners, upon the subject of your letter of sth June, in which
Mr. Mac Nair’s letter was forwarded; and I am to add, that a further Report from them
has been called for on the Governor’s present despatch.
I am, &c.
(Signed) FREDERIC ROGERS.
Inclosure 1 in No. 36.
Governor Blackall to Earl Granville,
My Lord, Brisbane, April 16, 1869.
I HAVE the honour to forward to your Lordship copies of Resolutions adopted at a
meeting held in Brisbane on the Bth March, and presided over by the Mayor, with regard


to the importation into this Colony of natives from the group of South Sea Islands, called
Polynesia or New Hebrides.
2. As these Resolutions, in effect, request the repeal of an Act of Legislature, and
express an opinion that no Legislation on such a subject can be satisfactory, I considered it
my duty to lay the matter before my Attorney-General, and to call upon him for a Report
as to the correctness of the view taken by the meeting, of the working of the present Act,
and the probable consequences of repealing it; with suggestions of any amendment which
struck him as possible to introduce to satisfy the Memorialists that due care was taken to
insure fair dealing in shipping natives from the islands.
3. I have now the honour to forward the Report furnished by the Attorney-General,
by which your Lordship will perceive that, whilst the Attorney-General admits the present
law may be improved, and he has introduced an amended Act for that purpose, yet he
considers that great misapprehension exists on the part of the Memorialists; and the
imputation that anything like slavery existing in Queensland is a gross exaggeration, and
that an unconditional repeal of the present Act would lead to great difficulty.
4. In connection with this matter, I inclose to your Lordship copy of a letter which
I have received from Commodore Lambert, covering a complaint made to him by the
Rev. Mr. Mac Nair, a missionary stationed at one of the islands of the New Hebrides. I
referred these letters to the Colonial Secretary, with a request that a searching inquiry
should be made into the case on the arrival of the “ Lyttona,” the vessel alluded to; this,
your Lordship will perceive, has been done, and the result throws considerable doubt on.
the correctness of the Rev. Mr. Mac Nair’s statement.
5. In conclusion, I would venture to offer to your Lordship my own opinion, derived
from my short residence here, that there is no reason to apprehend any unfair treatment of
these islanders during their employment in this Colony. They have even greater oppor-
tunities of making their complaints known than the coolies who are imported into
Trinidad or British Guiana from India or China.
6. I have seen them employed on several plantations here, working amicably with the
Europeans, and treated on an equality with them.
7. Nor do I believe that their employment is likely seriously to interfere with
European immigration, or the employment of white labour; on the contrary, I consider
that some kind of coloured labour must be introduced, if sugar is to be cultivated to any
great extent in the tropical portions of this Colony, which will entail an additional demand
for skilled white labour ; at the same time I am quite impressed with the necessity of
surrounding this traffic with well-considered safeguards ; and your Lordship may rely upon
my watching with great care the Legislation proposed, and the manner of carrying out the
details.
I have, &c.
(Signed) S. W. BLACKALL.
Inclosure 2 in No. 36.
Commodore Lambert to Governor Blackall.
Sir, “ Challenger ,” at Wellington , January 28, 1869.
I HAYE the honour to inclose for your Excellency’s information copy of a corre-
spondence I have this day received from the Rev. Mr. Mac Nair, Presbyterian Missionary at
Port Dillon, Island of Erromanga, New Hebrides, relative to the proceedings of G. Smith,
master of the schooner “ Lyttona,” in taking away natives of that island, and stating, as
his reason for so doing, that he had a license from the Queensland Government.
I forward this correspondence to your Excellency as I have lately received communi-
cations from the Admiralty on the subject of the traffic of natives from the South Sea
Islands, and I am about to send the <c Rosario’’ to make full inquiry into the whole
system.
I have, &c.
(Signed) ROWLEY LAMBERT.


Inclosure 3 in No. 36.
The Rev. J. Mac Nair to Commodore Lambert.
g- r Dillon’s Bay, Erromanga, October 22, 1868.
WHEN 1 had the pleasure of seeing you here two months ago you will, 1 ' dare say,
recollect a part of our conversation turned on the semi, or rather real, slave traffic carried
on amongst these Islands by a parcel of ruffians of the lowest type, sailing as the case may
be, from Queensland, Fiji, or New Caledonia, and employing, as Agents, old Sandalwooders
who have acquired a smattering of some of the New Hebrides languages and who have
at the sam* time distinguished themselves for their treachery, and foul murders, and gioss
immorality. You will perhaps remember I mentioned a case which occurred on the 2n
Julv last • on the morning of that day a suspicious little schooner was noticed to pass the
bay, but did not call here. In a day or two some natives from the north end ot the
island came to the mission premises to see if the missionary could do anything for them,
because “ Charley” was on board the vessel in question, and had deceived them by
representing that Captain Joe (Joseph Hastings, a kind man ) was on hoard, with plenty
of tobacco; powder, and shot, &c. The bait took well, for the wily Sandalwooders
managed to hook twelve or more stalwart Erromangans on the shoulders of Captain
Hastings, who were no sooner got on board than they were clapped below the hatches.
As this man is a fair specimen of the class of Agents employed in this nefarious traffic we
shall, with your pleasure, endeavour to sketch him. Charles Hyde, a native o ew
York, rather below the middle size, about thirty-live years of age peering eyes, sallow
countenance, sufficiently sunburnt, bloated face and very emaciated, certainly no great
temptation to cannibals* and yet the deceived Erromangans are threatening him to tiy him
in the oven should he fortunately fall into their hands. So far as I can learn he came o
these Islands about ten years since in the capacity of cook or steward on board a sandal-
wooding or trading vessel. He remained on this Island four or five years, shifting from
place to place as circumstances required, for he made himselves very odious to the natives
by running off with other men’s wives, stealing fowls and pigs, and having a hand in killing
one of the natives of the Island of Lifu (one of the Loyalty,) and three En ormmgans,
two men and a girl. Quitting Erromanga, he went scandalwoodmg to Santo, where he
took a prominent part, killing ten of the natives ot that Island in a skirmish, caused vciy
much on account of his pilfering propensities ; after leaving Santo, two years ago,.he set
up a kind of a cocoa-nut oil establishment towards the north end of the Island
Tanna. but having sold to the slavers, sons or relatives of a Chief there, he was this year
burnt out by the 'enraged Tannese there, when he made good his escape to Port Resolution
which appears to be his present head-quarters. , . T .
On the afternoon of the 6th instant, a little schooner came to anchor in this bay. Ihe
anchor was not lorn? down when two natives of Boras, or South River, made their appear-
ance here, saying that Charley was on board the vessel referred to, and that he had
succeeded in inducing nine of their companions into his boat by declaring he had veij
large pigs for them on board, excellent ones for their approaching easts, as well as tobacco,
powder and shot, &c„ in abundance. On hearing this story there was a good deal of
excitement even among the Christian natives, as not a few of their near relatives had been
stolen in a similar manner on previous occasions. I told them to keep very quiet, but it
would be well if they could ascertain for me the name of the vessel, captain, and whei e bound
for. Accordingly, four or five of them went off to the vessel mmy boat, but as it was now
dark they could not make out the name of the craft, neither could they find ou ic name
of the captain, nor yet could they see any Erromangans on board. They learned however,
that it was their intention to water on the following day, this being a convenient place foi
that purpose ; consequently early in the morning a boat with five natives of Mare landed
at this station. I desired them to come under the verandah that I might question them
little there. 1 may add (with one exception) that I found these natives calm and Christum in
their conduct, thoughtful and accurate in their expressions, and the knowledge of one of
them especially of the English language surprising for a native j in short, quite a credit
to the missionaries on that Island, Messrs. Jones and Creagh. Then story, is as
follows, viz.:—
Schooner “Latona” Captain Smith, from Queensland, came to Mare got six men,
thence to Tanna, took on board Charley, and got fifteen men at different places; next to
Erromanga. got nine men. “ Now, my good fellow, are you sure about the number you
not in Erromanga ? You know nine are—four, ana five, holding up mj-fingcis.
replied somewhat indignant, “ Yes, me know nine, me know Enghs . e ,my 0 00


friend, I see you do ; but tell me now, where these nine Erromangans were last night, when
their friends could not sec them when on board your vessel ?” “Oh, we put ’em below.’
“ Why do you do that ?” “ Because we no like ’em see their friends when near their
own land.’’ “Then I understand you have put them down below and closed the hatches
upon them until you are away from the land. Is that what you do?” “Yes; we do
that.” “ And have you done the same to the Tanna men?” “Yes, we do same man
Tanna; we keep ’em below.” Having obtained this information, I wrote the following
note and sent it off in a canoe: —
“To Captain Smith, schooner ‘ Latona.’ I understand you have got nine
Erromangans on board by treachery and lies, induced to go on board your vessel
yesterday ; I have, therefore, to request you will have the kindness to send them on
shore immediately, that I may question them on the subject; meanwhile, your boat will
remain here until you comply with my request.
(Signed “ Jas. Mac Nair.”
“ Dillon’s Bay, October 7, 1868.”
In half an hour or so, a boat w 7 as seen coming up the river with three white
men in it, and a number of natives. The white men were armed to the teeth,
with revolvers and rifles, one of whom remained in the boat, the other two came up
to the verandah and knocked violently at one ot the doors, and then came to one
of the windows which was open ; when I observed that he was so heavily armed,
and another rough at his back similarly equipped, I ordered him to put away his arms
at once, and then I might be induced to speak to him. He did so, and in great rage
demanded what business I had to keep his boat. The following interlocutions then
took place: —“And who are you, pray?’’ “1 am Captain Smith, of the schooner
f Latona.’” “Well, sir, if you come in here and take a seat, we shall talk over matters a
little.” “ No, I won’t go in; I want my boat —I shall make you pay for this. A man-
of-war is not far off (referring to the “ Blanche,’’ I suppose). J shall get you punished,
there will be bloodshed, and you will be blamed for it ; I want to know what authority
you have for keeping my boat. I shall go on board and get more men. 1 want my boat,
and I shall have her, too.” “Well, my good fellow, you are talking very fast; now I
shall ask you one question, which you will please answer directly, viz.: who has given
you authority to steal men ?” “ What business have you to question me—are you
Governor of this island? You have not seen the Erromangans on board this vessel—-you
have only native evidence. I have a-license from the Queensland Government, which I
can show you, if you like to come on board.” “A license to steal people?” “No; not
to steal people.” “And yet you have stolen nine Erromangans, yesterday.” “ I want to
know what business you have to interfere with me, I want to be off? I want my boat.”
“Well, I daresay —but you will have the goodness to land these Erromangans first;
suppose I saw you killing a man there, do you not think I should have a right to
interfere?” “Yes; certainly.” “Well then, is stealing men a much less crime? You
know they are both often classed together, and are both infringements of British law, and
yet you have violated that law. You ask my authority for interfering with you. I have
British law on my side—yea, I have even a higher authority to bear me out, the laws of
justice and morality on which the British Constitution is founded, and which you have so
foully transgressed yesterday. You will, therefore, land these Erromangans at once, or
sign a note to that effect, otherwise your boat will remain here” “No, no, I will sign
nothing, I will not put my hand to anything of the sort. You had better not try me, I
will not do it.” “ Very well, the boat will simply remain.” “ I will go for more men,
there will be bloodshed.” “ Oh, if you want fighting, there are plenty here ready to fight
you,” Meanwhile I noticed a number of heathen collecting fast by a back path, and it is
quite possible our bullying friend noticed this movement also, for he very soon signed the
note, taking care, however, before doing so, to draw the pen through the words, “ Dillons
Bay, Erromanga.”
The note is as follows :
“ Dillon's Bay, Erromanga, October 7, 1868.
“I hereby agree to send on shore (immediately) all the Erromangans I have on board.
(Signed) G. Smith, Master, Schooner “Latona .”
“ To Rev. Jas. Mac Nair.”
I inclose the original, that you may judge for yourself. I explained to the natives
that he had signed this note to me, and that if he did not land their friends, I would
forward it to his Chief (meaning you in Sydney), and, meanwhile, in order to prevent
fighting, they had better allow him to take the boat; some of them, however, were not


Nalen.
Narron.
Narrafoonam.
Nairpowan,
Jowene.
Oomass.
Hitaby.
Isia.
Maneroo.
Nawatue.
Eshoot.
Isogenta.
satisfied, and argued strongly that the boat should be kept until their friends were actually
landed, for they had plenty of guns, powder, and ball, and they could sink the boats and
then the white men could not get away. I said I did not doubt that they were quite able
to kill all the white men, but the white men had a number of revolvers, and they might
kill a number of Erromangans; besides, missionaries did not like to see people tight and
kill one another, it would be better to leave it with the big Chief in Sydney to punish
them, and that I was sure if the man-of-war was here to-day, the bad vessel would be
searched immediately and the Erromangans landed. At last they somewhat reluctantly
allowed the boat to go, and Smith proved himself ungrateful enough to me for perhaps
saving his life, and faithless enough to his own promise in weighing anchor at once, and
going off without landing a single Erromangan.
I inclose a list of the names of those kidnapped at this time, which may assist in
finding them out in Queensland, and 1 shall look to you as the good and big Chief of
these lawless subjects of yours, to see that these poor natives be rescued from their iron
grasp and safely returned to their native land, from which they have been so basely and so
foully snatched by some of the lowest and most degraded of our countrymen.
I am, &c.
(Signed) JAMES MacNAIR.
Names of Natives of Erromanga stolen hy Captain G. Smith, of the Schooner “ Latona,”
from Queensland , on the 6th of October , 1868.
Naling, Chief. Chupukan.
Nolraah, ditto. Etangar.
Nararunan. Eijore.
Jowenei
Two others were taken at the same time, but being from a distance, or bushmen, I
have not been able to get their names.
(Signed) JAS. MacNAIR.
Inclosure 4 in No. 36.
Mr. McDonnell to the Colonial Secretary.
Sir, Immigration Office, Brisbane , February 16, 1869.
IN compliance with your request I have the honour to report on the letter from
Commodore Lambert to his Excellency the Governor, enclosing a communication from the
Rev. Mr. McNair, of the Island of Erromanga, New Hebrides, in which the latter states
that in October 1868 the schooner “Latona,” of Queensland, George Smith, master,
arrived there with a man named Charley, who induced nine Erromangans to go on board the
vessel, and confined them below the hatches, with the intention of bringing them to
Queensland, and that Captain Smith when applied to by the Rev. Mr. McNair gave an
order for their release, but ultimately sailed without landing them.
On reference to the records of this Department, I find that the schooner “ Latona,”
George Smith, master, arrived in Brisbane from the South Sea Islands on the 3rd
November last, with 75 Polynesians on board, viz., 6 from the Island of Mare, 5 from
Taka, 24 from Lifu, 27 from Tanna, and 13 from Erromanga. On looking amongst the
names I can only discern three in any way corresponding with those mentioned by
Mr. McNair; this coincidence appears to be sufficient to prove that these are the men
alluded to when coupled with the dates given. The names of the Erromangans who arrived
are shown in the margin* in juxtaposition with those given by Mr. McNair; I may add that
the names were given to me by the natives themselves.
The certificate required under clause 8 of the Act was procured for these men
Erromangans, per u Latona.”
Names given hy Rev . Mr. McNair.
Naling 1 . Umpoohun.
Umpoohun.
Nararoonara. Itagar.
Jowene. Eijore.
Naluch. And two others,
unknown.


signed by the recruiting agent, James Martin; the interpreter, Charles Hyde; by the
natives, with their marks; and countersigned by the master, George Smith.
On my visit to the vessel the thirteen men were mustered, and amongst other
questions, I asked them if the captain (pointing him out) had stolen or run away with
them, and they replied as well as they could in the negative. I put the question to them
in various shapes with the same result, «
Six of the other islanders on board had been employed in the colony betore,
and were returning for further service ; one of these could make himself understood by
the Erromanga men, and assisted me in questioning them. He spoke and made signs
in such a way that I could understand him as well.
The Erromanga men as well as the others were in good health, condition, and spirits ;
they stated by signs and words that they came to work for three years, and were to get
18Z., with plenty of food and clothing. The latter I described to them ; they were all hired
under bond and agreement, which were signed in my presence. They are engaged in
agricultural occupations; sin the district of the Logan, 4 at Nerang Creek, and 4at
Maryborough. „ . . , , ... n
The vessel w&s very cind. there Weis abundance of food on boaid, consisting ot
was on board at the time of my visit. From what I know of that gentleman, I am sure
he will make strict inquiry on the arrival of the vessel daily expected.
George Smith is no longer master of the “ Latona, ’ but the foimer lecruitmg agent,
James Martin, is now captain, and will therefore be in a position to answer inquiries.
It appears to me a pity that the Rev. Mr. McNair did not accept the invitation given
him by Captain Smith to go on board his vessel and see the license, as he would then have
had an opportunity of conversing with the Erromanga men, and probably have thrown more
light on the subject.
° T bnvp ajp
(Signed) ’ JOHN Me DONNELL.
C A
Inclosure 5 in No. 36.
Mr. Hodgson to the Attorney-General.
Sir 'Colonial Secretary’s Office , Brisbane, April 8, 1869.
? I DO myself the honour to forward you a further Report from the Immigration
Agent on the subject of the alleged kidnapping case by Captain Smith, late of the
schooner “ Lyttona,” as brought under the notice of his Excellency the Governor in a
letter from Commodore Lambert, accompanying a complaint from the Rev. Mr. McNair.
I also forward a declaration from Mr. James Martin, at present master of the ‘‘ Lyttona, ’
now in this port, and as soon as Captain Smith returns from Melbourne, his declaration
shall be taken and forwarded to you.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ARTHUR HODGSON.
Inclosure 6 in No. 36.
Mr. McDonnell to Mr. Hodgson.
gj r Immigration Office, Brisbane, April 7, 1869.
WITH reference to my letter dated the 16th February last, reporting on a communi-
cation from Commodore Lambert respecting a complaint made by the Rev. Mr. McNair,
on the subject of the embarkation of nine Erromangans in the schooner “Lyttona” in
October last, I have the honour to state that the “ Lyttona ” has lately arrived in port
after a long delay at the islands owing to bad weather. . .
As soon as possible after her arrival, I went on board and saw Captain Martin, who
was alluded to in my former letter as having been the licensed agent on board the
«Lvttona ” in October last; on examining him very closely in the presence of
Mr. W. C. Winship, he stated that on the occasion alluded to he accompanied Captain
Smith, when he went on shore at Dillon’s Bay, to see Mr. McNair relative to the seizure
of the boat, and was acquainted with all the circumstances of the case; the statement


made by Captain Martin has been drawn up in the shape of a statutory declaration, whi
is herewith inclosed.
It will be seen on reference thereto that Captain Smith, on receipt of Mr. McNair’s
letter informing him of the seizure of the boat, and demanding that the men should be
sent on shore, asked the Erromogans who were on board if they wished to be landed, and
they replied that they wished to go in the ship. On seeing Mr. McNair, Smith informed
him of the circumstance, and invited him to come on board and examine the men himself
if he disbelieved his (Smith’s) statement. This Mr. McNair declined to do.
It will doubtless be remembered that Mr. McNair alluded to this invitation in his
letter to Commodore Lambert.
Captain Martin attributed the seizure of the boat to a desire on the part of one of
the natives to prevent his brother from coming in the vessel; this native had previously
been on board the “ Lyttona” with his brother, and having no wish to come with him,
was sent on shore with a number of the islanders who also refused to remain in the
schooner. Captain Smith is at present in Melbourne in charge of a vessel, but is expected
back in a few 7 weeks, as his family are resident in Brisbane. Before he left I told him
that when the “ Lyttona ” arrived I intended to hold an investigation into the matter of
Mr. McNair’s complaint, and he expressed his willingness to give whatever information
was required, and made a verbal statement which is corroborative of that given by Captain
Martin.
A declaration will be taken in his case as soon as he returns to Brisbane.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN McDONNELL.
Inclosure 7 in No, 36.
Declaration of James Martin.
I, JAMES of the schooner “ Lyttona,” do solemnly and sincerely
declare that, in the month 1 tober last, I was duly licensed recruiting agent for the
purpose of importing Polynesian labourers from the South Sea Islands into Queensland,
and in such capacity I was engaged on board the aforesaid schooner, of which vessel George
Smith was then master, and called at the Island of Erromanga and engaged thirteen
islanders for service in Queensland ; they remained on board ol their own free will and
consent, and several others from same island who had also been on board w T ere re-landed
as they refused to engage for service in Queensland. Amongst the latter was a man whose
brother remained on board ; we had on board at this time an Erromangan woman to whom
we gave a free passage from the Island of Tanna to her native place, which was situated
near Dillon’s Bay, Erromanga; we proceeded to the latter place in order to land this
woman, we sent the ship’s boat for the purpose of landing this woman, and as soon as sh ]
was landed, the natives seized the boat and drew it up a long distance from the water.
Amongst these men was the islander who did not wish to come to Queensland, and
who objected to his brother coming with us ; this, in my opinion, was the cause of the
seizure of the boat.
Soon after this occurrence Captain Smith received a letter from Mr. McNair,
informing him that he had detained the boat, and that his reason for so doing was, that
nine Erromangans were taken on board and kept there against their will. On receiving
the letter Captain Smith asked the Erromangans who were on board if they wished to be
landed; they said they wished to go in the ship. Captain Smith then went on shore
and I accompanied him ; on seeing Mr. McNair, Smith asked him why the boat was
seized, and what authority he had for acting in such a manner. Mr. McNair replied that
there were nine Erromangans on board whom he requited Smith to land. Captain Smith
explained that when he received Mr. McNair’s letter he had asked the men if they wished
to go ashore as he did not want to keep them if they liked to be landed, and that they had
said they would remain on board. Mr. McNair then said he could not get the boat unless
his wish was complied with. Smith then said, “If you disbelieve me, come on board and
talk to the men yourself.” Mr. McNair said he would do nothing of the kind, but wished
us to bring the men ashore. Smith replied, “If you do not give me the boat by fair
means he would be obliged to take it by forcebut he feared there would be bloodshed,
and he said he blamed Mr. McNair for the disturbance, and that if anything occurred
Mr. McNair would only have himself to blame, as he considered him (Mr. McNair) the
instigator of the whole affair.
Captain Smith again said that ho would not bring the men on shore, but that if


Mr. McNair went on board, either that he (Captain Smith) or I would remain on shore as a
guarantee of fair treatment. Mr. McNair declined to go on board at all, and said we
would have to take the boat by force.
At this time there were upwards of 150 natives near us. After some further
conversation between Captain Smith and Mr. McNair, the latter told the natives to haul
the boat down to the water from the place where they had it, which was about 200 yards
from the beach; we then got into the boat, went on board, and sailed away shortly
afterwards. The men were not landed.
I am not aware that Captain Smith signed any paper promising to put the men on
shore, I did not see him doing so. The natives appeared to be waiting for orders from
Mr. McNair to seize us. If the natives had resolved on seizing the vessel they could easily
have done so as they numbered over 150, and were well armed, and had plenty of canoes—in
fact, they could have killed us and burned the vessel without much difficulty.
I have not seen Captain Smith since I returned from Brisbane, neither have I received
any communication from him whatever, and I make this declaration conscientiously,
believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of the Oaths Act of 1867.
(Signed) JAMES MARTIN, Master of the Schooner “ Latona: 1
Declared and signed before me, this sth day of April, 1869.
(Signed) John Me Donnell, J.P.
Inclosure 8 in No. 36.
Mr. Murdoch to Sir F. Rogers.
Sir, Emigration Board , June 21, 1869.
I HAVE to acknowledge your letter of 17th instant, with one from the Foreign
Office, inclosing an extract of a letter from Mr. Mac Nair, a missionary in Erromanga, and
other documents, on the subject of the alleged kidnapping of South Sea Islanders for
employment in Queensland.
2. Mr. Macnair states that, in the month of October 1868, the schooner “ Latona,”
Captain Smith, from Queensland, succeeded in kidnapping thirty natives from Mare,
Tanna, and Erromanga (the former one of the Loyalty Islands, the two latter belonging to
the New Hebrides group), and sailed away with them, in spite of a written promise to
Mr. Mac Nair to reland the Erromangans. This is one of the cases referred to at the
meeting recently held at Sydney to protest against South Sea emigration; but the name
of the vessel and her destination was not then stated.
3. If the circumstances are correctly described the case is clearly one of great atrocity,
and occurring as it did after the passing of the Queensland Polynesian Labourers Act
(which was assented on 4th March, 1868), it justifies serious misgivings as to the efficacy
of that Act. It is evident that if, as may be taken for granted, the “ Latona ” sailed from
Queensland after the passing of the Act, the master must have felt confident that he would
be able to evade the provisions intended to prevent the introduction of labourers procured
by force or fraud. We have no intelligence of the return of the u Latona” to Queensland,
but I presume Earl Granville will call on the Governor to institute an inquiry into the
case, and to report the result. Should it appear that the people were procured in the
manner described, and that they have been landed in the Colony without discovery of the
facts, it will be difficult to avoid the conclusion that the Polynesian Labourers Act is a
failure ; but if so, there seems no alternative but to prohibit the immigration altogether.
I do not see in what way the Act could be altered to make it more efficient to prevent
kidnapping, and, at all events, if it failed in so outrageous a case as this, there could be no
confidence that it would succeed better in other cases. The Legislature of Queensland
would, probably, not refuse to prohibit the immigration, if once convinced that it could not
be carried on without abuse; but if they did, the only authority that could intervene
would be the Imperial Legislature. To give practical effect, however, to any Act that
might be passed by Parliament, it would be necessary to employ vessels to cruize among
the islands. It is superfluous to remark that even then the cruizers could only deal with
British vessels. The American and French vessels engaged in trade among the islands
would be beyond their cognizance.
4. The Foreign Office suggest that if the circumstances of the case have been
correctly reported, the master of the “ Latona ” should be punished. If there are the
means of punishing him, there cannot be a question as to the obligation to do so. But
unless he can be subjected to the penalties of the Polynesian Labourers Act, it is much to
be feared that there is no law that can reach him. His kidnapping could not, I apprehend,
[43B] K


be punished by Colonial law, even if there were any law that would meet the case, because
it was done beyond the jurisdiction of the Colony. It does not fall within the terms of the
Imperial Act (5 Geo. IV, cap. 113) for the abolition of the Slave Trade, and it would
obviously be useless to bring actions for damages against him on behalf of the islanders.
If, nevertheless, the Colonial authorities consider that he can be prosecuted in the Colony
with any chance of success, the necessary proceedings should be taken against him. Even
if the prosecution should eventually fail, the good faith of the Colonial Government would
be vindicated, and a warning would be given to others that the utmost power of the law
would be used to put a stop to outrages of this description.
I have, &c.
(Signed) T. W. C. MURDOCH.
No. 37.
Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond. —(Received July 30.)
Sir, Downing Street , July 29, 1869.
WITH reference to my letters of the Bth and 30th of June, and your letter of the
9th June, relative to the kidnapping of some Polynesians for service in the Fiji Islands,
and the murder of three of them on board the ship “ Young Australian,” of Sydney, I am
directed by Earl Granville to transmit to you, to be laid before Lord Clarendon, a copy of
a further despatch from the Governor of New South Wales, respecting the measures taken
for bringing to justice the persons concerned in this outrage.
Lord Granville fears, however, that the exertions of the Colonial authorities, however
they may effect the emigration to Queensland, can be of little service in controlling the
inter-insular Slave Trade of the Pacific.
I am, &c.
(Signed) F. R. SANDFORD,
Inclosure 1 in No. 37.
The Earl of Belmore to Earl Granville.
My Lord, Sydney , May 18, 1869.
WITH reference to my despatches dated 26th February and 20th March, 1869, on
the subject of the alleged murders on board the British ship “ Young Australian,” I have
now the honour to forward three further despatches, two of them with inclosures, which
I have received since the departure of the last mail from Her Majesty’s Consul for Fiji
and Tonga.
2. Mr. Thurston forwarded at the same time with these papers two natives of the
Island of Rotumah, for the purpose of giving evidence at the trial of Albert Ross Hovell
and Rangi, in accordance with a request contained in my letter to him of 10th March, a
copy of which formed one of the inclosures to my despatch above referred to.
3. I now beg to inclose a copy of my letter to Mr. Thurston in reply to his last
communications. This, with them, will, I think, fully explain the position of the matter
to your Lordship.
4. Mr. Thurston in one of his letters refers to a despatch which he sent to me at the
same time under flying seal addressed to Commodore Lambert. In accordance with his
request I perused it and forwarded it to New Zealand, where I believe the Commodore is
at present.
5. This letter mentioned that the British barque “Anna,” of Melbourne, had
returned on the Bth February from a cruize to the Kingsmill Islands (where, 1 believe,
she went for the purpose of procuring labourers), had disembarked at the port of Rewa
(Fiji) between sixty and seventy souls. That no report of her entry had been made to
him as Consul, and that she had returned to the Kingsmill Islands on the 16th.
6. Mr. Thurston also informed Commodore Lambert of an attempted fictitious sale of
a vessel by a British subject, who had not himself obtained (or completed) a clear title to
her, to an American subject at Fiji, whom he described as a pauper, proposing to take a
bill of exchange in ostensible payment for her, for the supposed purpose of enabling her to
sail under American colours. The Consul would appear, however (as I understand him),
to have prevented this arrangement being carried out at any rate at that time.
I IiQiTP Xrp
“(Signed) ' BELMORE.


| Inclosure 2 in No. 37.
Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Belmore.
My Lord, Fiji , February 3, 1869.
I HAVE the honour to inclose herewith the declarations of two Rotumah men
alluded to by me in my former despatch to your Lordship, reporting charges of murder
against the master and crew of the ship “ Young Australian.” These men, Hau or Ao,
and David or Levita, fully confirm the information first received, I have placed them among
my native servants where they will remain until the receipt of your Lordship’s advices.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Enclosure 3 in No. 37.
Declaration of two Rotumah Men.
PERSONALLY appeared before me, John B. Thurston, Esq.. Acting British Consul
in Fiji and Tonga, Hau, a Christian native of Rotumah, who, being examined touching the
proceedings on board the ship “ Young Australian,” during her late voyage to the
New Hebrides, declared as follows, to wit:—l joined the “Young Australian” under the
command of Captain Ross Hovell; at Rotumah 4 men from Notau, my town,
joined, 4 from Oinafa, and 2 from Elutert. From Rotumah we went to Tanna. At
Tanna we took on board sulphur and pigs, and also embarked some Tanna men for Fiji.
We then went to Erromanga and embarked some men by their own consent. Thence lo
islands of which Ido not know the names. At Santo we stole plenty of men. The boat
was usually sent in and anchored close to the beach. In the boat were Levinger, Bob,
four Rotumah men, and two Erromangans. The white men stayed in the boat. The native
crew went on shore and laid in wait for Santo men. Sometimes Santo men came to the
boat with yams for sale, and were seized and taken to the ship. Bob stood up with a
musket to shoot any one who should attempt to escape. The ship sailed round the
island, and her boat landed at different places.
I recollect three natives being shot on board the ship. Ido not know the name of
their island. They did not come on board by their own consent. They were seized and
made prisoners. It happened thus : We saw a small canoe lying off the shore, and two
boats were lowered to catch it. I was in one boat commanded by Bob; an Erromanga man
steered the other boat. We gained on the canoe, and - the natives on board jumping into
the water were soon caught. Two were caught by my boat, and one by the Erromanga
man’s boat. We then took the three men to the ship, and put them in the hold. They
tried to come up, and Levinger pushed them down again. I then went on shore with the
boats. On my return I saw all the people were in the rigging and on the yards, and heard
the three men taken by us were fighting with bows and arrows. Shortly after I returned,
Bob, Antonio, Louis, and two Rotumah men named Mai-ma-ofa and Moy-langi
commenced firing with muskets at the three men in the hold. By-and~by all three
were killed. Then the Tanna men and others, I among them, went down into the
hold. The bodies appeared quite dead, and were shot (wounded) all over. One was a
boy, one a young man, and the other an old man. The old man was not quite dead, and
lifting his head began to speak, when a Tanna man cut him down with an axe. I saw it
done. The bodies were taken on deck, stones tied to them, and they were thrown over-
board. The moon was up at this time, it was evening. The white men loaded guns and
gave them to the Rotumah men. I cannot speak English, and do not know what the
captain and others were saying during the time these facts were occurring. No other men
were shot to my knowledge during the voyage. 1 know nothing more than I have stated
about the death of the three natives we seized.
Before we anchored in Fiji, we Rotumah men were told not to say anything about the
seizure and shooting of the natives, because misunderstanding would give rise to much
lying, and the captain and other whites would therefore tell the story themselves.
(Signed) A. O.
I certify the above written statement to be a true interpretation of the replies made
by Hau to questions put to him through me by the Acting British Consul in Fiji and Tonga,
K 2


and that I have carefully read and explained the same to him, the said Hau, prior to the
subscription of his sign or mark.
(Signed) E. W. Lombern.
Declared before me this 2nd day of February, 1869, at Levuka, Ovalau, Fiji.
(Signed) John B. Thurston, Acting Consul.
Personally appeared before me, John B. Thurston, Esq., Acting British Consul in Fiji
and Tonga, David, a Christian native of Rotumah, who being examined touching the
proceedings on board the ship “ Young Australian ” during her late voyage to the New
Hebrides, declared as follows, to wit:—
I joined the ship “ Young Australian,” under the command of Captain Ross Hovell,
at Rotumah, from which place we went to Tanna. I was not employed at any
time on boat service, but remained entirely on board ship. I do not know the names of
the many islands we visited during the voyage. We took on board many men. I
heard they were stolen. 1 remember three natives being brought on board one day.
They had been caught in a canoe not far from the land. They were put below into the
hold to prevent their escape. I was at the hatch on deck watching them. They had not
been below long when they commenced to fight, and drove all the other natives on deck.
Some of the hatches were put on; but I was kept at the open one, until an arrow
striking me in the left breast (wound exhibited) caused such pain that I had to leave
my place and lie down. The three men below were afterwards shot. Firing commenced
as soon as Bob came back with the boats. I did not see the men shot, I was lying
down. While the white men and Tanna men were tying stones to the three bodies I went
on deck. All three were dead. The old man was cut on the head, and shot in the legs
and back. The boy was shot through the head. The other was shot in many places.
Bob, Antonio, and Louis shot from the forecastle and cabin bulkheads. Two Rotumah
men had guns given them, one gun would not go off’. These two men are still in the
ship. I hear Bob is in Fiji. The men Antonio and Louis went away from Fiji in a brig.
During the firing the captain said, “ Shoot them in the legs.” Some of the Rotumah men
who left in the ship for Sydney can speak English. I and Hau left the ship without being
paid off. The Tanna man who cut down the native in the hold with an axe is in Levuka.
I saw him a day or two ago. Ido not know his name.
(Signed) TEVITA.
I certify the above written statement to be a true interpretation of replies made by
David to questions put to him through me by the Acting British Consul in Fiji and Tonga,
and that I have carefully read and explained the same to him, the said David, prior to the
subscription of his sign or mark.
(Signed) E. W. Lombern.
Declared before me this 2nd day of February, 1869, at Levuka, Ovalau, Fiji.
(Signed) John B. Thurston, Acting Consul.
Inclosure 4 in No. 37.
Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Belmore.
My Lord, Ffy'z, March 30, 1869.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship s despatch under
date of 10th March instant, together with the annexed opinion of Sir William Manning,
Attorney-General for New South Wales, “ in the matter of participation by subjects of
France in the murders on board the British ship ‘ Young Australian.
On the 3rd of January last I wrote a despatch to your Lordship covering the deposi-
sitions of Ao and David, two Rotumah boys who formed part of the crew of the £S Young
Australian ” during her late voyage.
Since writing no opportunity has offered until the present to forward this despatch.
I have now to inform your Lordship of the transmission of said depositions, and also,
in accordance with your Lordship’s suggestions, that I have forwarded the boys Ao and
David by the schooner “ Ida ” to the Colonies for examination.
David is the man stated to have been wounded during the affray. # g
Both Ao and David are intelligent and likely, if not moved by their unusual position,


to give their evidence clearly. They are both Christians, and are either members, or on
trial for admission to the Wesleyan Church at Rotumah. They can write a little in their
own language, and have been for some years under the tuition of the Rev. W. Fletcher,
the resident Protestant missionary at their native island. They cannot sufficiently explain
themselves in English.
The arrival of the “ Ida ” permits me, however, to secure the services of the most
competent interpreter that could possibly be obtained. The master of the “ Ida,” Charles
Howard, has resided for nearly thirty years’ past at Rotumah, and speaks that peculiar
and difficult language as well or better than English. He is an illiterate, but very
respectable and honest, old man, and I have no doubt the Attorney-General will approve
of him as a trustworthy interpreter.
Touching the expenses incurred in the conveyance to Sydney, and maintenance while
there of the witnesses, 1 am of opinion that the charge should be debited to the public of
New South Wales. Should the Crown Law Officers dissent from this conclusion, I have
directed Mr. Howard to refer to this office. In order that the conveyance of these men
may be a matter of contract they will be forwarded much in the same manner as distressed
British seamen.
As the Island of Rotumah is within the limits of this Consular district, it is my duty
to request the witnesses Ao and David may, at the termination of the May sessions,
be returned to Rotuma, or to this office, in order I may return them from Fiji.
I have attentively read the opinion of Sir William Manning upon the propriety or
otherwise of arresting the French seamen charged with complicity in the murders on board
the “Young Australian,” and note in your Lordship’s despatch “the French Consul
declines to interfere further than to claim a mixed jury, if the men are actually brought
and tried ” in Sydney.
Feeling at the first what I now find ruled by the Attorney-General that no warrants
issued by Colonial Justices of the Peace could take effect beyond the limits of the Colony
excepting to such civilized places as the extradition laws might extend, 1 feared the actual
murderers of the natives might escape.
I remark the words of M. Sentis do not even convey an expression of opinion, but are
confined solely to a claim he would prefer “ if the men ” were brought within the limits of
the territory of New South Wales.
Under the circumstances, my Lord, I have decided not to risk the probabilities of
much lengthy and unpleasant correspondence by arresting the men Lennie and Voller
without full and sufficient authority.
The social position and treatment of New Hebrideans while in Fiji will form, my
Lord, the subject of a separate despatch.
For the further information of your Lordship, and by way of illustrating the desire
some resident British subjects have to withdraw their vessels from the surveillance of this
office, I have the honour to forward, under flying seal, a despatch addressed to Commodore
Lambert, to whom, after perusal, I beg it may be forwarded.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Inclosure 5 in No. 37.
Acting Consul Thurston to the Earl of Belmore.
My Lord, Fiji, March 30, 1869.
IN reply to your Lordship’s request for information as to the disposal, legal and social
position, and treatment of the labourers procured for service in these islands, I have the
honour to state :—On the arrival of any ship importing labourers, it has been customary
for the Master to hand into this office a complete list of passengers setting forth, also the
villages and islands at which they have been engaged.
The people are then mustered before me, and (as far as it is possible to do so) are
examined as to whether they have voluntarily arrived in Fiji, and understand the purpose
for which their services are required. Upon the planter (for whom the people have been
engaged) signing an undertaking to clothe, feed, pay, and finally return said labourers to
their homes at the expiration of three years, the men are allowed to be removed. In no
case, however, are the different villagers allowed to be separated.
The legal and social condition of these people must, my Lord, be considered
separately. Their legal position and rights are much the same as that enjoyed by British
subjects, on the ground of their being introduced upon the guaranty of British subjects,


and in British vessels. Briefly, they receive the protection of British authority as fully as
it can be extended to British subjects. If the labourers were ill-treated it is understood
they would be removed by the Consul. Not the slightest difficulty exists to prevent such
removal. If a labourer is assaulted or robbed by a Fijian, the offender, at the instance of
t s Office, is brought before the native Chief and punished.
If native labourers are not sent back to their homes at the expiration of their agreement
they never fail to complain to this Office, and no difficulty as yet has been experienced in
seeing justice done to complainants.
Your Lordship will inquire what authority exists to enforce any planter to perform
his contract with these people ? I regret to reply there is no authority except the assumed
authority of this Office, an authority described by the Colonial press as “ influence.” To
insubordinate settlers it may, perhaps, be compared to what is known in the army as
“ regimental pressure,” in some, grave cases, it is something more. This want of authority
(magisterial) is the great evil, and is the principal reason, my Lord, why I have
recommended the suppression, or authorized supervision of the system. As an illustration
of the foregoing, that contracts can at present be, and are fulfilled, through the “ influence ”
of this Office, I beg to call your Lordship’s attention to inclosures A, B, and C.
The manner in which I should have dealt with Mr. Scott, had he failed to return his
labourers at the termination of the just expired hurricane months, is not made apparent in
the correspondence forming inciosure. But the means are patent to Mr. Scott and every
other settler in Fiji, and they produce, as your Lordship will observe, the desired effect.
Any assumption of magisterial power may be attended with inconvenience to a Consular
Officer. The peculiar position of this Consulate district, its large and increasing British
population, render it imperative on me, for the prevention of gross wrongs or resort to
“Lynch law,” to overstep the strict limits of my instructions, and compel an observance
to law and order. This state of things, however expedient, is very unsatisfactory, and,
with the influx of population, present Consular authority must in part become inoperative,
from the utter impossibility of attending to all matters arising within the group of islands,
particularly without the assistance of subordinate officers. I need not say more on this
subject, rny Lord, except that awaiting particular instructions expected from the Foreign
Office, I shall continue to exercise all the power at my command for the protection of
right and suppression of wrong so far as British subjects or Polynesians are concerned.
The social condition of imported labourers in Fiji is undoubtedly much superior to their
condition at home. They are, as a whole, well fed, not overtasked, comfortably housed,
and daily brought in contact with a superior race. Many of them attend the native
chapels, and doubtless all would do so did their employers encourage them by example.
No doubt in a community of 1,200 or 1,400 persons many exceptional acts take place
which are not reported to this Office, but lam not aware of any serious case. In fact, an
employer is compelled to treat his men fairly, as they can run away at any moment.
In conclusion, my Lord, to your query, as to the condition and treatment of labourers;
and referring solely to their condition while in Fiji, I beg to state it bears no resemblance
to slavery at present; but considering the disposition of settlers to maintain labourers from
the New Hebrides and Kingsmill Islands without referring to this Office, and with the
unmistakeable intention, as reported in my despatch to Commodore Lambert, under date
23rd of March, of removing future immigrants from my authority and protection, I cannot
but advise the early adoption of such measures as your Lordship may deem necessary.
Regular reports have been forwarded to Commodore Lambert of all vessels lately
leaving Fiji for labourers.
I beg your Lordship to understand a standing notice, without this Office, calls the
attention ol shipmasters and others to the “ Slave Trade Laws,” which, within, are open
for perusal.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Inclosure 6 in No. 37.
Acting Consul Thurston to Mr. W. Scott
Sir, Fiji, March 15, 1869.
MR. RAE, on the part of Messrs. Hennings of this port, has brought some of your
Tanna labourers before me, complaining they will not leave the Totoga store.
The men, in explanation, say they look to Mr. Rae for a passage back to Tanna, he


Tanna Men (Port Resolution).
Paddy.
Gotereli.
Mangabin.
Beka.
Coperni.
Nako.
O Shiati.
Yareum.
Kanini.
Gutwas.
Sandwich Men (Town Waratap).
Jack (Tame).
Fatmeal.
Tom (Kalinan).
Kalasino.
Kalaruku.
Kaltataka.
NambatL
Kaparo.
Kalmet.
Veiseva.
Kalawat.
Kalapaan.
Si^itera.
Kalasong.
having brought them hither; that their term of engagement at Viro has expired, and that
they see no prospect of discharge or payment at your hands.
They also state, you “ intend offering them bad muskets,” articles they do not want,
by way of settlement.
You will understand the above as the remarks of your men, upon which I make no
comment.
It is right, however, that I again call your attention to the fact, your labourers have
for some months past desired to be returned to their own island, and that you have retained
them beyond the period of their term of service for some reason of your own.
You are doubless aware your engagement with the late Mr. G. Mockler was to
continue his agreement in its entirety: that is, pay the men 1 dollar each per month.
This simple arrangement obviates any necessity for their longer detention.
I have therefore to request you will inform me of the course you intend pursuing in
the matter under notice, for if you cannot or will not do these men justice, I must extend
to them such aid and protection as I may feel Her Majesty’s Government will warrant.
I have, &c.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON.
Inclosure 7 in No. 37.
Mr. Scott to Acting Consul Thurston.
Sir, Viro , Ovalau, March 20, 1869.
IN reply to your communication of the 15th instant, wherein you request me to
inform you of the steps 1 am taking to return my plantation labourers to their homes, I
beg to state that I have entered into arrangements with Messrs. Moore and Smith to have
a vessel ready by the Ist of April for the purpose of taking them and their effects to their
respective islands, viz., Tanna and Sandwich.
In explanation of my having detained them longer than the proper period, I beg to
inform vou that I induced them to remain a few months longer to avoid the dangers attend-
ing navigation in those waters during the hurricane months. On my explaining to them my
reasons for keeping them a few months longer they seemed perfectly satisfied.
On the completion of my arrangements I shall bring the men before you to be
questioned as to their treatment and payment received at my hands.
I have, &c.
(Signed) WM. SCOTT.
Inclosure 8 in No. 37.
Mr. Scott to Acting Consul Thurston.
Sir, Levuka, Ovalau , April 1, 1869.
REFERRING to my letter dated March 20, I now beg to inform you that my
arrangements are complete to send my Tanna and Sandwich men to their homes, and that
they are ready for your inspection on any day you may appoint. I am returning ten
Tanna men and fourteen Sandwich men, whose names are as under. A copy of agreement
in re charter I inclose.
T novo Xrn
(Signed) ’ WM. SCOTT.


The above men were this day paid off before me, and individually and collectively
expressed their satisfaction and receipt in full of wages due.
(Signed) John B. Thurston, Acting Consul.
April 1, 1869.
Inclosure 9 in No. 37.
Agreement between British Settlers and Foreign Labourers.
I HAVE this day engaged to hire, as farm-labourers, the men, per ship “ Sea Witch,”
whose names are mentioned in the margin,* for a term of three years from the date hereof,
paying them by way of wages the sum of 61., or its equivalent in trade.
And I further agree to provide the said labourers with good and sufficient food and
lodgings, to provide medicine and medical treatment in cases of sickness at my own charges,
and, at the expiration of the above term, to provide them with a free passage back to their
own island.
Signed before me, at Levuka, Fiji, this 14th June, 1867.
(Signed) JOHN B. THURSTON, Clerk of H.B.M. Consulate.
Inclosure 10 in No. 37.
The Earl of Belmore to Acting Consul Thurston.
Sir, Sydney, April 28, 1869.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your three despatches, dated
respectively 3rd February, 30th March, and 30th March, and also another under flying
seal, addressed to Commodore Lambert, which I have perused and forwarded to New
Zealand to him, by the mail of the 24th instant.
2. The schooner “ Ida” arrived, I believe, on the 22nd. Notice was given the same
day to the Crown Solicitor, who at once provided for the safe custody of the two native
witnesses whom you forwarded.
3. I did not get your despatches, owing to absence from Sydney, till next day. On
their receipt I communicated by telegram with the Attorney-General, who is attending the
Maitland circuit, and the next morning had an interview with the Crown Solicitor on the
subject.
4. I find that the trial of Hovell and Rangi is fixed for the 17th May, at Sydney,
whereas Levinger’s trial is fixed for the 19th, at Melbourne. The Crown Solicitor appeared
to think that the witness David, who seems to have understood English sufficiently well to
give evidence of what he heard said, as well as of what he saw, on the occasion of the
murders, would be a material witness at both trials. Should the Law-Officers of the Crown
in Victoria be of the same opinion, Levinger’s trial will probably have to be postponed to
the following sittings; Hovel’s trial having been already postponed once, cannot be so
again, and it would be hardly possible for the witness to give evidence in court in Sydney
on the 17th, and in Melbourne as soon afterwards as the 19th.
5. This will probably lead to the detention of David longer than you may expect.
The return of these natives to Rotumah or Fiji will however be attended to.
6. With regard to the non-arrest of the two Frenchmen, the Crown Solicitor assures
me that no right whatever exists to arrest them under the circumstances. If they were
found here, I apprehend, however, the Court would have jurisdiction, no matter how they
came here. lam further informed that the English law which enables foreigners to claim
a mixed jury does not extend to New South Wales
7. I observe a query in your despatch to Commodore Lambert, which leads me to
think that you have not yet received a copy of certain papers on the subject of the
Polynesian labour question, which have been laid before the House of Commons. I
therefore inclose a copy of the reprint of them which has been made here.
8. In conclusion, 1 beg to assure you of my willingness to give you any assistance or
advice in my power at all times. At the same time lam in possession of no instructions,
and have received no authority from Her Majesty’s Government to take any steps in this
1. Lerbooki.
2. Lokoiios.
* Island Twosse, Village Tong oar.
3. Konlay. I 5. Terroo.
4 a Towarrar. I 6. Karlailsee.
7. Inmeyar.


matter, or to interfere further than in the performance of such duties as may be incidental
to the Governor or Government of this Colony in the execution ot the Act 9, Geo. IV,
cap. 83, sec. 4, which extends the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
to deal with offences committed in the islands of the Pacific Ocean, not occupied by any
civilized Power.
9. 1 will forward a copy of your letters, and of this reply to Lord Granville.
I am, &c.
(Signed) BELMORE.
No. 38.
Circular addressed to Her Majesty's Consuls in the Pacific Islands.
Sir, Foreign Office, July 31, 1869.
GREAT interest has been taken of late in this country as regards the steps reported
to be in progress for obtaining from the various islands in the Pacific, immigrants to supply
the labour required in adjacent quarters ; and reports, which can scarcely have originated
without some foundation, have been current as to the hardships to which the immigrants
have been exposed.
The matter, indeed, has attracted so much public interest as to have made it necessary
for some explanations on the subject to be furnished to Parliament. Her Majesty’s
Government, therefore, feel it due both to the cause ot humanity and to public feeling in
this country, to exert any influence in their power on behalf of the immigrants, and to
protect them against any evil consequences which might result either from ignorance on
their own part, or from the cupidity of speculators in human labour.
On these grounds, I have to instruct you to direct your special attention to the
operations which may be undertaken to procure immigrants, and to report to me any
information you can procure on the subject, explaining tor what labour markets the
immigrants may be destined ; what contracts are entered into between the immigrants and
the contractors; and what precautions are taken for their safety and comfort on the
voyage.
I am, &c.
(Signed) CLARENDON.
No. 39.
Mr. Otway to Sir F. Sandford.
(Extract.) Foreign Office, August 3, 1869.
WITH reference to your letter of the 29th ultimo, I am directed by the Earl of
Clarendon to request that you will state to Earl Granville that his Lordship anticipates
that Lord Granville will concur with him in the opinion that the state of things exhibited
in the correspondence, of which you inclose copies, is very serious, —and all the more so
from the extreme difficulty of dealing with it; and Lord Clarendon considers that an
intolerable responsibility will be thrown upon Her Majesty’s Government if the present
state of things, as regards the introduction of immigrants into the Fiji Islands, is allowed
to continue. !
In the meanwhile, Lord Clarendon considers it of the utmost importance that Her
Majesty’s Government should be in possession of full and accurate information on the
whole subject ; and with this object his Lordship proposes, with Lord Granville’s
concurrence, to address to Mr. March, Her Majesty’s Consul at Fiji, the instructions of
which copy is inclosed.*
I am at the same time to inclose, for Lord Granville’s information, copy of a circular
which Lord Clarendon has lately addressed to Her Majesty’s Consuls in the Pacific,f with a
view to direct their attention to the general question regarding the operations being carried
on in the South Sea Islands.
* No. 40.
f No. OS.
[43B]


The Earl of Clarendon to Consul March.
Sir, Foreign Office, August 3, 1869.
THE Secretary of State for the Colonies has communicated to me copies of the
despatches which Mr. Acting Consul Thurston addressed to the Earl of Belmore on the 3rd
February and 30th March last. I have, however, received no despatches direct from
Mr, Thurston of so recent a date as the last of these, and I am therefore left to gather
from these despatches the anomalous state of things with which you will have to deal on
your arrival at your post.
In my despatch of the 20th May I explained to you the circumstances under which
I have been precluded from taking steps to extend your jurisdiction over British subjects
in the Fiji Islands. But it seems from Mr. Thurston’s despatches that, in the absence of
such powers legally conferred, necessity and convenience have practically secured to him a
certain extent of jurisdiction —more or less recognized by the resident community—which
may probably be extended to you.
The mode in which the influence thus acquired has been exercised as regards immigra-
tion into the Islands, and with respect to the position of the immigrants, is a very serious
matter. Indeed, there can be little doubt from the facts stated by Mr. Thurston that a
slave trade with the South Sea Islands is gradually being established by British speculators
for the benefit of British settlers, and that the traffic has had the indirect sanction of the
British Consul in the Fiji Islands, the only British authority on the spot, who appears to
have intervened, and hitherto with success, to prevent the gross abuses of which the traffic
is capable; but already reports of entry are evaded, fictitious sales of vessels are made,
kidnapping is audaciously practised; and it is under these circumstances that Mr. Thurston
reports that there are indications that the control he has hitherto exercised will be opposed
in some quarters, and it is manifest that the protection which he has extended to the
emigrants, and which cannot be enforced, will soon be openly defied.
The responsibility which has up to this time attached to Her Majesty’s Consulate in
regard to this question, and which becomes the more grave in view of deplorable occurrences
such as those which occurred in the case of the vessel “ Young Australian, must
eventually rest with Her Majesty’s Government; and it is therefore necessary that they
should receive accurate information on the subject in order to enable them to decide as to
the course which it may be expedient to follow in dealing with the matter.
You will therefore lose no time in reporting to me fully upon the whole subject,
explaining by whom, by what means, and from what quarters the emigrants are procured,
the nature of the contracts of engagement, the guarantees given by the settlers for the due
performance of the contracts, the employment for which the labourers are engaged, the
means possessed by Her Majesty’s Consulate for ascertaining how they are treated, and
specially whether you can rely upon having an interpreter through whom you can
communicate with the labourers; the facilities for re-conveying them to their homes at the
expiration of their engagements; the character of the vessels and commanders engaged
in the traffic, and whether there is overcrowding in the vessels, and a proper supply of
provisions; and the price paid per head for each emigrant.
If the introduction of emigrants is, as it would appear, conducted on an increasing
scale, it is to be presumed that a demand must exist resulting from a corresponding
increase in the number of the European settlers and in the development of their opera-
tions. You will therefore furnish me with particulars as to the nationality and general
character of these settlers ; the amount of land held by them, and as to the probability of
their requiring a large increase in the number of labourers, and whether these last cannot
be found in the Fiji Islands without importing them from other quarters.
You will understand that the subject is one which occupies the anxious attention of
Her Majesty’s Government, and you will endeavour to throw upon it all the light in your
nower. Any suggestions you may offer, either for placing the traffic on a sound footing
or for putting an end to it altogether, will be well received by Her Majesty’s Government.
I have, in conclusion, only to instruct you to convey to Mr. Thurston my approval of
the steps taken by him to procure the evidence which will be required by the Australian
Courts in dealing with the case of the “ Young Australian,” and you will bear in mind that
it is your duty to avail yourself of every opportunity which may present itself for keeping
the Australian Government informed of any points connected with the matter in which
their influence can usefully be exercised.
I am, &c.
(Signed) CLARENDON.


Mr. Otway to the Hon. A. Kinnaird, M.P
Sir, Foreign Office, August 4, 1869.
ON the receipt of your letter of the 27th of May, Lord Clarendon requested Her
Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies to institute an inquiry into the alleged case
of kidnapping at Erromanga, reported by the Rev. James McNair; and lam now directed
by his Lordship to inform you that he has received from the Colonial Office a copy of a
despatch from the Governor of Queensland, dated April 16, from which it appears that
the matter had been brought to his notice by Commodore Lambert, and that he had
directed a searching inquiry to be made into the circumstances as stated by Mr. NcMair.
The result of the inquiry is shown in two Reports drawn up by the Immigration
Officer at Brisbane, of which 1 am directed by Lord Clarendon to inclose copies for your
information,* and which would appear to throw considerable doubt on the accuracy of
Mr. McNair’s statements.
It will be seen from the last of these Reports that it was intended to procure further
evidence on the subject in the shape of a declaration from Captain Smith, and, meanwhile,
Commodore Lambert has informed the Governor of Queensland of his intention to send
the a Rosario ” to the Islands to make full inquiry into the whole system of native
emigration.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ARTHUR OTWAY.
No. 42.
Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Otway. —( Received August 10.)
(Extract.) Downing Street , August 10, 1869.
IN reference to the letter from this Office of the 22nd ultimo, on the subject of the
charges of kidnapping brought against the Captains of the “Lyttona” and “ Syren ” by
Mr. McNair, a missionary at Erromanga in the South Pacific, I am directed by Earl
Granville to transmit to you, for the information of the Earl of Clarendon, a copy of a
further Report from the Emigration .Commissioners which appears to Lord Granville to
impugn the accuracy of Mr. McNair’s statements.
Inclosure in No. 42.
Mr. Murdoch to Sir F. Rogers.
Sir, Emigration Board, July 27, 1869.
I HAVE to acknowledge your letter of 22nd instant, with a despatch from the
Governor of Queensland, inclosing and reporting upon various papers connected with the
introduction of South Sea Islanders into that Colony.
2. Among the inclosures to Colonel BlackalFs despatch are a copy of Resolutions
adopted at a meeting at Brisbane, presided over by the Mayor, in which the immigration
is denounced as slavery, and the copy of a letter from Commodore Lambert forwarding a
complaint from Mr. McNair, a missionary in Erromanga, that some natives in that island
had been kidnapped and carried away by the master of the ship " Lyttona.” The other
inclosures are, in substance, the answers of the local Government to these complaints.
3. The Resolutions of the Brisbane meeting describe the immigration as “ a backward
step in the direction of slavery;’’ as an attempt to establish a system of labour opposed to
the law and policy of the Imperial Government; as destructive of the work of the
missionaries in the islands; and demoralizing to the people themselves; and as opposed
to the principles on which the Colony of Queensland was established, and calculated to
check European immigration. It is further stated that the Act passed by the Legislature
for the protection of the people has failed to accomplish that object; that it does not
secure to the people proper treatment and protection, while it affords facilities for
kidnapping and other crimes. It is therefore prayed that the Act may be repealed.
4. The letter from Mr. McNair transmitted by Commodore Lambert states that the
* Inclosures in No, 36.


schooner “Lyttona,” Captain Smith, had kidnapped thirty natives from Mard, Tanna, and
Erromanga, having decoyed them on board by false pretences and confined them under
hatches; that the people of Erromanga were, in consequence, so excited that they would
have murdered Mr. Smith and his boat’s crew but for his (Mr. McNair’s) interference;
and that he interfered only on a written promise from Mr. Smith to re-land the
Erromangans, whichpromise he broke.
5. It will be convenient to take the case of the “ Lyttona ” first.
6. Mr. McNair’s representation was received in the beginning of last month from the
Foreign Office. In reporting upon it on 21st ultimo, I observed that if the circumstances
were correctly reported, the case was one of great atrocity, and that if the people had been
landed in Queensland without discovery, it would lead to the conclusion that the
Polynesian Labourers Act was a failure. The inclosures to Governor Blackall’s despatch,
however, give a different colouring to the transaction described by Mr. McNair. The
papers were referred by the Governor to the Immigration Agent for investigation, and the
result was as follows; —James Martin, now the master ot the “ Lyttona,’ but at the time
of the transaction in question the licensed Recruiting Agent on hoard, deposes that the
Erromanga people remained on board of their own free will and consent; that others from
the same island who had been on board but refused to engage tor service were relanded;
that among those relanded was the brother of one of the men who decided to go on; that
it was the endeavour of this man to prevent the emigration ot his brother, which caused
the excitement among the people; and (as is acknowledged by Mr. McNair) that the
master had invited Mr. McNair, if he was not satisfied, to go on board and talk to the men,
offering to remain on shore while he did so, but that he refused, ihe Immigration Agent
further reports that, on the arrival ot the “ Lyttona ” at Brisbane, he went on board and
asked the Erromangans whether the master had stolen them, and that they replied, “ as
well as they could,” in the negative; that six of the other natives on board had been in
the Colony before, one of whom could make himself understood by the Erromangans and
acted as interpreter; that the Erromangans as well as the others were in good health and
spirits, and that they understood the agreement they had made and the wages they were to
receive. The vessel also is said to have been clean and well provisioned.
7. The Immigration Agent expresses regret that Mr. McNair did not accept the
master’s invitation to go on board and inquire on the spot into the circumstances of the
case. If he had done so he would probably not have made the representation he did
make-to Commodore Lambert. It is clear that either Mr. McNair or the Immigration
Agent were deceived in the matter, and the circumstances appear to make it more probable
that it was Mr. McNair than the Immigration Agent.
8. In respect to the Resolutions of the meeting at Brisbane, the Attorney-General
asserts that no instance of cruelty towards the South Sea Islanders, or anything like
slavery has ever come under his notice; that there are many persons in Queensland who
would bring forward any case ot kidnapping or ill-usage if they existed; and that any
attempt to treat the people as slaves would be at once dealt with by the Law of
the Crown ; that large investments in the cultivation ot sugar and cotton, for which
European labour would not be available, have been made in dependence on the labour of
these people, and consequently that if the immigration were stopped, great loss would
accrue to the settlers engaged in this cultivation; that, moreover, to repeal the Act as
proposed in the Resolutions would leave the immigrants without any other protection than
the ordinary law, and would deprive them ot the security provided tor their back passages ;
that the question will be dealt with during the approaching Session of the local Legislature ;
and that among the amendments to be introduced into the Act, it is proposed to require in
future the introduction of a certain proportion ot women; that the outrages that have
been committed in connection with South Sea Island Emigration have had no connection
with emigration to Queensland ; and that the Queensland Legislature has no power to
prevent them. The Immigration Agent gives a summary ot the number of South Sea
Islanders introduced into Queensland before and since the Act. He admits that the Act
has not been altogether successful, and he suggests alterations to the effect
1. That women should be included in the Immigration at the rate of one-fifth the
number of men.
2. That a Government Agent should accompany each vessel to superintend the
collection of the emigrants.
3. That wages should be paid through the Government.
4. That a Government Agent should accompany return emigrants to see that they are
landed at the proper islands.
5. That employers of men introduced before the Act should make the necessary
payments for their return passages; and,


6 and 7. That cases between South Sea Islanders and their employers should be dealt
with under the Polynesian Act, the evidence of the islanders being accepted without oath.
9. Lastly, the Governor asserts that there is no reason to apprehend any unfair
treatment of the immigrants in Queensland. He states that they have greater opportunities
of making their complaints known than the Indian immigrants in the West Indies, and
that he has seen them on several plantations working amicably with Europeans and treated
on an equality with them.
10. The conclusion to be drawn from these papers is, as it appears to me, that the
South Sea Islanders hitherto introduced into Queensland, have been well treated; that the
Polynesian Labourers Act was passed in good faith, and with the full intention of providing
these people with sufficient protection, and that the Legislature may be depended upon to
make any additions or alterations that may be necessary to render it more efficient. The
proposed additions, especially those that require the introduction of a proportion ol females,
and the presence of a Government Officer on board the vessels both that recruit and that
return emigrants, will be essential improvements of the law, and ought to be sufficient
safeguards against kidnapping or ill-treatment of the people on board ship. At the same
time it is evident that the labour of these people will be very valuable in Queensland, and
it is difficult to deny the justice of the remarks of the Attorney-General as to the
advantages to be derived by the people themselves from their introduction to the higher
civilization to be found in Queensland as compared with their native islands.
11. But while the present papers vindicate the Queensland emigration, they do not
disprove—on the contrary, they distinctly show —that fraud and force have been employed
by others in recruiting emigrants in some of these islands. The principal offender in this
way appears to be a vessel called the “Young Australian,” owned in and sailing from
Sydney, which has been employed in the conveyance of natives from the New Hebrides
and other islands to the Fiji Islands. No authority short ol the Imperial Legislature
can put a stop to proceedings of this description, nor would an Act of Parliament be of
much avail unless cruizers were employed in the Polynesian Seas to carry it into effect.
It is for Her Majesty’s Government and Parliament to decide whether the circumstances
are such as to require so stringent and costly a remedy. But in deciding on that question it
must be borne in mind that the settlers in the Fiji and Samoa Islands, for whose service
labourers are said to be kidnapped from other islands, are not all British subjects, but that
there are among them Americans, and, it is believed, Frenchmen. Messrs. Burt and
Underwood, whose treatment of the natives in their employ is said to have caused the
outbreak in Viti Levu, mentioned in the Attorney-General’s Report, in which a number ot
lives were lost, are Americans. Over others than British subjects, as well as over foreign
ships, an Act of Parliament would, of course, have no authority.
1 have, &c.
(Signed) T. W. C. MURDOCH.
No. 43.
Sir F. Sandford to Mr. Hammond. —(Received August 10.)
(Extract.) Downing Street, August 10, 1869.
WITH reference to previous correspondence respecting the alleged kidnapping of
South Sea Islanders, I am directed by Earl Granville to transmit to you the inclosed
copy of a despatch on this subject received from the Governor of New South Wales.
Inclosure in No. 43.
The Earl of Belmore to Earl Granville
My Lord, Sydney , May 17, 1869.
YOUR Lordship’s serious attention has been drawn to a subject about which it has
been my duty lately to address you more than once, —the traffic in South Sea Island
labourers.
2. This is a question about which a great diversity of opinion exists here, but it is
one upon which I think I shall not be out of place in troubling you with a few
observations, which you will no doubt take for what they may be worth.
3. In the first place, I will give you a story told me the other day by one of my
Ministers, showing one of the methods by which the spirit of the Queensland Act may


be evaded, whilst the letter of it is complied with. My informant, it is right to say, did
not vouch for the truth of the story.
4. A vessel goes to one of the cannibal islands, thickly populated, and under the
control of a Chief. The Chief wishes to reduce his population, and to pocket the premium
the trader is ready to pay for each labourer. He calls his people together and says. Here
is a chance for thirty or forty of you to engage with this trader.” The number required
go on board. They are asked whether they are willing to go away in the vessel; they
declare their willingness, and the terras of the law are apparently complied with.
5. But they know very well that if they refuse to go, they will be killed and eaten.
No comment seems to be necessary upon this if it is true.
6. As far as I am able to form an opinion, the engagements made with those labourers
who emigrate voluntarily are generally carried out by employers. There may be cases
where they are not, but I am inclined to think they are the exception rather than
the rule.
7. Where the Act is evaded, is in procuring men by force, or otherwise improperly,
and sometimes perhaps on the voyage. Your Lordship will see by a letter from the
Consul at Fiji, which forms an inclosure to one of my despatches by this mail, that the
contracts made by the labourers engaged there are fairly carried out.
8. The only way that I can see to check the irregularities on the part of masters of
vessels which are complained of, is to have a man-of-war permanently stationed, or
cruizing about amongst the islands. I have conversed with naval officers on the subject,
and although I have not found an absolute agreement of opinion, yet I have come to the
conclusion that if this service is to be properly attended to, the present strength of the
Australian squadron (four ships), is insufficient.
9. Fiji is, speaking roughly, somewhere about 20° east, by 8° or 9° north of
Sydney. The ships are constantly wanted in New Zealand. The “ Virago ” spends a
great deal of time to the northward in surveying and other duties; consequently, the
visits of the men-of-war to the islands are only occasional, leaving considerable intervals of
time, during which traders can do pretty much what they like.
10. If I might venture to offer an opinion, founded on what I have heard from
others, a corvette of the “ Brisk ” class is the most useful for the islands. Speed or heavy
guns are not required, but a light draft of water. Comparatively large crews for the size
of the ship and plenty of boats, are the great desiderata. It is also advisable that a vessel
on this service should be commanded by a post-captain, in order that he may have
precedence of the Consuls.
I have, &c.
(Signed) BELMORE.




BlbLjO
