

CORRESPONDENCE
RESPECTING
NEW GUINEA.
Presented to hoth Honses of Parliament by Command of Per Majesty.
July 1876.
LONDON;
PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
FOR HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE.
1876.
[C.—1566.] Price 2s.




No. in
Series.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page
1
'Admiralty ..
Oct. 14, 1873
Stating that they have been informed that Captain
Moresby has taken possession of the eastern
portion of New Guinea, and that the Dutch
appear to claim the western portion ..
I
2
■ Mr. Labilliere ..
Mar. 26. 1674
Submitting his view* in favour of the annexation
of New Guinea by Great Britain
1
3
To Mr. Labilliere,
April 15, 1874
Thanking him for his interesting letter of the 26th
ultimo .. .. .... •• ...
4
4
To Admiralty ,. ..;
April 15, 1874
Transmitting copy of Mr Labilliere's letter of the
26'h ultimo, recommending the annexation of
New Guinea .. .. ..
A
5
To Governors of Australa-
sian Colonies
April 17, 1874
(Circular)
Inclosing copy of Mr. Labilliere’s letter of the 26th
ultimo, and requesting to be furnished with the
opinions entertained on the subject in the Colony,
under their Government ..
4
C
Sir James Ferguason,
K.C.AI.G.
J
July 2. 1874
(Rec. Aug 3 i)
(Extract )
Expressing his belief that the subject of the annexa-
tion of New Guinea has not attracted much
attention in New Zealand ...
4
7
Governor Weld ■.
July 14, 1874
(Rec. Aug. 31)
Stating that his own views are in favour of the
annexation of Papua or New Guinea, and that
the general feeling in Western Australia is not
opposed to it ■ .. '
5
8
; Admiralty ,. ..
Sept. 4, 1874
Inclosing Captain Moresby’s report of his proceed-
ings whilst surveying the north-east coast of
New Guinea .. .. ..
6
9
;Slr G. F. Bowen, G.C.M.G.
Sept. 1, 1874
(Rec. Oct. 26)
His reasons for not agreeing with Mr. Labilliere’s
suggestions in favour of the annexation of New
Guiuea .. .. .. .. ..
10
10
.Sir H. Robinson, K.C.M.G.
Sent. 7, 1874
(Rec. Nov. 18)
Inclosing Minute bv Mr. Parkes advocating the
Colonization of New Guinea by Great Britain,
and expressing his own opinion that the existing
isolation of New Guinea should be maintained ..
11
1
'Governor Cairns, C.M.Q. .
Feb. 22, 1875
(Rec. Apr. 24)
Expressing his own views in regard to the annexa-
tion of New Guinea, and inclosing the copy of a
Minute of the Executive Council recording an
opinion in favour of annexing that Island
15
12
The Royal Colonial Institute
April 29, 1875
Transmitting Memorial from the Resident Council
and Fellows of the Institute, strongly advocating
the annexation of New Guinea by Great Britain ,
18
13
iTo Admiralty and Foreign
■ Office
May 25, 1875
Requesting information respecting the title, or
alleged title, of the Dutch to the western portion
of New Guinea, and the precise boundaries of
the territory held to be Dutch
20
14
| Admiralty
July 9, 1875
Transmitting Memorandum relating to.the discovery
and exploration of New Guinea, together with a
chart
21
15
[Governor Sir H. G. Robin-
son, G.C.M.G.
1124]
June 3, 187.5
(Uec. Aug. 3)
Forwarding Minute of the New South Wales
Cabinet on the proposed annexation of New
Guinea and other islands in the South Pacific ..
b 2
26
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS.


No. in
Series.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page
16
Governor Musgra ve, C. M .G.
June 17, 1875
(Rec. Aug. 4)
Communicating the views of the South Australian
Cubmct •• • • •• •* • •
35
17
To Admiralty ., .V
Aug. 21, 1875
Sending copies of the above printed paper, and
recommending that a survey should be made of
the coast opposite Cape York
39
1
Admiralty
Sept. 22, 1875
Inclosing copy of a report from Captain Evans,
stating that no new survey or exploration of New
Guinea would add to the- knowledge already
possessed of the coast opposite Cape York . ..
40
>9
Governor Cairns, C.M.G. .
July 6, 1875
(Rec. Sept. 23)
Forwarding an Address to the Queen from the
Legislative Council of Queensland, respecting
the cession of Fiji and the annexation of New
Guinea ... ..
41
20
Governor Cairns, C.M.G. ■
July 6, 1875
(Rec. Sept. 23)
Transmitting an Address to the Queen from the
Legislative Assembly of Queensland, expressing
satisfaction on account of the cession of Fiji, and
recommending the annexation of New Guinea ,.
42
31
Governor Sir A. Musgrave,
K.C.M.G.
1
Aug. 11, 1875
(Rec. Sept. 27)
Forwarding Addresses from the Council and
Assembly of South Australia, advocating the
annexation of New Guinea ,. .. • •
42
32
i
The New Guinea Colonizing
Association
j
Oct. 9, 1875
Inclosing documents showing the nature of their
proposed operations in connection with the ex-
ploration and colonization of New Guinea
44
23
Governor Sir H. Robinson,
G.C.M.G.
Aug. 27, 1875
(Rec. Oct, 16)
(Extract)
Death of Commodore Goodenough, prorogation of
New South Wales Parliament, and Minute of his
Ministers advocating the annexation of New
Guinea .. ♦. •*■ •• ••
52
34
To E. Schubert, Esq.
Oct. 30, 1875
Stating that the project of the New Guinea Coloni-
zing Association for sending an expeditionary
force to the island cannot be supported by Her
Majesty’s Government
56
31
Tjie New Guinea Coloniz-
ing Association '
i
Nov. 8, 1875
Expressing an opinion that their letter of the 9th
ultimo has been misunderstood, and submitting
further • remarks upon, their project for the
• colonization of New Guinea.. .. ••
57
26
To tbc New Guinea Coloniz-
ing Association
Nov, 10, 1875
Stating that although Lord Carnarvon has nothing
to add to Mr. Malcolm’s letter of the 30th
ultimo, it is necessary to point out that the
meaning of that letter has not been rightly
apprehended by the Association .. . •
55
37
Secretary to the Anti-
i Slavery Society
Nov. 11, 1875
Respecting a private expedition now being fitted
out for New Guinea, the seizure of 1,000 square
miles of the island for allotment amongst the
adventurers, and requesting the favour of an
interview with Lord Carnarvon
59
38
The New Guinea Coloniz-
ing Association
Nov. 11, 1875
Acknowledging receipt of Mr. Herbert’s letter of
the 10th instant, and requesting to be informed
how the unclaimed portion of land in New
Guinea can legally be acquired
60
29
TO the Secretary of the
Anti-Slavery Society
Nov. 13, 1875
Stating that Lord Carnarvon will receive a depu-
tation from the Society on the 17th instant ..
64
80
• • • • • *
Nov. 18, 1875
Report from the “ Times” newspaper of November
18 of an interview between a deputation Lorn the
- Anti-Slavery Society and the Earl of Carnarvon..
62
31
To the New Guinea Colo-
nizing Association -
Nov. 19, 1876
Remarking upon their letter of the ,11 th instant, and
stating that Lord Carnarvon is unable to comply
with their request for advice as to the legal
acquisition of unclaimed land in New Guinea . •
63


No. in
Series.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page
82
To Foreign Office
Nov. 30, 1875
Inclosing copy of proposed despatch to the Gover-
nor of New South Wales respecting the extension
of British sovereignty over New Guinea and other
places in the Pacific Ocean ,, ..
64
38
Foreign Office ..
Dec, 4, 1875
Concurring in the terms of the despatch which Lord
Carnarvon proposed to address to the Governor
of New South Wales (No 48) .. ••
65
31
To Governor Sir H. Robin-
son, G.C.M.G.
Dec. 8. 1875
Stating that the arguments for and against the
annexation of New Guinea and other islands in
the Pacific Ocean will continue to bo examined
by Her Majesty’s Government; but that they
are not satisfied of the expediency of such a
course, and that they see no reason for hastening
a decision on so important a subject ..
65-
3>
Governor Cairns, C.M.G. .
Oct. 4. 1875
(Rec. Dec. 14)
Views of his Ministers on the subject of a joint
contribution towards the cost of the establishment
of the Colony of Fiji .. .. ••
67
36
To Governors of the Aus-
tralasian Colonies, except
New South Wales
Jan. 13, 1376
• (Circular)
Transmitting copy of Lord Carnarvon's despatch of
the 8th ultimo respecting the question of further
annexation, whether in New Guinea or elsewhere
in the Pacific
68-
37
Governor Sir H. Robinson,
G.C.M.G.
Nov, 26. 1875
(Rec. Jan. 17,
1876)
In replv to Lord Carnarvon’s Circular despatch of
July 9 respecting the proposed contribution, by
Colonies more particularly concerned, to expense
of carrying out any policy which they may
advocate or approve ... .. ••
69
38
To Governor Cairns, C.M.G.
Jan. 33, 1876
Acknowledging his despatch of October 4, forward-
ing Minute containing the views of bis Ministers
in regard to certain passages in Lord Carnarvon’s
Circular despatch of July 9, in which reference
is made to the special interest which might be
felt by the Colony,of Queensland in the annexa-
tion of Fiji
71
39
To Sir H. Robinson,
G.C.M.G.
Feb. 12, 1876
Question of financial assistance to be rendered by
Colonies interested in the pursuance of any
policy connected with the annexation of islands
in the South Pacific
71
40
Governor Sir H. Robinson,
G.C.M.G.
Mar. 3. 1876
(Rec. May 1)
Forwarding copies of papers which have been .laid
before the Colonial Parliament relating to matters
connected with the annexation of New Guinea
72
41
Governor Sir G. F. Bowen,
G.C.M.G.
Apr. 11, 1876
(Rec. June 5)
Inclosing Ministerial Memorandum expressing an
opinion that the annexation of New Guinea must
be regarded from an Imperial point of view
77
42
The Marquis of Normanby,
K.C.M.G.
Apr. 27, 1876
(Rec. June 26)
Colonial contributions towards the cost of governing
the islands of the Pacific, and Memorandum on
the question by Sir Julius Vogel
80
■13
To the Marquis of Nor-
man by, K.C.M.G.
June 10, 1(176
Acknowledging receipt of his despatch of the 27th
April last, inclosing a Memorandum signed by
Sir J. Vogel, expressing the views of the' New
Zealand Government on the subject of the
annexation of Fiji
83
APPENDIX.
Lord Carnarvon’s Circular despatch of the 9th July. 1875, with respect to a proposed annual contribution
by the Colonies of Victoria, New South Wales. Queensland, and New Zealand, of 4.000'. respectively
towards the Government of the Fiji Islands .. • • •• •• •• ••
(MAP to face page 26.)


Correspondence respecting New Guinea.
No. 1.
Admiralty to Colonial Office.
Sir, Admiralty, October 14, 1873,
IN reply to your letter of the Bth October, requesting to be informed whether
any information has been received showing that Captain Moresby took possession
of any part of New Guinea, I am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of
the Admiralty to acquaint you, for the information of Earl Granville, that they
understand by a private letter from Captain Moresby, as well as by a letter from
that officer to Commodore Stirling, which was published in a Sydney newspaper, that
he hoisted the union jack and took possession of the eastern portion of New Guinea
according to the usual form, but no official reports have yet been received at this
office, owing to the Commodore’s absence from Sydney.
2. New Guinea was formally taken possession of by Lieutenant Yule, of Her
Majesty’s ship “ Bramble,” in 1846, at a point named by him “ Cape Possession,”
about 300 miles westward of Captain Moresby’s discoveries.
3. The East India traders “ Kormuzen ” and “ Chesterfield ” likewise took
possession of New Guinea and other islands in the Torres Straits in 1793.
4. It appears that the Dutch claim the western portion of New Guinea, and their
boundary line is shown running north and south in about the longitude of 141° east;
but no nation has laid claim to or occupied the eastern portion extending to about IBl°
east longitude, unless it be Great Britain by these acts of taking possession.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ROBERT HALL.
No. 2.
Mr. Labilliere to the Earl of Carnarvon.
My Lord, 5, Pump Court, Temple, E.C., March 26, 1874.
I HOPE your Lordship will kindly pardon me for trespassing upon your atten-
tion. I take this liberty in the belief that it is the duty of the few who possess any
information respecting distant territories about which little is known, to place it at the
disposal of the-Imperial Government.
I am sure that the considerations respecting the importance to British interests of
our possession of both sides of Torres Straits, and of the eastern half of the valuable
island of New Guinea, which I have the honour to lay before you, will he duly
appreciated, and that you will excuse me for troubling you with a somewhat long
statement.
Having for some time taken a great interest in the subject, I have collected all
the facts I could procure upon it, from which I draw the conclusions I venture to
submit. In these many gentlemen with whom I have communicated concur. Some of
them have visited New Guinea; among others I may mention Captain Yule, R.N., who,
in Her Majesty’s ship “ Bramble,” surveyed part of the coast of the island in 1847. A
private conference about the British acquisition of New Guinea was held last summer,
(124) B


but it was thought advisable to draw as little public attention as possible to the subject,
lest the action of some foreign Powers, which were rumoured to be looking after the
island, might he accelerated; and it was felt that there was no hope of inducing the
late Government to take any steps in the matter.
The following facts convey, I submit, irresistible conclusions : —Eighty miles from
our Australian shores lies New Guinea, the largest island in the world next to the island-
continent itself, and also, by all accounts, one of the most productive. Through Torres
Straits a traffic of British ships, already considerable, and destined soon to be of vast
extent, has begun to flow. Captain Moresby, in Her Majesty’s ship “ Basilisk,” has
just discovered “a magnificent land-locked harbour,” and a strait which he'considers so
likely to become, a highway to China, as to have named after that country. He
describes the territory as “ very fertile,” and “ most delightful,” and the natives as
“taking every opportunity to show amicable intentions.” But, good or bad, we
cannot Help having to do with them, for they must henceforth affect British interests
much more than the Ashantces or Eijians, or any other race further removed from
territories occupied by our people, and routes which must be frequented by our trading
vessels.
Only three things can happen to New Guinea: it may be left as it is, or be
annexed by a foreign Power, or by Great Britain. The first appears out of the question,
I submit. The second would be the most undesirable for us; and that, therefore,
the third remains our only alternative, whether we regard it as the least of evils or
consider the territory a splendid prize, which, should England now let. slip, she will
have much reason hereafter to regret.
To leave the Papuans, independent would bo their certain destruction. Eiji is a
warning against that. Gold and other rich productions of New Guinea are beginning
to draw white men there. In a very few years they will swarm in the islands, extending,
unless controlled by a regular Government, over a vastly greater area all the evils they
Have occasioned in Eiji. When Englishmen first went to that island, their. Government
refused to extend its authority over them, and it is now more difficult to do so than if
that refusal had not left room for existing complications to spring up. The difficulty
of a regular Government following instead of preceding or accompanying its subjects,
where it must sooner or later set itself over them, is thus forcibly illustrated. The
evils and difficulties in store for us if we allow things to take the same course in New
Guinea, will be all the greater as that island is so’ much more extensive than Eiji. In
fact, we might, almost calculate them by the rule of three, remembering, however, that
the proximity of New Guinea to Australia will add an important element to our
estimate.
The unhappy fate of so many aboriginal races cannot but make us feel deeply that
if was probably an unfortunate day for the Papuans when first they saw white ’ men,
who can now be no longer kept out of the island. Much, however, can be done to
regulate their intercourse with its inhabitants; but for that the establishment of a
regular Government will bo indispensable. It is for the Imperial Government to decide
whether our responsibilities with respect to these people do not require us to extend
our authority over them, considering that under no flag would they be so well treated
as our own, that it is our fellow-subjects who will most interfere with' them, and that
we. are their nearest civilized neighbours who are able to undertake to rule them.
Annexation by us being the best hope for the Papuans in the future, will also be
best for British interests, whether Imperial or Colonial. We are strong in the
Australian waters because no other Power has dominions contiguous to our own, and
the only extensive territory where one could take up a menacing position is New
Guinea. With such a neighbour on the north shores of Torres Straits in complete
possession of China Straits, and with a naval station in the “ magnificent land-locked
harbour,” Port Moresby, our interests would be in much greater danger, and we should
be put to far more expense than if these positions were in our own hands. The
Australian Colonies would also have largely to increase their expenditure for defences.
But even if England merely look to her insular interests, without contemplating the
great possibility of her Empire remaining united and developing itself into a mighty
Confederation, it would be her best policy to keep any Eoreign Power out of such h
commanding position. Even were the Australian Colonies independent she would for
years possess the largest mercantile navy in those seas, to protect which she would
require a much larger war navy than if Torres Straits and China Straits were in her
hands.
The cost of the acquisition of New Guinea might amount to a few hundred
thousand pounds or even three or four millions; but, whatever it might be, the


Irhperial Government could make it a charge upon the territory* which one fee rich
would soon easily repay. Or, if a single farthing never returned directly to the
Imperial exchequer, the whole expense would he indirectly recouped by the increase of
revehlie which the trade with our new possession would assuredly produce. At all
events, it would be better to sink a good round capital sum at once than he saddled
with a perpetual annual expenditure, to protect our interests against a Foreign Power
settled in the island.
It has been suggested that the best solution of the question for us would he that
the Dutch, who claim the western moiety of the island* should take possession of the
whole. But, with their hands already so full in that quarter, and the population of
Holland s 6 inadequate to carry out any further extensive colonizing enterprizes, they
Would he clearly unequal to the task. They have done little or nothing to extend the
settlement they formed nearly half a century ago, in 1828, on the west coast of New
Guinea. Their claim, or that of any other small European State, might not he
recognized by some of the great Powers, even if followed up by the formation of
settlements, and, consequently, would afford us no protection against a powerful and
undesirable neighbour, sooner or later, settling close to us.
We should in no way interfere with the rights of the Dutch, who only claim to
the 141° longitude, were we to annex the eastern half of the island, in which are Torres
Straits and the other positions of so much importance to us. I submit we might even
guarantee their moiety of the island on condition that they would not dispose of it, as
they have been reported to wish to do, to any Power but Great Britain.
Having, I submit, said enough to prove that we can neither leave the Papuans to
themselves, nor allow another Power to establish itself in New Guinea, I venture to
think we have iio alternative but to go there ourselves, and that the necessity laid upon
tls is hot Unfortunate—that the advantage would not be merely negative. Ohr most
prosperous Colonies never exhibited to first explorers such evidence of richness as NeW
Guinea lids displayed. There is every probability that settlements formed there woUM
sooner become self-supporting than did those of Australia and New Zealand. I
advisedly allude to the latter; for it surely cannot be contended that it would have
been better, either for England or for the Maoris themselves, had war left them to
adventurers, kidnappers, or a Foreign Pow r er; and New Zealand ,is some thousand
miles from our other possessions, whereas Papua is not a hundred. Our experience
with the natives of the former would enable Us better to deal with those of the latter,
whose rights to their land and other property would doubtless be respected.
Captain Moresby has taken possession iff Her Majesty’s name of his new
discoveries, “ pending the decision of the Imperial Government.” Captain Yule
inforrUs mC that he, in like manner, proclaimed the coast farther west, at Cape Poss'es-
sibn, British territory in 1847. I venture, therefore, to think that our claim to Eastern
Papua is good against all the World, if w r e do not allow it to be ousted by sufficient
delay in occupying the coast to justify another nation in catering upon the territory.
To secure it all that would be needed would be the formation of three or foUr
settlements on the coast, progress into the interior being left to time and private
enterprise. The swampy and malarious tracts on the coast would have to be avoided;
but the Ucw harbour, Port Moresby, is healthy, many other positions equally so will
doubtless be discovered, wdiilst the high lands a short distance inland insure good and
bracing climates.
Were the territory taken possession of by the Imperial Government, one of the
Australian Colonies might be walling to undertake its management, as South Australia
has donC iff North Australia; but probably the fear that gold, or other attractions,
might draw away its own population w 7 ould deter Queensland or any of the other
Colonies from promoting the Settlement of New Guinea.
Should Her Majesty’s Government hold the principle that the Empire ought net
to be extended, I venture to submit that here is the strongest case for an exception t 6
the rule.
May I be permitted to remark that a step which would strengthen the outposts of
thfe Empire, and at the same time add a valuable jew r el to its Crown, w r ould be for
ever remembered with gratitude to the Administration which adopted such a policy.
I have also the honour of dispatching at the same time with this a similar com-
huinication to the Bight Honourable the First Lord of the Treasury.
I should explain that I have not the slightest interest in this question beyond the
fact that, having been bom and brought up in Australia, I take the liveliest interest in
everything affecting the Welfare of that country, and being devotedly attached to the
principle of the unity of the British Empire, I as warmly sympathise with everything
(124) B 2


calculated to cement and consolidate it. I trust you will kindly accept this as an
apology for my thus venturing to trespass upon your Lordship.
I have, &c.
(Signed) ERANCIS P. LABILLIERE.
No. 3.
Colonial Office to Mr. F. P. Labilliere.
Sir, Downing Street, April 15, 1874.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 26th ultimo,* in which you submit your views in favour of the annexation
of New Guinea by Great Britain.
I am to express his Lordship’s thanks for the information given in your letter,
which he has read with attention and great interest.
I am, &c.
(Signed) H. T. HOLLAND.
No. 4.
Colonial Office to Admiralty.†
Sir, Douning Street, April 15, 1874.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to transmit to you, for the information
of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, a copy of a letter from Mr. Lahilliere,
recommending the annexation of New Guinea by Great Britain, with a copy of the
answer which has been returned to it.
I am, &c.
(Signed) H. T. HOLLAND.
No. 5.
Circular to Governors of Australasian Colonies.
Sir, Downing Street, April 17, 1874.
I TRANSMIT to you a copy of a letter from Mr. Lahilliere, stating his views in
favour of the annexation of New Guinea by Great Britaiii.
I shall he glad to receive any observations which the information at your disposal,
and your knowledge of the opinions entertained on this subject in the Colony under
your government, may enable you to offer.
I have, &c.
(Signed) CARNARVON.
No. 6.
Governor the Right Hon, Sir J. Fergusson, Bart,, K.C.M.G., to the Eart of Carnarvon. —
(Received August 31.)
Government House, Wellington, New Zealand,
(Extract.) July 2, 1874.
IN reply to your Lordship’s Circular despatch of the 17th April, % transmitting
a copy of a letter from Mr. Lahilliere in favour of the annexation of New Guinea to
Great Britain, I have the honour to inform you that I have no reason to believe that
the subject has attracted much notice in New Zealand.
As regards the extension of British Sovereignty in this part of the world, public
attention has been chiefly directed to the Pacific, and I believe that the question
of the assumption of responsibilities in connection with New Guinea would he regarded
principally as affecting Australia. But I venture to state that generally opinion in this
Colony is decidedly in favour of the extension of British rule, protection, or control of
* No. 2. t A similar letter was addressed to the Foreign Office. £ No. 5.


countries adjacent to, or likely to affect the existing British Possessions, partly from a
strong national feeling, partly from a belief that commerce always follows the flag,
and to a great extent from an apprehension that in time of war the possession by
Poreign Powers of stations in the line of their trade, or at all near their shores, might
prove dangerous and embarrassing.
Without referring to your Lordship’s despatch I have consulted the Prefaiier,
the Honourable Mr. Yogel, C.M.G., who confirms this opinion and points out that New
Guinea appears to command the approaches from Eastern Australia and New Zealand
to China and Singapore, a point of some importance, he remarks, since recent changes
have weakened British control over the Straits of Malacca, and since Captain Moresby’s
discovery of a shorter route within the Islands which Me off the eastern extremity of
New Guinea: considerations which he thinks will increase in importance with the
development of New Zealand commerce. But he regards the question as of very
secondary importance to her as compared with that of Polynesia, in which there is felt
in this Colony a considerable and growing interest. He urges this matter, as he has
constantly done, with much force, but I do not feel myself justified in importing it
further into the present despatch.
Eor my own part, without possessing special knowledge of the subject, I may
state that when Governor of South Australia, my attention was naturally directed to
New Guinea in connection with the affairs of the northern territory. There have been
from time to time rumours in Australia of valuable resources in New Guinea which
have originated more than one abortive expedition. But I heheve that as yet no
European settlement has been made upon any point of the coast, and that the chief
purpose of resort to it has been that of procuring labourers for the pearl fishery, now
very valuable. It is in a high degree necessary for the prevention of abuses, that this
business should he regulated and watched, and I am glad to know that this is at
present likely to he accomplished by the action of the Commodore, enforced by a vessel
of war, whereby only Mcensed traders are permitted to engage the natives.
It appears to me that there would he a difficulty in enforcing such regulations
were the trade to he engaged in by persons of other European, or American
nationalities, and that, therefore, it is desirable that Her Majesty’s Government should
assume the right to do so ; while having regard to the inconvenience that might at
some future time accrue were a country adjacent to the track of vessels passing between
Eastern Australia and New Zealand on the one side, and China, Singapore, &c., on
the other, to belong to a Eoreign Power, I feel sure that there would he a strong
expression of opinion in favour of such a step were the public in this and the neigh-
bouring Colonies aware that it was in question.
*******
On the northern coasts of AustraMa, and in the neighbourhood of New Guinea,
the frequent visits of vessels of war are very necessary, and I beg leave to remark that
the sailing schooners lately fitted out for the police service of these seas are very
inadequate to efficient sendee, especially when, as I am informed, steamers are being
fitted out by private persons for the pearl fishery, and possibly for other branches of
trade.
No. 7.
Governor Weld to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received August 31.)
My Lord, Government House, Perth, July 14, 1874.
I HAVE received your Circular of 17th April, 1874,* in respect to Papua, or
New Guinea.
2. I think the general feeling of these Colonies would he in favour of annexation.
3. My own view would he in favour of annexation, if, in assuming the rights, we
also assume the duties of sovereignty, and fairly carry them out.
4. I think that a great nation, and especially a great maritime, colonizing, and
commercial nation, cannot well stand still; when its growth ends, its decay begins;
and there are circumstances wherein the annexation of fresh territory becomes not
only justifiable, hut almost a duty. Such a case, I think, is that of Papua. Its
proximity to our territory, its geographical position in relation to the commerce of
these seas, might, were it in the hands of a powerful nation, render it necessary, in the
* No. 5.


event of war, forcibly to seize it; whilst if in the hands of a weaker nation, we have tip
Security for its not being transferred to a more powerful one at any time, or for the
maintenance of internal order, which from its proximity may be very important to us.
- It will, moreover, be impossible to prevent its being settled, mainly no doubt by
British subjects, with the certainty that if we do not interfere, it will become a refuge
for criminals, and all kind of lawlessness and outrages oil the aboriginals will ensue.
Therefore, lam in favour of occupying it; blit I hold that such occupation can
Only be justified by occupying it in sufficient force to establish British sovereignty in
fact, and not only in name. . ;
h. Intimate acquaintance not duly with New Zealand from its early days; but also
With its native inhabitants, has convinced me that the greatest injustice is done to a
native face when they are riot at once taught that the Government is not only just and
benevoleiit, but firm, and that its authority is supreme; and its power irresistible. Iby
hd means propose that British rule should necessarily assert itself at once in all things
and everywhere Within the annexed territory \ on the contrary, so far as possible, native
Customs UlUst be respected and native rights secured, settlement concentrated and
collisions most carefully avoided, roads gradually pushed forward, if possible, by means
of the natives themselves, but aii armed force should be maintained partly composed of
hatiVeS, the European parc of it accustomed td the bush armed in the best possible
Manner, not dialled as regulars, but trained to fight in bush fashion, taught to hut
tEerhSelves, to cook for themselves, td carry provisions and equipments in thd lightest
add Most concentrated form—these men WoUld carry on public works and ordinary
police duties, and when wanted for seiwice, would not make campaigns, but would act
With rapidity and decision, a few against superior numbers, points essential in dealing
With, Uncivilized races in Wild country. There is a gentleman now in England; LieU-
teuant-Colohcl Whitmore, C.M.G., late Of New Zealand, Who knows my views well on
this subject, find who has had practical experience as well as theoretical knowledge of
military operations in the bush with SUch a force as I describe, which it was my object
to establish ih New Zealand, and Which has entirely fulfilled my expectations there.
fi. The Government of a hew tropical Settlement, hi a country inhabited by an
Uncivilized 'dr seini-civilized race, ahd Where the future labouring population will be
pfobably native Or Asiatic, should, so far as possible, be placed in the hands of one man.
*7. Advances should be made fairly to set oh foot the new Colony in the form of a
guaranteed loan./ Like a far-seeing land-owher Or merchant, we should look to future
fetUrns, but with the exception Of having a sufficient force at the outset to make the
Government respected, everything inight be done on US Economical a scale as possible*
consistently with efficiency. .
8. I hope that your Lordship will not think that t have gone out of my province
ih indicating these heads of consideration; I cannot; in reply to your despatch, avoid
tOUchilig, however lightly, upon them, because I think that they are essential to the
Aiain question. 1 have strong grounds for believing that no Australian Colony would*
of probably could, carry out the duties of sovereignty if such duties were delegated by
the imperial Government, and I Urn strongly of opinion that Uo country has a fight
to annex an inhabited country if not prepared to carry out those duties. To do so it is
necessary to occupy it with force at your disposal, and he who wields that force should
be directly and personally answerable to Her Majesty and her advisers that Ms policy
be just, wise, and Christian.
I have, &c.
(Signed) FRED. A. WELD, Governor.
No 8.
Admiralty to Colonial Office.
Sir, Admiralty, September 4, 1874.
r AM commanded by My Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit
herewith, for the information of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, a letter (in
original) from Captain Moresby, of Her Majesty’s ship rt Basilisk,” reporting his pro-
ceedings whilst Purveying the north-east coast of New Guinea, and I anl to request
that it may be returned as Soon as done with.
1 am, Ac.
(Signed) ROBERT HALL.


Inclosurc in No. %
Sir, Her Majesty’s skip “Basilisk” Singapore, duly JO, f 874.
I HA VE the honour to forward the following account of the proceedings pf Her
Majesty’s ship “Basilisk,’* for the information of my Lords CpmnpssiQnprs pf the
Admiralty, since the date of my last similar letter dated 15fh April, 1§ , Z4 1 fpqjp
Possession Bay, China Straits
April 15.—Haying ballasted the coal barque and Her Majesty’s schooner “ (Sandfly ”
being ready for sea, the “ Basilisk” left Possession Bay with both ycssqis |n tpvf; aftey
giving them a good offing, they cast off and proceeded to their several 5
the “ Sandfly ” ordered to Sydney.
On the evening of the same day we anchored in Hoop. Iron Bay for fhe purpose pf
rating our chronometers.
April 17.—Left Hoop Iron Bay and proceeded to prosecute the survey tp f;he
eastward of Moresby Island, in accordance with the intention reported in pay last h/ttpr
of proceeding. Prom the above date till 25th April, the time was fully occupied in
the survey referred to; the weather was favourable, and I haye thfi satisfaction pf
reporting that the entire survey which I originally contemplated y;as successfully
completed.
Accompanying this is the chart constructed by Lieutenant L. S. Dayrson, from
which their Lordships will better judge than by any words of mine of the work {kme
in the time at my disposal.
I regret to add that the unexpected discovery of a barge reef extending tp the
south-east of Cape Yentuant will oblige me to qualify my former report to the effect ;
“ I have no hesitation in recommending it (the passage between Teste Island and East
Gape) as a channel which may he safely used by any ordinary well-found merchant-
vessel.” '
Having reported on this in my hydrographical letter of this date I need only say
that, for a steamer or sailing-vessel noth a fair commanding breeze in clear weather,
the channel is perfectly safe, but otherwise with a merchant-vessel not smartly worked
and without local experience, great caution would he necessary.
Prom April 20 to 23, whilst the steam-pinnace and other boats were detached
surveying, the rest of the ship’s company were employed wooding at Blackney Island,
it being necessary to keep a constant supply of wood, to insure sufficient fuel to reach
Amhoina. This work has been very arduous, as, in addition to the boils and ulcers
prevalent amongst the men, a low fever pf a mild type increased the sick-list to 2§
and 29 out of only 141.
April 27. —Having completed the survey to the east of Sir Alexander Milne Bay,
so far as is necessary for its safe navigation, and being supplied with a deck-load of
wood, w r e proceeded past East Cape to the westward, anchoring for tbp night; in
Bentley Bay.
April 29.—Commenced the running survey of the unknown nprtb-east coast pf
New Guinea, the steam-pinnace taking an inshore line of soundings, and minutely
examining the coast as we proceeded ; and when in shoal or dangerous waters hey
services were invaluable, sounding a-head of the ship. In the evening anchored in
Bantle Bay. Distance done about forty miles.
The w T ork done each day may be briefly enumerated as follows, and, by the aid p|
the tracings and accompanying hydrographical letter, their Lordships will, I trust
without difficulty, arrive at a correct estimate of our work, an 4 tlie nature of the coast
surveyed.
April 30. —At anchor in Bantle Bay, where, whilst sights and true hearings were
taken, a fresh supply of firewood was got on board.
May I.—Running along the coast, and anchored for the night In the bight p|
Goodenough Bay. Distance done about thirty-eight miles.
May 2.—Rounded Cape Moresby, and anchored for the night off Jabbering Is|ets ;
Distance done about thirty-six miles.
May 3.—Proceeded along the shores of Coflingwopd Bay, and anebprej off Eiy
Tree Point. Distance done about thirty-two miles.' Sights and true bearings were
obtained hdre, and a fresh supply of w r pod got on board. Steam-pinnacp dctachecj
surveying.
May 4.—Wooding and steam-pinnace surveying.
Mayo. —Rounded Cape Nelson, and anchored for the night pff Spear Islpts.
Distance done about forty-eight miles.


May 6.—Stood across Dyke Acland Bay, and anchored for the night in the hay,
about eight miles off the shore. Distance done about twenty-six miles.
May 7. —Steered towards Cape Ward Hunt, and anchored off Caution Point.
Distance done about forty-three miles.
May B.—Bounded Cape Ward Hunt, and anchored in Traitor’s Bay. Distance
done about twenty-two miles.
At all the places above-named the natives had proved more or less friendly. In
Traitor’s Bay was our first experience to the contrary. Our men were cutting fire-
wood on shore when a party of about 100 natives were seen, fully armed and dressed
in their war paint and feathers, stealthily approaching our men under cover of the
hush. Having heretofore kept on friendly terms with all the numerous savage tribes
we have met, I still hoped to do so with these, and with this object pulled on
shore with a few riflemen to meet them, but our efforts (although I advanced
alone and used every peaceful sign) were unavailing, and to prevent a shower
of spears, on the point of being thrown, I fired at the leading savage. The hall
passed through his shield, hut fortunately did no further injury, as no other shot
was needed; they immediately ran away, hut showing a disposition to rally after
recovering from their first fright, I caused a few shots to be fired wide, when they
hurried away as before. Sights and true hearings were obtained in Traitor’s Bay,
which proved that the Biche Island of the Admiralty charts does not exist. Probably
Cape Ward Hunt, seen at a distance, has been mistaken for an island.
May 10. —Having been employed two days wooding, left Traitor’s Bay, and
anchored in Clark Bay. Distance done about twenty miles.
May 11. —Steered towards the Longuerue Island of D’Entrecasteaux, and anchored
in Death Adder Bay. Distance done about twenty-seven miles.
We had now arrived within sight of Huon Gulf of D’Entrecasteaux, but having
previously found that Biche Island, by the same navigator, did not exist, I deemed
that I should best consult the wishes of their Lordships by continuing our survey
round the shores of Huon Gulf, and thus connect it unbrokenly with the unexplored
coast between Cape King William and Cape Bigny, Astrolabe Gulf; this I have
carried out. Death Adder Bay having proved suitable for wooding, I took on board a
large deck load. '
May 14. —Stood along the shores of Huon Gulf, anchoring for the night in the bight
of this gulf. Distance done, about forty-one miles.
May 15. —Proceeded past the western shores of Huon Gulf, anchoring for the
night as usual. Distance done about thirty-four miles. On this day the cylinder of
the steam-pinnace split, and we have since been deprived of her services, which cannot
be too highly estimated.
May 16. —Bounded Cape Cretin, and hove to for the night off Cape King William.
Distance done, about fifty-two miles.
May 17. —Proceeded along the coast of the Einisterre Mountains, and hove to for
the night off Mount Gladstone. Distance done about fifty-four miles.
May 18. —Proceeded to Cape Bigny, Astrolabe Gulf, where our running survey
terminated. Distance done about thirty miles, and total distance since leaving Cape
Ducie about 548 miles.
In completing these surveys I have the pleasure of reporting to their Lordships
the zeal and cheerful activity with which the arduous work accompanying them has
been carried out by the officers and men under my orders; and my thanks are especially
due to "Navigating Lieutenant Thomas L. Mourilyan, for his ■ services as the principal
assistant of Lieutenant L. S. Dawson, Admiralty Surveyor.
I should have continued the running survey of the northern coast of New Guinea
as far as Humbolt Bay if my sailing orders had placed more time at my disposal, but,
under the circumstances, I judged, as the coast of New Guinea to the west of Astrolabe
Gulf is sufficiently known to enable a ship to pass its shores in safety whilst making a
passage, it was my duty to finish our survey at the point mentioned, and to make the
best of my way to Amboina. I accordingly, after passing between Dampier Island and
the mainland, stood to the west outside the Schontin Islands.
During the survey the “ Basilisk’s” crew were seven days employed cutting wood,
very arduous work, exposed to an unusually hot sun, and tormented by venemous
insects ; yet our sick list never exceeded twenty-nine, and the principal part of these
were from ulcers, cuts, and contusions; about a third of the number were cases of low
fever of a mild type, whereas the Bussian corvette “ Izmarond,” in 1873, after a short
stay of a few days in Astrolabe Gulf, when she embarked Mr. Maclay, the Bussian


livelier, returned to Amboina with 130 on the sick list. I attribute much of our
mmunity from disease to a free tank, both for drinking and washing.
After leaving Astrolabe Gulf, fair winds, were carried until we arrived in
Humboldt Bay.
May 23.—Put into Humboldt Bay for the purpose of obtaining’ supplies of
vegetables for the ship’s company, of which they were in much need. Being aware
that this Bay had been examined by the Dutch, with a view of establishing a Colony
there, I thought it possible we might get other supplies, but no settlement had been
made. After obtaining a good supply of fish, and some vegetables from the natives we
sailed the same day.
I have subsequently learnt that Port Dorey is now the eastmost settlement of the
Dutch, and there a sufficient supply of coal is kept for any casual vessels. Had I
before been aware of this it would have saved much labour, and it will be of much
importance to future vessels employed on this coast.
May 26. —Whilst passing between Providence and Myson Islands the wind headed
and the powerful equatorial current setting us rapidly on the former island, we
anchored on an extensive reef which surrounds the islands, whilst steam was raised.
The natives on shore flew a Dutch flag, but they must have had limited intercourse
with white men, being afraid to come alongside.
The New South Wales’ Government having, at my request, supplied me with
heavy sounding shot and patent detaching gear, and Commodore Goodenough also
having permitted the ship to draw 4,700 fathoms of sounding line at Sydney, I have
been enabled to take a series of deep sea soundings, not as many as I should have
wished to have done, for, having exceeded the time allowed for the survey, I only
caused a sufficient number to be taken to give a general idea of the depths of .the sea
in the parts we have visited.
I regret to say on May the 26th and 27th, after trying for soundings with 1400
fathoms, the line on both occasions parted and was lost, together with the disengaging
apparatus, thus preventing any further deep sea soundings being taken.
On the evening of the 28th May anchored in Threshold Bay east end of New
Guinea, for the purpose of painting, &c., before arrival at Amboina. Here we were
visited by the Rajah of Salwatti, who expressed his pleasure at seeing, for the first time,
one of Her Majesty’s ships; presents were exchanged, and I caused a shell to be fired
to show him the effect. He left us as he came in a state proa, with streamers flying,
gongs beating, and a large retinue of umbrella men; he landed abreast of the ship ;
the state proa was hauled up on the beach; the Rajah then came off in a small canoe
(having divested himself of all dignity) in the capacity of an ordinary trader, and
succeeded in disposing of his wares to great advantage.
The metamorphose was complete.
SOth May. —At 4 a.m., left Threshold Bay, and passing through Pitt’s Straits
reached Amboina on 2nd June, being 123 days from Sydney.
At Amboina was the Dutch steam gun-boat “ Bali,” of 60 horse-power, and an
armament of ten 3-pounder cannonades, and one long 12-pounder, also a small steam
yacht for the Resident (the higher rank of Governor being no longer appointed to
Amboina).
General leave was given, and on the return of our men the Resident requested we
would not coal until after the arrival of the mail steamer. This delayed our sailing
till the 11th June, when, having shipped 49 tons of coal, we left for Singapore.
I regret to report that at Amboina I left Mr. Maclay the Russian traveller, who
had spent fifteen months amongst the natives of Astrolabe Gulf, so dangerously ill
from fever and a complication of disorders that the medical men had hardly any hopes
of his recovery. ■
June 29. —Arrived at Singapore. Pound here Her Majesty’s Ships “ Modeste ” and
“Avon.”
Her Majesty’s ship “ Hart ” arrived on 30th June.
The “ Modeste ” sailed on Ist July, and “ Avon ” on 3rd July.
A survey having been held on the remains of biscuit shipped at Sydney, the
whole quantity, amounting to 3,769 lbs., was found to be so impregnated with maggotsj
insects, and cockroaches, as to be unfit for food. The cause of this has not been from
any fault in the biscuit, but in consequence of the plague of insects which have been
generated in the ship during her repeated service on the New Guinea Coast.
Since our arrival the ship’s company has been employed coaling and refitting.
General leave has been given.
Her Majesty’s ship “ Basilisk ” will be ready for sea about the 20th instant, but
(124) C


it will probably be necessary to remain here till 28th instant, when the next mail
steamer leaves for Sydney. This is in consequence of having Lieutenant Dawson,
Admiralty Surveyor, on board; and it appears advisable to transfer that officer, with
his valuable instruments and chronometers, direct to the mail-steamer.
I have, &o.
(Signed) J. MORESBY, Captain .
The Secretary of the Admiralty.
No. 9.
Governor Sir G. F. Bowen, G.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received October 26.)
My Lord, Government Offices, Melbourne , September 1, 1874.
I HAVE tlie honour to report that I have now given full consideration to the
circular despatch of the 17th April ultimo,* in which your Lordship transmitted a
letter from Mr. Lahilliere, stating his views in favour of the annexation of New
Guinea to Great Britain, and intimated that you would he glad to receive any observa-
tions which the information at my disposal, and my knowledge of the opinions
entertained on this subject in Victoria, might enable me to offer.
2. In the postcript to my “ confidential ” despatch of the 10th ultimo, I briefly
referred to a leading article in the “ Melbourne Argus ” of that date, a copy of which
is appended, treating of the proposed annexation to the British Empire of the Eiji
Islands, and observed that the remarks of the writer would apply, to a certain extent,
also to New Guinea; for in this Colony, as elsewhere, there are “ adventurous subjects
of Queen Victoria,” who will, from time to time, find their way to every group of
islands in the South Seas, and “ will presently make the discovery that it would be
very desirable to obtain the protection of the British flag, and the establishment of a
form of Government in which they would rule, and the black races would obey; in.
which the whites should constitute an official aristocracy, and the indigenous popular
tion a laborious and tax-paying proletariat.”
3. The article mentioned above seems to describe fairly enough the views enter-
tained on questions of this kind by most well-informed, thinking, and disinterested
men in this community. They appear disposed to agree with the principle laid down
in a recent speech of Lord Derby, to the effect that, as a general mile, “ Great Britain
has already black subjects enough,” although it is also acknowledged that there are
strong reasons of an Imperial and national character (some of which are stated in the
inclosure), which may render desirable, probably inevitable, the annexation of the
Eijis, and eventually, perhaps, of other islands in the South Seas. Meanwhile, one or
two attempts made in late years by a few adventurers from Australia to establish
themselves in New Guinea, have proved complete failures, and it scarcely seems likely
that the annexation or formal occupation of any portion of that great island will
become a question of practical politics, or at least a question requiring a final decision,
before the establishment of an Australian Confederation or Dominion.
4. There are no means at Melbourne of procuring any fresh or special informa-
tion about New Guinea. Indeed the interior of that country is one of the few parts of
the earth Avhich is still unexplored by, and almost unknown to, civilized man; while
even its coast-line has been very imperfectly laid down on the maps, as Captain
Moresby, 8.N., has lately shown. I wall, therefore, confine myself to a few remarks
on some points adverted to in Mr. Labilliere’s letter.
(A) The Dutch claim the western half of New Guinea, where they have already
planted some small posts or settlements, resembling, probably, in many respects, those
stations recently held by them on the African Gold Coast. Now if the Dutch were
induced to dispose of these stations, and of their general claims on the country to
England (as Mr. Lahilliere seems to hope, and as actually took place in Africa), it is
not improbable that complications might arise, directly and indirectly, in New Guinea,
of a character similar to those difficulties which recently occurred at Elmina and else-
where in Old Guinea. Many of the inland tribes are said to be warlike and hostile,
and they might prove ultimately more formidable than the Ashantees.
(B) It is presumed that the British Crown would not annex the eastern moiety of
New Guinea without some formal invitation or expression of consent on the part of the
native Chiefs, such as was recorded in New Zealand in the case of the Treaty of
Waitangi in 1840, and was recently proffered in Eiji.
* No. 5.


(C). Mr. Lahilliere calculates that “ the cost of the acquisition of New Guinea
might amount to a few hundred thousand pounds, or even to three or four millions
and he pointedly compares the acquisition of New Zealand. Now it is believed that
the aggregate cost to the Imperial and Colonial Governments together, of the Maori
wars, and of the expenditure consequent on them, has exceeded 12,000,00£)Z. sterling.
Moreover, there is no real resemblance between the two cases; for, when English
colonization first began in New Zealand, there were little more than 100,000 Maoris of
all ages and sexes in a territory as large as the United Kingdom, and possessing a
climate admirably suited to the English race, and destined, in all human probability,
to become the “ Great Britain of the South.” It was foreseen from the first that the
Maoris would, in the course of a single generation, he swamped by the flood of British
immigrants. And so it has come to pass ; for now, in 1874, there is already a rapidly
increasing European population of above 800,000, against a gradually decreasing
Maori population of less than 40,000. In the course of a few more years the Maori
difficulty will he practically at an end, at least if the Colonial Government continues
to adhere to the principle laid down during my administration as Governor of New
Zealand from 1868 to 1873, i.e., that it is at once more politic, more economical* and
more humane, to outlive the few still disaffected Maoris, rather than to attempt to
subdue them by force of arms. On the other hand, New Guinea is a vast tropical
country, peopled probably by several millions of savages, and with a climate generally
unfavourable to European health and vigour. Eew Englishmen will ever settle there
beyond a comparatively small body of planters, merchants, and miners; and the
native population will always remain as overwhelming in numbers in New Guinea as in
India. Under these circumstances the military protection of the proposed settlements
would entail a heavy and permanent charge.
5. In conclusion, I would venture once more to repeat that the general feeling of
this community is strongly in favour of the extension and consolidation of the British
Empire in Australia and New Zealand, and in all other countries with temperate
climates, and where white men can live and propagate their race under conditions
similar to those which obtain in Europe; whereas there are few thinking men in
Victoria who do not agree with the principle that, as a rule, liable to exceptions in
peculiar cases, “ Great Britain has already black subjects enough.”
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. E. BOWEN.
No. 10.
Governor Sir Hercules Robinson, K.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon. —
(Received November 18.)
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, September 7, 1874.
I HA YE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s Circular
despatch of 17th April,* transmitting a copy of a letter from Mr. Lahilliere stating his
views in favour of the annexation of the eastern half of New Guinea by Great Britain,
and inviting any observations on the subject which the information at my disposal, and
the knowledge of the opinions entertained in this Colony, might enable me to offer.
2. I have had some informal conversations on this subject with one or two leading
members of the Government, and I now inclose a copy of a Minute which I have
received from the Premier, in which he advocates the colonization of New Guinea by
Great Britain, alleging that such a course would he hailed with universal approbation
throughout Australasia.
3. I have no doubt that Mr. Parkes is quite correct in stating that such a course
would he very popular here. It would entail on Australasia neither responsibility nor
expense, whilst any advantages which could possibly accrue from such a policy in the
future would he largely shared, if not altogether monopolized, by these Colonies. But
I am unable to concur with Mr. Parkes in the opinion which he expresses, that there
is no country in the world which offers so fair and certain a field for successful colo-
nization as New Guinea.
4. The whole of that vast island is situated within ten degrees of the Equator,
and, consequently, it never could become like Australia, or New Zealand, or North
America, a home for the Anglo-Saxon race. This important point seems to he generally
lost sight of by those who advocate the colonization of New Guinea. It appears to be
* No. 5.
(124) C 2


overlooked that under the most favourable circumstances that country could only
become a Colony somewhat similar to Ceylon or Java, producing tropical products by
means of native labour under European supervision. And to effect even this result
not only the European supervision, but also the native labour would have to he intro-
duced. At present there is not throughout the whole of New. Guinea one European
resident, not even a missionary, and the Papuans, who are the sole occupants of the
country, are savages of a type which experience has shown in other places to be
incapable of becoming civilized. Like the Yeddahs of Ceylon and the aborigines of
Australia they could never be utilized for agricultural purposes, and would gradually
become extinct if brought into contact with other races. Before, therefore. New
Guinea could be made a tropical producing Colony the island would have to he peopled
by Malays or by native labourers drawn from either India or China. Looking to the-
estimated number of the present Papuan population, and judging by what has taken
place in Ceylon and Java, such a transformation would occupy centuries in its accom-
plishment, whilst it is scarcely possible to overestimate the difficulties and expense
which would be inevitable during the earlier stages of such an undertaking.
5. At present Great Britain is certainly not called on to assume such a responsi-
bility. British interests have not yet, as it were, taken root in New Guinea, and if the
Home Government remains passive, unless some such unforseen contingency should arise
as the discovery of an unusually rich gold field, British interests are unlikely for many
years to take root there. There is an almost unlimited number of small islands in the-
Pacific offering equal facilities to enterprising adventurers for the growth of tropical
produce without presenting nearly so many difficulties and dangers as would have to-
be encountered in New Guinea. Until, therefore, the capabilities of the Fijis, the
New Hebrides, the Solomon Islands, and numerous other similar groups are exhausted,
Ido not anticipate much attention being paid to New Guinea; and it appears to me-
to be obviously the true interest of both the Papuans and of the British Government
that the existing isolation of New Guinea should be maintained as long as possible.
Colonization Would, as regards the aboriginal race, simply result in their extermination,
and they would not be succeeded as in Australia, New Zealand, and North America by
people speaking the English language, but by other oriental races who alone are
capable of labouring and living in a tropical and unhealthy climate. Of course if
British subjects do settle in New Guinea, effectual provision should at once be made-
for controlling them, but at present this case seems to me to be one to which the
principle lately laid down by Lord Derby is specially applicable : “ England has already
black subjects enough,”
6. Mr. Parkes and Mr. Labilliere both urge how undesirable it would be for
Australia if New Guinea were annexed by any Foreign Power. But it appears to me
that there is very little prospect of any such contingency. No country would be so
unwise as to take possession of New Guinea solely with a view to colonization. The
possible advantages of such a course would be far too uncertain and remote to com-
pensate for the immediate embarrassments which would result from it, and for the
outlay of the 3,000,000 or 4,000,000 sterling which Mr. Labilliere estimates as the
possible cost of the acquisition. If any Foreign Power sought only for a naval station
in these seas with a view to eventualities in case of war, this object could easily be
secured by the acquisition of a small island with a good harbour in a commanding
position without the encumbrance, as in New Guinea, of many millions of warlike
cannibals. And if any rival should entertain such aggressive views, Ido not see how
it can be prevented from giving effect to them, as it is scarcely to be anticipated that
Great Britain will annex every available spot in the South Pacific.
7. 1 enclose a note which I have received from the Colonial Treasurer forwarding
a letter addressed to him last year by the Bev. W. Wyatt Gill, a missionary who had
recently returned from New Guinea. It will be seen that Mr. Gill, while deprecating
the acquisition of New Guinea by any Foreign Power, considers that the time has not
yet arrived for the occupation of the country by Great Britain.
8. Within the last few days I have met Lieutenant Dawson, R.N., who accom-
panied Captain Moresby as surveying officer, in the “Basilisk,” during his recent voyage
along the northern shores of New Guinea. The coast was carefully surveyed from the
eastern extremity of the island to Astrolabe Bay, and the “ Basilisk ” then sailed
along the remainder of the northern coast making observations and touching at various
places. A full account of the voyage will no doubt, before the receipt of this letter,
have been furnished to the Admiralty by Captain Moresby, and I will, therefore, only
remark here that Lieutenant Dawson’s description of the country seems to dispel
many of the illusions which have hitherto been entertained with regard to it. Along


, he whole length of the coast surveyed, not a harbour or river of any description was
discovered. There was no appearance of any cultivation, and the country near the
coast presented all those characteristics of tropical low lands which are so unfavourable
to European life. The natives they met with were all savages of the pure Papuan
type, black with woolly hair. They were perfectly nude, their bodies being smeared
with dirt and clay. They appeared filthy in their habits, and were sullen, treacherous,
and very unfriendly to visitors.
As a vast unknown country New Guinea will, doubtless, for some time to come
afford an interesting study to scientific explorers; but it is difficult to imagine a
field presenting fewer attractions than it does at present to English colonists.
I have, &c.
(Signed) HERCULES ROBINSON.
Inclosure 1 in No. 10.
Minute for His Excellency the Governor.
ON the subject of New Guinea, to which you made reference in a conversation a Y
few days ago, I desire to make some observations, in which my colleagues concur.
The attention of this Colony has been on several occasions directed to New
Guinea by persons who have been much impressed by its natural fertility and rich
resources. About seven years ago an effort was made to form an Association in
Sydney, for voluntary settlement on the eastern shores of the island; and again, in
1870 or 1871, a number of young men, mostly natives of this Colony, and some of
them the sons of respectable and well-known residents, banded themselves together, and
chartered a vessel, for the purpose of forming a Settlement there. This vessel, the
brig “ Maria,” sailed from Sydney, it is said under very improvident preparation for the
voyage; and she struck on a reef and foundered off the northern coast of Queensland.
Some of the adventurers were lost, others escaped to the shore, and suffered severely
in an uninhabited part of the northern Colony. The interest in New Guinea, and the
belief in its future importance which have been felt very generally in this Colony for
some years, have received fresh strength from Captain Moresby’s discoveries, and
from the increasing trade of vessels from this port to Torres Straits.
There probably is no country in the world which offers so fair and certain a field
for successful colonization as this great island, as there certainly is none so rich and
attractive, and at the same time so close to British rule.
It is understood that the objection of English statesmen to extend the colonies
of Great Britain is based upon the impolicy of throwing the cost of founding new
Settlements upon the English taxpayer. If this be so, and is held to be an insuperable
objection, might not an Imperial charter be granted to an Australian Company to
colonize the eastern side of New Guinea, England reserving to herself the appointment
of Governor, and authority in other matters deemed of just importance ? I feel very
confident that many men of high character and large wealth in these colonies would
at once engage in an enterprise so tempting and honourable, if they had the oppor-
tunity of doing so under British authority, and that a colony might be successfully
founded without costing Great Britain a single shilling, beyond the support of her ships
of war.
The importance of New Guinea to the English Empire now rapidly forming in.
this part of the world cannot be over estimated. Its close proximity to the Australian
coast, its territorial extent, the valuable character of its land, its known mineral
wealth, the pearl fisheries in the neighbouring seas, give to it a prominence in the
progress of these colonies which will go on increasing every year. Its colonization by
a Eoreign Power could not fail of giving rise to many embarrassments. Its colonization
by Great Britain would be hailed with universal approbation throughout Australasia.
(Signed) HENRY PARKES,
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
July 27, 1874.


Inclostire 2 in No. 10.
My dear Sir Hercules, July 31, 1874.
IN looking over my papers last night I found a letter from an old friend about
New Guinea, and as the question is now under consideration, I inclose it for you to
use in any way you please. There may he in it some information worth notice.
Yours, &c.
(Signed) GEO. A. LLOYD.
Although marked private and confidential, my friend authorized me to use it if I
thought it desirable at any time.
G. A. L.
His Excellency Sir Hercules Robinson, K.C.M.G.,
&c. &c. &c.
Inclosure 3 in No. 10.
My dear Sir, Sydney, January 28, 1873.
I VENTURE to address to you the following lines because you knew me twenty-
two years ago, when on my way to the South Pacific.
A few days since I arrived in this city from New Guinea. In connection with
Mr. Murray I had the honour of locating Christian Evangelists (natives of the South
Sea Islands) on two parts of the southern coast. It is hoped that, in a few months,
European missionaries will he resident on the mainland. But for the present the
Rev. A. M. Murray is at Cape Tuk, as Superintendent of the New Guinea mission.
Thanks are due to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland for the gift of the house which
he occupies.
I write now simply as an individual, and not as representing any religious society
whatever.
Does Great Britain claim the sovereignty of New Guinea in whole or in part ? It
is confidently asserted by some authorities that, whilst the Dutch claim the northern
portion of that immense island, the southern half belongs to Great Britain.
At the present moment it is said that a powerful German squadron is on its way
to the Pacific, with the intent of founding a Colony or penal settlement.
Through the supineness of the English Government some years ago. New Cale-
donia (to the possession of which Britain was supposed to have a good claim) became
a Erench penal settlement, so that these colonies are again exposed to the very evils
(of a convict population) from which they resolutely emancipated themselves soon
after my first visit to these shores. And not only so, but the Erench Colony of New
Caledonia, lying to the windward and so near to Australia, must ever he a menace.
This danger may be laughed at now, hut had the issue of the late war been in favour
of Erance, the immense wealth of Sydney might be less secure than it is at present.
Australia has a far deeper interest in New Guinea than in New Caledonia. My
own belief is that the time to occupy New Guinea has not yet come. Should our
missionary enterprise happily succeed, the interests of English colonization and civili-
zation will be effectually promoted. As an Englishman, especially as one deeply inte-
rested in the future prosperity of these Colonies, I should be exceedingly grieved if that
magnificent island should fall into other hands than English.
New Guinea is nearer to the mainland of Australia than Tasmania, the latter
being about 100 miles distant, the other 80. A recent Act pushes the territory of
Queensland sixty miles beyond the coast, thus reducing the actual distance between
northern Australian territory to twenty miles.
Australia and New Guinea are connected by a single reef, which I would not
hesitate to cross (as the Torres Strait islanders actually do) in a canoe. But Tasmania
is separated from Australia by a deep sea channel.
Australia and New Guinea are both known as Dandai; the former being called
Great Dandai, the latter Little Dandai. It were unnatural to separate the one from
the other. Should New Guinea fall into hostile hands, the key of Torres Straits would
be lost.
The more valuable portion of southern New Guinea is the South-Eastern
Peninsula. A naval station anywhere in that direction would he a constant source of
danger to Queensland, so easy would it be to run down upon this coast with the trade
winds.


It is obvious that this great country must in the future expand. There is no
possible way in which it can grow save in the direction of New Guinea.
The wealth of New Guinea must be immense. A country like the South-
Eastern Peninsula, with mountains rising abruptly 13,000 feet above the level of the
sea, must (one would think) be rich in minerals even as the twin island of Australia—
the greater Dandai—is rich. But to the absurd stories which have been tohl of gold
nuggets being found in the pottery, I give no credence whatever.
What suggestion has the writer to offer ? No silly “ Maria ” expeditions would
do good; evil alone would result. But Ido trust that the eyes of the Colonial and of
the distant Imperial Government will be open to watch the movements of the German
and of other expeditions. At any cost (save the dire curse of war), let not the rich
prize fall into other hands.
All I desire at present for New Guinea is that she may be kept free from any
power alien to Britain and Australia. Meantime we hope gradually, by means of
missionary and commercial enterprise, to open up this vast unknown country.
I am, &c.
(Signed) WILLIAM WYATT GILL, B.A.
To the Colonial Treasurer.
No. 11.
Governor Cairns, C.M. G., to the Earl of Carnarvon. —(Received April 24.)
My Lord, Government House, Brisbane, February 22, 1875.
WITH reference to the Marquis of Normanby’s despatch of the 17th July last,*
I have the honour to acquaint your Lordship with my having, shortly after my arrival
in the Colony, invited a definite expression of their views from my Responsible
Advisers, in regard to the subject of Mr. Labilliere’s letter advocating the annexation
of New Guinea by Great Britain.
2, The accompanying copy of a Minute of the Proceedings of the Executive
Council places on record the opinion of Mr. Macalister and his colleagues as being
on the whole favourable to annexation, inasmuch as Commander Heath’s Report,
in which they express their concurrence, and which is copied for your Lordship’s
perusal, supports the view that, on account of the natural wealth of the island and
for political reasons, New Guinea ought to be added to the other Colonial Possessions
of the Empire;
3. It is my impression that but little real interest is felt, as yet, in the destiny
of New Guinea by either the Ministry or the outside public of Queensland; no one
has spontaneously brought forward the subject, either in conversation or otherwise,
since my arrival; and I believe I may truly add that, if there is no hostile opinion
entertained, neither is there evinced such a strong desire for annexation as would
induce this Colony to assist in providing for whatever expenditure it might be
necessary, in the first instance, to defray from other sources than the revenue of the
newly acquired territory.
. . 4. On the other hand, I agree with Commander Heath that there is no danger of
jealousy or fear being shown, in regard to the Settlement of New Guinea, because of
the possibly injurious effect of such a measure upon the labouring population of this or
any other Australian Colony. Unless there be a very elevated plateau, of considerable
extent, beyond the high mountain-ranges of what, geographically considered, is a
wholly tropical island, white labour cannot hope to gain a permanent footing there.
5. About the fertility of New Guinea, —fecundity would, probably, be a more
accurate expression, for it should be borne in mind that tropical luxuriance may exist
where the soil is very poor; this is the case ’along the seaboard of Ceylon, in the Straits
of Malacca, and in certain parts of British Honduras; and ordinary travellers are, in
this way, very apt to draw erroneous conclusions from the mere rankness of the
vegetation.
It is probable that the forest land is rich, but that the humidity of the climate,
rather than any superiority in the soil, favours the growth of such common torrid-zone
products as the “ yams, plaintains, cocoa-nuts, and bread-fruit,” to which Commander
Heath refers; but even if such were not the case, and we had proof of its innate
excellence at the lower elevations on the coast, there would not thereby be created a
sufficient pretext for desiring to take possession of a country of which Hie savage, and
* Not printed.


•even cannibal, inhabitants are estimated by millions, when it is remembered that an
immense extent of the most fertile land, capable of producing every description of
•tropical and sub-tropical growth, exists in a virgin state in this already partially
'settled and perfectly orderly Colony of Queensland, from which source a practically
unlimited supply of all the enumerated fruits and vegetables of New Guinea may, at
•any time, be drawn.
6. No means are at hand of testing the accuracy of the assertion that the island
possesses great mineral wealth. Mr. Labilliere says, in his letter to your Lordship,
that “ gold and other rich productions .... are beginning to draw men there
but I have not heard of any Australian colonist who has yet engaged in raining or
even prospecting operations in New Guinea.
7. There remain the political considerations, and to these I attach the most impor-
•tance. I believe that, if Great Britain holds back from formally annexing New
Guinea for a very brief space of time, another Power, Germany or Italy, or Prance,
pernaps Russia or the United States, will make the attempt, and that such an attempt,
assuming it to be successful, would greatly injure the future prospects of Australia.
I am persuaded that the merest rumour of it would have a bad effect upon the relations
of the Mother Country with its colonies in these seas, and I hold that to Queensland
especially, the establishment of the authority of any Poreign State upon her water
frontier would be nothing less than a permanent disaster. It has, indeed, come to my
knowledge that one of the most distinguished of the present Governors of Australia
considers it improbable that a country under such barbarous conditions as those known
to exist in New Guinea can attract the notice of any of the other Powers; but, with
the greatest deference and the highest respect for his judgment, I feel myself unable to
accept this view.
8. It might not, and it probably would not, be the teeming soil or the mineral
resources of the island that should lead some maritime rival to hoist his flag in the
immediate neighbourhood of Torres Straits, and in the centre of our communications
with Malaya and China, and, indeed, both the eastern and western world; but what-
ever the motive, the result would follow, that the most difficult and dangerous
political complications must sooner or later most certainly arise.
9. Commander Heath’s suggested explanation of the seemingly contradictory
opinions which have been expressed by travellers and others regarding the character
and attitude of the natives, is worthy, I submit, of your Lordship’s notice.
I have, &c.
(Signed) W. W. CAIRNS.
Inclosure 1 in No. 11.
.'Minute of the Proceedings of the Executive Council, at Government House, Brisbane, on
February 18, 1875.
Present:
His Excellency the Governor in Council.
HIS Excellency the Governor, at the instance of the Honourable the Colonial
Secretary, submits to the Council a confidential Circular despatch from the Secretary
of State for the Colonies to the Officer administering the Government of Queensland,
dated 17th April, 1874, inclosing copy of a letter from Mr, Labilliere, stating his views
in favour of the annexation of New Guinea by Great Britain.
2. Also a Report on Mr. Labilliere’s letter by Commander Heath, R.N., whose
intimacy with the matter is sufficiently shown by his Report.
3. The Council deliberate and advise that his Excellency the Governor be pleased
to forward to Lord Carnarvon a copy of Commander Heath’s Report, with an intima-
tion that his Excellency’s Responsible Advisers concur in and approve of the Report.
(Signed) A. V. DRURY, Clerk of Council.
Inclosure 2 in No. 11.
Department of Ports and Harbours, Brisbane,
.Sir, .. , August 5, 1874.
HAVING served in Her Majesty’s ship “Rattlesnake” during the survey^by
Captain Owen Stanley of the south coast of New Guinea and the Louisiade, I am in a


position to add my testimony to that quoted by Mr. Labilliere as to the fertility of its
soil, and also as to the luxuriance of the vegetation and the magnificent appearance of
a great portion of New Guinea when seen from the sea with its mountain-range of
from 6,000 to 13,000 feet in height, and in addition to Port Moresby the existence of
numerous anchorages under the outlying islands and under the shelter of the harrier
reefs of the main coast and the Louisiade. As the more eastern portion* of the main
coast line is reached, the ground becomes higher and the country apparently thickly
populated; and yet the soil, under very primitive cultivation, evidently supplied all the
vegetable food required for the inhabitants, who brought on board yams, plantains,
cocoa-nuts, and bread-fruit in abundance, and among other productions fibre similar to
that from the Musa textilis perfectly clean, and even from end to end, and measuring
from 10 to 13 feet in length.
As to the character of the natives, I am not so convinced of their universal
amiability as Mr. Labilliere seems to be, for they wantonly and treacherously attacked
our boats at daylight in the morning without the slightest provocation, when anchored
under one of the islands in the Louisiade. On shore, on another island, a party of
officers Avho landed had some difficulty in getting back to the boat in consequence
of the threatening conduct of the natives. While on the islands off the mainland,
their conduct, though sometimes friendly, seldom induced any confidence in their
amicable intentions being long continued. Then, if I remember rightly, a vessel with
Chinese emigrants was wrecked somewhere at,the Louisiade some years ago, and it
was reported that the natives penned the Chinese up like sheep, and daily came to
select the one in best condition for the table, the last survivor being rescued by some
passing vessel. 'While Captain Yule himself, having landed to take observations near
Cape Possession, lost his instruments, and would probably also have lost his life, had
he not succeeded in amusing the natives by dancing, dressed in nothing but a short
flannel, while making good his retreat to the boat.
The great difference in the report that one hears of these natives may, I think,
be accounted for by their being divided into different tribes, each confined within
a certain limited area, and whose habits and mode of life are more or less dissimilar.
There can, I think, be no question as to the undesirability of, and, indeed, the
very serious inconvenience that might arise from New Guinea being in the hands of
any other Power than Great Britain.
The proximity of New Caledonia to these Colonies is quite sufficiently objection-
able without the prospect of any other similar outpost being established, especially
one which could command Torres Straits, and be a standing nuisance on the north-
eastern coast of this continent. While, on the other hand, the unlimited capabilities
of New Guinea for tropical vegetable products, and probably its mineral resources
also, to say nothing of the valuable pearl fisheries which are known to exist off its
coast in Torres Straits—and which will probably be found also along its southern shore
and in the Louisiade —point to it as possessing all the elements of wealth and prosperity
which a tropical country can furnish.
As to Mr. Labilliere’s suggestion of the Government being carried on by one of
the Australian Colonies, it does not seem to me probable that any of them would
seriously entertain the idea for one minute; while, at the same time, Ido not think
that any of these Colonies would wish, or that it would be to their interest, to put
the slightest obstacle in the way of settlement in New Guinea, for their labouring
population would not find any attraction in so hot a climate: but, on the other hand,
the settlement of that country would open up a large and profitable market for
Australian produce.
I need scarcely add that, if Great Britain does not shortly take possession of New
Guinea, it cannot be long before the opportunity of securing that country is taken
advantage of by some other Power.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. P. HEATH, Commander, R.N.,
Port Master.
The Honourable the Colonial Secretary,
&c. &c. &c.
(124) D


No. 12.
The Royal Colonial Institute to the Earl of Carnarvon.—( April 29, 1875.)
The Right Honourable the Earl of Carnarvon, Secretary of State for the Colonies.
The Memorial of the Resident Council and Fellows of the Royal Colonial
Institute and others,
Showeth,
THAT your Memorialists are induced to approach your Lordship by the conviction
that it is the duty of all good and loyal subjects of Her Majesty, who desire the main-
tenance of the integrity and security of the Empire, to bring before the Imperial
Government any important question affecting the safety, the commercial interests, and
good relations of the Empire. This is more especially so with respect to those parts of
it which, from their distance from its centre, attract less general attention. A recent
striking illustration has occurred in the case of the Island of San Juan.
With such feelings your Memorialists desire to call your Lordship’s attention to
the important questions which have been brought into prominence by the discoveries
of Captain Moresby and others in the Island of New Guinea.
They believe that the facts now more generally known must lead to hut one
conclusion, namely, that the authority of the British Government should without delay
he extended to the portion of New Guinea lying east of 141 degrees of east longitude
up to which the Dutch Government claims possession of the Island.
The nearest point of the territory in question approaches within eighty miles of
the shores of Australia, and through Torres Straits flows already a large and a rapidly
increasing British commerce. It would therefore he in the highest degree undesirable
that any Foreign Power should, by settling on the Papuan coast, enter upon the joint
occupation with us of this Strait.
It would also he most prejudicial to our interests that any position on the shores
of Eastern New Guinea, or of the islands situated off its coasts, commanding the
entrance to the new route recently discovered by Captain Moresby, should belong to
any other Power. This new route from Australia to China will shorten the passage by
about 300 miles, and is certain to be much more frequented by our trading vessels than
by those of any other nation, and besides it will also open up to commerce the produce
of the rich neighbouring tropical islands.
One of the consequences of the occupation of Eastern New Guinea by any other
Power would be, that disputes respecting rights of fishing, like those which have long-
occasioned so much trouble in British North America, would inevitably arise.
Yonr Memorialists also feel that it is impossible to estimate the extent of insecurity
to the Australian portion of the Empire and to British interests generally, which would
be occasioned by the fine land-locked harbour of Port Moresby, and many other valuable
harbours recently discovered, falling into the possession of a foreign State. The secret
of our strength and security in that quarter of the Empire lies in the fact that we have
no one to interfere with us, and the only remaining extensive territory in which any
other nation could take up a position of undesirable proximity is Eastern New
Guinea.
Were such a Power established there, however amicable our relations with it might
be, its presence would at once and for ever entail upon the Imperial and the Australian
Governments an increased expenditure for defences in time of peace, which would far
exceed whatever might be the cost of our establishing our authority in the Island.
And should war ever occur between us and the Power in possession of New Guinea,
we should enter into it, having an outpost of our enemy established in a very strong
position at our very doors.
With regard to the interests of the natives, your Memorialists beg to submit that
as they must now be brought into contact with Europeans, it will be desirable for them
to be placed under British rule. ,
Their rights to their lands and property would undoubtedly be completely respected
under the rule of the Imperial Government, and the establishment of that rule before
any adventurers settle in the island will prevent such complications as have arisen
respecting titles to land in New Zealand and Fiji, and kidnapping in Polynesia. Gold
havingLeen discovered in the island enhances the' anxiety of your Memorialists with
regard to the welfare of the natives. As soon as the fact becomes known to the
Australian mining population, an extensive rush will inevitably take place, subjecting


Name.
Colony-
llis Grace the Duke of Manchester ..
President.
Frederick V oung ..
Honorary Secretary.
H. li. T. Suangwavs
South Australia.
C. Fitzgerald
Canada.
(124)
D 2
a race described as most hospitable and amicable to all those evils and outrages which
the arrival of any large number of white people uncontrolled by the authority of a
egular Government must bring upon them.
The formation also by any other Power of a penal settlement in New Guinea,
similar to that which is established by thePrench in New Caledonia, would be a constant
source of injury and annoyance to the Australian Colonies. ’
Your Memorialists submit that all that will be required to secure the objects and
prevent the evils with respect to which they have the honour to address your Lordship,
is the immediate occupation of such one or more positions as shall be sufficient to make
good by actual possession our claim to the whole of the coast line of the eastern moiety
of the island.
Such an occupation it is believed might be effected at small expense. Your
Memorialists do not venture to suggest how far inland British Settlements should be
extended. That is a question which can only be decided after more perfect knowledge
of the climate and of the natives has been acquired by occupation of the coast.
Should experience prove that it would be undesirable to extend our authority so as
either to make a Colony to be settled by a British population or a dependency to be
held like Ceylon, the possession of the coast would still be of the greatest advantage to
us. It would secure to us many fine harbours and two important straits, which would
give us not only the command of most valuable strategic positions, but also of the trade
of an island which is reported to be one of the richest in the world. Having the coast
under our control we should also be able to prevent the growth of kidnapping, which
will most probably spring up unless the authority of some civilized nation is
established.
Your Memorialists submit that our occupation of the coast line unclaimed by the
Hutch, whilst it would give us all the positions in New Guinea of most importance to
us, would not in any way interfere with the rights of Holland.
The fact that explorers of other nations are already in Eastern New Guinea is an
additional reason why the possession formally taken by Captain Moresby in Her
Majesty’s name should be followed by immediate occupation, so that the rights claimed
on behalf of the British Crown shall not be allowed to lapse.
Your Memorialists would recall to your Lordship’s recollection that the valuable
Colony of New Zealand would have been lost to the Empire but for the most fortunate
circumstance of the Imperial flag having been hoisted on its shores a few hours only
before the arrival of a Erench expedition to take possession of the country.
Your Memorialists submit that the limited occupation they recommend need not
occasion any large expense. "Whatever it might amount to would be certain to prove
insignificant compared with the permanent annual expenditure which the presence of
a Eoreign Power in the island would most certainly entail upon the Imperial and
Colonial Governments. Such expense might be made a charge upon the new possession,
so that the Imperial Exchequer might be recouped the necessary outlay. Some of the
Australian Colonies might perhaps contribute a portion of it, and one of them
ultimately undertake the Government of New Guinea, as South Australia has under-
taken that of an extensive part of North Australia.
Much might be said of the value of the possession which your Memorialists desire
should be added to the British Crown, but they prefer to base their cause upon
considerations of security rather than of territorial aggrandizement. They believe that
they have said sufficient to prove that the safe and quiet enjoyment of the territories
already possessed by Great Britain, the security of her commerce, and the welfare of
the natives of New Guinea require that the shores of this island should be added to the
Empire without delay.
Inclosure in No. 12.
Royal Colonial Institute.
Reputation to Lord Carnarvon on New Guinea ; April 29, 1875.


Name.
Colony.
Purvis Ru«sell
New Zealand.
Stewart S. Davis,.
West Indie».
E. H. Minton
Lord Stanley of Alderlev ..
New South Wales.
Win. A. Brodnhb
Cape of Good Hope.
F. 0. Lahilliere .,
Victoria. Member of the Council (Institute).
Sir Charles Stirling
Victoria.
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.
New South Wales. Member of the Council.
P. F. Tidman
E. and A. Mail Company.
W. R. Scott
New South Wales.
T. B. Glanvilie ..
Cape of Good Hope.
S. W. Silver
Jacob Montefiorie
Victoria. Member of the Council (Institute)
James A. Youl, C.M.G.
Tasmania. Ditto.
Leonard Wray .,
Major C. Carpenter (late R.A.)
Straits of Malacca. Ditto.
Hugh L. Taylor ..
Victoria.
Sir Charles Clifford
New Zealand. A Member of the Council (Institute).
Henry Blaine
Cape of Good Hope. Ditto.
W. J. Biich, Junr.
New Zealand.
B. G. Ilaliburton
Nova Scotia. A Member of the Council (Institute).
H. W. Fre. land .,
1 titlo.
John Harvey
Singapore.
II. J. Jourdain ..
A Member of the Council (Institute),
T. M. Harrington
Bank of Au>ti alasia.
A. L. Elder
Mr. Alderman McArthur, M.P.
F. G. D.ilgety ..
South Australia.
Donald l.arnach ..
Bank of .New South Wales.
Hyde Clark
New Guinea Committee Agents, 1867. (Society of
Art-.)
R. N. Fowler
F. W. Che>8on ..
Edmund Sturge ..
50, Cornhill.
Sir George Macleay, K.C.M.G.
McCulIagh Torrens, M.P. ..
Gi o. Duchlell
New South Wales.
Colonel Lane Fox
Anthropological Society.
G. Molinmix .. .,
H. 10. Montgomerie
Right Hon Sir James Ferguson
Sir Richard Graves MacDonnell
Canada. A Member of the Council (Institute).
No. 13.
Colonial Office to Admiralty .*
Sir, Downing Street, May 25, 1875.
THE Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty are aware that an influential
deputation recently waited upon the Earl of Carnarvon to advocate the annexation to
the British Crown of the eastern portion of the Island of New Guinea.
A report of the proceedings at this interview will he found printed in -the
“ Times ” of the 3rd instant.
In connection with this question, Lord Carnarvon desires me to request that you
will move their Lordships to favour him with any information which they may posse ;s
as to the title or alleged title of the Hutch to the western portion of New Guine i;
the precise boundaries of the territory held to be Hutch; and with any other inform i-
tion bearing upon the suggestion that England should assert the ownership and take
possession of the eastern portion of the island.
I am desired to enclose a copy of a Memorial from the President, Council, and
Eellows of the Eoyal Colonial Institute and others on this subject.!
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. 11. MALCOLM.
* A similar letter was addressed to the Foreign Office,
f No. 12.


No. 14.
Admiralty to Colonial Office.
Sir, Admiralty, July 9, 1875.
WITH reference to your letter of the 25th May last,* and its inclosures, in Regard to
the suggested annexation to the British Empire of the Eastern portion of New Guinea, I
am commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to transmit, for the Earl of
Carnarvon’s information, a Memorandum, dated the 2nd instant, from the Hydrographer
of this Department, relative to the discovery and exploration of the coasts of New Guinea,
with other hydrographic information bearing on this question.
2. My Lords would suggest that Captain Evans’ interesting "Report should be printed,
and in that case they would be glad if a lew copies could be furnished for the use of this
Department.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ROBERT HALL
Inclosure in No. 14.
Memorandum relative to the Discovery and Exploration of the Coasts of New Guinea, with
other Hydrographic information bearing on the question of the Annexation by England
of the Eastern portion of the Island. Accompanied by a Chart.
ON these proposals, made by an influential deputation, for the British Crown to
annex the eastern portion of New Guinea, Lord Carnarvon requests to be favoured with
any information their Lordships may possess; first, as to the title of the Dutch to the
western portion of New Guinea, and the precise boundaries of the territory held by the
Dutch ; secondly, for any other information bearing upon the suggestion that England
should assert the ownership and take possession of the eastern portion of the island.
With reference to the title of the Dutch to the western portion of New Guinea,
commonly reputed to extend to the 141st meridian of east longitude from Greenwich
(and distinctly so marked on the Atlas of Netherlands India Possessions by the Baron
Melvill Van Carnbee), I can find no specific information, and can only assume it is by
right of discovery and exploration. The Dutch navigators in the early part of the
seventeenth century < of which, at least, four expeditions are recorded as starting from their
East India Colonies) explored the south-western shores of New Guinea as far east as
Torres Straits (or to about the 142nd meridian), while Le Maire, Schouten, and Abel
Tasman (1613-1643) traced the northern shores from about the 144th meridian to the
westward. The Great Geelvink Bay was explored in 1705. These several authorities
and dates are clearly shown on the map of New Guinea, in the Atlas I have already,
referred to.
In the years 1826 and 1828 the Dutch vessels of war “ Dourga ” and “Triton ”
examined the south-western coasts from about the 133rd to the 138th meridians, and a
Settlement (Fort Dubus) was founded in the latter year in 3° 40' south, and 134° east;
this project for opening up the country it is said ended in total failure, the abandonment
of the Settlement followed on account of the insalubrity of the position. In 1835 another
Dutch expedition resumed the exploration of this coast in continuation of that made in
the “Triton the chief discovery being the insularity of the large tract of land now known
as Prince Frederick Hendrick Island.
As late as 1858 an exploring expedition, consisting of a war-steamer and a sailing-
vessel carrying troops and stores, left Amboina to fix upon some place on the coast of
New Guinea to form a Settlement. Making a survey of that part of the south-west
coasts between the Outanata River and Lakahia, they proceeded to Port Dorey on the
north coast, remained there a short time, and then went on to Humboldt Bay in 141"
east (or on the assumed boundary line), shortly afterwards returning to Amboina without-
accomplishing the object of the expedition.
1 can find no subsequent information on the subject of Settlements being established,
by the Dutch in the western part of New Guinea.
Mr. Alfred R. Wallace, a distinguished English naturalist, who, in the pursuit of his;
favourite branch of science, happened to be at Port Dorey at the time of the visit of this;
• No. 13.


Dutch expedition in 1858, and, as he describes himself, the “ sole European inhabitant .
of the vast island of New Guinea,” sent to the Geographical Society of London his notes
on this visit to New Guinea. (See Journal and Proceedings for 1859, and subsequently
published in twb volumes, “ The Malay Archipelago,” London, 1869.)
The Dutch expeditionary visit in 1858 to Humboldt Bay does not appear to have been
productive in opening up that part of the country ; for on the visit of Her Majesty’s ship
“ Challenger ” to that anchorage in February of the present year, the menacing attitude of
the natives on two occasions, determined Captain Thomson to leave the same evening,
rather than risk embroilment, and perhaps bloodshed.
The foregoing sketch answers imperfectly this part of Lord Carnarvon’s inquiry, but
the secrecy and jealousy of the Dutch in relation to their East India Possessions, even to
a late period, is well known, and has barred political and geographical information to the
outer world.
With reference to the second part of Lord Carnarvon’s request for information bearing
upon the suggestion that England should assert the ownership and take possession of the
eastern part of the island, a brief sketch of the discoveries of the several parts of this
region in chronological order :s of interest.
Commencing first with the southern coasts. The discovery of the separation, by a
navigable strait, of New Guinea from Australia, was made by the Spanish navigator Torres
in a war frigate in 1606. Torres appears to have made the south-eastern extremity of the
Louisiade Archipelago “ went along 300 leagues of coast to the westward,” which he
describes in general but accurate language; took possession of it in the name of His
Majesty of Spain, and also of twenty natives, “ that with them we might be able to give a
better account to your Majesty.’’ After tw r o months of intricate navigation, Torres cleared
the Strait which now bears his name.
The passage of Torres’ Strait, and the discovery of South-Eastern New Guinea by that
navigator was unknown to the general world till Cook, in his first voyage (1770), passed
through the Strait. His accurate observations then enabled geographers to separate New
Guinea from Australia, and to assign their true places to the Dutch discoveries of the pre-
vious century.
Two years before Cook’s passage (i.e,, in 1768), M. de Bougainville, with two French
ships of war, foiled in an attempt to make the east coast of Australia by meeting with off-
laying reefs, sailed to the northward, and sighted parts of New Guinea between the 150th
meridian and the termination of the Louisiade Archipelago (which latter he named) in
154° east.
In 1791 Captain Edwards, of His Majesty’s ship “Pandora,” when returning from
Tahiti with the mutineers of the “ Bounty,” sighted the south-east shores of New Guinea,
in the meridian of 148° east, naming two prominent headlands Capes Rodney and Hood,
and also a mountain, Clarence.
In 1792, Captains Bligh and Portlock of the Royal Navy, in their passage through
Torres Straits on the occasion of transporting the bread fruit from Tahiti to the West
Indies, sighted the coast in the 142nd meridian. Bligh landed on one of the islands in
the Torres Strait, and took possession of it, “ and all those he had seen in his passage
through,” for His Britannic Majesty.
In 1793, two British merchant ships, commanded by Messrs. Barapton and Alt, sailed
from Norfolk Island (the dependency of New South Wales) with the intention of passing l
through Torres Strait; they were seventy-two days engaged in the task, bewildered by the
numerous reefs that barred their progress ; the shores of New Guinea were sighted
continuously by these navigators, and traced between the 146th and 141st meridians.
Little afterwards was known of the coast of New Guinea and the Louisiade Archipelago
until 1840, when D’Urville, with the two French corvettes “ D’Astrolabe ” and “ Zelee,”
made a running survey from the east extremity of the Archipelago for a distance of
450 miles towards Torres Strait; delineating in some detail the parts sighted by Bougain-
ville in 1768, and also the intervening portions of land and barrier reefs not seen by that
navigator. With the exception of the Spaniard “Torres,” neither British nor French
navigators appear to have landed on the shores of New Guinea under review up to this
time.
The growing importance of Torres Strait to the communication of New South Wales
and Tasmania with India and China, led to the elaborate survey of the region being under-
taken in 1842 by the Admiralty, embracing also an examination of the neighbouring shores
of New Guinea, and eastward to the Louisiade Archipelago with the adjacent seas. This


was effected in Her Majesty’s ships “ Fly,” “ Bramble,” and “ Rattlesnake,” under the
command respectively of Captain F. B. Blackwood, Lieutenant C. B. Yule, and Captain
Owen Stanley. These surveys, extending from the western part of Torres Strait to the
eastern extremity of the Louisiade Archipelago, were performed between the years 1845-50,
and subsequently published by the Admiralty in eight sheets (1852), accompanied also
with copious sailing directions. The general incidents attending the examination of these
regions, and the frequent intercourse with its savage inhabitants, together with the
descriptive features of the country, are recorded in the published voyages of the “Fly ”
and “Rattlesnake,” London, 1847 and 1852.
In 1865 a Government Settlement was formed at Somerset, near Cape York in Torres
Strait, and since that date, the extension by Colonial enterprise of the pearl fisheries to the
neighbouring shores of New Guinea has led to much intercourse with the Strait Islanders
and the natives of the mainland. Missionary labours following commercial enterprise,
stations with native teachers have been formed recently in Torres Strait and on the adjacent
coast of New Guinea.
In 1873, Captain Moresby, in Her Majesty’s ship “'Basilisk,” was engaged in Torres
Strait on duties connected with the labour traffic in Polynesia. He visited the South
East Coast of New Guinea, and added some details to the previous Admiralty Surveys of
1845-50. An opening in the land, described in the sailing directions above referred to, as
the entrance of a deep inlet or mouth of a river, was surveyed by Captain Moresby, found
to be a spacious haven, and'by him named Port Fairfax and Moresby Harbour.
Following up an examination of the eastern end of New Guinea, within the barrier reef
(which here extends 30 miles from the land), Captain Moresby partially delineated the
form and character of the group of islands in the vicinity; and, believing that he had
found a navigable channel immediately adjacent to the mainland, named it China Strait,
as one likely to be used in the route between Australia and China. In consequence of this
exploration, and of the interest taken by the Australian Colonies in New Guinea, the
Admiralty ordered the “ Basilisk,” which was then on the eve of returning to England, to
continue the previous year’s examination at the east end of the island, and afterwards to
proceed to Singapore by the route which skirts along the north-east shores (then an uncharted
piece of coast line).
In 1874, Captain Moresby, reinforced from the Admiralty by Lieutenant Dawson, a
well trained surveying officer, followed up the examination of the group of islands imme-
diately contiguous to the eastern end of New Guinea, and completed an excellent survey
of their shores, and of the channels through and past them; further, taking possession of
them in Her Majesty’s name.
These islands (now named Moresby, Basilisk, &c.,) were seen by D’Entrecasteaux in
1793 ; he was within five leagues of their northern shores when skirting in his ships an
adjacent group, then discovered and named after himself. They were also seen by
D’Urville in 1840, who passed them at a distance of six or seven leagues to the south-
ward when skirting along their off-lying barrier-reefs, and noted it as probable that this
apparent mainland of New Guinea was intersected by narrow, or, as he termed it, “ canal
straits.”
Stanley, of Her Majesty’s ship “Rattlesnake,” who followed up in 1850 D’Urville’s
examination of the Louisiade Archipelago, already referred to, commenced his survey of the
New Guinea shores at Heath point (or island), a few miles to the south-west of Moresby’s
group, leaving for future explorers the delineation of the features of the district eastward.
Geographically, Moresby’s group may be considered as an integral part of New Guinea,
and as forming the western boundary of the Louisiade Archipelago.
The foregoing completes the information relating to the discovery and exploration of
the south-east shores of New Guinea. It remains to similarly relate what has been
effected on the north-east shores from the terminating group of islands just referred to.
Westward to the 141st meridian.
The first authentic account we have is, that in 1616, the Dutch navigators Le Maire
and Schouten, from the Pacific Ocean, closed the mainland of New Guinea in about the
145th meridian, and closely skirted the coast as far as Geelvink Bay. Abel Tasman,
following in 1643, who closed the land a degree to the eastward of Le Maire and Schouten,
or in about the 146th meridian.
In 1700, Dampier, in Her Majesty’s ship “ Roebuck,” after discovering in part and
examining the eastern and southern shores of New Ireland and New Britain, sighted the
main .land of New Guinea, near the 148th meridian. This land, which he considered
as the east part of New Guinea, he described as high and mountainous, “ ending on the
north-east with a large promontory, which “ I named King William’s Cape, in honour of


His present Majesty.” Dampier then ran along to the westward, but apparently added
little, geographically, to the Dutch navigators who had preceded him.
In 1793, D’Entrecasteaux, with two French ships of war, sent for the purpose of
determining the fate of La Perouse, and completing the plans of geographical discovery
which that navigator had left unfinished, commencing at the eastern end of the Louisiade
Archipelago, where Bougainville terminated in 1768, proceeded westward, charting the
many islands and reefs forming the heretofore unknown northern limits of that Archipelago.
When close to the eastern extremity of New Guinea, as we now know it, and his westerly
progress barred, he turned to the north and traced the eastern shores of the group of
islands bearing his name, and also other groups and barrier reefs extending fully 100 miles.
When clear of these formidable dangers, he again pushed to the westward, still hampered
by reefs, but could not succeed in closing the shores of New Guinea till he had reached
the meridian of 147° east. He had, however, seen and named Riche Island (subsequently
found by Captain Moresby to be a part of the mainland), as also a prominent head-land
to which he gave the name of Cape South-East. It is well here to remark, that it is this
line of coast, which was so effectually barred to D’Entrecasteaux by the distant off-lying
groups of islands and reefs, that Captain Moresby and his assisting surveying officer,
Lieutenant Dawson, so well charted.
In 1827, the French navigator D’Urville, in the ships of war “Astrolabe” and
“ Zelee,” followed nearly in Dampier’s track along the south coast of New Britain, passing
through the Strait named after him. Closing the land at Astrolabe Bay (which he named
after his ship) in the 146th meridian, D’Urville charted the coast here with such fidelity
as his approach in the ships*would permit, and continued his valuable hydrographic
labours along the New Guinea shores to the westward, as far as Port Dorey and Cape of
Good Hope.
The detailed exploration of the shores between the eastern extreme of New Guinea
and Astrolabe Bay of D’Urville made by Captain Moresby in Her Majesty’s ship “ Basilisk ”
fills up the blanks left on our charts by the two distinguished French navigators; and the
fact now stands that every mile of the seaboard of New Guinea eastward of the 146th
meridian has been examined and surveyed in more or less detail by British naval officers,
and that on its southern shore similar surveys have been executed extending to the 142nd
meridian.
Having passed in review the part taken by Great Britain within the last thirty years
in exploring by special surveys the shores of the eastern half of New Guinea, the consider-
ation of certain points referred to in the Memorial accompanying Lord Carnarvon’s letter
may be entered on.
The Memorialists suggest “ immediate occupation of such one or more positions as
shall be sufficient to make good by actual possession our claim to the whole coast line of
the eastern moiety of the Island.” As weight appears to be attached by the Memorialists
to their proposition that England should have full possession of Torres Strait, and to the
value of the new route between Australia and China (that is, as proposed by Captain
Moresby, close past the eastern end of New Guinea, through the western Islands of the
Louisiade Archipelago, and presumably then along the north-eastern shores of New
Guinea till the broad Pacific Ocean is reached somewhere about the 144th meridian), as
also the occupation of the position formally taken possession of by Captain Moresby; these
conditions point to the site for a settlement as on the south coast somewhere adjacent to
the eastern extreme of the main island.
So far as secure anchorage is concerned the whole coast from Cape Possession of
Lieutenant Yule (1848) to Possession Bay of Captain Moresby (1874) distant from each
other 320 miles, fringed as it is by outlying barrier reefs, affords ample facilities for
selection ; and no difficulty beyond that of approach from seaward is to be apprehended on
this head. Precise information as to the seasons on the seaboard during the whole year,
the healthiness or otherwise of the climate, and other general points bearing on the
capabilities of the country for supporting European residents, and for their security from
organized attacks of the seaboard native population, is wanting.
Assuming, however, that a settlement is to be formed, its communications with the
outer world is one that deserves serious consideration. The following abstract has
accordingly been drawn up.
From a position near the east end of New Guinea, to the nearest—
Nautical Miles.
British Settlement, Somerset, Torres Strait .. .. 500
~ Port for general supplies (Brisbane) .. .. 1,050


British Port for docks, coals, equipment of steam vessels, &c.—
Nautical Miles.
Sydney .. .. .. .. ■.. 1,510
llong Kong .. .. .. .. .'. 3,050
Singapore .. .. .. .. .. 3,120
Foreign Port for partial general supplies—
Koepang, Timor,. .. .. ..1,750
Banda.. .* .. .. .. ..1,355
Foreign Port for docks, equipment of ships, &c.—
Sourabaya, Java.. .. .. .. .. 2,430
Yokohama, Japan .. .. .. .. 3,160
The time that would be required for making the above passages also demands
attention. From April to October, or during the south-east monsoon, sailing-vessels,
unless strong and well found, would find difficulty in reaching Brisbane or Sydney ; during
these months communication by sailing-vessel from Somerset, Hong Kong, and the
Dutch Settlements, would be suspended. Similarly, from November to March sailing-
vessels cannot get through Torres Strait bound westward. Steady communication
during the whole year can, therefore, alone be effected by steam-vessels, and the question
of coal supplies is by no means to be disregarded. To render, however, an approximate
estimate, keeping in mind the intricacies of navigation in the Eastern seas, the daily
average progress for a steam-vessel might be taken at 120 miles a-day, and an efficient
sailing-vessel at 50 or 60 miles.
The Memorialists refer to the advantages of the new route from Australia to China,
as shortening the passage to China by about 300 miles, and opening up to commerce the
produce of the rich neighbouring tropical islands.
This proposed route close past the eastern end of New Guinea originated with
Captain Moresby, consequent on his first year’s exploration of that locality, finding, as
he did, navigable channels through the islands. But here his inquiries ceased, excepting
so far as skirting close along the north-eastern shores of New Guinea; and we have yet
to learn whether a clear track, especially for sailing-vessels, exists from Goschen Strait to
the several straits between New Britain and New Guinea, a distance of nearly 400 miles;
and again, beyond these, for another 300 miles, till the reefs and small groups of
coral islands just south of the Equator are cleared; further, how the trade winds and
monsoons are affected by the mountainous land of New Guinea in this little-traversed
region: in short, how a sailing-vessel is to perform the passage at all at certain times ot
the year.
There are three well-known routes from New South Wales to China, passing.eastward
of New Guinea, in recent years frequently traversed by sailing-ships, and happily passing
in all parts through clear channels and well clear of the land, and thus entailing little or
no embarrassment on the navigator. The longest of these routes, eastward of New
Caledonia and the Solomon Islands, is over 6,000 miles, and the two shortest westward of
those islands are 5,500 and 5,000 miles. They are severally adopted according to the
seasons, and so far as can be ascertained with perfect safety, showing that the numerous
coral reefs and islets in this Western Pacific Ocean are charted near the truth.
With this practically clear navigation it is difficult to understand why, for a saving of
300 miles in 5,000, a vessel should be taken through the channels now recommended by
Captain Moresby close to New Guinea, the principal of which, though accurately surveyed,
has intricate navigation, even for a steam-vessel, of 80 miles in distance, and then to be
launched into a closed sea for another 400 miles, of which nothing is known beyond the
fact that a belt of reefs (seen by D’Entrecasteaux) stretches across one part of it to within
20 miles of the shores of New Guinea.
Whenever a settlement is founded near China Strait, and the seaman can obtain in
security supplies, or succour- if needed, this new route may command attention, but at
present the ship of commerce is far better clear of the many off-lying dangers from New
Guinea hereabouts, and of the chances of extermination of the crew by the natives should
shipwreck, a not improbable contingency, befall it.
There are no documents in the Admiralty which throw any light on the productive
qualities or richness of the adjacent islands of New Guinea.
(124) E


The Memorialists indicate their impression that the native population on this line of
coast are most hospitable and amicable. In isolated cases this may be so, or when the
natives come into contact with small exploring parties backed by a large force in the
immediate neighbourhood; but evidences are not wanting of their numbers, their powers
of combination, and their courage and audacity, to which may be added cannibalism.
The following is extracted from the Sailing Directions, published by the Admiralty,
“In 1849 Her Majesty’s schooner ‘ Bramble,’ shortly after daylight one morning,
whilst becalmed in Farm Bay (New South Capel, was in less than two hours surrounded by
forty-three canoes, each containing eight or ten men, who came boldly alongside; .some of
the natives had spears in their hands, ready for an attack, and with great difficulty were
prevented from boarding; fortunately a breeze sprang up enabling the vessel to get
away.”
On the 30th September, 1858, the ship “ St. Paul,” bound from Hong Kong to
Sydney, with 327 Chinese passengers on board, was wrecked on Rossel Island, when all
hands reached the shore. The Captain and eight of the crew then left in a boat to obtain
assistance, and on the French steamer “Styx ” arriving at the spot early in January, 1859,
it was found that the whole of the passengers and remainder of the crew, with the exception
of one Chinaman, had been horribly massacred by the natives. The survivor stated that
the natives feasted on the bodies of their victims.”
(Signed) FRED K . JNO. EVANS,
Admiralty, July 2, 1875. • Hydrographer.
No. 15.
Governor Sir H. G. Robinson, G.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received
August 3.)
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, June 3, 1875.
I HAVE been requested by Mr. Robertson, the Premier, to transmit to your
Lordship the accompanying Cabinet Minute advocating the immediate annexation by
Great Britain “ not only of the magnificent Island of New Guinea, but of the islands
of New Britain, New Ireland, and the chain of islands to the north-east and east of
New Guinea from Bougainville Island to San Christoval, the south-easternmost of the
Solomon Group, the Group of the New Hebrides, including Espiritu Santo, Mallicolo,
and Sandwich, with smaller adjoining islands, and the Marshall, Gilbert, and Ellice
Islands, to all of which the traffic from the Port of Sydney extends.”
I have, &c.
(Signed) HERCULES ROBINSON.
Inclosure 1 in No. 15.
Minute for his Excellency the Governor.
RECENT events that have taken place in this Colony seem to my colleagues’and
myself to impose upon us the duty of laying before your Excellency, for the informa-
tion of the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, our views on the
proposed colonization of New Guinea. And, although in the first place we are
induced to adopt this course from our appreciation of the almost universal interest on
the subject which exists in this Colony and in the adjoining Colony of Victoria, we are
not less impressed with a sense of the incalculable importance of the question from an
Imperial point of view. We venture respectfully and cordially to endorse the
language of the present Prime Minister of England that no English Minister will do
his duty who neglects any opportunity of reconstructing as much as possible our
Colonial Empire, and of responding to those distant sympathies which may become
the source of incalculable strength and happiness to England.
Eor a considerable period of time—long before any measures were taken towards
the annexation of Fiji—the attention of the people of this Colony had been directed
towards New Guinea as one the most promising fields for colonization. Its immediate
neighbourhood to the northern part of this Continent, separated only from our coast
line by a narrow strait of seventy-eight miles from Cape York with shallow water and


fie)u> i/n. LifJ[ra te*J


intervening islands the whole way, its immense size—the largest island as is supposed
on the glohe —being 1,400 miles long, and in its widest part 400 miles broad; its.
varied and beautiful forms of animal life; its luxuriant forests of valuable timber; its
supposed mineral treasures ; all combine to invest this greatest of unexplored regions
with an interest which requires little to stimulate the adventurous into active efforts
of colonization.
It may he convenient here briefly to describe such attempts as have been made
in this direction on the part of the inhabitants of this Colony.
In June 1867 a private Association, styling itself the “New Guinea Company,”
was originated in Sydney for the purpose of exploring this hitherto uncultivated field
for commercial enterprise and colonization.
As the projectors of this Company could not entertain any great hopes of imme-
diate profit from a voyage which would necessarily he of an experimental character,
they applied to the Government of this Colony for pecuniary aid in furtherance of the
enterprise. This assistance the then Government did not conceive itself justified in
affording; hut in a Minute of the Executive Council, of date 19th June, 1867, the
representations of the persons who were engaged in the promotion of this Company
were embodied for the consideration of the Governor, and in order that the matter
might he brought under the notice of the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for
the Colonies.
These representations were—
1. That New Guinea, an island lying immediately north of the Australian Conti-
nent and extending from the Equator southwards to about the ninth degree of latitude,
was, notwithstanding its reputed natural wealth in gold, copper, and other metals, in
ebony, sandalwood, mahogany, and other valuable timbers, in tortoiseshell, pearl-shell
and pearls, in ambergois, beche de mer, spices and medicinal barks, almost wholly
unexplored.
2. That a development of the resources of this great island would not only be
enormously beneficial to the material prosperity of the Australian Colonies, but assist
the great cause of scientific enlightenment.
3. That the increasing traffic between Australia and the Indian Isles by way of
Torres Straits makes the possession of New Guinea by the British Empire a matter of
the highest importance to Australian colonists.
These representation were embodied in a despatch to his Grace the Duke of
Buckingham and Chandos, the then Secretary of State for the Colonies, who, in a
despatch to the Right Honourable Sir John Young, dated 14th September, 1867,
intimated that Her Majesty’s Government could give no plan of voluntary settlement
in New Guinea the sanction of Imperial authority, and that any persons who might
embark in any such venture must neither look for aid nor protection from the national
forces, nor for the confirmation of Her Majesty’s Government of their titles to any
acquisitions of land which they might profess to make from the natives.
Under this discouragement, the' projectors of this enterprise failed to earn' it out.
But five years later, in the beginning of 1872, a large party of young and adventurous
colonists fitted' out in this port, at their own' expense; a brig, for the exploration and
settlement of New Guinea. This expedition disastrously terminated in shipwreck and
much loss of life—the vessel having become a total wreck on the Bramble Reef on the
26th Eebruary,—and a large number of the members of the expedition having been
either drowned on the wreck or off rafts and otherwise, or murdered by the blacks
between Point Cooper and Tam O’Slianter Point.
On the 10th of the present month, a scientific expedition, fitted out exclusively
at the private cost of an old and highly esteemed colonist of New South Wales,
Mr. William Macleay, and under his personal conduct, has started for New Guinea;
and the leading public men of the community have expressed the deepest interest in
this noble enterprise.
Simultaneously with the departure of this expedition, a public meeting of the
citizens, presided over by the Mayor of Sydney, and numerously attended by merchants,
shipowners, Members of Parliament, and leading citizens engaged in all departments
of commercial industry was held ; and it was unanimously agreed —
Ist. That, in the opinion of the meeting, the resources of the extensive Island of
New Guinea should not remain beyond the reach of' legitimate and commercial enter-
prise ; and as the inhabitants cannot much longer continue isolated from trading
operations, the immediate occupation of the Island by a civilized Power is expedient,
alike in the interests of humanity and commerce.
2nd. That Great Britain is the nation best fitted 1 for the work of colonizing New
(124) ' E 2


Guinea; and that the annexation of the territory not yet occupied by a foreign Power
is desirable in the interests of the whole Empire, as well as that of Her Majesty’s
Australian dominions, especially in view of the recent establishment of steam com-
munication between these Colonies, the east, and the mother-country, by way of
Torres Straits. An influential deputation was appointed by this meeting to w T ait upon
the Colonial Secretary, and urge upon his attention the desirableness of transmitting
these resolutions of the public meeting, through his Excellency the Governor, to the
Eight Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, supported by an expression
of the views of the Cabinet upon the question.
An interview between the gentlemen nominated by the meeting and the Colonial
Secretary took place at his public office on the 19th instant—a report of which from
the public journals is appended. It will he seen that a great deal of public interest
is manifested by the colonists in this question; and a very general desire exists that
the mother-country should, as early as possible, extend its sovereignty over this island.
The establishment of a subsidized line of English mail-steamers between Sydney
and London, via Brisbane and Torres Straits, unquestionably tends to make the
occupation of New Guinea a matter of much greater urgency than it was before this
service was undertaken. Torres Straits have now, as was more than a quarter of a
century since pointed out by a distinguished member of the scientific staff of the
expedition of Her Majesty’s ship “ Ely,” become the pass, through which one of the
great ocean highways of the world necessarily runs, and the cruize of Her Majesty’s
ship “ Basilisk ” in Torres Straits and its neighbourhood for the suppression of the
Polynesian labour traffic has, it is believed, added much to the information concerning
New Guinea possessed by the Imperial Government since the surveying voyages of
Her Majesty’s ship “ Rattlesnake,” and Her Majesty’s ship “ Ely.” The reported
discovery of a magnificent harbour in latitude 9° 30' S., longitude 147° 10' E., about
38 miles east of ilcdscar Bay, on the south-eastern coast, is a circumstance of the
deepest interest, and of the highest value in a commercial point of view; and if, as is
understood, the natives of this portion of the island have displayed friendly sentiments
towards white visitors, the colonization of the Island might be undertaken without
peril, or, which is always to he deplored, without difficulties with the original
inhabitants.
My colleagues and myself venture respectfully to offer our opinion that on many
grounds it would he desirable in the highest interests of civilization that Great Britain
should, with as little delay as possible, take possession not only of the magnificent
Island of New Guinea, hut of the Islands of New Britain, New Ireland, and the chain
of islands to the north-east and east of New Guinea from Bougainville Island to San
Christoval, the south-easternmost of the Solomon Group, the Group of the New Hebrides,
including Espiritu Santo, Mallicolo, and Sandwich, with smaller adjoining islands, and
the Marshall, Gilbert, and Ellice islands, to all of which the traffic from the port of
Sydney extends.
It appears to us that a more extended dominion over these waters on the part of
the British Empire would be not only consistent with the maritime supremacy of
England but would conduce much to the tranquillity and peace of these Australian
colonies. While the occupation by foreign Governments of large islands in the
immediate neighbourhood of our coasts and on the very tracks of our ocean communi-
cation with the mother-country, might, and probably would he in time of war, fatal to
our free navigation of the sea which adjoins our territory, whose coast line stretching
from our capital northwards to within sight of New Guinea is 1,700 miles in extent.
The extension of British sovereignty over Polynesia would not only, as it seems to
my colleagues and myself, open up new and rich fields for the employment of British
capital and enterprise, hut tend to the immediate mitigation of many of the evils which
naturally flow from the lawless condition of some of these islands, and to the early
extinction of the greatest of all these evils, the unlawful Traffic in labour.
The armed vessels built in this Colony some two years since by order of the
Imperial Government, for the purpose of cruizing in these seas, have already effected
a most beneficial change in thp condition of the natives, and in the regulation of inter-
course between them and the whites visiting these islands for the purpose of procuring
labour. The knowledge on the part of those who have for years been successfully
engaged in the procurement of native labour that they can no longer follow their
occupation with impunity, that they may at any island encounter an armed English
vessel, is rapidly circulating and producing, as an inevitable consequence, the mitiga-
tion of the horrors of this trade, now rendered so perilous. But the annexation of
these islands on the part of the British Government would, it seems to us, at once


put an end to tlie state of things which has been so long deplored, and for the suppres-
sion of which the Imperial Government has made such costly sacrifices. And under
the system of Government which my colleagues and myself venture respectfully to
suggest as most suitable, combining in the highest degree efficiency and economy of
public expenditure, arrangements could easily he made for the regulation of the bond
fide labour trade in these islands in such a way as to prove of inestimable value and
advantage to the employer who may have embarked his capital in plantations, and to
the natives, whose personal safety, wages, and certainty of return to their own islands
could be guaranteed. For, while nothing could he more disastrous than the prevalence
of those nefarious practices—by which, in the language of Her Majesty in the Speech
from the Throne in February 1872, “ the name of the British Empire was dishonoured
in the South Seas”—there can be little doubt that a legitimate labour trade could he
established without much difficulty.
Of the possibility of any one or more of these Australian colonies undertaking,
with Imperial sanction, and by means of powers specially conferred, the annexation of
these islands, or any part of them, my colleagues and myself desire to express our con-
currence in the view taken‘by Sir James Martin on this subject in his letter addressed
to the Earl of Belmore on the Bth of August, 1871. We are of opinion that no such
scheme is possible. Even if the inhabitants of these colonies, the resources of which
are so largely drawn upon for the construction of great public works and the opening
up of improved means of internal communication, were able or disposed to bear the
necessary expenditure (which wo do not believe would he the case), it would he impos-
sible for any Colony or Group of Colonies to exercise the powers and authority and
inspire the obedience which belong to a great Empire.
The course of settlement would be arrested by a feeling of insecurity on the part
of those who would hesitate to confide in the protection afforded by colonies. The
question is wholly an Imperial one, and it seems to us to regard it in any other light
would neither conduce to the satisfaction of the colonies nor to the dignity of the
Empire.
The interests of the British people resident in these Australian colonies are pre-
cisely identical with those of their fellow-citizens in England; and in any recommen-
dations which we presume to offer, my colleagues and myself desire it to be explicitly
understood that we are speaking, not as Australian colonists, but as British citizens.
The establishment already provided for the administration of the Government in
Fiji would, in the first place, be (with the necessary enlargement of the powers of the
Governor, and an increase in the number of officers of the Government) all that would
be essential for the administration of the Government of Polynesia. The Governor
might be styled the Governor-General of Polynesia. For the purposes of such a
Government, there would be no necessity for the maintenance at any place of an
expensive establishment for the Chief of the Executive. A vessel of war would pro-
bably for a large portion of his time be his home, and the visitation of the various
islands committed to his care his main business.
The officers engaged in the administration of justice, particularly in carrying out
effectively the provisions of 35 and 36 Viet., cap. 19, would, in like manner, move about
with all the necessary machinery for their Courts, and have the means of promptly and
satisfactorily deciding matters, civil and criminal, effecting enormous saving in the
transport of witnesses, interpreters, the bringing seized vessels for adjudication before
distant Yice-Admiralty Courts, and other attendant expenses.
In the first place, the settlements in these islands would, in all probability, be
founded by the floating population of these Australian Colonies—a class of persons in
some respects peculiarly qualified for purposes of colonization by the experience gained
and hardships endured in all kinds of occupations in new countries. But the necessity
of such a population being either accompanied or immediately followed by the
institutions of a civilized Government has been made so manifest by the example of
Fiji before its annexation by the Imperial Government, that it is supposed no such
state of things would again be sanctioned. For it is now, we venture to submit, made
perfectly clear that an earlier annexation of Fiji would have been attended not only
with great Colonial advantages, hut would have saved the Imperial Government a
large expenditure, rendered necessary in carrying out their legislative measures for the
prevention and punishment of criminal outrages upon natives of the islands in the
Pacific Ocean.
The Australian Colonies themselves, all requiring as they do for the development
of their resources the influx of abundant streams of immigration, would, in the
beginning of the occupation of New Guinea and other islands, suffer by the with


drawal of an active and intelligent population (which, is always the first to embark in
such enterprizes); hut they would he content to make this sacrifice in the confident
hope that,, in a few years, hy the establishment of new commercial centres, trade
would increase, the general prosperity of the Colonies he augmented, and the Colonial
Empire of Great Britain would he enlarged and consolidated, and her beneficent rule
extended over all the waters of the Pacific.
My colleagues and myself heg to append to this Minute returns, which we have
caused the Ilegistrar-General of this Colony to prepare, for the information of the
Imperial Government, showing the progress of the Colonies of New South Wales,
Yictoria, South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania, Western Australia, and New Zealand
from the year 1864-73.
(Signed) JOHN ROBERTSON, Colonial Secretary.
Sydney, May 31, 1875.


Inclosure 2 in No. 15.
Return showing the Progress of the Australian Colonies.
Population.
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia .
Queensland
Tasmania
Western Australia
New Zealand
1864.
1865.
1866.
1867.
1868.
1869.
1870.
1871.
1872.
1873.
392,589
601,343
147,341
74,036
93,307
172’ 158
411,388
621,095
156,605
87,804
95,201
190,607
431,412
636,982
169,153
96,201
97,368
204*114
447,620
651,571
172,860
99,849
98,455
21,713
218,668
466,765
674,614
176,298
107,427
100,706
226*, 618
485,356
699,790
181,146
109,897
101,592
23*7*, 249
502,861
726,599
183,797
115,567
100,765
24,785
248,400
519,182
752,445
187.851
125,146
101,785
25,353
266,986
539,190
770,727
192,223
133,553
102,925
25,724
279,560
560,275
790,492
198,075
104,217
25,761
295,946
Assisted Emigrants
FROM THE
United Kingdom.
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia .
Queensland
Tasmania
Western Australia
3,977
6,631
2,647
2,282
• •
2,717
5,104
4.625
10,979
92
1,204
4,194
3,891
8,538
53
944
3,202
349
1,075
470
2,871
"see
56
47
4,219
87
1,913
• •
4,341
2*,486
41
357
3,212
9
326
*1,310
17
140
**226
28
New Zealand ..
• ♦
• #
• *
• •
• •
• *
• •
• *
• •
• •
• *
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• *
• •
Revenue
•
New South Wales*
Victoria
South Australia .
Queensland .. .. ,. ”
Tasmania
Western Australia!
New Zealand ..
£
1,693,792
2,955,333
775,837
369,425
266,589
71,844
1,530,446
£
1,938,656
3,076.885
1,089,128
472,451
234,022
77,943
1,436,990
£
2,833,459
3,079,160
949,774
490,269
245,421
89,382
1,862.722
£
2,034,490
3,216,217
716,294
610.860
272,953
90,431
1,787,314
£
2,476,700
3,230,754
716,004
724,854
264,695
99,496
1,620,835
£
2.590,217
3,383,984
777.351
732,218
277,782
103,662
1,407,586
£
2,490,203
3,261,883
657,576
743,058
268,696
1,287,957
£ .
2,908,153
l,691,266f
778,094
823,169
269,856
97,605
1,299,371
£
3,592,979
3,734,422
697,442
996,323
271,993
105,300
1,624,714
£
3,937,410
3,644,135
937,648
320,754
134,832
2,753.181
+ ? XC v Sive ° f 1 - oans ’ bu . t includes Treasury Bills, Trust Fund, &c.
for the June^3o^' e; ' r WaS cluui S ed > t 0 terminate on June 30. The figures for 1871 are, therefore, for the six months ending June 30, and the figures for subsequent years are
| Includes Imperial aid.
Registrar. General’s Office, Sydney, May 27, 1875. fSigned) E. G. WARD, Registrar-General.


Inwards.
New South Wales
'Victoria
South Australia ..
Queensland
Tasmania
Western Australia
New Zealand
1864.
1865.
1866.
1867.
1863.
Total S
hipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men,
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons,
Men.
Tons.
Men,
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
607,168
620,200
100,093
129.687
124,099
45,972
426,004
31,087
33,250
9,265
7,791
5,136
18,777
80,166
168,124
20,948
30,255
9,910
102,679
2,802
5,489
1,151
318
3,559
635,888
580,973
183,102
173,227
100,276
51,741
293,625
33,887
32,723
9.041
12,294
0,715
5,043
13,647
70,968
147,689
42,074
37,099
8,411
75,090
2,371
5,000
1,492
1,378
’236
2,568
730,354
049,979
109,439
197,065
107,903
57,319
330,303
30,881
35,774
7,881
13,773
7,510
4,859
17,497
73,020
146,369
40,379
33,657
8,089
15,168
63,066
2,190
4,775
1,344
1,156
363
400
1,986
646,970
593,235
167,547
149.876
97,390
52,242
309,568
33,207
31,842
7,587
11,238
6,423
4,709
10,890
57,143
145,078
25,448
10,511
. 6,530
8,320
63,644
1.708
4,511
858
488
240
268
2,109
724,193
653,362
136,051
132,943
110,553
56,223
277,105
29,585
33,613
6,472
10,376
7.197
4,903
15,105
69,328
141,726
33,499
13,540
4,812
13,126
45,557
2,079
4,376
1,041
435
174
333
1,552
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia .. ..
Queensland
Tasmania .. ,.
Western Australia ..
New Zealand
1869.
o
l-w
00
1871.
1872.
1873.
Total S
hipping.
United 1
Cingdom.
Total Shipping,
United Kingdom,
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
741,369
721,274
167,991
145,213
114,410
62,703
230,731
34,233
35,628
7,486
11,541
7,594
5,000
12,330
83,721
165,305
36,638
14,929
12,602
7,838
50,647
2,466
5,193
1,127
514
437
215
1,613
689,820
663,764
140,081
133,292
105,647
273,151
31,014
32,838
9,481
7,002
14,180
76,753
153,853
31,219
19,307
6,075
56,874
2,179
4,713
"624
216
1,783
706,019
663,002
187,314
143,611
107,271
274,643
31,162
33,789
8,530
7,007
13,226
69,008
135,876
27,791
6,537
39,*725
1,940
4,246
834
206
1,327
774,490
666,336
175,867
148,630
102,379
69,306
300,302
33,836
33,551
8,301
10,300
6,866
6,459
13,866
72,053
147,383
37,538
14,160
5,273
10 930
58,270
2,043
4,399
1,046
407
184
261
1,838
874,804
756,103
258,781
118,353
69,669
289,297
36,747
36,307
10,929
7,509
5,764
12,177
101,056
167,390
52,442
7,783
8,704
80,032
2,799
4,977
1,518
259
238
2,564


Outwards.
1864.
1865.
1866.
1867.
1868.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men,
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
New South Wales
647,057
32,465
33,066
1,184
690,294
37,058
39,360
1,295
784,381
39,919
30,138
1,209
720,721
30,992
41,295
1,300
770,449
41,189
43,984
1,345
Victoria
641,614
33,614
72,759
2,629
599,351
33,045
72,129
2,621
675,741
36,888
74,484
2,499
017,026
32,984
88.673
3,114
085,207
35,332
90,066
2,976
South Australia ..
161,293
..
11,677
, ,
174,188
8,556
17,867
567
170,432
7,649
22,097
680
170,272
7,840
44,547
1,343
141,821
6,591
24,796
762
Queensland
116,702
8,352
4,632
146
167,153
11,791
30,194
797
195,991
13,567
6,070
212
145,301
10,724
6,128
208
127,871
9,970
8,306
201
Tasmania
123,791
7,990
, ,
104,218
6,990
. ,
, ,
106,065
7,508
9,601
2,173
430
102,754
0,815
5,827
192
111,491
7,257
5,932
198
Western Australia
47,826
5,143
1,285
48
52,411
5,082
2,268
73
56,417
4,791
70
51,077
4,711
2,070
69
52,195
287,710
4,942
1,756
60
New Zealand
433,253
17,303
18,323
597
283,020
12,091
20,716
699
306,979
15,960
31,252
1,032
308,109
16,714
33,914
1,122
15,759
27,384
892
1869.
1870.
1871.
1872.
1873.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Total Shipping.
United Kingdom.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
Tons.
Men.
New South Wales
833,248
37,476
50,673
1,591
771,942
34,110
45,152
1,365
794,460
35,615
56,661
1,670
813,550
34,993
45,592
1,346
887,674
37,233
44,428
1,281
Victoria
730,961
35,696
83,607
2,758
681,098
33,836
86,815
2,883
692,023
35,050
100,280
3,186
094,426
35,353
92,497
2,970
762,912
36,216
97,894
2,999
South Australia ,.
163,516
7,263
32,309
968
147,908
, ,
28,126
( ,
186,310
8,745
37,561
1,122
171,484
7,966
34,030
942
244,433
10,204
88,106
2,364
Queensland
142,802
11,196
11,201
355
127,992
9,035
12,126
347
139,004
, ,
, ,
, ,
143,380
10,024
10,198
293
, ,
, ,
Tasmania ..
112,565
7,631
11,051
394
107,263
7,138
4,699
141
108,889
7,170
6,039
208
103,101
0,903
6,453
213
119,759
7,697
5,085
. 202
Western Australia
65,812
5,072
5,861
312
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,
,,
08,411
0,239
19,460
2,012
70,568
5,846
1,689
70
New Zealand
247,764
12,192
32,608
1,121
265,407
12,307
43,532
1,273
265,618
12,371
41,849
1,311
285,360
12,802
40,396
1,196
281,847
11,254
51,659
1,435
Note. —There is no information in the Office showing the Country where the Ships are registered,
Registrar- General’ s Office, Sydney, May 27, 1875. (Signed) E. Gr. WARD, Registrar,


Exports.
1664.
1865.
1866.
1867.
1868.
1809.
1870.
1871.
1873,
1873.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
iTo
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
Total
Exports.
To
United
Kingdom.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
New South Wales .
9,037,832
2,559,380
9,563,818
3,319,628
9,913,839
3,162,616
6,880,715*
3,111,108
7,192,904*-
3,486,960
9,933,443
3,267,019
7,990,038
2,492,640
11,245,032
4,378,281
10,447,019
4,936,728
9,387,873*
.’6,657,559
Victoria
13,898,384
5,300,394
13,150,748
7,680,339
12,889,546
6,754,536
13,724.427
8,177,220
15,593,990
11,069,115
13,464,354
7,833,102
12,470,014
6,205,455
14,557,820
8.529,603
13,871,195
8,216,074
15,303,454
9,741,608
South Australia
8,305,545
918,523
3,129,816
964,894
2,858,787
1,155,865
3,164,622
1,426,025
2,819,300
1,423,741
2,993,035
1,363,185
2,419,488
1,136,463
3,683,897
1,626,739
3,738,623
2,193,231
4,587.859
2,801,676
Queensland
1,247,054
354,636
1,153,464
240,550
1,366,491
321,939
2,198,609
605,442
3,107,437
605,277
2,166,806
600,494
2,533,732
667,099
3,760,045
2,998,934
847,541
•••
Tasmania
975,730
Not,
880,965
403,559
834,606
344,131
790,494
378,532
920,820
435,523
826,932
331,748
648,709
253,200
740.638
337,508
910,663
462,486
506.375
232.305
Western Australia .
111,903
179,148
...
153,240
174,080
193,636
205,502
...
209,197
145,827
265,217
148,525
New Zealand
3,401.667
1,378,855
3,713,218
1,186,085
4,520,074
1,713,063
4,644,678
1,984,785
4,429,198
2,024,702
4,224,860
3,135,233
4,622,756
2,488,916
5,282,084
2,767,831
5,190.665
3,359,586
5,610,371
3,702,416
Imports.
1864.
1865.
1866.
1867.
1868.
1869.
1870.
1871.
1873.
1873.
Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom.
Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom.
Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom.
Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom
Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom.
Total
Imports.
Prom
United
Kingdom.
Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom.
- ..Total
Imports.
From
United
Kingdom.
, Total
Imports.
From
'United
Kingdom.
.Total
Imports.
From
■ United
Kingdom.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
New South Wales .
10,135,708
3,856,161
10,635,507
4,349,371
9,403,192
3,353,768
6,599,804*
3,203,463
8,051,377*
5,660,430
b,3y^,Vo3
3,541,285
7,757,281
3,200,706
9,609,503
3,253,617
9,208,496
.3,728,457
10,471,483*
5.137,139
Victoria ... ...
14,974,815
7,899,149
13,257,637
7,147,216
14,771.711
7,846,823
11,674,080
6,199,631
1,320,662
6,458,436
13,908,990'
7,153,937
12,455,758
6,198,805
12,341,995
4,092,603
13,691,323
6,622,136
16,533,856
7,873,134
South Australia
2,413,931
1,317,568
3,937,596
1,741,690
2,835,142
1,880,373
2,506,394
1,198,243
,2,338,510
1,411,808
2,754,770
1,630,761
2,029,793
1,196,292
.3,158,023
,1,183,347
2,801,571
■ 1,600,480
3,841.100
2,344,433
Queensland
3,267,954
606,697
3,505,659
713,515
2,467,907
743,884
1,747,735
'474,483
1,899,119
431,858
1,804,678
455,796
1,577,339
■136,436
1,563,665
...
2,218,717
474,845
908,365
Not_
762,375
283,056
883,107
253,180
856,348
, 299,892
845,152
265,396
. 975,412
408,188
792,916
282,342
778,087
272,797
:807,183
309,199
615,691
372^39
Western Australia.
168,707
168,413
...
251,907
...
204,613
335,614
...
256,729
'230,656
115,355
297,327
158,277
New Zealand
7,000,655
3.259,174
5,594,977
2,606,994
5,894,863
2,737,702
5,344,607
2.779.462
4,985,748
3,299,689
4,976,126
2,458,579
4,639,015
2,685,736
4,078,193
1,608,636
5,143,951
2,685,160
6,46-4,687
S,781,1S0
(Signed) E. G. WARD, Registrar-General.
* Exclusive of the overland traffic.
* Exclusive of the overland traffic.
Registrar-General’ s Office, Sydney, May 27, 1875.


Inclosure 3 in No. 15.
Extract from the “ Sydney Morning Herald ” of May 20, 1875.
Proposed Annexation op New Guinea. —The Colonial Secretary, the Honour-
able John Robertson, received a deputation yesterday, appointed at a public meeting
held a few days ago at the Masonic Hall, in reference to the proposal for the annexa-
tion of New Guinea to the British Empire. The deputation consisted of .the Mayor of
Sydney (Mr. Benjamin Palmer), the Bov. Dr. Lang, the Honourable J. L. Montefiore
(President of the Chamber of Commerce), Mr. E. H. Dangar, Mr. A. H. C. Macafee,
Mr. John Alger, Mr. S. Dickinson, Mr. J. Levick, Mr. G. H. Beid, Mr. James
Watson, M.L.A., Mr. G. B. Dibbs, M.L.A., Mr. B. Wisdom, M.L.A., Mr. A. Cameron,
M.L.A., Mr. George Oakes, Mr. W. H. Eldred, Captain J. Broomfield, Mr. W. S.
Buzacoot, and Mr. C. H. Hayes.
The Mayor, in introducing the deputation, said the gentlemen present waited upon
the Colonial Secretary in pursuance of a resolution passed at a public meeting, to urge
upon the Government the desirableness of taking steps to induce the Imperial Govern-
ment to annex New Guinea to the British Empire. The resolutions which the public
meeting arrived at were passed unanimously. lie had attended many public meetings
in the city; but the one at which the present deputation Avas appointed was the largest
and most influential public meet at Avhich he had ever had the honour of being present.
He apologised for the absence of Sir John O’Shanassy, the .Honourable J. B. Watt,
M.L.C., and Mr. A. Stuart, M.L.A., and concluded by handing a copy of the resolu-
tions passed at the public meeting to the Colonial Secretary.
The Rev. Dr. Lang said he did not conceive it to be necessary at this stage of the
proceedings to enlarge upon the object that had called them together, which was to
submit to the Colonial Secretary the resolutions passed at the public meeting recently
held. A more unanimous meeting or a more cordial assemblage he had never seen in
Sydney; and he felt sure the importance of the object in vieiv Avould recommend itself
sufficiently to the Ministry of this Colony to induce it to urge upon Her Majesty’s
Government the desirableness of conceding the boon now asked, namely, the annexa-
tion of Neiv Guinea, or, at least, a part of it, as Her Majesty’s Government might
think best, to the British Empire. That A\ r as an object of great importance to this
Colony. Every one kneAv that there Avas and alAvays had been a floating population in
these colonies, who had been resident perhaps for years in one or other of them, and
sometimes in more than one, but Avho had not succeeded in realising their expectations.
Those persons had necessarily acquired in the colonies a great deal of useful knowledge
which might be made available for colonization. Their want of success in one locality
did not imply that they would be equally unsuccessful in another. On the contrary,
he was personally aware of many cases of persons Avho had fail of success in one Colony
ha-ving realized their expectations in other colonies. He anticipated that that would
be the result of the influx into New Guinea of persons of the class he had mentioned,
and who Avould in all likelihood be attracted to the’ shores of that country. This Avas
Dot the first time a movement had originated for the colonization of New Guinea. But
the difficulty Avhich presented itself at the very outset of former undertakings of the kind
was that there was no poAver of dispensing justice amongst the immigrants themselves.
Years ago he was a member of a Board Avhich had for its object the colonization of
New Guinea. But when it was found impracticable to set up any judicial authority,
in the form of a magistrate as a judge, the effort gradually fell to the ground. But
that difficulty would be entirely removed by the Imperial Government annexing the
island as an appendage to the British Empire. It Avould not, he conceived, necessitate
a large expenditure on the part of the Imperial Government; and the floating popula-
tion of all these colonies Avould be sufficient to form the nucleus for the colonization of
Ncav Guinea. It would bo hopeless to expect emigrants from the mother-country. In
fact, it was not desirable that they should come. The experience gained by a few
years’ residence in the colonies fitted persons in a special manner for the work of
colonization. It Avould be sufficient, therefore, he conceived, for the Imperial
Government to constitute some judicial authority in the country, by the appointment
of magistrates or judges, and no large expenditure Avould be necessary. The persons
likely to become immigrants would, in many cases, supply funds requisite for their oavu
settlement in the island. Erom recent accounts there was reason to believe that the
climate of the south-east coast of Ncav Guinea Avas not unfavourable to colonization.
He trusted* therefore, that, as the attention of the public had of late been very much
(124) F 2


concentrated on this subject, both at Home and in this Colony—whose procedure would
no doubt he followed by the other colonies in due time—that Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment would feel disposed to sanction and recommend this effort very strongly; and, if
they did, he had no doubt hut that the result to the Colony would he favourable in the
highest degree. The productions of New Guinea were such as were common to
countries in tropical latitudes. An effort was made by the East Indian Company
about the very year in which this Colony was settled through Captain Eisher, who was
sent to New Guinea to introduce the spices so long produced in the Malacca Islands ;
and he found that the plants were indigenous on the north-west coast of New Guinea;
and Captain Eisher’s intercourse with the natives of the island was cordial on both
sides. He trusted the Government would he disposed to lend their great influence and
power in recommending to the Imperial Government the object which the recent
public meeting had so strongly in view.
The Hon. J. L. Montefiore regretted that, owing to a severe cold, he should he
unable to say all he desired to have said on this important question. He thought that,
for political reasons, Great Britain was bound to take steps towards the colonization of
New Guinea ; because, viewing the position which the Australian , Group at the present
moment occupied, it was very undesirable that New Guinea should he possessed or
colonized by a foreign Power. Every day the Australian trade with countries to the
north are increasing, and that was proved by the results of establishing a mail service
by way of Torres Straits. Compared to the trade with the islands and countries to the
north, the Eiji trade would form hut a small item. And when it was borne in mind
that this Colony had . not yet -completed its centenary; that when the American
colonies declared their independence their trade with the rest of the world did not
exceed 4,000,000/., whilst that of the Australasian Group now exceeded 75,000,000/.;
and when we looked at what had been accomplished in a few years, we should he able
in some degree to realize what these colonies were likely to he in a few years to come.
Looking, therefore, to the safety of the Australasian Group, as well as to their impor-
tance to the mother-country, he thought the Imperial Government was hound to take
steps which would at all events prevent any other nation taking possession of the island
of New Guinea.
Mr. George Oakes said that, as a very old colonist, he felt very great interest, not
only in the Australian colonies, but also in the adjacent islands. He believed that
every right-feeling man in the Colony was alive to the importance, in both a political
and a commercial point of view, of annexing New Guinea to Great Britain. Its
annexation to Great Britain would he a greater benefit to the inhabitants than its
annexation to any other Power. He thought there was hut one opinion regarding this
subject amongst the people of New South Wales, and lie felt sure that in whatever we
did we should receive the hearty co-operation of the other colonies.
Mr. Robertson said that what he understood was wanted by this numerous and
influential deputation was that the Government should do what might he in its power
to aid the movement set on foot by a public meeting. The resolutions that were passed
by that meeting decidedly expressed the opinion of the people of Sydney, and he
believed of the people of the Colony generally. He understood that the deputation
were desirous that this Government should facilitate in every way in its power the pro-
position contained in the resolutions. He should not attempt to follow at any length
the observations of the Rev. Dr. Lang, whom he supposed they all looked upon as
having been for half a century or more the great developer and friend of settlement in
the South Seas. He supposed no man had done so much as Dr. Lang for advancing
the settlement of Australia. He supposed that no two gentlemen could so well repre-
sent the commercial and the general interests of this Colony as the Hon. J. L. Monte-
fiore and Mr. Oakes. Under the circumstances, therefore, he need scarcely say that
he sympathized with the movement. He had not yet had an opportunity of bringing
the question of the annexation of New Guinea before his colleagues. But, whilst
expressing his own sentiments, he would like to point out what has been done. He
regarded this question of the proposed annexation in a somewhat more extended light
than that appearing from the resolutions. Eour or five years ago the question of
annexing Eiji was before the Government, of which he was the Colonial Secretary and
Sir James Martin was Premier and Attorney-General. In reply to certain despatches
from the mother-country. Sir James Martin took a course which he believed was really
the cause of the annexation of Eiji. He thought the paper written by Sir James
Martin pointed out that it was impossible for any Colony, as was suggested by the
Home Government, to create a Colony in Eiji and govern it. And he thought that,
if any one would take the trouble to read that remarkable paper written by Sir James


Martin, which Avas forwarded by him (Mr., Robertson) to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies five years ago, they Avould see that in those days the annexation of islands
Avhere a European population had settled, Avas defended and maintained, from onr point
of vlcav, as the duty of the British Government. Then we found that when there was
a change of Government, Avhen Mr. Parkes become Colonial Secretary and Premier,
that gentleman arrived at pretty much the same opinion. At any ratd, Mr. Parkes
Avas in favour of the annexation of Piji to the British Crown. He (Mr. Robertson)
held someAvhat different opinions to those of Mr. Parkes. Or rather he did not think
he would agree Avith the view he Avas about to put forward. But he thought the time
had now come Avhen that vieAV could he put forward and urged strongly on the British
Government. He Avas hound, however, to state that he had not laid his views
before his colleagues, and in now speaking he spoke for himself, and not for his
colleagues. He thought that if the Australian colonies Avere severed from the
British CroAvn—Avhich he hoped would not he for many years to come—we should
he sure to colonise, not only Ngav Guinea, hut the Avhole of the islands of Polynesia.
He thought the colonies Avould do it in the interests of peace 'and in the interests
of Australasia. We were, fortunately, connected Avith a great Empire, and it seemed
to him that what Avould he the duty of Australia in its oaau interests, it was the duty
of Great Britain to do in the interests of the Empire of which Ave formed a part. Great
Britain should take up every one of the unclaimed islands of Polynesia, in order that
that should not he taken up hy any other nation. He did not press that view upon
Sir James Martin, Avhen he was dealing Avith the question of annexation of Eiji, as he
thought it Avas hopeless to expect Great Britain to incur the expense of governing the
islands. He thought the Home Government had acted wisely in their last procedure
with regard to Eiji. But he did not think they need haA r e sent out a Governor Avith
1,000/. a-year salary, and everything necessary to form a first-class establishment.
But, having done that, if they would uoav make that gentleman Governor-General of
Polynesia, the Avhole of the islands might be governed, and the additional expense
Avould he a mere bagatelle. The Imperial Government had appointed a Governor and
a judicial staff, and the Governor he presumed Avas a gentleman of great ability. If,
as he had said, they had made that gentleman a Governor-General of the whole of
Polynesia, and made his palace on some man-of-war, which Avas, he believed, intended
at Eiji—call it a Government House, or anything else—whenever that ship was in any
harbour there would the seat of Government he whilst it remained. It appeared to
him that a ship-of-war Avould he a convenient residence for a of Polynesia.
The British Government had four vessels, three of which Arcre built in Sydney, cruising
about the Southern Seas to put down the Slave Trade. If they had three or four more,
and had on each a captain who could act in the capacity of police magistrate, they would
have itinerating Courts of Justice, which would ho sufficient for the Government of
Polynesia for a long time to come. If the Imperial Government could borrow money
at 3 per cent, for the government of the islands, he believed it AA r ould soon he recouped
hy the sale of land, extension of trade, and in other Avays; the Government would
really he no expense at all. He kneAV that the Government of this Colony had been
asked to contribute toAvards the government of Eiji. He did not see hoAV we could do
that. Ho did not think Parliament could he reasonably asked to contribute any large
sum of money in the expenditure of which it could have no control. But he thought
that the Imperial Government, having launched into the thing, and gone to nearly all
the expense that Avould be necessary for governing the whole of Polynesia —having
provided Judges and LaAV Courts, and having several ships—they might with a very
little further expense deal with the Avhole of Polynesia. He had had the advantage of
long and intimate acquaintance Avith Captain Charles Edwards, the gentleman who
Avent away yesterday in charge of the vessel so liberally fitted up as an expedition ship
hy Mr. Macleay. He had the pleasure of travelling Avith that gentlemen to the Guff
of Carpentaria some years ago, and knew him to he possessed of a good deal of
information with regard to the islands of Polynesia. In fact, he had had some twenty
years or more acquaintance with them. And that gentleman was of opinion, having
always been on good terms with the islanders, and conducted a large business with
them, that if the islanders saAV a British ship-of-war going now and then to visit them,
the people Avould have perfect security in their holdings or settlements which they
might form ; and the native inhabitants would aid in giving up to ships-of-war or the
Law Courts any person who might transgress the laws, whether natives or white
people. He intended to prepare a paper, if his colleagues agreed Avith him in such a
scheme as he had indicated, embodying his Adews on the subject, to he sent to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies by the next mail. He thought the scheme was


quite practicable. Captain Broomfield had considerable knowledge of the islands, and
perhaps he would like to say something about them.
Captain Bloomfield said he could endorse what had been said by Captain Edwards.
He had sailed with that gentleman many years, and knew something about the coast
of New Guinea, and the great importance to New South Wales of annexing that
territory to Great Britain. He thought it was evident to all that the mail service by
the eastern route would open up a large passenger traffic. And independently of that
New Guinea was an island possessing rich soil and vast mineral wealth. Twenty-two
years ago a canoe came off from the island bringing pieces of gold to an English
vessel. If colonised it would, as Dr. Lang had said, he an outlet for those who had
been unfortunate in this Colony, but who might nevertheless prove useful and
successful colonists in New Guinea. We were now advancing step by step to the
realisation of a prophecy he made to Lord Palmerston some years since, that New
South Wales would become the greatest country on the face of the earth. No oppor-
tunity ought to be allowed to any other country to step in and take New Guinea.
And in order to facilitate the annexation, he suggested that as soon as the Govern-
ment arrived at some determination they should telegraph their news to the Imperial
Government. He could endorse what has been said, that the safety of the white
population was secure on any island that was occasionally visited by an English man-
of-war.
The Mayor, on behalf of the deputation, thanked Mr. Robertson for his courtesy,
and for his expression of opinion in favour of the object which the deputation had in
view.
The deputation then withdrew.
No. 16.
Governor Musgrave , C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received August 4.)
My Lord, Government House, South Australia, June 17, 1875.
I RECENTLY received a telegram from the officer administrating the Govern-
meent of Victoria, Sir William Stawcll, stating that the subject of the annexation of
New Guinea will engage the attention of the Victorian Parliament, and that as a
united movement by all the Colonies is desirable, his Government were desirous to
know what the Government of this Colony proposed to do in the matter. It has since
been ascertained that the Government of Victoria intend to submit a Resolution to
Parliament, affirming that Great Britain should annex New Guinea.
2. Similar action is proposed here; but, in the meantime, I am urged by my
present Ministry to move your Lordship either to support the desire of Queensland
that. New Guinea should be annexed to that Colony, or that it should be made a part
the Empire, as in the case of Eiji.
3. I annex a copy of a Minute from Mr. Boucaut, the leader of the Government,
upon this subject.
4. It is submitted by my Ministers that no Colony is more interested in the
question now agitated than South Australia, because most of the communication,
and , all steam communication, with the northern territory passes by way of Torres
Straits. _
5. I am aware that in consideration of so important a subject. Her Majesty’s
Government cannot be entirely guided by the wishes of one or even of all the
Australian Colonies, but it is my duty to acquaint you with the views which are held
by my Advisers.
I have, &c.
(Signed) A. MUSGRAVE.
Inclosure 1 in No. 16.
Colonial Annexation.—New Guinea.
Memorandum for the Hon. Chief Secretary.
NEARLY two years ago in my place in the House of Assembly, I asked the then
Chief Secretary (Honourable Arthur Blytli) whether the attention of the Government


had been directed to the discovery of islands on the north-east of Australia hy the
Commander of Her Majesty’s ship “ Basilisk,” which were previously supposed to be
part of the Island of New . Guinea, and whether the Government had directed the
attention of the Imperial Government to the importance of these islands as lying so
near to Australia, and nearly on the track of vessels sailing from £he southern
Colonies via Torres Straits. Although the reply was that the Commander of the
“ Basilisk ” must of necessity have drawn the attention of the Imperial Government
to the matter, and that therefore it did pot appear requisite for this Government to
take any further action, I am deeply impressed with the grave importance of this
matter, and avail myself of the earliest opportunity of bringing the ’subject under the
notice of the Executive, with a view to some action being taken therein by this
Government.
The Island of New Guinea lies north of New Holland, from which it is separated
by Torres Straits. The country is generally supposed to be mountainous and well
watered, and is covered with an astonishing luxuriance of wood and herbage; the
inhabitants are savage in their manners and habits.
The bulk of the navigation from the eastern Colonies with China and the East,
and with England via Singapore, goes now by New Guinea.
Most of the vessels leaving this Colony for the northern territory also go by the
island in question, and any other nation having the command of that island would
have the power seriously to impede this traffic, and dominate not only those seas, but
the northern part of this continent, on which grounds it seems to me that it would be
eminently objectionable to have a foreign Power located there.
In another point of view, this magnificent Island, with amazing resources and fine
harbours, must be very advantageous to Great Britain, as affording additional means
for the development of her commerce, and would likewise be advantageous to the
Australian Colonies for the same reason.
And I would submit that the advantages to Great Britain of being called upon to
protect New Guinea, if made part of the Empire, would be but slight, because, if war
were adverse to the Empire, it would be impossible to protect all her present Colonies;
and if not adverse, the proposed new Colony would not be lost.
I may mention that notice of motion has been given in the Queensland Parliament
for an Address to the Queen favouring an annexation of New Guinea to that Province.
It appears to me that the policy of this Colony is to support that view.
As a further indication of the very great attention which this question meets with
in these Colonies, I append a slip taken from the “ Sydney Morning Herald ” of the
13th ultimo, showing that Mr. William Maclcay, E.L.S., has purchased a vessel at
Sydney for the New Guinea Expedition about to be undertaken by that gentleman in
the cause of science, and the vessel is being prepared with all possible despatch for the
intended voyage.
I therefore submit that his Excellency should be advised to move the Eight
Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies in favour of the immediate taking
possession of that Island, to be governed either as part of Queensland, or as Eiji is now
governed.
(Signed) JAMES P. BOUCAUT,
June 7, 1875. Commissioner of Crown Lands.
No. 17.
Colonial Office to Admiralty.
Sir, Downing Street, August 21, 1875.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 9th ultimo,* inclosing a memorandum by the hydrographer of the Admiralty
relating to New Guinea.
In forwarding herewith the inclosed copies of Captain Evans’s Eeport, which has
been printed in this Office in accordance with the suggestion contained in your letter,
Lord Carnarvon desires me to request that you will state to the Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty that his Lordship thinks it desirable that a survey should be made by
one of Her Majesty’s ships of the coast of New Guinea more immediately opposite Cape
York, as it is in his Lordship’s opinion important that Her Majesty’s Government
*, Np. 14.


should at any moment he in a position to secure the best situation for the formation of
a Settlement on that part of the coast without prejiidice to the question whether or not
a more extended annexation should eventually take place.
I am, Ac.
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
No. 18.
Admiralty to Colonial Office.
•Sir, Admiralty , September 22, 1875.
I AM commanded by my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of 21st ultimo,* and to convey to you their Lordships’ thanks
for the printed copies inclosed therein of Captain Evans’ Report of 2nd July, 1875,
relative to the discovery aod exploration of the coasts of JSTew Guinea, with other
hydrographic information hearing on the question of the annexation of the eastern
portion of the island hy Great Britain.
2. With reference to the opinion expressed hy the Earl of Carnarvon, that it is
desirable that a survey should he made, hy one of Her Majesty’s ships of the coast of
New Guinea, as it is important that Her Majesty’s Government should he in a position,
at any moment, to secure the best situation for the formation of a settlement on that
part of the coast, I am desired hy my Lords to inclose herewith a copy of some
further remarks hy the hydrographer of the Admiralty, from which it would appear
that no new exploration or survey would add any material facts to the knowledge
already possessed, of the coast opposite Cape York, and of the navigation of Torres
Straits..
I am, &c.
(Signed) VERNON LHSHINGTON.
Inclosure in No. 18.
Report of the Hydrographer of the Admiralty on the suggestion of the Colonial Office that a
more detailed Survey should be made of the Coast opposite Cape York, New Guinea.
NO new explanation would, I think, add any material facts to the knowledge we
possess of the coast of New Guinea more immediately opposite to Cape York, and of
the navigation of Torres Straits, as resulting chiefly from surveys made in Her Majesty’s
ships within the last thirty-five years.
I attach a portion of the general chart of this region, accompanied also by two
special charts (Torres Straits sheets, 1 and 2), wherein it will he seen that Torres
Strait, at its narrowest part, can alone he passed through with any degree of safety or
certainty, whether from east or Avest, hy two channels —the one Endeavour Strait, the
other Prince of Wales’ Channel. BetAveen Prince of Wales’ Channel and Banks Island
the several channels have been closely suiweyed, hut they are nevertheless considered
unsafe for navigation Avithout the greatest caution.
Between Banks Island and the mainland of New Guinea the navigation is practi-
cally closed to all hut small vessels hy innumerable coral reefs and sand hanks.
We also knoAv that the seaboard of the mainland of N cav Guinea, between Talbot
and Bristow Islands (opposite Cape York) consists of an almost unbroken line of
mangroves with thick scrub inshore. The coast line is fringed Avith a mud bank from
a half to one and a-half miles from the shore; and this, judging from the shoal nature
of the sea westward of Torres Strait, is probably the preA'ailing coast feature to
Marianne Strait in 139 east.
Off this mainland of New Guinea, opposite to Cape York at a distance of two to
three miles, are two groups of low and SAAmnpy islands—Talbot and Saibai—they are
cultivated in part, inhabited hy warlike hut friendly natives, and have been frequently
visited from the settlement at Somerset, and more lately hy Her Majesty’s ship
“ Basilisk.”
At Tanan (Mr. Cornwallis, of old naA'igators), near Saibai, there is a native
mission station, of which, and the neighbouring country, there is an interesting
* No. 17,


account by the Rev. W. Gill, in the Royal Geographical Society’s proceedings for
1874. (Three visits to New Guinea.)
Tanan (Mr. Cornwallis) is a small, but lofty isbnd (800 feet high), and appears
suited for an outpost; a vessel of moderately heavy draft can anchor close to. The
occupation of this island would practically give possession of the mainland of New
Guinea immediately opposite to Cape York, and at the narrowest part of Torres Strait.
With the new settlement at Thursday Island, and its signal station on Goode
Island, the Prince of Wales’ channel is commanded, and the only navigable channel
north thereof overlooked.
In considering the navigation of Torres Strait, it may be observed that outside or
beyond the channels I have named, no marine survey, however elaborate, will render
navigation secure; the interminable coral reefs and hidden sandbanks that exist can
alone be threaded by eye. I write from three years’ personal experience in those
regions.
(Signed) FREDK. JNO. EYANS, Hydrographer.
September 16, 1875.
No. 19.
Governor Cairns, C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received September 23.)
My Lord, Government House, Brisbane, July 6, 1875.
I HAVE the honour to forward an Address from the Legislative Council of
Queensland to Her Majesty the Queen, and I trust that your Lordship may see fit to
lay it at the foot of the Throne.
2. The intention of the Address is to humbly convey to Her Majesty the expres-
sion of the satisfaction felt by the Legislative Council in regard to what has been done
in the case of Fiji, and what it may still be in contemplation to do towards taking,
possession of the island of New Guinea.
I have, &c.
(Signed) W. W. CAIRNS.
Inclosure in No. 19.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty Victoria, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, &c., &c., &c.,
Most gracious Sovereign:
May it please your Majesty,
WE, your Majesty’s loyal and dutiful subjects, the members of the Legislative
Council of Queensland in Parliament assembled, dutifully approach your Majesty with
a renewed assurance of our respect to your Majesty’s person and Government.
We desire to express to your Majesty our grateful thanks for the course pursued
by your Majesty’s Government in accepting the cession of the Fijian group of islands,
whereby the benefit of civilization and British protection has been extended to the
inhabitants, native and foreign, of those islands.
We recognize with pride the zealous efforts of the officers in command of your
Majesty’s cruizers on this naval station to protect the rights of British subjects, and at
the same time to protect the native'"!slanders from lawless violence.
We have also viewed with satisfaction the interest lately taken in the survey and
exploration of the coasts of New Guinea by your Majesty’s navy. Separated, as the
Papuan Archipelago is, by only a narrow sea from the northern settlements of this
Colony, and inhabited as it is by uncivilized races, it has appeared to us that those
islands must eventually be occupied by persons migrating from these shores and from
the adjacent Colonies of Australasia. The formal assertion of a claim to certain island
territory immediately adjacent to the south-eastern extremity of New Guinea having
already been made by one of your Majesty’s commissioned officers, we beg dutifully to
represent to your Majesty that such claim should be maintained and extended as
circumstances may justify.
We believe that by so doing, and by the exercise of your Majesty’s influence in
those seas, very great benefits may result to the native island races, and that further
(124) G


facilities will be afforded for -the growth of trade between jour Majesty’s Australasian,
subjects and the native inhabitants of those regions.
We should, therefore, hail with satisfaction the adoption by your Majesty’s
Government of such a course as will continue to confer those benefits, both upon the
native races of those regions, and also upon such of your Majesty’s subjects as may
migrate thither.
(Signed) M- G. O’CONNELL, President.
Legislative Council Chamber, Brisbane, June 10, 1875.
No. 20.
Governor Cairns , C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received September 23.)
My Lord, , Government House, Brisbane, July 6, 1875.
I HAVE the honour to forward an address from the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland, for presentation to Her Majesty, and I venture to request your Lordship
to submit it for the gracious approval of the Queen.
• ' 2. While the Assembly express satisfaction on account of the cession to Great
Britain of the Fijian Group of Islands, and respectfully recommend the annexation of
New Guinea, the terms of their .address do not, as your Lordship will observe, commit
them to anything like an offer to share whatever expenditure woilld have to he incurred
in taking possession of New Guinea.
I have, &c. >
(Signed) W. W, OAIBNS.
Enclosure in No. 20.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty Victoria, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Eaith, &c., &c., &c.
Most gracious Sovereign:
May it please your Majesty,
WE, your Majesty’s loyal and dutiful subjects, the Members of the Legislative
Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled, dutifully approach your Majesty
with a renewed assurance of our respect to your Majesty’s person and Government.
We desire to express to your Majesty the satisfaction we have felt at the course
pursued by your Majesty’s Government in accepting the cession of the Fijian Group
of Islands; and we would humbly express to your Majesty our opinion that for the
extension of British interests, for the protection of your Majesty’s subjects now
resident in or adjacent to New Guinea, and for the promotion of civilization among
the native population, it is desirable that the whole of that island and the adjacent
islands, not at present occupied by any European Power, should he taken possession
of by your Majesty, and brought under the protection of your Majesty’s Government.
(Signed) WM. HENBY WALSH, Speaker.
Legislative Assembly Chamber, Brisbane, June 17, 1875.
No. 21.
Governor Sir A. Musgrave, K.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received September 27.)
My Lord, Government House , South Australia, August 11, 1875.
BEFEBBING to my despatch of 17th June last,* I have the honour to
forward to your Lordship Addresses from the Council and Assembly of this province
to Her Majesty the Queen, on the subject of the annexation of .New Guinea. .
2. I have no reason to suppose the desire of the Legislature, that New Guinea and
its Dependencies should he taken under British protection, to be sufficiently jstrang to
induce them to provide for any portion of the expense of such a course.
I Lave, &c.
(Signed) A. MUSGBAVE.
* No. lE.


Inclosure 1 in No. 21.
To the Queen’s Most Excellent Maj esty..
Most gracious ■,Sovereign:
May it please your Majesty,
WE, your Majesty’s loyal and dutiful subjects, the members of the Legislative
council of the province of South Australia, in Parliament assembled, dutifully
approach your Majesty with a renewed assurance of our respect for your Majesty’s
person and government.
We desire to express to your Majesty our grateful thanks for the course pursued
by your Majesty’s Government in accepting the cession of the Eijian group of
islands.
We have also viewed with satisfaction the interest lately taken in the survey and
exploration of the coasts of New Guinea by your Majesty’s navy. Separated as the
Papuan Archipelago is by only a narrow sea from the northern Settlements of
Australia, and inhabited, as it is, by uncivilized races, it has appeared to us that those
islands must eventually be occupied by persons migrating from the adjacent Colonies
of Australasia.
We believe that very great benefits will result to the native island races, and that
further facilities will be afforded for the growth of trade between your Majesty’s
Australasian subjects, and the native inhabitants of these regions, "by taking the
island of New Guinea and the adjacent islands under your Majesty’s control and
government.
(Signed) WILLIAM MILNE, President.
(Signed) E. C. Singleton, Clerk of the Legislative Council.
Adelaide, South Australia, August 10, 1875.
Inclosure 2 in No. 21.
To the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign:
May it please your Majesty,
WE, your Majesty’s loyal and dutiful subjects, the Members of the House of
Assembly of the Province of South Australia, in Parliament assembled, humbly
approach your Majesty with assurances of our respect to your Majesty’s throne and
person.
We desire to express to your Majesty the satisfaction we have felt at the course
pursued by your Majesiy’s Government in accepting the cession of the Fijian group of
islands; and we would humbly express to your Majesty our opinion, that for the
protection of your Majesty’s subjects now resident in, or adjacent to, New Guinea, and
for the promotion of civilization among the native population, as well as for the safety
and well-being of the Australasian Colonies, and for the extension and consolidation of
Imperial interests, it is desirable that the whole of that island, and the adjacent
islands not at present occupied by any European Powers, should be taken possession of
by your Majesty, and brought under your Majesty’s protection.
We believe that the establishment of a foreign Power in islands so very near to
this continent, and which command our north-eastern seas, would be greatly detri-
mental both to British and Colonial interests, and would be an event winch future
generations of our countrymen would find cause greatly to deplore. If such Power
should become aggressive it would throw on the people of this continent a necessity for
arming to an extent from which at present they are happily exempt, and would place
them at a serious disadvantage.
(Signed) G. S. KINGSTON, Speaker,
32*', G 2


No. 22.
The New Guinea Colonizing Association to the Earl of Carnarvon.
The Netv Guinea Colonising Association, 30, Parliament Street,
My Lord, Westminster, S. W., October 9, 1875.
THE public press having called attention to this Association while only yet in its
infancy, we deem it advisable to inform your Lordship of our aim and object sooner than
we pthervvise should have done. From the inclosed documents vour Lordship will observe
that the primary object of the New Guinea Colonizing Association is to despatch an
Exploring and Colonizing Expedition to the Island of New Guinea under efficient officers
and strict discipline, similar to that enforced in Her Majesty’s Service.
The total disorganization of the Macleay Expedition clearly proves that discipline
must be maintained among any body of men attempting to settle in a new country, while
the numerous records of past failures, such as that of Christchurch in New Zealand, in
attempts at colonization warn us not to attempt to land any body of men on the Island of
New Guinea without efficient rules and regulations having been previously drawn up for
its guidance.
We propose that each individual member of the expeditionary force shall sign a
contract with this Association whereby he agrees to abide by 'he provisions contained in
“the Queen’s Regulations,” and we further purpose appointing certain officers to see
these contracts duly carried out. We purpose sending out about 200 men and 50 officers
in a vessel of 1,200 tons (now filling out at her owner’s expense), provisioned for eighteen
months. This force will be divided into ei'iht pioneer companies of 25 men, to each of
which 4 officers will be attached, viz., 1 captain and 3 lieutenants; chaplains, medical and
scientific men, will form the remainder of the force.
We hope that, after effecting a landing, peaceable relations will be opened up with
the natives of New Guinea, and that a commerce will ensue therefrom to the benefit not
only of the Colony but of this country; and that time arrives we purpose waiting
upon your Lordship and hope to be in a position to request that you will be pleased to
move Her Majesty’s Government to annex an orderly and self-sustaining community of
British subjects.
We are aware that a New Guinea Company has been registered by a firm having
offices at 11, Queen Victoria Street, E.C., at the instigation of Messrs. S. W. Silver and
Co., at whose offices the New Guinea Company has been installed ; and from an interview
Lieutenant R. H. Armit, R.N., recently had with Mr. S. W. Silver, we are informed that
the promoters of that Company are endeavouring to obtain the immediate annexation of
the Island of New Guinea to the dominions of the British Crown, not by founding a penal
settlerhent, but by erecting a fort and immuring a body of men within its walls.
Such a proceeding must needs be costly, and as our expedition will, if successful,
answer all purposes, and save the Government all expenses, we venture to tnpe that it
Will meet with favourable consideration at your Lordship’s hands, and that we shall obtain
such moral support as you may deem expedient to afford to us.
The great question is as to how discipline can be legally enforced by the gentlemen
called officers acting as the servants of this Association ?
Under existing circumstances these officers will have to see that the men perform
their work as servants of this Association, and it is evident that without the moral support
of Her Majesty’s Government success or failure must depend on the good feeling which
will exist between officers and men.
It would, However, be most desirable to have a more definite authority than “good-
feeling ” legally recognized, and we therefore beg to submit the following proposals for
yodr Lordship’s consideration :
■ ; 1. That the expeditionary force to be enrolled under the Volunteer Act, and be styled
“ The Royal New Guinea Volunteers.”
2. That 1 the officers hold commissions as volunteer officers.
3. That the three senior officers, the chaplains, and medical men be appointed
Justices of the Peace for the Island of New Guinea, subject to the jurisdiction of, say, the
Government of the Fiji Islands.
4. That Her Majesty’s Government be indemnified against all liabilities of pecuniary
nature from having made the above appointments.
Should your Lordship consider that these proposals could be carried out without any
expense being incurred by Her Majesty's Government, we humbly beg that you will grant
this Association your Lordship’s valuable support to that extent.
In conclusion, we beg to call your lordship’s attention to the fact that, should the


foregoing proposals be adopted by Her Majesty’s Government, a bench of Magistrates will
exist in New Guinea from the day that the expeditionary force lands in that island and
that these Magistrates, bHng men of standing, experience, and resprnsibility, will, be
enabled to protect all classes and to legally enforce the due maintenance of Jaw and order
throughout the occupied districts, and to pievent the occurrence of such scandals being
perpetrated under tie British flag as came lo light in the Fiji Islands prior to,Her Majesty’s
Government’s annexation of those islands, which annexation was only accomplished at
great expense to the Imperial Exchequer.
We have, &c.
(Signed) EDWARD SCHUBERT,
Secretary pro tern.
Inclosure 1 in No. 22.
The New Guinea Colonizing Association.
Ihoposed Rules and Regulations for the Guidance of the Expeditionary Force, to be discussed
at the first General Meeting of Subscribers.
Rules regarding Discipline.
THIS Association is founded to despatch an Exploring and Colonizing Expedition to
the Island of New Guinea, on the following basis : .
I. The Leader of the Expedition to be Lieutenant 11. H. Armit, R.N., who will Lave
the chief command, and be the representative of the Association in the Island of New
Guinea.
11. The Navigating Lieutenant of the steamer to he
111. The Captain and Adjutant of the Expedition to be Lieutenant J. E. Armit, R.M.L.1.,
and to be second in command.
IV. The Lieutenants of the Expedition, to rank in seniority as per their present order,
to be
Y. The Secretary and Paymaster of the Expedition to be Harrington Edgar O’Reilly,
Esquire. The Assistant Paymaster to be
VI. The subordinate officers of the Expedition will be chosen by its leader, at his
discretion, from amongst the expeditionary force under his command.
YII. The expeditionary force to consist of 200 volunteers, in addition to its officers as
above enumerated.
VIII. The volunteers will be enrolled after having passed a thorough ,medical
examination, and the Commander of the Expedition will hold a general, inspection, at
which he will select the men who will form part, of the expeditionary force.
IX. All officers and men thus selected will be required to enter, into a. contract
whereby they agree to submit to the discipline which is carried out on board Her Majesty's
ships, and to be at all times amenable to the provisions of the Naval Discipline Act, and
the Queen’s Regulations and Admiralty Instructions for the Navy when on board ship, and
to the provisions of the Mutiny Act and Queen’s Regulations when on land; and this
contract shall hold good until such time as Her Majesty’s Government shall declare, the
Island of New Guine.i, or any portion of the said island, occupied by the expeditionary
force of the New Guinea Colonizing Association, annexed to the dominions of the British
Crown, and shall have appointed a regularly constituted Government for the said annexed
territory or territories.
. X. The expeditionary force sent out by this Association will receive no pay, but each
man will receive a land-order for four square miles, to be dealt with as hereinafter
mentioned. Each man will receive an outfit and daily rations. ;
XI. Until such time as a definite form of Government shall be,established in the
Colony by Her Majesty’s Government, each volunteer shall be under the same rules and
regulations with regard to his outfit or kit as are at present enforced in Her Majesty’s
forces.
XII. The crew of the steamer belonging to the Association shall be under the
command of the Leader of the Expedition, and will be subject to the Naval Discipline Act.
XIII. The crew of the steamer will receive the same rate of pay as is at present in
force in Her Majesty’s service, and in addition thereto each able seaman will be entitled to
a land-grant of 80 acres, each petty officer to a land-grant of 160 acres, and each warrant


officer to a land-grant of 320 acres, which they shall be at liberty to take up and utilise,
eithpp by settling on the same themselves, or disposing of the same by sale to any
individual other than a member of the expeditionary force, at the expiration of four years
from the date of the Expedition landing in New Guinea.
XIV. The crew of the steamer, when required to do so, to act as the police of the
Colonv, as also its revenue officers.
XV. Every member of the Expedition to asree by deed to abide by the foregoing
regulations, or any alterations thereof as may from time to time be made by the Executive
Council of the Association.
Plan of Operations.
I. The leader of the Expedition, having chosen an advantageous spot at which to
establish a settlement, will proceed to disembark fatigue parties, if necessary, to clear a
sufficient surface of land on which to establish a Colony, the fatigue parties returning
each day on board the steamer during the noonday heat of the sun and daring the night.
The land having been cleared, the leader of the Expedition will proceed to erect
dwellings, and to protect the same by such fortifications as, in his opinion, may he
necessary, and a store will he immediately opened with a view to inducing tiie natives to
trade, as also to offer their services as labourers in exchange for such articles of barter as
they may covet.
11. A church will be erected, and by their example, the Expedition will teach the
natives to observe the Sabbath, which day will at all times be observed in a Christianlike
manner.
111. Having established a settlement as hereinbefore laid down, the leader of the
Expedition will proceed to dispose of the force in the following manner:—
A detachment of the force, accompanied, if possible, by natives, will proceed to
explore and survey the interior of the island, and in this manner open up friendly inter-
course with the native villages therein situated. The remainder of the Expedition will be
daily employed clearing the hind around the settlement, and erecting such machinery as
shall have been sent nut.
The timber collected by this means will be prepared for export, and as teak abounds
on the island, will form a most valuable source of revenue to the Colony.
Sufficient land will he immediately placed under cultivation to ensure a plentiful
harvest, and thus render the Colony self-supporting.
When sufficient land has been cleared for this purpose fresh land will be cleared to
the extent of five acres per man of the Expedition, and the said cleared land will be allotted
amongst the men forming the Expedition.
A house will he erected on every twenty-acre plot, and by this means there will be
four men in each house, and all houses will be within supporting distance of each other.
In the case of married men additional houses will lie erected.
Every precaution will be taken to ensure perfect security to the community by means
of a properly organised system of outpost duty, lor which suitable block-houses will be
erected.
IV. ft is estimated that in carrying out the foregoing scheme the best part of a year
will he construed, and therefore the Expedition will have to he provisioned for at least a
period of eighteen months, the greater portion of which wi'l he taken out in the steamer.
The remainder, together with additional stores and the wives and families of the married
men, will leave England in a sailing vessel within six months of the departure of the
Expedition, on the receipt of telegraphic communications from the Colony to that effect.
V. Pending the arrival of a sailing-vessel, the steamer belonging to the Colony
vvil' be utilized in trading as mav be required, with the Australian Colonies, or with
China, with a view to obtaining Chinese labour, tkc., also in surveying the adjacent coasts
of the Colony.
VI. On the. arrival of one or more sailing-vessels, the timber and other products of
the Colony will be shipped for the English or other markets.
VII. The various sum- obtained hy the sale of these cargoes will pass into the
hands of the New Guinea Colonizing Association, and will be dealt with in the following
manner: —
(a ) Interest at the rate of per cent, will be paid to its subscribers.
{b.) One-hr.lf of the balance (if any) vvili then be applied to repaying the subscribers
their subscriptions in full. The remaining half will be remitted to the
Colonists, either in goods or cash, or in both, as they may elect.


(p.) The value thus remitted to the Colony will be equitably divided amongst
the Colonists, according to the time each man has made from the of
landing.
(d.) After the subscribers to this expedition have been repaid their subscriptions in
full, they will retain their original land grant, and shall be entitled to deal
with same as they may think fit.
VIII. The Leader of the Expedition to cause a complete survey of the island to he
made under his immediate supervision, and to remit his plans from time to time, as the
work progresses, to the head office of the Association.
IX. In consideration of the services to be rendered by the officers of the expedition,
they will he remunerated in land grants of five square miles each, and shall not thereby
be debarred from purchasing additional land from the Association, or from Govern-
ment, or from leasing same on the terms in force in the Australian Colony of New South
Wales.
Selection of Land.
After a survey, extending over an area of 1,000 square miles, has been completed
sufficiently to enable tlm Leader of the Expedition to divide the same into lots, the selection
of land will be made in the following manner:—
Ist. The cleared land around the township will belong to the subscribers of the
Association, and will be divided amongst them in such a manner as they shall
decide on.
2nd. The Leader of the Expedition, acting in conjunction with the clergymen, medical
men, and officers of the expedition, will apportion the land amongst the men, the officers,
according to their seniority, having the priority of choice. Non-executive officers to rank,
as is the custom in Her Majesty’s service, as regards their seniority,
3rd. The selection of land herein referred to only refers to uncleared land.
4th. Each member of the expedition shall, however, in addition to his allotment of
uncleared land, be entitled to a town lot of cleared land, as hereinafter mentioned, viz.:—
(a.) The Leader of the Expedition, as also its officers and men, shall be entitled to
the ground their respective habitations stand upon, together with the,
surrounding land they have themselves fenced in, not exceeding twenty acres
in the case of officers, nor five acres in the case of men.
(i b .) The Leader of the Expedition to have the right of deciding all claims or disputes*
and, when necessary, he is to summon the clergymen and medical men of
the expedition together, and with them form a Court of Arbitration on any
disputes that may arise between any of the colonists. The decision of such
Court to be at all times final.
Provision aqainsi Non-Success.
J. In the event of the expedition proving a failure, a general meeting of the officers,
clergymen, and medical men belonging to the expedition will be assembled on the Leader of
the Expedition receiving a request to that effect from a deputation appointed from amongst
the men to wait upon him. Should this general meeting decide that the island must be
abandoned, then in that case every .member of the Expedition shall be entitled to a free
passage to England.
11. In the event of sickness, and on presentation of a medical certificate invaliding its
holder to England, the invalid shall he entitled to a free passage home. ’ ■
111. The regulations regarding passages shall be the same as those in operation amongst
Hex Majesty’s forces.
IV. The steamer which takes the Expedition out shall remain attached to the Colony,'
and be under the immediate command of the Leader of the Expedition, so that means of
communication with other countries shall at all times be at hand.


Name.
Rank or Rating.
Consideration which I agree to accept
in return for my services, ns laid down in
the foregoing Rules and Regulations to
We, the Undersigned, jointly and severally agree to abide by the provisions contained in
the foregoing Rules and Regulations, for the guidance of the New Guinea Colonizing
and Exploring Expedition. We also agree to give our cordial support to the Com-
mander and other officers of the Expedition, and to maintain due order and discipline
throughout the expeditionary force.
Inclosure 2 in No. 22.
The New Guinea Colonising Association,
President.
Vice-President.
Executive Council of Directors.
A DEPUTATION, headed by his Grace the Duke of Manchester, Lord Stanley of
Alderley, Sir Daniel Cooper, Mr. McArthur, M.P., the Hon. Arthur Kinnaird, M.P.,
James Youl, Esq., C.M.G., Sir Charles Nicholson, and several other members of the
Royal Colonial Institute, accompanied by Mr. Tidman, the Secretary of the Eastern and
Australian Mail Steam Company, Mr. Torrens, M.P., and many other gentlemen well
known as interested in the Colonies, recently waited on the Earl of Carnarvon to impress
his Lordship with the necessity of at once annexing the eastern division of the fertile island
of New Guinea to the dominions of the British Crown, not only on political but also on
humanitarian grounds.
Since then the Australian Colonies have unanimously passed resolutions praying that
the Imperial Government should annex this valuable island.
The reply given by Lord Carnarvon to the deputation enables it to be assumed that
the Imperial Government does not consider the time to have arrived for any direct action
on its part in the matter, since private enterprise has not as yet been directed in this channel,
and no single white British subject inhabits the island.
The Australian Colonies have made a step in this, direction, and Mr, Macleay, the
well-known member of the Legislative Council of New South Wales, accompanied by
Commander Onslow, R.N., for many years First Lieutenant of Her Majesty’s ship
“ Herald,” on the Australian station, have started from Sydney at the head of a small
exploring expedition in the barque “Chevert,” fitted out at the expense of Mr. Macleay.
This may lead to successive expeditions, by which New Guinea may become colonized,
after the manner in which the Fiji Islands recently were, by a host of straggling adven-
turers, who, to make their own fortunes, would not scruple at oppressing the natives, nor
at subjecting them at times to the most revolting cruelties. In the interest of Christianity
and civilization it is, therefore, deemed expedient to at once organize a well-equipped
colonizing expedition, under the command of efficient and energetic officers, with a view to
establishing an English colony in the island.
Expeditions of a similar nature are at the present moment fitting out both in
Germany and France, with a view to founding colonies in the East Indian Archipelago,
and it is therefore incumbent on this nation to prevent herself being forestalled and sup-
planted in regions where, up to this time, her flag has been supreme.
The Indian Peninsula proved a source of immense wealth to the old East India
Company, and the territories of the Hudson’s Bay Company are now paying its share-
holders good dividends. The soil of New Guinea, according to all accounts, is more
fertile than is that of either India or Canada, while of its mineral wealth nothing is known.
The island, however, belongs to that group in which tin abounds, as it is from this very


part of the globe, that the Billeton and the Banca tin are derived. There is>
every probability of New Guinea proving a valuable acquisition to its proprietors;. but, far
above the consideration of gain is that of humanity, and from a humanitarian; point of
view this Association will be doing an inestimable amount of good if, by its efforts* the
savages of New Guinea are converted from their present state of cannibalism to one of
Christianity. The intestine wars of these savages will then be put an end to, and the
system of slavery which results from this cause will then be abolished. Under such
circumstances it is considered that much good will result from the formation of this Asso-
ciation, even though it does not pay a dividend to its shareholders for some years through
the unforeseen expenses it may have to incur in efficiently developing and carrying out its
objects, and it therefore only appeals to the wealthy for support, and at the outset warns
those who cannot afford to wait for a return from their outlay not to venture to invest in
its land orders. There is no doubt that every new port opened is a benefit to the mercan-
tile world, and it is therefore to those who will directly benefit by the operations of this
A ssociation, as also to the great and good of the land, that this Association appeals for
support.
The services of Lieutenant Robert H. Armit,R.N., late Admiralty Assistant-Surveyor,
formerly employed on the Australian Hydrographic Surveys, having been secured for the
purpose of leading an exploring and colonizing expedition into the interior of New Guinea,
it is proposed to form The New Guinea Colonizing Association, with a view to providing
the necessary funds required to equip the expedition, by the issue of land grants in return
for subscriptions.
It is proposed to form an Executive Council to draw up laws to govern and direct the
administration of the new colony after it has been established, the members of this
Executive Council to be elected from amongst the subscribers to this expedition, and to
become the Directors of the New Guinea Colonizing Association. The Directors, after
election, to have the sole control of the fitting out of the expedition, and of the necessary
expenditure incidental thereto.
Those noblemen, gentlemen, and merchants who intend to assist in the formation of
this Association, are hereby informed that no preliminary expenses have been incurred
beyond the printing of this circular, and that no liabilities will be incurred until after the
Executive Council has been elected by the subscribers at a general meeting, to.be hereafter
called, as soon as it has been ascertained what amount of support this Association is likely
to receive. Consequently, there is no promotion money to be paid to anyone.
The primary objects of this expedition would be as follows
1. To choose some advantageous harbour within which to effect a landing; not near
low, swampy ground, but in the immediate vicinity of high land, where good water could
be easily procured.
2. To erect a fortified camp in a salubrious situation.
3. To disembark all stores and erect storehouses for trading purposes, at which the
natives could barter their produce for the usual articles of trade, such as hatchets, knives,
hoop-iron, beads, cloth, &c.
4. To purchase land from the natives on account of this Association, and to divide
the same amongst the Colonists, under certain terms, rules, and regulations, to be agreed
upon and duly drawn up by the Executive Council of Directors of this Association.
5. To clear and cultivate the said land.
6. To plant coffee, sugar-cane, and cotton; as also cereals, &c., from seed supplied
to the Colonists by this Association.
7. To make roads and construct jetties.
8. One of the first acts of the expedition will be to erect a church, which it is
intended to send out in frame, ready for immediate erection; together with a few
smaller huts for the accommodation of the Colonists, until such time as timber has been
procured in sufficient quantities, and sawn into planks, to enable each man to erect his
own dwelling; one or more portable steam-engines and saw-benches will be sent out with
the expedition for this purpose.
9. Only such volunteers will be accepted for this expedition who desire and agree to
become resident Colonists, and they will receive no pay. Rations, however, will be
served out to every man by the Leader of the Expedition as long as, in his opinion, it may
be necessary to do so. It is considered that 200 volunteers will suffice in the first
instance.
10. The only paid servants of the Association will be the crew of the steamer it is
intended to attach to this expedition, under the command of its leader, that he may at all
times have an efficient force of disciplined men at his disposal, not only for the protection
of the whole community, but also for the due maintenance of order in the Colony itself.
(124) H


11. One or more clergymen and medical men will be attached to this expedition, and
it is not doubted but that many will be found to volunteer for the service.
12. The funds necessary to effectually carry out this programme will be raised by
subscription, land orders for the amount subscribed being issued to each subscriber, so
that no liability can be incurred by any member of the Association, who becomes simply
a landowner.
13. The moneys thus received will be vested in trustees, and no sums will be called
up until the said trustees have been nominated.
14. The subscriptions to be for 20Z., or multiples thereof.
15. For each 20Z. subscribed a land order for eighty acres, and one town block of not
less than half an acre will be allotted.
16. The moneys subscribed will be paid over in full to some bank to the credit of the
trustees.
17. The sum of £ to be paid to the Secretary of State (if required) as a guarantee
towards the cost of Government for, say, five years.
18. The sum not paid to the Secretary of State will be expended in trade, commerce,
sending out emigrants, erecting buildings, and so forth, as may be required.
19. The produce of the colony will be consigned to the agents of the Association at
the various ports throughout the world, and the amount realized thereon will be placed to
the credit of the respective shippers, after deducting expenses and the usual commissions
for selling, guarantee against bad debts, &c,
20. This Commission will form one of the sources of revenue of this Association,
and it will furthermore be enriched by the sale of lands, &c., to the present and any future
colonists it may send out.
The island of New Guinea forms one of that fertile group of islands known as the
Islands of the Indian Archipelago, amongst which are the celebrated islands of Java,
Sumatra, Borneo, the Celebes, and Timor, all of which have turned out mines of untold
wealth to their possessors. Of the island of New Guinea little or nothing is known. In
size it is larger than England; owing to its high mountain ranges its temperature varies
with the altitude of the land from the torrid heat of the coast to the Arctic cold of its
frozen snow-clad peaks.
From the various hydrographic expeditions which from time to time have visited the
coast of New Guinea, and of which Lieutenant Armit formed part during 1866-1869, the
following details have been collected, which tend to prove that the island is one of the
most fertile of the globe.
Yule Island, in the Gulf of Papua, recently visited by Her Majesty’s ship “Basilisk,”
was found to be numerously inhabited by a race of natives of a dark copper colour, quite a
different race from the black Papuan.
The natives of this island were very friendly, and crowded oil board the “ Basilisk.”
They also allowed the villages to be visited. Their weapons consist of bows and arrows,
spears and clubs.
There was no apparent trace of these natives having been before visited by white Wen,
as they were totally ignorant of the use of iron or of firearms, and preferred the polished
Torres Strait pearl shell to any other article of barter. The villages were found to be
in all cases situated at only a short distance from the beach, but always out of sight
in the bush. The plantations were found to be very extensive in this island, neatly
fenced in, and producing an abundant supply of yams, bananas, sweet potatoes, sugar
cane, &c.
Yule Island lies across the entrance of Hall Sound, into which the Hilda and Ethel
Rivers empty themselves, and has an altitude of 534 feet above the level of the sea.
Hall Sound affords good anchorage in 13 fathoms of water, and there is no doubt but
that a settlement might easily be effected on this island, and its natives turned to good
account in establishing an intercourse with those of the main land, so as to remove, as far
as ‘possible, all obstacles which they might throw in the way of a settlement being estab-
lished amongst them. South-east of Yule Island lies Round Head, distant about 100
miles. This headland rises abruptly from the sea, and is about 300 feet in height. It is
surrounded by a reef, which forms a natural breakwater enclosing a good anchorage.
Round Head is directly connected by a sloping chain of hills with Mount Astfobate, 3,800
feet high, and about 25 miles distant in a northerly direction. This mountain is hgain
connected with Mount Owen Stanley, 45 miles further north. Mount Owen Stanley is a
peak in the central range of the main island of New Guinea, whose spurs inclose lovely
valleys and rich fertile plateaux. To the east of Mount Owen Stanley, and at the same
distance off on the northern coast as is kound Head on the southern, lies the new Gbschen
Channel, discovered by Captain Moresby, R.N., in Her Majesty’s ship “ Basilisk.”


The natives of this south-eastern portion of New Guinea and the adjacent islands in
appearance are copper-coloured, averaging 5 feet 3 inches in height, of a light, active build,
often with good features,Which, however, they paint in fantastic colours, and the men’s
teeth and mouths are much disfigured by the constant chewing of the betel-nut, which
turns these parts to a dirty red hue. The hair is usually worn frizzled out into a huge
mop, and is ornamented with feathers. The women’s hair is invariably cut short. Both
sexes go about almost naked. Their weapons appear to be wooden spears and swords,
clubs, slings, and stone hatchets. Great caution is requisite in dealing with these people,
as they are much inclined to pilfer. In some places they appear to be trustworthy and
friendly, but it is at all times necessary for a white man to go about armed, and at no time
by himself, but in parties of at least five or six.
Human jaw and spinal bones are worn by these natives as ornaments, and they appear
to take pleasure in making it understood that they had eaten the original owners of the
bones. These relics, however, # as well as the skulls and bones seen in the villages by the
officers of Her Majesty’s ship “Basilisk,” appeared to be of ancient date.
The houses in the villages on the northern coast are built after the Malay fashion, on
poles raised 5 or 6 feet from the ground, and consist of one large apartment, with peaked
gable-ends, and a saddle roof. Dogs, cats, and pigs are kept, also tame cassowaries, birds
of various kinds, and a small species of opossum bear as pets. Their plantations are very
extensive, and carefully terraced on the mountain sides. Abundance of yams of the finest
quality, taro-root, bananas, sugar-cane, apples, Indian corn, and other tropical fruits in great
abundance and variety, are everywhere to be found. Of the mineral wealth of New Guinea
little is known, but gold, tin, and iron are known to exist—gold utensils having at various
times been found in earlier days.
All the villages have a vast number of cocoa-nuts hung on poles, on trees, and on
every other available place, probably as a propitiatory offering. No other sign of religious
worship was seen amongst them. Yoco, or Yoko, is the name they give to the sun, as
also to fire, and they never travel about at night without a fire-brand to frighten any evil
spirits. Their attacks on hostile camps are ever made either at sunrise or sunset.
The fishing-nets of the New Guinea natives are precisely similar in appearance to an
English seine, with shell sinkers and light wood floats, and vary in length from 1 to 20
fathoms. The material from which these are made is spun by the women from the fibre of
a small nettle-like plant, very much similar to the Indian Rhea grass, and possesses the
same strength.
Taking every known circumstance into consideration, and remembering that a line of
mail-steamers now runs regularly along the coast of this fine island, it does indeed seem
strange that no one has as yet attempted to establish a colony in one or another of the fine
harbours which exist along the shores of New Guinea.
Any further information may be obtained of—
JOHN GUTHRIE MURRAY, Esq., 117 and 118 Leadenhall Street, E.C.,
at the Offices of the Anglo-Australasian,
E. SCHUBERT, Esq., 32, St. Swithin’s Lane, E.C., Secs. (pro tem .); or of
R. H. ARMIT, Lieutenant, R.N., at the Offices of the Association,
30, Parliament Street, Westminster.
It being desired to ascertain what amount of support this undertaking will receive, please fill in and return this Form to the Secretary.
Approving of the proposal to colonise and annex the Eastern Division of the Island
of New Guinea, I hereby agree to subscribe the sum of £ : : towards defraying
the expenses of the Exploring and Colonizing Expedition it is intended to dispatch, under
the command of Lieutenant R. 11. Armit, R.N., to that Island, provided that 1 am satisfied
with the formation of the Executive Council of Directors ivhen elected.
And I further consent to become one of the members of the Executive Council it isl
proposed to form, whereby to govern and direct the movements of the Expedition from
time to time as may be deemed necessary, should I be elected by the remaining f
subscribers.*
J
Name in full
Address
Date
Usual Signature
* Should you not desire to take an active part in the management of this undertaking erase these lines.
(124) H 2


No. 23.
Governor Sir H. Robinson, G.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received October 16.)
(Extract.) Government House, Sydney, August 27, 1875.
MINISTERS laid upon tlie table of both Houses before tbe recess tbeir Minute
advocating tbe annexation by tlie Imperial Government of New Guinea and other
islands in tbe South Pacific. Tbe paper has been commented upon unfavourably
in two leading articles in tbe “ Sydney Morning Herald,” which I have extracted and
annex, in case your Lordship should care to peruse them. I also forward herewith
the usual news summary published this morning for transmission to Europe by the San
Erancisco mail, which leaves this to-morrow.
■■ »
Inclosure 1 in No. 23.
Extract from the “ Sydney Morning Herald ” of August 14, 1875.
EARL CARNARVON, in writing on the subject of New Guinea, expressed his
opinion that the annexation of that island was a matter more of Australian than of
Imperial interest, but he desired to know more of the Colonial opinion on the subject.
Mr. Robertson, writing as Premier of New South Wales, has indited a minute on
the subject, in which it is to be presumed, the Cabinet concur. In such a minute we
naturally look for one of two things, either an admission of the correctness of Earl
Carnarvon’s view, and the expression of a willingness on the part of the Colonial
Government to contribute to any inevitable expenses according to some fair estimate
of tne proportion of the Australian interest in the matter; or some proof that Earl
Carnarvon was wrong, and that the annexation was more an Imperial than an
Australian affair. The former course was that adopted by the late Government with
respect to Eiji. Mr. Parkes frankly admitted the Australian interest in the matter,
and intimated the readiness of his own Government to co-operate financially. The
principal fault to be found with him was that he made that half promise without
having in any way sounded Parliament on the subject; the consequence of which was
that in England the promise was considered to have more weight than it really
possessed, and an erroneous impression was created in England as to the willingness
of the Colonies to bear a part of the burden. The correction of that false impression
has done us more damage than the original supposition did us good. We received a
host of compliments for our public spirit and our Imperial sympathies which we did
not deserve, and those who commended us having had to feel uncomfortably foolish
in finding that the wish had been father to the thought, will be more sceptical and
cautious in the future.
Mr. Robertson has not sounded Parliament on the subject of contributing towards
the cost of New Guinea, and therefore fihe same mistake will not arise in this case.
He takes a different ground, and says, “ The question is wholly an Imperial one, and
it seems to us to regard it in any other light would neither conduce to the satisfaction
of the Colonies nor to the dignity of the Empire.”
Nothing can be more explicit than this, and Earl Carnarvon will distinctly
understand that New South Wales, as guided by its present Premier, repudiates
altogether any special interest in the matter, and certainly any special obligation to
to bear a portion of its cost. At the same time the minute is equally distinct in
recommending the annexation, and we might therefore look in it for some proof that
could rationally satisfy British people that the Imperial interest in the matter was
sufficient to overcome economical considerations, and the unwillingness of the Execu-
tive to assume fresh and unknown responsibilities.
Unfortunately we do not find anything in the minute likely to be accepted in
England as such a demonstration, and we fear that after it is reprinted in the mother-
country it will not add much to the estimate formed of our wisdom or our fairness, cr
our public spirit.
Mr. Robertson begins by referring to “ the almost universal interest on the
subject which exists in this Colony and in the adjoining Colony of Victoria,” and
adds, “we are no less impressed with a sense of the incalculable importance of the
question from the Imperial point of view.” But is not the universal interest on the
subject in the Colony contrasted, as it must be, with the very slender interest which
exists in England, some kind of a presumption that the matter affects the Colony


more than it does the mother-country ? And is it not the business of our Prime
Minister, when engaged in denying such a conclusion, to show some reason for his
opinion ?
He recites what was done in 1867 by the New Guinea Company, and also the
failure of the expedition which set out in the ill-fated “ Maria.” He refers to
Mr. Macleay’s scientific expedition, and to the resolutions passed at a public meeting
in Sydney, and to the establishment by Queensland of the Torres Straits mail service.
But this narrative, though it shows a certain amount of Colonial interest in the matter,
can hardly be said to prove an equal amount of Imperial interest; and to show that
was the principal point for which alone it was much worth while to write the memo-
randum. He goes on to say, “ that it would be desirable in the highest interest of
civilization ” that Great Britain should annex a certain portion of Polynesia which he
describes, winding up the description by saying “ to all of which the traffic from the
port of Sydney extends.” That undoubtedly shows the interest of the port of Sydney
in the matter, but the principal task devolving on him was to show that the Imperial
interest was as great as the Sydney interest.
He then goes on to add that English supremacy over the area indicated would
conduce much to the tranquillity and peace of these Australian Colonies, and that
occupation of large islands by foreign Governments would probably in time of war be
fatal to our free navigation of the sea which adjoins our territory. It undoubtedly
would, and, so long as Australia is part of the Empire, whatever injures Australia is
pro tanto an injury to the rest of the Empire; but when we are trying to persuade
the British Government to bear the whole expense of relieving Australia from the risk
of a hostile interference with the navigation along its coast, we are bound to show
that the matter is so little Colonial, and so extremely Imperial, that the Colony
should bear none of the expense, and the Imperial Treasury should bear the whole.
He then goes on with a much better argument to show that the police of the
Polynesian seas would be better kept by Great Britain if it extended its dominion. In
this argument there is a great deal of force, although to press it to its conclusions would
make it difficult to limit occupation. But undoubtedly Great Britain acting under the
impulse of philanthropic motives has undertaken to put down slavery, not only within
its own dominions, but by its own people everywhere, and has found itself, in
consequence of this policy, drifting more and more into the necessity of establishing
protectorates or actual occupations where no settled and responsible Governments
exist.
There is great truth, also, in the paragraph which expresses the difficulty there
would be in any one Australian Colony, or in any combination of Australian Colonies,
undertaking the duties of sovereignty in the Southern Seas. To be done satisfactorily,
the matter must be done by the Imperial Government, although it is not likely to be
done economically if the extravagant precedent set in the case of Eiji is to be followed.
But though we look to any annexation as involving the necessity of Imperial action
and Imperial responsibility, we cannot see why the Colonies should so ostentatiously
disown all financial responsibility towards a matter which so closely concerns them.
Even as a part of the Empire we are interested in it, and ought, even on that ground
only, not to shirk our fair share of the responsibility. But it is simply not true to say
that we have no special interest in the matter. We have a special interest—a greater
interest than any other portion of the Empire; and, though we may fairly call upon
the Imperial Government to recognize the fact that there are no inconsiderable Imperial
interests involved, we simply take a cowardly as well as a false position by pretending
to say that the matter has so little special interest for us that it is consistent with
equity that we should be let off without any share in the responsibility. We should have
stood better in the eyes of the mother-country if we had stated the honest truth—if
we said that the proposed annexation was intimately connected with the increase of
our commerce and with the defence of our coast in time of war, and if we had shown
a readiness to go into any proposals not inconsistent with our existing self-government
to unite with the mother-country in carrying the scheme out. Such a proposal would
have been really worthy of a Colonial Government, and would have done more prac-
tically to bring about the consolidation of the British Empire than any number of
pamphlets or speeches on the subject. Nothing is more likely to create a prejudice in
England against the annexation than the cool disclaimer of special interest which this
Minute embodies.


Inclosure 2 in No. 23.
Extract from the “Sydney Morning Herald ” of August 19, 1875.
UNDER the present Constitution of the Empire, the position assumed by
Mr. Robertson in his minute on the annexation of New Guinea is, as we have already
pointed out, untenable. “ The interests of the British people resident in these Austra-
lian colonies are precisely identical with those of their fellow citizens in England, and
in any recommendations which we presume to offer, my colleagues and myself desire
it to be explicitly understood that we are speaking not as Australian colonists, hut as
British citizens.” But it was precisely as Australian colonists that Earl Carnarvon
had asked us to speak. Ignoring this altogether, Mr. Robertson, in his assumed
character of British citizen, urges on the Colonial Office the importance of annexing
all the best of Polynesia, but at the same time indicates his belief that these colonies
would not be “ able or disposed to bear the necessary expenditure.” Did it never
occur to him that a British citizen has certain duties as well as privileges, not the
least of which is the duty of paying taxes, and we are not likely to establish our claim
to the one by repudiating the other. The real issue turns upon a point which the
minute of our Cabinet does not even notice. It is simply this. The people of these
colonies are not prepared to pay taxes in the expenditure of which they have no voice.
It has seemed good in the eyes of British statesmanship, which has acted of late years
rather in the spirit of disintegration than in the spirit of consolidation, to place the
management of our own affairs entirely in our own hands, simply reserving to the
Crown the right of appointing a Governor, and the right of veto on certain acts of
Colonial Parliaments. This heavy burden our people hear as cheerfully as those in any
other part of the Empire. If the Polynesian Islands are annexed, for many years to
come they can be efficiently governed only by being made Crown Colonies. The
management of such colonies can vest in no other hands than those of the British
Parliament, in which we have no representation. The difficulty is how to reconcile
our being subject to taxation with the necessity of leaving the administration in the
hands of the Imperial authorities ; although, after all, the principle and the practice
were familiar during those days when we used to contribute to the support of an
English regiment over which we had no effective control. That is the question, how-
ever, which ought to have been discussed carefully with Earl Carnarvon; and it is just
the one point above all others which British statesmen will have to consider if they do
not mean to allow the colossal Empire of Victoria to suffer gradual disintegration.
The safety and prosperity of every part of that Empire are matters affecting the
welfare of the whole. It is for the sake of this safety and prosperity that New
Guinea and other islands are to be occupied, and therefore it is but just and fair that
the cost of it should fall upon all who reap the benefit, and not entirely upon the
inhabitants of the British Isles. But if an Imperial taxation be added to the local
burdens of each member of the Empire, there will have to be a representative body
competent to impose that taxation, and to control its expenditure. Canada has a
population of 4,000,000; Australia has 2,250,000. South Africa is being rapidly
settled, and in Central Africa settlements will soon he formed, and when formed will
probably grow with amazing rapidity, fostered by the vast and lucrative trade of the
interior. India, with her 240,000,000 of people, is being rapidly civilized, if not
Anglicised. These are interests which must before long be greater than those of the
32,000,000 in the Mother-country; and if it is desirable to have representative institu-
tions for each branch, equally desirable must it be to have a general and equitable
representation of the whole in some great British and Colonial Parliament, to form a
bond of perpetual amity and good-will. The time has not yet come for sucli a
consummation, but events are hastening it; and this question of New Guinea is one
of those opportunities for educating public opinion in this direction such as no prudent
and patriotic statesman should neglect. Had Mr. Robertson argued his case on this
ground, instead of placing the Colony before the British public in forma pauperis, he
would have secured for us as much respect as he has probably by this time exposed us
to ridicule.
The Cabinet Minute itself is supplemented by an elaborate series of tables
showing the progress of the Australian Colonies in the decade between 1864 and 1873
—which were also sent home. The Colonial Secretary makes no application of these
tables, bra concludes with a bare statement that his Cabinet bad caused them to be
prepared. But if they were worth preparing, they were also worth using in the
argument of the Minute. The inference intended to be drawn is evidently this :


that if Australia had progressed so rapidly in a decade uhddt British colonization,
Polynesia might he expected to recoup England for the expense of annexation by the
development of a lucrative trade. The strength of the case, in the view of the people
at home, will probably lie there—supposing annexation to he desirable on other and
general grounds. To do the right thing becomes easy when it can be shown to he as
profitable as it is proper. As Mr. Bobertson did not analyse these returns, we will do
it for him, and perhaps we shall find his facts susceptible of a much wider arid inore
varied application than he was aware of when he sent therii home.
His first return gives the increase, of the population during each year of tlie
decade for each of the seven Australian Colonies, with the omission of Western
Australia for several years and of Queensland for the last year, for it appears the
Government of New South Wales could not tell in May 1875, what the population of
the neighbouring Colory was in 1873. Now, if these returns are worth publishing,
it is also worth while to have them complete, and our authorities might do this with
very little trouble. The total population of Australasia in 1864 was about 1,500,000.
In 1873 it had risen to over 2,100,000 —an increase of over 41 per cent. But the
chief interest of this fact lies in the proportion of it contributed by each Colony.
Queensland stands at the head of the list, with an increase of 98 per cent. New
Zealand comes next, with a clear gain of 72 per cent. Then comes New South Wales
with ari increase of 42b per cent., South Australia with Victoria with 31|,
and Tasmania with per cent, increase respectively. We have therefore far
less to flatter ourselves upon in the rate at Avhich we are overtaking Victoria than
Qrieerisland and New Zealand have to boast of in the rate at which they are
overtaking us. Nor is it true that we are increasing more rapidly now than during
former years. The highest ratio of increase was for the year 1868, being 4 - 8 per cent,
upon the previous year; the lowest was for 1871, being only 3 - 2 per cent. The ratio
of increase was greater for the first half of the decade than for the last; and even for
1874, the best year in the last half, the ratio was less than for three of the years in
the first half. Do not these facts prove to demonstration that we cannot be gaining
at the expense of our neighbours to anything like the extent that is commonly
asserted.
Let ris now take the column in the Government paper which shows the number of
assisted immigrants from the United Kingdom. Here the returns are so defective as
to be almost worthless for the purpose of comparison. Lor the present we need only
note that the number assisted by this Colony was 3,977 in 1864, and bad dwindled down
to 140 in 1873. Yet, on the very same leaf which records this fact, Mr. Robertsori
says: “ The Australian Colonies themselves all requiring as they do, for the develop-
ment of their resources, the influx of abundant streams of immigration, would in the
beginning of the occupation of New Guinea and other islands suffer hy the withdrawal
of an active and intelligent population, which is always the first to embark in such
enterprises ; but they would be coritent to make this sacrifice in the confident hope
that in a few years, by the establishment of new commercial centres, trade would
increase, the general prosperity of the Colonies be augmented, and the Colonial Empire
of Great Britain would be enlarged and consolidated, and her beneficent rule extended
over all the waters of the Pacific.” What extraordinary generosity to offer to the
British Government such a sacrifice of our people for the glory arid greatness of the
Empire! How strongly it contrasts with Mr. Robertson’s parsimony in regard to
expense ! Not a penny of our money, my Lord, but as many of our “active and intelli-
gent population ”as the enterprise may demand. Such a sacrifice will have aU the
greater merit in the eyes of the British public when they see how thoroughly the
officiating high priest appreciates “ the influx of abundant streams of immigration.”
The present Colonial Secretary—as he often boasts—has held office in more
Governments, and for a longer term than any other man in the Colony, How comes it
that he has permitted these “ abundant streams of immigration” to dwindle down from
4,000 to the ridiculous figure of 140 during the last decade ? And not only that, but
during the last session he has refused to entertain a proposition for reviving them and
making them stiff more “ abundant.” During the whole ten years we have received
from home only 16,536 immigrants of all kinds, against 45,205 for Queensland, and
58,718 for New Zealand. And at the present time while we are quibbling about the
introduction Of a few hundreds per annum, the two younger Colonies between them
are likely to introduce not less than 40,000 during the current year. “Let them,”
say some of our legislators, “ they will only bring them out at their expense to
swell our population, by a migration across the border.” But the facts given above
respecting the comparative increase of the several populations show that this exodus


cannot be much in onr favour. And even if we should admit it, to the utmost
extent, what would it prove? Simply this, that immigration miglii I ' n a bad thing for
our neighbours, but not on that account a bad thing for us; for if wo ..re so prosperous
as to attract their people, it follows that we are in no danger of losing our own. “ Oh,
but you will swamp the labour market.” Not very likely with 140 immir. .. J ; per
annum; nor with 10,000 so long as labour is so scarce that Mr. Robertson’s
Government has been compelled to grant a year’s extension of time to the railway
contractors, because they have appealed in vain to all the Colonies for a sufficient
number of workmen. It is a scarcity of labour, not a surfeit that we have to fear;
and if we had 6,000,000 of people, instead of 600,000, our prosperity would be all
the greater and the more secure, as it would rest on a broader basis.
The paper proceeds to give the revenue, imports, and exports of the shipping of
the several Colonies for the decade. An examination of these we must reserve for a
future issue.
No. 24.
Colonial Office to Edward Schubert, Esq.
Sir, Downing Street, October 30, 1875.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 9th instant,* transmitting the prospectus of a proposed Association, to be styled “The
New Guinea Colonizing Association,” with a draft of proposed rules and regulations for
the guidance of an expeditionary force, and requesting that this project may receive the
moral support of Her Majesty’s Government, and such legal recognition as the promoters
conceive could be given to it by the enrolment of the expeditionary force under the
Volunteer Act and the appointment of certain members of it as Justices of the Peace for
the Island of New Guinea.
2. His Lordship has attentively examined the scheme laid before him by you, and
regrets that he is obliged to consider it one to which he can in no way give the approval
which you seek. Even if the information at present possessed by any persons in this
country were such as to afford any assurance, or even any confident expectation, that an
expedition such as is projected would not result in commercial failure, in loss of health
and life to its members, and in serious disturbances among the native tribes of the island
(the probability of any of which consequences would impose a heavy responsibility on a
Government which should lend it the weight of an official recommendation), it would be
Lord Carnarvon’s imperative duty to object very strongly to the leading features of the
proposal on public and constitutional grounds.
3. Even if New Guinea w'ere a part of the Queen’s dominions, it would be impossible
to entertain the suggestion that a number of persons, brought together by the love of
adventure or the desire of profit, should indiscriminately, and without a searching scrutiny
into the personal fitness of each, be enrolled or commissioned as members of a military
or §Mflsi-military force, whose services within this island could be accepted by, and whose
proceedings would be invested with the high sanction of. Her Majesty. For service in an
unknown country abounding, as far as has been ascertained, in the gravest physical
difficulties, and inhabited by a numerous, powerful, and warlike population, a force would-
need to be very differently constituted.
4. So, also, with regard to the appointment of magistrates, Her Majesty’s Government
could on no account accept as suitable persons to discharge the duties of magistrate in any
part of the Queen’s dominions, the unknown conditions of which demand tried experience
and special attainments, such persons as a Company might select as its leaders, chaplains,
or medical officers.
5. His Lordship directs me to add that he would be glad if, consistently with his
duty, he could conclude with this expression of his inability to give to the Association that
support and recognition which are desired, and leave the members of it to undertake, on
their own responsibility the risks of an enterprise which they appear to think likely to
prove remunerative. The position, however, in which Her Majesty’s Government now
stand with regard to New Guinea is not such as to leave them free to sanction, even
tacitly, the acquisition of land within the island by British subjects.
6. As you are no doubt aware, the Governments of the Australian Colonies have
addressed to Her Majesty’s Government strong and formal representations in favour of the
annexation of New Guinea by this country. Those representations are now being carefully
considered, and, pending such consideration, it is not open to any independent and
* No. 22.


unauthorised association of Englishmen to take possession of, or to purport to acquire from
the savages of the island, that land with respect to the acquisition of which on behalf of
her subjects generally the Queen is now being advised.
7. In the prospectus it is suggested that the Association should “ purchase land from
the natives,” but in the rules and regulations there is no mention of purchasp, the not
unreasonable inference from which seems to be that it is now proposed to take by force the
very large tracts of land required in order to make a grant of four (or in some cases five)
square miles to each person joining the expedition, There is no evidence whatever
respecting the power of the natives to enter into contracts which would be intelligible to
them or binding upon them, or of their willingness to allow private settlers to occupy their
country. But if there were no objections from the native point of view to so extensive an
appropriation of territory, it would be impossible that any such acquisitions, or ostensible
acquisitions, of land could be sanctioned and confirmed in the event of the territory here-
after becoming British. It is clear that, without the funds arising from the sale and lease
of lands, it would be impossible to provide for the Government of the country, and any
persons who may now settle in the country, knowing that Her Majesty’s Government is
considering the question of annexing it, must distinctly understand that no acquisitions of
land made previous to a decision on this subject, can be recognized to the prejudice of the
Crown.
8. With reference to the concluding paragraph of your letter, I am desired by Lord
Carnarvon to point out to you that although, as has already been observed, Her Majesty’s
Government could not permit the exercise of magisterial functions by persons connected
with the expedition, there exists, under the provisions of the Pacific Islanders Protection
Act 1875, a sufficient means of preventing and punishing abuses or outrages committed
by British subjects upon the natives of New Guinea.
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. R. MALCOLM.
No. 25.
The New Guinea Colonizing Association to the Earl of Carnarvon.
New Guinea Colonizing Association, 6, Westminster Chambers,
My Lord, Victoria Street, S.W, November 3, 1875.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s reply * to my
letter of the 9th ultimo, and I am now instructed to request your Lordship to allow me
to offer the following comments thereon, as it appears to the members of this Association
that their remarks, as contained in my letter of the 9th ultimo, regarding the object of
this Association, have been partly misunderstood.
1. The proposal that Her Majesty’s Government should lend its “moral support ” to
the New Guinea Exploring and Colonizing Expedition was made while labouring under
the belief that Her Majesty’s Government did not intend to take any immediate steps
towards annexing the Island of New Guinea to the dominions of the British Crown.
The support was, morever, asked for, not to impose a heavy responsibility on Her
Majesty’s Government, nor to throw upon it the responsibility of the acts of the expedition
against the natives of New Guinea, but, on the contrary, to enable the officers of this
Association to maintain order amongst the members of the expedition, and thus prevent
any act which might render it necessary to resort to hostilities against the natives, even in
self defence. In fact, it was desired that the expedition should have the means of
defending itself from itself.
2. From the information we have collected regarding the Island of New Guinea,
from both Dutch and English sources, we are satisfied that its climate, except on its
southern and south-western coasts, is most healthy, particularly so on its north-east coast.
The resources of the Island are also great, and well calculated to prove remunerative
if properly developed. The natives of New Guinea are also most friendly, except when
cause of offence is wilfully forced upon them, and, as this Association does not intend to
conquer by force of arms, but by means of pacific and conciliatory measures, in fact, by-
means of commerce, and the many advantages the natives will soon find are to be derived
therefrom, it is confidently expected that our expedition will prove successful.
3. Regarding the appointment of magistrates, we would humbly leave the choice of fit
and proper persons to your Lordship.
4. The antecedents of every officer of this Association will bear the strictest scrutiny,
and their personal fitness and past experience render them well qualified to fulfil the duties
they have voluntarily agreed to perform.
* No. 24.
(124) 1


5. As, however, your Lordship informs us that “the Governments of the Australian
Colonies have addressed to Her Majesty’s Government strong and formal representations
in favour of the annexation of New Guinea by this country, and, moreover, that those
representations are now being carefully considered with a view to the acquisition of the
island on behalf of Her Majesty’s subjects generally,” we feel confident that we can now
afford to dispense with the “moral support” for which we originally asked your Lordship,
as the act of annexation by Her Majesty’s Government once publicly enforced, will
necessarily carry with it all its many responsibilities, of which one will be to cause law
and order to be maintained throughout the land, to the great benefit of our expedition.
6. In our draft prospectus we state that we intend to “purchase land from the
natives,” but in the draft rules and regulations “ there is no mention of purchase,” as
your Lordship most justly remarks; but, as both the “prospectus” and “rules and
regulations ” have to be discussed at a public meeting before being adopted, we do hot
understand why your Lordship should consider that “ the not unreasonable inference from
which seems to be that it is now proposed to take by force the very large tracts of land
required in order to make a grant of four (or in some cases five) square miles to each
person forming the expeditionthe more so that one paragraph of our prospectus
clearly states as follows, viz., “ the sum of £ : :to be paid to the Secretary of State
(if required) as a guarantee for the cost of Government for, say, five years.”
7. By this paragraph is meant that the Association will purchase the land it occupies
from Her Majesty’s Government, even though it had originally been obliged, in the cause
of peace and goodwill, to purchase the said land from the natives. We are perfectly well
aware that “ the title ” to any lands must be obtained from Her Majesty’s Government by
purchase, so that the Imperial Treasury may obtain the necessary funds to defray the
expenses of government.
8. In New Guinea, there exists no law of proprietorship in land ; the land is free to
all; war being resorted to only as a means of pillage and defence of crops. Of this fact
the Basle missionaries have supplied us with substantial evidence.
,9. We beg to thank your Lordship for informing us that the provisions of the “ Pacific
Islanders Act, 1875,” will enable this Association to enforce order amongst its servants if
landed in New Guinea before annexation, and at the same time prevent them from
committing such acts as may render them liable to the provisions of the said Act.
10. I am further desired to inform your Lordship that, out of the funds of this
Association, a sum will be set aside wherewith to pay Her Majesty’s Government for the
land we may occupy in New Guinea ; and that, should Her Majesty's Government decide
on annexing the Island of New Guinea before our exploring Expedition starts, we shall be
willing to provide a passage in our ship for a detachment of men from Her Majesty’s
forces, together with any additional officers your Lordship may determine on sending out,
at a cost that will simply cover the cost of their daily rations, taking out all stores and
provisions at the usual rates, but payable in land grants.
11. In conclusion, we beg to inform your Lordship that the subscribers to the funds
of this “The New Guinea Colonizing Association” are all gentlemen of the highest
respectability, who do not risk their capital so much with a view to ultimate profit, as to
the benefit that will be derived therefrom by a large class of Her Majesty’s subjects.
We have, &c.
The New Guinea Colonizing Association,
(Signed) EDWARD SCHUBERT, Secretary, pro tern.
No. 26.
Colonial Office to the New Guinea Colonizing Association.
Sir, Downing Street, November 10, 18*75.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge the receipt of your further
letter of the 3rd instant, * with regard to the objects of the proposed Association for the
Colonization of New Guinea.
2. In reply, I am to state that though Lord Carnarvon has nothing to add to the
letter to you from this Department of the 30th ultimof on this subject, he thinks it
necessary to point out that you have not rightly apprehended his meaning in some
particulars.
3, Thus, for example, that letter does not contain the phrase quoted by you with
respect to the representations of the Australasian Colonies in favour of annexation, that
“ those representations are now being carefully considered with a view to the acquisition
* No. 25. f No. 24.


of the island on behalf of Her Majesty’s subjects generally nor was any indication given,
or intended to be given, that Her Majesty’s Government entertained any such view. •
4. Nor can bis Lordship see that the letter can be construed as informing yon that
the provisions of the “ Pacific Islanders Protection Act, 1875,’’ will enable the Association
to enforce order amongst its servants if landed in New Guinea. It is scarcely necessary
to say that this Act would confer no powers of any sort upon the Association, though it
does contain provisions for the punishment of outrages which would apply if any were
committed by British subjects upon the natives of that part of New Guinea which it is
proposed by the Association to occupy.
5. I am to add that his Lordship did not infer that the paragraph of the prospectus
which says : ‘ the sum of £ : ; to be paid to the Secretary of State (if required) as
a guarantee for the cost of Government for say five years,” meant that the proposed
Association would purchase from Her Majesty’s Government the land which it might
occupy ; nor even, on reading this paragraph again with the assistance of your interpreta-
tion, is it apparent to Lord Carnarvon how it meets his objection that no sufficient
provision is made for satisfying the claims of the natives.
6. His Lordship infers from your letter that you contemplate in certain events that
there will be “ acts of the expedition against the natives of New Guinea,” and that the
subscribers of the Association risk their capital with a view to ultimate profit, though
more with a view to the benefit that will be derived therefrom by a large class of Her
Majesty’s subjects. His Lordship does not suppose that the Association contemplate the
employment of violent means in order to take land and convert it to the profit of its
subscribers, since, as he remarks, you state that there exists no law of proprietorship ig
New Guinea, and that the land is free to all; and it is therefore possible that the Associa-
tion may regard the occupation of land in the island as an act not hostile to the natives,
and at the same time likely to be remunerative and largely beneficial, to Her Majesty’s
subjects. Lord Carnarvon does not profess to have any knowledge on the subject as
applied to this particular island, but, judging from the analogy of other countries, he is of
opinion that this statevnent with respect to the tenure of land should not be received until
it has been well tested, as experience elsewhere has shown that among savage tribes the
usages and customs which govern the use and occupancy of land are so various and
complex that to adjust the claims arising out of them usually forms one of the most
difficult and dangerous tasks which a civilized Government has to face on taking
possession of a new country.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
No. 27.
The Secretary to the Anti-Slavery Society to the Earl of Carnarvon.
My Lord, 27, New Broad Street, E.C., November 11, 1875.
THE Committee of the Anti-Slavery Society are desirous of having the oppor-
tunity afforded to them for presenting to your Lordship an address in reference to the
expedition now being fitted out for New Guinea, especially in relation to the proposed
seizure of 1,000 square miles of the island, for allotment amongst the adventurers,
without reference to the rights of the natives.
I therefore write on behalf of the Committee to request your Lordship kindly to
favour them with an interview on any day next week most convenient to your
Lordship.
I have, &c.
(Signed) AARON BIJZACOTT, Secretary.
Inclosure in No. 27.
th& Right gon. the Earl, of Carnarvon, Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State
for the Colonies.
My Lord,
PHE Committee of the British and Poreign 4htLSlaverj Society haye learned
Tftitlr feelings, of; apprehension that a private expedition is now in process of organiza-
tion for effecting a Settlement in New Guinea, and for taking territorial possession of a
(124) 12


portion of the island, with a view to the division of such territory among the several
adventurers.
Without imputing other than honourable intentions to the promoters of this enter-
prize, your Lordship w ill share our apprehensions—that, severed from responsibility to
British Law, or to British control, the expedition is hut too likely, from disorganiza-
tion and the absence of efficient authority, to inflict misery and disaster on the natives
of the island.
It is asserted in the programme of the expedition that a survey of one thousand
square miles will he first effected. This survey will he accompanied hy a seizure prior
to the division of the land amongst the members of the expedition and the English
subscribers, who will have received land orders, allotted to them at the rate of eighty
acres, and a town plot of not less than half an acre for every 20/. paid into the funds of
the association.
It is also significant that, while appropriating the 1000 square miles of territory,
not a word is said about the rights of the natives in the rules and regulations to be
signed by every volunteer; but in the programme issued to the public it is proposed
to purchase land from the natives on account of the association. This is the only
reference to the rights of a people who dwell in large villages throughout the whole
district; who own every acre of the soil, and who now cultivate “ extensive planta-
tions neatly fenced in, and producing an abundant supply of yams, bananas, sweet
potatoes, sugar cane, &c.”
Erom the rules and regulations to be signed by the adventurers, it is clear that
<this expedition will be powerfully armed, and able and ready to take by force whatever
the natives may be unwilling to dispose of. All personally acquainted with the natives
of the Pacific Islands will realise that resistance and bloodshed will accompany the
first actions of the adventurers as expressed in their rules and regulations, viz.;—
“ Sufficient land will be immediately placed under cultivation to ensure a plentiful
harvest, and thus render the Colony self-supporting.
“ When sufficient land has been cleared for this purpose, fresh land will be cleared
to the extent of five acres per man of the expedition, and the said cleared land will be
allotted amongst the men following the expedition.
“ In consideration of the services to be rendered by the officers of the expedition,
they will be remunerated in land grants of five square miles each, and shall not
thereby be debarred from purchasing additional land, from the association, or from
Government, or from leasing same on the terms in force in the Australian Colony of
New South Wales.”
Your Lordship cannot but be deeply impressed, with the extent of the disorder
and rapine, which have during the past few years prevailed in the Pacific. The Com-
mittee have but too much reason to fear from recent experience that the contemplated
expedition may, as in the case of Eiji, result in the establishment of a new focus from
whence these evils will be further extended. They, therefore, trust that, as a private
and irresponsible undertaking, it may receive neither sanction nor encouragement from
Her Majesty’s Government.
Should it hereafter be determined that the interests of England require the coloni-
zation of New Guinea, the memorialists earnestly hope that it may take place on
Government responsibility, and under Government control. On behalf of the Anti-
Slavery Committee,
We are, &c.
27, New Broad Street, E.C., November 1875.
No. 28.
The New Guinea Colonizing Association to the Earl of Carnarvon.
6, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, S.W.,
My Lord, November 11,1875.
I AM directed by the Committee of the Association to acknowledge the receipt
of your Lordship’s letter of the 10th instant.*
2. In reply I am to state that, with regard to the remarks made by your Lordship
in the third paragraph we, in our letter of the 3rd instant, f referred to the sixth
paragraph of your Lordship’s letter of the 30th ultimo, \ wherein you state in reference
to the strong and formal representations made by the Governments of the Australian
Colonies in favour of the annexation of New Guinea by this country, that: “Those
* No. 26, f No. 25. f No. 24.


representations arc noAV being carefully considered with respect to
the acquisition of which on behalf of her subjects generally the Queen is now being
advised.”
3. By this we understand your Lordship to mean that: “ Those representations
arc now being carefully considered with a view to the acquisition of the island on
behalf of Her Majesty’s subjects generally.” *
4. We furthermore observe, that in your Lordship’s letter of the 30th ultimo you
assume that private individuals have not the right to acquire or take possession of land
by purchase from the “ savages of the island,” but in your Lordship’s letter of the
lOth instant you complain that “no sufficient provision is made (in our rules and
regulations) for satisfying the claims of the natives.”
5. In your Lordship’s letter of the 30th ultimo we are given to understand, in the
seventh paragraph, that—“ There is no evidence whatever respecting the power of
the natives to enter into contracts which would be intelligible to them, or binding
upon them, or of their willingness to allow private settlers to occupy their country
and in the same paragraph your Lordship further states that—“ If there were no
objections from the native point of view ” to our purchasing land, there are objections
from your Lordship’s; for you state that —“ It is clear that without the funds arising
from the sale and lease of lands it would he impossible to provide for the government
of the country.”
0, Prom the foregoing it would appear as if your Lordship considers that;—
a. Contracts with the natives are invalid.
1. Contracts with the natives are imperative.
c. Land must be purchased from the natives.
d. Land must be purchased from Her Majesty’s Government.
7. As we cannot pretend to possess sufficient experience to reconcile these contra-
dictory assumptions, we would humbly request your Lordship to inform us what course
Her Majesty’s Government will deem “a legal course ” for private individuals to pursue
in order at once to acquire possession of land in that portion of the Island of New
Guinea not claimed by the Dutch Government.
8. In conclusion, I am directed to inform your Lordship that the members of the
New Guinea Colonizing Association, recognizing the full force of “ the strong and
formal representations in favour of the annexation of New Guinea by this country,”
which have been received from all parts of the Australian Colonies, desire in every-
thing they do to act in harmony with your expressed opinion on the subject, and
furthermore beg to assure your Lordship that no acts of the expedition against the
natives of New Guinea will ever bring its members within the meaning of the “Pacific
Islanders’ Protection Act, 1875.”
9. Nor do we see why, in reply to our request, that your Lordship should inform
us by what means discipline could be legally maintained throughout a private expedi-
tion, organized by the “ private enterprize” which your Lordship has elsewhere stated
should be the precursor of Government action, you should direct us to be informed
that the “ ‘ Pacific Islanders’ Protection Act, 1875,’ contains provisions” for the pre-
vention of outrages committed by British subjects upon the natives of that part of
New Guinea which it is proposed by the Association to occupy. We are fully aware
that the “ land question ” has ever proved one of the most difficult questions to solve
that the Colonial Office has had to deal with; and would humbly suggest that the
cause of the difficulty in all cases can be traced to the early settlers in savage countries
having had no organized system of self-government for many years after they landed.
This complicated state of affairs we desire to prevent from recurring in New Guinea,
and have therefore prepared draft rules and regulations to be discussed at a public
meeting shortly to be convened, and at which these rules and regulations will be
referred to a Committee there to be appointed.
I have, &c.
(Signed) J. GUTHRIE MURRAY,
Secretary , pro tern.
No. 29.
Colonial Office to the Secretary to the Anti-Slavery Society.
Sir, Downing Street, November 13, 1875,
IN reply to your letter of the 11th instant,* I am directed by the Earl of Car-
narvon to acquaint you that his Lordship will be happy to receive the Deputation
* No. 27.


from the Anti-Slavery Society, and the Address which they propose to present to his
Lordship in reference to the expedition now being fitted out in this country for
effecting a settlement in New Guinea.
His Lordship will be prepared to receive the Deputation at a quarter before one
o’clock on Wednesday next, the 17th instant.
I am, &c.
(Signed) W. R. MALCOLM.
No. 30.
Report from the “Times” Newspaper of November 18, of an Interview between a Deputation
from the Anti-Slavery Society with the Earl of Carnarvon.
LORD CARNARVON received yesterday, at the Colonial Office, a deputation
from the Anti-Slavery Society, on the subject of a scheme which has been formed for
the colonization of New Guinea. According to the memorial presented on the part of
the Anti-Slavery Society by the Rev. Aaron Buzacott, its secretary, a private expedi-
tion is now in organization for effecting a settlement in New Guinea, and for taking
possession of a portion of the Island, with a view to the division of territory among
the adventurers. The memorialists quote the programmes of the expedition to show
that it is proposed to take possession of a large tract of country, which is now culti-
vated by natives who dwell in large villages, and who own every acre of the soil.
They anticipate strife and bloodshed, and trust that as a private and irresponsible
undertaking, the scheme may receive neither sanction nor encouragement from Her
Majesty’s Government. They add that should it hereafter be determined that the
interests of England require the colonization of New Guinea, they earnestly hope that
it may be carried out on Government responsibility and under Government control.
Mr. Serjeant Simon, who introduced the deputation, showed that the adventurers
proposed to go out armed to establish a sort of military organization in the island,
which seemed to contemplate warfare with the natives. He was asked to raise the
question as to the legality of the whole thing under the Foreign Enlistment Act,
which provided that if any one fits out an expedition against a friendly State he will
be liable to fine and imprisonment. Mr. Edwin Sturge disclaimed any wish to impugn
the motives of the Association, but thought some declaration should be made by the
Government to escape complicity in the outrages which must be the result of any
expedition not under efficient control. After some observations in support from
Dr. Mullens, foreign secretary of the London Missionary Society, from Mr. Buzacott,
and from the Rev. W. A. Murray, who has recently Returned from missionary labours
upon the coast, Lord Carnarvon said that two questions arose out of what had been
urged before him—the first, as to the annexation or colonization of New Guinea ; the
second, how far the particular Association, to which allusion had been made, was
placing itself in a satisfactory position. The Anti-Slavery Society were sensitive to
anything which must seem to lead to the revival of the labour trade, such as it existed
a short time ago in the South Pacific. He could certainly say for nimself, as he could
for Her Majesty’s Government, that he was most keenly alive to any danger that
might arise with reference to such a matter, and perhaps the deputation would do him
the justice to remember that it was only a few months since he procured, from
Parliament an Act called “The Pacific Islanders Act,” which was very stringent in
its provisions, and not only calculated to affect the labour trade in the Pacific, but
which was deliberately framed by Mm to extend tp the coasts of New Guinea. lie
would look upon that Act as especially applicable to this question of perpetuating the
abuses of the labour trade. As to the question of annexation pr colonization of New
Guinea, they would not expect Mm tp say much, because he was at that moment, on
behalf of the Government, in communication with the Governors of the different
Australian Colonies, who had all been taking a very lively interest in the matter; and
it would not be consistent with the usual form of proceedings if he should go at length
into that which formed the subject pf such communications. But he might say
generally that on this very important question the difficulties of colonization were in
danger of being underrated, and the advantages supposed to arise out of colonization
were, he though, overrated. Excepting those missionary settlements to which so mneh
is due, he did npt think it conld be fairly said that there is one single white man
resident in the whole pf that great island. .(“ Thai is so.”) . Nor, on, ihe other hand,
could he fairly say that any very large Imperial interests were involved in the matter.


To a certain extent they were, because nothing that concerns the welfare or the
ultimate interests of the great continent of Australia could, he alien from us, hut the
interests primarily involved were those of Australia. Reference had been made by one
of those who had spoken to previous expeditions which had been unsuccessful. He
noticed in the very learned address the other evening of the President of the Geo-
graphical Society the statement that there had been four or five. The recent* Macleay
Expedition started under very good auspices and had equally ended in failure. There-
fore considerable caution was necessary, and the difficulties were greater than generally
believed. A letter on the subject he had received from an Australian correspondent,
Avhose name he would not mention, hut whose judgment and knowledge were both very
great, said that the reports of the Macleay Expedition were not encouraging, and that
the more people heard about the natives, the mangrove swamps, and other disagreeables,
the more desirable they thought it that the present state of our relations with New
Guinea should he maintained. That was the opinion of one perfectly qualified to
judge, though it was not couched in the style of the documents which usually come to
the Office. With regard to the second question, the proposed operations of the Asso-
ciation, he was not surprised that they had excited some attention. Wlien he first read
the draught rules some weeks ago, he was startled by them; and his action had
preceded that of this Deputation. He had been in communication with this proposed
Association. He was surprised and startled to see, as had been pointed out, that it was
in its character an expeditionary and military force of picked men here to he sent out
there. He noticed the regulation to which his attention was called, that all volunteers
in this force should be subjected by land to the provisions of the Mutiny Act, and by
sea to the rules of the Naval Discipline Act; and he observed the rules as to the
allotment of land. As to that, he believed that what had been stated that day was
perfectly correct. They had reason to believe that the land along that coast was owned
by the natives. It could not be acquired, except by contract or by force; and though
he quite admitted there was no direct statement in the regulations or prospectus to the
effect that force would be employed by the Association, yet to the ordinary intelligence
the idea of force as the ultimate resort was not darkly or dimly indicated. There was
of course a spirit of adventure in the whole thing, but it rather savoured of the spirit
which characterized Pizarro, than of the ordinary mode of proceeding in our days. He
should have felt he had not discharged his duty unless he had expressed his distinct
protest against anything of the sort. So far as English trade and colonization go,
while they are legitimate nobody could wish them more success than he. At the same
time, it w T as, quite beyond his power to stop Englishmen from trading in any part of
the world so long as adventures were in a legitimate fashion ; hut.that quasi-military
expedition gave rise to reasonable suspicion, for which the Association had only them-
selves to blame if it was but due to the ambiguous language of their rules. He
doubted whether, with all deference to the learned Serjeant, he should have power to
forbid such an expedition, although as a layman he would express no opinion on the
subject; but he was within his power as a Minister in assuring those who proposed to
take part in it, as he did most distinctly, that they were embarking on a most unusual
and a most dangerous course; that if they do acquire land, the Crown will not
recognize titles which they may have obtained in an improper w T ay; and that if there
should bo occasion to colonize New Guinea hereafter, such holdings would not be
recognized as legal. He hoped what he had said would be satisfactory to those
present. The Deputation assured his Lordship that they were satisfied, thanked him,
and withdrew.
No. 31.
Colonial Office to the New Guinea Colonizing Association.
Sir, Downing Street, November 19, 1875.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to acknowledge the receipt of a letter
from the New Guinea Colonizing Association of the 11th instant.' 5 *
2. His Lordship cannot agree that the paragraph which the Association purported
to quote from the letter of this Department, dated the 80th ultimo,! gives a correct
representation of his moaning, nor does it seem to him that to piece together the
beginning and end of a sentence, omitting important words and inserting others, is an
ordinary or acceptable mode of quotation.
3. Lord Carnarvon regrets that you should feel any real difficulty in arriving at
* No. 28. f No. 24.


the meaning of the letters from this Department, the more so as he fails, after
reperusal of them, to see in what the difficulty consists. Lord Carnarvon, however,
directs me to point out that he objects to the proposals of the Association upon two
principal grounds: first, that in the present circumstances, when Her Majesty is
being advised with respect to the course to be adopted upon addresses which have
been received from the Australian Colonies in favour of the Annexation of New
Guinea, it is not open to any unauthorized Association of Englishmen to purport to
acquire land from the savages of the island, in anticipation of the action of the Crown,
and in possible prejudice of the rights of many of Her Majesty’s subjects; secondly,
that, putting aside the claims of Her Majesty’s Government in this respect, the rules
and regulations of the Association implied to any ordinary intelligence, though they
may not express it in so many words, that land was to be taken from the natives by
force.
4. Of these objections, the first was general in its application, the second related
to the merits of the particular scheme of the Association; and upon the second point
the answer of the Association did not tend to convince his Lordship that whatever
might be their readiness to pay a sum of money to Her Majesty’s Government, the
Association contemplated dealing with the land otherwise than upon the assumption
that they might take it, if it should be considered necessary, by force; and, if so,
with all the consequences which long experience abundantly shows to follow from such
an arbitrary mode of procedure.
5. Lord Carnarvon, it is true, warned the Association that they were not
warranted, under the present circumstances, in purporting to acquire land in New
Guinea, but he cannot find any authority in the letters from this Department for the
inference that he considers that—
“ (a.) Contracts with the natives are invalid.
“ (&.) Contracts with the natives are imperative.
“ (c.) Land must be purchased from the natives.
“ (d.) Land must be purchased from Her Majesty’s Government.”
On the contrary, he has stated that he has no knowledge of the usages and
customs which govern the occupation of land of New Guinea, and he is, therefore,
unable to comply with the Association’s request for advice as to the legal course to be
pursued in order to acquire possession of land in the island.
6. In conclusion, I am to point out that there is no sufficient warrant for your
assumption that his Lordship’s allusion to the Pacific Islanders’ Protection Act had a
particular reference to the contemplated acts of the Association. Lord Carnarvon
mentioned the Act (as will be seen upon reading the letter from this Department of
the 30th ultimo) with regard to the statement of the Association that upon the
adoption of their proposals “a Bench of Magistrates” would exist in New Guinea
who, among other things, would prevent the occurrence of such scandals being
perpetrated under the British flag as came to light in the Eiji Islands prior to Her
Majesty’s Government’s annexation of those Islands.
7. His Lordship desired to point out that a Bench of Magistrates is not required
for this purpose, as the necessary powers already exist under the Act referred to.
I am, &c.
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
No. 32.
Colonial Office to Foreign Office.
Sir, Downing Street, November 20, 1875.
I AM directed by the Earl of Carnarvon to transmit to you the inclosed copy of
a despatch which his Lordship proposes to address to the Governor of New South
Wales relating to the proposed extension of British sovereignty over New Guinea and
other places in the Pacific Ocean.*
2. I am also to inclose copies of despatches received from Governors of some of
the Australian Colonies upon the same subject.!
3. Lord Carnarvon desires me to request that you will lay these despatches before
the Earl of Derby, and that you will move his Lordship to inform him whether he
concurs in the terms of the despatch proposed to be addressed to Sir Hercules
Robinson.
# No. 34. f Nos. 15, 10, 19, 20, and 21.


4. Lord Derby will observe that this correspondence does not enter into the
question of the assumed claim of the Netherlands Government to the western portion
of New Guinea. Lord Carnarvon has not thought it necessary to discuss this point on
the present occasion.
5, With reference to that part of the despatch in which it is stated that Lord
Carnarvon understands that Germany has lately intimated that it has no intention of
acquiring Colonies, I am to inclose an extract from a letter lately addressed to his
Lordship by a Colonel Scott, of Victoria,*
I am, &c.
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
No. 33.
Foreign Office to Colonial Office.
Sir, Foreign Office, December 4, 1875.
I AM directed by the Earl of Derby to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 20th ultimo,t inclosing a copy of a despatch which Her Majesty’s Secretary of
State for the Colonies purposes to address to the Governor of New South Wales,
relating to the proposed extension of British sovereignty over New Guinea and other
places in the Pacific Ocean.
In reply, I am to state to you, for the information of the Earl of Carnarvon, that
Lord Derby concurs in the terms of the despatch proposed to be addressed to Sir
Hercules Robinson.
I am, &c.
(Signed) TENTERDEN.
No. 34.
The Earl of Carnarvon to Governor Sir H. Robinson, G.C.M.G.
Sir, Downing Street, December 8, 1875.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch of the
3rd June,j: in which you transmitted a minute signed by Mr. Robertson on behalf of
your Ministers, recommending that Her Majesty should be advised with as little delay
as possible to take possession, not only of New Guinea, but of the Islands of New
Britain, New Ireland, and a large number of other islands extending to a long distance
in the Pacific Ocean east and north-east of New Guinea. I have also received
addresses in favour of the annexation of New Guinea from the Legislatures of South
Australia and Queensland, and I am informed that a similar representation will he
addressed to me from Victoria; but, as the minute of your Ministers comprises a
much more extensive proposal than has otherwise come before me, it may be
convenient that I should address to you that general statement of the present views of
Her Majesty’s Government which it is convenient no longer to delay.
The principal reasons which have been advanced for the extension of British
Sovereignty over new Guinea and other islands of the Pacific may fairly be summed
up as follows:
(1). That their possession would be of value to the Empire generally, and conduce
specially to the peace and safety of Australia, the development of Australian trade,
and the prevention of crime throughout the Pacific.
(2.) That the establishment of a foreign Power in the neighbourhood of Australia
would be injurious to British, and more particularly to Australian interests.
But it is urged, that although primarily of importance to Australia, it is as an
Imperial question that this annexation should be considered; and I am further led
to understand that those' Colonies which would derive most advantage, whether in a
political or a commercial point of view from this step, are of opinion that no part of
its cost should be defrayed from Colonial funds.
I could wish that some facts had been stated, or some arguments adduced to sub-
stantiate a view which will naturally be thought here to need proof. There is, I am
satisfied, not only no disinclination but a hearty willingness on the part of the people and
* Not printed. No. 32. + No. 15.
(124) K


Parliament of this country to accent, whether in expense Or in political responsibilities,
the common burdens of that Empire of which they are justly proud; but it is simply
impossible either forme to admit—Or if even I were to make the admission—to persuade
the English people that the Australian Colonies have no special interest in the annexation
of New Guinea, and that the responsibility of the measure rests exclusively with the
Imperial Government. While, therefore, lam ready to give the fullest consideration
to any advantage, if such can be shown, which would accrue to the Empire at large
from the acquisition of the very great area of country now under consideration, I
cannot at present perceive any ground other than that of its interest to Australia on
which such a proposal could be seriously entertained. The proposal is made, it must
be remembered, in the absence of any English Settlements, I might almost say, of any
individuals of European race, on this unexplored continent, and in face of the fact
that the information which we at present possess respecting it is extremely discou-
raging. Such trade, however, as could be developed in New Guinea and the ad acent
islands would principally benefit the Australian Colonies, and it would not be easy to
show that for such a purpose this country ought to incur a heavy expenditure unshared
by any Australian colony i
Your Ministers refer at some length to the facilities which would be giveh for
repressing abuses and maintaining order by the establishment of British Sovereignty
throughout the islands. On this, again, I am bound to remark that it is only to a
limited extent that this country can be deemed to lie under the obligation of Controlling,
single-handed and unassisted, those places in which British subjects, in common With
the subjects of many other Powers, carry oh their trading business in the South
Pacific ; and, on the other hand, it will, I think* be admitted that England has shown
no unwillingness to accept her full share of the expense, labour, and responsibility
attendant upon the discharge of such a duty. Sfie has within the last twelve months
undertaken and carried out, in hb grudging spirit, the duties involved in the annexa-
tion of Eiji, and she has created by Imperial legislation an adequate machinery for
establishing and maintaining the authority of a High Commissioner over such places
in the Pacific as it may from time to time seem expedient to bring under his jurisdic-
tion. Your advisers will, in fact, find that the 6th section of the Pacific Islanders
Protection Act of 1875 (passed since their Minute was written) answers iu effect most
of the latter part of their suggestions. It will, under this Act, be in the power of Her
Majesty’s Government, should they think fit, to bring within the control of the High
Commissioner the places referred to by your Ministers as desirable for annexation; and
it will thus be possible to punish crime, to supervise the local trade; and, it indy
perhaps be added, to learn by experience hoW far there are other places which it may
be expedient or necessary to bring absolutely under British rule.
As, therefore, provision has been made in the manner Which I have explained, for
the exercise of some authority over British subjects in the places under consideration,
the principal, if not the only, ground on which Her Majesty’s Government could be
pressed to come to so hasty a decision as is now urged, in favour of further extending
the Queen’s sovereignty in the Pacific, would be the imminent probability of the
annexation of New Guinea by some foreign State. I should regret any such intention
On the part of any foreign Power, but I tail to perceive any present indication of it.
The United States have continued to adhere to their traditional policy of not acquiring
dependencies remote from the Continent of America; the German Government has, I
am informed, ‘ Very lately intimated that it has no intention of Acquiring colonies, and
this intimation had special reference to New Guinea; and if, contrary to all present
expectation, any other European Power should contemplate the acquisition of any of
the Pacific Islands, it may be confidently supposed that it would not, without previous
communication with this Government, assume jurisdiction over a place, the expediency
of annexing which to the British Empire is well known to have been formally recom-
mended, and to be under the consideration Of Her Majesty’s Government. To assume
any other line of action would be to assume a course of conduct very little consistent
With those friendly professions which Her Majesty’s Government constantly receive
from other Governments and States;
I request you, therefore, to inform yoUr Ministers that while Her Majesty’s
Government will continue to examine, by the light of such information Us they may be
able to procure, the arguments for and against the extension of British Sovereignty
over New Guinea or any other of the Pacific Islands, they are at present far from being
satisfied that such a course is expedient, and see no reason for hastening a decision bn
so important a question. In the meantime, with a view to avert as far as possible the
disasters, bloodshed, and mortality which are likely to arise out of the speculations^!


trading Companies, or quasi-military expeditions, and also with a view to reserve to the
Crown that power which cannot properly be surrendered, and the abdication of which
in former times and in similar circumstances has led to very great trouble, loss, and
expense, it is, I think, convenient that the warning contained in the inclosed letter,
addressed to the prompters pf a projected Company in London, should be made
public in the Colonies, where similar schemes are, as I understand, already being
proposed.
I have, &c.
(Signed) CARNARVON.
No. 35.
Governor Cairns, C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon. —(Received December 14.)
My Lord, Government House, Brisbane, October 4, 1875.
THE copy of a Minute of Council which I have the honour herewith to transmit
to your Lordship, embodies the views of my Ministers in regard to certain observa-
tions contained in the Circular despatch dated the 9th July last,* to the addresses
severally of the Governors of Australia.
2. Where it is observed in the Minute that although the labour traffic, to which
reference is made in the despatch, has been regulated by a Queensland statute,
with a view to the prevention of abuses, yet a majority of the Colonists would have
preferred to have seen the traffic put an end to altogether, my advisers intend to
convey their opinion that the Colony cannot properly be said to have incurred an
obligation to contribute towards the establishment and upkeep of the recently
accepted possession of Fiji, because of such labour traffic being still —not
encouraged, indeed, —but permitted to exist under circumstances greatly more
favourable than was the case in earlier times.
3. Your Lordship will not, I trust, understand, from the subsequent observa-
tions contained in this. Council Paper, that because the suggestion of the adoption
of a general principle has failed to commend itself to my advisers, they woidd be
reluctant to consider attentively, and 1 may even add favourably, any proposal to
join the Imperial Government, and the Governments of the other parts of Australia,
in whatever well-considered project might be devised for protecting and developing,
in the common interest, the trading relations of British subjects with a place or
places adjacent to one or more of the Australian Colonies, or for anticipating, in the
the same interest, and by means of combined action, the occupation of such place or
places by some foreign Power.
4. With regard to what my Ministers point out as being the actual present
position taken up by the other Colonies directly benefited by the maintenance of a
Settlement in the north (Somerset, or such locality as may shortly be selected as a
preferential site), I have already, in a despatch to be transmitted to your Lordship
by the present mail packet, brought under notice (he case of the assessment, made
by the late Commodore Gondenough, of the contributions towards the Settlement at
Cape York, and stated what finds repetition here, namely, that although it was
agreed that the Commodore’s decision was to be understood to bind the several
Colonies in an assessed proportion of the expenses of the Settlement, New v; outh
Wales and South Australia have not yet given any indication of their final adhesion
to the arrangement proposed by that officer in April last.
1 have, &c.
(Signed) W. W. CAIRNS.
• Vide Appendix.
-Jr ■*
(124),
It 2


Inclosure in No. 35.
Extract from the Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Council of Queensland.
At the Government House, Brisbane, September 30, 1875.
Present:
His Excellency the Governor in Council.
HIS Excellency the Governor lays before the Council copy of a Circular despatch
from the Secretary of State for the Colonies, dated 9th July last, and the same
having been considered, the Honourable the Colonial Treasurer for the Honourable
the Colonial Secretary, desires to point out that with regard to the Bth paragraph
of that despatch, although it is true that the labour traffic referred to has been regu-
lated by a Queensland statute, and the evils incidental to the trade controlled as far
as possible by law, yet that the traffic itself has always been regarded with
disfavour by a majority of the Colonists.
With regard to the adoption of any general principle to be laid down for
establishing contributions, from the various Colonies concerned, towards the cost of
carrying out any Imperial policy that may be advocated, the Honourable the
Colonial Treasurer submits that the recognition of any general principle will have
no practical value, inasmuch as each special case will still have to be decided upon
its merits.
In the case of the Settlement at Somerset referred to, although the principle of
assessment of the contributions to be made by the different Colonies in proportion to
the tonnage of the vessels passing through Torres Straits has been admitted, and
the late Commodore Goodenough assessed the Colonies of New South Wales and
South Australia accordingly, no reply has yet been received to a letter addressed,
on 26th April last, by this Government to the Governments of each of those Colonies,
in which they were asked if they were prepared to accept the Commodore’s
assessment.
The Council advise the adoption of the views of the Honourable the Colonial
Treasurer.
(Signed) A. V. DRURY, Clerk of the Council.
No. 36.
The Earl of Carnarvon to Governors of the Australasian Colonies, except New South Wales.
My Lord, Downing Street, January 13, 1876.
I HAVE the honour to transmit to you a copy of a despatch which I addressed
last month to the Governor of New South Wales,* being of opinion, as I stated in
the first paragraph of that despatch, that I might most conveniently address to that
Colony which had made the most extensive proposals with regard to further annex-
ation (whether in New Guinea or elsewhere in the Pacific) those observations which
had been called for by despatches which I had received from other Colonies on
portions of the same subject.
I need not, of course, add that, whilst embodying my general reply in a
despatch addressed to one single Colony, I have given the fullest and most careful
consideration to all the communications which have reached me on this matter
from other Australasian Colonies, and I trust that the course which I have taken
will not be thought inconvenient. I regret, however, that, through an accidental
delay, this despatch has not been sooner addressed to you.
I am, &c.
(Signed) CARNARVON.
* No. 34.


No. 37.
Governor Sir Hercules Robinson, G.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon.—(Received
January 17.)
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, November 26, 1875.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Lordship’s Circular
despatch of 9th July last,* in which you review the negotiations which have taken
place between Her Majesty’s Government and the respective Governments of the
Australasian Colonies with regard to the suggested contribution to the anticipated
deficiency to the revenue of Fiji, and in which, while abandoning any desire to press
that suggestion further, you request these Governments to consider whether the
time has not arrived for the adoption of some general principle, under which each
Colony more particularly concerned shall bear its reasonable proportion of the
expense attending any policy which it may advocate or approve.
2. Immediately on receipt of that despatch I forwarded a copy for the con-
sideration of my Ministers; and on the 9th instant, Mr. Robertson, the Premier,
addressed to me a Minute on the subject, of which the following is a copy:—
“ I would have written a reply to this despatch sooner had I not thought that
his Excellency would have considered my Cabinet Minute on the subject of the
annexation of New Guinea substantially an answer, stating, as it does, the views of
this Government with reference to contribution of money by this Colony for the
Government of that. Our Minute and this despatch crossed each other on the way.
His Excellency will please say that we regret that we do not see our way to a
change of the view stated in that Minute.”
3. On reperusing the Cabinet Minute mentioned by Mr. Robertson, printed
copies of which are herewith inclosed for facility of reference,f I found that it scarcely
met the point to which attention has been drawn by your Lordship in the despatch
under acknowledgment; as the Minute merely enlarged upon the impossibility of
any one or more of these Australian Colonies carrying out an extensive scheme of
annexation and colonization, even if they were prepared to pay for it; but was
silent as to whether, in the event of the Imperial Government undertaking the work
at the request and in the interest of the inhabitants of these Colonies, they would
bear their fair share of the cost. I accordingly returned the papers to Mr. Robert-
son, with a request that he would state more clearly his views on the subject, and
he has in consequence added the following words to his previous Minute:—
“ I desire to add to what I have written above, that the objections of the
Cabinet to contribution do not rest mainly, dr even at all, upon an indisposition to
assist in a pecuniary way, but are based upon the apparent impossibility of this
Colony having any share in the control of the Colony contemplated commensurate
with the amount subscribed, and upon the natural indisposition of the Representa-
tives of this people to grant money for a purpose over which they cannot have any
such control.”
4. I understand from Mr. Robertson that the meaning of the above-quoted
minutes is this —that in his opinion the people of this Colony would at present
be unable and indisposed to contribute any portion of the expenses that might be
entailed in giving effect to the annexation policy recommended by himself and his
colleagues to the Home Government.
5. I believe that Mr. Parkes, the late Premier (as evidenced by his minutes on
the subject of Fiji, and the action of the Cabinet, of which he was the Chief at the
time of my late mission to the Islands), held a different opinion. Whether he or
Mr. Robertson has more correctly gauged the state of public feeling on this question
is a point which an actual vote alone can determine.
Assuming, however, Mr. Robertson’s view of the present state of public opinion
here on this subject to be the true one, as it is possible it may be, I am inclined to
think that any unwillingness on the part of the people of this Colony to contribute
to the expenses of the Government of New Guinea and the adjacent Islands in the
South Pacific may be attributed rather to the fact that they are not thoroughly
convinced of the magnitude of the benefits likely to accrue to them from such a
policy than to any deliberate desire on their part to participate in the advantages
of British citizenship without sharing in its common burthens and responsibilities.
6. I think, too, that the willingness or unwillingness of the Colonists to
contribute to the expenses attending the annexation of a new territory, may be
* Vide Appendix. + Inclosure 1 in No. 15.


fairly taken as the measure of their real estimate of the benefits likely to accrue to
them thereby. It is only natural that they should wish the Imperial Government
to take possession of territory, tiie annexation of which would probably redound to
their advantage, while it could not, by any possibility, be prejudicial to their
interests; but it is easy to understand hesitation in voting - contributions, unless
there is a thorough conviction of the urgent importance to the Colony of the
undertaking, and of the probability of the ultimate financial success.
If at any time the Colonists should feel assured that such a scheme is of vital
importance to their interests, I apprehend that they would make but small difficulty
about voting the money necessary to carry the proposal into effect, even if they
were not to have any control over the expenditure.'
7. Since writing the above, I have chanced upon an article in one of the most
respectable of our country newspapers, which so correctly represents what I believe
to be the real state of public feeling here at present on this question, that I cannot
do better than forward it herewith for your Lordship’s perusal.
I have, &c.
(Signed) HERCULES ROBINSON.
Inclosure in No. 37-
Extract from “ The Goulburn Herald ” of November 24, 1875.
THE enthusiasm which was exhibited some time ago in regard to exploration and
colonization in New Guinea appears to have cooled down very piuch. Mr. William
Macleay has come in for some ridicule for the results of his recent expedition.
But after all he appears to have rendered good service to the publjc, besides
having carried out the particular objects he had in view. The service he has
rendered tp the public it is true may be looked upon as of somewhat a negative
character; but this is valuable in certain cases. If he ha.s not opened out a
country for civilizatibn or discovered new fields for commerce, he has given us the
means of forming opinions as to the possibility and propriety of colonization in
New Guinea at all.’ The impression upon the mind of a gentleman of intelligence
made by a personal visit, must be of more force than the vague ideas which are
formed by enthusiastic persons who have never seen the country in question.
What, then, is this impression? That the country is not one vvhicji invites
colonization. Difficult of access to the interior, wjth a climate unsuitable tp
Europeans, and with a population numerous and fierce — and pannibals.
Moreover, there were no particular indications of such natural riches as would form
the basis of trade.
It is easy to say that further and more energetic exploration vyoulc| givg a
much more accurate knowledge than could be obtained by a brief visit such as
that made by a private gentleman for purposes of study or curiosity. But it
is evident that so far as settlement of a European population is concerned, any
gtep in that direction would be at least premature; and it is difficult fp sep, there-
fore, the justification for urging upon the Home Government the expediency of
annexing the country. If seems that there are certain portions, consisting of
islands recently discovered near the south-eastern coast, which may be taken
possession of with advantage as a naval station ; but it is difficult tp see what
advantage is likely to arise from adding the whole country to the British dominions,
upless indeed on the assumption, v'hjch has much ito recommend it, that it is
advantageous to take possession of all unappropriated territory that may be con-
venient and may at some future time be useful.
The case of Fiji may be cited in support of the idea, of further annexation.
But it is really very different. The natives there had been brought to a certain
stage of civilization, and settlement by Europeans had already taken place. The
acceptance of the country was in a manner pressed upon the Imperial Government
by circumstances; pnd tjiere are sonie reasons for thinking that ad a future time
this new possession may be of value, Yet even in this case there are evidently
many difficulties to be overcome; and there are at present no particularly hopeful
indications of a rapid progress.
So far as Australian colonists are concerned, it is hard to see the force of the
attractions which a country like New Guinea can have for them. Can it be seriously
urged that we want additional scope for the energy of our population ? Extent of
territory, variety of soil and climate, and diversity of resources, Australia possesses


within itself sufficient, one would think, to satisfy every requirement. So far from
the question of colonization and annexation of New Guinea being 1 a question
particularly concerning Australian colonists, as appeared to be assumed by the
Home authorities when asking for the expression of opinion from these communities*
it appears to be a question which should be decided from an Imperial point? of view.
Reasons of a political nature may exist, which might induce the Home Govern-
ment by forestalling them to prevent other European lowers from Establishing
themselves in New Guinea. But English statesmen will be slow to act upon such
reasons, the application of which might lead to indefinite consequences.
. The Imperial Government will have learnt from the course taken by the
Colonies in regard to the annexation of Fiji, that these communities, though
represented as zealous for annexation, aie not prepared to share in the expenses
attendant upon the proc.r-’s. In urging upon the Home authorities the acceptance
of the proposed surrender of the Fijian group, some of our leading men went so
far as to make the proposal of pecuniary contributions by the various Colonies to
the expenses of Government. But it was soon made evident that this was a
proposal which the local Parliaments were hot likely to ratify. Nor can we be
surprised at this ; for it is certain that the various Colonies have enough to do to
develop their own particular resources, without incurring liabilities for the extension
of settlement elsewhere. But the facts serves to show that the question is not one
which vitally affects Australian interests; or at least that colonists themselves do
not think it does otherwise there would not have been so general and decided an
objection as was immediately apparent when the proposal fdf pecuniary contribu-
tions became known.
No. 38.
The Earl of Carnarvon to Governor Cairns, C.M.G.
Sir* Downing Street, Janvar’y 93, 187 G;
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch of the
4th of October,* forwarding a copy of a Minute of Council, winch contains the views
of yolir Ministers in regard to certain passages in my Circular despatch of the 9th
of July lastf in which reference is made to the special interest w'hich might be felt
by the Colony of Queensland in the annexation of Fiji, and to the joint contributions
of some of the Australian Colonies in aid of the Settlement at Cape 'York.
1 have read your despatch and the Minute which accompanied it. with attention,
but it would appear to be unnecessary at the present time to enter into any further
consideration of the points to which your Ministers have referred.
I have, &.c.
(Signed) CARNARVON;
No. 39.
The Earl of Carnarvon to Governor Sir Hercules Robitison, G.C.M.G.
Sir } _ Downing Sired, February 12, 1876.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch of the
2Glh of November last| in reply to mine of the 9t h of July, in which your Government
Was invited to consider, either alone or in concert with the other Governments of
Australasia, whether the time had not arrived for the adoption of some general prin-
ciple of financial co-operation on the part of each Colony more immediately con-
cerned in the pursuance of any policy which it might advocate or approve.
My despatch of the Bth of December§ will have placed you in possession
of the views of Her Majesty’s Government as regards the Minute of your advisers
in favour of the colonization of New Guinea and other Islands, and although 1 am
obliged to Mr. Robertson for the observations which he has added with reference to
the subject of my previous despatch, it would appear to be unnecessary at the
present moment to engage further in any consideration of the points to which your
despatch specially relates.
T have, &c.
(Signed) CARNARVON;
* No. 35. f See Appendix. | No. 37. § No. 34,


No. 40.
Governor Sir Hercules Robinson, G.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon. —(Received May 1.)
My Lord, Government House, Sydney, March 1 876.
I HAVE the honour to inclose, for facility of reference in your Lordship’s office,
copies of papers which have been laid before Parliament here relating to the annexa-
tion of New Guinea, and the proposal for contribution by the Colonies interested in
any scheme undertaken for their benefit by the Imperial Government.*
2. I also inclose some leading articles which I have extracted from the local
press, which show that your Lordship’s views on the subject are considered by
the leading journals here and in Victoria reasonable and just.
I have &c
(Signed) ’ HERCULES ROBINSON.
Inclosure in No. 40.
Leading Articles extracted from the “ Sydney Morning Herald ,” “ Sydney Mail ,” and
“ Melbourne Argus” relative to the proposal for Contributions by Colonies interested in
any Scheme undertaken for their benefit by the Imperial Government.
The Sydney Morning Herald, March I, 1876.
SOME important correspondence with reference to the proposed annexation of
New Guinea has been laid before Parliament. Some of it our readers have already
seen, but the most interesting portion of it is new. It begins with a letter from
Mr. Francis P. Labilliere to the Secretary of State, urging the importance of the
annexation of New Guinea, which letter was forwarded for the comments of Sir
Hercules Robinson, who replied in a tone adverse to Mr. Labilliere’s views. In his
reply Sir Hercules inclosed Mr. Parkes’ minute, which is also in favour of the
annexation ; but he himself points out that the island cannot be colonized in the same
sense as Australia can, that foreign Powers are not very likely to annex the island,
as a military or naval station could be obtained with far less responsibility, and that
with so many islands as there are in the Pacific it is impossible for Great Britain to
prevent foreign Powers from getting a footing if they wish it.
Then follow Mr. Robertson’s Alinute, which has already been published, and
the report of the interview between Mr. Robertson and the deputation that waited
on him.
After that comes the most interesting portion of this publication. The Earl of
Carnarvon, writing in July last, refers to the request that each of the three principal
Colonies of Australia should contribute not more than 4,000/. a-year towards the
probable deficiency in the Fijian revenue. His Lordship thinks it necessary to take
some notice of the replies which were made to that proposal, because the principles
on which he proceeded seem not to have been sufficiently explained or understood.
He points out that Fiji was annexed at the strong and repeated instance of the
Australian Colonies ; that it was not expedient to subject the island to the govern-
ment of any one of them ; that it was necessary to provide an effective government;
and that it was probable that the local revenue would be insufficient to pay its
expenses. Two Colonies, viz.. New South Wales and New Zealand, had volunteered
to give assistance through the medium of their official staff, but it seemed to him
that it would be more convenient, and especially so to Victoria and to Queensland,
if the contribution should come in a money form ; and for reasons he explained it
was obviously impossible that the contributing Colonies should undertake any share
of the government of Fiji. Each Colony refused in a different mode, but the
substance was that not a single Colony would give the money required.
That being the case, the Earl of Carnarvon, who very properly remarks that
the grace of the action depended upon it being voluntary, intimates that he could
not put the slightest pressure upon any one of them to make the contribution.
The amount asked for was small, but it was asked for, he says, not so much for the
sake of the money as “principally to give trial and effect to the principle of joint
action among the different members of the Empire in such cases.” If that was the
* Not'printed.


case, then the effect of the appeal was equivalent to saying that the Colonies were
not prepared to co-operate with the British Empire in any Colonio-Tmperial matter.
If this was the first experiment in such a policy it was certainly a most discouraging
failure.
The Earl of Carnarvon, however, professes not to be wholly discouraged, but
“ still inclined to believe that the Colonial Governments are alive to the ekpediency
of bearing, in certain cases, a share of those burdens which cannot fairly be thrown
entirely upon the revenue of Great Britain.”
In this faith he takes the opportunity of again explaining the part which, in
his opinion, it would be reasonable for the colonists to bear. The future of the
South Pacific Islands, he poinfls out, is of the most direct and material importance
to the Colonies of Australasia. It will be impossible for the English taxpayers to
understand why they should bear taxation, and the Colonies should be exempted,
in order to carry out an object in which the Colonies are most immediately con-
cerned. He goes on to say that if it were a Crown Colony there would be no
question at all about it. The Crown Colony would have to bear its fair share of
any undertaking in which the said Colony was interested. This principle has been
adopted recently in some matters connected with the Malay territories adjacent to
the Straits Settlement. His Lordship might have added that the principle is
universally adopted with regard to the Indian Empire.
The Indian Exchequer has always been made responsible for expenses which
though outside the Indian territory, are considered as incident to the possession of
India. Thus, for instance, the fortifications of Aden were, w 7 e believe, constructed
entirely at Indian charges. This principle, which is thus definitely one of Imperial
policy, will not apply with less justice to the case of Dependencies that are entrusted
with self-government. But in this case, of course, the Colonies have to be asked
to exercise the powers which have been committed to them. Hitherto they have
declined to do so, and the question that now presses is: has this been from a
mistake, from want of a sufficiently comprehensive view of the situation, or is it the
deliberate view of the Australasian colonists ?
Earl Carnarvon’s despatch can only be considered in the light of a request for
reconsideration. He says that he has been told that our united revenues amount to
14,000,000 L per annum, and the table which Mr. Robertson sent to England,
showing the progress of the Australian Colonies, very nearly justifies these figures.
Earl Carnarvon does not allow 7 himself to doubt that Colonies possessing such
magnificent resources, which have shown an enlightened liberality in their internal
government, and which, on occasions of emergency, have exhibited a remarkable
eagerness to contribute to Imperial needs, will be desirous to join in establishing
some system under which they may share in the cost of any policy which they may
hereinafter propose as essential to their interests and those of the Empire generally ;
and he asks the Governments to consider whether the time has not arrived for the
adoption of some general principle under which each Colony more immediately-
concerned shall bear its reasonable proportion of the expense attending any policy
it may advocate or approve.
We concur with Earl Carnarvon in thinking that the good sense and the
liberality of the Australasian colonists will ultimately lead them to a right decision.
We think the course hitherto taken has been a mistake, and has been taken under
an incomplete consideration of the whole question involved; but on this point, and
on the remaining despatches of Sir Hercules Robinson and his Lordship, we must
reserve our remarks for a future article.
The Sydney Morning Herald, March 2, 1876.
The points submitted for consideration by Earl Carnarvon, with reference to
annexation, deserve all the more consideration by the people at large, because up
to the present time they have never pronounced any decision thereupon. Whatever
may be the case in the other Colonies, in New South Wales neither Parliament nor
people has as yet given any definite opinion as to the practicability and propriety of
co-operation between the Colony and the Crown in undertakings of common
interest to both. All that has happened with us is, that two Premiers, with their
Cabinets, have each undertaken to speak for themselves, and, to a certain extent,
for the Colony too; but they have done so without an}'- authority, and they have
done so without any subsequent approval or disapproval. So far forth the Question
(124) L


is an open one, as two'different Governments have given to some extent .two different
opinions ; and, as the people at large have not at all pronounced on the matter, the
Colony may be considered uncommitted.
In the matter of Fiji, Mr. Parkes gave a qualified and cautious promise of
Colonial assistance up to a certain point. In the matter of New Guinea,
Mr. .Robertson used language which is tantamount to a refusal of any assistance.
Probably both Ministers, if required to restate their views now in the light of all
subsequent events, would do so with more care .and fulness-; but, so far as the
matter has gone at present, we .prefer the tendency of Mr. Parke’s policy to .that of
Mr. Robertson in this matter. We do so on the simple ground .that it behoves the
colonists of New South Wales in all their dealings to be straightforward and
equitable, reasonable and honourable; and it seems to us that it would be neither
to ask the mother-country to be perpetually undertaking difficult and expensive
tasks on behalf of the Colonies, and yet refusing to bear a share of the-expense.
We do not believe that the people of the Colony, if appealed to, would in any
respect be unwilling to assume their fair and legitimate responsibility. They have
asked for and they have received self-government to the full. So far as all their
internal administration is concerned, they are carrying out the government of the
country with spirit and enterprise, entering into large responsibilities, and fulfilling
to the letter all the obligations those responsibilities involve.; nor is there the
slightest justification for supposing that they would seek to shirk any kind of duty
which devolves upon them as a dependency of the Empire, or as a young nation
in the germ.
It seems to us, therefore, that Mr. Robertson has made a mistake in rejecting
on behalf of the Colony all pecuniary responsibility with respect to the colonization
of New Guinea, should it be undertaken. Even if we were to admit that it was
.exclusively an Imperial question, still we are a part of the Empire; and if we set
the Imperial authorities in motion we ought even on that ground to stand our fair
.share of any expense.
Mr. Robertson presses the argument that there cannot be co-operation in
expenditure without co-operation in government. But this argument may be
ipushed too far. Admitting the general soundness of the principle that taxation
and representation go together, still there are in practice certain limitations of this
rule. It is a constant thing in common life, and not an uncommon thing in political
life, to part with money to certain trusted persons and powers, and to leave them
the executive control. If it were just as easy for the .mother-country and the
Colonies to co-operate in governing Fiji or New Guinea as it is for them to
co-operate in finding the funds, then there would be no objection at all to push the
.principle we have referred to; but if in practice it is found that a divided Govern-
ment would simply mean a divided responsibility and endless complications, with
the prospect of ultimate failure, then practical common sense suggests that the
executive duty should be left in the hands of those most competent to discharge it.
Jf on account of proximity the Colonial Government were the better of the two to
undertake the task, then we should be fairlv entitled to ask that .it should be left in
our hands. But if, on the other hand, the Imperial Government is the better fitted
for the discharge of the duty, then the Colonial Government may be content to
leave the responsibility there, and to watch or suggest as circumstances may
dictate. To push a principle to extremes without regard to expediency would often
destroy the very purpose for which the principle exists. Means are for the sake of
the ends, not the ends for the sake of the means; and if we want New Guinea
annexed and colonized, we are simply standing in our own light by asserting stiffly
a theoretical principle which stands in the way of the practical realization of our
wish.
It ought not to be overlooked that this principle of co-operation in payment
without co-operation in administrative control is already recognized to some extent.
Thus, for instance, the Mint, although situated within our own territory, is paid for
by a fixed Colonial contribution of 15,000 Z. a-year, yet it is managed exclusively by
the Imperial Government, which is represented here by the Governor. This Imperial
.Establishment is in no respect under the control of the local Cabinet, although any
suggestions from Ministers are always carefully considered. The Settlement at
Somerset, Cape York, is in the territory of Queensland, and it is managed exclusively
by that Colony. But being established mainly in the interest of the mercantile marine,
.and especially for the behoof of shipwrecked sailors, the mother-country contributes
towards the cost of maintenance ; so do the other Australasian Colonies in the oro


portion? in> which it is; supposed that, the shipping of each is interested. The
contributions come from various Governments, the; administration rests with'one..'
When we had Imperial troops in the Colony we. contributed to their maintenance*
but had no control' over them, and the same remark applies to our naval contribu-
tions. Our mail services are: at present exclusively in Colonial yet the
Government of England virtually contributes to each of the three Colonial lines,
by carrying the mails free to and from the points at which the Colonial lines
commence. In all these cases, and in similar cases, it is obviously the common
sense arrangement to have the.authority where, all things considered, the authority
can best be vested, and to let contributions be shared on some equitable basis.
Go-operation is impossible on any other principle.
At any rate, in view of the present unwillingness of the Australian Colonies to
spend a farthing towards the colonization of New Guinea, that project stands in
indefinite abeyance; Earl Carnarvon does not see it to be an Imperial duty, and he
is not distressed at the idea of its falling into the hands of any great foreign Power.
The assurances received are adverse to any such supposition, and there does not
seem anything to justify an appeal to the British taxpayer.
Mr. Robertson says that if the Australian colonies were a separate nationality,
they would annex Polynesia as a matter of course, in which case they would have to
pay for it. The question then arises, “ Why should they lose by it because they
want it done in their interest, while they are still dependencies'?” If the colonists
press a particular policy on the mother-country, and if they do so mainly with a
view to their own advantages, they do not stand well before the eyes of their fellow-
countrymen in England, nor well before the world at large, in declining to contribute
anything towards the cost of such undertakings, on the ground that they cannot
co-operate in the act of government with the mother-country, and that therefore
they will contribute nothing in money. The probabilities are that, in the long run,
as these colonies increase in power and population, and especially if they become a
federation nation, the government of these dependencies will fall into Australian-
hands ; none the less, however, it is reasonable that, while these colonies are small,
weak, isolated, and even: mutually jealous,, the Executive Government of these
dependencies should rest in Imperial hands. The Colonies are not strong enough
to act single-handed at present in the matter of those outlying administrations.
They are too suspicious of each other to act in conjunction, and yet they all want
that Australia should get its footing on the Polynesian Islands. Obviously, there-
fore, the simple policy is for them all to solicit the aid of the Imperial Government,
and to back up that aid by the most substantial support. How that is to be carried
out is, of course a matter to be considered, but at present the only question submitted
to the different Colonies is, whether they will recognize the principle, that if the
Imperial Government does what the Australian Colonies ask for, it should be
proportionately assisted in the task?
The Sydney Mail, March 4, 1876.
Colonial Contributions towards Imperial Expenditure. —Some correspon-
dence between the Earl of Carnarvon and Sir Hercules Robinson on the New Guinea
question, and matters connected therewith, has been laid before Parliament. It is
well known that, although urgent representations in favour of the annexation of
New Guinea by'Great Britain have been sent from these colonies to the Imperial
Government, and. that, although it has been obvious throughout that the step was
recommended chiefly on the ground of Australian interest, it has been made perfectlj'
plain that the charge was to fall upon the British taxpayer. It will be remembered
that when the acquisition of Fiji was resolved upon by Great Britain, also greatly
in the interest of Australia, the Secretary of State suggested that each of these
colonies should contribute a certain proportion (insignificant in amount) towards the
cost of governing the new dependency. The suggestion found no favour with those
Colonial Legislatures to which it was submitted (for it was not brought before them
all). The most interesting part of the correspondence before us is that in which
the Secretary of State, assuming that this cold reception was due to a mistake as to
the nature of the proposal, explains its true character, in order that the Colonies
may reconsider the principle involved, and be prepared for future contingencies in
which its application might seem desirable. The object of the Home Government
was not to obtain the small sum of money required in the case of Fiji, but to intro-
(l34) L 2


duce a system under which the distant colonies would co-operate as parts of the
Empire in carrying' out the measures of the Imperial policy in which they were
primarily, if not chiefly, interested. Such co-operation would justify, or at least
promote, the favourable consideration of such measures by the British taxpayers,
who, of course, cannot always see the equity of their bearing all the cost, and
securing only a share of the benefit of distant enterprises. The chief objection here
seems to be that the colonies would not be able to control the expenditure of money
contributed. But, in the nature of the case. Imperial undertakings must be under
Imperial control; and there is not only inconsistency, but meanness, in the conduct
of those who complain that England is relaxing her Imperial policy, and not
showing a due interest in the welfare of her dependencies, and then claim that the
dependencies shall be exempt from bearing any share in the cost of Imperial action
that would promote their welfare, because, as Imperial'action, it would be beyond
their control. If the matter were rightly understood, the colonies would embrace
with eagerness such a proposal as that made by Lord Carnarvon.
“ The Argus,” March 1, 1876.
The despatches which have passed between the Earl of Carnarvon and the
Governor of New South Wales on the subject of the actual annexation of Fiji, and
the suggested annexation of New Guinea, which are published elsewhere, will repay
a careful perusal. Studiously courteous in tone, and calmly dignified in language,
those of the Colonial Secretary seem to have been framed with a scrupulous desire
not to give umbrage to communities which are in the habit of setting their backs up
on the slightest provocation—communities in which Her Majesty’s Secretary of
State for the Colonies is occasionally spoken of as “ a foreign nobleman,” and
credited with all sorts of nefarious designs upon the independence of their public
men, and upon the integrity of their political institutions.
In the first of these despatches, Lord Carnarvon recapitulates the narrative of
events preceding the annexation of Fiji, which was effected by the Imperial Govern-
ment at the “ strong and repeated instance ” of these colonies, and then relates the
kind of reception which his overtures to the Governments of four of them, with
reference to a contribution towards the cost of administration, met with. On the
whole, it was anything but satisfactory ; but, as Lord Carnarvon observes, the
circumstances of the case being such as to make the grace of the action depend
upon its being voluntary, while the contribution “ would be mainly valuable as
proving the readiness of the great colonies to accept their membership in the
common duties of the Empire,” Her Majesty’s advisers did not feel that the occasion
was one which would justify the slightest pressure being put upon the unwilling
co-operators. The result, Lord Carnarvon evidently wishes to insinuate, is that
Great Britain is saddled with an island she does not want, entailing upon her losses
which she did not anticipate; and her experience in connection with this transac-
tion inclines her to be extremely cautious with regard to any overtures which may
be addressed to her from these colonies for the incorporation of other islands with
her dominions. “It must be obvious,” significantly remarks Lord Carnarvon,
speaking with reference to both Fiji and New Guinea, “that the future of these
islands is of the most direct and material importance to the colonies of Australasia,
while it would be impossible for a very large proportion of taxpayers of this country
to understand on what principle they should bear, whilst the colonies immediately
concerned should be exempted from, the burden of any expenditure that may be
incurred in connection with such places.” Therefore, Sir Hercules Robinson is
invited to ask his Ministers whether the time has not arrived in which the various
Governments of Australasia might combine to bear a reasonable proportion of the
expense attending any policy of annexation advocated or approved by them. The
reply, however, of the Governor of New South Wales, conveying the sentiments of
his Ministers, was unfavourable ; and, in another despatch from Downing Street,
dealing with the question of annexing New Guinea exclusively, Lord Carnarvon
enters into the whole subject very fully. Summarising the reasons which have been
advanced for placing that island under the British flag, he comments upon them
seriatim. He considers that these colonies are chiefly, if not solely, interested in the
acquisition of so great an area of country, and would principally benefit by any
trade which might be opened up with the Papuans. He states that the provisions
of the Pacific Islanders’ Protection Act, passed by the Imperial Parliament last


year, will apply to New Guinea as well as to Fiji, and will bring that island within
the control of the High Commissioner ; so that “ it will thus be possible to punish
crime, to supervise the local trade, and—it may perhaps be added—to learn by
experience how far there are other places which it may be expedient or necessary to
bring absolutely under British rule.” There remains, then, Lord Carnarvon observes,
the possibility or probability of New Guinea being annexed by a foreign Power
to be considered and disposed of. Of this, he says, he fails to perceive any indica-
tion. The United States, he alleges, adheres to its traditional policy of not acquiring
remote dependencies.- Germany has formally declared, with special reference to
New Guinea, that she has no intention of acquiring colonies ; and Lord Carnarvon
is of opinion that if any other European Power should contemplate laying hold of
any of the Pacific Islands, they would have the politeness to communicate with the
British Government before assuming “jurisdiction over a place the expediency of
annexing which to the British Empire is well known to have been formally recom-
mended, and to be under the consideration of Her Majesty’s Government.” But if
Russia should take it into her head to establish a settlement in New Guinea, we
scarcely think she would trouble herself to make her intentions known to the Cabinet
at St. James’s; any more than Lord Derby thought it necessary to apprise the
Foreign Office at St. Petersburg of his purpose to purchase the Khedive of Egypt’s
shares in the Suez Canal.
Finally, Lord Carnarvon signifies that, having weighed the arguments pro and
con , he regards the present extension of British sovereignty over New Guinea or
any other of the Pacific Islands as inexpedient, but does not wish us to understand
that he considers the question to be closed. To quote his own words, he “ sees no
reason for hastening a decision on so important a question.” In the meantime, it is
satisfactory to know that the Secretary of State for the Colonies has caused a very
impressive warning to be addressed to Lieutenant Arm it and the other members of
the “ New Guinea Colonizing Association,” who will receive neither moral support
nor legal recognition at the hands of the Imperial Government, which refuses to
sanction, even tacitly, the acquisition of land within the island by British subjects.
The question stands in this position, then. Great Britain does not preclude
herself from annexing New Guinea at some future day. But, as she holds that the
advantages of such a step would be almost wholly reaped by the Australian
Colonies, she is of opinion that, whenever the subject is re-opened, these Colonies
should be prepared to sustain at least a considerable proportion of the cost of
occupying and administering this additional territory. Whatever view may be
entertained on this question of annexation, it must be admitted by all dispassionate
readers that Lord Carnarvon’s despatch is a well-considered and statesmanlike
document.
No. 41.
Governor Sir G. F. Bowen, G.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon. —(Received June 5.)
My Lord, Government House, Melbourne, April 11, 1876.
I HAVE the honour to report that I have directed the attention of the
Victorian Ministers to your Lordship’s Circular despatch of the 13th January
ultimo,* forwarding a copy of the despatch addressed by you on the Bth December
ultimo to the Governor of New South Wales, respecting the annexation to the
British Empire of New Guinea, a measure which has been recommended by the
Governments and Parliaments of that and of certain other Australasian Colonies.
2. I am requested by Sir James McCulloch to transmit the inclosed Ministerial
Memorandum on this subject.
3. In ray opinion there can be but little doubt that the remark made not long
ago by Lord Derby, in a speech delivered at Liverpool, to the effect that “England
has already black subjects enough,” lays down a good general principle, subject, of
course, to exceptions in special cases, such as that of the recent annexation of the
Fiji Islands. This principle, it need scarcely be said, is not understood in any
quarter as discouraging the extension and consolidation of the British Empire in
Australasia, North America, South Africa, or in other countries with temperate
climates, and where the English race can settle and propagate itself without
impairing its vigour.
• No. 60.


4. Moreover, it is to be apprehended that it will be very difficult to procure - 1 h
general concurrence of the Australasian Colonies in any project for the annexation
of the neighbouring 1 islands in the-Pacific, in any joint contribution towards the
expense of such- annexation, or in any common system of military and naval
defence, before the advent of federation, which is so much to be- desired* on these
.and'on other obvious grounds, alike of fmperial and of Colonial policy.
I have, &c.
(Signed) G. F. BOWEN*.
P;S.—I annex copies of leading articles respecting the proposed annexation of
New Guinea,, which have recently appeared in the “ Argus ” and “Age,” the chief
journals of opposite sides in this Colony. It will be seen that both recognize the
“justice ’’as well as the “dignified* courtesy” of your Lordship’s despatches to
Sir Hercules Robinson on this subject.
G. F. B.
Inclosure 1 in No. 41.
Memorandum for his Excellency Sir George F. Bowen, Governor of Victoria, fy c.
SIR' JAMES McCULLOCH has the honour to inform liis Excellency the
Governor that the copy of Lord Carnarvon’s despatch (herewith returned) of the
Bth of December last to Governor Sir Hercules Robinson, in reference to the
annexation by Great Britain of New Guinea and numerous other islands, has
received attentive perusal.
His Excellency’s advisers concur generally in the opinion, and for the reasons
assigned by New South Wales, South Australia, and Queensland, that the extension
of British sovereignty over the islands indicated, and especially over New Guinea,
is much to be desired; but they regard the question as one for consideration from
an Imperial point of view.
The Government of Victoria has not felt it necessary to address any special
communication to the Home Government on the subject, nor do they now feel called
upon to press it as.demanding immediate settlement.
Sir James McCulloch feels bound to add, on behalf of his Excellency’s advisers,
that they do not believe the Parliament of Victoria would be willing to make an
appropriation of Colonial funds in aid of the expenditure that would be incurred by
such annexation.
(Signed; JAMES McCULLOCH.
Melbourne, April 11, 1876.
Inclosure 2 in No. 41.
Extract from the “Argus” of March 22, 1876.
WHATEVER feelings of disappointment may have been engendered in the
minds of Australian colonists by the decision of the Imperial Government in
reference to the proposals which have been made to it for the annexation of New
Guinea, that disappointment has been materially softened by the tone and tenour of
the two despatches on the subject addressed to Sir Hercules Robinson by the Earl
of Carnarvon in July and December last respectively. These clearly show that the
whole question has been carefully considered, and weighed with the anxious
deliberation due to its intrinsic importance, as well as to the representations
addressed to the Colonial Office by the Governments of these Colonies; and while
it is due to the political head of that Office to make a special acknowledgment of
the spirit of dignified courtesy which animates his correspondence with Her
Majesty’s Representative at Sydney, we must also frankly recognize the force
and cog'ency of the Earl’s replies to the reasons advanced from this side in favour
of an extension of British sovereignty over New Guinea and other islands of the
Pacific and the Indian Seas.
We quite agree with Lord Carnarvon in the position which he takes up in his
despatch of the 9th July last, that in the event of the British Crown assuming
jurisdiction over territory occupied ftft? the principal or exclusive benefit of any of


the Australian Colonies, it would be most unreasonable to cast the burden-of the
expenditure :thus entailed upon the British taxpayer, and to claim exemption from
it on our own part. We believe, also, that there is no disposition on the part of
Her Majesty’s subjects in this part of the world to evade any legitimate responsi-
bility of the kind. In the case of the annexation of Fiji, the difficulties About the
money question with New South Wales and with New Zealand arose oilt of the
debateable right of those two Colonies to have some share in the administration of
the islands ; while the unwillingness of Victoria and Queensland to contribute is
sufficiently explained in the terms of Lord Carnarvon’s despatch. At the same
time, the cession of Fiji had come to be regarded as a matter of Imperial policy.
A naval station in that part of the Pacific had been rendered necessary by the
immense expansion of British commerce in these seas, as also to enable Her
Majesty’s cruizers to prevent the transformation of a traffic in coloured labour
into a Slave Trade, with all its attendant horrors and atrocities. Viewed as a
mere question of profit and loss, there appears to be no reason to apprehend that
the revenues of Fiji, under prudent administration, will not suffice to cover the cost
of governing that dependency, as the present deficiency in the revenue is to be
satisfactorily accounted for by the epidemic which has swept off so many thousands
of its population. Under a normal condition of affairs, the islands may be expected
to regain their normal prosperity.
In addressing himself to the subject of annexing New Guinea, Lord Carnarvon
reviews and replies to the principal reasons adduced in favour of the Imperial
Government taking that step. They are these:—
“ (1.) That their possession would be of value to the Empire generally, and
conduce specially to the peace and safety of Australia, the development of Australian
trade, and the prevention of crime throughout the Pacific.
“(2.) That the establishment of a foreign Power in the neighbourhood of
Australia would be injurious to British, and more particularly to Australian,
interests.”
We believe that the second of these is the one which has had most weight with
the majority of persons in these Colonies, who were favourable to the annexation of
New Guinea. The advantages to be derived hereafter from the foundation of any
Anglo-Australian settlements upon the island, and from any trade which might
spring up between it and these ports, could only be conjectural, and the very
slender information we possess with respect to the climate, population, and
resources of New Guinea, is such as, while leaving plenty of scope for the imagi-
nation of the sanguine and the adventurous, to suggest extreme caution and
discourage rash enterprise on the part of legitimate traders. But the dangers to
be apprehended from any other great naval Power wedging itself in between the
Asiatic and the Australasiatic provinces of the Empire, were such as could not be
safely disregarded.
Upon this point, therefore, Lord Carnarvon’s despatch of the Bth of December
last is highly satisfactory and re-assuring. He tells us that he fails to perceive
any indication of a foreign Power assuming a new jurisdiction in these seas ; that
the United States continue to adhere to their traditional policy of not acquiring
dependencies remote from the continent of America; that the German Government
has recently intimated, with special reference to New Guinea, that it has no inten-
tion of planting colonies; and that “ if, contrary to all present expectation, any
other European Power should contemplate the acquisition of any of the Pacific
Islands, it may be confidently supposed that it would not, without previous
communication with this Government, assume jurisdiction over a place, the
expediency of annexing which to the British Empire is well known to have been
formally recommended, and to be under the consideration of Her Majesty’s
Government.”
This certainly deprives us of the strongest plea we could put forward on
behalf of the annexation of New Guinea; whilst it justifies us in anticipating that
Her Majesty’s Government would assert its prior claim to the island in the event
of either of the Great Powers planting its flag upon it. Five and twenty years
hence, perhaps, these Colonies will be sufficiently strong in population and
resources to dissipate all uneasiness with respect to a hostile occupation of New
Guinea.
In the meantime, we are glad to learn that the provisions of the Pacific
Islanders’ Protection Act, 1875, are such as to bring within the control of the High
Commissioner any places in the Pacific that are not now under the jurisdiction of


&-ciyilk«}s nation,* srid : Wfirm -him' with all the powers necessary for the prevention
crime 1 by British subjects on the various islands in these seas. It is no less
gratifying to’learn 1 that no countenance whatever will be given, by the. Colonial
‘Office to such quasi-filibustering expeditions as that projected by Lieutenant Arfnit
S and’his friends ; and that the Imperial Government will not sanction, even tacitly,
fthe acquisition of land within the Island of New Guinea by any of Her Majesty’s
subjects.
No. 42.
The Marquis of Normanby, K.C.M.G., to the Earl of Carnarvon. —(Received June 26.)
My Lord, Auckland , April 27, 1870-
REFERRING to your Lordship’s Circular despatch of the 9th of July, 1875,*
on the subject of the annexation of Fiji, in which, while waiving any desire to press
further the consideration of a contribution from this Colony towards the deficienc
in Fiji'your Lordship expresses a desire that, as regards any future action, my
Government should consider “ whether the time has not arrived for the adoption of
some general principle under which each Colony more immediately concerned shall
Lear its reasonable proportion of the expenses attending any policy which it may
advocate or approve,” I have now the honour to inclose six copies of a Memorandum
in Which ray Government have embodied their views upon this subject.
2. I regret that there has been so much delay in procuring this reply, but my
Government were anxious to reserve their answer until after the return of Sir Julius
, Vogel, with whom they wished to consult.
3. It certainly appears to me most desirable that, in future, any questions of
contribution from the revenue of one Colony towards the support of any new Colony
that it is proposed to annex should be distinctly settled before the annexa-
tion takes place, so as to preclude any subsequent misunderstanding. At the same
time, however, where such annexation takes place at the instigation and for the
’benefit of any particular Colony or Colonies, it does seem to me most reasonable
that, before complying with their request, they shonld be required to fix definitely
/the funds that they are prepared to appropriate towards the carrying out of the
policy they are advocating.
4. The advantages and disadvantages to the Colony of the proposed annexation
could then be dispassionately considered; and while the Imperial revenue would
thus be relieved from a fair proportion of the burden entailed, the Colonies could
have no possible complaint, as their contribution would have been voluntarily
tendered in consideration of the benefits they expected to derive.
5. My Government will, in accordance with the wish expressed by your Lord-
ship, communicate with the other Australian Governments with the view, if possible,
of adopting some general principle on the subject.
I have, &c.
(Signed) NORMANBY.,
Inclosure in No. 42.
Memorandum for his Excellency the Governor.
THE Premier, with the approval of the Cabinet, has the honour to respectfully
submit to his Excellency the following remarks upon the Circular despatch of the
Earl of Carnarvon, dated 9th July, 1875, on the subject of Colonial,contributions to
the cost of governing the Islands of the Pacific, of which Her Majesty assumes
possession for the benefit of these Colonies.
■ The delay in commenting on this despatch has arisen through the Premier’s
absence, and his colleagues desiring to await his return before taking action
about it.
( Lord Carnarvon states his views with great kindness and courtesy, and
dvidently desires to consider that the Colonies have been actuated by not illiberal
motives : but it is impossible to fail to see that the case, as put by his .Lordship,
means—that the Australasian Colonies more or less urged on the Imperial Govern-
* See Appendix.


ment the expediency and the necessity of assuming possession of Fiji; that partly
in consequence of these representations possession was assumed ; that the Colonies
are particularly interested in such possession being taken ; that they have ample l
revenues; tha£, so soon as annexation was effected, a trifling contribution to the
revenue of Fiji was asked from them, as much with the view of testing their feelings
as from the necessity of such contribution ; that the contribution was refused oni
various grounds ; that the Imperial Government were left to bear alone the cony
sequence of complying with the advice of the Colonies ; and that, to avoid any
similar misconception, it will be better, in future, for the Colonies to recognize the
principle that certain responsibilities attach to the advice they render.
It is not unnatural that the Secretary of State should see the subject in
light. He finds the Imperial Government threatened with a deficiency on account
of Her Majesty having accepted the possession of Fiji, that possession having been
taken at the instance of the Colonies; and when he turns to them for aid, the specific
request he makes meets with refusal.
Hut the Premier wishes to say a few words on the Colonial view of the case, to
show that at any rate the Colonies have not been actuated by an illiberal desire to
evade responsibilities they conceived to be just, fie believes that umlcrhing the
replies of all the Colonies there have been these two feelings:—lst. That the mother
country was drifting into an entirely new Colonial, or rather anti-Colonial, policy;
that in times past she did not hesitate to incur Colonial expenditure; that assuming
possession of Fiji was analogous to many previous cases; that to ask contributions
from the Colonies was a novel proceeding, connected only with the presumed policy
of casting the Colonies adrift; and that to acquiesce in it would argue an acceptance
by the Colonies of the new position it was desired to assign to them, 2nd. That
there was an anomaly in contributing to the cost of a Government in which no
control was to be permitted to the contributors.
The Premier is glad to hope that the policy of disintegrating the Empire is
less actively pursued. The Conservatives never supported it, and an important
section of the Liberals appears to have abandoned it—as witness the remarkable
Speech on the Colonies delivered a few months since by the Right Honourable
Mr. Forster. But it is not to he supposed that the soreness which for several years
had grown up in the Coonies at the idea that they were regarded as burden onj
rather than as valuable parts of, the Empire, should die away iu a day. Lord
Carnarvon’s proposal was not altogether viewed in the spirit in which it was made:
Besides, it is much better that prospective rather than retrospective arrangement?
should be made. It is not the business of Governments to be liberal ; on the
contrary, they have to consider it, as a rule, highly inexpedient to indulge in any
expenditure that can with honour be avoided. The Imperial Government having
annexed Fiji, made it more difficult to entertain the question of contributions than-
would have been the case had the Colonial Governments been told that agreement
to make such contributions would be considered necessary before Her Majesty
would be advised to annex those islands. *
1 The case now to be considered is that of prospective contribution as arconse-
quence of advising further annexation. The question is one of great interest to
New Zealand, because this Colony is no doubt much concerned in the annexation 1
of the Navigator Islands. It is a new feature for a Colony by pecuniary contribu-
tions to aid the mother-country to enlarge the Colonial possessions. The Secretary
of State gives no analogous instance excepting one of a joint contribution to a
harbour of refuge at Somerset. Humanitarian rather than commercial reasons led
to this arrangement, and it is very little in point. But a great deal of weight may
be attached to the view, that the Imperial Government have the right to consider
advice volunteered by the Colonies, unsupported by any assistance, as, to say the
least, not much entitled to consideration if it be made on the ground only of
Imperial concern. On the ground of the interests of the whole Empire, a reqoei?
to. extend the Colonial possessions made by 300,000 people in New Zealand is
entitled to no more weight than a similar request from 300,000 British subjects in a
British town. To them the answer would be, “Why do you want to cast an addi-
tional cost on the country ? Our Colonial possessions are sufficiently large.” But
the request from New Zealand would really not mean advice volunteered in the
general interests only of the Empire: it would mean that it was volunteered also hj
the special interest of the portion of the Empire making the request. And here
another fact obtrudes itself. The English Government, before Fiji was annexed,
had commenced a crusade against labour traffic amongst the islands. Nothing
(124) M


could Imre been more satisfactory -than this determination fo stamp out a.system
shivery; -but the feeling was very strong, that the attempt to do it would I *e compa-
ratively futile until the Government acquired a more substantial right to protect the
islanders than they possessed. Whilst they did not hold, and were not directly
intei'ested in ruling, a single island between Sydney and San Francisco, their efforts
were regarded as spasmodic and temporary, and had the effect of rather stimulating
the labour trade, by making it more profitable. It is impossible to overstate the
moral effects of annexing Fiji; but before the annexation, the Colonics felt that
their own interest in its annexation was trifling as compared with the interest which
the mother-country had in it, in aid of the determination to repress South Sea
Slavery. ,
. The Premier, when he despaired of any thing like a comprehensive South Sea
Islands’ policy being pursued by the Imperial Government, proposed that New
’Zealand should take the task in hand, by means of a chartered Company. It is his
duty to admit that there is no longer need of New Zealand volunteering in this
way ; for he recognizes that, as far as the Empire is concerned, the steps being
itnken are in a wise and excellent direction. Not only has Fiji been annexed, but,
by an Act of last year. Her Majesty, without possession, has asverted in a novel
form a right of exercising considerable authority in those of the islands which do
not possess civilized Governments. Sir Arthur Gordon, the High Commissioner
appointed under the provisions of “ The Pacific Islanders Protection Act, 1875,”
is certainly not likely to undervalue the responsibilities of the powerful posi-
tion assigned to him. Under these circumstances, it seems to the Premier
treasonable that any recommendations for further annexation which New Zealand
'makes should, unless those recommendations are wholly free from considerations
•specially affecting itself, be aecompanied by a statement of the pecuniary aid it is
■prepared to render. No doubt such pecuniary aid woidd be very peculiar; but the
■ recommendations would also be peculiar, for they would be made in New Zealand
interests. It is unquestionably important to New Zealand that a foreign Power
should not own the Navigator Islands. But in this case, the Imperial Government
bas a large direct interest. The islands are excellent, both in resources and
position.; they are outside the hurricane track, and for maritime purposes are, it is
believed, much more valuable than Fiji, with its dangerous approaches. It is, per-
haps,'inexpedient to urge annexation just now, but it may be desirable at some
future time to do so; and, in the face of the despatch under consideration, it would
be impossible to make the recommendation without knowing the views of the
Assembly'&s to a money contribution. The Premier, therefore, thinks that when it
is considered desirable to take further steps, the Government should submit to both
H ouses a Resolution to the effect that the Assembly recognizes that if the Colony
urges the Imperial Government lo further annexation, because of the interests of
New Zealand partly or whoPy requiring the annexation, a statement should also be
imade of the amount, the Colony is prepared to ;contribute; and the Assembly is also
•of opinion that if the Government at any time deem it necessary to recommend the
annexation of the Navigator Group, such recommendation should be accompanied
by an undertaking to submit to the Legislature a stated contribution.
Lord Carnarvon intimates that he would prefer that the Colony should come to
a conclusion in concert, with the other Colonies. On behalf of New Zealand, the
Premier would be glad to aid this result, but he does not see much prospect of it.
New South Wales and New Zealand frequently'act in concert, and their interests
are identical with regard to some of the islands. The other Colonies have less direct
interests at stake. With his Excellency’s permission, copies of this Memorial
might be sent, to all the Australian Colonies, though it is doutful if any results
would follow. Probably each Colony has already forwarded an expression of its
viouSi
(Signed) JULIUS VOGEL.
MprOl 5, iisrc.


No. 43.
The Earl of Carnarvon to the Marquis of Norman, K.C.M.G.
My Lord, Downing Street, June 1876.
I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of jour despatch of t!iq
27th of April,* inclosing a Memorandum, signed by Sir Julius Vogel, expressing t io
views of the Government of New Zealand with regard to my Circular despatch ojf
the Uth of July, 1873,t on the subject of the annexation of Fiji.
I have, &c.
(Signed) CARNARVON.
• No. 42. + g ee Appendix.
( 124 ) M 2


APPENDIX.
The Earl of Carnarvon to the Governors of Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, and New Zealand.
(Circular.)
My Lord,
Sir, Downing Street, July 9, 1875.
IN' the autumn of last year, and in the course of a correspondence with reference to the cession
of the Fiji Islands, I suggested in a despatch addressed to the Governor of New South Wales, of
which copies were subsequently sent to the Governors of Victoria, New Zealand, and Queensland, that
each of these four Colonies, being from various reasons specially interested in the establishment of the
new Colony, should contribute a small annual sum, not to exceed in any case 4,000/., towards the
probable deficiency in the revenue.
2. Even before the lamentable outbreak of disease which has recently ravaged the Islands,
sufficient proof had been afforded that the anticipations of revenue were not likely to be realized, and
the last return which I have received shows the collections from the 11th of October to the 31st of
December, 1874, to fall short by 1,544/. 135., or considerably less than the moderate expenditure of the
same period. The late calamity, It is needless to say, has of course seriously crippled the necessarily
slender financial resources of the young Colony.
3. Her Majesty’s Government has now made such provision as seems necessary for enabling the
Colony of Fiji to contend with what I trust may be only a limited period of financial difficulty, and it
is not my object to renew in this despatch the suggestion that any of the Colonies should co-operate
in the way contemplated by me last year. But I think it due to myself, and indeed to the Colonial
Governments also (all of whom readily entered upon the consideration of the question, although none
of them were satisfied that they could confidently make any recommendation to their Parliaments),
that I should take some notice of the replies which have been made, more especially as the principle
on which I proceeded would seem not to have been sufficiently explained or understood.
4. The circumstances under which I considered that Her Majesty’s Government would be justified
in accepting a money contribution from the Australian Colonies were these: At their strong and
repeated instance, and for reasons on which I need not now dwell, it had been decided to accept the
cession of Fiji, and to establish there a British Government, which, though its presence must
necessarily affect in many ways the neighbouring Colonies, it was not thought desirable to place in
special connection with, or under the political influence of, any one of them.
5. It became, therefore, necessary to provide a sufficient civil staff for the proper administration
of Fiji as a separate Crown Colony, and, having been called upon on many recent occasions to consider
what minimum of expenditure could be safely adopted in similar cases, I framed a scale of establish-
ments involving the lowest possible cost which, according to my experience, could safely be incurred.
6. I at once perceived, however, that it was very doubtful whether the revenue would meet the
cost of such an administration ; and as New South Wales and New Zealand had liberally volunteered
to give assistance (through their Governors or Judges, or otherwise) in the conduct of public affairs,
I thought it not impossible that they might be disposed to make their contribution in another, and, as
it so happened, in a more convenient form, and that the other two Colonies principally concerned in
Polynesian matters (namely, Victoria and Queensland) might desire not to be excluded from any such
an arrangement. In order to place all as far as possible on the same footing, it appeared to me that
the most satisfactory course for all parties might be a money contribution, but that, for reasons which
I explained, and which I think must command general assent, the Colonies contributing should not
undertake any share in the Government of Fiji.
7. Without recapitulating in detail the replies of the several Governn ents, I may state briefly
that the Government of New South Wales was of opinion that it would not be possible for all the four
Colonies to combine with the Imperial Government in granting financial assistance, but, with a
liberality and readiness which Her Majesty’s Government fully appreciate, offered to ask the sanction
of the Legislature to a proposal that New South Wales should bear an equal part of any deficit with
this Government, suggesting as an alternative that New South Wales and England should each
guarantee one-half of a contemplated loan of 100,000/.
8. The Government of Queensland, on the other hand, was not favourable to the principle of a
contribution from the revenue of that Colony, and considered that Fiji had no claim, direct or indirect,
upon it, on the ground that no trading relations exist between the two Colonies. Without desiring to
enter into any unnecessary controversy, I feel bound in passing to observe on this head that, as
Queensland has been largely concerned in the labour traffic, the regulation of which was a principal
object of the annexation of Fiji, that Colony could not be considered to be uninterested, if, indeed, it
was not under a special obligation to assist in such a case as this.
V. The Government of New Zealand took a somewhat different view, and was unwillLig to


contribute towards the expenses of Fiji without a corresponding voice in the direction of the
administration.
• 10. And lastly, the Government of Victoria, observing that it had not been a party to previous
communications with respect to the annexation of Fiji, felt unable to decide whether it should place
the proposal before Parliament without further information as to the duration of the proposed grant,
and as to the obligations which would devolve on Victoria in the event of complications in Fiji,
matters which I had endeavoured, though as it would appear imperfectly, to explain in my despatch
to the Governor of New South Wales of the 7th August- , The representation, however, made by the
Government of Victoria that “no Colony 'or Colonies should'* exercise any exclusive control or enjoy
any special privileges in Fiji from which the rest of Australia should be shut out,” would in any
case have had great weight with me; and expressed a conclusion to which I had myself already
been led.
11. It would, in my opinion, have been obviously undesirable, in a matter where the grace of the
action depended upon it being voluntary, and where the amount involved was so small, that it would
be mainly valuable as proving, the- readiness of the - great Colonies-to-accept their membership’ in. the
common duties of the Empire, to put the slightest pressure upon any one of them to make this joint
contribution. It was, as I explained in my former despatch, principally to give trial and effect to the
principle of joint action among different members of the Empire in such cases that I invited
co-operation in. a matter in which the contributions proposed were so inconsiderable as to make it
practically immaterial, except in connection with such a principle,, whether the arrangement could be
at once earned out.
12, But as lam still inclined to believe that the Colonial Governments are alive to the expediency
of bearing in certain cases a share of those burdens which cannot fairly be thrown entirely upon the
revenue of Great. Britain, it may be well that I should take this opportunity of again explaining the
part which, in my opinion, it would be reasonable in any similar case in future for them to bear in an,
undertaking into which they may desire the Imperial Government to enter.
18, It may again hereafter be deemed a matter of great importance to a Colony or group of
Colonies, that the protection or sovereignty of the Crown should be extended to a place adjacent to
those; Colonies, either because British subjects have settled, or are likely to settle, there, or because
there is a trade with Colonial ports needing protection or development, or in order to anticipate the
occupation of the country by any foreign Power.
14. Taking, in illustration of this principle the case of’ Fiji, or that of New Guinea (over a portion
of which Her Majesty’s Government have been invited, for reasons which are more or less worthy of
consideration, to advise that the Crown should assume jurisdiction) it must be obvious that the future
of these-islands is of the most direct and material importance to the Colonies of Australasia, while it
would be impossible for a very large proportion of the taxpayers of this country to-understand on
what principle they should bear, whilst the Colonies immediately concerned should be exempted from,
the burden of any expenditure that may be incurred in connection with such places.
15. In the corresponding case of a Crown Colony, there would be no doubt as to the course to be
pursued. If the Government of suen a Colony should recommend the- intervention of this country
and the expenditure of money in a neighbouring territory, among the first questions to be considered
would be, whataraount the Colony would and ought to expend on such objects, as, in fact, has recently
happened in the Malay Peninsula. There, in order to promote British enterprise and extend relations
in the Malay territories adjacent to the Straits Settlements, the Government of those Settlements has
granted a subsidy for a telegraph line beyond its frontiers, and has made itself responsible, in the first
instance, for the salaries of Presidents at the Courts of the native Princes. Tire progress of the
Australasian -Colonies is so rapid that one can hardly venture at any particular date to calculate what
their aggregate revenues may be, but it has been lately said that they amount to some 14,000,0007.
peranuum. I cannot doubt that Colonies which possess such magnificent resources, and which have
shown not only an enlightened liberality in their internal government, but, on occasions of emergency,
a. remarkable eagerness to contribute to Imperial needs, will be desirous to join in establishing some
system under which they may share in the cost of any policy which they may hereafter propose as
essential to their intere.- ts and those of the Empire generally. And I request you, in communicating
this; despatch to your Ministers, to intimate to them that, while 1 am obliged by the consideration
which they have given to my suggestion in reference to a contribution towards tire deficiency of
revenue in Fiji, and have no desire to press it further on them, I shall be glad if they will consider
whether, as regards-the Colony of alone, or better still, in my opinion, should this appear
Convenient, in concert with the other Governments of Australasia, whether the time has not arrived
for the adoption of some general principle (such as has in fact been already tested, though on a very
small scale, in-the case,of the joint contributions towards the. Settlement at Cape York), under which
each Colony more immediately concerned shall bear its reasonable proportion of the expense attending
any policy which ib may advocate or approve.
I am, &c.
(Signed) CARNAHVON.


Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Com-
mand of Her Majesty: July 18? 6.
Correspondence respecting New
Guinea.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SONS.


