

CORRESPONDENCE
conducted through the Bathurst
“Daily Times”
between
Rev. Charles Stead, Wesleyan Minister
and
The Hon. John Meagher, K.C.S.G.,
M.L.C.
Also the Editorial from the Bathurst “Daily Times” at
the conclusion of the correspondence.
1889




STATEMENTS BY THE REV. C. STEAD CHALLENGED.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES’
Sir, —
You report the Rev. C. Stead as having said at The Orange Cele-
bration, “In this colony a man who was a terrible drunkard, a dreadful
swearer, and a thorough paced gambler, died with marvellous sudden-
ness, and his poor wife paid £lOO to the priest to get him out of Pur-
gatory. In another case an infant, three years old, died, and the poor
struggling mother, who earned her living by sewing, paid £5 to get it
out of Purgatory.”
The above are very grave charges, and the public would expect that
a gentleman occupying the position of the Rev. C. Stead does in this
community, would not make them unless ne was in a position to prove
them.
If the reverend gentleman will give the names of the priests who
took the £lOO from the “poor wife” (very poor, being able to give £lOO
to take a drunkard out of Purgatory), and the name of the “poor wife”
who gave the £lOO for the above purpose, and if the Rev. C. Stead proves
that the priests accepted this money on the condition that they
would take the drunkard husband out of Purgatory, I will place £5O in
your (Mr. Editor’s) hands to be given to the Hospital.
In the case of the three year old infant, if the Reverend gentleman
will give the “poor struggling mother” who gave the £5 to get her three
year old infant out of Purgatory, and give the name of the priest who
accepted the money for such a purpose, and prove it, I will give another
£5O to Mrs. Munro, the worthy President of the Poor Relief Society, to
be distributed by her amongst the poor.
Yours, etc.,
15th July, 1889.
JOHN MEAGHER.
THE REV. CHARLES STEAD IN REPLY TO MR. JOHN
MEAGHER.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES”
Sir,—
It is a comfort in these poor times to know that there is a gentle-
man in our city who is able so liberally to assist our charitable institu-
tions. But Mr. John Meagher knew when he penned the letter which
appeared in your issue of the 15th inst. that there was no possibility of
his being called upon to part with his money. He knew, or ought to
know, that the conditions upon whicl he promised £lOO to the Hospital
Fund and The Poor Relief Fund couH not be complied with.
First, if I were to disclose the name of the priest who took the
money for praying the man’s soul out of Purgatory, and also that of
the child of three years and six months old, and if that priest were
asked if he did so he would be perfectly justified, according to the tea-
chings of his church, in telling a deliberate untruth or prevaricating, so
as to save his church from disgrace or injury.
Mr. Meagher knows, or ought to know, that it is a regulation among
the Jesuits, that a lie can be told, and should be, for the good of “the


Church.” And this very regulation has received the sanction of the
Pope. Let each reader of this reply obtain a copy of the book ‘‘The
Modern Avernus,” and read for himself. In that book he will find the
most irrefragable proofs that “there is no harm—no sin, in lying, pro
viding you aim at or secure the good of the Roman Catholic Church.”
Does anyone believe that the priest who took the money would acknow
ledge it, “criminate” himself, and show the very thing the whole body
of the priesthood want to keep secret, when such a provision is made
for escaping detection and securing the good repute of his order? A
gentleman of Mr. Meagher’s discrimination surely knows all this as well
as anyone can tell him.
Secondly, supposing I were to disclose the name of the woman who
paid the money, what would the result be? The priest could deny, or by
some method explain away the fact. And then, alas| for the woman.
Would they not be subjected to awful penance, persecutions, and pains
for telling what would be used against the “Mother Church”?
Has not the Roman Church always had from the time of Pope In-
nocent 111 to this day secret means to punish and harass all who pro-
voked the ire of the priests? Have all your readers forgotten a com-
paratively recent case of harassing? If it be right for a priest to con-
ceal truth for certain ends, can we expect two who are members of the
Church and completely under the influence of the priests to tell all
they should tell —so as to convince Mr. Meagher of the truth of my as-
sertions? 1
Third, how can I mention the names of persons and places honor-
ably without the sanction of those who put me in possession of these
facts? Mr. Meagher knows if I did, those so named would be no longer
regarded as they now are in the Church of which he is a member. Have
I mentioned something new in the world? Are there no wills of deceas-
ed Romanists in which there are no clauses relating to money and
Purgatory? Does every priest stand ready to declare on oath that he
never took or asked for money for praying souls out of Purgatory?
I did not say in my speech last Friday night that the woman who
paid the £lOO was poor. I know she was well provided for. Your re-
porter admitted to me that I only used the word “poor” in relation to
the woman who paid the £5. So Mr. Meagher’s raillery is groundless. I
hope Mr. Meagher will, whether he pays the money or not, believe me>
when I assure him that the statements I made were perfectly reliable.
I am,
18th July, 1880.
(Signed) CHAS. STEAD.
MR. MEAGHER IN REPLY TO THE REVEREND C. STEAD
TO THE EDITOR OF THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES”
Sir,—
I am very much mistaken in the character of my fellow citizens of
every denomination, but in an especial manner in that of the denomin-
ation under the spiritual guidance of the Reverend Chas. Stead, unless
they feel thoroughly humiliated by that Reverend gentleman’s reply to
my challenge in a late issue of your paper.
Let the Reverend C. Stead keep to the point. I have not in any
way, in my previous letter, sought to defend Pope or Popery, neither do


I in this. All I wanted, and wish for now, is to ascertain the truth or
untruth of the statements made by the Reverend C. Stead, principal
Wesleyan Minister in Bathurst and district, which statements were,
that certain priests were paid money, in one case to take a drunkard,
and in another, an infant of three and a half years old, out of Purgatory.
I appeal to the Reverend gentleman’s audience, if they were not
positive that what their brother Orange Minister stated was true, and
that they believe he was perfectly cognisant of the facts (?) and could go
and lay his hands on the poor dupes of women who were so gulled by
those unscrupulous priests, as he said that it occurred “in one place
where I lived.” So shocked were the audience that they are reported
to have cried “shame” and in order that his hearers, and your readers,
should not have the shadow of a doubt of the facts (?) he was about to
place before them, he requested the reporters to make a special note of
what he was about to say, and he defied Cardinal Moran to disprove it.
Then, the Reverend gentleman related what, I am certain, numbers of
his hearers believed as firmly as they would any revealed truths, viz.,:
That the Rev. gentleman knew that silly woman who gave £IOO to get
her “drunken” husband out of Purgatory, as well as the poor struggling
widow who lived by sewing as well as the sale of thread, tapes, etc., and
who gave the £5 to take her three-and-a-half year old child out of Pur-
gatory, as he stated that the circumstances occurred “in a place where
I once lived.”
It now appears, when our Rev. friend is cornered, not, as he request-
ed, by Cardinal Moran, but by a humble and simple layman, his tender
conscience forbade him to divulge names, etc., lest “Alas for the women,
would they not be subjected to awful penance?”
I will quote a portion of the Rev. gentleman’s third paragraph, as
follows:—“How can I mention names of persons and places honourably
without the sanction of those who put me in possession of the facts?”
A new aspect altogether is here presented to us, and your confiding inno-
cent people who cried out “shame” at a scandal that you believed your
minister and friend gave you all particulars of, as he would of Gospel
truth, as he stated it occurred “in one place where I lived.” He gives
now as his reason for not divulging the names of his informants, that
he has not their sanction to do so; thereby stultifying himself, having
led his hearers and readers to believe that what he stated was from his
own knowledge.
I am now willing to abide by the decision of your readers, whether
or not the Rev. C. Stead has exactly acted the part he accuses the Jes-
uits of, in saying: “That it is a regulation of the Church that a lie can
and should be told for the good of the Church.”
Has not the Rev. Stead, knowingly, willfully, and of malice afore-
thought, stated a deliberate lie in order to gain the applause of his
hearers, as well as for the advancement of the Orange cause, and to
foster bitterness and hatred against Catholics?
For our Rev. friend’s information I may tell him that under no cir-
cumstances is a lie allowed, much less encouraged by the Catholic
Church, whose teaching is “No lie is lawful, or innocent, nor no motive
however good, can excuse a lie, because a lie is always sinful and bad in
itself.”
In order to still further prove my desire to arrive at the truth or
otherwise of the Rev. Stead’s allegations against those priests who ac-
cepted those moneys to “pray” that drunkard and infant out of Purga-
tory, I am prepared to have the moneys offered by me still considered
ready for distribution for the objects named on the following condi-
tions: I am willing to proceed with our Rev. friend to the “place where


lie lived’’ to interview those persons who put him in “possession of the
facts,” also the two women who, he said, paid the money to the priests
for the purpose stated, and that we be accompanied by the Police Mag-
istrate of the place (I am indifferent whether he be Catholic or Pro-
testant), who must be satisfied as to the good character of the women
who are said to have paid the moneys, and that the Police Magistrate
decide from the evidence given ex parte (thus giving the Rev. gentle-
man a more than due advantage) by the woman, in the first place, who
is said to have paid the £IOO to get her drunken husband out of Purga-
tory, and in the second place, that of the poor widow who is said to
have given the £5 to get her infant of 3i years out of Purgatory.
I say that if these women will prove, to the satisfaction of the Police
Magistrate, that the priests accepted these moneys on condition that they
(the priests) would “pray” the two out of Purgatory, I will not only give
the £IOO to the charities named, but will pay all the expenses of the
Rev. C. Stead to and from the “place where he lived.” I will also pledge
my word as a man that I will never reveal to bishop, priest or layman,
the names of the women who, as the Rev. gentleman alleges, gave the
moneys to the priests, or the names of the priests who are said to have
accepted the moneys from the women, so that our Rev. friend need
have no qualms of conscience regarding those so named, being “subject-
ed to the awful penance, persecutions, and pains” of Mother Church.”
In conclusion, I may state that, but for the challenge thrown out
by our Rev. friend I would have taken no notice; and if, after seeing the
part he has played in this “Purgatorial” matter, his flock is still satis-
fied with him, then all I can say is—they are easily satisfied. One thing
is certain, that at the next meeting of Orangemen our Rev. friend's
utterances will be taken by all honest and intelligent persons—cum
grano salis.
Yours, etc.,
19th July, 1889.
JOHN MEAGHER.
REV. C. STEAD’S REJOINDER TO MR. JOHN
MEAGHER’S REPLY.
TO THE EDITO& OF THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES’’
Sir,—
There are several reasons which induce me to furnish what may be
regarded as a comparatively brief answer to Mr. John Meagher’s last
letter. Instead of answering my arguments, he has descended to per-
sonal abuse. Whether his co-religionists are ashamed and disgraced, or
honored by his conduct, I shall leave your readers to decide. In my
reply I treated him with courtesy and respect. There was not a single
personality from beginning to end. All I called attention to was the
doctrine and practice of his Church. Because this was too repugnant a
revelation of the true character of Romanism, he leaves fair argument
and indulges in reviling. His vilifying and abusive language may please
some Roman Catholics; but the Protestant community will not by any
means accept this as a substitute for a logical refutation of my last letter.
Mr. John Meagher asks, “Has not the Rev. Stead stated a deliberate
lie. I answer, If I have it came straight from the Roman Catholic
Church itself, and that by two of its members. I believe that what was


communicated to me was true, though as may easily be imagined, I did
not see the priest take the money.
I did not state this before Roman Catholic priests with the promise
or intention of proving it in the way they might require, and to their
satisfaction, and the satisfaction of those who are duped and deceived
by their teaching. If Cardinal Moran will give his assurance to the
world at large that for the last twenty years there has been no Purga-
tory, and that there have been no Masses said for souls confined there,
and that for the same length of time no fees have been taken for pray-
ing souls out of this Purgatory, then the reader can easily see that my
assertions have been unreliable. But one of the funniest things is that
very similar lies are in the mouths of many respectable inhabitants of
this city. The truth is, at many a street corner you can find someone
prepared to substantiate the lie by the trustworthy narrative of facts.
The remark about the teaching of the Catholic Church respecting
telling a lie, is another instance of the way in which Roman Catholics
are deceived and led astray. I knew well enough what was their tea-
ching when applied to little children in their day schools. But does this
touch the great question of the rules and regulations of the Jesuits be-
fore mentioned? Are not the two things wide apart as the poles are
asunder? Is not the duplicity and shameful deception in Romanism
here unwittingly manifested as clear as daylight? Will Mr. Meagher,
with all the priests in the colony at his back, deny my statements, as
they stand in my last letter respecting the Jesuits, and their abomin-
able and pestiferous laws, lives and conduct?
Mr. John Meagher still asks me to disclose the names of the women
who paid the money for souls to be prayed out of Purgatory, and says
“I will pledge my word as a man that I will never reveal to bishop,
priest or layman the names of the women.” This looks very plausable,
and very tempting, particularly when it is done that I may be freed
from ‘‘qualms of conscience.” But I have to tell Mr. Meagher that, as
a man and a Romanist, he cannot make such a promise, and if he does,
at the peril of his soul he cannot keep it. His conscience is not his own;
but the first time he presents himself in the confessional, if the priest
asks him, he is bound to divulge the names. I will here quote from the
“Decrees of the Council of Trent,” which he is bound to observe (Sess.
xiv, Cap. 111, Canon vi.)“lf any one shall deny either that sacra-
mental confession was instituted or is unnecessary unto salvation, of
divine right; or shall say that the manner of confessing secretly to a
priest alone, which the Catholic Church has ever observed, is alien from
the institution and command of Christ and is a human institution; let
him be accursed.” Mr. Meagher is not his own. Body and soul he is<
the property of his church. If a priest asks him any question he is
bound under this decree to answer. He has no absolute control over
his conscience. His conscience belongs to the priest. If necessary I
might quote the decrees of one of the Councils of Lateran to the same
purpose. Either Mr. John Meagher is ignorant of the principles of his
own church, or he is throwing dust into the people’s eyes for the pur-
pose of deceiving them. Mr. John Meagher keep a secret from his priest?
Is he not bound by the rules and usages of the confessional as a true
Romanist to tell even the whole “circumstances” of what transpires.
Again, almost anyone acquainted with the Decrees of Councils, and
the Bulls of Popes, know that Mr. John Meagher’s promise to me about
secrecy is absolutely worthless. According to the teaching of his church,
he “ought not to keep faith with a heretic.” It does not matter how
solemnly, or upon what subject a promise is made, his word to a heretic


is nol his bond. When the interests of the church are at stake he has
no power to act but in exact accord with these decrees and rules. I
will here quote the words literally from the nineteenth session of the
Council of Constance:—“No faith is to be kept with heretics.” Again
Pope Martin V. declared in writing to Alexander, Duke of Lithuania:—
“Know,” says he, “that thou sinnest mortally if thou keep thy oath with
heretics.”
Commit something confidential to a man who utters a base slandei
about you? 1 would ask Mr. John Meagher if, when he was calmly com-
posing his last letter, he was not conscious of penning a deliberate un-
truth when he said that I stated a lie “with malice aforethought.” And
what proof has he that I ever attempted to foster bitterness and hatred
against Roman Catholics, or that I have a fraction of either in my mind.
It is just the opposite with me, for while I foster (and am glad I am
not labouring in vain) the strongest opposition to the blasphemies and
cruelties of Popery, there is not a Roman Catholic whom I would injure
in the least. Mr. John Meagher does not know how many Roman
Catholics I have assisted, and that in various ways. Could I trust his
word when I am conscious in the presence of God that I have no malice
whatever —either aforethought or after-thought—in my heait against
any Roman Catholic in the Colony? Nor has he or anyone else seen
the least manifestation of it. This remark about me, I repeat is a slan-
der, and one of the most unfounded insinuations which he could utter.
One thing is certain, that the spirit which runs through that letter,
wherever it emanated, would for ever prevent me from gratifying Mi.
John Meagher on this point. If the bitterness and vindictiveness which
he has shown are indications of what lurks in the Roman Church, then,
for the cake of those two defenceless woman, the names shall not be di-
vulged by me, firmly believing as I do that there are many ways of per-
secuting and punishing the Roman Church always has at hei command.
Mr John Meagher has thus with his own hand closed the door of hope.
Perhaps he will say: “Shall my Priest go with you, he can keep a sec-
ret.” Yes, and so can I. Constantly enough does Mr. Meagher say lie
does not defend Pope or Popery; though one would think these would be
flic first to be defended, as the unanswered argument m my last letter
turned upon this very point—the lying sanctioned within the system
by those very Popes.
It would be a very profitable exercise for Mr. John Meagher, who
himself a “simple” as well as a “humble” layman, to get to know
what some of these Popes were. Sanctioning lying was one oi tliu
“five acts” one of their gentlest offences. Take an instance: In honoi
Ihe massacre in Paris of St. Bartholomew’s Day, Pope Gregory XIII.
, -j .. mcc ial struck on one side of which was a picture of himself, an<
o the otS a picture* of the slaughter.! Imagine, gentle reader, JO,OOO
Protestants put to death in the middle of the night; men, women and
dfildren infants at the breast, slaughtered till the blood ran down the
streets of the city. Who, but a monster of iniquity, would have struck
such a medal? A shudder comes over you while you try to picture the
scene before your mind’s eye. Defend the Popes! Defend Pope John
m Pnne Alexander VI. The unutterable brutality of these de-
X , „ n can never be fully described. Let me attempt it—no; I
eiuM eaSly do so, and that in the language of their own historians m
some measure; but I must refrain-simply because of the fact that lad-
i. s liid children of tender years are readers of your journal. Why docs
u Mr Member come out of such a church, in which such men are
a, Saints, Holy, and inlalliWe? Why does he


and other sensible Romanists remain in a system honeycombed with
error to be fleeced by the exacting men who gorge themselves with the
best of viands after the “last days,’’ if one who was in their ranks is to
be believed, and then go on repeating thei r incantations over a fiction,
for Purgatory is nothing but a fiction? No wonder that intelligent infi-
dels turn away from Christie nity with disgust, and a sneer. But let me
tell them this is not Chrism rJty at all. It is a God-dishonouring mis-
representation of it. Whoever draws aside the curtain and shows to the
world the secret wickedness, the degrading dogmas, and the cruel ex-
actions inside the Rt.manish Church is, in the estimation of their
priests, a liar. John Calvin and John Knox, holy Melancthon, and sin-
cere Ridley, John Milton, and John Wesley are all liars. Martin Lu-
ther was the prince of liars.
When a man or woman comes out from them and in the most
solemn, honest and truthful manner possible confirms these exposures,
he, or she, is denounced as a most egregious falsehood-teller. Who, I
ask, can believe the Church of Rome when she has, in -the most bare-
faced manner, denied the abundantly confirmed exposures of foulness
and perfidy? Seme of your readers may say this is strong language. So
it is: but it must be remembered that “ a severe case requires a severe
treatment.” When our Divine Redeemer had to deal with hypocrisy,
deceit, and shams in his day He did the same. Read St. Matthew's Gos-
pel, Chapter XXIII., as one out of many instances. As a citizen Mr.
John Meagher has been respected, and deservedly so; and it is a pity
he put his name to the last letter. Every reader is sufficiently aware
that what I affirmed is in harmony with the teaching of the Romish
Church—a church which declares herself to be infallible and unchange-
able.
As cursing Protestants of every denomination, and indulging in
abuse, are such common things in the Romish Church, very few of your
readers will either be surprised at, or influenced by them. Suffice it to
say that, unless there is an attempt to overthrow my arguments, there
will be no need to take any further notice of the abuse, which humiliates
every Roman Catholic in the district.
Mr. John Meagher had better leave the ignorant Orangemen alone,
or a revelation of the secret doings in Romanism will be made, either
in your columns or in some other way, which will shame every decent
priest as he walks the streets of this city. Let me inform Mr. John
Meagher that there is no need to instruct Orangemen to take my utter-
ances with a grain of salt (cum grano salis) for they always do, if he
implies that keen spirit of inquiry—which reasons before receiving. As
for his church, it needs in some of its departments loads of salt of
another kind to keep it from moral putrefaction.
Mr. John Meagher has thrown out a challenge to me. I will now
throw out one to him. Basing my calculations upon a recent authentic
statement, if Mr. John Meagher will give me one penny per head for all
the men. women and children which the Roman Catholic Church has mur-
dered or caused to be murdered, with the sanction of Popes, Cardinals and
Bishops, I will undertake to give £2OO a year for ten years to the Bath-
urst Hospital; and I will further undertake to give Mrs. Munro £l5O a
year for the Poor Relief Fund as long as she lives.
I am, etc.,
26th July, 1889.
CHARLES STEAD


MR. MEAGHER’S REPLY TO REV. C. STEAD
TO THE EDITOR OF THE BATHURST ‘DAILY TIMES"
Sir,
It is characteristic of a certain animal that the greater its efforts
to save itself from drowning, the more it hastens its end by cutting its
throat. So with the Rev. Charles Stead, principal Wesleyan minister
in Bathurst and district, who makes a desperate effort to save himself
from the stigma which my challenge has fastened upon him, and which
will stick to him as tightly as the grip of an octopus and keep him
under water until he be morally drowned, unless he extricates himself
by the only means possible, viz., prove his allegation. The Rev. gentle-
man has so persistently avoided the point at issue, one might think that
his memory was at fault, to refresh which I give his allegation in a few
words: “That a woman paid £lOO to a priest to take her drunken hus-
band out of Purgatory, and that a poor struggling widow paid £5 to a
priest to take her infant, 31 years old, out of Purgatory,” and both of
these, he said, occurred “in one place where I lived.”
As your readers and the public generally are aware, I have dis-
claimed against in any way identifying myself with a religious discus-
sion, and, religon has, therefore, no place n the dispute so far as I am
concerned, except inasmuch as truth, honor, and candour form the basis
of solid and lasting religion. The attempt of the Rev. C. Stead to di-
vert me from the principle which actuated me in challenging his state-
ments are, therefore, useless.
Let us again see what were those statements. He (Rev. C. Stead)
said: “In this colony a man, who was a terrible drunkard, a dreadful
swearer, and a thorough paced gambler, died with marvellous sudden-
ness, and his widow paid £lOO to the priest to get him out of Purga-
tory. In another case an infant, three and a half years old, died, and
the poor struggling mother, a widow, who earned her living by sewing,
paid £5 to get it out of Purgatory.” The reverend gentleman then goes
on to say: “I contend that for a man who was a drunkard and a
swearer, to be got out of Purgatory for £lOO is a soul degrading sys-
tem.” (Cheers).
Mind you, the Rev. gentleman told his audience that all this oc-
curred in this colony, in “one place where I lived,” and in proof of his
knowledge of all the facts, he would like the reporters to make a special
note (mind a special note) of what he was about to say, and he defied
Cardinal Moran to disprove it. Then the Rev. Stead narrates, minutely
and precisely what he wished his hearers to believe he knew of his own
personal knowledge, else, why call upon Cardinal Moran to disprove any-
thing, it would be necessary for the Rev. gentleman to give facts, names,
and all particulars, otherwise how could Cardinal Moran or anyone else
disprove it? Supposing I said to my next door neighbor (Mr. B. Edye),
“Amen stole a saddle from your shop last night, and I defy Sergeant
Musgrove disprove it” unless I gave him some particulars to work upon?
There can be no defence without a specific charge being made. Has
the Rev. C. Stead made any specific charge for Cardinal Moran to dis-
prove? You, Mr. Editor, will say "No”; the public will say “No”; and I
say emphatically, “No”.
As the Rev. C. Stead withholds the names of the priests who are
said to have accepted the money, and the names of the women who are
said to have paid the money, neither Cardinal Moran nor anyone else
can prove or disprove his statement. What reason then, could the Rev.


C. Stead give for calling special attention to his utterance, which he
knew he could not substantiate? Is it not that he felt, under the cir-
cumstances, perfectly safe in making any charge, however absurd, slan-
derous, or malicious, as, no doubt past experience has led him to be-
lieve it would pass unquestioned? As a “Rose by any other name would
smell as sweet,” so a person charged with making a statement which he
knew to be a base and malicious lie, appears as odious under a more
euphonius title than that usually bestowed upon such persons. You may
call a rose a thistle, or a liar a truthful man; but the same in either
case will not alter the person or thing.
The Rev. C. Stead seems to feel very keenly my comparison of his
action with that of which he accuses the Jesuits, viz., lying for the good
of the cause, and my charging him with having “knowingly, wilfully,
and of malice aforethought stated a deliberate lie in order to gain the
applause of his hearers, as well as for the advancement of the Orange
cause, and to foster bitterness and hatred against Catholics.” I will
humbly apologise to the Rev. gentleman for ever conceiving such
thoughts of him, when he proves (as I will give him-every opportunity
to do) that no such motives actuated him to make such grave charges
against certain priests, “in the place where he once lived,” and that he
stated nothing but what he could prove. If our Rev. friend stated the
truth, he can easily prove it, for two circumstantial cases could never
occur more than once in a lifetime. Here you have a baby, exactly
three and a half years old—the child of a widow who lived by sewing
and selling needles, pins and tapes “in the place where the Rev. C.
Stead once lived,” whose mother paid exactly £5 to get it out of Pur-
gatory, as well as the woman who paid exactly £lOO to get out of Pur-
gatory a drunken husband, who must have been a pest in a small com-
munity like the place where the Rev. C. Stead once lived, and who was
a terrible drunkard, a dreadful swearer, and a thorough paced gambler,
and died with marvellous suddenness. Surely there are no two such
men, corresponding with such a minute description, that died in “one
place where the Rev. C. Stead once lived.” Therefore, if such deaths
occurred at all, and such amounts were paid for their soul’s ransom
from Purgatory, it ought not to be a difficult matter for the Rev. gen-
tleman to prove his case. Nay, he should feel it incumbent upon him
to do so without my challenging him, as such unworthy priests should be
exposed and hounded down, and two such silly women put under re-
straint. It now appears that the Rev. C. Stead cannot trust me, so he
will not accompany me to “the place where he once lived” to interview
those women upon whom the priests imposed. I do not wonder that
the Rev. gentleman cannot trust me, for after all he has written, it
would cause me great surprise if he trusted any Catholic.
I will now afford the Rev. C. Stead another opportunity of proving
himself a truthful man, and no one will be better pleased than I at his
proving his allegations against these swindling priests, for if any priests
acted the part they are said by the Rev. C. Stead to have acted, it
would be in the interests of society to brand them as “ravening wolves,”
and even though it cost me my £lOO and expenses, I would much pre-
fer that such imposters be exposed. As the Rev. C. Stead will not trust
me, I will now propose an amendment to my previous offer, whereby
he may be enabled, “with safety,” to substantiate his allegations against
“such a soul degrading system,” and so remove from himself the burn-
ing brand of shame which will otherwise cling to him for the rest of
his life.


I will entrust a Protestant, even a Protestant of his own particular
denomination (Mr. A. G. Thompson) to proceed with the Rev. C. Stead
to the “place where he lived.” to interview the women who were so im-
posed upon by those priests, and if the Rev. gentleman succeeds in sat-
isfying my friend that certain priests undertook, for the sum of £IOO, to
pray that particular man out of Purgatory (or any man), and that they
also undertook to pray an infant 3 h years old out of Purgatory, then the
£IOO I promised will be ready to be handed over for the objects speci-
fied. 1 will also pay the expenses of the Rev. C. Stead, and those of my
friend to and from the place where our Rev. friend “once lived, as
well as his, Mr. Thompson’s, fee. I will, however, stipulate with the
Rev. gentleman, that, if he fails to establish his case, he must pay all
expenses incurred.
The Rev. C, Stead accuses me of descending to personal abuse in-
stead of answering his arguments. This is simply childish, as, in the
first place there were no arguments, pertinent to the question, to answei,
and in the second place, on no account would I descend to personal
abuse. The reverse is actually the case.
The Rev. C. Stead has not only evaded the point, but has poured
out vials of slanderous abuse upon myself and my religion, and in-
troduced all kinds of matter entirely irrelevant to the question. Per-
secutions of Church, Popes, or Bishops have no bearing whatever on
the point at issue, and are introduced by the Rev. gentleman simply as
T would like, however, to draw particular attention to the Rev. C.
Stead's threat in his last effusion, viz., “Mr. John jMeagher hadbetUu
leave the ignorant Orangemen alone, or a revelation of the seciet do
Sr of Romanism will be made either in your columns, or m some
other way, which will shame every decent priest as long as he walks
the streets of this city.”
Does the Rev. C. Stead think for one moment that this mean, cow-
ardly threat will intimidate me? If so he is greatly mistaken in the one
Z haft,tell with Moreover, where or when did I make use of the
words “ignorant Orangemen," os implied mUieoOovequotauoiK Inow
invite the Rev. Stead to make “the revelation” that will bung shame
on those priests and unless he does so, all honourable persons will re-
gard Sr as a coward and moral assassin. We will expect to have a
brand new revelation not a rehash of threadbare generalities.
I appeal to the better instincts oi all honorable
lish, Irish, and Scotsmen to say whether or not the o£
country are the most forebearing people on the face of the* earth, in su
mitting patiently, calmly, and resignedly lSeHt us,
tuperations, ridiculings, slanders, and scurrilities whichi arebulled t
lUst vearlv from every Orange platform in the country, we nave
WksSSsSESSSiSZi
death itself ia y insulting my religion, with
raiTo? i rsSisrvSi .rLcr* 1 &
rrUn y g°X”uS« ?™a5S you, and who would not
hurt a hair of your head.
In conclusion I would inform the Rev. C. Stead that, whether
these letters bring upon me praise or blamo hm TO
me with suggested, or dictated one line of the letters which nave my


liame appended to them in this correspondence. I merely mention this
as the Rev. gentleman seems to doubt the paternity of these letters,
when he says, referring to my last, “wherever it emanated.”
Yours, etc.,
29th July, 1889.
JOHN MEAGHER.
THE REV. CHARLES STEAD IN REPLY TO MR. JOHN
MEAGHER’S LAST LETTER.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES”
Sir,
There is only one point in Mr. John Meagher’s last letter which re-
quires, or seems to require, an answer. I may say before going to it
that he has ignored the whole of the arguments contained in my last
letter, and has not made even one attempt to answer, them. The dis-
cerning public, whatever their creed may be, will know what to think
and what to say of this way of treating a subject. Moreover, when a
man steps into the arena to represent a Cardinal (for my defying dis-
proof was not given to Mr. John Meagher, but to his superior) he should
know that a rehash of a previous letter of his own is a very different
thing from dealing with Decrees of Councils, Bulls of Popes, and the
most reliable facts of history. The method of disproof pointed out in
my last letter he cannot touch without bringing the most tremendous
condemnatory evidence of the radical badness of his own cause. Could
any man with the smallest modicum of commonsense propose a more
absurd and preposterous method of arriving at the truth of my asser-
tion respecting the payment of the money by the Roman Catholic wo-
men referred to, than that proposed in Mr. Meagher’s last letter?
Examine carefully for a moment. Imagine a well-known Wesleyan
jMethodist solicitor and a magistrate, possibly a Wesleyan Methodist too,
for aught Mr. Meagher knows, and a Wesleyan Methodist Minister call-
ing unexpectedly upon a woman to interview her respecting paying
money to her priest for praying a soul out of Purgatory. Can onybody
suppose, who knows Roman Catholic doctrine, law, practice, and usage,
that this woman would acknowledge it? Do not the very same laws and
regulations relating to the confessional and the treatment of heretics
apply to her, which I so distinctly quoted from the Standards of Rom-
anism in my last letter, as applying to Mr. Meagher? To tell us would
not only imperil her soul, but must lead to the very results I pointed
out in my first letter.
Then, if several days’ notice were given to her, this would make
the case more difficult still. The priest would have to be consulted, and
in exact accord with the rules of his order, binding him to a certain line
of conduct, he would have to instruct the woman to flatly deny it; if
he did not, the principles of his own creed and church would be broken
in a most flagrant and dangerous manner.
But remember, courteous reader, Mr. A. G. Thompson was not ask-
ed by Mr. Meagher, nor anybody representing him, to go with me to
interview the two women. When I asked Mr. Thompson if he were
ready to start he at once declined to accompany me. And why? Mr.
Thompson knows as well as anybody what a devout Romanist (and only
a devout one would give the amount I specified) would do.
Let me definitely inform Mr. John Meagher that what was confident-
ially committed to me, I shall confidentially retain. My reasons have
been given in the most distinct manner. If Mr. Meagher is angry be


cause I have preached before him and the world the true character of
his church, he has only himself to blame. The doctrines and facts of
history are before men’s eyes, and no power on earth can hide them.
They are very troublesome things, I am aware, in the nineteenth cen-
tury, and before an enlightened community, like most in the city of
Bathurst. But now to conle to the main question at issue—the pay-
ment of money for Masses for the repose of the souls of Rmsn} Gath**
olios who are in Purgatory. I have in my possession the certified copy
of the will of a deceased Roman Catholic, who recently died at New-
town in the City of Sydney. This copy I have shown to Mr. A. G.
Thompson, Solicitor, Russell Street, and if Mr. Meagher will call on
him he will be informed that it not only bears the name of the Cus-
todian of Wills, but the Seal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
The clauses of this will have been examined by Mr. Thompson, and he
can certify to the correctness of my quotation from it. The will is that
of a gentleman, but I refrain from giving his name, as his family, so
far as I know, are residing in the colony. After bequeathing certain
properties and moneys to his relatives the clause stands thus: “I direct
the sum of £5O to be paid for Masses for the repose of the souls of my-
self and niy wife.” Now, will Mr. John Meagher say whether the
Church did not or will not receive that amount? What need have we
of any further evidence? Mr. Meagher dare not affirm that the very
things I mentioned have transpired.
I am, etc.,
2nd August, 1889.
CHARLES STEAD.
MR. MEAGHER IN REPLY TO THE REV. C. STEAD.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES”
Sir,
The Rev. Chas. Stead must credit his readers with very little dis-
cernment, or, at least, those whom he is in a particular manner suppos-
ed to regard, or else he would not dare imperil his reputation which he
should know would be sure to suffer from his tergiversation in his cor-
respondence with me. He now stands a self-convicted man.
When I first requested the Rev. gentleman to give particulars of
the charges he preferred against certain priests in the “place where he
once lived,” I was perfectly sure he could not substantiate his charges,
for the very obvious reason that such acts could not have been com-
mitted, either in the “place where he once lived,” or any other part
of the world. One would, however, have expected that the Rev. gen-
tleman when he found he could not substantiate his charges, would at
least had the grace to apologise. This, however, would be too much to
expect from one who would hold up to an audience the actions of a
ruffian as worthy of imitation. In his celebrated 12th July oration, the
Rev. C. Stead said: “In Australia the supremacy of the priests is not
great. At Tumut (.exact again) a man met the priest in the street, and
said. “Stop, your reverence, we are not in Ould Ireland now.” (Laugh-
ter) He stopped the priest; the priest could not stop him. (Cheers).
I am convinced that this circumstance never took place; but even sup-
posing it did occur, would not a man, with the instincts of a gentleman,
rather suppress such a ruffianly act, than hold up the blackguard as a
man to be admired and imitated? If this be the morality of the Rev. G.
Stead would indicate in our midst, we may expect a good harvest of


Nihilism when the doctrines have tune to bear fruit; and if a ruffian
will be cheered for insulting a priest, depend upon it the parson will
come in for his share of insult when his teachings take root.
Look on this picture and on that.
We find that in another part of Her Majesty’s Dominions a meet-
ing, presided over by the Prince of Wales, was held to do honor to the
memory of a priest, at which meeting the Archbishop of Canterbury
took part, and extolled the virtues of one who, as far as the dignity of
his office went, was no greater than the Tumut priest, whom the Rev.
C. Stead held up at the Orange meeting to ridicule. But as any red
material is calculated to infuriate a bull and arouse its dormant brutal
nature, so in like manner the name of a priest is calculated to infuriate
the Rev. C. Stead, and arouse his congenial natural instincts whereby
he sees in every priest all the evils that nature is heir to.
The Rev. gentleman has discovered a mare’s nest in the dead man’s
will he mentions, which proves to me that he has no. more idea of the
Catholic doctrines than, in vulgar parlance, “a cow has of a holiday.”
If he has no objection to come to me, I will show him a similar clause
in my will, and as he has reason to know, I am at the moment worth
several dead men.
I am now done with the Rev. C. Stead, and am most grateful to you
for the space placed at my disposal, as well as to my many friends, espec-
ially those outside my own communion, who have expressed their sym-
pathy with me on account of the insulting manner in which the Rev.
C. Stead has treated not only myself, but persons and institutions that
I hold in reverence.
Mr. Stead has played the role of a lawyer in a bad case, there be-
ing nothing left to do but to abuse the other side; and he has done so in
a mast significant manner.
Again thanking you, Mr. Editor.
I am, yours, etc..
sth August, 1889.
JOHN MEAGHER.
THE REV. CHARLES STEAD’S REPLY TO MR. JOHN
MEAGHER’S LAST LETTER.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES*’
Sir,
I am fully aware that as Mr. John Meagher inserted the first letter
in your journal addressed to me in the form of a challenge, I am en-
titled according to the rules and courtesies of newspaper controversy, to
close the discussion with the final reply. But although Mr. John
Meagher has quitted the field of contest, after thanking you for insert-
ing his letters and giving expression to further unmerited abuse, I am
not going to be tempted to indulge in the same kind of substitute for
fair argument and unperverted references to high authority. Your
readers will know without my telling them who has hurled insults and
abuse. And they will know who has writhed in the firm grip of an
unassailable appeal to that which has confirmed every assertion I have
made on the doctrines of Purgatory and the practices of priests in re-
lation to it.
I must say, however, that Mr. Meagher has retired with not only
“bad grace,” but by assuming a position which ill befits a modest man.


In all his letters he acted the part of “pleader” now he assumes '/the
position of Judge. Without waiting to know what others thought, he
closes his first paragraph by saying, I “stand a self-convicted man.”
There is an old Book which says “Let another man praise thee anH“not
thine own mouth.” Would that Mr. Meagher could be induced’ to read
that Book, especially the Revised Version; he would not swallow the
absurd doctrines of Romanism much longer. Yes, it is true enough that
I “stand,” but it is the very reverse of truth to say I am “self convicted”,
for the most conclusive evidence has been submitted to your readers that
the very assertions which I made, without any retractions, have been
most satisfactorily proved to be reliable. Strange indeed that Mr.
Meagher should refer to his own will, in which, as he gives us to under-
stand, there is a clause directing that a certain sum shall be paid to
the Romish Church for Masses for the repose of his soul when he has
gone to Purgatory. If I had asked him to put the climax on my argu-
ment, he could not have done so more effectively. I have other legal
documents at my command exactly of the same nature, but I need not
use them now. I will rely on the veracity of Mr. Meagher.
One of the most unfortunate sentences Mr. John Meagher has
penned since the controversy commenced was the one in the last letter
about my teaching and morality causing Nihilism. Who are the “Moon-
lighters,” and from what church have they sprung? What is the “Clan-
na-Gael” Society, and what class of men compose it? What has Fen-
ianism to reveal in its origin, its abettors, its aims, and its results? Here
I refrain from saying another word on this dark and dread subject. No
one but a man driven to a painful extremity would say that because I
referred to a Roman Catholic in Tumut not submitting to everything a
priest demanded I was “holding up a ruffian to be imitated.” Shame on
you, Mr. John Meagher, for calling a respectable Roman Catholic, as
good as yourself, by such an epithet. Here is another partially concealed
slander. Wesleyan Methodism, comprising her preachers and people, is
among the greatest enemies of Nihilism in the world.
All the rest of Mr. Meagher’s letter shall be taken by your readers
for what it is worth.
The idea of Mr. John Meagher professing to accept sympathy from
any body is preposterous, when he is lamentably guilty of pouring vitu-
peration on one who has treated him with respect from the beginning.
He does not see the difference between personal abuse and my proving
that certain doctrines and practices in the Romish Church, and the
vaunted conduct of its pretended infallible Popes are unscriptural and
dangerous. My knowledge of Romish doctrine, and its historical deve-
lopment, is such as to lead me more and more to denounce and oppose
it, whatever Mr. Meagher may say about his “reverence” for the men
and institutions who support that doctrine. Depend upon it the ad-
vance of education, the progress of scientific discovery, above all, the dis-
semination of the pure Word of God, will hasten a crisis in the Roman
Catholic Church. Such dogmas as transubstantiation, the worship of
images, celibacy of the priests, and the infallibility of an ordinary mor-
tal will have to go—to go and return no more, or men in thousands will
abandon the Church, as they have done in France, alas, to the accept-
ance of blank atheism.
Here I beg very gratefully to express my thanks to my many friends
who have approved my entire conduct in the defence of Protestantism
and my exposure of Romish error in my correspondence with Mr. John


Meagher. And I sincerely affirm that no bad feeling shall be cherish-
ed by me towards either Mr. Meagher or his co-religionists.
With the usual thanks for editorial courtesies.
I am, etc.,
10th August, 1389.
CHARLES STEAD.
MR. MEAGHER IN REPLY TO THE REV. C. STEAD
TO THE EDITOR OF THE BATHURST “DAILY TIMES”
Sir,
I fully intended that my letter of sth inst. should terminate my cor-
respondence with the Rev. C. Stead; but there are one or two points in
that gentleman’s (can it be termed) reply which called for comment.
He says “I must say, however, that Mr. Meagher has retired with not
only bad grace, but by assuming a position which ill befits a modest
man. In all his letters he acted the part of pleader; now he assumes
the part of Judge. Without waiting to know what others thought, he
closes his first paragraph by saying I stand a self-convicted man.” I
admit I did act the part of a Judge, believing that I voiced the great
majority of the public, basing this belief on the expressed opinions of
the various sections of the community. It is usual, when a criminal is
arraigned for any crime, however gross or heinous, to ask him how he
pleads, guilty or not guilty. If the criminal pleads not guilty then he
is tried by twelve of his countrymen, and sentenced, if found guilty, by
a Judge. If the prisoner in his endeavors to deceive and mislead the
Judge and jury, had resorted to every subterfuge—even that of trying to
incriminate his accuser in order to prove his innocence, and the jury,
seeing through the foul devices of the prisoner, bring in a verdict of
guilty, then, I say, that prisoner would receive a much more severe sen-
tence <han had he pleaded guilty in the first instance.
I did believe that the Rev. C. Stead would have pleaded guilty after
my late letter, and thus have received a lesser sentence of condemnation
from the public; but it appears I was wrong in assuming anything of
Uie Jewish now to afford the Rev. gentleman a public opportunity of
proving his innocence of my .charge, failing which, he will of necessity,
share the fate of the criminal who refused to plead guilty—the severity
of his sentence will annihilate him.
The Rev Chas. Stead, principal Wesleyan minister in Bathurst and
district has‘been charged by me with making grave charges against
certain priests “in one place where he lived,” to wit, “That certain pnests
received £lOO from a widow to get her husband out of Purgatory—a man
who had been a terrible drunkard, a dreadful swearer, and a thorough
paced rambler, and who had died with marvellous suddenness; and in
mothef received £5 from a poor struggling mother-who earned
her living by sewing—to get her infant, who had died at the age of 3 l
years out of Purgatory’* All this, he said, occurred “in one place
Whe on l these 'charges I adjudged the Rev. Charles Stead guilty of mal-
iening certain priests without his being able to prove his allegations to
ihe sansfactSn of the public, every facility having been offered by me
tn that end I therefore, considered I was justified in delivering the ver-
d°ct o the majority of the public, and had no hesitation in accusing


him of falsehood; or, should he prefer it, of economising the truth in
order to bring discredit on persons and institutions, which he has prov-
ed by his correspondence he holds in abhorrence. He now pleads not
guilty. Here, then, I give him the best and fairest of opportunities to
clear his character of my imputation, and should he not accept it, I
would expect that his term in Bathurst would close forthwith.
I propose that the Rev. C. Stead should meet me at the School of
Arts Hall, where I will nominate six Protestant gentlemen belonging to
the various Protestant denominations, and that the Rev. C. Stead nom-
inate six gentlemen belonging to any denomination—even his own. Then
let the twelve gentlemen appoint a Judge to deliver the sentence, and if
I fail to prove, to the satisfaction of a majority of the twelve jurymen,
a charge against the Rev. C. Stead of making false charges of corrup-
tion against certain priests “in the place where he once lived,” then I
am prepared to pay £lO to the Hospital, and £lO to the Poojr Relief! Soc-
iety; but on the contrary, if my charge be sustained, then the Rev. C.
Stead must pay the amounts named for the same objects, the moneys
to be placed beforehand in the hands of, say, the Very Rev. Dean Mar-
riott. I propose that a charge of one shilling be made for admission to
the Hall, the charges for the hall to be paid out of the sum thus re-
alised, and the balance to be paid to the charities named. When the
Rev. C. Stead accepts this proposal (as he is bound to do, unless lost to all
sense of honor, I will require fourteen days in which to select six gen-
tlemen referred to, as well as to allow of making other arrangements,
engaging the hall, etc.
Why should the Rev. C. Stead wander from the original subject, and
enter into every conceivable matter other than that that he wished the
reporters to make a special note of, and regarding which he defied con-
tradiction, or disproof? I have only questioned his Purgatorial state-
ment. Supposing that he succeeds in showing that the priests and the
Church are everything to be abhorred, it would in no way prove the
truth of his allegation that certain priests “in the place where he once
lived” contracted for the sum of £lO5 to take a drunkard and an infant
out of Purgatory. The Rev. C. Stead writes in his latest production,
“One of the most unfortunate sentences Mr. John Meagher has penned
since the controversy commenced, was the one in the last letter about
my causing Nihilism. Who are the Moonlighters, and from what church
did they spring? What is the Clan-na-Gael Society, and what class of
men compose it? What is Fenianism to record in its origin, its abettors,
its aims and results?” Since I commenced this correspondence I did
not introduce a third party; not a disrespectful word did I pen against*
Orangeism, Welseyanism, or any other “ism”, matter, person, or thing,
except to call a “Roman Catholic”, who insulted a priest at Tumut, a
blackguard. Yet the Rev. C. Stead introduced ruffians and societies that
have been condemned by the Church over and over again, and if I
were responsible for the acts of individual outlaws, as well as their con-
demned societies. Unless the Rev. C. Stead can implicate me in as-
sisting, encouraging, or justifying such things, why bring them up as
an argument against me? Is it now cowardly to introduce them at all?
I will ask the Rev. C. Stead who was Judas Iscariot? Who were the
rabble? Who were the persons by whom our Saviour was crucified? Was
not Judas one of the chosen twelve? The rabble and the executioners
who crucified our Saviour—were they not his own countrymen and co-
religionists as far as outward appearance and profession went? Thus,
according to the Rev. C. Stead’s mode of reasoning, our Saviour was
responsible for the actions of his betrayer and murderers, as they were


his deciples, countrymen and co-religionists. If this be the Rev. C.
Stead’s mode of trying to extricate himself from the charge of Nihilism
I preferred against him, and if he imagines it will pass as current coin,
then I again say he is imperilling his reputaton, as such arguments
could only proceed from a most illogical and ignorant person.
I will again quote the words uttered by the Rev. C. Stead, that hio
audience might learn how a priest could be, and was, insulted by a
blackguard at Tumut. Is it possible the Rev. C. Stead looked on, and
remained to hear and enjoy the insulting language? The Rev. gentleman
said, “In Australia the supremacy of the priests is not great. At Tumut
a man met the priest in the street and said, “Stop your reverence, we
are not in Ould Ireland now.” (Laughter). He stopped the priest, the
priest could not stop him. (Cheers). Unless it was to show that ‘Jack
was as good as his master,” and in the Rev. C. Stead’s eyes, much bet-
ter, why relate the story that the priest had not the power 01 influence
to stop an ignorant, and impudent Irishman (as, from the Rev. C.
Stead’s description, he must have been) ? A man may be excused for ig-
norance, but not for impudence. Yet the Rev. C. Stead declares that
that ruffian is as good as I am, when he says “Shame on you, Mr. John
Meagher, for calling a respectable Roman Catholic, as good as yourself,
by such an epithet.” We are, then, to understand that the Rev. C. Stead
knew this impudent Irishman who stopped the priest and informed him
that he was “not in Ould Ireland now”, or else the Rev. gentleman
could not have known that this Irish ruffian was as respectable a Roman
Catholic and as good as myself. Citizens of Bathurst, I appeal to you
if the Rev. C. Stead stated the truth when he said that I was no better
than that impudent Tumut scoundrel, who, without any provocation,
insulted a priest in the streets of Tumut. I am certain theie is not an
Orangeman, nor any man or woman in Bathurst that will admit such
a calumny as the Rev. C. Stead thus uttered against me, by saying that
I am no better than a man who, without any provocation, would stop a
gentleman in the streets and insult him. How dare he, a stranger, a few
weeks only in our midst, utter such a slander against one who would not in-
sult the humblest in the community? Out, then, on such a slanderer
and social leveller. Let the Rev. C. Stead bolster up, as best he can,
his ideal Catholic Irishman. He related the story to show how little
influence the priests had in this country, when he pompously and tri-
umphantly said to his Orange audience, “In Australia the supremacy
of the priests is not great. At Tumet a man met the priest in the stree
and said “Stop your reverence we are not in Ould Ireland now. ei im
££ the audience «. S to infer that the man implied “We are as good at
vour reverence here in this free country—you have no more influence
here than I have-“We are not in Ould Ireland now. You.dare* not
look crooked at me here—one man is as good as another. Go home to
Ould Ireland where you will be respected; where the creatures know
nothing We aretoo much for you here. The Steads, the Ohiniquys
and the O'Gormans have opened our eyes to your impositions If I
were in Ould Ireland I not pull you up in the street as I could a
navvy, and be cheered by the Rev. C. Stead and his friends for show-
ing my contempt for you. I dare you to stop me in the street, for if
you do the Rev. C. Stead will get his friends to join him in groaning at
and^es Sl this y °is'the “Roman Catholic” that the Rev. C. Stead states is
as eood’as lam in the following. “Shame on you Mr. John Meagher for
calling a respectable ‘Roman Catholic’ as good as yourself by such an
epithet.” I say shame on you Rev. C. Stead for trying to impose upon


the public, and for prevaricating; and not being man enough to prove
what you stated you knew all about, as you say it “occurred in one place
where I lived.”
If you do not accept this last chance of clearing your character of
a charge that no man worthy of the name of man would allow to hang
round him, then I say that your teaching and preaching will have no
effect.
Yours, etc.,
12th August, 1889.
JOHN MEAGHER.
EDITORIAL PUBLISHED BY THE BATHURST “TIMES”
Thursday, August 22, 1889.
It is hard to tell which does the more injury to a cause —the avowed
and active hostility of an opponent, preached and practised in and out
of season, or the partizanship of the over-zealous adherent who sacri-
fices fact and argument for the sake of a telling point, and who makes
allegations which, when analysed, cannot be proved. In the latter cate-
gory we are afraid we must class the Rev. C. Stead in his recent con-
fict with Mr. JOHN MEAGHER touching those two ideal beings, now
famous—the mauvais sujet of mature age and the infant who, according
to Mr. Stead, were gotten out of Purgatory at so much per inch. The
narrative of the newspaper war between Mr. Stead and Mr. Meagher is
well-known to our readers. At the last 12th July celebration, Mr. Stead
speaking against Popery, said:
“In this colony a map, who was a terrible drunkard, and a
dreadful swearer, and if thorough-paced gambler, died with
marvellous suddenness, and his wife paid £lOO to the priests to
get him out of Purgatory. In another case an infant three
years old, died, and the poor struggling mother, who earned
her living by sewing, paid £5 to get her infant out of Purgatory.
(Cries of shame and cheers).
Mr. John Meagher who is nothing, if not a good and zealous Roman
Catholic, is also a fearless one. Most men of his creed would probably
have consulted his clergy ere he bearded a platform speaker in a news-
paper, and if Mr. (Meagher had sought advice in the mattei’, very likely
the assertions of Mr. Stead would have been unchallenged, and become
accepted as negative truths—as so many unchallenged statements are
allowed to become. Mr. Meagher, however, assumed an attitude unique
for a Roman Catholic. He acted on his own responsibility in a relig-
ious matter, and in the public Press challenged Mr. Stead to prove his
allegations, offering to pay a goodly sum in charity if the Protestant
clergyman could give him name and date. This—it is useless to beg or
fence with the question—Mr. Stead apparently could not and cannot do,
and, like all men who have a weak case, he has persistently attempted
to obscure the issue by arguing the doctrine of Purgatory.
Mr. Meagher refused to enter into a religious controversy, and per-
tinaciously demanded proof, the whole proof, and nothing but the proof.


Mr. Stead declined to give that proof, and then, instead of confessing
himself worsted, endeavored to force Mr. Meagher into a theological dis-
cussion, which the latter never courted, and which he naturally declined
to follow up.
The verdict of unprejudiced men who, Protestants though they be,
are not blind bigots or haters of Roman Catholics because they are Ro-
man Catholics, is that Mr. Stead has done worse than commit a wrong;
lie has perpetrated a blunder. By his rashness he has evoked sympathy
where he intended to cry a warning and—speaking from the standpoint
of Protestants—he has, perhaps, undone with a few foolish words the
work of years. He has given the opponents of his creed a formidable
weapon, the weapon of the pointing finger, which enables the wielder
to say ex uno disce omnes, and many a just and careful man will be
judged and condemned and his words lightly regarded because of Mr.
Steads injustice and carelessness.
Many have been impelled—reluctantly perhaps—to admire Mr.
Meagher’s plucky stand on behalf of his creed and clergy. That re-
doubtable son ol Erin and of Mother Church must have known ere he
entered the list that he was staking much on the cast of a die. Firstly,
he must have known that his stand might cause some loss of trade, that
the odium theologicum, however just was his quarrel, would drive cus-
tom from his shop, and bring him into unpleasant prominence among
the bigoted, as one who bearded a Protestant clergyman. Secondly, had
Mr. Stead been able to prove his words, Mr. Meagher would have done
his side harm instead of good, and, as he took up the cudgel unauthor-
ised by his spiritual guides, he might have incurred odium. However,
bravery has had its reward. Mr. Stead has been badly beaten. Mr.
Meagher is the victor, and the Roman Catholics of the colony are to be
congratulated on the possession of such a doughty champion. But, Mr.
Meagher not only deserves the thanks of his co-religionists, but of Pro-
testants as well. He has taught the latter that rash assertion and hot
utterance are not the methods to be used in controversy; that it is not
always safe to attack individuals when condemning a creed. It will be
a bad day for the community when either Catholics or Protestants
abandon the discussion of abstract principles and take to reckless abuse
and charges. Such tactics, even when based on truth, stir up the strife
of creeds, and the bitterness of hatred follows, making both Catholic
and Protestant unchristian, uncitizenlike and unpatriotic. Mr. Stead
has sustained a defeat, and he should acknowledge it manfully and
gracefully, and as publicly as he made his unproved assertions, which
have been challenged with such signal success. He owes this reparation
alike to an important section of the community,who, in religious belief
differ from him. and to those of his own faith whose cause he has in-
jured by his tactical blunder. With his retraction we trust the dead
past may be permitted to bury its dead, and that fellow-townsmen who
have fallen out in the heat of dogmatic discussion, will agree to differ,
leaving each other in peace and continuing friends.






