

PtITH PrVr»
' So\ o
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
COTTON-GROWING
IN THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
REPORT BY MR. JOHN BOTTOMLEY
{WITH MAP).
1904.
MINISTER CONTROLLING THE NORTHERN TERRITORY—HON. J, G. JENKINS.
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE,
1905.




NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
COTTON-GROWING IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
REPORT (with MAP) by Mr. JOHN BOTTOMLEY.
Palmerston, Northern Territory, December 15th, 1904.
Sir—l have the honor to present this report, prepared in compliance with your instructions, on the
present position and prospects of cotton cultivation in the Northern Territory of South Australia.
This report is illustrated by a rough sketch map of the “ cotton belt” of the world, and serves to throw
light on a question of great and increasing importance, not only to those parts of the British Empire which
are capable of growing cotton, but also to the cotton manufacturers of Great Britain, to whom the question
of opening up new sources of supply of the raw material of their industry is already becoming a grave and
urgent problem.
At the present day cotton occupies more attention in the commercial world than any other product, and
we hear on all sides of the great endeavors which are being made to increase its jn-oduction in those countries
which are already growing it extensively, as well as to introduce it into new regions. It is the most important
fibre which enters into the commercial life of the textile industry, and this is more true to-day than formerly.
It is universally used for the clothing of all nations, both rich and poor, and it would be difficult to name a
commodity in wider use. Being cheap and easy to manufacture, it is clear why this is so. It is the only
fibre which nature produces ready for immediate manufacture, and so long as its price, relative to that of
other fibres such as wool, flax, and silk, remain as at present, there seems to be no limit to its production and
consumption for some time to come at least. There seems to be no doubt but that the consumption of
cotton is increasing at a faster rate than its production. During the past few years consumption has, in fact,
equalled the production, and so tightly has the former pressed upon the latter that cotton mills in England
and on the Continent have been forced into partial idleness on account of the shortage of the supplies of the
"raw material. The world now needs a new supply of cotton, and it is generally accepted that a gveater or
less scarcity threatens us. You will notice from the sketch map that the principal cotton-growing countries
of the world are the Southern States of America, Egypt, South America, the West Indies, India, China,
Persia, and Central Asia. Japan consumes practically the whole of the Chinese crop, which amounts to
36,000,0001b5. In Central Asia Russia has not been able to grow sufficient cotton to meet the demands
of the Russian mills. India exports four-fifths of her crop, which annually reaches 3,000,000 b ties. The
Southern States of America, the greatest cotton-producing country of the world, exports two-thirds of her pro-
duction. The total production of the Southern States last year amounted nearly to 11,000,000 bales.* Egypt
exports the whole of her crop, which annually reaches 500,000,0001b5., nearly half of which goes to Great
Britain. As a consequence of the increasing consumption of cotton by the American mills, a corresponding-
decrease has occurred in the exports, with the result that the Lancashire spinners have been compelled to
restrict their output. The British Cotton-growing Association, composed of spinners and manufacturers, was
formed more than two years ago for the purpose of assisting and encouraging the growth of cotton in those
parts of the British Empire where experimental cultivation has demonstrated, with greater or less certainty,
the possibility of inaugurating cotton production on a commercial scale.
In the early days of British cotton manufacture practically the whole supply of raw material was drawn
at first from India, and at a later stage from the West Indies. The amounts at present obtained from these
sources are relatively insignificant. The British cotton industry is now almost entirely dependent on the
United States for supplies of raw cotton. This state of things has been brought about by various causes,
such as the deterioration of Indian cotton, the replacement of cotton by sugarcane in the West Indies, and
the continuous improvement in quality of the cotton fibre produced in the Southern States of America. At
the same time, improvements in cotton-spinning machinery which have been made in Great Britain during
the last century have all been in the direction of utilising the medium and long-stapled cottons characteristic
of America and Egypt, so that, although no actual decline in the production of Indian cotton has taken
place, India now produces little of the long-stapled varieties suited to the requirements of the British cotton
manufacturer. The position is therefore in this respect worse than in the period 1861-5, when the American
Civil War led to the deficiency in cotton similar to that now brought about mainly by economic causes. At
that time British manufacturers were still able to utilise Indian cotton, and the deficiency in American cotton
was to some extent compensated for by increased imports from India. Some efforts were made at that time
to extend the sources of cotton supply in India and other countries, but the rapid recovery in the United
States after the close of the Civil War unfortunately led to their abandonment. The present failure in the
supply of American cotton is likely, however, to prove of a more permanent character, since the continual
extension of cotton manufacture in the southern portion of the United States is likely to lead in the near-
future to a greater utilisation of the raw material in the country of its production, and to a decline in exports
to England and other countries. It is therefore a matter of great importance to the British manufacturer
that new sources of cotton supply should be established over a wide area, in order to preclude as far as
possible
* From recent cables it would appear that the crop this year is a record one, exceeding 12,000,000 bales.


possible the occurrence of unusual deficiencies in supply, either as the results of climatic disturbances, the
operations of speculators, or other causes. You will notice from the map that a considerable area of British
territory lies within the region 40 c to the north and to the south of the equator, which may be considered a»
limiting the area where cotton can be commercially grown. The Northern Territory lies within this region,
and there is unquestionably a considerable area suitable as regards soil and climate for cotton cultivation, and
large enough to provide for the present requirements of the British cotton industry, and to keep pace with its
natural increase for many years to come. In India it is probable that the area under cotton will be increased,,
especially if the high prices which have ruled recently are maintained; but, as I have pointed out, the bulk
of the cotton produced in India at the present time is unsuited for the British market, and the problem, so
far as that country is concerned, resolves itself into the possibility of cultivating cotton of longer staple. As-
regards Egypt but little extension of production may be looked for, since nearly the whole of the area
available for cotton appears to have been already taken -up.
Many years ago several attempts were made to establish cotton-growing in Queensland, but after a trial
lasting for several years the industry was abandoned, and at the present time is non-existent. Although
cotton had been grown in the early history of Queensland, it was not until the time of the American Civil
War that the industry became important. In 1862 H,3441b5. of cotton were exported, of an average value
of Is. lid. per pound; and from that date up to 1871, 8,000,0001b5. were exported. A large bonus granted
by the Government on every bale of cotton exported helped to stimulate the industry. Later on it was
decided to abolish the subsidy, and very soon cotton ceased to be cultivated. Then the idea of manufacturing
their own cotton fabrics in the State came to the front, and led to the second period of cotton-growing. The
Queensland Parliament sanctioned the payment of a large sum of money to the first factory which turned
out a quantity of cotton manufactured goods. With this inducement a company was formed and a factory
established at Ipswich ; and thus, with a prospect of a market at their doors, the farmers at West Moreton
again included cotton among their crops. This revival, however, was short lived, lasting only from 1890 to
1897, when financial difficulties brought the operations of the cotton manufacturing company to an end p
and by this misfortune cotton-growing was stopped for a second time. It was proved, however, that cotton
could be grown, and experience was gained as to the soils to be selected. Errors were made in planting on
rich alluvial ground, where the plant grew vigorously, but produced wood rather than cotton fibre. One
difficulty attaching to the cotton-growing industry is the amount of labor demanded in picking, and although
the work is light, it involves an outlay of much lime, and this renders the crop only profitable when cheap
labor is available for the purpose. Hence the Federal laws, which prevent the introduction of cheap colored
labor, seriously effect the question of restarting the industry ; but hopes are entertained that cotton may be
grown in districts where the white farmer can cultivate it on small holdings, capable of being managed by a
white family, with occasional hired labor. I have spent about six months in Queensland, acting on the
Commission appointed last January by the State Government for the purpose of ascertaining whether cotton
could be successfully grow r n by white labor. An officer of the Department of Agriculture accompanied me,
and we both traversed the State, interviewing farmers, examining soils, &.c., and the results of our investiga-
tions were embodied in a report, which the Government forwarded to the British Cotton-growing Association,
of Manchester. We came to the conclusion that cotton could be successfully cultivated by the farmers in
small and easily-worked areas (from five to ten acres), as an adjunct to other crops; but that it could not be
successfdlly grown in large plantations in the absence of cheap colored labor. That is the view I still hold.
I found, however, that in Queensland the farmer wished to be guaranteed a minimum price for several years
before undertaking the cultivation of cotton. The Queensland farmer is quite aware that to cultivate cotton
successfully it is necessary to receive some measure of protection from the colored labor of the tropical-
countries. If tropical Australia is to enter into competition with other countries in the production of cotton
the conditions must be equalised as respects labor, or he must receive protection by the granting of a bonus
or the fixing of a minimum price.
The successful establishment of cotton cultivation in the Northern Territory at the present time will
depend to a large extent on the prevailing economic conditions, especially on the possibility of cultivating
other and more profitable crops than cotton, as well as on the supply of labor and the facilities for transport.
Not less important than these to the successful and permanent establishment of the industry will be the
necessity for continual activity in scientific experiments and in the collection of information as to the progress
being made in foreign countries in cotton cultivation, and as to the needs of manufacturers for special
varieties of cotton. The actual cultivation of cotton is an agricultural problem, requiring for its solution
chemical and botanical knowledge, in addition to practical experience. The present permanent position of
the United States in cotton cultivation is largely due to the operations of its well-organised and spendidly
equipped experiment stations of the Department of Agriculture, which are continually engaged in the
scientific investigation of the innumerable problems which arise, and in the collection and dissemination of
information. I would recommend the establishment at Palmerston of an experiment station and a seed farm,,
where agricultural experiments on cotton cultivation and improvement may be carried on, and where selected
seed may be grown for distribution to growers.
I have been shown by Mr. Holtze, curator of the Botanical Gardens at Palmerston, an indigenous cotton,
yielding, even in its wild or semi-cultivated state, fibre of a fairly good quality, which by careful selection
and cultivation could doubtless be greatly improved; and in this cultivation and improvement of native
varieties there probably lies, as a rule, a better chance of success than in the introduction of foreign forms,
although in some countries American and Egyptian varieties have been experimentally grown with some
success. These experiments, however, in most cases have so far not been conducted on a scale large enough,
to prove that these varieties can be acclimatised, although sufficient information has been gained to show
that exotic cottons can be cultivated successfully. The Sea Island variety grown at Palmerston, samples of
which I have examined, clearly indicate that this long-stapled cotton grows to perfection on the coast lands of
the Northern Territory. The best soil for cotton cultivation is a deep loam, possessing good drainage, but able
to retain sufficient moisture to furnish a uniform supply throughout the entire growing period of the plant.
I found during my visit to Arafura, 340 miles from Port Darwin, that near the coast there were large areas of
land of this description eminently adapted for the cultivation of Sea Island sorts; and when it is remembered
that the Northern Territory has a coastal frontage of 1,200 miles to the Indian Ocean, and a large proportion of
this coastal country possesses soils of a similar nature, and that this variety of cotton is undoubtedly the finest
grown in the world, possessing as it does all the main qualities of a good cotton, viz., strength, length, and fine-
ness of staple, I have no hesitation in recommending that these coastal districts should be first cultivated,
before


before attention is paid to the inland districts. Through the courtesy of Captain Bradshaw, manager of the
Eastern and African Cold Storage Supply Company, I was enabled to visit the district controlled by the English
company. I remained a foi’tnight in this district, and was greatly' surprised at the character of the country.
Drought is certainly unknown in the coastal districts of the Northern Territory, the average rainfall being
6Sin. ; grass is abundant, and the soil in many places being extremely rich, is of course on that account
unsuitable for cotton. My first visit was to the Goyder River heads. The river is narrow at the entrance,
but after proceeding a couple of miles inland it opens out into a broad sheet of tidal water, affording splendid
anchorages to the largest of ships. A hedge of mangroves fronts the margin of the water, beyond which
the country rises in gentle undulations, clothed in a rich growth of tropical timbers that present every shade
of tint to the eye of the observer. The soil on these lands consists of a fine sandy loam—an ideal soil for
cotton, and eminently suitable for the cultivation of Sea Island varieties. Captain Bradshaw is at present
making experiments in cotton culture, and the conditions are certainly favorable for the cultivation of the
cottons. In company' with Captain Bradshaw and his staff we proceeded up the Glyde River,
which is very tortuous. At various places up the river our party landed for the purpose of enabling me to
examine the soils ; it is splendid grass land, if anything too rich for cotton. On our arrival at the station,
the head-quarters of the company, 1 spent several days examining the country, sampling a A'ast variety of
soils, some of which I found well adapted for the growth of upland cottons; but, as a rule, the soils here
are far too rich for the growth of cotton. I selected two spots near the station, which are to be planted with
experimental crops of Uplands. We next visited several islands, the principal one being Marbonga Island,
situated about 18 miles from the mouth of the Goyder River. This island is about 50 square miles in area,
and Captain Bradshaw was desirous that I should make an inspection of it. The soil on this island consists of
deep loam, and is admirably adapted for cotton culture. I have been greatly pleased with my visit to Arafura,
The soil and climate are well adapted for the growth of cotton, especially on the lands near the coast, where,
in my opinion, the conditions for the successful cultivation of the Sea Island or long-stapled varieties are all
that could be desired. I also visited Pine Creek, 146 miles inland from Palmerston. The greater part of
the country bordering the railway line from Palmerston to Pine Creek is suitable for cotton-growing, the soil
being of a light sandy nature and lightly timbered. In consequence of the distance from the coast, the Sea
Island varieties cannot be grown here. I would, however, recommend that the short-stapled varieties be
cultivated. There seems to be no doubt but that the country is well adapted for the successful cultivation
of the latter kinds. Moreover, they do not require the same careful and close supervision as is the case with
Sea Island, and on that account the aborigines of the district could be very well employed at picking the
crop, if they can be induced to work; but on that point I cannot express an opinion. Only the Upland
varieties should be grown here. Different kinds of cotton have been tried at the experimental nursery at
Palmerston, with very gratifying results. During last season 12 varieties were cultivated. The cotton plant
has been grown in light sandy soil, on a dark well-drained loam, and in the ferruginous gravelly soil typical
of Palmerston. The plants seem to thrive equally well in either of these soils. December is the proper time
for planting in the Northern Territory, during the occurrence of the summer rains. Crops begin to ripen in
May and June, the cool and dry months of the year. The Caravonica has been grown at Palmerston. A
great deal of attention has been paid to this new variety, originated by Dr. 'lhomatis, of Cairns, Queensland,
It is a cross between a long-stapled Mexican cotton with the Sea Island cotton of Peru, lire Mexican variety
was chosen for its length, fineness, and gloss ; and the Amazonian for its length and strength. The principal
feature of the Caravonica is the heavy yield of produce per acre. I have recently visited the Cairns planta-
tion, spending several days with Dr. Thomatis, and I am bound to say that a heavy yield may be anticipated.
The cotton is excellent; but it is desirable that a large quantity should be sent to Manchester for testing
purposes, for it is only after being worked that a definite pronouncement can be made. But lam emphatically'
of the opinion that it should be cultivated in tropical regions; it is a perennial, needs but little cultivation,
and grows to a great size, 12ft. to 14ft. The Caravonica has been planted at Palmerston, producing
excellent results.
And now I will deal with the labor question. The population of the Northern Territory is composed of
900 Europeans and 2,700 Asiatics, who are principally employed in mining, pearlshell fishing, and cattle-
raising. The minimum wage for Europeans is Bs. per diem, and the Asiatics receive ss. to 7s. per diem;
in addition, there are a large number of aborigines. The Federal laws, which prohibit the introduction of
colored labor, make it impossible for the successful cultivation of cotton in large areas. It has been suggested
that the poorer classes in Continental Europe might be brought out to the Northern Territory, and by land
grants and special concessions induced to settle on these lands and engage in the cultivation of cotton and
other tropical industries. I believe that this territory is well adapted for the physically strong to live in; but
to engage and work in the open fields under a scorching sun would assuredly lead to a breakdown. Ido not
think that, generally speaking, they could continue at the work for more than two years, and then a change
would be imperative. Hence it is desirable, if cotton production is to be carried out on a scale of great
magnitude, that plenty of cheap labor should be available to compete with those engaged in the cultivation
of cotton in other tropical countries on the same terms. I therefore respectfully suggest to your Government
that the Federal Parliament be asked to sanction the introduction of Indians—fellow-subjects of the Crown—
to a portion of the Northern Territory, under such restrictions as are enforced in the importation of colored
labor for pearlshell fishing. The Indians are natural cottongrowers. 1 found that in Fiji 22,000 have been
introduced in recent years. It appears that the sum of £l5 has to be paid to secure the passage of a coolie
from India to Fiji, and that the indenture is for five years. At the expiration of that terra he becomes a
free Indian, and can return to India if he desires. If the property of the white planter is leasehold, an
additional sura of £9 has to be paid as security with the Government for wages; if freehold, no cash security
is required. This arrangement works admirably. I discovered, in the course of my investigations in Fiji,
that the Indians were desirous of growing cotton. The Fijian is daily growing more and more disinclined
for labor, and for the attention necessary to be given to the cultivation of produce. If the Federal Parliament
will sanction the introduction of Indians to the Northern Territory the company introducing them could be
held responsible for the coolies under their control. The coolie should be engaged for a definite term, say
five years, and have the right to return to India or the option to renew his engagement for a further period.
They could be confined solely to growing cotton and such other tropical products in which it is impossible to
employ European labor; therefore they would not enter into competition with Europeans; on the contrary,
they would provide lucrative channels of employment for white people. I believe that if this arrangement
could be made—opening the door to our fellow-subjects under the Crown—it would be greatly appreciated in
England _
3


England. It must also be borne in mind that the cost of introducing coolies to the Northern Territory
would be very low, probably not more than £5 per head. Adequate safeguards could be made by the
Commonwealth Parliament, w'hich would effectually keep the Indians within the limits defined, the various
companies engaging the coolies being held responsible. 1 believe that it is only by an arrangement such
as I have outlined that this magnificent territory can be properly developed, contributing materially to the
prosperity and happiness of this continent, and to the great Empire to which we are all proud to belong.
In conclusion, I would say that it seems to me the Northern Territory possesses unlimited possibilities
for the successful cultivation of the highest grades of cotton over a very large area of coastal country, and
of Upland varieties further inland, the labor difficulty alone standing in the way. I trust that this will
receive the earnest and serious attention of the Commonwealth Parliament. I cannot close this report
without gratefully acknowledging the valuable assistance rendered to me by Mr. N. Holtze, Curator of the
Botanical Gardens, at Palmerston, in connection with my mission to the Northern Territory.
I have, &e..
The Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Premier and Minister Controlling the Northern JOHN BOTTOMLEY.
Territory of South Australia, Adelaide, State of South Australia.
MAP


SKETCH MAP OF THE “COTTON BELT” OF THE WORLD.
TO ACCOMPANY MR. JOHN BOTTOMLEY’S REPORT ON COTTON GROWING IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.






