

1916.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF EDEICATION.
COURSE OF INSTRUCTION
FOR
ABORIGINES’ SCHOOLS.
(ISSUED 1916.)
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
—A 1916.


1916.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.
COURSE OF INSTRUCTION
FOR
ABORIGINES’ SCHOOLS.
(ISSUED 1916.)
✓
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
56161- 1916.




SYLLABUS FOR ABORIGINES’ SCHOOLS.
PRELIMINARY NOTES.
The literary part of this Syllabus is to be regarded as the minimum. It will
be expected in all schools. The more intelligent children in Third Class may be
given advanced work, such to be left to the discretion of the teacher; but the lessons
will be registered in detail for the information of the Inspector.
Manual Training is the special feature of the Syllabus, and this subject is
to be regarded as of maximum importance.
It is intended that the teacher will, as far as possible, direct the whole of
the school work with the object of assisting the boys to become capable farm or
station labourers, and the girls useful domestic servants.
The teacher is urged to enlist the practical sympathy and support of a local
committee in order (i) to secure positions for both sexes after leaving school, and
(2) to exercise kindly, effective supervision during the service of the ex-pupils.
The periods for carpentry, cookery, laundry work, needlework, and garden
work are definitely stated. No departure from these periods can be permitted
without the sanction of the Inspector. Full details of the work are not .<
in order to allow scope and freedom for the teacher to meet local conditions, and
to suit his own qualifications.
SYLLABUS.
ALL CLASSES.
The Garden and Bush. —Pupils who are physically able to do so should take
an active part in all practical gardening operations. They should learn the local
names of wild and cultivated plants, note their growth, and be taught their com-
mercial values. Not less than one-half hour per day is to be devoted to practical
work, but no fixed half hour. The teacher will note when the most suitable climatic
conditions obtain for this work.
Advantage should be taken of these children’s innate love of striking colours
in order to train them to see similar but grander beauty in sky, landscape or
seascape. The beautiful mornings, the glorious sunsets, the bountiful harvests,
and other attractive phenomena, should be noted and discussed in order to develop
a love and reverence for the Creator.
The bush excursion should be undertaken not less than once per month.
Teachers and pupils to start about one hour before closing time, and, before doing
so, the teacher is recommended +o read and explain an appropriate selection from


Mr. C. Musson’s “ The Pageant of the Year/'* which appeared in the Education
Gazette during months from September, 1913, to November, 1914. A short
quotation from Kendall, illustrating a charm of the Australian Bush, should be
memorised. Each excursion should have a definite aim and object, such as
developing a. love for the order and beauty found in the forest; following for a
short distance in the track of a rain storm to note the results of erosion, &c.;
making a collection of tap-rooted plants in order to discover the cause of their
drought-resisting powers ; noting, and ascertaining why the leaves of indigenous
Australian trees hang perpendicularly or slantingly. The experiences of these
excursions might be made the substance of “ A letter to a friend,” prescribed in
the composition exercises of Third Class.
SYLLABUS OF INSTRUCTION.
FIRST CLASS COURSE—TWO AND HALF YEARS.
English. —First Year, Reading Primer, I to end.
Third Half-year, Primer II to end.
Fourth and Fifth Half-years, Reader I to end.
Talks on topics from the children’s experiences. The elements of good manners
to be inculcated during these talks. Pupils to be encouraged to question the
teacher, and to talk freely of their bush knowledge, &c.
PFnVmg—Transcription exercises from Reading lessons, and dictation tests
from simple words used by the children. Letters to written in the following
order- —i, u, w, t, r, n, m, p, v, o, a, d, q, g, e, 1, h, b, j, k, y, f, c, s. Formal graded
writing lessons in letter formations, combinations of letters ; associating the names
with shapes. Writing of words by the pupils to be associated with the oral
expression of them, that is, the pupils will be expected to read what they have
written. Copy-books—Collins’ New Graphic, Numbers 3 and 4, in fourth and
fifth half-years, or sooner, if practicable. Pens and ink to be introduced as soon
as possible.
As many children leave before completing the First Class course, they should
be taught to write their name legibly at the earliest moment. In the later stages
of this class, pupils are to write sentences of their own. List of misspelt words in
these sentences to be regularly and carefully recorded by the teacher, and the
correct spelling taught.
Number— The realising of number by counters in the hands of children,
or from a group of trees in the bush, or plants in the garden. Addition and
subtraction not to exceed 100; notation to 200. Thorough memorisation of the
multiplication tables to six times. The mental and written exercises to deal with
objects either on or connected with the settlement. Use of multipliers to 6 with
products to 100, and divisors to 6 with dividends to 100. Important. —Not less
than fifteen minutes mental arithmetic (prepared questions) to be given to each
class daily. Lists of these prepared questions are to be kept by the teacher in a
note-book provided for this purpose.
• To be published later in pamphlet form.


Scripture and Moral Lessons. —Stories from the authorised Scripture lessons,
suitable for infants, and to be taught from pictures. Moral attiibutes which lie at
the-foundation of home and school life, such as greetings at home and at schoo;,
personal cleanliness, kindness to animals, truthfulness, honesty, obedience, family
affection, politeness, gentleness, control of temper, See. These qualities should be
embodied in simple stories. A book (Gould’s) will be supplied by the Department.
Manual Work. —Stick-laying, bead-threading, paper-folding, weaving, shell-
work, paper-cutting, modelling, designing. Any of these to be taken as opportunity
offers, or the qualifications of the teacher permit.
Music. —Singing simple melodies by ear. Action and Marching songs.
Singing should be given at the change of lessons.
Physical Exercises. —Deep-breathing. Marching is to be limited to entering
and leaving school.
SECOND CLASS.
English.- —School magazine and part of any approved story book. Learning
short poetical selections. Correct pronounciation. Answers from pupils to be in
complete sentences. The pupils will be expected to talk freely about the subject-
matter and to ask questions. Spelling of words in the ordinary speech of the
child. (Lists of these misspelt words to be kept.) Transcription and dictation
exercises.
Writing.- —Collins’ New Graphic, Numbers 5 and 6. Careful writing in
spelling tests, composition and arithmetical exercises. All books to show careful
supervision. Errors are to be marked with a coloured pencil, and pupils to under-
stand why the letters and words are marked. Writing a simple letter to a mate.
Number work. —Construction and thorough memorisation of tables to 12
(twelve) times. Finding | and Mental practical exercises in the four simple rules.
Written work in number to 500, multipliers and divisors to 12. All written work
to have a practical application. Use of symbols + x -f.
Bush and Garden.- —Lessons on the plants under observation. Animals on
the Settlement to come under review. (See notes for all classes.)
Scripture and Moral Lessons. —As for the First Class. These classes to be
taken together. Stories are always to be illustrated by pictures, and the lessons
to be limited to fifteen minutes.
Needlework.- —Girls, one and a half hours; boys, half hour per week.
1. All girls and boys of 7 years of age to take needlework; but the work of
the boys to be limited to sewing on buttons, plain sewing, mending and
patching.
2. The needlework materials will be supplied by the Aborigines’ Protection
Board direct to the teacher of sewing.
3. Each garment to be made up in the school and marked with the name of
the child to whom it belongs.
Course. —Plain sewing of simple articles and garments.
Manual Work. —Weaving, net-making. (See Third Class.)
Music and Physical Exercises. —Same as for First Class.


THIRD CLASS.
English. —School Magazine and approved story books. Short poetical
selections illustrative of Australian Life should be included. Not less than two
very short selections per quarter to be memorised. Correct speech in all oral lessons
to be insisted upon. Full intelligent answers to questions. Outlines of lessons to
be narrated.
Spelling.- —Ordinary words in the Magazine; words used in original composi-
tion, and common words of irregular spelling. Dictation exercises. (Lists of
misspelt words to be kept.)
Writing.- —Small hand in Collins’ New Graphic, Numbers 12, 15, 16. Careful
work in all written exercises (composition, dictation, note-books, &c.).
Composition.- —lndispensable business matters, e.g., order for goods, receipt
for payment of stock, notification of non-receipt of rations, 'letter to a friend.
(Teacher will be careful to give practical subjects.)
Number Work.- —Mental and oral work. Half-pence, pence, shillings, and
pounds; yards, feet, and inches. Concrete exercises in money only including
domestic accounts and business transactions common to the Settlement. Applica-
tions of k, -|, f, I- |. Measurements pertaining to the school and homes of the
pupils. Use of the foot-rule. Recognition and naming of coins-—-their relative
value.
Written. —Long Division dividends not to exceed 1,000. The four operations
in money not to exceed £lOO, and to be based upon practical requirements and
transactions. Drawing ground plan of a cottage, barn, or stable; simple scale.
Nature Knowledge.—Cox (End points. Study of geographical features of the
locality. Commercial value of plants produced on Settlement. Flowers, shrubs,
cereals, and vegetables to be grown where practicable, and notes of the experiments
to be recorded by each pupil. (See also Bush and Gardening for all classes.)
Civics and Morals.- —As for First and Second Classes. Also stories (no
lectures) stimulating to self-reliance and facing difficulties; benevolence
the weak, aged, or suffering; temperance.
Needlework. —Girls, one and a half hours; boys, half an hour per week-
Plain sewing, darning, patching, and any other work based on the requirements of
pupils. (See notes to Second Class.)
Manual Training for Boys. —A total of four hours per week to be devoted
to all indoor branches of this subject.
Boys to be taught (1) the use of a carpenter’s tools, and (2) the construction
of ordinary articles of wood used on the Settlement. They should also be
encouraged to carry out minor and simple repairs to the school and fences. Other
branches of manual work may be taken up as opportunity offers. Suggested
list : netting, mat and run-weaving, brush-making, broom-making, leather plaiting,
rope-making, harness and boot repairing, wire-work, simple plumbing. Carpentering
is to be taken by all boys over g years of age.
Domestic Work for Girls.
Cookery.- —Lessons in plain cooking and preparation of foods for infants and
invalids. Two hours weekly to be set apart for this work.
Laundry.- —Washing and ironing of ordinary domestic clothing and linen.
Two hours weekly.
Music and Physical Training as for First Class.


ANNEX TO SYLLABUS.
HOURS OF INSTRUCTION.
Indoor work for First and Second Classes is not to occupy more than three
(3) hours per day; Third Class, three and half hours.
Note. —It is left to the discretion of the teacher to lengthen the period to four (4) hours
per day in the case of any specially clever pupil.
Daily Routine.
Indoor work. —
" A.M.—8.30 to 10 ... Lessons and occupations.
10 to 10.30 ... Play.
10.30 to 11.30... Lessons and occupations.
to 2 ... Lessons for First and Second Classes.
1.30 to 2.30 ... Lessons and occupations for Third Class.
Indoor Manual Work for boys over nine (9) years of age should take about
five hours per week; for girls about six (6) hours.
Outdoor Work. —One half-hour per day to be devoted to gardening.
Note. — The time for opening and closing school during the different seasons of the year
may be altered with the permission of the District Inspector of Schools.
Bjdney : William Applegate Onllicl.-, Government Printer.—l9lB.
