

1911.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION
COURSES OF STUDY
FOR
HIGH SCHOOLS.
SYDNEY : WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1011.
t 9*068


1911.
NEW SOUTH WiALES.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
COURSES OF STUDY
FOR
HIGH SCHOOLS.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1911.
t 93068




COURSE OF INSTRUCTION
FOR
HIGH SCHOOLS.
CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Introduction 5-8
Time-tables 9-13
English 15-22
History 22-28
Geography 28-33
Mathematics 33-42
Science ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42-58
Languages 58-69
Drawing 79-73
Domestic Arts 73-81
Music - 81-84
Economics and Commerce 84-88
Professor. Carslaw’s Memorandum 89-119




INTRODUCTION.
The purpose of the High School is the education of boys and girls from
13 to 18 years of age. It fulfils this purpose by enabling the pupil to
acquire such knowledge and skill, combined with training in their use, and
such habits of thought and conduct as will form the foundation for the
private and public responsibilities of adult age.
Pupils will be admitted to the High Schools upon completing the primary
course of instruction and obtaining the Qualifying Certificate testifying to
their fitness to enter upon higher instruction.
It should be understood by pupils who thus pass into the higher school
that the transition is one that imposes on them a new set of obligations
differing in character from those which marked the passage from class to
class in the Primary School. The transition is marked by the call for more
self-reliant effort on the part of the pupil, and with each succeeding year
of the higher course, the character of the school should bo such as to
demand from him a steadily increasing degree of self-dependence.
The courses of study for High Schools provide for four years of work,
and are designed to furnish a preparation for various types of vocation:—
(1) A general course loading to the professional studies of higher institutions;
(P) a commercial course, preparing for business careers; (3) a technical course,
leading to industrial pursuits; (4) a domestic course, qualifying for home
management.
In those courses, provision is made for a group of studies which is common
to them all, having no immediate bearing on vocational ends, but designed
to provide for the common needs and the common training for well educated
citizenship. These subjects are English Literature, History, Mathematics"
and Science. It is especially in the use of the mother tongue and the study
of its literature that the High School will exercise its highest influence upon
the general training of the pupils.
Outside of those studies which form the common meeting ground for all
the students of the High School, and to which about one half of the school
time is devoted, there lies the field for the student’s choice according to his
individual aptitudes or his prospects of a future career. This choice is pro-
vided for by courses in Ancient and Modern Languages, in Science and
Mathematics, in Manual and Field work and Drawing, and in Domestic
Arts.
The work of the four years is divided into two equal portions, a test of the
pupil’s attainments being made at the end of the second and fourth years.
The issue of an Intermediate Certificate will mark the successful termination
of the second year’s work, and of a Leaving Certificate the satisfactory com-
pletion of the four years course.
These certificates will bear upon their face a statement of the subjects in
which the student has shown a satisfactory degree of attainment. The con-
ditions of the award are—(l) that the pupil has regularly and diligently
followed the courses of study for two or four years; (2) that his conduct
and character are reported as satisfactory; (3) that he has passed the exam-
ination in at least four subjects of the course followed.


When the certificate is required as a recommendation for employment
or for admission to other institutions, it will rest upon the student to see
that his attainments are such as to secure the endorsement upon the certi-
ficate of the specific subjects which may be demanded by the employers or
institutions concerned.
The courses of study laydown broadly the nature of the subject materia
but they leave scope for variations in detail of the programmes which the
teacher may follow. A register showing- the scope of treatment with regard
to subject matter will, therefore, be kept by each teacher, and will be placed
in the hands of the examiners prior to each examination.
The examination papers will be sufficiently wide in their range to provide
for a test of all pupils presented. The Inspector will satisfy himself that the
programmes provide an adequate treatment of the prescribed course of
study, and are such as would lead the pupil to the standard of attainment
required. Any programme deemed to be inadequate will be disregarded by
the Examiners. All class note books will be made available for the scrutiny
of the Inspector upon his visit to the school.
Pupils in High Schools will be classified as First Year, Second Year, Third
Year and . Fourth Year pupils. The Intermediate Certificate will be the
warrant for a pupil passing from the Second to the Third Year. The
transition from the First to the Second year, and from the Third to the
Fourth year will be determined by the Principal of the school, upon the
nature of the pupil’s class record and the result of the class tests which the
Principal has applied. The failure of the pupil may be such that he may
be required to repeat the whole year’s work, but where he has fallen short
in a minor degree only, he may be required only to repeat the year’s work in
the deficient subjects. This is a matter which lies with the discretion of
the Principal.
In the choice of courses which a student may follow, especially in his third
and fourth years, it is highly desirable that the Principal of the school should
advise the student as to the course most suitable to him, particularly with
regard to any special end which the parents of the pupils may have in view
concerning him. It is, moreover, desirable that any ultimate purpose which
the pupil may have formed early in his course should be known to the
Principal.
When it is found practicable a course for a fifth year may, with the sanction
of the Director of Education, be provided for students who have gained the
Leaving Certificate and wish to make more advanced study of one or more
subjects. This course will as a rule be possible only in the largest schools,
and it will be necessary for pupils who desire such instruction to attend
for the fifth year at such schools. Such an extended course will be specially
serviccablo to those who propose to follow up specialised courses of study
afterwards at higher educational institutions.
The course of study detailed in this syllabus, taken in conjunction with the
apportionment of school time shown in the time tables, should be regarded
as indicating the general scope of the instruction in each subject for each
year. The selection of lesson material within that scope is an essential
factor in securing the highest degree of effectiveness in the school course.
In the immense mass of matter which an attempt may be made to teach in
the Secondary School there is much that should not be taught. The
relative values of available lesson material need to be studied. The con-
sideration that should determine the selection of subject matter should be.


not what it is possible for pupils to learn, but what is the material that will
prove to be of the greatest use to the particular pupils whom the teacher
has before him, what will best give them a knowledge of the most influential
thoughts of men, what will best stimulate their own thought, what know-
ledge will best serve the practical purposes of the type of career they are
likely to follow, and what will most help them to grasp the essential elements
of the problems which will be presented to them as members of the com-
munity.
It is to be remembered, too, that this selection of subject matter is to be
made for the Australian boy and girl, living and thinking under Australian
conditions. In some subjects, history for example, there is much that has
for the English pupil a significance which it lacks for the Australian. The
facts of history which have a world-wide significance need to be supplemented
by those which bear upon Australia’s heritage from older lands and upon the
points of contact which in a constantly increasing number Australia is form-
ing with other countries. The comparative isolation of the Australian pupil
in itself suggests that he should be introduced to the best of the world’s
literature, that he should be familiar with other lands through his language
studies, that he should lay the foundation of a knowledge of the sciences on
which material advancement rests, but that at the same time he should know
how the conditions that surround him in this Continent are affected by the
past and present relations of Australia to other lands, and how these condi-
tions bear upon his own career and upon the questions on which every
intelligent Australian citizen has to form a judgment.
The courses laid out in this syllabus may be regarded as supplying a guide
in the selection of subject matter.
Certain text books are prescribed for the use of pupils. The place which
the teacher assigns to the use of the text book will go far to determine the
degree of vitality in the instruction. If the text book is merely to supply
the pupil with something which he has to learn in order that he may after-
wards reproduce it, the book will hinder rather than help the pupil’s real
education. No course of instruction should be dominated by the text book.
The too exclusive use of it invariably leaves the important and the less
important undistinguished by the pupil. The prepared lesson of the teacher
is, therefore, the backbone of the instruction, and for this he needs to draw
from many sources that lie outside the pupil’s text book. Without this
the school work, whether it deals with literature or history or geography or
science, will remain barren and lifeless. The text book is an auxiliary to the
teacher’s lesson. It should never be a substitute for it. The study of a
subject should not be lost in the study of the text book.
In the notes that accompany the courses of work, hints and suggestions
as to methods of treatment are supplied. Little more than general prin-
ciples and aims can, however, be indicated. The keynote of the secondary
school course should be thoroughness. By this is meant not a mastery of
comprehensive details, but rather exactness of knowledge based upon
thoroughness of apprehension. Study which leaves merely hazy impres-
sions or a residue of facts that stand related in no connected sequence should
have no place in the High School. The pupil should carry away with him
at the end of his course a store of the kind of knowledge most worth having,
interwoven in its parts, not merely learnt but grasped as the result of the
pupil’s own thinking. Whatever may be the path to which the teacher
has directed the pupil, the pupil himself has travelled it and made all its


features his own. And what is worth learning is worth remembering. What
is not worth retaining as part of the pupil’s mental equipment is scarcely
worth learning in the first instance. It will be by the thorough mastery of
his subject of study that he will get the training of the judgment that will
give him the power to render the higher forms of service which may reason-
ably be expected from the pupil who passes through the Secondary School.
Even though it involves some limitations upon the range of study, the High
School should stand for thoroughness.
The library, the laboratory and the workshop are essential adjuncts of the
school for secondary instruction. The part that each of these takes in the
education of the pupil should be governed by the fact that it is there that he
has to do work on his own account, and is most dependent on his own personal
effort. In each of them he is an investigator, an experimenter. It is by the
use of them, especially the library and laboratory, that the pupil learns the
art of study. As the end of his High School course approaches these should
claim an increasing portion of his time. Closely allied to the use of the
library and laboratory is the pupil’s use of the note book. The art of in-
dependent study depends partly upon the power of the pupil to discern what
he should record in the form of notes, and how such notes should be made.
At first he will need help in distinguishing the outstanding and most suggestive
features of the subject ho is immediately studying, and the teacher’s assistance
will be necessary in order that the note book may be the means of summarizing
or classifying or systematizing what ought to be remembered. But at no
time should notes be dictated to the pupil. The teacher will bring the
contents of the pupil’s note books regularly under review.
Advantage should be taken of the ethical value of school studies.
Especially in dealing with literature and history opportunities will be
presented for directing the pupils to the consideration of principles of
conduct, and thereby developing a thoughtful attitude towards moral
questions.
Apart from the subjects of study, part of the training which the High
School affords comes from its corporate life. The school time table will,
therefore, provide an allotment of time for the games, clubs and other
similar activities of the school. Out of these will grow the self-government
by the pupils of some of their school concerns, the cultivation of social obliga-
tions, training in organization and opportunities for leadership.
P. BOARD
Sydney, October, 1910.
Director of Education


Years—
-I,
II,
III, IV.
(Periods, 45 minutes.)
English ... ....
... 5
5
5
5
History...
... 3
3
3
3
Geography
2
2
—
—
Mathematics
... 8
8
8
8
Elementary Science
... 4
4
—
—
Physics ...
... —
—
3
3
Chemistry
... —
—
3
3
Biology ...
... —
—
3
3
Two of the subjects
to be taken.
Geology...
... —
__
3
3
Economics
... —
—
3
3
{ 1) Foreign Language...
... 6
6
5
5
) Latin, Greek, French
(2) Do do
... (6) (6)
/k\ f or German.
( 5 ) (-3) J
Drawing and Manual Work ...
... 4
4
4
4
Music ...
... —
—
1
1
Physical Training : Ten minutes d<
lily after the second
morning period*,
TIME-TABLE.
GENERAL COURSF.
Note.— l. In the fourth year Mathematics may be reduced to four periods, and the four
periods thus released devoted to other subjects.
2. (a) When a second foreign language is taken in the first and second years,
omit Drawing and Manual Work and Geography.
(6) When taken in the third and fourth years, omit Music, Drawing, and
Manual Work.
A pupil may be permitted to take up the study of a third foreign language in the third
and fourth years. In this event four periods of Mathematics and three periods of
Science will be omitted. The range of study in Mathematics, as presented for the third
year, would thus spread over the third and fourth years.




TIME-TABLE.
Commercial Course.
Y EARS —
I, II, III, IV.
(Periods, 45 minutes.)
English...
5
5 5
4
History...
3
3 3
3
Geography
2
2 1
1
Mathematics ...
6
6 4
4
Elementary Science
4
(6) (6) Where second language
is not taken.
4
Science ...
—
— 3
3
Do (optional)
(1) Foreign language ..
6
— (3) (3) Where second language
is not taken.
6 5 5
(2) Do do
Economics
(G) (6) 5
2
5 Optional in 1st and
2nd years.
O
O
Business Principles and Practice ... 2
2 4
4
Drawing and Manual T
raining ... 4
4 —
—
Physical Training: Ten
minutes daily, after the second morning period.
Note.— Where a second language is taken in the first and second years, Geography
(two pe hods), Drawing, and Manual Training (tour periods) to he omitted. Where a
second language is not taken in the third and fourth s'ears, an additional Science subject
shall be tdsin, and six periods devoted to Mathematics. Whore Shorthand is taken,
Drawing ard Manual Training (four period ) to be omitted.




TIME-TABLE.
Industrial Course.
Years—I,
II, III,
IV.
(Periods, 45 minutes.)
English ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
5
5
5
History ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
3
3
3
Geography ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
2
—
—
Mathematics ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
8
8
8
Elementary Science ... ... ... ... ... 4
4
—
—
Physics ... ... ... ... ... —
3
3
Chemistry ... ... ... ... ... ••• —
3
3
*Botany, Elementary Agriculture, Geology, Zoology 2
3
3
3
Pield Work ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 g
7
7
7
Drawing and Manual Work ... ... ... ... 1
Physical Training : Ten minutes daily, after the second mornir
g period.
TIMETABLE.
.Domestic Arts and Science Course for Girls.
Years— I, II, III, IV.
(Periods, 45 minutes.)
English
5
5
5
5
History
3
3
3
3
Geography
2
2
—
—
Mathematics ...
6
6
4
4
Elementary Science
...
4
4
—
—
Foreign Language
6
6
5
5
Chemistry
—
—
3
3
Sanitary Science and Hygiene
...
—
—
1
1
Cookel-y and Laundry...
Drawing and Design Needlework,
Dressmaking,
and
4
5
Millinery ...
6
6
6
5
Music ... ... ... ... ... ... ... — — 1
Physical Training : Ten minutes daily, after the second morning period.
1
* Sciences to be chosen from this group according to the special aim of the course—
Technical, Mining, or Agriculture. In Agricultural Schools the Sciences to be taken
from this group are as follows
Ist year, Botany ; 2 periods.
2nd ~ ~ ~ Elementary Agriculture; 1 period.
3rd ~ Botany ; 2 periods. Zoology, 1 period.
4th ~ Botany; 1 period. Zoology, 2 periods.
In mining centres Geology is to be taken as a third Science in the third and fourth
years. The times shown in the first and second years are to he added to those devoted
to Drawing, Manual and Field Work, making a total of ten periods per week.




ENGLISH.
FIRST YEAR-I. SITERATURE.
(a) Reading. —The following works to be read according to the three-years
cycle indicated hereunder :
A.
Cooper’s The Last of the Mohicans. (Cassell, Is.)
Stevenson’s Treasure Island. (Cassell, Is.)
Dickens’ Christmas Carol. (Cassell National Library, 9d.)
Franklin’s Autobiography. (Cassell, 9d.)
Prescott’s Conquest of Mexico (abridged). (Blackie’s English Texts, 6d.)
Macaulay’s Lays of Ancient Rome. (Cassell, 9d.)
Lowell’s Vision of Sir Launfal. (Blackie’s English Classics, 2d.)
B.
Stevenson’s Black Arrow. (Cassell, 6d.)
Scott’s Ivanhoe. (Cassell, Is.)
Dickens’ Chimes. (Cassell National Library, 9d.)
Life of Nasmyth by Lucy Taylor. (T. Nelson and Sons, 6d.)
Boy’s Odyssey. (Macmillan, Is. 6d.)
Scott’s Marmion. (Blackie’s English Classics, Is.)
Ballads Old and New, Part I. (Macmillan, 6d.)
C.
Scott’s Talisman. (Cassell, Is.)
Conan Doyle’s The White Company. (Longmans, Green, & Co., Is. 6d.)
Little Women, Alcott. (Strang’s Library, Henry Frowde, 6d.)
Charlotte M. Yonge’s Book of Golden Deeds. (Macmillan, Is.)
Britain’s Sea Story, ed. Speight and Nance. (Hodder and Stoughton,
Is. 6d.)
Arnold’s Balder Dead. (Laureate Poetry Books, No. XXXI; Arnold, 4d.)
Longfellow’s Poems (selected). (Chambers, 4d.)
(b) History of Literature —Simple Biographies of authors read.
11. Language.
(«) Composition—Oral and written.
h) Grammar, Prosody, Word Composition.
Practice in speaking and reading.
Second Year—l. Literature.
(a) Reading.— The following works to be read according to the three-years;
cycle indicated hereunder :
A.
Scott’s Quentin Durward. (Cassell, Is.)
Dickens’ Cricket on the Hearth. (Cassell, 9d.)
Butcher and Lang’s Translation of the Odyssey. (Macmillan, Is,)
Life of Havelock. (Nelson, 6d.)
Quinn’s Art Reader. (Forhes, 4s. 6d.)
Idylls of the King, Gareth and Lynette. (Cassell, 9d.)
■"■Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice. (Blackie’s Plain Text, 4d.)
* For more detailed study.


B.
Kingsley’s Hereward the Wake. (Cassell, Is.)
Gaskell’s Cranford. (Cassell, Is.)
Malory's Knights of the Bound Table. (Blackie’s English Texts, 6d.)
Thayer’s From Log Cabin to White House. (Ward, Look, it Co., Is.)
Amy Mack’s Bush Calendar. (Bell, Is.)
Henry V. (Blackie’s Plain Texts, 4d.)
Tennyson’s Enoch Arden.
* For more detailed study.
c.
Scott’s Rob Roy. (Cassell, Is.)
Tom Brown’s School Days. (Henry Frowde and Hodder and
Stoughton, 6d.)
Gatty’s Parables from Nature. (Bell, Is.)
Lockhart’s Life of Scott (abridged). (Bell and Sons, Is.)
Macaulay’s First Chapter. (Blaokie’s English Classics, 6d.)
Selections from Australian Poets. (Angus and Robertson, Is. 6d.)
* Shakespeare’s Julius Cmsar. (Blackie’s Plain Text, 4d.)
* For more detailed study.
{b) History of Literature. —Biographies of authors read—their works and
environment.
11. Language.
(a) Composition—Oral and written.
( b) Practice in speaking and reading.
Third Year—l. Literature.
. (a) Beading. —The following works to be read according to the three-years
cycle indicated hereunder ;
A.
Scott’s Kenilworth. (Collins, Is. 3d.)
Macaulay’s Warren Hastings. (Blackie, 6d.)
Carlyle’s Hero as Divinity., (Blackie’s English Texts, 6d.)
Bates’ Naturalist on the Amazon | /r , ~ T , , T , ,
’Milton’s L’Allegro and Ii Penseroso j (Dent s Everymans Library, Is.)
*Lowell’s Poems. (Penny Poets.)
Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner. (Blackie’s English Texts, 6d.)
Shakespeare’s As You Like It. (Blackie’s Plain Text, 4d.)
* For more detailed study.
B.
George Eliot’s Mill on the Floss. (Cassell, Is.)
Thayer’s Life of Lincoln. (Hodder and Stoughton, Is. 6d.)
Lamb’s Essays (selected). (Cassell, Is.)
Darwin’s Voyage of the Beagle.
Shorter Poems. (Blaokie’s Smaller English Classics, 6d.)
Shakespeare’s Tempest. (Blackie’s Plain Text, Id.) ,
• For more detailed study.


c.
Dickens Old Curiosity Shop. (Cassell, Is.)
Smiles’ Lives of the Engineers.
Plutarch’s Lives—Julius Caesar and Alexander. (Vol. 2—Dentytj,
Everyman’s Library. 'Scott Library, Is.)
Mrs. David’s Funafuti.
*Laureata—Shakespeare to Byron. (Arnold, Is.)
Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream. (Blackie’s Plain Text, 4d.)
* For more detailed study.
(b) History of Literature. —-Biographies of authors read—their works and
environment—relation of works to times in which they lived—condition and
influence of contemporary literature.
11. Language.
(ns) Composition—Oral and written.
( h) History of Language—Historical Development of English Vocabulary.
(See Notes and Suggestions.)
(c) Practice in speaking and reading.
Fourth Year.—l. Literature.
(а) Re idiaj. —The following works to be read according to the three years’
cycle indicated hereunder :
A.
Dickens’ Tale of Two Cit es. (Cassell, Is.)
Holmes’ Autocrat of the Breakfast Table. (Dent’s Everyman’s
Library, Is.)
*Ruskin’s Selections. (Bell and Sons, Is.)
Cailyle’s Essay on Burns. (Cassell, 9d.)
*Chaucer’s Prologue. (Skeat. Clarendon Press.)
Shakespeare’s Macbeth. (Blackie’s Plain Text, Id.)
* For more detailed study.
B.
Jane Austen’s Northanger Abbey. (Cassell, Is.)
Emerson’s Representative Men —Shakespeare the Poet, Napoleon the
Man of Action. (Dent’s Everyman’s Library, Is.)
Addison—Selections from the Spectator. (Blackie and Sons, lOd.)
*Burke’s Conciliation Speech. (Blackie’s English Text, 6d.)
Comus and Lycidas, (Clarendon Press).
*Shakespeare’s Coriolanus. (Blackie’s Plain Text, Id.)
*For more detailed study.
c.
Kingsley’s Geoffrey Hamlyn. (Ward, Lock, k Co,, Ltd., Is. 6d.)
Stevenson’s Virginibus Puerisque.
Essays. (Blackie and Sons, 6d.)
Gibbon—Age of the Antonines. (Blackie and Sons, 6d.)
*Laureata—Shelley to Kipling.
Shakespeare’s A Winter’s Tale.
For more detailed study.
(б) History of Literature. —Chronological survey, in epoch series, of English -
literature. (See Notes and Suggestions.)


II. LANGUAGE.
(а) Composition—Oral and written.
(б) History of Language—Relation of English to other European Languages
(live lessons) —Brief survey of History of English Grammar (fifteen lessons).
For further details, see Notes and Suggestions.
(c) Practice in speaking and reading.
NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS.
Intkoductoky.
The course of instruction in English will comprise two main divisions:
Literature and Language. The works included in the Literature Course
have been chosen, not merely for their value as a means of information, but
as a source of higher pleasures, as a means of knowing life, and for their
ethical or their literary value. It will be seen that the main literary types
have been included : the novel, the essay, biography, travel, the lyric, the
ballad, the romantic narrative poem, myth and legend in prose and poetry,
history, and the drama.
I. (a) Literature.
General aim in teaching Literature.
As the special educating power of Literature lies in its effect in developing
the mind, filling it with high ideals, and in its influence in refining and en-
nobling character, and as Literature cannot exercise this power unless the
works are understood and enjoyed by the pupils, it follows that the true end
and aim of the teacher must be to rouse interest and create enjoyment in the
books read. All methods, therefore, employed in teaching the subject should
be planned with this end clearly in view.
Suggested general Method of Treatment of various Literary Types.
It is suggested that the pupils should first read the books out of class, unaided
by the teacher. Thus the mental grasp of the pupils will be strengthened and
their own impressions formed. The W orks might then be discussed in class in
more or less detail; this will involve the re-reading of the works, in whole or in
part, under direction.
The Novel.
“ In good fiction the story is the embodiment of the author’s view of some
phase of human life, given not in abstract terms, but as a concrete vision.”
Therefore, though methods must necessarily be varied with regard to class,
book, &c., the. story should be treated as a story, and efforts made to bring out
its real and living interest.
In connection with the reading of the novel, the following main lines are
suggested for class study and discussion: —
1. The Story. —The book may be talked over in an informal manner and the
whole story retold by one or tw ! o members of the class. In the third and fourth
years this study may be extended to embrace Plot Construction—the main
threads of the plot may be traced and a diagram drawn in the literature note-
book showing how these have been interwoven by the author. Other interesting
exercises of the same nature may follow. *
2. Place Interest. —This will involve, besides brief discussion, the oral read-
ing in class of interesting descriptive passages (to be chosen by the pupils them-
selves). The pupil might also be required to reproduce some of these, either in
his own words (oral or written), or by pen and ink or water-colour sketch.
3. Time Interest. —This will involve a brief discussion of the history of the
period in which the story is set, the customs then in vogue, the costumes worn
by different classes, the weapons in use, houses, furniture, &c. The reading in
class of passages from the book throwing light upon these matters will
naturally follow.
4. Character Interest. —The leading personages in the story could then be
discussed, their adventures followed, estimates formed of their characters, con-
trasts and comparisons made.


6. Author’s Life. — A simple and interesting biography of the author might
be given by the teacher, just so far as it adds interest to or throws light upon
his work. The appropriate time for this, i.e., whether at beginning or at
close of the reading and discussion, must be decided by the character of the
actual work being read.
Shakespearean Play.
It is Suggested that in this the main work should centre round the reacting
of the play, thus :
1. Introduction. —The aim in this should be to arouse interest in the play.
The introduction may not be necessary in all cases, but in a Historical Play,
as for instance, Julius Csesar or Henry V, it would be desirable to discuss the
historical setting of the play, or even to devote a couple of lesssons to the
History of the Period in which the play is set
2. Heading of Flay. —Preferably by the teacher, in order to give pupils a
general and appreciative impression of the play as a whole.
3. Dramatic reading of a series of all the finest scenes in the play by members
of the class. It will be necessary to prepare for this reading by a preliminary
discussion of the scene about to be read. This will entail a study of the chief
characters (the development of these characters will be watched and noted as
the play progresses); the dramatic situation, the setting of the scene, &c. ;
also the elucidation of any difficult passages that may interfere with an effec-
tive oral interpretation.
4. Language Study. —Brief study of the language may follow the reading of
each scene, but only so far as to lead to a due appreciation of its beauties of
sound and form.
5. Character and Plot Study. —A general discussion of the characters of the
chief personages in the drama, the construction of plot, striking characteristics
of the play, &c. This should involve simply a summing up of the impressions
gathered by the pupils during their reading of the play. At this stage, pupils
of the fourth year might be encouraged to read some Shakespearean criticism
by good writers.
General Beading of a Shakespearean Play.
In a general reading of the play. Step 3 would be considerably modified, only
a few of the most striking scenes being chosen for dramatic reading, and (4)
and (6) might be omitted, the teacher contenting himself by briefly discussing’
with the class the most interesting characters in the play, drawing attention
to its chief beauties, and, encouraging the pupils to memorise some of the more
striking and effective passages.
The Essay.
In this the intellectual purpose is prominent, and the meaning and method
of the author may claim equal attention. Its connection with composition can
be made somewhat close, and from it certain principles of literary form can
be illustrated, such as paragraphing, unity, coherence, use of metaphor, &c.
Bach essay is built upon a clear plan, and is divisible into large sections.
These are again divisible into smaller topics. The main topics and sub-topics
of a paragraph may be found and their interrelation considered (i.e., a literary
analysis may be made). As a clear idea of the whole essay is necessary, this
examination of the parts should not lead pupils to lose sight of the clear and
orderly development of the essay as a whole.
Exercises could be given on forming summaries of certain paragraphs and
correcting these by the text.
Pupils should be encouraged to use their literature note-books systematically
in connection with the reading of the essay, and these books should show, at
close of the reading, the summaries made by each individual member of the
class.
Poetry—Lyrical and Narrative.
In this the appeal is specially to the emotions. As the study of poetry
scarcely comes within the sphere of the exact intellectual activities, it does not
lend itself to treatment by any prescribed method. Even the explaining of
poetry has its difficulties and dangers for both teacher and pupil; often the
mere understanding of a passage is so closely connected with emotional experi-
ence that in attempting an explanation its delicate beauty is lost. Something;
Snould be left to the pupil’s feeling and imagination.


The teacher’s reading should play an important part in the early presenta-
tion of any poem. Carefully-thought-out questions upon the substance of the
poem might then follow, designed to cause the pupils to feel the meaning of the
poem or to visualise the pictures embodied therein. If one of the longer
narrative poems, the poem might be divided into certain sections (these sec-
tions to be agreed upon by class), and each of these studied in turn. (Certain
poems have been thus divided by the poet, e.g., “Evangeline.”) Summaries
of these sections could be framed by pupils, in which the poet’s own words
should be used where possible, and these summaries entered in the literature
note-book—this to ensure a further careful reading by the pupils. Members
of the class might then be asked to read or recite certain passages selected
either by other members of the class or by the teacher.
The memorising of passages from the poem (or the whole of it, if a short
poem) may follow. If the pupils have appreciated the poem, this will not
appear as a task; they may be encouraged to suggest passages especially
worthy of being memorised, and each pupil can make his or her own selection
from the list thus formed.
Included in the discussion of any poem reference will be made to the author,
his life, place in literature and relation to contemporaries, chiefly in order to
throw further light on the subject-matter of the poem, and thus add to its
interest.
Literature Kotc-hook.
It is suggested that a note-book should bo kept by eacb pupil, to be used
systematically in connection with the reading. In this may be recorded
the pupil’s own impressions of the books read, his estimates regarding charac-
ters, and references to passages on which ho has based his estimate; sum-
maries, appreciations, illustrations (however rough they may be, these are
always valuable diagrams of plots); transcriptions of fine passages, allu-
sions to other works, and so on.
The teacher might also present topics that will furn’sli exercise in narration
and description and argument. The pupils might be required to read
occasionally some of these compositions to the other members of the class,
for the information, interest, or enjoyment of their hearers.
I. (o) Histoby op Liteeateee,
In the first year the interest of personality will be uppermost with, the
pupils, and the life of the author should serve to illustrate and add interest
to the works being read. How far anecdotal interest shall bo developed must
be a matter for the teacher to decide.
In the treatment of myth, legend, and ballad, where biographical interest
is lacking, an account might be given of the means by which these have been
preserved and transmitted to us, also a description of the country, and the
characteristics of the people amidst which they took shape.
During the second year the biographical treatment may be continued, but
a wider view taken of the author. At this stage, not only the life of the
author but his more important works and his environment may be dealt with.
In the third year the biographical treatment may merge still further into
the epoch treatment; in addition, the author’s life, works, and environ-
ment, his relations to his contemporaries may be considered.
In the Fourth Year. —ln this last year the history of literature should
be presented connectedly in outline in order to give a clear sense of the
development of our literature. It is suggested that it be viewed in epoch
series, the central work or event in each period being discusssed in some
detail, e.g., the Saxon Period (“The Beowulf”); Chaucer Period (“Canter-
bury Tales”); Renascence (“ Caxton and the Printing Press,” Malory’s
“ Morte d’Arthur,” “Introduction of Sonnet”); Elizabethan Period (Spen-
ser’s “ Fserie Queene,” “Rise of the Drama”); Milton Period (“Paradise
Lost”); Restoration Period (Dryden); Eighteenth Century Prose Period
(“The Spectator,” “Rise of the Novel”); Eighteenth Century Poetry (Pope
and Goldsmith); Nineteenth Century Romantic Revival (Wordsworth)." These
divisions are to be regarded as merely suggestive.


11. Language: (a) Composition.
Regular practice in composition, both oral and written, should bo
given in order to enable pupils to gain power over the spoken and written
language. Such practice should embrace the three main literary forms of
narration, description, and argument, and should be kept in closest relation
with the Reading Course.
_ The general principles regarding thought structure and paragraph forma-
tion may be studied in connection with the reading of the essay. Apart
from such incidental work, formal instruction in the theory of expression
will scarcely be needed. In any case it is doubtful whether such instruction
is effective in securing a good style of composition. Pupils who daily hear
and read well-framed sentences will naturally tend to use similar ones—hence
the importance of a liberal supply of good models. Comparison can thus be
studied to best advantage in and through masterpieces.
In connection with this branch of English work, the literature note-book
referred to under I (Notes and Suggestions) should be used constantly.
11. ( b) Grammar and History oe Language.
Grammar. —A short course of instruction in formal Grammar. The main
aim in this should be to enable pupils to develop the power of recognising
quickly the function of words or phrases in sentences and their relation to
one another.
Prosody (Simple verse-forms). —Parsing and analysis and scansion may be
treated to a certain extent incidentally throughout the whole course and
used mainly as instruments of interpretation and criticism.
History of Language. —( i ) Word composition, (ii) Elements of English
vocabulary. (Hi) Relation of English to other European languages, (iv) His-
torical Grammar (brief survey). The aim in this course is_ to develop an
intelligent interest in the mother tongue and not to acquaint pupils with
a body of details.
First Year.
(i) Word Composition (see Campbell’s “ Higher English,” section iv, or
Meiklejohn’s “ English Language,” pp. 143-167). —A short course of about
twelve lessons upon such topics as—synonyms; words derived from names or
places, persons, or other sources; words disguised in form; self-interpreting
words; rise and fall in the meaning of words; word-branching.
(ii) Historical Development of the Vocabulary of English Language _ (see*
Meiklejohn’s “ English Language,” chapter 11, or Campbell’s “ Higher
English,” section II). —A short course of about twenty lessons to be given
in the third year upon the elements of the English vocabulary and the chief
influences from without and within, which have contributed in its develop-
ment, e.g., the Teutonic Invasion—relations between Saxons and Celts, effects
upon language, words acquired from Celts; (2) introduction of Christianity—
effects upon language, examples of words acquired; (3) incursion of Danes,
linguistic effects, examples; (4) Norman Conquest—characteristics of language
of Normans, linguistic effects, examples of words acquired; (6) revival of
learning—effects, large importations of words from classical sources, and
from Italian and Spanish.
(Hi) Delation of English to other European Languages. —A short course
of about five lessons to be given in fourth year. (See Campbell’s “ Higher
English,” pages 14-20, or Meiklejohn’s “ English Language,” Introduction.)
(iv) Brief Survey of the History of English Grammar. —A short course of
fifteen lessons to be given in fourth year. (See Meiklejohn’s “English
Language,” chapters 111 and IV, or OamphelTs “ Higher English,” section
III.)
11. (c) Practice in Speaking and Reading.
In addition to the continuous practice in oral expression incidentally
given in connection with, the Reading Oourse 3 training should be given m
the art of clear and effective utterance. Exercises may be given at
intervals for the purpose of correcting slovenly enunciation and pronuncia-
tion.


BOOKS ON THE TEACHING OF ENGLISH (RECOMMENDED FOR
THE TEACHER.)
The Teaching of English.
Chubb’s Teaching of English. 4s. 6d.
Roberts and Barter’s Teaching of English. (Blackie and Son.) 3s.
Wilson’s Lingua Materna. (Edward Arnold.) 3s. 6d.
The Teaching of English. Carpenter, Baker, and Scott. (Longman, Green,
& Co.) 7s.
Hinsdale’s Teaching the Language Arts. (Appleton & Co.) 4s. 6d.
Hisioby of Literature.
Biographies—English Men of Letters Series.
Saintsbury’s History of Literature. (From Sixteenth to Nineteenth Century.)
Logie Robertson’s History of English Literature. (This is a simple yet well-
arranged and comprehensive little volume suitable for either teacher’s
or pupil’s use.)
History of Language.
Meiklejohn’s English Language. 4s. 6d.
Campbell’s Higher English. (Blackie and Son.) 2s. 6d.
The Place of the Mother Tongue in National Education. Pamphlet. Is.
Green’s Short History of the English People.
Trench’s Study of Words.
Lee’s School History of English Literature. Three vols. at Is. 6d. and 2s.
English Literature: Its History and Significance. W. J. Long, Ph D
(Ginn & Co.)
A History of English Literature. R. P. Halleck. (American Book Co.)
A History of English Literature. H. S. Pancoast. (George Bell and Son.)
The Teaching of English Composition. Miss Covernton. (Heath.)
The Study and Teaching of English Literature. W. S. McPherson. (Cam-
bridge University Press.)
The Epoch Series. W. S. Stobart. (Edward Arnold.)
HISTORY.
Fie, st and Second Years.
]. History of Greece and Rome in general outline.
Text Books ; Rome (History Primers), Creighton.
Greece (History Primers), Fyffe.
For Supplementary Reading :—-
Roman Antiquities, Wilkins.
Greek Antiquities, Mahafiy.
2. English History in outline, from 1485 to the present lime, with fuller
treatment of the growth of the Brit'sh Empire.
Text Book : History of Great Britain, Tout. ( Longman's Historical
Series, Book 2.)
Woodward’s Outline History of the B.'itish Empire.
For Supplementary Reading :
Jose’s Growth of the Empire.
3. Outline of Australian History, 1851 -1901.
Text Book : Jose’s Short History of Australasia.
Approximate allotment of time :
(1) 4 months. First half-year.
(2) 12 months. Seconc. and third half-years.
(3) 4 months. Fourth half-year.


Third and Fourth Years.
1. Chief periods of European History from the beginning of the sixteenth
Century.
Text Book : Robinson’s History of Western Europe.
2. Special studies (one of the following),
(a) The Nineteenth Century.
(b) British Industry and Commerce.
(c) Australian Industry and Commerce.
(d) Periods of Greek and Roman History (for classical students only).
Below are shown, in greater detail, outlines of the Courses indicated in the
skeleton Syllabus above.
English History in Outline, from 1485.
1. The Renaissance and Reformation, 1485-1603.
2. The Struggle for Civil Freedom, 1603-1685.
3. The Revolution—it» causes and effects, 1685-1688.
4. The Beginnings of Modern Constitutional Government, 1688-1714.
5. Social Life and Progress during sixteenth and seventeenth Centuries.
6. England under the Hanoverian Kings (George I and George II) 1714-
1760.
7. The American War of Independence, and
The French Revolution, 1760-1815.
8. The Industrial Revolution, 1760-1815.
9. Industrial and Social Developnunts of the nineteenth Century.
5 he Growth of the British Empire.
1. Period of preparation, 1497-1558 : Europe and the New World.
2. Elizabethan Age.
The beginnings of Maritime Expansion—Relations with Spain as a.
W< rid Power. —Great Seamen : Hawkins, Frobisher, Drake—
Motives and Objects of Colonisat’on in Elizabeth’s Time.
3. The English in the East.
Relations with Portugal and the Netherlands—The East India Com-
pany—Its establishment, aims, and development.
4. The English in North America.
Altered Conditions of Colonisation —Development of North American
Colonies, 1606-1650. Relations with Dutch and French Settle-
ments. Jamaica.
5. England’s attitude towards her Colonies.
The Navigation Acts of 1651 and 1660—their effect. The Commons
and Colonial Indus’ ry. The Navy and Maritime Supremacy.
Treaty of Utrecht, 1713.
6. The American Colonies.
Their Ex f ension—(1) by settlement, (2) by conquest. Internal Con-
ditions of De' clopment. The Slave System in the Southern States —-
its coinonr'c basis.
7. Expansion by Conquest—India and Canada.
Wars—to conquer or retain Colonies, 1739-1783. Effect of Maritime
Supri macy.


8. Sovereignty in India.:
The Work of Clive and Hastings—Burke and Pitt.
'9. Development of Canada.
(1) Military Rule, (2) Partial Self-government, (3) Full Responsible
Government. The Work of Lo.d Durham.
10. British South Africa.
Cape Colony—Early conditions up to 1795. Conquest by British in
1806—Conditions then existing—The Boers—Effects of Abolition
of Slavery—The Great Trek (1836). The Orange River State and
the Transvaal Republic. The Wars of 1881-1899. South African
Federation. _.
Australia (1851-1901).
1. General conditions in Australia in 1851.
2. Discovery of told. Its effects upon social and industrial life. Life on
the gold-fields—Bendigo and Ballarat—The Eureka Stockade.
3. Sydney and Melbourne Universities. The First Railway.
4. Repre entativc Government. Separation of Victoria and Queensland
from New South Wales.
5. Crossing the Continent, McDouall Stuart; the Overland Telegraph
and the Northern Territory.
6. Torrens’ Act. Land laws and pastoral industries. Robertson and
Wentworth.
7. The Education Acts of 1866 and 1880 in New South Wales.
8. The story of the Federal Movement—Sir Henry Parkes. The States
and the Commonwealth—powers of each.
9. Industrial developments—pastoral, agricultural, and mining. Staple
industries of each State. The sugar bounties and kanaka labour.
Spread of dairying industries—changed conditions on Richmond
and Shoalhaven Rivers.
10. Beginnings of a navy and citizen army.
New Zealand.
First settlement and early development—Sir George Grey and the Consti-
tution of 1852. The Maoris and their customs. The Maori war—its cause
and settlement. Later industrial and political developments.
Chief Periods of European History.
1. Brief review of conditions existing at end of fifteenth century in
England, Spain, France, Germany, Italy and Austria and Turkey,
i.e., Conquest of Granada and Union of Castile and Aragon—
Charles VIII and Savonarola. German States—the sources of
their weakness and strength. The Turkish menace.
2. The Reformation in Germany.
3. Philip II and the Catholic Reformation.
4. The Spanish Netherlands—Philip’s policy. The revolt. The Decline
of Spain, and Independence of the Netherlands.
5. The Reformation in France.
6. England under Elizabeth. European relations and influences during
her reign.
7. Brief review of the causes and results of the Thirty Years’ War.
Richelieu’s work in France and abroad.
8. The struggle for constitutional government in England—James I
and Charles I.


9. The Ascendancy of France under Louis XIV. Contrast between
English and French development (hiring this pc Tod. Progrc sof
international law.
10. Russia—brief review of early history, development during eighteenth
century-—lnfluence in European politics.
11. Ttic Rise of Prussia in eighteen h ceniuty.
12. The expansion of England—maritime and commercial supremacy.
13. The French Revolution—general and proximate causes. The Euro-
pean conflict and its outcome. Review of the condition of' Europe
at the end of Napoleonic wars.
14. The Unification of Italy and Germany.
15. The Europe of to-day. General social and industrial developments
of leading countries during nineteenth century.
(a) The Nineteenth Century as the jrroduct of the French and Industrial
Revolutions and Scientific Developments.
A study of the French Revolution. Rousseau and Voltaire. England’s
attitude (Burke and contemporary poets). Constitutional experiments,
1789-99. The Napoleonic Era. Congress of Vienna, 'the struggle
between reactionary and liberal forces, e.g., the various movements for
constitutionalism or nationality in the various countries of Europe, especially
in France, Italy, Germany, and Russia; and more generally in Greece,
Spain, Belgium, Poland, and Austro-Hungary.
Contemporary events, such as recent developments in Russia, Turkey, and
Persia. Relations of Europe with Asia and Africa.
Industrial Revolution. The age of machinery—effect on society and
politics. The labour question. International trade. Relative positions of
United Kingdom, United States, and Germany. International arbitration.
The course will involve some study of the lives and principles of such men
as Stein, Metternich, Kossuth, Mazzini, Cavour, Bismarck, Louis Napoleon,
Peel, Palmerston, Disraeli, Gladstone, Ashley, Rhodes, and Chamberlain.
(h) British Industry and Commerce.
Its development from the earliest stages in Anglo-Saxon and Norman
times, down to the most recent transformations brought about by steam,
electricity, capitalism, trades unionism, etc.
A beginning may be made by a short preliminary study of the industrial
and commercial enterprises of more remote times (e.g., The Ancient Orient,
Greece, Rome) and of Mediaeval Europe (e.g., The Italian Merchants, The
Hanseatic League).
The trade of the early Britons. Influence of the Romans, Anglo-Saxons,
and Danes. Agriculture and the Manor. Urban trade and handicraft.
The rise of the woollen industry. Peasants’ revolt and free labour. Foreign
and Colonial intercourse. The mercantile system. Commerce and war.
Manufactures and mining. Agricultural and industrial revolutions, and
subsequent developments. Individualism, socialism, and communism.
Trades unionism.
History of currency, taxation, banking, foreign and imperial commerce.
Freetrade and preferential trade—their possible effects on Australia.
Relative positions of United Kingdom, Germany, and United States at the
present time.


(c) Australian Industry and Commerce.
1. Development of the various Australian industries. Industries in the
school district—their establishment, and their connection with State, Inter-
state, and International Commerce.
2. The arteries of trade. Road development in early period. Railway
development—how far determined by economic conditions. State ownership
and use of borrowed capital. The development of steamship communication —
storage facilities. The steamship mail service.
3. Irrigation—Mildura and Barren Jack, artesian wells.
4. Origin and development of our commercial relations with the East and
in the Pacific (Japan, China, India, Philippine Islands, New Guinea and
other islands). America—consideration of her position (a) in view of her
natural resources, (b) in view of her geographical position.
5. The commercial resources of Port Darwin and the Northern Territory-
The “ White Australia ” policy.
6. Australia compared or contrasted with Great Britain, Germany, United
States (and other countries as occasion demands—e.g., Argentine) :
(a) As regards mineral and agricultural wealth.
(b) ~ industrial conditions.
(c) ~ trade.
7. International competition in Australia—effects on British trade ;
(a) Tariffs—the New Protection.
(h) The Preferential Trade movement—its pros and cons. How far
recognised (1) in the Empire, (21 in Australia.
8. Industrial conditions in Australia. Trades unionism—conditions bring-
ing about its establishment. Its growth and present position.
9. Industrial Legislation—•
As related (a) to industry directly; (b) to social questions.
Old-age and Invalidity.
Factory and Shop Legislation.
Wages Boards and Arbitration.
10. Immigration. Need ffr population. State policies past and present.
The federal interest.
11. Land policies in different States. Land Tenure and Closer Settle-
ment.
12. Development of State Debts. Loan polici-s - their character con-
trasted with European national debts.
13. Federal and Slate revenue and expenditure—general character.
14. Commerce and Defence. The evolution of military and naval forces.
The Imperial aspect.
(d) Greek and Roman History (for Classical Students only).
(a) History of Greece from the Archonship of Solon to the Periclean
Age (B.C. 594-429). Athens under Pericles. Peloponnesian war—-causes
—main incidents—fall of Athens. Age of Alexander.
(b) History of Rome from the Tribunate of Tiberius Gracchus to the
Augustan Age (B.C. 131-A.D. 14).


NOTES.
The pupils who have passed through the primary course are presumed to have become
familiar with the most striking events in English and Australian history, largely through
the medium of biographical sketches of the careers of men who were leaders in our race
development. The first year of the secondary course is designed on similar lines, to
give the pupils in broad outline such vivid pictures of the great civilisations of Greece
and Rome as are deemed appropriate to their age and mental growth. The natural
sequence of this outline course would be a similar treatment of the chief periods of
mediaeval history. But careful consideration of what is possible in the first two years,
at the end of which so many pupils leave school, leads to the conclusion that if
mediaeval history is included, some other part of the scheme must be omitted. If not,
the course, theoretically complete, would be open to the very grave objection that it
could not be mastered with reasonable thoroughness in the time periods set apart for it.
As need arises, however, the teacher will be careful to trace the origin of great
movements to the fundamental and far-reaching causes which in the past were operating
to bring them about. In this way, notwithstanding the chronological gap, there should
be no difficulty in impressing upon the minds of the pupils a due sense of the continuity
of history.
The English history course is planned to cover the period during which it may be said
that modern England has developed. It aims primarily at giving a clear view of the
internal growth of England. The lessons will group themselves naturally round the
man Who played the greatest part in each stage of the nation’s progress toward civil,
religious, and industrial freedom. Though the course as outlined is topical in character,
a broad continuity of treatment should be kept in view.
Following upon this course on internal England is the more comprehensive one on the
growth of tire Empire during the same period. It deals with Britain abroad, but at
various stages should come into touch with what has been done in the previous course,
so that pupils may be trained to appieciate, as fully as possible, the many points of
intimate connection between internal development and external expansion.
As many pupils must necessarily terminate their school life at the end of the second
year, and thus lose the benefit to be derived from the fuller courses of the third and
fourth years, it is thought desirable to conclude that period with a series of lessons on
Australia from 1851 to 1901. The aim of this treatment of Australian History is to give
tlie pupils some definite understanding of the events which culminated in the formation
of the Commonwealth, its relations to the Empire and the civilized world, and some
realization of the obligations that must devolve upon them when, a few years later, they
enter upon full citizenship.
Reference may be made at this stage to the necessity for occasional pauses in the
course of lessons, for judicious revision. 1 he object of such revision should be to deepen
and strengthen those impressions which it is the aim of the history course to make
permanent. If this aim is kept steadily in view 7 , the teacher will have no difficulty in
deciding upon the appropriate times for such revision. A word may be said on the
question of dates. These should be few', chosen with purpose, and firmly fixed in the
mind. The time sense is weak in young pupils and needs cultivation. Without some
such training there is danger of much unsuspected mental confusion in the pupil’s method
of establishing relations between the various facts and events.
In the third year the pupil enters the wider field of European History. Already he
has learned how frequently England came into conflict with one or other of the
continental nations. Some study of the development or decline of these nations will now
form a fitting continuation of the courses already completed. 'This course, while giving
the pupil a certain amount of foundational knowledge of European History, will also
serve to throw fresh light on the striking story of Britain. It may well conclude with a
summary of the characteristic social industrial movements in the leading countries during
the nineteenth century.
For the fourth year several courses l ave been outlined. Unless the staff arrange-
ments are favourable, it is not expected that more than one of these courses will be
attempted.
The Course in Ancient History is intended for classical students only. It is suggested
that the treatment of the Peloponnesian War should be confined to a brief but definite
statement of the main incidents, so as to render possible some attention to the age of
Alexander without overloading the course, and thus making it wearisome to those who
are called upon to study it.
It will be noted that Course C has been drawn up in somewhat greater detail than the
others. The reason for this lies in the fact of its being new—and Australian. It is
hoped also that the final outcome of such courses will be the realisation by the pupils
that History is not merely an academic study, but one which affords a very real
preparation for effective citizenship.


In this year an important advance is to be made by the pupils. Under the guidance,
and with the assistance, of the teacher, (hey will be expected to make systematic use of
the library for the purpose of such original research as they are now capable of
making. The advantages to be derived from such practice lie in developing breadth of
view, the spirit of toleration, power to sift and weigh evidence, and to look at all sides
of a question, and finally, to form judgments based upon the exercise of one’s own
intelligence rather than upon unthinking acceptance of the opinions of others.
Closely associated with the use of the library is the debating class. The debate may
be used profitably even in the third year, but should be an essential feature of the treat-
ment of the special course of the fourth year. The necessity for clear thinking and clear
expression will be brought home to the pupils by no better means than the debate for
.which due preparation has been made. It will be the teacher’s office in large measure,
both through the medium of debate and occasional essay writing, to choose or suggest
topics which help pupils to get at the heart of the matter set down for study.
GEOGRAPHY.
Fiest Year.
Keiv South Wales.
Its physical features, railways and chief towns, Eastern, Central, and
Western Divisions.
Effects of varying seasons on production.
Pastoral areas.
Wool as a staple product. A sheep station. Treatment, sale, and export
of wool. Compare with other countries producing wool.
Wheat areas. Varying output. Mode of export. Countries that com-
pete in wheat-growing.
Coalfields. Countries that buy our coal. Relation of coal-production to
other industries.
Dairying districts. Rainfall and soil as alfecting these. Artificial grasses.
Co-operation in butter-making. Other products of the dairy-farm. Export
of butter. Refrigerating chambers. Export of frozen meat, hides, tallow, &o.
Silver and gold production.
Conditions aifec ing the price of the chief'exports.
How i ail ways help in development.
How the towns depend on the country. Coastal trade.
Interstate trade.
Commodities not yet largely produced but possible.
Making of graphs— e.g.. showing the number of sheep in different coun-
tries in the world.
Wool production of the world.
' Making of sections— e.g. along the respective parallels of latitude of Yew
South Wales.
Making and reading of maps— e.g. showing—
(l) Parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude.
(2) Topography.
(3) Isotherms (for January and July and the year).
(4) Winds (for January and July).
(5) Rainfall (for January and July and the year).
(6) Soils.
(7) Vegetation.
(8) Productions.
(9) Industries and Minerals.
(10) Density of population.
(11) Commerce —Railways—Rivers—Shipping Routes.


Collection of postcards, newspaper cuttings, Ac., in a definite and systematic
order to illustrate any of the above types.
it • Further study of the Australian States and New Zealand in less detail
than that suggested for New South Wales. For example, having dealt with
“the build” of Victoria, a course of lessons as outlined in J. W. Gregory’s
Geography of Victoria, part 111, pp. 238-268, Political Geography, might be
followed—
I. The Geographical Divisions of Victoria.
11. The Aborigines.
111. The Colonists.
IV. The Pastoral Occupation.
V. The Mines.
VI. The Railways.
VII. Irrigation and Water Supply.
VIII. Future Development.
Second Year Course.
Commerce—General Ideas.
Natural productions and manufactured goods.
Dependence on physical conditions, soil, drainage, shoreline, mineral
wealth, climate, and the intelligence and civilisation of the race.
Exchange and transportation of goods.
Water carriage and land carriage.
Home consumption.
Export of surplus products.
Chief natural productions of the tropical and temperate zones. Mining
and manufacturing centres. Sources of food supply.
Chief sub-marine cables. Coaling stations. Relation of the navy to
British trade.
The United Kingdom. Its iron and coal fields. Manufacturing industries.
Imports and exports, with special reference to Australia. Great seaports.
Trade routes to Australia.
The United States and Canada. Means of internal communication.
Transcontinental railways. Chief products and external trade.
France, Germany, and Russia. The Trans-Siberian railway. Trade
relations with Australia.
India, China, and Japan, Peoples, products, trade.
South Africa. Its races and chief industries. Trade with Australia.
Physical Features and Political Geography.
In connection with each of the countries above mentioned, the chief
physical features and the form of government should be studied.
Physical Geography.
The Earth as a Planet Stars and planets. The solar system. Ocean
basins and continents.
Land Forms.—Plains, plateaus, mountains, basins, and valleys.
Distribution of Temperature.—lsotherms, study of chart showing
isotherms —e.g. Mill’s Realm of Nature, plates 3 and 4.
Weather and climate defined.


Principal causes which influence climate.
Latitude.—Angle of incidence of the sun’s rays. Temperature deceases
poleward from the tropics about 1 degree F. for every parallel of
latitude.
Altitude. —Temperature falls about 1 degree F. for every 333 feet of
ascent. The snow line.
Proximity to the sea. —Continental, and Oceanic Climates.
Direction of Prevailing Wnds.—Local winds.
Direction of Mountain Chains.
Slope of the Land.
Nature of the soil.
Direction of Oceanic Drifts and Currents.
Wind.—The pressure of the atmosphere, Isobars, Isobaric charts (e.g.
Mill, plates 5 and 6). Land and Sea breezes;—The monsoons. Wind
systems of the world. The trade winds. How rotation acts on the direction
of winds. The thermal equator. The doldrums. Antitrades—Calms of the
tropics (Horse latitudes). Roaring forties of the southern hemisphere and
the west winds of the northern hemisphere.
Currents of the Ocean. —Cause of. Currents of the Atlantic —Gulf
Stream. Currents of the Pacific. Currents of the Indian Ocean—Why
they change their direction. Currents of the Arctic Ocean. Currents of the
Southern Ocean. Rate of movement of currents. Study Mill, plate 18.
Rain. —Cause of rainfall. Rainfall of the world. (Siudy Plate Bof Mill).
Australian Conditions in regard to rain. Special study of the Isohyets of
New South Wales (see Public Instruction Gazette, February, 1906).
Weather Charts.—“ Low pressure ” and “ high pressure ” areas. How
they are plotted. Law of movement in the southern hemisphere. Anticy-
clones —Summer, winter. Cyclones. Moneoonal, V reversed, and closed
curve. Systematic study of weather charts.
Third Year.
One hour per week.
The Outlines of the History of Discovery.
The World as known to the Ancients.—The world according to Eratos-
thenes. The world according to Ptolemy.
The Spread of Conquest in the Ancient World.—The Chaldeans, the
Assyrians and the Babylonians; Medes and Persians; Greeks, Romans;
Roman roads.
Geography in the Dark Ages.—The Hereford map. Discoveries of the
Norsemen. Mediaeval travels. Marco Polo.
Roads and Commerce.—Why certain places are chosen for towns. Roman
roads. Caravan routes of Asia.
To the Indies Eastward.—The Portuguese route. Prince Henry. Vasco
da Gama.
To the Indies Westward.—The Spanish route. Toscanelli’s map. Colum-
bus. Vespucci. Magellan.
To the Indies Northward.—The north-west passage. English and French
routes. The north-east passage. English, Dutch, and Russian routes.
The Partition of America.—The work of Balboa. Cortes in Mexico. Piz-
arro in Peru. British, French, and Spanish America.
Australia and the South Seas.—Loaysa’s voyage round the world. Saa-
vedra sails from Mexico. Villalobos attempts to colonise the Philippines.
Mendana and Villalabos discover the Solomons. Mendana and Quieroz fail


to colonise the Solomons. Quieroz and Torres. The Dutch and Australia.
Tasman’s Voyage. Dampier. Cook’s voyage along the east coast of Australia.
How physical conditions influenced exploration in Australia.
Africa.—Mungo Park and the Niger. Speke and the Nila Livingstone
and the Zambesi. Stanley and the Congo. The Spheres of Influence.
The Poles.—Captain Cook, Franklin, Nansen, Peary, Weddell, Ross,
Borchgrevink, Scott, Shackleton.
Special Study in Cycles—
(l) Columbus.
(2) Magellan.
(3) Captain Cook.
(4) Antarctic^.
Course in Practical Geography.
A course “to take the place of laboratory work in modern scientific
instruction.”
Each student will make at least one piece of geographical apparatus.
The following are suggested as suitable among others :—Hygrometers,
plane-tables, weather-vanes, compass-charts, rain-gauges, time indicators, sun-
dials, shadow-sticks, orreries, and models of volcanoes, showing geyser action
of the neighbourhood, showing how wind is caused, showing the flattening at
the poles, showing the bending of strata.
The following plan may be adopted in regard to this work. As early as
possible in the year students should know definitely which piece they may
do. Before proceeding with the constructive work they should send in plans
of the intended work. Upon completion, discussions in class may follow on
“ How to make,” “ How to use,” and “ Where to use ” the apparatus.
In the event of any pupil not being able to make any one piece of appar-
atus, he or she should substitute records obtained by the use of apparatus,
and the facts and principles established by these records. In any case a
few—preferably girls—should be detailed for this part of the work, which
should be the result of personal observations.
Text-book. —Simmons and Richardson, “An Introduction to Practical
Geography,” Macmillan & Co., pp. xi +3BO.
(J. F. Unstead, “The Practical Geography,” in two parts, pp. 116 + 112,
Clarendon Press, 1909. For the records only).
Fourth Year.
The Pacific.
The Hydrosphere, Divisions of.—Pacific compared with other oceans in
extent.
The Discovery.—Balboa, Magellan—the name.
The Two-coast Types.—The Atlantic coast type, the Pacific coast type.
General grouping into “ Festoons.”—The Australasian (including the
Melanesian) —New Guinea t ) New Zealand. The Micronesian (Caroline
Islands to Samoan Islands). The Pelew (Ladrone). The North Pacific
Chain (Hawaiian Islands). The South Pacific Chain (Hervey Islands to
Marquesas). The Chinese Ftstoon (Borneo to Formosa). The Lu-chu
Festoon. The Japanese Festoon. The Kurile Festoon. The Aleutian
Festoon. The British Columbian (Baranov to Vancouver). The Californian
(Galapagos Festoon). The J nan Fernandez Festoon.
The Isotherms.—January to July. Relation to parallels of latitude.
Compare isotherms of North and South Pacific; migration of temperature
belts and cause of.


The Isobars.—January and July. Relation to isotherms. High and low
.pressure noted.
The Winds.—January and July. Relation of wind belts to isobars and
sotherms. Distribution of winds in relation to “ high ” and “ low ” pressure
areas.
Rainfall. —January and July.
Trace the relations between general system of winds and rainfall.
Currents.—January and July.
Show relation to Isotherms and Winds.
(On these lines a systematic study of maps is sufficient, e.g., Mill’s Realm
of-Nature—Plates 3,4, 5,6, 7, and 18.)
The Peoples of the Pacific.
The Deeps of the Pacific.
The Control of the Pacific. Spheres of Influence—Australia’s share and
position in the control—Fleets in the Pacific.
The High and Low Islands—The Coral Islands—Distribution. Theory of
Formation—Special Study of one island to serve as a type, e.g., Funafuti.
Extent and importance of the Great Barrier Reef.
The Volcanic Belt—Volcanic Islands—Distribution. The Earthquake
Areas.
Commerce,—Shipping routes in the Pacific. Sydney in regard to these
routes. Trade in the Pacific especially in the Western Pacific —New South
Wales and Australia’s share of this trade. The International Date Line,
Cable Routes. Wireless Telegraphy. Effect of opening of Panama Canal
on Commerce (and Defence) of Pacific.
The Shores of the Pacific. The Australian Shores. The Asiatic Shores.
The North American Shores. The South American Shores.
Drainage,—Principal rivers.
Cities.—Account for location of principal.
Individual work in connection widi the study of the principal islands-or
island groups. Such work to be illustrated by maps, sketches, diagrams,
pictures, &c. Discussion on this work.
Library Work or Private Reading.
Making notes of Boohs read on or relating to the Pacific.
Fourth Year.
Special Study of the Malay Archipelago on lines similar to those suggested
above.
or, the following :
Discovery. The Portuguese and the Spaniards—the Line of Demarcation—
Magellan—Loaysa.
Deeps—Wallace’s Line.
The Isotherms.
The Isobars.
The Winds—Monsoons —Typhoons.
The Isohyets.
The Currents,
Vegetation. Productions—Special reference to spices, sago.
Animals.
Minerals—Copper.
The Peoples—Malays, Negritos, Melanesians.
Earthquake Areas. Volcanic Belts—-Krakatoa.
Communication—Cables.


Steamship Routes—Sydney to Japan. Sydney to Singapore. Sydney to
Batavia.
Channels.
Control of the Islands—British, Dutch, Portuguese, American, Natives.
Grouping of the Islands—Greater Sunda Islands, Lesser Sunda, Moluccas,
Philippines.
New Guinea—Aru Ke.
Asiatic Shores of the South China Sea.—Malay Peninsula—Siam—•
Cambodia—Auam.
Northern Shores of Australia.
Text Books ik Geography.
First year —Geography of New South Wales Taylor.
Second year —Commercial Geography of the World ... Herbertaon.
The Realm of Nature Mill.
or Physical Geography Davis.
or Physical Geography Hughes, revised by Gregory.
Third year —The Story of Geographical Discovery Jacob..
An introduction to Practical Geography ... Simmonds and Richardson.
or The Practical Geography Unstead.
Fourth year —(Pacific) Stanford’s Compendium of Geo-
graphy, Australasia, Vol. I. Gregory.
(Malay Archipelago) Compendium of Geo-
graphy, Australasia, Vol. II Keane.
ARITHMETIC.
First Year.
1. Factors and Prime Numbers. In connection with factors: —Square
Root, Cube Root, H.C.F. and L.C.M. Tests of divisibility by 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9.
2. Decimals, omitting Recurring Decimals which should be treated with
Geometrical Progression in Algebra. Free use to be made of the Metric
System. Approximate results should be taken when a large number of
decimal places would otherwise be involved. Also simple methods of
approximation should be used. Application of decimals to money. Decimal
systems.
3. Ratio (introduced by unitary method). Percentages. Simple Interest.
Retail and Banker’s discount. Rates and taxes. Customs duties. Commission.
Commercial documents in common use. Balance-sheets and Accounts of
Receipts and Expenditure.
4. Problems on areas and dimensions of rectangles, triangles, parallelograms
and quadrilaterals. Square Root. Areas of circles, concentric circles and
sectors.
5. Use of graphical illustrations and methods.
(Mental work to give facility in dealing with numbers and in rapidly
making such calculations as occur in ordinary business should be continuous
throughout the Arithmetic Course.)
Secokd Yeas;
(Parts of this course may be omitted for girls, and exercises baaed eat
calculations arising in domestic affairs may be substituted.)
1. Exchange. Stocks and Shares with reference to the current practice
of the Australian Share Markets.
2, Compound Interest, using logarithms, and in some cases the slide rule.
B


3. Annuities. Interest and Annuities Tables. House Purchasing on
Deposit and Rent principle. Time-payment systems.
4. Life and Fire Insurance. Municipal and National Loans. Common
Banking Operations.
5. Volumes and surfaces of the simpler solids, viz., rectangular box,
prism, cylinder, pyramid, cone, and sphere.
6. Examples involving the simplest facts of Trigonometry and Surveying.
Plans to scale.
7. Simple problems on the lever, wheel and axle, and inclined plane.
ALGEBRA.
FIRST YEAR
1. Statement in words and symbols of some of the formulae of Arithmetic
and Mensuration. Evaluation of these for particular values of the symbols.
2. Positive and Negative Numbers. Generalisation of the Arithmetics,
rules for Addition and Subtraction. Simplification of easy expressions
involving brackets.
3. Definition of the product of two numbers. Extension to several
numbers. Division defined as the inverse of multiplication.
4. Statement and arithmetical illustration of the following principles;—
ah = ha,
(a + b) c = ac + he
(a + b) (c + d) = ac + he + ad + hd,
{a + h) (c - d) ae + he - ad - bd,
(a - b) (e + d) = ac - he + ad - hd,
(a' —b) (c —d) = ac be + hd ad.
5. Multiplication and Division of algebraical expressions of simple form.
6. Easy Simple Equations with numerical coefficients. These to be intro'
duced by the statement of easy problems to be expressed in the form of
simple equations.
7. Easy Simultaneous Equations of the First Degree with numerical
coefficients. These to be introduced, as before, by the statement of easy
problems.
8. The identities—
(x - a) (x + a) = x 2 -a*
(x —a) (x t +ax + a 2) =x s -« 3
(x +a) (a; 2 -ax + a 2) =xs+ a 3
{x -a) {x -b) = a; 2 - (a + b) x + ab,
and other factors of the same form.
9. Simplification of fractions involving these factors. The simplification of
easy expressions involving fractions, without spending time on complicated
expressions.
10. Graphical Work.
The variation and change of sign of the expression (ax + b). Graphical
illustration of this variation and change of sign.


Second Year.
1. Solution of Simultaneous Equations of the First Degree in three vari-
ables, with numerical coefficients.
2. Literal Equations of the First Degree, in one or two variables.
3. Factors of Standard Types. H.C.F. and L.C.M., by factors and
otherwise.
4. Remainder Theorem. Illustration by examples in factors.
5. Solution of any equation when the linear factors of the expression are
given.
6. The solution of equations by factors to lead to the solution of the
general quadratic equation. Only cases to be considered where the roots are
real. The relation between the roots and the coefficients to be obtained,
7. Problems involving quadratic equations.
8. Simultaneous equations involving quadratics :
(i) One linear equation, and one of the second degree.
(ii) Two equations, in which only terms of the second degree and constant
terms occur.
9. Problems involving simultaneous quadratic equations.
10. Graphical Work.
Variation and change of sign of the quadratic expression ax 2 + hx + c.
Graphical illustrations. Maximum or minimum of- this expression.
Third and Fourth Years.
Part /.
1. Algebraical discussion of maxima and minima, with the help of the-
theory of the quadratic equation.
2. Equations solved like quadratics and harder cases of simultaneous-
equations.
3. Ratio and Proportion.
4. The Index Laws. Fractional and Negative Indices. Logarithms.
Calculations, with the aid of Four Figure Logarithm Tables, and in some
cases the Slide Rule. Evaluation of Square and Cube Roots by the aid of
the Logarithm Tables.
5. Arithmetical and Geometrical Progressions.
6. Interest and Annuities.
7. Permutations and Combinations. Only simple problems to be attempted.
8. The Binomial Theorem for a positive integral index.
9. Graphical Work.
Problems in maxima and minima to be illustrated graphically, 'Also
simple cases of the solution of simultaneous equations of the first and second
degree in two variables.
Part 11.
1. Simple cases of Convergence of Infinite Series. The Ratio Test for
lts application in the Power Series.
2. The Binomial Theorem for a fractional or negative index and its
applications.
3. The Exponential and Logarithmic Series and their applications.
4. Course in Co-ordinate Geometry of the Straight Line and Circle.
5. Short introduction to the Differential Calculus. Only differentiation of
powers of x and simple algebraical expressions to be attempted. This work
to be applied to the equations of tangents in the Analytical Geometry Course;
to velocity and acceleration in Dynamics; and to the evaluation of important
areas, volumes, and surfaces, in mensuration.


GEOMETRY.
FIRST YEAR COURSE.
I. The fundamental notions of solid, surface, plane, line, straight line, point,
angle, length, area and volume, congruence and equality of area or volume.
11. Short course, treating practically the simple constructions :
(1.) To bisect a given angle.
(2.) To bisect a given straight line.
(3.) To draw a perpendicular to a straight line from a point outside or
upon the line.
(4.) To construct an angle equal to a given angle.
(5 ) To construct, in simple cases, triangles from sufficient data.
111. Formal proof of the following theorems :
(1.) If two straight lines intersect, the vertically opposite angles are equal.
(2.) If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
other, each to each, and also the angles contained by these sides equal,
the triangles are congruent.
(3.) If two sides of a triangle are equal, the angles opposite to these
sides are equal, and conversely.
(4.) If two'triangles have the three sides of the one equal to the three sides
of the other, each to each, the triangles are congruent.
(5.) The exterior angle of a triangle is greater than either of the interior
and opposite angles.
(6.) The sum of any two angles of a triangle is less than two right
angles.
(7.) If two sides of a triangle are unequal, the greater side has the greater
angle opposite it.
(8.) If two angles of a triangle are unequal, the greater angle has the
greater side opposite it.
(9.) Of all the straight lines that can be drawn to a given straight line
from a point outside it, the perpendicular is the shortest; and those
which are nearer the perpendicular are less than those which are
more remote.
(10.) Any two sides of a triangle are together greater than the third side.
(11.) If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
. other, each to each, but the angle contained by the two sides of one
greater than the angle contained by the corresponding sides of the
other, then the base of that which has the greater angle is greater
than the base of the other.
(12.) If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
other, each to each, but the base of one greater than the base of the
other, then the angle contained by the sides of that which has the
greater base is greater than the angle contained by the corresponding
sides of the other.
(13.) If two triangles have two angles of the one equal to two angles of the
other, each to each, and a side of the one equal to the corresponding
side of the other, the triangles are congruent.
IV. Formal proof of the constructions named under (II).
V. Easy riders should be worked by the pupils in connection with the
most important of these propositions.


Second Year.
I. Short course, treating practically the following constructions ;
(1.) Construction of parallels to a given straight line.
(2.) Simple cases of the construction of triangles, parallelograms, and
other quadrilaterals from sufficient data.
(3.) Construction of a triangle equal in area to a given polygon.
(4.) Division of straight lines into a given number of equal parts or into
parts in any given proportions.
(5.) Construction of tangents to a circle and of common tangents to two
circles.
(6.) Simple cases of the construction of circles from sufficient data.
(7.) Construction of regular figures of 3,4, 6, and 8 sides in or about a
given circle.
(8.) Construction of a square equal in area to a given polygon.
11. The Theory of Parallels.
(i) Definition of parallels. Euclid’s definition, viz., Straightlines are said
to he parallel when they lie in the same plane, and do not meet one
■ another when produced indefinitely in either direction.
(ii) The Parallel Axiom — Euclid’s axiom to he used, or one of its
equivalents, e.g., Playfair’s axiom.
111. Formal proof of the following Theorems on Parallels :
(1.) When a straight line cuts two other straight lines and makes
(i) a pair of alternate angles equal, or
ii) a pair of corresponding angles equal, or
iii) a pair of interior angles on the same side together equal to
two right angles,
then the two straight lines are parallel.
(2.) If a straight line cuts two parallel straight lines, then it makes—
(i) the alternate angles equal,
(ii) the corresponding angles equal, and
(iii) the two interior angles on the same side together equal to two
right angles.
(3 .)■ Straight lines which are parallel to the same straight lines are
parallel to each other.
IV. Formal proof of the following Theorems, which can be obtained
directly from the above :
(1.) The sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles.
(2.) The straight lines which join the corresponding extremities of two
equal and parallel straight lines are themselves equal and parallel.
(3.) The opposite sides and angles of a parallelogram are equal, each
diagonal bisects the parallelogram, and the diagonals bisect each
other.
(4.) If there are three or more parallel straight lines, and the intercepts
made by them on any straight line which cuts them are equal, then
the corresponding intercepts on any other straight line which cuts
them are equal.
V. Theorems on Areas :
(1.) Parallelograms on the same or equal bases and of the same altitude
are equal in area.
(2.) Equal parallelograms on the same or equal bases are uf the same
altitude.


(3.) If the number of units in the length of a rectangle is multiplied by
the number of units in its breadth, the product gives the area of the
rectangle.
(4.) Triangles on the same or equal bases and of the same altitude are
equal in area.
(5.) Equal triangles on the same or equal bases are of the same altitude.
(6.) If the number of units in the base of a triangle is multiplied by
half the number of units in its altitude, the product gives the area
of the triangle.
(7.) Illustrations and explanations of the geometrical theorems corres-
ponding to the following algebraical identities :
k{a+ h+ c+...) —ka +kh+ kc + ...,
{a + b) 2 = a 2 +2ab + b 2,
(a - h) 2 =a 2 - 2 ab + b-,
a 2 -h 2 = (a -b) (a + h).
(8.) In a right-angled triangle, the square on the hypothenuse is equal
/ to the sum of the squares on the two sides.
(9.) In any triangle the square on the side opposite an acute angle is
less than the sum of the squares on the sides containing that angle
by twice the rectangle contained by one of these two sides and the
projection upon it of the other.
(10.) In an obtuse-angled triangle the square on the side opposite the
obtuse angle is greater than the sum of the squares on the two sides
containing that angle by twice the rectangle contained by one of
the two sides and the projection upon it of the other.
YI. Theorems on the Circle :
(1.) There is one circle, and one only, which passes through three given
points not in a straight line.
(2.) If two circles touch, the point of contact lies on the straight line
through the centres.
(3.) Equal chords of a circle are equidistant from the centre and the
converse.
(4.) The tangent at any,point of a circle and the radius through the
point are perpendicular to one another.
(5.) The angle which an arc of a circle subtends at the centre is double
that which it subtends at any point on the remaining part of the
circumference.
(6.) Angles in the same segment of a circle are equal; and, if the line
joining two points subtend equal angles at two other points on the
same side of it, the four points lie on a circle.
(7.) The opposite angles of any quadrilateral inscribed in a circle are
supplementary; and the converse.
(8.) The angle in a semicircle is a right angle ; the angle in a segment
greater than a semicircle is less than a right angle; and the angle
in a segment less than a semicircle is greater than a right angle.
(9.) In equal circles (or, in the same circle) (i) if two ai’cs subtend equal
angles at the centres, they are equal; (ii) conversely, if two arcs
are equal, they subtend equal angles at the centres.
(10.) In equal circles (or in the same circle) (i) if two chords are equal,
they cut off equal arcs ; (ii) conversely, if two ares are equal, the
chords of the arcs are equal. ' ’ ■


(11.) If a straight line touch a circle, and from the point of contact a
chord be drawn, the angles which this chord makes with the tangent
are equal to the angles in the alternate segments.
(12.) If two chords of a circle intersect, either inside or outside the circle,
the rectangle contained by the parts of the one is equal to the
rectangle contained by the parts of the other.
YII. Formal proofs of the principal constructions in (I).
Y.III. Simple riders to be worked on the principal propositions. The idea
of a locus to be explained, and the simple results in loci obtained and proved.
Third and Fourth Years.
Part I.
I. Revision of the course of the second year, with further practice in riders,
loci, and constructions.
11. Ratio and Proportion : Similar Triangles and Polygons. Proofs which
are only applicable to commensurable magnitudes will be accepted.
Formal proof of the following theorems :
(1.) Triangles and parallelograms which have the same altitude are to
one another as their bases.
(2.) If a straight line is drawn parallel to one side of a triangle, the other
two sides are divided proportionally ; and the converse.
(3.) If two triangles are equi-angular, their corresponding sides are
proportional; and the converse.
(4.) If two triangles have one angle of the one equal to one angle of the
other, and the sides about these equal angles proportional, the
triangles are similar.
(5.) The internal bisector of an angle of a triangle divides the opposite
side internally in the ratio of the sides containing the angle, and
likewise the external bisector externally.
(6.) The ratio of the areas of similar triangles is equal to the ratio of the
squares on coresponding sides.
(7.) The ratio of the areas of similar polygons is equal to the ratio of the
squares on corresponding sides.
(8.) In a right-angled triangle any rectilineal figure described on the
hypothenuse is equal to the sum of the two similar and similarly
described figures, on the two sides containing the right angle.
(9.) In equal circles (or in the same circle), angles, whether at the centre
or circumference, have the same ratio as the arcs on which they
stand.
111. Formal proof of the following constructions:—
(1.) To divide a straight line in extreme and mean ratio.
(2.) Construction of a fourth proportional to three given lines, and a
mean proportional to two given straight lines.
(3.) Construction of an isosceles triangle whose base angles are each
double the vertical angle.
(4.) Construction of regular polygons of 5, 10, and 15 sides in or about
a given circle.
(5.) To describe on a given straight line a rectilineal figure similar and
similarly situated to a given rectilineal figure.
(6.) To construct a rectilineal figure which shall be similar to a given
rectilineal figure and equal to another given rectilineal figure.


IY. The properties of the centroid and the orthocentre, the inscribed,
escribed, and circumscribed circles of a triangle.
V. Riders and simple constructions which can be deduced from the above
theorems and problems.
Part 11.
The following portions of Modern
I. Transversals :—Properties of the nine points circle of a triangle ;
harmonic ranges and pencils; pole and polar; radical axis; similitude;
inversion.
Solid Geometry.
11. The substance of Euclid, Book XL, 1-21, together with theorems
relating to the surfaces and volumes of the simpler solid bodies.
111. The simple geometrical theory of the Conic Sections.
TRIGONOMETRY.
The course proper commences in the Third Year andjextends for two
years. Preliminary work may he done along with the Geometry and Arith-
metic of the First and Second Years.
Third Year.
A course leading to the solution of triangles by the sine and cosine
formulae, with applications to problems in heights and distances.
(1.) Definition of the six trigonometrical ratios of angles less than 90*.
Relations between these ratios. Evaluation of these ratios for 30°,
45°, and 60°.
(2.) Change of the ratios as the angle increases from 0° to 90°. This to
be illustrated by the drawing of the curves for the sine, cosine, and
tangent, (i) from values found graphically, (ii) from the tables.
(3.) The trigonometrical functions of an acute angle and the functions of
the complementary angle.
(4.) Trigonometrical solution of '“real” problems on right-angled tri-
angles. Use of trigonometrical tables. Angles of elevation and
depression.
(5.) Extension of the notion of the trigonometrical functions to
angles up to 180°. (Particularly to show sin A = sin (180°-A),
cos A = - cos (180° A), &c. Solution of easy equations for angles
between 0° and 180°.
(6.) Area of a triangle.
(7.) Areas of regular polygons.
(8.) Proof of the following theorems :
(i) a _ h _ c
sin A sinß sinC =
(ii) —J2+ c 2 _ 2 he eos A.
These results to be applied to simple cases in the solution of
triangles where (1) two angles and one side (2) two sides and the
included angle, (3) three sides are given.
(9.) (a) Height of a point, the position of which is inaccessible), ( h)
distance between two inaccessible points. (Solutions involving
measurements in one plane only.)


Fourth Year,
The eourse for the Fourth Year is an extension of the above, with the
addition of the trigonometrical functions of compound angles, multiple and
sub-multiple angles; further relations between the sides and angles of a
triangle, and their applications; the circular measure of an angle ; De
Moivre’s Theorem and some of its important applications; and the series for
sin 9 and cos 6.
(1.) Trigonometrical functions of angles of any magnitude, positive and
negative.
Trigonometrical functions of o°, 90°, 180°, 270°, and 360°.
(2.) Relations between the trigonometrical functions of the angle A
and ( - A), (90°±A), (180° +A), (270°+A), (360°±A), &c.
(3.) Trigonometrical functions of compound, multiple, and sub-multiple
angles.
To express sin (A + B), cos (A + B), and tan (A ± B), as functions
of A and B.
'To express sin 2A, cos 2A, tan 2A, sin 3A, cos 3A, and tan 3A, as
functions of the angle A.
To express sin C + sin D, and cos D + cos C as products.
Applications of the above.
(4.) Suitable formuhe for the full logarithm'c solution of triangles.
The ambiguous case to be omitted, or only referred to in passing.
Applications to heights and distances with measurements in more
than one plane.
(5.) Trigonometrical treatment of the properties of the Triangle and its
Circles.
(6.) Circular measure of angles, tan 9 > 9 > sin 9, with extensions and
applications.
(7.) De Moivre’s Theorem and easy applications,
(8.) Summation of the series—
sin a + sin (a + /3) +sin (a+ 2/3) + ...
cos a + cos (a + /?) + cos (a + 2/3) + ...
to n terms.
(9.) The series for sin 9 and cos 9.
MECHANICS.
THIRD AND FOURTH YEARS.
Wherever possible, the study of Mechanics, including Elementary
Hydrostatics, should be preceded and accompanied by some experimental
work by the pupils. The aim of the course is to teach the mechanical
principles, and experimental and graphical methods should receive their
proper place in the discovery and elucidation of these principles.
Part I.— (a) Preliminary Experimental Work—A simple course of
experiments, illustrating—
(l.) The composition and resolution of forces.
(2.) The centre of gravity.
(3.) The principle of the lever.
(4.) The pulley and inclined plane.
(5.) Friction.
(6.) Motion of falling bodies.
(7.) The principle of Archimedes.
(8.) Atmospheric pressure.


These experiments should, if possible, aim at discovery and be quantitative
as well as qualitative.
(6) The discussion of motion with constant velocity and constant
acceleration along a straight line.
Part II. —The more advanced course to consist of the whole or part of
the following sections of Statics, Dynamics, and Hydrostatics ;
(1.) Parallelogram and triangle of forces.
(2.) Resolution and composition of forces acting at a point.
(3.) Velocity and acceleration in rectilinear motion.
(I.) Circular motion.
(5.) Simple harmonic motion.
(6.) Moments.
(7.) Parallel forces.
(8.) Centre of gravity.
(9 ) The inclined plane.
(10.) Friction.
(11.) Work and energy.
(12.) Hydraulic press and pumps.
(13.) Atmospheric pressure.
The examples snould, as a rule, be numerical, and where the work is of a
general character numerical illustrations should always be added. Stress
should be laid on Newton’s Laws of Motion.
The order in which these subjects are taken need not be that given
above.
ELEMENTARY SCIENCE COURSE.
Introductory.
This course is intended to be given after a preliminary course in Fifth Class. In the
introduction to the lattet the general aims of elementary science work were briefly
stated, and the remarks there made should be taken to preface the following.
.At the present time the general consensus of opinion is that the “ heuristic ” method
is the most valuable as far as the teaching of elementary science is concerned, and forms
the most satisfactory basis of Such a course. It need scarcely be mentioned, however,
that exclusive use of the “heuristic,” or any other method, will not be found all-
suflSeient.
In practice, the high ideals of the “ heuristic ” method are not always realised—the
failure being usually due to too narrow an interpretation of the term. There is some-
times a tendency to overlook the important point that there are factors other than
“experiment ” necessary to secure a training in scientific method. Obviously if the aim
of the experiment is not thoroughly understood, or if the experiment leads nowhere in
particular, the mechanical manipulation is comparatively valueless. The preliminary
discussion and the use made of the experimental results are links in the chain quite as
important as the actual experiment. Often, in revulsion from the didactic methods of
telling too much, and inspired by the desire to get children to “ find out for themselves,”
the enthusiastic teacher is apt to go to the opposite extreme of telling too little. It is
well to remember that the original investigator had his own previous w(jrk and reflections
to give definiteness to his researches, and also had the advantages of contemporary
knowledge to suggest moans of carrying out such researches. Evidently to deprive the
pupil of the corresponding assistance that the introductory discussion should afford is to
expect the average schoolboy to be something more than a second Newton or a second
Faraday.
The experimental course should he so graduated that the discussion and interpretation
of the results of one experiment will lead logically to the next in the series. When all
the experiments of one section have been completed, it will in general he found necessary
to review and amplify the class-work—possibly by some experiment too difficult for the
class as a whole, and probably by some work of a more formal nature than the greater
part of the course—so as to thoroughly bind the results into one coherent whole. An
example of an amplification of the former ckss will he found in the burning of phosphorus
in a stoppered flask (ref. rred to in the notes on section 3), while the general review often


affords room for a certain amount of more didactic work, i.e., filling in of gaps thao
sometimes unavoidably occur in the experimental sequence, historical sketches, practica
applications, &c.
In the case of quantitative experiments, the need for the mean of a number of
determinations is shown by considering the class results. Results varying materially
from the average should be specially dealt with—the cause of such deviation discovered
Ttnd repetition of the experiment made by the pupils concerned. The sources of error
common to the method employed, or unavoidable under the working conditions, should
then be discussed, and, where possible, the way of reducing such to a minimum, and,
finally, the mean result compared with that obtained by experienced scientists working
under ideal conditions. In the interpretation of results not only the conclusions from the
individual experiments are to be kept in mind, but also their relationship to preceding
experiments and conclusions. At the outset inferences follow directly from experiment.
When the results of a number of experiments are compared, it will often be seen that
there is sufficient resemblance to suggest a more general conclusion (c/., the generalisa-
tion regarding conservation of mass—of definite composition of chemical compounds, &c.)
the validity of which may be directly tested by further appeal to experiments. At a
later stage comes the attempt to push explanation back a step further, cf. Avogidro’s
Hypothesis to “explain” the observed fact that gases unite in simple proportions by
volume, or the atomic theory to “ explain ” the law of definite proportions, &o. The
distinction between generalisations based on and confirmed by direct experiment and
attempts at explanation which may or may not be true (hypotheses and theories) should
always be carefully observed—particularly since they are so often confused and stated
equally dogmatically' in elementary text-books.
It will be seen that the preliminary Fifth Class scheme is mainly physical in character,
while sections 1-21 of the general introduction course are chiefly chemical. As many
children will not proceed beyond the second year, it was considered advisable to conclude
this introductory course with some further sections drawn particularly from the domain
of physics.
In the short time available (about four months) an attempt has been made to deal with
certain physical topics (necessarily in a very elementary way) and yet retain a similar
inter-connection of subject-matter as in the case of chemistry. Physios has been defined
as the science of matter and of energy, and if the above definition be accepted it should
scarcely be necessary to state that physics is not a set of disconnected subjects such as
mechanics, heat, light, sound, magnetism, and electricity. The exceedingly important
concept of energy transformaf ion has been taken as the connecting link between the
sections chosen.
Note-books should be kept by each pupil, clearly showing the experiments actually
carried out by such pupil —the record being made at the time of the experiment. This
record will be taken into account when awarding the final mark for the course.
ELEMENTARY SCIENCE.
First and Second Years.
L Study of flame —bunsen burner—fish-tail burner—glass working.
2. Action of acid on marble—preparation and properties of carbon dioxide.
3. Study of combustion —effect of heat (and air) on metals—combustion
«f candle, sulphur, and phosphorus—elementary treatment of conservation of
matter.
4. Study of air—isolation of active from inactive constituents—common
methods of preparing and characteristic properties of oxygen—properties of
nitrogen.
5. Study of slow- combustion —the rusting of iron—the smouldering of
(yellow) phosphorus—oxidation taking place in living organisms.
6. Respiration gaseous diffusion—ventilation relationship between
animal and vegetable life.
7. Study of chalk —effect of heat and acids on chalk--determination of
composition of chalk analytically and synthetically' —determination of volume
of carbon dioxide yielded by given weight of chalk.
8. Study of washing soda—action of washing soda on lime water—proper-
ties of the caustic soda produced—action of caustic soda on fats —soaj s —■
cleansing action of soap.


9. Action of acids on metals—preparation and properties of hydrogen—
density of hydrogen—quantitative experiments on the volume and weight of
hydrogen liberated by the action of acids on metals —combustion of hydrogen
—identification of the product.
10. Composition of water by weight—equivalent weight of oxygen-
composition of water by volume.
11. Natural waters —mineral impurities—hardness—organic impurities—•
desirable and undesirable types of filters—use. of boiling water —the salinity
the ocean.
12. Action of acids on oxides.
13. Study of salt—action of sulphuric acid on salt—examination of the
products—search for the constituent (or constituents) of hydrochloric acid
other than hydrogen—action of hydrochloric acid on compounds rich in
oxygen —preparation and properties of chlorine—quantitative composition of
hydrochloric acid.
14. Study of sal ammoniac—preparation and properties of ammonia—
composition of ammonia.
15. Further study of acids and alkalies—comparison of their actions on
common substances— i.e., litmus, plum juice, coloured fabric, marble, &c.—
use of “tests” and “reagents”—delicacy of reaction—neutralisation—
preparation of common salt from hydrochloric acid and caustic soda—simple
volumetric work.
16. Further quantitative on neutralisation and equivalents. The composi-
tion of sal ammoniac—conversion of magnesium (metal) to the oxide—oxide
to hydrate—hydrate to chloride. Law of constant proportions.
17. Study of sulphur—action of dilute and concentrated sulphuric acid on
metals contrasted—comparison of gas yielded by concentrated sulphuric acid
and copper with that obtained when sulphur is burnt in air. Examination
of residual liquid. Manufacture of sulphuric acid. Effect of heating iron
and sulphur—uses of sulphuretted hydrogen.
18. Study of nitre—action of sulphuric acid on nitre—action of nitric
acid on copper —examination of gas evolved and residual liquid—nitrogen
peroxide and nitrous oxide. Law of multiple proportions.
19. Study of chemical nomenclature—explanations of generalisations from
experiments—effect of temperature and pressure on the volume of gas—
Avogadro’s hypothesis—atomic theory.
20. Further study of the metals—determination of what happens when
hydrogen and carbon are heated with oxides—“reduction,” “oxidation” and
“ fluxing”—elementary blow-pipe work.
21. Study of fuels and foodstuffs—identification of carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen of sulphur in certain foodstuffs—characteristics of proteids, carbohy-
drates and fats—value of mixed diet.
22. Mass and weight—rest, motion, inertia—gravitation —motion of falling
bodies.
23. Matter as a vehicle of energy—energy of position—energy of motion—
the inclined plane—levers—composition of forces.
24. Energy changes connected with change of physical state—measurement
of latent heat—heat capacity of the elements —measurement of specific heat.
25. Elementary study of magnetism and static electricity—natural and
artificial magnets —magnetic attraction and repulsion—the compass. Electri-
fication—conductors and insulators—electric attraction and repulsion—
induction.


26. Connection between energy of chemical affinity,—heat and electrical
energy. The voltaic cell. Some effects produced by the electric current—
thermal—electrolytic—magnetic. The elec ro-magnet—the electric bell.
Note.
Sections 1-11 constitute the first year’s work.
Sections 12-26 constitute the second year’s work.
Books of Reference.
The Teaching of Scientific Method—Armstrong.
The Teaching of Chemistry—Russel. (Teacher’s and pupil’s editions.)
Junior Chemistry—Adie. ,
Introduction to Chemistry and Physios—Perkin and Lean.
Introductory Course of Chemistry —Bausor.
1. This preliminary section on glass working will serve to bring out all the main
points connected with the nature' and structure of flame. Glass tubing, after having
served its purpose in the pieces of apparatus required in the following course, should be
kept for such introductory work of following classes.
The rounding off of all tubing and careful attention to detail generally should be
insisted on from the outset of the course.
2. In the Fifth Class a considerable number of solids and liquids were examined, but
only one gas—air. The isolation of another gas opens up a new field and suggests further
lines of investigation. The fitting up of the necessary apparatus gives rise to immediate
application of the knowledge of manipulation just gained. The experiments have the
further merit of being perfectly simple and safe, and so particularly suited to the
beginner.
3. In the Fifth Class it was discovered that heat sometimes produced permanent and
fundamental changes in a body. In experiments on combustion it is found that some
substances like candle, sulphur, &c., in burning with free access of air completely
disappear and seem to be destroyed. Substances like wood leave but a small ash
while metals leave very considerable residue. Simple experiments show that where-
annihilation seems to be the case other (gaseous) substances make their appearance and
evidently these must be taken into account when trying to determine the nature of
combustion. The study of the burning of metals forms a suitable starting point since
the products of combustion are (usually) non-volatile. The facts that air is necessary
and that there is an increase in weight after the metals are burnt give the clue to the
solution of the problem. Burning of a metal like magnesium in a confined volume of air,
i.e., in a pickle jar or gas jar inverted over water gives additional information. The
burning of sulphur, phosphorus and candle in a confined volume of air should then be
taken. Preliminary experiments show that the products of combustion in these cases
are soluble and thus the diminution in the volume of air represents the volume affected
by combustion. The fact that approximately the same fraction of the confined air
disappears in each of these cases leads to the inference that air consists of at least two
constituents, one of which comprising one-fifth volume is active in combustion. Means
of collecting the volatile products of burning candle and phosphorus could now be dealt
with, due consideration given to these two important and commonly occurring cases of
combustion, and the fact noted that an increase occurs similar to that in the case of
metals. The immediately preceding experiments suggest that this increase in weight is
due to the weight of air taken up in combustion. Ready proof is obtained by burning
phosphorus in a securely corked round-bottomed flask and noting the constancy in weight
before and after combustion.
Note.— This experiment should be performed by the teacher only, and then only after
taking due precautions—the phosphorus should be insulated from the glass and may be
ignited either by a heated wire fastened to the stopper or by passing an electric
current, the part of the circuit touching the phosphorus, consisting of a short piece of
fine platinum (or iron) wire.
i. The problem of separating the active from the inactive constituent of the air may
now be attacked ; the attempt to isolate the former by splitting up the calces of the
metals previously formed will probably be suggested. Lavoisier’s experiments with
mercuric oxide, are of great interest in this connection. The names oxygen and nitrogen
may now be introduced, and convenient methods of preparation and typical properties
dealt with. This will lead to a more detailed study of oxides, and to some preliminary
notions regarding acids and alkalies. _
NOTES.


5. Cases of slow combustion unaccompanied by evolution of flame should now be dealt
With, such as rusting of iron, smouldering of (yellow) phosphorus, and the oxidation that
is continually going on in living organisms. In the rusting of iron the balance again
indicates the line of action. Further experiments in a confined volume of air suggest
that the same kind of action takes place as when a candle burns. Proof is obtained by
experimenting with the combustible substances previously dealt with and the residual
air from the iron experiment. The reaction in the case of phosphorus and air is then
then similarly shown to be another example of slow oxidation. Previous experiments
have shown that when carbon and carbon compounds.bum with free access of air, an
oxide of carbon (carbon dioxide) is produced. It may now be shown that in certain
cases slow oxidation of organic compounds takes place, even in aqueous solution, with
the characteristic production of carbon dioxide, and thus some light is thrown on the
oxidation processes going on in the body; cf. to a solution of oxalic acid, slightly
acidified with sulphuric, slowly add solution of potassium permanganate. Note loss of
colouration of latter and test gas evolved.
6. The matter of respiration, gaseous diffusion, and ventilation should now be
discussed, and also the question of how a balance is maintained between the oxygen and
carbon dioxide in the air.
7. The effect of heating a little precipitated chalk on platinum foil should be noted,
and the residue compared and contrasted with the original. The weight relationships
before and after heating, and also the effect of acid on the two substances, indicate that
something gaseous has been driven out of the chalk. This gas should be identified, and
■the previous inference confirmed by attempting to synthesise chalk from quicklime and
carbon dioxide, and finally by the addition of sodium carbonate to chalk dissolved in
acid. Similar treatment of marble, calcite, &c., leads to the recognition of the same
chemical nature of these substances in spite of differences in physical appearance. The
percentage of carbon dioxide present in chalk should be determined by loss in weight or
heating, and when treated with an acid. Finally, the volume of carbon dioxide liberated
from a given weight of chalk should be found, and from the results just obtained the
weight of a litre of the gas calculated, thus paving the way for future work on vapour
density. The possible sources of error in the experiment should be noted, and the need
shown for measuring gases at some standard temperature and pressure.
9. The action of common acids (concentrated as well as dilute) on common metals
should be examined, and results carefully noted for future explanation, hydrogen only
being studied at this stage.
In the preparation of hydrogen the difficulty of displacing air from a flask by a gas
lighter than air will account for using a smaller flask (250 c.c.s.) than is commonly used for
generating gases. The necessity for always testing the issuing hydrogen for admixture of
air should be impressed upon the pupils. Except under special conditions, it will probably
be found advisable to restrict the preparation of hydrogen to the demonstration table.
In examining the residual liquid in the flask, it will sometimes be possible to directly
prove the presence of the metal in solution (cf. the deposition of copper on iron
from copper solutions). With others the solutions should be evaporated and the crystals
obtained identified with crystals of known composition.
There is here splendid opportunity to give examples of what the alchemists considered
“ transmutation ” (cf. supposed change of iron to copper and copper to silver, and also
to detect the fallacies).
10. The work of the previous section on hydrogen showed that this gas burns in air to
form water, which is probably an oxide of hydrogen. The displacement of a weak acid
by a stronger {cf. the displacement of carbonic acid by hydrochloric acid) suggests the
question whether hydrogen is able to displace metals from their oxygen compounds.
Confirmation is thus obtained of the previous inference regarding the composition Of the
product of hydrogen-in-air combustion. An easy method of preparing this latter product
in considerable quantity draws further attention to its nature, and prepares the way for
the work on the composition of water by weight.
The explosion of mixtures of hydrogen and oxygen, hydrogen and chlorine, &c., should
not be attempted unless such facilities are at hand as will render the experiments
absolutely safe.
12. Acids that were found to yield hydrogen with metals are now used with the
corresponding metallic oxides. The solutions obtained should be evaporated, and the
crystals compared with those yielded by the solution of metals in the same acids. Infor-
mation so gained, coupled with the known affinity of hydrogen for oxygen and the
observation that no hydrogen is evolved, indicates what happens when hydrochloric
acts on oxides rich in oxygen.
, The composition of hydrochloric acid gives another important volume relationship,
which will be further discussed in a later section.


13. It has been seen that many substances (carbon, sulphur, &c.) are capable of
combining with oxygen to produce oxides, which when dissolved in water give “ acid ”
solutions. Attention should be drawn to other common acids, such as vinegar, spirits of
salt, and oil of vitriol. The action of these in litmus, plum-juice, coloured fabric, skin,
marble, &c., should be noted. The more powerful action of some of these should suggest
the possibility of a “ stronger ” displacing a ‘ ‘ weaker ” from its compounds (cf. the action
of sulphurous acid on the precipitate carbonic acid produces with lime-water, and finally
the action of sulphuric acid on salt and later on saltpetre should be studied in detail).
16. The apparently exceptional behaviour of moistened magnesium oxide among those
studied leads to the further consideration of common alkalies. The action of lime-water
on “washing soda” brings out the difference between the “mild” and “caustic”
alkalies.
In addition to the ordinary experiments on neutralisation some simple volumetric work
(without the use of formulae) might advantageously be taken here. Thus by weighing
out (as quickly as possible) 50 grams of caustic sods and making up to a litre with
distilled water, a (roughly) 5 per cent, solution of caustic soda will be obtained. (The
unsuitability of caustic soda as an absolute standard may be shown).
The fact that the same Volume of this alkali always takes the same volume of a given
acid to neutralise it gives additional data for the later generalisation concerning chemical
combination by constant proportions. Also the different quantities of different acida.
required to neutralise the same amount of alkali gives a means of comparing the strengths-
of different acids.
The case of the neutralisation of 'ammonia by hydrochloric is an important case, since
the composition of the two reacting substances has been worked out. A simple way of
carrying out the experiment is to pass dry hydrochloric acid gas into a known volume of’
water until a tenth-normal solution is obtained—the direct increase in weight showing
when the required point is reached. By careful evaporation the weight of ammonium,
chloride produced on neutralisation may be very approximately found; from the
numbers of cubic centimetres of acid used the weight of acid employed may be readily
calculated, and hence the most probable composition of ammonium chloride deduced.
17. The relationship by volume of sulphur dioxide (as well as carbon dioxide) to the
oxygen originally taken is well shown by Hoffmann’s experiment (described in Armstrong’s -
“ Teaching of Scientific Method,” p. 319).
19. The fact that the quantitative similarity in the behaviour of gases under the same-
temperature and pressure variations, together with the chemical combination of gases in
simple proportions by volume, was interpreted by scientists to point to some fundamentals,
resemblance in constitution of gases, may now be noted, and a brief historical survey of
the Atomic Theory from the time of Guy Lussac, Dalton, and Avogadro, dealt with.
Sufficient groundwork has now been provided for a simple outline of the Atomic Theory-
in’so far as it depends on vapour density relationships, and thus the reason for assigning
the conventional chemical symbols to certain typical compounds.
The whole of the preceding results should now be revised, and the reactions expressed’
by the ordinary chemical, notation, and attention drawn to the co-ordination and simple
interpretation of the large number of more or less isolated experimental facts that the,
Atomic Theory affords.
20. The blowpipe work here commenced will probably be extended over several weeks,,
and should include an examination of naturally occurring compounds of metals of economic
importance, special stress being laid on those of Australian occurrence.
Suitable practical work will thus be provided, while section 19, which is more-
theoretical in character, is being dealt with.
22 and 23. The motion of falling bodies, kinetic and potential energy, and a great deal
of other important work concerning the fundamental points in mechanics, may very
profitably and simply be studied by means of pieces of grooved wood and large marbles
(provided the groove is either considerably wider or considerably narrower than the
marbles). Another simple and instructive piece of apparatus in this connection consists,
of a tightly-stretched piece of wire extending from one side of the room to the other,
having a slope of about 1 in 7, and fitted with a sliding carriage made of two pulleys
fastened together.
Much useful work on the composition of forces and the inclined plane may be done.-
with a few spring balances.


CHEMISTRY.
THIRD AND FOURTH YEARS.
At this stage a more detailed and systematic treatment of the more
important elements and their compounds should be taken so as to give the
pupils a sound knowledge of the principles of elementary chemistry which
may serve at. a thorough basis for future work. An elementary text-book
should also be studied in conjunction with and to supplement class work. As
.far as possible each section of the work should be centred round some
important compound, and special attention given to the study of substances
and processes of economic importance. At the same time the educational
aspect should not be subordinated to the mere acquisition of facts—the
practical work will still form the basis of what is done, and firsthand
knowledge gained by individual observation and experiment and drawing of
conclusions is as important here as in the earlier stages - although didactic
treatment will become more prominent as the course adtances.
At all times theory should be carefully distinguished from experimental
facts.
1. Revision and more detailed study of oxygen —oxygen and ozone—
reasons for the formula of ozone—Review of the composition of the air—The
discovery of argon—Liquefaction of air. Commercial methods of preparing
oxygen. Putrefaction and Pasteurhaiion.
2. Revision and more detailed study of hydrog' n, water, and solution.
Gaseous and liquid diffusion. Osmosis.
3. Further study of nitrogen and nitrogen compounds—importance of
nitrogen compounds to living organisms—nitrification and denitrification.
4. Study of coal—occurrence of coal—New South Wales deposits—study
of coke—products of coal-tar—acetylene—characteristics of illuminating
gases—Oxides of carbon—Allotropio modification of carbon.
5. Study of elements allied to chlorine (fluorine, bromine, and iodine), and
their simple compounds.
6. Revision and more detailed study of sulphur and sulphur compounds—.
sulphuric acid —elements allied to sulphur.
7. Study of phosphorus—manufacture of matches—occurrence and uses of
phosphates in fertilisers, soils, <fco.
8. Study of sodium and potassium compounds—properties of common
salt—conversion into sulphate and conversion of sulphate into carbonate—
conversion of carbonate to hydrate, &c.—uses of above compounds—manu-
facture of glass—preparation of nitre.
9. Comparative study or silver and copper—copper and lead—determina-
tion of amounts of silver and lead nitrate formed by dissolving known
weights of the metals in nitric acid—conversion of nitrates to chlorides, &c.
Further study of equivalents—preparation and properties of copper nitrate—
chloride and sulphate. Reactions of silver, copper, lead—occurrences in
Australia—processes of extraction.
10. Study of common calcium compounds—origin of marble—study of
calcite, coral, Ac.—the limestone belt of New South Wales. Characteristics
qf Urpestone cave formation—plaster of Paris—lime chalk, &c.—hardening of
mortar—resemblance of strontium and barium compounds to those of
calcium—reaction of the alkaline earths.
11. Study of magnesium—zinc—mercury—tin.


12. Study of aluminium—clay—effect of heat on clay—manufacture of
pottery and cement—preparation and uses of metallic aluminium.
13. Study of iron—common iron ores—metallurgy of iron—wrought iron—•
cast-i ron—s teel.
14. General relationships of elements—periodic classification—the spectro-
scope—chemical calculations.
15. Elementary qualitative analysis—the study of the typical metals above
noted will have brought out their characteristic reactions, and hence will have
paved the way for analysis —typical group-metals only should be taken,
comparatively rare elements like cadmium omitted, and difficult and some-
what dangerous separations like nickel and cobalt also not attempted. The
reactions of each group should be taken with the theoretical work above
outlined, and thus the general scheme of analysis gradually developed.
16. Elementary organic chemistry—hydrocarbons (methane, ethylene,
acetylene, henzene) general classification petroleum fermentation—■
alcohol—phenol—ethers—fatty acids—manufacture of vinegar—ethereal salts
—fats, glycerine and soap—stearin, margarine and butter—tartaric, citrio
and oxalic acids—starch—sugars-—cellulose—aniline.
17. More systematic quantitative work—preparation and use of standard
acid and alkali solution®, i.e., tenth normal sodium carbonate, sodium hydrate,
hydrochloric and sulphuric—volumetric estimation of silver in a silver coin—
preparation of a tenth-normal solution of potassium of permanganate—estima-
tion of iron in an iron ore.
Gravimetric estimation of copper in copper sulphate—lead in lead nitrate
and iron in iron sulphate.
Sections 1 to 15 should constitute the third year’s work, and the remainder
of the course the fourth year’s.
Text Books Recommended.
“ Descriptive Chemistry ” —Newell.
“Junior Chemistry ” —Adie.
“ Volumetric Analysis ” —Russel and Bell.
PHYSICS.
THIRD AND FOURTH YEARS.
Attention is directed to the remarks made in connection with the chemistry
course. As in the latter, at this stage a systematic and somewhat detailed
study of the subject is undertaken, and an approved text-book studied in con-
junction with the class-work.
It should be remembered that physics, like chemistry, is essentially and
fundamentally an experimental science, and any attempt to teach it otherwise
will be futile.
Equations and formulae serve as a convenient shorthand way of summarising
the experimental results—if used otherwise, i.e., before there are many results
to so summarise, or, as is sometimes done, at the opening of the work, they
ai» meaningless, and will prove a hindrance to the development of the work.
1. Elementary mechanics—revision and more detailed treatment of the points
dealt with under this heading in the general introductory course of the first


two years— rest, inertia, motion, velocity, momentum, force, proportionality
of force to acceleration, weight, gravity, forms of energy, moments, levers,
.pulleys, inclined plane power, the pendulum.
Note. — This portion of the work is intended to be taken in conjunction
with a course in theoretical mechanics in the mathematical section—hence
“the physical treatment should be essentially practical. As large and typical
number of simple experiments as possible should be performed so as to give a
real concept of mechanical terms. Principles thus inculcated should form %
sound basis for systematic mathematical treatment.
2. Hydrostatics—Transmission of fluid pressure—communicating vessels—
pressure on sides and walls of vessel—Pascal’s principle—Bramah press—
flotation—Archimedes’ principle—atmospheric pressure—pumps—siphons—
manometers—Boyle’s law—Charles’ law—density.
3. Properties of matter—surface tension and capillarity—cohesion—elas-
ticity—viscosity—diffusion—osmosis.
4. Heat—expansion—coefficient of linear expansion of iron rod—apparent
coefficient of expansion of air in glass and water in glass—thermometry—
change of state—calorimetry —transference of heat—conduction—radiation
and convection—hygrometry—freezing mixtures —mechanical equivalent of
heat—concept of conservation of energy.
5. Light—propagation and reflection of light —pin-hole camera—shadows—-
photometry—simple experiments on reflection—refraction of light—path of
ray of light through a prism—analysis of light—colour —disperson—study of
simple optical instruments, i.e., lens, microscope, telescope—photography—-
the eye —effects of vision.
6. Sound—transmission of sound—speaking-tubes, Ac. —reflection of sound
waves—echoes —reinforcement of sound waves—resonators —pitch—intensity
and quality of musical notes—vibration of strings—nodes and internodes—■
the organ-pipe—discord and harmony—musical instruments —the ear.
7. Magnetism—natural and artificial magnets —attraction and repulsion—
the electromagnet—the magnetic field —laws of magnetic force. Terrestrial
magnetism —declination and dip—magnetic stoims.
8. Electrostatics—electrification by friction—conductors and non-con-
ductors—electrification by induction—the electric field —Coulomb’s Law—
phenomena of discharge—lightning —gold-leaf electroscope.
9. Current electricity —simple voltaic cells—chemical action in cells—
“ Current,” “ Electromotive Force and Resistance ’’—polarisation—methods
of connecting voltaic cells.
10. Magnetic action of currents —galvanometers —the electric bell and
electric telegraph.
11. Chemical action of currents —electrolysis and electroplating —the
accumulator cell.
12. Heating effect of a current —the electric light—Joule’s law.
13. Measurement of resistance and current —the Wheatstone bridge—
copper and hydrogen voltameters.
14. Electromagnetic induction—the induction coil —dynamo and motor—
telephone.
Sections 1-6 (with special emphasis on section 1-4) constitute the third
year’s work. Sections 7-14 constitute the fourth year’s work.
Books Recommended.
Elementary Text Book of Physics—Crew and Jones.
Elementary Practical Physics —Watson.


BIOLOGY (BOTANY).
General Course.
THIRD YEARS.
Detailed Study of a Plant, e.g., Broad Bean.—Parts, roots, root'ets, root
hairs, root cap, nodules ; the shoot, section of the stem ; the leaf, stipules ;
branches, buds ; flower in detail; fruit, seed ; seedling ; cotyledons.
Seeds and Seedlings.—Germination of bean seed; absorption of water;
entry of water; osmosis ; capillarity; necessity for air in germination; respira-
tion of germinating seeds; need for warmth. Seeds and seedlings of allied
plants ; food storage in seeds ; endospermic seeds ; cotyledons.
Photosynthesis.—Chief functions of root and stem; green leaves manu-
facture starch; light and air required; microscopic structure of leaf;
chlorophyll; carbon assimilation.
Water Culture. —Principal chemical elements in a plant; estimation of
water; other volatile matter, and ash ; growth in complete and incomplet
culture solutions.
Respiration of Plants.
Transpiration. —Stomates; transpiration current; transpiration experi-
ments ; function of bloom and hairs.
Foliage leaves. —Functions; s.ipules; petioles; venation; margin; division ;
shape ; bracts ; tendrils ; glands and prickles ; arrangement; evergreen and
deciduous leaves; fall of the leaf.
Roots and their work.—Root hairs; root pressure; plant food in soil;
tillage and manuring; fertilisers and manures; food storage in roots ; tuberous
roots.
Growth. —Geotropism ; hydrotropism; heliotropism ; the root tip and cap.
Histology.—The plant cell; cell way ; protoplasm ; vacuole ; nucleus,
chromatophores ; cell division; parenchyma and prosenchyma.
Anatomy of stem and root.—Epidermis; cortex ; vascular cylinder; xylem;
ijhloem ; cambium ; growth in thickness ; herbaceous and wcody stems ;
classification of stems by habit; exogens and endogens ; corms ; bulbs, tubers,
buds ; function of stem.
Flowers. —The four whorls of the complete flower; arrangement of whorls,
calyx, corolla, androecium, gynoecium ; bisexual and unisexual flowers;
monoecious and dioecious plants; floral diagrams.
Reproduction.—Sexual;—pollen grain and pollen tube ; ovule ; pollination ;
fertilisation ; self and cross fertilisation ; carriage of pollen; hybridization.
Vegetative reproduction; offshoots, bulbils, &c., by cuttings, layers, grafts,
and budding ; plant breeding.
Fruits and seeds.—Dehiscence; classification of fruits; seed dispersal.
The Leguminosae.—Study by comparison and contrast.
Rosace®.
Principles of classification.
Cruciferse, Myrtacese, Cucurbitacae, Umbellifene.
Fourth Year.
The main characters of the following orders—Ranunculaceae, Cruciferse,
Hutacese, Malvaceae, Leguminosae, Epacridae, Casuarinse, Myrtacese, Rosaceae,
Compositae, Liliaceae, Orchideae, and Graminese. Detailed examination of
Pteris, Pinus, and Vicia.
The main features of the classes Filicinae, Gymnospermae, and Angiospermae.
The course of experiments in plant physiology is to be continued during
this year.


Text Books.
Dendy and Lucas : Introduction to the Study of Botany (Melville and Mullens, 4s. 6d.)
Cavers : Plant Biology (University Tutorial Press, 3s. 6d.).
Reference Books.
Cavers: Botany for Matriculation (University Tutorial Press, 5s. 6d ).
Osterhout; Experiments with Plants (Macmillan, 6s.).
NOTES.
In this course, the special and general aims are similar to those of the elementary
science course.
(1.) The course is designed to give a training in scientific method, and in the words
of Armstrong, “ to make the student exact, thoughtful, and dexterous.”
(2.) It is intended to make the student acquainted at first hand with the facts and
phenomena underlying agricultural operations.
Many of the remarks prefacing the courses in Elementary Science for the fifth class,
and for District High Schools, apply equally to this course.
It is above all things necessary that the knowledge gained by the student should be
first hand, the result of “ accurate observation, experimenting with some object in
view, and reasoning from the results of such observation and experiment, . . . and
it is clear that this object can only bo fully realised by carefully directed individual
practical work.”
No set of experiments has been put forth ; the syllabus particularises the subjects
upon which the student is to work—the teacher should select suitable experiments to
illustrate the points from one or other of the text and reference books, which contain
everything that is needed.
The ordinary procedure of devoting the first part of the course entirely to morphology
has been departed from. The introduction of the main facts of vegetable physiology so
early in the course is intended to give variety to the work, and to help in creating an
interest in the subject.
As far as possible, the experiments should be worked individually by the students, or
groups of students, and many of them are well suited for demonstration, and will be
almost as effective in that way. No very elaborate apparatus is needed.
The student’s note-books should contain records of the observations and experiments,
drawing being freely used. They should be closely examined and initialled by the
teacher at short intervals, and should be of service in estimating the value of the work
done.
The work prescribed in the Natural Orders and Classes in both courses must be done
by actual examination and comparison of the living plants. The student must examine
as many plants as possible belonging to each order. His observations on each must
appear in his notebook.
In the study of germination it is necessary that several seeds of different types should
be worked out —one such as the bean, in full detail, and others, e.g., Lima bean, pea,
peanut, pumpkin, castor-oil, maize, and wheat will follow. The experiments will take
some time, and may overlap the next section—two or three sets of experiments may be
under observation at one time.
In the study of foliage leaves, ivy, sedums, agave, begonia and lily give good material
for the study of epidermis and stomates, and cabbage and nasturtium for bloom. Root
hairs can be well shown in seedlings of cress or raddish grown between sheets of damp
blotting-paper. Food storage in roots is well shown in carrot, parsnip, beet,, turnip,
radish, Marvel of Peru, and of young currajong trees ( Sterculia dimraifoha).
Water hyacinth, duckweed (Lemna), and wheat may be used to demonstrate the root-
cap. The inner epidermis of the layers of a growing onion, stained with carmine or
hsematoxylon shows cells, nuclei, and the division of the nuclei clearly.
The structure of exogenous stems can be illustrated by sunflower or Jerusalem arti-
choke, native oak ( Oasuarina) and honeysuckle ( BanJcsia). The annual rings and
medullary rays are particularly well seen in the last two. Sections should be cut trans-
versely, radially and tangentially from stems 5 or 6 inches thick to show the arrangement
of the rays.
Com shows the endogenous structure plainly, and for micro-preparations, the young
shoots of bamboo and stems of IMium canriidum are excellent.
Maize, pumpkin, and other cucurbitaceous plants, pines, native oaks, and the castor-
oil plant are good examples of the separation of sexes in plants. The enclosure of the
female flowers of the pumpkin or squash in muslin bags is a good means of showing the
purpose of pollination.


Vegetative reproduction ean be illustrated by the bulbils growing the as ils of the leaves
of LUium laneifolium or L. tigrimtm, and the small plants springing from the margin of
the leaves of the leaf plant (Bryophyllum). Geraniums, nasturtiums, and fuchsias can be
utilised to show propagation of plants by cuttings ; the large-leaved begonias for leaf
cuttings, and the strawberry for multiplication by runners.
Grafting and budding should be practised by the students on any growing twigs to
attain the necessary mechanical dexterity. Afterwards, if possible actual grafts shoul
be made on fruit trees, and budding on these and on rose bushes. Weeds and plant
injurious to stock should be collected and identified.
BIOLOGY (BOTANY).
INDYSTRIAL (AGRICULTURAL) COURSE.
FIRST YEAR.
Detailed Study of a Plant, e.g. t Broad Bean. —Parts, roots, rootlets, root-
hairs, root-cap, nodules; the shoot, section of stem; the leaf, stipules;
branches, buds; flower in detail; fruit, seed ; seedling, cotyledons.
Seeds and Seedlings.—Germination of bean seed; absorption of water;
entry of water; osmosis ; capillarity; necessity for air in germination; respira-
tion of germinating seeds; need for warmth.
. Seeds and seedlings of allied plants; food storage in seed cotyledons.
Photosynthesis.—Chief functions of root and stem ; green leaves manufac-
ture starch; light and air required; microscopic structure of leaf; chloro-
phyll ; carbon assimilation.
Water Culture.—Principal chemical elements in a plant, estimation of
water; other volatile matter and ash; growth in complete and incomplete-
culture solutions.
Respiration of Plants.
Transpiration.—Stomates ; transpiration current; transpiration experi-
ments ; function of bloom and hairs.
Foliage Leaves.—Functions; stipules; petioles; venation; margin; division ;
shape; bracts; tendrils; glands and prickles; arrangement; evergreen and
deciduous leaves; fall of the leaf.
Roots and their Work.—Root-hairs ; rookpressure ; plant food in soil;
tillage and manuring; fertilisers and manures; food storage in roots;
tuberous roots.
Second Yeae.
Growth.—Geotropism; hydrotropism; heliotropism; the root tip and cap.
Histology.—Plant-cell; cell-wall; protoplasm; vacuole; nucleus; chroma-
tophores; cell-division; parenchyma; prosenchyma.
Anatomy of stem and root. —Epidermis; cortex ; vascular cylinder;
xylem; phloem; cambium; growth in thickness; herbaceous and woody
stems; classification of stems by habit; exogenous and endogenous stems;
«brm, bulb, tuber; buds; functions of stem.
Flowers. —The four whorls of the complete flower; arrangement of whorls,
calyx, corolla,, androecium, gynoecium; bisexual and unisexual flowers;
monoecious and dioecious plants ; floral diagrams.
Reproduction.—Sexual:—-pollen grain and pollen tube; ovule; pollination;
fertilisation; self and cross-fertilisation; carriage of pollen; hybridization.
Vegetative reproduction:—Off-shoots, bulbils, &c., by cuttings, layer, grafts!
Mid budding; plant breeding.


Fruits and seeds.—Dehiscence; classification of fruits; seed dispersal.
The Leguminosre.—Study by comparison and contrast
Uosaceae.
Principles of classTication.
Crucifera?.
Myrtacese.
Cucurbitacefe.
Umbelliferm.
Third Year.
Natural orders of plants.—Composite; Solanacese, Chenopodiacese; Loran-
thacese ; Coniform; Liliacese; Gramme* (characters of order; cereals; the
work of Farrer and others ; native and introduced grasses and their value).
Fungi (general characters and growth ; mode of life ; classification ; root
fungi; fungoid diseases). Bacteria (characters, reproduction, sterilisation,
pasteuri-aiion; the work of bacteria; fixation of nitrogen; diseases of
animals caused by bacteria).
Fourth Year.
Weeds.—What makes a plant a weed ; injury caused by weeds ; duration ;
habits of growth; dispersal; how to destroy them ; common weeds tf
Australia.
Plants injurious to stock.—Poisonous plants ; plants hurtful by impaction
or indigestible qualities.
Farm seeds.—lmportance of good strains of seed ; testing quality ; test of
capacity for germination; absolute and specific weight; charactf rs of
principal farm seeds.
The principal farm crops and their characteristics.
Text Books.
Percival - Agricultural Botany (Duckworth & Co., 7s. 6d.)
Cavers—Plant Biology (University Tutorial Press, 3s. 6<1.)
Reverevc£ Books.
Cavers —Botany for Matriculation (University Tutorial Press, ss. 6d.)
Oaterhont—Experiments with Plants (Macmillan, 65.)
ELEMENTARY AGRICULTURE.
SECOND YEAR-INDUSTRIAL (AGRICULTCRAL) COURSE.
1. Formation of soils—organic and inorganic agencies.
2. Composition of soils as revealed by mechanical analysis.
3. Texture of soils—air circulation and water circulation.
- 4. The food of plants—air food and earth food—simple water-culture
experiments—elementary qualitative analysis of soils.
5. Some causes of fertility and sterility—improvement of the soil—part
played by cultivation.
6. Nitrification and denitrification.
7. The intelligent use of manures and fertilisers.
8. Types of soils.
9. Elementary meteorology.
10. Deep-seated springs—Artesian water—Composition ard effects on soil
Text Books. , ,
(6s ) “Soils,” Burkett (Orange, Judd & Co.) ; or, (65.) “The Soil,” Hall (John Murray).


BIOLOGY (ZOOLOGY).
INDUSTRIAL COURSE (AGRICUSTURAL) —THIRD AND FOURTH YEARS.
Plants and animals contrasted.
Protozoa (unicellular animals).—A microscopic examination of Amoeba;
reproduction by fission. Paramoecium, Yorticella or other Infusorian.
Reproduction by budding. Blood parasites, e.g., those which cause malaria
and tick fever. Microscopic study of Foraminiferal and Radiolarian tests.
Porifera (Sponges).—The skeleton.
Coelenterata.—Dissection of a sea-anemone ; sexual reproduction. Com-
parison of a sea-anemone with a coral polype. Corals and coral reefs.
Platyhelminthes (Flat Worms). —The structure and life history of the
liver fluke and the tape-worm. Fresh specimens of the liver fluke, and
preserved specimens of the tape-worm should be examined for external and
internal features. Hydatids.
Nemathelminthes (Round Worms). —The structure of a round or thread
worm to be shown by dissection. Intestinal worms and root galls.
Echinodermata.—Dissection of a starfish.
Annulata (Segmented Worms). —The earthworm in detail. Dissection of
an earthworm; their effect on the soil. Leeches, their alimentary canal,
and habits.
Arthropoda. —External examination of a fresh-water crayfish. Centipedes
and millipedes—the former carnivorous, the latter vegetarian.
Insecta. —General structure ; metamorphosis ; control methods, insecticides.
Types of the following should be studied Dragon flies; white ants,
grasshoppers, locusts and crickets; stick and leaf insects ; butterflies
and moths ; bees, ants, and wasps ; beetles; two-winged flies ; bugs,
aphids, and scale insects.
Insects of great economic importance, and useful and detrimental genera
distinguished.
Among the many ways in which they affect man the following should be
noted: —Provide commercial products, also food for birds and other
animals ; introduce diseases through their bites; damage crops ;
some beneficial by destroying other insects.
Life changes should receive special attention, also feeding habits, social
life and respiration.
The Honey Bee : varieties, anatomy; queen, drone, worker; swarming,
hives.
Special attention should be paid to common'garden and farm pests and
their treatment.
Arachnida. —(Spiders, <fec.)
Spiders, scorpions, mites, and ticks, externals only. Arachnids useful and
detrimental.
Mollusca. —Dissection of the garden snail. Snails and slugs.
Chordata".—Y ertebrata.
Pisces (Fish). —External and internal structures of the bream or other
common fish.
Amphibia. —The frog, structure and metamorphosis. Dissection of the frog.
Reptilia. —Dissection of a lizard. Venomous and non-venomous snakes.


Aves (Birds). —A detailed study of an example such as t! e common pigeon.
Useful and detrimental birds of the neighbour)!' od. L)u< ks and geese ; birds
of prey ; game birds.
Special features to be noted are :—Feath rs, feet, and bills, flight, migration,
relation among themselves and to other living forms.
Mammalia. —An example such as the rabbit to be studied by dissection
for the following : —Skeleton, digestive organs, blood vascular system, respira-
tion, the brain and nerves, and organs of special sense.
Domesticated mammals. Pests.
GEOLOGY.
THIRD YEAR.
I. Introductory.
A. Elements, Minerals, Rocks.
(a) Physical Characters of Minerals.—This might be introduced by a
comparative study of several common minerals— felspar,
calcite, galena.
( b) Chemical composition of Minerals.
(c) Difference between Minerals and Rocks.—A piece of coarse-grained
granite might be taken for study to show that it is a mixture of
minerals, and not a homogeneous compound.
Note. —This section should be purely introductory, and would be followed
latter in the course by section D.
11. Dynamical Geology.
B. Geological Processes resulting from the forces within the earth.
(a) Volcanoes and Vulcanism.—The general phenomena of volcanic
eruptions. Nature of the materials brought to the surface.
(Specimens of tuff, pumice, obsidian, and vesicular basalt might be
introduced here, and their origin discussed.) Evidence given by
vulcanism as to the condition of the earth’s interior. Records left
by volcanoes.
( b ) Earthquakes.—Nature and cause. Volcanic and tectonic earth-
quakes.
(c) Changes of Level.—Upheaval and subsidence and evidences thereof.
C. The work of Natural Forces in modifying the earth’s surface.
(а) The Atmosphere.—Effect of change of temperature on rocks.
Wind—its destructive and transporting effects. Sand-dunes, loess
and adobe deposits. Rain and its chemical action upon rocks.
Solution, oxidation, hydration, formation of carbonates. Weathering
of rocks. soil.
(б) Underground water.—Surface springs, deep-seated springs, mineral
springs, artesian water, and conditions under which it may occur.
Chemical action of underground water. Alteration and solution of
rock-material. Limestone caves, spring deposits. Landslips and
their cause.
(c) Running water.—Transport of material in suspension. Corrosion of
rocks by running water. Formation .of gorges, canons, valleys,
waterfalls. Deposition of mechanical sediments. Alluvial fans,
flood-plains, river-terraces, deltas, transport of material in solution
Ultimate results of the work of running water.


( d) Snow and Ice.—Work of frost and snow. Avalanches. Glaciers!.
Work of glaciers. Transport of material. Moraines and moraine
deposits Corrasion by glaciers. Records left by glaciers. Ice-
beigs.
(e) The Ocean.—Depth, topography of the ocean bottom, salinity, tempera-
ture, waves, currents, ocean drift, tides and their cause. Life and
its distribution in ocean waters. Marine erosion, cliffs, bays, beaches,
barriers, sand-spits, river-tars, transport of material. Character of
deposits produced. Littoral deposits. Infra-littoral deposits.
Abysmal deposits. Saline deposits.
(/) Life and its geological importance.—Protective action of vegetation.
Deposits formed of animal and plant remains on land and in the
sea. Coral reefs and atolls. Man as a geological agent.
111. Structural Geology.
D. The Rocks of the Earth’s Crust.
(a) Rock-forming Minerals.—Description and composition of the follow-
ing minerals: —Quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, muscovite, biotite,
tourmaline, hornblende, augite, olivine, magnetite, garnet, talc,
serpentine.
(i b ) Igneous Rocks.—Plutonic and volcanic rocks. Chemical and mineral
composition. Crystallinity and granularity. Phanero-crystalline,
aphanitic and glassy rocks. Typical examples of the following
rocks should be taken for study—granite, syenite, diorite, gabbro,
quartz-porphyry, felsite, rhyolite, pitchstone, obsidian, trachyte,
andesite, basalt.
(c) Sedimentary Rocks.—Nature, origin and composition of tuff,
conglomerate, breccia, sandstone, shale, chalk, limestone, dolomite,
diatomaceous earth, chert, flint, peat, lignite, coal, anthracite,
kerosene-shale, rock-salt, gypsum. Original structures in sedi-
mentary rocks, stratification, false-bedding, ripple-marks, sun-
cracks, annelid-tracks, footprints, &c. Overlap of strata,
E. Structure of the Earth’s Crust.
(а) Original position of sedimentary beds. Effects of lateral pressure.
Folding—anticlinal and synclinal folds. Inclination of strata. Dip
and strike. Dislocation of strata. Reversed faults and overthrusts.
Effect of vertical uplift. Normal faults. Monoclinal folds. Con-
formable and unconformable strata. Joints.
(б) Mode of occurrence of Igneous Rocks.—Sills, laccolites, dykes, necks,
bosses, bathyliths, flows, columnar structure.
F. Metamorphism.—Contact metamorphism, regional metamorphism.
Metamorphic rocks. Marble, quartzite, claystone, phyllite, schist,
gneiss, serpentine.
Fourth Year.
I. Elementary Mineralogy.
Physical characters of minerals, including specific gravity determinations.
Simple blow-pipe tests for the determination of common metallic
minerals of commercial importance. Description and determination
of the following minerals.—Galena, cerussite, sphalerite (zinc blende),
chalcopyrite (copper pyrites), malachite, azurite, cassiterite, stibnite,
pyrite, mispickel, magnetite, hematite, limonite, siderite, pailomelane,


11. Historical geology.
A. Palaeontology.
Processes of fossilization. What may be learned from fossils. Geological
chronology. Evidence of climatic and geographical changes. Classi-
fication (simple) of plants and animals (only the more important
classes and orders should be dealt with, and living representatives
of the forms dealt with should, as far as possible, be made use of.
Long lists of genera to be avoided.)
B. Stratigraphical Geology.
(a) The Original Condition of the Earth.
(b) The Pre-CambriaSi Periods.—Gneisses and schists.
(c) The Palaeozoic Era.—Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian,
Carboniferous, and Permian Periods.
( d) The Mesozoic Era.—Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods.
(e) The Cainozoic Era.—Tertiary and Recent Periods.
Note.— ln this section special attention should be given to the Australian
geology, with particular attention to the Permo-Carboniferous and Triassic
Coal Measures, the artesian-water bearing bed, &c.
111. Physiographical Geology. (Land Sculpture.)
(a) Rivers and River Yalleys.—Development of river systems. Conse-
quent and subsequent streams. Stream piracy. Antecedent and
revived streams. Youth, maturity, and old-age stages in the
development of river valleys. Cycles of erosion.
( h) Mountains and Tablelands.—Volcanic mountains, folded mountain
ranges, dissected tablelands—features due to faulting, fault blocks,
horst, rift valleys (Senkungsfelder). Fault escarpments.
(c) Glacial Topography.
( d) Lakes.—Origin of lakes.
(e) Shore line Topography. —Types produced by uplift and subsidence
respectively.
Note.—ln this section Australian examples should be, as far as possible,
taken for purposes of illustration.
IV. Elementary Economic Geology.
(а) Metalliferous Deposits.—Reefs and lodes, beds, alluvial deposits.
(б) Non-Metalliferous Deposits.—Building stones, ornamental stones
road-making material, clays.
V. Elementary Topographical Surveying.
Use of plane-table and compass. Interpretation of results.
LATIN.
FIRST YEAR.
Scott and Jones’ First Latin Course.
Scott and Jones’ Second Latin Course to Caput xx.
First Latin Translation Book (Rivington) or
The Fables of Orbilius, Parts 1 and 2 (Arnold).


Second Year.
Scott and Jones’ Second Latin Course to end. (Only the more important
sentences in Part IV to be translated).
Composition—Passages based on authors read.
- Scott and Jones’ Latin Grammar for reference.
Creighton’s Primer of Roman History, together with one of the following
groups to be taken in successive years : —
(a) Nepos, Select Lives, Earl (Bell).
Csesar, Invasions of Britain, Brown (Blackie).
( h) Nepos, Lives, Melhuish (Blackie).
Eu'ropius, Books I and Laming (Blackie).
Third Year.
Composition—Selections from North and Hillard’s Latin Pi os?.
Compositio i, and passages based on authors read.
Scott and Jones’ Latin Grammar for reference, together with one of the
following groups to be taken in successive years :—
(a) Cicero, Pro Milone, Reid (Pitt Press).
Cicero, Select Letters, Nicklin (Blackwood).
Virgil, Aeneid, Book I, Page (Macmillan).
( b ) Cicero, Pro Lege Manilla, Woo l house (Blackie).
Cicero, Pro Archia, Reid (Pitt Press).
Csesar, De Bello Civili, Book I, Pcskett (Pitt Press).
Virgil, Aeneid, Book II, Pane (Macmillan).
(c) Cicero, In Catilinam, I, If, III, Keene (Blackie).
Csesar, De Bello Gallico, Book VI f, Brown (Blackie).
Virgil, Aeneid, Book VI, Page (Macjnillan).
Fourth Year.
Composition—Selections from Allen’s Second Latin Exercise Book and
passages based on authors read.
Scott and Jones’ Latin Grammar for reference, together with one of the
following groups to be taken in successive years :—
(a) Livy, Book XXI, Loane (Blackie),
Cicero, Pro Murena, Heitland (Pitt Press).
Horace, Selected Odes, Book I, Page (Macmillan).
Odes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, U, 16, 22, 24, 31, 34, 35.
(b) Livy, Book XXII, Loane (Blackie).
Cicero, Philippics V, VI, VII, Brighouse (Blackie).
Horace, Selected Odes, Books II and IV, Page (Macmillan).
Book II, Odes 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 14, 15, 17, 18, 20.
Book IV, Odes 2, 3, 7, 14, 15.
(c) Livy, Book IF, Conway (Pitt Press).
Cicero, Pro Sestio to Caput, 57, Holden (Macmillan).
Horace, Selected Odes, Book III, Page (Macmillan).
Odes 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 25, 28, 29, 30.
NOTES.
The distinctive feature of this coarse is the wider range of reading required of the pupil,
the design being, that by an extensive rather than an intensive study of the language, he
•nay acquire a more intimate acquaintance with and a truer appreciation of Roman life
and literature. Therefore, while Grammar and prose composition will receive adequate
attention, the cultivation of the power of facile reading and grasp of Latin prose should
receive special emphasis.


Translation.
All translations should be into accurate, idiomatic English. Too much emphasis
cannot be laid on this point. Hence the literal translation of a lengthy La' in period,
with its numerous participles and subordinate clauses, should be avoided. Side by side
with oral should go written translations. These will furnish a valuable means of
developing in the pupil the power to express the meaning of his author in appropriate
language.
Allusions, biographical, historical and mythological, occurring in the text should be
explained, and sufficient history and geography taught to secure an intelligent under-
standing of the period under review.
Unseen Translation.
Regular practice in translating unseen passages should be given from the beginning of
the second year.
Grammar.
This subject should be treated for the most part on the lines laid down in the text-
book—i.e., in the closest connection with the reading matter.
This, however, will not do away with the necessity for short regular drills, in order to
fix the various grammatical forms in the memory.
Composition.
In the early stages, the treatment of this subject should be oral. From the outset,
the correct order of words in the Latin sentences should be insisted upon.
In the second year, continuous passages should be introduced. These should be framed
by the teacher ou the subject-matter of the author. They should be properly graduated,
and embody the constructions most frequently met with.
Re-translation of passages from the author should also be required, and the pupil
encouraged to compare his version with the original.
In the third and fourth years, additional passages should be selected from the prescribed
text-books, but the principal work in composition should be based on the author.
One period per week will be considered sufficient for this branch of the subject.
Reading.
The pupil should be trained to read fluently, with attention to the proper collocation
of words. From the very beginning, care should be taken that the syllables receive
their proper quantities, and that an accurate and uniform pronunciation be acquired.
In order to secure this, the method of pronunciation adopted by the Classical Association
of England and the University of Sydney should be taught.
Passages, prose and verse, selected for their intrinsic worth from the authors which
the pupil is reading, should be committed to memory and frequently recited. These will
serve to cultivate the ear, render familiar the order of thought and the structure of the
language, and form a basis for exercise in composition.
Prosody.
In the third and fourth years, the pupils should have frequent practice in the scansion
of the dactylic hexameter and the more common metres of the Odes of Horace.
GREEK.
(To be taken at the beginning of the Second Year.)
SECOND YEAR.
The Beginners’ Book of Greek. (Marshall.)
Rutherford’s Greek Grammar. (Accidence and Syntax.)
Nall’s Easy Exercises in Greek Syntax.
Beresford and Douglas’ First Greek Reader ; also Vocabulary. (B.ackie.)
History : —Fyffe’s Greece—(Primer Series). (Macmillan.)


Third Year.
Rutherford’s Greek Grammar.
Composition —North and Hillard’s Greek Composition.
History—Greek History for Young Readers—Alice Zimmern. (Longmans,
Green, & Co.), together with one of the following groups to be taken in
successive years:—
Authors :
(a) Xenophon—Anabasis, Book I Walpole (Macmillan); Homer’s
Iliad, Book I—Bond and Walpole (Macmillan); Lucian—Pisca-
tor—Heitland (Cambridge University Press).
(b) Xenophon—Anabasis, Book ll—Walpole (Macmillan) or Marchant
(Bell); Homer’s Iliad, Book Vl—Edwards (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press); Lucian—Vera Historia—Jerram (Clarendon Press).
(c) Xenophon—Anabasis, Book IV—Stone (Macmillan) ; Homer’s
Odyssey, Book IX—Edwards (Cambridge University Press);
Lucian—Charon—Heitland (Cambridge University Press).
Fourth Year.
Rutherford’s Greek Grammar.
Composition—North and Hillard’s Greek Prose Composition.
History—Greek History for Young Readers—Alice Zimmern. (Longmans,
Green, & Co.), together with one of the following groups to be taken in
successive years : —-
Authors
(a) Demosthenes —Olynthiac I—Abbott and Matheson (Clarendon
Press); Plato—Apologia—Stock (Clarendon Press) ; Thucydides—
Siege of Platea (Rivington, Percival, and Co.); Euripides—
Medea —Heberdon (Clarendon Press) or Williamson (Blackie).
(b) Demosthenes—Olynthiac ll—Abbott and Matheson (Clarendon
Press) ; Plato—Crito —Stock (Clarendon Press) ; Herodotus,
Selections from—Merry (Clarendon Press); Euripides —Hecuba—
Heberden (Clarendon Press).
( c ) Demosthenes—Olynthiac lll—Abbott and Matheson (Clarendon
Press) ; Plato —Me.no—Stock (Clarendon Press) ; Thucydides,
Book 11, Ch. 1-65, exclusive of “ Funeral Oration ” —Marchant
(Macmillan) ; Euripides—Alcestis —Jerram (Clarendon Press).
Notes.
Pupils will take up the study of Greek chiefly, it is expected, from choice. They will
be about 15 years of age, will have made a careful study of English, and formed
some acquaintance with Latin and probably a modern language. As comparatively few
will become students of Greek, the classes will be small. The teacher will thus be able
to bestow greater attention upon individuals. Progress for these reasons should be
rapid.
From the beginning reading will be practised. Indeed the main general idea of the
course outlined is that there shall be wide reading rather than minute verbal analysis or
intense study of a limited portion of prose or verse, and undue stress upon translation
from the mother tongue into Greek. Good English should be insisted upon. Every
lesson in Greek may be and should be a lesson in English.
Provision is made for three years’study of the language. At the outset rare forms
and words belonging to dialects other than Attic will be avoided as far as possible. In
the first and second years the pupil will, by means of regular and thorough drill, from
which there must be no shrinking, master the forms of the parts of speech, especially
the verb forms, using Rutherford’s Greek Grammar (Accidence), and by observing for
himself the forms and functions of words met with in his reading. By means of “ Nall's
Exercises,” and North and Hillard’s Greek Composition, he will become acquainted with


the rules governing composition in Greek, and will have regular practice in their applica-
tion to sentence-making and easy continuous prose. Throughout, the pupil should be
required to find out for himself in the course of his reading rules relating to the forms
and functions of words and the building up of sentences. It is considered that the
wider reading set forth will be an effective aid to facility in composition. Translation
and retranslation will be excellent-guides to translation generally.
The strangeness of the language will be lessened, interest in its acquisition stimulated,
and the student’s vocabulary increased by the association of English words with their
Greek originals. Such words as cinematograph, telephone, electrolysis, bicycle—to
mention a few current terms—tell their own tale to the student of Greek. The obser-
vation of parallelism between Latin and Greek constructions will also be a source of
interest.
Whether a book of Homer, a play of Euripides, or a dialogue of Plato is the subject
of study, care will be taken that the pupils have some idea of the whole before entering
upon the study; the setting of the narrative, play or dialogue, as the case may be, will
Ire mastered, so that its study will not be purely grammatical and philological, but will be
a source of real human interest.
An outline of the history of Greece accompmies the course, and as the history and
geography of Greece are closely related, there will be frequent reference to the map of
Greece and adjacent countries.
The study of the Greek language is only a means to an end—some appreciation of the
Greek spirit as it manifested itself in religion, philosophy, literature, politics, art and
society. The wonderful mythology of the Greeks, their search for truth, their segregation
in city states, their love of beauty of form, their unending rivalries and other character-
istics will be revealed in a course of reading under capable direction. In this connection
Mr. Lowes Dickinson’s “Greek View of Life” will be found helpful.
MODERN LANGUAGES.
The course in Modern Languages should enable the pupil—
(1) to read the foreign language with intelligence ;
(2) to express his own thoughts with facility in the foreign language, in
writing, and, as far as possible, in speech ;
(3) to enter sympathetically into the national spirit of the foreign people
and to appreciate their literature, their customs, their institutions,
their ideals.
To this end the curriculum makes provision for a wide course of reading.
Reading is therefore to be the basis of the instruction, though the method,
particularly at the outset, should be conversational in character.
Grammar and translation are by no means to be neglected, but they
should not displace conversation and reading as the dominant features of the
wort.
GENERAL OUTLINES OF WORK.
First Year.
Acquirement of a correct pronunciation through practical exercises;
practice in grasping sounds and producing them correctly. Words built
from sounds. First steps in conversation. Exercises in asking and answer-
ing questions in the foreign language.
Passages of prose and poetry to be read with understanding and made the
basis of grammatical teaching. The essential rules of Grammar to be taught
thus.
The acquirement of a stock of useful words and phrases.
Dictation of short passages of prose containing words within the pupils’
vocabulary. Reproduction of lessons and stories and the beginnings of
original composition.


Second Year.
Continuation of exercises in conversation. Reading of historical and narra-
tive prose. Extension of vocabulary and of grammatical teaching. Repro-
ductions and original compositions. Translation of sentences and simple
passages of prose into the foreign language. Dictation of short passages of
prose. Occasional reading and translation of passages from the foreign
language at sight.
Third Year.
More developed conversation practice, starting from the reading and
extending outwards. Enlargement of pupils’ vocabulary. Reading of more
difficult authors on historical, geographical, and social subjects, together with
selections of poetry.
Practice in written and oral translation into the foreign language. Repro-
duction of what has been heard and read. Original compositions—letters
and short essays. Translation of passages at sight. Dictation.
FbURTH Year.
Continued practice in speaking in every lesson, mainly on what has been
read and on the events of every-day life. Further cultivation of the ability
to carry on a simple conversation in the foreign tongue.
Reading : Selections of modern prose, together with a classical drama.
Enlargement of pupils’ vocabulary. Writing of essays on simple topics.
Instruction and practice in writing ordinary business letters. Written and
oral translation of simple English prose into the foreign language.
Occasional reading and translation of passage? from the foreign language
at sight. Some knowledge of • the foreign literature of the 17th, 18th and
19th centuries.
FRENCH.
FIRST YEAR.
Siepmann’s Primary French Course, First part (Macmillan).
French Without Tears, Books I and II (Arnold).
Guerber’s Contes et Legendes (Heath).
Second Year.
Siepmann’s Primary French Course, Second part (Macmillan).
Primer of French History, Charlotte Yonge (Macmillan), together with one
of the following groups, to be taken in successive years :
(a) Laboulaye, Contes Blens (Heath).
Poole and Becker, Lectures Frangaises, Geographic el Histoire
(Blackie).
A. Dumas, Les Deux Frferes (Macmillan-Siepmann’s Series).
Laboulaye, Y von et Finette (Macmillan-Siepraann’s Series).
(b) Adair, French Historical Reader (Bell).
Wolff, Les Frangais en Voyage (Arnold).
Zola, L’Attaque du moulin (Hachette).
Mairet, La T&che du Petit Pierre (Heath).
(c) Moreau, Contes k ma soeur (Blackie).
Verne, Yingt-mille lieues sous la Mer. (Heath).
Souvestre, David le trappeur (Macmillan).
Ninet, Un Petit Voyage i Paris (Blackie).


Third Year,
Wellington College French Grammar and Primer of French Literature
(Saintsbury, Clarendon Press), together with one of the following groups, to
be taken in successive years ; .
(a) Erckmann-Chatrian, Histoire d’un Consent (Hachette).
Chateaubriand, Les aventures du dernier Abencerage (Blackie).
Deslys, Le Zouave (Blackie).
Poemes Choisis, edited by R. L. A. du Pontet (Arnold).
(b) De Maistre, Les Prisonniers du Caucase (Macmillan-Siepmann’s
Readers).
Mignet, L’Histoire de la Revolution (Macmillan-Siepmann’s
Series).
About, Le Turco (Blackie).
Feval, Le Docteur Bousseau (Blackie).
Poemes Choisis, edited by R. L. A. du Pontet (Arnold).
(c) Dumas, La Tulipe Noire (Heath).
Daudet, La Belle Nivernaise (Bell). •
Michelet, Deux Heroines de la Revolution (Arnold).
Poemes Choisis, edited by R. L. A. du Pontet (Arnold).
Fourth Year.
Wellington College French Grammar and Primer of French Literature
(Saintsbury, Clarendon Press), together with one of the following groups, to
be taken in successive years :
(а) Racine, Esther (Hachette), limp cloth.
Lamartine, Scenes de la Revolution Franchise (Heath).
A. Daudet, Tartarin de Tarascon (Macmillan).
George Sand, Les Jumeaux (Blackie).
(б) Moliere, Les Femmes Savantes (Macmillan).
Sarcey, Le Siege de Paris (Heath).
Theuriet, L’Abbe Daniel (Blackie).
Gautier, Le Pavilion sur I’eau (Blackie).
(c) Corneille, Le Cid (Macmillan),
Dumas, Monte Cristo (Arnold).
Mery, Trafalgar (Arnold).
L’Expedition de Bonaparte en Egypte (Heath).
With reference to Songs, Poems, and Plays, teachers will find suitable
books among the following :
. SONGS.
(a) French Songs with Music, Barbe (Blackie).
(b) French Nursery Rhymes, Thirion (J. Williams, London).
(c) 45 Franzosiche Lieder (Wetzel, Berlin).
(d) Chansons et Rondes Enfantines (Yermot, Paris).
(e) French Songs and Verses, Middleton (Swan, Sonnenschein, A Co.)
POEMS.
First and Second Years.
(a) Shorter Poems for Recitation, Barb 6 (Blackie).
(b) Longer Poems for Recitation, Barbd (Blackie).
(c) Little Book of French Poetry, Scott (Blackie).
Third and Fourth Years.
(a) Poemes Choisis, R. L. A. du Pontet (Arnold).


PLAYS.
(a) French Dramatic Scenes, Musgrave (Arnold). (This contains twelve
admirable little plays).
(b) Little Plays for Acting, Blaokie’s Series. (Contains some excellent
little plays, including Cendrillon, Le Petit Poucet).
(o) Le Livre de Jeux (twelve French games for English pupils) Tillyard
(Blackie).
(d) Fables en action, Partington (Dent),
GERMAN.
FIRST YEAR.
(a) Longman’s First Pleader.
( b) German Without Tears, Books 1 and 2 (Arnold and Sons).
(c) Foster’s Geschichten und Marchen (Heath).
( d ) Guerber’s Marchen und Erzahlungen (Heath).
Second Year.
Siepmann’s Public School Primer (Macmillan).
Primer of German History, J. Sime (Macmillan).
Together with one of the following groups, to be taken in successive years :
(a) Stories from Grimm (Blackie).
Gluck Auf (Ginn & Co.).
(h) Niebuhr, Griechisclie Heroen-Geschichten (Clarendon Press).
German Reader, Scholle and Smith (Blackie). Omit Part V.
(c) Schmid, Heinrich von Eichenfels (Macmillan).
Germany in Story and Song (Blackie). Omit Part iii.
Third Year.
A School German Grammar, H. W. Eve (Nutt).
Handbook of German Literature, Phillips (Bell).
Together with one of the following groups, to be taken in successive years ;
(а) Andersen, Bilderbuch ohne Bilder (Isbister).
Wachenhusen, Yom ersten bis zum letzten Schuss (Macmillan).
Kotzebue, Dergerade Weg der beste (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Heine’s Poems (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
(б) Storm, Immensee (Isbister, Heath).
Lessing, Selected Fables (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Schrader, Friedrich der Grosse (Macmillan).
Schiller, Ballads (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
(a) Grimm, Die Zwei Briider (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Hoffmann, Historische Erzahlungen (Longmans).
Schiller, Der Neffe als Onkel (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Goethe, Lyrics and Ballads (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Fourth Year.
A School German Grammar, H. W. Eve (Nutt).
Handbook of German Literature, Phillips (Bell).
Together with one of the following groups, to be taken in successive years •
(a) Schiller, Thirty Years’ War (Cambridge University Press).
Goethe, Iphigenie auf Tauris (Clarendon Press).
Sintram (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Muellenbach, Die Silberdistel (Blackie’s Little Gennan Classics).


(b) Kohlrausch, Das Jahr 1813 (Cambridge University Press).
Goethe, Hermann und Dorothea (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Schiller, Wilhelm Tell (Clarendon Press).
(c) Freytag, Der Staat Friedrichs des Grossen (Cambridge University
Press).
Heine, Harzreise (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
Lessing, Minna von Barnhelm (Clarendon Press).
Goethe, The Road to Italy (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
SONGS.
Singing should he a prominent feature of the early work. Every German
class should know such popular songs as “ Die Wacht am Rhein,” “ Die
Lorelei,” “ Deutschland, Deutschland, iiber Alles,” “ Der Tannenbaum,”
“ Der gute Kamerad,” “ Reiter’s Morgengesang.”
Books recommended.
(a) Scholle and Smith’s “First Steps in German” (Blackie) contains
ten popular songs for beginners.
(b) Songs with (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
(c) Liederbuch fur preussische Yolksschulen—Friedrich Hirt, Breslau.
(d) The Songs of Germany—Kippey (obtainable at Paling & Co,, Sydney.
POEMS.
The learning and reciting of poems should also be a feature of the work.
Books recommended.
(a) Rippmann’s First German Course contains an excellent selection of
short and easy poems for beginners.
(h) Poems for Recitation (Blackie’s Little German Classics).
(c) The various readers prescribed will he found to contain a number of
suitable poems for this purpose.
PLAYS.
The performing of simple plays will appeal powerfully to the pupils and
deepen interest.
Books recommended.
(a) For beginners—(1) German Dramatic Scenes, Abel Musgrave ; (2)
Kleines Haustheater, Mrs. Hugh Bell (both Edward Arnold).
(b) Buchheim’s Short German Plays.
NOTES.
Elementary stage.
Throughout the course, Modern Languages should be treated as living languages.
Tongue and ear should be trained from the beginning, and drill in pronunciation must
be steadily maintained until correct enunciation is secured.
This end will best be served by giving a short course in sounds at the beginning.
Incidentally, the phonetic alphabet—that of the Association Internationale—
may be introduced. This will be required at a later stage, and will most naturally be
introduced when dealing with the particular sounds.
The use of the phonetic symbols will be advantageous in correcting errors in pro-
unciation. It would be very desirable, therefore, for the teacher to have an adequate
owledge of phonetics.


Oral work.
There should be a preponderance of oral practice throughout the course, especially in
the early stages. Such oral practice will, in general, take the form of question and
answer based upon the reading-book. Free conversation may also be based on objects,
pictures, and common topics. Except lessons set apart for written translations, no
lesson should go by without some practice in conversation. Apart from the value
attaching to the ability to converse in the foreign language, this daily practice in
conversation materially assists the rest of the instruction.
Oral and written exercises based on reading-hook.
The materials for instruction in modem languages have been chosen in such a way as
to serve as an introduction to the social conditions, the history, the ideals and mode of
thought of the people whose language is being studied.
The reading-book also supplies the basis for the reading, conversation, grammar, and
written exercises, and thus plays a prominent part in the instruction. The reading
lessons should aim at intelligent, well-accented, fluent reading, and at thorough compre-
hension of the matter read. The means of testing the latter are, in the main, questions
put by the teacher and framed so as to elicit the main points of the lesson, both question
and answer to be expressed as far as possible in the foreign tongue.
Formal translation from the foreign tongue, necessary in the elementary stage, should
be gradually lessened, until in the later years it will only be necessary in cases of
great difficulty. Even then the passages might be rendered into their simpler
equivalents in the foreign language, in order to ensure their comprehension.
This does not preclude the teacher, however, from giving the pupils set passages for
translation into good idiomatic English, as a means of strengthening their command
over the mother-tongue.
Exercises in re-translation should also be based on the subject-matter of the reading
lesson. Phrases occurring in the lessons which are considered worthy of retention
can be most effectively committed to memory by re-translation, both oral and written.
This exercise should form part of the oral work of every reading lesson.
After the pupils have read and re-read the lesson, and have been questioned upon it,
they may reasonably be expected to be able to reproduce the main features of part or
the whole of it in their own words, and to write a portion of it from dictation, without
serious errors.
The hooks—their character and treatment.
First Year.
Siepmann’s Course and Longman’s Reader provide the necessary minimum of grammar,
closely associated with a series of well-graduated lessons. Their plan should be closely
observed. Additional questions and statements on the subject-matter of the various
lessons should be framed by the teacher
The two books, French and German Without Tears, have been selected because of the
interest they awaken in beginners. They are full of fun, and lend themselves admirably
to simple dramatisation. The pupils will find delight in being allowed to represent the
different characters of the stories. Thus treated, the lessons may be read and re-read
without interest becoming exhausted. Moreover, both books are drawn up on an
excellent methodic plan, by which words and idioms are made to recur in new settings,
while the graduation of vocabulary and of grammatical construction is all that could be
desired. They should be introduced as soon as the pronunciation has been fixed, and
should receive at least half the time allowed for the subject. This will widen consider-
ably the experience of the pupil, and facilitate the work of the Reader. Each of these
three books should be subjected to an intensive revision, and not laid aside till all the
eommon words and idioms have been committed to memory-
Equipped with the knowledge thus acquired, the pupil will have little difficulty with
the remaining books. These are constructed in such a way as to minimise the necessity
for translation. Their treatment should be extensive. The amount of new matter con-
tained in them to which special attention may be drawn must be left to the discretion of
the teacher.
Second Year.
In each course of the Second Year miscellaneous readers have been included. This
has been done to secure an introduction of the pupil to the main facts of the national
life of France and of Germany.
In the German course the final prose chapter in each of the readers of the Second
year has been omitted with regret. The subject-matter furnishes excellent reading,
but the language employed represents a higher standard than is likely to be reached
by the pupil at this stage. However, where success seems possible, the extended reading
should be attempted.


Third and Fourth Years.
Little need be said concerning the treatment to be adopted in the Third and Fourth
Years. As a wide acquaintance with and an appreciation of French and German Litera-
ture are the grand objects of the course, the various books prescribed are not to be
laboriously translated. When, too, grammatical difficulties are encountered, their full
consideration should not be immediately undertaken, but postponed to a lesson set apart
for such discussion. On no account should the main purpose of reading the books for
the pleasure and profit it brings be defeated by minute analysis of structural forms.
Vocabulary.
Great importance should be attached to the gradual acquisition of a large stock of
useful words and phrases. In order to give the pupils a thorough mastery over such
words and phrases, continual repetition is necessary. Such phrases often serve as useful
models in connection with written work.
In the early stages of the course, vocabularies should be constructed by the pupils
themselves.
At a later stage, the vocabulary may be extended by such means as groups of words of
allied meaning, systematically arranged as in “Spier’s Vocabulary,” and of words
philologically connected.
Spelling and Dictation.
Exercises in spelling and dictation should be regularly given from the beginning, and
continued in the higher classes. They serve as an excellent means of training the pupil
to hear and interpret sounds correctly. Passages for dictation should be generally based
upon the subject-matter of the reading lesson, and should contain words within the
the pupils’ vocabulary. Occasionally “ unseen ” passages should be given.
Grammar.
Grammar should be learnt in the early stages inductively. From a consideration of a
number of examples the pupil is led to perceive what is the correct form, and then to
formulate the law. Later on, the pupils should be given a deeper insight into the
grammatical structure of the language by means of a fuller study of the accidence and of
the more important rules of syntax.
For the first year the amount of Grammar and the method for treating it are indicated
in the opening books of the courses : —Longman’s First Reader and Siepmann’s First
Course. The work proceeds pari passu with the reading, and in the closest connection
with it. The teacher should be careful not to emphasise unduly its importance, but
always to remember that his main purpose is to sustain interest and to widen experience
by a fairly rapid reading of the books. At the beginning of the second year, pressure
should be brought to bear on the grammatical side of the work.
The treatment of Siepmann’s Course should be of a very thorough character ; upon its
completion the pupil should find himself in full possession of the essential grammatical
forms of the foreign language. In the third and fourth years the grammars recom-
mended are to be used merely for reference.
Written Work.
There should be abundant practice at the various stages of the course in reproduction
of what has been read and heard, and in original compositions, such as letters and short
essays. This work should be commenced at the beginning of the second half of the first
year.
The first exercises in translation into the foreign language should be given at the
beginning of the second year. They should consist of the translation of simple sentences
based upon the reading book. These should be followed in the later years by passages of
English prose of increasing difficulty.
Teachers will find useful material for work of this kind in such books as the
following;—“Elements of French Composition, J. H. Cameron (Arnold); French
Composition by Imitation”—H. Brown (Blackie) ; “ Class Book of French Composition
—Blouet (Haohette).
Correspondence.
Frequent opportunities should be afforded the pupils of expressing their ideas on
different topics in letter form.
tWing the second half of the fourth year pupils should receive, in addition, instruction
ad practice in writing ordinary business letters, special attention bemg directed to the
correct form of commencing and ending, of dating and addressing such letters.


Poetry, Plays, Songs,
Selected passages of poetry and of prose should be committed to memory by th
pupils, and recited from time to time.
Singing in French and German should be introduced at the outset and continued
throughout the course. It is a valuable aid to pronunciation and memorising, as well at
a source of great pleasure to the pupils.
The acting of little plays by the pupils has very many advantages, and should be
encouraged in all classes.
History and Literature.
These two aspects of the instruction should receive attention in the second and later
years. A Primer of History and a Handbook of Literature will be studied in this
connection.
Foreign Books and Periodicals.
Teachers are recommended to endeavour as far as possible to invest their teaching
with the foreign atmosphere by such means as the use of French and German news-
papers, periodicals, photographs, maps, pictures, &c. In this connection the teacher
is recommended to consult such books as the following :
(a) Home Life in Germany—Mrs. A. Sidgwick (Methuen).
(b) Home Life in France—Miss Betham Edwards (Methuen).
(c) Modern Germany—J. Dawson.
(d) The Rhine—Mackinder.
Medium 0/ Instruction.
As far as possible the foreign tongue should be the medium of instruction, except in
the explanation of grammatical or textual difficulties. In such cases time will be saved
and clearer ideas given by reverting to the mother tongue.
Bibliography — Methodology.
C. Brereton, Teaching of Modem Languages.
M. Brebner, ~ „ ~ in Germany.
K. Breul, ~ ~ ~ and training of teachers.
M. Brgal, De I’enseignement des Langues Vivantes.
English Board of Education (Special Reports), Vol. 11, No. 26, Vol. 111, Nos. 7,8, 9,
10.
O. Jesperson, How to teach a Foreign Language.
M. Walter, Der franzosische Klassenunterricht (Marburg), 1888.
M. Yietor, Der Sprachunterricht muss umkehreu (Heilbronn), 1886.
K. Hartmann, Die Anschauung im neusprachlichen Unterricht (Holzel, Wien).
G. Pfeil, Wie lernt man eine Sprache am leichtesten undbesten.
F. Franke, Die praktische Spracherlernung.
H. Sweet, Practical Study of Language.
W. H. Widgery, Teaching of Languages in Schools.
Chapters on the Teaching of Modern Languages jn
(a) Practice of Instruction, Adamson.
(b) Principles of Teaching (Welton), new edition.
(0) Teaching and Organisation, Barnett.
Special Method — Phonetics.
P. Passy, Les Sons du Francaia.
G. G. Nicholson, Practical Introduction to French Phonetics.
Saillens and Holme, First Principles of French Pronunciation.
Vigtor (Translated by Rippmann). Blemente der Phonetik.
Scholle and Smith, Elementary Phonetics.
B. Dumville, Elements of French Pronunciation and Diction (Dent).
Special Method — Conversation.
The following books may be used by the teachers as a guide to the conduct of conver-
sation lessons :
Rossman and Schmidt, French Course.
Perry and Reum, French Course.
Rippmann’s French and German Courses.
Berlitz, Erstes Buck.


DRAWING.
GENERAL COURSE.
1. Drawing from reality, memory, and imagination.-
2. Design and its application to objects constructed.
3. Mathematical Drawing—geometry and its applications.
4. History and principles of Art.
It is not the intention of this Course to train artists, nor is it to be
expected that at the end of it any very great skill will be developed. It is,
however, expected that every pupil will acquire some elementary knowledge
of Art —both Fine, and Applied.
Pupils from the first should be instructed in the differences between
decorative composition and ornament. Natural forms are decoratively
composed in works designed for beauty alone—pictures, Christmas cards,
millinery—but objects of utility should receive ornament properly invented,,
conventionalised from the source, to accentuate any beauty of form or colour
already latent in them.
The teacher should emphasize the kind of work most suited to the aims of
his pupils. Sections numbered 3 are for boys only. Sections 1 and 4 are of
primary importance.
GENERAL ART COURSE.
First Year.
1. Drawing from reality (objects and nature alternately), memory, and
imagination, in colour and outline. The colour work should also show shade
and shine. For objects, use dry colour, as Reeves’ Greyhound Pastels, or
Red seal, Banner, or Matchless coloured chalks. The manipulation is easy,
and permits improvements of the one drawing.
Nature drawing. —Sprays of foliage and blossoms, in water-colour drawn
directly with the brush.
Principles to be mastered.—Objects with circular ends lying on their sides
below the eye-level, and the free perspective of scientific apparatus as set up
for experiments.
, 2. Design, and its application to objects constructed in the manual training
lessons.
Pupils to invent designs in flat colour and modelled relief (alternately if
possible), based upon the plant or other natural form studied in the drawing
lessons, and, when passed by the teacher as being sufficiently simple, the
pupil is to apply such design to the object by some process, as stencilling,
carving in relief, painting in colour or gesso. Also, for the girls especially,
the making and decorating of artistic and useful objects in leather (repousse
and tooled) as book-covers, bags, belts, cushions ; in Art Needlework (applique
and embroidered) —table centres, teapot cosies, parts of dress, stencilled
curtains, and the ornamentation of china for use.
3. Commercial Drawing —for boys only,—the girls to continue their Design
and Applied Art. On one sheet of paper, first a free sketch is to be made
of the appearance of an object. On this sketch the real measurements are
to be noted, and from these data a plan and necessary elevations are to be
made to a scale mentioned by the teacher. A short written description of
the object, its use and manner of construction, should follow in about three
lines.
4, History and principles of Ornament. —Ten lessons —one lesson for each of
the following styles, and to be able to sketch from memory the most important
decorative item of each.—Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Saracenic,
Gothic, Renaissance, Cinquecento, Louis Quatorze, and present-day work.


Second Year.
1. Drawing. —ln dry colour—groups of two or more objects, one standing
and one lying on its side. In water-colour—plants and insects.
Memory reproductions of drawings previously made.
Imaginative drawing—the pupil’s pictures of his mental images from
material in literature or history. This exercise should rarely occupy more
than five minutes at a time, and may be placed in the note-books.
Scientific drawings of experiments, in science note-books.
2. Design and Applied Art. —Continuation of the first year’s course. A
higher degree of manipulative skill and a greater knowledge of ornament and
its arrangement will be visible. Insect forms learnt in the drawing lessons
should be used as motives for design in combination with grasses and plant
life which each insect favours.
3. Architectural Drawing. —Plans and elevations to scale, first measured
and drawn from existing buildings or their parts (school-room porch, window-
sash, doorway), the various “ bonds ” in brickwork should be shown when
met with. Ability to understand blue print copies of plans, elevations,
and sections.
, 4. The Artistic Studg of Pictures. —To have some knowledge of the making
of a picture in order to be able to see and appreciate the beautiful. Ten
lectures during the year, including five visits to Art exhibitions where
possible. The class lecture should be preparatory to the Art Gallery visit,
and after the first visit the attention should be centred on a very few works.
Third Year.
1. Drawing. —At least ten lessons devoted to the drawing of outdoor
objects and their immediate surroundings (in most cases the class need go no
further than the playground) as truthful descriptive work in dry colour.
Present one object (with its own background) each lesson—a small tree
with sky, fence and ground, part of the school building, steps and handrail,
'a tree trunk. Each of these lessons to be succeeded by a lesson giving
practice in rearranging the same items to form a decorative composition
to fill a given space. Ten lessons in water-colours, as used in the previous
years’ nature drawings, but now to attempt to express roundness. Begin
with easy work, as an orange on a square of brown paper with an upright
enclosing background.
Memory and imaginative work continued.
2. Design and Applied Art.—- The above outdoor items (including clouds
and distant hills if visible) conventionalised to form ornament for such items
as stencilled friezes, book-covers, posters, and panels, in flat colour and in
relief alternately if possible.
3. Geometry. —Areas. Plan, elevation, and simple sections of the cube,
cone and cylinder in upright positions. Architectural —arches and classical
mouldings.
4. History of Architecture. —Ten lectures on the chief or most distinctive
styles —Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Saracenic, Gothic, Renaissance,
and Present day. Attend to local buildings in the various styles, and as
far as possible give reasons for the essentials of each style and for modern
ideas.
Fourth Year.
1. Drawing. —Ten lessons, outdoor work in water-colour. Ten lessons
sketching the costume model in various poses—boy or girl reading, walking,
digging, playing. Ten lessons arranging previous drawings as decorative


compositions to suit given spaces, changing the arrangement but not the
posture, and trying new colour schemes. These arrangements should be
suitable for posters and pictures. Memory and imaginative work continued.
2. Design and Applied Art. —The above work conventionalised to form
ornament, and treated as book-plates in black and white, and panels in
colour and relief.
3. Geometry. —Plane curves, easy machine drawing.
4. History of Painting. —The aims and limitations of some of the principal
schools and artists, with a knowledge of a few great works of art and their
creators. To endeavour to know the style of work of at least seven
Australian artists sufficiently well to be able to name the artist without
seeing the signature. Ten or more lessons, including visits to an Art
Gallery.
DOMESTIC COURSE (ART).
The work of the General Syllabus with these alterations:—
No “ Mathematical Drawing.” Extra time for Applied Art, and additions
as follow :
Eiest Year.
A knowledge of ornament and colour schemes for personal adornment—
clothing, millinery, jewellery, lace (and names of chief kinds). Colour
schemes and arrangements of flowers for school (daily exercise if possible)
and home. The attractive presentation of food.
Second Year.
To discriminate between good and bad design in household Art—furniture
and furnishings. This should include designs of wall-papers, floor coverings,
table-cloths and covers, ceilings. Consider the beauty of “ fitness ” of first
importance in furniture. Subordination.
Third Year.
Modern domestic architecture. Four lessons.
Fourth Year.
Extra Applied Art.
COMMERCIAL COURSE (DRAWING).
First Year.
Commercial Drawing, Drawing in line and colour, Design and its appli-
cation, History and principles of ornament, as for the General Course.
Particular attention should be paid to these first and last portions.
Second Year.
Commercial Drawing continued, of more complex apparatus than in the
First Year, instead of the Architectural Drawing. Drawing, Design and
Applied Art, and the artistic study of pictures as for Second Year in the
General Course.
INDUSTRIAL COURSE (DRAWING).
The work of the General Syllabus with the following additions :
First Year.
The Elements of Geometrical Drawing. —Definitions and terms, Lines and
Angles, Proportionals, Triangles, Quadrilaterals, Circles and Tangents, and
Regular Polygons.


Second Yeah.
Continuation of above, to Scales and their uses; Circles touching lines and
circles ; Inscription and Circumscription of rectilineal figures.
Third Year.
Particular attention to the continuation of the above, which will be found
prescribed for Third Year in the General Course.
Perspective. —Carroll: Book I, one-half this year.
Fourth Year.
Perspective —Carroll: Book I to be finished, with attention to the Free
perspective of the ordinary object drawing.
NEEDLEWORK.
FIRST AND SECOND YEAR STUDENTS.
Girls’ School Manual Training periods (2) to be taken in one lesson.
The prerequisite of this course is a satisfactory completion of needlework
as set out in Course of Instruction for Primary Schools —Syllabus A—Third
and higher classes.
Taking women’s and children’s measures for bodices, sleeves, and skirt.
Notes on any deformity or abnormal development. Differences between
measures for children and measures for adults.
Drafting of the foundation for the body part of any garment. Working
out the foundation draft to any measures. The necessity of having this
foundation draft made to the measurement of the woman who is to wear the
garment, and not depending on alteration when fitting to correct the size
and shape.
Marking in lines to the foundation draft for cuts or seams from waist to
armholes, from waist to neck, from waist tapering to a point at bust (darts).
Fitting bodice draft for a fully-developed figure, with four pieces •—back,
side body, under arm, and front, with two darts.
Draft for an undeveloped figure with three pieces ;—back, side body, and
front, with one dart.
Drafting foundation for sleeve.
Foundation draft of sleeve to the size of the woman’s arm, as measured.
Methods of marking the outline of each piece of the garment on to
material: —tracing, thread line, chalk. Each piece cut in duplicate for right
and left sides. Possibilities of cutting both pieces for the same side, and how
to avoid that. Allowance for seams.
Drafting the foundation for skirts.
Skirt with seven gores.
Skirt with five gores.
Marking on the foundation drafts details for simple ornament, such as may
bo used for yokes, collars, cuffs, fancy sleeves. Cutting of
frills and flounces.


Cutting in paper from the foundation drafts, the following garments :
nightdress, underskirt, chemise, drawers, bloomers, slip-bodice, combinations.
“ Lay ” of material. —Methods of placing the paper patterns on the material
to cut with the least possible waste.
Putting the pieces of each garment together in the correct position.
Stitchery.—ln addition to the stitches in plain sewing already learned in
primary schools, the student should learn some of the stitches used in
embroidery, Art needlework, and lace.
Making by hand one or more of the garments previously cut, showing :
running and felling, tuck-running stitching, gathering, setting into the band,
button-holes.
This garment may be embroidered in an original design which has been
executed in the Art Class.
DRESSMAKING.
THIRD AND FOURTH YEAR STYDENTS.
The three periods a week should be taken in one lesson.
The prerequisite for this course is the manual training of First and Second
Year.
Third Year.
Students should take each other’s measures.
Each student should make a foundation draft, to her own measures, of a
bodice, sleeve, and skirt. Then the form of “ cut ” of the garment must be
decided.
Form.
Showing that women’s garments should be made with a threefold purpose:—
To protect; to conceal; to display.
To protect;—Hygiene of clothes.
To conceal; —Not only a covering for modesty’s sake, but an arrangement
of lines and draperies so as to conceal defects and veil all weaknesses.
To display : —Not only to reveal the beauty and symmetry of the contour,
hut to be an eloquent exposition of the inner self.
The “cut” of the garment:—Cuts which, when joined, become seams
and are conspicuous, made symmetrical to enhance the beauty of a woman’s
contour.
Showing how unsymmetrical “ cuts ” or lines make a beautiful figure
appear deformed, even when the garment fits as to size.
How a good cut can always partially, and sometimes wholly, conceal
defects in the development of the figure.
Horizontal lines, giving breadth.
Vertical lines, giving height.
Describing lines on the foundation drafts, indicating shape and size of
pieces for a tight-fitting bodice, with special emphasis on the making of the
lines or seams where the pieces are joined symmetrically.
Lay of material.
Marking the shape of each piece on material, cutting-out, tacking together.
Materials all flexible: —Where to stretch and where to avoid stretching.
Methods of finishing seams of lining.
Cambric tucked bloutc and ga'hercd skirt.


Putting in lines to the foundation draft for the cut of the blouse. Blouse
pattern in two pieces. Cutting blouse looser than fitting lining.
Simple ornament—tucks, gathers, box-pleat; yokes—round, peaked, square,
or saddle yokes. Berthas.
Putting together parts. Finishing, pressing. Difference in finishing and
fastening when opened in front or at back. Button-holes. Buttons.
Waist:—How to keep a loose blouse firmly in its place.
How to draft a collar ; to set it in its place : mode of fastening ; finishing.
To cut a full sleeve from foundation draft. Placket. How to avoid twist
of front seam.
Puff—plain and ornamental.
Joining cuff to sleeve.
Setting sleeve into armhole.
Foundation skirt draft to students’ measures. To cut skirt with gathers
from foundation draft.
Lay of material. Allowance for hem and tucks. How to prevent seams
stretching. To tack, press, finish seams in print. Different methods of
making plackets. Setting. Setting gathers into waistband. Hangers.
Fourth Year.
Drafting to measures, cutting-out and making of a more elaborate blouse
than the first one.
Students who have made progress with art work should be encouraged to
make their own design. In every case the only suggestion for the cut of the
blouse should be a picture of the finished garment on a figure.
Drafting, cutting, making of a fitting plain skirt. Making wider around
the bottom. Various seams—felled, slotted, tucked. Inverted or box pleat
at back. Plackets on woollen material. Stiffening and facing skirts. Setting
into waist-band. Simple ornamentation.
Children’s Dresses.
Foundation draft for child’s first dress. Yoke. Skirt. Smocking. Sleeve.
Collar. Art needlework stitches for ornamentation.
Foundation draft for girl’s bodice. Putting in lines for fitting lining.
Lines for sailor blouse. Pouch. Open V front. Lay of material. Drafting
sailor-collar. Cutting sailor sleeve from foundation draft. Outlining.
Making. Finishing.
Cutting and pleating skirt. Joining bodice lining and skirt. Provision
for lengthening.
MILLINERY.
THIRD YEAR.
Making Hats—
Tools and material required.
How to measure blocked shapes for making up in wire.
Difficulties in making wire shapes and how to overcome them,
Foundation for straw covering.
Points about sewing straw in shape.
Simple trimming.
Drafting pattern on paper for a buckram shape.
Cutting shapes in buckram.
Manipulation and shaping of buckram.
Stitches used in millinery.
Art needlework.


CHEMISTRY.—DOMESTIC SCIENCE STUDENTS.
THIRD AND FOURTH YEARS.
Three periods per week for two years.
Note —This work is intended to follow the General Elementary Science
Course taken by all pupils in their first and second years,
1. Study of sodium and potassium compounds—properties of common
•alt—conversion into sulphate—sulphate to carbonate, <fcc. —“ baking soda ”
“ washing soda.”
2. Comparative study of silver and lead—determination of amounts of
silver and lead nitrates formed by dissolving known weights of the metals in
nitric acids—conversion of nitrates to chlorides, dtc. Further study of
“ equivalents.”
3. Study of copper, iron, and aluminium—advantages and disadvantages of
utensils made of these metals—examination of “ tinned ” and “ enamelled ”
ware.
4. Elementary qualitative analysis—involving typical group-metals only.
5. General relationship of the elements—periodic classification.
6. Further study of carbon—coal and coke fires—the hydrocarbons—-
methane—paraffin—petroleum—fraction distillation. Ethylene, acetylene,
and benzene. Yalency—deduction of a formula—graphic formulse. Coal
gas—the gas-meter—dangers of escape of gas. The kerosene lamp and
kerosene stove.
7. The alcohols—alcoholic fermentation—yeast—“methylated” spirits—
manufacture of beers, wines, and spirits—physiological effects of alcohol.
Phenol, its uses and derivatives.
8. The Ethers. Radicles.
9. Aldehydes—formalin—disinfectants.
10. Fatty acids—manufacture of vinegar—-sugar of lead and verdigris.
11. Ethereal salts—fats, glycerine, and soaps—stearin, margarine, and
butter.
12. Tartaric, citric, and oxalic acids—“ cream of tartar ” —baking powder—
other leavening agents.
13. Starch and starch foods. Cellulose and celluloid.
14. The sugars.
15. The organic ammonias—amines —amides—aniline—ptomaines—urea.
16. Proximate analysis of flour—further study of the characteristic
reactions of proteids, &c. A loaf of bread.
17. Proximate analysis of an egg. Comparative study of albumen and
gelatine.
18. Effect of cooking on foods—effect of dry heat—combined effect of heat
and moisture—reaction attending heating of food combinations—influence of
different combinations on digestibility.
19. Study of milk—general properties of emulsion—estimation of cream,
added water, &c., in milk—characteristic reactions of fresh milk—odour-
absorbing properties of fresh milk—curdling—lactic fermentation—preserva-
tion and pasteurisation of milk—detection of common preservatives in milk.


20. Some beverages and their characteristics—water—filtration—desirable
and undesirable types of filters—use of boiling-water. Characteristics of
serated and acidulated beverages. Tea,coffee, and cocoa—effect of “stewing”
tea and coffee.
21. Tests for quality of foodstuffs—freshness of eggs—detection of chicory
in coffee—analysis of “ egg ” powders, &c.
22. Food-preservation—some causes of decomposition—methods of preserva-
tion in common use—sterilisation and exclusion of air—drying—chemical
methods.
HOUSEHOLD COOKERY.
THIRD YEAR.
This course to cover a period of 90 hours, to be divided into 30 lessons of
3 hours, and to embrace a systematic course of instruction in the following
1. Management of stoves and, table utensils.— Weights and scales—manage,
ment of. Their equivalent measurements. To illustrate this, make and bake
scones.
2. Stoves and cookery utensils. —Methodical and effectual means of cleanli-
ness and care of same.
3. Vegetables — Root vegetables. —Food value. Rules for boiling and draining.
Examples : Potatoes, carrots, turnips.
4. Green vegetables. —Food value. Rules for boiling and draining.
Examples: Green vegetables in season.
5. Soup-making — Value as a food — Glasses of soups. —Cottage broth, pea.
soup.
6. Stock. —. Rules for making first and second stock. Methods of usings
Examples: Julienne soup, tomato soup.
7. Soup, without meat or stock. —Value as a food. Examples; White soup,
maigre, lentil soup, fried croutons.
9. Meat. —Different kinds of meat—General rules for cooking. The effect
of heat on meat. Illustrate. Grilled chops, beef tea.
9. Roasting and baking. —Rules for. Roast beef or mutton, and gravy,,
baked potatoes, Yorkshire pudding.
10. Boiling and steaming. —Boiled mutton, vegetables and sauce, suet-
dumplings.
11. Stewing. —Economy of this method of cooking meat as regards quality
of meat and amount of fuel used. Rules for making and serving Irish stew,,
stewed tripe.
12. Methods of making and serving brown stews.— Haricot steak, stewed'
ox-tail.
13. Frying — Dry or shallow frying. —Rules for. Foods suitable. Tempera-
ture of fat. Examples : Fried sausages, liver and bacon.
14. Wet, deep, or French frying. —Rules for. Quantity and temperature
of fat. Foods suitable. Examples ; Rissoles, potato chips.
15. Grilling and broiling. —General rules. Food suitable. Grilled chops
and steak. Grilled fish and bacon.
16. Pastry-making — General rules for making short crust. —Temperature
of oven. Examples: Cornish pasties, jam tart.
17. Method of making suet crust.— Rules for. Examples : Jam roly, apple
pudding.
18. Rules for making flaky pastry. —Temperature of oven. Examples
Steak and kidney pie, sausage rolls.


19. Puddings — Methods for boiling and steaming. —Examples : Apple
pudding, urney pudding.
20. Rules for baking. —Food values of cereals. , Temperature of oven.
Examples : Rice pudding, sago' pudding, bread pudding.
21. Fish Cookery. —Different kinds of fish and most suitable methods of
cooking them. Examples : Fried mullet, boiled bream, baked flathead.
22. Gold-meat cookery. —Economy of and necessary rules for success in
reheating of all cold meat. Examples : Curry and rice, shepherd’s pie.
23. Salad-making. —Simple rules for making salads and salad dressings.
Examples : Mixed salad, cold vegetable salad.
24. Breakfast cookery. —-Porridge, tea, dry and buttered toast, poached
egg and bacon.
25. Beverages. —Suitable and unsuitable, with reasons thereof. Make tea,
coffee, cocoa, apple-water, lemonade.
26. Invalid cookery. —lmportance of extreme care in the preparation of
food. Necessary rules to be observed. Beef tea, arrowroot, gruel, barley-
water, toast-water, custard.
27. Cake-making and baking. —Rules for. Plain cakes, scones, Swiss roll,
tea-cakes.
28. Mixeddiets. —Importance of varied and well-balanced diet. Aday’smeals.
29. Breakfast. —Porridge, poached egg, grilled bacon or fried fish, toast,
tea, coffee.
30. Dinner. —Mutton broth, grilled steak, potatoes, green vegetables, fruit pie.
31. Luncheon. —To include hints on packing luncheon baskets. Cheese,
egg, or meat sandwiches, fruit or meat patties, cake, or scones.
HOUSEHOLD LAUNDRY.
This course to cover a period of 30 hours, to be divided into 20 lessons of
hours, and to embrace a systematic course of instruction in the following ;
1. General notes on advantages and economy of home laundry work. How
to avoid discomfort on washing-day.
2. - Equipment of laundry. —Cost and care of.
3. Gleaning agents. —Their properties.
4. Cleaning agents. —Use and care of.
5. Removal of stains, such as tea, coffee, fruit, iron, rust.
6. Washing day. —Preparation for.
7. Use of starch. —Making raw and boiled starch.
8. Processes of washing and order of weekly laundry.
9. Wash table linen.- —Tablecloth, serviettes, d’oyleys.
10. Wash bed linen. —lron table linen.
11. Wash body linen. —Mangle and iron bed linen.
12. Wash blouse, skirt, and collars. Iron body linen.
13. Wash stockings. Starch and iron collars.
14. Wash flannels and silks.
15. Iron flannels and silks.
16. Clean and wash black and coloured woollen goods.
17. Wash, char starch, and iron sash-curtains.
18. Use of bran, salt, and vinegar. Wash and iron cretonne and chintz.
19. Special rules for washing and finishing infants’ clothing. —Baby’s cotton
and muslin gown.
20. Importance of airing clothes. —Directions for airing, folding, and
storing clean linen.


ADVANCED COOKERY.
FOURTH YEAR.
This course to cover a period of 120 hours, to be divided into 40 lessons
of 3 hours, and to embrace a systematic course of instruction in the
following:—
1. Sauces.- —Method of making. How they may be used. Examples ;
Melted-butter sauce, sweet sauce, white sauce, clear sauce, mint sauce.
2. Batters. —Rules for making and cooking. Examples: Fruit fritters,
pancakes.
3. Salad-making. —Food value of salads. Principles of making and
materials used. Examples; Spring salad (lettuce, &c.), meat salad, fruit
salad.
4. Eggs. —Value as a food. Various methods of cooking. Boiled eggs,
scrambled eggs.
5. Fruit-preserving — Buies for Preserving. —Kinds of bottles to be used.
Preparation of fruit. Example : Bottled pears in syrup.
6. G are of Bottles — Storage of Preserves. —Preparation of fruit. Example :
Bottled fruits in water.
7. Jam-making. —General directions. Preparation of fruit. Directions
for bottling, labelling, and storing.
8. Jellies and marmalade. —Method of making. Examples : Quince jelly
orange marmalade.*
9. Pickles, sauces, and chutney. —General rules for making pickles.
Examples ; Pickled cabbage, mustard pickles.
10. General directions for making sauce and chutney. Examples : Tomato
sauce and chutney.
11. Meats, Pork. —Necessity for care in choosing, and signs to guide one
in choice of pork. Importance of thorough cooking. Example : Roast pork
and apple sauce.
12. Veal. —Directions for cooking, and signs to guide one in the choice of
veal. Example : Stuffed fillet of veal and adjuncts.
13. Mutton. —To bone, season, and cook leg or shoulder of mutton.
14. Rules as to method of egg and bread crumbing. —Mutton cutlets, mashed
potatoes.
15. Revision of rules for vegetables. —Cook two vegetables in season.
16. Breakfast cookery. —Necessity for variety. Croquettes, omelette.
17. A simple breakfast. —The cost. Food value of the same: Porridge,.
French cutlets, toast.
18. Infant diet. —lmportance of correct feeding. The elements necessary
in food for infants. Make food—show how to use ; care and use of bottles ;
afterwards how to clean them.
19. Diets for older children. —Reasons for choice. Food value. A
dinner. Examples ; Mutton broth, mashed potatoes, junket, and fruit.
20. Cookery for convalescents. —Examples : Chicken broth, baked apples,
fricassee brains.
21. Soup-making, rules for clearing stock. —Example: Julienne soup.
"2. Cream soups and purees. —Methods of making. Examples ; Oyster
iOup ana wnite vegetable soup.
23. Pastry-making, rules for making good short crust. —Suitable dishes.
Temperature of oven. Examples : Lemon tart, fruit pie.
24. Rough puff pastry. —Rules for making. Temperature of oven.
Example: Fish patties.


25. Puff pastry. —Method of making. Rules to be observed. Temperature
of oven. Examples : Yeal and ham pie, patties.
26. Braizing. —Rules for, and advantage of. Example : Braized steak,
braized sweetbreads.
27. Fish. —Methods and advantages of filleting. Example: F.llet and
fry mullet.
28. Simple rides for care of a patient and the sick-room. —Arrangement of
invalid’s tray. Beef tea, steamed fillet of whitin<r, custard.
29. The use and abuse of tinned and preserved foods. —Fish sandwiches,
salmon cakes, smoked fish.
30. Cake-making — method of making. —Management of oven. Example :
Biscuits, sponge cake.
31. Revision of method and management of oven. — Example : Sultana cake,
jam sandwich (plain icing).
32. Economical savoury and meat dishes. —Pood value. . Cost of same.,
Example : Liver and bacon, stewed rabbit.
33. Vegetarian diet. —Food value of cheese, vegetables, and fruit as
articles of diet. Example : Macaroni cheese, roast potatoes, stewed fruit.
Poultry. —General directions for choosing, cleaning, trussing, and
cooking.:—
34. A roast chicken with seasoning, bread sauce, and gravy.
• 35. r A boiled fowl with egg sauc“.
36. A roast duck with seasoning, apple sauce, and gravy.
37. Jelly.— Rules for charing. Examples: Lemon Jelly, wine jelly, fruit
set in jelly.
38. Creams. —Method of making. Examples : Fish or chicken cream,
p4ssion-fruit cream.
39. A four-course dinner, at a given cost, for a given number of persons
suitable for a summer season. Dishes to be chosen from previous lessons.
40. A four-course dinner, at a given cost, for a given number of people
suitable for a winter season. Dishes to be chosen from previous lessons.
DOMESTIC ARTS.
Practical Management.
Theoretical and practical dealing with furnishings, arrangement, and
cleanliness of home.
This course to cover a period of 30 hours, to he divided into 20 lessons of
hours, and to embrace a systematic course of instruction in the
following:—
L Daily and weekly work. —Arrangement of.
2. Methods of cleaning. —Sweeping, dusting, scrubbing, &c.
3. Various recipes for cleaning, and application thereof.
4. Bedroom. —How to turn out and clean. How to air and make the bed.
5. Dining-room. —Care of. Daily and weekly cleaning.
6. Storeroom and larder. —Care of.
7. Storage of food. —Cooked and uncooked.
8. Utensils and equipment of household.
9. Planning of meals.


Food and Dietetics.
10. Foods. —Classification of.
11. Nature of nutritive constituents and relative value, of foods—anima
vegetable, fruits.
12. Cookery. —Objects of.
13. Food. —lts selection and purchase.
Household Economies.
14. Family income and division of expenditure.
15. Estimates for outlay of money in housekeeping with best results.
16. Marketing and shopping.
17. Household book-keeping.
MUSIC.
THE AIM.
A. —A musical ear fully trained for “pitch and “ rhythm.”
B. —The power to read music at sight, the standard being the moderately
difficult hymn tune for harmony, ancT national song for melody.
C. —Knowledge of the elements of musical theory. Tonic Sol-fa and Staff
Notations.
T). —lndividual effort.
Third Year.
1. Ear Training.
(a) To tell any arrangement of a three-tone chord, particularly of any of
the major triads of the Major Diatonic Scale.
(b) To write down the notes of any scale passage of four notes sung by
the teacher.
(c) To estimate correctly any scale interval, the notes being sounded
simultaneously.
(d) To write, in both notations, a phrase of a hong when sung by the
teacher. s
(e) To judge correctly, in terms of the Italian equivalents taught previ-
ously during the primary school course, the tempo and the expres-
sion with which the teacher plays or sings a piece of music.
(f) To recognise readily the chromatics fe and ta in relation to the tonic
when sung by the teacher.
(g) To estimate correctly scale relationship (tonic, dominant, and sub-
dominant), the scale of the tonic being first heard.
2. Sight Beading.
(a) To read at first sight, beating own time, a passage of eight bars in
keys C, G, or P, in simple time, and involving the minim, crotchet,
quaver, and semi-quaver; dotted minim, crotchet, and quaver; and
corresponding rests.
(b) To read at first sight any of the simpler melodies contained in the
appended list, which conform to the qualifications enumerated in (a),
and contain no modulation.
(The student should be encouraged to write from memory the phrases of
the songs which he reads.)


3. Musical Knowledge.
(a) The major diatonic scale in all keys. The form of the scale to be
known, whether accompanied by the key signature or not.
(b) Key relationship—tonic, dominant, and sub-dominant; the develop-
ment of each scale out of the previous i.e., G out of C, F out
of C.
(c) Modulation from tonic into dominant, and from tonic into sub-
dominant.
(d) Intervals fully : complete classification.
Fourth Year.
1. Ear Training.
(a) To write any scale passage when sung or played by the teacher.
(b) To estimate correctly, in terms of the Italian equivalents, the degree
of expression, tempo, and style with which a piece of music is sung
or played by the teacher.
(c) To recognise readily the chromatics ba and se in relation to (i) the
tonic, and (ii) the scale note immediately above or below it.
(d) To distinguish readily both forms of the minor mode, and any of the
intervals of the minor scale.
(e) To write, in both notations, ihe phrases of any of the songs from the
appended list when sung by the teacher, correctly indicating the
rhythm, pace, expression, and style.
2. Sight Reading.
(a) To read fluently at first sight any of the melodies from the appended
list, or of similar difficulty.
(b) To read at first sight any of the parts of a four-part hymn-tune,
chorale, or chant of moderate difficulty. Facility and fluency in
reading music in either the major or the minor mode will be
expected.
3. Musical Knowledge.
(a) The minor scale completely ; the scales to be sol-faed readily. Rela-
tionship between a Major Scale and its Relative Minor, and
between a Major Scale and its Tonic Minor; the intervals of the
Minor Scale.
(b) How to find the key.
(c) Chief Italian terms of style.
APPENDIX A.
SUGGESTED LIST OF NATIONAL MELODIES.
A. The National Anthems of the various nations :
B. English Songs.
Gather ye Rosebuds. (Lawes).
Tom Bowling.
Bay of Biscay.
Drink to me only with thine eyes.
The Golden Vanity. (Time of Elizabeth).
British Grenadiers.
Cheer, Boys, Cheer.
Hearts of Oak. (1759).
Here’s a Health unto His Majesty. (Puritan Revolution).
Admiral Benbow. (1702).


To all you Ladies. (1665).
Ye Mariners of England. (18th Century).
Roast Beef of Old England. (Time of Elizabeth).
Russell’s Triumph. (1692).
Chevy Chase
Brave Grenadiers, Rejoice. (1734).
When the King enjoys His own again. (Charles and Jacobites).
The Sea is England’s Glory.
A Life on the Ocean Wave.
Fresh and Fair the Breeze is Blowing.
Vicar of Bray. (Charles Ito Anne).
C. Scottish Songs.
Scots, Wha Hae.
Caller Herrin.
Flora Macdonald’s Lament.
Blue Bonnets over the Border.
Charlie is my Darling.
Wha Wad’na feoht for Charlie.
Wha’ll be King but Charlie.
W i’a Hundred Pipers.
Bonnie Charlie’s Now Awa.
The Clans for Royal Charlie.
Bonnie Dundee.
Ilka Blade o’ Grass.
A Man’s a Man for a’ That.
Kelvin Grove.
Annie Laurie.
The Rowan Tree.
Robin Adair.
Ye Banks and Braes.
O Wtjft Thou in the Cold Blast.
The Bonnie Briar Bush.
Hush-a-bye Darling. (Ancient lullaby).
D. Irish Songs.
Go where Glory waits Thee.
Tara’s Halls.
Minstrel Boy.
Believe Me if All.
Silent, 0 Moyle.
The Shamrock.
Last Rose of Summer.
Meeting of the Waters.
Oft in the Stilly Night.
O For the Swords of Former Time.
When Through Life Unblest we Rove.
My Gentle Harp.
The Flight of the Earls.
The Dear Little Shamrock.
Shandon Bells.
E. Welsh Songs.
God Bless the Prince of Wales.
Men of Harlech. (Edward IV expedition against Wales, 1469).
The Marsh of Rhundlan. (Defeat of Caradoc by the Saxon Offa in 752).
The Ash Grove.
Taliesin’s Prophecy. (Ancient Welsh).
All through the Night.
The Old Year is Dying.
War Song of the Men of Glamorgan. (Border warfare ; traditional defeat of Earl
of Pembroke).
Bells of Aberdovey.
Forth to the Battle. (Edward I—circa, 1294).
The Hirlas Horn.
On this Day.
The Blackbird.


Degrees of Proficiency — 5, 4, 3, 2, 1
,0.
Name.
Beta.
Voice Quality.
Ear.
Distinctness of
Words.
Sight Reading.
Pitch.
Rhythm.
Vowels.
Consonants.
Springtime is Returning.
The Dove.
New Year’s Eve.
Black Sir Harry. (End of 15th Century).
Monks of Bangor’s March. (Saxon Invasion in 613—Massacre of the Bards).
The Departure of the King. (Llewelyn).
E. Other Melodies, not necessarily national.
Love was Once a Little Boy.
Fairest Isle. (Purcell).
Where the Bee Sucks.
Since First I Saw your Face. (Elizabethan).
Why do Summer Roses Fade ?
Cherry Ripe.
Sigh no More, Ladies.
Robin, Lend to Me Thy Bow.
O willow willow. (Othello).
Sweet Day so Cool. (Elizabethan).
Love will find a Way Out.
Isle of Beauty.
Thou Soft Flowing Avon (In relation to Shakespeare).
Now is the Month of Haying. (Elizabethan).
APPENDIX B.
INDIVIDUAL EFFORT
A RECORD CARD.
ECONOMICS.
THIRD YEAR.
A. — lntroductory.
(a) Why men work ? Economic wants and their satisfaction.
(b) Economic goods.
(c) Definition and illustration of terms like utility, value, wealth, capital,
income.
(d) Economics a social science.
B. —Economics of Production.
(a) Meaning of Production, and the Factors of Production.
(b) Production in an animal community, e.g., a bee community.
(c) Differences between Production in such a community and Production
among civilised men: e.g., private property in goods of all kinds;
exchange or production for sale ; man’s use of tools, machines, &c.;
man’s use of extrinsic forces. .


(d) Natural Resources, Powers, and Conditions—
(l) How climate, soil, <fcc., influence production.
(2) Natural forces used in industry.
(3) Natural resources of Australasia.
(e) Man as agent in production —Kinds of labour—Causes of efficiency
—Comparison of various countries.
(f) Specialisation in Industry.
if) The forms of Capital and the place of Capital in Industry.
(A) Growth of large industries.
(i) The advantages of Production on a large scale.
(J) The structure of Capitalistic Industry—the Industrial Classes.
(A) Business management—its characteristic forms.
(l) Place of Invention and Science (hence of Education) in Industry.
im) Complexity of the industrial system and interdependence of in
dustries.
(n) Types of Industry.
(1.) Agricultural and Pastoral.
(2.) Mining.
(3.) Manufactures.
(4.) Transport and Distribution of goods.
(5.) Wholesale and Retail businesses.
C. — The Limitations of Production.
(а) Quantity and efficiency of the various Factors of Production,
(б) The Law of Diminishing Returns and the Law of Increasing Returns,
(c) The size of the market, or the influence of Commercial Demand upon
Production.
id) Charting of local and external trade forces.
(e) Analysis of some representative trade to show its connection with
other trades, and the dependence of the whole system upon Sales.
D. —Consumption as the object of the industrial system. Elementary laws
of, and relation to, Production.
Fourth Year.
E. — Exchange (which, it must be remembered, is a part of Production).
(a) In primitive production no Exchange.
ih) Advantages of Exchange.
(c) Merchants.
id) Markets.
(e) Terms on which goods are exchanged—-Value and Price, Supply and
Demand.
(f) Cost of Production in relation to selling price.
ig) Competition and Monopoly as affecting price.
(i h) Barter.
{i) Metallic money as standard of value and medium of Exchange.
(j) Other forms of Currency.
(A) Credit and instruments of Credit.
( l) Banks and their principal functions.
(m) How debts between traders in different countries are settled—Bills
of Exchange and their operation.
(n) Foreign Trade and Commercial Policies of the Great Nations.


F. —Distribution of Wealth amongst the various classes of Producers.
(a) Review of the structure of Economic Society from point of view of
Distribution.
( b ) What is the social income ?
(c) Wages, Rent, Interest, Profits.
(d) Trade Unionism.
(e) Co-operation, Profit-sharing, Co partnership.
G. The State and Industry.
(a) Relation of modern States to private industry.
(b) Industries carried on hy the State.
(c) Sources of State Revenue.
(d) Taxation.
1. As Economics is new to the curriculum of secondary schools the teacher may find
some difficulty in determining the scope of the study and the standard which he should
aim at. Exactly what is practicable and expedient for High School students can be
determined only by experience; but the following elementary text boobs, in use in
American schools, may serve as a guide :
Blackmar*: Outlines of Economics.
Watson and Nearing : Economics.
Paper : Wealth and Welfare.
If a text book is considered necessary, the first-named will probably be found the
best. It contains a useful sketch of economic history and gives the essentials of modern
economic theory. But even in these books, elementary as they are, there are abstract
discussions which the wise teacher will omit or simplify.
2. In general, the consideration of difficult points of theory should be omitted at this
stage. Controversial matter also should be touched lightly. Where the arguments are
easily within the grasp of school-boys, the opposing views should be given in as simple
language as possible.
3. The method in this course should be concrete rather than abstract. The pupils’
own knowledge and observation should be drawn upon to the fullest extent. The
theory, or statement of how the facts are related to each other, may often be educed by
skilful questions. If this method be followed, the pupils will have the feeling of having
discovered the principles themselves.
Every lesson might well be followed by a resume of the facts and any conclusions
arrived at. This statement should be entered by the pupils in their note-books, which
should be inspected by the teacher and taken into account in estimating a pupil’s place
in the class at the end of the year.
4. In the introductory lessons, all, or nearly all, that is necessary may be got by a
process of questioning. When provisional definitions are reached, teacher and pupils
should combine to illustrate them as widely as possible. Eor this section the teacher
might refer to
Marshall: Economics of Industry.
Gide : Political Economy.
Seligman: Political Economy
. 5. For High School purposes most time will naturally bo devoted to the Economics
of Production (including Exchange).
In section B the aim should be to give the pupils a clear idea of the structure of
modern industry, and of the conditions, natural or institutional, under which industry
is conducted. Although no lessons are suggested on this topic, teachers should always
bear in' mind that the forms of industry are continually changing. The idea that in the
last 150 years there has been only one industrial revolution is as common as it is mischie-
vous. For this reason it is necessary that the teacher of Economics shold have an
adequate knowledge of Economic history. In this connection the following works are
recommended :
Olive Day : History of Commerce.
Cunningham : Growth of English History and Commerce.
Hobson ; Evolution of Modern Capitalism.
MoVey: Modem Industrialism.
NOTES.


6. Teachers are recommended to associate themselves with local industries, and to
arrange visits to factories, workshops, mines, farms, &c. The pupils should he trained
to write accounts of what they have seen on these visits or ascertained by their own
questions. The teacher’s function should be to lead the pupils to observe the less obvious
features of any business being studied.
The series of lessons on “ Types of Industry ” should begin, as far as possible, with
local industries. The object is to trace the growth of the staple industries ;to ascertain
their present organisation ; to illustrate division of labour, and the co-operation of the
factors of production ; and to show the dependence of these industries upon markets and
other industries.
6. In dealing with Exchange, the teacher will find it expedient to pass over many
important problems. For instance, it would be unwise to enter into a full discussion of
the theory of value, or of the quantity theory of money, qr of the theory of international
trade. For this part of the subject, the following books will be found serviceable ;
Withers : The Meaning of Money.
Sykes : Banking and Currency.
Fiske ; International Trade Policies.
Fuchs : Trade Policy of Great Britain.
Scott ; Money and Banking.
7. A similar discretion will have to be exercised in regard to the problem of Distri-
bution. All that can be expected at this stage is that the pupil should get a clear
conception of the meaning of the Social Dividend, and how, under present conditions, it
appears to be divided among the owners of the various factors of production. But even
this much involves the acceptance of some theory of Wages, Rent, Interest, and Profits.
The teacher is recommended to follow the text-book (say Blackmar’s), merely indicating
that other writers have other views. It is important to bring out clearly the good as well
as the bad points of the present system. Statistics should be used freely to illustrate the
concentration and inequality of wealth. The social movement generally, and the
various remedies put forward as palliatives of economic inequality should in the main be
treated historically.
8. For the relation of the State to Industry, taxation, &c., the teacher is recommended
to read, in addition to the text-books already mentioned, Plehn’s Public Finance. The
principal features of the State and Commonwealth systems of obtaining revenue can
be ascertained from the Commonwealth Year Book.
BUSINESS PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE.
1. Mercantile Persons:—
(a) Sole Traders ;
(b ) Partnership.
2. Elementary Office Routine:—
(a) Incoming Correspondence;
(b) Filing Systems ;
(c) Indexing;
Id) Card Records;
(«) Making up Letters for Post ;
\f) Postal arrangements;
( g) Precis writing and correspondence.
3. Sales and Purchases :
(a) Forms and conditions;
( b) Price, delivery, and payment;
(c) Documents concerning sales and purchases: Price lists ; Tenders ;
Orders; Contract notes; Delivery orders; Invoices; Credit notes,
<fec.


4r. Machinery of Payment
(a) Barter;
(b) Money and its uses ;
(c) Bank notes ;
(d) Cheques ;
(e) Bills of exchange and promissory notes ;
(f) Postal notes, &c. ;
(g) Receipts.
5. Customs and Warehousing;—
(a) Different kinds of duties ;
(b) Passing customs entries ;
(c) Transhipments;
( d) Bonded warehouses.
6. Carriage of goods by land and sea.
7. Insurance.
8. Limited Liability Companies.
9. Stocks and Shares.
10. Advances and Securities.
NOTES.
1. The following books are recommended for the use of teachers :—
Braddou : Business Principles and- Practice (Australia).
Warner : Commercial Knowledge.
Garnbaro : Lessons in Commerce.
Dicksee ; Business Organization.
2. The study of business principles should if possible be taken in conjunction with the
study of the economics of production and exchange ; it is, in fact, to be regarded as an
integral part of the applied science of economics. In business practice the emphasis is laid
•on the individual; in economics on the social effects of individual activities. The business
man needs to know the methods and practices upon which successful management
depends; but it ought to be equally important for him to know the laws upon which the
wealth afld welfare of a whole community depend.
3. The objects of lessons on business principles and practice are to familiarise the
student with the forms of business, and to train him for a commercial career.
The thing to be aimed at here is executive ability ; the discipline of other subjects
will train the intellect. Exercises in business practice may be so designed as not only to
enforce accuracy and methodical habits, but to strengthen the judgment and initiative of
the pupil.
As in the study of economics the teacher should endeavour to keep himself in touch
with business life. If he depends on books only, his teaching will lack reality. He will
fail also to understand the great variety of method which obtains in different businesses.
It is hopeless to attempt a specific training for every kind of business. But the teacher
should know that there is variety, and should make use of the fact to exercise the pupils
in the art of adapting principles to different conditions.
4. Some knowledge of commercial law is required by teachers who undertake this
course; but it would hardly be wise on their part to give the pupils more than is
necessary to enable them to grasp the raison d’etre of certain business practices. The
teacher will find all that he needs to know in such works as the following
Teece and MoLaurin (N.S.W. Edition): Australian Manual of .Accountancy and
Commercial Law.
Stevens ; Mercantile Law.
Russell : Banker and Customer.
5. In order to give reality to the work, it is suggested that teachers should at
intervals turn the class-room into a typical business community. One group of scholars
will form the staff of a business, from manager and heads of branches down to office boy,
others will represent the bank, the customs office, the insurance office, &c. This plan
has been tried in many commercial schools in Europe, and becomes, in the hands of a
skilful teacher, a powerful means of stimulating interest. To carry it out successfully
will require much previous thought in regard to details. A great variety of business
forms will have to be provided, and a set of typical transactions prepared Sufficient to
give occupation to each member of the class. The teacher should endeavour to select a
business with which he is familiar.


MEMORANDUM
ON THE
TEACHING OF ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS.
A SUPPLEMENT TO THE PROGRAMMES
F(sr THE
Mathematical Work in High Schools,
BY
PROFESSOR H. S. CARSLAW, Sc. D.
Issued by the Department of Public Instruction
of New South Wales.




MATHEMATICAL WORK IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS.
This memorandum is intended to form a supplement to the various mathema-
tical programmes which the Department of Public Instruction of New South
Wales has issued for the guidance of the teachers in its secondary schools.
These programmes have been drawn up after careful study of the changes
made in recent years in other countries, both In the method of presenting
these subjects, and in the actual content of their subject matter. The educa-
tional, as well as the technical, value of the different subjects has been borne in
mind, and an attempt has been made to assign to each its proper place. Although
I have been permitted to take some share in their construction, I may be
allowed to express the hope that this attempt has been successful; and also
to state that I believe they embody all the Important new features which have
gradually justified themselves. They will, I am confident, be found to be a
valuable help, not only to the schools for which they have been officially
compiled, but also to other secondary schools throughout the State.
But, in itself, the issuing of programmes would not be effective unless the
teacher were informed of the spirit in which It is desired that they be inter-
preted and used. To do this is the object of the present memorandum. And
the opportunity which has been afforded to me of making some general remarks
on the teaching of elementary mathematics is one of which I readily avail my-
self. No little confusion still exists in our midst as to the real meaning and
relative importance of the alterations which have recently been made and the
omissions which have been encouraged; and I am afraid that methods of pre-
senting the mathematical subjects of the school curriculum are still occasionally
used which render them only to a small extent the valuable educational dis-
cipline they are acknowledged to be by those who are at all qualified to judge.
In the first place, it is necessary to point out that these schedules are not
meant to limit the freedom or the initiative of the individual teacher. Neither
are they intended to reduce all the school teaching to one uniform plan. They
contain only a general outline of the courses which the. Department will expect
its pupils to have covered. The order in which the different sections shall be
taken is not prescribed, nor is the teacher prevented from going beyond the pro-
gramme, if he think fit, or carrying the best scholars of one year into the work
allotted to the next. As a whole, the work of the first two years resembles
what is at present expected from candidates for the Junior Public Examination.
On the completion of this work, some of the pupils will no doubt devote their
remaining school years to higher work in other subjects. But those who pro-
ceed further in mathematics, and obtain a satisfactory knowledge of the more
elementary parts of the third and fourth years’ courses, will have covered the
work required for Higher Mathematics at matriculation, while those who take,
in addition, the more advanced work, will have more than reached the standard
the University expects from those who matriculate with honours in mathematics.
In the second place, it must be remarked that, although it has been found
convenient to issue separate programmes for the different subjects—arithmetic,
algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and mechanics —these should not be taught as if
they were unconnected with each other. It is true that only a few years ago the
methods of algebra and trigonometry were forbidden in the work of arithmetic,
and arithmetical or algebraical illustrations banished from the instruction in
geometry. These days have now passed; but their evil effects are only gradually
disappearing. The subjects of the earlier school course—arithmetic, algebra,
and geometry—should all be taught by the same teacher, and no opportunity
should be lost of allowing the one to illustrate the other. The same is true of
the more advanced courses. Algebra will still have a close relation to arith-
metic. and an even closer connection with geometry. Trigonometry is but a
branch of geometry, and one which finds many important applications in
mechanics. Further, the mathematical teacher should have had some training
in physical science; mechanics should be taught in such a way that Its laws
and important theorems are grounded upon experiment, and in many cases
are generalisations from the pupil’s own practical work; and there is much


to be said for the custom which holds in some of the best schools in this and
other countries, that the head of the Mathematical Department should be a
graduate who has specialised both In mathematics and In mathematical
physics.
Finally, before passing to the detailed examination of the different pro-
grammes, it is right to point out that a distinct feature of the syllabus la
geometry for the first two years Is the association in groups of the fundamental
theorems. In every secondary school in which the pupils are drawn from
different quarters, endless confusion arises from the various ways in which the
first steps in deductive geometry have been taken, and It is almost impossible
to prevent frequent occurrence of the most obvious cases of reasoning in a
circle. After all, the fundamental theorems on which most of the others rest
are very few: those of congruence of triangles, and those of parallelism: and
It would be no small gain if some greater degree of uniformity were observed
in their treatment. Without prescribing rigid adherence to the scheme drawn
up and embodied in its programme, the Department intends to base its
instruction upon it. Of this resolve I have no hesitation in approving, on
the understanding that this uniformity concerns only the few most funda-
mental theorems, and that, in other respects, their teachers have the advan-
tage which freedom from the methods and sequence of Euclid have, without
doubt, brought.
We pass now to the different schedules, and to some remarks upon the teach-
ing of the different subjects to which they refer. As many of the teachers’
difficulties He in the subjects of algebra and geometry, this memorandum deals
chiefly with these two branches, and it will probably be in the remarks upon
them that most assistance will be found.
ARITHMETIC.
With regard to the teaching of arithmetic, and the programmes for that
subject, a few words will be sufficient. Valuable reports on the best methods
of overcoming the difficulties of the subject have been published in recent years,
and the teacher has a large choice of excellent modern text-books, written by
men who have made full use of the suggestions embodied in these reports, and
of the-deliberations of various important representative bodies. However, it
should be remarked that the influence of examinations and the nature of the
problems set in the arithmetic papers have caused these text-books to devote
far too much space to specialised arithmetical rules. There are few who will
not admit that much of the time spent in dealing with difficult questions in
mixtures, stocks, discounts, arid other of these special rules, might be employed
to far greater advantage. Tn my opinion it would be better to restrict the
work to simpler questions involving the principles, and the time thus saved
could be given to numerical trigonometry of the easiest kind. An elementary
treatment of numerical trigonometry will no doubt soon form part of the
arithmetic course, and of the earlier geometrical course in most schools.
The chief fault In the teaching of arithmetic has always been that the pupil
has been encouraged to depend upon rules and formulae, while neglecting the
fundamental principles on which these are based. Anyone who has grasped
the principle of the unitary method, and applied it to such questions as simple
interest and percentage, should never be at a loss, even if he has to obtain
afresh for himself the rules which govern the solution of such problems.
Indeed, he will find that most of the arithmetical work, after the earliest
stages, simply consists of applications of the unitary method. When he has
mastered the language of these so-called different rules, he can for himself
discover the methods by which they are to be solved. On the other hand, the
pupil who starts his work on interest by writing down the formula
T _ PRT
100 ’
while he has only tfie vaguest idea of the meaning of the symbols and the
reason for the formula, is just as likely on another occasion to adopt a mistaken
version.
The teacher of arithmetic should thus make sure that his pupils can find for
themselves the formulae by means of which the various questions are to be


solved. Also, at any rate In the earlier stages, problems should be worked
from first principles, and the use of the formulae discouraged. Similarly, In
algebra, at the corresponding stage, the pupil would not be allowed to solve
a quadratic equation by the formula which gives the roots, but would obtain
these roots by factorising the expression concerned. In setting down the solu-
tion of an arithmetical problem the pupil should show clearly the various steps
in the reasoning.
Fiest Year’s Course.
1. Factors and Prime Numbers. In connection with factors:—Square
Root, Cube Root, H.C.F. and L.C.M. Tests of divisibility by 2,3, 4,5, 8, 9.
2. Decimals, omitting Recurring Decimals which should be treated with
Geometrical Progression in Algebra. Free use to be made of the Metric
System. Approximate results should be taken when a large number of
decimal places would otherwise be involved. Also simple methods of
approximation should be used. Application of decimals to money. Decimal
systems.
3. Ratio (introduced by unitary method). Percentages. Simple Interest.
Retail and Banker’s discount. Rates and taxes. Customs duties. Com-
mission. Commercial documents in common use. Balance Sheets and
Accounts of Receipts and Expenditure.
4. Problems on areas and dimensions of rectangles, triangles, parallelo-
grams, and quadrilaterals. Square Root. Areas of circles, concentric circles,
and sectors.
5. Use of graphical illustrations and methods.
Mental work, to give facility in dealing with numbers, and in rapidly-
making such calculations as occur in ordinary business, should be continuous
throughout the Arithmetic Course.)
It will be observed that before entering upon the work of the secondary
school a sufficient foundation in elementary arithmetic Is supposed to have been
laid, although there may remain some need for a slight revision of the funda-
mental principles. Square root and cube root will be illustrated by numbers,
in which these can be found from the prime factors. The arithmetical rule for
the cube root is to be omitted, though that for the. square root is retained, as
it is often convenient to be able to extract such roots without resort to the tables.
The chief difficulty is to be found in the proper treatment of decimals; but the
methods of the text-books are now so much improved that this difficulty is no
longer serious. The important thing is to base the work in decimals upon
concrete examples and actual measurements in the metric system. A rule
divided in Inches and tenths of an inch, and centimetres and millimetres,
is useful, and illustrations should be drawn from the other important metric
systems as well as the linear one. The meaning of a decimal fraction will in
this way be more easily understood; and the rules for operation with decimals
can be readily explained and proved.
At this stage It would be well to ask the pupil to find the area of a page
of his book, or the volume of a rectangular box placed in his hand, the required
measurements being made by himself. He should also be able to give a rough
estimate of such results beforehand, and an error in the position of the deci-
mal point would be obvious to him, if such were made. Recurring decimals
should, in this class, be treated purely approximately. The rules for operating
with these, and further discussion of their meaning, can only be obtained at a
much later stage of the mathematical work.
A certain amount of time should be given to simple methods of approximate
calculation; but there is a tendency to attach too much importance to such
work. The pupil should be warned against expressing results to a large num-
ber of decimals, when such a statement is meaningless in the question which
hi being solved.
Scattered through the course there will naturally be many examples involv-
ing the measurement of areas, surfaces, and volumes. Speaking generally, ths
results which are required will have been already obtained in the work on


geometry, and such numerical examples will be employed as Illustrations in
the geometrical course. In all such questions, the pupil should be encouraged
to draw a suitable diagram—not necessarily actually to scale —and this remark
is equally true right through the work in arithmetic. Also full use should be
made of graphical methods, both for themselves and as Illustrations. Many
of these methods will also appear in algebra.
The tendency to check every step in a calculation before proceeding to the
next should be discouraged. This will be found to destroy the pupil’s confi-
dence, and to render him timid and irresolute. A preliminary rough estimate
of the answer, if it can readily be made, is useful; also, some independent
test of the final answer; but, speaking generally, these two should be sufficient.
The teacher will also remember that neatness in writing out the work —neat-
ness both of execution and method —will lead to accuracy. Arithmetical
calculations, if they are to be of value, must be accurate, and everything which
will ensure accuracy must be encouraged.
Second Yeab’s Coukse.
(Parts of this course may be omitted for girls, and exercises based on
calculations arising in domestic affairs may be substituted.)
1. Exchange—-Stocks and Shares with reference to the current practice of
the Australian Share Markets.
2. Compound Interest, using logarithms, and in some cases the slide rule.
3. Annuities. Interest and Annuities Tables. House purchasing on
deposit and rent principle. Time-payment systems.
4. Life and Fire Insurance. Municipal and National Loans. Common
Banking Operations.
5. Volumes and surfaces of the simpler solids, viz., rectangular box, prism,
cylinder, pyramid, cone, and sphere.
6. Examples involving the simplest facts of Trigonometry and Surveying.
Plans to scale.
7. Simple problems on the lever, wheel and axle, and inclined plane.
In this course harder questions, Involving fuller use of commercial terms,
and the best methods of the office and counting-house, will be discussed and
solved. And in this connection it will be seen that, in girls’ classes, work in-
volving such measurements as will occur in dressmaking, millinery, &c., will
take the place of hard calculations in stock and shares, percentages, profit
and loss, exchange, &c. It will be noticed that the use of four-figure logarithm
tables is encouraged, and—at any rate in the case of boys—of the slide rule.
The theory of logarithms finds a more natural place in the algebra work of a
later year, but it is easy to give a simple sketch of that theory, which will be
sufficient for the needs of those who are to use the tables in arithmetical ques-
tions, such as compound interest and annuities. In such an introduction, but
only for the purposes of illustration, it will be found an advantage for the pupil
himself to make a small table of logarithms to a smaller base —say two or three
—by extraction of square roots, or the use of the table of square roots. The
extent to which the slide rule should be used would depend upon the nature of
the school work and the future career of the scholars. There are obvious
reasons against insisting upon its universal use in the schools, but its advantage
in engineering, chemistry, and physics is so great, that pupils who are preparing
for technical pursuits would certainly be the better of an early practical
acquaintance with the instrument.
Another feature of the syllabus is that questions involving the oblique cylin-
der and prism are to be omitted. The proof of the results for such solids
is so easy when the principles of the calculus are admitted, and so hard with-
out them, that it seems best to definitely exclude them from the programme.
The same might be said of the cone, sphere, and pyramid, were the results not
of such importance that they must enter, at any rate to some degree, into their
work. But these results might be taken here, without proof. In the fourth year’s
course in algebra, it is proposed to introduce a short treatment of differentiation,
which would bring all these theorems within the grasp of those who study that


subject, and there Is no doubt that such a simple treatment of the calculus is
quite suitable for many pupils in the highest form of a secondary school, while it
need involve no more than the ability to differentiate any positive integral power
of the variable, and to apply the results thus obtained. Finally, the claims of the
counting-house, the office and the bank, the workshop and the laboratory, must
be borne in mind. Commercial arithmeitc —so called —the boy will only learn
satisfactorily in the office Itself; but the lesson he will there have to learn can
be made easier for him by suitable preparation in the school. Part of this
preparation would no doubt be some exercise in mental arithmetic, Involving
the most useful short-cuts and methods In actual everyday use in the counting-
house, though, of course, oral and mental work is not confined to these ques-
tions, but forms part of the whole mathematical discipline and training of the
school. Also, the arithmetic of the workshop and laboratory will have brought
the pupil already into touch with the simpler facts of trigonometry, while
the detailed study of that subject is reserved for a later year. However, some
of the earliest numerical applications of trigonometry will Interest the pupils;
for example, the determination of the height of a tree; the area'of the school
grounds; the height of the school buildings or of a house; or the area of an
adjacent paddock. The easy numerical trigonojnetry of the right-angled
triangle will soon form part of the earlier mathematical work of the school,
both in arithmetic and geometry. If arithmetic is taught in this way, in close
connection with the other mathematical subjects, it will be both more interesting
and more valuable.
ALGEBRA.
We have seen that the educational value of the teaching of arithmetic is
often impaired by an excessive use of formulae and by the neglect of the fun-
damental principles by means of which these have been obtained. This fault is
Just as likely to occur in the teaching of algebra, and must be as carefully
guarded against. The pupil must first learn to associate the symbols with
which he is working, and the operations upon them, with the accustomed num-
bers and operations of arithmetic. Otherwise, he is apt to regard his whole
work in algebra as little more than the simplification of needlessly compli-
cated expressions, obedient to certain mysterious laws, and the evaluation of
the wily and elusive symbol x. Such a one will quite readily state that
1 +JL = L_
a 6 o+ 6,
or that
o’+l ti s
h 3 +l ' h\
when he would never think of saying that
1 ! = 1
5 + 7 12’
or that
2 s +1 8
3 s + 1 ~ 37
These errors, and others of the same nature, can be traced to the difficulty
in the transition from arithmetic to algebra, and to the defects in the earlier
portions of many of the text-books in common use. It cannot be too strongly
impressed on the teacher that it is absurd to prove the rule of signs in multi-
plication, and that the writers of books in which It is proved that
2 x(- 4) =- 8,
(- 2) x(- 4) = . 8,
have failed to understand the place which definition, as contrasted with demon-
stration, occupies in the generalisation of the fundamental operations of arith-
metic. These difficulties concern the teacher more than the pupil; but they
are points upon which there is so much confusion in many teachers’ minds
that they seem to call for some remarks before passing to the various courses
Which have been drawn up for this subject.


The first step in algebra has been made when a symbol has taken the place
of the positive integer of arithmetic. The pupil learns that
2 + 4 = 4 + 2,
2 + 4 + 5 = 5 + 2 + 4 = 4 + 5 + 2,
2 x 4 = 4 x 2,
2x4x5 = 5x2x4 = 4x5x2:
and then he brings these and other similar results together under the state-
ment that if a, 6, o are any positive integers,
a + 6 = b + a,
a+b + c = c+ a + b = h + c +a,
ab = ba,
abc - cab = bca.
This is a part of his arithmetical work, and such a result offers little difficulty
to him.
Again, without passing from the arithmetical stage, it is found that when the
positive integers a, b, e, and <1 are such that all the steps are arithmetically
intelligible.
tt + (ft + C) ft + & + C,
a + (b-c) = a + b-c,
a-{b-c) = a-b +c,
a- {& +c) = a-b-c,
(a +b) (c +d) = ac +bc+ad + bd
(a +b) ( c-d ) = ac + bc-ad-hd
(a-b) {c +d) = ac-bc + ad-bd
(a -b) (c-d) = ac-bc- ad + bd :
and the rules for removing brackets, for simplifying expressions, and for mul-
tiplication, are obtained from these results, under the limitations mentioned
above.
Now in arithmetic we soon pass from zero and the positive integers to the
fractional numbers given by such integers. This step involves a fresh definition,
or explanation, of the fundamental rules. Similarly in algebra we must pass
from the cases In which the symbols denote zero and the positive Integers, and
from operations which are arithmetically intelligible with the old definitions, and
we must introduce the negative integers, and fractions, positive and negative. As
in the case of fractions in arithmetic, this step involves a fresh statement of
the fundamental operations, and it is in this new definition of these operations
that the rule of signs and other such rules are to be found.
We can speak of subtracting 2 from 4; that Is, 4—2 is arithmetically intel-
ligible; but to speak of subtracting 4 from 2 is nonsense on the original state-
ment of subtraction. The domain of numbers has to be extended by the
creation, or definition, of the negative integer; and the operation of subtraction
has to be restated, so as to Include these new numbers. Only by the creation of
the negative numbers can the equation
x+a b
be solved, a and 6 being any positive Integers. And only in this way do we
obtain an algebra useful in arithmetic, geometry, trigonometry, mechanics, and
all the various fields in which mathematics is applicable.
The teacher has thus, first of all, to Illustrate the meaning of the negative
number. The degrees above and below zero on the thermometer; the credit
and debit side of an account; the points gained or lost in a game; the number
entering or leaving a class at the beginning of a term; and, most Important
illustration of all, the motion of a point along a straight line; these are all
useful means of bringing before his mind this new Idea. Indeed, the figure
! ! 1 I I I I I i
-4-3-2-1012 3 4
is the common property of all, however slight their mathematical knowledge
may be; and the fundamental axiom, which permits the application of arith-
metic and algebra to geometry, is that, as we pass along a straight line, and
reckon the position of the moving point as measured from some fixed point
upon it, to every point upon the line corresponds a real number, and to every
real number corresponds a point.


We must not forget, however, that this step—the introduction of the
negative number and the subsequent generalisation of the fundamental opera-
tions —is for the pupil a peculiarly difficult one. In his earlier work the
numbers with which he has been dealing, and later, the symbols which
took the place of the numbers, have stood for definite, concrete magnitudes.
In adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing he has always been able to
associate the operation with a corresponding process Involving these magni-
tudes. With the introduction of the negative number this correspondence is
not always possible, and it is just this step from the real world of arithmetic
to the more formal and abstract world of algebra that appeals most to the
teacher, though in fact it may not mean so much to the pupil. But it is
absolutely necessary that, by dhe teacher at any rate, the step should be made,
and the reasons for it understood.
We suppose, then, that the negative integral numbers have been put before
the pupil, and that the domain of the numbers has been extended in this way
from zero and the positive integers.
The next step is the new meaning of the operations of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. These operations have to be defined afresh,
though the new definitions naturally will Include the old. In stating these
definitions it is convenient to use the term “ absolute value of a number
e*g., the absolute value of - 2 is 2 ; the absolute value of - a (a >0 ) is a.
On this understanding addition is now defined as follows: —
The sum of two numbers of the same sign is found by adding their absolute
values and giving to this sum the sign common to the numbers.
The sum of two numbers of the opposite sign is found by subtracting the
smaller absolute value from the greater, and giving to this difference the sign
of the number which has the greater absolute value.
From this rule we have at once
-2 + (-4) - -(4 +2) = -6
-2 + 3 = +(3-2) = 1
2 + (-6) = -(6-2) = -4.
Then the sum of several numbers is defined to be the result obtained by first
adding the first and second, then to this sum adding the third, and so on, and
It can be shown that the associative and commutative laws hold for such a
sum, as they do for the arithmetical sums.
e.g., a + {b + c) = a + b + c
a+b+e— a + c + b.
The new definition of subtraction follows from that of addition, of which it is
the inverse.
To subtract the number a from the number b we have to find a number c,
such that
b = a + c, and this is mitten b - os = c.
The rule for the subtraction of two numbers can then be stated as follows:
To subtract the number a from the number b it is sufficient to add to b the
number (—a).
Indeed let c= b + (- a).
Then we have c+ a b + (-a) + a b.
Therefore b— a b + ( - a).
Also, in adding and subtracting several numbers we are supposed to take the
first two in the prescribed way, then the third, and so on.
Thus —
2 - (-4) + (-3) + 6 - (-8)
= 2 + 4 + (-3) + 6 - (-8)
= 6- 3 + 6- (-8)
= 3 + 6 - (-8)
=9 + 8
=l7.
This could have been written at once 2+4-3 + 6 + 8 = 17, and the terms canid
hatve been taken in any order we please.
D


The rule for the removal of brackets follows at once.
For example, to prove that a-{b+c) == a - 6 e,
we have only to show that a-b-c+(h + c) = a.
But a-b-c +(6+ c)
=a-6-c+6+c
= o + (-6) + (-c) + 6 + c
= a + (-6) + 6 + (-c) + c.
And the terms (- 6) +6,( -c) + c
are zero.
Similarly we have a (6 -c)=a- b + c.
We have already seen that a+(h+c)= a + b + c
a + (b -c) = a + b - e.
And these results now hold when a, b, c are any positive or negative integral numbers.
If the teacher has grasped that these theorems have followed from the
definitions of the operations of addition and subtraction, he will now be ready
to adopt the same methods in dealing with the definitions of multiplication and
division.
The product of two numbers is defined as the number whose absolute value
is the product of the absolute values of the factors, while its sign is taken
positive when these have the same sign, and negative when they have opposite
signs.
Hence, from the definition of multiplication—
(-2) x (-4)= + (2 x 4) = 8,
(-2) x (4) = - (2 x 4) = - 8. .
The rule for the product of several factors follows immediately; also the
fact that in any such product the order of the factors is immaterial; and the
distributive law
a(5 + c + d +...) = ab + ac + ad + ...
Finally, division is defined as the inverse of multiplication.
To divide the number a by the number b we have to find a number c, such that
a = be,
and this is written
The rule for division may then be stated as follows: — The quotient of two
numbers has for its absolute value the quotient of their absolute values, and it
is positive or negative according as they are of the same or opposite sign.
For example, by this rule,
■a--©-*-
And this is a consequence of the definition, since we have only to prove that
- (?) x(-4) = 12.
So far we have been dealing with the addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division of positive and negative integers. The next step is the introduc-
tion of the algebraical fraction.
Such a fraction would first be defined as the quotient of two positive or
negative Integers. If a, b, and m are three such numbers, we can show imme-
diately that
ma a
mb b'
Thus in defining addition or subtraction of fractions we need only speak of
fractions with the same denominator.


Finally, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of fractious are
defined as follows: —
To add or subtract several fractions having the same denominator, ice add
or subtract the numerators, and divide this result by the common denominator.
The product of two fractions is a fraction having for numerator the product
of the numerators, and for denominator the product of the denominators.
The quotient of two fractions is the fraction obtained by multiplying the
first fraction by the second fraction, with its numerator and denominator
interchanged.
We might then proceed to show that the rules we have obtained for
simplifying expressions with brackets —the distributive, commutative, and asso-
ciative laws —hold for fractional numbers as well as for the positive and
negative Integral numbers treated above. But this Is hardly necessary.
Sufficient has been said to show how these generalisations have been made, and
what the fundamental rules for the operations now are. The justification for
the rules is their application; the fact that by their means we are able to apply
methods of calculation to the different fields in which mathematics is required.
In “ Chrystal’s Algebra ” the inverse method to that sketched in the preceding
paragraphs Is followed. The fundamental laws of algebra—■
The commutative law: a + b = b +a, and
the associative law :a + (6 + c) = o + 6-l-;,
for addition; and the commutative and distributive laws for multiplication
ab = ba,
(a + b) c = ae -f be,
are proved for the cases in which they are arithmetically intelligible. Then,
after the introduction of negative numbers, they are assumed to be true for
these cases also, and the rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division deduced from this assumption.
Of course, neither of those methods are suitable for the pupils in their first
steps in algebra, and what we have given in the preceding paragraphs is meant
for the teacher only. That the teacher should know the real foundations of
algebra, and the method in which the transition from arithmetic Is made, is
essential. Otherwise he will blindly follow the text-books In their fallacies,
and his pupils will be asked to demonstrate what cannot be proved. (1)
We proceed to the course proper as outlined in the programme for the first year.
First Year’s Course.
1. Statement in words and symbols of some of the formulae of Arithmetic
and Mensuration. Evaluation of these for particular values of the symbols.
2. Positive and Negative Generalisation of the Arithmetical
rules for Addition and Subtraction. Simplification of easy expressions
involving brackets.
3. Definition of the product of two numbers. Extension to several
numbers. Division defined as the inverse of multiplication.
4. Statement and arithmetical illustration of the following principles:—
ab = ba,
(a + b) c = ac + be
{a + b) (c + d) = ac + be + ad + bd,
(a + b) (e -d) = ae + be - ad - bd,
(a -b) (c + d) ae - be + ad - bd,
(a - b) (c - d) = ac - be + bd - ad.
(1.) Two excellent school-books by the well-known French mathematician Borelgive an
admirable introduction to Algebra, and have attracted much attention. They form part
of a series—Cours de Mathfimatiqnes—written by him especially for the new pro-
grammes in the French schools.
fknile Borel: (premier cycle), Armand Colin, Paris (1909); 2 - 50 francs.
Algebre (second cycle), Armand Colin, Paris (1905); 3 francs.
Another very useful book for the teacher who can read French, is Tannery (J.):
Notions de ; Delagrave, Paris (1903). 5 francs.


5. Multiplication and Division of algebraical expressions of simple form.
6. Easy Simple Equations with numerical coefficients. These to be intro-
duced by the statement of easy problems to be expressed in thef form of
simple equations.
7. Easy Simultaneous Equations of the First Degree with numerical co-
efficients. These to be introduced, as before, by the statement of easy
problems.
8. The identities—
(x -a) (x + a) = x z - a 2
(x —a) (x z +ax + a 2) =x s -a 3
(x +a) (x 2 -ax + a 2) =x 3 +a 3
(x —a) (x -h) = x i - (a + b) x + ah,
and other factors of the same form.
9. Simplification of fractions involving these factors. The simplification
of easy expressions involving fractions, without spending time on compli-
cated expressions.
10. Graphical Work.
The variation and change of sign of the expression (ax + t). Graphical
illustration of this variation and change of sign.
The pupil must first accustom himself to the use of letters instead of the
numbers of arithmetic. Probably he has already been led to use these symbols
in arithmetic, and this step will take little time. He will be asked to calculate
simple algebraical expressions, when particular numbers are substituted for the
symbols.
e ' 9 ’’ -XT 2 , ~xr % ab + bc+ia, bji &c -
Probably he will also be given some easy problems in arithmetic, which can
be solved by stating them in the form of simple equations. In this and other
ways the meaning of an algebraic expression and of an algebraic equation
can be brought home to him. Indeed at this stage he will learn a great deal
from further work in problems, to be expressed as simple equations and
solved; and in many text-books there will be found a suitable collection of such
problems on their earliest pages.
So far, however, he will have been working with positive integers or frac-
tions, and all the steps will have been arithmetically Intelligible. He will have
found that for such cases
a + (b + c) = a + 6 + c,
a + (b -c) = a + b -c,
a - (5 + c) = a - b -c,
a - (6 -c) = a - b + c;
and he will have had some slight practice in removing brackets and simplifying
expressions in the work on equations.
Before he proceeds further he must be told something of the negative number.
Illustrations of the need for such numbers are ready to the teacher’s hand;
also of their use. We suppose, then, that the nqmbers (—2) and —a, where
a is any positive integer, are known to him.
By illustrations, such as motion along a straight line, payment or receipt of
money, &c., he will be brought to understand that we are about to work with
these numbers as with the positive integers, and that we shall assume that the
equations,
a + (b + c) = a + 6 + c,
a + {6 - e) = a + b -c,
a - (b + e) x=a - b ~ e tl
a - (i -c) = a - b + c,
are to hold, even if a, 6, c are positive Integers which would make some of
these steps arithmetically unintelligible.


Probably the teacher would Illustrate the truth Involved In such examples as
2 + (3-6)=2 + (-3)=2-3=-l,
2 - (3 -6) = 2 - (-3) =2 + 3 = 5,
and would give the pupil further practice in such numerical expressions; and
he might also get him to work out for himself similar cases involving addition
and subtraction of positive and negative numbers, with and without brackets:
e.g. 4-(-,5)+ 7,
- 5 - 3 - (-15) + (-2),.
3 - (2 -5) - (6 - 3 -9),
a + [6 - (c - d>],
a - [h + {c -cl)).
The next step is the definition of the product and quotient of two numbers.
This should be given somewhat in the form stated above, though not in the
exact words of that statement.
For example, he should be told that
(-2) x (-3)
is to be taken as equal to + 6 ; and that if a, b are any positive integers
ax - b = - ah,
- a x b = - ai,
-ax - b = + ab.
A simple illustration of the use of this definition will be found in the
formula for motion along a straight line with contant velocity, viz.:—
s = vt.
These results make this formula hold for negative v and negative t ; and, of
course, this is only one of many cases which can be put before him.
Then, in the purely arithmetical work, he will be able to show that
ab = ba,
a (b + c) = ac + be,
(a + b) {c + d) = ac + be + ad + bd,
(a + b) (c -d) = ae + be - ad - bd,
(a -b) (c + d) = ac - be + ad - bd,
(a -b) (c -d) —ac - be - ad + bd.
These results are now to be taken as true in general, and the work in
multiplication and division of simple algebraical expressions will be begun.
A certain amount of practice will be required in both multiplication and
division of algebraical expressions, but there is no advantage in taking compli-
cated or very long expressions at this stage. This work should lead to accurate
addition and subtraction, to readiness in arranging the expressions in ascending
or descending order, and to some idea of algebraical symmetry. __
After this work has been done, it will be time to return to the solution of
simple equations. They will again be taken to a certain extent as they arise
In the statement of problems; but practice will also be needed in the solution
of equations of a more complicated nature. These should not, at this stage,
involve letters, but only numerical co-eflicients. The pupil should, however, be
led to solve simple simultaneous equations, and from the graphical discussion
of the expression
ax + b,
with numerical values for a, b, he should be able to interpret his work
geometrically as well as algebraically.
There remains, in the First Year’s Course, the work in factors which can be
made to depend on the simple identities —
(x -a) (x +a) =x 2 - a l , .
( x-a ) (x 2 +ax + a z )=x i - a*,
(x +a) ( x s -ax + o 2) =x 3 + a’,
(x +a) (x + b) x 2 + (<r+ 6) x + ab,
(x +a) (x -b) —x' 1 + {a -b)x-
(x-a) (x+b)=x t -{a -b) x-ab,
{x-a) \x-b) = x' i -{a+b) x+ab.
This work in factorising expressions will be applied to the simplification of
Tractions.


It will be noticed that tbe rules for H.C.F. and Ij.C'.M. are omitted from this
programme, and inserted in that of the second year. Also, that any discussion
of fractions, or of expressions involving fractions, is to be confined to simple
expressions, and that much time should not be given to this part of the work.
The pupil, in the First Year’s Course, should have obtained some facility In
dealing with the fundamental rules as applied to easy algebraical expressions
and identities; he should have learned how to state a problem in the form of a
simple equation, and how to solve the problem from the equation; he should be
able to verify the different steps in the solution, and should see that they are
all reversible; and he should have had some practice in graphical work as
applied to the expression ax + ft.
Second Year’s Course.
1. Solution of Simultaneous Equations of the First Degree in three vari-
ables, with numerical coefficients.
2. Literal Equations of the First Degree, in one or two variables.
3. Factors of Standard Types. H.C.F. and L.C.M., by factors and otherwise.
4. Eemainder Theorem. Illustration by examples in factors.
5. Solution of any equation when the linear factors of the expression are
given.
6. The solution of equations by factors to lead to the solution of the
general quadratic equation. Only cases to be considered where the roots are
real. The relation between the roots and the coefficients to be obtained.
7. Problems involving quadratic equations.
8. Simultaneous equations involving quadratics:—
(i) One linear equation, and one of the second degree.
(ii) Two equations, in which only terms of the second degree and
constant terms occur.
9. Problems involving simultaneous quadratic equations.
10. Graphical Work.
(Variation and change of sign of the quadratic expression ax 2 + hx +c.
Graphical illustrations. Maximum or minimum of this expression.
Tbe First Year’s Course has had for its chief topic the solution of the simple
equation with one or two variables, when the coefficients are numerical. The
work of the second year will begin with some revision of principles and the solu-
tion of numerical equations with three variables, and literal equations with
one or two.
Then such further practice will be given in factors of standard types as would
he useful for the later -work in equations. The rule for H.C.F. and L.C.M. may
be learnt, but it should not have too great importance attached to it.
The work of obtaining the linear factors of an algebraical expression is to
lead to the solution of the equation obtained by equating these expressions to
zero. The equations thus solved should not be only quadratics, and stress
should be laid upon the fact that when the linear factors of the expression can
be obtained the equation can always be solved.
The pupil will now be able to attack the solution of quadratic equations.
First of all, he will work quadratics which can be readily solved by factors.
Then he will be led to obtain the factors by the method of completing the
square in cases where the roots will be real. And in this way he will be
brought finally to the general formula for the solution of any quadratic equa-
tion. However, at first he should not be allowed to use this formula, but
should be compelled to obtain the roots from the factors. Also, his work should
not be confined to equations whose roots are rational. Irrational roots should
be calculated to one or two decimal places.
While it might sometimes be well to point out the way in which imaginary
numbers, and Imaginary roots, would enter, if the quadratic equation is to be
solved in general, just as negative numbers were required, if the simple equa-
tions were to be always solvable, the work of the class should not include the
solution of equations with imaginary roots.


The rest of the course deals with such work as is naturally associated with
quadratic equations; simple cases of simultaneous quadratics; and problems
Involving quadratic equations with one or two variables.
The graphical work concerns the variation and change of sign of the
quadratic expression
ax’ + hx + c,
and would find its application in various questions relating to the quadratic
equation. It will be noticed, however, that the theoretical discussion of maxima
and minima is deferred till the Third Year’s Course.
Third and Fourth Years’ Courses.
Part I.
1. Algebraical discussion of maxima and minima, with the help of the
theory of the quadratic equation.
2. Equations solved like quadratics and harder cases of simultaneous
equations.
3. Ratio and Proportion.
4. The Index Laws. Fractional and Negative Indices. Logarithms.
Calculations, with the aid of Four Figure Logarithm Tables, and in some
cases the Slide Rule. Evaluation of Square and Cube Roots by the aid ot
the Logarithm Tables.
5. Arithmetical and Geometrical Progressions.
6. Interest and Annuities.
7. Permutations and Combinations. Only simple problems to be attempted..
8. The Binomial Theorem for a positive integral index.
9. Graphical Work.—Problems in maxima and minima to be illustrated
graphically. Also simple cases of the solution of simultaneous equations of
the first and second degree in'two variables.
Part 11.
1. Simple cases of Convergence of Infinite Series. The ratio test for
Convergence. Its application in the Power Seriea
2. The Binomial Theorem for a fractional or negative index and its-
applications.
3. The Exponential and Logarithmic Series and their applications.
4. Course in Co-ordinate Geometry of the Straight Line and Circle.
5. Short introduction to the Differential Calculus. Only differentiation of
powers of x and simple algebraical expressions to be attempted. This work
to be applied to the equations of tangents in the Analytical Geometry Course;
to velocity and acceleration in Dynamics ; and to the evaluation of important
areas, volumes, and surfaces, in Mensuration.
The programmes for the Third and Fourth Years’ work have to be interpreted
in different ways, according as this work is taken by pupils with special
mathematical ability reading for Honours, or by those who desire only to reach
such a standard as that denoted by a pass in the Senior Public Examination.
The specially able mathematical pupil could, in many cases, complete all the
work given in these two courses. However, many of the pupils at present pre-
paring for matriculation in the University, and taking Higher Mathematics
as one of their subjects at matriculation, only hope to reach the pass standard
in that subject, and to qualify for entrance to the science or engineering-schools.
If the nature of their work is determined in this way, it will be seen, on refer-
ence to the courses for the third and fourth years, that a considerable portion
of the more advanced course would not be necessary. However, the programmes
will serve the purpose of both classes of pupils, if they are interpreted in the
way which has been suggested.


In addition, It Is perhaps right to remark that the use of the slide rule is
Inserted chiefly for the boys who will require to use it in actual work later.
Also that the proposed course in the Differential Calculus is meant to be purely
an introduction to that subject, and to be confined to the differentiation of
powers of the variable. The pupil who has grasped the principle involved
in differentiation, and can apply it to the differentiation of such powers, has a
valuable mathematical tool ready for use. The first use to which he would
put it would be the calculation of the results in mensuration, which, until now,
he has had either to take on trust or to prove by a complicated process,
amounting, in fact, to a disguised use of the calculus. Equally valuable appli-
cations will be found in the analytical geometry work and In mechanics.
So many of the suggestions embodied in the valuable Report of the Commit-
tee of the Mathematical Association on the Teaching of Arithmetic and Algebra
[1902] will be found to be in agreement with the details of these programmes
and the suggestions in this paper, that this report is printed here as an appendix.
However, the teacher is not expected to adopt in full all its recommendations.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION
ON THE TEACHING OF ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA, 1902.
1. The Committee consider that there is considerable danger of the true
educational value of arithmetic and algebra being seriously impaired by
reason of a tendency to sacrifice clear understanding to mere mechanical
skill.
2. In view of this the Committee recommend:
(®) that easy vivd voce examples should be frequently used in both
arithmetic and algebra;
(6) that great stress should be laid on fundamental principles;
(c) that, as far as possible, the rules which a pupil uses should be
generalisations from his own experience;
(d) that, whenever practicable, geometry should be employed to illustrate
arithmetic and algebra, and, in particular, that graphs should be used
extensively;
(e) that many of the harder rules and heavier types of examples, which
examinations alone compel us to retain in a school curriculum, should
be postponed.
With these as guiding principles the Committee are led to make the following
suggestions:—
Arithmetic.
3. That, ns a preparation for contracted multiplication, pupils should, in
multiplying, from the very first be taught to begin with the highest digit of the
multiplier.
4. That first principles should be carefully taught before vulgar fractions
are begun, special stress being laid on factors with index notation, and the
use of the signs, +, - , x. -, and of brackets.
5. That, as far as possible, prime factors should be used in finding H.C.F.,
L.0.M., and square and cube roots.
6. That much time should not be spent in teaching complicated vulgar
fractions.
7. That, in order to facilitate the teaching of decimals, a scale divided
decimally (both in inches and centimetres) should be used for the actual
measurement of lines; the scale should be subsequently used in the determina-
tion of areas and volumes.
8. That in teaching decimals concrete examples should be taken from the
metric system.
9. That approximate work with decimals should be introduced early:—
recurring decimals should be treated in this way, the theory of recurring
decimals being postponed'to a later stage.
10. That the rule for cube root should be omitted.
71. That those parts only of the English tables of weights and measures
which are in general use should be taught; and that long questions in reduction
(e.j7., square miles to square inches) should be avoided.


12. That in money sums the system of decimalising money at sight should
be largely used, and that answers should, as a rule, not be required beyond the
nearest penny.
13. That, in pass examinations in arithmetic, the use of algebraic symbols
should not be prohibited.
14. That rough checks should be constantly employed in arithmetical
work.
15. That in many cases a rough estimate might usefully precede the detailed
work of an arithmetical computation.
16. The Committee consider that the mental training afforded by arithmetic
is largely impaired by the existing tendencies of text-books to classify problems
and to establish each type as a separate rule.
Algebea.
17. The Committee suggest that beginners should be taught the use of letters
to denote numbers, by substituting letters for numbers in suitable illustrations
(Involving integers) of the fundamental laws underlying arithmetic and
algebra; they should also be shown how results and processes with which they
are familiar in arithmetic and geometry can be expressed generally by the use
of letters (for example, before beginning algebra pupils will have been taught
how to solve questions on Interest and areas without formulae; from these and
similar examples they should be led at an early stage of algebra to construct
formulae for themselves).
18. ’That the fundamental laws of algebra should be inferred from examples
in arithmetic and geometry by a rough induction; formal proofs should be
postponed.
19. The Committee consider that the use of the minus sign to denote negative
quantity should be introduced at the very beginning of algebra.
20. That, instead of the usual difficult substitutions, practice should be given
at an early stage In substituting numbers for letters in identities, and in testing
the roots of equations, not necessarily of the first degree, and in plotting
graphs of functions.
21. That long .multiplication and division should be postponed till after
problems on x, y equations, the method of detached coefficients should be
taught, and the analogy with the corresponding processes in arithmetic should
be pointed out.
22. That the methods used in solving equations should be based on and
frequently referred back to first principles (the four axioms) ; and that roots
should be tested by substitution.
23. That graphs should be introduced as early as possible and be used
extensively (certainly in connection with x, y equations, and quadratic
equations).
24. That complicated fractions, hard H.C.F. and L.C.M., and literal equations
should be postponed till after easy quadratics.
25. That irrational roots of quadratic equations should be often worked out
to a few significant figures.
26. That the algebraic method of proving such theorems as those of Euclid,
Book 11, should be explained, and that problems similar to Euclid II 11, should!
be given among quadratic problems, and that other applications to geometry
which assume a knowledge of Euclid, Books I and 111, should also be given.
27. That in surds the chief stress should be laid on numerical evaluation,,
including rationalisation of denominators.
28. That complicated questions on fractional indices should be avoided.
29. That fractional indices should be illustrated by logarithms taken from
four-figure tables or from graphs made by the pupils themselves.
30. That work with imaginary quantities should, as far as possible, be avoided
in elementary algebra.
31. That the comparison of the algebraic definition of proportion with that
given by Euclid, together with all such phrases as “ duplicate ratio,” “ com-
pounding ratios,” &c., and the examples illustrarting them, should be dropped
out of elementary algebra.
32. That algebraic work should be checked by the consideration of simple
special cases and the substitution of numbers.


33. In view of the great amount of time now required for teaching the various
rules connected with our complicated system of weights and measures, this
Committee desires to record its unanimous opinion that the Interests of
education demand the early introduction of a decimal system of weights,
measures, and coinage.
GEOMETRY.
It Is common knowledge that within the last few years the methods adopted
In the teaching of geometry have been greatly altered. No less common is the
belief that many of the changes which have been made have hardly justified
themselves, that the relative importance of the various parts of the subject
has been frequently forgotten, that much unsatisfactory reasoning is being
accepted as logical, and that much unnecessary confusion exists. We shall deal
with these points, and try to correct some of them, in the paragraphs which
follow.
When it was agreed that in England, and also here in Australia, the schools
would no longer be compelled to use Euclid’s Elements as a text-book in geometry,
one of the chief reasons for this decision was that, however famous the book
might be, it was not written as a text-book for school boys or girls, and at any
rate in its present form was not suitable for their use. For generations the
custom had been followed of letting the boy of 12 or 13 spend one year in
learning the definitions and axioms and some of the propositions of the First
Book; of giving the next year to the remainder of that,book, and the whole
of the second; the next to the third and fourth; and the last to parts of the
sixth and the eleventh; —that this custom was both unsound and wasteful w T e
all admit. A boy who has made a comparatively close acquaintance with
straight lines, angles, circles, triangles, parallelograms, &c., by actual drawing
and measurement; knows far more of their properties than one who has
learnt by heart long lists of definitions and some of Euclid’s propositions. And
when, by a carefully graduated series of experiments and drawings, he has
discovered for himself the fundamental theorems regarding congruent triangles,
the theory of parallels, the measurement of areas, and the circle, he is ready to
proceed to the study of deductive geometry, and should profit by that study in
many different ways.
This is the first, and one of the most important, of the changes which
have been made in the teaching of geometry; but, with regard to it, some
words of warning are still necessary. There Is no doubt that the rdle of
experiment, careful drawing, exact measurement, and calculation from the
figures drawn by the pupils has been exaggerated. Drawing, experiment, and
measurements are valuable in themselves as a part of the geometrical course,
but their greatest value is near the beginning of the course, and to carry this
method past that stage shows a mistaken view of their relative value in the
teaching of geometry.
Fibst Xeae’s Coubse.
I. The fundamental notions of solid, surface, plane, line, straight line, point,
angle, length, area and volume, congruence and equality of area or volume.
11. Short course, treating practically the simple constructions :
(1.) To bisect a given angle.
(2.) To bisect a given straight line.
(3.) To draw a perpendicular to a straight line from a point outside or
upon the line.
(4.) To construct an angle equal to a given angle.
(5.) To construct, in simple cases, triangles from sufficient data.
111. Formal proof of the following theorems
(1.) If two straight lines intersect, the vertically opposite angles are equal.
(2.) If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
other, each to each, and also the angles contained hy these sides equal,
the triangles are congruent.


(3.) If two sides of a triangle are equal, the angles opposite to these
sides are equal, and conversely.
(4.) If two triangles have the three sides of the one equal to the three sides
of the other, each to each, the triangles are congruent.
(5.) The exterior angle of a triangle is greater than either of the interior
and opposite angles.
(6.) The sum of any two angles of a triangle is less than two right
angles.
(7.) If two sides of a triangle are unequal, the greater side has the
greater angle opposite it.
(8.) If two angles of a triangle are unequal, the greater angle has the
greater side opposite it.
(9.) Of all the straight lines that can be drawn to a given straight line
from a point outside it, the perpendicular is the shortest; and those
which are nearer the perpendicular are less than those which are
more remote.
(10.) Any two sides of a triangle are together greater than the. third
side.
(11.) If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
other, each to each, but the angle contained by the two sides of one
greater than the angle contained by the corresponding sides of the
other, then the base of that which has the greater angle is greater
than the base of the other.
(12.) If two triangles have two sides of the one equal to two sides of the
other, each to each, but the base of one greater than the base of the
other, then the angle contained by the sides of that which has the
greater base is greater than the angle contained by the corresponding
sides of the other.
(13.) If two triangles have two angles of the one equal to two angles of the
other, each to each, and a side of the one equal to the corresponding
side of the other, the triangles are congruent.
IV. Formal proof of the constructions named under (II).
Y. Easy riders should be worked by the pupils in connection with the
most important of these propositions.
“ The first stage of work in geometry is now generally recognised to consist
in gaining familiarity with and clearness of perception of the fundamental
geometrical concepts—solid, surface, line, point, direction, angle, and the
like —with some experience in the use of geometrical Instruments, and therefore
consists in the main of observation and practical work.” Before the pupil enters
the secondary schools this work should already have been done. The geometri-
cal concepts are supposed to have been treated in this way in the primary
schools, and the pupils of the secondary schools are prepared for the second stage
of their geometrical work. It may be advisable, as suggested in the programme
for this year, to begin with these fundamental concepts, especially those In-
volving the ideas of solid geometry; but if this is necessary, little time should
be spent upon such revision. The work which the pupil must now undertake
is exactly that in which careful drawing and measurement are most important.
With his ruler, protractor, compasses, and squared paper, he will be expected
to proceed some way towards the discovery of the most fundamental facts of
geometry, and to the realisation of their truth. The congruence theorems on
triangles [I., 4,8, 26], the theorem regarding the sum of the angles of a triangle
[I. 32], the equality of parallelograms on the same base, and between the same
parallels, the expressions for the area of triangles, rectangles, and parallelo-
grams, of the truth of all these results he can be convinced by actual measure-
ment and careful drawing, and some of the properties of the circle will be
treated in the same way.


lii all this work careful drawing and accurate measurement are essential; but
after this stage is passed, the need for accurate figures no longer exists, and the
right to draw a general conclusion from the measurement of several carefully-
drawn figures is his no longer. Indeed, he must now proceed to the study of
deductive geometry; to the substitute for Euclid’s Elements, though not to the
substitute for Euclidean geometry, for it is still Euclidean geometry that he
learns; and from this course in deductive geometry he is to learn how to reason
about the figures the properties of which he has established In an experimental
way, but with the risk of experimental error. It is in this third stage of his
work that the most confusion now exists, and it is here that there is the
greatest risk of unsatisfactory teaching. The confusion arises from the
different methods followed in establishing the few fundamental theorems; the
unsatisfactory teaching is due to the faults of various text-books.
After all, the fundamental theorems on which the later work rests are few
in number. The group of theorems about angles at a point [I., 13, 14, 15] ;
the group regarding congruent triangles [{•, 4, S, 26]; the angle-sum theorem
[I. 32] ; and the set in parallels [I., 27, 28, 20],
It is now generally recognised that it is unnecessary to formally prove the
content of I. 13. In Euclid’s scheme the proof was necessary, since he did
not recognise the straight angle. But under the usual treatment of the
concept of angle, the angle of 180° can be admitted just as well as any other
angle; and the assumption which Euclid makes, that if OA, OB are the
lines bounding an angle AOB, and OP any line within the angle, then
Z. AOP + A POB = Z. AOB,
can be used immediately to prove the facts stated in 1.13. The converse [1.14],
and the theorem on the equality of vertically opposite angles [I. IB] are easy
deductions hardly needing formal statement and proof, but they are inserted in
the above list for the sake of definiteness.
One set of Euclid’s theorems has thus been dealt with. The next important
set is the group of theorems about congruent triangles. The Board of Educa-
tion! in England, in a circular from which I have quoted above —a circular
which has given rise to much difference of opinion—suggests that the earlier
practical discussion of these theorems be taken as sufficient, and that they be
accepted as facts which are “ as obvious and real to the pupil as the difference
between white and black, or between his right hand and his left.” The same
assumption is to be made about the angle-sum theorem and the fundamental
theorems on parallels. And these results having been obtained in this way, the
course in geometry proper is to consist of the theorems and problems which
can be deduced from them. With this advice I find myself unable to agree, for
Various reasons, and this method of laying the foundations has not been adopted
in the programme of the Department. One of my reasons for disagreeing with
t-heir method is that I am sure the difficulty that these fundamental congruence
theorems offer to the pupil is exaggerated, and that I believe the reasoning, by
means of which they are to be proved, can be of value to him. Another ground
for my dissent from the plan of that circular is that the treatment of parallels
Which It recommends, by its introduction of the Idea of direction as funda-
mental, and by making the angle-sum theorem independent of the theory of
parallels, includes one of those fallacies with which the long history of that
theory is crowded. It is now admitted, and it Is most certainly true, that
Euclid’s treatment of the theory of parallels is one of the most striking features
of the Elements, and forms one of his greatest triumphs. And it seems more
than a pity to allow the schoolboy to be brought up on geometrical reasoning
regarding parallels which, if it were true, would mean that Euclid’s parallel
postulate [Axiom 11] Was unnecessary, and that his famous assumption was
itself capable of proof.
ft kt* of course, true that the fundamental congruence theorem [l. 4], in the
modem treatment of geometrical axioms, is taken as an axiom-—the axiom of
congruence; but this is in order that the method of superposition may be
removed from the domain of geometrical reasoning. That method the school-
boy wili use frequently, and adopting It, the proof of the theorem offers no
particular difficulty.
■ EWm tile result of this theorem It is easy to deduce I. 5, Using the method
Of the hypothetical construction, and with this method It is, of course, best


to take the bisector of the angle rather than the base. And the equality
of the base angles of an isosceles triangle gives the simplest proof of
the next important congruence theorem [I. B]. If we might now assume that
the sum of the angles of a triangle is always two right angles, the remaining
congruence theorem would be easier to prove; but the fundamental theorem
on the sum of the angles depends upon the theory of parallels. Any so-called
proof of that theorem, by rotation or change of direction, Involves a further
hypothesis, as it is well known that if this theorem could be proved without some
assumption equivalent to Euclid’s parallel postulate, that postulate would itself
be capable of proof. And that it cannot be proved is absolutely certain. For
this’reason it is better —though at the risk of breaking up a group of congruence
theorems, which otherwise could be associated —to proceed now to the different
Inequality theorems [I., 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25]. Of these the most important
for our purpose is the theorem on the external angle [I. 16], as upon it the
proof of I. 26, and the discussion of the propositions on parallels, will rest.
This list of theorems, and the formal proof of the constructions which have
been used in the practical work, the bisection of an angle and a straight line,
the drawing of a perpendicular to a straight line, the construction of an angle
equal to a given angle, and the construction in simple cases of triangles from
sufficient data, complete the deductive work of the First Year’s Course.
It should bb noted, however, that the pupils should have solved many simple
riders on the theorems and problems. The nature of their introduction to
geometry has made it much more easy for the average pupil to follow the steps
needed in working easy riders; and this is a part of the course which can prove
of great value to all the class. The subject has not been properly taught if
the pupil has not gained some confidence in working easy illustrations of this
nature.
Further, it should be noticed that under the scheme of the Department it is
proposed to postpone the deductive work on parallels to the following year.
This does not mean that in the earlier course no knowledge of parallels should
have been obtained. The drawing of parallels, the treatment of parallelo-
grams and of rectangles, and the measurement of areas, will all have been
part of the work of the class at the stage at which practical geometry and
accurate drawing and measurement were important. The deductive work in
parallels is, however, postponed till the Second Year’s Course, though naturally
the teacher is in no way prohibited from carrying the pupils of the first year
forward into the work of the second if he finds this possible and advisable.
Second Yeab’s Cotjese.
I. Short course, treating practically the following constructions ;
(1.) Construction of parallels to a given straight line.
(3.) Simple cases of the construction of triangles, parallelograms, and
other quadrilaterals from sufficient data.
(3.) Construction of a triangle equal in area to a'given polygon.
(4.) Division of straight lines into a given number of equal parts or into
parts in any given proportions.
(5.) Construction of tangents to a circle and of common tangents to two
circles.
(6.) Simple cases of the construction of circles from sufficient data.
(7.) Construction of regular figures of 3,4, 6, and 8 sides in or about a
given circle.
(8.) Construction of a square equal in area to a given polygon.
11. The Theory of Parallels.
(i) Definition of parallels. Euclid’s definition, viz., Straight lines are said
to be parallel when they lie in the same plane, and do not meet one
another when produced indefinitely in either direction.
(ii) The Parallel Axiom — Euclid’s axiom to he used, or one of its
equivalents, e.g., Playfair’s aaciom.


111. Formal proof of the following Theorems on Parallels :
(1.) When a straight line cuts two other straight lines and makes
(i) a fair of alternate angles equal, or
(ii) a pair of corresponding angles equal, or
(iii) a pair of interior angles on the same side together equal to
two right angles,
then the two straight lines are parallel.
(2.) If a straight line cuts two parallel straight lines, then it makes —■.
(i) the alternate angles equal,
(ii) the corresponding angles equal, and
(iii) the two interior angles on the same side together equal to two
right angles.
X (3.) Straight lines which are parallel to the same straight lines are
parallel to each other.
IV. Formal proof of the following Theorems, which can be obtained
directly from the above :
(1.) The sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles.
(2.) The straight lines which join the corresponding extremities of two
equal and parallel straight lines are themselves equal and parallel.
(3.) The opposite sides and angles of a parallelogram are equal, each
diagonal bisects the parallelogram, and the diagonals bisect each
other.
(4.) If there are three or more parallel straight lines, and the intercepts
made by them on any straight line which cuts them are equal, then
the corresponding intercepts on any other straight line which cuts
them are equal.
V. Theorems on Areas :
(1.) Parallelograms on the same or equal bases and of the same altitude
are equal in area.
(2.) Equal parallelograms on the same or equal bases are of the same
altitude.
(3.) If the number of units in the length of a rectangle is multiplied by
the number of units in its breadth, the product gives the area of the
rectangle.
(4.) Triangles on the same or equal bases and of the same altitude are
equal in area.
(5.) Equal triangles on the same or equal bases are of the same altitude.
(6.) If the number of units in the base of a triangle is multiplied by
half the number of units in its altitude, the product gives the area
of the triangle. .
(7.) Illustrations and explanations of the geometrical theorems corres-
ponding to the following algebraical identities :—■
k (a + b + c+ ...) = ka + kb + kc+ ...,
\a + b) 2 =a 2 + 2ab + b 2, '
(a b) 2 =a 2 - 2ab + b 2,
. a 2 -b 2 = (a-b){a + b).
(8.) In a right-angled triangle, the square on the hypothenuse is equal
to the sum of the squares on the two sides.
(9.) In any triangle the square on the side opposite an acute angle is
less than the sum of the squares on the sides containing that angle
by twice the rectangle contained by one of these two sides and the
projection upon it of the other.


(10.) In an obtuse-angled triangle the square on the side opposite the
obtuse angle is greater than the sum of the squares on the two
sides containing that angle by twice the rectangle contained by
one of the two sVles and the projection upon it of the other.
VI. Theorems on the Circle :
(1.) There is one circle, and one only, which passes through three given
points not in a straight line.
(2.) If two circles touch, the point of contact lies on the straight line
through the centres.
(3.) Equal chords of a circle are equidistant from the centre and the
converse.
(4.) The tangent at any point of a circle and the radius through the
point are perpendicular to one another.
(5.) The angle which an arc of a circle subtends at the centre is double
that which it subtends at any point on the remaining part of the
circumference.
(6.) Angles in the same segment of a circle are equal; and, if the line
joining two points subtend equal angles at two other points on the
same side of it, the four points lie on a circle.
(7.) The opposite angles of any quadrilateral inscribed in a circle are
supplementary; and the converse.
(8.) The angle in a semicircle is a right angle ; the angle in a segment
greater than a semicircle is less than a right angle ; and the angle
in a segment less than a semicircle is greater than a right angle.
(9.) In equal circles (or in the same circle) (i) if two arcs subtend equal
angles at the centres, they are equal; (ii) conversely, if two arcs
are equal, they subtend equal angles at the centres.
(10.) In equal circles (or in the same circle) (i) if two chords are equal,,
they cut off equal arcs; (ii) conversely, if two arcs are equal, the
chords of the arcs are equal.
(11.) If a straight line touch a circle, and from the point of contact a
chord be drawn, the angles which this chord makes with the tangent
are equal to the angles in the alternate segments.
(12.) If two chords of a circle intersect, either inside or outside the
circle, the rectangle contained by the parts of the one is equal to
the rectangle contained by the parts of the other.
VII. Formal proofs of the principal constructions in (I).
VIII. Simple riders to be worked on the principal propositions. The idea
of a locus to be explained, and the simple results in loci obtained and proved.
The work of the second year starts with the theorems on parallels. Such
lines have to be defined. Various substitutes for Euclid’s definition have been
attempted. The statement that “ parallel lines are lines in the same direction ”
at once leads to the question of the meaning of the words “ in the same direc-
tion.” It Is, of course, an unsound definition. Other attempts to alter Euclid’s
phraseology have more to be said for them. But I would again repeat what I
have said above, that as Euclid’s treatment of parallels is one of his greatest
triumphs, and one of the most important features of the Elements, it is a pity
to depart from that treatment unless necessary.
Those writers who have attempted to substitute other proofs for his sequence
[I., 27, 28, 29] have not been signally successful. And the attempt is usually
due to the omission from its proper place of the theorem of the external angle
[I. 16], a theorem essential to Euclid’s work, and one which can well be re-
tained in the position he granted to it.
For all these reasons it seems to me best in this connection to follow Euclid,
and the programme of the second year begins with the discussion of parallels


on his plan. It is intended that this programme be followed in the schools for
which it has been compiled, and that these few theorems be taken in the order
in which they are given.
Following the fundamental theorems on parallels are the important deduc-
tions from them, viz., the angle-sum theorem, the theorem establishing the
properties of a parallelogram, and that which will be found to give the property
of similar triangles and the fundamental facts of trigonometry.
After this the course in geometry offers little difficulty. The risk of con-
fusion is attached only to the earlier group of theorems, those on congruent
triangles, those on parallels, and that on the sum of the angles of a triangle.
The course of theorems and constructions for the second year is one which
will give the pupil ample knowledge of all the important facts contained in
Euclid, Books I, 11, and 111, and some of the important constructions of
Book IV. It has been possible to compress all this work—which in the past
has often occupied three full years of the school curriculum —into these two
years, for several reasons. One of these is the fact that the principle of
hypothetical constructions has been admitted; another is the use of the principle
of symmetry in the geometry of the circle, and the idea of the tangent as the
limiting position of a chord; and a third is the omission of many propositions—
theorems which are obvious or unnecessary, and constructions which are so
simple that they hardly require statement or proof.
It is to be noted that in the Second Year’s Course additional practice is to be
given in riders, loci, and in easy constructions; also, It should be remembered
that “ to draw an accurately finished figure in writing out a proposition is sheer
waste of time. The figure must be large and neat; straight lines must look
straight, parallels parallel, and right angles right. But all this can be done
per hand and quickly, with the help of the compass perhaps for a circle.”
And finally, in all this work there will be frequent opportunity for arith-
metical illustration, and need for numerical examples. These illustrations and
examples are one of the most useful means of impressing the truth of the
theorems, and the value of the construction upon the pupil, and they should
never be omitted. But too great reliance upon numerical illustration, experiment,
or accurate drawing, is apt to encourage the belief that certain constructions are
possible with the aid of the ruler and compass only—that is to say, by Euclid’s
methods—whereas they are, in fact, Impossible. These limitations should be
pointed out by the teacher; and the folly of attempting to trisect any angle,
or construct certain regular polygons, should be emphasised.
Thxed and Foueth Xeae’s Coubse.
Part I.
I. Revision of the course of the second year, with further practice in riders,
loci, and constructions.
11. Ratio and Proportion ; Similar Triangles and Polygons. Proofs which
are only applicable to commensurable magnitudes shall be accepted.
Formal proof of the following theorems :
(1.) Triangles and parallelograms which have the same altitude are to
one another as their bases.
(2.) If a straight line is drawn parallel to one side of a triangle, the other
two sides are divided proportionately ; and the converse.
(3.) If two triangles are equi-angular, their corresponding sides are
proportional; and the converse.
(4.) If two triangles have one angle of the one equal to one angle of the
other, and the sides about these equal angles proportional, the
triangles are similar.
(5.) The internal bisector of an angle of a triangle divides the opposite
side internally in the ratio of the sides containing the angle, and
likewise the external bisector externally.
(6.) The ratio of the areas of similar triangles is equal to the ratio of the
squares on corresponding sides.


(7.) The ratio of the areas of similar polygons is equal to the ratio of the
squares on corresponding sides.
(8.) In a right-angled triangle any rectilineal figure described on the
hypothenuse is equal to the sum of the two similar and similarly
described figures, on the two sides containing the right angle.
(9.) In equal circles (or in the same circle), angles, whether at the centre
or circumference, have the same ratio as the arcs on which they
stand.
111. Formal proof of the following constructions;—
(1.) To divide a straight line in extreme and mean ratio.
(2.) Construction of a fourth proportional to three given lines, and a
mean proportional to two given straight lines.
(3.) Construction of an isosceles triangle whose base angles are each
double the vertical angle.
(4.) Construction of regular polygons of 5,10, and 15 sides in or about
a given circle.
(5.) To describe on a given straight line a rectilineal figure similar and
similarly situated to a given rectilineal figure.
(6.) To construct a rectilineal figure which shall be similar to a given
rectilineal figure and equal to another given rectilineal figure.
IY. The properties of the centroid and the orthocentre, the inscribed,
escribed, and circumscribed circles of a triangle.
Y. Riders and simple constructions which can be deduced from the above
theorems and problems.
Part 11.
The following portions of Modern Geometry.
I. Transversals --Properties of the nine points circle of a triangle;
harmonic ranges and pencils; pole and polar ; radical axis; similitude;
inversion. •
Solid Geometry.
11. The substance of Euclid, Book XL, 1-21, together with theorems
relating to the surfaces and volumes of the simpler solid bodies.
111. The simple geometrical theory of the Conic Sections.
As has been stated in dealing with the programmes for the algebra work
in the two highest classes, these will be interpreted and used in different ways,
according to the ability and needs of the pupils. Those who are able to read
for Honours in this subject could cover all the prescribed work of the two years,
while those whose object is simply to reach such a standard as the pass stan-
dard at matriculation in the University, would not require to cover so much
ground. What they will omit, and what they should take, will be obvious to
the teacher, and will depend upon their own particular needs.
It will be noticed that further practice in riders, constructions, and loci is
asked for; also that the theory of similar triangles and rectilinear figures,
and the constructions which can be obtained from that theory, form a most
important part of the course.
This work now differs from Euclid’s in the assumption—for the sake of
simplicity—that the magnitudes to be compared are commensurable. Indeed
this assumption makes the work on similar triangles so simple that the most
Important of the results —those required for the facts of elementary trigo-
nometry—could quite well have been inserted earlier in the course, and pro-
bably they will have been referred to in the Second Year’s work. The illustra-
tion of the properties of similar triangles by trigonometry, and the use of the
ideas of trigonometry in the solution of riders, can quite well be encouraged.
Many of the propositions which find a place in Euclid, Book YI, no longer
need proof when the assumption referred to above has been made, and when
the use of algebraical methods is permitted In dealing with ratio and propor


tiou. The omission of these propositions allows room for the discussion of the
properties of the centroid, the orthocentre, the inscribed, escribed, and
circumscribed circles of a triangle.
The second part of the course includes the customary treatment of portions
of so-called modern geometry, some deductive work in solid geometry of no small
importance, and a short discussion of the geometrical theory of the conic
sections. Of these subjects, the first and last would be more particularly
for Honours pupils; the second —the work In solid geometry—should, In some
form or other, be undertaken by all. It is probably the result of the time
given, under the old methods of teaching geometry, to the long complicated
work of Euclid, In Book VI and Book XI, that so few of the pupils on leaving
school are able to think readily in three dimensions, and to solve simple ques-
tions In the geometry of the pyramid, the cone, the sphere, and the cylinder.
It is to be hoped that the earlier practical work and the freer use of modern
methods and of models in the teaching of solid geometry will make this defect
disappear.
TRIGONOMETRY.
Trigonometry can be made one of the most attractive parts of the school work
in mathematics, and probably it is the subject which offers least difficulty, under
present conditions, to the teacher and pupil. Its Important applications at once
attract the attention of the pupil, and show him some of the uses to which skill
in mathematics can be put. These applications need not be deferred till a late
period in the course, but should be introduced at the very beginning; indeed
there is no reason why the idea of the trigonometrical ratios should not be
taught much earlier in the geometrical course, and the elementary numerical
trigonometry of the right-angled triangle should in many cases be used in the
work in arithmetic.
The changes recently made in the method of teaching trigonometry consist
chiefly in the free use of trigonometrical and logarithm tables (usually of four
figures) from quite early in the course; in the more practical nature of the
examples which are introduced, whenever the first of the trigonometrical ratios
is defined; in .the omission from the earlier, and to a great extent also from the
later, work of much complicated and purely analytical work; and in the post-
ponement of circular measure to a part of the course when it can better be
understood and applied. And one recommendation which should be adopted,
whenever possible, is that the pupils should themselves carry out some simple
practical work. For example, they might observe certain angles, and measure
certain lengths, by means of which the height of some object near the school,
or the area of the playground or an adjacent paddock, could be calculated.
These observations and measurements, and all the calculations, should be the
work of the pupils themselves. They would learn more of the elementary facts
of trigonometry by an hour or two devoted to such an easy lesson in surveying
than from several weeks’ study of their text-book.
Third Year’s Course.
A course leading to the solution of triangles by the sine and cosine
formulae, with application to problems in heights and distances.
(1.) Definition of the six trigonometrical ratios of angles less than 90°.
Relations between these ratios. Evaluation of these ratios for 30°,
45°, and 60°.
(2.) Change of the ratios as the angle increases from 0° to 90°. This to
be illustrated by the drawing of the curves for the sine, cosine, and
tangent, (i) from values found graphically, (ii) from the tables.
(3.) The trigonometrical functions of an acute angle and the functions
of the complementary angle.
(4.) Trigonometrical solution of “real” problems on right angled tri-
angles. Use of trigonometrical tables. Angles of elevation and
depression.


(5.) Extension of the notion of the trigonometrical functions to
angles up to 180°. (Particularly to show sin A = sin (180° - A),
cos A = - cos (180° - A), Ac. Solution of easy equations for angles
between 0° and 180°.
(6.) Area of a triangle.
(7.) Areas of regular polygons.
(8.) Proof of the following theorems :
(i) “
sin A sin is sin (J
(ii) a 2 J2+ c 2 _ 26c cos A.
These results to be applied to simple cases in the solution of
triangles where (1) two angles and one side, (2) two sides and the
included angle, (3) three sides are given.
(9.) ( a ) Height of a point, the position of which is inaccessible; (6)
distance between two inaccessible points. (Solutions involving
measurements in one plane only.)
The first work in trigonometry should be numerical, and should deal with
the trigonometry of the right-angled triangle only. And the trigonometrical
ratios needed—principally the sine, cosine, and tangent—should be taken
separately, considerable time being spent upon each. When the pupil has grasped
the fact that every acute angle has a definite sine, cosine, and tangent, and
that if these ratios are given, the angle can be found, he should calculate
them approximately by carefully-drawn figures for different angles. The
ratios for 30°, 45°, and 60° will, of course, have been found geometrically.
Others will be added to the list, and a rough table of the sines, cosines, and
tangents made, from which the graphs of these functions can be drawn.
It will then be time to refer to the trigonometrical tables, and to show how
they can be used. At first the angles taken should involve degrees only; and
many simple examples should be worked, both theoretically and graphically.
Easy “ heights and distances ” are the most useful of all problems for the pupil
at this stage; the easier the better.- He should be led to associate with the
sides of the right-angled triangle their values in terms of the angles and any
one of them; and, in fact, for any triangle he should be able to do the same,
by breaking it up into two right-angled triangles.
The difficulty which has to be overcome is purely that the reality and
definiteness of these trigonometrical ratios must be brought home to the pupil.
When he is ready to use them as he would any of the numbers of arithmetic,
or the symbols of algebra, he can proceed further.
The tables will have led him to see that—
sin A = cos (90° - A),
cos A = sin (90° - A),
tan A = cot (90° - A).
He will now prove these results for the case of any acute angle.
The next step will be to consider the definition of the ratios for an obtuse
angle, and to see how the signs of the lines have to be considered, as well as
their numerical measure. And the theorems connecting the ratios of an angle
and its supplement will be proved. This will be a convenient place to bring
before his notice the use of polar co-ordinates, and the way in which they are
related to the ordinary Cartesian co-ordinates already familiar to the pupil
in his graphical work.
At this stage some practice in the solution of easy equations will be useful
to the pupil (the angles found should be those lying between 0° and 180°);
and he should gain confidence In working with the six different trigonometrical
ratios, and also in reading off the angles from their trigonometrical ratios.
The rest of the course deals with the simple applications of trigonometry
to the solution of triangles, the evaluation of areas, and further problems, such
as would arise in elementary surveying. The pupil should not rely too much
upon formulte; but for the different cases he should always have a mental


picture of the geometrical figure, and he should be able to express the geo-
metrical results lu trigonometrical language. In trigonometry, probably more
than in any other part of school mathematics, the work at each stage should
be complete In Itself, and the proofs of the results required should go back, as
far as possible—not to former theorems —but to first principles.
Fourth Year’s Course.
The course for the Fourth Year is an extension of the above, with the
addition of the trigonometrical functions of compound angles, multiple and
sub-multiple angles; further relations between the sides and angles of a
triangle, and their applications; the circular measure of an angle ; De
Moivre’s Theorem and some of its important applications ; and the series for
sin 6 and cos 6.
(1.) Trigonometrical functions of angles of any magnitude, positive and
negative.
Trigonometrical functions of o°, 90°, 180°, 270°, and 360°.
(2.) Relations between the trigonometrical function's of the angle A
and ( - A), (90°±A), (180°±A), (27G°+A), (360°±A), &c.
(3.) Trigonometrical functions of compound, multiple, and sub-multiple
angles.
To express sin (A + B), cos (A +B), and tan (A + B), as functions
of A and B.
To express sin 2A, cos 2A, tan 2A, sin 3A, cos 3A, and tan 3A,
as functions of the angle A.
' To express sin C+ sin D, and cos D + cos C as products.
Applications of the above.
(4.) Suitable formulae for the full logarithmic solution of triangles.
The ambiguous case to be omitted, or only referred to in passing.
Applications to heights and distances with measurements in more
than one plane. Explanation of triangulation and application to
simple surveys.
(5.) Trigonometrical treatment of the properties of the Triangle and its
Circles.
(6.) Circular measure of angles, tan 9 > 9 > sin 9, with extensions and
applications.
(7.) De Moivre’s Theorem and easy applications.
(8.) Summation of the series—
sin a + sin (a +j3) + sin (a + 2/3) + ...
cos u -f- cos (cl -)- (3) -|- cos (lx -{- 2(3) + ...
to n terms.
(9.) The series for sin 6 and cos 6.
The remaining work in trigonometry is more analytical. The limitations
upon the size of the angle have to be removed, and the definitions of the ratios
remodelled. For this the polar co-ordinate system will be again convenient
and suitable. Then the usual scheme of book-work follows. Considerable
practice will always bo needed as each forward step is made; also, the geo-
metrical proofs are of peculiar value, and should be carefully written out by
the pupils. In dealing with the addition formulae sin (A + B), &c., the most
logical and satisfactory method is, of course, that by projection. To tins method
some reference should be made, even if it is found advisable to adopt an easier
proof for the class as a whole.
The subject of the solution of triangles must be treated at greater length than
In the more elementary part of the course; but the tendency has been to devote
too much time to the various alternative methods, and to solve too large a
number of problems all of the same nature. What is required is that such


problems as would actually occur in the daily work of a surveyor or civil
engineer can be solved quickly, neatly, and accurately. The theory and
practice of the ambiguous case might well be omitted.
Much useful work can be done in the application of trigonometry to the
geometry of the triangle. This should be associated with corresponding work
In geometry.
Circular measure should be treated in this course, and some knowledge of its
applications should be obtained by all the pupils. It Is easy to give interesting
examples: the dip of the horizon; the area of a circular sector, and of the circle
Itself; the length of a circular arc —these should all be mentioned.
De Moivre’s Theorem is important in itself, and for its applications. So far
as school work is concerned, these would probably be chiefly—
(l) The solution of binomial equations—that is, equations of the type
x n = + a ".
(2) The expression of sin + 03-f...), cos (0J +OJ+ 03 + ...), tan 0 3 +..,)
in terms of the ratios of the individual angles.
(3/ The expression of sin nO, cos nO, tan n 0 in terms of sin 0, cos 0, or tan 0.
It will be noticed that the series for sin 0 and cos 0 are included in the course. It is
of great importance that pupils reading Higher Trigonometry should have a working
knowledge of these series.
MECHANICS.
The school course in mechanics has been drawn up chiefly in the interests
of those who are preparing for some technical pursuit in which a knowledge
of the mechanical principles is required. Without undue specialisation some
of the first steps in the study of these principles can be made before the end
of the school course, and allied with the earlier work in mathematics and with
the trigonometry course, which will be taken about the same time.
The most important change which has been made in the teaching of this
subject is the closer union of the practical and theoretical side of the work.
Up till recently most of the school work in mechanics has been taught as a
mathematical subject, pure and simple, without any preliminary experimental
course. Indeed, the mathematical master who has taught the subject may
himself have been quite ignorant of the experimental work on which the science
of mechanics is founded. That the teacher of mathematics has so frequently
been Ignorant of physical science and of practical applied mathematics, and
that there has been so little contact between the mathematical class-room, the
workshop and the physical laboratory, are two of the chief reasons for the reform
movement in mathematics generally. If the course in mechanics were to consist
simply of kinematical illustrations of rectilinear motion with constant velocity
or acceleration, of simple harmonic motion, and of circular motion, interspersed
with a few axiomatical statements as to some physical principles, the old system
might still survive. But mechanics—as a school subject—is meant to render
the pupil familiar with the mechanical principles; so familiar with them
that he will not be afraid of some of the simple practical problems which
the engineer or the physicist must daily solve; and the most satisfactory way
in which he can gain this familiarity and confidence Is by a preliminary course
of simple experiments which will illustrate these principles, both qualitatively
and quantitatively. There seems no reason why this work should not be done
by the mathematical master, if properly trained; and as in future the majority
Of those who will teach mathematics in the higher forms of the schools will
have also done a greater or less amount of physics, any difficulty which at
present may exist will gradually disappear. Both the mathematics and the
science of schools and universities have suffered from the cleavage between
these two departments, and nothing but good can result from a closer inter-
course between the mathematical class-room and the physical laboratory.
Further, it must not be supposed that much expensive apparatus or a fully-
quipped laboratory are required for the purpose we have in view. A great
deal can be done with simple apparatus. Indeed, the earliest, and some of
the greatest, physicists, had few of the advantages which every physical student
aow claims as his own. The experiments which will Illustrate the fundamental
results of mechanics and hydrostatics, so far as we require them here, are


few in number and easy of execution. But the pupil must perform them him-
self, and his work must be quantitative. He must know something of the
actual units, and he must know the limitations the theoretical work imposes
upon the actual conditions as they appear in experiment.
We pass to the programme which has been drawn up for the work in
mechanics and hydrostatics in the two last years of the school course.
Third and Fourth Years’ Courses.
Wherever possible, the study of Mechanics, including Elementary
Hydrostatics, should be preceded and accompanied by some experimental
work by the pupils. The aim of the course is to teach the mechanical
principles, and experimental and graphical methods should receive their proper
place in the discovery and elucidation of these principles.
Part I.— (a) Preliminary Experimental Work—A simple course of
experiments, illustrating—
(l.) The composition and resolution of forces.
(2.) The centre of gravity.
(3.) The principle of the lever.
(4.) The pulley and inclined plane.
(5.) Friction.
(6.) Motion of falling bodies.
(7.) The principle of Archimedes.
(8.) Atmospheric pressure.
These experiments should, if possible, aim at discovery and be quantitative
as well as qualitative. -
(b) The discussion of motion with constant velocity and constant
acceleration along a straight line.
Part If. —The more advanced course to consist of the whole or part of the
following sections of Statics, Dynamics, and Hydrostatics :
(1.) Parallelogram and triangle of forces.
(2.) Resolution and composition of forces acting at a point.
(3.) Velocity and acceleration in rectilinear motion.
(4.) Circular motion.
(5.) Simple harmonic motion.
(6.) Moments.
(7.) Parallel forces.
(8.) Centre of gravity.
(9.) The inclined plane.
(10.) Friction.
(11.) Work and energy.
(12.) Hydraulic press and pumps.
(13.) Atmospheric pressure.
The examples should, as a rule, be numerical, and where the work is of a
general character numerical illustrations should always be added. Stress
should be laid on Newton’s Laws of Motion.
The order in which these subjects are taken need not be that given
above.
Part I.
(a) The extent of the preliminary course of experimental work will pro-
bably depend upon the nature of the school and the equipment which it possesses.
The experiments should be simple and carefully chosen. They should, if
possible, aim at the discovery of the more important principles. They should,
at any rate, elucidate these principles, and they should be quantitative as well


as qualitative. For example, the parallelogram of forces should be obtained as
an experimental result, and, having been obtained in this way, it will form later
one of the principal foundations of the subject of statics. There are many
students of mechanics, as at present taught, who can readily discuss general
problems or theorems, while they are hopelessly at a loss if actual numerical
cases such as occur in the simplest application of mechanics are put before them.
The experiments should cover the whole or part of the given list, and they
should not be confined purely to statics or dynamics, as usually interpreted, but
involve the simple results of hydrostatics as well. Further, in much of this
experimental work there will be an opportunity for the use of graphical methods,
and the examples chosen should be of a practical nature.
(6) The more elementary work in mechanics will also include the develop-
ment of the idea of velocity—constant and variable —find of acceleration. The
applications will be confined to rectilinear motion under constant velocity or
acceleration, simple harmonic motion, and circular motion. And if the methods
of the Differential Calculus are available, this work will be much simplified;
but of course it is only in exceptional cases that these methods will have
been taught, and the power to differentiate become part of the mathematical
equipment of the pupil. If it has been acquired, it would be used here and in
other parts of their mathematical work.
Part 11.
The second and more advanced part of the work In mechanics is more theoreti-
cal and less practical, in the sense that into it experiment does not necessarily
enter. However, there is no reason why it should be wholly divorced from
experiment. The examples should, wherever possible, be numerical and practical.
Stress has to be laid on Newton’s Laws, as the foundation of theoretical
mechanics. Many examples should be given to illustrate their meaning.
Generally this course will consist of three distinct parts—
(l.) Statics.
(2.) Dynamics.
(3.) Hydrostatics.
The order in which these should be taken is not of very great importance,
and there are some who prefer to give the dynamical work and principles the
first place. As to whether this is the best course to pursue there is still dif-
ference of opinion, and either order can be made interesting and instructive.
There will be many pupils whose course will not Include all the topics men-
tioned in the programme, while there may be a few who could go further than
the bounds which have been set. For both of these classes it is equally unsuit-
able to conceal the important mechanical principles under artificial and
meaningless examples.
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—l9lU
