

ffeTH ?Prm
ioub P/\ ns
80/c n
Conscience
Creeds
and
Y Ilea far t|e Abolition af Subtriptiait
to Jactriiral Stankrh
KEY. A. CtOSM A N
AUGUSTINE CHURCH, HAWTHORN
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCLXXXI




CREEDS AND CONSCIENCE.
As the atmosphere to the life of the globe, so is freedom to men
and nations. There can be no healthy exercise of our energies
where we are unnecessarily controlled and hampered. Freedom
is not the end of life, but it is the condition of its highest
attainment. WEere these conditions are lessened or weakened, to
that extent are we injured and dwarfed; and where such
curtailment is the work of our fellow-creatures, a great crime is
committed by them against the race.
No one who knows what the Bible is requires to be told that
the spirit of liberty animates the entire body of Scripture. The
Jews as a nation were born to liberty in a day; and, as long as
they were a nation, nothing roused their patriotism to intenser
activity than the recollection of what Jehovah had done for them
when He brought them out of the land of Egypt, which was
to them the house of bondage. The priesthood represented the
Conservative element in the Jewish commonwealth; but that
spirit was held in check by the prophetic fire which occasionally
broke forth amongst the people—an influence which, although
incapable of definition, was a distinctly recognized part of their
constitution. It was this spirit of life which more than once in
its history lifted Judaism out of the deadness of literalism into
which it was ever in danger of falling; which gave meaning and
moral significance to its sacrifices and ritualistic observances;
and which kept alive, even in the darkest periods, the hope of
the Messiah promised to their fathers, whose advent was to be
distinguished by the proclamation of liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that were bound.


When Jesus Christ began his public ministry, He quoted this
very passage from Isaiah ; and, with an unmistakable reference to
Himself, told the people of Nazareth that the prophecy was
fulfilled that day in their ears. On another occasion when
discoursing about the nature of His kingdom, He claimed to
possess the power of conferring upon His followers a larger liberty
than deliverance from the house of bondage. “If the Son make
you free,” He said, “ye shall be free indeed.” Paul also, in
writing to that foolish and fickle people, the Galatians, could
hardly conceal his scorn, when, in reference to some of their
ritualistic tendencies and reported falling away from the liberty
and freedom of the Gospel, he asked them, with the warmth of just
indignation, whether it was their intention to turn again to the
weak and beggarly rudiments of their former bondage ?
It is pretty generally acknowledged that the churches of
ancient Christendom enjoyed a very large measure of freedom ;
freedom of thought, freedom of prophecy or teaching, freedom of
speech, and freedom of action. How comes it, then, that in these
days of ours they are regarded as amongst the least free of
modern institutions ]ls the impression that they are crushed to
the earth by the weight of some cruel despotism a popular
delusion, or is it justified by the actual facts of the case ?We
are compelled to admit, looking at the churches as a whole, that
the popular judgment is not in error wholly in this instance.
At one time the champions of the faith, like bold knights,
challenged anyone to the contest, and the trumpet blast that
rung out from the battlements of the Church had something of
the throb of assured victory. But now, alas 1 fear has fallen like
a torpor about the Church’s heart, and she seems sometimes as if
she were incapable of doing more than uttering lame apologies for
her own existence, or, with coward lip, appealing to the mercy of
her enemies.
Amongst the causes that have brought about this deplorable
condition of things, subscription to creeds and aitides of faith
has a very prominent place. The human intellect in its higher
energies is pre-eminently argumentative. Definite thought runs
into logical forms as naturally as the spirit of poetry runs into
verse. We find no fault with creeds and articles of faith
considered simply as historical documents. The question of their
agreement with Scripture, or otherwise, is not raised here at all.


It is the policy of subscription we desire to discuss. The position
we take up is that it is unnecessary, and should be abolished.
Subscription has totally failed in regard to the purposes for
which it was originally imposed ; it is the chief difficulty in the
way of union and co-operation amongst the sects; it is at the
present time a heavy burden upon the clerical conscience, from
which there are no immediate hopes of relief ; and as churches
have existed, and do now exist, and fulfil all the purposes of
churches without demanding subscription, the only true policy
is its entire abolition as a basis of ecclesiastical fellowship.
Subscription to creeds and articles of faith has totally failed in
regard to the purposes for which it was originally imposed.
The purposes contemplated by the imposition of subscription
were : to keep error or false doctrine out of the Church; to
maintain the purity of Christian doctrine; and to define, as far
as definition could do so, the limits within which Christian fellow-
ship and co-operation were possible. In other words, subscription
was considered necessary to prevent within the Church the spread
of error, and to aid her in the defence of the truth. The justi-
fication of wisdom is in her works. The brilliancy of many a
theory suffers immediate collapse when it is brought to the test of
practical application. Subscription was meant to accomplish
these purposes, and, theoretically considered, it may be possible to
demonstrate that it is both necessary and wise. But what has
history to say as to the results of subscription upon the churches ?
If an engineer were to construct a dam across a creek for the
storage of water, and if that dam were to give way and flood the
neighbourhood, it would only be a waste of time to go to that
gentleman’s office to hear him marshal his figures and attempt to
c 5
prove that the dam ought not to have given way. The effect of
laying down a doctrinal basis and subscribing to it is certainly in
the first place the inclusion of those who can accept that basis,
nnd their formation into an ecclesiastical organization is the
natural outcome of such action; but unless the basis has the
comprehension of Christ, the organization must necessarily be
something less than the Church of Christ, and consequently
sectarian. Will it be contended, then, that there is no way of


preserving and defending the truth except by the process of
breaking up the Church’s visible unity? For, unless its advocates
can show that subscription is not antagonistic to the principle of
5 hile xt is absolutely necessary for Christian recogni-
tion and hearty co-operation, the reasons assigned for its imposi-
tion are perfectly fallacious. Now, as we have, in fact, about
as many different ecclesiastical organizations—charitably called
churches—as we have creeds and doctrinal standards, it is cer-
tainly a curious instance of human perversity, to which the
clerical mind appears to be singularly liable, to insist upon the
continuance of subscription when history conclusively proves
that it has called into existence those very evils it was originally
intended to prevent. And the same argument applies to the
prevention of error, or the defence of the truth. Will any-
one with the controversies of Christendom in his ear, and
the signs of an impending storm in the cyclonic area of
the Church, calmly and fearlessly assert that creeds have
been of the slightest use in keeping her doctrines pure, or in
enabling her to stem the tides of error that have occasionally
threatened to submerge her ? By the multiplication of creeds, the
imposition of formulas, and their elevation into the position of
authoritative documents, the area subject to the floods of error has
been greatly enlarged, and in active warfare the Church has had
to defend not only the doctrines of Christ, but the traditions of
men. David in Saul’s armour did not feel at all comfortable.
Had he gone forth to meet the giant so heavily handicapped, his
life would most certainly have been sacrificed, in having not only
to defend himself, but the costly weapons of his royal master.
Less prudent than David, how frequently has the Church gone
forth to battle in defence of the truth with such rusty, heavy, and
clumsy weapons that defeat was certain \ and had it not been for
the fact that truth is never crushed, though her weapons be
broken, the Church would never have arisen from defeat to renew
the contest. Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty;
and we plead for liberty from the burden of subscription. We feel
assured that if the Church were free in every period of her
history to adapt her modes of warfare to the necessities of the
times, she would soon regain her strength and coui'age. The
faith that overcomes the world is not the faith inspired by
doctrinal standards, but by the promise of her Lord—“ Lo, lam


with you always.” What church need tremble for the truth
whose life is penetrated with the Spirit of Christ, who is Himself
the truth? And what church need fear false doctrine if it
derives its illumination from the Light of the World, before
whose beams error melts away like mist before the rising sun ?
Subscription to creeds and articles of faith is at the present day
the greatest obstacle to ecclesiastical confederation and the visible
unity of Christendom.
We have just shown that sectarianism is the direct and inevit-
able result of subscription; and it is only natural to conclude that
as long as subscription is maintained, so long will the evils of
sectarianism be perpetuated. The law of cause and effect holds
good in the ecclesiastical world, as well as in the domain of nature.
We cannot gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. The evils
of sectarianism are too obvious to require pointing out. The old
theologians were accustomed to call it the sin of schism—a tearing
up and dividing of Christ’s seamless coat. In this age we are not
sufficiently impressed with the enormity of the offence of causing
divisions, and so weakening the power and retarding the progress
of Christ’s Church. What right has any section of the Church to
set up barriers against the entrance into its communion of any
other section of the Church? The moral element that pervades
the spirit of sectarianism is exceedingly low; religiously it is as
directly opposed to the spirit and the commands of Christ as it is
possible for anything to be. In this young country especially its
pernicious effects are seen on every hand. Who can witness with
composure the existence of two or three different places of worship
in a small country township where there is hardly room for one?
If these houses of prayer represented different religions, with
strongly-marked lines of demarcation between them, there might
be some excuse for such prodigality in providing for the religious
wants of the district. But Christian churches have one Head, one
code of laws, one Bible, one government, and in all important
matters are of one faith. Why then should the members be
divided into separate folds, and be taught to look with suspicion
upon each other, as if they were goats and not sheep, or even
wolves in sheep’s clothing ?


The dream of the modern ecclesiastical thinker is comprehension,
or the visible unity of Christendom. In pursuit of a phantom of
his own active brain, which he christened catholicity, John Henry
Newman found himself erelong within the entrenchments of the
Komish Church. The late Dean Stanley, one of the most con-
sistent exponents of the doctrine, and himself the perfect embodi-
ment of the notion of comprehension, was prepared to fraternize
with the Eastern Church on the one hand, and with the Non-
conformists of England on the other. Mazzini’s dream of a
united Italy, as long as it was a dream, was regarded as the
impracticable vision of an enthusiast; but when it became a fact,
the dream was regarded as the product of prophetic genius. So
the notion of comprehension may in the future history of the
Church become a reality; but at present the obstacles seem to be
almost insurmountable; and these obstacles for the most part are
closely associated with the law of subscription. Meantime we
may inquire whether any of the ecclesiastical organizations of the
day can fairly lay claim to the comprehension of Christ, and
whether they have any right to be considered catholic in the
proper sense of that word.
The Church of Home looks upon all Protestants as heretics,
and against heretics she hurls her fiercest anathemas. She is
sometimes said to be the mother, or the grandmother, of us
all; but her feelings towards us are more like those of a step-
mother than of one who has brought us forth and nourished us
in the days of our tender childhood from her maternal bosom.
However, it is quite well understood she wants us back ; but
on what conditions ? She has crowned her doctrinal system with
the dogma of infallibility, and she claims to exercise authority
over the whole domain of our intellectual, moral, and spiritual
nature. Now, is it within the limits of the possible that Protestant
churches can go back under such conditions as these ? Can the
sun stand still in the heavens'? Can the rivers flow back to
their sources amongst the mountains ? Can the trees of the
wood refuse to bend their heads when the swift winds—the
messengers of heaven —sweep past in fulfilment of the mission
with which they have been charged'? No! Nor can this age
go back three centuries, blot out the memory of its free life
during that interval, and entomb itself in a dungeon from
which the hope of resurrection has departed. The Church of


E/Ome could not possibly swallow up the Protestant churches and
live. A single Congregational church would be too much for
her impaired digestion. The whale that swallowed Jonah soon
repented of his hasty meal. A Congregational church could
not possibly be assimilated into the bone and sinew of the
Church of Pome.
Only think what a true typal Congregationalist, even of the
modern school, really is ! He is a man of strong, and some-
times of original powers of mind; of firm purpose, with an
individuality of character deeply and definitely drawn. He has
looked into the mystery of existence, and felt his soul shaken to
its very centre. The yawning abyss of perdition has opened at his
feet, and his ears have been filled with the meanings of the lost.
In the dark and horrible pit of doubt he has called out for divine
help, and in these doleful regions God has come to him, and his
soul has felt the peace and sweetness of a new existence. With
his hand in the strong grasp of the Heavenly Father’s he has
come forth to the world, which has no terrors for him now.
Like Moses, his face glows with the light of heaven. He stands
up in the presence of men with an erectness and firmness which
no one can misinterpret. Before God he is as humble as a child,
confessing his sins and imploring pardon with a fervour and
earnestness that testify to the sincerity of his religious convic-
tions. He not only dislikes ecclesiastical authority and priestly
assumption, but he hates them as something that thrusts its
offensive presence between his soul and God.
Now, is it possible that a man of this stamp —a man who
has gone through all this—should put the light of his intellect
under an extinguisher, ignore his moral sentiments, declare he
renounces what has interwoven itself with every fibre of his life,
and profess to believe what he is incapable of comprehending;
that at the bidding of a fellow-creature he should shut his eyes,
open his mouth, and swallow any mixture that priestly craft and
cunning may mix for him in superstition’s laboratory ? It is
simply impossible. And yet if that man is a Christian —and who
in the presence of Christ will dare say he is not?—can that
church be catholic which has no place within her folds for him,
yea, rather, which cuts him off with the hypocrite and the
unbeliever as one who has provoked, and, if he repents not, as one
that deserves the sentence of everlasting damnation i


But the same reasoning will hold in regard to the Church of
England. She, also, is destitute of the true marks of catholic
comprehension. It is all very well for her adherents to cherish
the sentiment of belonging to a great national and historic church.
It is all very well to extol her beautiful liturgy. We are quite
prepared to admit that the scholarship of some of her clergy and
dignitaries sheds a lustre upon the English language and nation.
But the Church of England, in the estimation of many con-
scientious men, teaches baptismal regeneration. The Church of
England authorizes her priests to say to her people, we absolve you.
The Church of England anathematizes all who do not believe the
creed of Athanasius. The Church of England buries all who die
within her pale in the sure and certain hope of the resurrection to
eternal life; but to unbaptized persons, including infants, she
grudgingly concedes the common right of burial. Now, we do not
say—it would be wrong even to insinuate —that the members and
ministers of the Church of England are not sincere and con-
scientious. That is not the point. The question is, what is there
in the Church of England now to induce conscientious dissenters
to join her communion, when, little more than two hundred
years ago, she compelled two thousand clergymen to leave her
pulpits or be recreant to conscience? If nonconformity was a
duty and a necessity then, it is a duty and a necessity still. And
if the Church of England by her formulas and subscription com-
pels anyone to seek outside the freedom of a religious life, how
can she claim to be catholic ? and if she is not catholic, how can
schism be a sin ?
But 'even although her doctrinal basis were widened, and some
atonement made for the errors and the crimes of the past, her
haughty exclusiveness, to all those who cannot conform to her
ceremonies, including the Presbyterians of the National Church of
Scotland, is a serious obstacle to ecclesiastical co-operation and
union. She will admit a Catholic priest into her communion
without re-ordination. He may pass from Bomanism to Angli-
canism without official humiliation; but not so with a puritan
minister. Now, in the face of that fact, what man who has a
single drop of the genuine puritanic blood in his veins would
consent to kneel before a bishop, and, by receiving ordination at
his hands, virtually ignore his past life and ministry, and humbly
and meekly take authority to preach the Gospel and administer


sacraments —a work in which, up to within a short period of that
solemn farce, he had been honourably engaged ? No, the Church of
England, as at present constituted, cannot be the all-embracing
church of the future. She is tod much in love with priestly
efficacy to meet the wants and aspirations of modern religious
life. Her devotion is stately but cold ; it has no freedom of
adaptation to the ever-varying circumstances of human life. She
says the same words of comfort, and reads the same prayers, when
the nation in tears stands beside the grave of a departed hero, as
when the most worthless of mankind are laid in the dust.
Within such narrow channels the tide of a healthy spiritual
life cannot be confined ; and if the visible unity of Christendom
cannot be realized until nonconformity loses its fire and force,
then the visible unity of the Church must for ever be an
impossibility.
With regard to the Presbyterian churches, there is more of
comprehension in them than in any other religious denomination.
They are distinguished by their love of order and their hatred of
spiritual despotism. Their congregations are virtually free
without being isolated. Like a regiment they stand shoulder to
shoulder, and it is no common shock that would break their ranks.
Their ministers are not priests, their sacraments are not sacrifices.
Their adherence to the doctrines of the New Testament is
undoubted, and the intelligence and courage with which these
doctrines are preached and defended are worthy of all commenda-
tion. Her organization is well adapted both for discipline and
the propagation of the faith. But the Presbyterian Church is, we
think unfortunately, a subscribing church ; and as long as she
continues to be so, she cannot become the church of the future.
The true Catholic Church must necessarily be free, and freedom
and subscription to articles of faith are not contradictory but
incompatible. The Presbyterian Church is, we believe, in all
parts of the world, on the verge of a great controversy, which will
shake her to the very foundations of her being. We have no
misgivings as to her orthodoxy; but her soundness in the faith is
not the result of subscription, and, as far as we can see, is no
essential part of Presbyterianism. The only danger that
threatens the old ship, whose timbers are yet perfectly sound, is
the storage of explosive material in her holds. Let that be cast
overboard, and no vessel at present afloat on our troubled and


storm-swept waters has a better chance of sailing peacefully
through seas lit up with millennium glory than that from whose
tall mast there flies the Presbyterian flag.
111.
Subscription is a very heavy burden upon the clerical con-
science, and as no modification of the terms of subscription, or
revision of the articles subscribed to, can give full and satisfactory
relief, their entire abolition becomes an imperative necessity.
To profess to believe any doctrine you do not fully understand,
or of whose truth you may have doubts or difficulties, is a very
shady transaction in the high court of conscience. Now, sub-
scription is in a great many cases such a transaction ; and no
wonder the clerical conscience cries out against its tyranny and
injustice. The number of those who can with clear judgment,
sound reason, and high courage reconcile their creed with their
personal convictions must, we fear, be very small. And as the
living tide of modern thought touches with its murmuring lip
every shore of knowledge, the difficulty of harmonizing one’s belief
with his church doctrines must become more and more apparent.
The manner in which the clerical mind finds it possible to exist
under the burden of subscription is not without its significance.
Pirst of all there are those who try to persuade themselves, and
not without success, that there is after all no great weight upon
them at all; or if there is, the best way is simply to carry it, and
endeavour to think nothing about it. These are your easy-going,
contented clergymen. They have almost ceased to know what doubt
is. With a docility truly charming, they swallow the dogmas of their
particular church in exactly the same manner as they take their
medicine—thankful to be relieved of the necessity of mixing it for
themselves, or even of too curiously inquiring of what materials it
is compounded. Why should they set up their opinions—of which,
by the way, they can hardly be said to possess any —against the
wisdom of their forefathers and the decisions of councils'? They
are happy and contented, and why should they rush into war
when there are so many panting for the conflict'? Por them the
earth exhales no vapours and the atmosphere condenses no clouds.
Thought with them has become hard, like the shell on the back of
a crab; and the energy of life is now almost entirely spent in


sticking like barnacles to whatever hard substance they can lay
hold of. It is not good either for the intellect, or the heart, or
the conscience that the energy of life should be in this manner
suppressed; and subscription is largely responsible for lowering
and compressing the natural flow of the spirit, and in a manner
compelling it by the necessity of its environment to take refuge
in the humble sphere of the Crustacea. We object to subscription
on these grounds; and the only remedy that will ultimately com-
mend itself to the judgment of mankind is its entire abolition.
The great majority of subscribing clergymen and ministers
endeavour conscientiously, and with a commendable courage, to
find relief from their burdens in some theory by which the doc-
trinal standards they have subscribed to and their own personal
beliefs may be brought into harmony. The variety of these
theories, and the ingenuity with which they are spun, are evidence
enough of the genius and industry of human beings. No one has
yet discovered where that magic bone is to be found from which
everyone may suck the marrow of his own convictions. In the
meantime words are put upon the rack, and made, under
to give out a meaning which they do not naturally possess. They
lie in their agony, and the lie is accepted as the living truth. By
such a process, for example, the phrase “ six days ” can be made
to mean any six periods of time, with millions of years in the
interval between one day and another. To pronounce the abso-
lution of sin, it is contended, is no more than to express the hope
that the loving Father of mankind may pardon all who are truly
penitent, although to do so is not lawful, save to one in priest’s
orders. From the damnatory clauses of the Athanasian creed,
some take refuge in the theory that these clauses are no part of
the original creed, forgetful of the fact that the additions are 3-n
integral part of the doctrinal standards to which they have sub-
scribed. Some, again, argue as if subscription were not subscription,
but general consent only, and subject to the reservation “in so
far as they are in harmony with the Word of God.”
Such are some of the ways by which good men and true en-
deavour to ease their consciences under the intolerable burden of
subscription. It is perfectly manifest to everyone who gives the
subject the least consideration that such wriggling, and twisting,
and hair-splitting are injurious both to the intellect and the con-
science. Why should any honest man, and minister of God’s truth,.


be compelled—for there is no mistake about the compulsion—to
walk in such crooked paths as these"? If subscription is not
subscription, but general consent, what is the use of it at all 1
Through that little opening, “in so far as it is in accordance with
sacred scripture, 5 ’ any liquid mixture may how into the mind and
out again, and the conscience remain untouched. The Koran, the
moral teachings of Confucius, anything, everything can be re-
ceived in so far as it is in accordance with Scripture. There is no
stronger argument for the entire abolition of subscription than
this. If spectacles are not spectacles, why burden the sight with
their counterfeit ? If medicine is not medicine, why should it be
taken h and if subscription is not subscription, why should any
one be called upon to say that he believes in doctrines which, after
all, it is not really necessary for him to believe ?
But while admitting all this, many still cling to the hope that
relief will come to them by revision of the standards, or other-
wise. We confess to an utter hopelessness on this matter, and
for that reason we urge all the more vehemently the abolition of
subscription. To alter or modify the terms of subscription so as
to give everyone plenty of room for his thoughts to move and
exercise themselves in, is simply to surrender the plea for its
necessity. It does not seem possible for freedom of conscience
and subscription to exist together in the same person. If anyone
rounds off his beliefs, and binds them about his neck by the strong
cord of a solemn declaration of unfeigned assent and consent, how
can he contend that this strong cord of honest hemp is an elastic
band or a spider’s thread ? We have only to look calmly at the
proposal to modify the terms of subscription to see at once that
any modification, however slight, means abolition, to which openly
let us come with all convenient speed.
Nor is there much hope of relief from any revision or compression
of the doctrinal standards of the Church. ISTo one who has any
admiration for the achievements of the human intellect can treat
these creeds and articles of faith either with indifference or with
contempt. They are strong in logic. There is a grand fearless-
ness about their statements ; an utter unconsciousness to apparent
contradictions which unman and perplex inferior and pedantic
minds. They have not by the force of ecclesiastical authority or
of superstition, but by their own inherent strength, held their
place for centuries; and although the tide of modern thought is


now sweeping by them with a rush and volume that threaten to
overthrow them, they are not even flooded. They stand out
before the critical eye of this generation in wonderful preservation,
indicating at once the enduring character of their materials,
and the great strength and skill which put their several parts
together. * ?
Now, this very fact is one of the chief obstacles to revision.
The proposal is regarded by many as a kind of sacrilege. Here,
for example, is an old family mansion which has just come into
the hands of the young heir, who is full of the spirit of improve-
ment and innovation. He begins upon the old house thus He
puts two rooms into one ; he throws out a bow window where
there was formerly a dead wall; he clears away a whole wing of
low-roofed kitchens and cellars, and erects spacious and elegant
apartments, and furnishes them with profusion and taste. He
turns the place upside down, and what is his reward ? He will
ere long texl you he has acted foolishly ; that he has spent more
money in his improvements than a new mansion would have cost
him; that he has alienated his family almost beyond the hope of
reconciliation; that his married sister refuses to speak to him,
because he abolished the room where she was born; that his
brother has written him a dozen of letters, charging him with
callous indifference, because he pulled down the room where their
mother died; that an old housekeeper who is pensioned off, but
lives in the neighbourhood, declares that she will never enter the
new house at all, believing the old part of it to be haunted with
the spirits of the departed family, who shriek out their protests
in the ear of midnight against those innovations that disturb their
sepulchral repose. Such, under a figure, will be the inevitable fate
of any reforming party in the Church that will dare to touch with
sacrilegious hand her venerable historical standards. But even if
this difficulty were got over there are other obstacles behind
which block up the path of reformation. It is, we believe, im-
possible to frame a creed that will cover every shade of theological
belief, and at the same time impose no burden upon the con-
science. There is nothing more difficult than the definite and
adequate expression of religious opinion. We can measure and
express in words the distance between this earth and the sun.
We can calculate the contents of ocean. The objects of nature
that come into contact with our senses can be named, and dis-


tinguished without fear of confusion; but who can give cate-
gorical expression to the ideas of the soul regarding God, eternity,
and the mysteries of human life ! Who can catch and chain the
wiu ged thoughts that fly from star to star and hardly abate th eir
flight in their progress through the universe! A painter may
catch a sight of the sea in one of its grandest and wildest aspects ;
but the sublimity of the moment, although transferred to his
canvas, is a poor representation of the boundless, never-resting,
ever-heaving ocean. So is it with thought. Abu may catch its
expression in one or other of its varied moods; you may follow
some of its currents from where they rise in the warm region of
the emotions to where they are lost in the dark icy seas of specu-
lation ; but who can sound what is unfathomable, or follow the
deep currents of the soul into those inaccessible caves into which
they seem as if they delighted to flow, and murmur inarticulately
the burden of a hidden sorrow! Yes, the mind has its certain
knowledge, which, ensphered in sciences, stands out like stars on the
dark background of the infinite ; but who can sound the illimitable
depths of space! But the difficulties do not all arise from the
nature of the subject to be expressed in the definite language of a
creed. We are not always the same in our religious beliefs and
emotions. Sometimes we feel as if we breathed the balmy air of
heaven. The angels, as they glance past us like flashes of light,
fill our souls with a celestial peace. The mysteries of existence
fade away before our vision, and truth in all her beauty and
stateliness stands before us with a clearness and vividness that
create no surprise. There is no sound which breaks upon our
ear, whether it is the murmuring stream or the song of the bird,
that is not laden with the sweetness of a sacred melody. The
soul is flooded with the sense of God ; and the universe is one
grand temple filled with His glory. But such penetration and
ecstasy do not last always. There are other times, when the day-
light is short and the nights long; when dark, threatening
clouds rise like a wall upon our horizon; when the whistling
wind pipes in our ear the warning of the coming tempest; when
the lights of heaven go out, and the damp mists wreath their
cold folds about our shivering hearts; when the very rock on
which we stand seems to crumble at our feet, and the caverns
of earth yawn around us as if they were ready to swallow us up,
and when in our very confusion and helplessness we can only ask


the question which seems to mark the limits of human doubt
“My God, why hast Thou forsaken mef”
What are creeds and articles of faith to us in such circum-
stances as these % In our higher moments we soar above them
like the lark over her humble nest upon the ground ; when we
pass through the waters, they cannot keep us afloat; and when
we pass through the fire, they add intensity to the flame that is
consuming us. If, then, it is impossible to give accurate and
adequate expression to our religious convictions, the imposition
of subscription is a mistake, and in some cases a crime. Who
will rise up for our deliverance from the burden of subscription i
IY.
The last argument we shall adduce in favour of abolishing
subscription is one that rests upon the solid basis of fact.
Churches have existed, and do now exist, without subscription;
and, consequently, objection to its abolition, on the ground that
•ecclesiastical organizations would fall to pieces without its strong
bond and cement, is proved to be fallacious by the irresistible
logic of fact. The churches of the Congregational order—that
is, churches where the supreme authority is vested in the whole
body of the duly-enrolled members of each church or congre-
gation—do not impose subscription upon their ministers or office-
bearers, and yet they exist, and grow, and fulfil all the purposes
of churchesj as well, and, in the estimation of many, a great
deal better than those held together by doctrinal definition and
subscription. Upon each church rests the duty and responsibility
of calling its minister, appointing and ordaining its pastor and
officers, and generally of managing its own affairs, without
reference to any external authority. It is free, also, to enter
into association with other churches or societies to help, by
union and co-operation, in extending the boundaries of Christ’s
kingdom.
Objections are made from time to time to weaken this argument
from fact, but with comparatively little success. We shall
calmly look at some of them—put forth in all honesty, we believe,
but with a defective knowledge, which it is our duty to supple-
ment. It is sometimes said we are a small body, and that,
.although we may exist without subscription, it does not follow


that it can be dispensed with in larger bodies without endanger-
ing their very existence. There is here an ambiguity in the word
“ body,” against which we must be on our guard. There is no
such thing as a Congregational “ body ”or church. But if we
estimate our strength by the number of Congregational churches
in all parts of the world, we cannot in any sense be looked upon
as a small body. The number of Baptist churches, alone, is very
considerable, and as nearly all Baptist churches are independent
in their government, the Congregational denomination is second
to none in its numerical strength. We do not urge this as a
proof of the wisdom of abolishing subscription, but simply as an
answer to the objection that the area of experiment is too narrow
to warrant a general inference.
The isolation of Congregational churches, and consequently
their inability to engage in great enterprises and present a firm
and united front to the foe, is another popular objection, and has
considerable weight with those who accept the principle of Congre-
gationalism, but neglect its practice. To represent Congregational
churches as dwelling apart, each in its own little enclosure, and
indifferent to the claims of the great world without, may provoke
a smile, especially when they are daubed “ Bethels ” or “ Salems,”
and described as gatherings of ignorant and vulgar people, who
are in a state of continual warfare for the petty distinctions which
the society has to bestow. But to argue from this point of view
would indicate either ignorance, or what is worse, animus ; for
Bethelism, if we may coin a word, does not belong to Congre-
gationalism any more than to Presbyterianism, or, indeed, to any
form of government where congregational liberty is not wholly
suppressed. And as for true worth and Christian activity, what
churches are so zealous as those of the Congregational order?
The necessities of existence press upon them with such force that
activity is aroused to its utmost extent, and, as in other spheres of
vital action, they live only as they energize. The Congregational
churches have their schools and colleges. They have their Home
and Foreign missionary societies. For all the purposes of churches
they are not only adapted to do the work which has been given
them to do, but actually do it with as much zeal and success as
more compact organizations of larger means and greater social
influence.
Anxiety naturally arises in certain minds for the orthodoxy


of ministers were subscription abolished; and a dark hint is
let drop occasionally of the sad condition of the Congrega-
tional pulpit. But the loyalty of Congregational ministers to the
doctrines of Christianity is beyond dispute. They hold with the
strength of a strong personal conviction the faith once delivered
to the saints ; and they are under no obligation whatever to inquire
whether they belong to this school or that school of theology ; and,
what is better still, they are free to welcome any new light that
may break forth, either from God’s Word or God’s world. There
are no ecclesiastical prosecutions amongst Congregationalists.
Newspaper controversy is not prosecution. If a congregation is
satisfied with its minister, no other church has a right to interfere;
and this very liberty is a better safeguard for the purity of
Christian doctrine than subscription. Where a servant is trusted,
he is more likely to be honest than where he is suspected and
watched. Congregational ministers are trusted, and it is a very
uncommon thing to find one who has been false to the confidence
reposed in him.
Congregational ministers are said to be in danger of being
ill-used, and sometimes with great injustice, by their congregations ;
and, as they have no higher court to appeal to, they are compelled
to suffer without redress. The relation between a pastor and his
people is one of great delicacy. If there is no sympathy and
affection between them, for the welfare of both parties the
relationship should cease. No external authority in the world
can interfere with effect. To compel a congregation to listen to a
minister whom they dislike and have no confidence in, is simply
an act of ecclesiastical despotism. The history of Congregational
churches puts this matter beyond all dispute—that injustice, or
even harsh treatment, on the part of congregations to their
ministers is extremely rare. Congregations are far more frequently
victims than their pastors. The patience and long suffering of
some, under incompetent pastors, occasionally exceed the limits
of Christian endurance. If a minister is wronged or cheated by
his church, he has the law of the land to appeal to; and, even
at the worst, when the law cannot interfere, he has the press and
public opinion ; and is it not just as likely that he will receive
justice in this way and as readily and fully as if he were to put his
case into the hands of his clerical brethren in church court
assembled? Congregationalism, no doubt, is a delicate machine,


and requires careful handling ; but so is a gas-stove ; and although
the introduction of the latter into a house is sure to burn the
fingers of unskilful servants, and may possibly cause an explosion,
that is no reason why we should abolish this scientific mode of
cooking, and revert to the good old style of boiling the family
kettle on a pyramid of wood.
Congregational churches are, theoretically and practically, free
from the taint of sectarianism. They impose no conditions of
fellowship which Christ has not sanctioned. Membership and
communion are open to all who acknowledge His supreme authority
and sustain that profession by consistent conduct. We have no
anathemas for any branch of the visible church. We are ready
to fraternize and co-operate with all who love the Lord ,Tesus
Christ and receive us as brethren for His sake. There is a manlv
•>
P r ide in our ranks that will not permit us to call any ecclesiastical
dignitary either lord or master.
Congregational churches, it has been said, require high intelli-
gence and piety in their management, but where these do not
exist they begin to droop and die. Other bodies, by the aid of
organization and ritualistic services, can live, or appear to do so,
when the circulation is slow, and the heart feeble. According to
o
this view, the system that confers upon any body the power to
hold together after life has departed is supposed to possess a cer-
tain ecclesiastical virtue. But what is the value of life when it
can do no more than keep its own organs together ? When the
body dies, why embalm it, and perpetuate the repulsiveness of
death ? Why should its limbs and nerves, now rigid, be made to
move and tremble in horrid mockery of life by currents of gal-
vanic foi’ce sent through those channels from which life has
for ever departed? Let everything that is dead, in accordance
with the wise and kindly intentions of nature, be buried, that
its several parts, no longer under the direction of a living and
governing head, may reunite themselves to other forms of life,
and thus help to swell that mighty river of vital being which,
issuing at first from the divine fountain, rolls through the ages,
and returns to its source in the infinite life, laden with the
accumulated treasures of creation.
Walker, May , and Co., Printers, Melbourne ,
