

ONE PENNY.
CRIES
FROM THE CONDEMNED CELL
OF
CATHERINE WILSON
A History of the Private Life of this atrocious Poisoner relating, among other
startling ami horrible facts, the means by which she Discovered the Secret,
which utterly bathed the skill of all the Medical Profession ; to which is
added anecdotes of her Profligate Career; and her numerous Laisons with
different Paramours—Her Depravity—The Ctalty Manner in which she
ingratiated herself into the favor of her numerous Victims, only to destroy
them ; and other particulars from Private and Authentic sources.
2 & 3, SHOE LANE, FLEET STREET.


LIFE . OF. CATHERINE WILSON.
The history of this wretched woman, Catherine Wilson, con-
victed of murder by poisoning at the-Central Criminal Court,
reveals a long course of crime, so secret and appalling that it is
almost impossible to think of it without a shudder. Though
•several limes suspected, and more than once actually arrested in
a charge of secret poisoning, Catherine Wilson successfully
evaded the avenging sword of justice, she has, however, been at
length overtaken by the strong arm of Ihe law, her guilty career
is finally arrested, and she will speedily pay the first penalty of
her accumulated crimes.
The particular crime for which this woman is condemned Was
committed no less than six years ago, and considering the long
time that has elapsed, and the great difficulty of obtaining
definite proof in such cases, the evidence produced must life
regarded us remarkably satisfactory and conclusive.
A trial for life, is one of the most impressive scenes which
the common routine of human affairs affords. Few who have been
present at such an occasion, can forget the solemnity of the
impression it produces—the anxious calmness of the judge, the
grave and quiet discharge of their duties by the respective
counsel, the earnest and almost awe-struck attention of the
spectators, and the dramatic completeness of the inquiry, make
up a whole which can hardly be forgotten, the consciousness that
human life is really at stake, and does actually depend on the
result of the investigation, of which every step takes place
before the eyes of the spectators, gives a reality and an interest
to the scene that belongs to few others. It is an awful thing to
see a woman standing in the pride of health and strength, and
to think that the courteous and accomplished persons who play
the principal parts in the scene which is passing, are engaged in
deliberating whether or not she is to be publicly put to death in
the course of a fortnight or three weeks. On the by-standers,
and no doubt on some of the actors in such scenes, they make a
deep and lasting impression; but there is frequently, it may
almost be said usually, one person who feels to take it in." The
murderess herself is often wrapped up in such a strange web of
delusions, that even the gallows and the rope do not seem to bring
her to herself. Having lived a life of unutterable guilt, she dies
a death of unutterable horror.


Catherine Wilson, the subject of this bitter history, was born
in 1822. Her parents were poor and could not afford, even if
they had wished, to give her a good education; her natural
acuteness made up greatly for her want of knowledge; as a girl
she was resolute and determined to work,her own will in every-
thing. There is nothing positively known against her
character during the youthful period of her life,—she lived in
service fora considerable time, until she was seduced by the son
of a master of hers, at Boston,—a male child was the offspring
of this illicit connection, the boy did not live long; and grave
suspicions were excited by that occurence. An inquest was held
on the child, and a verdict of , “ Death from natural causes”
recorded.
.. - Catherine Wilson, though a very illiterate woman, would have
liked to become a very fine lady; she was in early life very
extravagant in her habits, and by some means or other, which may
never be ascertained, always seemed to be able to procure money,
and used to dress well, but without taste; her natural shrewdness
gave her a very plausible tongue, and made her a deep bold
designing woman.
The first time the finger of suspicion was pointed at her was in
1853, when she was housekeeper to a man named Mawer, —he
possessed a little property—and she was very kind sod attentive
to her victim; by her artifices she got him to make a Will in
her favor, which the man did some short time before he died.
This Mawer had been in the habit of taking colchicum for a
certain purpose, she knew this and carefully watched its effects;
for six months he lingered, and then death seized him. Catherine
Wilson, simply by an over-dose of his own medicine, had seat
him out of the world.
f,„ Being acquainted with the poisonous nature of Colchicum,
and her tigress nature having tasted blood, she looked about for
.another victim, and found one in a young man named Dixon,
who became her paramour; it does not appear that they lived
very happily—true it is that she got tired of him, as she had
taken up with a man that travelled about the country as a medical
manbeing a very swarthy person he was denominated by the
name of the dark doctor, and many mysterious stories were
told of him; the country folks used to speak with fear and awe
of, and look with dread at the little bottle he would exhibit, and
tell them, that the strongest man living would die instantly,
simply by smelling it, and they would look with horror depicted
on their countenances, when he proved the truth of this assertion
by ocular demonstration, by letting a dog sniff at the open phial.


This was the man that’Catherine Wanted. One night she and
the dark doctor were in Dixon’s bed-room, Who lay stretched
sleeping on his bed, the dark man applied the bottle to the nose
of the slumbering man ; Catherine held the light and a fiendish
grin illuminated her features, as she saw her wretched paramour
struggling to awake from the sleep of death.
An inquest was held, but no evidence of the presence of poison
could be had. Catherine Wilson in her evidence before the coroner,
stated that Dixon died from galloping consumption, but direct
evidence of the contrary' was brought by the medidal man that
made the post-mortem examination, he proved that Dixon’s lungs
were sound, and his organs generally healthy, but that the cause
of death to him was shrouded in mystery.
Mrs, Catherine Wilson must live. She cannot work any
more. Mrs. Wilson borrows money, and lives for a considerable
time on that system; the little independence that Mawerleft
her is not enough to keep her in affluence. She had a friend of
the name of Jackson that resided at Boston ; she writes letters,
borrows money, and then visits her. She was aware that that
lady used to draw regularly £1 S2O, and that this sum Was in her
'possession. She telegraphs to London for the bottle; the
dark doctor does not send it, but after some time posts a hand-
kerchief instead. Mrs. Wilson could not wait for it, but has
been dosing the old lady with colchicura, her favorite poison, who
is seized again with the same violent symptoms—-retching,
purging, vomiting and great agony, and in four days she was
dead.
In 1861, we find that Catherine Wilson was living with a man
named Taylor, after a short cohabitation with him he was taken
ill and attacked in the same manner as the other victims; but
fortunately for him remedies were promptly administered, and
the man recovered.
But now the calumniating point in her career arrived, Cathe-
rine Wilson separated from the man Taylor, made the acquaint-
ance of another one that was married, and had a family. She
was One evening walking Out with him when they met his wife ;
mutual recrimination ensued between the two women. Cathe-
rine waited her time, and artfully contrived that she should be
dosed with sulphuric acid; the poison did not have the desired
effect-—the woman recovered, and charged Mrs. Wilson with
poisoning her. Catherine was arrested, in the company of the
unfortunate woman’s husband, taken before a magistrate, and
committed for trial in the early part of the present year.
The evidence was pretty conclusive, and Baron Bramwell


thought himself justified in summing up the deed against her,;.
but the jury, after a long deliberation,.came into court acquitting/
her of the charge.
But this did not happen to he a very fortunate thing for
Catherine Wilson, suspicious evidence had been brought forward,,
on the trial implicating the infamous woman vfith complicity in a,
great number. of diabolical crimes An. inquiry was instituted.,
Evidence was brought forward, and Catherine Wilson was com-
mitted for (rial on two. separate charges of murder ; had she been
convicted at first for the attempt she, might bavp been sent for
penal servitude , but the acquittal she received, at the hands of
the jury wag the means of her now being in (he condemned cell
waiting tbe last dread penalty of the law. ,
, As. she was convicted on a charge of murder (hat we have not
referred to, we will, believing that they will prove interesting,
state briefly the. whole facts, of the case.
f About Christmas, in the year 1855, the condemned woman
went to lodge with Mrs., Soamea, a widow lady, residing in
Alfred-street, Bedford-square ; , she occupied the , firat-flooij
unfurnished, and the man Dixon that she cohabited with—fyujt
said was her brother—reame, with her, and for, a time occupied
oueroom on the same floor, Her first object op taking up h.et
residence in the bouse was to establish herself in her landlady’s
confidence, and secure her good opinion, and in this she appears
to have succeeded. Tbe eldest daughter, in giving her evidence,
states —"The prisoner became on, very intimate terms with my
mother soon after she came, and my mothei; frequently went to
her room.*’ The prisoner continued to live jin the house on
terms, of growing intimacy with the family, until the month of
October; on Wednesday, tbe Xsth of that month, Mrs, Soames
went to see, her brother, at Holloway, with the view of getting
some money from him, and he let her have £9 in gold; a
legacy of £lOO had been left her by her father a little while
before, which she appears to have received her brother by
instalments,'so that she had been in tbe habit of going to him
from time to time for money. Her brother deposes that when
with hint,.on the afternoon of that day, she was iq.her usual
health and spirits. On returning, she had tea with her daughter
as usual, While we were at tea’’—deposes the eldest daughter
—" (fie prisoner came in and my mother, she wanted tq speak, to
her, and she went up to her room; during the night Mrs. Soames
was attacked with great sickness and violent pain at the chest;, the
Sain and sickness seemed rather to increase than to' diminish and
uring the whole of Thursday tbe poor woman remained very ill. A,


medical man, Dr.Whidbourne was sent for, and he, thinking that it
was English Cholera from what the symptoms indicated, adminis-
tered the usual soothing draft to arrest the progress of the disorder
and relieve the pain. The prisoner was constant in her attend-
ance upon the sick woman, and insisted on giving her her
medicine. After taking it, however, the terrible pain and sick-
ness came on with greater violence than before. On his second
visit, the doctor being surprised and puzzled at this unexpected
result, prescribed a stronger opiate, in the hope of affording
relief; this too was administered by the prisoner, and with the
same result of aggravated symptoms as before. Both daughters
said that during the day the prisoner several times gave their
mother something to drink out of a tumbler, while the younger
adds that she expressly told her it was a mixture of brandy and egg.
The poor woman continued to get worse, and after suffering dreadful
tortures, died during the Friday night. Dr. Whidbourne was
so dissatisfied and suspicious, that he refused a certificate as to
the cause of death, and made a post-mortem examination, with
the view of ascertaining whether poison had been administered.
No trace of it,' however, was discovered. Both he and Dr.
Alfred Swayne Taylor agree, however, that the symptoms were
not of, English Cholera, and could only be accounted for on the
supposition that some vegetable mineral had been administered,
and was rapidly absorbed into the sympton; what this poison
really was, another part of Dr. Whidbourne’s evidence may
explain. He says, “ a person named Dixon lodged in the house
of Mr. Sofunes, and he died there in June, four months before
the death of the deceased. During his illness I had a conversa-
tion with the prisoner, and she told me that Dixon had been in
the habit of taking colchicum for rheumatism, I told her that it
was a very dangerous medicine, and the prisoner replied that
she'knew this and was well acquainted with it, I told
her it should not be administered unless under medical
supervision. An over-dose of colchicum would produce all
the sympions that where exhibited by the deceased—namely,
vomiting, purging, sickness and pain in the chest and bowels;
no such results could have followed the administration of the
medicine I prescribed.” Dr. Taylor’s evidence as to the influence
of colchicum is to the same effect, and there can hardly be a
doubt but tnat tne poor woman died from poison. A number of
decisive circumstances convict the prisoner with the administration
of the poison; she not only gave the medicine, as we have seen,
and another mixture with her own hands, but she kept the bottles
Containing the medicines, locked up in in her own room, and on


being asked by one of the lodgers (Miss Ebse) why she did
so, explained “that it was particular stuff, and that she must
administer it herself, and give it to the deceased with hsr own
handit comes out in evidence moreover that the prisoner,
with a view to her own protection, circulated a report that the
deceased had poisoned herself, that she was privy to the fact,
but that she did not reveal it for the sake of the family; it was
proved, however, that the poor woman was perfectly cheerful—in
good health and spirits —with no motive whatever for committing
such a desperate act, and had, in fact, made arrangements during
her short illness on the expectation of her speedy recovery. If
site died by poison—as the prisoner confidently affirmed—there
could be no doubt as to who had administered it. The only point
remaining to be noticed is the motive for the murder, and this,
as in every previous case of poisoning by the same hand, was—
money] The prisoner knew that Mrs. Soames had gone to her
brother with the intention of getting money from him, and,
probably, did not know how much money she had received ; but
whatever it might be, she evidently resolved to possess herself of
if,—and, accordingly, no trace of the money the deceased had
received from her brother was ever obtained after Mrs. Soames’
death ; it appears uncertain whether she had obtained other sums
from the murdered woman ; after her death she certainly obtained
£lO from the daughters, on the faith of a document said to be
in their mother’s writing; but it is very clear that the wretched
prisoner had become so truely familiar with the appaling crime
of murder, by poison, that the certain prospect of even a
comparatively small sum would be quite sufficient to incite her
to another attempt. Fortunately, though Justice has Justice, has
been slow in overtaking its victim, it has not failed, —and this
merciless woman will now expiate her offences on the scaffold.
THE MURDERESS IN NEWGATE.
Catherine Wilson appears to he somewhat impressed with her
awful position, and is preparing to meet her fate in a becoming
manner. After her conviction she continued positively to assert
her innocence of the crime alleged against her, and she professed
not to have understood a word of the observations that were made
to her by Mr. Justice Byles. It has been observed by all prison
officials, that prisoners, who are alleged to have committed mur-
der by poison, present a different conduct and demeanour to other
classes of criminals, and that all their proceedings seemed to
be based upon the most deliberate consideration, and in the present


case it was evident that the prisoner persisted in her declaration
of innocence, as the only chance by which she might evade the
final sentence of the law. Now, however, as the time approaches,
and the prison authorities have felt it their duty to caution the
prisoner against entertaining any hope that mercy will be exten-
ded to her, a considerable difference have been observed in her
demeanour, and she no longer asserts her innocence in the posi-
tive manner she previously has done, and it is considered not at
all improbable that she will make a full confession of her guilt.
Mr. Neale,, the Attorney that conducted her case, has sent a
memorial to the Horae Secretary, praying that the sentence may
be stayed, and urging the absence of any positive proof jn support
of the charge; in addition to this, the prisoner herself has drawn
up a statement, which was transmitted to the Home Office by Mr.
Jonas, the Governor of Newgate, on Saturday last, in which she
prays that the mercy of the Crown may be extended to her, and
asserts her innocence of the crime of which she was convicted.
She says all the symptoms that the deceased exhibited were the
result of natural disease, and that she never did administer poison
in any shape pr form. The evidence however was so conclusive,
that there is not the slightest chance that this, assertion will make
the slightest difference with the decision upon the advisers of the
Crown; and although no formal answer has been received to
either of the memorials, there does not appear to be the least
reason to think that the law will not be allowed to take its course.
Fourteen years have now elapsed since the capital sentence was
carried out at Newgate upon a female; the last woman that was
executed was Harriett Parker, for the murder of two children,
belonging to a man she cohabited with in the Goswell Road.
Catherine Wilson, 40, a good-looking woman, described as a
widow, was indicted before Mr, Justice Bylps, at the Central
Criminal Court, on Thursday, for the wilful murder of Maria
Soames—Mr. S. W. Barnes said : I am the half brother of the
deceased, and reside at Holloway. The deceased was a widow,
and resided at 27, Alfred Street, Bedford Square, and she died
on the 18th of October, 1856. I saw her at my house on the
15th of October, in the afternoon. She was then perfectly well.
She borrowed 91. of me, and I think I gave it her in gold. I
had paid '.he some more money a short time before this for a
legacy. I saw her again on Friday, the 17th of October, about
half-past nine in the evening. She was in bed, and complained
of great pain and sickness. I saw the prisoner in the bed-room
of the deceased at this time, and she appeared to bp attending
upon my sister. I was sent for again on the following morning,


and was informed that my sister was dead. A coroner's inquest
wps hold on the following Monday or Tuesday, at my instance.
I remember a letter being received on the Monday, It was given
to me by Miss Rowe. The letter was put in and read, It was
as follows, but bore neither date, nor address, nor name Dear
Maria, —I hope you were not very hurt at my not being at home on
Friday. I was surprised to hear a lady in black wanted me. I
can’t let you have the 80Z. now, but if you will let me have ten
more I will by next Monday come into the corner. Don’t say
anything of what you are going to do to anybody. Send me
word if you was not well after you got home on Wednesday, as
you was unhappy in the afternoon. Direct this letter as the first
used to be, for the old postman found fault in the street. Be
cheerful, and come on Wednesday. I will be there. Write
by return.—Your —-Mrs. Anne Naacke said: I am the
eldest daughter of the deceased, and at the time of her
death I and another sister lived with her. I remembe rthe
prisoner coming to lodge at my mother’s house, No. 27,
Alfred Street. She occupied the first floor, unfurnised,
and a man named Dixon came with her, whom she repre-
sented to be her brother, and they each occupied one of
the rooms on the first floor. The prisoner became on very
intimate terras with my mother soon after she came, and my
mother frequently went to her room. I recollect my mother
going to see her brother on the 15th of October. She came
home between four and five o'clock, and we all had tea together,
and my mother appeared quite well. Her usual health was very
good, but sometimes she had bilious attacks, but they never
lasted more than one day, and I am not aware that she ever took
any medicine for them. ; The prisoner came jn while we were at
tea, and told my mother she wanted to speak to her, and she
went up to her room, I did not notice any sickness or illness in
my mother before 1 went to bed, but at six o’clock the next
morning she came to me and said she was very ill with a
bilious attack, and she must go to bed again,—and she did so.
I saw her soon afterwards, and she was very sick, and complained
of great pain in her chest, and she vomited while I was in the
room. During the Thursday I saw the prisoner in roy
mother’s bed-room, and in my presence she gave something to
drink to my mother. My mother continued very ill during the
whole of Thursday. On Friday morning, the 17th, my mother
was still very ill, and always complained of the sickness and
pain in her chest, and she vomited every ten minutes or quarter
of an hour, and appeared to be getting weaker. Dr. Whidboma


was sent for during the day, and some medicine came to the
house for my mother, and I saw the prisoner give her a portion
of the medicine, and she then took the medicine bottle away
with her, and she did so every time she administered the medi-
cine. My mother did not appear to be getting any better of the
sickness and pain until just before her death. I sat up with her
on the Friday night, and she died about five o’clock in the morn,
ing. About an hour before this my mother said she felt better,
and the prisoner said it was time to take her medicine again, and
she gave her some. My mother was very ill and in great pain
immediately, and said she would not take any more of the
medicine, and the prisoner said she must do so, and that
it would do her good. I went for the doctor, and when
I returned my mother appeared very much worse, and in
violent agony, and she died in about half an htmr. A lady
named Rowe lodged in the other house, and she came in just
after my mother died. Soon after the funeral the prisoner told
mo that my mother had borrowed £lO of her, and I told her I
was surprised at it. I had never heard of it before. The pri-
soner showed me a paper which she said had been written by my
mother, and I believe it was her handwriting. It was a promise
to pay the bearer £lO. I and my uncle afterwards paid the
prisoner that sum. My mother always paid her bills regularly,
but at the time of her death the bills were a few weeks in arrear.
I had never heard anything about my mother going to be mar-
ried again. All the money that was found in my mother’s room
was only a shilling or two. It was in a small purse that was brought
me by some one, but I cannot recollect by whom.—Sarah Soames
the sister of the last witness, said ; My mother was quite well
on the 15th of October, until the time the prisoner asked her to
go to her room. (The witness then gave similar evidence to
that of the last witness as to the condition of the deceased on
the following morning.) During the Thursday I saw the prisoner
frequently give my mother something to drink, and she told me
it was brandy and egg. She brought it into the room ready
prepared, and she said it would do my mother good. My mother
retched directly she took this drink, and she also complained of
violent pain in her chest and great thirst, and said that she had
never had such a bilious attack during her life. My mother was
a stout, healthy woman, and I never saw her low-spirited, and
had not the slightest idea that she meditated self-destruction.—
Miss Emma Rowe said; In October, 1856,1 resided as a lodger
in one of the deceased’s houses, No. 13, but I used to take my
meals at No. 27. I saw deceased on Wednesday, the 15th of


October. At that time she appeared to be perfectly well.
When I saw her the next morning she was very ill, and the
prisoner advised me not to see her again, and said she would be
better if left to herself. Either on the Thursday or the Friday
1 observed two medicine bottles on the chimney-piece in the
prisoner’s room, and she told me that one of them contained
Mrs. Soame’s medicine. I asked her why she locked it up in
her room and she said it was particular stuff, and that she must
administer it herself, and give it to the deceased by her own'
hand. The door of the prisoner’s room was always kept locked.
After the death of the deceased on the Saturday morning the
prisoner called me into her room, and said she wanted to speak
to me, she had a secret to tell me. I asked her what it was,
and she said it was about Mrs. Soame's death. She said it was
not a natural one; but she had made away with herself. She
said she was acquainted with some man who had borrowed money
of her, and who had disappointed her, and that she had taken
something to destroy herself. • She said that she had taken it in
brandy and water in her presence. I inquired how she came to
allow her to do such a thing, and why she did not tell her
family or the medical man ; and the prisoner replied that it was
not her business. I then said to the prisoner, “ You are a
villain.” I asked the prisoner about this roan, and she told me
that in all probabilty a letter would be received from him on the
following Monday, and that he would make a further application
for money. I saw the letter that has been produced on Monday,
the 20th October, and il gave it to the prisoner, and have never
seen it since until this year.—Mrs. Eliza Matthews said : I was
acquainted with the deceased for many years, and we were on
very intimate terms. ' She generally had very good health, I
went to her house on the Sunday after her death, and prisoner
showed me the body of the deceased in her coffin. I was
surprised at the appearance of the deceased. Her hands were
clenched and her face' dreadfully distorted, and I observed it
must have been a bad death.; She said, ‘‘Ah, poor dear; you
don’t know all.” I said, “ Don’t know all ?—what do you mean ?”
The prisoner replied, ‘‘ Did you know she was going to be
married ?” I said, “ No,” and inquired if her daughters or Mrs.
Barnes knew about it, and she replied that they did not, and it
was a profound secret. She added that if it had not been for
what she stated the deceased might still have been with them.
She also said that the deceased had been to see the man she
referred to the day before she was taken ill, and that she had,
found his circumstances very different to what be had repre-


seated, and that this had disappointed her, and had brought on
the bile. She then said that this man's letters were addressed to
her under cover, in order that the affair might be kept secret,
and that she had no doubt that a letter would come from this
man the next day, and that it would contain the old story-
asking for money. The prisoner also said that the man had
borrowed so much as £BO of her, and that she herself knew the
man quite well, and she had with Mrs. Soames to meet him on
the Wednesday, and that this meeting had upset her, and she
was taken ill in her room after taking a little brandy-and-water.
I was on very intimate terms with the deceased, and had known
her from a child. I took tea with the deceased’s daughter
directly after the conversation with the prisoner. I said
nothing to them ahout it, but when my husband came to
fetch me home I told him about it. I believe there was a
desire to keep the matter secret, in order to spare the
feelings of the daughters of the deceased. We used to
converse upon the subject of Mrs. Soame’s death, and
always considered it was a most mysterious one. A man
named Taylor was shown .to me, and I was told that he was
the man who had been living with the prisoner. - Mr.
O. Widbourne said: I am a surgeon residing in Guildford
Street, Russell Square. I was acquainted with the deceased, but
I had not attended her professionally, and I considered her very
healthy, and a person of cheerful disposition, I was first called
on to attend the deceased on Friday, the 17 th of October. It
was in the after part of the day. I found her suffering from
great sickness and pain in the bowels, and there, were also spasms
and great restlessness. 1 heard that she had vomited, and there
had been a great deal of purging before I came. The deceased
looked very dejected, and in coneequence.of the state I found her
in, I enquired what she had taken, and she said she had taken
some pork-pie which she supposed might have disagreed with her.
The prisoner was present, and she • appeared very kind to the
deceased. I prepared some medicine, which contained a mild
preparation of opium, and it was sent to the deceased’s house
immediately. I went to see the deceased again lata at night, and
found that the medicine had had no effect in alleviating tho symp-
toms, and I prepared some a little stronger.' On the Friday night
I remember a statement being made hy the. prisoner to the effect
that the deceased had got into some trouble and anxiety on
account of her connexion with somo man she had met in an omni-
bus. I was at the house of the deceased at a very early hour on
the Saturday morning, and the deceased was then alive, bat as


ill as she could possibly be, and I considered she was near her
end. After the death had taken place an application was made
to me for a certificate as to the cause of death, and I refused to
give one, I was afterwards examined at the inquest and made a
post-mortem examination of the body, and tq the best of my
recollection the mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels
was inflamed, and I attributed the death of the deceased to that
infiamation. The effect of the medicine I had prescribed in a
case of choleraic diarrhoea should have been to ease the pain
and stop the purging. At the time I attributed the death to
natural causes, and the coroner’s jury returned a verdict to that
effect. A person named Dixon lodged in Mrs. Soame’s honse,
and he died there in June, four months before the death
of the deceased. During his illness I had a conversation with
the prisoner, and she told me that Dixon had been in the habit
of taking colchicum for rheumatism, and I told her it was a very
dangerous medicine, and that it -should not be administered
except under medical supervision, and the prisoner replied that
she knew this, and was well acquainted with it. An overdose of
colchicum would produce all the symptoms that were exhibited
by the deceased, namely, vomiting, purging, sickness, and pain in
the chest and bowels. No suoh results could have followed
the administration of the medicine that I prescribed. I was
satisfied at the time that the inflammation in the stomach of the
deceased had been produced by something she had taken, and
any vegetable irritant poison would have produced all these
appearances, and colchicum, if administered in brandy and egg
or brandy and water, would certainlg have done so, I also have
no doubt that such a poison might pass out of the system
without leaving any trace.—At this stage of the case the trial
was adjourned, the jury, aa is usual in cases of felony, being
taken to the London Coffee-house, in charge of the officers of
the court.
At the sitting of the Court on Friday, Dr, A. Swaine Taylor
said; After five years’ interment there would bo no possibility
of discovering a vegetable irritant in the stomach. Even after
three or four days, if taken in a fluid state and there had been
violent vomiting, he should say there would be no trace.
Vomiting and ' purging, i and pains in the stomach, were
the results of choleraic diarrhoea. • He had never seen or heard
of a healthy person dying from an attack of choleraic diarrhoea
in 40 or 50 hours. Violent pains in the chest were not symptoms
of English cholera- The medicine given by Dr. Wbidbourne would
have allayed the symptoms if the patient had been suffering from


natural disease. The medicine was very proper, and the symptoms
ought to have yielded to it. He- could not attribute the
death of Mrs. Soames to natural causes. The administration of
colchicum would account for the symptoms under which Mrs.
Soames laboured. Colchicum would produce burning sensations,
nausea, purging, violent retching, pains in the stomach, and
thirst Great restlessness would also be produced. In most
cases where irritant poison was' administered great distress was
exhibited in the countenance. In the case of death from
choleraic diarrhoea the appearance was that of exhaustion. He
made an analysis of the contents of Mrs. Soames’s stomach on
the 29th of July last. He examined for every kind of poison
likely to be found after that long period of interment. He
found none. There certainly was no trace of arsenic, antimony,
or mercury. This was the case for the prosecution. Mr.
Oppenheim proceeded to address the jury for the defence. He
said the two great points which the jury would have to consider
were these—First, whether Mrs. Soames died of poison ; and
second, whether that poison was administed by the prisoner at
the bar. Referring to the evidence, he contended that neither
of those propositions was proved ; that no poison was found in
the body of the deceased, and that no poison of any kind was
traced to the prisoner. The learned gentleman spoke three
hours and ten minutes, and concluded by an earnest appeal to
the jury that they would found their verdict on justice and mercy.
The judge, at the desire of the jury, deferred his summing up
until the following morning.
On the re-assembling of the jury, on Saturday morning, the
prisoner was placed at the bar. She appeared to be in a very
depressed and nervous ; Btate.—Mr. Justice Byles then proceeded
to sum up the evidence.-'—'They had heard, no doubt, with great
attention, the statement of the counsel for the prosecution, which
was instituted at the instance of the government, and had been
conducted temperately and fairly, and they had also heard the
statement of the learned counsel' for the prisoner. He (the
judge) had most anxiously considered the evidence, to ascertain
what were the points most favorable to the prisoner, and he
could not find any one of those points had escaped the notice and
observation of the learned counsel for the prisoner. They all
well knew what the consequences would be to the prisoner, and
there was no reason to believe that in the case of the decision of
the jury being adverse to the prisoner that those consequences
would not be carried out. If they believed the case fairly made
out against the prisoner it was their duty to convict the prisoner;


but, on the other hand, if they did not think the evidence bore
out the case, they ought to give the prisoner the benefit of any
doubt they might have. After some further general remarks,
the learned judge said the duty of the jury lay between the
public and tbe prisoner, and they were bound not to swerve from
their duty. If upon the evidence they believed the prisoner
guilty, they were bound to say so, whatever were the consequences.
On the other hand, they were bound to give her the benefit of any
reasonable doubt they might entertain.—The jury retired to con-
sider their verdict at one o’clock, and at a quarter to three they
returned to court, with a verdict of Gdiltv.
The learned judge immediately put on the black cap and pro-
ceeded to pass sentence upon the prisoner. He said that she
had been convicted, after a long and patient trial, and most
anxious consideration by the jury of all the circumstances of the
case of this most atrocious crime, and, although it was not his
custom in this or any other case to express either concurrence or
dissent with the verdict of a jury, he could not forbear stating on
the present occasion that it appeared to him that, upon the evi-
dence that had been laid before them, the jury would have failed
in the performance of their duty if they had come to any other
conclusion. In his opinion there never was a case where a
murder by deliberation, and causing the most excruciating agony
to the victim, under the eyes of the murderer, had been so
clearly established. Great care had been taken during the
inquiry to exclude anything that had previously happened from
the consideration of the jury, but now that they had returned
their verdict, and the case was concluded, he thought it right
that the jury and the public should know what sort of a person
it was that had at length been reached by the avenging arm of
the law. It appeared that, in the first place, in the year 1853
or 54, she was living at Boston, in Lincolnshire, as servant to a
person named Mawes, and that he made his will in her favour in
the month of April, and died in the month of October
following; and it appeared that this person was in the
habit of taking colchicutn. He would say no more in reference
to this matter, than that it established that at this period she
was well acquainted with the qualities of colcbicum. After this,
it appeared that she was living with a young man named Dixon,
and it appeared by the evidence of Dr. Whidborne that he was
attacked with vomiting and purging, and that he died under
similar circumstances to those detailed in the case of Mrs.
Soames; and that, although the prisoner had stated that he died
of galloping consumption, when he was opened, nothing was


found to be the matter with hie lungs. About the year 1859 it
appeared she was living at Boston with a Mrs. Jackson, and that
this person was known to have drawn out of the bank a sum of
£l3O, and she was taken ill almost immediately afterwards, and
died in four days, and after the death no trace of the money
could be discovered. It was true that a promissory note was
found, purporting to be signed by two persons living at Boston,
but their signatures were proved to be forged. In October, 1860.
she appeared to be living with a Mrs. Atkinson, at Kennington,
and on the 19th of that month, that person was attacked with the
same symptoms, and died in four days. If the jury had
acquitted the prisoner upon the present charge, she would have
been at once put upon her trial for the murder of this person ;
and having read the depositions carefully, he had no more doubt
that she was guilty of this crime than if he had been present at
the time, and had seen her with his own eyes commit it. In
addition to this, it appeared that in 1861 she was living with
a man named Taylor, and that he also was taken ill with
the same symptoms that had been exhibited in the other
cases, directly after he had had his dinner, but remedies being
administered, he recovered. Besides this it appeared that in the
course of the present year she had been tried in this court for
the offence of attempting to commit murder by poison, and
although she was acquitted, he was informed that the learned
judge who tried her believer her to be guilty, and on that
account felt it his duty to sum up the case very unfavourably for
her. These were undoubtedly, most simple facts, and they
rendered the statement that was made by Dr. Taylor, that in the
midst of apparent prosperity a fearful crime and vice was rife in
this metropolis—namely, that of murder by secret poisoning—
more than probable. He then said that the life of the prisoner
was In the hands of the Crown, bnt he thought it right to say that
if any application were made to him upon the subject he con-
sidered the case was one of such a character that he certainly
should not interfere, and he therefore could not hold out to her any
hope of commutation of the sentence. His lordship then passed
sentence of death in the usual form, and the prisoner, whe
exhibited the utmost coolness and self-possession, was removed
from the bar.
