

Criminality and Levels of Intelligence
Being a Report of a Mental Survey
of the Hobart Gaol
TASMANIA
BY
PROFESSOR E. MORRIS MILLER, M.A., LITT.D.
University of Tasmania
Director of State Psychological Clinic
Presented to both Houses oj Parliament by His Excellency's Command
[Estimated cost of printing (280) —£8 12s. 6d.]
(No 7.)


CONTENTS.
1. Hobart Gaol Mental Survey.
2. Psychological Classification of Prisoners.
3. Types of Crime in Relation to Mental Levels.
4. Brain Measurements of Prisoners.
5. Need for Early Diagnosis and Differential Education
of Mental Deviates.


Table of Distribution of Intelligence Quotients (IQ).
Intelligence
Quotients.
Imbeciles.
Feeble-
minded.
Border-
line.
Inferior.
formal
Ul
a
i-
D
>
◄
Superior.
1
Total.
21-30
1
—
1
31-40
7
7
41-50
1
8
—
9
51-60
— t
16
4
20
61-70
—
1
28
i
30
71-80
— s
—
4
15
1
20
81-90
—
—
—
5
8
13
91-100 .
—
—
8
8
101-110 ... .
—
6
6
110 and over
—
—
—
—
3
3
9
25
36
21
23
3
117
Criminality and Levels of Intelligence: Being a Report
of a Mental Survey of the Hobart Gaol.
I.—Hobart Gaol Mental Survey.
In June of 1924 it was decided, with the concurrence
of the Attorney-General (Hon. A. G. Ogilvie), to ascer-
tain what prisoners in the Hobart Gaol were defectives
within the meaning of “ The Mental Deficiency Act.”
The State Psychological Clinic is empowered to do so
under Section 20 of the Act. As it appeared that the
prison population was likely to show a considerable per-
centage of subnormality, the Superintendent of the
Gaol (Captain H. C. Davies) arranged that the whole
of the prisoners should be examined by the Clinic.
The examining authority comprised the Gaol Medical
Officer (Dr. W. Inglis Clark) and the Director of the
Clinic (Dr. Morris Miller). In view of the fact that
the main purpose of the examination was to discover
defectives so that they might be certified and registered,
it was not considered necessary on a first survey to give
a detailed psychological examination in the cases of
non-defectives, except where special circumstances war-
ranted it.
(a) Mental Levels. —So far 119 male prisoners have
been examined. Their chronological ages are as fol-
low ;
Under 20 years, 5; 20-30 years, 54; 30-40 years,
31; 40-50 years, 16; 50-60 years, 7; over 60, 6.
Total, 119.
The mental levels of 117 cases are;
Imbeciles, 9; feeble-minded, 25; borderline, 36;
normal inferior, 21; normal average, 23; normal
superior, 3. Total, 117.
In this classification there are included four mild
psychotics and two epileptics whose mental levels were
not seriously disturbed by their mental condition. Two
serious psychotics were excluded owing to marked men-
tal deterioration. They were transferred by the proper
authorities to New Norfolk. Of the defectives six were
remand cases, not sentenced, being afterwards trans-
ferred to an institution for defectives.
The following table shows the distribution of intel-
ligence quotients (IQ) according to mental levels. (The
intelligence quotient is obtained by dividing the chrono-
logical age into the mental age multiplied by 100. E.g.,
if the chronological age is 12, and the mental age 8,
the intelligence quotient is 66. The highest chrono-
logical age used as a divisor is 16 years. In the case
of all these prisoners the mental age has been divided
by 16 to obtain the intelligence quotient.) The table
also shows the range of quotients for each mental level.
(No. 7.)
The median quotient is 68, and it is calculated that
50 per cent, of the IQ’s lie between 57 and 82, and
that only 25 per cent, exceed 82*. The mental develop-
ment of this prison population is therefore consider-
ably below that of the general community.
(5) Defectives. —Of all the prisoners examined the
percentage of defectives (including the feeble-minded
or moron) is 28 per cent., of border-lines 30 per cent.,
and of normals 40 per cent. But it must not be inferred
from these figures that the percentage of defectives
among the criminal population of Tasmania is as high as
28 per cent. Six tractable defectives were remand cases
who were directly transferred to a suitable institution.
Several others were not “ criminal,” as the term is
ordinarily understood, and would now be dealt with
otherwise than by being senttogaol. Further, the survey
should extend over a period of three or four years before
the percentage of criminal defectives can be reasonably
gauged. It may likely range round 20 per cent., but
even 10 per cent, of criminal defectives is large enough
to warrant serious consideration by the prison
authorities. It is quite possible that in the larger
prisons (or in all the prisons of a large population) the
intelligence distribution of the prisoners may bear some
correspondence to that of the general population,
though the probability is that there will be a preponder-
ance in the gaols of intelligences below the average nor-
mal levels. It might be added that somewhat similar
percentages have been obtained by Dr. Guy G. Fernald
from his examination of 1100 prisoners in the Massa-
chusetts Gaol Reformatory, viz.—segregable defectives,


Mental Level.
Number.
Percentage.
Borderlines
16
44
Normals
17
36
Defectives
14
41
Totals
47
41
Class.
'Number.
Percentage.
Defectives
31
26
Psychotic, &c
6
5
Non-defective psychopaths ...
33
277
Totals
70
58'7
15 per cent.; subnormals, 44 per cent, normals, 40 per
cent.
( c ) Psychopaths. —ln addition to determining the
mental levels of the prisoners, their mental functioning
was observed. It was ascertained that at least 47
men manifested psychopathic functioning in various
manners and degrees. These included cases indicating
constitutional inferiority, inadequate personality, sexual
psychopathy, paranoid personality, psychopathic depres-
sion or exaltation, emotional instability, and other
marked “ erraticisms ” of behaviour. All these indi-
viduals manifest anomalous or aberrant character trends
which prevent them from adequately adjusting them-
selves to their environment, but not in such a manner
as to warrant their being classified as insane. In addi-
tion to the classes indicated above under psychopathy,
there was also included any prisoner who manifested
such marked deviation of mental functioning as pre-
vented him from reacting stably in the community in
accordance with his mental level. As a rule the psycho-
paths are of a mental level above that of the defective,
though it is not infrequently the case that a defective
also manifests intractability and social mal-adjustment.
All these types are usually socially inefficient, and their
psychopathy may affect them either personally or
socially. The most troublesome cases are the social
psychopaths, and in many instances it is impossible for
them to effect a social adjustment. In view of the fact
that some psychopaths are, and others are not, improv-
able, it is desirable to afford them institutional care
and treatment. For the delinquent psychopaths the
indeterminate sentence is most appropriate, as it enables
them to remain under the observation of a competent
authority, and places them under the best conditions
likely to effect a satisfactory adjustment, where unprov-
ability is possible.
The prisoners with psychopathic mental functioning
were classified as follow :
( d ) Comparison with Sing Sing Prison. —lncluding
among the six psychotics previously mentioned three
individuals who were also defectives, we may now sum-
marise the total number of mental deviates as follow:
Accordingly, nearly three-fifths of the Tasmanian
prisoners are mental deviates of some sort. These facts
reveal the importance of making provision for the
differential handling and treatment of criminals. As
it may be objected that the number of examinees is
rather small for the purpose of making deductions, and
that a larger prison would not show so large a propor-
tion of mental deviates among prisoners, a comparison
may be made with an examination of 608 consecutive
admissions to Sing Sing Prison, New York, by Dr. Ber-
nard Glueck. His percentages of deviation from nor-
mality are as follow :
Per Cent.
Mentally diseased or deteriorated 12'
Intellectually defective 28'1
Psychopathic or constitutionally inferior 18'9
Percentage of mental deviates 59
We have therefore in Dr. Glueck’s figures a general
correspondence with the Tasmanian findings. The
variation in the percentages of psychopaths is due to
the fact that Dr. Glueck has confined the term to the
stricter use of it by the alienist. It might further be
mentioned that in a survey of 1500 delinquents in
Detroit 70 per cent, were found to be mental deviates,
and that nearly 50 per cent, were found to be so in a
Boston survey by Dr. V. V. Anderson.
(e) Recidivism. —Recidivism is one of the most diffi-
cult problems of criminology. In Tasmania we have
classified as recidivists any prisoner who has served three
or more sentences. The total percentage of recidivism
is 42 per cent., and the distribution of percentages
according to mental levels is:
Per Cent.
Defective 47
Borderline 57
Normals 29
The percentage of recidivism among prisoners of all
mental levels with psychopathic functioning is about 70
per cent.
Glueck’s percentage for recidivism among the Sing
Sing prisoners (recidivism there including two or more
sentences) is 66 per cent, for the whole; the per-
centage for the defectives being 80 per cent., and the
psychopaths 86 per cent. The Tasmanian percentages
would advance if recidivism were similarly calculated.
These figures demonstrate the fact that the men who
return frequently to gaol are drawn mainly from the
mental deviates.
2.— Psychological Classification op Prisoners.
While the examinations were proceeding the Gaol
Medical Officer and the Director of the Clinic brought
these facts relating to the prisoners’ mentality under
the notice of the Superintendent (Captain H. C.
Davies). The Superintendent, though only a short time
in office, was already convinced that many of the
prisoners were merely “ children ” in mind, and raised
the question whether the existing classification of
prisoners was suitable to their mental condition and
reactions. The old classification was based on the
number of offences, first, second, third, and higher, &c.
After discussion between these officers it was eventually
decided to reclassify the prisoners in accordance with
their mentality and its mode of functioning, so far as
the accommodation of the gaol permitted.
The scheme of classification now adopted is as fol-
lows :
Division A, Class I.—Low and high grade
defectives.
Division B, Class 2.—Defectives with marked
psychopathic functioning.
Class 3.—Borderline and normals
with marked psychopathic func-
tioning.
Division C, Class 4.—Borderline, inferior normals
with normal mental functioning,
capable of unskilled and semi-
skilled work.
Class s.—Average normals with nor-
mal mental functioning, capable
of industrial or clerical employ-
ment.
Division D, Class 6.—Habitual criminals.
Division E, Class 7.—Adolescents.
Class B.—Remand prisoners.
Indeterminate sentence prisoners as well as defectives
receive differential treatment in accordance with their
mentality.
This psychological classification of prisoners came into
force last January. The Superintendent has reported
that since that time the number of gaol offences had


Offences.
9
>
9
Borderline.
Normals.
*e8
H
Against property :
Larceny, vagrancy, &c. ...
17
11
7
35 1
Burglary, receiving, &c. ...
Forgery, embezzlement, &c.
—
10
10
20 V 70
5
10
15 '
Against the person :
Assault, resisting, &c
3
6
Murder
3
1
1
5 ( 21
Sex offences :
Sodomy, assault,, &c. ...
11
3
6
20 Ur
Bigamy, maintenance ...
—
6
6 f 2t>
Totals
34
36
47
117
Median Brain
Capacity.
J 1
s E-
£
Class of Crime.
Tasmanian.
Victorian.
Number of
Victorians
5
Murder and manslaughter
1 1402cc.
1456cc.
11
29
Larceny and vagrancy
| 1412
1432
144
2.5
Sex offences
1 1440
1440
56
15
Assault, wounding, &c.
1456
1425
15
9
Forgery, uttering
I 1487
1459
14
13
Burglary, entering
i 1493
1435
26
4
Embezzlement
1499
J
1475
5
fallen by 68 per cent., which is admirable testimony
to the application of psychology in the discipline of
prisoners. In determining punishments the Super in-
dent takes into account the mentality and reactions of
the individual prisoners. In view of these results it is
highly desirable that the gaol should be removed and
re-established on modern lines with ample grounds and
buildings, so that the Superintendent may make more
effective use of his improved methods of care and
treatment. It is also necessary that a separate area
should be provided for .criminal and other psychopathic
defectives, so that they may receive more adequate
differential treatment in accordance with their mental
condition. It may be argued that these improvements
in prison conduct are easily obtainable in a small gaol.
But the following quotation from Dr. B. Glueck’s
report shows that it also occurs in a larger prison’:
" In fact, one of the most beneficial results of the new
regime at Sing Sing is Just this—that many individuals
who, under the former regime, were guilty of breaches
of discipline, owing to their mental disorder, are to-day
able to get along well and keep out of trouble under
the more lenient discipline prevailing at the prison.”
And, further, it may be pointed out that when the
attendants and instructors become better acquainted
with the nature of the mental reactions of criminals,
they are able to handle their prisoners more effectively,
and this knowledge adds to their interest in the work
of supervision. Similar results have been reported by
Mr. John L. Whitman, Warden of the Illinois State
Penitentiary, where differential treatment is given to
the prisoners, in accordance with the examinations of
the psychologist and the psychiatrist.
3-—Types of Crimes in Relation to Mental
Levels.
Finally, a classification of offences in relation to level*
of intelligence has been prepared, as follows:
Table of Glassification of Offences tvith Mental Levels
of Prisoners.
The percentage of cases committing offences against
property is about 60 per cent., and against the person
40 per cent. The percentage of sex offences is 22 per
cent. The percentage of sex offenders will certainly falf
as the survey extends over three or four years, for most
of these offenders receive long sentences. About half of
the defectives have committed petty crimes against pro-
perty, and the other half more serious crimes against
the person (including sex offences). The percentage of
the prisoners of all mental levels with psychopathic
functioning, who have committed sexual or violent
offences, is about 58 per cent.
4.—Brain Measurements or Prisoners.
It is of interest to make brief mention of some facts
relating to the brain measurements of the prisoners.
The number measured to date is 100. The median
brain capacity for each mental level is as follows;
Defectives, 1382 cc.; borderlines, 1462 cc.; nor-
mals, 1476 cc.
The median for the whole of the groups is 1456, as com-
pared with 1481 for the average individual in the com-
munity. The percentages of very marked sub-normal
(or small) headedness among prisoners at each mental
level is as follows:
Imbeciles, 71 per cent.; feeble-minded, 50 per
cent.; borderlines, 13 per cent.; normals, 12 per
cent.
Further, it is estimated that 83 per cent, of the Tas-
manian defective prisoners are on the small-headed side
of the brain measurements. It is clear, then, that
marked variations from normal brain measurements are
much accentuated in the case of the defective prisoners,
and less and less so as we advance towards normal
mental levels.
The following table shows the median brain capacity
of the Tasmanian prisoners, classified according to the
class of crimes they have committed, and compared with
Professor Berry’s medians for similar Victorian
prisoners: -
The above table indicates that, in general, brain
capacity show some positive relation with the nature
and mental grade of the crime. Sex and violent crimes,
as well as petty thieving, appear generally to go with a
brain capacity below the median for normality.
s.—Need foe Eaely Diagnosis and Differentiae
Education of Mental Deviates.
It will therefore be easily seen that the defective and
psychopathic delinquents are accountable for the greater
number of the crimes against the person, and as they
together comprise, in this survey of a small prison popu-
lation, 56 per cent, of the whole, our prison systems
and methods of dealing with criminals generally should
be altered to meet with these outstanding facts which
p ychology has revealed. It is now possible to deal with
defective criminals under “ The Mental Deficiency
Act,” and place them under institutional control at
the gaol. In the case of non-defective psychopaths,
placement in a gaol reformatory under indeterminate
sentence is desirable in their own and the community’s
interests. Before these methods of dealing with both
defectives and non-defective psychopaths can be reason-
ably effective—especially for the purpose of providing
suitable environmental influences both as regards deten-
tion and release—modern buildings and grounds,
varied and ample opportunities for prison employment,
as well as enlightened constructive discipline adminis-
tered with firm restraint and sympathetic understand-
ing, are absolutely essential and, at the present time,
peremptory. The Superintendent has made a good
beginning, but lack of structural facilities considerably
hampers his work.


It must not be supposed that because there is a large
percentage of defectives and subnormal delinquents in
the gaols, consequently mental deficiency and subnor-
mality and crime go together. There are considerably
far more defectives outside the gaols and reformatory
institutions than within them. It is not the defects
of mentality as such (though they have their effects, of
course), that account for the criminal trends so much
as environmental circumstances, which, being adverse
or contrary to social adjustment, easily twist and lead
astray weaker personalities who have not been strength-
ened by the right sort of educative stimuli to cope
with them. And, furthermore, the high-grade defec-
tives, or morons, are not usually recognised either by
their relatives, friends, or even the police authorities;
and, where special classes are not provided for their
education, they do not receive early in life such
differential treatment as would impart a salutary
restraint, and probably save the tractable individuals
from a downward path. Until recently very little had
been done to check these classes of delinquents by early
diagnosis and treatment during school age or even
adolescence, when many of them may be discovered
before their anti-social trends have become fixed or
brought about serious consequences.
When we bear in mind that the certifiable defectives
do not number 1 per cent, of the school population, and
that the borderlines do not exceed an additional 2 per
cent, to 3 per cent., and, further, that the dull and
backward only account for about another 10 per cent,
to 12 per cent. —that is, about 15 per cent, in all—and
when we consider at the same time the fact that these
grades of mentality contribute about 50 per cent, of
the gaol population, we might well ask ourselves as to
whether it is not impossible so to adjust the social,
economic, and educational order in which these weaker
intekigences develop as to enable them to meet more
adequately their environmental demands. It is one
thing for psychologists to point out these facts, but it
is quite another matter, and a very difficult one, for
the educational authorities to cope with them; for a
large number of these children are scattered throughout
the small towns and rural districts where special educa-
tional facilities are not usually available. But still,
something definite is being attempted in the larger
centres, which means that a fair proportion of them
will eventually receive special class instruction, or
undergo a modified curriculum with increased manual
work, as well as specialised training of volitional and
emotional responses to enable them readily to adjust
themselves to an environment which is constantly
changing in its complexity. The scattering of mal-
adjusted children throughout country areas constitutes
a problem which will probably take educational adminis-
trations a considerably long time to deal with at all
adequately; hence there is no likelihood in the imme-
diate future of solving all the difficulties surrounding
the problem of delinquency in its relation to subnormal
and dull or backward intelligences. But in the larger
centres every concerted effort towards correcting
aberrant trends of character in both normal and sub-
normal children will help to diminish the anti-social
effects indicated in delinquency. The improved methods
of care and treatment (both social and educational) of
the delinquent and incorrigible boys at Deloraine are
already bearing good fruit, in the diminishing numbers
of them who eventually reach the gaol. This achieve-
ment in prevention of criminal propensities in adoles-
cents is of incalculable value to the community, and
would justify an increased expenditure on child-
redemption. But when we consider the fact that over
85 pfer cent, of the prison population so far examined
have not passed through the old New Town or Delo-
raine Training School, it is a question for the future
to determine what percentage of prisoners come up pre-
viously before the children’s courts, and to consider
how far this child-saving institution is fulfilling its
original intentions. Also their school careers as regards
truancy, breaches of discipline, incorrigibility, &c.,
might also be tabulated. Further, the problems of
causation considered apart from mental deviation, such
as drunkenness, sexuality, bad home and economic con-
ditions, &c., should be inquired into, especially with a
view to determine what individuals first enter upon
crimes at the adolescent and post-adolescent periods of
life. These are matters that will require an extended
investigation.
Though it is certain that under-development of intel-
ligence is not the sole determining factor making for
criminality, and that the force of circumstances, com-
bined with moral deficiency, is not quite so insignificant
as Goring, a leading Enghsh authority, maintains, yet
our educational systems might well be rendered more
plastic, so as to furnish a more satisfying and beneficial
social environmental outlet for the children who
cannot keep the grades, especially the lowest 12 per
cent, to 15 per cent. But when it is asserted that the
pedagogically lowest 3 per cent, of the school popula-
tion ultimately contributes from 15 per cent, to 20
pei cent, (or even more) of the adults with criminal
piqpensities, educational administrators are everywhere
being asked to give this question of the relation of
criminality and subnormality their earnest attention,
and to realise the serious consequences that arise both
to Lm individual and to society from an inadequate
adjustment of school curricula and character-training
to the mental and physical endowments of the children.
Ihe educationists in their turn have the right to
request other members of the community to share with
them a social responsibility which goes beyond the
bounds of the schools.
JOHN VAIL,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA
