

/ FO 3 7
Crooked
Paths.
THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHRISTIAN
CITIZEN AS TO THE RACE-COURSE
AND GAMBLING.
A Sermon Preached in the Prahran Presbyterian Church, on
Sabbath, April 29th, 1894,
BY THE
Rev. W. S. ROLL AND.
Printed by Request.
PUBLISHED BY M. L. HUTCHINSON,
305 & 307 Little Collins Street,
Melbourne.
PRICE
THREEPENCE.


They have make them Crooked Paths.”— lsa. lix. 8.
CIRCULAR recently sent by the Committee of
our Church on the State of Religion to all our
|M® ministers, contains the following paragraph
“ While it is the duty of every minister to preach
the Gospel faithfully, it is also his duty to mould public
opinion upon all questions which concern the present
welfare and future prosperity of this young country.”
Acting upon this recommendation, I purpose as
occasion may offer, to refer to some of the more
prominent evils that prevail amongst us as a people—evils
to which none of us can be blind, evils which we must
all deplore, evils which we must try to put an end to, if
we have any real love for our country and for our
fellow-colonists.
While as Christian men and women we aim at
individual righteousness, and seek to make our own
homes the abodes of peace and purity, bright with the
clear and holy light of Christ’s Gospel, we shall un-
doubtedly exercise an influence for good upon this
community. But can we not do more than that ? Can
we not directly help in the straightening out of the
“ crooked paths ” which are too common in this land ?
I think we can.
It is quite true that the surest and best way to
raise the tone of a people is to begin with the individual
and work outwards to the wider sphere of society in
general. Christianity from the start has ever made
this its chief business. In the very calling to Himself
of a few men, and training them as individuals to go
forth and work upon the mass around them, our Lord
and Master made clear the great principle by which He
meant to influence the world, a principle upon which
He acts still. And a Socialism which proposes to lift
whole masses of men to a higher level by some mere
outside agency, such as drastic legislation, and levelling
of all classes and distinctions and rights, is a Socialism
foredoomed to failure, and certainly cannot be called
Christian Socialism. So long as men remain untouched
inwardly by high and unselfish motive, so long as the
evil heart is retained, tending towards unrighteousness,


so long your levelling process will certainly be tollowed
by a state of things very similar to that which preceded
it.* The truth is that Society suffers to-day not so
much from bad legislation, as from selfish, ungenerous,
evilly-inclined hearts, and disregard of the moral law of
God, which is holy, and good, and true.
Will any man put before him an ideal state of
Society ? Then let him conceive—if he can —of a
Society, every one of whose members shall love God
supremely, with the whole heart and strength, and his
neighbour as himself! When such a state of Society is
reached, and the Christian aim is ever towards it, you
will not have men driven to do justice to their fellows
by the strong arm of legal coercion, but by the
constraining influence of an inward motive power, an
infinitely higher and grander thing! And that must
ever be the main purpose of the Church of Christ —
the changing of the inmost being of the individual, and
the multiplication of such individuals in the State. 1 o
put before her any lesser aim, as the chief purpose of
the Church, is to be unfaithful to her trust.
But while this is true as regards the principal end
which the Church must ever keep in view, it would be
wrong for her to be indifferent to the bearing of outward
law upon the well-being of the people. While there are
men still without pure, and gentle, and unselfish hearts,
there must be the restraints of human law, or else earth
would become a pandemonium, a chaos, a very Hell:
All purity and virtue would be crushed out by mere
brute force, and the passions of evil men. Even in the
age of a cruel and tyrannical Nero, the Apostle Paul
was not indifferent to the beneficent character of Roman
law, and had no scruple in taking advantage of the
partial shield which it threw over innocence and
virtue. Bad as many laws were at that time, the
Apostle evidently held that they were better than
none. He distinctly tells his “ son in the faith
Timothy—that the law was good which was made for
the lawless and unruly—for murderers and man-slayers,
and men convicted of any crime. And he further
* An interesting commentary is supplied on this point i.y Mr.
Lane, of the “ New Australia ” Settlement in South America, who
speaks of that scheme as “ unoemented by a sense of God.”


we can.
of
our
ach
blic
ent
all
we
fell.
ore
vils
ust
our
I think
iwn
the
un-
his
Zan
the
id?
It is quite true that the surest and best way to
raise the tone of a people is to begin with the individual
and work outwards to the wider sphere of society in
general. Christianity from the start has ever made
this its chief business. In fhe very calling to Himself
of a few men, and training them as individuals to go
forth and work upon the mass around them, our Lord
and Master made clear the great principle by which He
meant to influence the world, a principle upon which
He acts still. And a Socialism which proposes to lift
whole masses of men to a higher level by some mere
outside agency, such as drastic legislation, and levelling
of all classes and distinctions and rights, is a Socialism
foredoomed to failure, and certainty cannot be called
Christian Socialism. So long as men remain untouched
inwardly by high and unselfish motive, so long as the
evil heart is retained, tending towards unrighteousness,


so long your levelling process will certainly be iollowed
by a state of things very similar to that which preceded
it,* The truth is that Society suffers to-day not so
much from bad legislation, as from selfish, ungenerous,
evilly-inclined hearts, and disregard of the moral law of
God, which is holy, and good, and true.
Will any man put before him an ideal state of
Society ? Then let him conceive—if he can —of a
Society, every one of whose members shall love God
supremely, with the whole heart and strength, and his
neighbour as himself! When such a state of Society is
reached, and the Christian aim is ever towards it, you
will not have men driven to do justice to their fellows
by the strong arm of legal coercion, but by the
constraining influence of an inward motive power, an
infinitely higher and grander thing! And that must
ever be the main purpose of the Church of Christ —
the changing of the inmost being of the individual, and
the multiplication of such individuals in the State. To
put before her any lesser aim, as the chief purpose of
the Church, is to be unfaithful to her trust.
But while this is true as regards the principal end
which the Church must ever keep in view, it would be
wrong for her to be indifferent to the bearing of outward
law upon the well-being of the people. W hile there are
men still without pure, and gentle, and unselfish hearts,
there must be the restraints of human law, or else earth
would become a pandemonium, a chaos, a very Hell.-
All purity and virtue would be crushed out by mere
brute force, and the passions of evil men. Even in the
age of a cruel and tyrannical Nero, the Apostle Paul
was not indifferent to the beneficent character of Roman
law, and had no scruple in taking advantage of the
partial shield which it threw over innocence and
virtue. Bad as many laws were at that time, the
Apostle evidently held that they were better than
none. He distinctly tells his “son in the faith”—
Timothy—that the law was good which was made for
the lawless and unruly—for murderers and man-slayers,
and men convicted of any crime. And he further
• An interesting commentary is supplied on this point by Mr.
Lane, ol the “ New Australia ” Settlement in South America, who
speaks of that scheme as “ nncemented by a sense of God.”


asserts that that law to keep the lawless in check, is
“ according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed
God ” that was committed to his trust. And of Roman
magistrates, much as he himself suffered under them,
he writes in his letter to the Church of Rome, that
“ they are not a terror to the good work, but the
evil”—that the ruler is “a minister of God .for
good ” —“ an avenger for wrath to him that doeth evil,”
and that “he beareth not the sword in vain.” From
all which we may gather, that so long as evil
men exist, there must be the power lodged somewhere
to deal with them, and that the restraints of law for the
evil-doer—the due protection of the weak from the
ravages of the strong, the defence of the innocent from
the designing, is not contrary to, but is in full
accordance with the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
In the days of the Apostle, however, the laws
which formed the basis of magisterial action were very
slightly —if at all—the result of the popular will; but it
is very different to-day, and this makes it so necessary to
refer to the question of legislation. It is the whole com-
munity that is responsible now for the laws that are
enacted, or maintained in force. To bring it closer home,
it is you and I who are concerned with law making or
law maintaining. It is you and I who are responsible,
therefore, for the laws being bad or good, tending to
make righteousness more easy or vice more difficult, or
the reverse. And here comes in the responsibility of
voting, and let me add, the responsibility of not voting.
If, by your neglect, men are sent into power who are
not fit to govern righteously, the blame must, to some
extent, lie at the door of those who refused to do their
duty as citizens, and thus permitted men of indifferent
character, or besmirched name, perhaps, to represent
them in the place where the laws are framed.
To take an extreme—even an impossible—case.
Suppose men were elected to Parliament who were
lawless themselves —murderers and thieves, let us say —
would it be very wonderful if the laws devised or altered
by such men bore very lightly on such crimes ? But
could you grumble much, if such men were put in by
your votes, or because you didn’t vote ? And if vice


and crime stalked rampant through the land, and
virtue was flouted everywhere, to whom could the
blame be attached primarily but to those who by
their action, or by their indolent neglect to act, sent
such men to legislate for them ? That is—l admit—an
extreme, even an impossible case, but it is sometimes
by putting a thing strongly that we get at the general
principle of an argument, and the effect of the working
out of that principle.
Now we have heard a good deal of late about the
gambling which—on the authority of men who cannot
be accused of straitdaced Puritanism—is becoming
such a curse to this Colony. Is it not time that
legislation should be demanded which shall deal with
what is admittedly working inconceivable ruin amongst
young and old in this country ? It appears to be
chiefly connected with horse-racing, but it is by no
means confined to that pastime. It goes without saying
that it would be by far the best thing, if all our
gamblers were converted, for when a man becomes a
whole-hearted Christian, I have no doubt at all that he
will cease to be a gambler. But are we to wait
till all gamblers are converted, while we never touch the
vice of gambling by penal enactment ? Do you deal in
this fashion with thieves and murderers ? Truly,
if all men became changed in heart, they would cease to
steal or to destroy life! But we do not stand by, •
waiting for that event. We make the thief and
murderer suffer the penalty of outraged law. I do not
of course regard gambling as on a par with such crimes,
but what I do say is that if it is proved—as surely it
has been proved without any question,—that the practice
of gambling is ruinous to hundreds of our people, and
that it is steadily gaining ground every day—it is time
that some laws were planned to deal with it, and to
check its all too rapid progress.
You who form part of the public of Victoria can
hasten such legislation by raising your voices with
others, and giving your votes to men who are not
gamblers, and who will pledge themselves to make
every effort to get this “crooked path ” shut off from
use by the law of the land.


As to horse-racing itself, with which gambling is so
closely interwoven, I differ from those who hold that
Christian men should visit the race-course. It seems
to me that the presence of Christian men at a carnival
so pervaded with vice as the race-course is at present,
is an anomaly. What position could any Christian
man take at a race-course where the pastime is
admittedly stained through and through with trickery,
dishonesty, and vice of all kinds, except that of pro-
testing against and denouncing the evil accompaniments
of the sport ? Could he really enjoy seeing the race
run with the knowledge of such things going on in his
neighbourhood ? Ought he to enjoy it ? And further,
unless he is occupying his time with the attempt to
purify the pastime, can his presence there do the
slightest good to any one, or in the smallest degree
assist towards the suppression of the things which he
knows to be wrong ? Would he be tolerated upon the
course at all, if this were his special reason for going there,
and protestation his .sole or chief occupation while there?
It was not by the mere presence of Christian men
at the gladiatorial games of ancient Rome, that the
brutal pastimes of the Arena gave place to something
better. It was by the influence of Christianity outside
upon the mind of a heathen Emperor, or to put it on
the lowest ground, it was by the Christianising of
society to such an extent that it became a matter of
Imperial policy to give heed to its protests. And when
it was finally put down, it was as the result of the active
interposition of a brave monk, who threw himself
between the combatants, and sacrificed his life in the
attempt. Imperial legislation, the result of a public
opinion, itself the result of Christianity—that was the
order of things by which the first blow was given to the
cruel and degrading accompaniments of a Roman holi-
day ; and the last blow was given, not by the mere
presence of a Christian man at the games as a spectator,
but by his active and self-sacrificing protest. And if
it be said that the race-course and the gladiatorial
games cannot be compared, inasmuch as purification is
sought for the one, and abolition was lequired for the
other, I fancy a pretty strong indictment could be
brought against racing itself pure and simple, apart


from its gambling accompaniments. And is it not safe
to say that if these accompaniments were removed,
racing itself would cease to be ? I believe the purification
of the pastime would be tantamount to its abolition.
But however that may be, considering the amount of
ruin both for this world and the next, which is caused
by the vice of gambling, it is surely the duty of every
Christian man to abstain from patronising the race-
course as it now is, to turn away from gambling of any
kind whatsoever, and to do his utmost towards bringing
about such legislation as may successfully cope with
this great evil which is eating like a cancer into the
moral life of our people.
And the State, it must be remembered, has already
recognized the evil. Is it not a crime on the statute-
book to be the owner of a betting-house or a gaming-
table ? How is it then that inside the ring-fence of a
race-course, the State appears to alter its opinion, and
allows the most open gambling to proceed there without
let or hindrance ? .One may well say with the prophet
of old :—“ They have made them Crooked Paths.”
Surely the time has arrived for the putting down of
gambling, not in this or that place, but in every place ;
not merely in the Chinese opium-den, but on the racing
field and in all public places of resort whatsoever. The
sooner such action is taken the better will it be for
“ the present welfare and future prosperity of this young
country.” And I would specially appeal to young men
here. I urge upon each one of you to set your face like a
flint against gambling in any form. I ask you to streng-
then by your loyal support, every public movement that
has for its purpose the cutting away of the gambling
parasite from the tree of innocent recreation. There is
not the slightest reason why gambling should be mixed
up with any of our pastimes, and I need hardly say
that to the Christian, recreation should always be the
means to an end, never an end in itself. It should
have for its purpose—“ mens sana in corpore sano ” —the
keeping of the body in health that we may use the life
which God has given us to the best advantage, for His
glory, and the efficient doing of our work in the world.
Here is tly great Christian motto:—“Whether
therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do—do all to
the glory of God.”


Note.
I have said that a “ strong indictment clduW he
brought ” against racing itself, apart from the gambling
connected with it.
Is there no cruelty exercised upon the horse to
compel it to win the race ?
What about the jockey’s life ?
What about his training ?
What about his stunted physical development, with
the view of keeping him down to a certain weight ?
What about his mental and moral growth ?
It is well known that a course of starving, sweating
and severe exercise must be gone through to suppress
the healthy growth of the boy—(some of them begin the
life at 12 years of age)—to fit him for his jockey career.
As for his mental and moral growth —the recent
newspaper reports of a Supreme Court civil case have
thrown a sufficiently lurid light upon these matters.
And I have it on good authority that the jockey must
cultivate “ the jockey character” if he would get on, and
the type of character is not one to be dwelt upon with
any pleasure.
After he has once taken up the life, it appears
to be most difficult for the jockey to give it up, and
return to honest hard work.
And what of the many young lives sacrificed on the
racecourse for no high or noble cause ?
No! It would be an immense gain if racing itself
were put down, as well as the gambling which so often
accompanies it.
These things are surely worth considering by those
who would advocate racing, minus gambling.
From a N.Z. paper I quote the following extract,
and it is significant“ The social current is setting in
against racing ; the political may be expected to follow
in due course.” Sir Robert Stout seems determined at
least to limit the amount of racing in New Zealand, and
in a recent speech, said, that “ if the pastime improved
the breed of horses, it certainly had the opposite effect
on men.” This is the testimony of a statesman who
does not speak from the Christian standpoint.
»R
