







CROSSING THE DEAD HEART




CROSSING THE
DEAD HEART
BY
C. T. MADIGAN
M.A., D.Sc. (OXON.), B.E. (ADELAIDE), F.G.S.
GEORGIAN HOUSE
MELBOURNE
An Australiana Society Publication


First published 1946
Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne,
for transmission by post as a book
Wholly setup and printed in Australia
for
GEORGIAN HOUSE PTY. LTD.
431 Bourke Street, Melbourne, C.l
At The Hassell Press, Adelaide.


TO MY WIFE
WHO HAS DONE SO MUCH AT HOME.


PREFACE
THIS book is a popular narrative of the Simpson Desert
Expedition, 1939. The scientific results are being
published by the Royal Society of South Australia, and papers
have already appeared on the physiography and meteorology,
the mineralogy of the desert sands, the sand formations, the
spiders, the fishes, the reptiles, some of the insects, part of
the botany (the catalogue of plants), and the soils and vege-
tation. These will be found in volumes 68, 69, and 70 of
the Trcmsactions of the Society. Among papers still to come
are the description of the main insect collection, a compara-
tive study of the desert flora, and notes on the mammals and
birds.
The scientific papers are mainly technical descriptions, of
interest chiefly to specialists in the various subjects; this narra-
tive gives the general story of the Expedition, with no more
scientific detail than is of general interest. It is a plain tale
of what was actually seen and done, without dramatization or
exaggeration. There were no high adventures, which are
usually due to incompetence or invention, but the spirit of
adventure was not lacking. There was enough risk to give
colour to the enterprise, and enough strange variety to keep
the glamour of the desert undimmed from day to day. Those
things, if they can be adequately conveyed, together with the
human interest, make the story of the Expedition a tale worth
telling.
The Expedition owed its existence to the late Mr. A. A.
Simpson, c.m.g., of Adelaide, after whom the desert was
originally named. The enterprise was carried out at his sug-
gestion and was entirely financed by him. Grateful acknow-
ledgment is also made to the following for their contributions
to the success of the Expedition:
To the University of Adelaide, for granting the necessary
leave of absence.


To the Australian Broadcasting Commission and The
Advertiser Newspapers Limited, who gave helpful co-opera-
tion and publicity to the Expedition.
To Bejah Dervish and his son Jack Bejah and the Afghans
of Marree, who exercised such care in the selection and pro-
vision of an excellent camel team and equipment.
To Mr. A. H. Traeger, 0.b.e., who provided us with one
of his pedal wireless sets, which proved a complete success.
To Mr. H. E. Ding, of Yunta, who handled all the wire-
less traffic through his station V.H.U9. This included tran-
scribing many press and private messages for telegraphing,
and the organization of the reception and relaying of the
national broadcasts, which latter would have been impossible
without him. In addition he gave much useful advice on the
operation of our own set.
To Messrs. W. Angliss & Co. (Aust.) Pty. Ltd., who sup-
plied several cases of “Imperial” tinned meats, which were
accepted as a luxury but proved to be a necessity.
To the Royal Society of South Australia, for publishing
the scientific reports.
And finally, to all my comrades of the journey, who went
laughing through a wilderness.
C. T. MADIGAN.
Blackwood,
August, 1946.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
i The Simpson Desert, last Untrodden Area in
Australia 1
ii Earlier Attempts to Cross the Desert - 8
in Preparations - - - - - - 13
iv We get Away - - - - - - 23
y Andado Station - - - - - - 31
vi Northward to the Hale - - - - 40
vii Eastward into the Desert - - - - 49
viii Rain in the Desert ----- 54
ix Near to Failure - - - - - 58
x Danger past, we reach the Hay - - - 69
xi The Mulligan at last - - - - 79
xii Birdsville - - - - - - - 95
xiii Down the Diamantina - - - - 107
xiv Lake Eyre - - - - - -134
xv To-morrow to Fresh Woods - - - 153
Appendix A. Notes on the Scientific Results of the
Expedition - - - - - -156
Appendix B. The supposed Deterioration of the Lake
Eyre Country - - - - - 15 8


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
THE EDGE OF THE DESERT Frontispiece
Acacia pence on the stony plain at Andado Bore No. 1. This tree is known
only in two small patches, this one and another near Birdsville
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
Facing page
THE PARTY LEAVING ADELAIDE
Left to right: H. O. Fletcher, R. L. Crocker, C. T. Madigan, R. A. Simpson,
D. Marshall, A. Hubbard (Press Phot.)
OLD TELEGRAPH STATION, STRANGWAYS SPRINGS 5
A small mound spring in the foreground, others in the background
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
THE BLANCHE CUP - - - - - - - 26
One of the best known mound springs, near Coward Springs. It is high and
circular, with the water flowing over the low lip through notches
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
GIBBER PLAINS NEAR ABMINGA - - - - 27
On the track to Charlotte Waters (D. Marshall, Phot,)
IN THE BED OF THE FINKE --.... 2 y
Near Charlotte Waters on the track to Andado (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
LOADING UP AT CHARLOTTE WATERS ----- 3^.
Left: Showing pack saddles and 16-gallon water canteens. Right: Andy
loads a groaning camel (D. Marshall, Phot.)
the andado mail
An engineless camel-drawn motor car which never breaks down. Fred Sharpe
at the wheel (j). Marshall, Phot.)
the ROYAL MAIL - - . . . . - 35
track has sunk into the mud in wet weather. Willochra,
(C.T. Madigan, Phot.)
BLACKS’ CAMP AT ANDADO - - - . . - 42
The “wurlies” are made chiefly of bullock hides. Note the big sandridge in
the background ( C . T. Madig an, Phot.)
ANDADO BORE, No. 1 - . . . . . - 42
The windmill over the bore has been dismantled. Lady boils the billy, and
Storm sits on the stones (c. T. Madigan, Phot.)
“THE DOG SAT ON THE TUCKER BOX” - - - * 43
Jack Bejah’s dog thus guarded his master’s boxes all the way across the desert.
Jack and Andy load a camel in the background (D. Marshall, Phot.)
AT THE CAIRN ON POODNITERA HILL - - - - - 50
L.ft to right. Ly-Ly, Nurie, Fletcher, Madigan, Marshall, Crocker, Hubbard.
(R. A. Simpson, Phot.)


Facing page
THE END OF THE TODD RIVER FROM POODNITERA HILL - - 50
There is no defined channel, but the larger trees mark the course of floods.
The junction with the Hale is four miles to the right of the picture
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
ALLUA SOAK, HALE RIVER - - - - - 51
Filling up the canteens (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
THE COLUMN ON THE MARCH - - - - - 5 1
Descending a sandridge (D. Marshall, Phot.)
SANDRIDGES ON THE BIRDSVILLE TRACK - - - -58
Near Cooper Creek. These are wavy and immature, and indicate movement
to the left (west). Bottom of picture about half a mile across
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
PARALLEL SANDRIDGES OF THE SIMPSON DESERT - - -58
These are straight, fixed, and mature. Dense spinifex and a few acacias.
Bottom of picture about a quarter of a mile across (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
THE SIMPSON DESERT AT ITS WORST - - - - -59
Between Camps 9 and 10. Canegrass, spinifex, and sand
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
SETTING A COURSE IN THE DESERT - - - - -59
Madigan takes bearings from the crest of a sandridge (D. Marshall, Phot.)
THE BIG SANDRIDGE AT ANDADO - - - - - 66
Only the live sand of the crest is conspicuous, but the gentle approach from
the right (west) and steeper fall to the plain to the east can be seen
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
TYPICAL DESERT SANDRIDGE, CAMP 11 - - - - 66
View shows the steeper eastern side. Saw-tooth effect is well shown
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
STRUGGLING ACROSS A SANDRIDGE ----- 67
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
CAMP 11 - - - - - - - - 67
Shallow claypans between the sandridges (D. Marshall, Phot.)
CLAYPAN BETWEEN CAMPS 11 AND 12 ----- 74
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
FLETCHER WITH A WOMMA - - - - 74
Between Camps 16 and 17. Note the high stems of the seeding spinifex
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
D. MARSHALL, PHOTOGRAPHER - - - - - 7 5
(R. A, Simpson, Phot.)
ANDY DIGS FOR A RAT ------- 75
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
CAMP IS IN THE HAY RIVER ------ 82
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
A NATIONAL BROADCAST FROM THE HAY RIVER - - - 8 2
Left to right: Madigan, Fletcher, Simpson, Crocker (D. Marshall, Phot.)


Facing page
R. L. CROCKER WITH A WILD TURKEY, HAY RIVER - - 83
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
A TREE BLAZED AT CAMP 16, HAY RIVER - - - 90
Fletcher standing by (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
CAMP 17, QUEENSLAND BORDER - - - - 9 1
A grove of gidgee between sandridges (D. Marshall, Phot.)
KUDDAREE WATERHOLE, MULLIGAN RIVER - - - “91
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
REMAINS OF KALIDUWARRY STATION - - - 98
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
ANNANDALE STATION - - - - - - - 98
The dwelling house is unroofed (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
CAMP 21, RIVER MULLIGAN ------ 99
Looking over the river valley flooded by local rains (C. T. Madigan, Phot,)
SANDRIDGES WEST OF BIRDSVILLE - - - - *99
These giant ridges a mile or more apart lie on sand-free gibber plains,
flooded at the time (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
BIRDSVILLE, 1929 - - - - - - - - 122
The large white building is the hotel. The other large building to lower
left is an extinct hotel, then the A.I.M. Hostel, which is now in new build-
ings. The beginning of the sandridges extending westward is seen on the
right (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIA-QUEENSLAND BORDER FENCE - - 122
With some of the riding party (D. Marshall, Phot.)
DIAMANTINA CROSSING AT BIRSDVILLE - - - - 123
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
ABORIGINAL MOTHER AND CHILD, BIRDSVILLE - - - 123
(D. Marshall, Phot.)
STARTING ON THE LONG ROAD HOME - - - - - j3c
The expedition leaving Birdsville for Marree (D. Marshall, Phot.)
CROSSING GOYDER’S LAGOON - - - - - - 13 c
One of the many braided channels on the plain (C. T, Madigan, Phot.)
A GIANT SANDRIDGE NEAR THE DIAMANTINA - - 131
The flowers are Blennodia pterasperma with Spinifcx paradoxus (canegrass)
and Salsola kali (roly-poly). The river is among the trees in the back-
ground, with Andrewilla Waterhole off to the right (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
the warburton at BULLARA crossing 138
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
COWARIE STATION - - - - - - - 138
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)


Facing page
RUINS OF KALAMURINA STATION - - - - - 139
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
THE END OF THE DIAMANTINA - - - - - - 139
The Warburton at Lake Eyre, with Kalaweerina Creek running off left into
the lake (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
THE SHORES OF LAKE EYRE - - - - - - 146
Looking across a wide arm on the eastern side (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
“SYDNEY HARBOUR” - - - - - - - 147
An arm of Lake Eyre, with island, and sandridge in the foreground
(C. T. Madigan, Phot.)
JOURNEY’S END AT MARREE - - - - - - 147
Left to right: Hubbard, Nurie, Crocker, District Nurse, Bejah Dervish,
Fletcher, Jack Bejah (C. T. Madigan, Phot.)


CHAPTER 1
THE SIMPSON DESERT, LAST UNTRODDEN
AREA IN AUSTRALIA
AS long ago as 1927 my geological explorations and in-
vestigations in Central Australia were begun. Every-
thing that had been published by explorers or geologists on
the central regions was soon read, and these researches coupled
with enquiries among the pastoralists, drovers, miners and
adventurers I had met in the Centre, convinced me that there
was still one patch of Australia where the white man’s foot
had never trodden, and that was the sandridge desert in the
south-eastern corner of the Northern Territory, north of
Lake Eyre. The sandridges made the use of motor trans-
port, at least the kind of motor transport available in this
country, impossible, while the lack of feed and water had
prevented penetration by pack horse or even camels. This
desert is only some three hundred miles across, which is not
an impossible dry stage for camels if some green feed is
available for them, yet it appeared that the endless succession
of sandridges had presented such difficulties and proved so
exhausting that even attempts to cross by camel had been
abandoned.
All my enquiries in every direction failed to discover any
evidence that these attempts had ever resulted in anything but
a mere nibbling at the margins. Jim O’Neill, the famous
opal prospector, had tried to go eastward from, the Hale
iver and had turned back in a sea of sandridges and spmifex.
Simon Rieff, miner and prospector of Alice Springs, had
gone across the top end to Lake Caroline on the Hay River,
m a dry season, and had lost most of his camels and barely
escaped with his life. Everywhere the tale was the same on
the western side of the desert, where my first enquiries were
made.
Here then was an interesting bit of exploration to be done,
to find out what lay behind the forbidding borders of this


unknown area, and the aeroplane was the obvious means of
solving the problem.
In 1929 I obtained the support of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, South Australian Branch, for a pro-
ject to carry out an aerial reconnaisance of the dry lakes of
South Australia and the unknown desert regions to the north
of them, and also to make aerial geological investigations in
the Mac Donnell Ranges. The publicity this expedition re-
ceived in the press brought forth a crop of letters in the papers
from bushmen and some others who should have been better
informed, deriding my “unknown area”. One man claimed
that he had taken racehorses to Alice Springs from Queens-
land across this “desert”; another that he had been marooned
up gum trees by the floods in the “desert”. The old bushman
is inclined to be resentful of the “amateur explorer” or new-
comer in his special field, and he is always jealous of his
own knowledge of the country. His great disadvantage is
that he is not familiar with maps. Most of the writers
showed that they were talking of some other part of the
inland regions and not the area under discussion, actually
providing evidence that the desert really was unknown.
I was not on as firm ground then, for my work had only
begun, and I was a little shaken by some of the claims put
forward by men still living in the country, but after later
travels, when I had made enquiries on the cattle stations all
round the desert, and even learned something of the critics
themselves, I was completely satisfied that at that time no
man had crossed this desert, and all that was known of it was
what could be conjectured by visiting its margins.
Even my old friend, the late Larry Wells, the explorer,
had his hit at me by writing that the few hundred miles
across this desert would be nothing to camels. He had
surveyed the Queensland-Northern Territory border, the
eastern side of the desert, and also made his great journey
from Willuna to the Fitzroy River across the Great Sandy
Desert in Western Australia, and he knew camels and sand-
hills. He wrote another letter to The Advertiser saying that
he did not mean to “wound” Dr. Madigan, but he proceeded
to elaborate his point, and with his knowledge and experience
he did my credit in men’s eyes some harm. Larry knew only


the eastern side of the desert, where the sandridges are
scarcely an obstacle at all sno one knew the interior. It was
a great regret to me that he did not live to hear the story I
am now going to tell.
However, this was away back in 1929, and I was in truth a
beginner, though more right than I knew then.
he aerial reconnaisance was arranged with the help of
the Geographical Society and the co-operation of the Royal
arrivS W Wh ° - PUt tW ° of their then newly-
nved Wapiti aeroplanes with crews at my disposal. This
was the first time that the Eagle cameras had been used in this
country, and we took the first aerial strip photographs. It
as also the first time that aeroplanes had been used for
geological work in the Commonwealth. The results of this
expedition were published in the Proceedings of the Royal
During the expedition three flights were made over the
unknown area; the first direct from Birdsville to Alice
Springs, the second eastward from Alice Springs to Lake
Caroline, thence fifty miles southward back to
c 'C Spnn S s > and th e third south-eastward from Alice
Springs to the centre of the desert and then south to Oodna^
but '"there 1 oblique photographs were taken,
but there had been little to photograph. Some clavoans
were seen in the northern parts of the deLrt and Tome Water-
courses, not hitherto mapped, near the margins, but all the
rest was a uniform monotony of sandridges and spinifex
There were no ranges hidden behind the safdridge ramparts’
no water, nothing to record from the air but fom e sISS
C angcs m the relative sparseness of the vegetation. The
whole expanse below was like a pink and gigantic circular
fo hoZn T h mth Cl ? se / raight “ ndrid *£ from horTon
paced Tueu e Sandndees We r re remar bably uniformly
paced, being about a quarter of a mile apart, and their
astonkh eSS ’ St " a , lghtneSS and con tinuity were unique and
astonishing. Their trend was about 30” west of north,
and they ran straight as far as the eye could see, which was
ome titty miles in each direction from 4,000 feet. Their
uniformity and parallelism were much more obvious and


arresting as seen on the smaller scale from the air than
appeared later from the ground, where local irregularities
tend to obscure the general plan and the view is limited to a
single lane between two sandridges if you are in a lane, or
to two lanes if you are on a crest.
At the close of this expedition I said that there seemed to
be nothing to warrant the expenditure of any further effort
in the exploration of this desert as it contained nothing but
sandridges, and all that was to be found there ,could be seen
round its borders. The late Mr. A. A. Simpson, C.M.G., of
Adelaide, was the president of the Geographical Society at
that time and had been most helpful in the preliminary
arrangements. He said he would not object to having his
name attached to so inhospitable a region, so I named the
Simpson Desert after him, and the name was duly accepted
by the Department of the Interior, Canberra.
The Simpson Desert is a unique physiographical unit whose
borders are clearly defined. It is a vast level plain of some
56,000 square miles, a waste ribbed with parallel sandridges
and sparsely clothed with spinifex, the commonest and uni-
versal plant. It lies roughly between latitude 23° and 27
south and longitude 135° and 139° east. It is waterless
except in times of rain, when streams enter it from the north-
west, but all these streams soon flood out in it, with none
reaching the farther side. It forms a broad triangle with
the apex on Lake Eyre in the south. Its margins are the
Finke and Macumba Rivers on the west, the Mac Donnell
Ranges to the north-west, the Plenty and Thring (Marshall)
Rivers to the north, the Mulligan River to the east, and the
lower Diamantina and Kallakoopah Rivers in the south.
It lies mostly in the south-east corner of the Northern Terri-
tory, but extends into Queensland and South Australia. Sand
and spinifex are its dominant characteristics, and here let us
deal with this matter of spinifex once and for all, so that it
will not be necessary to be continually and pedantically
referring to the so-called spinifex, like the people who talk
about the so-called crow. The genus spinifex is mainly a
coastal sand-dune grass, civilized and tractable. It is repre-
sented in the desert by a species known as cane grass, Spinifex
paradoxus. The universal spiky, hemispherical masses typi-


THE PARTY LEAVING ADELAIDE.


OLD TELEGRAPH STATION, STRANGWAYS SPRINGS.


cal of the whole of the Central Australian sandy deserts
belong to another genus, Triodia , a much more forbidding
plant, among which even camels and horses pick their way.
The commonest species is Triodia basedowi. Its popular
name is more properly porcupine grass, but spinifex has
become attached to it and we will let it stay. It is too late to
tell David Carnegie that his book should have been called
‘‘Porcupine and Sand”.
On this aerial expedition many new contacts were made
with pastoralists on the eastern side of the desert, notably
Mr. L. Reese of Birdsville, who had a lifetime’s experience of
the Queensland border regions. He was certain that no
white man had crossed the desert, and was convinced from
frequent questioning that the blacks did not go far in either,
but had a wholesome fear of the area.
In the same year I followed up the aerial investigations
of Lake Eyre by a ground expedition to the lake, which was
at that time completely dry. This gave an opportunity of
gathering more information on the Lake Eyre Basin and its
stock routes.
In 1935 and 1937 I traversed the northern end of the
desert, through the Jervois, Tarlton and Toko Ranges. A
dogger, Fred Rogers, who had lived for ten years in that
most isolated spot where the Thring and Arthur Creeks
join to form the Hay River, gave very interesting and useful
information on the nature of the unmapped country to the
south of him. He and his natives would go down the Hay
m wet seasons but would not leave its vicinity. From his
camp we made a day’s excursion into the desert on horses.
By this time I had travelled almost all round the desert,
had flown over most of it, and got to know the inhabitants
round its borders. It was obvious that the drovers who
thought they had crossed it had merely gone round it either
on the north side from Tobermorey Station in Queensland
via the Jervois Ranges to Alice Springs, where there are no
san ridges, or on the south side from Birdsville down the
Diamantma and up the Macumba, the latter not a difficult
stock route.
In response to an invitation from the Royal Society of
New South Wales to give the Clarke Memorial Lecture for


1938, I chose as my subject “The Simpson Desert and its
Borders,” and this lecture, later published in the journal of
the society for that year, gave all my knowledge of the desert
up to that time.
At the close of this lecture my earlier statements that there
was nothing to warrant further investigation of the Simpson
Desert were modified. Its broader features were certainly
known, but it still had not been crossed on the ground. Com-
parison was made with the much bigger problem of Mt.
Everest, whose summit had been seen and photographed
from the air and whose base had been studied from the
ground, surely leaving nothing more to be discovered about
it, yet man must set his foot on the topmost point. All is not
known about new environments till man has had the personal
experience of living in them, and there is great satisfaction
in overcoming the natural obstacles and discovering the
adjustments necessary to make this possible. The Simpson
Desert should be crossed on foot, from west to east across
its centre. This would give the fullest details of the arrange-
ment and nature of the remarkable series of parallel sand-
ridges whose origin and mode of formation were still a
puzzle, as well as provide an opportunity for a complete
study of the fauna and flora of a unique desert area. Geo-
graphically the field was restricted, but in the natural sciences
such a journey still presented great attraction and possibilities.
The distance across the difficult central part of the desert
was only about three hundred miles, and the requirements
were good camels and a good season when it could reason-
ably be expected that green herbage would be found, for then
the camels could do the journey without water, which it
was anticipated they would have to do. Given a good season,
the only remaining hazard was the ability of the camels to
stand up to the heavy work of continually struggling across
the sandridges, which had steep banks of loose sand along
their crests.
Ever since the aerial investigations, Mr. Simpson had been
anxious that his desert should be further explored on the
ground, but I had been unwilling, as I felt that to make it
worthwhile a well organized and equipped expedition in-
cluding botanists and biologists was necessary, something


considerably more elaborate and costly than my two-man
journeys of the past had been. The use of helicopters had
been suggested but was rejected as being too hazardous and
impracticable at that stage of development of the helicopter.
Short demonstration flights with one of these machines were
being given in Australia at the time. The most primitive and
ancient means of transport in the desert—the camel —was
undoubtedly the safest, the surest, the most effective, and not
least, the cheapest, for this task.
After the Clarke Memorial Lecture, Mr. Simpson
approached me again, and I drew up a plan for a camel
expedition across the desert at an estimated cost of £5OO to
cover equipment, stores, camel and truck hire, rail travel and
incidentals, the scientific staff to receive only their out-of-
pocket expenses, and as much as possible of the instruments
and scientific equipment to be borrowed. Mr. Simpson
agreed to finance this expedition.
The 1937—38 season in the interior had been a phenomen-
ally wet one, with floods and washaways along the railway
line. Herbage was abundant. Another good season to
follow could be anticipated from past experiences of the
vagaries of the weather, as there are usually two good seasons
in sucession, so that the time seemed most propitious, and
preparations were begun in the middle of 1938 for an expedi-
tion to start out in the winter of 1939. Crossing the sand-
ridges in the summer, when the desert is no place for any kind
of human activities, would be impossible, even for camels.
The difference between summer and winter in these regions
has to be experienced to be believed. The heat makes the
summer almost unbearable, but in winter the weather is per-
fect by day, clear, sunny and bracing, while the nights are
so cold that it is a common mistake not to take enough
blankets to make sleep possible.


CHAPTER II
EARLIER ATTEMPTS TO CROSS THE DESERT
AS a background for our journey, it will be of interest to
review the earlier explorations in the area and the
previous attempts to cross the desert. The desert was first
seen and entered by Sturt in 1845 in his attempt to reach the
centre of the continent from a point on the Darling River
where Menindie now stands. He discovered and named the
Barrier Ranges, the Strzelecki, Cooper and Eyre Creeks,
and was finally defeated when within two hundred miles of
his goal by the waterless sea of sandridges and spinifex in
which he found himself, the Simpson Desert. He turned
back at a point near the present Queensland border in latitude
24° 40' S., on the more hospitable eastern side of the desert.
To modify modern slang, he had not seen anything yet,
though he wrote: “It was a remarkable fact that here on the
northern side of the desert (his Stony Desert, in the Dia-
mantina country) and after an interval of more than fifty
miles, the same sandridges should occur, running in parallel
lines at the same angle as before into the very heart of the
interior, as if they absolutely were never to terminate”, and at
his turning point, “We had penetrated to a point at which
water and feed had both failed. Spinifex and a new species
of Mesembryanthemum .... were the only plants growing
in that wilderness, if I except a few withered acacia trees
about four feet high. The spinifex was close and matted,
and the horses were obliged to lift their feet straight up to
avoid its sharp points. From the summit of a sandy undu-
lation close upon our right we saw that the ridges extended
northwards in parallel lines beyond the range of vision, and
appeared as if interminable. To the eastward and westward
they succeeded each other like the waves of the sea. The
sand was of a deep red colour, and a bright narrow line of it
marked the top of each ridge, amidst the sickly pink and
glaucous-coloured vegetation around”. These few vivid


words, written nearly a hundred years ago, proved to be an
accurate description of the whole of the 56,000 square miles
of the Simpson Desert, yet an account of the journeys that
have led up to this conclusion make a tale worth telling.
It would have been fatal for Sturt to have attempted to con-
tinue on his course with his horses, and difficult enough with
camels, though he was running parallel to the sandridges
and not across them.
Next Burke and Wills made their ill-managed and fatal
expedition up the eastern side of the desert. They were the
first to visit the lower Cooper, but their records were too
meagre to be of any value. It was the relief expeditions sent
out after them that really advanced the knowledge of the
country, and particularly the one from Adelaide led by
J. McKinley in 1861—2. He went right through to the Gulf
of Carpentaria, and his reports led to the occupation of the
Cooper and Diamantina country in South Australia.
In 1876 the Queensland Government sent out an expedi-
tion under W. O. Hodgkinson, who had been in McKinlay’s
party, to explore the western side of the State. He dis-
covered the Mulligan River and the Toko Range, which he
originally named the Cairns Range. This journey com-
pleted the preliminary exploration of the eastern side of
the Simpson Desert.
J. W. Lewis in 187 T-5 first sketch-mapped most of the
shores of Lake Eyre, a task still incomplete, and carried his
route surveys up the Warburton and Diamantina to beyond
where Birdsville now stands, thus delineating the south-
eastern margin of the desert. Other South Australian sur-
veyors, H. Vere Barclay and C. Winnecke in the years
1878-81 rounded the northern end of the desert and dis-
covered the Plenty, Marshall, Thring and Arthur rivers and
the Jervois and Tarlton Ranges. The western margin of the
mapped country was still the Overland Telegraph route,
first traversed by MacDouall Stuart in 1861. The telegraph
line was completed in 1872.
In 1883 Winnecke, with camels, made the first definite
attempt to examine the desert itself. He came in from
Queensland and traversed most of the upper course of the
Hay River, which he discovered and named after a Queens


land pastoralist. He made considerable diversions on each
side of the river. His traverses remained the eastern limits
of ground exploration of the Simpson Desert and there is
no evidence that the lower Hay had ever been visited by
anyone except Winnecke till we arrived there in 1939. Win-
necke wrote that “This country is a perfect desert and I am
afraid will never be of much use to the squatter. I am
almost certain that this country has never been visited by
natives”.
At one stage his camels travelled 278 miles in sixteen days
without water in what Winnecke described as the heaviest
and worst sandhill country in Australia.
The Queensland-Northern Territory border was sur-
veyed between 1883 and 1886. L. A. Wells was assistant
surveyor throughout and never left the task from beginning
to end. He said he was granted a fortnight’s leave at the
end of it, but this was cancelled and he was sent out on another
urgent survey job immediately on his return to Adelaide.
Hard old days indeed, but they made men. Wells used to
check the chaining by taking latitudes with a sextant by
meridian altitudes of stars, staying up all night to take twenty
north and twenty south stars. This would seem to be check-
ing accurate methods by approximate ones, but no doubt the
relative values change places when it is a matter of dragging
the hundred jingling links of the old Gunter’s chain over
seven hundred miles of sandhill and scrub. He said that
they put in a low but solid peg every quarter of a mile and
a good post at every mile, with the mileage from PoeppePs
Corner marked on it. The boundary between the Northern
Territory and South Australia, westward from Poeppel’s
Corner (Poeppel was the surveyor who started the north-
south line) along the 26th parallel across the Simpson Desert,
has never been surveyed.
David Lindsay in 1885 set out on an unsuccessful attempt
to cross the desert from south to north. He first managed
to get across the southern end of the desert from Dalhousie
Springs, using a native guide who knew a line of waterholes
or native wells stringing across and ending among the clay-
pans near PoeppePs Corner. He then tried to go north-
eastward from the bend in the Finke where Anacoora Bore


now is, but gave up the attempt after three days, considering
that the task was too much for the camels, owing to the sand-
ridges and the intense heat.
In 1916 the late Surveyor-General of South Australia,
T. E. Day, made the journey from Charlotte Waters to the
point where the Todd and Hale Rivers flood out, and then
one party followed the Hale up into the Mac Donnell Ranges.
Day’s journey up the Hale set the western margin of authen-
tically described country, Winnecke’s journeys along the
Thring (Marshall) and Hay the northern and eastern mar-
gins and Lindsay’s tracks the south-western and southern
margins when I made my aerial reconnaissances in 1929.
Since then, in 1936, Mr. E. A. Colson, a pastoralist of
Blood’s Creek, made a very successful southern crossing of
the desert with one black boy and camels, travelling from
Mt, Etingambra near Anacoora Bore to Poeppel’s Corner
and Birdsville, and returning on a more southerly route. His
journeys lay immediately north of Lindsay’s track, and he
was the first to traverse the vicinity of the 26th parallel, the
border line between the Territory and South Australia. Mr.
Colson later planned to cross the middle of the desert from
the end of the Hale River, the route I had selected for 1939.
He actually started out, but had to abandon the project be-
fore reaching the Hale through lack of equipment and
apparently the consequent dissatisfaction of the party, who
were all very inexperienced. The routes of all these journeys,
including my flights, are shown on the map accompanying
the Clarke Memorial Lecture referred to above.
Anacoora Bore was sunk many years ago with a view to
opening a stock route across the desert from Queensland.
My old friend Charlie Kunoth was employed on it. He
told me that he went eastward from the bore seventy miles
with Surveyor Ayliffe and camels to select another bore site.
They found the country so inhospitable that no further bores
were sunk and the stock route project was abandoned.
An adventurer named Bryce Russell boasted that he could
cross the Simpson Desert alone, and started out from Oodna-
datta with camels in the winter of 1937, in defiance of all
Warnings. Officially he has never been heard of since.
Extensive searches for him were carried out by the Royal


Australian Air Force. He wrote to me on the day o£ his
departure from Oodnadatta saying that it would be hopeless
to look for him if he did not turn up. It seemed very much
as if the whole thing was staged as a means of effecting a
disappearance as complete as that of Leichhardt, particularly
as it was rumoured that he turned up soon after in Queens-
land.
This, then, is the story of the Simpson Desert up to the
time of the Simpson Desert Expedition of 1939.


CHAPTER III
PREPARATIONS
THE success of an expedition depends primarily on the
preliminary organization. Stefansson has rightly said
that adventures are a sign of incompetence. In these days,
when no terrestrial conditions are quite unknown, success
should be assured before an expedition sets out 5 nothing
unexpected should happen, no difficulties should arise that
the party is not prepared to meet and defeat. Many explorers
have said that their greatest difficulties and worries were
endured before ever they set sail, and once all equipment
and party were on board the rest was comparatively easy.
This is a profound truth, but the preliminaries are not all
worry and trouble 5 finance is usually the worst obstacle; the
planning, the basis of the whole enterprise, is of absorbing
interest, and the satisfaction later of seeing the plans work
out successfully in the field is unsurpassed. It is a pleasure
missed by those who only take part in the carrying-out, for
to them it is all just plain sailing.
This expedition was a small one; the objective was of no
great importance, the times and distances were unimpressive;
yet it set out to do something that had not been done before,
a task that had been attempted half a dozen times by men of
experience over a period of a hundred years. Former
attempts had all ended in failure and in some cases possibly
in loss of life. This little desert was obviously a tough nut
to crack, and the journey was not one to be lightly under-
taken.
The route was to be from Charlotte Waters up northward
through Andado Station to the junction of the Hale and
Todd Rivers and thence eastward across the middle of' the
desert to the Mulligan River in Queensland, and thence to
Birdsville. Andado Bore would probably be the last water
before reaching the on the other side of the desert,
so that a waterless stage of some two hundred and fifty miles
had to be reckoned on. Camels, whose natural environment


is the desert, were the surest means of transport, and the
first thing to do was to find a good camel team. Thoughts
at once turned to Bejah Dervish, Larry Wells’ old camel
man on all his desert journeys, who was still living at Marree.
There were camels at Marree, where the Afghans were still
able to find some employment for them, so I visited Bejah
in August of 1938. I found him the grand old man Larry
Wells had always represented him to be, still full of tales of
the great adventure of the journey of the Calvert Expedition
of 1896—7 from Willuna to the Fitzroy across the Great
Sandy Desert in Western Australia, and proud to tell that
Wells had called him his friend. Bejah said with great
regret that he was too old to go, but his son Jack, who was
away at the time, would go, and Jack was a good boy on whom
I could rely. He had a big round-up of camels to show me
and there were obviously plenty to choose from. The only
uncertain quantity was Jack, whom I did not see till the fol-
lowing February, when I made another trip to Marree for
that purpose. Jack Bejah impressed me favourably at once.
He was young, solidly built and powerful, and seemed keen
on the undertaking. He had his own camel team which he
used on stations and fencing jobs in the outback, and could
make up the required number from his friends’ herds in
Marree, where there seemed to be a sort of pool of camels,
mostly out of work. Jack was tough, knew camels and the
country, and seemed just the man for the job. Indeed, he
later thoroughly proved himself to be a worthy son of his
father. He was one of the first members appointed to the
party, and he could not have been a better choice.
After the camels came the party, and this presented diffi-
culties, as there were to be no salaries, and few men of the
required qualifications could leave their work for three
months. The smallest party should contain at least a
botanist, a biologist, a photographer, and a wireless operator,
with myself as leader, navigator and geologist, and possibly a
cook.
To my great satisfaction my old friend and former student,
R. L, Crocker, was able to get leave from his duties as a soil
surveyor for the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research at the Waite Institute to come with me as botanist.


We had been round the northern end of the desert together
before and he already had some experience of the desert flora.
R. A. Simpson, the son of the expedition’s patron, was
anxious to come, and he fitted in excellently as wireless
operator. The field biologist was more difficult. Eventu-
ally H. O. Fletcher, palaeontologist at the Australian
Museum, Sydney, was appointed. He had been an assistant
biologist on one of Mawson’s summer cruises in the Antarctic,
and had had some experience as assistant collector for the
Museum in the Northern Territory. A man experienced
with the moving picture camera was required, but no pro-
fessional photographer could be persuaded to come. Photo-
graphy is a very important part of any expedition, and it
requires to have one man with his mind continually on it,
and with an eye to what makes a picture, or opportunities are
lost never to return. A primary maxim is, never miss a pic-
ture in the hope that the chance will recur under better con-
ditions. Experience in making a photographic record of ever-
changing scenes is much more important than is generally
known; it is not sufficient to be able to handle a camera. A
young friend of Simpson’s, David Marshall, was finally
appointed.
If the scientists are to have full opportunity to do their
work, a cook is necessary. On my small journeys in the
interior I had always done my own cooking, but decided this
time to take a cook, and it was a happy decision, for Albert
Hubbard, who had heard of the proposed expedition, came
and offered his services free of charge, and he proved to be
one of the outstanding successes of the expedition. He had
been cook both at hotels and shearing sheds and knew what
was required and how to do it. When every day is a day of
travel most of the scientific work has to be done at camping
time and it is a great help to the scientists to be relieved by a
cook of the task of preparing meals during the last hour or
two of daylight, not to mention the improvement in the
meals, which otherwise are apt to be left till they have to be
prepared in the dark by tired men. Napoleon’s famous
saying applies not only to armies.
Once the camels and the party were assured, the next thing
to consider was equipment. Bejah had shown me a shed full


of the best camel pack saddles I had ever seen, all strong and
in excellent repair. The Arab pack saddle is always a lament-
able affair, just on the point of falling to pieces, and held
together with odd bits of much-frayed cordage which parts
at the least pull. All Arab repairs are temporary, till in time
the whole saddle becomes temporary, with the straw pro-
truding from much-patched sacking and the bars continually
falling off. Bejah’s saddle pads were very heavily stuffed
and covered on the underside with genuine imported Indian
goat-hair, the ideal material, and not a straw was to be seen.
The wooden frames were strong and very well made. It
needed only a glance at the saddles to reassure me that I was
not going to have anything to worry about in the matter of
baggage transport. There was, however, a shortage of riding
saddles, and here I was able to rely on my friends the police
at Alice Springs, whose equipment I had often used before
and knew to be very good, having been designed for personal
use rather than for baggage camel trains. The police had
iron-framed riding saddles and great leather saddle-bags for
them, and also very strong iron-bound wooden tucker boxes
for baggage camels that could be used for instruments and
other scientific gear such as collecting bottles. I have never
seen better equipment for its purpose than the gear of the
Northern Territory Police Camel Patrols. It had often been
admired by other camel men in my former journeys; now it
was falling into disuse as the motor car replaced the camel,
so the Administrator gave me all I wanted, four riding
saddles with saddle bags, to which I had only to add some
new girths and stirrup irons and leathers, and four camel
boxes. With this patrol gear and Be j ah’s pack saddles I had
most excellent camel equipment, and so efficient was it that
even after crossing a thousand sandridges and making more
than fifty camps, not a thing was damaged, though our load
included a ship’s chronometer, theodolite, compasses,
cameras, batteries, many bottles, wireless valves, and lamp
globes. Much gear was borrowed and all was insured, yet
we could not find an excuse to make a single claim on the
insurance company when the expedition ended!
Water was expected to be our chief problem, and provision
to meet it was a fundamental part of the planning. I


reckoned that we might be out of reach of any water supply
for perhaps three weeks, and for this period we must carry
all the water we needed. The party would consist of nine
men, and a gallon a day should be ensured, so that we must
load up with about two hundred gallons of water; for this,
fourteen sixteen-gallon galvanized iron camel canteens were
made to my own design. They were very successful, and
were in great demand at the close of the expedition. In addi-
tion, there were a pair of 4-gallon canteens for emergency
use on short journeys in case it was necessary to send a detach-
ment away from the main party. A coil of copper tubing was
also taken to make a condenser in case we got into difficulties
and should find water in salt lakes. A condenser could
readily have been rigged up by luting the end of the coil into
the bung of a canteen with clay, but it would be very difficult
without a metal tube. Happily the coil was never required,
A pair of 16-gallon canteens would make about a four
hundred pound load for a camel, which was a reasonable
maximum for sandridge travelling, though half a ton is not
an uncommon load for Australian camels, and even up to four
360-lb. bales of wool is sometimes carried. Seven camels
were thus needed for water, seven for riding and carrying
the rider’s personal gear, and five should take the rest of the
stores and equipment, so that we required nineteen good
camels.
The low cost of the expedition was due in part to the gener-
ous assistance of various bodies in the loan of equipment, or
in some cases the promise of re-purchase on return. The
wireless equipment was one of Traeger’s pedal sets, made in
Adelaide. These excellent little outfits were in use at many
homesteads throughout the Interior; in fact there was a regu-
lar network of internal communication in the north-east of
of South Australia and through Birdsville into Queensland.
Harry Ding of Yunta on the Broken Hill railway line seemed
to exercise a sort of local control in his area, and Bob Gaffney
filled a similar role at Birdsville. Ding was running an
inland motor transport service and had all his trucks
equipped with these Traeger sets so that he could keep in
touch with them, and they report any trouble to him. He
had the whole set-up of wireless communication at his finger


ends, including much experience in care and maintenance,
which proved very valuable to us, and it was soon arranged
that our channel of communication with the outside world
should be through him and his more elaborate receiving
station at Yunta on the telegraph line. He arranged to
receive and transmit all our messages, including national
broadcasts from the desert, and our wireless success was very
largely due to him and his organization. The Traeger set
is very light and consists of the pedal generator and necessary
valve equipment, and a small aerial with telescopic poles.
We also carried batteries which were found quite adequate
and lasted the journey through, so that the pedal generator
was scarcely used. The range was up to a thousand miles
at night. Yunta was six hundred miles from us and we never
failed to make contact at night.
As well as prismatic compasses I took a Sestrel Mark 111 A
aerial compass of the kind commonly used on commercial
planes, which I attached permanently to my camel saddle on
a board in front of me and half-way between the iron frames
of the saddle, the slight effect of which was readily com-
pensated, This was an excellent arrangement in theory,
as the compass is very easy to read and courses can be readily
set, as with a ship’s compass, but in practice the motion of the
camel makes this type of liquid compass rather too sluggish
and it was not an unqualified success. When swung out of
true it tended to stay there and one was never quite sure
at a glance whether it was going to move again or not. A
good deal of checking had to be done by stopping and using
the prismatic.
The University of Adelaide lent a theodolite, an Abney
level, and two petrol lamps. The South Australian Govern-
ment and the Board of Anthropological Research each pro-
vided a 16 mm. moving picture camera. Among the pur-
chases were the ship’s chronometer, an aneroid barometer,
tapes, maximum and minimum thermometers, firearms and
other small instruments. Several members of the party
brought their own hand cameras. The Australian Museum
provided the collecting bottles and spirit cans and other bio-
logical equipment.


We had no medical man, but I took my usual little kit of
things that experience has shown meet the bushman’s needs,
things that are fool-proof but may be a very present help.
It consisted of bandages, gauze and medicated dressings, eye-
bath, scissors, tweezers, boracic acid, iodine, Condy's crystals,
aspirin, antiseptic ointment, laxative pills, chlorodyne and
snake-bite outfit.
The value of the snake-bite outfit, a little wooden tube
with a scarifier at one end and some Condy’s crystals to rub
in at the other, probably does not extend beyond, the psycho-
logical effect of having it with you, a value not to be alto-
gether despised. Chlorodyne is a very popular outback
remedy, stocked by every store. It is a pain killer, used to
alleviate “belly-ache”. Sometimes it is taken excessively as a
narcotic. The only things that we actually used on the
expedition were a bandage and some ointment on a blistered
heel, and someone took a few drops of chlorodyne, probably
to see what it was like.
The camp equipment was simple. All that the drover
uses in rain or shine is his blankets and 10 feet by 10 feet
Birkmyre waterproof canvas sheet. The sheet encloses all
his belongings and makes the “swag”. Besides the sheets,
canvas sleeping bags were also provided for those of the party
who did not already have them, but they were not necessary.
The sheet is all that could be desired. It can be laid on brush-
wood if the ground is wet. To make the bed the sheet is
first spread on the ground and the blankets laid out on one
half. The other half is then lapped over the bed, and may
be. tucked under all round if there is rain; and there is noth-
ing in the same class as the Birkmyre canvas; the bushman
will not look at anything else. I had not used these sheets
before, and thought that 10 feet by 8 feet looked quite
sufficient, but I was wrong; the two extra feet are needed, and
10 by 10 is the perfect size. We took no stretchers or tents,
but included an 18 by 20 foot waterproof canvas sheet, a
truck cover, always a useful thing, and later to prove of the
very greatest value to us.
Another item of camp equipment peculiar to Australia
and worthy of mention is the Bedourie camp oven, a flat


round pressed-steel oven, light and unbreakable, which can
be used for almost any sort of cooking—bread making, roast-
ing or frying. The lid has separate hinged handles and
makes an excellent frying pan. It is a tremendous improve-
ment on the old cast-iron camp oven with its unnecessary
legs. The meat boilers and billies are half-round for con-
venience of stowing in saddle bags, and all fit together in a
nest. They boil very quickly with the flat side to the fire.
Rations were to last nine men for six weeks. The chief
items were five fifty-pound bags of flour, and two hundred
and fifty pounds of salt meat to be picked up at Andado
Station. The meat was supplemented by several cases of
‘‘lmperial” assorted canned meats, a gift from Wm. Angliss
(Aust.) Pty. Ltd., which were not only a luxury but later
the only meat we had. Onions, potatoes, dried fruits, bacon,
honey, golden syrup, rice, condensed milk, tea, coffee, cocoa,
sugar, jam, cornflour, and as it was winter, 24 lb. of fresh
butter, were included, and even curry powder, herbs and
sauces were demanded by our professional cook. Some of
these things I thought unnecessary at the time, but their bulk
was small and when we had a day in camp, due to the rain or
the place meriting a halt for scientific work, then Albert came
into his own and we lived like kings, or at least better than
some desert kings I have known. I long ago realized the
sense and value of putting a small pillow in one’s swag (this
head-on-the-saddle stuff went out with the early Egyptians
and persists only in novels), and after this experience I regard
a cook as the next best thing to take.
To get information about Central Australia all you need
do is to pay occasional visits to the “Black Bull” in Hindley
Street, Adelaide, There you will meet in due course all the
cattle men from the Centre, particularly during a good
season, for the occasions, too few and far between, when
there are cattle fit for the market and cheques are coming
in, are always the family holiday times, and the “Black Bull”
is the Mecca of these far-scattered people. If they are not
staying there, they will forgather there, for it is the recog-
nized rendezvous. The hotel is flanked with little shops dis-
playing stock-whips and saddlery, and big hats and coloured


shirts and riding boots. Here I found Bob McDill, owner
of Andado Station, and was able with his help to make all
plans for the early stages of the expedition without a pre-
liminary visit to the starting point. Andado is well inside
the western edge of the desert and no one knew conditions
in the neighbourhood better than McDill. I thought he
might like to come with us across the desert but he refused
the invitation. His assistant on the station, Fred Sharpe,
was equally well acquainted with the country and was most
willing and anxious to come, but as he was undergoing serious
medical treatment the risk of including him in the party
was too great. McDill told me that they collected their
mail from Abminga, on the railway line, which was
about ninety miles from the homestead. A track ran from
Abminga through Charlotte Waters on the telegraph line,
across the Finke to Andado, with no difficulties except a
couple of sandridges to be crossed near the station. Motor
vehicles had got through, though they did not have any motor
transport themselves. Stony country ran another 25 miles
northward from the station tq Andado Bore No. 1, where
water was obtainable, and a motor truck could get that far.
From there northward and eastward only camels could be
used owing to the sandridges.
McDill would supply us with meat if he had enough
notice, but he had no blackboy suitable to accompany us. It
was most important to take a native, the wilder the better. He
would not be required or expected to know the country, but
I knew the value of the natives on trips such as these, real
bush natives who know the habits of all the bush creatures
and can track and catch them. They are of the greatest help
to the biologist and botanist in collecting, not to mention their
well-known ability in tracking strayed camels or recovering
any little article of camp equipment that is dropped or lost.
A good bush native can be more valuable than any other
single member of such an expedition. I have never for-
gotten how once in former days I lost a hammer off a gun
while out shooting, and a native later followed my tracks and
found it. I was staggered at the hopelessness of the quest,
but even more that he expected to find it.


McDill knew of a boy, then with MacKinnon, the police-
man at the Finke, but correspondence with MacKinnon dis-
closed that this boy had gone bush again. At one stage the
blackboy was the only deficiency in the planning, and a serious
one.
It was finally arranged that Jack Bejah should take the
camels, with what loading was then ready, from Marree to
Charlotte Waters, nearly four hundred miles, and the rest of
the party should go by rail to Abminga and thence by motor
truck to meet Jack and the camels at Charlotte Waters, where
the whole party would assemble and the rest of the camel
loads would be made up. The scientific staff would then go
on by truck to Andado Station, followed by the camel string
on its way to Andado Bore No. 1, where the truck would be
left behind and the whole expedition would proceed by camel.
There was a great advantage in this long trip by the camels
to the starting point. It was very necessary that all the
camels should be in good training and working trim, and
this journey would ensure it and allow the team to settle
down and any weaknesses to be discovered while it was still
possible to remedy them. However reliable Jack Bejah
might be, it was a sound policy. Our whole success depended
on our camels and their equipment, and that was my first care.
Harry Ding was to supply a motor truck and driver, to go
up on the same train as the scientific staff. In Jack Bejah and
Tom Kruse it was felt that we had the best camel man and the
best outback motor driver the country could provide, and time
proved that our confidence in them was justified.


CHAPTER IV
WE GET AWAY
JACK BEJAH with the camels left Marree early in
August for Charlotte Waters. He had been left to choose
an assistant and he took a young Afghan, Nurie, and also a
blackboy named Andy. He said he thought Andy would
come all the way with us, and would be suitable. I left the
decision on this till I had seen Andy and whatever other
natives McKinnon or McDill might have when we arrived
in their vicinity.
The rest of us, Crocker, Fletcher, Simpson, Marshall,
Albert Hubbard and myself, left Adelaide by train on May
25th, 1939. It had been arranged with the Australian
Broadcasting Commission that an attempt would be made to
broadcast three talks from the desert. Colonel Thomas,
then manager for the Australian Broadcasting Commission
in Adelaide, had charge of the arrangements, and he came
with us to Andado to see us safely on our way and to acquire
some desert “atmosphere”.
Tom Kruse joined the train in the night at Hawker, with
his truck. He had driven across from Yunta. The train, the
usual mixed one, was fully booked up and there was no
sleeping accommodation for Tom —not that that was much
worry to him. He slept as usual on the seat of his vehicle,
which was on a railway wagon. He had no ticket, but the
railways later prized a fare for him out of the expedition,
raising a rather nice point over which we differed, my argu-
ment being that you pay for a seat on a train, theirs that you
can’t travel on a train without a ticket, which is not true; it
is often done on those mixed trains.
At Marree old Bejah visited me on the train at six o’clock
in the morning and told me that Jack had got away with all
the gear in good order. He was obviously very pleased with
the equipment and camels. He was very anxious to impress
on me that we should never let the camels loose. “Always


have your camel in your hand” he kept repeating, shaking
his hand as though holding a nose-line. It was not clear
just how the camels were to get any feed. Bejah had had
trouble with the camels getting away in the night during
the Calvert Expedition, a thing that could be fatal.
At Mt. Dutton I saw my old companion of the Lake Eyre
adventure, Charlie Kunoth, who was cooking for the railway
gang. He gave us enormous mugs of tea and wished us luck.
Fred Wilkinson at Oodnadatta had seen Jack pass through
with the camels, which they had photographed. It was not
long ago, he said, that they used to photograph aeroplanes,
but now there was one plane a day each way at Oodnadatta
and the camel was something to turn out and see.
There had been heavy rains all along the railway line, and
local pastoralists said they had never seen anything like the
feed. This was a good augury for the desert. There had
been several washaways on the railway, and trains were only
just getting through again. This was the first train that had
run to schedule since the floods.
We arrived at Abminga at four o’clock in the morning of
May 27th, in the dark and cold, and proceeded to off-load
our truck and stores by the light of inadequate hurricane
lamps. Fortunately there was a loading ramp there, but it
was not easy to get the truck off sideways in the dark.
When the train had gone we found several men standing
round a fire, and joined them till daylight should make it
easier to load the truck and allow the moving picture camera
to film the departure from Abminga, which place consisted
of a little shed and a ramp, a fettler’s camp, a railway water
tank and a notice board with the name in huge letters, all set
in a featureless gibber plain.
At the fire were Fred Sharpe from Andado, in for the
mail, and Lowe of Dalhousie, among several others, Fred
told us that Jack was at the Charlotte with the camels, wait-
ing for us. Lowe was one of the chief figures in the recent
extraordinary affair of the supposed Leichhardt remains dis-
covery, where a party went out to investigate what was said
to be seven human skeletons lying round a camp fire in the
sandridges near Muckarinna waterhole on the Finke, forty


miles east of Abminga. The skeletons proved to be merely
calcified plant roots and bore little resemblance to human
bones. Whether it was a hoax or a jest that was never
intended to be taken seriously, was never determined, but
the story originated in the “Black Bull,” where newspaper
reporters picked it up and started a snowball which ended in
the State Government financing a so-called Leichhardt Expe-
dition into the Simpson Desert. There had been one of the
periodic references in the daily press to the disappearance of
Leichhardt, including mention that the party consisted of
seven men, and no doubt the reporters went to the “Black
Bull” to get a little local colour for an article on Leichhardt.
They would get it alright. There would be sure to be some
men there from the wide open spaces who over a few drinks
would tell more about Leichhardt than what there really is,
like Punch’s lighthouse keeper, and it is highly probably
that this is what happened.
Before long an elaborate party was organized to penetrate
the Simpson Desert on this interesting quest. It included an
anthropologist, a moving picture photographer and a Gov-
ernment Surveyor, and was provided with seven coffins to
bring back the remains in. The Lowes took the party by
truck to the site, which was on their country only a couple of
hours run from the railway at Abminga, and showed them
the petrified roots lying about over a considerable area.
They said the bones had been scattered by cattle since they last
saw them. Some of the party were for immediate return,
but others thought they would at least use the anthropo-
logist’s sieves that they had brought, so they marked out a
hundred and two ten foot squares and proceeded syste-
matically to sieve the first six inches of the sand. Human
tooth fragments, small fragments of bone, some of it human,
and pieces of leather and iron turned up, which was sur-
prising enough, but what was absolutely staggering was the
discovery of two coins, a half sovereign dated 1817 and a
threepenny bit dated 1841! The half sovereign on examin-
ation was seen to have been used as a pendant, probably a
watch chain pendant, from the wear and the marks showing
where it had been attached. It was one of the first issues of


half sovereigns, of which only a little over a million were
minted. But this was nothing to the threepenny bit, which
proved to be a Maundy threepence of which only 2,904 were
minted in that year. It seems incredible that a coin so com-
paratively rare should be sieved out of the sand of the
Simpson Desert. There was no sign saying “Dig”, nothing
to differentiate this spot from a million others on the sand-
ridges. Leichhardts last expedition started out in 1848, so
the coins could have belonged to him or one of his party.
One complete tooth built up of fragments had the charac-
teristics of a blackfellow’s tooth. The bone fragments might
of course have been of black man or white. It seemed most
probable that the site was an old blacks’ camp, as indeed
almost every inch of the country within reach of a water-hole
must have been at one time or other. Blacks would camp
away while whites were on the water, and they would pick up
or steal many little things. The leather, the iron and the coins
might have come from any travellers such as exploring, tele-
graph construction or cattle-mustering parties, or from a
neighbouring station, through the years subsequent to 1841.
There is nothing to connect them with Leichhardt except
remote possibility. The mystery of the coins is baffling and
intriguing. It will probably never be solved. It seems to be a
question of which is the more improbable, that the rare coins
were actually lost there and the party had the extraordinary
luck to dig for them on the very spot, or that the coins were
planted, involving the planter having to get them somewhere
at fairly short notice. Planting would seem more likely if it
were not for the presence of the other relics indicating a camp
site. The “Black Bull”’ and the Lowes are now inclined to
be reticent on the subject. The story shows the value of
reconnaissance, which could have been carried out by one man
without any equipment in a few days.
We got some bread and meat from the fettlers’ camp at
Abminga to see us through till our own stores and cooking
gear were unpacked. Soon after sunrise all was loaded up
and we left in the truck for the old telegraph station at
Charlotte Waters, sixteen miles away across the gibber
plains. The telegraph station, a group of well-made stone
buildings, once a relay station and a busy centre, had long


THE BLANCHE CUP.


GIBBER PLAINS NEAR ABMINGA.
IN THE BED OF THE FINKE.


been closed. It had the forlorn and desolate aspect of all
deserted places. From a telegraph station it had become a
police station, and now even the police had left. It had been
built almost as a fort and there were loopholes in the thick
walls at the main door. I had been there twelve years before,
when the place was still cheerfully occupied, but now an air
of gloom and tragedy and decay seemed to surround it, and
this was no mere fancy, for inside we found, in one room,
the belongings of an old man who had been living there and
had been dead for some time before he was discovered by
Fred Sharpe a few days before. Fred and the police had
removed the remains on a sheet of iron and buried them
nearby j they had thrown sand on the floor, but it was still
impossible to linger in the house.
The old telegraph buildings and an artesian bore with
windmill and tanks half a mile away are all that there is at
Charlotte Waters. My companions, from their memory of
the prominence given to Charlotte Waters on school maps
and it will be found in all atlases —had imagined that it was
a town, the capital of a thriving centre. We found its one
inhabitant dead. There was a little grave nearby with some
nice ironwork railings round it. This proved to be the last
resting place of a blacksmith’s dog of old telegraph station
days.
Jack was camped in the open nearby. I had expected to
use tKe old buildings, but this was impossible, and anyway it
was better to take to life under the sky straight away. There
was Jack, with Nurie, the blackfellow Andy and the camels,
all in good trim. They had struck no trouble on the journey
up, which had taken them about three weeks. We had
brought by train most of the stores and at once set about
“breaking bulk” and making them up into loads and filling
the camel boxes, which last takes a little thought so that
things wanted first will be on top. There is nothing more
irritating than to find the thing you seek at the bottom of a
box full of loose tins and parcels, except to find that it isn’t
there but at the top of another box.
Simpson set up the wireless aerial ready for the first try-out
when night came, and others did some natural history collect-
ing in the neighbourhood.


The telegraph construction parties had found water in the
shallow holes in the small creek now called the Coglin, and
these gave the name to Charlotte Waters. The holes are
far from being permanent, but at the time of our visit they
were well filled and even contained little fish of which we
took specimens. They were easily netted in the shallow
water. One was later placed in a 1 new genus, Madigania , but
there was some question as to whether it deserved this treat-
ment. There were actually ducks on the water, and I shot
two, which we cooked that evening. The party felt that the
proper thing to do was to cook them encased in mud in the
coals, the supposed blackfellow method. It may be a native
way, perhaps on the Murray, but I have never seen it used.
It is usually hard to find any mud in Central Australia, and
all flesh is simply put in the coals till it is slightly burnt on
the outside but never cooked inside. It is merely warmed
and singed by these inland natives. However, everyone
knows of the excellence of duck cooked in a mud case, but
few I imagine, have ever tried it. It is like that other myth,
that when the boomerang misses its mark it returns to the
thrower. The returning boomerang is a thin little thing,
actually a toy, known only to a few tribes in the south. To
make it return, the thrower must have a fresh breeze on his
left hand. The hunting or fighting boomerang is quite a
different thing, much heavier and stronger, with no return-
ing properties. You will not find a returning boomerang
among all the wild tribes of to-day. They have never heard
of it. The mission blacks of the south are taught to make
them for tourists. I have followed up the boomerang ques-
tion and collected many boomerangs, but the only returning
ones I have came from the Point McLeay Mission Station
on the lower Murray, and from Ooldea on the east-west rail-
way where they are being sold to the passengers. They are
a fascinating toy, but the limitations of direction and manner
of throwing make their returning properties of no practical
value.
A friend of mine once said he was sure he had a good
returning boomerang and asked me to test it, so we went out-
side and threw it in the approved manner. It travelled


extraordinarily well, and was last seen passing over the roofs
of some houses on the far side of a vacant block of land;
we never saw it again, and decided it was not the returning
kind.
Ido not speak with authority on mud-cooking. It may
have been general in the south, but I feel that it has been
overrated and is a practice not likely to gain ground; in fact
lam strongly in favour of letting it die out. The birds are
not plucked, and in theory the feathers and skin come off with
the clay when the savoury ball is cracked open. In the best
practice I understand the entrails are left in, thus improving
the cooking and preserving the flavour. I am not sure
whether we observed this rule. Its omission may have been
our undoing. Anyway it was not a success. It was practically
raw, though Andy seemed to think it overdone if anything.
There was plenty of good gamey flavour, but somehow not
quite what one expected. A longer and slower baking
was probably needed. One by one we quietly passed our
portion on to Andy. Albert was disappointed at the results
of his first effort to cook us a dinner. He had obviously not
attended an aboriginal school of cookery, or perhaps the fault
lay in our not being aborigines. Andy had no complaints,
not even from over-eating.
That night Simpson made contact with Harry Ding at
Yunta without any trouble, and we sent our first messages to
the Australian Broadcasting Commission and The Advertiser
newspaper to say that the whole expedition was assembled
and looking forward -to the desert trek.
The maximum temperature for the day was 76 F., and at
night it fell to six degrees above freezing. Later we had
colder days, and night temperatures below freezing. In spite
of winter weather the flies were swarming at Charlotte
Waters and Andado Station, making it difficult to eat or
handle food. Out in the desert they disappeared. Human
occupation encourages them; stock manure is their chief
breeding ground.
Fred Sharpe arrived at the camp during the morning and
spent the night with us. His transport was a very unusual
camel buggy, an old Ford car minus the engine, drawn by a


pair of camels and followed by several spare animals
attached behind. It was an excellent thing for crossing sand-
ridges and he could make the journey of eighty miles from
Abminga to Andado in a day of non-stop travelling. It was
a great sight to see it in action, with Pred at the steering
wheel and the spare parts following behind.
Before we turned in, all the camel loads were made up
and all gear checked. Everything was there j nothing was
forgotten j men, material and transport, all were assembled,
and the party lay down to sleep on the ground in the first
camp, cheerful and full of anticipation of the adventure
ahead.


CHAPTER V
ANDADO STATION
BY ten o’clock next day, a Sunday, the camel string was
loaded and we started it off on the sixty-five mile
journey to Andado Station, preceded by the camel buggy.
The scientific staff with their personal gear boarded the
truck and shot on ahead. It was a three-day journey for the
camels and we intended to wait for them at Andado, where
time could be usefully spent in making future plans and
examining the edge of the desert.
The track from Charlotte Waters to Andado runs east
along the Coglin Creek to the Finke, which is crossed near
the Coglin junction. It follows the left bank of the Finke
for a few miles before turning north into the desert towards
Mt. Peebles. After the Finke is left the track runs for about
eighteen miles between sandridges till it reachs a stony patch
free from sandridges, an area about thirty miles long east
and west by twelve miles wide. There are several conspicu-
ous hills in this area, notably Mt, Peebles, a “trig.” station,
and Mt. Day behind it, with the Moolta Tableland at the
east end. The track passes close to the east of Mt. Peebles
and near Mt. Day it turns north-east to run straight to the
Station past the north end of the Moolta Tableland.
The Finke at the crossing was a wide valley full of gum
trees and high grasses. It is under water only when the
river is in flood, which is by no means every year. There was
actually only one defined channel to cross, a deep, narrow
and dry ditch. Owing to recent rains the vegetation was
profuse. Particularly conspicuous was the plant locally
called verbena that grew in dense thickets several feet high
in the lower ground along the edges of waterholes, which
were then dry, and a vine called by the natives ilkarta , that
twined among the lower shrubs and was covered with little
green melons the size of large gooseberries, very popular
with the natives and quite pleasant to eat. Some of the
grasses were head high.


About seven miles from the river and among the sand-
ridges we came upon Mayfield’s Swamp which was then a
big sheet of shallow water, a large claypan. No streams
appeared to enter it, and it was rather surprising to see so
much water. It was the only surface water we found between
the water-holes in the Coglin and the claypans in the centre of
the desert. There were no signs of water in the Finke Val-
ley, in fact a newcomer could have crossed the Finke at that
point without recognizing it as a river at all.
Andado Station lies off the stony area and in the edge of
the sandridge desert. Two high sandridges have to be
crossed to reach it. The first one is the more difficult, and one
wondered if our truck would ever manage it. We inspected
it first. It was about fifty feet high, with the usual compara-
tively gentle rise of sand fixed by spinifex on the western
side and a nasty ridge of live sand on the top, but without
any abrupt faces. Kruse charged it at full speed from several
hundred yards away, wildly and recklessly, but just failed
to reach the top. He decided to back down and charge again.
He carried two eighteen foot lengths of three inch water
piping, which is much the best thing for getting vehicles out
of either sand or mud, and makes matting or wire quite
unnecessary, but it can only be used if the vehicle has dual
rear wheels. The end of the piping is thrust in between the
two tyres from behind or in front, depending on which way
you want to go, and the pipes may be left sticking up in the
air. When the clutch is let in the tyres grip the piping and
draw it under, and the vehicle will run along the pipes and
out of the worst of bogs. It is a very quick and rapid method
of backing out of mud bogs, as we saw later on the
Diamantina. In the case of mud, to back out and try some-
where else is always the best thing to do. Going forward
in sand presents less difficulties than in mud as the pipes are
drawn inwards through the sand as the vehicle advances.
They cannot be put under the front wheels as well as the back
so they are not parallel when the vehicle starts, A heavy
load becomes an advantage rather than a disadvantage. It
is pipes that get the Birdsville mail through in wet weather.
With single tyres the pipes are useless, and the difficulties
of bogs are much greater. The term bog is used for both
sand and mud in the back country.


At the second charge our truck reached the summit, and
on starting again on the pipes it succeeded in running down
the far side. The track then ran between two sandridges for
a couple of miles to where there was a lower crossing of the
next sandridge and a sandy way into the valley in which the
station lay. Here we found a typical Central Australian
cattle station homestead, a corrugated iron house nicely white-
washed, some gum trees, well-built stockyards, and a well and
windmill nearby, with the usual blacks’ camp in the offing,
all walled in between two high red sandridges that stretched
as far as the eye could see. Everything looked very arid
and there was no feed to be seen round the station.
Bob McDill was away, but we were met by his assistants,
Mr, and Mrs. Brooks, with Fred Sharpe and his mate Lady
and their little daughter Storm, and also a boy called Wal.
Lady and Fred cooked a turkey Marshall had shot on the
way out, and we all had an excellent dinner. Fred had left
his camel buggy to his native assistants and had come on with
us on the truck as guide. We made a stack of our gear and
the sand began to pile up over it. That night we had to
sleep on the ground outside, and this is never very pleasant
when close to a homestead. The wind eddied round and the
sand poured over us, and with fowls and goats about it is not
always all sand. A tame magpie came picking at our faces
at the crack of dawn. It visited us all and each tried to
persuade it to go to his neighbour.
In the morning everyone got into his desert dress, and all
superfluous gear and clothing was sorted out for return to
Marree, where it would await us at the close of the expedi-
tion. Col. Thomas had to return to Adelaide, so I went back
to Abminga with him in the truck and left the surplus lug-
gage there for railing to Marree. We were sorry to say
good-bye to Col. Thomas, who had been a very cheerful and
interesting companion. On the return I camped for the
night at the Finke and next morning examined the edge of
the tableland round which the river flows before turning
south. It is only about a hundred feet high. On the top we
found a curious arrangement of stones in the form of a sort
of yard, over sixty yards long and twenty feet wide. Inside
the yard there were many stone slabs turned up on edge with-
out definite arrangement. It must have been the work of


aboriginals but its significance was obscure. It suggested an
imitation stockyard.
The camels reached Andado that afternoon. Jack was
disappointed at the lack of feed, and took them several miles
up the valley to find fodder. McDill turned up with pack
horses the same evening.
That night I took astronomical observations for the posi-
tion of the station, after comparing the chronometer with
the wireless time signals, which came through clearly at seven
o’clock each night. The station was not marked on any maps.
Next day we brought in all the camel canteens and filled
them with water from the Andado Well. It was excellent
water. Most of the party then made a picnic trip to a well
three miles to the west, to dig for marsupial mice and to
bring in a load of wood. They had no luck with the digging
so Fletcher returned with the truck to set traps for the night.
He was so long gone that we thought the party was lost in
the sandridges, so we lit a fire on the high ridge to the west
to guide them in, which seemed rather to have annoyed
them. They had been doing some more digging and this
time they had succeeded in catching some mice.
While they were out there they had been questioning
Lady on the art of tracking and she had given a demon-
stration. She found two dingo tracks going away from the
well, and said one of the dogs was poisoned. She showed
them where it had suffered fits. Later Brooks found a dead
dog not far from the well.
That evening we had a mishap with the wireless. All
three transmission valves blew out, for no known reason,
and this left us without any spares. We made arrangements
for more spares to be sent to Oodnadatta by plane and then
on to Abminga by rail. This accident was disconcerting,
particularly as the cause remained undiscovered. It kept us
another three days at Andado, but the time was well spent.
The following day we went out by truck to Andado Bore
No. 1, twenty-five miles northward of the station. On the
way we passed Jack Bejah and the camels, with Andy and
Nurie. When Jack first looked round Andado he said rather
gloomily that it was a desolate place and that he would get
poking on, an expression he always used for moving with


LOADING UP AT CHARLOTTE WATERS.


THE ANDADO MAIL.
THE ROYAL MAIL.


the camels. I never agreed with his apologetic attitude
towards his means of transport. It may be slow, but it gets
you there. It has the advantage of dependability, and in
places where camels go men are not the slaves of time.
We had now discovered that the heavy rains had missed
Andado, where only a couple of inches had fallen in the past
six months, and that had been swallowed up by the sand.
Stock feed was very low, and Jack was rather worried. It
was arranged that he should poke along a few miles each day
searching for feed, and arrive at the bore in three day’s time.
We wanted to start the heavy sandridge work with the camels
in the best possible condition.
The track from the station to the bore lay for the first ten
miles between the two station sandridges; then the eastern
sandridge gave out and we rounded its end. We were then
on stony flats against which all the desert sandridges came
to an end. We rounded the ends of four of them as we passed
along this edge of the desert, and arrived at the bore in
twenty-five miles.
We found later that this second stony tableland extended
north-east for about twenty-five miles in a narrow tongue
to the Todd-Hale junction. As far as we could ascertain it
did not connect up with the Mt. Peebles stony tract, but the
two of them form a more or less sandridge-free peninsula
extending into the desert from the Finke. The main Simp-
son Desert lies to the east of the peninsula, with the Depot
Sandhills, through the western edge of which the railway
runs, making a big bay to the west.
The bore had been sunk to a depth of 870 feet and the
water stood at seventy feet below the surface. Most of the
Simpson Desert lies on the Great Artesian Basin but the bores
do not flow near its margin, which runs from Charlotte
Waters in a north-easterly direction across to the Queensland
border, with the basin to the south of this line. The windmill
and tanks were out of action but there was a windlass and
“sand-pump”, a long tube with a valve in the bottom, by
means of which water could be raised. Near the bore there
was a patch of “waddy” trees, tall, straight trees some fifty
feet high, with thin and drooping foliage and seeds in long
pods. The wood is red and very hard and heavy, a perfect


timber for blackfellows > waddies. The tree is an acacia, Acacia
fence. There are only two known localities for this tree in
Australia, the Andado bore grove and another a few miles
north of Birdsville. It is known as “waddy” at Birdsville
and casuarina at Andado. It has a resemblance to the she-
oak or casuarina in shape and foliage but the seeding habit is
quite different. The sheoak bears cones or “apples” while
the waddy seeds are in pods. Like the isolated Livistona
mariae palms near Hermannsburg, it probably once had a
much wider distribution.
We brought a load of posts in from the bore for McDill,
who went out with us. One hoped that a few waddy trees
would be allowed to survive. We caught a small yellow
rabbit at the bore, and took it back as a pet for Storm. It
had run into a length of bore casing. We later saw a few
more rabbits on the Hale further north, but not another sign
of them in the whole desert crossing and beyond, until we
reached the Diamantina River far below Birdsville.
Drought had driven them out of this part of the country,
but they reappear in good seasons with astonishing rapidity.
It is unlikely that they ever populate the Simpson Desert
itself.
Between the station and the bore we caught some desert
mice, and dug out a scorpion. The scorpion burrows down
in a spiral several feet in diameter, so that a hole dug inside
the spiral exposes the burrow coiling round it, with the
scorpion at the end.
A bullock had been killed at the station and the meat was
now ready for us. In this country the meat is not corned in
a brine tub, but the salt is rubbed into it by hand and the
pieces are then hung up for a couple of days to drip and dry.
On trek it is spread out each night on branches of trees broken
down for the purpose, till it is quite dry on the surface, when
it can be left in the bags and will keep for months in the sum-
mer and almost indefinitely in winter. If dingoes are about
it has to be hung up in the trees till it is dry —a laborious job.
We had now got all the information that Bob McDill,
Fred Sharpe and the natives could give us on the surround-
ing country, and it was clear that the original plan to go up
to the Todd-Hale junction and cross due east to the Mulligan


River needed no modification, but would best achieve our
object.
The Hale is known to aboriginals as the Allitera, which
name was always used at Andado. About six miles up the
Allitera from its junction with the Todd we were told there
was a native soak called Allua, and we decided to go to this
for a final fill up with water before turning east. The soak
was about sixty miles from the station. An old aboriginal,
Ly-Ly, would come with us from Andado to show us the
soak, and then return by himself to the station.
By this time I had seen enough of Andy to decide that he
would do as a member of the expedition. He was extra-
ordinarily keen and energetic for an aboriginal, and had
already shown his enthusiasm for collecting. Ly-Ly was
too old, and there was no other suitable aboriginal on the
station, nor had Constable IVlcKinnon been able to produce
one. The only catch was that Andy was rather hesitant
about going. He obviously feared the desert, but Jack Bejah
managed to overcome his fears. He had been brought up
on the Killalpaninna Mission on the Birdsville track and
knew the south side of the desert. The Mission was long
closed and the remains of Andy’s people, the Dieri, had
drifted into Marree. Andy was about middle-aged. He
spoke quite fair English, and even knew some German words
and phrases, which always seemed utterly incongruous. My
opinion of him improved daily and he turned out to be one
of the highlights of the expedition.
Other information obtained from McDill was that both
the Todd and Allitera had only a single channel above the
junction, not the wide belt of braided channels commonly
shown on maps, and that they flooded out at the junction to
four miles wide without definite channels, and continued so
for some ten miles, when a single channel was again formed
running to the latitude of Andado, another forty miles, where
there was a swamp about thirty-five miles east of the station,
below which the river continued in numerous ill-defined chan-
nels between the sandridges. He also told of a round hill
called Poodnitera, near the junction, a conspicuous landmark.
The next day the truck went into Abminga for the spare
valves and more petrol, taking McDill and Sharpe. Crocker


and Fletcher were to go to the Finke and remain there to do
some collecting, but the whole party went on into Abminga
and played cards at the fettlers’ camp, of which I took a very
poor view, particularly later when I heard of the money
supposed to have been won from me in the camp. It made
a good story, to have taken the leader of the expedition down
at poker.
They saw Ted Colson at Abminga, in for the mail from
his home at Blood’s Creek. He was sorry he had missed the
party when we all arrived by the previous mail. He had
been rather late and we had got away early. He sent a mes-
sage generously wishing us luck, though he must have envied
us the staff and equipment that he so sadly lacked for the
expedition he had to abandon.
Marshall and I did some photography round the station
while the rest were away and then ran a section across several
sandridges to the east of the station. The first sandridge to
the east was one of the largest in the whole desert. It was 84
feet high, with a big crest of live sand in dunes and mounds
on top. The steep faces of the crest were quite difficult to
climb owing to the sand giving way and sliding down. Like
nearly all the desert sand, it was a bright red and responded
well to colour photography.
The little girl Storm spent the afternoon with us. Her
magpie rather interfered with the instrument work by alight-
ing on heads at unexpected moments s she was in the habit
of going round with it on her own head. After a while she
got tired of watching us and wandered off. One of her
proudest possessions was a pair of sun spectacles and during
the afternoon she lost them somewhere in the sand. She
had covered a good mile of country in her wanderings, and
after half an hour I gave up the search as hopeless. When
Lady heard of this she at once went out, followed all the
wandering tracks unerringly, and was soon back with the
glasses. Like the man with the gun-hammer, it was not a
matter of looking for them; she just went out and got them.
We were no doubt a highlight in Storm’s life, but she was
of almost as much interest to us and her quaint sayings were
a continual amusement. She referred to Simpson, who wore
puttees, as the man with the tape round his legs. When she


found we were interested in the native names of things she
was very proud to tell them to us, and was always saying
“You ask me that one”. While at the station we got the
meaning of most of the better-known local place names. To
give a few examples: Andado means stone-knife; Abminga,
snake’s track; Rodinga, road or foot; and Rumbalara, rain-
bow. The Andado swamp is called Ajajacun , literally “meat
inside”. Apma is the snake, elunja the galah, an gala the
crow, and errkuppa the waddy tree.
One day Marshall got some good colour film of clearing
sand from the stockyard by horse scoop, a frequent necessity
if the yard is to be prevented from becoming a solid heap
of sand. The open structure of railings seems more effective
in accumulating sand-drift than a solid building like a house.
I have seen the stockyards at Parachilna Railway Station in
front of the Flinders Ranges in South Australia so drifted-up
that stock could walk over the top of them, and part of the
fence and the railway yard gate completely buried, yet the
offices and houses were quite free of sand. Buildings cause
eddies in the wind which scour the sand away rather than
build it up.
On the afternoon of Sunday, June 4th, a week after our
arrival, we left Andado in the truck for the bore, taking the
filled canteens, the meat, and the members’ personal gear.
On the way we stopped to catch a few more marsupial mice.
At the bore we found Jack, Nurie and Andy with the camels
and stores waiting for us. They had found some good feed
ten miles short of the bore and had stopped there, coming
on to the bore only that day. That night I observed for the
position of the bore, which was only very approximately
placed on the map. Crocker acted as recorder for the astro-
nomical observations throughout, and was very efficient at
it, reading the chronometer like an old hand.
We were all together that night, eager to get into camel
marching order next day and start the real desert trek as a
single unit.


CHAPTER VI
NORTHWARD TO THE HALE
THE truck was to leave us here at the bore, so it was now
necessary to make everything up into camel loads. The
seven camels were already detailed for their fourteen water
canteens, and the provisions had been distributed at Charlotte
Waters, but the personal gear and scientific equipment still
remained to be loaded on. The proper making up of camel
loads is of fundamental importance and is quite a technical
business. With poor loading there is not only the danger of
losing things, but there will be continual delay in adjusting
loads. Then again, some things will not be used perhaps for
weeks, while others may be wanted several times during a
day’s march, so there must be an order of priority and acces-
sibility. The wanted things like firearms, cameras, collect-
ing bottles and other scientific gear must be securely fastened
yet easily detached. Much experience is necessary for com-
plete success, and usually one is making improvement
throughout the whole journey.
The riding camels were allotted to the riders, and each
had to make up his own load of blankets and personal gear,
and such instruments as he might want during the march.
Fletcher required an extra camel for his collecting bottles
and spirit cans, but Marshall managed to get his photo-
graphic equipment on to his own riding camel. Simpson’s
wireless gear made up the best part of another camel load,
and then there were the theodolite, chronometer, plane
table, thermometers and other small gear to find a place for.
The leather pack-bags for riding saddles and the extra
wooden tucker boxes lent by the Police simplified the load-
ing considerably.
It is essential to have some containers and not to try to tie
everything on to the camels in bundles, as the Arabs do. I
once saw some Italian mica miners in the Hart Ranges who
had every article dangling on strings from their camels,
including hurricane lamps and frying pans and coffee pots,
after the style of Tenniel’s White Knight.


To the newcomer the loading of camels is always a fear-
some business. The camels roar and show their teeth in a
most alarming manner. Actually it is a groan rather than
a roar, a protest far from mute but not belligerent, in fact
merely an inherited habit that means nothing. The old
camel-hand takes no notice of it at all, and in a few days
even the beginner finds himself so used to it as to be quite
unconscious of the noise. Once the load is on, the camel
makes no further sound till next loading time, not even a
grunt of satisfaction when the load is taken off.
We decided to give the camels a drink, as it might be their
last for a month if the Allua soak failed us, so we got the
sand-pump going. Winding this up by windlass was so
slow that most of the water had leaked out of the tube by
the time it reached the surface, but the enterprising Tom
Kruse soon altered this. He detached the end of the wire
rope from the windlass and fixed it to the rear of his truck,
leaving a few turns on the windlass, and then went ahead
with the truck, thus making a sort of miners’ “whip” with
the truck instead of a horse. The windlass looked as if it
would fly to pieces at any moment as it whirled round, but
the tube shot up practically full and the camels were soon
watered at the trough. The water was not very good. In
addition to its natural high mineral content, it had been long
standing in the casing and was rather black and oderiferous.
However, the camels drank it, and we topped up the par-
tially-used canteens with it.
At last everything was loaded up, we mounted the riding
camels, and the procession moved off. I lead the way on
Snowy, Jack’s riding camel, closely followed by Albert on
his young beast, over which he never succeeding in exercising
any control jit just followed me round like a dog. Then
came the rest of the riding camels followed by Jack Bejah
walking and leading the string of baggage camels.
Jack said he was going to walk across the Simpson Desert,
but his dog had no such ambition. It sat between the big
tucker boxes for the whole journey, only getting off when
the camel knelt down. Nurie and Andy brought up the rear
on foot. Later on when the loads had lightened, everyone
could ride who wanted.


The truck started up and we waved a farewell to Tom
Kruse as he turned back for Andado and the railway.
Ly-Ly had joined us at the bore, complete with camel and
equipment, which was all apparently his own. He was an
aboriginal of some importance, and a property owner. He
knew little English and was very reticent, and an old man.
I found it very difficult to get any information out of him,
which was not due to any unwillingness on his part but to
my lack of understanding.
Andy had very quickly assumed the role of collector. He
needed no prodding. It was a job right into his hands, and
old Ly-Ly soon took the cue and became equally enthusiastic.
A spirit of competition developed between them in catching
lizards, snakes and mice.
It was early afternoon when we started off on a north-
east course towards the Todd-Hale junction. In six miles
we were off the stony ground round the bore, and entered low
sandridges. After crossing them for an hour we halted and
made the first desert camp, eight miles from the bore, with
ten sandridges behind us and a thousand before. It was a
very barren camp, in spinifex and dead mulga. Not a living
tree was to be seen
In six miles next morning, after crossing another 28 small
sandridges, we were again on a grassy plain with a broken
tableland on our right. It appeared that we had merely
crossed a sandy bay on the west side of the higher ground.
Near the end of the tableland we sighted a little round out-
lying hill which I took to be Poodnitera, and we made for it
and camped there, rather early in the afternoon.
Like all hills in very flat country, the tableland looked
imposing, but proved to be only sixty feet high. It was quite
narrow here and ended in a point. It was composed of a
porcelainized shale, very similar to the formations at the
Finke River, but was here capped by a pebbly conglomerate.
There were signs of recent rain along the tableland edge
and there was plenty of camel feed at the camp, including
green buck-bush, and the succulent munyeroo.
From the tableland we got a good view all round. A mile
out in front of the end of the tableland tongue there were
two lone little twin hills close together. I was uncertain


BLACKS’ CAMP AT ANDADO.
ANDADO BORE No. [?].


“THE DOG SAT ON THE TUCKER BOX.”


whether these twins were Poodnitera, or the single larger
hill with a flat top on the west side of the tongue. To the
north of the Twins there were irregular lines of small gum
trees among sandridges, obviously flooded country, but no
defined water channels could be seen. The patches of trees
had a south-easterly trend and apparently marked the course
of the Todd. A better-defined line of trees coming down
from the north, and more to the east, marked the course of
the Hale or Allitera. The lines met about three miles to
the east of our position.
Next morning we reached the Twins in two miles and
climbed the more northerly one, where we found a cairn of
stones, possibly built by Day. We pulled it down to search
for any message left there, but found none. We left one of
our own in a tin and rebuilt the cairn. From the Twins the
courses of the two rivers were clearer. A tableland edge on
the east side of the Hale could be seen, about eight miles
away, bearing 5 . I questioned Ly-Ly on the hill about his
soak, but could get nothing definite. He had no idea of
distances in miles, but he seemed to convey that the soak was
where the tableland could be seen. This tallied with
McDilPs estimate of six miles above the junction of rivers,
being rather more than less. Anyway, the next thing to do
was to go to this point. There was a large dry claypan on
the south-west side of the Twins, which Ly-Ly called
Djibata. This name seemed to include the Twins as well.
In the first six miles north of the Twins we crossed thirty-
eight close sandridges, most of them small but some up to
fifty feet high. We crossed the Todd without noticing it.
We would not have known it was there if it had not been for
the view from the Twins, showing the extra vegetation
between the sandridges. After six miles we entered green
grassy flats and trees along the course of the Hale, and after
two miles crossed its one well-defined channel and camped
among trees between the channel and the low tableland
edge sighted from the Twins. This was a delightful spot,
with gidgee against the cliffs, and box and swamp gum and
dense undergrowth on the river flats. The channel was
little more than a ditch and it was obvious that in flood times
it would overflow and cover a considerable width. There


were flowering acacias and munyeroo on the sandridges
between the rivers and high green flowering plants on the
flooded areas among the trees along the Hale. There was
plenty of firewood, and it was a perfect camping place, except
for the lack of water. We were not to see its like again till
we reached the Hay.
There was another cairn on the edge of the tableland at
this camp. We searched again for any messages, but found
nothing, so left one of our own. Cattle have been brought
down this river from the MacDonnells from time to time
and possibly the drovers had put these cairns up as land-
marks. The natives often build them too, in imitation of
the white man’s trigonometrical stations, a thing to be remem-
bered when searching for the trig, points of surveyors.
For the past two days we had seen budgerigars, which do
not go far from water, and to-day there were zebra finches
and pigeons as well. The tracks of emus and wild camels
were noticed. There was a rabbit warren near the camp,
with a few rabbits, the last we were to see of Brer Rabbit for
the whole journey across the desert.
This was the place indicated by Ly-Ly from the top of the
Twins, and it was more than McDill’s six miles up from the
junction, yet there were no signs of water, and no holes in the
channel big enough to hold water for any length of time.
In the deeper places the sand was damp and obviously water
had not long dried up, but it was not suitable for a soakage;
there was not enough sand, only a veneer on sandy clay, and
no hard rock bottom. Next day Jack and I put down a
twelve-foot hole in the best place, without success. The
hole was mainly through clay, becoming drier as we went
down. We carried a post-hole borer with which we could
sink twenty feet, a tool with tremendous advantages over
the shovel for water search.
I hoped to observe for position that night, in order to fix
the Hale-Todd Junction, but the sky was overcast.
The following day was spent by the botanist and biologist
in collecting, while Jack and I searched for water. There
were plenty of spiders, scorpions and lizards, and Andy was
very busy and keen. Marshall made a colour film of Andy
getting a widgetty grub out of a gum tree and eating it.


The presence of the grub in the tree can be detected by a bulge
on the trunk the size of a cupped hand, with a hole just below
it, marked by a red stain, out of which borings and excreta
exude. The bulge is chopped into with an axe, disclosing
a hole extending upwards. Into this the native pushes a
stick or strong grass stem turned back at the end like the barb
on a harpoon. When the stick is gently withdrawn the barb
drags the grub down. The grubs are white and of the order
of six inches long and half an inch in diameter, with a small
brown head. The natives eat them raw or roasted on coals,
holding them by the head and biting off the remainder. The
body is mainly composed of a fatty substance and smells good
when roasted.
Ly-Ly was the most difficult person to get information
out of that I had ever met. I could not discover whether
he expected to find the soak here or not. I began to think it
was a long time since he had been here and he had forgotten
the place, or that the soak might be a hundred miles away
up in the MacDonnells. It was not absolutely essential to
find water, but we had used four days’ supply and I wanted
to replenish this and leave for the desert crossing with a full
load. At four o’clock on the day of our arrival Ly-Ly had
disappeared on his camel, but turned up again at ten o’clock
next morning saying he had found the soak. Of course I
could not gather just where it was, so I sent Jack off with
him on camels to investigate. Jack came back in the evening,
saying the soak was there all right, seven miles upstream.
He had taken a shovel and dug down to water. On this good
news I decided to shift camp to the place next day.
Andy was in great form that night, even more cheerful
than usual. He told us of an old man who had made the
Georgina run by means of the rain ceremony, which takes
a very big rain, and a big witch doctor too. Only the old
men can do this, said Andy, good men, no drink, no cards.
Fletcher asked him how they stopped it if it rained too much,
but this need does not seem to have arisen. One gathered
that Andy did not consider his own years and moral standing
sufficient for rain making. He may have given it a surrepti-
tious try-out, for it rained gently all night and gave our
ground sheets a good testing, or rather the arranging of them.


There is nothing more unpleasant than having to break
camp after a wet night. One potters about hoping things
will dry out, unwilling to roll up damp blankets, wondering
what to do next, and generally wasting time. It was well
after ten o’clock next day when at last we got on the move.
We first heard the yaps and mournful howls of the dingoes
at this camp. They were heard almost every night after-
wards and often seen peering over the crests of the sand-
ridges down on to our camps, desert outcasts gazing in
hungry loneliness on the feasts they longed to share.
We went northward between the river and the edge of the
tableland, crossing sandy saltbush flats that made wide bays
in the tableland, and soon covered the seven miles to the soak-
age. An emu was seen near the soak walking about rather
suspiciously, and it was not long before some of the party
found her nest with four eggs. The whole party breakfasted
on the eggs next morning, one emu egg being enough for
a meal for four men. Ly-Ly seemed rather annoyed about
this. He had not helped to find the nest and the general idea
was that he wanted to find it after we had gone, as this was
where we were to part, his job of locating the soak being
done. Apart from this little set-back, he was very excited.
The locality was obviously an old native camping ground,
probably a place for ceremonies, and he rushed round appar-
ently locating spots of particular interest to him, or where he
had camped in the old days when large gatherings took
place there. He said there was plenty of food about,
“bloody widgetty, bloody yam, bloody mobs”. He did not
mention bloody emu eggs. Exactly fifty per cent of Ly-Ly’s
conversation consisted of bloody. He used it as a sort of
prefix to every word and no doubt regarded it as an essential
part of word structure. He reminded me of the story of the
man who was asked by a friend what this one man one vote
business meant. He answered, “Well, it’s like this, you see,
Fred; one bloody man, one bloody vote”. “Oh, I see”, said
the friend, “why can’t they explain it to you like that?”
I really saw yams for the first time at this camp, after
hearing many erroneous descriptions of them by people who
had not seen them. They are usually said to be like potatoes,
to which they actually bear no resemblance at all. They are


the roots of a vine-like plant that has little foliage and is
rather hard to find. It may be seen climbing on other low
plants and brambles. The roots are cylindrical and may be
several feet long and no thicker than your finger, with a dark
skin, but fleshy inside. When collected for roasting they
look like a bundle of thin sticks. They are cooked on the
coals and taste rather like a tough and fibrous parsnip. There
was a sandy bank near the camp where floods had washed
away some soil, and the roots could be seen sticking out of
it and were very easy to get. We all ate some, but they
could only be looked on as an emergency diet.
Andy and Ly-Ly kept to themselves at this camp and pre-
pared their own bush tucker. They had cooked a lot of
widgetties and these attracted Simpson and Crocker, who,
though not anxious for a bush meal, wanted to try the
widgetties. Ly-Ly had roasted the grubs in the ashes and
laid them out on pieces of bark. Simpson and Crocker each
ate four, and like Huck Finn, they could have eaten a lot
more if they’d wanted to, but they didn’t want to. They
pulled the head and tail sections away and thus removed
most of the digestive tract, a black string, and then drew out
the inside of the grub from the dry and browned skin.
Actually this is a much too refined and wasteful way of eating
them. Only the hard head should be thrown away.
The Hale or Allitera here had a broad sandy bed fifty
yards wide, but this was the end of it as a well-defined single
channel. Beyond, it flooded out into swamps and ditches.
The sand was saturated with water a few feet below the
surface. All hands turned to and dug a large soak about six
feet deep and twenty feet across, a big excavation owing to
the caving of the sides. This always happens with sand
soaks. You have to dig over a much bigger area than you
think at first and it is almost impossible to get down more
than a few inches below water level without timbering. The
task made a good piece of colour film, the sand flying
at an astonishing rate while the eye of the camera was
on the workers. Troughs were made in the sand and lined
with ground sheets for the camels to drink from.
The sky was clear that night and I was able to get star
observations for position. I had to work these out and set the


course for the morrow before turning in. “Mudloo Well”
was marked on the maps, between the Queensland border
and the Mulligan River. I had no information about this
well, whether it was a permanent waterhole, a dug well, or
even if it was still in existence, but it offered the nearest chance
of water the other side of the desert and I decided to set my
course for it. I found its magnetic bearing from our present
position was only a degree north of east and its distance a
hundred and fifty miles away by air line across the sandridge
desert. Next morning we would start out on this course into
the unknown, and the real task of the expedition would begin.
We were then about sixty miles north of Andado Station.


CHAPTER VII
EASTWARD INTO THE DESERT
IN the morning we emptied out the bore water and topped
up all the canteens with water from the soak. It was
beautiful water, clear and soft, and had quite settled during
the night after the disturbance of our excavations. The
camels showed little interest in our beautiful white troughs
and only a few would drink. Jack said the water was too
cold for them. Owing to the weather and the green feed
about along the river, this did not seem to matter much at the
time.
It was nearly noon on Sunday, June 11, before we got
away. We had spread all our gear out in the sun to dry after
the wetting of the night before. When all was ready we
said farewell to Ly-Ly, who was going to spend a few days
alone in his old haunts before returning to Andado, mounted
our camels, turned our backs on the river and headed into the
desert. The venture we had prepared for was begun.
We climbed a small gully to the top of the scarp, only
about fifty feet high, that bordered the river, and found
ourselves on a stony tableland that proved to be no more than
a couple of miles across. Beyond it was a valley nearly three
miles wide, with a watercourse in the bottom, running away
south-south-east. This valley also had plenty of green feed
in it, with gum trees, acacias and flocks of shell parrots or
budgerigars. A slight rise on the other side of the valley
again brought us to a stony tableland where there were a few
small sandridges and some dry claypans. In lower areas
there was green mulga and herbage, but everywhere the gum
trees were dead, both box and bloodwood. There were
patches where the dead timber and brushwood had been
burnt. It is always a mystery how such fires start, though
this burning might have been done by aborigines as we were
not far from water. The vegetation, though dead, had been
comparatively dense, dense enough to burn in places. We
camped early on a green patch with a sandridge on the far


side. There were zebra finches round the camp. We had
made only eleven miles and crossed five sandridges, but it
was a propitious beginning. There was some feed about, the
camels were in good condition, all the equipment had been
tested and found satisfactory, there was a ton of water on the
camels, and everything was running smoothly. It was a good
camp, and Albert made us an excellent dinner from tinned
meats. In the morning the empty tins were fixed up in a
mulga tree to attract the attention of the next comer, if he
comes before the tins rust away. There is a fascination in
finding in lonely places signs that others have passed that
way. It made us go to the trouble of taking down and re-
building the cairns on the Hale. I hope somebody some day
sees those empty meat tins again. He will take them down
and try to read the lettering on them and to figure out who
left them there.
The temperature fell to two degrees below freezing that
night, and the dingoes kept us awake with their howling.
It was midwinter and the days were short. The sun rose
at about seven o’clock and set at five. The routine for the
day’s march was to rise at the first daylight, about half past
six, breakfast, break camp, and start moving as soon as possi-
ble, and then to keep on the move till it was time to camp
again, without any luncheon halt, with its inevitable unpack-
ing of loads and loss of time. This also allowed the camels
the maximum time for feeding after camp was made in the
evening, for we took no chances with them at night but yarded
them up as soon as it was dark. Jack made the most incredible
yards with a single strand of rope round four corner sticks,
using standing trees where there were any, or stakes that he
carried when there were none. The camels were hobbled and
herded inside this, where, to my astonishment, they stayed.
It was only a token yard, but Jack said they would think it
was the real thing, and apparently they did. Sometimes in
the morning it would be found that one or two had rolled
under the rope, but it did not seem to matter much which
side of the line they were on, reminding one of the man going
round the outside of the park railings and lamenting that he
was locked in again.


AT THE CAIRN ON POODNITERA HILL.
THE END OF THE TODD RIVER FROM POODNITERA HILL.


ALLUA SOAK, HALE RIVER.
THE COLUMN ON THE MARCH.


Our object was to get on the move by 9 a.m., though this
ideal was rarely realized, and to camp about 4 p.m., thus
allowing the camels about two hours to feed at night and
perhaps an hour in the morning before we were ready to
begin loading. Feed would have to be fairly plentiful for
this to be enough time for them. In the early stages of the
expedition we only had two meals a day ourselves while on
the march, which was no hardship.
Off-loading a camel team at camp time is a quick process.
The camels kneel down in their line, the slip knots on each
load are pulled free and the cordage is paid out, allowing the
two loads to slide gently to the ground, one on each side of
the camel. One man can release the loads of the whole team
in a few minutes. The pack saddles are then lifted off and
placed on end at one side, the hobbles put on, nose-lines
removed and the camel is free to go off and feed. Most of
the loads can be left undisturbed, and when reloading time
comes the camel is lead up and kneels down between his loads
again j but it takes two men to put the loads on, one for each
side. The loads have to be lifted together and held on the
knees against the saddle while the cordage is passed across
from the top of one load to the other and secured. Jack and
Albert always did this part of the loading. A competition in
smartness and efficiency developed between them, and
though Jack was much the bigger and stronger, Albert kept
his end up right through the whole journey. Every morning
Jack’s cheery and continued cries of “Come on, Albert”, were
a familiar feature of the packing up. Each rider, of course,
packed his own camel.
As soon as we left the Hale it was arranged that water
should be used only from the two four-gallon canteens,
which were filled from the larger ones every morning before
starting, and that quantity must last till next morning. This
put the party of nine on a ration of eight gallons a day. The
small canteens also had the advantage of being much easier
to handle.
So far we had been on stony ground, with claypans, good
feed in patches, and only a few straggly sandridges. What
lay beyond the sandridge by the camp? Next morning wc


were soon across it j closely following came another, and then
another, and another. Spinifex began to replace all other
herbage. The trees disappeared. The sandridges became
higher and straighter, and were soon up to fifty feet high.
Camel feed was reduced to a few plants on the crests of the
ridges. The country and the going became steadily worse.
At the end of six and a half hours we had crossed no less than
seventy sandridges in sixteen miles, and then camped among
them in a place with little feed and only a few sticks of dead
needlebush for firewood. We were into the desert. It was
going to be tough.
At first there had been some stony patches, showing that the
hard surface was not far below the sand, but now there was
only sand and spinifex between the sandridges.
The following day was much the same. At noon we passed
a tree-covered claypan between sandridges, with signs of
recent water. The last rains had been patchy, and feed was
variable but becoming alarmingly scarce. That day we
covered another sixteen miles and crossed seventy three sand-
ridges. Seventy or more sandridges a day was going to be
very hard work for the camels. It meant crossing one every
six minutes. We had expected this, but it seemed much
worse when theory became actual practice, the endless repiti-
tion of the long spinifex-covered approach, the struggle up
and through the bank of live sand on the crest, the much
steeper stumbling descent to the valley on the far side. I
ticked off every ridge as we crossed it with a pencil mark on
the compass box before me. We bore to the left as we climbed
up, and to the right as we descended, in an attempt to balance
the zig-zagging of the course. Sometimes we had to go
along the crest for a distance to find a better way down. My
latitudes showed that there was a constant slight drift to the
south in our easterly course. We were not straightening up
enough after coming down the ridges.
Next day the sandridges became even more formidable.
They rose to eighty feet or more, and were all like the big
ridge at Andado Station. In the morning we passed through
country that had had no rain for at least two years. The
spinifex had not flowered for at least a season. There were
no seeding stems remaining on it ; in fact most of it was quite


dead. This was the very height of desolation. There was
no fodder at all. At three o’clock in the afternoon we sud-
denly came into a patch where there had been recent rains,
and found ourselves among green spinifex in flower and
green canegrass. The whole vista was suddenly green except
for the red crests of the sandridges. I thought we had
entered the edge of the Queensland rain area, the rains that
had brought floods down the Diamantina, and on which the
whole expedition had been planned. In another hour the
herbage began to disappear and the aspect become arid again,
so we camped. Jack thought I should have camped earlier,
but he was being wise after the event. There was a clump of
needlebush at this camp, some of it alive, the rest good fire-
wood. There had been rain fairly recently, not long enough
ago to affect the herbage, but there were signs that water had
run down the sandridges and lain in the low ground.
The rate of progress had been slower to-day. I reckoned
we had made twelve miles in six hours j we had crossed fifty-
five sandridges, all big ones, and it had been a heavy day.
This was our Camp 8, the eighth halt since we left Andado
Bore. We had come ninety-five miles from the bore and
were fifty-five miles east of the Hale.
Rain was threatening, so we made a shelter with the large
canvas sheet supported by the camel boxes, but only Crocker,
Fletcher, Marshall and myself took advantage of it.


CHAPTER VIII
RAIN IN THE DESERT
THE most unexpected thing now happened. We were
held up by rain in the middle of the desert! About
twenty points fell during the night, enough to make things
uncomfortable, and it drizzled gently all next day so that we
could not break camp. However, it gave us an opportunity
to do some scientific work. Fletcher shot some wrens and
chats which were around this camp. Some of them were
most brightly coloured and beautiful little birds. Crocker
examined the flora and took soil samples and also assisted me
to run a three-quarter mile section across the sandridges with
level and tape. The nearest sandridge to the camp was found
to be sixty-three feet high. Marshall made some film, and
Albert had us feeding in undreamt-of luxury,
I finished the preparation of the first of three national
broadcasts that were to be given from the desert and expected
to put it over that night, but it was postponed on account of
poor reception.
Before night we greatly improved the shelter by making
a walled enclosure with all the camel saddles and stores, and
covering it with the sheet, supporting the centre with a spare
piece of pack-saddle wood fixed to the top of the theodolite
tripod. This made quite a cosy hut, which attracted Simpson,
but still Albert, Jack, Nurie and Andy preferred to stay out
under their ground sheets.
The rain increased and fell all night. An inch was
measured in a pannikin up to noon next day. Albert slept
alongside his fire, and in the morning brought us in the tent
a breakfast in bed of bacon on toast with coffee. The rain
did not seem to hamper him at all, but it kept the rest of us
under cover all day. I read aloud The Case of the Stutter-
ing Bishop , which intrigued everybody, and particularly
Jack. Mark Twain’s story of the golden arm was very suc-
cessful too. It took Nurie’s fancy immensely. At the end
he nearly jumped out of what Simpson called our zareba.


We caught about thirty gallons of water on sheets to make
up for what we were using during the delay. Crocker found
half a dozen large black water beetles swimming in Simp-
son’s ground sheet. This seemed most mysterious till I
found that they had very effective wings and were equally
at home in the air. They must have flown in to our camp,
but'from where? The wind was east, which suggested open
water to the east. It was still an intriguing problem.
The wireless transmitter was inside the shelter and that
night the first broadcast was attempted. It was very different
from giving a talk from a studio, crouched there under the
tarpaulin with inadequate light, no table, notes scribbled in
pencil and only one hand to hold them, the other being occu-
pied with the little telephone transmitter. The wonder of it
appealed strongly to me and I tried to make my listeners
feel it too. There were we, in our cramped, cold, damp and
ill-lit quarters in the sandridges, hundreds of miles from any
signs of human activity, hidden away in the most inaccessible
part of Australia’s empty wastes, and yet I was talking to
people sitting before fires in armchairs a thousand miles away
and surrounded by all the luxuries of modern civilization.
My voice was in their rooms, a voice from where all else was
silence except for the tinkle of the camel bells and an
occasional dingo’s howl; not even the voice of the cricketer,
as Andy called it, is heard in that land. Against the back-
ground of our most ancient and primitive way of life and
travel the modern scientific equipment showed up in sharp
relief, compelling the realization that in civilized places the
amenities that science makes available are multiplying so
rapidly that appreciation of them is dulled and lags behind.
The little wireless plant could bridge three thousand years.
The rain cleared off that night, but the following day was
heavily overcast. It was now necessary to dry out before
packing up. It is a very bad practice to put wet pack saddles
on heavily laden camels, as all the cordage and material has
shrunk and hardened and the fit is ruined. We draped all
our blankets and equipment over the few needlebushes to air
in the wind, which had now changed to south. The day was
spent in sketching and studying sand formations. We sank a
hole by the camp, between the sandridges, with the post-hole


borer, but could only get down eleven feet when sandstone
gravel stopped further progress. This was the bottom of the
sand and the top of its parent material, the underlying sand-
stone. Some of the party trimmed a needlebush and put up
signboards on it showing distances to Adelaide and Birds-
ville. The latter was two hundred miles away as the crow
flies, but a good deal further as the camel crosses the sand-
ridge, and Adelaide over seven hundred miles, but the sign-
board rather incorrectly read, Birdsville 130 and Adelaide
1,004.
There was no more rain. About an inch and a half had
fallen, but there was nothing to show for it, no pools of water
to be seen lying about. The sand had merely absorbed it as it
fell, and was moistened down to a depth of fifteen inches, as
we found by digging holes. Where the sand is eleven feet
deep even between the sandridges there can be little run-off or
accumulation of water on the surface, such as there is with
stony ground or ordinary clay soils. Even the desert sands how-
ever, are not entirely free of clay, and in heavy rains there
may be some run-off from the sandridges, of which in fact
we saw some evidence from past rains in little rill-marks
down their sides.
Claypans are small low-lying areas with impervious clay
bottoms that hold temporary waters. They may be due to
the sand having been swept away by local wind eddies, some-
times caused by the sandhills themselves, thus exposing a clay
floor, or by the run-off from adjacent higher sandy country
carrying the finer clay particles down to lower ground and
depositing them to make a watertight bottom. They are
always very shallow and the water can usually only be relied
on for a few weeks, as it is soon lost by evaporation. The
claypan is usually from fifty to a hundred yards across.
Beyond that they become dry lakes. We were to see many
in heavy sandridge country, particularly round Lake Eyre.
Some were miles across and were marked as lakes on the map j
others were like holes scooped out of the sand, with the sand-
hills invariably higher around their edges, which strongly
suggested that in those cases they owed their origin and con-
tinued existence to wind scour.


On the following day, June 17, the fourth day since our
arrival, we got away from the wet No. 8 Camp to a late start.
The wooden sections of the wireless poles had swollen and
become jammed in their iron sockets. We heated the joints
over the fire till the wood was almost charred, and the whole
party engaged in tugs-of-war, all to no effect. It looked as
though we would never get them apart. The problem was
solved at last by twisting with the pipe grips belonging to the
boring set.
aroun d the camp had been poor, but the camels
had all day to browse and were still in good condition. They
had had no water, but the herbage was damp and the weather
cool and moist, so they did not need it. We had made up the
four days’ water supply the delay had cost us, but Albert’s
generous catering had made rather serious inroads on the
fresh meat. We had been in the desert a week and had only
put fifty-five miles behind us in four days’ of travelling.
This rate of progress would have to be increased, but such a
hold up would not be likely to occur again, and we reckoned
that we should be able to maintain a rate of at least ten miles
a day in the worst country we had seen. The feed was not
up to expectations it had only been good through the
ooded country along the Hale—but sooner or later we must
enter the area affected by the known good season in Queens-
land. The rains along the telegraph line had not extended
mto the western side of the desert, but surely we would not
have the same ill-luck on both sides! We got away from
Camp 8 full of enthusiasm and confidence, refreshed and
eager to press on.


CHAPTER IX
NEAR TO FAILURE
THE new start was most propitious. The camels were
rested, the party in high spirits. As we progressed, a
clump of trees —probably mulga—was seen to the south
between sandridges, and we passed three little pools of sur-
face water. This must have been where the water beetles
came from. Two small mobs of budgerigars were noted,
and some finches and wrens. A flight of twenty crows
seemed interested in us.
The sandridges were big but seemed less formidable to
the refreshed cavalcade. Andy, as usual, was running here
and there, continually snatching up plants for Crocker or
lizards for Fletcher. He had a remarkable memory for what
had been already collected, but was rather given to pressing
on them what he considered better specimens of the same
thing. Towards the end of the day his enthusiasm would
often outlast their receptiveness. He was both an example
and a task master. It was in the larger field of biology where
his contributions were most valuable and most needed. He
could always tell at a glance, by its last tracks, whether a
reptile or a mouse was in its hole, whether at home or gone
visiting, as he said, thus saving a lot of useless digging.
A big lizard of the frill-necked variety was caught that
day.
Early in the afternoon Andy found the hole of a marsupial
rat which he said was at home, so he and Fletcher and others
began to dig it out. They thought they would not be long,
so elected to stay behind to avoid delay, expecting to catch us
up later. I knew the exasperation of trying to overtake a
camel string on foot—you gain about half a mile an hour on
them, although they seem to be going so slowly. Their long,
slow strides are covering a lot more ground than they appear
to be. It is when they are in sight, and then only half a mile
away and even within hailing distance, that it becomes so irri-
tating, when you are struggling to close the last short gap and


SANDRIDGES ON THE BIRDSVILLE TRACK, NEAR COOPER CREEK.
PARALLEL SANDRIDGES OF THE SIMPSON DESERT.


THE SIMPSON DESERT AT ITS WORST.
SETTING A COURSE IN THE DESERT.


your pride forbids you to call them to halt. It is bad enough
on a road, but stumbling through the tufts of spinifex was
going to make it much worse. However, we meant to camp
early, so I left them to gain their experience.
In good country, on tracks, the Australian camel covers
about three miles an hour. In hilly country in the Mac-
Donnells I had found two and three-quarter miles an hour
a reliable average. In these sandridges I was reckoning on
two and a half to two and a quarter, but had so far been
unable to check it as there had been no clear nights for longi-
tude observations. The hourly rate of the camel is extra-
ordinarily constant; in fact it is most difficult to vary it. The
pack camel cannot be hurried up to any extent, nor does he
slow down, but swings along hour after hour at his own fixed
gait. This makes route traversing on camels very simple and
accurate. It is only necessary to keep a note of the direction
and the time of every halt and start. The times are liable
to be overlooked at first but it soon becomes a habit to jot
them down,, like winding on the camera film. At the end of
the day the time of marching is added up to the nearest five
minutes, and this multiplied by the rate gives the day’s run.
It is usually possible to check the rate at the beginning of a
journey by the time taken between two known points, but
we could not check the sandridge rate on our easterly course
till I could take a longitude.
We had been told that the first national broadcast had not
been a success, and I was to repeat it to-night. The reception
had been weak, due probably to the dampness of our equip-
ment. We were also to try a little earlier, soon after sunset,
instead of 7.30 p.m. That was the reason for an earlier camp.
We had seen nothing of the digging party trailing us up, and
had made camp before they appeared. In the valley between
sandridges the view ahead or behind was always limited by
the next sandridge a few hundred yards away. Even from
the crest of a sandridge only two valleys could be seen, each
with a series of crests beyond it, so that to see anyone at a
distance it was necessary for both to be on a crest at the same
time.
At last the diggers came in, tired and disgruntled, with
a quaint story to tell. Before we moved on, a big excavation


had been made, Andy working like one possessed. Work
apparently went on at the same rate in relays till they had
dug themselves out of sight, with shafts and tunnels and
regular underground works. The sand was easy to work in,
but the amount moved was terrific; and still the hole went on.
At last the party began to despair of ever coming to the end
of the hole, and questioned Andy more closely on the habits
of this subterranean creature. Andy calmly replied, “Him
bin dig on fast as you dig after him”! Whether Andy him-
self ever expected to succeed, perhaps by physical exhaustion
of his quarry, or whether he was letting our ignorance over-
come his better judgment, was not clear, but the others at
once gave up what seemed a hopeless task, picked up their
tools and began the weary chase after the camels. When they
came into camp even Andy’s spirits were damped. It was
too bad having the long walk after the failure of the mining
operations. Marshall got a good picture of the later stages
of the work.
That day I reckoned we had progressed thirteen miles in
six hours. We crossed fourty-four sandridges, as big as any
we had seen. They were rather more irregular and wider on
top,without such well-defined crests. The feed had not im-
proved, but was rather worse. There were some green acacia
bushes at the camp, of which I had hopes, but Jack said the
camels would not eat them. Firewood was very scarce.
It was a miserable camp, with a cold damp wind. Con-
ditions in the open, with poor light, were about as wretched
as they could be for a national broadcast, but this time recep-
tion had improved, and the broadcast was successfully re-
corded. Perhaps the conditions were reflected in the repro-
duction and helped to give it realism and local colour. There
was some comfort in the thought.
While we were trying to warm ourselves round the fire
something suddenly hit Albert in the back and fell to the
ground. It was found to be a bird, attracted by the light of
the Are. It had been hard to get specimens of these little
birds, but when this one recovered we let it go.
The rain had raised the humidity, and extraordinarily
heavy dew became a nightly experience. It was as much
trouble as rain. Every night everything became covered with


water, the drops all running together to form a veritable
layer. We could have used it to augment our water supply,
had it not been obvious by this time that water was not going
to be our problem, but feed for the camels.
The cheerfulness of the new start scarcely survived the
day. The going had been heavy and the feed showed no
signs of improving.
Next day we were still in giant sandridges, the biggest yet.
They must have reached a hundred feet. They were more
symmetrical, with the approach side steeper, and there were
sometimes short transverse dunes on the top of them. We
made rather a late start owing to the dew, but got in our six
hours of travel, and it was quite enough. The going was
very heavy. The wider crests with more loose sand greatly
increased the camels’ tasks. We passed a few little patches
of munyeroo during the day, but otherwise it was very barren.
In the afternoon some of the camels began to stumble and
fall. We pushed on, hoping to find some feed and firewood
to camp on, but it became worse. At last I had to stop.
There was some dead needlebush for the fire but no feed at
all. Again Jack criticized me for not stopping earlier where
there was a little feed, but it was my way to hope for some-
thing better ahead and to put the miles behind. The only
satisfaction I had that day was to travel hopefully. I
reckoned we had made eleven miles, in which we had climbed
over forty great masses of sand. They were the highest sand-
ridges we had seen. There was nothing but sand and spini-
fex between the ridges, no feed, no signs of claypans. A few
finches were noticed, a hawk, and a flock of nineteen crows.
I wondered if they were the same crows as we had seen the
day before, following us. Something sinister about these
carrion birds.
It was a quiet and sober camp that night. Things were
beginning to look serious. The day’s march had definitely
given cause for some misgiving. We were not yet half way
across the desert, and the camels were beginning to fail. One
was developing mange and seemed almost done. There was
still over a hundred miles to go to reach the Mulligan, but
there could be no question of turning back, for returning was
now no easier than go o’er, but on the contrary would be much


more difficult if one’s expectations about the country ahead
proved correct. Jack Bejah was depressed. He spoke of
leaving one or two camels behind to follow us if they could,
but this would have been against all the principles of explora-
tion. Once you begin to abandon your gear it is a sign of
approaching collapse. You should not have any gear you
can do without. I told him to redistribute the loads but to
keep the string together. It was no good spreading ourselves
over the desert. We must come into that Queensland feed
any day now.
We were sending a press message almost every night, with
a longer one at week-ends, but I had promised Mr. Simpson
a special personal one from the middle of the desert. It was
hard to decide just where this was. We were now half way
to the Queensland border, where we would be in known
country, so that this was about the middle of the unknown
part and we seemed likely to be near the climax of our diffi-
culties, so I decided to send the message from this camp. It
read: “Mr. A. Simpson, Ru Rua Hospital, North Adelaide.
Camp 10, June 18. This is promised message of greetings
from the middle of Simpson Desert. All going well.
Natural history collections mounting. Beautiful coloured
desert wrens and finches, some probably new. Physio-
graphical observations very interesting. No rock so far since
leaving River Hale Tablelands. Camels feeling heavy work
just now in giant sandridges. Little feed. None to-night
but conditions will improve in next few days. All party well.
Regards. Best wishes. Madigan”. The message was
endorsed. “Sent to V.H.U.9., 7.20 p.m., Sunday, June 18,
R.A.S”.
Mr. Simpson had been in very poor health for some time,
and had gone into hospital in a serious condition befolre we
left Adelaide. There was an unhappy possibility that he
might not live to hear of the end of the expedition he had
financed. Birds were mentioned as he was particularly
interested in them.
It was a clear night again at last, and I was able to take
star observations. This careful navigation was not really
essential, as there had been no features worth fixing since we
left the Hale, but there was satisfaction in it. We could go


east and strike the Mulligan without even the aid of com-
passes, but we would not know which side of the old Kali-
duwarry Station we were on, and might have difficulty in
finding it and waste time in locating ourselves before setting
a course for Birdsville. Also I expected to find the course
of the Hay River, if nothing else, where no one had seen it
before, and this was worth fixing. If disaster should befall
us and aeroplanes had to be sent out, we should be able to
say exactly where we were 5 so I took my observations as
opportunity offered. This was the first clear night since
leaving the Hale, and our first opportunity to fix our position
since then. The night was cold, the light poor. Papers,
books, maps and instruments were soon wet with dew. Sit-
ting out in the open among the spinifex under these condi-
tions, not to mention considerable physical fatigue, did not
help the accuracy of the calculations. I kept making mis-
takes and finding myself in the Pacific Ocean, which was no
place to go to bed in. At last I got it right and was able to
pin-point our position on the map. It was 24°44' south and
136°59' east. We had come seventy-eight miles from the
Hale in thirty-five and three-quarter hours, giving an average
rate of just over two miles an hour. My daily dead reckon-
ing had made it seventy-nine miles, one mile out in seventy-
eight. This was the reward for a late night, an aching back
and a shivering frame. We might be in considerable diffi-
culty in the worst place in the world, but we knew just where
it was. My companions had long ago turned in, quiet and
somewhat worried, and were now all fast asleep. I got into
my pyjamas as usual, distributed all my clothing along the
side of the sleeping bag on the ground sheet, not forgetting
boots and socks and hat, else they would be soaking wet in
the morning, covered and tucked everything in with the other
half of the sheet, and crawled under. I was pleased with the
results of my calculations. That feed couldn’t be far away
now! It was a little bit fuggy shut up in this waterproof and
almost air-tight groundsheet, but very warm and comfort-
able. The camels couldn’t stand many more days like to-day,
but we could take easier stages. The chronometer was wound
and put away in the bottom of Jack’s big box —must get a
better fastening for that, the piece of stick came out to-day.


Nice the way the wireless was working—we must all send
more messages home —been neglecting that. We’d be in that
feed any day now. . , ,
Next morning there was some readjustment of loads, but
soon the damp packages were heaved up and the wet cordage
knotted, the camels jerked themselves on to their feet, and
the long string began to wind slowly over the first sandridge.
How were we going to fare to-day? Across the valley and
on to the top of the next sandridge —and there before us lay
a small claypan covered with water. Down into the valley,
to find the clayey soil was carpeted with munyeroo! No
waiting for something better this time. There were a few
low mulga bushes at the end of the claypan, a suitable place
to camp. Round to these, and down went the camels, and off
came the loads laboriously put on a quarter of an hour before.
We would let the camels graze here all day. If we had only
come on another half mile last night it would have saved us
a lot of work and some anxiety! This water and the green
munyeroo must mean the edge of the rain country. Anyway,
we would give the camels all the feed they wanted and a
spell before tackling the sandridges again. They were soon
chewing at great mats of munyeroo pulled up from the ground
and dangling from their mouths.
It was a beautiful sunny day. We opened up the baggage
and spread everything out to dry, then took a walk round the
camp. Two sandridges away to the north-east there was a
group of five claypans with gidgee trees, the first gidgee we
had seen since leaving the Hale. This certainly looked like
the edge of the rain belt. There was more clay here in the
soil between the sandridges, and a thinner cover over the
underlying rock. Nodules of ironstone lay around, and
pieces of chalcedony, Crocker discovered a small rock out’
crop of chalcedonized sandstone. More interesting still was
the discovery of signs of the former presence of aboriginals,
the only such indications seen in the whole desert crossing.
These were chips of chalcedony, typical of aboriginal work-
shop sites where knives, scrapers and spearheads have been
made, and also parts of grinding stones, one a piece of schist
that must have come from the MacDonnells. This disproved
my theory and Winnecke’s that aboriginals never entered any


part of the desert. It was obvious that in wet seasons they had
followed streams down from the ranges to the north, prob-
ably only on short visits. We were then not far south of a
group of claypans I had mapped during the 1929 aerial recon-
naissance. Several claypans had been noted in the northern
part of the desert, suggesting that they represented the ends
of unnamed streams that come down from the MacDonnelis
and flood out in the desert. In wet seasons the blacks could
obviously follow these streams down from the north, just as
Fred Rogers went down the Hay. _ It was the natives of
the east, west and south who had denied all knowledge of the
desert, but it was now obviously no more than the southern
parts that could be quite unknown to any aboriginal.
The largest of the claypans was only fifty yards across and
they held at most a few inches of water. It was too shallow
to dip up so some of the party dug a sump in our claypan
to draw from. When the water in it settled it was still a nice
yellow colour, but proved quite good for drinking water.
Buckets were filled and put on the fire, and everyone had a
hot bath—the first all-over wash for a fortnight. Out of
our gallon a day there was enough water for everyone to wash
face and hands once a day, but that was as far as it would go.
The sandridges here were more wavy and broader on top,
and the crests of live sand were steep on both sides. There
were lower saddles at intervals along the crests giving a jagged
profile to the summits. Most of the bigger sandridges
showed this saw-tooth effect more or less ; the live sand along
the crests slopes gently up northwards for a hundred yards
or so to a summit and then falls rapidly away to start another
rise, thus making serrations along the top of the sandndge.
The serrations were more regular and marked in the centre
and eastern desert than they were round Andado. Here at
this camp they were strongly developed and the saddles
between them so pronounced as to make better crossing places.
This had not been so for the first sixty miles, when the ridges
were practically level along the top and one place was as good
as another to cross.
The tension of the last few days was now relieved, and
Camp 11 was a very cheerful one. Albert made a pair of
beautiful jam tarts. The pastry could not have been bettered.


Marshall took some colour films of camp life, in which the
tarts showed up to great advantage in a monotonous setting,
for the desert colours were practically confined to the red of
the sandridges and the grey of the spinifex. There was still
very little herbage or green plants, but the munyeroo, now
dying off, made brown mats on the lower ground. It is a low,
spreading and succulent plant of the portulacca or pig-face
family. Again it would have been better to have gone on for
another couple of sandridges and camped among the rather
poor and scattered gidgee at the next claypans, but this camp
was quite good enough. I had ridden on to the crest of the
next sandridge before deciding to off-load, but still another
sandridge denied us the view of the group of claypans and
trees that lay beyond.
Andy was in great form this night. He loved a good camp.
Now everything was rosy for him. He said, “This life good,
walkabout, homestead no good, live longer this way”, a very
profound truth as applied to him and all his people. I don’t
think he had ever seen the sea, but when something lead the
conversation to it he said he didn’t like the sea —“too wet, no
tracks, land more better”. I was sitting aside writing notes
while the rest of the party talked, and I took the opportunity
of recording some of Andy’s remarks, which were a constant
entertainment to us. His conversation was always jerky, con-
sisting of short statements without elaboration and often with
little connection, like a series of wise-cracks. It was often
interesting to try and fill in the gaps that he left blank in his
train of thought. Andy went on: “Can’t sleep during day.
Night long enough. Last night too long, make my jaw ache.
First one side then the other. This fellow clever more top
(God). Bring down water, ducks, plenty. (Ly-Ly did not
know of God. He expressed his pleasure at a good camp
more crudely, with his bloody widgetty, bloody yam, bloody
mobs). At Marree they think I not come —too many people
—country too dry. At Warrina my people say not go—
Frank say not go. I say I chance myself—never mind
perish”. Andy was boasting now. For the past two days he
had obviously been wishing he had not come. It was interest-
ing to hear that his people had warned him not to come, at
Marree and again at Warrina. It was Jack who had turned
the scale. At Andado he was still undecided.


THE BIG SANDRIDGE AT ANDADO.
TYPICAL DESERT SANDRIDGE, CAMP 11.


STRUGGLING ACROSS A SANDRIDGE.
CAMP 11.


As I had missed the time signals for a couple of nights I
made sure of getting them that night, and as it was clear
I took further observations to check our position. The results
agreed sufficiently well. We were about seven miles south-
west of the claypans I had mapped from the air, so I decided
to go north-east next day to locate them. Those we were at
seemed too small to be the same. I also wanted to check the
position of the claypans, which had been plotted only from
dead reckoning in the middle of a five-hour flight.
We left Camp 11 next day, June 20, and started on the
north-east course. We were now travelling obliquely to the
sandridges and thus crossing fewer. They were becoming
smaller, too, so that the going was much easier. We passed
the first group of claypans, and then another pair of small
ones beyond the next sandridge, one surrounded by
munyeroo, the other in quite a grove of gidgee. After a few
more sandridges we came to the south end of a broad valley
of gidgee, with trees visible to the horizon. A sandridge
came to an end here, and we rounded its northern extremity.
This was the only end of a sandridge we saw in the whole
desert journey, the only one we did not have to cross. There
was probably a claypan up in the gidgee. We did not investi-
gate, but continued on our course and were soon crossing
sandridges again.
Later in the morning I saw a big brown snake that disap-
peared down a hole. We halted to dig it out. The hole was
a long one, probably a mouse hole, and followed a log buried
in the sand. Andy as usual dug with the excitement of a
terrier. At last we came to the snake at the end of the hole
and pinned it with a forked stick and eventually killed it.
It was a venomous species nearly six feet long.
The country was improving and green herbage began to
appear. We crossed another valley, or inter-ridge space, with
gidgee trees in it, then one with a stony patch in the middle,
and in the next we came on a wide claypan a couple of hun-
dred yards across covered with about two inches of water.
We tried the camels at it but only a few of them wanted to
drink. After another wooded valley, at the end of seven
miles on the north-east course, we turned east again. In the
next two miles we passed, four the last surrounded
on all sides by sandhills, a regular hole in the sand like those


we were to see later near Lake Eyre. This one was about
three hundred yards by a hundred and fifty, and had about
an inch of water on it. We went on for another couple of
miles without seeing any more claypans, and camped. This was
obviously the group of claypans I had seen from the air, and
gratifyingly close to where I had placed them; in fact as
accurately placed as such an area could be, without plotting
each individual claypan.
The sandridges were now only about thirty feet high, and
closer together. There was green sandhill wattle about, and
green spinifex and canegrass, with plenty of camel feed.
There had been several halts on this day. We had covered
about twelve miles and crossed thirty-nine sandridges. It
had been a very interesting day, with more variety than we
had known so far in the desert. At every mile the vegetation
was improving and there was already abundance of feed.
The day’s march had put it beyond doubt that we had entered
the Queensland rain belt and there was nothing further to
worry about. It was only a matter of time and the other side
of the desert would be reached. For a few days we had been
haunted by the possibility of failure, but those days were
behind and the crisis was passed. The rest should be easy.
It was more obvious than ever that the journey would be
impossible except after exceptionally good seasons, and even
then the desert would present some difficult patches. The
distance is short, but the going so heavy that progress must
be slow, and good feed for camels is thus essential. The
journey cannot be hurried by day-and-night travel, as the
camels must be given frequent rests, and six hours’ march a
day is enough in the heavier parts. That night we knew that
success was sure. A message was sent to the University of
Adelaide.


CHAPTER X
DANGER PAST, WE REACH THE HAY
THE journey now became more carefree, and a spirit of
light-heartedness manifested itself in various ways,
one of which was an outburst of enthusiasm for knife-throw-
ing. A sheath knife worn on the belt sailor-fashion, a thin
butcher’s knife, not a Boy Scout’s dagger, is one of the most
useful things you can have on any sort of expedition, and
every member of the party carried one. I had made rather an
impression at Andado by throwing mine into posts, and now
the party settled down to steady practise, so that it was not
long before I had to look to my laurels. Several of them
continually threw their knives ahead as they walked along.
It was Simpson’s ambition to transfix a lizard, but I do not
think he ever achieved it.
Competitions were staged in camp, with the whole party
standing in a ring round a target on the ground.
We decided to have a short halt at noon in the future to
eat some lunch. Albert cooked some very fruity cakes for
the purpose, and filled water bottles with tea after breakfast
each morning. The lunch was put in one of Jack’s boxes that
had a lower compartment with side door and could be opened
from the ground, so that it was easily got at and the camels
remained standing while we had our quarter-hour snack.
Those hunks of raisin conglomerate became something to look
forward to. . ,
One day Andy found some feathers, and then the buried
remains of a wild turkey. He carefully re-buried it. He
said, “Dog save ’em up for puppy—sluts all big now—soon
have puppies”. He had found half a rabbit buried in the
sand away back at the Hale and buried it again. He would
not rob the dingo and her puppies. Dingo tracks were now
to be seen along the crests of every sandridge.
Most of us took turns at walking and riding to vary the
monotony. Andy, Crocker and Fletcher spent most of their


time walking and collecting. The rain had cleared away by
now and it was warm and sunny all day, though still cold
and wet from the dew at night and in the early morning.
The routine was by this time well established. Jack always
woke before daylight, at about 6.30 a.m. I would wake to
find Albert, Jack, Nurie and Andy already standing round a
fire, their swags rolled up, the camels out of the yard and
feeding, and some tea ready, for it is the bushman’s invariable
custom to have some tea and stand round the fife for a while
at dawn before he begins the work of the day. Everyone
rolled up his swag, often wet, as soon as he got out of it, and
then after the customary stand round the fire, breakfast was
eaten, the camels were brought in, and loading started. While
the loading was being done by the four, there was a chance for
the scientific staff to do a little collecting and note making.
At every camp I took the direction of the sandridges, which
never varied more than two degrees from 332 true bearing
from side to side of the desert, and at intervals also measured
their height. Fletcher brought in his rat traps, which were
always empty. Crocker had a look at the plants, and Mar-
shall and Simpson dismantled and packed up the wireless.
It only took a few minutes for each to load his own camel,
thanks to the convenience of the police pack-bags, but the
pack camels were a considerably longer job. Before their
loads were ready the breakfast things had to be washed up
and stowed away, and there was still some equipment that
was too long to go in the boxes or bags, like theodolite legs
and shovels and boring gear, and these had to be made up
into bundles and tied on. The bundles were never undone
if it could be avoided, as with the staff officer who hesitated
to consult his map because of the problem of folding it up
again. In spite of all our attempts to hasten camp-breaking
it was more often after nine o’clock than before by the time
we finally got on the move. Then followed about six hours
of steady travelling with only one stop of a quarter of an
hour for lunch. This time of march was later increased to
seven or eight hours when conditions became easier.
Albert and his little camel usually provided some comic
relief to the monotony of the day’s march. He was just a
passenger, and never made any attempt to control the camel,


usually riding with his hands in his pockets. The camel went
where it liked, sometimes with its nose at my elbow and
taking an occasional bite at my sleeve, sometimes lagging
behind to feed, after which it would give a few bucks and then
run to catch up, causing Albert much alarm, but never any
damage. It was not above sitting down if it felt tired. Some
of the riders used to encourage it to lag behind the string
with them and then they would trot forward again and leave
it. This ruse always made it play up, to everyone’s amuse-
ment but Albert’s.
At the evening camp Albert would have hot tea ready
twenty minutes after the camels went down. He would
snatch the makings out of one of the big tucker boxes as soon
as it hit the ground and have the tea made before the rest of
the unloading was finished and the camels hobbled.
We each had our own ideas about the best place to unroll
our swags in for the night. Jack liked what he called clean
ground, which meant the barest, highest and hardest he could
find. He scorned to put any brushwood under his sheet at
any time. The crown of a concrete road would have been
his ideal. Nurie followed suit. Andy was always away by
himself, usually with a little fire of his own and mostly with
a bed of bushes, sometimes over him as well as under. Albert
slept close alongside his fire amongst his equipment, and
Marshall was attracted by the supposed warmth of the fire.
Simpson was prone to shovel up a mound of sand, especially
if it was wet, and sleep in a basin at the top of it. Crocker,
Fletcher and I scattered ourselves round the outskirts. I
preferred clean sand to Jack’s hard places, and always sought
some brushwood if the weather was wet.
It was usually dark before dinner was ready, but we had
the two petrol-vapour lamps, which were Marshall’s special
care. While the meal was being prepared and served, and
the yard made and the camels finally brought in, the scientists
had time to label their specimens and write up their notes,
while Simpson unpacked the wireless gear, put up the aerials
and prepared for the nightly contact with Harry Ding.
Before leaving the Hale I had appointed Fletcher as
second in command, which did not involve any duties unless
I should become a casualty. Besides his photography, Mar-


shall assisted Simpson with the wireless and Albert with the
cooking. When the pedal generator was used Marshall got
plenty of leg exercise, but fortunately for him we found the
batteries were really better. I took the chronometer com-
parison with the time signal at seven o’clock, and sometimes
had star observations to make in the evening. We were usually
all under the blankets by nine o’clock, by which time it was
generally very cold and we were glad to get under cover, for
in the desert there was never enough wood for a decent
warming fire. Out in the open it is a fallacy to think that
there is any advantage in sleeping beside a fire. You must
have unlimited firewood, and get up every hour or two to
make up the fire, and also you must sleep so close to it, if you
are to get any benefit at all, that you get holes burnt in your
blankets from sparks, which happened to several of our party.
The wild blackfellow sleeps between two fires in the winter
and frequently gets very severely burnt by putting arms and
legs into the fire, but he, of course, has no covering, and must
rely on fire for any extra warmth at night.
June 21 was the date for the next national broadcast, at
Camp 13. We camped early that day, after covering thirteen
miles and crossing seventy-four small sandridges. The big
sandridges were always more evenly spaced and further
apart, the smaller ones closer and more irregular. It seemed
as if groups of smaller ones might eventually form one large
one. I had announced at the first broadcast that next time
Andy would be on the air, a full-blodded aboriginal speaking
to Australia, which would be something new to broadcasting,
and coming from the heart of the desert would make it even
more unique. It was arranged that Andy should say a few
words, and then sing a corroboree song. We had some
rehearsals of this, and on the night before Andy had given
a splendid performance. He lost all his diffidence and put
his whole heart into it, leaping and gesticulating as he warmed
up to his theme. He was soon quite unconscious of his sur-
roundings, and became transfigured. We watched him lose
contact with us and drift into another world, a mysterious
spirit world, where he was a stranger to us. It was eerie in
the desert darkness. We could not hope to put the full effects
of this performance on the air. Andy would have to sit


down and hold the telephone transmitter and could never
get into the spirit of it without the action. He said the song
was about a “dorg”, or dingoes, but it was not clear why it
led up to such dramatic intensity of feeling. Later we gave
him a rehearsal with the telephone, under the pretence that
it was going on the air, but I do not think he was deceived,
as he seemed so little disconcerted 5 there was too much levity
going on at the time.
When the time arrived for the actual transmission we had
the transmitter on a small sandridge near the camp. I gave
my talk and then introduced Andy. I could see his confidence
oozing away as the moment approached. He was to say a
few words about the song by way of introduction, but by the
time I handed him the ’phone he was speechless. It was a lot
to expect of him, and for a moment I thought all was lost.
At last he found a still, small voice and said “Dog all about.
Singum good song”, and went straight into the song. It
lacked the fire of previous performances, but it did not falter,
and the sequence of strange cadences sounded quite typical,
and I believe went over very well. He gained more con-
fidence towards the end, and when it was finished he called
quite boldly, “Good luck all people in Australia”! It was
a good impromptu end, and showed he realized what he was
doing. Later in the evening he suddenly said, “My nerves
all gone”.
When Andy had finished, Jack, son of the grand old man
Bejah Dervish was introduced, and Jack said a few modest
words that could not convey a picture of the fine sturdy fellow
that he was, a key man of the expedition.
I observed for latitude that night, as the course had been
rather irregular and I was not sure how much northing we
had made.
Camp 13 was little more than twenty miles from my
aerially determined position for the Hay River, so we should
reach the river in a day and a half. The sandridges were
now more like sandbanks, with rounded and irregular crests
and small hollows and mounds on them. They were only
from ten to thirty feet high and were not conspicuous.
Between Camp 13 and Camp 14 we crossed eighty in sixteen
miles without difficulty. A few days before we had seemed


shut in by a close sky-line jagged with high and menacing
sandridge crests, in a red, forbidding and hostile landscape,
but now the low smooth ridges no longer obscured the distant
horizon, and the stems of the seeding spinifex gave to the
whole wide view the friendly appearance of a vast yellow
cornfield.
For most of the journey there was deep sand in the lanes
between the ridges, with nothing growing there but spinifex.
In a few places where the sand was thinner there was scattered
needlebush, and round the claypans, where there was no loose
sand, gidgee was always found, but otherwise there was
nothing but spinifex in the lanes. All the other vegetation,
shrubs and annuals, was concentrated on the sandridges them-
selves, and specially along the crests in the live sand. This
always seemed a paradox. Surely there must be more
moisture in the lower ground and better water-holding
properties, yet all the greenery was on the ridges! Perhaps
the seed is swept away from the valleys and buried and pre-
served better on the ridges. One theory put forward is that
the water is more available in the porous sand of the ridges
than in the more clayey lanes, and the plant roots can there
drain it to the last drop. This difference in porosity between
the live sand of the ridges and the denser soil of the lanes is
probably the real reason for the better growth of plants on
the ridges. The rainfall readily soaks into the sand and may
sink beyond the range of capillarity and thus escape loss by
evaporation to a large extent, forming a damp layer available
to roots below a dry surface. With less penetration and
greater capillarity all the soil moisture is soon lost by evapora-
tion.
Now there was flowering wattle and grevillea, cane-
grass, hopbush, buckbush, water bush and many other herbs
and grasses on the ridges, becoming more luxuriant every
day. Parrot flower with its curious green blooms like minia-
ture birds, typical of the south-west of Queensland, was seen
here for the first time, and several wild turkeys were noted,
the first since we had left the Finke.
I thought that it had been made clear before we left that
telegrams for us would be accepted by the P.M.G.’s Depart-


CLAYPAN BETWEEN CAMPS 11 AND 12.
FLETCHER WITH A WOMMA.


D. MARSHALL, PHOTOGRAPHER.
ANDY DIGS FOR A RAT.


ment, addressed to the expedition via Yunta, to be trans-
mitted to us over the air by Harry Ding, but we had had very
few personal messages, so we requested the Broadcasting Com-
mission to announce it again. On the next night at Camp 14
everyone got a message from home except Andy. It was later
noticed that Andy had gone very silent and sad, and it occurred
to Simpson to get a message for him as well, so this was staged,
I called to Simpson to listen in again in case any further
messages were to hand, and Simpson went to the receiver and
after a while had an imaginary conversation with Harry Ding,
with all the usual conventions of the Inland wireless, which
included a stereotyped intonation, repetition of each phrase,
and much “Over to you, Harry, over to you”, of which Simp-
son was now a master. Soon he had a message of greetings
and good wishes from Col. Thomas written out on a slip of
paper, and gave it to Andy. Andy could not read it, but put
it in the pocket of his shirt, and was once more his enthusiastic
self. Like British Israelites, he had a way of foretelling
events after they had happened, or bringing up all sorts of
mystic evidence which should have foretold them. He said,
“all day he feel people thinking about him down there”. It
made him very happy. It seemed a pity that it was a decep-
tion.
On June 23 we got away from Camp 14 at 8.50 a.m. for
the last run to the Hay River. At 11 a.m. we passed a few box
gums, where there were galahs and budgerigars, and at 11.15
a.m. came upon a wide valley several hundred yards across,
well covered with trees and bushes. I rode on for another
mile to make sure it was not merely a branch of the main
stream but there was nothing but sandridges beyond. This
dry and sandy valley was the Hay River. We went down-
stream for a mile and camped among gum trees and flowering
wattle, the best camp of the whole journey, with the possible
exception of the first Hale River camp.
The last of the national broadcasts was to be given this
night, and it was a very suitable occasion, for now the
unknown was behind us. Winnecke in 1883 had come down
the Hay to a point about five miles upstream from this camp,
and the Queensland border, surveyed in 1882, was only


twenty-three miles away. The Mulligan River, where there
had been cattle stations, was another forty miles to the east
of the border. We were practically on known ground, and
about a hundred and fifty miles from human habitations at
Birdsville. Feed was plentiful, the water in hand was more
than we would need, the desert was conquered! We were not
yet quite out of the wood, but we could whistle with confi-
dence. It was only a matter of walking in to Birdsville
about ten days away. We had taken just a fortnight to
cross from the Hale to the Hay, through a hundred and
twenty-five miles of untraversed desert and across five hun-
dred sandridges.
We decided to make a good camp, and to celebrate the
occasion. Crocker had the luck to shoot a turkey and Albert
started to prepare a feast. A turkey was just what was wanted.
The poor bird could not have shown up at a more opportune
moment. We made the first good fire since leaving the
Hale, this time with gum logs, not the twisty needlewood
sticks of the desert, and the smell of the burning leaves was
incense. I did myself well with a thick spring mattress of
blossoming wattle boughs, and several others made them-
selves soft and fragrant couches.
For the last broadcast each member was to have a minute
of the programme, except Jack and Andy, who had already
spoken. These minute speeches had been written out and
rehearsed and pruned for several days before, and brought
to each speaker’s satisfaction. No record of the speeches was
kept but the speakers were introduced as Crocker, botanist—
an old companion and a most industrious collector ; Fletcher,
biological collector and genial humourist of the party; Hub-
bard, cook and one of the best men in camp one could find;
Marshall, photographer, young in the ways of the bush but
learning in a good school; Nur Mahommet Moocha —Nurie
for short —Bej ah’s assistant, with the nimblest of fingers on
a camel’s nosepeg; and Simpson, who had made a great suc-
cess of the wireless, and could turn out no mean damper.
The broadcast ended with a personal message to Mr. Simpson
in hospital, telling him that the successful crossing of his
desert was now assured.


When the broadcast was finished, Albert put on his dinner
of stuffed roast turkey. It was a really excellent meal. The
nine of us ate our fill, and still a meal remained. To every-
one’s astonishment, Marshall produced a bottle of whisky,
which gave a final touch to the festive board. It was
apparently the need of some Dutch courage for the broad-
cast that had brought this treasure to light, but it could not
have chosen a better occasion for emerging from its hiding
place.
I observed for position that night and fixed Camp 15 on
the Hay River. It was a cold night, with the first frost since
the rains.
We were all looking forward to another meal of cold
turkey. Albert left it on a box near his head and when he
woke in the morning he found it had disappeared without
leaving a trace. Even Andy had no explanation for this.
It must have been a cat or a dingo that took it but Andy could
find no tracks. The ground was rather leafy round about
but still he was inclined to take a supernatural view. It just
vanished and that was the end of it. We wished we could
have eaten more the night before.
Next day we went down the valley of the Hay for ten
miles and again camped in its bed. The river here at its
lower end can be described as a broad sandy valley full of
trees and shrubs, running parallel to the sandridges, with a
waste of sandridges and spinifex each side of it. The valley
varies in width from two hundred to four hundred yards,
occasionally opening up into box-gum flats and then narrow-
ing down, but keeping a very straight course of about south-
east by south. Only one small channel was seen in the valley,
with occasional wider swamp areas. There were no signs of
large volumes of running water ever passing down, no drift
wood or scour, and no gravel, only fine red sand everywhere.
It was like a dead river valley. At one point there was a patch
of about a hundred yards of stone along the channel floor,
a flinty crust, showing that rock was not far below. Stunted
box gums were everywhere in the valley, with acacias and
various shrubs. Birds were fairly plentiful, though where
they got their water was a mystery. Possibly the dew was


sufficient for them at that time. We saw no water in the ten
miles we traversed the valley, and knew of none within fifty
miles. There were large flocks of budgerigars, several galahs,
and crows, hawks, zebra finches nesting, and some other small
birds. We saw only one turkey, the one that Crocker shot.
I observed again that night for position as a check, and
found we were seventeen miles west of the Queensland bor-
der at a point eighty-six miles north of PoeppePs corner. The
longitude gave the position of the river about where Win-
necke had placed it, and agreed with my aerial observations,
and with a longitude taken on a former expedition near the
Tarlton Range, 150 miles upstream at the head of the Hay.
The course of the river is practically a straight line parallel
to the sandridges. Existing maps show the Hay about ten
miles too far to the east.
I blazed a gumtree in the river at this camp, Camp 16, on
the largest tree we could find, which was only about a foot
in diameter. After removing the bark half way round I cut
M .
into the wood with a chisel in the conventional way.
I would be much interested to know who next sees this tree.
Simpson had dropped his knife somewhere in the ten miles
we had travelled in the Hay valley, and Andy went back to
find it. He came back with it all right, but said he thought
he was never going to find it and was wondering what to do,
when he thought of turning his hat round the other way.
As soon as he did this, there was the knife on the ground in
front of him.
I had seen the rabbit-proof fence marking the Queensland
border at Tobermorey Station, and had it in my mind that
this fence ran right down to PoeppePs corner, although I
knew that the corner of the State of Queensland had been
cut off by a fence running up on the west side of the Mulligan.
I expected to come to a fence at the border next day and even
hoped to find the eighty-sixth mile post on it, for I knew
Wells had put small pegs in at every quarter mile and good
posts with the mileage carved on them at every mile.


CHAPTER XI
THE MULLIGAN AT LAST
NEXT morning we set off due east to find the border
fence, seventeen miles away. Two or three little clay-
pans were passed on the east side of the river bed, all dry.
There were some clumps of bushy mulga and some odd hakeas,
but the country was much drier again, with little feed. The
sandridges were higher, up to fifty feet, and the spinifex very
dense and dry, with the sand blown away from the bushes
and the camels having to pick their way between the tufts.
This patch had missed the rains and we were back in desert
conditions again, actually in the country where Sturt turned
back in 1845, and his description, quoted before, exactly
fitted it.
Later in the morning I saw a large snake and got off my
camel and started beating it with my camel whip, which was
not very effective and only slightly stunned it. Andy came
running up from the rear and shouted to me to desist and at
once picked up the snake and began to treat it with sympathy,
even affection. It was a womma, a harmless carpet snake.
Everyone had to handle it then, and most of the party were
photographed with it round their necks.
Everyone was looking forward to seeing the fence, the
first sign of civilization. We should arrive at it about five
o’clock. That time came, and passed, and there was nothing to
be seen. We went on till sunset, about half past five, and still
no indication of a border line, no fence, no mile posts. We
came to a little dry claypan lined with gidgee, and camped.
We had come a good seventeen miles and I felt confident that
we had crossed the border, but it was disappointing to see noth-
ing. I fancied my companions were a little doubtful of my
navigation, as they well might be, whereas I had hoped to im-
press them by finding the eighty-sixth mile post. I was re-
minded afterwards in Birdsville that this portion of the border
had never been fenced, a thing I should have remembered.
The old rabbit-proof fence south of Birdsville runs along the


Queensland—South Australian border to a point ten miles west
of the Mulligan and forty-five miles east of the Northern
Territory border at PoeppePs Corner, and from there it runs
north along the west side of the Mulligan, finally coming in
to the Northern Territory border at a point over two hundred
miles north of PoeppePs Corner, and just south of the Toko
Ranges, thus cutting off the south-west corner of Queensland.
The fence is no longer maintained, and west of Birdsville it is
completely buried in sand in places. At one time they used
to rebuild it over the top of the buried parts, but now the
rabbits could walk over if they wanted to, though there is not
much to be gained by it. There was no fence where we
crossed into Queensland, and it would have been a bit of
exceptional luck if we had seen a mile post. The pegs are
probably buried or eaten by white ants, but the posts should be
standing although they were put in over sixty years ago.
Colson found the corner post still standing at PoeppePs
Corner, with the lettering clear to read. We camped on the
border on June 26, at Camp 17.
I now decided to take a straight course for a bend in the
Mulligan rabbit-fence near old Kaliduwarry Station. This
was thirty-nine miles away on a true bearing of 136°, accord-
ing to my reckoning, that is, south-east, so we had finished
with crossing the sandridges almost at right angles and would
now take them more obliquely, which would mean fewer to
cross in a day’s march. On the last day we had crossed sixty-
seven, the one nearest to the border camp being thirty-eight
feet high. There was no need now to bother about the doubt-
ful Mudloo Well as we had plenty of water to see us through.
This course would take us a little to the south of its marked
position.
It was three days’ march to Kuddaree waterhole at Kalidu-
warry Station. The first day showed a marked change in
the country. Instead of dense spinifex between the sand-
ridges there were clumps of gidgee, gradually becoming more
continuous till they ran for miles along the valleys. This
means better rainfall and more clayey soil. The country
became greener again, with annuals on the crests of the sand-
ridges, parrot flower, flannel flower and grasses. The sand-
ridges had been more straggly on each side of the Hay, but


now they were straight again, higher and with more defined
crests and live sand on top, favouring the annual plants, and
with flatter valleys between. We crossed only sixteen ridges
that day, on the oblique course, in fifteen miles, and fifteen
on the following day in the same distance.
Marshall filmed the arrival at Camp 18, showing the
making of camp; Jack’s dog getting down from his tucker-
box, the rapid unloading, and Albert’s speed with the tea,
were the high lights.
Camp 19 was the last desert camp, for we would reach the
Mulligan next day. The adventure was nearly over and the
task done; the glamour was fading. Indeed, it is better to
travel hopefully than to arrive. The rest would be easy. I
suffered a reaction from the strenuous days, and was tired.
Perhaps this was the last of the hard journeys I had started
out upon so hopefully twenty-eight years before, to end them
in this desert place. For some of the young men in the party
it was the first real living they had known, but they had all
before them. Would I ever be out on the trail again?
We had seen no traces of the Leichhardt expedition though
we had kept the possibility in mind right through. This did
not prove anything, as even if that expedition had perished
in the desert, which I believe to be the case, the chances of
finding any trace of them in a single crossing would be very
remote. There is a story, largely discounted, of blacks
reporting their presence on the Mulligan River to an early
traveller.
This camp was in a grove of gidgee that stretched as far
as the eye could see up and down the inter-sandridge flat.
Vegetation was plentiful in the live sand along the crests of
the ridges, and on the flats there was small buck-bush and
quite a lot of saltbush. Spinifex was thinning out.
We were away next morning at nine o’clock to find the
angle in the rabbit fence, from which another fence ran east
for five miles to the river and the old station. Later in the
morning we crossed a big dry lagoon extending as far as we
could see to the north and south. It was about three miles
west of the rabbit fence and was not marked on the Queens-
land maps. Its surface was a glaring white, like the pipe-
clay track on the Coorong in South Australia. After lunch I


saw a large copper-coloured snake which disappeared in
bushes and we were unable to find it. The sandridges became
low and rounded, giving the country a gently rolling appear-
ance, and at half-past two we suddenly arrived at the fence.
It was only a derelict-looking affair, a boundary that had
not been “ridden” for years, yet it was the handiwork of man,
and at its sight the whole dreary aspect of the place was
changed to one of friendliness, the desert atmosphere was
dissipated in the twinkling of an eye. We photographed the
party stringing along beside it. I picked up a rusty tobacco
tin and a small ointment pot gone purple from the action of
the sun’s rays. They seemed objects of the greatest interest.
Now, from this westerly projecting angle in the fence, one
part ran east of north and the other east of south, the southern
part being set back a mile along the east-west fence, with a
catch paddock between them. If we missed the corner on
its south side we would not meet the fence till considerably
south of the corner, which is exactly what happened. I
wanted to come right in on the sharp corner of this
paddock at the end of two hundred miles of desert naviga-
tion, but we met the fence in a straight, and I went on down it
for nearly a mile before it occurred to me that I might be
south of the corner. A compass bearing along the fence
showed this to be the case, and we turned back. On the way
back we came to a claypan covered with water, and made a
halt. Some of the camels had a drink, their first for eight days,
but they did not drink much and others would not touch the
water at all. It was a mile and three-quarters from where we
first met the fence back to the east—west fence that runs from
the corner to the river. As we came back we saw no paddock
fence at all. It had probably been removed, being a private
fence, when the station was closed, if indeed it had ever been
on the ground as well as on the map, so there was no paddock
corner. When I plotted our course back from the point of
first meeting the fence it passed right over the paddock
corner on the map. This was very satisfactory, to have
passed over the point, but not nearly as thrilling as it would
have been to see it appear before us. And we had wasted an
hour and a half in locating ourselves.


CAMP 15 IN THE HAY RIVER.
A NATIONAL BROADCAST FROM THE HAY RIVER.


R. L. CROCKER WITH A WILD TURKEY, HAY RIVER.


We halted to boil up some tea at the inner corner, and then
started on the last five miles to the Mulligan River along
the fence. There were some wire netting rabbit traps along
the fences near the corner, but we saw no rabbits about.
It was after sunset when we started on the last two hours’
ride, but dusk soon gave way to bright moonlight. The
country was bare and undulating, with broad rounded sand-
ridges and little live sand. We crossed several claypans,
glaring white in the moonlight. This last two hours seemed
very long. The moonlight gave a rigidity and unreality to
the scene, and seemed to intensify the silence. The country
became flatter, with dry swamps in which stood scattered and
dead box gums stretching upwards their bleached and ghostly
limbs. Complete silence fell on the party, where a last
joyous scramble might have been expected. Nineteen camels
and nine men were stealing along through the moonlight
without a sound. In the lead I could not hear even the soft
padding of the broad feet in the sand, but only the occasional
creak of a pack saddle.
Then cloud came over and the moon was obscured. It was
difficult to see any distance. I began to wonder if the great
white claypans might not be the Mulligan River. We had
no idea what the river was like. Perhaps it was only a string
of claypans with occasional waterholes. We passed a gate in
the fence, and a quarter of a mile beyond came to another
flat with dead box gums. We had made the distance, so I
camped on the side of a broad sandridge on the edge of this
dry swamp. Crocker and I went back to the gate and through
it, thinking the old homestead might be there, but after
making a wide circuit we came back to camp without finding
anything. Simpson and Fletcher went along the fence, and
came back saying they had found a better-defined channel
with a waterhole, and a hut on a sandhill beyond it about a
mile away. This seemed likely to be the station, so we pre-
pared for the night, satisfied that the camp was on the Mulli-
gan and the desert was crossed.
In the moonlight it was very difficult to tell whether there
was water in the claypans or not. They all had white sur-
faces. We had passed a small one near the gate and a


discussion arose as to whether it had water in it. I thought
it was water. Jack thought it was mud. We had the usual
bet on it, a bottle of beer at Birdsville —by this time balances
were being struck as to each member’s liability over these
bets —and some of us went back to investigate. The claypan
was found to be covered with white colloidal mud, with
practically no water. That there was not a cupful of water
had been the bet, and I think I won, but not very satis-
factorily, as I expected to find much more than that. The
claypan was only twenty feet or so across and we had passed
very close to it. In the middle, in the dampest spot, we found
a small lone frog and brought it back for the spirit bottle.
Rain was now threatening so we erected the tarpaulin
again. I did not get under it. It rained during the night,
but I slept through it and woke rather wet, as the water had
got between the folds of my ground sheet. Andy had camped
on the top of the sandhill. He told us next day he was fright-
ened there would be a flood, on account of the frog, which was
sitting up in the mud praying for more rain to come. He
did not like the frog being put into the spirits. He had been
rather worried about the collecting all along, his keenness to
please and show his knowledge conflicting with his sympathy
for the victims. He was always expecting it to bring us bad
luck. He sometimes wanted to let lizards go, and one Sun-
day he did release one. He was very particular about
Sundays. He said swearing was bad on Sunday morning, not
so bad in the afternoon, more better not swear at all. The
Christian teaching he had received as a child at the Kilalpa-
ninna Mission had left an indelible impression, but was some-
what mixed with his own tribal beliefs and superstitions, in
fact was superimposed on them without destroying them, for
their roots were very deep. What the mother teaches is never
entirely lost. He considered that Simpson, Crocker and
Fletcher all swore too much, and particularly Fletcher, to
whom something might happen —“You might fall off camel
or camel might fall over on a sandhill”. This was the only
prophesy of Andy’s that ever came true, for on the very day
that he made the remark Fletcher’s camel did roll him off
on to some spinifex. The same day a mountain devil lizard


was found and Andy said, “Devil him sometimes very bloody
clever. Too much swearing and only catchem devil lizard”.
There seemed to be something in Andy’s foreboding on
this occasion for it rained lightly all day and everything was
miserably wet again.
We still had seventy-seven gallons of water in our canteens
left from the two hundred and thirty-two we had started
out with, plus the thirty we had caught on tarpaulins, so the
nine men had used one hundred and eighty-five gallons in
nineteen days—an average of nearly ten gallons a day, or one
gallon a man. We had relaxed the water restrictions towards
the end, but not much more had been used.
Thirty-one sandridges had been crossed on the last day,
making a grand total of seven hundred and six from Andado
Station to the Mulligan.
It would now be impossible to move till the rain stopped.
We found that we were on a branch of the Mulligan, a series
of swamps with a better-defined channel a mile away. The
hut on the high sandridge was beside the fence and was a
deserted boundary rider’s hut. The river took a turn round
the end of the sandridge. The Kuddaree waterhole was at
the north end of the sandridge, a wonderful sheet of water
six hundred yards long, a hundred yards wide and several
feet deep, with black swans on it, teal and several other
species of duck, and cranes. There were large flocks of white
cockatoos (corellas) in the green trees, and some galahs. At
a smaller waterhole further east and a mile and a half from
the camp, we found the remains of the old Kaliduwarry
Station. It was built of boughs and thatch and most of the
roof had fallen in. It was a desolate looking place, sur-
rounded by mud. I shot a few ducks on the water and Mar-
shall got some more. The water was wide and the cover
small, so they were difficult to get. Before the day was over
water was lying about in all the swamps.
That night we sent messages to the press, to Mr. Simpson
and to our families, telling them that we had reached the
Mulligan and the desert crossing was finished. We were
then seventy-five miles from Birdsville or about four days’
journey.


The next day was fine and we spread everything out to
dry. Everyone bathed and shaved, and we took the oppor-
tunity to make some repairs to clothing and equipment.
When we first started out the Birdsville wireless was out
of action, as the operator, Bob Gaffney, was away at Marree
and could not return on account of the state of the track.
Now he was back again and we were in touch with Birdsville,
where we were told a welcome was awaiting us.
On the first of July we left Camp 20 on the Mulligan and
began the last stage of the journey into Birdsville. We
intended to follow the Mulligan down to Annandale Station,
a day’s journey of nineteen miles, from where we expected
to find a track leading to Birdsville.
We started off along the branch of the river we were
camped on, which was by now a series of shallow lakes. The
going was wet and slippery, of the sort that the camel abhors.
After a mile we managed to cross the low ground to the
sandridge which separated the two branches of the river, and
continued on down the left bank of the branch on the edge of
the sand. In the afternoon we crossed the dividing sand-
ridge, as it was becoming lower, and entered the valley of
the main stream, which was there very well defined, a chan-
nel about six feet deep and twenty-five yards across. There
was a high sandridge on its far side as well. Like the Hay,
the Mulligan runs between the sandridges and parallel to
them. We followed along the edge of this sandridge, which
ended —or began —at an open space or backwater, and in this
we found the track from Kaliduwarry to Annandale, faint
and hard to follow. It began to rain again, and the rain
steadily increased. After an hour of it I decided to camp,
although then only a couple of miles from Annandale. If
that place proved to be anything like Kaliduwarry there was
nothing to be gained by going on there, in the way of shelter.
So we made camp on the side of the sandridge on the left
bank of the river. We made a good camp with the tarpaulin
and even put up a ground sheet for Albert to cook under.
There were scrubby gum trees all about, with many hol-
lows in them, and in almost every hollow there was a
budgerigar’s nest. We could hear the young birds squawking
for food whenever we approached an occupied hollow trunk


or limb. It rained steadily, but Albert put on a splendid
dinner of braised duck.
After four weeks of sandridges in the desert, this first day
of level going down the Mulligan had been a wonderful
change and relief. We had crossed only one sandridge all
day. There was no bother about keeping on a course. The
track had been a welcome sight. It seemed just too easy to
be following a road, and gave one an extraordinarily com-
fortable and care-free feeling.
The river bed was lined with better-grown box gums, and
the valley floor was covered with good feed, salt bush, buck-
bush, marsh-mallows and grasses. There was some “dead-
finish” about too, a straggly and thorny acacia of the most
derelict and melancholy appearance, whose name most aptly
fits it. It’s only use is for firewood, and that only in the
direst extremity, although I am told it makes a good stock-
whip handle. There had been no saltbush in the desert, even
along the Hay, till well after the Queensland border was
passed, but at Camp 19, halfway from the border to the
Mulligan, there was quite a lot between the sandridges on the
gidgee flats, with small buckbush as well. Limey nodules
had been noticed on those flats.
At this camp there was a fence, and an old poison cart for
destroying rabbits. The surroundings seemed quite home-
like.
As usual, Jack and Nurie and Andy slept outside, the rest
of us under the tarpaulin. Jack went up to the top of the
sandridge and dug down to dry sand under a canegrass bush.
Andy made himself a beautiful bed of dead buckbush with
two bags on it, then his two blankets and a waterproof ground-
sheet on top. It was like a thick spring mattress.
It rained gently but steadily all next day and we were con-
fined to camp. By this time over an inch had fallen. Water
was lying about everywhere on the river flat and even our
sandridge was covered with little pools, mostly formed in
the footprints. We had certainly chosen a remarkable season
for our journey. Fortunately there was plenty of firewood.
We spent most of the day reading King Henry the Fourth,
which Simpson had brought, and playing five hundred with
Albert’s cards.


In the afternoon Jack and Andy walked on to Annandale in
the rain and reported on their return that the store was
standing, with the books still in it, but the house was taken
away.
Andy was pretty damp. He said the brolgas (native com-
panions) “sing out too much —they bad animals —that frog
too —all make it rain”.
Next morning there was fog and mist, but the rain had
stopped. Sunshine was breaking through so we packed up
and got on the move once more, late in the morning. By the
time we reached Annandale it was raining again and went on
lightly all the rest of the day till 6.30 p.m. This time we
ignored it, and carried on, a miserable procession, the camels
sloshing along through mud and water.
Annandale Station was a sad ruin amid signs of former pros-
perity. Some outbuildings, a harness room and a store still
had iron roofs on and were habitable. In the store room were
a stores account book and a great bag of peppercorns. The
roof and doors had been taken away from the house, but to
our astonishment we found the furniture was still in it. There
were beds, wardrobes, chests of drawers, a dining table,
account books, garden seats, window glass, a surveyor’s chain,
a windmill, tools and even explosives. All were covered
with dust and now subject to the ravages of wind and rain.
There was a drilling plant nearby complete with boiler,
casing and tools, all rusting away. The extraordinary
paradox was that the waterhole by the house, half a mile long,
was full of water, and the whole surroundings were choked
with vegetation. Buckbush, green and luscious, had crossed
the thresholds and invaded the very house, its great round
masses springing up from the earthen floors in rooms
that were open to the skies; but there was not a man or beast
to break the desolate silence within a hundred miles. The
drizzling rain added to the general depression of the scene.
Annandale was a typical example of what is often called
the Kidman blight on the country, and indeed it did seem as
though some plague had descended upon it, or some invader
despoiled it and driven off the inhabitants. Let us look at
this question a little more closely for a moment, for we are


to see much more of it along the Diamantina. The Mulligan
was deserted, the stations closed and all the cattle gone, yet
here were water in abundance, an artesian bore half com-
pleted, and luxuriant feed for countless miles around, enough
for many thousands of cattle within reach of the existing
waters. How can these things be? Well, firstly, before
Kidman took up the stations the previous pioneers and owners
had probably failed and been forced off the holdings. We
saw the river valley a maze of lakes and meadows, the bor-
dering sandridges covered with good fodder, byt this was a
very exceptional season. There might not be such another,
or such a succession of two or three, for another ten years.
In the following summer the annual plants would die down
and soon blow off the sandridges altogether 5 in the river flats
it would wither but remain as dry fodder perhaps for another
year j the water would dry up in most of the waterholes,
leaving only two or three permanent waters in the whole
length of the river. What the country had recently been
through could be judged by the fact that not a single rabbit
was to be seen along the river. The thousands of cattle that
the country might carry to-day would have to be got rid of
very quickly in the future. If they are not to perish they
must be sold when all the neighbours are trying to find a
market at the same time. It would be hard to give them away
in this remote place, and they would die in thousands in the
next drought. This history has repeated itself over and over
again on all the private holdings in the Lake Eyre basin.
Kidman’s method was to take up holdings all over the vast
interior, and when there were droughts in one area he could
move the stock somewhere else and close the stations affected.
He absorbed a great many stations in this way, and many of
them are now deserted. They would probably have been
deserted in any case. He could take advantage of the good
seasons wherever they were, but the man on the single
holding, however large, cannot do this and is ruined in a
long drought. The old Cattle King is now beyond the reach
of droughts and honours and curses, which all came alike to
him, but his company carries on with great success. It is the
way of capital for the shareholders, and of Stalin for the


people. It is the best way to make the most of our resources.
There only remains the question, under which political
principle is it better to carry it out?
The continuous stock-carrying capacity of any single
holding in the drought areas of the interior over a long
period is actually very small. It depends on the drought-
resisting perennial plants like saltbush and even on the trees
such as mulga, whose boughs are lopped down for the stock in
times of drought. The ephemeral plants that come up in the
rains are merely the fattening fodder. The permanent her-
bage, the mainstay of the country, is in delicate equilibrium
with its surroundings, and maintains itself with difficulty even
when undisturbed. The young plants are not sufficiently
strong and prolific to stand up to much grazing by stock or to
the attack of rabbits, so that the perennials rapidly fall away
and may practically disappear. Regeneration is a slow pro-
cess. The country is commonly overstocked on a new holding
and eaten out to such an extent that it does not respond to the
next good season, and requires a long rest before it is restored.
That it does recover was abundantly shown on this journey.
Kidman was accused of overstocking and ruining the country,
but actually it is a quetsion of which is better, to stock
heavily for a short time and then let the country rest, or to
carry a few stock continuously and never take full advantage
of the good seasons. Kidman was only doing in a big way
what actually happens on the individual holdings; one owner
fails and goes out, another comes along after an interval and
eventually fails too; but Kidman never failed because he had
somewhere else to go to. Organization on Kidman’s
principles, and the provision of more permanent water sup-
plies, would greatly increase our herds and flocks. The
greatest problem —water —has in the past been dealt with in
a very unenterprising way. Much more could be done in
conserving surface water and exploiting underground water,
instead of leaving it to nature to fill the few shallow water-
holes she has provided. There is too much reluctance to
spend money on water supply, deriving from the failure of
many deep dug wells badly sited. Boring plants should
entirely replace hand-sinking.


A TREE BLAZED AT CAMP 16, HAY RIVER.


CAMP 17, QUEENSLAND BORDER.
KUDDAREE WATERHOLE, MULLIGAN RIVER.


I once heard a nervous speaker trying to introduce Sir
Sidney Kidman as guest of honour at a luncheon. He began
with “Sir Kidney Sidman”. . . .and this so disconcerted him
that he repeated the spoonerism and then went on to say that
our guest began life as a boy of thirteen. Although such a
miraculous beginning is hardly credible, the career of the
old Knight was certainly a remarkable one, from those early
days at Broken Hill to the position of Cattle King. _
At Annandale we refilled some of our canteens with water
from the waterhole. It was “white” water, white from the
fine suspended clay it carries. This was our first experience
of the unpleasant white water, but we were to find it typical
of the Diamantina region after rains. After this rather
unnecessary supplementing of the water supply, we went on
down the Mulligan valley, still travelling between high red
sandndges. There was no spinifex or canegrass in the valley
and it was a pleasure to be away from them. There were
patches of wild lilies in places.
The river began to break up into narrow channels. About
eight miles below the station it takes an offset to the west in
scattered channels before continuing its old direction, and
the track to Birdsville there leaves it. We passed a stockyard
with windmill and tanks near here. The track had been very
indistinct and beyond the stockyard we were unable to locate
it at all. After a couple of miles we camped in gently rolling
sandridges. Next morning we had a good look round for
the track in our valley and the neighbouring ones between
sandridges, but failed to find any sign of it. I had an idea
that this track went round the south side of a patch of sand-
ridges that separated us from Birdsville fifty miles away in
a direct line, but it made a considerable loop to the south and
would probably take a day or so longer, owing not only to
the distance but also to the time wasted in finding and fol-
lowing it, so as we were travelling much lighter now, I
decided to take to the sandridges again on a bearing of 125
and make straight for Birdsville. ,
For the first few miles the sandridges were low, with sand
and spinifex between them, just as in the desert, but as the
day wore on they became farther apart and were separated by


gibber-covered plains. The day was bitterly cold, with a
south-west wind. The light load, cool weather and good feed
had brought the camels back to as good condition as when
they started, except that mange was spreading, and they were
getting a little more difficult to manage. Most of the party
were now preferring to walk. The camels had developed the
habit of springing up very quickly as soon as the foot touched
the stirrup to mount —a very nasty habit and liable to leave
one dangling by the leg. Their defection in this direction
was probably due to our bad handling.
The sandridges were now very high and separated by
plains a mile or more wide. On the course we were taking it
was sometimes over two miles across from ridge to ridge.
In one plain there were low outcrops of sandstone, the parent
of the gibbers. The gibbers in turn break down to sand and
the sand is all swept up into the ridges. There was no sand
at all on these stony plains, but pools of water and bogs lay
about everywhere. The camels were sometimes up to their
knees in water and it was difficult to pick the best way to
go. Wet feet and cold wind made it a very unpleasant day.
The sandridges were as big as any we had seen. Marshall
took a good strip of film of the camel string struggling across
the top of one.
We had made a late start and camped late, crossing a last
huge sandridge and camping well up on the far side of it,
for it was too wet to make camp on the flat. The sand was
wet enough, but much preferable to the mud. There was
very little firewood but we were out of the wind in the lee
of the sandridge. We had come seventeen miles and crossed
thirteen sandridges at an acute angle.
This was most extraordinary, to come out on the edge of
what is commonly thought to be and usually is a burning
arid desert, and find ourselves, when not held up by rain,
struggling along, freezing cold, through bogs of mud and
threading our way between pools of water. We suffered from
a surfeit and not a lack of water in the later stages.
It was a wonderful scene that night from our camp on the
sandridge side. By nine o’clock the sky had cleared, the wind
had fallen, and an almost full moon in the east was reflected
from the pools and sheets of water in the plain before us.


It seemed very comfortable to be in the open again after
being huddled together under the tarpaulin for the last five
nights of rain. Also it was only two days to Birdsville.
This sandridge seemed like a mountain range in the flat
plains. I measured its height next morning and found it to
be seventy-seven feet six inches. The moonlight on the
water had been beautiful, but it meant a lot of wading and
slogging next day. I was always rather apprehensive of bog-
ging the camels, of which I had never had experience, but
I had read a lot about losing camels along the Diamantina,
and how difficult they were to de-bog. The fear of getting
bogged makes the camel very nervous and this nervousness
seems to infect the rider. However, most of the boggy flats
were safely crossed before the morning was over. We saw
some cattle for the first time in one swampy plain, and found
an emu’s nest with nine eggs, some of which we had for break-
fast next morning. My enjoyment of them was rather
marred by seeing some bits of young emu in the omelette,
which Albert was trying to pass off as normal ingredients,
though why these signs of change should so put one off does
not bear analysis, as it is all in the egg anyway.
In the early afternoon the orderly arrangement of sand-
ridges and plains became broken, and a branch creek with gum
trees led us down to Listore Creek, marked on the maps,
which crossed our course. Beyond the creek we came into
sandridges again, more like the country near the Hay, but
now the sand was becoming distinctly yellower. It had lost
that rich red of the desert. This meant we were at the edge
of the desert and close to the Diamantina country where the
sand is all light yellow. The red colour is due to a fine coating
of oxide of iron (the basis of “rouge”) on the grains of quartz.
If boiled in acid the grains quickly become quite clear and
colourless. This coating only forms under arid conditions,
which is why beach sands are never red. It takes a long time
to form, so that young dunes are usually white or yellow.
The sandridges near the Diamantina are continually being
built up from sand from the river deltas, so that the ridges
are white along the river and gradually become redder
towards the interior of the desert till they are as red as rouge.
The same process, the solution of iron salts and their deposi-


tion by evaporation, reddens the surface of all rocks in deserts
and gives them a uniform appearance. If you chip the sur-
face away with a hammer you may find almost any colour
underneath.
We were now among huge ridges up to eighty feet high
and a couple of miles apart, with live sand on their crests,
and separated by low and straggly twenty-foot ridges in
place of the gibber plains. Once more all was sand, and we
made camp beside a miserable clump of needlebushes that
provided some firewood but no shelter. There was a claypan
full of water near by, but it was by now nothing more to us
than a repulsive sight.
This was the last camp before Birdsville. We put up the
wireless for the last time and sent a press message, and also
had a talk to Bob Gaffney at Birdsville, We told him we
would be at the hotel at four o’clock next day. He told us
the country was flooded and the mail truck was bogged on
its way from Marree, so there would be no mail for us. It
was uncertain when the mail would arrive. Once again it was
brought home to us how reliable our ancient camel transport
was. The mail was bogged and its future all unknown, but
we were still poking along and would be there at four o’clock
next day. The camel’s time-table may show long time inter-
vals between stations, but he runs to schedule.


CHAPTER XII
BIRDSVILLE
WE got away to an early start on the next cold grey day,
for the last seventeen miles’ run, or rather slither and
wade, into Birdsville. We were soon out of the sandy area
and into big ridges and stony plains again. One plain was
covered with limey soil, with watercourses and high grass,
where we saw some more cattle. A boggy creek led us
through the next sandridge on to a wide plain with stony
undulations, almost hills, the first rises we had seen since
leaving the tablelands of the Hale, the first country that was
not absolutely flat plain, and in fact the last such country
till Marree was reached, four hundred miles away, for all
our journey was in one vast plain. Away to the north-east
could be seen some of the waddy trees in the patch to the
north of Birdsville.
As Birdsville was approached the sandridges became close
and jumbled, with small lakes that we had to go round
scattered about among them. The sand was yellow, and the
ridges high and hummocky. I had never approached Birds-
ville from this side, and few others would have done so, for
I found later that we were coming down a tongue of sand-
ridges and might have been clear of them. Four o’clock
approached and there was no sign of the town, nor any indi-
cations of the proximity of one, only more sandridges in front
as each one was crossed. I began to wonder if we could have
passed it, though I seemed to remember that there were no
sandridges anywhere near except to the west of the town.
Those on foot were keeping well ahead. At last I saw them
sink down on the top of the ridge ahead, tired out as I
thought. When I came up beside them, there before us lay
the gibber plains of Birdsville, with the few scattered tin
houses shining white not half a mile away. This bare and
wretched little town, the most remote in Australia, was a
beautiful sight. I had been there ten years before and knew
what a fascinating place it was, what generous and big-hearted


people inhabited those tin dwellings among the gibbers. It
looked better to me than a city with dreaming spires.
We wound down off the sandridges on to the plain. We
saw a little riding party of girls and waved to them. They
had come out to meet us, but shyness overcame them and they
did not come close. They said afterwards that they thought
the horses would be frightened of so many camels. Past the
police station, and at exactly four o’clock on July 6th, the
camels went down in front of the pub. There to meet us were
gathered the leading citizens of Birdsville, including Norman
Carralan, the policeman ; Harry Afford, the hotel manager;
Dorothy and Bob Gaffney, daughter and son of the
proprietress; Ben Barton, the schoolmaster; and stockmen
and townsmen I did not know. We took the camels to a wire
yard nearby, threw off the loads, put our personal gear into
Bob Gaffney’s car and dumped it at the hotel again, and then,
in accordance with the custom of the country, both expedition
and town crowded into the little bar. We were rather late
into the bar even then I think, to satisfy the best traditions.
We drank a toast to Mr. Simpson, to ourselves, to the desert,
to Birdsville, and then it became a little uncertain just what
toast was being drunk. After a while I withdrew from the
bar and had a hot bath and a shave in anticipation of dinner
at a table again, to be followed by an easy chair and a pipe
before the fire and then a long sleep in a warm dry bed with
sheets and a soft mattress and a roof over my head, in place
of the plate on the ground, the cold wind, the damp blankets
and the hard earth under a wintry sky. This is one of the
greatest charms and benefits of rough living, the re-adjust-
ment of values that makes a humble shack, a fire, and enough
to eat seem all that a man could desire. Darwin said that
the chief pleasure of a sea voyage was coming into port, a
remark not quite so obvious to-day, but it is always true oi
the first few days in civilization after a primitive life in the
wilderness, cut off from all the comforts and amenities that
pass unnoticed in modern life. I pity all those who have
never got a thrill out of switching on electric light, as we did
at Birdsville. The thrill soon fades, and then it is time to
think about getting away again. I remember how I resolved


after two years in the Antarctic that when I got back I would
never be without a block of chocolate in my pocket. Not even
a start was ever made to carry out this cherished resolution.
On a summer camel journey in the Sudan from Gallabat to
Gedaref my drinking water was bad and always warm, and
I had been without cigarettes for weeks. My mind was con-
tinually turning to thoughts of sitting in the shade at Gedaref,
with a glass of cold lemon squash and a Virginian cigarette,
but these thoughts did duly and sumptuously materialize.
Unlike my friends in the bar, I have never been able, often
to my regret, to throw olf dull care and become thoroughly
hilarious and hearty on a joyful occasion such as our arrival
at Birdsville. The more reason for jubilation, the more sober
I seem to become, while in adversity I am by comparison
more stimulated and companionable. This curious reaction
to success, this coldness when warmth is expected, has lost me
some of the pleasures of life, even though it cloaks a deep
inward satisfaction. Only Crocker joined me at the table
that night. The rest remained unwashed and unfed but
happy till the small hours of the morning. I joined them
again for a while after dinner. The party had by then taken
the form of a concert. Ben Barton was a good singer, and
Albert and others were ably supporting him.
Bob Gaffney now handled our signals. He had his trans-
mitter in the dining room, and it was a change to write a
press message from Camp 25, Birdsville Hotel, sitting at a
table under good light instead of on the ground out in the
wind and rain. There were messages for home to be written,
and acknowledgments of the many telegrams of congratula-
tion on the successful completion of the desert crossing that
were awaiting us. These things were all attended to, the pipe
was smoked out, and so to bed, with greater anticipation than
Pepys ever knew.
The last mail from Marree was already a week overdue.
The truck had been abandoned on the track and the driver
had gone back to Marree on horseback. This was due to the
rains and mud. The mail was not likely to arrive for at least
another week. The weather was still very cold and windy,
with occasional rain, and we decided to lay off in Birdsville


for a few days till the country had dried up somewhat and
the movements of the mail were known. We were out of
moving picture film and had very little still picture film left,
but otherwise were not in need of supplies. There was more
film in the mail truck. The future plans of the expedition
could wait a few days.
There was to have been a reception ball on our arrival but
the people had not been able to come in from the surrounding-
stations owing to the state of the country, and it was quite
indefinite when this would be possible. However, there were
other social duties and entertainments not to be neglected or
missed j it was out of the question to think of moving on till
this lonely little town had given us the honour and hospitality
it was so glad to offer. My experience of ten years before,
on the aerial reconnaissance, when aeroplanes had landed
there for the first time, had taught me what to expect and
what was expected. Then the country was in a desperate
plight through being in the end of a long drought. The
cattle were all dying and the few horses that were left
could not travel, so that the people who did not have motor
cars had to come in by camel. Now it was floods and bogs
that kept them away. The people at Birdsville were
interested then in my desert investigations, and had followed
this expedition with even greater interest. They had lived
their lives on the edge of the desert and understood the diffi-
culties of crossing it. Their congratulations meant more to
us than all the generous expressions of those who did not
know. I was very much at home here.
On our first day in Birdsville we made a tour of calls at
all the homes in the town —about six—under the conductor-
ship of Norman Carralan. No one who was at home was
neglected. We also visited the school and the Australian
Inland Mission Hostel. One old lady who had some pretty
young daughters who were much in demand, told us of her
first journey up from New South Wales in a waggonette.
Another had a nice little garden, with ripe tomatoes, onions,
nasturtiums, and oranges. Her son was droving cattle to
Marree and the mob was just passing through Birdsville.
We expected to catch up to him near Goyder’s Lagoon and
get some meat, as he would be killing there. We saw the


REMAINS OF KALIDUWARRY STATION.
ANNANDALE STATION.


CAMP 21, RIVER MULLIGAN.
SANDRIDGES WEST OF BIRDSVILLE.


well-borer who had worked on the Annandale bore, with his
wife and pretty little daughter. It was rather remarkable
that we should find a crop of half a dozen attractive young
girls blossoming in so small a patch of the desert —surely as
rare a state of affairs as the good seasons themselves. Their
sweetness was not wasted on the party, and it all helped
towards a gay and happy stay.
It was tea time when the last call was made, and a little
boy had to be brought in to have his hot dinner in front of us.
He was very shy, and we so overwhelmed him with our
attentions that he sat at the table and cried into his bowl of
soup. His rather grubby little baby sister on the other hand
thought it was a great occasion, and clapped and laughed.
The A.I.M. had moved out of the hotel that had been
their quarters and were in new buildings. There were two
sisters —Henderson and McKenzie —and their hostel was
the social centre of the place, in the best traditions of the
A.1.M., and as it used to be in Alice Springs.
At the school next day we found a few black children under
a bough shelter outside, and a few white children in the main
building. I gave them a talk on our journey, with the aid of
a map, and then paid some special attention to the little
blacks outside. The native children get along very quickly
in the early stages at school and up to a certain point. They
are very good with their fingers and make beautiful figures
in their sums. They recited for us “Two little kittens one
stormy night, began to quarrel and then to fight. One had
a mouse and the other had none, and that was how the
quarrel begun”. They said it very rapidly in a soft monotone,
with their heads down so that we could hardly follow it.
Ben Barton said he had had a hard job to teach them this
recitation. They had only just started school and it was one
of the first things they had learnt. They got the idea all
right but were not particular about the exact form of words.
One of them favoured “Two little scats, big stormy fight”.
Another said “Two little kittens, big rain jump up”. None
of them would say “the other had none” but always “the
other had no mouse”. To celebrate the occasion I gave the
school a half-holiday, which is the only really memorable
and impressive thing to do when visiting a school. I had no


authority to do this, but even if I had made it a week’s holiday
I do not think it would have been likely to reach the ears of
the education authorities in Brisbane.
The black children spent their lunch time sitting on the
wood-heap at the hotel, where Mrs. Gaffney would give them
food. It was hard to get them away from the wood-heap till
Barton instituted a bell, but after that they would all come
back at the run when he rang it. They called it the dindle,
for obvious reasons, as it was a cattle bell.
In the afternoon there was a grand riding party. Norman
Carralan provided horses for the whole expedition. He had
some police horses and in addition a number of drovers’
horses that passing drovers had left in his care. The local
girls and the sisters had their usual mounts and we made an
imposing cavalcade, with quite a sprinkling of blood stock,
for this was a country of good horses. It was a wonderful
change from our camel riding. The ground was very heavy,
but we scrambled down to the river and splashed across
shoulder deep in the fast-running water, and then down-
stream till we overtook a drover with a thousand heifers
making for New South Wales. He had spent a night at the
hotel, a big man muffled up in a huge greatcoat, with muddy
boots and spurs, and a camera slung across his shoulder, none
of which he removed at the table or at any time far as I
knew, for I never saw him without them. I asked him about
the camera and he said he always kept it handy snap any
unusual scene, the sort of thing that there is no time to go
and get a camera for, like cattle breaking, or swimming rivers,
and he used to send the pictures to the press.
It was the height of the droving season, and owing to the
recent good seasons there were plenty of cattle to move. Half
a dozen mobs were within a day or two’s distance of Birdsville,
and the drovers were making the best of their opportunities
while within reach of the place, for the next stop is Marree,
over three weeks away. In the palmy days there used to be
seven hotels in Birdsville, but now they were reduced to one.
Men were in great demand at this time and the drovers, the
professional full-time drovers who own a plant and hire
assistants, were having a difficulty in holding their men. His


two men deserted old Greatcoat next day and returned to the
hotel. I often wondered how he got on about it. It is quite
a usual thing for a drover to have to fight his men to induce
them to stay on. The extraordinary thing about it is that if
the man loses the fight he seems quite willing to stay. The
idea seems to be that the boss is then shown to be a good man
to work for.
When I asked one drover about his difficulties he made a
very wise remark that applies to leaders in all walks of life,
and I have often quoted it since. He said a drover must
know more than his men and do more than his men. It was
said of old Greatcoat that he lay under his blankets in the
morning and expected his men to get the cattle on the move
without him.
On the way back from the cattle we had a race over a wide
and rather boggy flat. It seemed dangerous to me and I
noticed that Carralan had more respect for his mount and
stayed behind. It was a wild gallop of a mile or more
through the mud. I expected a fall and a broken leg or two,
and did not think the horses could stand up to it, but they
breed them hardy up there. One of the girls won, on a little
black blood mare.
The hostel entertained us that night. It was an extension
of the usual weekly gathering. There was ping-pong, at
which Bob Gaffney beat all comers, and an impromptu con-
cert, and a wonderful supper of dainties cooked by the sisters.
Everyone was present, including the passing drovers. The
children sat on the floor round the room with their backs to
the walls. It began to be harder to stand up to the hospi-
tality of Birdsville than to trek across the desert.
The next day was a Sunday. Some of us went out by car
to the waddy trees in the stony ground about four miles to the
north of Birdsville and on the west side of a low tableland.
We collected seed and made notes on the tree, confirming
that it was the same tree as we had seen at the Andado Bore
No. 1. At Birdsville it grows within an area of a square mile
at most and is an isolated occurrence.
On our return I had a look at the local rock formations,
which consist of some small and low sandstone and con-


glomerate outcrops near the town, the only solid rock to be
found for many miles around.
In the afternoon there was a cricket match, town plus
drovers against expedition plus drovers, in which the expe-
dition won by a narrow margin. Bob Gaffney and Crocker
both retired at twenty-four, and Jack Bejah took the hat
trick. While this was going on I took the opportunity of
getting down to the plans for the future. The main object of
the expedition had been achieved, and a mail truck would
soon be going back to Marree which could take us in to the
railway in a few days; but the camels had to return to
Marree and although it would take a month longer I did
not want to miss the opportunity of going down the river
and seeing Lake Eyre after the rains, to compare conditions
with what I had seen ten years before after a long drought.
It was four hundred and fifty miles to Marree via the lake,
and would take a good four weeks by camel, whereas the
mail would do the three hundred and sixty miles down the
track in three days when the state of the track allowed it to
continue its running. I decided not to wait for the uncertain
mail truck, but to go on down the Diamantina to Lake Eyre
by camel with a reduced party, leaving Birdsville on Tuesday,
July 11th. Marshall had no film for further photography,
and the press did not want any more messages now that the
excitement was over, so that the wireless could be dispensed
with. I was by this time rather worried about the way mange
was spreading among the camels and we had no treatment
for it. We did not need to carry much water, so that loads
could be considerably reduced and we could travel lighter
and faster. Simpson and Marshall would remain at Birds-
ville for the mail, and bring on the wireless gear, cameras,
six canteens and the botanical and biological specimens already
collected, and the rest of us would go on by camel. I checked
stores and ordered what was wanted, chiefly a few things in
Albert’s department.
The next day would be our last in Birdsville, and we
would leave the following l morning, for it seemed that the
hospitality of Birdsville would never exhaust itself. It had
by this time almost exhausted me, and I was feeling the need
of some restful travelling again.


Every morning at eight o’clock Bob Gaffney sat at his
pedal set in the dining room contacting all the stations in his
range from far away in Queensland through the north-east
of South Australia and down the track to Marree. This was
a regular arrangement when everybody stood by to exchange
news. It made them all one family, a round-the-table con-
ference of people many hundreds of miles apart. The news
was all local and domestic —illnesses, visitors, who was on
the track, where the cattle were, how the mail was getting
along, when Bill or Harry were expected in, what the track
was like and how the rains were going. What was happening
in the outside world had practically no interest at all for them
and it seemed that no one ever listened to national stations.
It was a little world of its own. “All 0.K., Bob, all O.K”.
“Well, I don’t think we have anything else here, Peter, I
don’t think we have anything else here. So over to you,
Peter, over to you” —or “Over to you, Sister, over to you”.
A story typical of outback humour was told of Albert
Blinman from Glengyle, who at the time was a willing slave
at the Hostel. It is a perfect example of the pleasant answer
and the bushman’s optimism. Bob and Albert were trying
to knock a leaf of a spring back into place, and Albert was
under the car, Bob banging away above in an awkward posi-
tion with hammer and chisel. The spring had about three
inches to go. After about ten minutes Bob asked how it was
going and Albert answered enthusiastically, “Oh, she’s going
by leaps and bloody bounds! ” When it was Bob’s turn to
get under he found it had moved about half an inch.
That day I made a more critical study of the river in the
vicinity. The banks are of clay, but most of the bed was
covered with running water. There was sand and gravel at
some of the bends, but I was told that gravelly places were
rare. Bob Gaffney had found a diprotodon jaw near the
town and I wanted to see his locality and to make a further
search. The Diamantina is a well-known locality for the
remains of these extinct giant wombats as well as of giant
kangaroos and emus. The search for fossil bones was one
of my objects in going down the river, but it proved hopeless
as we found the river was quite full lower down. Even at


Birdsville there was too much water to see much of the river
bed and I only found some calcified roots, like Leichhardt’s
bones, but Bob’s diprotodon jaw was genuine, and a good spe-
cimen. He still had it at the house.
The local sandridges came in for further examination too.
Birdsville is on the west side of the river, and the origin and
beginning of sandridges can be seen here. It can be observed
that they advance across the gibber plains in the direction of
their length. It is to be noted that they are referred to as
ridges, not dunes. Dunes are crescent-shaped and lie across
the direction of the wind and move sideways. These ridges
are parallel to the prevailing winds, and extend by growing
onwards at their ends, creeping forward lengthways like a
snake. This advance over the clean-swept gibbers is shown
at the end of every ridge by the fan of fresh sand enveloping
bushes and shrubs. At the other end, the south-east end, the
ridge is worn away, the canegrass bushes once growing on the
ridge now left standing on pillars of sand held together by the
roots. The side-winds play an important part in ridge
development, and shape the crests where the sand is live.
There are often small dunes on top of the ridges. The
stronger winds are from the south-west, which gives the
gentler slope on the west side of the ridges and the steeper
slope formed by falling sand on the east. East winds may
reverse the slopes in the live sand on the crests. This was
often seen in the Birdsville area, where there were some-
times steep banks on the western side of the crests, but it was
never observed west of the Hay.
The dance could be deferred no longer, so it was arranged
for our last night. Only one party decided to try to get in
from outside the town. They were Mr. and Mrs. Leo Crabb
from Pandi Pandi down the Diamantina in South Australia,
the station where the sandridge crept up from the south and
went between the kitchen and the living quarters and separ-
ated them so that the occupants had to climb over the ridge on
a wire netting track every time they wanted to go from one
place to the other. The Crabbs were to arrive early in the
afternoon by car and Bob Gaffney made several trips to the
punt to see if they were waiting to come over the river. By sun-


down it was obvious that they had struck trouble, so the police-
man sent a tracker and horses out to help them. He found their
car bogged and brought them back, wet, exhausted, and cov-
ered with mud; and to crown her troubles, Mrs. Crabb’s case
had been dropped off the packhorse in the darkness somewhere
on the way in, probably in the river at the crossing. She had
nothing to change into, but the women came to the rescue
most effectively and satisfactorily, and Mrs. Crabb soon
warmed up after her late start. She was the lady who ten
years before had said, on leaving for home after the dance,
“That was good-ohj it will do me for another year”. Leo
himself did not put in an appearance at the dance till con-
siderably later.
Ten years ago a man had played an accordion right through
the dance practically without stopping, though it must be
admitted that liquor as well as the ideal of service to others
had something to do with that feat of endurance. Now there
was a gramophone with electric pick-up, another activity of
that progressive and active young man, Bob Gaffney.
Ten years ago water reticulation pipes had been laid
down in the town for five years past, but the river level had
not risen high enough to fill the lagoon that was to supply
the system and it had not been used. Now the raised tank
was full, but leaking, and had made a bog on the track to the
Council Chamber, which was the ballroom. A hurricane
lamp was hung at this bog as a warning, but Albert took it for
a street lamp to light the way and made straight for it, and
was bogged to the knees.
The dance was a great success. Everyone was there, even
the babies, which were asleep in beds provided for the pur-
pose in a room at the back. A young silent-heeler cattle dog
enjoyed himself immensely. He ran round the edge of the
floor, or sat up with eyes sparkling, and snapped at the
dancers’ heels as they went by. He did a bit of damage to
one girl, but gave up when the trooper caught him a back
kick in the face. There was no drink and no sitting out.
Partners separated as soon as each dance was over. Drinking
and love-making are taken seriously and separately in the
outback, where men are still men and not gigolos; each has


its proper time and place, where it can be enjoyed in a big
way, but a dance is definitely not the time or place for either.
In the small hours of the morning Leo Crabb made a
speech of welcome to the expedition, and every member
responded except poor old Andy, who was not officially there,
though he probably got his share of the supper, which, inci-
dentally, would have done credit to any entertainment.
Another grey dawn was beginning to spread over the
gibber plains when the happy party broke up.


CHAPTER XIII
DOWN THE DIAMANTINA
TO cross the Simpson Desert had been the main object of
the expedition, and that had been achieved. We now
started on quite a different phase, the return to Marree
through the flood-plains of the Diamantina. This part of
the journey was in known country most of which had been
occupied at one time or another and was trigonometrically
surveyed and roughly mapped. Still, it is very remote and
unusual country, full of interest, romance and tragedy, about
which little has been written, so we will continue the story
of our travels till the camels are let loose again on the Com-
mon at Marree.
Difficulties and uncertainties had given a spirit of adven-
ture to the desert crossing, but actually the daily routine was
terribly monotonous, with the same endless sandridges day
after day. By comparison, the remainder of the journey was
full of natural interest and variety. Usually the Birdsville
track is a drought-stricken desert, but we were to see it under
very exceptional conditions, with the river running and the
desert blooming. Our plan now was to continue the bio-
logical and botanical collecting round this fringe of the
desert, as well as to see just what became of the waters of the
Diamantina, which had been running for some months, to re-
examine Lake Eyre and find out whether these two exception-
ally wet seasons had put any water into it, and to search the
river bed for fossil remains of the extinct animals that roamed
these plains in former pluvial times. The exceptional season
made it a wonderful opportunity for natural history collect-
ing.
Lake Eyre is the focus of an enormous inland drainage
system, stretching from the MacDonnells in Central Aus-
tralia to the Dividing Range in Queensland and covering
half a million square miles of country. The main streams
are the Finke and the Macumba from the north-west, and
the Diamantina and the Cooper from the north-east, each of


them many hundreds of miles long. Most of them run only
at rare intervals and their floods seldom reach the lake. The
Cooper has not run in its lower courses since 1917. It has
countless lakes and swamps to fill on its way. The Diaman-
tina runs at Birdsville almost every year, but usually only a
“channel flood” not inundating the country, such a run as
was now on. It would be interesting to see how far the water
went.
To the north of the Lake lie the waterless sandridges of
the Simpson Desert, but to the east and north-east stretch
hundreds of miles of the flood plains of the Diamantina and
Cooper, with countless lakes and claypans, scattered stony
plains, and fewer but often higher sandridges.
The rain had now ceased and the surface water was drying
up, but strong and bitterly cold winds were constantly blow-
ing. We had little more actual wading through water like
we had experienced on the way in to Birdsville, but travel-
ling was for the most* part damp, cold and miserable. For-
tunately the wind invariably died down at six o’clock and the
nights were calm.
We got away from Birdsville after lunch on July 11th,
waving farewell to all our friends and facing into a bleak
wind for the start of our four hundred mile journey to the
railway. There is a signpost in Birdsville with three arms
reading, “Marree 330 miles, Bedourie 125 miles, Betoota 108
miles”. Those are the nearest places along the three tracks
leading out of the town. Only Marree is of importance j the
other two are only little Queensland centres like Birdsville.
There can be few places in the world where the next village
is over a hundred miles away.
We made seven miles south that afternoon and camped on
a small sandridge in South Australia, just across the border
fence. Once more the sky was our roof and sand or buck-
bush our bed.
We intended to use the Birdsville-Marree stock and mail
route, “The Birdsville Track”, as far as it went down the
Diamantina, and where it left the river we would leave it and
continue on down the river to the lake. There are alterna-
tive routes at the top end of the track. The fine-weather
track keeps to the west of the river, the same side as Birds-


ville is on, as far as Goyder’s Lagoon, which it crosses at the
far end opposite the ruins of the old station of that name,
and there it joins the wet-weather track which lies entirely
on the east side of the river, and is reached by crossing the
Diamantina in the punt at Birdsville. We chose the shorter
fine-weather trail. The first objective was the great Andrew-
illa Waterhole about forty miles below Birdsville and near
the head of Goyder’s Lagoon. The track runs south from
Birdsville along the edge of the Diamantina flood-plain and
then turns into it along the course of a tributary, the Eleanor,
which leads down to the waterhole. W 7 e were travelling in
flat country but passing the ends, or rather the beginnings,
of the sandridges of the desert on our right all the way to
the Eleanor. They were high ridges, sixty feet or so, and
of yellow sand, rather pale and harmless-looking after the
fierce red ridges of the Interior ; in fact they were even
friendly, as they were dry to camp on, made better going
for the camels, and were covered with good feed. It was
now the wet and muddy plains that were forbidding.
Simpson and Marshall, with a riding party, were to over-
take us near the fence next day, but we did not see them;
again it was a case of the stern chase of a camel proving unex-
pectedly long. There were several waterholes along the
track, usually situated near the end of a sandridge. We
passed the Dickerrie and the Eight Mile, and camped on
the Karrathunka Waterhole on the Eleanor, an indefinite
stream which appears to connect up the waterholes. There
we nearly overtook Tom Finlay, a drover with a mob of
cattle who had given us fifty pounds of meat at Birdsville.
We saw two of his men on their horses on the crest of a
sandridge beyond our camp. The cattle were the other side
and out of sight. Apparently they were not going to camp
yet. They stood for a long time and watched us make camp,
lonely black figures silhouetted against the grey and wintry
sky. It was a cold, hard, comfortless time for them. I was
reminded of the dingoes staring down on our desert camps.
Then they disappeared. I thought if they camped soon they
would come back to us, but we never saw them again.
Next day we went on down the Eleanor, which became
merely a strip of flooded country between sandridges, with


occasional waterholes. The waterholes were full, but there
was by this time little surface water lying about and we had
no difficulty with the camels, except for mud in a few
channels. At a big waterhole, the Ten Mile, we found a
boomerang marked with the names of a party of drovers,
Hayes’ party, who were well ahead of us, and a little later
another party passed us on their way back to Queensland for
more cattle. These men were in a hurry. Fifteen miles a day
is about the rate for travelling with stock, but without them
the drover travels fast, covering perhaps fifty miles in a day,
a rate quite out of the camel’s class. The drover has very high
heels to his elastic-sided boots, to prevent his feet from slip-
ping through the stirrups. Hard and permanent cones of
grey clay had formed on these men’s heels, making them
even longer. I wondered how they managed to walk in them
at all, not that the horseman does walk very much. Inci-
dentally, the elastic sides are to help the foot to slip out of
the boot in the case of being thrown and dragged by the
stirrup.
Near the Diamantina the course of the Eleanor became
much more river-like, with high box gums, and the feed,
which had been scant further back, grew most luxuriously.
There were giant buckbushes, spherical masses five feet or
more across. This is the rolypoly, common throughout the
drier parts of Australia. It is lightly anchored to the soil
by its roots and when dead breaks away and bowls across the
country before the wind for miles. Where there are fences
they become piled high with it so that the bushes are soon
rolling over the top. It is good camel and cattle feed when
green. There was saltbush and parrot flower, and on the
sandridges great stretches of wild stocks in bloom, making a
wonderful show. In some places we saw new plants coming
up in such profusion that the whole surface of the sand was
pocked with the little crusty pieces raised up on the stems
below.
Near the end ■of the Eleanor we came upon a great pile of
stores covered with a tarpaulin, groceries of all kinds and
material for Clifton Hills Station, evidently left there
because the truck bringing them could not get across the
Diamantina. There were no signs of any track. We left
a message written on a board.


The last sandridge along the Eleanor was measured and
found to be eighty feet high.
We made camp on the side of the Andrewilla Waterhole,
a permanent water up to two hundred yards across and
several miles long. This water is at the eastern end of
Goyder’s Lagoon, a plain fifty miles long by fifteen miles
wide, over which the Diamantina spreads in countless small
lignum-lined gutters, which reunite again below into a single
channel and then again divide into two parts, the Warburton
and the Kallakoopah, before reaching Lake Eyre. Between
the lagoon and Birdsville the river is made up of several
channels and swamps but above Birdsville there is again only
a single well-defined channel.
We decided to spend a day at this waterhole. There were
the ruins of a mud hut which had been a police station in
the days when blacks were numerous. All that are left of
these tribes are now either in Birdsville or Marree, or on the
few stations that still survive. The white man dispossessed
the black, and now he too is driven out and the country is
deserted. Andy himself was a survivor. He told some grisly
tales of a certain policeman with a Hunnish name who used
to shoot the blacks and then lay them out in rows and poke
them with a burning stick to see if they were still alive, for
it was a common trick to pretend to be dead. What truth
there was in this Ido not know, but Andy believed it. He
said the proper name of the waterhole was Annarrawilla.
I had brought fishing lines, and early in the morning
Albert went fishing with cockatoo’s gut, which he said was
good bait. He had lived for some time on the Murray.
It was not long before he came running up with several carp,
weighing a pound or two each, and soon we were all fishing.
One fish was put in spirit, but the rest made an excellent
dinner of fish and chips. The water in the hole, like all the
claypan water, was opaque white and the fish were a curious
dead-white colour too. We naturally thought that these
fishes, being common in the Diamantina, would be well-
known to science, so we only preserved one, which was
determined later by the Australian Museum as Triefhaestus
welchi , known only by the single type specimen taken at
Innamincka on the Cooper, which suggests that there is still
work to be done on the fishes in the Inland waters.


The trees were alive with cockatoos. Birdsville got its
name from the flocks of birds that frequent this part of the
river.
I watched a very wonderful dawn at this waterhole, one
that has stood out clearly in my memory ever since, among
the hundred dawns we saw. It was cloudless and calm. I
lay in my bed on the bare ground above the steep bank, just
beyond the thin line of trees that edged the waterhole. The
moon was high, but its light was already paling and the
shadows were gone. Orion still rode the skies, but the
glorious morning star in the east was heralding the approach
of the bold sun. The sky still held the dark blue of the
night, but towards the east it changed to dove grey, then
light grey and finally to a strip of tangerine that lay low on
the horizon. They were not the brilliant colours of sunset
clouds, but the most delicate hues of the sky itself. The
black trees were silhouetted against these lovely tints.
Gradually the stars faded and the mystic moonlight with-
drew as night crept silently away, and objects took their true
shape and distance in the hard light of day. A squawk was
heard here and there in the trees, and soon the clouds of
cockatoos came to life and filled the morning with their harsh
screeching, tearing away the last soft trailing veils of night
as the sun came up.
We packed up and got away from the waterhole. Adven-
ture was not quite gone from the journey, for there was
likely to be trouble with bogs, and Goyder’s Lagoon was an
obstacle that was causing us some apprehension. Even the
southern track is not always passable, but the mail had been
using it for some time, abandoning the considerably shorter
northern track that crosses the lagoon, as the lagoon becomes
quite impassable to vehicles as soon as the river runs, owing
not so much to the mud as to the depth of the gutters them-
selves. Accounts varied about the state of the lagoon. Cattle
were still following that track, but whether loaded camels
could get through was another thing. Some drovers said the
water was still rising, some that it was falling. I had decided
to risk it, but it was going to be very awkward if we could not
get across, and even worse if we got half the team bogged.


We continued on westward along the edge of Goyder’s
Lagoon plain, passing the ends of the desert sandridges.
There was a good deal of open water and some boggy ground,
but so far the going was fair. At noon we came to the long
Pelican Waterhole, where there were a lot of ducks. I shot
three but could only recover one as the wind blew the others
out of reach.
During the afternoon we saw ahead a large circular disc
like a notice board, stuck up on the end of a sandridge. When
we arrived at it we found it was the end of a forty-gallon
petrol drum of a familiar yellow colour, that had been cut
out of the drum. There were other ends lying about, with
holes in them where smaller discs had been cut out, and the
tracks of a truck were still clear. So this was where the
Birdsville mailman on his last trip on this route had cut
clutch plates out of petrol drums to repair his ruined clutch!
We had read about it in the newspapers, but though I have
the greatest respect for the ingenuity of the bush mechanic,
I had thought this was going a bit too far in good stories.
However, here was proof of it. Hammer, cold chisel and
file were probably his only tools.
After a short day of fifteen miles we reached Burt’s Water-
hole, a small temporary hole in a gutter, full of thick white
water. As mentioned before, this white water is characteristic
of the lower Mulligan and Diamantina plains It is due to a
fine white clay in suspension in the water. As the water dries
up it becomes thicker till it reaches a gelatinous stage and
finally only dry grey clay remains. We saw a horse plant
approaching the waterhole from the opposite direction, and
hurried in to get first choice of camping ground, but the others
made for a place in the open a few hundred yards down the
ditch. I went down later to see them and soon found the
reason for this. The water in the hole was too thick to use,
but in the ditch it was comparatively clear. They had been
there before. I found it was Hayes, whose party had
inscribed the boomerang. His two men had left him in
Marree and he was going back with a blackfellow, Sandy, and
a new hand, for another mob of cattle from Durrie on the
river above Birdsville.


Burt’s Waterhole was on the edge of the sandhills, with a
few sorry-looking trees in the vicinity. This was the last tim-
ber before Goyder’s Lagoon Waterhole twenty-five miles
away across the lagoon, according to Jack, who had travelled
this part of the track before, so we made up some loads of
faggots to carry with us.
After we had finished our meal, the other party visited us.
Hayes reported a lot of water on the lagoon plain, which he
had just crossed, and seemed rather doubtful of our succeed-
ing in getting over with the camels. He did not think the
mail truck would be able to get in to Goyder’s Lagoon old
station but would have to go round it, so we would miss our
mail. It had been arranged that if the mail got through in
time they were to leave our letters in the old building on their
return.
•It turned out that Sandy was a friend of Andy’s and the
two of them had a great yarn. It was soon clear that they
wanted Andy to join them, and rather to my surprise I found
that Andy wanted to go. We ourselves were heading for
home and comfort, and would have needed some very strong
inducement to turn back and retrace our steps over the same
dull and muddy trail. I never knew what sort of home or
ties Andy had in Marree, but here he was, willing in a
moment to turn his back on them and start all over again on
the track we were so glad to leave behind us. It brought it
strongly home that there was really no discomfort at all for
him in this life, that he was at home all the time on the long
walkabout, and happier here than in the hovels round a town.
Next morning Andy was still of the same mind, so I reluc-
tantly decided to let him go. He was really in Jack’s employ,
and Jack too was willing. I gave him six ounces of tobacco
and an expedition mug as a souvenir, and promised him any
clothing he wanted at Scobie’s store in Marree when he should
reach there again. And so we said good-bye to Andy. He
had made a great contribution to the expedition with his keen
collecting he had been a tireless worker about the camp, and
not least, he had been a constant source of interest and amuse-
ment with his quaint and eager ways and his myths and
native lore. I had become very fond of Andy, and was
disappointed that he should want to leave me, but I made no


move to dissuade him. It was best for him. Our journey
would be over in another three weeks.
Actually we suspected there was some heart interest in it
for Andy, for he told us that a gin at Birdsville, Lucy, was
all the time looking at him there, the last remark of Andy’s
that stays in my mind.
Hayes told us that McAuley with his cattle was only just
ahead of us. We hoped to catch him up at about Mt. Gason
Bore, and get the promised meat.
We had now to tackle the Goyder’s Lagoon crossing. At
Dead Man sandridge, six miles beyond Burt’s Hole over grey
flats, we left the sandridge margin and went into the plain.
The next landmark was One Tree, seven miles away, an
isolated tree in the plains. Before we reached it we began to
cross gutters of running water, and beyond it the plain was
a maze of gutters. We crossed a dozen in the next five
miles. They were from ten to thirty feet across, and running
full, the water only an inch or two below the surface of the
level ground. The depth was usually only up to the camels’
knees, but one could never tell what the bottom would be
like, or the depth. We generally avoided the places where
the cattle had crossed, as being likely to be more cut up and
boggy, but on the other hand they were probably the best
and shallowest places. My camel, Snowy, was the best
trained and most experienced, and he would face up to it, so
I went over first and the string followed. There was some
staggering and splashing, but as one ditch after another was
safely crossed we began to gain more confidence. The plain
was covered with vegetation, high marsh-mallows along the
ditches, and a carpet of yellow daisies and billy-buttons all
around. The ditches were lined with the dreary swamp lig-
num but it all appeared to be dead.
We camped in the lagoon on the hard ground only a few
inches above the level of the water, and made a fire from our
load of wood. Three ducks settled on the water near the
camp but were off again before fire could be brought to bear
on them. During the day we had seen dotterel, a few quail,
and some hawks.
The lagoon had been a bugbear, but we were now more
than half way across it and there were only another six miles
to go.


A man with horses from Cowarie Station passed us on the
plain. He said he was going to Birdsville, and asked us if we
had seen any stray cattle about. We got the impression that
he was looking for lonely cattle that wanted a home.
We crossed more gutters next morning and soon the low
stony tableland on the far side of the lagoon came into view.
Half a mile before we reached it we entered a canegrass
swamp almost covered with water, and the going became
very difficult. Even Snowy was making heavy weather of
it. Nurie on his light young camel forged ahead and soon
stood waiting for us on the dry land. Progress was very slow.
The pack camels sank to their knees in the mud at every step,
and it was as much as they could do to drag each foot out
again. Jack shouted and urged, and the string crept slowly
on. I heard the steady flock-flock-flock behind me as the feet
came out of the deep holes they had made, and dreaded to
hear it cease, for to stop in the mud is fatal. The gap between
us and the shore diminished with exasperating slowness, but
at last we stood with Nurie on the firm ground. It took
exactly fifty-five minutes to cover the last half mile.
The Goyder’s Lagoon Waterhole was some way off on our
right among trees, but we had seen more than enough of
water. We went up the slight rise on to a gibber plain and
soon joined the track from the waterhole to the old station
five miles away. There was more mud and water round the
station, which we found to be nothing but ruined mud walls
with the exception of an open iron-roofed shed with a fire-
place at one end. We found no signs of the mail having
been there, so we left a note saying we had passed on a!nd
would keep to the track as far as Mt. Gason Bore.
There was a long narrow waterhole near the station and it
was literally swarming with ducks swimming up and down,
many of them young but full grown, and so unafraid that
one could walk up within twenty yards of them. I got out
the gun. It was a duck shooter’s dream. Once they rose
they flew up and down, over the water, passing the same
point again and again. I stood by the trunk of a gum tree
and brought down ten, and only stopped to conserve ammu-
nition. The ducks settled again and Crocker shot another
five. There was every kind of duck, black duck, widgeon,


teal, and a big brown duck I had never seen before. Mar-
shall got a good moving picture of them at the same spot
later on.
As we were leaving the old station we had our first bog, in
the gutter running away from this waterhole, a ditch only
a few feet across. The camel had to be unloaded, but
eventually struggled out itself. The remains of our dried
fruits and the tea had got soaked. The tea later turned to
solid blocks in its packets and went rather mouldy.
Soon after, we saw a truck bogged on the plain, and found
it was the mail, with the driver and one passenger, bound for
Birdsville. They were soon out of that trouble, but anxious
to push on to the higher ground on the other side of the
station, for all about there the ground was treacherous, and
though it did not appear to have rained for several days, I
noticed that water had just arrived there and was spreading
and extending before our eyes. I was anxious to get on
better ground myself, so it was arranged that we should
proceed a mile or two to a tree by a waterhole and they should
try to get past the station, and when we had each got out of
our difficulties we would meet again. We discussed opening
the mailbags, which was irregular, but the mailman was
inclined to agree to it; in fact he suggested it, but we post-
poned a final decision till later.
We camped early at this One Tree camp —Camp 31 for
us —to keep near the mail. There were more ducks on this
waterhole, and I had another unusual duck-shooting
experience. Under cover of some bushes, and with much
crawling in mud, I reached the side of the hole with a small-
bore rifle. The ducks were more scared here and remained
on the far side of the hole about fifty yards away, swimming
slowly along. They were not more than a hundred yards
from our camp in the open, where men and camels were still
moving about. I shot four ducks with five shots, and the
remarkable thing was that the wind was blowing directly
across the water and blew the ducks one by one right into my
hands as I lay there on the edge. We had all the ducks we
wanted by then and there was no point in going on shooting.
We each had three or four to pluck and just got them
finished in daylight. Albert cooked a dinner of roast duck,


green peas and potatoes. It was hard to say which was most
memorable, the turkey on the Hay, the fish and chips at
Andrewilla Waterhole, or the roast duck at Goyder’s Lagoon.
It was lucky we still had some of our load of firewood for
there was no other wood about Again we were camped on
damp ground only a few inches above the level of the water
in the hole. There was no further sign of the mailman and
his passenger that night.
In the morning Jack took Snowy and went to look for the
mail truck. He followed their track for about five miles, and
only turned back when the going got much better. He said
the truck had been bogged near the old station but had got
away and gone on beyond reach. Jack and Albert had both
thought they heard a truck in the morning, so it had not been
far away that night. We felt that the mailman had let us
down. However, with any luck they would overtake us on
their way back in a few days. We would keep to the track as
far as Mt. Gason bore, or five miles to the south of it, where
there was said to be a letterbox belonging to Mona Downs, a
new station across the Warburton opposite that point on the
track.
I now decided to go to this station and have a look at the
Warburton and Kallakoopah, and then follow the Warburton
down to Lake Eyre, calling at Cowarie Station, which had
been reoccupied. As we were now unlikely to catch up to the
drovers ahead, we would be short of meat, and must get some
at Mona Downs or Cowarie.
There are artesian bores all along the Marree-Birdsville
track from Goyder’s Lagoon downwards, at intervals of about
twenty-five miles, to provide water for the stock route. They
are at Goyder’s Lagoon, Mt. Gason, Mira Mitta, Mun-
geranie, Mulka, Kopperamanna, Dulcaninna, the Clayton and
Lake Harry. They are all flowing bores, with the water prac-
tically boiling. It was only a few miles from the old station to
Goyder’s Lagoon bore, and we had been looking forward for
some time to having hot baths there. The track here follows
along the indented front of the low rise that separates the
river flats from the surrounding plains. The flats were boggy
and water was still running down on to them from the higher
ground in little streams at intervals along the scarp. It was


only just arriving and spreading near the old station, which
was in a bay in the flats. We soon left the flats and went up to
the better going on the plains, which we found were covered
with gibbers. Sturt crossed Goyder’s Lagoon in a dry time
and did not associate it with any river. He came back quite
unaware of the existence of the Diamantina. He called the
gibber plains in the north-east corner of South Australia the
Stony Desert. There are no particular geographical
boundaries to Sturt’s Stony Desert. It is merely the part
he visited of the vast area of similar gibber plains that make
up a big proportion of the Lake Eyre Basin.
The reader may know, or have already gathered by
inference, what gibbers are, but in case there is any doubt
remaining, it may be said that gibbers are flat, roundish and
flinty pebbles of all sizes from an inch or two across up to
six inches or more. They are dark red to yellow in colour
and are smoothed by sand-blast and even quite polished
through a coating of “desert varnish”, a deposit of colloidal
silica or oxide of iron, or both, which is a characteristic super-
ficial process in hot and arid regions. They are formed
through the breaking up of an old siliceous or flinty soil
horizon, formed possibly in more pluvial times, from which
the wind has removed the loose soil cover. Solid siliceous
crusts still cap the table-topped hills and preserve them,
while round about the crust has been broken up and the softer
underlying beds removed by wind and water erosion, but
still the crust remains as a red carpet of gibbers on the surface.
Larger masses of the old crust are called “billy” in Queens-
land.
The gravelly gibber plains are similar to the reg and senr
of the Sahara, where the table-tops are called hammada y
but our gibbers are smoother and rounder than the stones of
most deserts. The word is pronounced with a “g”.
Its origin appears to be unknown, though some aboriginal
source is probable.
The bore stream at Goyder’s Lagoon runs into a creek
which was swampy at the time, and there were the
usual flocks of ducks on it, of which I got another five,
and clouds of noisy cockatoos. There were box gums
and water plants along the creek but the bore was several


hundred yards to the side on the bare gibber plain. Over
half a million gallons of boiling water pours out of the bore
day in and day out, and runs down a gutter to the creek.
The gutter is fenced for the first couple of hundred yards to
keep the stock off it till it has had time to spread and cool.
On the lower ground there was a grove of big acacias which
made a very pleasant camping place, with the hot stream
flowing past the door. In this winter weather a cloud of
steam could be seen over the bores from many miles away.
There were gravelly pools surrounded by green grasses and
for a bath it was just a matter of walking along till you found
a pool at a temperature that suited you, and then sitting down
in it. Instead of the three stages of the Roman baths, there
was an infinite range for warming up or cooling off. The
bathing was particularly delightful in this cold weather.
Goyder’s Lagoon bore was put down in 1905 to a depth
of 4,850 feet. It delivered when first completed 600,000
gallons a day at a temperature of 208°F. and a pressure of
173 pounds per square inch at the surface. The dissolved
salts amounted to 56 grains to the gallon, which is very low
for artesian basin water, the figure in South Australia being
usually nearer 200 grains to the gallon. The limit for human
beings to live on is placed at about 300 grains to the gallon,
and sea water contains over 2,000 grains to the gallon. The
bores along the Birdsville track give much better water than
the mound-springs and bores round the margin of the basin.
The salts in the waters are characterized by the high per-
centage of soda compared with lime or magnesia. In
Goyder’s Lagoon bore water, 41 out of the 56 grains of
solids are carbonate of soda, and eight grains are common
salt. The salts consist usually of common salt the most, then
carbonate of soda, followed by sulphate of soda, carbonate
of magnesia, and carbonate of lime, with variable sulphate
of magnesia and sulphate of lime. The waters are quite
drinkable but some of them have a decided aperient effect
on the newcomer. Bore water is not used for drinking when
better water is available. Even with the solids up to several
hundred grains to the gallon, the water is not hard in the
technical sense, that is there is never much carbonate of lime
in it, but quite to the contrary it is marvellous water to wash


in, owing to the presence of the soda. We all did some
washing at this bore and were astonished at the unexpected
whiteness of the clothes on drying. The high soda content
of the water, in addition to its high temperature, gave strong
support to the theory, now abandoned, that the water was of
volcanic origin. Now that the physiography and geology of
the Great Artesian Basin have been thoroughly investigated,
and the aquifers and intake beds are known, it is clear that the
water is surface rain water that soaks into the sandstones
round the rim of the basin, mainly in Queensland, and is
tapped under pressure by the bores at depths from nil round
the margins, where it runs out itself and makes the mound
springs, to five thousand feet in the deepest bore. Still, the
temperature is strangely high for such shallow depths, and
the amount of soda is exceptional. High soda and carbonic
acid are characteristic of the hot springs of volcanic regions.
The track from Goyder’s Lagoon to Mount Gason bore lay
along the slopes of the low stony tableland bordering the
river flat. We could see from time to time the line of trees
marking the course of the Diamantina a few miles off to the
right. There were occasional sandridges that made land-
marks along the track. One was called the Potato Tin. We
camped near the Seven Sandhills, a curious little isolated
group that I had photographed from the air years before.
Next day we came to Mt. Gason bore, another boiling
stream. There was a flooded flat there too that gave us some
anxious moments in crossing. The old station buildings were
of good stone, but the roofs were gone and the place in ruins.
Bore water had been laid on to the house and hot water could
still be drawn off from a standpipe. There was a one-room
building down by the track with a roof on, that was used by
the passing drovers. The walls were decorated with charcoal
drawings, some not without merit, and legends expressing
very strong views on the character of certain drovers, with
particular reference to the rations they provided. We left
another note here for the mail, in case they missed the first,
saying we would wait a day or two at the Mona Downs letter-
box five miles further on.
From Mt. Gason to Marree along the track, and particu-
larly near the river in this neighbourhood, there are occasional


flat-topped hills standing out in the lower ground where
erosion has been more rapid, remnants of an earlier and
higher surface. Mt. Gason is one such, a small and sym-
metrical hill 110 feet high. We passed it and found the
letterbox on the track a couple of miles beyond the hill, and
made camp.
Next day we all did some collecting in our various spheres.
I climbed Mt. Gason. The flat top was covered with gibbers
but the rest of the hill was composed of sandstone and gyp-
sum. Mounds of flour gypsum were scattered all about the
lower ground. We dug several feet down into one but were
still in gypsum.
At lunch time Nurie declared he could hear a motor truck,
and sure enough the mail truck appeared in the early after-
noon. He had heard it at the bore, five miles away. Simp-
son and Marshall were on board an empty truck. They had
left all the gear behind for others to look after. However,
they had our mail and we kept the truck waiting while we
hurriedly read it and wrote a few letters for the truck to take
on. Marshall had some more moving picture film and had
taken some pictures at the bore and would get more along the
track. I had only colour film in my camera at this stage and
although the results from Goyder’s Lagoon, where there was
some colour, were good, the pictures were, of course, not
suitable for reproduction.
Next day we took the track from the letterbox for Mona
Downs. The letterbox, by the way, was an empty tea chest
standing beside the track. The country was poor, stony and
gypseous at the letterbox, but as soon as we got down on to
the flats again there was a wonderful change. There were
swamps and meadows splendidly grassed and fields of yellow
daisies on the sandy patches, with cotton bush, while in the
lower ground there were wide areas covered with the purple
flowers of a creeping plant, a very attractive Swainsona. The
lignum in the swamps was all dead, as it had been at Goyder’s
Lagoon, a reminder that things were not always like this.
It was eleven miles to the river. On the way we saw a
group of five kangaroos, the only ones seen on the whole
journey. Emu tracks were common, and there were many
ibis in the swamps. It had been noticed again how clearly


BIRDSVILLE, 1929.
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIA-QUEENSLAND BORDER FENCE.


DIAMANTINA CROSSING AT BIRDSVILLE.
ABORIGINAL MOTHER AND CHILD, BIRDSVILLE.


tracks stood out on the gibber plains we had just left. A
single vehicle track is plain to see for years after it has been
made, and footprints of animals last an astonishing time. A
little study had just revealed the reason for this. The gib-
bers are only a layer of stones on top of crusty soil, and they
are pressed down by the weight of the vehicle or animal.
The wind blows the sand into the depressions and fills them,
burying the sunken gibbers. The sand is a lighter colour
than the dark-red gibbers and the sand-filled tracks thus stand
out on a darker background and are preserved almost
indefinitely. The track of a vehicle becomes two lines of
sand.
The track we were following led us to a crossing over the
Warburton just below where the Diamantina divides into
the two channels, the Warburton and Kallakoopah. The
crossing was newly corduroyed with timber and vehicles had
recently been over it. We could not tell the depth of water
owing to its turbidity, but went boldly in and found it was
only a foot or so, and the camels slipped and plunged across
on the logs. There were several tracks on the other side,
but the best seemed to bear to the left so we followed it.
After a few miles we realized that there was something
wrong. Other tracks branched off, and it appeared that they
were all just odd tracks about the run. After seven miles we
camped at a waterhole among sandhills to which a track led
us. Some black duck that were on it flew away. There were
a few cattle and a couple of horses grazing near by. These
and five cattle belonging to Clifton Hills seen near Andre-
willa Waterhole were the only stock we saw in the four hun-
dred miles from Birdsville to Marree. We passed through
five old stations —Goyder’s Lagoon, Mt. Gason, Cowarie,
Kalamurina and Poonarunna —and all were melancholy
ruins except Cowarie.
After making camp I walked to a high sandhill a mile
away to get a view and try to locate the homestead, but there
was nothing to be seen but flats and sandridges and vege-
tation, with the gum-tree line of the Kallakoopah to the west.
We never found any homestead. The people were new-
comers and we had not been able to get any information as
to where or how they were settled. We only knew their


name was Oldfield, which was not much help. There were
some old sticks at the top of the sandridge, which I set fire to,
as it was getting dark, on the chance of attracting attention.
Pulling at these I found some were fastened together, and
then discovered that they were part of a timber pyramid that
had fallen over and become half buried in the sand. It was
Wadamoolooloo Hill, and this was the old trig, station. I
hastily put the fire out, I have an admiration and respect for
the memory of our old surveyors, and in any case it would be
a crime to obliterate a trig, station. It was rather a surprise to
find that some of the trig, hills were only sandhills. Great
use had been made of the flat-topped hills where there were
any, but over vast areas the only elevations were sandhills.
There was a crossing over the Warburton marked on the
map Bulkalara Crossing, about eight miles below our camp,
and I decided to go to this and cross to the south side of the
river again in case we should get cut off. The crossing was
just below a long waterhole. At the crossing we found, in
place of the usual steep clay banks, that there was a gentle
approach to a sandy shore. The stream was rather more than
fifty yards wide with running water that looked shallow.
Jack took his trousers off and waded into the cold water.
Like all Afghans, he was very particular about undressing
in public. He found the water was little more than knee
deep, with a firm bottom, but muddy on the far bank. Coming
back he tried to put his trousers on standing in the water,
while his feet were free of mud, but lost his balance with one
leg in, and fell over and was completely soaked. I then
took Snowy in and made the far bank, after a little trouble
in the mud, and Jack led the string safely across on foot.
The crossing made a good colour photograph, with Jack’s
blue shirt one of the high-lights.
We went on down the left bank of the river for seven miles
and camped. A track to Cowarie was marked here on the
map, but we saw only a few traces of it on the higher ground.
There were quite a few rabbits along the Warburton, in
burrows under the dead lignum bushes. Feed was poor along
the river. It was always best in the sandridges, more sparse
and scattered in lower patches and “crab holes” on the gib-
ber plains, least on the clay flats near the river.


In this part of its course the Warburton was a channel some
fifty yards wide between steep clay banks twenty to forty
feet high, with shallow running water connecting a series of
deeper holes. It was obvious, on account of the water, that
we could do nothing about the fossil bones, and we aban-
doned all thought of it.
During the day Albert took the gun and walked along the
river for a time, but had no luck. We thought we had lost
him for a while and had a short halt till he appeared again.
We missed Andy and his conversation round the camp, and
had to rely chiefly on Albert for entertaimenty and he was
a fair substitute. He still had long arguments with his
camel, which seemed to take little heed. Jack told him a
camel could not roll on him on account of its hump, but he
said his would find a hole in the ground and stick its hump
into that. I asked Jack if he knew anything about djinns,
and he said his father had told him that they were lights
like a fire in the night and if you go to one it moves to
another place.
We were now only eleven miles from Cowarie Station,
which is on the Derwent, a tributary of the Warburton, and
a few miles up from the junction. I took a bearing from the
map, and for the first time in my life I made a mistake with
compass variation, adding the easterly variation to the true
bearing instead of subtracting it, with the result that I was
eight degrees out in my course and when we came to the
Derwent there was no sign of the station and we had to go
another mile and a half upstream to find it—no great hard-
ship, but very annoying to me. The tableland edge receded
up the Derwent and our way lay across flats with many clay-
pans full of water. We had a little difficulty at one run-
ning gutter. In the last five miles there were sandridges
between the river and the flats and we travelled in these.
The herbage on them was wonderful, and flowers were every-
where. It was very bright and colourful compared with the
forbidding red sand and grey spinifex of the Simpson Desert.
Here the sand was light yellow and covered with yellow
daisies, yellow and mauve stocks, everlastings, flowering
broom and the beautiful “lilac” or Swainsona, with annual
saltbush and other plants. Spinifex was absolutely gone,


and we never saw a single bush of it in the whole of the Lake
Eyre region. This is a remarkable thing, when one con-
siders there is nothing but dense spinifex a hundred miles
to the north. It may be that it is inimical to gypsum, in
which the Lake Eyre soils abound. There is no difference in
climate, and all is sand.
Cowarie had been a big place. There were all the usual
buildings—“ Government House”, men’s quarters, stores,
shops, stockyards—but now only an old retired drover and
his wife lived there, with a young half-caste man, among
these relics of former great and spacious days. They had
been there three years. A niece from down south —a quiet
little seventeen-year-old girl in a navy blouse and trousers
tucked into her elastic-sided boots —had been staying with
them but was leaving by the next mail. Old Morley said
she had become a good rider. They were evidently trying
to get some stock, but we saw nothing but a herd of goats.
Morley told Jack he would have killed a bullock if he had
known we were coming, perhaps a brave gesture, but he did
kill four goats for us, two to be salted next day and two fresh,
for we were out of meat and it was still over a fortnight to
Marree. It was obvious that the old station could not offer
hospitality now, so we went a quarter of a mile up the stream
and camped and had our lunch. The Derwent was a well-
defined creek with sandy bottom and lined with gum trees,
but it was dry. We were told there had been a waterhole
at the station twenty-five feet deep but it was now silted up
and there was no hole. This is what happens under heavy
stocking and erosion. However, there was a good well and
windmill and we were able to get rid of our “white” water
from the rivers and claypans and to fill up with clear well
water. The white water never settles while you are carrying
it, and it makes poor tea. No doubt it does come clear in the
waterholes after standing a year or so in drought times but
in wet seasons it seems to be permanently white, and clear
water is only to be found on the gibber plains away from the
river flats.
There was some firewood from dead box gums at our camp,
and it was needed, for the weather was still very cold. Wild


pigeons were nesting in the acacias by the camp. They did
not fly off the nest when discovered.
Later in the afternoon we had a cup of tea and a yarn at
the station. Morley said the Warburton had been running
since February and would run for another month, making a
total of eight months. In both the previous years, 1937 and
1938, it had run, rising rather higher, but still only a channel
flood. For some years before that it had not been more than
a trickle. The last big flood inundating the country was in
1933, and 1918 had been the biggest flood of recent years.
Except for big floods, the Kallakoopah got no water from
the Diamantina, and at present would only have local run-
off in it.
Morley had a lot of interesting information about the
country, and we visited the homestead again after dinner and
continued our yarns. Wood was scarce, the fire small, and
the room very cold, but we had some coffee and our host
produced a box of excellent cigars, which, as one suspected,
had been a present, a birthday present. There could have been
no greater hospitality than this. Mrs. Morley said it was a
cold night and would be cold camping, to which we agreed,
but actually we were glad to get back to the warmth of our
own camp fire and our beds.
We spent most of the next day at the station. Morley
pointed out some landmarks from a sandridge near by, on
which there was another old trig, station. He told of swamps
to go round and sandridges to cross, and how the river lay.
There had been a track along the Warburton to the stations
lower down but this would be obliterated. There were
several crossings over branches and tributaries to look out for,
and the going was likely to be difficult in a wet season.
There was a tragic little cemetery on the side of a sand-
ridge near the station. The headstones were almost buried
in the sand and the lead lettering stood out on the surface of
the abraded marble. The sand-blast had worn away the
stone but left the malleable lead almost unaffected. One
could read memorials to William Alfred Thomas who died
in 1892, aged 19 years; and to Eugenie Patterson in 1887,
aged 24 years} and to Henry Loman in 1881 at 34 years;


and one wondered under what tragic circumstances death
had come so early to these young people in that remote place.
While the meat was being prepared and the canteens filled
we watched Morley breaking in a black filly. His methods
were very slow and gentle. He had her in the usual small
circular yard with a post in the middle, a yard enclosed by
ten-foot log walls, and an old grey horse in with her. She
was lassooed cleverly by the half-caste and allowed to run
round the yard with the old horse, the end of the rawhide
rope from her neck passing round the centre post. This is
the first exercise in restraint. The pair kept together, the
filly on the outside, and when they stopped Morley would
handle the old horse and then reach across to the filly. He
was soon running his hands all over her. Later he had a
bridle and bit on her, and then surcingle and even hobbles.
Then in a larger yard they had her by herself, without
hobbles, and put reins through the rings in the surcingle,
still with the rawhide halter round her neck. All went well
till they pulled the reins back over her rump. The reins
seemed a little too long, for they fell away behind and down
to her hocks. Ido not think this was intended. As soon as
it happened she went mad and bolted round and round the.
yard. I saw her look wildly up at the top of the rails and
almost decide to try to jump. There was a gate at one end,
made of the light angle-iron from a windmill frame. Sud-
denly this apparent opening caught her eye and she dashed
straight at it, crashed into it, bent it almost double, shot over
the top and landed on her head the other side. I thought
her neck would be broken, but not a bit of it. She sprang up.
bucked and kicked, and then galloped away over the sand-
ridge horizon, free once more. It was an amazingly sudden
change from docility to wild action. There was some hair
left on the iron gate but apparently no great damage had
been done to the horse. Morley was not in the least per-
turbed. He climbed down from the rails and said he liked
to see them like that, with a bit of spirit—she would make a
good horse. They let out the other yarded horses and the
half-caste rode off with them to bring her in again with the
mob. I have seen much rougher methods, where the first
lesson is to draw the horse by the rawhide rope up to the side


of the yard as opportunity offers, where it suddenly finds it
can’t get away and struggles madly, often damaging itself
on the rails, till it gives in from exhaustion and learns that
man is master. This is breaking the spirit, subjugation. By
the other method it is hoped that the animal will accept con-
trol through having nothing to fear. Both schools have their
following. I mention these out-of-date things as being
possibly of more interest to-day than an account of how to
run-in a motor car, on the same principle as Wilkinson’s
photographing of the camels at Oodnadatta.
We left Cowarie in the afternoon and made across country
to the river again and camped on a sandridge. The sand-
ridges here were in groups several miles apart, each group
made up of three or four ridges close together, like one
great sandhill with several crests. This was only seen near
Cowarie, but Colson said they were all like that at the south
end of the Simpson Desert. The sand was redder again in
these big ridges, and there was much live sand on the crests
with steep banks on the west side.
We camped on slopes covered with flowering stocks,
daisies and everlastings.
Next day we followed the Warburton round a southerly
bend, sometimes on the edge of the sandridges, sometimes
crossing bays where the flood plain ran back into the sand-
ridge country. Three creek crossings were almost dry and
caused little trouble. There were a number of large claypans
on the flats, fast drying up, and around them and along the
water courses and in swampy country were many box gums,
but they were all dead. The only living trees were along the
main stream itself.
We camped again on a sandridge, among huge buck-bush,
and several of us made buck-bush beds. The bushes are easily
detached from the ground with one sweep of the shovel
underneath to cut the single tap root, and two or three big
ones make a wonderful bed. From then onwards it became
the usual thing, scorned by Jack but enjoyed by most of us.
Jack’s argument was that once you make it a habit it is hard
to do without it. His principle was to stay tough and you
were always comfortable. So far we had only made a few
camps among buck-bush, but now the plant became universal


and we never had to go back to sleeping on the hard ground.
The nights were almost luxurious and the shovel was in great
demand at camping time.
Another five miles next morning over sandridges that came
close in to the river brought us to the old Kalamurina Station,
at the apex of the southerly bend in the river. We had found
Cowarie occupied, Annandale only recently deserted, Kalidu-
warry in ruins, though it had .never been much more than a
bough shelter, Goyder’s Lagoon and Mt. Gason mere skele-
tons, but as they were beside the track life still went past
their fallen doors; but here was desolation indeed, isolated,
silent, deathly desolation that gave verisimilitude to
Gregory’s term the “Dead Heart of Australia”. The home-
stead was roofless, but the mud-brick walls still stood, breached
with irregular gaps that had been the doors and windows. In
the front a single door remained, with a latch and brass knob.
Instead of using one of the gaps I opened this door and went
in through it, so that another foot should cross the threshold
after the fifty years of silence since the station closed down.
Two cart wheels lying on the ground had decayed away com-
pletely, leaving only the iron rings of the tyres and hubs, and
radiating lines where the spokes had been. A small railed
enclosure surrounded a large dead box-gum at the front of
the house, and there was a pile of stones that had once been
a rock garden. The railing was probably put up to protect
a small sapling possibly planted there; now it grotesquely
ringed the base of a giant skeleton. The outbuildings
appeared to have been made of wattle and daub, but all the
daub had fallen away. A broken piece of cut glass, purple
from long exposure to the sun’s rays, took the mind back
to happy times around the table in the brave days before
the grim desert had destroyed the illusions of the pioneers.
The Warburton here looked remarkably like the Darling,
a muddy stream fifty yards across between high banks of clay,
and lined with lignum and box gum. The water appeared
deep but there was no obvious flow.
Our course was then due west for thirty miles across a
northerly bend in the river, and then another ten miles down
the river to where it appeared on maps to enter the Lake.
We followed the river for a few miles over white clay flats


STARTING ON THE LONG ROAD HOME.
CROSSING GOYDER’S LAGOON.


A GIANT SANDRIDGE NEAR THE DIAMANTINA.


with dead box-gums till it bore away north, and then we
entered big white sandridges again, in country like the Simp-
son Desert but with white sand instead of red, and with buck-
bush instead of spinifex. There was no timber at all. On
the river flats we had come for the first time upon areas of
matted dead grass, brown and extraordinarily tough and wiry
on which the camels’ feet slipped. This was on the sand-
ndges too, and proved to be chief vegetation at that time
ail down the eastern side of Lake Eyre.
, n W sL camped that night in sandridge desert again at Camp
40. I here were wild camels about, and some had got among
our beasts while they were grazing, so Jack built a yard
again. VVe had given up this practice since leaving Birds-
vilie. He said a bull camel might scatter our team and cause
havoc. It is not uncommon for a team on the track to be
attacked m this way, and Jack was obviously very apprehen-
sive. The bulls can terrify and even kill the timid bullocks
bure enough, just before we turned in we heard a roaring
m the darkness, and Jack dashed for his old Winchester
carbine. We all turned out to search, and there dimly seen
was a young bull camel in fighting mood. Jack brought it
down with a first shot, and then another. We went up and
ound it sitting down with head erect and motionless, and
not a sound but the dreadful gushing out of its life blood
I went up close with my .22 rifle to end the,tragic business
and fired four or five shots from the side into what I thought
would be its brain, but the head never moved. It was most
uncanny. I might have been firing blank cartridges. I then
went behind and fired into the base of the skull, when the
beast immediately collapsed and never moved again. The
camel must have a very small and well-protected brain. It
was a melancholy affair, but appeared to have been necessary.
By next morning, owing to the green fodder, the carcase had
already swollen to an enormous size. Some of the party had
been talking of the camel steaks that they intended cutting
from it next day, but in addition to its repulsive appearance
it was found to be suffering badly from, mange, and the
subject was dropped.
The whole of the next day was spent in travelling across
the sandridges j we crossed fifty-two at a slight angle to the


perpendicular in about sixteen miles. The spacing was about
the same as in the desert, but the direction about fifteen
degrees nearer north, being only about ten degrees west of
north. This is characteristic of the eastern side of Lake Eyre.
To-day was the last day of counting sandridges, and the
last full day of sandridge crossing, for to-morrow we would
be on the river again and then turning south and travelling
more or less parallel to them. Since leaving Andado Bore
1 had covered my compass box with seven hundred and
ninety-two ticks with the date for each day’s tally. Between
Andado Station and Birdsville we had crossed seven hundred
and forty-four sandridges, and in the whole journey had
negotiated no less than eight hundred and six.
This sandridge country was dotted with claypans, and we
passed to the north of a very long one, Lake Koolkootinnie,
which appeared to have two pools of water in it but was dry
at the near end. All the smaller lakes were dry. These
lakes and claypans are not connected with the river but are
surrounded on all sides by sandridges. It is only local
rainfall that can put any water in them. We tried to cross
one about a mile in diameter, with a very gypseous powdery
surface, but before we got half way across the camels began
to get frightened and play up, so we took fright too and came
out; it was getting very boggy.
The sand was all very gypseous and is often largely com-
posed of gypsum crystals. This makes it much more coherent
than the Simpson Desert sand, so that there were often
vertical faces on the sides of ridges where wind or water had
caused erosion, a thing never seen in the desert. On lower
slopes there was often wind sculpturing, with pillars and
castles similar to the sculpturing seen on a big sandridge near
Andrewilla Waterhole, though there the coherence was due
to clay and not gypsum. There were gypsum “blows” on
the flats, and plates of clear gypsum lying about. Some of
the ridges were up to sixty feet high, and they were
invariably higher and more precipitous beside claypans. The
sand instead of filling the claypans seems rather to be swept
up from their surfaces to build the ridges or dunes _ even
higher. The eastern slope of the sandridges was still, as
always,- the steeper, but here and at this time there was


invariably a steeper bank in the live sand of the crest on the
western side, due to secondary east winds. Crossing the
ridges in a westerly direction was considerably more laborious
than it had been going east in the desert.
Albert and his Peter were still providing the fun. That
day I heard him say, “Blast you, Peter, what do you keep on
eating all the time for instead of trying to go down the hill
properly”? Masses of flowering stocks, everlastings, broom
and lilac still covered the sandridges, with the wire grass
everywhere. It was tempting for the camels to take a bite
as they passed a luscious plant, but Peter had a way of stopping
altogether in awkward positions on steep slopes'
We camped that night on an old east-west running fence
on the edge of the sandridges about a mile from the river.
The remains of two fences on Cowarie, the rabbit fences at
Kaliduwarry, and this one, were the only signs of fencing in
seven hundred miles.
In the morning we went up to the river bend at Poonarunna
Station but did not see this ruin, if any of it remains. We
were possibly a mile down stream of the station site and
did not search for it. The river here was a hundred and
fifty yards across and appeared to be running slowly.
We were then only about ten miles from the end of the
Warburton, where a branch creek, the Kalaweerina, running
south, connects it to Lake Eyre. We crossed another small
bend in the river by entering the sandridges again, and then
another five miles along the river brought us to the Kala-
weerina Creek, where we made Camp 42 in the early after-
noon at the junction of the waters.


CHAPTER XIV
LAKE EYRE
WE were now at the north end of Lake Eyre, and the
last phase of the expedition was to travel down its
eastern side for a hundred miles to iVlarree, to see to what
extent the two good seasons had quickened the very core of
the Dead Heart, and to test my theory that the lake is never
covered all over with water at any time, but that each river
that runs a flood merely spreads its waters over a portion of
the four thousand odd square miles of the lake’s surface
in the vicinity of its own mouth. If all the rivers from all
sides ran together, which probably never happens now, they
would only put a few feet of water in the lake, which
would disappear in a few months under the evaporation of
a hundred inches a year. I had thoroughly examined the
lake all over from the air, and the southern end of
the North Lake from the ground, just ten years before,
at the end of a drought, and there was then no water any-
where. Now I had followed the full-flowing Diamantina
down, though it was only a channel flood, and the next thing
was to see what became of its waters.
The Kallakoopah and the Warburton, according to the
maps, form a closed ring which the Macumba, which has
already been joined by the Finke, joins just north of the
lake. Probably some of the waters from this ring enter
the lake near the Macumba junction, but we could not reach
that point, twelve miles away, as all further progress west-
ward or northward was blocked by the waters of the Kala-
weerina and Warburton, and only the south was open to us.
It was obvious at any rate that the Kalaweerina was an
important connection to the lake from this ring.
The country is so flat and the watercourses so ramified
that it is practically impossible to distinguish them. Any
of the rivers flowing would back water up all parts of the
ring. At our camp three waterways met—the Warburton
which we had followed down, a continuation of it towards


the west or a loop back of the Kallakoopah, whichever it is,
and the Kalaweerina running away south. The three looked
like great still canals. The Warburton was about two hun-
dred yards across and the Kalaweerina about seventy-five
yards. The waters appeared at first to be flowing northward
up the Kalaweerina from the lake to the Warburton, from
observation of floating sticks, but movement both ways was
later noted and no definite .conclusion could be arrived at.
The great body of water in the Warburton seemed to be
motionless. Water birds were in great numbers and varieties.
There were ducks, pelicans, seagulls, terns and shags. The
water was saline but drinkable. Little fish were jumping
but we got no bites on the lines. Rabbits were more plentiful
here than anywhere along the river, but they were not
numerous j they were just starting to breed up again. Trees
had practically disappeared from the river banks. There
were only a few acacias at the camp, and an occasional stunted
box. The dominant plant was masses of buck-bush. Since
we entered the Lake Eyre sandridges a new bird had appeared
in considerable numbers, the orange-fronted chat, a beautiful
bird with jet black throat, orange on the underparts and
yellow back.
We all had a bath and shave at this camp. It was too cold
to enjoy bathing. Albert surprised us all by jumping in
fully clothed and splashing about. He said he wanted to
wash his clothes at the same time. One could not wade
across the Kalaweerina and it seemed too cold to swim over.
I made a small raft next morning with empty water canteens
and paddled across. A pair of canteens made a crazy affair
that was too unstable and only floated satisfactorily upside
down, so I had to sit on the submerged decking and carry
my clothes. There was nothing further to be seen in a short
walk on the other side, and I returned with only a large
bouquet of yellow daisies that were growing more luxuriantly
there.
The east side of Lake Eyre has never been accurately
mapped. The trigonometrical survey had not been carried
down that side. The present-day maps are based on J. W.
Lewis’s route sketches made on his exploration of 1874—5,
with some additions. Where modifications are made to


features along Lewis’s tracks the newer versions are less
correct. The same applies to Winnecke’s maps of the upper
Hay River and the Tarlton Range area. Where the sketches
of these old surveyors are departed from, the maps have
suffered. I would have been saved some trouble if I had
had Lewis’s original maps with me on this journey. There
are many arms stretching out eastward from the lake, and
in addition numerous scattered lakes, large and small, some up
to ten or twenty miles long, not connected to the main lake
at all. These lakes and arms would be sure to be boggy if
not actually under water, and we were obviously going to
have some problems in getting round them without being
cut off and having to retrace our steps. It would be
impossible to distinguish an arm of the lake from a separate
lake. The country is as bad as any in the Simpson Desert,
and has never been occupied at all. Detailed mapping would
be a long and arduous task, and has not so far been justified.
We found difficulty as we progressed in reconciling our
position with features on the map, as all lakes were not
marked and those that were gave only an approximate shape
and position. We wanted to keep as close to the lake as
possible and to visit its shores at least two or three times.
We started off by following the Kalaweerina Creek down
for eight miles. It opened out to two hundred and fifty
yards wide, and became a wonderful sheet of water with
pelicans, swans, geese, ducks, gulls and terns on it. The water
was deep and blue, no longer white, for the mineral salts
cause flocculation and rapid settlement of the colloidal clay.
At one time we were puzzled by what seemed to be low
moving clouds, constantly changing and appearing and disap-
pearing. This proved to be clouds of birds on the wing in
the light of the setting sun, the light catching them differently
as they changed their direction. It was obviously abundantly
true that aboriginals would come to the lake for birds’ eggs,
an argument used in favour of the permanency of the water,
but I was convinced that this great congregation of birds was
entirely temporary and seasonal, for I had seen the lake
utterly deserted.
At the end of eight miles the Kalaweerina Creek opened
out into a wide arm that ran away east and cut us off from
further progress south. The map shows the creek continuing


on past the end of this arm for another five miles and then
entering Lake Eyre proper, and the arm turning south-east
and entering the lake some twelve miles further down.
Whether the arm that cut us off from the lake should be
considered a branch of the creek or an arm of the lake it is
difficult to say. Like other marginal swamps it might be
considered as either. If we were unable to visit the real
shores of the lake here we would have to go a long way
down the side before we had another opportunity, owing to
the ramification of arms or branches. The water was only
a few inches deep in the arm, and the distance across about
half a mile, but it was too great a risk for the camels, and
we were obliged to camp on the shore. If we had got over
we should probably have had to come back the same way
as we would have been going on to a sort of island.
We were now in lake country proper. It was a most
desolate camp on the gypsum slopes that formed the shore
of the arm. There was no vegetation at all near the shores,
owing to the salt and gypsum, no timber anywhere in sight,
and a cold west wind was blowing. The outlook over the
perfect flatness of the inhospitable shores and the limitless
sheet of shallow water was bleak and depressing. The only
wood was a few dillon bush or nitre bush, a wretched looking
plant with very tough and brambly limbs, difficult to collect
and unsatisfactory for fire-building even when it has been
battered into more or less tractable pieces. We made a fire-
place by digging into the gypsum bank, to get the most out of
our small supply of wood. Later in the evening the wind
died down, the little fire burned brightly, the full moon
shone over the still water and the prospect lost some of its
harshness under the gentle influence of night. The straight
line of the shore divided the level earth into two halves, the
shining water and the bare dull ground, and these two, with
the moon above, the pin-point of the fire and the silence,
comprised all the simple elements that made up the strange
stark scene.
By this time not one of the camels was free from mange,
and some of them were in a bad way with it, so that though
the loads were light we were slowing up. The camels
required urging just when we were most impatient to get on.
Next day we followed down the arm of the lake in a


south-south-east direction. After about eight miles the water
came to an end and the bed was dry. We saw no more
birds after leaving the creek 3 the water was probably too
salty for them. The branch then turned eastward and we
were compelled to follow it, as the surface was too boggy
to attempt to cross. We caught a glimpse of the main lake
from the top of a sandridge at this point and it appeared to
be dry, but our course was taking us further and further
away from it, and it was camping time before the eastern
end of the arm was reached. Buck-bush was still abundant,
with plenty of flowering plants and vegetation on the sand-
ridges and everywhere except along the saline shores.
Everyone but Jack and Albert was now making buck-bush
beds. I observed for latitude that night to check our position.
On the following morning we continued in an easterly
direction for another five or six miles to round the end of
the arm. It had several spurs in it and we had to go round
all these branch arms, thus losing a lot of time. Owing to
the sandridges we could never see the bays till we came right
upon them, and after rounding each one we would turn hope-
fully southward only to be forced back again to round the
next. Eventually we came to a narrow neck. I led Snowy
across this. Sand was encroaching from the far side and
though moist, the ground was firm, and the string safely
followed. At last we were going south once more, but by
this time were a good twelve miles or so from the lake. There
was another arm shown on the map sixteen miles to the
south so I decided to go down to this before trying to turn
in to the lake again. After half an hour’s travelling another
lake surface suddenly appeared in front and to the east of
us, and it looked as if we might be on an island. I was
inclined to turn back at once, but decided to investigate a
little further before doing so. We went south-west and
eventually rounded what proved to be a bay and then found
ourselves in lake-free sandhills, and all was well. It was
seen that the arm we had just crossed had followed us round.
I discovered later that Lewis had crossed at this very place,
but we did not have his original route sketch with us as I
wrongly supposed that later maps would be more correct.
Another ten miles to the south brought us to the shores of the
next arm, a very wide bay in the lakeside.


THE WARBURTON AT BULLARA CROSSING.
COWARIE STATION.


RUINS OF KALAMURINA STATION.
THE END OF THE DIAMANTINA.


The shores of this bay were most desolate. Barren gypsum
slopes led up to the sandridges behind, and a bitter cold wind
was blowing dust off the lake surface. There was no fuel.
We turned back into the sandridges to camp and found
a few dead trees in a hollow, so we made a fire, and all hands
turned to and built a wind-break of buck-bush in black-
fellow fashion half-way round it, a suggestion of Jack’s that
proved most effective. After we had finished our dinner of
braised goat and green peas, followed by stewed apricots
and blancmange, the wind died down, the moon shone
brightly, and this most dead and desolate place in the world
gradually grew quite friendly as a sense of well-being infused
us under the influence of warmth, food, rest and the wafting
fragrance of the tobacco smoke. It had been a long and
tiring day. We were making earlier starts now and travelling
not less than eight hours a day.
The map indicated that this bay had a smooth and rounded
contour but again we found this was far from being the case.
We started off eastward to round its end but were immedi-
ately confronted with an arm lying across our path. Crocker
and Fletcher walked across this one, and said it was too
boggy for camels, so we had to go round it. At last we were
able to turn south along the broad end of the bay. After
four miles another arm suddenly shot out in a south-easterly
direction and again barred our way south. We made rather
a long lunch halt here. There was an island in a bay in this
arm about half a mile from the shore, and I rather disgusted
Fletcher by saying that the scene reminded me of Sydney
Harbour, except that one had heard there was a bridge there.
Actually there was a resemblance, for the sandridges were
covered with the dark wire-grass which made them look
quite black in the distance, as if covered with trees. The
white dry bed of the arm with its islands and the dark
indented shore line with capes and bays gave exactly the
appearance of a great sheet of water enclosed by wooded
hills. The vertical scale was very deceptive. When the
grass looked like trees the points rose up to mountain spurs
instead of fifty foot sandridges.
Everywhere the sandridges ended abruptly and steeply
on the south shores of lakes, but the northern shores rose


gently from the margins over hard gypseous slopes into the
sandridges beyond. This is due to the prevailing winds
being southerly and causing a general northerly movement
of the sand along the direction of the ridges.
We dug a three-foot hole in the lake bed a hundred yards
from the shore. The first two feet was through gypseous
sand below which was sandy clay saturated with salt water.
The camels had to go round this small bay but Crocker and
Fletcher walked across to the island and on to the far side,
saying afterwards that the going was firm and we might
have taken the team across. The main arm then ran away
south-east for four miles. Half way along it there appeared
to be a patch of water in the middle.
This arm proved to be the last obstacle for the time being,
for after rounding it we were able to make south again for
Cooper Creek, which, according to the maps, entered a still
more southerly arm of the same bay. After about four miles
through gently-rolling sandridges, we came to a broad valley
or depression crossing them, about a mile wide, and at the
bottom of it wc found a narrow winding lane of sand of a
texture rather coarser than that of the sandridges. There
was not a tree or a shrub along this watercourse j the whole
valley was bare except for the ephemeral grasses. So this
was the end of the famous Cooper Creek, the mighty river
that has its origin eight hundred miles away in the Great
Dividing Range of Queensland, whose floods carry both life
and destruction half way across an arid continent! The
sandy bed was too narrow and too shallow to take any con-
siderable quantity of flood water, even as much as the chan-
nel flood we had just seen in the Diamantina, and there were
no signs of rises or lateral spreading, yet the clear, coarse
nature of the sand and the absence of vegetation in the bed
indicated that water does still run here occasionally, though
it would be mainly local drainage and not Queensland floods.
The last flood that reached the Birdsville track was in 1917,
but there is no evidence that it got as far as the lake, though
this is probable. No one attempts to visit the lake in times
of flood.
We crossed the valley and began the usual search for fire-
wood before making camp. In the sandridges beyond we


found some scattered needlebush, some of it actually living,
and camped among it. Crows were nesting in the trees and
there were eggs in the nests, Albert was going to cut down
one tree with a nest in it—they were only brambly affairs
about twelve feet high—but Jack told him not to on the
grounds that it was the poor b ’s home. Jack’s reactions
in cases like this were often unexpected. Like the Arabs,
he seemed to have a dual personality which made him capable
of either great cruelty or surprising kindness. These people’s
feelings, their loves and hates, their rewards and punish-
ments, seem to run to much greater extremes than ours, par-
ticularly when translated into actions; we say “I could kill
him for that”, but leave it at words. Jack once told us how he
tied up a camel that bit him and bashed out several of its teeth
with an axe —it was Punjab, the camel that Marshall rode —
and another time he said with conviction that he would kill
the man who had left a bogged camel to die at Goyder’s
Lagoon.
According to the map, this crows’ nest camp should have
been about fifteen miles at least from the lake, for there was
no sign of the long north-west trending arm shown on the
map with the Cooper running into the near end of it.
We started off westward for the lake margin next morning,
across the low rolling sandridges. Although Lewis had
marked the area with “high sandridges” one could not agree
with him. By our standards they were no more than sandy
undulations rising perhaps thirty or forty feet above the val-
leys. For a few miles nothing was to be seen but sandridges.
Then a narrow lake appeared to the south, coming up from
the south-east. At five miles we were at the north end of
this lake. There was shallow water in it over a distance
of about a mile, varying in width from twenty to a hundred
yards, and two inches deep where we examined it. It was
brine, with a salt crust an inch thick all round the edge. As
with all lakes in the sandridges, the water was from local
rainfall. There are no drainage lines and no obvious catch-
ments except the lake floors themselves, which are simply
wind-swept flats surrounded by sandhills. No birds come
near these very salty waters, which most of the time are
saturated solutions of salt.


After another mile and a half we topped a sandridge,
and there suddenly before us lay Lake Eyre stretching in
a dead white plain to the western horizon. It was all the more
dramatic as we did not expect to see it for at least another
two hours, though by this time it was obvious that the map-
ping in this region has been very sketchy. From the top of
the sandridge along the shore there was no sign of water
as far as the visible horizon some six miles away, so Fletcher,
Crocker and I at once started to walk out on the lake. The
surface was of damp buff-coloured gypseous clay in which
our feet sank about half an inch. It would be typical bull-
dust in dry weather. This continued unchanged for the two
and a half miles of our walk. We sank several two-foot
holes on the way out, disclosing nothing but clayey sand
saturated with brine. There were odd sticks of wood lying
about, and we found a log big enough for all three to sit
on at the end of the walk. This is driftwood, and shows
that there has been at some time a considerable flow of water
on the lake. I had seen driftwood in the south-eastern
corner of the lake on my former visit, and there is no doubt
that the wood was brought in by the Frome River entering
at that corner. The Frome rises in the Northern Flinders
Ranges, in sparsely timbered country, and is a comparatively
short and swift stream. Heavy rains in the Flinders cause
the Frome to flood at least once every few years, and the
waters, carrying considerable debris, can easily reach the lake,
but it is questionable whether normal Frome floods could
carry timber half way up the lake side and leave it so close
in-shore. By every piece of timber lying on the lake there
was a hole scooped out by wind eddies, and these holes had
recently held water from local rainfall but were now dried
up. Round their margins there was a black band half an
inch wide, which closer inspection showed was made up of
the dead remains of many kinds of insects, among which
ladybirds, beetles, and grasshoppers were most conspicuous.
They must have blown out over the surface from the shore
till stopped by the water in the pools. Ants were frequently
seen all the way out, the entrances to their holes protected
by mounds of clay, little columns with a narrow waist like
cotton reels stood up on end. Spiders’ webs were fairly


common on the surface too. The spiders lived in holes in the
crust beside their webs. Two species were collected and they
both proved to be new to science. The presence of these crea-
tures so comparatively far from the shore shows that normally
there is no water on the lake near the shores for long periods.
My previous study of the south-eastern part of the lake had
shown that although the surface looks level, there is an imper-
ceptible fall between the shores and the level salt crust in the
area I have called the bull dust margin, which is up to four
miles wide in the south. Lewis found a fall of two and a
half feet in seven miles at the north end. The salt
was seventeen inches thick at a distance of twelve miles
from the south end of the North Lake when I was there
ten years before. We did not go out as far as the salt crust
on this occasion. The place was at about the middle of the
eastern side of the North Lake, near to and south of the
Cooper entrance, though we did not actually see what became
of the Cooper. We had left it as a well-defined water-course
running a little north of' west only eight miles behind us,
but the maps show it going rather indefinitely north-west into
an arm of the lake and eventually reaching the lake some six-
teen miles north of where we were. The Cooper in rare floods
like the 1917 one might bring down timber such as we saw there
and deposit it on the marginal zone of the lake. Whenever
it was that the wood was washed in, it was long enough ago
for the ants and spiders to be able to colonize the first two or
three miles of the lake margin.
We could not follow the shores down on account of
another long arm to the south of us that ran out in a south-
easterly direction. We decided to go round this arm and
then go due south till we met the shore of the lake again
near the south end. We camped that night a few miles down
the arm. It was the coldest night of the whole journey, the
minimum thermometer recording 22.8° F. “at grass”, which
was where we slept. The days were dull, with bleak winds,
but the temperature rose to sixty degrees or so during the
day. The highest recorded day tempertaure was seventy-
eight degrees near Charlotte Waters, and generally the daily
maximum was between sixty and seventy degrees.
We saw another copper-coloured snake during the day,
but failed to catch it.


Next day we found it was a further eight miles before we
reached the end of the arm we were camped on. Near the
end of it there was some slushy salt or “near” water. We
crossed the end of the arm and found the sandridges on the
south side of it were seventy feet by aneroid above the lake
floor. We now went due south, crossing the white sandridges
at a small angle. In the lake country it is only on the edges
of lakes or claypans that the sandridges have sharp crests
with live sand. Most of the country is gently-rolling, with
sandridges like the broad ocean swells that only steepen up
as the shoal water of the coast is reached. There is a
remarkable similarity in this respect between desert and ocean,
though in this desert the “ocean” is at a higher level, and
the “land” —that is, the lake floors —at a lower level. There
were numerous claypan islands scattered through this sand-
sea we were in. Some of them were quite small, less than a
mile in diameter. They were like holes scooped out of the
sand, with the sandridges higher on their southern and
western sides. The remarkable thing is that they persist.
One would think that the sand would encroach on them and
fill them. It must be that the depressions form air eddies
that keep the floors swept clean. They were quite hidden,
unless very big, till one arrived at the very edge and looked
down on them as into a crater. The smaller claypans in the
Simpson Desert were of the same type.
The only timber in the country was occasional needlebush,
some of it living, and even rarer acacia which was mostly
dead. It was difficult to find firewood. The whole country
was covered with the dead wiry grass in brown mats and tufts,
looking black in the distance like heath on moorland. The
camels’ feet slipped on it, slowing up our pace. The crests
of the sandridges were still decorated with flowers and buck-
bush, particularly where there was fresh live sand, but now
it was beginning to dry off. The pretty orange-fronted chats
were about in small numbers, and an occasional skylark had
been noted ever since we came into the lake country. The
herbage and the few birds mitigated the usual awful deso-
lation of this region. It is hard to believe that in a few
months all the vegetation can die and actually blow away,
but I had seen it absolutely bare except for the butts of a


few dead bushes. Ten years before it had been very difficult
from the air to determine the shores of the lake, the whole
country looking a uniform pink colour. Now the dark sand-
ridges clothed with vegetation would stand out in strong
contrast to the white lake surface. Times such as these come
perhaps once in ten years. As I rode across the sandridges
in the cold wind I noticed small plants, dead and already
blown over, anchored loosely by a few remaining roots, and
describing little circles in the sand. Soon they would lose
their hold and blow away. Here in this vast, depressing
and long-dead region the Psalmist’s simile was starkly clear:
“The days of man are but as grass, for he flourisheth as a
flower of the field. For as soon as the wind goeth over it
it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more”.
Towards the end of the day we saw a lake close to the west
of our course and went over to it. It was about three miles
long and a mile and a half wide. As it curved away south-
east we decided to cross it near the top end where it was about
three quarters of a mile wide. I walked ahead leading
Snowy, and the riding camels and the string silently followed.
It was rather a risky experiment, and I could feel the silence
behind me. The surface was the usual damp gypseous clay,
with no water, identical with the margins of the main lake.
The camels’ feet sank in, but nothing like as deeply as they
had at Goyder’s Lagoon. At three parts of the way over
Jack began to talk and joke, and soon everyone joined in.
The tension was relieved, and the bogey of the bottomless
mud was temporarily laid. Just before the far side was
reached it became rather worse but we made the shore safely.
Actually the mud is practically bottomless on the main lake,
but the gypsum crystals in the upper layers give it some
stability. Once the surface breaks through it is very
dangerous for camels. Their long legs may go right down
and it is almost impossible for them to extricate themselves;
in fact it is a very difficult proposition to get them out at all
and might take a day’s digging and hauling. This makes
camel travelling in flooded country after rain a trying
business and to be avoided. Quite a lot of our journey since
leaving the Mulligan had been in this sort of country, but
so far we had avoided the worst places and good fortune had
supported our care.


The rise to the top of the sandridge on the west side from
the floor of this lake was sixty-five feet. From its crest we
could see Lake Eyre three miles away to the west, a wide
white sweep to the horizon, and what was much more attrac-
tive, away off forty or more miles to the south-east stood
a flat-topped hill. The depressing effect of the desert was
shown up by the spontaneous rise in everyone’s spirits at
the sight of this distant hill.
The sandridge by the lake was as usual well covered with
flowering stocks and buck-bush, and a little beyond there
were the requisite few dead acacias for firewood, so we made
camp, after eight and a half hours of steady going. We lost
sight of our hill at the camp and never saw it again. The
low lake bed that we were looking over, assisted perhaps by
mirage, may have made the long view from the top of the
sandridge possible.
The objective now was to reach the neck connecting the
lake that receives the waters of the Frome and Clayton Rivers
with Lake Eyre North. This lake deserves a separate name
and I will refer to it as Clayton Lake as there is already a
Lake Frome east of the Flinders Ranges, not associated
in any way with the Frome River, This neck is in the south-
eastern corner of Lake Eyre North and the Clayton Lake
comes up to it from the south-east, A few miles to the west
is the narrow channel connecting Lake Eyre North with
Lake Eyre South, which latter stretches away to the south-
west. This corner of the lake had been the scene of my
investigations on the ground in 1929 and I was very anxious
to revisit the spot to see if there had been any changes or
signs of flooding in the past ten years, for previously there
had been no water anywhere and we had taken a motor truck
out as far as the salt crust and then followed the crust round
the lake for twenty miles. Only some mud between the salt
crust and the bull-dust margin had prevented us from get-
ting on to the salt and motoring to the centre of the lake.
To visit this place it was necessary to cross the Clayton neck,
and this would also open a direct route to Marree up the
Frome River past the old Muloorina Station, the way I had
brought the truck out ten years before. If we were unable
to cross the neck it was another two day’s journey round the


THE SHORES OF LAKE EYRE.


“SYDNEY HARBOUR”, AN ARM OF LAKE EYRE.
JOURNEY’S END AT MARREE.


Clayton Lake, with possibly some difficulty in crossing the
Clayton which had been running and would be boggy.
Our course was now south till we should meet the edge
of Lake Eyre North, and then along the shore to the neck.
This course should take us past the end of a very large horse-
shoe lake marked on the maps, but we saw no signs of it at all.
The general level fell as we neared the lake margin, which
we were approaching at an acute angle. Finally we came
to the shore. The shore line was here very straight, with a
low ridge some fifteen feet high running along it, a coastal
dune, and behind, low parallel ridges in moor-like country.
There were no high sandridges near the lake at this end.
No water was visible.
In less than three miles along the shore we came to the
neck of the Frome-Clayton entrance. This was some five
miles sooner than expected, and indicated that the lake at
the previous night’s camp had been one already marked on
the map, and that we had on the day before crossed the map
position of the great horseshoe lake shown surrounding the
north end of the camp lake and stretching eight miles wide
across our path. This horseshoe lake is either non-existent
or badly out of position.
Our route surveying was not carried out as carefully as
usual in the lake region owing to the country being already
mapped, and when it was found that the mapping was very
sketchy it was rather too late to do more. We found the
features were in general as marked on the maps, but several
arms extended further east than indicated, and we would
place the shore of the lake south of the Cooper entrance as
much as eight miles to the east of its marked position,
eliminating the bulge in the middle of the east side.
We arrived at the neck at mid-day, and after some lunch
we made a preliminary examination. It was a little over a
mile across, with some slushy gypsum in the middle, and was
quite safe for men on foot, but camels were another matter.
The wet part looked like coarse sand but closer inspection
showed the sand to be gypsum crystals. We decided to try
to cross at once. I wanted Jack to divide the string into two
halves, as the long line churns up the mud, but he was against
this. I walked in, leading Snowy, and the string followed.


A hundred yards, two hundred yards, half a mile, and
then we were on the part with a wet surface. Half
way over and the far shore began to seem quite near.
It looked as if we were going to make it. Then sud-
denly a camel went down to the belly—poor old Grundy,
who had the big boxes and the heaviest load. We all
stopped, and the camels stood trembling with fear. I
thought they might stampede, but they seemed frozen to
the spot. Jack and Nurie quickly took the load and saddle
off, while we stood by wondering when another camel would
go down. Old Grundy, who seemed to know the drill, rolled
over and extricated himself, to my surprise. His load was
soon on again and the string turned tail and made back to the
shore. It was a relief to see them arrive safely. It was not
worth further risk for a day’s saving of time.
I decided to walk on with Crocker and Fletcher, and left
Jack to take the camels back, with instructions to make camp
wherever he could find some firewood, but not more than
a mile from the shore, and to light a fire on a sandridge after
dark, as I expected it would be long after sunset before we
got back.
We found that the strip of water in the neck was about a
quarter of a mile wide and never more than half an inch deep,
while the rest of the surface was gypseous silt tessellated with
small cracks, a feature of all claypan floors. There was a thin
salt crust where the water had evaporated. Six inches below
the surface the clay was full of the typical flat gypsum
crystals, rather larger than a penny. Our footprints were
scarcely more than heel marks, but it was just a little too
treacherous for the camels.
It was over six miles along the southern shores of the
North Lake to the channel connecting to the South Lake,
and we did not reach it till sunset, at a point some half mile
south of the North Lake end, but still north of the place
7 where I had examined it before. The channel is nowhere
more than a few hundred yards wide. At the old spot it had
shown just the same flat white crusty surface as any part of
the lake margin or its numerous arms, but here it did not look
like the lake floor at all. There were gutters in the bed,


running crosswise and lined with shrubs, that had clearly
taken the run-off from rainfall on the immediate shores.
This was something quite new, to find vegetation on the floor
of any lake or claypan in this region. It showed that the soil
was sweet and proved that the brines of the lakes can never
pass through the channel now. The inwash from the shores
and the presence of the 'plants clearly indicated that the
channel was on the way to obliteration at its north end.
It was too late to search for the old place to look for signs
of the holes with their little spoil-heaps beside them that we
had made with the post-hole borer, but it was obvious here
that water had not passed along the channel in either direction
for a very long time, or these little cross water-courses with
their vegetation would not be there, but rather salt and
gypsum, with signs of scour or driftwood. It was quite unlike
the Clayton neck. The south end of the South Lake is often
covered with water that can be seen from the railway and
runs in from Stuart’s Greek and numerous other short creeks
from the south, but I have always held that this water does
not extend up into the North Lake.
Half a mile from the mouth of the channel was the point
where we had entered the lake with our truck. We found
the place just before dark and to my astonishment there were
the tracks of the truck leading out into the lake, almost as
clear as the day we left them ten years before! We followed
them out till they turned west a mile and a half from the
shore. There was just enough light to photograph them
at a point where we had been bogged and subsequently gone
round the bog, making a loop off the original track.
By this time it was almost dark and we were far out on
the lake. I took a compass bearing across a bay to the point
five miles away that marked the Frome entrance, and we
began the long walk over the lake in a direct line for it. It
was soon pitch dark, but a star was rising over our point to
guide us. It was a question whether it was easier to walk
all the way on the level crusty surface of the lake or to
make in to the shore and then along the uneven sandridges
with their tufts of grass. The latter would have been very
rough going in the dark so we chose the former.


Lake Eyre is eerie enough by day 5 in total darkness it is a
hundred times more so. We could not see the shore. The
only things visible except the stars and ourselves were
occasional emu tracks on the surface at our feet. The
depressions had become filled with salt and stood out white
like chalk marks on a grey slate. We might have been in
the middle of this dead lake with its unfathomable mud
beneath the thin crust under our feet. I had actually camped
and slept on the lake, but it was all a new experience to my
companions. I felt confident that there would be no change
in the surface, but the others may have dreaded what the
next step might bring forth. Nevertheless, it was even for
me a weird experience, and I was by this time very tired.
The distance seemed interminable as we dragged our weary
feet over the soft surface. At last, after nearly two hours,
we found ourselves walking up the slopes of the shore and
into the sandridges again 5 then over the narrow point, and
there across the neck was the bright beacon of Jack’s fire,
hidden till then by the point. It was still over a mile away,
but after a rest on the shore we started the half hour’s tramp
through the slush across the neck, and at last threw ourselves
down by the fire. lat least was thoroughly exhausted. The
camp was only a quarter of a mile away. I asked Jack what
sort of dinner there was and he answered with unexpected
enthusiasm, “Bloody good!” We went on to the camp, but
it was some time before I felt like tackling the dinner. When
I did I realized that it was something out of the box even for
Albert. He had made the most of a free afternoon,
and it was a suitable occasion, for not only was it our last
night on the shores of the lake, but it proved to be the last
dinner but one that Albert would cook for us. He had done
a wonderful job right through, and his industry and
enthusiasm never waned. That night he put on for us a three
course meal, consisting of pea soup and the last of the canned
meat, with boiled onions and potatoes, followed by a straw-
berry blancmange, the whole accompanied by large quantities
of cocoa. Such a meal was never before prepared on the
shores of Lake Eyre, nor after it is there likely to be any
such. It completely immobilized me. I fell into my sleep


ing bag and knew no more till dawn. There was no question
of buck-bush that night.
Next morning we turned our backs on Lake Eyre and went
south-east along the shores of Clayton Lake with the object
of crossing the Clayton at the first opportunity. There was
a track marked on the maps from the Cooper to Muloorina
Station, crossing the Clayton near the lake; we thought we
might find this track, but in any case decided to make from
wherever we crossed direct to Muloorina, which Jack said was
now reoccupied. There was a chance we might get a lift in to
Marree by truck over the last thirty miles and thus save a day.
It was Sunday, August 6th, and we wanted to catch the weekly
train at Marree on the Wednesday.
We made twenty miles that day along the north side of
this arm of Lake Eyre, which I have called Clayton Lake,
and camped at its end, where there was an island enclosed
between branches of the Clayton. We had seen no water in
the lake all day but it was too damp and too wide to attempt
a crossing, and at the end the channels were definitely muddy.
We had to pass round several arms, and crossed the neck of
one which saved many miles; it was slightly boggy but was
safely negotiated. We crossed another of the arms higher
up, instead of rounding it, and found the going quite good.
It was a cold and dreary day, but “the girls were on the tow-
rope”, and we made good progress in spite of the slippery
grass.
Notwithstanding the flowers and the grasses, and occa-
sional small birds, the Lake Eyre region had still cast its queer
spell over us. All who have travelled there have felt this
haunting sense of desolation and death. The song dies
on the drover’s lips; silence falls on the exploring party. It
is like entering a vast tomb; one hesitates to break the silence.
The rivers are dead, the trees are dead, but overshadowing
all in the qualities of death is the very heart of the region, the
great lake itself, a horrible travesty, a vast white prostrate
ghost of a lake. Here time seems to have stood still for ages,
and all is dead. We had seen one sluggish vein quickened
in the north, the Warburton. Sea and river birds had
gathered there, bringing a show of life that threw into greater


relief the deadness of the rest, but the Dead Heart, the focus
of a drainage basin of four hundred and fifty thousand
square miles of country, will never throb again.
On that last day as I walked along leading my camel —we
walked a good deal in order to keep warm —a bird, one of
the orange chats, flew out of a low bush at my feet. I parted
the foliage and at once three gaping little mouths stretched
up from a nest. I passed on, but looked back, knowing that
Jack, who followed me, never missed anything. He peered
in and then looked thoughtfully at me and said, “Something
living! ” He too felt how strange it was that any life should
begin in this sepulchre.


CHAPTER XV
TO-MORROW TO FRESH WOODS
THAT night’s camp, No. 50, was our last in the lonely
sandy wastes. Next morning we crossed some muddy
claypans and then came on the Clayton River, at first an incon-
spicuous muddy channel on the plains. We followed this
along, making one or two efforts to cross, but Snowy got into
difficulties and we did not attempt it with the string. In five
miles the country began to rise and the river occupied a
valley between well defined and even stony banks. We saw
an old stockyard and signs of a track j the crossing here was
gravelly and safe. We could not follow the tracks beyond
the crossing but once over we set a course for Muloorina
Station fifteen miles away, over broadly undulating sandy
country. At last the line of trees along the Frome came in
sight, and then the station roofs. We found that the old
station, which had been closed for over ten years and was last
used as a government camel depot till the remainder of the
unwanted camels were destroyed, was now once more a hive
of industry. It had been reopened as a sheep station and
shearing was in full swing. The gloom of the Dead Heart
vanished like a dream in this atmosphere of life and activity.
We put the camels down near the shearing shed and went
across to it. Well-dressed women were just taking a dainty
tea, with teacups and cakes, into the shed. They asked me
if I was looking for work, and seemed rather disappointed
when I said I wasn’t. When our identity was satisfactorily
established we were treated with all the traditional hospi-
tality of ranches the world over.
Mr. Stan. Price, who had taken up the lease, was an enter-
prising business man from Peterborough, a boring contractor
with a wide knowledge of the outback. He had come in at
the height of a run of good seasons, and there was feed for
countless sheep. How long would this last? Would the
venture be a success, or had Lake Eyre lured another man
to his destruction?


Some of us dined at the station that night, but we all slept
in a little creek near by and got our own breakfast in the
morning at Camp 51, the last camp of the expedition. Mr.
Price found it convenient to go into Marree, and could take
Crocker, Fletcher and myself in the car. Albert decided to
stay with Jack and Nurie and the camels. We got them away
to an early start. They would have one more night on the
track before reaching Marree next morning.
Although there were good wells at Muloorina, I found
they were carting water from Lake Letty bore ten miles away.
I asked about this and was surprised to find that they thought
so highly of the clothes-washing properties of the bore water
that they went to all this trouble to get it, a quality we thought
we had discovered at Goyder’s Lagoon.
We left Muloorina by car later in the morning and called
at Lake Letty, where we found a rebuilt homestead and the
beginnings of another brave attempt to do battle with the
desert.
We were now travelling in a motor car along a road. In
a few hours we would be in a hotel in a town on the railway.
It is true it was a very old car, and a dirt track, but we were
back again in the ways of civilization; its familiar cloak
seemed suddenlv to enclose us as the tattered garments of
the desert life fell rapidly away. Then we overtook the
camels poking slowly and silently along, with Jack at the
head of his team again. How well and faithfully they had
served us where no vehicle could go! Now they seemed
weary and shabby, outmoded and desperately slow. We
would be in Marree in an hour. They might be there by
noon next day, I felt mean to dash on and leave them
behind, and glad that Albert had stayed. Perhaps Jack’s
way of life was best. I saw he felt this moment too. It was
our real parting. We merely looked and waved. The
expedition was over.
As soon as we reached Marree I called on old Bejah
Dervish and his wife and told them that Jack would be
there next day. We collected our luggage that had been sent
down from Abminga and were soon dressed for ordinary life
again.
The camel team arrived late next morning in the Afghan
quarters, and we had the afternoon to arrange for the dis-


posal of the equipment; scientific instruments and collections
for Adelaide, camel saddles for Alice Springs, water canteens
to be left for local sale, surplus stores to the Afghans. The
train left that night, and we arrived back in Adelaide next
day, August 1 Oth.
And so ended the field work of the Simpson Desert Expe-
dition.
It had provided plenty of material for work in the labora-
tory, and a start was made at once to arrange for the
preparation and publication of the results, upon which the
real lasting value of the expedition depended. The natural
history collections, both botanical and biological, were sorted
and sent to specialists in the various groups for identification
and description 5 the mapping work was checked and plotted;
the photographic results were examined and classified and the
film edited and titled. Mr. Simpson lived to see the film
but passed away a few weeks after our return.
The desert crossing had been a happy and successful adven-
ture, and it only needed the completion of the scientific work
to bring it all to a satisfactory conclusion. But the war clouds
were about to break, and before long we found ourselves
engaged in the much grimmer adventure of war, which soon
claimed most of us, some in the more heroic field of active
service and others in training, administration or munitions.
The scientific work was greatly hampered for of
workers j even its value or necessity seemed open to question.
It is only now, six years after our return, when manpower has
been reshuffled and adjustment to war conditions has become
more stabilized, that it is again possible to pick up the threads
and to make some further progress with writing and publi-
cation.
As I bring this story to a close, light is beginning to break
in the darkness. The prospect of an end to this return to
savagery is dimly seen, and one takes heart to look forward
with hope to a chastened and readjusted world wherein right
and justice rule, where all men can work in peace and good-
will for the benefit of humanity and not its destruction, and
where once again one will be free to take pleasure and pride
in such things as the study of deserts.


APPENDIX A.
NOTES ON THE SCIENTIFIC RESULTS OF THE EXPEDITION
REPORTS by various authors on the scientific results will be appearing
by the time this popular narrative is published. The Royal Society
of South Australia has generously undertaken to publish them serially as
they are prepared. Papers on various biological sections, and on the
mineralogy of the sands, are already awaiting publication.
The chief geographical study is the source of the sand and the processes
by which it has been swept up into such a remarkable series of long, straight
and parallel ridges. Is the process still going on and the sandridge deserts
extending, is it static, or are the desert areas receding? These problems
arc now being studied.
The botanical collecting was very thorough and complete. After the
good seasons the time was most opportune for it, with every plant flourishing
and most in flower or fruit. The botanical results should be a very satis-
factory section of our contributions to natural science.
The field of biology is a much wider one, and anything approaching
completeness in biological collecting requires more time than was available,
and what is even more essential, a specialist in each section, who knows how
and where to search, has a knowledge of the common forms and can
appreciate what is rare or unique. Unfortunately we had no biologists
expert in any particular direction, and so had collected without system
everything we could lay our hands on. An ornithologist, for instance,
could have kept a record of birds without necessarily bringing back a
specimen of each. Bird collecting and preserving is itself a full-time
job for one man. It was the most neglected of the biological sections
on our journey. We took specimens of five different species of wrens and
chats from the middle of the desert, beautiful little birds, but none of
them new or undescribed. We made no attempt to cope with the prolific
bird life of the Diamantina.
The mammals were restricted to the dingo and the mice and rats.
Besides the introduced mice found round the borders of the desert, we
succeeded in collecting only two forms, in spite of much digging, a fat-
tailed marsupial mouse and the fawn jerboa mouse. The latter was first
collected by Sturt in 1854, a pretty little hopping fellow with a brushy
tail. Either the rarer small marsupials were absent or we missed them.
The insect collection was much more extensive. Some eighty different
species were obtained, some of which may prove to be new to science, and
one (Varnia perloidts) is only known by a single specimen housed in the
British Museum,
A hundred and five spiders were collected, representing fourteen families
and twenty-eight species. Fourteen of these species were new.


The reptiles were described by the Director of the Australian Museum
as an excellent collection. A few snakes were caught, and a large number
of lizards of many different kinds. The lizards are much the commonest
and most conspicuous inhabitants of the desert, the outstanding features
of which at a glance are sand, spinifex, and lizards, in that order. Any-
thing further has to be sought for, but a careful search reveals an astonishing
number of less obtrusive plant and animal forms.


APPENDIX B.
THE SUPPOSED DETERIORATION OF THE LAKE EYRE
COUNTRY
FROM time to time statements are made to the effect that the seasons.in
the Lake Eyre country are not as good as they were, and that the
country has gone back through the decrease of rainfall, through over-
stocking, through rabbits, through sand drift and erosion, through any
or all of these causes, but chiefly through deterioration in rainfall. The
supposed failure of the rainfall is very commonly connected with the
supposed reduction of the amount of surface water in Lake Eyre and the
river and lake systems in its vicinity. It is said that in the good old days
when there was a wet season it was always followed by another, showing
that the presence of moisture brings about more precipitation.
Now, such statistics as there are, and such enquiries as I have been able
to make, do not bear out these stories of deterioration of the country and
its rainfall at all. I made extensive Investigations in the country from
Lake Eyre to Birdsville in 1929 and again in 1939. 1929 was the worst
drought year the country had ever known. The mean recording of
the eleven rain gauges then in operation was 1• 8 inches, with one
station (Mulka) as low as 70 points. Lake Eyre was absolutely dry, just
three thousand square miles of pink and dusty salt, and there was scarcely a
beast on its feet in the country. The only living things to be found near
the lake were needlebush and crows, and it,was hard to find enough needle-
bush to boil the billy. The waterholes were still holding out on the
Dlamantina and there were a few cattle remaining on Pandi.Pandi.
1939 on the other hand was one of the best seasons ever known
in the Dead Heart, with an average of 10 inches of rain over all
stations, and the difference in the country was amazing. The Dlamantina was
running a channel flood, there was some shallow water on parts of Lake Eyre,
seabirds were at the lake in flocks, and the whole region was covered with
a wonderful growth of herbage and grasses, as has been described above.
The Birdsville track had not been in such a condition in the memory of
living drovers, and mobs, of cattle were pouring down from Queensland.
There was fodder in the country for millions of sheep and cattle, but
hardly a beast to eat it. The following year, 1940, was again one of the
worst on record, with an average rainfall of just over 2 inches at nine
recording stations.
The average annual rainfall of the Lake Eyre region is 5 inches, but
this figure has little meaning, as the rainfall varies so widely from the
average. It is characterized by several drought years in succession when
there will be no more than 2 inches in the year, and then perhaps a fall of
12 inches will come. It is better described as 10 inch or nothing country.


After the return of the expedition all the rainfall statistics from the
Dead Heart available at the Weather Bureau, Adelaide, were examined.
Sixteen stations were selected for special study, most of them unofficial
gauges on cattle stations, the readings having been made available by the
pastoral firms and companies concerned. The stations were Marree,
Muloorina, Mulka and Mungeranie along or near the Birdsville track;
Kalamurina, Cowarie and Clifton Hills along the Dlamantina; Kanowana,
Innamincka, and Cordillo Downs in the Cooper Country; Farina and
Murnpeowie in the North Flinders Ranges; and Strangways Springs,
Coward Springs, Oodnadatta and Charlotte Waters along the railway and
telegraph line on the west side of the lake. The records began In 1874
at the telegraph stations at Strangways Springs and Charlotte Waters, and
those stations have continued to the present day, if one discounts the move
of the Strangways gauge to William Creek in 1896 and the Charlotte
gauge to the Finke in 1938, both short moves. Farina records begin in
1879, Muloorina and Cowarie in 1882, Cordillo Downs in 1883, Inna-
mincka in 1884, Marree in 1886, Kanowana in 1890, Oodnadatta
in 1892, Murnpeowie in 1893, Clifton Hills in 1894. Cowarie ceased
recording In 1901, Muloorina in 1902, and Kalamurina opened in 1884
and closed in,1897. There are gaps in the Clifton Hills records, as the
station has been moved or abandoned and then reoccupied, and also in
several of the others, notably Kanowana. The records disclose the follow-
ing facts of special interest. The ( best general season was in 1920, with
an average rainfall over all stations of nearly 12 inches. The next
best seasons were 1879, 1885, 1890 and 1939, all with about 10_ inches.
In 1917 there was an exceptional rain along the Birdsville track with over
13 inches at Kanowana and Clifton Hills, and over 12 inches at Mun-
geranie, the only stations recording. In the same year Marree only
received 6j inches. The maximum readings from all the stations men-
tioned are 1,599 points at Cordillo Downs in 1890, 1,621 points at Inna-
mincka in 1885, and 1,626 points at Innamincka in 1907. The maximum
recording at Marree is 1,145 points in 1939 and at Charlotte Whters 1,231
points in 1908 (100 points is an inch).
The worst general season was 1929 with an average of about 180 points.
Other very bad years were 1900 with 240 points .and 1940 with 220
points, but away back in 1876 Charlotte Waters only received 171 points
and Strangways Springs 212 points, the only stations recording. The
worst year on the Birdsville track was 1888 when only 65 points fell at
Cowarie and 70 at Muloorina. Other very bad periods along the Diaman-
tina were from 1898 to 1902 and from 1927 to 1929.
In four cases an exceptionally good season was followed by a second,
namely in 1877, 1889, 1909 and 1910. On the other hand, on four
occasions, in 1885, 1917, 1920 and 1939, a single good season,was followed
by a normal poor one, and also in four cases, 1877, 1885, 1889 and 1904
the good season was preceded by an exceptionally dry one.
The only conclusion that can be drawn from the rainfall figures Is that
the rainfall is extremely erratic. There does not appear to be any rhythm


in it. There have been eight good seasons in sixty-two years, which gives
an average of about nine years apart, and eight bad seasons in sixty-four
years.
There is no evidence that rainfall is deteriorating or that a good season
begets a good season. If the latter were true, one good season should
initiate an endless series of good seasons. Actually, the recurrence of a
good season only means that the conditions of major atmospheric circula-
lation that produced the first have persisted in,the next.
Professor J. W, Gregory, the author of The Dead Heart of Australia ,
visited the country in the summer of 1901-2, a time of drought. The
bores had been sunk along the Queensland Road or Birdsville track, but
all the cattle stations were closed. Only the Killalpaninna Mission
Station was still occupied and that closed soon after. Gregory wrote:
“We were now well out on the Queensland Road, and for .the first few
days of our journey we were lost in admiration of the pluck of the South
Australian people in settling here,,and at the enterprise of the Government
in opening a practicable route across such a desert: it seemed incredible
that stock raising could ever have been successful in such a country”. Five
years later there were two good seasons in succession. Had Gregory
seen the country then he would have had a very different and equally
erroneous tale to tell, I have Jiad the opportunity of seeing the country
both at its very worst and at its very best, and I would say that conditions
have not changed since the first white occupation. The,history of the
country is made up of a series of long droughts broken by short periods
of comparatively heavy rain which put the land,into good heart for a
year or two, from which happy state it slowly but inevitably falls away
again till the next rain comes, and these cycles of .long droughts and
short rains control the occupation or desertion of the holdings. Some
stations and managements have lasted out several cycles, some have : closed
finally after one, some have been reoccupied several times after long
breaks.
It is obvious that a rainfall of 5 inches or under is practically useless.
It is only the exceptional rains that bring any profit to the land, so that
success must be the exception and not the rule, and that makes it a gamblers’
country. It is an exciting game, but can be played with success only
by players with the necessary experience, and what is even more important,
with sufficient resources behind them to tide them over the lean years.
Stories of the sand drift are exaggerated. There are few obvious signs
of this. After coming through the Simpson Desert, where there has
been no interference by either rabbits or man, we felt the Diamantina
country was very stable, with quite a remarkable .absence of live and
moving sand. One hears stories of homesteads being drifted over with
sand. There may be such, but all I can say is that at all the deserted
stations I have seen, namely Kaliduwarry and Annandale on the Mulligan,
and Goyder’s Lagoon, Mt. Gason, Cowarie, and Kalamurina along the
Diamantina, and Muloorina near the Lake, there are no signs whatever
of any drift sand piling up round the homesteads. They are no different


from the houses in Marree, which is in a completely devastated area.
Another persistent story is that the Strzelecki and the Cooper are com-
pletely blocked with drift sand and can never run again. We crossed
the Cooper near Lake Eyre and its bed was perfectly free There was
no sign of encroaching sandridges, though its course crossed the ridges
at right angles. There is also no blocking where the Birdsville track
crosses the Cooper. Jack Bejah had ..made many trips up the Strzelecki
and Cooper, and he declares that there,is nothing to prevent the Cooper
from flowing again as soon as enough water comes down, and that there
is sand in the Strzelecki only at its southern end near Lake Callabonna.
The Surveyor-General of South Australia, Mr. C. M. Hambidge, has
recently traversed the Strzelecki and confirms Bej ah’s statement for that
river, and Mr. Jack Conrick who has spent most of his life on Napper
Merrie Station on the Cooper near Innamincka confirms Bejah for both
r ivers.
The Cooper reaches Innamincka practically every year, at least as a
channel flood, but it must flood literally hundreds of square miles and
fill countless branches, channels, billabongs and lakes, including Lake
Hope, before it can reach Lake Eyre. It is only in times of high flood
that water has ever been able to overflow into the Strzelecki. A colossal
amount of,water must come down before the flood reaches the Birdsville
track and Lake Eyre, and such occasions must have been extremely rare
in the last few centuries. The last big flood was in 1918, after record
rains and floods in the delta area itself in 1917, when over 13 inches
was recorded at several stations. This rain must have at least partially
filled the lakes and swamps and left the way open for the Queensland
floods. As far as I have been able to ascertain the Cooper also reached the
lake or ran in its lower courses in 1891, 1898 and 1906, with 1906 the
record flood, but there are no proper records, only the tales of old timers.
One such account claims that the water reached Lake Hope eighteen times
in the forty-five years preceding 1932., It seems certain that the river
will only reach the lake when there are exceptionally heavy rains all along
its course, which is half way across the continent.
The Diamantina is .quite a different river from the Cooper. It has
a single channel all the way to Lake Eyre from Birdsville, except for
Goyder’s Lagoon, and has no lakes to fill on the way. There is one branch,
the Kallakoopah, before the lake is reached, but this is only filled at very
high flood. Normally all the water goes down the Warburton, as the
main channel is called below the branch. The channel flood reaches
Lake Eyre on the average every other year.and runs for several months
when it is running.
All the evidence indicates that the seasons are no better and no worse
than they had,been for a very long time before the white man came, and
that a good season brings up as much feed as ever it did. Take the example
of Muloorina Station, on the Frome, thirty miles north of Marree and
almost on the shores of Lake Eyre. It was opened as a sheep station in
1882 and closed in 1902. The rainfall averaged 407 points in that time


with a maximum of 771 points in 1885. The next best was 704 points
m 1889. For the last three years of its existence the figures were 204, 26
and 125 points. The Government took it over as a camel depot soon
alter and abandoned it in about 1929, as the camels were no longer wanted.
In 1938 it was reoccupied as a sheep station and enjoyed greater prosperity
than it had ever known, and this has continued up to 1944. The rainfall
in Marree in 1939 was 1,145 points, its all-time record. Muloorina was
certainly not eaten out and destroyed beyond hope of regeneration, though
it looked like it when I saw it in 1929. Only rain was required for it to
regenerate itself without any assistance or expenditure whatever.
The permanent stock-carrying capacity of the country depends on the
perennial shrubs, which are the drought resisters, and they are in very
delicate equilibrium with their environment. They can stand very little
interference at all. They are like the aboriginals, in that contact with
the white man leads to their extinction. The fattening food is the
annuals, and they come up abundantly after every rain. The perennials
are soon destroyed and their regeneration is a much slower process, so
that, as the permanent stocking depends on them, it seems fair to say that
this is practically nil. The actual experience of the country’s history
bears this out. The region has never been destroyed by overstocking or
reduced to a state of drifting sand. The stations closed simply because the
droughts were too long to be tided over. The permanent feed was never
of any account. At every reopening, and most of the stations have gone
through several, things were just as good as ever they were in the early
days, when the supposed prosperity was just as short lived. Actually,
a lot of the country has still never had any stock on it at all, in areas
far from permanent water.
The only way of making any use of this country would seem to be
1o recognize that prosperity only comes intermittently with the rains, and
that it is impossible to carry stock through several successive years of
drought. This means that the country must be exploited in good seasons,
abandoned in droughts, which was the Kidman way. Whatever may be
said of the sheep country, I am convinced that since the white ,man came,
the cattle country of the Cooper and Diamantina has undergone no change
in climate and very little in productiveness. Its value was always very
low, and far too much was expected of it, a country where the rainfall
may be under two inches for several years in succession.
Various schemes have been brought forward for Improving this desert
re §jon. The oldest is that of letting sea water into Lake,Eyre by means
of a channel cut from Spencer’s Gulf. It was considered by the Govern-
ment in 1883 and rejected. Gregory in his Dead Heart regards it
as quite impracticable, and comes to the conclusion that even if the scheme
were a success the sheep would need to grow golden fleeces to pay for it.
The idea is still brought forward from time to time. It appeals to the
imagination but does not bear any close investigation. Actually little
is known about the levels of the lakes. The only precise level known is
that of the bed of Stuart’s Creek at the railway line, thirty-nine feet
below sea level. This means that Lake Eyre South is at least that much


below sea level along its southern, shore. Whether the main area, Lake
Eyre North, is higher or lower than the south lake is quite unknown. The
surveyor Lewis ran a line of levels out from the shore ,at the north end
of the north lake and found a fall of two and a half feet in seven miles.
That is all that is known about levels. However, assuming that both
lake beds are forty feet below the sea, one can do some rough calculations
on the project of letting the sea in. The distance from Port Augusta to
the north lake is 250 miles. The evaporation is 100 inches per year
and the net loss of water would be about 85 inches a year, allowing
for the slower evaporation of saline water, additions by rainfall, etc.
The area is about 3,000 square miles. Thus, to beat the evaporation our
canal must carry some 19,000 cubic feet of water per second. With
a fall of 39 feet over the distance, a canal a thousand feet wide at the
bottom flowing ten feet deep would be required. Lake Torrens would
be no help to the scheme, as l its bed is 111 feet above sea level, and
the country beyond rises up to 200 feet above sea level at the divide
between the lakes. The canal Would thus be from 100 to 200 feet deep and
the cost of its excavation would run into several hundred million pounds.
A very Important consideration, and one not often foreseen, js that the
lake must eventually fill up with salt, as salt would be pouring in all
the time. Evaporation is reduced as salinity increases, but we may
take it as 60 inches over a long period. Sixty inches of sea water contains
one inch of solid salt, so that one inch of salt will be deposited annually
in the lake. If its depth is ten feet, it will become entirely filled with
salt in 120 years. Thus the scheme must pay for itself in a period of
something of that order.
The Quatara Depression in the Libyan Desert, recently brought into
prominence by the fighting at El Alamein, has been thoroughly investi-
gated from this point of view. The object was chiefly to provide a
power supply by the fall of water. There the area is 7,000 square
miles, the distance from the Mediterranean only 35 miles, and the fall
200 feet, so that it is an .immense potential source of power, with a life
dependent on the rate of Inflow of water allowed. It was not considered
that there would be any appreciable effect on climate and there was not
enough demand for power in Egypt to justify the outlay at that time.
The fall is too small for Lake. Eyre to be used as a source of power in
this way.
Meteorologists are unanimous in the opinion that the presence of Water
in Lake Eyre would not have any noticeable effect on the rainfall.
Rainfall depends on the major wind circulations of the globe, and water
evaporated in one place may be precipitated half a world away, where
conditions for cooling and condensation are suitable. It is practically
impossible for the evaporated water to be dropped immediately beside
the evaporating lake or sea, otherwise the Dead Sea, the Red Sea, and many
other seas and oceans, would not have such arid and barren shores. It
can be argued with more reason that an atmosphere, cooler and moister
from the presence of surface waters, will induce more precipitation from
passing air masses that have brought their moisture from elsewhere, and


there must be some slight effect in this direction, but the question is, how
much? In no place in the World can such a beneficial effect be noted.
Spencer’s Gulf itself does not appear to be of any help to the rainfall in
its vicinity. The Flinders Ranges, on the other hand, to the east of the
Gulf, have a very marked and obvious effect on the rainfall. The great
uncertainty of any appreciable effect whatever on the rainfall, the com-
paratively short life of the scheme owing to the filling of the lake with
salt, and the enormous cost, make it quite impossible to give further serious
thought to the project of letting the sea into Lake Eyre.
Almost equally fantastic schemes for the irrigation of the central regions
were advanced not long before his death by Dr. Bradfield of Sydney
Harbour Bridge fame. One part of these schemes was the construction
of four reservoirs at the headwaters of the Finke, Georgina, Diamantina
and Cooper Creek. Each dam was to be 140 miles long, and to impound
5,000 square miles of water 20 feet deep, that is, water which at present
can scarcely reach Lake Eyre, was to fill four dams each many times the
holding capacity of Lake Eyre. Another scheme was to bring the waters
of the Burdekin River across the Dividing Range by tunnel from the
Queensland coast, and discharge them into the Cooper, thus Watering
western Queensland from Hughenden to the border with a constant stream
of 6,000 cubic feet per second. Dr. Bradfield’s map shows a circular area
of over 600,000 square miles stretching from the Gulf of Carpentaria
to Lake Torrens, which could be irrigated by these schemes and would
be suitable for growing rice, cotton, flax, jute, maize, wheat, tropical fruits,
tea, coffee, sheep and cattle. Dr. Bradfield’s figures are astronomical,
and his statements fire the imagination, but his schemes are entirely visionary
and rest on no firm foundations whatever. His brochure will not bear
any close examination. It consists of bald statements not supported by
any facts or observations. It is merely good journalism, with no more
foundation in fact than the fiction of lon Idriess. Dr. Bradfield had
never visited the places he so liberally Irrigates, and he admitted that
surveys must be made, and that he had no knowledge of the country or
the levels or even the discharges of the rivers. The sandridges of the
Simpson Desert form the core of his Irrigated lands. He recommends
as a subsidary scheme the damming of the Mulligan River and .taking its
waters a hundred miles across to Lake Caroline on the Hay River that
traverses the Simpson Desert. Why not use .these waters along the Mulligan
itself? Transporting waters to another place seems to have been rather
an obsession. Dr. Bradfield wrote as though there were no question but
that the,presence of surface waters increased rainfall, and even went as
far as asserting that the whole of the evaporated water would be dropped
in the immediate vicinity, so that the same water would be used over
and over again!
It is impossible to take Dr. Bradfield’s schemes seriously or to regard
them as anything but visions having little connection with reality. To
fill Lake Eyre from the sea is a useless idea. There is not enough rainfall
to revive the river systems, and the impounding of water has limited scope


owing to the topography of the country. The diversion of rivers is not
to be thought of till after the fullest use has been made of their waters
in their own basins. In our post-war reconstruction there are a thousand
sound schemes waiting to be carried out at our back doors so to speak,
in the way of irrigation, closer settlement, development of brown coal
deposits, power schemes, secondary industries, transportation, before we
need turn to any hazardous and uncertain plans for the arid interior,
which is only poor pastoral country that will never support any considerable
population. Its supposed deterioration is really an acknowledgement of
its initial poverty. It need not be neglected. More bores should be
sunk for water, erosion should be combatted, grazing controlled, pastures
improved and soil surveys made; but the Interior should never be looked
on as a great asset or as a solution of the population problem, and expendi-
ture on it should be in strict accordance with possible returns, for otherwise
we should be forsaking the substance for the shadow. Dreams of
increasing the rainfall by impounding water or of making the arid Interior
a garden of Eden by irrigation are nothing’but castles in the air, with
no more substance than Lasseter’s Reef, another myth that is kept alive
only by the glamour of mystery and inaccessibility that surrounds it.




INDEX
Abmlnga, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 33,
37, 38.
Aboriginals, Dieri tribe, 37.
ill-treatment of, 111.
playground, 33.
signs of, in desert, 64.
value in field, 21.
words, 39.
Advertiser, The , 2, 29.
Aerial reconnaissance, 3.
Alford, H., 96.
Afghans, 14.
Allitera, see River Hale.
Allua Soak, 37, 41, 47, 49.
Anacoora Bore, 10, 11.
Andado Bore, 13, 21, 22, 34.
description, 35.
raising water, 41.
Andado Station, 13,21,22, 29, 31,
32, 48.
description, 33.
Andrewilla Waterhole, 109, 111.
Andy, aboriginal, 27, 29, 37, 41,
44, 45, 47, 54, 55, 58, 69,
70, 71, 76, 77, 78, 79, 85,
87, 88, 106, 111, 125.
broadcasting, 72, 73.
Christian principles, 84.
digging for rat, 58-60.
farewell, 114.
wireless message for, 75.
Artesian Basin, Great, 35, 121.
Artesian Bores, 118, 120.
Arthur Creek, 5, 9.
Astronomical observations, 34, 39,
47, 62, 67, 73, 77, 78, 138.
Australian Broadcasting Commis-
sion, 23, 29.
Australian Inland Mission, 98, 99.
Ayliffe, Surveyor, 1 I.
Barclay, H. Vere, Surveyor, 9,
Barton, Ben, 96, 97, 100.
Bedourie, 108.
ovens, 19.
Beetles, water, 55, 58.
Bejah Dervish, 14, 23, 154.
Bejah, Jack, 14, 22, 23, 24, 27, 41,
44, 45, 50, 51, 54, 60, 62,
70, 71, 73, 76, 81, 87, 88,
102, 124, 126, 129, 141,
147, 150, 154, 161.
Betoota, 108.
Birdsville, 76, 79, 80, 86, 91, 95,
ball, 105.
riding party, 100, 109.
school, 99.
signpost, 108.
visiting homes, 98.
Birdsville Track, 107, 108, 112,
120, 160, 161.
Black Bull Hotel, 20, 25, 26.
Blacks, see Aboriginals.
Blazed tree, 78.
Blinman, Albert, 103.
Blood’s Creek, 11, 38.
Boomerangs, 28.
Border, N.T.—S.A., 11, 80.
N.T.-Q., 2,5, 8, 10, 75, 78,
79.
Q.-S.A., 80, 108.
Bradfield, Dr., 164.
Broadcasts, 54, 5 5, 59, 60, 72, 75,
76.
Buckbush, 129, 138, 139.
description, 110.
Budgerigars, 44, 49, 58, 75, 78,
86.
Bulkalara Crossing, 124.
Burke and Wills, 9.
Bush mechanics, 113.
Burt’s Waterhole, 113.
Cairns, 44.
Calvert Expedition, 14, 24.


Camel, buggy, 29.
equipment, 16, 51.
fodder, 34, 42, 50, 52, 53, 57,
60, 61, 66, 68, 76.
in bogs, 93, 117, 145, 148.
loading, 17, 40, 41.
long dry stage, 10.
mange, 61, 102, 1 37.
rate of travel, 59, 94.
Snowy, 41, 115, 124, 153.
wild, 44, 131.
yarding, 50, 131.
Camp, beds, 71.
equipment, 19, 20.
fires, 72.
routine, 71, 72.
sheets, 19.
Carpentaria, Gulf of, 9.
Carralan, Norman, 96, 98, 100.
Cattle, 95, 123, 1 58.
Cemetery, Cowarie, 127.
Charlotte Waters, 11, 13, 21, 22,
26, 28, 29, 31.
old telegraph station, 27.
Chats, 135, 144, 156.
Clarke Memorial Lecture, 5,7, 11.
Claypans, 49, 52, 64, 65, 67, 68,
79, 83, 94, 132.
crossing, 132, 145.
description, 56.
Lake Eyre type, 144.
Clifton Hills Station, 110.
Cockatoos, 85, 112, 119.
Coglin Creek, 28, 31, 32.
Colson, E. A., 11, 38, 80, 129.
Compass, camel, 18.
Condenser, 17.
Conrick, J., 161.
Cooking, 1 5, 1 18, 139, 1 50.
Cooper Creek, 8, 107, 108, 140,
143, 161, 164.
Cow'arie Station, 1 18, 125, 126.
Crabb, Leo, Mr. and Mrs., 104,
105, 106.
Crocker, R. L., 14, 37, 39, 47, 5 3,
54, 58, 64, 69, 70, 71, 76,
78, 83, 84, 97, 102, 116,
139, 140, 142, 148, 154.
Crows, 58, 61, 141, 158.
Dalhousie Springs, 10.
Darwin, Charles, 96.
Dawn, description, 112.
Day, T. E., 11, 43.
Dead-finish, 87.
Dead Heart, The, 130, 134, 151,
1 53, 1 58, 1 59.
Dead Heart of Australia, The, 160,
162.
Depot Sandhills, 35.
Derwent Creek, 126.
Desert, Great Sandy, 2, 14.
Dew, 60.
Dickcrie Waterhole, 109.
Ding, H., 17, 22, 29, 71, 75.
Dingoes, 46, 50, 69, 156.
Diprotodon, 103.
Dotterels, 115.
Drovers, 100, 110.
Ducks, 29, 85, 115, 1 16, 1 17, 1 19,
135.
cooking in mud, 28.
Eight Mile Waterhole, 109.
Eleanor Creek, 109, 110.
Emus, 44, 46, 93, 122.
Eyre Creek, 8.
Feed, stock, 124, 158.
Fences, 1 33.
Finches, 44, 50, 78.
Finlay, Tom, 109.
Fish, 28, 111, 135.
Fletcher, H, 0., 15, 34, 38, 40,
53, 54, 58, 69, 70, 71, 76,
83, 84, 139, 140, 142, 148,
154.
Flies, 29.
Floods, 161.
Frog, 84.
Gaffney, Bob, 17, 86, 94, 96, 97,
101, 102, 103, 105.
Gaffney, Dorothy, 96.
Gaffney, Mrs., 100.
Galahs, 75, 78, 85.
Geological formations, 42, 101.


Gibbers, 26, 92, 96, 116,
description, 119.
tracks on, 123.
Gidgee, 64, 67, 80.
Goyder’s Lagoon, 109, 112, 113.
crossing, 115.
description, 111.
Goyder’s Lagoon Bore, 120.
description, 119.
Goyder’s Lagoon Station, 116, 160.
Gregory, Prof. J. W,, 160, 162.
Gypsum, 132, 139, 345, 147.
Hambidge, C. M., 161.
Hawker, 23.
Hawks, 78, 115.
Hayes, drover, 110, 113.
Hodgkinson, W. 0., 9.
Horse breaking, 128.
Hubbard, Albert, 15, 41, 50, 51,
54, 57, 60, 65, 69, 70, 71,
72, 76, 77, 81, 86, 87, 93,
97, 1 17, 125, 133, 150, 154.
Ibis, 122.
Innamincka, 111.
Insects, 156.
Instruments, scientific, 18.
Kalamurina Station, 130, 160.
Kalaweerina Creek, 133, 134, 135,
136.
Kaliduwarry Station, 63, 80, 160.
description, 85.
Kangaroos, 122.
Karrathunka Waterhole, 109.
Kidman, Sir Sidney, 88, 162,
pastoral policy, 89, 90.
Killalpaninna Mission, 37, 84.
Knife throwing, 69.
Kruse, Tom, 22, 23, 32, 41, 42.
Kuddaree Waterhole, 80.
description, 85.
Kunoth, Charlie, 11, 24.
Lady, half caste, 33, 34, 38.
Lake Callabonna, 161.
Lake Caroline, I, 3, 164.
Lake Eyre,
basin, 107.
birds on, 136.
camp at, 137.
connection to South Lake, 14-8,
149.
Cooper entrance, 143.
Frome entrance, 147> 148.
insects on, 142.
like Sydney Harbour, 1 39.
old tracks on, 149.
sea water canal to, 162.
shore, 142, 147.
surface, 140, 142, 143, 145,
146, ISO, 158.
water in, 134, 142, 161.
Lake Eyre South, 146, 162.
water in, 149.
Lake Hope, 161.
Lake Letty Bore, 154.
Station, 1 54, ,
Lakes, effect on rainfall, 163.
Lasscter’s Reef, 165.
Leichhardt, Ludwig, 12, 81.
supposed remains, 24, 25, 26.
Lewis, J. W., 135, 136, 138, 163.
Lindsay, David, 10, 11.
Listore Creek, 93.
Lizards, 44, 58, 84.
Lowes, pastoralists, 24, 25, 26.
Ly-Ly, aboriginal, 37, 42, 43, 44,
45, 46, 47, 49.
McAulcy, drover, 115.
McDill, Bob, 21, 23, 36.
McKinley, J., 9.
McKinnon, Constable, 22, 23, 37.
Mail truck, 117.
Marrce, 14, 22, 86, 94, 160, 162.
Marshall, D., 15, 33, 38, 39, 40,
44, 53, 54, 60, 66, 70, 71,
72, 76, 77, 81, 92, 102, 109,
122, 141.
Mayfield’s Swamp, 32.
Meat, salting, 36.
Medical equipment, 19.
Melons, native, 31.
Menindie, 8.


Mice, 34, 36, 39, 156.
Mona Downs, 118.
Moolta Tableland, 31.
Morley, pastoralist, 126, 127.
Mt. Day, 31.
Mt. Dutton 24.
Mt. Etingambra, 11.
Mt. Gason, 122.
Mt. Gason Bore, 118, 121.
Mt. Gason Station, 121, 160.
Mt. Peebles, 31, 35.
Muckarinna Waterhole, 24.
Mud, extricating vehicles from, 32.
Mudloo Well, 48, 80.
Muloorina Station, 146, 153, 160,
161, 162.
Munyeroo, 61, 64.
description, 66.
Museum, Australian, 18.
Natives, see aboriginals.
Needlebush, 53, 61, 94, 158.
Nurie, 23, 41, 54, 70, 71, 76,
87, 122, 154.
O’Neil, Jim, 1.
Oodnadatta, 24, 34.
Ooldea, 28.
Overland Telegraph, 9.
Pandi Pandi, 104.
Parachilna, 39.
Photography, 1 5.
Pigeons, 44, 127.
Poeppel’s Corner, 10, 1 1, 78, 80.
Point McLeay Mission Station, 28.
Poodnitera, 37, 42, 43
Poonarunna Station, 133.
Price, Stan., 153, 1 54.
Quail, 115.
Quatara Depression, 163.
Rabbit-proof fences, 78, 79, 81,
82.
Rabbits, 36, 44, 87, 124, 13 5, 160.
Rain, 54, 56, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88.
Rainfall figures, 1 58, 1 59.
Ranges,
Barrier, 8.
Cairns, 9.
Flinders, 164.
Jcrvois, 5, 9.
Mac Donnell, 2, 4.
Tarlton, 5,9, 78, 136.
Toko, 5,9, 80.
Rations, 20.
Reese, L., 5,
Rieff, Simon, 1.
River, Clayton, 146, 1 5 1, 15 3.
Darling, 8.
Diamantina, 4, 107, 108, 111,
161, 164.
Finke, 4, 21, 31, 32, 33, 107,
134, 164.
Fitzroy, 2, 14.
Frome, 146.
Georgina, 164.
Hale, 1,11, 37, 47, 63.
Hale-Todd Junction, 11, 13,
35,36,37,42,43.
Hay, 5,9, 11,63,75, 136, 164.
description, 77.
position, 78.
Kallakoopah, 4, 111, 123, 134,
135, 161.
Macumba, 4, 107, 134.
Marshall, 9.
Mulligan, 4, 1 3, 76, 78, 81, 83,
87, 164.
description, 86.
discovery, 9.
Plenty, 4, 9.
Thring, 4,9, 11.
Todd, 11, 37, 43.
Warburton, 111, 123, 125, 130,
134, 135.
flow, 127.
Rogers, Fred., 5, 65.
Royal Australian Air Force, 3, 11.
Royal Geographical Society of Aus-
tralasia, S.A. Branch, 2,3, 4.
Roval Society of South Australia,
156.
Russell, Bryce, 11.


Saltbush, 46, 87.
Sand, colour, 93.
drift, 39, 160, 161.
motor vehicles in, 32, 33.
Sandridges,
crossing by camel, 52.
crossing by car, 32.
description, 61, 65, 72, 73, 74,
80, 81, 82, 94, 95, 104, 129,
131, 141, 144.
direction, 3, 70.
height, 38, 43, 52, 61, 68, 79,
80, 92, 93, 111, 144, 146.
measuring, 38, 54.
numbers, 52, 53, 60, 73, 80, 85,
132.
sawtooth, 65.
Sandy, aboriginal, 114.
Scorpions, 36, 44.
Seasons, good and bad, 1 59.
no evidence of change, 161.
Sharpe, Fred., 21, 24, 27, 29, 33,
36.
Signboard in desert, 56.
Simpson, A. A., 4,6, 7, 62, 76, 85,
96, 155.
Simpson, R. A., 15, 27, 29, 40, 47,
54, 70, 71, 72, 75, 76, 78,
83, 84, 87, 102, 109, 122.
Simpson Desert, earlier attempts to
cross, B—l 2.
general description, 4.
naming, 4.
origin of expedition, 7.
previous investigations, 3, 5.
reasons for crossing, 6.
supposed crossings, 2, 5.
Snakes, 67, 79, 82, 143.
Soak, digging, 47.
Spencer’s Gulf, 164.
Spiders, 44, 142, 143, 156.
Spinifex, 52, 74, 79, 80, 81, 125.
name and description, 5.
Stefansson, 13.
Stony Desert, Sturt’s, 8, 119.
Stock-carrying capacity, 90, 162.
Storm, station child, 33, 36, 38.
Stuart, J. McD., 9.
Stuart’s Creek, 162.
Sturt, Capt., 8, 119.
Strzelecki Creek, 8, 161.
Temperatures, 29, 50, 70, 143.
Ten Mile Waterhole, 110.
Thomas, Col., 23, 33, 75.
Tickets on trains, 23.
Tobermorey Station, 78.
Tracking, 34, 38.
Travelling, routine, 50, 5 1, 70.
Trigonometrical Station, 124.
Turkeys, wild, 33, 74, 76, 77, 78.
University of Adelaide, 68.
Unknown area, doubted, 2.
Vegetation, 74, 80, 81, 1 10, 125,
129, 133, 138, 144, 146.
Wadamoolooloo Hill, 124.
“Waddy” trees, 35, 36, 95, 101.
Wapiti aeroplanes, 3.
Water, carried, 17, 51, 65, 85.
surface, 92, 110, 118.
“white”, 91, 1 13, 126, 136.
Wells, L. H., 2, 10, 14, 78.
Widgetty grub, 44, 47.
Wilkinson, Fred., 24, 129.
Willuna, 2, 14.
Winnecke, C., 9, 1 1, 75, 78, 136.
Wireless, pedal, 17, 18, 27, 34, 55,
57, 75, 85, 97, 103.
Inland network, 17.
Yunta, 17, 23, 29.


PRINTED
AT
THE HASSELL PRESS
CURRIE STREET
ADELAIDE












