

NEW SOUTH WALES,
* ■'s.* ■. .s
■ .;;;„■■■, o-/%v A .: ■■ ' : p§ y
HOW AND WHERE TO
iC GET THEM.
, ' . ■ . . ' . - . ■ • '
BY D. J. FROST.
t •* > *»«».•' - :‘*i *: \ s, ‘- ' ;
, All
■ ; V 'U\t; ;v ■ fcPSi ■ /;vw ; fefj, n-*.. > .
5% PRICE --- SIXPENCE.


h T "7


NOTE
Since issuing my book, “ Crown Lands; How and Where to
Find Them ” 1 have had numerous applications for Crown Lands
near Sydney. I have now compiled a large map of such lands,
which I shall be pleased to show any intending selector Free
of Charge, and point out the BEST BLOCKS with all features.
PLANS supplied showing the best lands open for selection
in any part of N.S. W , also the boundaries of the land shown
on the ground if required.
ALSO, all Maps mentioned on page 51 can be seen Free of
Charge, and the Best Lands Pointed Out
Lands round Sydney suitable for Orchard, Bee, Poultry and
Pig Farms, and General Purposes.
Applications put through the Department, and all necessary
business 'undertaken
Any further information required, please send stamped en-
velope for reply
D. .1. FRO S T,
AUTHORISED GOVERNMENT DRAFTSMAN,
LANDS DEPARTMENT.
Private Office—WOOL EXCHANGE,
MACQUARIE PLACE,
SYDNEY.




CROWN LANDS OF N.S.W.;
HOW AND WHERE TO GET THEM.
This pamphlet has been issued solely in the interests of intending
selectors and others wishing to secure crown lands, at present
open for selection. It is intended to bring under their notice
some of a portion of this colony, the coastal rivers and New
England districts, the western slopes of the great divide, and
and arable plains in the upper watershed of the great Darling
River; to point out to them some facts relating to the existing
settlement; to show them where the best lands remain, and the
most economic means of settling upon them. Within the scope
of such a publication, it is impossible to give more than outline
particulars, but I have in my possession the detailed maps of the
whole of this country charted up to date, showing not only what
land is open for the selector, but the natural features of the
country round, added to which my personal knowledge of the
country has placed me in possession of detailed information
which must be of great value in securing to my selector exactly
the class of land he may require. My fifteen years experience in
the Lands and Survey department of this colony, and the fact
that I have travelled in the course of that time over nearly the
whole of the land, have taught me how difficult it is for any ore
unacquainted with the district in which they wish to settle to
gain anything like reliable information. lam firmly convinced
of the great future in the settlement of this district, and to those
who favour the idea of “village settlements” I would direct
attention particularly to later remarks. At any time I shall be
pleased to give my assistance either through my maps or other-
wise, which will tend to alleviate the annoyance, trouble or
expense of any intending selector.
D. J. FROST.




AT the present time when there is amongst our rural popu-
lation, particularly in the southern parts of the colony, an
ever increasing demand that the agricultural lands of the central
division be thrown open for selection, it may fairly be con-
sidered an opportune moment to direct attention to a district far
richer in its natural capabilities, and in every sense better fitted
for settlement, where there is still open to the man who wishes
to go on the soil with an earnest determination to win a living by
honest toil large areas of land fitted for the highest class of
agricultural settlement. In this pamphlet it is not intended to
draw any exaggerated picture of one of nature’s gardens, but
rather in a plain brief way, to lay before the reader facts called
largely from official sources and the writings of specialists, and to
some considerable extent from personal knowledge and observa-
tion, which will plainly indicate from the results of past trial and
experiments what the future of this country will be. Within brief
limits it is desired to let the reader know something fresh about this
country, it’s produc'ions, the terms in which the large areas of
crown lands available can be selected, the facilities which exist
for dealing with produce after it has been raised, and in a
general way to attract the attention of intending selectors to the
district. The figures quoted are those officially published by the
government statistician and other official sources. If, by the
perusal of this pamphlet some few selectors can be induced to go
to the country referred to, then it will in so far have achieved a
good result, for it is on the settlement of the land, the future
prosperity of this country main’y rests.
It does seem an extraordinary thing in a young country
like this, with as yet but a fringe of settlement on the
soil, with our capabilities grasped only by the more foreseeing
minds of the community, there should be a movement afoot to
start in South America what the founders term “a new Australia.”
In the main without question this agitation is that of those who
hold “advanced” ideas on questions of settlement, and the
fortunes of their colony in Paraguay will be watched with very
•considerable interest. But what should be impressed on those
who are won over to the adventure by the glamour of romance,
which, like a thin veil, hides from their view the knotted gnarly
naked truth, is that in leaving Australia for these Sou ih American
States, they are going to a different condition of things; they are
leaving a country well governed and with a settled government, in
which whatever rights to property they possess and their liberties
.as individuals are zealously guarded. They go to a country where
the dominant power is in the hands of another race than them-
selves, and where those political rights they strongly maintain
1 33 5 y r 99 z0


here may be in a very peremptory and sudden fashion denied
them. They must not labor any mistaken idea that they are-
going to a country where they will be able to make their own
laws ;it it not so. Ihe laws of the particular State to which
they go will bind them, and it is not generally supposed to be the-
custom of those in authority to brook any interference with those
laws. Agitators who can thrive here upon the gullibility of a
section of the public, and are the subjects of the amused
contempt of the majority of citizens, would there find such,
tactics met by very stern and convincing proof that the govern-
ment for the time being is all powerful and apt to be exceedingly
severe upon those who choose to disagree with it. We do not
intend any reflection upon the ‘new Australia’; thisis simply an illus-
tration of differences between the two countries. It may be that
the settlers will find that the selection made by the prospectors
is a suitable one, that the grant is a proper one, but before these
considerations they should in their own interests also require full
satisfaction in these three points : ( 1) That the general trend of
legislation in the country they are going to is better than here ;
(2) that the laws governing the occupation of the land are an
improvement on those of this country; and (3) that their new
home possesses the same stability of government, that there-
is not the danger of some political cataclysm engulfing them and
their prosperity in a state of ruin and desolation. This country
cannot afford to lose its bone and sinew, and there is no necessity
that it should do so. People are too apt here to take as gospef
truth the windy declamations of wide mouthed orators as to the
injustice of the land laws, when as a matter of fact those
individuals are more inbred with a desire to create a momentarily
favourable effect than of explaining the whole truth Our land
laws are no more perfect than any other legislation that has to
pass the ordeal of conflicting interests and opinions personified by
Parliament; but they do, as we will show, give settlers opportun-
ity to get on to land on exceedingly reasonable terms. The ex-
tent of land that is open for selection at the present moment is,
we venture to think, not understood by the people who really do
want to get on to it. with the object of staying there.
As for the idea of co-operative settlement which forms a
central feature in the Paraguayan scheme, what is there to prevent
a body of men under our existing land laws from taking up
adjoining blocks of country. That there is available large areas,
of land where such material settlement can be carried into effect
with advantage, there is no question, we are prepared to
show any such selectors land capable of giving them individually
large returns, and working in co-operation still more satisfactory
results. This idea of co-operative settlement has not entered the-
region of serious politics in this colony long, but in the Land Bill


which the present Minister has before the House, provision
is made very complete in its character to adopt in our land laws
this principle of settlement, which, by a large number of thinking
men, is at the present moment looked upon in favour.
THE NORTH COAST DISTRICTS-
What are familiarly known as the northern river districts
of New South Wales, form within themselves a province of im-
mense agricultural richness. The fruitfulness of the different
districts in a wide variety of crops has been proved, and they
now only need the presence of the hardy husbandman
to convert a garden of nature into a granary supplying its own
population of millions and exporting from its ports immense
value of marketable produce. Situated as it is in a corner of the
colony, with access from the main centre only by sea, it is not
altogether a matter of surprise that the development of this
country has been but steady though exceedingly sure. The opening
of the northern line a few years ago gave further opportunity of
visiting different places open to settlers, and there has been a
marked advance in the tide of settlement. Any one knowing the
districts from an agricultural point of view, and remembering
that at the time gold was unknown, can well understand why it
was the town lots of Grafton, offered by aucti m on the same day
as Melbourne, fetched a higher price than those of the southern
city. When the gold discoveries were made, and - Victoria
jumped at once into a position of first importance, the value of
Melbourne of course went up enormously, giving an indication
of what population will do in that respect. Grafton has, on the
other hand, had to fight under the disadvantage of comparative
neglect and isolation, yet to-day it stands among the solidest of
our towns But this by the way.
The country is that lying between the great dividing
range and the sea, and extending from where the Tweed River
forms the boundary line between this colony and Queensland,
down as far as the Manning district above Port Stephens. This
embraces a large area of country, and as is bound to be the case
in such a large extent very varible in its character. The coastal
area of the northern portion is in all respects semi-tropical in the
nature o ! its productions, but the most southern ward portion loses
to a considerable extent that characteristic, and while the soil over
immense areas is still fertile in the very highest degree, the nature
of the products is in some extent changed. Sugar, for instance,
one of the staple crops on the Clarence and Richmond, is not
now grown to any extent on the Macleay, though the latter river
was really the nursery of the industry, and for some years a
large area of land was under cane. The liability of this southern


land to frosc is a reason why the farmer there prefers other crops;
a more certain character.
Speaking in a general sense the country forms the sea
coast to the mountains of the great dividing range
is undulating in nature. The area over which this
undulating country extends varies considerably. In the northern-
most parts of the colony for instance spurs of the ranges run
down almost to the sea, and form the use of two comparatively
small rivers, while in behind these spurs again come in the longer
plans of the two great rivers. Further down than this again the
mountain ranges at the back of Grafton are hardly visible, and
lower still the hills approach the ocean. The exceedingly fertile
soil which is to be found in the undulating country spoken of
extends back among the ranges in places for a very considerable
distance, but as yet its productiveness has been but little-
tested by man. Nature, with its forests of valuable
timbers, has shown clearly what lies in store for the hardy
settlers who are now steadily penetrating these recesses of the
great divide on the plateau of which lies the rich and fertile
tablelands of New England. On the banks of the rivers the soil
is a rich easily worked alluvium, and it is this land together with
that of volcanic formation which appears here and there more
particularly in the northesn parts that forms the best land. In
the succeeding ages the earth washed down from the mountain
sides or formed by the weathering of the rocks has mixed with
the immense masses of decaying vegetation and formed a soil
capable of producing anything.
Starting with the northern portions, the Tw*eed and Bruns-
swick rivers How trough a country of great richness and semi-
tropical in character. At this point parts of the main range
approach the coast, and the courses of the rivers are but short.
Added to this the difficulty at the bars makes navigation possible
only for small craft. Communication is now being established by
rail in Lismore, on the Richmond River, and settlers will the nbe
better able to bring their products to market. On the Tweed
River, which rises at the foot of Mount Warning and flows in a
north-east course 80 miles to the sea, there are considerable areas
of rich agricultural land, dense brush country, which only
requires clearing in order to be ready for the cultivation of all
classes of semi-tropical products. At the back of the Tweed
watershed comes in the watershed of the Upper Richmond, with
its splendid grass country and cedar forests, and magnificent
stretches of deep rich alluvial soil. Behind these again,
separated by another spur, is the watershed of the Uppei-
Clarence. The Brunswick River has a short course through
rich country, capable of high development and already
considerably settled. Communication is carried on with the


Richmond; only boats of light draught being able to enter.
Between the Brunswick and Richmond Rivers is the wonderfully
fertile Byron country, with its dense cedar forests and thriving
settlements. Byron Bay At the present moment it is much more
than the mere harbour of shelter which it formed a few years ago.
A large pier has been constructed, for which the products of the
neighbouring district are now shipped, and when the weather
renders the Tweed or Brunswick Rivers impracticable, produce
from these places will be easily forwarded to Byron Bay for
transhipment to the port. A steamer now trades to this place
weekly. The Richmond River, which rises amid the recesses of
the Macpherson Range drains, with its tributaries over 2400
square miles of country, and runs itself a course of 1 20 miles, of
which a very great portion is high class land. The river at
Coraki divides into two branches, one of which is navigable to
Lismore, the other to Casino, terminus of the railway
from the northern border. By steamer and owgher, the
river is navigable 200 miles and at places is fully half a
mile wide, The upper portions of the river, contains rich
land, — interspersed in rugged, pastoral, country—and densely
timbered, brush forests, but the lower land is rich alluvial,
capable—as existing settlements has already proved —of pro-
ducing immense yields of semi-tropical vegetation.
In this country there are still great areas of wonderfully rich
brush land, carrying cedar, tulip wood, beech and other valuable
timbers in great quantities. The soil varies from very rich, on
the flats, to splendid grazing country with patches fit for agricul-
ture in the uplands. In the eailier days on the Richmond, cattle
raising was the great industry, and this together with
timber getting, from the rich virgin forests, formed great sources
of wealth. In this way the land was prepared for agricultural
settlements, and to-day the visitor will find the growing of sugar-
cane and maize, and the production of dairy goods are, the
principal lines to which the settlers turn their attention. The
cultivation of sugar-cane and the manufacture of sugar has be-
come a great industry, and furnishes ample work for several mills
—tnat of the Colonial Sugar Co. at Broadwater being the finest
south of the line. Fruit and other fine products grow in
abundance.
In this Richmond district is an area of country some 60
miles long by 30 miles broad, known as the big scrub, which is of
wonderful richness. With a plentiful water supply intersected
by small streams, this land, volcanic or alluvial in its character,
forms a belt of country where the natural growth of timber and
vine, teak, pine, cedar, brushwood and numerous other woods of
high commercial value, forms a belt of land, the equal of
which it would be very difficult to discover. Settlement over


this area has progressed very considerably during the last few
years, and the settlers are generally speaking doing well.
In a report made by Mr. W. S. Campbell, the present head
of the Department of Agriculture, several years ago, that gentle-
man gave an excellent description of the Richmond country, said :
“The district is simply magnificent and its national fertility is
almost unequalled. Blessed with beautiful, generally undulating
land for the most part, and rich flats along the rivers. An
annual rainfall, second to none in the colonies, a wonderfully
temperate climate, absolutely free from malaria and extremely
healthy, an absence of hot winds, and water courses going for
miles fresh and ever flowing, even in the most severest drought,
Nearly the whole of the county of Rous consists of beauti-
ful generally, undulating country, admirably adapted when
judiciously cleared—for the raising of cattle, horses, pigs
and probably sheep, for dairying, for fruit, and for the growing
of medicinal and a vast variety of economic plants. In
different localities and wide apart, I found growing well,
coffee, (in berry), ripe sugar-cane, tea, maize, chinchona,
(peruvian bark), cork, ginger, mangoes, loquat, persimmon,
pineapples, bananas, grapes, oranges, limes, lemons, citrons,
sorghum, broom corn, vegetables of many kinds, apples
plums peaches, passion fruit (wild along the roadsides) and
many small fruits, cultivated grasses, cocksfoot, prairie grass,
and perrennial rye, and white alsibe and red clovers were grow-
ing magnificently, so well, in fact, that I have no doubt when
the brush land is well cleared from logs and stumps one acre will
easily support the year round; two or even three cows in full
milk, and without other feed, or fatten two bullocks at the same
time. The district is, I think, destined to become one of the
most important dairying in the colonies ; another important
industry will be fruit growing. Oranges and all the citrous
order thrive wonderfully well on the red volcanic soil, in fact
they will grow wild and bear good crops without any attention.
I saw some orange trees about 15 or 16 years old, in perfect
health, without the sign of scale or cochins and bearing good
crops, with a dense mass of buffalo growing about their roots.
I expected to find the Richmond district suffering from a
fearful drought, but to my surprise I could see no signs of
drought. The cattle were all fat and contented looking, many
up to their knees in grass, the maize crops in many places, good
sugarcane looking well, grass where protected for stock looked
magnificent (cocksfoot 3 feet high), good vegetables where ever
any one had taken the trouble to grow seeds, enormous crops of
pumpkins in places, bananas, pineapples, and oranges, with good
crops, oats had been cut upwards of 5 feet in height, excellent
field turnips and potatoes, small patches of lucerne looking well,


and abundance of water ia the main creeks distant only very few
miles apart. With all this, I was informed that the district had
just gone through the worst drought known. Twenty acres,
or even 10, of the land in the greater part of this district should
support a large family if well cultivated and attended to.”
On the banks of the river there are now the thriving
towns of Lisrnore, Ballina, Warded, Broadwater, Woodburn,
Swan Bay, Coraki and other places, all in direct communication
with Sydney, by water and with frequent coaches from the more
important places, to join the railway on the table-lands.
The North Coast Company’s Steamers make two trips
weekly, to and from Sydney, leaving the metropolis, Tuesday and
Saturday, and droghers ply in cargo in the higher parts of the
river as far as possible.
After leaving the north arm of the Richmond River,
the volcanic formation is changed for what is geologically known
as the Clarence series. The soil is alluvial in the river areas,
with a change at places to a land of a more sandy character,
and still highly fertile. This country between Lisrnore and
Grafton is fertile in character in places, but not so rich as in
other parts of the district. It is covered with timber of
high value. The land is good for grazing, with large
patches fit for agriculture, and coal is known to exist.
Where agricultural land is met with the soil is magnificent. The
proposal to instruct a railway from Lisrnore to Grafton is hung
up for a while, but the line will be very soon an accomplished
fact, and then the land will all be occupied either for agriculture
dairying or mixed farming The land is suitable for a variety of
crops, including barley, g ape vines, oranges, and many fruits.
In the richer parts sugarcane will grow. The subsoil is lighter
and there are some rich open plains in the vicinity of the mountain
ranges which, while not so fertile as the Richmond and other
river districts the land being more open is less costly in the first
instance to clear.
Immediately to the south of this country we reach the
rich district of the Clarence, the largest watershed on the eastern
coast This magnificent river, in its course of 240 miles from the
Obilisk mountains, passes through some of the richest land to be
found upon the face of the earth, and with its tributaries drains
an area of country, within which there are potentialities of
wealth, which are tremendous.
Grafton, the predestined capital of this district, “ the
queen city of the north,” as she has been described, is situated 42
miles from the river mouth, and is navigable for large vessels.
H.M.S. Lizard successfully accomplished the trip in May, 1892,
when Lord Jersey visited the district. The climate is very
healthy. The Lower Clarence is a magnificent stream, averaging


half a mile in width for nearly 50 miles, and is navigable for 61
miles to the town of Copmanhurst, while steamers can go ur> the
Orara to the Remornie meat works. From the mouth upwards
the river passes through rich alluvial country, much of which, as
in the case of the Richmond and other rivers, is already in a
high state of cultivation, and producing maize, sugarcane, pota-
toes, barley, wine and fruit. It is suitable for the growth of
almost all tropical products. In stock and dairy produce the
Clarence has few equals anywhere. Minerals are plentiful, and
at a shore distance from the ci'y are to be found gold, copper and
coal. Along the banks of this magnificent stream are the
thriving towns of Harwood, with its great sugar mills, Maclean.
Ulmarra, Brushgrove, I awrence (the shipping port for the woof
of the northern tablelands) and other places.
Above Grafton the upper Clarence with its tributaries the
Man, Nymboi, Timbarra Nimbodia, and Orara rivers, pass through
magnificent country. In the Orara distiict there has been very
considerable settlement on special areas, the price paid per acre,
varying from 80s to £Q per acre, A lot of the land there is
nearly if not quite, as good, as the wonderfully rich alluvial flats
of the lower Clarence, with the additional advantage of not being
subject to floods. The mountainous country is in places very rugged,
but contains a great deal of good grazing land, and is richly timbered,
while within the last few years, these ranges have been proved to
be amongst the richest mineral bearing districts in the colonies.
Communication with Grafton is kept up by the North Coast
Co’s, steamers, Kallatina and City of Grafton, the best of the
company’s fleet which makes regular trips twice a week, leaving
Sydney on Tuesday and Saturday. Droghers ply up the arms of
the rivers, conveying produce to the settlers and bringing down
to the mills and wharves heavy cargoes of cane, grain and other
produce for the farms. A coach from Grafton connects with the
railway at Glen Innes, a distance of 110 miles.
Some years ago Mr. Gullett, a leading Sydney journalist, in
the course of a series of articles in the Daily Telegraph, on the district
from Grafton to the Tweed, wrote of it as “ A district rich to an
unexampled degree in many of the conditions of wealth —teeming
with fertility blessed with a most stimulating climate, wat red
with rivers and creeks, beyond any other in Australia, and at
the same time absolutely prohibited from producing any hing
over a large part of this magnificent territory, paralysed in its
growth, and the development of its resources by the utter
inability to do anything wi h its products, if it had them.” The
last part of the remarks are intended to convey the difficulties
which existed at the time on getting those products to market.
Even at the time the situation was highly colored, and to-day
the position is very different. During the last few years of


extravagant expenditure, no part of the colony has participated'
so largely in the immense grants by government for roads and'
bridges, and the result is to-day that the setders are in a much
better position in that respect than they were at the time Mr.
Gullett wrote. Besides that, the advance of settlement has led
to keener competition in the carying trade, and to-day this rich
district is no longer shut out, as it has been in the past, from the
markets of the world. There are good roads from the Manning
to the Tweed, not merely between the main towns, but in the-
outside settlements, to the ports of shipment, in the different
ways.
Below the Clarence there is a belt of rich grazing land
eminently suited for dairying, and timbered with valuable hard-
wood. Along the coast between the Clarence Heads and Wool-
goolga, plumbago, gold, and coal, have been found. The coastal
land in places is very much suitable for sugar growing, and other
cultivati m. At the back of this at some elevation is the rich Orara
country included within the Clarence basin, but of which the ports
of Coffs Harbour and Woolgoola, will be the natural outlet. These
are comparatively new places with open jetties and, the Byron
Bay steamer pays a weekly visit, if the weather permits. Around
these places there is bound—in the near future—bo be a con-
siderable settlement.
This Orara country will grow magnificent crops, as the-
present settlers have proved, and it is eminently suited for dairy
farming. Already a factory for the Upper Orara is projected.
This is one of the sites adaptable to village settlement. The-
area of Crown lands suitable to settlement is enormous, and there-
are places where hundreds of families could settle in communities
with their farms some distance away. A good deal of selection-
has taken place in this Orara land recently.
The Bellinger river though small, is the outlet of a rich
district. Along its banks are large areas of land, suitable for high-
class farming, sugar, maize and other products, being grown.
The cedar and other forests are considerable, and at the back of
the river is very much talked of Don Dorrigo country, a
wonderfully rich and extensive belt of brush forest, with
enormous belts of cedar and other valuable soft woods. At the
present time, Fernmount is the principal part of the Bellinger,
and the towns of Bellinger and Raleigh, are also rising
centres. The trade to this river is conducted by a weekly
steamer. At the present time, Hexham, just north of Newcastle,
and 259 miles from Fernmount is the railway station, and
communication between this place and Hexham is made by coach,
taking in also the towns on the more southern rivers.
The Don Dorrigo country is a belt of dense cedar scrub,
which is worthy of attention at the present time. It is remark


• ably rich in the quality of its soil, and will yet form the midst of
a thriving settlement. Perhaps this Don Dorrigo district might
be included within the tableland country. It is really a smaller
tableland, lying as it were half way up the mountains of New
England. Within six miles from the valley of the Orara, the
mountains rise precipitously about 2000 feet to what is known
the false tableland, on which is situated the rich Don Dorrigo
and Bobostuck lands. It is a remarkable change. On this
country the English gooseberry will grow to perfection, whiie 8
or 10 miles away sugar cane is growable. From Jones’ to
Coghlan’s selections there is a dense brush forest, splendidly
watered. The Don Dorrigo and Bobostuck form a patch of vol-
canic soil, with magnificent cedar and other timbers, and soil quite
■equal in richness to the wonderfully fertile lands of the Richmond.
Scattered here and there amidst this heavy brush forest are small
ylains, destitute of timber or only lightly covered, varying in area
up to 120 acres or more and wonderfully rich in grass, admirable
sections for intending selectors.
This country is one which, still to a large extent in the
■state of nature, must ere long attract a large number of settlers.
Covering, as it does, a vast extent of country, it is bound to
'become in time a centre of agricultural production equal to any
in the colony and site of thousands of prosperous homesteads.
Here, perhaps better than any other place, is provided a site in
which experiments in village settlement could be tried. The
land, well timbered and well watered, is capable of producing
anything; the climate all that could be wished for; and there
are especial spots where settlers holding adjoining lands could
well settle in small communities at a convenient centre and work
their farms under a system of co-operation. Such a spot as this
would be far better suited for the settlement of these New Aus-
tralian pioneers than any block of land in far away Paraguay.
A large area of land is to be secured by settlers in this district,
which would form an admirable site for any form of co-operative
settlement, that may in the future be attempted.
Below the Bellinger a few miles is the Nambucca, another
short river pissing through country of similar characteristics.
Between the two rivers there is a considerable area of high-class
land. The cedar forests in this portion of the colony are of
enormous extent; the soil is rich aad settlement is, comparatively
speaking small.
Leaving these two small rivers and coming further south, is
the rich and ferlile district of the Macleay. This river, which
takes its rise near where Ben Lomond lifts his head, runs for 200
miles, and enters the ocean at Trial Bay. The upper part of the
watershed is rough country, rich for the pastoralist and timber-
getter. Including the Gyra and Apsley rivers, the Macleay


drains an area of 4800 miles of country. The lower portion of
the river passes through rich alluvial country, richly timbered
and capable of high cultivation. Yery extensive settlement has
taken place on this river recently. Navigation is possible as far
as Green Hills, 30 miles from the mouth, and a short distance
beyond the thriving town of Kempsey. In addition to the
extensively conducted industries of dairy-farming, the growing of
maize, potatoes, barley, &c, and wine-growing, the
breeding of horses, cattle and other stock, is a feature of the
district. Antimony, gold, silver and tin in the vicinity, also add
materially to the prosperity of the district. The upper portions
of the river are in very rough country, and the Aspley Falls and
gorges will, in time become a great resort of tourists, searching
for the weird and wonderful in nature A North Coast steamer
rnns between Sydney and Kempsey, doing the round trip in five
days.
The Hastings, which empties itself into the sea at Port
Macquarie, has a watershed of 1400 square miles, and passes
through rich undulating and densely wooded country, with extensive
agricultural and pastoral industries. The soil is remarkably rich
in places, and the trade of the district is becoming considerable.
The products which consist chiefly of maize, barley, oats,
potatoes, wine, dairy goods and timber, are brought down the arms
of the river by light-draught steamers for a distance of 30 miles,
and transhipped to the ocean vessels at Port Macquarie. The
stock industry is an important one, while saw-milling gives
employment to a considerable number of people. Gold and
and copper, worked in the neighbourhood, forms an aid to the-
purely agricultural operations. Two of the North Coast Co’s,
steamers call weekly at Port Macquarie.
The Manning, southernmost of these rivers, which, form;
what is known as the North Coast country, rises in the main
dividing range, near Nundle, and flows through a rich country
now being occupied by settlers. It has a length of 100 miles
through undulating country, rough and broken in the upper por-
tions, but widening out to alluvial flats, with valuable timbers
and capable—as the thriving existing settlements prove—of high
developement in agricultural products. The river is navigable as
far as Wingham 20 miles, to which place a steamer runs twice
a week.
In addition to the town of Wingham, there are on its
banks, the thriving settlement of Cundletown and Taree, Coraki,
Tinonee and Coopernook.
These northern rivers in the coast district between Port
Stephens and and the nothern bolder of the colony, constitute a
portion of the territory of this colony, far exceeding in richness
and capability of products, in any similar area to be found in


•any one of the colonies, if not in the world. All that is
needed is sett’ement, and within the next few years the
developments will be enormous. The first section of the north-
-coast railway is nearly completed, and it will not now be long
before the iron-horse will be speeding over these fertile valleys
•conveying the products of the settler to the market, and bringing
therefrom, the comforts of civilization, with which to adorn the
settlers’ homes. Large expenditure has already been incurred by
the Government in making more navigable the great natural
highways to commerce, which these rivers afford.
That eminent engineer, Sir John Goode, when he visited
the Colonies some years ago, reported to the Government on
schemes for securing permanent deep waters at the bar entrances
of these rivers, and at the present moment extensive works are
in progress with this aim in view.
Now then is the time to secure land and settle in
this country. Land in large quantities in all these districts
is available for the selector at low rates at the present
moment, less considerably than its value in comparison with
the freeholds of other districts. In most places the timber
on the land is an item of no small value ; in many places it will
immediately almost repay the entire cost of the land when cleared
and ready for cultivation. The initial difficulties of pioneering
are over. Many crops are proved by experience to be profitable.
Nowhere is the market inaccessible; in most places it is within
easy distance, and within a few years it will be brought almost to
the door of the settlers. All that is wanted is men such as those
who in the past have made the country. The opportunity is there
for these, and no necessity exists for going further afield.
The climate is admirably suited for the European races, as
shown by the healthy nature of the large settlements in existence.
The general dryness of the climate of Australia has no doubt a great
deal to do with the entire absence of the malarial fever and other
ills to be found in other countries. Probably no country in the
world approaching the semi-tropical regions is so healthy. A few
figures will give a correct idea of the heat and cold. At Lismore,
28.53 deg. south, 52 feet above sea level and 13 miles distant,
there is a mean temperature of 69.2 deg., the summer average
•being 78 deg. and winter 52.5 deg. The daily range of the
thermometer in the shade is 21.2 deg. The highest reading in
the shade recorded is 101.2 deg., and the lowest 30 deg. At
Clarence Heads 29.28 deg. south, 120 feet above sea level, and
on the coast the figures are: mean temperature, 62.23 deg.,
summer average 59.4 deg., winter average 59.4 deg., daily range
of thermometer in the shade 15.6 deg., highest reading recorded
96.8 deg., lowest 42.5 deg. Port Macquarie, 31.25 deg. south, 49
feet above sea level, and on the coast: mean temperature 63.8


deg., summer average 72.1 deg., winter average 54 deg., daily
range of thermometer in the shade 16.9 deg., highest reading
recorded 94.6 deg., lowest 31.8 deg. In a recent table
prepared by no less an authority than Mr. H. C, Russell,
the Government Astronomer, that gentleman makes some
interesting comparisons between places in this Colony, Europe
and America, which are valuable as showing that in com-
paratively the same positions in relation to the equator, places in
this colony have much the advantage in coolness. For instance,
Grafton, 29.43 deg. south, has a mean temperature of 68.1 deg.;
while New Orleans, 30 deg. north, is 69.8 deg., and Cairo, 30.3
deg. north, 72.3 deg. The summer temperature of the three places
is: Grafton 76.8 deg., New Orleans 82 deg., Cairo 85.1 deg.; while
the mean winter temperature is ; Grafton 58.4 deg., New Orleans
55.8, Cairo 58,2. This shows that at Grafton, not only is the
avei’age heat considerably lower than these other places which are
really further from the Equator, but the change of temperature, a
most important feature, is not nearly so great. Speaking
of the climate in “ Coghlan’s Wealth and Progress of New
South Wales,” it is stated: “Casino and Grafton would
resemble the country bordering on the Gulf of Suez in the Red
Sea, Delhi in India, Nangpo in China, and New Orleans in the
United States.” Such, however, is not the case. Casino has a
mean temperature of 67 deg., only 1 deg. more than that of
Messina in Sicily, which lies more than 9 deg. further from the
Equator. Not only is the climate of the coastal region more
mild in regard to average temperature than the corresponding
latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere, but the range is not so
great. This is a very important factor in estimating the
healthiness of a country. Taking the coast generally, the
difference between the mean summer and mean winter tempera-
ture may be taken as averaging not more than 24 deg., a range
so small that it will be rarely found elsewhere. The famed
resorts of the Mediterranean seaboard bear no comparison with
the Pacific slope of New South Wales, either for natural
salubrity of the summer and winter, while the epidemics and
pestilences which have devastated those regions of ancient
civilization have never made their appearance on these shores.
The rainfall of the district is comparatively heavy; in
fact, the coastal portion shows the heaviest records of the colony,
and The Tweed basin and all along the coast down as far as
Port Macquarie all show big records of rainfall. Back from the
the coast—Lismore, Casino and Grafton, Kempsey and Taree—
though still considerable, are not nearly so heavy; but in the
country around Newton Boyd around the Guy Fawkes lands are
places where the downpour is heavy. Rainfall is at all times an
uncertain quantity, inasmuch that at any given place the


quantity in one year may be only half as much as that of the
year succeeding. Still, as showing the comparative wetness or
dryness of a place, the mean average of a number of years must
be taken as a very useful guide, and the valuable publications
issued from the Observatory, based on the investigations of Mr.
Russell, are of great value. In the general results of rainfall
observations of the latest published returns, we gather the
following details, showing the mean annual rainfall, the mean
annual rainy days, the number of years for the mean, and the
rainfall for 1891 for the status named :
Tweed River Heads, on the coast, 71.68 inches, 149 rainy
days for 5 years; 1891, 71.38 inches.
Casino, 28 miles from the coast, 44 06 inches, 116 rainy
days for 16 years ; 1891, 49.85 inches.
Lismore, 13 miles from the coast, 55.42 inches, 145 rainy
days for 7 years; 1891, 53.10 inches.
Clarence Heads on the coast, 55.97 inches, 106 rainy
days for 14 years ; 1891, 72,59 inches.
Grafton, 22 miles from the coast, 38.25 inches, 96 rainy
days for 19 years ; 1891, 44.18 inches.
Bowraville, 10 miles from the coast, 69.28 inches, 154
rainy days for 1 year; 1891, 69.28 inches.
Guy Fawkes, 37 miles from the coast (1) 71.57 inches,.
167 rainy days for 4 years, 1891 ; 71.09 inches. (2) 66.04
inches, 122 rainy days for 2 years; 1891, 54.39 inches.
Trial Bay, on the coast, 92.42 inches, 149 rainy days for
2 years; 1891, 87.34 inches.
Kempsey West, 12 miles from the coast, 50.88 inches,
102 rainy days for 9 years; 1891, 52.28 inches.
Manning Heads, on the coast, 63.94 inches, 145 rainy
days for 4 years ; 1891, 65.40 inches.
Taree, 10 miles from the coast, 46.28 inches, 134 rainy
days for 8 years ; 1891, 41.72 inches.
The geological map shows that the chief part of the
Clarence and Richmond watersheds are what is known as the
Clarence series, while below the Nymbodia is a large area of
silurious formation. The coal measures of the Newcastle district
form the southern boundary of the Manning, and extend a short
distance back from the coast nearly as far up as Kempsey.
The third system of the coal-bearing rock comprises the Clarence
carboniferous basin, and is of the Mesozoic age. Professor
David estimates the length of the part of it which contains
the principal seams to be about 65 miles from east to west,
while its width is 37 miles from north to south. The most
remarkable beds in the Clarence basin are a series of massive
white sandstones, which were considered by the late Mr. C. S.
Wilkinson, Government Geologist, to be the equivalents of the


Hawkesbury sandstones, and were named by him the Middle
Clarence series, occupying as they do an intermediate position
between the upper and lower coal beds of this basin. None of
the coal beds of this basin have yet been proved to be of com-
mercial value. Professor David estimates the top seam to contain
1 ft. 9 in. out of a total thickness of 5 ft. 7\ in. of coal fit for
ordinary consumption, while the second and third seams have
not yet been sufficiently tested to allow of adequate opinion
being formed of their value. It is probable, however, that even
if the seams prove to be of insufficient thickness and purity for
export purposes, they will supply all local wants. Three seams
have been proved at Coraki on the Richmond, and trials are
being made on the Clarence and elsewhere. Diorite and basalt
occur principally in the country between the Macleay and
Manning Rivers. Serpentine is found at Port Macquarie.
Granite, diorite and basalt formations occur on the
mountain ranges among which the rivers take their rise, and which
form the western boundary of the districts. The granites and
diorite rocks have been recognised as belonging to the Palaezoic
age, whilst the volcanic rocks, basalt and others, are contem-
poraneous with the series which cover other parts of the districts.
The alluvial deposits in the watersheds of all these rivers,
are of very great depth.
In the forests of this district will be found some
indications of its great richness. “It is impossible,” says Mr.
Ednie Brown in one of his reports on Forest department, “ to
assess the commercial value of forests to a community ; it is so
enormous as to be absolutely incalculable, not only from a direct
trading point of view, but also from the indirect benefits that are
conferred upon the agricultural, pastoral, the dairying, and a
variety of other important industries, and through them upon the
general public America has secured an opening in all the
markets of the world, Old and New, by means of her timber
products, and the Baltic Provinces have commanded, if they have
not monopolised them, for centuries. The properly planted and
carefully conserved natural forests of a country are as gold mines,
though more lasting in their character, and possess an inexhaus-
tible and unassailable value of their own. At the present time
hundreds of-thousands of pounds are sent out of this country
every year for timber, a very large portion of which might be
obtainable in the forests of these Colonies, and the whole of which
might be produced in New South Wales for a comparatively
small annual expenditure. Nearly all the timber that is required
for mining, fencing, railway, and firewood purposes can now be
obtained from our own forests, and, with a little care, it would be
possible to produce nearly all the timber, including the best
hardwoods, which is required for building and manufacturing


purposes.” Such woods as these contain within them a very-
strong comment on the productiveness of this district, wherein
the majority of our valuable timber forests exist. The soft
woods of the Colony are found chiefly in the brush forests
of the coast districts, and rival those of any other part of
the world. Some of the least known of the brush forest trees
have wood grained and marked most beautifully, which is
capable of receiving the highest polish, while others are fragrantly
perfumed. These woods are adapted to the finest description of
cabinet-making, and it is strange that their merits should have
so long escaped attention. Amongst the chief varieties of woods
of this class may be mentioned red cedar, now unfortunately
disappearing, the beautiful wood of which, somewhat resembling
mahogany, is admirably adapted for the finer kinds of cabinet-
makers’ work. Some of the cedar trees grow to an immense size,
as much as 2,500 cubic feet of valuable timber having been
obtained from one tree. In addition to the cedar may be
mentioned rosewood, tulip-wood, yellow-wood, white maple, white
beech, myall, marble-wood, mock orange, and many others.
Besides their use for cabinet-making, many of the brush timbers
are of great utility for the rougher kinds of carpentry, while some,
both hard and soft woods, are admirably adapted for coachbuilders’
and coopers’ work.
In determining the value of a country no better criterion
can be found in a general way than the natural forests, and
those of these northern river districts are of immense value.
One of the most important if not the most important trees
indigenous to New South Wales is the red cedar, the timber of
which has a high commercial value, and is favorably known in
all parts of the world. “ The wood is easily worked, comparatively
light in texture, fairly durable, and is largely used in the con-
struction of furniture, general house decorations, and other
purposes where lightness, beauty of grain, and capability of
taking a fine polish are necessary. The tree attains a height
sometimes of over 180 feet, and from 4 to 10 feet in diameter.
As a rule it is deciduous, umbrageous when allowed sufficient
room to expand its branches, and is generally handsome in
appearance. The natural habitat of the tree is limited to deep
alluvial soils, sheltered and warm situations, with general sur-
roundings of a semi-tropical nature. In all cases where the
tree has been found, and this has invariably been in isolated
patches, it has been intermixed with, surrounded and protected
by more or less dense masses of forest vegetation. To a very
large extent the cedar can only be grown successfully upon sites
which are suitable for settlement, and hence no doubt will be
sought after for the latter purpose. The real habitat and home
of the red cedar in its most comprehensive sense, is found to be


upon the Tweed, Richmond, Brunswick, Clarence and Macleay.
Perhaps, however, the palm as regards the natural production of
the tree may be given to that of the rich alluvial deposits of the
Tweed River District, from which, to say the very least, millions
of superficial feet of the timber have been removed.” These,
again, are the words of the Director General of Forests, and
may be taken to give some indications of the value of forests of
this country.
Among the timbers which these northern river forests
contain are red cedar, blue gum, spotted gum, flooded gum, grey
gum, red gum, white gum, oak, ironbark, blackbutt, stringybark,
tallow wood, blood wood, white mahogany, beech, teatree, box,
bastard box, hoop pine, peppermint, apple, white cedar, silky oak,
mountain ash, mountain pine, turpentine, scrub box, rosewood,
tulip-wood, coach-wood, sassafras bean, cherry, messmate, red
mahogany, plum, brush box, honeysuckle, swamp oak, forest oak,
teak, cudgery, fig, quondong, cork-wood, mock orange, thorny
yellow satin-wood, scrub myrtle, marara, lignum, marble-wood
and hickory. Most of these trees have a commercial value, and
could find a ready market within the colony. Cork-wood, rose-
wood, negro-head, beech, mock orange, thorny yellow satin-wood,
white thorn, white beech, bastard myall, scrub myrtle, marara,
mountain brush, union nut, water gum, brush cherry, bignum
brush-wood, scrub white cedar, marble-wood, hickory, are all
timbers that have been tested and proved suitable for engraving,
and while not equal for this purpose to box-wood, some of them
are better than the American maple. They are all capable of
good work, it only requires proper seasoning and dressing to give
them a marketable value. In one of his reports Mr. Brown, says:—
“ Under our present Land Laws, in the Eastern Division
of the Colony it is open to the timber-getter to select splendidly
timbered unreserved Crown lands of an area of from 40 to 640
acres upon a deposit of 2s. per acre, and the conditions otherwise
are such that he can have cut and drawn away the very finest of
the indigenous timber before ever being called upon to fulfil other
conditions of the Land Act, and as a matter of fact eventually he
may allow the selection to lapse.” This is certainly not a
healthy condition of things, but not the slightest doubt exists as
to its truth. There is land in this country which can be
selected to-day on the easiest of terras, on which there is timber
that will, within a few years, pay a selector the entire cost of his
holding. Surely this should be a premium to the bona fide
selector to go perhaps a little out of his way to get on the land.
The timber trade of these sources is still enormous in its
proportions, and we still, from the virgin forests of this country,
supply not only a great portion of its own wants, but export con-


siderably, for harbour works of Melbourne and parts of New
Zealand all or nearly all hardwood has been used, and from these
Northern Rivers of New South Wales, chiefly the Clarence.
Having thus in brief described some of the salient features
of this district, it is now necessary that we should, in more detail,
give some of the facts of past experience to show the satisfactory
value of the settlements that have taken, and in brief to indicate
that it is all that has been claimed of it. Of the question of past
settlements, no better authority can be quoted than Coghlan’s
“ Wealth and Progress of New South Wales,” in which the writer,
referring to the Northern Coast District, says “ the occupation of
the country has extended rapidly of late years along the banks of
the fine rivers which empty into the Pacific Ocean. Figures re-
garding this district will be found below ;
NORTH COAST.
Occupiers of.
T 3
<V
. rt
*d 2 E
■3 2 =
.a ■§ <!
s i |
j <
cj c 3 _
g g _g
< C O
ores. Acres. Acn
72,209 49,219 721,
30,211 19,368 109,
53,438 32,068 285,
37,811 42,249 210,
58,760 73,112 331,
42,4291216,016 1,658,
is the Northe
isfactory resu'
(Owhere else h
on industrio
T 3
C
►3
2
o
&
<D
D
5-1
73 cr
C T 5
c 3 C
J a
® -t
I 2
fa o
Electorates.
fa i 8
w cSfa
fa
No. No.
No. Acres.
Richmond
Clarence
Grafton
425 80
254 43
2,316 672,209
820 90,211
923 253,438
1,217 167,811
1,561 258,760
6,837 1,442,429
Acres.
721,428
109,579
285,506
210,060
331,872
1,658,445
258 62
Macleay
Hastings and Manning
Totals
316 95
361 78
1,609 358
Of all the districts of New South Wales the Northern
Coast Electorates exhibit the best and most satisfactory results
as regards the settlement of the crown lands. Nowhere else has
the great object of the Act of 1861 to settle on industrious
farming population on the soil been better fulfilled. The total
number of land-holders is 6,837, of whom only 1,609 are tenants,
4,319 occupying their own freeholds, whilst 358 work both their
own land and additional areas rented from private owners, and
551 occupy areas of crown lands together with their freeholds.
The total area alienated in this rich part of the colony amount
to 1,658,445 acres, or only 19.9 per cent, of the total extent of
the district, which covers some 8,352,640 acres; and the average
area of holdings is 343 acres, ranging from 133 acres in the
Clarence to 311 in the Richmond. The proportion of leasehold
lands to the area alienated is comparatively small, there being
only 216,016 acres so held, or 13 per cent, of the total alienated
area ; whilst 1,442,429 acres are in the occupancy of the owners
of the land themselves. In the districts of the Richmond and


Grafton the area leased by private persons forms only 6.8 and
11.2 per cent, respectively of the area alienated; and the
maximum is reached in the Macleay, where 20.1 per cent, of the
settled rural lands is occupied by tenants. From the above
a pretty fair idea may be obtained of the present state of
the rural settlement in the valleys of the coastal rivers,
and in all that country which extends from the sea to the
first slopes of the Great Dividing Range. Geographical features
and climate are the main elements in determining the occupation
of the soil, irrespective of administrative boundaries. In this
part of New South Wales the settlement of the public lands has
proceeded in a way very different to that of the table land which
extends from north to south, and divides the rich agricultural
valleys of the coastal rivers and their broken mountainous
watershed from the immense plains of the western district.
It would be erroneous to imagine, however, because the coastal
region is better fitted for the purpose of the agriculturist,
the dairyman and fruit-grower, that the lands at present alienated
are solely devoted to those industries ; the agricultural develop-
ment of New South Wales proceeds very gradually, and even in
the districts referred to only a small proportion of the settled
area is under cultivation.
Referring to agricultural products, the same authority
says ;
“ The north-coast districts, comprising the electorates of
the Hastings and Manning, the Macleay, Grafton, Clarence, and
the Richmond, altogether contain 115,756 acres of land under
crop, or 7.0 per cent, of the area alienated, which is computed at
1,658,445 acres. The proportion of the area farmed by tenant
occupiers and the proprietors themselves, is as follows : —Area
cultivated by owners equals 78,398 acres, or 64.3 per cent.; area
cultivated by tenants 41,358 acres, or 35.7 per cent. In the
electorates of the Macleay and Grafton, the proportion of area
cultivated by tenants is greater, reaching 42.7 per cent, and
43,8 per cent. ; but on the Hastings and Manning, the Clarence
and the Richmond, this proportion only attains 34.5, 32.7 and
29.1 per cent, of the total area cultivated. The proportion of
land cultivated to that alienated is 7.0 per cent, for the whole
district, but this does not include the area laid down in grasses
for dairy purposes, which covers 94,417 acres, the total area
devoted to agricultural or dairy purposes in the north-coast
district, amounting, therefore, to 210,173 acres, or 12.7 per cent,
of the area alienated. The dairy industry is rapidly assuming
large proportions in the two electorates just mentioned, but the
principal crops raised are maize and sugar, the latter being the
chief industry of the more northerly situated electorates of the


Richmond and the Clarence Rivers, with some acres in that of
the Macleay. The number of persons employed in agricultural
occupations, including dairy farming, was in all 10,835, of whom
1,595 were females. Of the latter, 1,166 were employed in the
dairy and 429 assisted in farm work ; whilst the males engaged
in purely agricultural pursuits numbered 8,564, and 676 attained
to dairy industries.”
The agricultural future of the north-coast districts cer-
tainly looks very bright, as there is no scarcity of land suited to
the purpose of the farmer, and the climate is favourable to the
growth of all the natural productions of sub-tropical and
temperate zones. The lack of means of transport has been the
principal drawback to the progress of agricultural settlement in
this district; however, the question of providing railway com-
munication throughout its extent has now received the attention
of Parliament, and as has been pointed out, the roads are much
improved.
The most valuable statistics of all are those dealing with
the average production per acre of these different crops, and any
one who will study these figures cannot but be struck by the
magnificent returns which a bountiful nature gives to the tiller
of the soil in this especially favored district. It must be
remembered, however, that these figures show the results of all
farming, good, bad or indifferent, that the evils of floods, droughts
and disease all have a lowering tendency on the general average,
and therefore, the returns in the majority of cases are larger and
considerably larger than these figures indicate. In the year
1891, for which most of the figures are quoted, the rivers were
visited with floods which tended largely to decrease the returns
and bring down averages. Take as an instance potatoes. The
average yield was apparently not a large one, but in ordinary years
on ordinary land 10 to 12 tons per acre is not an exceptional
return. And if it be remembered in considering these figures
that they deal with the cultivation carried on over an immense
area of country equally good in all respects, it will be seen what
a field is open here for the bona fide settler who wishes to
establish for himself a home upon the soil. With that settle-
ment which must come in the not distant future the fruitful
valleys of these rivers will become a home of peace and plenty,
where toiling thousands will draw from the earth an ample
reward for their labors.
It is now thirty years since the first start was made at
sugar growing in the Macleay River district, and so quickly was
the suitableness of this Northern River country shown for the
productiveness of this crop that it was within a short period
from the date mentioned being cultivated on the rich lands of the
lower valley of the Clarence, Richmond, Brunswick and Tweed


Rivers, and this is now the great industry of this fruitful district.
The Macleay, which for some years was the principal seat of the
industry, was found to be subject to frosts and has now dropped out
of the trade. The sugar crop returns show that last season in the
county of Rous there was under cultivation 5,141 acres cut, and
8,201 acres not cut-yield 122,237 tons. In the county of Rich-
mond 1,704 acres cut, 2,221 acres not cut-yield 35,697 tons. In
the county of Clarence 4,645 acres cut, 4,673 acres not cut-yield
105,581 tons. In the county of Fitzroy 49 acres cut, 67 acres
not cut-yield 344 tons.
The chief centre of the sugar cultivation at the present is
the Richmond Electorate, covering the Tweed, Brunswick and
Richmond Rivers. The total area planted in this district, in 1891,
was 13,549 acres, or over three-fifths of the whole area under cane
in the colony; of this 5,133 acres cut yielded 121,329 tons, an
average of 23.6 tons per acre. On the Clarence River the;
aggregate area under crop was 8,496 acres, and the area cut 2,700
acres, giving a yield of 62,126 tons, or an average of 23.4 tons per
acre. Sugar cane is generally cut in the second year of its
growth, the fields being replanted after being cropped for 3 or 4
years. From plantations of full bearing the weight of cane
cut varies from 25 to 32 tons, while the price paid ranges
from 11s. to 13s. per ton in addition to the cutting, so
that the annual yield is from £7 10s. to £lO per acre planted.
As is shown, these Northern Rivers are eminently adapted
in soil a'nd climate to the growth of this crop, and it is not very
often that the enemy to the young cane, the frost, is experienced,
except some distance back from the coast. In 1870 there were
3,082 acres under cultivation; in 1880, 10,971 acres; in 1890,
20,446 acres; and in 1892, 24,708 a.cres. This shows a progress,
steady and substantial increase in the area cropped, and there is
every prospect of a vigorous extension of the industry.
In reference to sugar production a mere glance at
statistics will show that we do not yet produce nearly sufficient
for our own wants. In 1891, we imported 3,744 cwt. of loaf
sugar, while our exportations of other sugars have of late years
totalled: 1887, 520,192 cwt. ; 1888, 470,668 cwt. ; 1889,
642,880 cwt. ; 1890, 558,540 cwt. ; 1891, 512,728 cwt. There
is no substantial reason why, instead of importing sugar we should
not, with the development of the north-eastern corner of the
colony supply our demands, if not indeed become exporters.
Sugar cane is the best paying crop where the soil is
especially suitable for its growth. So far, it has only been
planted along the banks of the rivers, owing to the difficulty of
carting the cane any distance to the mills. But in this back
land there is an immense area of land in every way suited to
sugar cultivation. That large area, known as the big scrub and


the volcanic ridges and flats between the Richmond and the
Tweed are eminently adapted for sugar growing, and the opening
of the Lismore-Tweed Railway will make available an immense
extent of this country, so that it is very generally anticipated the
industry in this district will be considerably advanced in the
early future. About Casino, the frost is the cause of some
trouble, and hardy varieties of cane are required. On the
Clarence, Grafton is nearly the limit of the sugar country. The
flats between that place and the sea are eminently suited to
sugar cultivation. At Woolgoolga and Coff’s Harbour, sugar is
being grown a few miles from the sea. On the Bellinger and lower
rivers, the essentially sugar country has disappeared, and though
the product can be grown it is necessary that the varieties shall
be hardy, and the average crop is not of the high total which is
obtained from the more tropical districts of the northern-most
rivers.
Maize may be termed the staple crop in the valley of these
coastal rivers. These districts are peculiarly adapted by nature
for this cereal, which will grow big crops almost anywhere
within the boundary. The yield is very large. The growth of
maize cultivation in these districts has been very considerable.
The area under cultivation was 77,620 acres in 1888, and 84,722
acres in 1892. The crop average in the latter year for the
various rivers was: Macleay, 37.69 bushels per acre : Hastings
and Manning, 36.32 bushels per acre; Clarence, 36.43 bushels
per acre; Richmond, 34.45 bushels per acre ; Grafton, 36.85
bushels per acre. According to the latest figures published by
the Government Statistician, the total average under crops in the
different counties last year were : Rous, 24,749 acres ; Richmond,
7,087 acres; Clarence, 35,064 acres; Fitzroy, 8,951 acres;
Macquarie, 18,088 acres.
Taking the seven years embraced in the period 1885-92,
the mean averages in the river districts were ; Macleay, 34.3
bushels per acre ; Hastings and Manning, 32.5 bushels per acre;
the Clarence, 34.6 bushels per acre; the Richmond, 29.7 bushels
per acre ; Grafton, 35 bushels per acre. The only districts in the
Colony that compare at all well with these averages are Tumut
and the South Coast; and in the former exception the area under
cultivation is hardly sufficient Mr. Coghlan thinks to justify
any deduction being drawn from its exceptional yield. The
whole North Coast combined for the period mentioned showed
an average of 33.3 bushels, the maximum average for
every one year being 36.3 bushels, and minimum average 27.6
bushels. With the advance of the dairying industry, a large
area will, it is anticipated, be cultivated with this crop for the
purpose of green fodder for cattle.
Potatoes and other root crops, which are excellent in


variation with maize, have been proved successful in all the
districts; but potatoes, however, form practically the only root
crop yet grown in the district, and the area under cultivation in
1891-2 was 2,688 acres, the totals for the districts being : Rich-
mond, 400 acres ; Clarence, 689 acres ; Grafton, 956 acres;
Macleay, 290 acres; Hastings and Manning, 353 acres. The
average production for the whole of the districts was 2.91 tons
per acre, and for the individual districts : Richmond, 3.03 tons ;
Clarence, 2.70 tons; Grafton, 2.85 tons; Macleay, 3.71 tons;
Hastings and Manning, 2.71 tons. These yields, though not
so high as the coastal districts immediately in the south
and those in the neighbourhood of Eden, are considerably
above the average for the colony. Their great value is in
forming a crop in variation for maize and other more profitable
products. They clear the land wonderfully, and while giving
a considerable return in themselves, enhance the value of
the land in the following year for maize production.
Oats is a crop not so much cultivated as in other parts of
the colony, again because in the settled districts other crops will
pay better. The latest statistics issued show that the area under
cultivation in the district was—for grain, 25 acres ; for hay, 1,475
acres ; and for green food, 198 acres. The average production of
grain was 25.16 bushels, and hay 1.62 tons, in both cases the
figures being the highest for the colony for the season 1891-2,
The cultivation for grain, which is hardly worthy of note, was in
the southern districts of the Hastings and Manning and Macleay,
while the cultivation for hay was evenly distributed over the
districts.
Over the greater area of this country wheat is not
a suitable product. The land is altogether too rich for that
cereal, and can be better employed in more productive crops, and
consequently the wheat crop has been practically nil. In 1882-3,
over the whole North Coast District, only 547 acres were under
this cereal, and that area has year by year diminished till in
1891-2 only 155 acres was cultivated. The average yield of the
small area during the 9 years, 1883-92, was 18.2 bushels, a record
only equalled by the South Coast Country. There is land back
somewhat in the mountain ranges of the poorer class, where wheat
will yet be grown ; but it is doubtful if the crop will ever meet
the requirements of the district, which will in the future, when
railway communication is established in New England, obtain its
supplies from that fruitful tableland.
Barley is another of these crops that the land has been
far too fruitful in other products to allow of it being largely cul-
tivated. The areas under crop for last year were —for grain, 579
acres ; hay, 52 acres ; and green food, 211 acres ; and the average
yield per acre—grain, 28.65 bushels; hay, 2.88 tons. In both


cases being in advance of all the rest of the colony, except that
New England averaged 3.05 tons of hay.
Rye and millet are crops which are grown to a small
extent for fodder purposes chiefly, and on nearly all the rivers.
With that development of the dairying industry may be
anticipated with considerably larger area of ground will be cul-
tivated with these crops. Both grow well, and as in the case of
others yield higher values on these northern rivers than elsewhere
in the colony.
Lucerne is a crop that grows splendidly on the river flats
particularly. Wherever it has been tried, it produces considerable
crops. The averase crop of hay for lucerne and sown grasses for
1891-2 season was 3.47 tons, the total area grown being 172
acres for hay, and 483 acres for green food. The only districts
in the colony which compare favorably with these yields are
some of those on the lower part of the Hunter river, and one or
two other coastal districts.
The practice of laying down permanent grasses for cattle
is extended to the North Coast districts, and at the beginning of
last year there were 94,417 acres down, the areas being : Rich-
mond, 53,865 acres; Clarence, 465 acres; Grafton, 616 acres;
Macleay, 35,719 acres; Hastings and Manning, 3,932 acres.
This area is extending with the extension of the dairying industry
which will yet be one of the principal features, particularly in
the back settlements of these rivers.
Pumpkins and melons are cultivated in the districts to
a considerable extent, and the yield for 1891-2 for 659 acres,
averaging 6.80 tons per acre.
The cultivation of fruit more particularly those varieties
of sub-tropical fruit which grow so well, has been somewhat
neglected despite the splendid market that exists in Sydney
and the southern colonies for these products. This industry is
being taken up now in some of the districts. The total area
under fruit is 556 acres, 362 acres bearing and 194 acres not
bearing. About one-half of these orchards are situated in the
Richmond district. The value per acre of the crops varied
considerably in the district, the statistics showing Richmond,
£l5 11s 4d per acre; Clarence, £9 7s 6d per acre; Grafton,
£26 per acre; Macleay, £l3 15s 5d per acre; Hastings and
Manning, £8 16s 5d per acre; general average, £l4 11s 2d per
acre.
The orangeries of the north coast districts, though in the
aggregate only covering an area last year of 106 acres, are yet
likely to be very much more considerable. Of these mentioned,
68 acres are in bearing, and 38 acres not yet bearing, an indica-
tion of the extension of plantation more recently. These
orangeries are situated in all the different districts, and every-


where the fruit and others of the citrus variety do very well.
The grape vine is grown to some slight extent in these
districts, 312 acres being under cultivation in 1891. Of this, 161
acres was for wine making, 90 acres for table use, and 61 acres
not bearing, and the average yield per acre was: wine, 210
gallons; fruit, 1.96 tons. In these three northern districts of
Richmond, Clarence and Grafton, the yield was in both respects
small, but the Macleay (275 gallons and 2.29 tons) and Hastings
and Manning (268 gallons and 5 2.55 tons of fruit) prove them
to be among the most productive districts in the Colony.
Tobacco has been a considerable crop in the past, but is
now only cultivated to a very small extent, probably owing to the
fact that production in other districts has reached the limit of
home requirements, and also because it is a crop requiring very
much more working than those now grown, without giving the
corresponding higher returns. There is a lack of knowledge among
European agriculturalists apparently, as to the proper cultivation
and preparation of the leaf. The soil on these northern rivers is
in places admirably suited to the growth of the finer class of leaf
suitable for cigars, and if in the direction of improved class of
production the industry could be revived, it is possible it might
be extended to considerable limits. The tobacco now produced in
the Colony is not in quality equal to the American, and this has
militated against the establishment of an export trade. This is a
disadvantage- to be largely overcome by more careful selection of
stock and cultivation. In the only district in which tobacco was
grown in 1891, the Hastings and Manning, the average yield was
14.55 cwt. per acre.
Having shown by actual figures what these districts have
proved themselves capable of producing, there comes the question
what other crops are there of commercial value which could be
grown. Within the limits of a pamphlet such as this, it will be
impossible in any but the briefest manner to give an indication of
some of those likely to come into considerable prominence.
Coffee it has been proved will grow well in different places.
Splendid shrubs of this valuable plant have been grown in the
Byron Bay District and around the Richmond, at Chatsworth
Island and other parts of the Clarence. It is a plant requiring
well sheltered spots, and will probably grow well from the
Clarence to the Tweed. There may be some difficulty with regard
to cultivation. The berries have to be picked when they are ripe;
and this necessitates during the season that each tree should be
narefully inspected nearly every day. The cost of labour would
be a drawback perhaps.
Rice will grow in the tropical districts; the question is,
however, whether it would be a payable crop in the face of the
enormous competition to which it would be subjected from eastern
countries.


Among the industries deserving attention in this district
is that of sericulture. The mulberry-tree grows to great perfection,
and the silkworms already introduced have shown by their
instinctive industry that a great trade in raw silk might be carried
on from the shores of Australia as easily as from those of China
or Italy. The matter has received some attention recently, and
considerable interest attaches to the work of a colony of Italians
now engaged on the industry about 8 miles from the township of
South Woodburn, between the Richmond and Clarence. “The
country about the settlement,” said Mr. Campbell in a recent report,
“ is undulating, bearing a hardwood forest, the chief timber being
ironbark, blackbutt, tallow-wood, peppermint, stringy-bark,
sheoak, &c. The soil, which is considered to be extremely poor
and worthless in comparison with the rich alluvial brush land on
the banks of the Richmond and Clarence Rivers, or the soil of
the “ Big Scrub ” in the Richmond River district, is better than
it seems to be at first sight, or when it is in a state of nature, and
this is apparent where it has been veil cleared and cultivated.
The timber is very heavy and difficult to clear. The country and
soil have very much the appearance of many of the heavily
timbered proportions of the county of Cumberland—both districts
overlying coal-measures. The grape vine succeeds very well, and
grapes are produced abundantly. The mulberry suceeds admirably,
in fact its growth is surprising. The cuttings planted a little
more than one year ago have grown into trees, many of them to
a height of 10 or 12 feet, having stems with a diameter of from Itj
to 2 inches.” In some parts of the North Coast Districts the
mulberry becomes almost evergreen owing to the mildness and
salubrity of the climate, and yields larger supplies of food for the
worm than elsewhere, even in its own natural habitat.
The industry is one which, in the course of time, will be
developed to very considerable dimensions in this district.. It
will probably be found to be an important adjunct to other farming
operations ; one of those adjuncts to other crops which help to
swell the profits of the year, or tide over a season of misfortune.
Speaking of the experiment at New Italy, Mr. Campbell
in his report says ;
“ I found everyone much excited about the unexpected
results of the late, and first, rearings of silkworms. They were
all greatly pleased, as well as surprised, at the successful result of
their experiment, which had not been anticipated, considering the
age of the majority of the mulberries, and the poor and rough
conveniences which were available to enable them to rear the silk-
worms. They informed me that they can hardly understand how
easy it is to manage silkworms at New Italy, compared with the
difficulties they used to meet with at home. They were greatly
surprised at the health and vigour of the worms, for, notwith-


standing the rough manner in which they had to be reared here,
there were no deaths and no losses whatever. In Italy they were
certain to lose at least 20 per cent, of the silkworms, and the
labour of rearing, in spite of all conveniences, is very considerable,
owing to severity of climate. The Italians are quite satisfied that
sericulture, when once firmly established, will be sufficiently
profitable to enable them to remain at home altogether, instead of,
as at present, being obliged to absent themselves for, at least,
half the year. They will be satisfied to obtain small profits.”
In this sericulture there is evidently the opening of a great
industry. Within the last decade says the Scientific American of
March 11, the advance of the the American silk industry has
been wonderful, and the value of the product of the mills,
which in 1880 was 41,033,045 dollars, was in 1890, 87,298,454
dollars, while the wages product last year was 19,680,318
dollars, and the capital employed 51,007,537 dollars.
In that valuable publication the Agricultural Gazette
there was published some two years ago a classified “ list of
commercial plants that can be grown successfully in the northern
parts of New South Wales,” which show the immense produc-
tions of the country. The list is given as
Fruits. —Kei apple, sapodilla plum, golden apple, pine-apple
and its varieties, cherimoyer fruit, sour sop, sweet sop, netted
custard apple, jack fruit, caramba, bilimbing, papaw apple, cape
plum, star apple, whampee, date plum and its varieties, wine
palm, rose apple, brazilian cherry, fig tree and its varieties,
Indian plum baloka plum, sherbet shrub, sappan fruit tree,
sweet tamarind tree, marmalade tree, mamme-apple, mango and
its varieties, rnonstera, Chinese banana, leechee, longan rambutan,
grandadilla, avocada pear, date palm, otaheite gooseberry, winter
cherry, cape gooseberry, spice guava, apple guava, pear guava,
tree tomato, shrubby tomato, otaheite or ri-apple, Himalayan
apple, tamarind, abo fruit, owarie fruit, voa-vanga, jujube tree.
Plants or their Seeds which Yield Commercial Oil.—
Japan candle-nut, pea-nut, puliva oil plant, mahwa or epie oil plant,
Ilpa oil plant, cheroongee oil plant, croton oil plant, physic nut oil
plant, Jatropha oil plant, earth or ground almonds, cotton plant,
ranetic oil plant, sunflower, linseed oil plant, madia oil tree, olive
oil tree, poppy oil plant, aniseed, castor oil plant, gingelly oil
plant.
Nut-bearing Plants and Trees.— Long-fruited almonds,
pea-nut, cape almond, Spanish or sweet chesnut, earth or ground
almond, Queensland nut, pistachio nut, bambarra ground nut,
Persian walnut, Chinese walnut, edible acorn (ling nut, singhara
nut, water chestnut). These last three are floating aquatics.
Tuberous-rooted Plants,— Sweet potato, Kaawi yam,
Uvi yam, purple yam, Chinese yam, Trivoli yam, Ooyala yam,


Jerusalem artichoke, sweet cassava tapioca plant, arrowroot plant,
chocho plant.
Medicinal Plants. —Colic or ague root, cape aloes, Bar-
bacloes aloes, deadly nightshade, buchu-leaved plant, Tinneveliy
senna, Alexandrian senna, Aleppo senna, yellow fever bark, loxa
fever bark, Peruvian fever bark, colocynth plant, scammony
plant, squirting cucumber, Indian ague weed, jalap plant, black
neubane, white neubane, opium poppy, Jateorhiza root, guarana
tree, snake root, nux vomic tree, chiretta plant, white nellebore.
Edible Legumes and Pulses. —Catjang or red grain,
Congo pea, carob tree, chick pea or grain, Egyptian kidney bean,
Chinese soy plant, yam bean, horse grain lentil, green grain,
simbi bean, Chowlee bean.
Tea, Coffee and Spice. —Assam tea plant, common tea
plant, coffee plant, caper plant, cayenne pepper plant, Chinese
cinnamon tree, coriander, tumeric, cardamous star anise, calabash,
nutmeg, allspice, ginger.
Dye-yielding Plants. —Wild indigo, arnatto, safflower,
logwood tree, indigo plant, dyer’s wood, fustic wood, cochineaj
cactus, Chinese indigo plant, Persian berry plant, young fustic,
Bengal madder, dyers’ madder, Malabar almond tree, myrabolanes.
Gutta-percha Tree.
Caoutchouc Producing Trees. —Caoutchouc tree, india
rubber vine, india rubber plant, maugaihas rubber plant, African
rubber, Senegal rubber, Ceara rubber.
Plants Yielding Gum, Resin, Balsam and Wax.—
Jarilla balsam, cape balsam, mukul resin, myrrh, balsam
of mecca, sandarah resin, sweet gum, varnish tree, wax myrtle,
candle-berry myrtle, white balsam plant, balsam of Peru, balsam
of Tolu, Cyprian gum or chio turpentine, Japan wax, Japan
varnish tree, Chinese tallow tree, storax resin plant, genn benzoin,
copal resin, angico gum.
The Bark or Seeds of Trees Containing Tannic
Acid. —Catechu or cutch, Chilian algorroba, divi, Burchell’s
tanning plant, Loblolly Bay plant, tanning cassia, white algorroba,
amboyna kino tree, valonea oak, Kermes’ oak, aleppo gall, tanners
sumach, scarlet sumach, Cahaigre, becd’d-nut tree, myrobalans.
Fibre Producing Plants. —Pita fibre, ranne or rhea
fibre, hemp plant, jute fibre plant, sun hemp plant, native sun
hemp plant, Mexican lily fibre, cotton plant, short staple cotton,
rosella fibre plant, tree mallow, flax plant, manilla fibre, bow
string hemp, Nycanda hemp, African bow-string hemp.
Grain-yielding Plants. —Mitchell grass, raggee plant,
rice plant, millet, cultivated panic grass, canary grass, rye,
Hungarian millet, native millet, Indian millet, or guinea corn,
kaffir corn, implice, Canada rice, water oats.


Insecticidal Plants. —Dalmation and Persian Insect—
powder plants.
Perfumery Plants.— Heliotrope, jasmine, lavender,
lemon-scented verbena, peppermint, jonquil, geranium, patchouli,
tuberose, rosemary, provence rose, violet.
The great industry of the future is that of dairying.
Throughout the colony of late years this has made very great
progress, and among the settlers in the northern coast rivers
dairy farming is being rapidly developed to a very important
industry indeed. It is not wholly confined to the farmers and
small settlers, as already some of the large land holders are
turning their attention to the business. One feature about the
dairying industry which is very marked is the success which has
attended the introduction of the co-operative system.
In a recent article on the dairying industry, the Clarence
and Richmond Examiner , wrote : The report for the nine-months’
operations of the factory at Ulmarra is encouraging to those
who are interested in the progress of dairying. An average of
4|d per gallon to suppliers, with a very scant supply of milk the
first month, and a dividend of 7 per cent, to shareholders is a
good record for a new industry, and proves that the manage-
ment, though new to the business, dischax’ged their duty well.
The takings represent at the rate of over £5,000 for twelve
months, and this shows what may be expected when the several
factories now projected and in course of construction are in
operation. Next year these institutions may be safely reckoned
upon as adding £25,000 or £30,000 to the income of the district;
and what is more, this will be obtained without—except in a
very limited degree—reducing the returns from other crops. 'She
area of maize, sugarcane and potatoes has not suffered through
the dairying, so that the takings therefrom may be fairly
reckoned as over and above the usual returns from the land. As
the industry becomes established, and a better acquaintance with
the working and management of factories is attained, we look to
still better results, for there is much yet to be learned before
anything like perfection is secured. The example of Ulmarra is
already taken up at some half-dozen other centres on the river,
and with the number of factories that will be working within a
few months, a very large proportion of the settled parts of the
district will be accessible to these establishments, which will no
doubt be multiplied as they are found to succeed.” That refers
particularly to the Clarence districts but the papers of the last
few months show that on the other rivers the movement is being
taken up on an extensive scale. It is found that the dairying
pays well in conjunction with the crops to which attention has
been directed. Large portions of the new country being opened
up back from the river banks offer special inducements to the


dairy farmers, and it may be confidently anticipated that the north
coast districts will within a few years show very prominently in
connection with other districts. According to Coghlan, at the
beginning of 1892, the number of dairy cows in the districts,
were : Clarence, 2,150; Grafton, 5,801 ; Hastings and Manning,
6,664; Macleay, 5,695, and Richmond, 14,942. The number of
factories in existence at the time, and their products were :
Clarence, one factory—butter, 2,000 lbs. ; cheese, 9,800 lbs. ;
Macleay, two factories—butter, 52,000 lbs. ; cheese, 2,000 lbs. ;
Richmond, fifteen factories—butter, 549,485 lbs. ; cheese,
103,160 lbs. It will be seen from these figures that fifteen
months ago the only district where the factory system was much
in vogue was the Richmond. That is altered now, and the next
returns published will show a very different result. The total
quantities of dairy produce for the year, ended March-April,
1892, are stated to be : Richmond—butter, 1,133,995 lbs. ; cheese,
125,721 lbs.; bacon and hams, 49,472 lbs.; Clarence—butter,
120,395 lbs. ; cheese, 9,800 lbs. ; bacon and hams, 9,380 lbs.;
Grafton—butter, 185,563 lbs.; cheese, 14,110 lbs.; bacon and
hams, 68,676 lbs. ; Macleay—butter, 197,631 lbs. ; cheese,
12,824 lbs. ; bacon and hams, 112,273 lbs. ; Hastings and
Manning—butter, 167,332 lbs. ; cheese, 5,909 lbs. ; bacon and
hams, 64,948 lbs.
The pastoral industry must always remain one of con-
siderable importance. This north coast, like the remainder of
the seaboard, has not proved so suitable for the merino sheep as
the western slopes and plains, but cattle and horses do well. The
latest returns show, and the total number of stock for the whole
of the districts, was : horses, (including foals), 48,580 ; cattle
dairy, 35,252; ordinary, including calves, 263,487 ; sheep, in-
cluding lambs, 7,193; swine, 50,296 ; goats, 154. It will be
seen from this that horned cattle from the great bulk of the
stock raised in this country, and in this the Richmond district
leads the way, the totals in the different districts are ; Rich-
mond, 137,323 ; Clarence, 15,909 ; Grafton, 53914 ; Macleay,
25,172 ; Hastings and Manning, 31,169. Pig breeding is a
profitable industry, which so far is being chiefly carried on in the
southern parts of the districts, where the totals are : Macleay,
13,279; Hastings and Manning, 17,428.
Beekeeping is an industry which it should pay farmers well
to follow as an adjunct to their other works, but as yet it has not
been adopted to any great extent. According to the returns last
published, there were only 4,072 hives of bees in the whole North
Coast District, and the yield was 81,789 lbs. honey and 2,948 lbs.
beeswax.
The district is one of very considerable mineral wealth.
The census returns for 1891 will give some idea of the extent of


the mineral industry. The number of men employed mining
for minerals other than coal or shale in 1891 were : in the
Clarence and Richmond Districts—alluvial gold 108, quartz gold
335, total 443 ; Macleay—alluvial gold 12, quartz gold 146, other
minerals 9, total 167. On the slopes of the mountains, which
come within the mining division of New England, the develop-
ments of mining for gold, silver, tin and other metals has been
very considerable during the past few years. Beach mining for
gold is carried on to some extent on the coast, and good finds have
been made in places. There is in the districts a want of systematic
prospecting, though where it has been carried out some successful
finds have been made. In the Dalmorton District, between
Grafton and Glen Innes, gold is known to exist in the quartz of
considerable quantities, but difficulty and cost of carriage in
machinery and other drawbacks have militated largely against
the advance of what, with improved facilities, must become a big
gold producing district. At Nana Creek, the Upper Orara,
Woolgoolga, there has been considerable activity in gold mining,
with fairly satisfactory results. Gold is being worked at Nam-
bucca Head with fair results. Good prospects of alluvial is to
be found in the Kempsey division.
That very valuable metal platinum has been found in
places, and it is known to exist in payable quantities with othor
minerals in the beach sand. A report of the Department of
Mines on sand from the far northern coast was to the effect that
platinum, gold, tin, osmium and iridiun were detected, the
platinum being in it at the value of £1,680 per ton. Johnson,
Huntley & Co., of London, reported other sand to the worth of
£l,OOO per ton.
Silver is known to exist in different parts of the district,
and active prospecting has been carried on in the Nambucca and
Kempsey Districts.
Antimony has given good returns for working at
Nambucca Heads, and it has been proved near Grafton and at
several other places. A considerable quantity was raised some
years ago in the Corangula Mines, in the Macleay District.
At Gordon Brook near Copmanhurst in the Upper Clarence
District, deposits of chromite ore have been discovered, and
Professor David has reported them to be of considerable value.
Tin has been discovered near Hollands Plains, and good
prospects obtained.
Opals have been found in the sandstone near Lismore.
Marble limestone has been discovered at Kempsey.
Such then is the north coast district of the colony, which is
specially commended to the attention of hona fide settlers.
Naturally enough, it may be asked “ where is the land to be ob-
tained 1 ” This information I will be very glad to afford anyone


consulting me. The maps to which I have referred will give
the detailed information, which, in this pamphlet, can only be
given the briefest resume. In the Tweed District a large area of
heavily timbered land, fitted for growing sugar and maize, or for
dairying, is open for selection at the present time. The Brunswick
is only a small area, and a considerable amount of settlement
having taken place there of late years, there is only a
comparatively small area of land in this district now available
for any intending settler. Blocks of good land are obtainable if
the selector can only find them, with the aid of a surveyor who
knows the country. In the Richmond District there is a large
area of agricultural land adopted for sugar and maize and other
crops, or for dairying, and covered with valuable timber now open
for selection. It has been noted by the late Director General of
Forests, as has been pointed out, that some of the land open
for selection in these districts, has, growing on it, timber
which, when felled, will be worth a sufficient sum to pay
the cost price of the land. From the point of view of
the state, this may not be desirable; but certainly it is
a big inducement to place in the way of an intending selector.
There is no question that in the past numbers of selections,
similar to those now open, were taken up for the cedar alone.
Away up at the head of the Richmond River, there is a large area
of magnificent country, and a lot of this suitable for dairying
purposes is now open for selection. At the back of Byron Bay,
most of the available land has been secured, but there are still at
points along the railway line agricultural and dairying land of a
very high class open. The construction of the railway line is
bound to do much to induce settlement in this neighbourhood, for
the selector will have the choice of the three ports—Lismore,
Byron Bay and the Tweed open, to which he may send his produce
for transmission by the regular trading steamers to the Sydney
market. On the Clarence, there is a large area of dairy
and pastoral country suitable for selectors now open to be taken
up. In the Orara country, which is looked upon as yet likely to
be the centre of immense agricultural settlement, there is a good
deal of land of the best quality still open for the selector. A large
number of the south coast farmers are among the settlers of the
Upper Orara. In the settled country of the Clarence and other
rivers, there are scattered about amongst the freeholdeis lands,
blocks of different size of land yet not taken up. Six miles west
from the Orara country comes in the false table land, a splendid
belt of country, 14 miles from the coast, extending up to and
including the Don Dorrigo. It is a dense scrub country, and
splendidly suited for extensive dairying. Selectors are going on
to this land now. English grasses grow splendidly, the country
is well watered and with a fine climate. A considerable area of


land is now open for selection, and there is a lot of good land
■contained within the area of the reserve for railway purposes.
In the famous Don Dorrigo country there will shortly be
thrown open a considerable area of magnificent undulating
country covered with forests, and capable of high agricultural
production, and specially suited to dairy farming. West of the
Don Dorrigo again is the Guy Fawkes country, in which there
are large tracts of agricultural and pastoral lands open
for selection. The small Bellinger and Nambucca rivers, the
land on the banks is nearly all secured by settlers, and though
there is good land still to be got in these districts it is generally
necessary to go some distance back. The lower part of the
Macleay is nearly all taken up, but in the Upper Macleay there
is a very large area of high-class dairying and agricultural land
still open for selection. The Hastings and Manning rivers are
sites of older settlements than the other districts of the north
coast, and although there is a great area of freehold country on
these banks large tracts of agricultural and pastoral lands are
still to be obtained.
NEW ENGLAND AND THE WESTERN SLOPES.
Having thus explained to my readers some details of this
wonderful northern river district, I now purpose in a much
more circumscribed scale to draw attention to the fertile
plateau of New England and the rich west slopes of the Great
Divide, and the great plain which extends to the west, forming
the upper watershed where the great Darling River gathers its
force, over 2,000 miles from its entrance to the sea.
The New England tableland, bisected as it is by the
main trunk railway from Brisbane to Sydney, the overland
route between Queensland and the Southern Colonies, is so
generally well known that description of it seems almost
unnecessary. It is a district, the agricultural capacities of which
are almost untouched, with a wide variety of soil varying from
rough, poor pastoral country, to exceedingly rich agricultural
lands, which with the advantage of an agreeable temperate
climate, are capable of producing in abundance wheat, barley,
oats, and all the cereals and crops of Southern Europe. The
results of cultivation are encouraging, as shown by the details
given later. The great drawback to the rapid advancement of
this district at the present time is the fact that such large areas
of freehold lands are devoted entirely to pastoral persuits and so
little to agriculture. Where the agriculturalist has obtained a
footing, the result has been the establishment of towns of con-
siderable size as compared with small villages in essentially
pastoral country. Around the thriving town of Tamworth there


is a large area of magnificent agricultural land, and the application
of the foregoing remarks is very apparent in the comparison of
the freehold farms and the pastoral property of the Peel River.
Beyond Tam worth are the Moonbi Ranges, the rich Bendemeer
and Salisbury Plains, and after passing through some good
country, we are landed in the city of Armidale 3,300 feet above
sea level, and in the centre of a large area of rich open downs of
agricultural land fringed by good grazing country. The climate
here is glorious, about that of the south of France, and all classes
of European fruits and farm products can be grown. Getting
beyond the agricultural belt which surrounds Armidale, the line
passes into fair agricultural land on to Guyra. The country away
from the line on either side is described as steep and rocky, and
in places good grazing land with considerable workings in minerals
in the neighborhood of Bundarra. Guyra forms one of the pro-
jected points of departure for railway enterprise, and the rivalry
between this place and Glen Innes has become proverbial. Grafton
on the sea coast and the rich district of Inverell on the west are
the parts to be opened, and sooner or later these lines will bO
constructed; from what point is yet uncertain, but the probabilities
at present point to Glen Innes so far as the Inverell line is
concerned, the Public Works Committee having after fullest con-
sideration, decided in favor of that route.
On the question of coastal communication the line from
Guyra, after passing for some distance through rough and
broken country, strikes into rich country in the neighbor-
hood of the JDon Dorrigo, and thence on to Grafton. Either
of these lines to the coast, one of which must be built, must
have the effect of opening up a considerable trade between the
two districts. It is a remarkable contrast of country within a
few miles from the wild semi-tropics of the Clarence and Rich-
mond to the invigorating climate of the mountainous plains.
The exchange of products will, as settlement increases in both
places, become enormous, and Grafton will yet be the main port of
shipment for the export trade of this district. But this is the out-
look of the future. Beyond Guyra the northern line passes through
a large area of splendid grazing land, leaving to the west the
important mineral settlement of Tingha. Glen Innes is another
of those places settled in a rich agricultural centre, and this part of
the district will yet become enormously wealthy, agriculturally
speaking. Around Glen Innes itself the soil is very rich, and away
to the west is the famed district of Inverell, the black soil of which
is so splendidly suited to the successful growth of farm orchard
and vineyard products of a temperate climate. Around this
district too, the great mineral wealth of the New England
tablelands is considerably centered. Beyond Glen Innes, the
agricultural land is interspersed with first-class and good grazing


country to Deepwater, on the east being fair grazing and west
excellent agricultural and grazing. From Deepwater to Tenter-
field, the country is good, and the border town is situated on a
considerable area of agricultural land. The mineral workings of
New England are so important as to require specific attention.
To the agricultural settler, the development of the mining
industry in his district is of utmost importance as affording him
the local market for his products. Later on we give a slight
indication of the mineral resources of this district and their
development. “Leaving the great New England plateau and
coming to the district situated on the western slopes of the Great
Dividing Range, we find, says Mr. Coghlan, the transition
between the agricultural settlements of the coast and table lands,
and the purely pastoral settlements of the great west; the extent
of arable land is very considerable, but little is devoted to culti-
vation, as it is more economical at present to use the land for
grazing purposes, the great distance to the markets being the
principal obstacle to a rapid expansion of agriculture on the
tableland.” The immense importance of this district in the
future for agricultural purposes is evident to anyone giving but
slight attention to the subject. The great Liverpool Plains at
present in the hands of the squatters must in the time to come
be the home of an immense farming population which will draw
from the rich soil the wealth that it is ready, when man so wills
it to produce The immense richness of this country is shown
at the break up of dry weather, when the black baked soil
within a week of the fall of rain disappears beneath a mantle of
luxuriant herbage. All that is wanted is better communication
with the markets. At present the cost of cartage through all
these districts is the great drawback. Time alone will remedy
this evil. As to the cost of produce over our railways, the fol-
lowing illustrations may be given. Wheat and agricultural
produce generally, per truck of 6 tons, Narrabri, 350 miles, 15s
4d per ton; Armidale, 358 miles, 15s 6d per ton; Tenterfield,
479 miles, 17s 8d per ton. Dairy Produce—Narrabri, £2 6s 4d per
ton ; Armidale, £2 7s 2d per ton ; Tenterfield, £2 19s 3d per ton.
That is to say the cost of hauling a bushel of wheat to Sydney
from Narrabri or Tam worth is just under sd, and for Tenterfield
over The extension of the Railway from Tamworth via
Manilla to Barraba, when it takes place will open up an immense
area of rich country, the possibilities of which from an agricul
tural sense have already been proved. Getting further to the
westward there is a large quantity of crown land all round the
rivers (which lower down from the Darling) that is fit for
settlement, either agricultural, pastoral or both, but unfortunately
there is not much open for the selector at the present time, being
either locked up in reserves or held by squatters under leasehold,


and great difficulty exists to anyone not acquainted with the
country in securing blocks suitable. It must not be forgotten
that when the division of runs was made the squatters took care
to retain the lease over that portion containing the least number
of reserves. The further out parts of this district, that is the
country away from the railways, must remain stock producing,
and for this purpose some increase on the maximum area allowed
might be an advantage ; though in the better localities the area is
quite sufficient to enable a man to do some good for himself. With
the additional area suggested leased for a limited period, the land
would be held as it were in till the increasing settlement
enabled him to go on more for agriculture. At present, however,
the pastoral industry must remain the mainstay of the district.
In the neighbourhood of the towns, the land is suitable for
agriculture, and pastoral and agricultural pursuits could be com-
bined with advantage. It is this combination of pastoral and
agricultural occupations, which will make an important feature in
the development of the whole of this immense northern district.
Already the pastoralists are wisely recognising that wool alone
should not be depended upon for a return, and that the carcase of
the sheep is worth more in the Old World than what can be ob-
tained for it in tallow. The frozen meat industry, as a writer in
the Australian Star some time ago pointed out, is going to be in
this colony one of great proportions, and no district in this
greatest of sheep producing countries is better able to go in for
this industry, than the one with which we are now dealing.
Already a start has been made with the works at Aberdeen and
Tenterfield, and it may be that now capital finds by sad
experience, that fixed deposits in banks is not as safe as was
fondly hoped, it will be the more readily embarked in such enter-
prises as this, which, while benefitting itself, will aid others
engaged in the work of production, and generally advance the
wealth of the community. Fruit preserving and growing, for the
home market, are subjects worthy of attention of capitalists, and
no district in the colonies is better able to produce the fruit
required. This plateau and the slopes leading out into the west,
from a country, which, for the settler, is full of promise for the
present, and certain in the immediate future, when' the resources
of civilization are brought nearer his door, to give him an
abundant return for all his labor in its development.
The climate of the New England tableland is one
of the most beautiful in the world. Coghlan puts it briefly,
when he writes—“ On the New England tableland, the climate
of Armidale and other towns may be considered as nearly
perfect as can be found. The yearly average temperature
is scarcely 57 deg., while the summer only reaches 69 deg.,
and the winter falls to 46 deg., a range of temperature approxi-


mate closely to the famous health resorts of the south of
France.” Mr. Russell, the Government Astronomer, in one of
his many publications, says—“ The mein temperature of the
southern part of England is about 52 deg., and that of France,
near Paris, about the same, increasing as you go south to 58 deg. ‘5
at Marseilles. Taking this as a sample of the best part of Europe,
let us see how the mein temperatures in the colony compare with
these. Cooma, on the high land, is 54 deg., Queanbeyan high
land 58 deg., Goulburn high land 56 deg., Armidale and
New England district 56 deg., Moss Vale 56 deg., Kurrajong
53 deg., Orange 55 deg. These towns are scattered along
the high table lands from south to north, and represent fairly
the climate of a very considerable portion of the whole colony,”
In a map of comparative climates, Mr. Russell shows that
Muswellbrook compares with Orange, in France, Inverell with
Montpelier; Tenterfield with Madrid; Cassilis with Lisbon ;
Scone with Barcelona or Naples. As has been pointed out in a
previous part, this colony has the advantage of not such a
a great range of temperature. Armidale, 30.32 deg. south
has a mean temperature of 56.1 deg., a mean summer, 69
deg. ; winter, 45.9 deg., and may be compared to Washington
the capital of the United States, which 38.52 deg. north,
has a mean temperature 56.9 deg.; but in summer rises to
76.7 deg., and in winter falls to 37.8 deg., or Bordeaux, France,
44.50 deg. north, which varies from 711 deg. summer to 43 deg.
in winter. In Washington, the variations are 39 deg. are more
severe, and even Bordeaux they are 28 deg., as compared with
23 deg. Beyond those facts, it is absolutely unnecessary to say one
word in favor of the climate of New England. In the time to
come when communication is opened by rail with the coastal
districts, themountains of New England will be the sanatorium and
summer retreat from the cities of the coastal district, just as
Moss Vale and the Blue Mountains afford a change to the
leisured classes of the metropolis. Coming down the western
slopes opening out on to the great plains of the west, the climate
naturally becomes hotter. It loses, however, that moisture which
in the summer weather sometimes makes the coastal districts
oppressive. It is very dry and healthy, and though at times in
the summer days extreme heat are registered, still the climate is
taken all the year round glorious. Narrabri, which may be taken
as a fair example is slightly warmer than Messima in Italy, and
considerably cooler than Cario or New Orleans, At Narra-
bri, which is 30.20 deg. south, the mean average heat is 66.5 deg.
summer, 81.1 deg. ; winter, 52.2 deg.
The rainfall of the tableland is not so great as upon
the east coast, but is amply sufficient for the needs of vegetation,
varying from 30 to 35 inches. Getting on the western slopes


and further from the range of the clouds brought from seawards,
there is a decrease which, as is illustrated by the figures quoted,
continues as we get further out on the great plains of the west.
Tenterfield, 80 miles from the coast, 32.37 inches, 81 rainy
days for 21 years; 1891, 40,66 inches.
Glen Innes, 90 miles from the coast, 35.60 inches, 95 rainy
days for 10 years; 1891, 35.89 inches.
Inverell, 124 miles from the coast, 31.37 inches, 84 rainy
days for 14 years; 1891, 35.40 inches.
Armidale, 81 miles from the coast, 32.07 inches, 97 rainy
days for 26 years; 1891, 38.92 inches,
Bundarra, 113 miles from the coast, 29.92 inches, 73 rainy
days for 7 years ; 1894, 34.04 inches.
Barraba, 142 miles from the coast, 29.96 inches, 87 rainy
days for 10 years; 1891, 29.73 inches.
Warialda, 162 miles from the coast, 29.23 inches, 97 rainy
days for 13 years ; 1891, 32.72 inches.
Manilla, 135 miles from the coast, 30,09 inches, 78 rainy
days for 5 years; 1891, 25.81 inches.
Narrabri, 196 miles from the coast, 26.64 inches, 63 rainy
days for 20 years; 1891, 30.42 inches.
Walgett, 286 miles from the coast, 20.71 inches, 51 rainy
days for 13 years; 1891, 24.95 inches.
An important matter to be taken into consideration in
conjunction with rainfall, particularly in the western slopes, is
the evaporation of water. So far observations in this direction
have not been carried out to any great extent. At Walgett,
between 1887 and 1891, observations have shown the different
evaporation to vary between 46.416 inches and 65.252 inches ;
at Hay, between 1886 and 1891, between 31.194 inches and
46.948 inches; Dubbo, between 1888 and 1891, from 53.958
inches to 62.250 inches; and Sydney, from 1886 to 1891, from
34.34 inches to 37.289 inches.
The geological map of this Hew England district shows it
to be remarkably varied in its formation. Taking the railway
line from Tenterfield down to Armidale, on the eastern or coastal
side is an extensive area of granite formation adjoining the
silurian deposit, and in spots the Clarence series. This mass of
granite formation on the eastern side is broken into in the
neighbourhood of Falconer, by diorite and basalt, a formation
which also occurs at intervals throughout the granite. The
western side of the line from the border, near Bonshaw,
southerly to Tamworth, is chiefly in the same area of granite
country ; but a large area—taking roughly Stonehenge, Inverell,
and midway between Deepwater and Tenterfield, marks the in-
clusionof porphyry, broken with diorite, Basaltoccurs between Glen
Innes and Inverell, and again along the course of the Severn river.


Below Armidale, the eastern slope of the mountains is included
in the great silurian area which extends to the ocean. Below
Walcha, the silurian series extends to the western side of the
range.. Tamworth forms the centre of an intrusion of Devonian
rocks marked to the south with diorite and basalt, and bordered
with a small area of coal measures. The great Northumberland coal
measures extend to within a short distance of Werris Creek, and
may be considered to form, for a considerable distance, the southern
boundary of the country under consideration. West of Tamworth,
the upper Namoi and its tributaries, cut through a considerable area
of silurian formation, a narrow band of which, broken at places
with diorite, basalt and granite, extends to the northern border.
To the west of this, the coal areas again come in, extending over
a large stretch of country from the northern border down to below
the neighbourhood of Gunnedah. At this spot, there is a large
intrusion of the tertiary series and volcanic country, which make
a break between this and the main body of the great coal
measures. North of Gunnedah, in the upper Gwydir country,
there are considerable areas of volcanic country, with small spots
of granite formation, and in the neighbourhood of Bingera, a
large extensive intrusion of serpentine and porphyry. Leaving
the coal measures, near Narribri, right out to the Darling, the
valleys of the Gwydir, Barmedman, Namoi and other rivers pass
through a vast area of tertiary formation.
The natural forests of the tablelands and western slopes
are markedly different from the semi-tropical brush of the coastal
rivers. From the details of timbers found in the different forest
reserves, it appears that the different woods of the districts
according to the different land boards are :
Hillston, North —Pine, box, mallee.
Armidale —Stringybark, messmate, tallow-wood, blue, white,
spotted and grey gum, cedar and brush timbers, blackbutt,
ironbark, box, pine, black wattles, Cyprus pine, peppermint.
Glen Innes —Woolly butt, messmate, grey, brown, blue and white
gum, sassafras, honeysuckle, white-wood, oak, peppermint,
cedar, beech, tallow-wood, rosewood, coachwood, mahogany,
bloodwood.
Tamworth —Pine, ironbark, stringybark, box, gum, apple.
Inverell —lronbark, pine, red gum, white gum, box, apple,
bloodwood, stringybark.
Tenterfield —lronbark, red gum, grey gum, pine, box, apple,
bloodwood, tallow-wood, messmate, stringybark, sassafras,
woollybutt, blue gum, honeysuckle.
Coonabarabran —lronbark, pine, box, stringybark.
Narrabri —lronbark, pine, oak, belar, box, myall, stringybark,
red gum.
Coonamble —lronbark, pine.


Moree—Pine, carbene, gum, bloodwood, box, brigalow, ironbark,
belar.
Cassilis—lronbark, box, red gum, stringybark, pine.
Gunnedah—Stringybark.
Bingera—lronbark, pine, bloodwood, stringybark, box, apple.
messmate, gum.
Warialda— lronbark, pine.
The manner in which the splendid country of the northern
tableland has been secured is thus plainly remarked by Mr.
Coghlan : “ In the northern tableland the disproportion between
freeholders and tenants is very strongly marked, the latter
forming a very small minority of the occupiers of alienated lands,
owing to the same causes which operate both in the south and in
the centre of this great section of New South Wales. It is
evident that the object of the Land Act of 1861 to create a class
of independent settlers, has been fairly successful, notwithstanding
the fact that the number of actual occupiers is small compared to
that of the individual selectors, who since the year 1861 have
applied for conditional purchases.” The following figures illus-
trate the state of settlement in the part of the country in
question ;
NORTHERN TABLELAND
Inverell
Electorates.
Occupiers of:
T 5
O T 5
X «
a> -g
£
c 5 c 3
a» a>
<! <1
ires. Acre
38,360 22,6
38,902 68,1
37,369 10,4
51,288 6,0
31,959 42,5
T 3
C
3
2
'o
XI
o
u
T 3
a
a
a
0)
&
T 5
° s
'S Pn .
p k 'd
— 1 c
a i
O fl
'g *
p 2
o
No. Acres. Acres. Acres.
543 388,360 22,687 411,047
New England
Glen Innes
Tenterfield
Tamworth..
Totals
1,159 1,168,902 68,140 1,237,042
504 307,369 10,401 317,770
489 151,288 6,079 157,367
845 931,959 42,510 974,469
3,540 2,947,878149,817 3,097,695
The total area alienated in these electorates is 3,097,695
acres, or 23.2 per cent of its whole extent of 13,333,120
acres.
The total number of occupiers of rural settled lands is 3,540, of
whom 2,069 live on their freeholds, whilst only 240 are tenants,
157 holding both freehold and leasehold lands, and 1,074
occupying Crown lands in addition to their freeholds. The pro-
portion of the area occupied by private tenants is 149,817 acres,
or 4.8 per cent, of the whole extent of alienated land, whilst 95.2
per cent, representing 2,947,878 acres, is occupied by the land
owners themselves. The land is used for both agricultural and
pastoral purposes, and these industries are generally carried on


shown in a corresponding table to that just quoted.
NORTH-WESTERN SLOPES.
Electorates.
Occupiers of.
Total.
Area Freehold.
Area Rented.
Total.
Freehold Land.
Rented Land.
Parti) Freehold
and Partly Rented
Land.
Freehold and
Crown Land.
Gunnedah
Gwydir
Namoi
Totals
254
200
214
668
23
40
48
111
13
23
13
49
161
333
359
853
457
596
634
1681
1,523,755
1,290,905
1,103,266
3 917,926
19,559
375,060
82,246
476,865
1,543,314
1,665,965
1,185,512
4.394,791
“ The area alienated is 4,394,791 acres, or 26 per cent, of
the total area which is 16,890,384 acres, the highest proportion
of alienated land being in Gunnedah, where 1,543,314 acres or
58.8 per cent, of the total area of electorate, calculated at
2.626.560 acres, have become alienated, the greater portion by
conjointly. The average area of holdings in this district varies
from between 322 acres per holding in Tenterflield, and 1,153
1,057 acres in those of Tamworth and New England where large
freehold estates are situated ; in Glen Innes the average reached
630 acres, and in Inverell 757 acres, the general average of the
district being 875 acres.” The proportion of land alienated
diminishes on coming to the western slopes, and it is here that
the settler of to-day has undoubted right to secure property for
himself and his family. The distribution of settlement is thus
shown in a corresponding table to that just quoted.
“ The area alienated is 4,394,791 acres, or 26 per cent, of
the total area which is 16,890,384 acres, the highest proportion
of alienated land being in Gunnedah, where 1,543,314 acres or
58.8 per cent, of the total area of electorate, calculated at
2,626,560 acres, have become alienated, the greater portion by
the pastoralists, who have succeeded in preventing the settlement
of an agricultural class over the best portion of the famed
Liverpool Plains. There are also 1,665,965 acres alienated in
the Gwydir, out of 7,253,120 acres, or 23 per cent, of this total;
whilst in the extensive district of the Namoi, out of 7,010,704
acres, 1,185,512 acres or 16.9 per cent, only, are as yet alienated.
The competition between pastoralists and selectors was not as
keen in the north-western districts as it was in the central, and
more particularly in the south-western division, presumably
because the land, though equally good in quality was too distant
from the markets, besides the country becomes more exposed to
extreme climatic influences in the northern parts. The average
area of holdings throughout the district though higher than in
the central western districts, is not so large as in those of the
south-west, it reaches 2,614 acres, with a maximum of 3,421
acres in Gunnedah, owing to causes explained above, and a
minimum of 1,870 in the Namoi, the Gwydir having an average
of 2,795 acres per holding. These districts, with the exception


of their eastern portion abutting on the boundary of the table-
land of New England, are entirely devoted to the depasturing of
stock. Tenant occupiers are most numerous, only 111 being
returned as renting some 476,865 acres of land, principally for
grazing purposes, the remaining 3,917,926 acres, out of a total
of 4,394,791 acres alienated, being still occupied by the pro-
prietors themselves.”
“ The cultivation of the land as in other table-land districts
of the colony, has been carried on in a desultory way only
generally, as in addition to grazing which is as yet thought it
should not be by far the most important industry. In the
northern portion of the table-land, says Coghlan : the proportion
of land under crop to the total area alienated is very low. There
being only 56,239 acres, or 1.8 per cent, cultivated out of
3,097,695 acres alienated in this division, which embraces the
electorates of Tenterfield, Glen Innes, Inverell, New England
and Tamworth. Private tenancy of land is reduced to much
smaller proportions than is the case in the districts in which
agriculture is carried on independently of grazing, as only
4,323 acres, or 7.7 per cent, of the area under crops is cultivated
by tenant occupiers. In addition to the area under crops last
season, 12,251 acres were laid down in artificial grasses, so that
a total area of 68,490 acres may be considered as devoted to
this branch of an industry which gave employment to 5,769
persons, of whom 2,006 were females, 1,038 of the latter being
employed in the dairies, and 968 assisting on farms, whilst there
were 3,527 male hands occupied in agricultural pursuits, and
only 236 engaged about the dairies. Wheat, oats and maize are
the principal crops raised in this district.”
Still more marked is the ascendency of the pastoral
industry, at the present time in the districts, on the slopes with
which we are dealing. “In the electorates of Gunnedah,the Namoi
and the Gwydir, the progress of agriculture being confined to that
portion of the district of Gunnedah, adjoining that of Tamworth,
and a few patches along the banks of the rivers in the immediate
vicinity of townships and village settlements. The total area
cultivated in this extensive region is 8,340 acres, of which 7,686
are worked by the proprietors of the soil, and 654 by tenant
farmers. There are also 716 acres under grasses, making a total
of 9,056 acres devoted to agriculture in this district. There em-
ployment was found last year for 1,735 persons, of whom 897 were
females; 664 of the latter assisted in farm work, and 232 were
engaged in dairy, whilst 773 men were employed in purely
agricultural operations, and 65 in the dairies.”
Yet, as I have pointed out, this should not be. The land
is, in many places, especially adopted to agriculture, and fitted to
the settlement of the farmer on the land. Undoubtedly one great


draw-back of the district, is the distance from the port and market,
and the consequent cost of transit still, with the rates of transit
so low as they now are, there should be no difficulty in the selector,
provided that he can secure suitable land, making a very big
advance.
Dealing with the statistics of production on the table lands,
we may turn our attention first to the sheep, which are largely
raised throughout the districts; the total number being 3,490,421,
made up of—lnverell 542,667, New England 1,478,466, Glen
Innes 260,060, Tamworth 1,120,563, and Tenterfield only 88,665.
The total number of lambs marketed during the year was 532,074.
The quality of wool and other conditions make sheep-breeding in
this district a generally profitable industry, and one which will,
with the immense area of freehold land, continue for a long while
to be of the first importance.
On the table lands, cattle breeding is a great industry, the
total number of ordinary cattle being returned 12 months ago as
289,052, the calves branded during the year being 66,848, The
totals in the different electorates are—lnverell 27,503, New Eng-
land 95,597, Glen Innes 64,976, Tenterfield 56,543, Tamworth
44,440
Dairying is carried on to some extent in all the districts,
but there is still room for considerable development. The number
of dairy cattle is set down as 21,720, the greatest number in any
district being New England 6,791. The products of butter and
cheese in the electorate for the year, were—butter 557,460 lbs.,
cheese 73,326. New England and Tamworth produce the largest
quantities of butter, while the local centre of the cheese industry
is in Glen Innes, These are, however, emphatically industries of
the future.
Swine do well in this district, but are not kept in con-
siderable numbers in any of them. The aggregate total of pigs
in the district, by the last published returns, were 14,209. The
amount of bacon produced during the year was considerable,
though not approaching the more southern and central districts.
Altogether the total for the year was 474,743 lbs., the principal
contributors being New England 180,322 lbs,, and Tamworth
100,119 lbs.
The cultivation of wheat in this district was according to
the latest published returns for 1891 : Inverell, 6,552 acres,
average 18.04 bushels ; New England, 3,887 acres, 13.95 bushels;
Glen Innes, 977 acres, 16.63 bushels; Tenterfield, 1,870 acres,
16.83 bushels ; Tamworth, 11,596 acres, 13.09 bushels. The hay
returns were: Inverell, 563 acres, average 1.35 tons; New
England, 1,056 acres, 1.90 tons; Glen Innes, 346 acres, 0.94
tons; Tenterfield, 35 acres, 1.37 tons; Tamworth, 584 acres, 1.26


tons. The averages for the whole district were: wheat, 14.95
bushels per acre; hay, 1.22 tons per acre. The yield is fair, and
shows that for the selector, with a local market unsupplied and
suitable land, it should become, with other cereals, a thriving
industry. In a comparison extending over a series of years it is
shown that Tumut 16.6 bushels, Glen Innes 15.9 bushels, and New
England 15.4 bushels, hold the pride of place among the wheat-
growing districts of the Colony. The position of these districts
places them under conditions of climate and rainfall, as we have
shown, similar to those which obtain in the richest wheat-growing
countries of Europe and America, and therefore the result is not
to be wondered at. The figures quoted show these districts to be
far above the average of the mainland colonies and approaching
that of Tasmania.
The cultivation of maize for 1891-2 gave returns : Inverell,
3,478 acres, 22.44 bushels; New England, 1,069 acres, 18.54
bushels; Glen Innes, 1,327 acres, 18.80 bushels; Tenterfield,
1,503 acres, 22.74 bushels; Tamworth, 2,514 acres, 19.87
bushels. The average yield per acre for the district was 20.91
bushels. Only a small quantity of maize is grown for green food.
This crop, though yielding fair returns, does not compare
favourably with the coastal districts.
Oats is given to a considerable extent in some of these
districts, particularly New England and Glen Innes. These two
districts are the only ones worthy of consideration ; so far as
the grain crop is concerned. In New England, 1,016 acres,
averaged 23.28 bushels, and in Glen Innes, 697 acres, 22.12
bushels. The crop is much more extensively grown for hay, the
areas and averages being: Inverell, 1,034 tons, 1.23 tons; New
England, 3,754 acres, 1.30 tons; Glen Innes, 2,669 acres, 1.33
tons; Tenterfield, 735 acres, 1.48 tons; Tamworth, 342 acres,
1.60 tons. This is a crop which could be grown to a very
great extent in these districts and the returns are so
distinctly favourable that it is somewhat to be wondered at that
it has not been more extensively gone into. Want of settlement
no doubt has something to do with this, for there are enormous
areas of country suitable for the growth of the cereal with satis-
factory results. It is a finer food than wheat or maize, and yet
we have to import unusually large quantities from abroad to
meet our requirements.
Barley is only slightly grown and chiefly in the Tamworth
district, were 422 acres of a total of 685 acres was cultivated
last year. The average for Tamworth, was 14 bushels of grain,
and 2.40 tons of hay, while for the whole districts the average
was 15.57 bushels, and 3.14 tons of hay. This, like all the rest
of the cereals is a crop neglected in this district, fitted for its
cultivation.


Rye has been tried in several districts to a slight extent.
In New England 41 acres averaged 17.97 bushels, Glen Innes 21
acres 13.86 bushels, Tenterfield 3 acres 16.67 bushels. The crop
was also grown to some extent for green feed, and millet has been
tried for that purpose also.
The figures for lucerne and sown grasses, are : Inverell,
564 acres, 1.48 tons; New England, 136 acres. 1.51 tons; Glen
Innes, 97 acres, 0.87 tons; Tenterfield, 24 acres, 1.67 tons:
Tam worth, 1,004 acres, 3.47 tons. The result in the last named
district is particularly worthy of note. With the extension of the
dairying industry there is no question that the area under this
form of cultivation must increase.
The potatoe is grown to a considerable extent in all the
districts, the figures being—lnverell 236 acres, 2.21 tons; New
England 1,394 acres, 2.91 tons; Glen Innes 607 acres, 3.03 tons;
Tenterfield 307 acres, 2.47 tons; Tamworth 155 acres, 2.91 tons.
The average for 2,699 acres in the whole districts was 2.82 tons.
Onions and turnips are growing to a slight extent, and give an
average of 2.33 tons, and 4 tons respectively. Glen Innes and ,
Tenterfield are apparently, from the figures given, the best districts
for these root crops.
Tobacco is grown at Tamworth, where 21 acres in 1891
gave an average yield of 7.62 cwt.
There is not a very large area under the grape vine. The
figures show that it is being chiefly cultivated in the Inverell and
Tamworth districts, where there are, in places, somewhat extensive
vineyards. The area under cultivation and average return was—
Inverell 143 acres, wine making 267 gallons, 27 acres table, 1.22
tons, 17 acres not bearing. New England 16 acres, wine making
234 gallons, 6 acres not bearing; Glen Innes 14 acres, wine
making 257 gallons; Tenterfield 3 acres table use 1 ton; Tam-
worth 41 acres, wine making 280 gallons, 23 acres table, 2.35
tons, 14 acres not bearing. The average for the district went 210
gallons of wine, and 1.96 tons of table grapes per acre.
The orchards of the New England district have long been
famous for their fruits, and it is only the difficulties of sending
goods to market that has militated against the very great
extension of this industry. The area under cultivation twelve
months ago and the average return per acre for the previous
season were:—lnverell 161 acres, £lO 14s 3d; 25 acres not
bearing. New England 423 acres, £7 11s 2d; 198 acres not
bearing. Glen Innes 54 acres, £7 10s ; 37 acres not bearing.
Tenterfield 110 acres, £8 10s 4d ; 87 acres not bearing. Tam-
worth 21 acres, £l5 17s5d; 34 acres not bearing. The average
for the 841 acres of fruit cropped in the district was £9 4s Id
per acre. It is a very plain evidence of the advance which the
industry is making that while there were 841 acres bearing fruit,


there were no less than 368 acres, or over 30 per cent., not
bearing.
The orange is grown at Inverell and Tamworth, the areas
and averages being: Inverell, 13 acres, 159 cases; Tamworth, 3
acres, 67 cases.
Market gardens, as in other districts, supply the local
wants of the towns and settlements. Altogether there are 167
acres under cultivation in this form, and the average yield per
acre is £2O Is 7d; Tamworth, £24 4s Id, being the highest.
Peas and beans, pumpkins and other unspecified crops, are grown
to some slight extent, the averages being : Peas and beans 29
bushels, pumpkins and melons 3.15 tons, and unspecified crops
£5 4s 6d per acre.
Turning to the productions of the Western slope we find
ourselves in one of the most important sheep growing centres of
the colony, from whence annually come to the ports of shipment
vast stores of wealth in wool. These districts form one of the
finest homes for sheep in this great sheep-producing country, and
there were depasturing last year within the boundaries of the
districts under review, no less than 7,306.345 sheep, the relative
totals being: Gunnedah, 3.915,584; Gwydir, 2,729,461 ; and
Namoi, 2.661,300. The lambs marked daring the year in these
districts totalled 1,831,739.
Cattle form the second prominent product of this practi-
cally pastoral country, and according to the statistics the number
of cattle last year was 191,862, the great majority of which
110,401 are in the Gwydir district, while 46,243 are in Gunne-
dah, and 35,218 in Namoi.
Dairy cattle number altogether 11,047, there being in the
Gwydir district, 4,862 ; Gunnedah, 3,257 ; and Namoi, 2928.
The product of butter for the year was 160,567 lbs., and cheese
11,920 lbs. All the remarks made in respect to the develope-
ment of this industry elsewhere, apply equally well to these
districts.
In the three districts the latest statistics show that the
total number of pigs kept was 7,323, and the product of bacon
100,537 lbs.
The area under wheat yet is small, but so far the results
may be taken as satisfactory. Quoting the latest published
figures again, the areas and averages were • Gunnedah, 667 acres,
12.80 bushels; Gwydir, 1,201 acres, 14.94 bushels; Namoi, 762
acres, 13.05 bushels; general average, 13.84 bushels. The figures
for hay are : Gunnedah, 294 acres, 1.87 tons; Gwydir, 345 acres,
1.33 tons; Namoi, 533 acres, 1.44 tons; general average, 1.52
tons. On the same comparison as has been applied to the other
districts, the average yield of wheat has been 11.7 bushels.


That Maize is being grown to some extent, and with fair re-
sults, the figures will show : Gunnedah, 503 acres, 26.45 bushels ;
Gwydir, 659 acres, 24.15 bushels; Namoi, 706 acres, 23.18
bushels; the average for the whole district being 24.40 bushels.
Oats are chiefly grown as a hay crop, only 10 acres in the
whole district being reaped in 1891 for grain, and the average
yield being 22 bushels. For hay the figures were : Gunnedah,
132 acres, 1.48 tons; Gwydir, 108 acres, 1.69 tons; Namoi, 208
acres, 1.15 tons. The climate is not as a whole so suitable for
the grain as the hay crop.
Barley is not grown to any great extent, the figures show-
ing that in Gunnedah and Namoi the averages for 55 acres of
grain being 18 bushels, and 7 acres of hay 2.86 tons.
Lucerne and sown grasses are grown to some extent, the
figures being : Gunnedah 364 acres, 2.07 tons; Gwydir 444
acres, 1.31 tons; Namoi 197 acres, 1.91 tons; the average yield
being 1.70 tons per acre. A considerable area of this crop was
cut as green feed.
Potatoes are grown to a small extent, but the yield is not
so prolific as in the other districts. The figures given are ;
Gunnedah 46 acres, 1.48 tons; Gwydir, 52 acres, 2,37 tons;
Namoi 93 acres, 2 tons.
The grape vine is coming under cultivation, but so far the
area is very small. For instance, wine bearing is represented by
one acre each in Gunnedah and Namoi, and the average yield is
•quoted at 120 gallons. For table use the figures are ; Gunnedah
9 acres, 1 ton, 2 acres not bearing ; Gwydir 12 acres, 1.50 tons,
14 acres not bearing ; Namoi 31 acres, 1.52 tons, 12 acres not
bearing ; the average yield for table use is 1.40 tons per acre.
Fruits of different kinds do well, and with the advance of
settlement the area of land under orchards is increasing. The
figures for 1891-2 were : Gunnedah 63 acres, £7 7s 7d per acre ;
16 acres not bearing. Gwydir 46 acres, £lO 10s; 11 acres not
bearing. Namoi 59 acres, £l9 5s Id ; 20 acres not bearing. In
the whole district 168 acres of land produced at the rate of
£l2 8s Id per acre. A small quantity of oranges, 4 acres in all,
is under cultivation in the Gwydir, but not yet bearing.
Market gardens to supply local wants occupy 83 acres,
and yield crops worth £6l 13s per acre. This high average is
caused by the enormous yield of the gardens in the Namoi
district, where 34 acres give an annual average return of
£llO 10s 7d per acre, the nearest approach to which in the
colony is the Argyle district, where £7O 8s lid per acre was
obtained in the same year. This is an indication of what
will yet be made of this country by irrigation, for which it is by
its natural conformation eminently adapted. The average in the


Gunnedah district was £2B 16s Id, and Gwydir £24 15s sd.
Pumpkins and melons give an average yield of 3.81 tons per acre,
and the value of unspecified crops is set down at £5 per acre.
As to the lands open for settlement as the figures show,
the New England plateau is largely in the hands of the private
land owners. Around Inverell and Glen Innes there is not much
land now open, but small areas of suitable country are still to be
obtained. At Deepwater, patches of good agricultural land are
still open to the selector. Armidale is nearly all taken up, but
around Tenterfield there is still some openings. On the slopes
and plains, at places, there are large areas of land which might be
obtained, and, within a short time, a very considerable area will
be available for selection. The difficulties attending selection are
sometimes, no doubt, considerable; but, as stated in the opening,
if at any time, a would-be selector chooses, the maps prepared by
Mr. Frost will be found of immense assistance.
There is little to be added. Since this pamphlet was put
in the press the Government has announced its intention of
proceeding with a liberal measure associated with village settle-
ments. Much of the Crown lands in the districts which have
been dealt with is eminently adapted to this form of settlement,
and the maps referred to will be invaluable to any co-operative
association wishing to know a suitable spot for settlement.


MAPS,
Sh[©v\/ina all Lands open for also
all Seleetioqs, F(eser\/es, Floods, S(@.
Map of the TWEED
„ BYRON BAY
„ BRUNSWICK
„ RICHMOND
„ CLARENCE
„ ORARA
„ DON DORRIGO
„ BELLINGER
„ MACLEAY
„ NEW ENGLAND (in parts)
„ MANNING
„ HASTINGS
Or Map of any part of New South Wales,
PRICE - -£3 3s. EACH.
Copies of plains or any iqforrqatioq frorq the
Lapels, /Airies or
Bepartrqept.
D. J. FROST,
AUTHORIZED GOVERNMENT DRAFTSMAN,
LANDS OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Private Office-WOOL EXCHANGE,
MACQUARIE PLACE.




SYNOPSIS OF NEW SOUTH WALES
LAND ACT.
DIVISIONS, LAND BOARD DISTRICTS AND
LAND DISTRICTS.
The Colony of New South Wales, for the purpose of the Land
Acts, comprises Divisions, Land Board Districts, and Land Dis-
tricts. There are three divisions, running about north and
south, and approximately parallel to each other, which, having
regard to their relative situations, are termed respectively the
Eastern, the Central, and the Western. The boundaries of
these divisions are liable to slight modification.
AUCTION SALES.
Town lands cannot be sold in areas exceeding half an
acre, or at a lower upset price than £8 per acre.
Suburban lands cannot be sold in areas exceeding 20
acres, or at lower upset price than £2 10s per acre.
Country lands cannot be sold in areas exceeding 640
acres, or at a lower upset price than £1 5s per acre.
CONDITIONAL PURCHASES.
WHO MAY SELECT.
Any person of or over 16 years of age may take up a con-
ditional purchase to which a condition of residence is attached,
and may make additional conditional purchase by virtue of any
such conditional purchase, whether made before or since 1 Janu-
ary, 1885, or whether the term of residence has expired or not.
No one, however, under the age of 21 years can take up a non-
residental conditional purchase under section 47 of the Crown
Lands Act of 1884.
A married woman, if living apart from her husband
under an order for judicial separation, may, out of moneys be-
longing to her for her separate use, conditionally purchase land.
A married woman differently situated is denied this privilege,
but may acquire a conditional purchase under the will or
intestacy of a deceased holder.
AREA WHICH MAY BE CONDITIONALLY PURCHASED.
The smallest area (outside special areas) which can be
conditionally purchased (whether under residential or non-resi-
dential conditions) is 40 acres. From this up to 640 acres may


be conditionally purchased in the Eastern Division, and up to
2,500 in the Central Division; but it will be understood that in
the Eastern Division an area of 1,280 acres may be conditionally
purchased by means of conditional lease.
Non-residential conditional purchases cannot exceed in
all 320 acres.
Lands within special areas may be taken up in such areas
as may be prescribed by the proclamation in the Gazette declar-
ing them to be special areas. The minimum area of lands within
special areas, not embracing population areas or suburban lands,
is fixed ordinarily at 40 acres ; but when embracing population
or suburban lands smaller portions may be made available. No
special area conditional purchase can exceed 320 acres in the
Eastern or 640 acres in the Central or Western Division, and it
will, of course, depend upon the terms of the proclamation
whether areas as large as these may be applied for. The fact of
an original conditional purchase being situated in a special area
(whether embracing the maximum area allowed in the special
area or not) will not prevent additional purchases of ordinary
land being made by virtue of it; nor will a selector who holds
an original conditional purchase of ordinary land be prevented
from making an additional conditional purchase in the special
area of the full quantity allowed in the special area. In either
case, the maximum area prescribed in connection with the Divi-
sion in which the land is situated cannot, of course, be exceeded.
PROCEDURE IN TAKING UP LAND.
With every application for an original or additional con-
ditional purchase, other than land within a special area, or non-
residential, a deposit of 2s per acre must be paid at the time of
application,
A survey fee is required in connection with every condi-
tional purchase application, whether the land applied for is
measured or not. The broad rule is that for the purpose of the
survey fee measured portions are to be regarded as unmeasured.
CONFLICTING APPLICATIONS.
If two or more complete applications for conditional pur-
chases or conditional or homestead leases are tendered to the
Land Agent at the same time and are conflicting (that is to say,
two or more of the applicants are seeking the same or part of
the same land), the Land Agent will determine by ballot how
the application shall stand in relation to each other in point of
time.
It is important for applicants to understand that if two
persons apply at the same time, and one presents a complete ap-
plication and the other does not, preference will be given to the


applicant who tenders his application filled in and ready for ac-
ceptance. In such case as the applicants would not be deemed
to have applied simultaneously.
MEASUREMENT OF CONDITIONAL PURCHASES.
An original conditional purchase of unmeasured land
which has not a frontage (to a river, frontage road or frontage
creek, &c.) must be a reasonable distance from a frontage, and
should be measured in the form of a square or rectangle not
more than twice as long as it may be wide. The boundaries
(other than the frontage) should run, north, south, east, and
west.
If the land has a frontage the frontage must not be more
than half the depth. In such a ease the land may be applied for
and measured with boundaries at right angles with the frontage.
CONDITIONS TO BE FULFILLED.
RESIDENCE.
A conditional purchaser is at liberty to enter upon the
land immediately after he has applied for it, as his title com-
mences with h ; s application and the effect of his application
has been to withdraw the land from any annual
lease or occupation license. The conditional purchaser will,
however, be acting prudently if before entering into occupation
he assures himself of the validity of his application, seeing that,
should it be invalid, it would not apparently have had the effect
of interrupting the rights of occupation which the lessee or
licensee possessed with respect to the land. It is important to
understand, however, that the law does not compel any selector
to commence residence until confirmation of his application has
taken place; so that between the date of application and con-
firmation he is free to act as he chooses.
Any person who has selected (other than non-residential),
must within three months after the date of confirmation of his
application commence and thereafter continue to reside and live
upon the land continuously, making it in good faith his usual
home without any other habitual residence, until five years com*
puted from the date of his application shall have expired.
Residence is not re for any additional conditional
purchase applied for by virtue of an original purcnase ; that is
to say, the residence required in connection with the original
purchase suffices for all the additional purchases, at whatever
intervals the additional purchases may have been or may be
made.
Original and additional conditional purchases and condi-
tion'd leases of the same series are treated as one purchase so far


as residence is concerned. The holder of the land can therefore
carry out his residence on any part of the land.
Minors who may become conditional purchasers at a time
when they may be residing with their parents may, up to the
age of twenty-one, in the case of unmarried females, continue to
reside with them, provided the conditional purchasers forward to
the Chairman of the Land Board a declaration in form 21 notify-
ing their intention of doing so. In this way chi'dren (not, of
course, being under sixteen years of age) may acquire land while
remaining under their parents’ roof. This privilige is allowed,
however, only in cases where the land upon which the parents
reside is held under conditional purchase or conditional lease,
and where the land selected adjoins the parents’ land, or is
separated from it only by roads or creeks, or by land held under
conditional purchase or conditional lease by a child of the same
parent. It would appear that if a boy should now. under these
circumstances, apply for a conditional purchase on his sixteenth
birthday, he might reside for his full term on his parents’ land ;
but if he should not apply till his eighteenth birthday, he would,
after the first three years, be obliged to remove to his own con-
ditional purchase, and there reside continuously for the balance
of the term.
If any conditional purchaser should die or be declared a
lunatic before the fulfilment of the condition of residence his
conditional purchase may be held, without residence, by his
representatives or their assigns in trust for and for the benefit
of the person rightfully entitled. Under this provision residence
is now waived even when the conditional purchase passes by
transfer to other than the representafives of the deceased.
FENCING ON CONDITIONAL PURCHASES.
Every holder of a conditional purchase (other than a non-
residential one), is required to fence the boundaries of his land
within two years after his application for it has been confirmed.
If the conditional purchase is a non-residential one, the
fence must be erected within one year from the date of confirma-
tion ; and in connection with a conditional purchase of this
character the holder is required to produce, five years after con-
firmation of the application, evidence satisfactory to the Board
that he has expended a sum not less than £1 per acre upon per-
manent improvements other than for the boundary fencing.
An original conditional purchase, together with all addi-
tional conditional purchases made by virtue of it, and all condi-
tional leases granted by virtue of any of the conditional pur-
chases, may for the purpose of fencing be treated as one holding.
It is, therefore, not necessary that each conditional purchase or


lease should be fenced off separately. It is sufficient if the fence
be erected on the exterior boundaries so as to enclose the whole
area.
SUBSTITUTION OF OTHER IMPROVEMENTS IN LIEU OF
FENCING.
As a conditional purchaser may desire not to fence any
one of his boundaries or may desire to fence one or more and
not the whole, but the facts of his case may be such as would
not supply him with such grounds for exemption from fencing.
In any such case the Land Board may grant the holder of any
conditional purchase permission to substitute other improve-
ments in lieu of fencing upon application being made to the
Chairman before, or within two years after, confirmation of the
application for the land.
An original purchase, together with its additional, and
any conditional leases granted by virtue of any of the purchases
may, with respect to improvements, be treated as one holding, so
that it will be sufficient if the required improvements be made
on any one or more of the portions without each portion being
individually improved.
If the conditional purchaser should through illness,
drought, flood, or other sufficient cause be prevented from fulfill-
ing his condition of improvements, &c., he may apply to the
Chairman in form 19 for a suspension of his conditions for a
period not exceeding six months.
TRANSFERS OF CONDITIONAL PURCHASES.
Conditional purchases may be transferred apart only
when the conditions of residence, fencing, or improvements have
been fulfilled with respect to each and every one of the purchases
of the series.
PAYMENT OF PURCHASE MONEV OF A CONDITIONAL
PURCHASE.
The price of land conditionally purchased, other than
under non-residential, of the Act of 1884 or within a special
area, is £ I per acre.
The prices of lands within special areas are determined
by the Covernor-in-Council, and vary from 30s per acre upwards,
according to the estimated value of the portions.
Upon any conditional purchase of the first-mentioned
description the balance of purchase money, 18s per acre, is pay-
able by annual instalments of Is per acre, extending over 32
years, with interest of four per cent, added.
If in either of these two cases the conditional purchase
had been applied for under non-residential the annual instalment
would, of course, be £4.


CLOSING AND PURCHASE OF UNNECESSARY
ROADS.
The holder is fee-simple of land which adjoins a road re-
served exclusively to access to his land may apply to have it
closed and to be permitted to purchase it should it not be
required for public use or convenience
The holder of any land through which passes a proclaimed
road, rendering unnecessary a reserved or other road bounding
or traversing his land or neighbouring land may also apply to
have the unnecessary road closed and to be permitted to pur-
chase it.
The holder of a conditional purchase through which
passes any unnecessary road may apply to have it closed and to
have it added to his conditional purchase.
A plan should be forwarded with the application showing
accurately the land applied for, the position of adjoining land
held by the applicant or other proprietors, and all other particu-
lars necessary to illustrate the intention of the applicant and the
effect of compliance with the application. •
ANNUAL LEASES.
Crown lands may be let under annual lease by auction or
tender, or upon application in areas not exceeding 1,920 acres.
Land held under any lease or license is not put up to
annual lease and cannot be applied for under annual lease.
Lands reserved from sale are not barred from annual
lease.
Lands reserved from lease generally or from annual lease
specially, or from license, are not open to annual lease.
Improved lands may be let on annual lease subject to
payment of rent for the use of the improvements. When the
lands are offered to lease by sale or tender, the upset rent will be
fixed so as to include the estimated annual value of any
improvements.
LEASING BY APPLICATION.
Application for an annual lease may be made (on any
business day, not being a Thursday) in form 43 to the Land
Agent of the District, accompanied by a deposit of £2 for each
640 acres or less area. If made after the land has been adver-
tised for lease by auction or tender it will not be considered
until after the expiration of the date of sale, &c., and will not
stand in the way of sale or tender of the lease.
The land applied for should be contiguous and described
in the application, and a separate application made for each
separate tract.


LEASES OF LAND SURROUNDING ARTESIAN
WELLS.
Any holder under annual lease or occupation license of
land in the Western Division who desires to bore and search for
water in the land held by him may apply in form 47 to the
Under Secretary for Lauds. The application should contain a
receipt showing that a deposit of £lO has been paid to the
Colonial Treasurer.
With the application there should be furnished a plan
showing the lands desired to be reserved, and the proposed site
of the bore relatively to some survey mark or comer of a
measured portion, or to any point otherwise sufficiently
determined.
After receipt of the application the Minister may by
notice in the Gazette set apart an area not exceeding 10,240
acres in one block on the resumed area with a view to the appli-
cant carrying on boring operations without incurring the risk of
losing the land.
CONDITIONAL LEASES.
WHO MAY APPLY.
Any person who has applied since the 31st December,
1884, for an original or additional conditional purchase may at
any time before or after confirmation of the application apply for
a conditional or additional conditional lease by virtue of it.
A conditional lease cannot be granted by virtue of a non-
residential conditional purchase, nor by virtue of a conditional
purchase applied for prior to the Ist January, 1885, or compris-
ing land within a special area
An application for a conditional lease cannot be made by
virtue of a conditional purchase standing in the name of a person
who has died, or been declared a lunatic, until the applicant has
forwarded a certificate from the Crown Solicitor showing that he
is entitled to be registered as the holder of the purchase, and
has been so registered.
AREA WHICH MAY BE CONDITIONALLY LEASED.
The area of the conditional lease or leases applied for by
virtue of any conditional purchase cannot exceed three times the
area of the purchase, and cannot be less than 40 acres.
In the Eastern Division the total area of the condition-
ally purchased and conditionally leased land cannot exceed 1,280
acres.
In the Central Division the total area of the condition-
ally purchased and conditionally leased land cannot exceed,
2,560 acres.


PROCEDURE.
A deposit of two-pence per acre of the area applied for,
and a survey fee according to the scale paid at the time of appli-
cation.
The application should be signed by the applicant or his
duly authorised agent, and may be tendered by him in person or
by the agent. When signed or tendered by an agent, his written
authority must be delivered to the Land Agent with the applica-
tion.
TERM OF A CONDITIONAL LEASE.
Subject to the payment of rent and fulfilment of the
prescribed conditions all conditional leases have a ttrm of fifteen
years, computed from the respective dates of their commence-
ment.
PAYMENT OF RENT.
In connection with leases applied for a provisional rent of
2d. per acre must be paid until the rent as determined by
appraisement is called for. The deposit paid with the applica-
tion will serve as provisional rent for the first year.
In every case the rent as appraised, whether greater or
less than the provisional i ent, applies from the date of commence-
ment of the lease.
If the rent exceeds twopence per acre the lessee will be
required to pay the necessary balance within one month from the
date of notice, calling for payment, but if the rent is less than
twopence per acre he will be entitled to a refund of the over-
payment.
LAND UNDER CONDITIONAL LEASE MAY BE CONDITIONALLY
PURCHASED.
All conditional leases, without distinction, may (subject
to certain limitations) be taken up under additional conditional
purchase by the leaseholders themselves. This applies to leases
applied for before or after the Ist December, 1889, and includes
converted pre-emptive leases under section 52 of the Act of 1884.
HOMESTEAD LEASES
WHAT LANDS ARE AVAILABLE
Homestead leases may comprise land situated in the
Western Division only.
The only lands available are vacant lands, or lands held
under annual lease or occupation license.
No improvements constitute a bar to homestead lease.
WHO MAY APPLY.
Any person of or over sixteen years of age, if not a female
minor, may apply.


A married woman, if living apart from her husband under
an order for j udicial separation, may, out of moneys belonging to
her for her separate estate, apply for a homestead lease. A
married woman not so situated cannot do so, but may acquire a
homestead lease under the will or intestacy of a deceased holder.
AREA WHICH MAY BE OBTAINED UNDER HOMESTEAD
LEASE.
The area which may be held under homestead lease cannot
be less than 2560 acres or more than 10,240 acres. The area of
an additional homestead lease may be less than 2560 acres, pro-
vided this area is not available, or, being available, it would,
with the area of the other leases of the series, exceed 10,240
acres.
PROCEDURE IN APPLYING FOR A HOMESTEAD LEASE.
The application should contain a full description of the
land applied for.
With the application a deposit of Id. per acre of the area
applied for must be paid.
A survey fee is not required with the application.
CONDITIONS TO BE FULFILLED—RESIDENCE.
During each year he must reside six months until five
years from the date of application for the lease shall have
expired. It will thus be seen that the Crown Lands Act of 1889
has shortened the term of residence both with respect to applica-
tions made before as well as to those made since it came into
operation.
It is important, however, for the lessee to understand that
each six months’ residence must now be continuous. He cannot
reside on and off and make up his six months by residing at
intervals.
TRANSFER OF HOMESTEAD LEASES.
An original homestead lease cannot be transferred abso-
lutely until after the full term of residence has been fulfilled.
OCCUPATION LICENSES.
Lands held under occupation license comprise, for the
most part, the resumed areas of the original pastoral holdings
which under the Act of 1884 were divided, one part being
granted under pastoral lease and the other under occupation
license.
Upon the expiration of the term or extended term of a
pastoral lease, the land (if not applied for under preferential
occupation license) may be offered by auction or tender under
occupation license.


jAt f
$ i$ AiO
PQ 700 62 A
Occupation licenses runs from 1 January to 31 December
of each year.
RESIDENTIAL LEASES OF LAND WITHIN
GOLD AND MINERAL FIELDS.
The Governor, on the recommendation of the Warden of
any gold-field, may grant leases for periods not exceeding fifteen
years of areas not exceeding 10 acres of Crown Lands within
gold and mineral fields to any holder of a miner’s right or mineral
license for the purpose of bona fide residence, upon such terms
and conditions as to rent, cost of survey, term of lease, erection
of fences and buildings, and upon such other provisions for the
protection of the public interest as may be prescribed.
SCRUB LEASES.
The Minister may, upon the recommendation of the Land
Board, declare Crown Lands, which are wholly or partly covered
with scrub, noxious undergrowth, prickly pear, &c., to be scrub
lands, whether the lands are vacant or are held under lease or
license.
The land may be let under scrub lease upon application,
or by auction or tender.
If the land contains improvements the lessee (if not the
owner of them) will be required to purchase them.
TERM OF LEASE.
A scrub lease may be for such a term not exceeding
twenty-one years, as the Minister may fix, and the term may be
divided into such periods as the Minister may determine. The
rent for each period will be separately appraised.
SPECIAL LEASES
Special leases of Crown land may be sold by auction, or
granted on application.
Applications for any special lease should be made in form
45, to the Chairman of the Land Board. The application must
be accompanied by a receipt showing a deposit of £5.
Every application must be accompanied by a plan or
tracing of the land applied for, and must set forth the position
and extent of the land applied for, the purpose for which the
lease is desired, the rent offered, and such ether information as
may tend to facilitate the dealing with the application.
TERM, AREA, AND CONDITIONS.
A special lease cannot comprise moi’e than 320 acres, or
be granted for a term exceeding fifteen years. The area and
