

/ V '
—. ... /
yy y tn
I C c? K?
f / '
ET-0 P>
'% c \f c VA(W©» Q
CRUISES IN
MELANESIA, MICEONESIA, AND WESTERN
POLYNESIA,
IN’ 188 S, 188 3, A-ND 18 84,
VISITS TO NEW GUINEA AND THE LOUISIADES
IN’ 1884= AND 1885.
By Captain Cyprian Bridge, r.n.
From ‘ Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Afonthly
Record of Geography September No., 1880.


•
*•


CRUISES IN
MELANESIA, MICRONESIA, AND WESTERN
POLYNESIA,
lIST 188 2, 188 3, .A. NID 188 4,
VISITS TO NEW GUINEA AND THE LOUISIADES
11ST ISB4L ISBS.
Captain Cyprian Bridge, r.n.
The cruises of which I propose to give some account were the follow-
ing :
In 1882 the New Hebrides and the Banks Islands were visited.
Towards the close of the same year, during a second cruise, visits
were paid to several islands of the Solomon group, to New Britain, and
to the Duke of York Islands.
In 1883, in the course of a very extended cruise, I called at Eotumah,
Sophia Island, the Ellice, Gilbert (or Kings mill), and the Marshall
groups, the Pelew Islands, both sections of the Great Caroline Archi-
pelago, New Britain, the Duke of York Islands, and some of the north-
western Solomons.
In 1884 my duties took me to Keppel Island, or Niu-to-bu-tabu, to
Samoa or the Navigators’ Archipelago, and to the several divisions of
Tonga or the Friendly Islands. Later in this year, the ship wliich I
commanded, the Espiegle, accompanied Commodore Erskine during the
proclamation of the British Protectorate over South-eastern New
Guinea, and I touched at many places on the coast between Port Moresby
and Dinner Island, and also at Basilaki (Moresby Island), and Teste
Island.
In 1885, in H.M.S. Dart, I visited the Louisiades and Woodlark
Island, the eastern part and also the north-eastern coast of New Guinea
as far as Cape King William, and the little-known Rook and Long
Islands.
It is not worth while to occupy your attention with the details
of the several archipelagoes visited. A glance at a fair-sized chart


of the Western Pacific will exhibit their position, extent, and com-
position much more clearly than even a long description in words.
It may he remarked that, in the above enumeration of cruises, no
mention has been made of Fiji, to which I paid several visits. It has
now been for years a British colony with a settled government: among
its population are nearly 4000 whites, and accounts of it have been too
often published to render necessary a repetition of them here.
Of the other archipelagoes the New Hebrides has, perhaps, been the
most frequently described in print; and we have, amongst others, an
interesting narrative of a cruise in the waters of the group by Captain
Albert Markham when in command of H.M.S. Bosario. The greater
part of it is, however, still but little known, and very few strangers
have seen anything of the interior of the larger islands. Of late years
the group has been invested with a special interest as being one of the
principal areas of the so-called “ labour trade,” and the scene of outrages
on the “ labour traders ” and of retaliatory expeditions against the
natives. The southern section of the group, composed of Aneiteum,
Tanna, Erromanga, and Sandwich or Yate, with a few smaller islands,
is sufficiently remote from the equator to enjoy, during at least several
weeks of the year, a far from disagreeable climate. Being in the
southern hemisphere, January and February are the hottest, and July
and August the coolest months. The temperature in the shade ranges
from about 62° in the latter, to about 92° in the former months, as
established by observations made at Futuna (or Erronan) by the Rev.
J. Copeland. I experienced some very pleasant weather at Havannah
Harbour in Sandwich, and at Aneiteum in August 1882; but in my
journal I can find no record of a lower day temperature than 68°, and
only one entry of a night temperature, at the former place, as low as 66°.
In the more northern islands, Api, Ambrym, Mallicolo, Espiritu-Santo,
Aurora, Pentecost, and Aoba, the climate is warmer and more generally
humid. As a rule the climate is not favourable to white men, especially
in the northern islands, and bad fevers are very common.
The scenery of the southern section is the more varied. The foliage
is not so dense as in the northern, and especially in Erromanga and
Sandwich, the step-like terraces of the hill-sides, faced with precipitous
bluffs of coralline limestone, are surmounted with broad belts of open
grass-covered country which has been proved to afford excellent grazing
for horned cattle. On the lee sides of the northern islands coco-nut
trees grow in enormous numbers; and north of Mallicolo, the grass
country is rare. There are several active volcanoes. That in Tanna is
the best known, but about two years ago a party of officers from H.M.S.
Bart reached the summit of the loftier volcano of Ambrym. There are
few good harbours in the New Hebrides. Havannah Harbour is spacious
and sheltered from all winds, but the entrances are narrow and the
water inconveniently deep ; Vila has the same defects. On the lee sides


of most of the islands there are many fairly snug anchorages, hut these
are not secure in the hurricane season, which lasts from about the
middle of December to the beginning of April.
The inhabitants of the New Hebrides are Melanesians, divided into a
multitude of independent and usually hostile tribes. On several islands
there are communities of Polynesians, some of whom —as shown by theix
complexions —have preserved, amongst their Melanesian neighbours,
their purity of descent. One of the difficulties of communicating with the
natives is due to the immense variety of languages, which renders it impos-
sible to obtain the services of an interpreter likely to he of use in more
than a single district. This difficulty has seriously impeded the work of
the missionaries of the Presbyterian Church who labour in the islands
from Amhrym southwards, and of the Anglican Melanesian Mission, who
have taken spiritual charge of the northern islands, the Banks group, and
the Solomons. The necessity of confronting this difficulty has been advan-
tageous to linguistic science, for the Eev. Dr. Codrington, of the Anglican
Mission, has recently published a learned work on ‘ The Languages of
Melanesia.’ As a rule, white men and natives communicate with each
other by means of a very singular jargon, like the “ pigeon English ” of
China, known as “ sandal-wood English,” or the “ heche de mer lingo,
designations which explain its origin. Bearing in mind who the devisers
of this dialect were, it is not surprising that a prominent characteristic
should he the frequent interpolation into a sentence of exceptionally
vigorous profanity. This the native linguist utters without a suspicion
of its being improper. A few phrases, without the ingredient just
mentioned, will convey an idea of what the jargon is. “ That fellow
man he no good ”= “ That is a had man.” “ That fellow woman Mary
belong a me” = “That woman is my wife.” “Big fellow yam he stop
Tanna ”= “ Large yams grow in Tanna.” This “ pigeon ”is the uni-
versal mode of communication between white men, except missionaries,
and islanders throughout the South-western Pacific, and is used by both
Englishmen and foreigners. I have even heard the oath administered,
to Melanesian witnesses in a French court of justice at Noumea in the
following terms“ Me talkee true, me no tell lie, me no gammon; me,”
raising the right hand to the sky, “ swear.” At many places even this
imperfect method of conversing is unknown, but so intelligent and such
adepts in gesture language are the natives, that they understand, and
make themselves understood by, a stranger much more thoroughly than
the inexperienced would expect.
At the time of my visit there were, including the wives and children
of the missionaries, between eighty and a hundred white residents in
the group. There are probably now fully a hundred in all. Aneiteum
is completely Christian; and the natives are amongst the most devout
of believers. A more attentive congregation than that attending the
church at Port Tnyang it would be impossible to meet with. Ihe
b 2


members carry with them to worship small libraries of devotional
works, which require bags and baskets for their conveyance. On other
islands progress has been made, progress with which the missionaries
themselves are dissatisfied, but which appears very surprising to a
stranger who can discern the difficulties of the situation. As a lule, a
missionary establishment consists of the clergyman and his wife, and
perhaps children, and one or two teachers, or subordinate lay missionaries,
who are generally natives of other and remote islands, .A plain wooden
house is brought from New Zealand and put up for the missionary and
his family, usually with his own hands and those of his brethren who
assemble for the purpose. A church built in the style of the native
houses, of reeds and mats, occasionally at the older stations of coral
masonry, and a similar edifice for a school, with the comfortable huts of
the teachers and the catechumens, complete the buildings of the station.
The other white men in the group follow the occupations of planters
and traders. Attempts, in one case on a large scale, were made some
years ago to grow cotton, but without much success, on the island of
Sandwich or Vate. The cultivation of maize and coffee has been tried
with better results on the same island. The staple vegetable product is
copra, the dried pulp of the coco-nut. One or two settlers have planted
trees for the express purpose of obtaining copra, but there has hardly as
yet been sufficient time to see if it will answer. The immense groves of
coco-nut trees on Ambrym and Api, for instance, render it unlikely that
much deliberate planting will be undertaken for some time to come.
But the climate of the northern islands is so humid,' that on them the
copra has to be artificially dried by fire, which is more costly, in labour
and material, than the sun-drying process, and gives a dess valuable
article for sending to market.
The white “trader” gets permission from the chief of a tribe to
settle in his district. The stranger’s presence is usually very acceptable
to the tribe. He must bring with him a stock of “ trade ”; that is,
tomahawks, knives, handkerchiefs, pipes, tobacco, matches, &c., for pur-
poses of barter. Natives with a trader near them can rely upon a pretty
steady supply of those goods of the white man which they had become
fond of. A rude hut, except that it contains a rough table and a chair
or two differing little from those of the natives, is put up as a residence,
and a larger one as a copra store. A few platforms of slender poles
raised two or three feet above the ground serve as drying-places for the
nuts, the shells of which are split in half, so that the pulp when it
shrinks in drying can fall out. On islands where it is necessary to use
fire to dry it, the shells form no inconsiderable part of the fuel. The
trader is usually the agent of a mercantile firm, which supplies him
with a certain quantity of “trade” goods, and receives in return his
copra. He has, as a rule, three or four labourers in his employment.
Owing to a singular custom or prejudice, these are rarely natives of the


island in which they work. He buys the nuts from his neighbours, and
with the assistance of his labourers prepares the copra. On the more
savage islands, arms and ammunition, as long as their introduction was
allowed (and it is doubtful if it has yet been quite stopped), matches,
pipes, and tobacco, are the things commonly given for nuts. The price
varies greatly, according to locality and year, but a pipe, a small frag-
ment of tobacco, or a box of matches, is frequently given for a dozen
nuts. Every few months a small vessel visits the different stations,
bringing goods and supplies of food for the traders, and taking away the
copra, which on arrival in Europe is converted into oil, the refuse being
used in the manufacture of cake for cattle.
The life of a trader is a hard and isolated one; and undoubtedly the
profession comprises in its ranks some very despicable persons who
have made the name of “ beach-comber ” a synonym for a vicious and
lazy scoundrel. But lam bound to say that I met among them several
honest, industrious, and temperate men who would have done credit to
any community.
The New Hebrides natives differ greatly in physical qualities. On
Mallicolo there are two distinct races, distinguished by the length
and breadth of their skulls. Persons familiar with the group can
readily point out an Espiritu-Santo man, a Sandwich man, a Pentecost
man, or a Tanna man. The dress differs in nearly every island, and in
some is very remarkable, more jso on Tanna, on Erromango, on Api, and
on Ambrym than would bear public description. The modes of dressing
the hair are various. On Tanna it is dyed auburn or nearly gold colour
with lime, €hid is gathered into small thin locks which are wound round
with a slender filament like thread. On Sandwich the women shave the
skull completely. On Espiritu-Santo they shave it, but leave a broad
ridge of frizzled hair in the middle from poll to forehead, like the well-
known garniture of the head of a clown. I had the good fortune to
witness some Santo ladies making their toilet, which was effected by
mutual assistance. The person being dressed had her head shaved with
a knife of bamboo, of course without soap or any facilitating lather.
In the New Hebrides the villages are always invisible frdtn the
water. Each village as a rule consists of a set of different hamlets or
collections of huts. The houses in the various islands differ greatly in
architecture, but I always found them beautifully neat and clean. The
dead are usually buried at the door of the hut. On Ambrym and some
other islands the young unmarried men in a village always sleep in a
largo house specially set apart for them.
In general it may be said that all the Melanesians who have not
been converted to Christianity are cannibals. It is not, however, to bo
supposed that human flesh is their ordinary diet. It is probable that
none partake of it often, and that large numbers have only rare oppor-
tunities of doing so. They arc almost invariably ashamed of canni-


balism, and will generally conceal their indulgence in it or discontinue
it if a white man comes to live among them.
Wars are nearly perpetual, and the non-Christian natives invariably
go armed. I have been amongst natives whose custom it was not to lay
aside their weapons even to eat, but keeping them in their right hand
to take their food in the left. The spear, the bow and arrow, the club,
and the tomahawk are all in use in the New Hebrides, but there are
many firearms in the hands of the natives. The Tanna men have a
high reputation for boldness, and even in ordinary intercourse they
have a more independent bearing than most of their neighbours. Native
wars are not usually very sanguinary; at least, pitched battles are few.
The savage art of war consists in murdering stragglers and making
forays to kill women and children, burn down villages, and lay waste
plantations.
Nothing struck me more than the great intelligence of the natives
of Oceania in general and of the Melanesians in particular. Within the
limited sphere of their acquirements whatever they do they do tho-
roughly. This will be generally admitted. One quality which my
experience compels me to credit them with is more likely to be dis-
puted ; that is, their truthfulness. I had to conduct more than one long
and intricate inquiry, and, difficulties of communication notwithstanding,
each resulted in the discovery of the point sought for; whilst the
straightforward manner in which the native evidence was given led me
often to compare it with that in which white testimony was delivered
in the multitude of cases I had had official cognisance of, and usually
the comparison was not to the advantage of the latter.
The Melanesians of the Solomon Islands are less known than their
neighbours of the New Hebrides. The climate of the group is less
favourable to white men. Up to the time of my last visit only three or
four traders resided in the whole archipelago; and the system on which
the Anglican Mission is conducted does not admit of more than occa-
sional residence on a few of the islands of Bishop Selwyn and his clergy.
The enormous influence which that estimable prelate has obtained
wherever he is known is convincing proof of the noble qualities which
ho brings to the furtherance of the cause to which he has devoted his
life. It is impossible to exaggerate the high opinion of him held by
the officers and men of the squadron on the station, who regard him both
as a pious ecclesiastic and an excellent seaman. His zealous and self-
denying companions have won the esteem of all who have visited the
scene of their labours.
The cool intervals experienced in July and August at Aneiteum or
Sandwich are not enjoyed in the Solomons, which, on the other hand,
are not visited by hurricanes. The scenery of the islands is often
grand, as the mountains are lofty; but the surface of the country is
covered with the luxuriant vegetation of the tropics, usually of a deep


green hue, which, beautiful enough in itself, becomes in time somewhat
monotonous. The geological structure of the group gives promise of
mineral riches in at least some of the islands. In Guadalcanal’ there
are some large rivers, which in the heavy rains pour their turbid floods
into the sea, thereby greatly hampering navigation, which, as amongst
all coral islands, has to be conducted largely by attention to the colour
of the water.
The Solomon islanders are in general an aquatic people. Their
canoes, except as New Ireland and New Britain are approached, have
no outriggers. They are of graceful shape, of large size, built up of
pieces, and with seams “ payed ” with a sort of vegetable pitch. The
villages are usually near the water’s edge and unconcealed by trees. The
use of firearms is still not very common. But on some islands, notably
Guadalcanal they are expert bowmen. The Savo men make clubs
covered with straw plaiting of singularly fine texture and tasteful
pattern. Some of the spears are of prodigious length, and are tipped at
the end with a human bone cut into a multitude of sharp and brittle
points, which break off in a wound and are said to certainly cause
death. Having succeeded with some difficulty in purchasing one of
these at Tesemboko, a friendly native cautioned me against allowing
any one to touch a point even with the finger, saying that if any person
did, “My word ! he die quick.”
New Britain is one of the most beautiful countries in the world.
The contours of the lofty mountains are very graceful, and the variety
of tints of the rich tropical verdure is as attractive as it is unusual.
The dense foliage is interspersed with patches of grass of an emerald
hue. At Matupi in Blanche Bay there is an active volcano, a curious
volcanic island, and a region of hot springs. I travelled by land once
from Nodup to Blanche Bay, and the heat and fatigue were more than
compensated by the beauty and varied character of the scenery traversed.
The New Britain people go entirely naked. They are not a fine race,
and want the activity and vigour of the Solomon islanders. Foreigners
have introduced a good many firearms amongst the inhabitants of
Blanche Bay and Kambeirah, but as a rule the spear, usually 'Sdorncd
with brightly coloured feathers, is their weapon. They build good
houses and make excellent nets and ingenious fishing-baskets. They
are the only cannibals I know who are not ashamed of their fondness
for human flesh. A German settler told me that overtures were made
to him to arrange the purchase of the body of a man who had been
accidentally killed by a neighbouring tribe with whom the would-be
buyers were not friendly. The reason given was a desire to eat what
otherwise might bo wasted in a commonplace interment.
The curious and little understood ceremonies of the duh-duk are ex-
tensively performed in New Britain and the neighbouring Duke of York
group. One thing about them is certain, and that is, that those who


are initiated into the mysteries obtain considerable influence over the
rest of their tribesmen. There is another very remarkable custom, about
which I was given information by the Rev. Mr. Rooney of the Wesleyan
Mission, which labours in this part of Melanesia. It may be described
as follows:—If A injures B, B burns down C’s hut, or makes a hole in
his canoe, or sticks a spear in the pathway so that C is nearly sure to
run against it. B lets C know that he has injured him, and the reason
of it; when Cis expected to settle the account with A, the first aggressor.
On the whole the New Britain people are the least attractive of all
Melanesians whom I know. They are very dirty, and do not possess
the skill in fashioning pottery, or carving wooden bowls, of their neigh-
bours in the Solomons and the Admiralty Islands. Yet amongst them
I had some very worthy friends. One of them I specially remarked
from having been struck with the persistence with which he insisted on
observance of the curious Melanesian etiquette, that a person should
never be asked his name. The savage has no objection to his name
being known, but politeness requires that it should be asked of some one
else. The New Britons have a curious money called dawarra, made of
small shells perforated and strung on fibres of some plant. It is counted
by measure of length, and has some of the properties of the money of
civilisation, as it owes its value to the rarity of its material, and it can
be easily divided into small sums.
At Meoko, in the Duke of York group, there is a large German
trading station of the South Sea Company, but it serves principally as a
depot for labourers who are “ recruited ” in the neighbouring islands for
the plantations in Samoa. At Matupi, in Now Britain, is the western
headquarter station of the Messrs. Hernsheim.
Two white men, Messrs. Farrell and Parkinson, have laid out a
plantation for coffee, cotton, and copra, on New Britain, with fair pros-
pects of success, provided the difficulty of obtaining a steady supply of
labour can be overcome. A Catholic mission was established a few
years ago at Nodup in New Britain, but its existence did not last
long. The missionaries believed themselves to have been threatened by
the natives, and their principal station was burned down in 1883. In
September of that year I brought away the two fathers and a lay brother,
who comprised the mission. They were in a complete state of destitu-
tion, without clothes and weakened by fever. 1 met Father Navarre,
the amiable and self-denying head of the mission, last year at Thursday
Island, where he had halted preparatory to going over to New Guinea.
The Ellice, the Gilbert (or as they are usually called by the seamen,
the Kings mill),- and the Marshall groups, are all composed of low, flat
Islands formed of coral. Some of them are nearly perfect atolls, Maraki
in the northern Gilberts being perhaps the most perfect in the world.
The usual formation is a belt of coral, often of very irregular outline,
from which a series of low sand islets rise a few feet, seldom more than


twelve, above the surface of the water. The belt is generally pierced
by several passages leading to the lagoon, often navigable by ships of
considerable size. In some cases, as at Nukulailai in the Ellice group,
there is no navigable passage. Where this is wanting, landing has to
be effected in canoes on the edge of the reef on the lee side, and the
shallow interior waters of the lagoon have to be traversed by wading.
The larger sandy islets on the reef are inhabited and are planted with ex-
tensive groves of coco-nut trees. The coco-nut and the pandanus are
almost the only trees that grow in these archipelagoes; but in the
Marshall Islands there is a kind of bread-fruit which is also found in the
other groups, but in smaller quantity.
It seems absurd to speak of the fertility of soil apparently composed
almost entirely of sand, nevertheless even amongst these coral archi-
pelagoes there are differences. The Marshall Islands have the most
profuse natural growth of ferns and grasses; on the Gilbert Islands
there is not even a fern ; whilst the Ellice Islands hold an intermediate
place between the sterility of the latter and the comparative fertility of
the former. It is customary to reproach the natives of Oceania with
invincible indolence; and, if it be a fault, I fear they must be
convicted of desultoriness and unsteadiness in their work. The amount
done in a year would if spread over the whole period give, I believe, a very
respectable daily average. The labour expended by the Ellice Islanders
in cultivating their lands and growing the huge taro, which is the
staple of their diet, must have been enormous. The vegetable is planted
in vast trenches which look as though they had belonged to some great
fortress long ago fallen into ruin. Even with the best implements the
excavations would be extremely laborious, but one is lost in astonish-
ment when one finds that many of the taro beds now in existence were
excavated by generations in possession only of tools of shell or wood.
In the Gilbert and Marshall groups the fruit of the pandanus is largely
used as food; and, of course, in all the groups fish is a common article
of diet. The pandanus fruit is preserved for use as sea-stock by the
bold canoe sailors of the two more northern archipelagoes. The drupes are
separated, dried, and pounded into a dust resembling snuff. This?dust
is exposed to the sun till a sweet juice exudes rendering it sticky. It is
then rolled into broad flat cakes which look exactly like pieces of thick
blanket soaked in treacle. These are rolled up and tightly wrapped
round with dried leaves and sennitt, much after the fashion in which
blue-jackets make up their tobacco. Thus preserved the fruit is not
injured by salt water. All the islanders are expert fishermen. Shark’s
fin being an article of export the shark is eagerly sought for. He is often
caught without a hook; a piece of bait is put on the end of a line
passed through a noose in a larger line and towed from a canoe. As the
shark is seen to follow the bait, it is gradually hauled up till his head
and shoulders are past the noose. The latter is then quickly tightened.


Another plan, of which I was told on good authority, is even more
remarkable. The sharks are supposed to sleep in rather shoal water
under projecting pieces of coral with their heads just protruding. When
a Gilbert islander sees one in this position he dives down with a small
stick in his hand and gives the fish a tap on the nose, repeating it until
the shark, for comfort’s sake, changes his position and leaves his tail
where his head had been. This is the fisherman’s chance, and a
second dive with a noose at the end of a line soon makes him master of
his game. lam bound to say that I never saw this mode of fishing.
The Ellice islanders are all Christians, having been converted by the
missionaries of the London Mission Society. They are inoffensive folk
and have no arms. The Nukulailai people declare that they never did
have any : but the natives of other islands undoubtedly had some until
comparatively recently. They are well educated, can all read, and are
most persistent letter writers. No present is more acceptable to them
than a few sheets of paper and some pens. In the Espiegle we nearly
ran out of ink before we got clear of the group. The people are very
much under the influence of the resident missionaries, who are all, as far
as I saw, natives of Samoa. At Nukulailai wo anchored on a Sunday,
and the natives had been forbidden to shout “ Sail-ho! ” the ejaculation
which they have learned from sailors, and which all Pacific islanders
shout when a ship heaves in sight. At Funafuti there was a single
Roman Catholic, a survivor of a former missionary epoch, who was com-
pelled to go to the Protestant church by the intolerant majority, in spite
of his protests that, “ though his body went his soul did not.” lam
glad to be able to add that on this coming to the ears of the Rev, M.
Phillips, the estimable missionary at Apia, in Samoa, he assured me that
he would visit the island and have such persecution, if it really existed,
put a stop to.
Some of the islands of the group were nearly depopulated twenty
years ago by Peruvian kidnappers, who carried off many natives to
work in Peru. As a general rule the population of each island is very
small, never, as far as I am aware, exceeding a few hundreds. All are
governed by a constitutional sovereign and a kaupuli, or parliament.
The form of government, in its present state, is to a great extent the
work of the missionaries. At Vaitupu I noticed in the kaupuli house
some curious couches, carved out of single pieces of wood, with four legs
and a solid block like a pillow at one end. To my inquiries it was
replied that as some members of the assembly are fond of long speeches,
the debates are occasionally protracted, and wearied legislators get
rather sleepy, so the couches are provided to enable them to slumber in
comfort. All the natives wear European clothes of some sort. The men
usually put on at least a shirt: the women’s dress is peculiar. They
wear a long garment of coloured calico, tight round the neck, and
reaching in ungirt looseness to the heels. On their heads they put a


curious high-crowned hat, cross-laced with bright ribbons, exactly re-
sembling the head-gear of a brigand in the opera of ‘Fra Diavolo.’
Ladies of a certain age in the Archipelago are inclined to embonpoint;
and a crowd of portly dames streaming out of church in their flowing
calicoes and brigand hats, always many sizes too small for them, is a
sight not soon to be forgotten.
The Gilbert islanders are only partially Christianised. The southern
portion of the group is under the London Mission; some of the other
islands are under American missionaries, who, however, do not reside in
them. Like the Ellice Islands these also were once governed by kings;
but in all the southern part regal government has been abolished, and a
sort of federal republic has been established in several islands. The
natives seem to have an innate capacity for parliamentary institutions.
I have been present at several debates amongst them, some of which were
so far of importance, that on their issue depended whether we should be
at peace or at war with the inhabitants. Nothing could exceed the
regularity and decorum of the proceedings, and some of the speakers
were assuredly fluent, and apparently eloquent. The islanders are
capital sailors, fearlessly visiting distant islands in canoes of large size,
not dug out of single trees but built up of pieces. One very remarkable
feature of the islands is their dense population. This is especially
striking, as the islands are extremely barren.
The weapons of the Gilbert islanders are curious wooden swords and
halberts, studded with shark’s teeth. They make also complete suits of
armour out of coco-nut fibre, stiff hauberks, cuisses of matting, and close-
fitting helmets, like those of the crusaders. Firearms have of late to a
great extent replaced the old weapons, and the armour has been generally
laid aside. It is odd that the custom of the duel should be common
amongt the Gilbert natives. Duels are rarely to the death, but a wooden
sword bristling with shark’s teeth can, to judge from the tremendous
scars on many of the men’s bodies, inflict very severe wounds.
The Marshall Islands are less known than the Ellice or Gilbert
groups. The Archipelago is divided into two chains; the Ralick, or
western, and the Eadack, or eastern. It is unsafe to dogmatise in ethno-
logical matters, except after minute and careful inquiry, but I hazard the
opinion that the Samoan type, plainly to be discerned amongst the Ellice
and some of the Gilbert people, becomes less and less apparent as one
proceeds further north : and that consequently the Micronesian is, so to
speak, purer. The Ellice Islanders use the Samoan edition of the Scrip-
tures ; and both they and the southern Gilbert islanders stand probably
to pure Samoans as the bulk of the inhabitants of Hispano-America stand
to pure Spaniards. Christianity has been introduced into the southern
part of the Marshall Archipelago by American missionaries, but in the
islands which I visited it has scarcely taken root. King David of Arnho
is a baptised Christian. Ho is able to read and write, and is still an


industrious student of the Bible. Some years ago his desire to take an
additional wife was opposed by the missionaries. The result was that the
king carried out his polygamous intentions and relapsed into heathenism.
The Marshall Island men are tall, the women singularly short. Some
of the latter sex, who are of high birth, are very good-looking, and
extremely graceful. The men are tattooed on the body and right up to
the temples. Those of chiefly family cover the whole body; commoners
leave an unmarked patch from the armpit nearly to the waist. The lobe
of the ear is perforated, and often greatly distended with an unclosed
hoop of wood. When this ornament is not carried, the vacant loop of
flesh is hung over the point of the ear. The women tattoo the back of
the hand and the forearm nearly to the elbow in tasteful patterns, so that
they appear to have on open-worked silk mitts. The male costume is
decidedly picturesque. It consists of two enormous tassels of shreds of vau
bark joined by a plaited strap and disposed round the body so as to form
a kilt. It is kept in place by a cord covered with plaiting of pretty
pattern, which cord, being often over a hundred feet long, is wound round
the waist till it forms a large coil. Chiefs particularly affect great
length of cord, which does not improve the wearer’s appearance, as it
makes the kilt too bunchy. With a coil of moderate size the kilt is
very becoming, and recalls the Albanian fustanella. The women’s dress
is composed of two mats worked with devices of great taste. The
so-called “ Greek key ” is common as an ornament at the edges. These
mats are bound round with a cord, similar to that of the men, above the
hips, leaving a few inches of mat above, while the rest reaches nearly
to the ankle. The costume is thus very like a low-necked European
gown without sleeves, and though a little stiff for sitting down in, has
an attractive appearance when the wearer stands.
The Marshall Island canoes are like those of the Gilbert Islands;
but they are larger, and on the sloping platforms built out on each side
there are frequently little houses in which three or four of the crew can
sleep. The natives are great navigators. They actually make curious
charts of thin strips of wood tied together with fibres. Some of these
charts indicate the position of the different islands with a surprising
approach to accuracy. Others give the directions of the prevailing
winds and currents. These are used as instruments to determine the
course to be steered, so as to take advantage of the wind and to allow
for current drift rather than as charts are used by us. At Kusaie I fell in
with the survivors of the crews of five canoes belonging to Milli Atoll who
had been drifted from their own island. After being at sea six weeks,
during which they lost five hands and had to break up one canoe for
firewood to cook some rice, they were driven ashore on Kusaie, by the
Christian natives of which they were well treated.
The islands of the Marshall Archipelago are much less thickly
populated than the Gilberts. Arnho and Majuro atolls at the time of


my visit were distracted by wars. Wars caused by rival claimants to
the chiefly throne are common in these islands. lam glad to say that
we succeeded in making peace in both. At Arnho I was afraid that,
until the stock of firearms in the hands of the resident traders had been
bought up, eagerness to sell them to the natives after my departure
would prevent any permanent peace. Later information has shown that
these fears were justified. At Majuro also peace was made, and an
interview arranged at a spot about midway between the headquarters
of the contending armies. The scene was the most interesting and
touching that I ever witnessed, and I wish that time allowed me to
describe it.
The low atolls of the three groups just spoken of are called by
sailors the “Line Islands,” from their position with respect to the
Equator. In spite of their general unproductiveness the number of
coco-nut trees is so large that there is a considerable export of copra.
One English and three German firms have nearly the whole business in
their hands. There is one American firm also, but its transactions must
be much less extensive than those of the English, and of at least two of
the German houses. All are represented by resident traders. At
Majuro Messrs. Henderson and MacFarlane have a very complete and
extensive head-station. At Jaluit the German firms of Hernsheim and
Co. and the South Sea Company, the latter at the time of my visit under
the style of Capelle and Co., have large head-stations for this part of
Oceania.
The contrast between Kusaie and Ponapi in the Carolines and the
low atolls of the Mai shall, Gilbert, and Ellice groups is striking and
agreeable. Both of the former are called by our sailors “ high islands,”
a designation which is soon appreciated by any one who has cruised
among the groups mentioned. Kusaie is densely wooded and picturesque.
Its soil is very fertile. The people, who only amount to between three
and four hundred, are all Christians, having been converted by the
American missionaries, who have an important station on the island.
The American missionaries are fond of giving to the petty chiefs
tribes with whom they come in contact the absurd title of king. Tokusa,
the chief of Kusaie, which name includes all the islets near as well as
the main island of Ualan, is accordingly called king, though his subjects
are so few. He speaks English well, and is very intelligent and well-
mannered. The natives are straight-haired and rather light-coloured.
They paint their canoes a dull red with a pigment made of an ochreous
earth found in two caves on Ualan. Their houses are large, with high-
pitched roofs and elevated gables. Most of them now wear some article
of European dress, but the garb of the country is a broad sash woven of
the fibre of an inedible banana, frequently dyed black except at the
ends, where there are some bright coloured bars, which make it resemble
the silk scarves of the I lonian peasantry.


On the little island of Lele, on which the natives live, there are some
interesting ruins, which appear to bo those of a fortress with cyclopean
walls of large irregular blocks of basalt, 25 to 30 feet thick. There are
also canals and artificial harbours. The natives can give no account of
them, though King Tokusa told me that he believed they had been
constructed by his ancestors. In the splendid island of Ponapi, the
inhabitants of which are more barbarous than those of Kusaie, there are
even more remarkable ruins. Four-sided platforms stand out of the
water, and are composed of layers of hexagonal basaltic prisms, like
those of the Giant’s Causeway, transversely superimposed one on another,
the prisms of a layer being at right angles to those of the one above or
below it. These platforms are arranged to form canal streets, and the
walls of edifices erected on them are built of basaltic columns in like
manner. The ruins are much overgrown with the rich vegetation of
the tropics, but enough is visible to disclose the remains of a city, of a
second Venice, of whose builders wo are ignorant.
Yap, in the Western Carolines, is singularly interesting. The
natives are gook-looking and profusely tattooed. The hands and fore-
arms of the women are tattooed with mitts as in the Marshall Islands.
The houses are large and built of mats. They stand on an extensive
platform of earth revetted with stones, against which is placed the
curious stone money of the islanders. This is in the form of huge discs
of arragonite, quarried in the Pelew Islands, more than 200 miles away.
The discs are like great grindstones, and frequently weigh three tons.
People have said on hearing of this money that there was not much risk
of its being stolen. Nevertheless an American trader at Yap complained
to me that some which had been placed in his charge had been carried
off in the night.
I visited two other islands which may be included in the Caroline
group. These wore Nuguor and Greenwich Island, both low atolls. At
Nuguor human sacrifices are still offered; one had occurred about two
years before I was there. The inhabitants are of almost gigantic size.
They are ruled by two queens, and have retained the tradition of their
migration from Samoa and the name of the chief, Vave, who led it.
Greenwich Island is very little known. The inhabitants make tnppa
from the bark of a bread-fruit tree, being, as far as I am aware, the only
people dwelling on a low island in these seas who do. The costume of
the men is a T bandage formed of a mat almost as fine in texture as
muslin.
I visited the Pelew Islands exactly a century after the wreck of the
Antelope, through which the natives were introduced to the civilised
world. On the centenary of the wreck I succeeded in inducing the two
principal kings to make a treaty and stop the wars which had long de-
vastated their islands. They also promised to give up the cruel and
savage custom of taking heads. The Pelew islanders are a particularly


interesting people. In each village there are large “club-houses,” to
which the younger men resort. A few women from neighbouring
villages also frequent them. It is not considered comme il faut for a
woman to enter one in her own village. If she did she would become
an outcast; going into one a mile or two off, however, in no way affects
her position. The buildings are of wood, and the gable ends are adorned
with carvings and frescoes. There is also in the Pelew Islands, a curious
kind of money. It is really hits of antique glass vessels and jasper heads,
which the people believe came down from the gods, but which in fact
came out of the ships of early navigators. The scenery of the islands is
picturesque and varied. There are. grassy downs, wooded hills, and
precipitous coral islets crowned with verdure.
In the Polynesian archipelagoes of Samoa and Tonga we find a
superior race and, especially in the latter, a comparatively advanced
civilisation. The people of the two are akin. The Samoans are of a
softer type than the Tongans, who live in a cooler climate. The beauty
of the Samoan women has often been remarked, and it would be difficult
to exaggerate it. The Tongans are of greater stature, and the women
are rather handsome than pretty. The scenery of the Samoan Islands
is only surpassed by that of New Britain and Eastern New Guinea.
Except in the Yavau group, the Tongan scenery is at best rather poor, as
the islands are, in general, low, Samoa is always hot, whilst the winter
climate of Tonga-tabu is delicious. Both archipelagoes are visited by
hurricanes, but they are apparently less violent than those of the West
Indies and come rarely. All the Samoans are Christians, most of them
being under the missionaries of the London Society. There are also
Wesleyans and Eoman Catholics. In Apia there is a large stone Catholic
church and some excellent schools for white, half-caste, and native
children, kept by French nuns, of whose work no praise can be too high.
Of late years an attempt has been made to organise a settled govern-
ment in Samoa; and Great Britain, Germany, and the United States
have recognised, and have entered into treaty relations with the chief,
Malietoa, who has been made king. The head of a rival family, the
Tupua, is vice-king. There is a parliament of nobles and elected re-
presentatives who sit in a single assembly. The country was for a long
time the scene of tribal wars, and the new government was established
to ensure peace. It has, to a great extent, proved a failure, as it has no
power and no one respects it. On the whole the country has been
peaceful since its establishment, solely because the people are afraid that
the outbreak of hostilities would lead to interference on the part of
foreign men-of-war. Upolo, on which the town of Apia is, has some
large plantations owned by Germans. The Germans have nearly nine-
tenths of the trade in their hands, but the British share is increasing.
Apia is an orderly settlement of white men, with a municipal govern-
ment secured to it by treaty. The town and district are exempt from


Samoan jurisdiction, and have an extra-territorial stains, something like
that of a foreign “ concession,” at a treaty-port in China or Japan.
Tonga is trying a constitutional experiment on its own account.
Mr. Baker, an ex-Wesleyan missionary, has drawn up a constitution to
which the venerable king George, who was over ninety years old at the
time of my visit, but was as vigorous as most men of sixty, has given
his approval. There is a cabinet of which the ex-missionary is the head,
a parliament, and a constitutional sovereign. There is also a regular
judicial establishment. Great Britain has entered into treaty relations
with Tonga, and has even accorded a limited jurisdiction over British
subjects to Tongan courts. Englishmen in the South Seas are fond of
laughing at the Tongan polity. But it is to the credit of the new State
that its public expenditure is small, that it has been for years perfectly
orderly, and that there are in the group probably five times as many
miles of carriage road as there are in our colony of Fiji, dhere aie
many Tongans still living who saw the first horse brought to their
own particular island, and thought that it was a laige kind of pig.
There are hundreds of horses in the archipelago now, and most Tongans
are fearless horsemen. They are also capital cricketers, which they
owe to the good sense of that very able man, the Eev. Mr. Moulton, who
is, or was till lately, at the head of the Wesleyan Mission. Mr. Moulton
his founded an admirable college. The scholars receive an education
equal to that given in the colonies. I was present at one of the public
examinations, and amongst other surprises heard the first canto of the
* Paradise Lost ’ recited in the native tongue. Most of the Tongans are
Wesleyans, but there is also a Roman Catholic mission in the country,
and a moderate number of the natives belong to that church, lill lately
the trade was almost exclusively carried on by Germans, but our
countrymen are getting control of great part of it.
All Pacific Islanders, even many of the Melanesian cannibals, are
distinguished by a remarkable refinement of external manners. The
Polynesians excel all others; and, probably, no people in the world
surpass the Tongans and Samoans in grace and dignity of deportment.
The latter races are highly ceremonious, and great observers of etiquette.
In Tonga at a Ttava party, where an infusion of the root of the Piper
methysticum is drunk, the order of precedence is as strictly observed as it
would be at a European State banquet. In Samoa the Ttava root is
chewed by young ladies before being placed in the bowl. In Tonga it
is invariably pounded on a lap-stone. Connoisseurs assert that the
beverage is never so good as when the root has been chewed. I never
quite got over my repugnance to that method of preparing it, and only
drank of it sparingly and to avoid giving offence when out of Tonga.
Even in Tonga I felt little inclination to indulge in it freely, possibly
Upoause I retain my youthful dislike to rhubarb and magnesia, the
“of which that of kava closely resembles.


My first visit to New Guinea was in the latter part of 1884, as the
ship I commanded was in Commodore, now Admiral Erskine’s squadron,
when that officer proclaimed the British Protectorate. The complete
success with which the Commodore carried out this delicate operation,
was shown in the uninterrupted friendly relations existing between the
white men and the natives in all parts visited. It is no mean testimony
to the excellence of the Commodore’s arrangements, and the perfection
of the discipline he maintained, that though hundreds of sailors were in
daily contact with natives, to many of whom white men were almost
unknown, not a single unpleasantness occurred. To this satisfactory
result the influence of the remarkably able and zealous missionaries, the
Eev. Messrs. Lawes and Chalmers, greatly contributed. The good work
that these two admirable men have done is simply astonishing in amount
and in beneficial effect.
To one who has cruised much amongst the small islands of the
Pacific, and who has grown familiar with the monotonous landscapes of
Australia, the scenery of New Guinea appears especially grand and
imposing. It differs greatly in character. Near Port Moresby the
headlands are sparsely wooded, and in the dry season have an almost
arid look. As South Cape is approached the vegetation becomes more
luxuriant; and near China Straits are found all the varied tints of
foliage and herbage which delight the eye in New Britain. As far as
has been ascertained the climate is not favourable to Europeans.
The natives of the coast evidently belong to two distinct races.
From a point rather to the westward of Port Moresby right on to Aroma,
the people are light-coloured, of tall and graceful figure, grave in manner,
taciturn, and abhoring cannibalism. The men’s dress is simply a strip
of bark twisted into a string. The wearers of this express great con-
tempt for neighbouring tribes who go perfectly naked. The other race
is black, of shorter and sturdier figure, nimble, cheerful, loquacious, and
cannibal. The men wear a curious and decent costume of leaf. The
women of both races wear the titi petticoat of grass, which is very like a
ballet-dancer’s skirt. At Port Moresby the houses are built half in
the water. At Tupu-selei, Kaile, and Kappa-kappa, they stand out in
the sea at a distance of a couple of hundred yards from the beach.
Throughout the parts of New Guinea with which I am acquainted, the
inhabitants are ingenious and industrious agriculturists, and carefully
fence in their plantations. Their houses are large and well built. They
make very fine fishing-nets. The canoes of Port Moresby are of enormous
size, and the trees out of which they are dug are procured by barter
from tribes living a long way off. The Port Moresby pottery is made
in large quantities for export; as is a finer kind at Toulon Island by the
dark race. This shows that both races engage in manufacturing industry
for the express purpose of trading with the products, a thing of happy
augury for their future progress.


I made an excursion from South Cape to the summit of a neighbour-
ing mountain, where our party had to pass the night almost without
food or water, and drenched to the skin by a nearly continuous fall of
very fine rain. The discomforts of the night were scarcely compensated
by the pleasure of hoisting the Union Jack in the morning. Attempts
at sleep were constantly frustrated by the necessity of expelling some
particularly unpleasant intruder's —slugs as thick as your forefinger and
six or seven inches long, which persistently endeavoured to get inside
one’s shirt. Twice I was aroused from a doze by finding them coiled
round my ears. We took off our wot clothes before lying down, and our
native companions seized the occasion to put them on, with such cheery
impudence, that we were obliged to join in their roars of laughter instead
of scolding them. One gentleman converted a pair of inexpressibles
into a vest with sleeves, so much to the improvement of his personal
appearance that I made him a present of them: and he had the honour
of being presented to the Commodore in his becoming garb, which he
wore throughout our stay.
My second trip to New Guinea included visits to the Louisiades, to
Woodlark Island, to Rook and Long Islands, and to the mainland near
Cape King William. The Louisiade people are in physique and know-
ledge of the arts inferior to both races of South-eastern New Guinea.
Many of them are quite unfamiliar with white men. But I found, even
amongst them, som'e who had heard of Queen Victoria, a name which is
so frequently known and so greatly respected throughout the South-
western Pacific, that the stranger is fairly astonished. A native of
Joannet Island intimated that he was aware that Queen Victoria was
the chief of Cooktown, the little port in Northern Queensland. On
Rossel Island I noticed, in the case of some of the men, the curious
dentition which the eminent Russian traveller Dr. Miklukho Maclay has
called “ macrodontism.” A continuous tooth extends over the space
usually occupied by two or three teeth. The Woodlark islanders are
very fierce, and at one time I thought a collision with them inevitable.
They make the same curious gesture of salutation as the Basilaki (or
Moresby) islanders, pinching first the nose with one hand and then the
navel with the other, finishing up with a low bow.
The natives of the north-east coast of New Guinea whom I met were
black, and not superior in physique to the Louisiade people. While in
the south of New Guinea the natives are in the stone age, these people
have not got beyond the period of shell implements. They could hardly
bo made to understand the use of a tomahawk, and were frightened by
striking a match.
The Rook islanders seemed never to have seen a white man. Smoke
coming out of the mouth of an officer with a pipe greatly surprised them.
A chief on being brought up to a looking-glass was struck dumb. The
exhibition of a cat caused great excitement, which was immensely


increased by showing them a sheep. They are a light-coloured, tall,
good-looking race, who express great repugnance- to cannibalism. They
build good houses and temples, have well laid-out villages, and possess
large highly painted canoes ornamented with carvings. They practice
circumcision, and an incised figure of an alligator adorns the entrance to
their temples. Their reception of my companions and myself was
courteous and friendly in the extreme. One of the officers of H.M.S.
Dart was a good conjuror, and the delight with which the disappearance
of a coin through the bottom of a tumbler was hailed by the natives was
intense.
A few observations on the condition of the South-western Pacific
may not be out of place. I believe that the members of even the most
savage tribes desire to be on friendly terms with white men. There are
some tribes who, in pursuance of the barbarous custom of taking heads,
will make unprovoked attacks on white visitors. But they are com-
paratively rare exceptions. I fear that most of the so-called “ outrages ”
are to the natives what the retaliatory action of ships of war is to us.
We regard the latter as the proper punishment of an offending tribe;
and the islanders look upon the killing of a white man—if any white
man has done them an injury—as much the same thing. Events have
proved that the old practice—for years given up by us, but still followed
by some European nations—of the wholesale punishment of the people
of an island charged with an “ outrage ” does nothing to improve re-
lations with the islanders. The plan of punishing only the really
guilty has been far more successful, and when that is universally
adopted the friendliness of our relations is sure to increase. During all
my cruises we invariably contrived to keep on good terms with the
natives, even, as at Woodlark Island, where they were at first very
suspicious. But I had the immense advantage of cruising, at all events
in most waters, where the humane and just actions of my predecessors
had brought the names of English captains into high repute with people
who, savage as they are, have a keen sense of justice. I doubt if there
ever was a time when a determination to act justly and considerately
failed to make friends of the Pacific islanders. Forty years ago
Captain John Erskine, in command of H.M.S. Savannah, proved that
this was possible, perhaps easy; and I advise any one likely to have
anything to do with the islanders to read the charming narrative of his
cruise.
The diminution of population is one of the mysteries of the Pacific.
It has perhaps been arrested in Fiji. Time will show if the stoppage is
permanent. On the small Wallis Island under the Catholic, and Niue
or Savage Island under the Protestant missionaries, the people increase;
elsewhere, whether Christian or savage, they diminish. It is common
for natives to speak of the greater numbers of their tribes in former
days, and there is evidence to support their assertion. Can it be that


the islands of the Pacific have been the seats of a succession of races, all
of which have at a certain period in their history declined and dis-
appeared, and that our acquaintance with the present inhabitants only
began when the declining stage had been reached ? The suggestion is
made with timidity, but I confess that I sometimes fancy that something
like it may explain the existence of the curious ruins so widely scattered
throughout Oceania.
The Pacific islands cannot be mentioned without calling to mind
the missionaries who labour amongst them. Their success has been
very great; but, great as it is, I think its magnitude has been exag-
gerated. The Christianity of the Western Polynesians is not much to
boast of; and their present state of civilisation is much more owing to
frequent intercourse with white men who are not missionaries, than is
generally admitted. Without missions they would not have advanced
as far as they have done; nor with them would the advance have been
what it is had no other white men ever gone among them. The same
thing is true of Fiji. Some of the “ pioneer ” missionaries are men of
whom every country might feel proud. The influence for good of such
men as Mr. Moulton of Tonga, or Mr. Eobertson of Erromanga, is
enormous; but they are men of enlarged views and of even statesmanlike
capacity, who would be powerful over their fellows anywhere. The
same may be said of Messrs, Lawes and Chalmers in Now Guinea, and
will explain to a great extent their astonishing success. Mr. Chalmers
is a born leader of men, and his ascendancy over those with whom he is
brought in contact is due to a never-failing tact and a nobility of mind
which have been rarely equalled.
It is hazardous to forecast the future, but it does not seem that the
Pacific islands are likely, for generations yet to come, to be of use to
mankind at large. Fertile as they may be, they can only be made pro-
ductive with labour, of which no man can say where it is to be obtained.
The Spanish colonisation of the Caribbean Islands cannot be repeated;
extermination of the natives and the substitution of African slaves are,
fortunately, impossible,* Though we have made what I venture to think
an unwise and uncalled-for irruption into New Guinea, we are not
likely to do as at least one foreign nation has done. One great State
has begun its colonial history by annexing islands which cannot for
many years, if ever, do more than provide moderate incomes for two or
three trading houses, and the trade of which will infallibly pass into
English hands if anything like fair competition is permitted. This is
not a profitable return for a material increase of public expenditure, for
an injudiciously wide distribution of a not too considerable naval force,
* Even should Chinese immigration repeople the island, which is possible and not
very unlikely, many years must elapse before the products of Oceania will be at the
disposal of the outside world in considerable quantities. 'The day is past when even
Chinese would cultivate the island as the virtual slaves of the white planters.


and for the risk of entanglements full of menace to the tranquillity of
foreign relations.
As we have chosen to go to New Guinea uninvited, we are hound in
honour to do all the good we can to the races who have not resented our
intrusion, but have received us as friends. If we do not take the proper
steps, we shall soon find that we have a wolf by the ears. We have
a noble chance, we are not likely to have another, of showing that
Englishmen can rule barbarians without exterminating them or dispos-
sessing them of their lands, I believe it possible to make New Guinea
happy, prosperous, and civilised ; I also believe that it may, and in no
long time, be made self-supporting. But the right method must be
adopted, and a system to suit politicians here and in Australia may
be utterly unsuited to the conditions of the country. If the latter be
adopted the natives will deserve all the pity we can give them.
Previous to the reading of the above paper,
The Chairman (Lord Aberdare) announced that Captain Bridge, the author, was
prevented being present, through having been just appointed to the command of the
Colossus , one of the largest vessels of war in Her Majesty’s service. Captain Bridge was
for several years Deputy Commissioner to enforce the laws as to the employment of
labour in the Western Pacific. Most of those present had observed from time to time
the accounts that appeared in the papers of outrages committed on the natives of many
of the islands, especially the Solomon Islands, and the New Hebrides; of late years
the British Government had most laudably endeavoured to enforce those laws and
to prevent the inhabitants being kidnapped and taken to the Australian Colonies,
especially to Queensland, which had been the principal offender in this respect. It
had been the duty of the Deputy Commissioner to punish offenders against those
laws. The veteran traveller, Baron Hubner, had published a book describing his
visits to the British possessions. He accompanied Captain Bridge on part of his
cruise in 1884, and had given a most lively description of all that he saw. He had
also given what to Englishmen must ho a very pleasant account of the state of things
that he found on board the ship. We often found fault with our army although
that army was constantly doing most heroic duties, and we were often told that our
navy was nothing like the navy of the olden times, but with regard to the Espiegle
commanded by Captain Bridge, Baron Hubner after speaking of the officers as being
very intelligent and pleasant companions, said, “ Most of the sailors seem to me very
young, but strong, well set up, and cheerful. I am struck by the tone of good
breeding that prevails on board. There is not a coarse word nor an oath. Every-
thing goes like clockwork. What a contrast to what I have seen forty years ago
on board many English and other men-of-war! ” The photographs exhibited on
the table were taken by the sailors themselves from instructions they received from
a photographer in Australia. This would be acknowledged by all to be a wonderful
advance over the Jack Tar of old. In the absence of Captain Bridge the paper would
bo read by Mr. Gervase Mathew who was one of the officers on board the Espiegle.
After the paper,
Mr. A. P. Maudslay, who was called upon by the Chairman, said his experience
had principally lain among the natives in Fiji, Samoa, and the Friendly Islands.
Captain Bridge deserved great thanks for the information he had given with regard
to the islands in the Western Pacific, because it was most difficult to obtain such


information. When he (Mr. Maudslay) was out there he used to question all the
Government Agents who sailed in the vessels employed in the labour trade, hut
they were not always careful observers, and such as were good observers were not
always able to describe what they had seen. One man to whom he spoke seemed
to be very intelligent and greatly impressed with the beauty of the Solomon Islands,
but when he attempted to describe the country his language altogether failed him,
and he simply said, “ I never saw such scenery. There is first-rate bathing, most
beautiful blue water, and it is a most eligible site for villa residences.” It turned
out that his previous occupation had been that of a house-agent in Melbourne. The
question of the migrations from island to island was a very interesting one. Captain
Bridge had alluded to a light-coloured people who lived on Eook Island, and there
were light-coloured people on many of the islands of the western groups, but they
must certainly have migrated from the east. There had been a great distribution
of races from one or more centres, but he wanted very much to know where the
centres were. It was most important and interesting to trace these migrations. On
one occasion he went to church in the King Country in New Zealand ; it was on
Thursday, but it was explained to him by the Maoris that the king had found four
Sundays in a month too many, so that it had been agreed that there should only
be a Sunday every ten days. The service lasted about a quarter of an hour, and
at the end of it the chief turned round and said, “I suppose it is all gibberish
to you, but those were the songs that our forefathers sang when they came from
Hawaii.” This Maori tradition of the migration from Hawaii is particularly clear, but
Hawaii is a name found in many forms all over the Pacific, such as Savaii in Samoa,
Haapaii in Tonga, and the Kawaki of New Zealand, and it is difficult to identily
the true Hawaii of tradition.
He was at one time engaged in assisting in the establishment of the authority
of a supreme chief or king in Samoa, and he was much struck by the stress laid by
the natives on the legitimacy ot the claim of Malietoa to this chieftainship on the
grounds of descent. It appeared that the first Malietoa had risen to power as a
leader of a revolt against the rule of the Tongans who had invaded and conquered
the Samoa Islands. What was the date of the Tongan conquest it is not very easy
to ascertain, but the expulsion of the Tongans took place probably not more than
250 years ago, as only between twenty and twenty-five Malietoas had since then
succeeded to the name. In the islands of Upolu and Savaii, the Samoan natives
inhabit only the sea coast, and the Tongans effected the conquest by making a road
along the central mountain ridge and thence making descents on the villages on
either side of the island. Traces of these roads called Ala i Tonga (Tongan roads)
can still be seen.
A number of Samoan chiefs and elders once met him to discuss some matter of
business in the house of Dr. Turner the missionary at Apia. Just before the meet-
ing, Dr. Turner (who had recently returned from a missionary voyage to the Gilbert
and Ellice group), had been showing him a staff which had been given him by
some natives in one of the Ellice Islands who held to the tradition that their fore-
fathers had come from Faleuli in* Samoa, and had brought this staff with
them. The staff, which was old and worm-eaten, held together with a lashing of
sinuct, did not appear to differ in any way from the tall staff which a Samoan
orator always holds in his hand and leans on when making a speech. After
the business of the meeting was over, this staff was shown to the native chiefs.
* Mr. Maudslay, who was speaking from memory, said that he was not certain of
the name of the district.


without however any remark being made as to its history, and it was passed
from hand to hand. The first remark made was, that the sinnet with which it was
hound was foreign, as the strands were not plaited in the bamoan manner. 1 hen,
when it passed to the hands of one of the “ talking chiefs,” after examining it
carefully, he stood up as if about to commence a speech, placing his hands on the
top of the staff and then attempting to rest his chin on his hands. He then sat
down with the remark that the staff must have come from Faleuli. When asked
why, he replied, “ Did not you see that when my bauds were on the top of it I
could not pass it under my chin, and no orator would have the bad manners to talk
over a staff that he could not rest against his chest; but the men of Faleuli are so
fall that they could use a staff of that height without offence.” Subsequently,
inquiries at Faleuli resulted in showing that the story was well known that
several generations before, a number of large canoes had put to sea on some expedi-
tion from which they never returned, and that they were never heard of again.
He would like to hear more about the ruins in the Caroline Islands which Captain
Bridge had alluded to. It was important that they should be carefully described
and surveyed. The traditions and customs of the Samoans had been preserved to
us in Dr. Turner’s admirable book, and those of Tonga in that best of all books on
native affairs—Mariner’s ‘ Tonga Islands,’ which had apparently become Professor
Huxley’s favorite theological reading; but it is to the efforts of naval officers and
deputy commissioners that we must look to obtaining some knowledge of the
natives of the Western Pacific, before they become influenced by foreign ideas and
customs.
The Chairman called upon the meeting to join him in a hearty vote of thanks
to Captain Bridge for his interesting paper, which was brimful of information,
graphically conveyed by a man of unusual powers of observation. It was most
satisfactory to Englishmen to know that their maritime supremacy was maintained
by men of such intelligence and humanity. If all officers were like Captain Bridge
many of the difficult problems as to the proper relations between semi-barbarous and
civilised people would be satisfactorily solved. He was pleased to learn from the
paper, as he had previously done from Mr. Romilly’s account of the same regions,
that the practice of wholesale vengeance for an act of cruelty had been abandoned by
the English, though he was sorry to say it had not been by some other nations as
civilised as ourselves. Mr. Romilly had described the great astonishment of the
natives at finding that when an Englishman had been maltreated or murdered, the
vessel that arrived subsequently did not take indiscriminate vengeance on the people,
but only tried to discover the real offenders and punish them. The effect of that
action had been most advantageous in every way, teaching the natives that the real
offence lay in the perpetrators of the act and not in the tribe of which they were
members, and enlisting their feelings on the side of justice, instead of leading them
to place every possible obstacle in the way of inquiry. During the three years and
a half of his cruise in those regions no act of hostility took place between Captain
Bridge and even the most barbarous tribes. He was happy to hear that acts of
brigandage on the part of the colonists had greatly diminished, and believed that
in a few years there would be an end to a practice which had brought disgrace upon
our brethren in the Australian Colonies.
LONDON: PRINTED BY WM. CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET
AND CHARING CROSS.


%
I
■


130 J40 150 160 170 180 170
r' i 1 . ■ ■ ■ ■ —■ p- — - 1 1 ' ■+—' *—■ -■■>—*-■ — 1 r -‘ 1 •' - 1 : t—■ ■—* 1 1 ’ ■ i ■
io i — _4- : : 1 10
i ° * 1H . r ..v s 1 a ■■ iKm\ ' i
f .CPelevr C P- • li S %• : o
| * * * >■ FT j[ '* '/“i, 1
-Q? Jaluit-r, V v 'v V 1
I M I C B O X e\ * S I A
* NugiwrJ . $
P -A C r F .1 C 0 ‘
> • Greenwich t. ■>
0 Equator _____ ,.Q GILBERT ISLAND S \ Equator | n
4 i RQngsmiFl Group)
— lv_i \A • • ’ ' -Admiralty I? Q , "V, '
, fT ,, ••■ : NEW ,
' frArrw TjntJEJw GUINEA" * * ’I j * | | 1
J ?. , «T \\ “**“■*4 w ’w'“Waw EX.HCT ’ P « I. TIE S I A .
fLJZ'' \ ' ' ?^ -S v5fe S • ISLANDS' ,,IS
Aiiatura sea A.J.G™,' •
U)1 : : : '0
» ” S C^™""«S , SAOTACHCIZI. , ■***■ I-
I 4 *£>& \£>RosselI. \ HenneU.I. • v
AsPAK” '^ / VWli ? Y " liOTOSlADEXS
<J A V ’ *•“ Hatumah.
5 <§ji C ii If n P } i Aoba''. 4 v WaHisEs SARKIA OR A AVIGAEOR I? j
trlLLt Ol l f ■ • 4- Savau5^, ctt -dp ltt '
J . ( V- . BAiraai?S c. . GJ>olo % #
V Carpentaria. \ to, A n • . H> y 0
( £ SspintuK ti\ J^iurorcu
‘ f 5anft) Xr^ 4 tXVentec.ist'V'i >, <* • „ , r
( / \ C O RAL ST, A _ A
L A i«^ t ' 1
( M E XXa. (A IT E S' ■ Aa ■'</' A I
20 P*K xJSuA• 'FonAmju. . ..-FRIENDLY | I 2Q
, ~~ , -v . XSLAS-DS
V . Ton^taba^O
1 7 C-AIXDONIAX.N A> I
I .' I
\l I I
AUSTRALIA > south pacific
i *• |
°Tiorfollrl- r8rt of tKc
30 : ' 1 'WESTERN PACIFIC _30 |
5TE¥ SOUTH / -lordHowel. ILLUSTRATING THE CRUISES
wales O C FA N CAp? . CY phia°n bridge,h.k.
SYDMSY #' »™4”S?Tin sJTs^m,.
II | ..... | | i | j— I,, i ; i y j «e o n?o ay mp -mo s<)o
130 140 150 160 170 180 170
H.AMne.R.G.S.(feL ' ' ’ ' ' '" — -■ ' . '■ —~-a— i, -.-.njj .. J
H.A.Mflne.K.G.S.del.
EdwfWeiller, lith.


,
*
*
,
.
■
'


3 1508 00665895 4


r:
I
.
\
r :
Hr M
sm
• * | •■■•
* :? |i
■%
