

MMI
Foreword, by GENERAL SIR lAN HAMILTON and GENERAL SIR WILLIAM BIRDWOOD,






TO THE
HONOUR AND GLORY OF MY COMRADES,
WITH WHOM I SPENT
THOSE FIRST TERRIBLE WEEKS AT ANZAC,
I DEDICATE THIS WORK.


CRUSADING AT ANZAC
ANNO DOMINI 1915.
(HO
PICTURED AND DESCRIBED
SIGNALLER ELLIS SILAS,
A Soldier Artist serving with the Australian
Expeditionary Force.
Forewords by General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., D. 5.0., A.D.C.,
and General Sir William Birdwood, K.C.1.E., C. 8., C.1.E., D.S.O.
LONDON:
The British-Austrai.asian, 115, High Holborn, W.C
1916.


Foreword. By General Sir lan Hamilton.
AS the man who first, seeking to save himself
trouble, omitted the five full stops and brazenly
coined the word “Anzac,” I am glad to write
a line or two in preface to sketches which may
help to give currency to that token throughout
the realms of glory. Though treating so largely
of death, they are life-like; though grim, they do
justice also to the gaiety and good humour which
never deserted any of our troops in the trenches;
though slight, they seem solid and serious enough
to such of us as were there. Therefore it is that
I wish for these outlines of heroes abiding fame,
and hope that many an Australian or New
Zealander now unborn will better realise by their
aid what a splendid thing it was to have been
alive and crusading at Gallipoli in the year of
our Lord 1915.
April 29th , 1916.


Introduction . By General Sir William Birdwood.
IT gives me much pleasure to be able to write a very
short introduction to the book of drawings of
Signaller Ellis Silas, though these will themselves,
I hope, appeal fully to all who see them, as portraying
incidents in the lives of some of our Australian and
New Zealand soldiers on service.
The sketches were made by Signaller Silas during
the time he spent with the Australian troops on the
Gallipoli Peninsula, and they contain an excellent
record of the life spent by those troops during the
months they and their comrades at Cape Helles and
Suvla were upholding the honour of the British Flag
in that part of the world.
I heartily wish Signaller Silas all success with his
book, and trust that, before the war is finished, his
health will enable him to rejoin the troops, and that
he will find opportunity of giving us yet further proofs
of his ability as an artist, in showing us something
of the life of the troops in other theatres of war-
May Ist, 1916


.
-4
1
- '
I
1
4
fl
1*1 \
> 1
1L r , l&k \ . ■ #
M,\
■
i
!\;
M
£f
v* ' 1 1 Hi W
SIGNALLER ELLIS SILAS. [PI
loto. by Bassano.


Author s Note.
IN this work I have not touched upon the big
torical facts, but have endeavoured to portray War as
the soldier sees it, shorn of all its pomp and circum*
stance; the War that means cold and hunger, heat
and thirst, the ravages of fever; the War that brings
a hail of lead that tears the flesh and rends the limb,
and makes of men, heroes. It is these little incidents
that must necessarily be lost in the larger issues at
stake, but which, none the less, constitute War, and
form a large factor in the successful termination of
a great movement.
Egypt was an interesting part of our military
career, and I do not feel that this work would be quite
complete without the introduction of a few Cairene
incidents. If, perhaps, the behaviour of some of the
" Boys” was not all that a Sunday School teacher
might desire —God! if one could have seen them on
that famous April 25th, their little human weaknesses
could easily be forgiven I cannot but feel
honoured at being able to call such men my comrades.
And if I have succeeded in giving to the world a
truthful record of their heriosm and fortitude, then my
work has not been in vain.


The Indian Ocean.
the Navy iias done.
IT was a sight, this huge fleet of transports,
ploughing its way through a sapphire sea —
a spectacle that, perhaps, will never be seen again.
That this vast fleet was able to sail all those
thousands of miles, without an escort of any
kind, is an excellent proof of the splendid work
Christmas Day, 1914.




In the Bazaars .
“TV 7ALKING SICK ! cigarette flag! cigar, pos’
VV car d ♦ B'ery goo-o-d!!! B'ery nice, Australia,
B'ery goood !! Baksiesh. Gib it —'alf piastre
—Mr. McKenzie; I know you, b'ery nice,
quies Katieah!!! ”
The Cairene is an indefatigable vendor. Why
he is not wealthy is a mystery. Whether
you meet him miles out in the desert, or in
some equally remote spot, he has always got
something to sell you. Should you, perchance,
happen to be falling off a donkey—or the
top of the Pyramids—you would probably
find a horde of Arabs rush forward and
endeavour to sell you something during your
meteoric flight through space. Though the
Egyptian is cunning, his artlessness is
delightful; he will usually begin by asking
a fabulous sum for his goods, and will be
quite pleased if, in the end, he obtains the
equivalent of a pennyTarthing.
Egypt, Jan., 1915.




Heliopolis — Donkey Races.
RIDING is not my strong point. I wear leggings
because they look nice. Some of the boys would
spend the whole evening in that most diverting
pastime, donkey racing. The Donkey-boys made
much money and shed many tears. Often, when
returning to camp, I would come upon a Donkey'
boy, who was usually a man, weeping copiously
over the loss of half a piastre, or something equally
trivial. It takes very little to bring tears to the
eyes of a Cairene.
Egypt, Jan., 1915.




Heliopolis—The Paper Seller.
“'Egyptian Timees’ —This morning’s news, to-day.”
0 V
Egypt, Feb., 1915.




Heliopolis—Oranges.
“ Oringees, three for 'arf piastre, big one! Gib it! ”
Egypt, Feb.y 1915.




Heliopolis—Cooked Eggs.




Heliopolis—The Bootblack.
“Ki wi, Clean er boots! No good—No money V*
“Mr. McKenzie!
Egypt, Feb., 1915.




Sylvan Quietude.
IT was a welcome diversion to get ashore, after being
cooped up in a transport; a pleasant change to be
marching along hard roads, in place of the wearisome
toiling across the desert sands of Egypt. The rich
fresh green of the pastures, splashed with brilliant
scarlet poppies, the sheep grazing peacefully on the
hillside, truly a sylvan quietude. As we sat in the
village, tranquilly smoking, from afar we could hear
the ominous thunder of distant guns. It was difficult
to realise that soon —very soon—we were to exchange
this peaceful scene for one of colossal strife; to mete
out and receive death in a hundred hideous shapes ;
to climb a hillside splashed with scarlet, that was
not of poppies.
Lemnos, April, 1915,




The Real Thing at Last!
AT first, it was a little difficult to realise that every
burst of flame, every spurt of water, meant death
—and worse. For days before we reached the
final scene in the “ Great Adventure,” we could
hear the ceaseless thunder of the bombardment.
We were told of the impossible task before us, of
probable annihilation. Yet we were eager to
get to it. We joked with each other about getting
“ cold feet,” but deep down in our hearts we knew,
when we got to it, we would not be found wanting.
Gallipoli, April 25th, 1915.




The Last Assembly.
answer my question.
IN the hold of the troopship, “Hyda Pasha.” There,
for the last time in this world, many of us stood
shoulder to shoulder. As I looked down the ranks
of my comrades, I wondered much which of us were
marked for the Land Beyond. We were well in the
zone of fire, and every second I was expecting a shell
to come bursting through the side of the ship, to
Gallipoli, April 25th, 1915.




Boarding the Destroyer “ Ribble.”
WE were very tightly packed. One of the Boys
said : “Mind where you are stepping, Silas.”
I looked behind me; there, lying in a row, half
covered by tarpaulin, were three silent forms —
one of them a signaller! I had often been told
of the dangers of signalling—that few signallers
lasted more than three days. Now, indeed, was
this brought home to me with considerable force.
Once more I prayed that I might not fail my
Battalion in the hour of need, because I knew
full well that the miscarriage of a message might
mean the lives of hundreds of men. The sailors
were very kind to us, having fully realised that
we were, many of us, going to certain death.
Their “ sang froid,” when the shrapnel was
raining down on them, was splendid!
Gallipoli, April 25th, 1915 .




From the “ Ribble ” to the Boats.
shells.
WE were transferred from the transport to the
destroyer, which took us close into the shore,
and then we were transferred into the ship's
boats and rowed to the shore, amidst a hail of
Gallipoli, April 25th, 1915-




The Landing.
IT was a relief to get ashore. We were packed so
tightly in the boats and, moreover, so heavily laden
with our kit, that had a shot hit the boat we would
have had no chance of saving ourselves. It was
awful, the feeling of utter helplessness. Meanwhile,
the Turks were pelting us hot and fast. In jumping
ashore, I fell over; my kit was so heavy that I couldn't
get up without help. Fortunately the water was
shallow at this point, otherwise —well, I'm here to
relate the incident. It was a magnificent spectacle
to see these thousands of men rushing through this
hail of death, as though it were some big game.
Anzac,
April
25th, 1915




Popes Hill,
This was the most advanced position, at that time,
and quite the hottest corner in Anzac, Every few
minutes, with sickening monotony, would sound
the cry —“ Stretcher bearers!! ” Poor fellows, how
magnificently they worked* This drawing gives
an idea of the nature of the ground across which
they had to carry the wounded; and when it rained,
it was well-nigh impossible to obtain a foothold.
The shells seen bursting are from our own ships.
The hill on the left was stiff with snipers. The
domelike dug-out, half-way down the edge of the
hill, was the quarters of Major Mansbridge, All
his signallers were put out of action by snipers, so
I had to do the work of A and B Companies—
signals and despatches—alone. I think the Turkish
snipers were keenly interested in my movements,
too much so for my liking. I like people to take
an interest in me, but there are times when I wish
they wouldn't.
Anzac, April, 1915.




“ Dead Maris Patch”
IT was across this exposed spot that many times I
had to run despatches. The ridge on the right, where
shrapnel can be seen bursting, was thick with snipers,
who had this patch so well set that they rarely missed
their mark. The poor chaps seen in the drawing all
got caught when trying to get across. I wondered
if I was to join them.
.Anzac, May , 1915 .




My First Dug-out .
THIS bit of a hole took me four days to dig. I was
not strong enough to lift a pick, so had to do what
I could with my trenching'tool; also I was kept so
busy signalling, as I was the only signaller left out
of A and B Companies. As soon as I would
commence to work on my dug-out, I would hear
the everlasting cry ** Signaller!!! ” So up I had to
get with my flags. The thick scrub on the hill to
the left was ** stiff ” with snipers ; in fact, it was
safer in the firing line than cut of it. The poor
fellow lying on top was my only companion for
three days; that silent reminder of what I might
any second be n yself, was not pleasant. It was
impossible to bury him. To put one's head above
the bit of earth I had thrown up was to court
death. How I escaped being hit is wonderful,
for I had to get out of my hole every few minutes.
It is not with any desire for morbid sensationalism
that I introduce the dead in every drawing. They
were part of our daily life; they were part of the
character of the Peninsula —at least of Anzac.
Anzac, April, 1915.




A Shell on Either Side.
ONE of the most trying experiences was when
our ships mistook the range, and began to
plump shells into us; when the Navy gets on
its mark —it's a hit every time. They put
eleven shells into us before we could signal to
them to alter range; and the Turkish trenches
were so near ours, that it made it very difficult
for the ships to get the correct range. I was
covered with earth from the explosions. I quite
thought the next shell would strike my dug-out,
and finish me. It is some seconds before the
debris drops to the ground, and one quite
realises what has happened.
Anzac, April, 1915 .




At the Water Hole
This was always covered by the Turkish snipers;
in fact, it was safer in the trenches than at this
place. It was quite one of the warmest spots at
Anzac, The poor fellow in the dug-out was
caught, just a few minutes before I filled my water-
bottle. All round here were wounded and dead
men, who had been hit when dodging round this
corner. However, one must drink, even if the
price be death.
Anzac, May , 1915.




The Snipers.
THE snipers had been causing us a deal of trouble.
It became almost impossible to go round this
corner without getting hit. Finally we were
unable to bring up our supplies. The poor
chap in the foreground was shot a few minutes
before I made this sketch; and the pack-horse
severely wounded. Despite the great danger, two
men rushed forward and caught hold of the
startled animals, thus preventing a stampede
which, in the confined space of the narrow road
—if such it could be called—might have caused
an impasse, and this under the existing conditions
would have been highly dangerous. The repetition
of shrapnel in each sketch is not a fad of mine,
but just the natural order of things : they became
as much part of the landscape as the clouds.
Anzacy May , 1915.




The Last of a Comrade.
the ** Last Assembly.”
THIS poor chap was shot while in his dug-out. He
was lying there two days, his “ billy-can ” full of
tea, the charred remains of the fire he was cooking
by, a few biscuits scattered about, and his pipe by his
sic’e. At dusk we crept out and buried him, on the
spot that had been his resting-place when not in
the firing fine. There he is still resting—awaiting
Anzac, May, 1915.




Bloody Angle .
THIS trench had been giving us considerable trouble,
owing to its position. It overlooked the road
through which our supplies were brought.
Eventually it became quite impossible to get further
stores through. This naturally caused great
anxiety. So at dawn, May we were ordered
to storm the heights. It is difficult to describe the
almost impossibility of the task. It was a sheer
slope of sandy soil, which made it extremely difficult
to obtain a foothold. Up we went, and, despite the
murderous fire that was poured into us, we sang
“Tipperary,” The cries of the wounded, the
tremendous fusillade of rifles and screaming of shells,
were indescribable. Quite impossible to hear
orders, it was each man for himself. We knew
what we had come to do, and we did it —at a price!
It was on this occasion that the 16th Battalion was
practically wiped out. One fellow whom I came
across, frightfully wounded, said: “My ! but they're
willing.” Another poor man came tearing along,
his right hand blown off, waving the bleeding
stump, and calling out: “My God! but I've done
my duty!!! Hallo! that you Silas, old chap, I've
done my duty, haven't I ? ”
Anzac, May, 1915




At the Top of the Hill.
OF this magnificent and terrible charge at Bloody
Angle, which decimated our ranks, I have already
spoken.
Anzac, May 2nd , 1915.




Dawn.
I SHALL never forget the indescribable scene in the
gully; it was choked with dead and wounded.
These poor lumps of clay had once been my
comrades —men I had smoked and worked and
laughed and joked with. Oh God! the pity of it! It
rained lead in this gully. All round could be seen the
sparks where the bullets were striking. It was
amidst this hail of bullets that General Godley
calmly did up my puttee for me. I implored him to
take cover, knowing we could ill spare the loss of a
General. But he wouldn't hear of it; every second
I was expecting to see him hit. But not until he
has done up my puttee would he move. Then, with
an amused chuckle, he passed his hand across the
top of his cap, at the same time remarking: u That
was a pretty near thing." A bullet had singed the
top of his cap 1!!




The Stream of Wounded.
FROM daybreak there had been a ceaseless stream
of wounded —in many cases they died on the way
down—until in many places the pass was so
cumbered with the dead and badly wounded, waiting
for the stretchers, that it became impassable. Along
the edge, bodies were hanging in all sorts of most
grotesque and apparently impossible attitudes.
Seeing those fine stalwart men going up the gully,
and shortly returning frightfully maimed and covered
with blood, was a sight I shall never forget. One
poor fellow, a New Zealander, came tearing .down
the gully, smothered with blood, and quite delirious,
kissing every man he passed, upon whom he left
a splash of blood. Some would come along
gasping out their lives, suddenly drop, then remain
silent —for ever. The ridge where the shrapnel
is bursting was the one we took on the night of
May 2.3, now an historical event. We had to
abandon this ridge,and so were never able to bury our
poor fellows, who can be seen lying on the hillside.
Anzac, May, 1915.




Stretcher-Bearers .
cannibals.
THIS gives some idea of the difficulties and dangers
the stretcher-bearers had to contend with. Their
bravery was quite equal to any heroism shown on
the field of battle. When we first landed, the
Turks shot at anything that moved, sparing not
even the wounded on stretchers. They had been
told by the Germans that the Australians were
Anzac, May, 1915.




A Field Dressing Station.
THIS was quite one of the saddest sights on the
field of battle. Here the medical officers fought
hard for the lives of what had once been magnify
cent specimens of manhood. Note the poor fellow
on the left, his puttee undone, ready to have his
wound dressed; but he slipped away into a land
where pain is not —thus it was with_many.
Anzac, May, 1915.




Bathing under Shell Fire.
THIS was certainly a most unique experience. I
remember how delightful it was to be immersed in
the sea, after not having had a decent wash for
about three weeks. We would hear the enemy’s
gun fire, then : ** Shell O!! ” Out we would all
scamper like a crowd of naughty schoolboys, and
lake cover behind anything on the beach that
afforded shelter. Then, after the shell had burst,
back we would go into the sea. I remember the
beautiful colour of the water, and the ships lying
out on the horizon. 44 Shell O 1! ” This time we
were nearly caught, for two or three shells came
sliding through the air, and burst quite close to us;
however, we were determined not to be done out of
our swim, so back into the water we went.
Anzac, May, 1915.


' 1
O.: /•
<
A W
J r.
' jiijjfF* *
- ' ' > (
v>V < . -
! ... t, ;•/_ 1 .
jt;
. .ft -
<;ttif#St« —ttus Su-Oi- *>’4.— ~5- -r- 'M| - | 1 — _ t ' • -
-—— " ■""' ~ - —
|j|


In the Trenches—Quinn s Post ,
THE Turks' trenches were only a few yards in
front of ours. They caused us much trouble with
bombs. The poor chap on the left was badly
caught , but I don't think he knew much about it.
He was lying there some days. Though I often
had to climb over him when going through the
trenches, I didn't dare look at his face—if there
was any —he was such an awful spectacle. The
man on the right “ caught it" badly; whether he
died I know not. There was little time to think
of these matters. He was out of action; another
man must take his place.
Anzac, May , 1915.




Signalling—Quinns Post.
SNIPERS created a considerable amount of dust,
every time I got up to signal. In fact, I think they
had a real merry time, but being so sure of their
mark they became careless. Well, whatever the
cause, they didn't get me. The feet above are those of
a buried comrade. It was not an unusual occurrence
when 44 digging-in ” to come in contact with a grave.
Anzac, May, 1915




Shrapnel Gully from Quinn s Post.
dug'Out.
MANY an anxious moment we spent scanning the
horizon for a sight of the transports which were
to bring the much needed reinforcements; for the
Turks were pressing us very hard. We were
only just "hanging on,” expecting any moment
a final rush from the enemy; for they were our
superior in numbers. The man on the left was
shot by a sniper just as he was leaving his
Anzac, May, 1915 .




“Stand to Arms!”
“QTAND TO ARMS!” ‘‘B Company will advance.”
before dawn, every morning, we had to “ Stand
to Arms "in readiness for a probable attack. It
was all very eerie, dreary and cold in the thick
morning mists; we would appear and disappear
like phantoms. On this particular occasion, we
were in for a hot time. I shall never forget how
weak and helpless I felt—l think fever must have
got a firm grip of me. I wondered how many of
us would be left by sunset. The figure in the
centre is Capt. Margolin, such a fine fellow, and
brave beyond compare, through it is difficult to say
who wasn't during these first terrible weeks.
He could not do enough for his “ Boys," as he
called us. On one occasion, during the charge
of the Light Horse, which I have mentioned
elsewhere, when we, the 16th Battalion, were sent
into action by mistake —“ I must get my Boys
out of it," he said, “ there will be none of them
left! ”
Anzac, May, 1915.




Capture of Turkish Trenches by Light Horse.
THESE trenches, facing Quinns Post, had been
giving us a hot time, causing many casualties with
their bombs. After the trench was captured —the
forty yards of flat ground between this, our new
front and our own trenches, was swept by the
enemy’s fire, which was enfilading us. The 16th
Battalion was only supposed to reinforce, instead
of which, by some error, we were sent into the
firing line; but there was not room in the trenches
for all —many had to lie outside. I had to go six
times across this plateau until eventually
I could find the 16th Battalion, and deliver the
order to retire. In the darkness I had not noticed
a communication trench, which would have
obviated the necessity of my crossing this lead'
swept space. What worried me most was that I
might fall over the decomposing bodies of the dead
Turks. The figure in the centre is that of Lieut.
Harwood. When I got to him with my message
he yelled above the din: " Silas, this is fine, I
wouldn’t be elsewhere for a thousand pounds! ”
Anzac, May, 19IS .




The Roll Call —Quinns Post.
THIS is always a most heart-breaking incident.
Name after name would be called; the reply—a
deep silence, which could be felt, despite the noise
of the incessant cracking of rifles and screaming
of shrapnel. This was taken the morning after
the charge, on Sunday night, May 9th. We, the 16th
Battalion, were supposed to be resting, and were
only to reinforce if the necessity arose. Unfor-
tunately, through some error, we were sent into
the firing line. At dawn, the following morning,
there were few of us left to answer our names
when the roll was called —just a thin line of weary,
ashen-faced men. The bodies on the right we
were unable to bury for some days, as we were
so hard pressed by theJTurks.
Anzac, May, 1915




The Field Hospital.
HERE all that could be done to relieve the terrible
sufferings of the worst cases, was accomplished
under the most trying and difficult conditions.
The operating table was made of packing cases.
Occasionally shrapnel would come flying through
the tent. One unfortunate chap was hit three
times in this manner, the last putting an end to
his agony. Here, as everywhere else at Anzac,
there lay those silent forms awaiting burial.
Anzac, May, 1915




Near the Beach.
AFTER the incessant roar of the firing line, it
seemed comparatively quiet at this spot. It was
the end of a glorious afternoon. All the landscape
was tinged with the warm glow of the sun. In
the distance the blue ocean sparkled like a jewel.
Up the narrow winding path, with its border of
sad little mounds, placidly came the Indians with
the ammunition mules. It seemed more like a scene
in a play than one of the most tragic dramas in
the world's history. But one was never left long in
doubt as to the reality of it all. A buzzing, as of
a huge bee—a flash of yellow flame —on the ground
a mangled heap, from which slowly trickles a dull
red stream. Far away across the sapphire ocean,
just a few more will be waiting in vain for the
return of their loved ones.
Anzac, May, 1915




Boarding the Hospital Ship.
WE were towed from ship to ship. Always the
same reply: “Full up!” Eventually we managed
to get aboard one. The “ cot cases ” were
hoisted on board by the derricks. Fortunately,
on this particular day, there was a fairly smooth
sea, so the embarkation was not difficult; but
during the rough weather, the wounded suffered
terribly when being put aboard the Hospital ship.
Even right out here, a stray shell would
sionally come buzzing through the air. Note
the narrow escape of the boatload alongside the
ship. After having been in the thickest scrim'
mage, to be hit, so far out from the firing line,
would have been truly annoying.
Gallipoli , May , 1915




The Hospital Ship “ Galeka.”
ON the ship there was only sufficient
tion for iso wounded; we had on board 500.
Although delirious at night, I had the use of my
limbs —so I did orderly work. Sometimes I
would be on duty from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m., taking
what little food I required when I got the
tunity. The medical officers were splendid. They
worked night and day, scarcely giving themselves
time for meals. On one occasion, Dr, Fiaschi,
junr., worked for five hours on one case without a
rest. The body on the left--covered with a
blanket —was one of my cases ; the poor fellow
“ went out ” quite unexpectedly; he was not badly
wounded. The man sitting on the right on the
seat (a N.S.W. boy), though he had lost his right
arm, was the merriest, brightest man on the ship.
Gallipoli, May, 1915




The Hospital Train .
I SHALL always remember the delightful feeling of
peace; to be lying there amidst the sparkling
cleanliness of this carriage in the Hospital train!
Many of us were really too far gone to care much
what happened; though, for my part, I was suffi-
ciently conscious to appreciate my environment.
The Indian orderlies had always a welcome smile
for us, gave us cigarettes, and handed round tea
and bread and butter. Think of it! —bread ! One
doesn't know what a luxury it is until one has been
without it. For my part, I couldn't eat anything;
to be in the train was all sufficient. In fact, once
my duties on the Hospital ship were over, I just
went " right under "; there was no longer need for
further effort on my part.
Alexandria—Cairo, May , 1915




Palace Hospital, Heliopolis.
** Heaven! ”
May, 1915.




Gallipoli, December, 1915.




'em
Printed by
The British-Australasian (1910), Ltd.,
115. High Holborn, London, W.C.




