

SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
CULTIVATION
OF THE
DATE PALM
IN THE
INTERIOR OF AUSTRALIA
BY
ARTESIAN AND OTHER WATERS.
Adelaide:
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.
1890.




CULTIVATION OF THE DATE PALM IN THE INTERIOR OF AUSTRALIA
BY MEANS OF ARTESIAN AND OTHER WATERS.
(Obtained at the request of the Hon. G. IV. COTTON, M.L.C.)
The following particulars relating to the utilisation of the artesian
and other waters in the African desert of Sahara, in Algeria, have
been selected from five papers obtained by the Government of South
Australia through the British Government from the Government of
France, which very courteously sent out two pamphlets, being
extracts from La Revue Scientijique, one dated 1887, and the other
1888, written by M. G. Holland, the French engineer in charge of
the works in Sahara, also a Report by the same author written for
the Paris Exhibition of last year, with two papers in La Nature for
February and March, 1889.
In the desert of Sahara, the Oued Rir’, of which the capital is
Tougourt, is a large district of the vast region of Africa, formerly
known as a trackless waste of drifting sand. This portion of Sahara
is now discovered to be really endowed with artesian waters. It is
here that remarkable works of boring have been executed since the
French conquest, and, thanks to the good effects of irrigation, they
have wrought a veritable transformation.
In thirty years the oases have been increased in value five times
over, and by the development of their natural resources the popula-
tion of the district has largely increased.
But before going any further let us see exactly what this date
palm tree is—this precious tree that constitutes the wealth of the
Saharian oases.
The date palm, Phoenix Dactylifera, has both male and female
trees. The female trees bear large clusters of fruit enclosed in a
case or sheath. These fruits cannot form and develop unless each
tree has been fecundated by the pollen of the male tree. To make
sure of this fecundation the natives themselves effect the fertilisa-
tion by hand ; one male will suffice for about 400 female trees.
There are several varieties of the palm tree. The finest kind of
dates realise a much higher price than the others. The palm tree
is not propagated by seeds but by suckers. If one were to sow date
stones only, wild or male palm trees would come; but by detaching
from the female palm tree the suckers which sprout at the foot of
the trunk, and transplanting them, palm trees of the same sex and
variety will be obtained.
The palm tree presents an exceptional regularity in its growth
and in its productiveness. With proper care and regular irrigation
it produces fruit in five years—sometimes in three years—after it
has been planted, but it is not till it is eight years old that it is in


full bearing. It produces best from the tenth to the sixtieth year,
and lives to over 100,
It is justly remarked that the palm tree is the mother tree of the
Sahara, for without the palm tree the Sahara would be everywhere
a desert, and it is there only that the fruit ripens properly. The palm
tree supports the extremes of temperature of the Saharian climate
—nocturnal cold, dry, and transient, six degrees below freezing
point not being hurtful to it, and the heat never being too great for
the fruit. But more important than the heat is the dryness of the
atmosphere. This last is indispensable to produce sweet and
luscious dates. The neighborhood of the sea is fatal to it; on the
southern coast of the Mediterranean the dates are comparatively
worthless, not having either sweetness or flavor. The palm tree
grows in the poorest soils, impregnated with gypsum or a consider-
able amount of salt. As for the fine variety, known as “ deglet
nour,” it flourishes in soils the poorest, the most sandy and stony,
and with even a fair percentage of salt in it.
The date is for the Sahara what wheat is for Europe and rice for
India. It is the usual food of those who live there, the chief
article of consumption and exchange for populations of millions;
moreover, it is food fairly scarce and very much in demand in its
own country, and it is not to be supposed that it will to any
appreciable extent come down in price, although there may be a
considerable increase in production. A sure and remunerative
market will always be found on the spot. Nowaday the fine date
is exported in considerable quantities, principally to Marseilles,
whence it is sent to numerous countries. Its consumption is on the
increase in Europe, and it will be more in demand when this
nutritious fruit is better known. It is very difficult to estimate
accurately the profit of the palm tree one year with another, as
the regularity of production depends largely on the care given and
the species planted.
A “ deglet nour ” palm tree has been mentioned in the garden
of M. Colombo, which, in a favorable year, had borne a crop worth
£2. It is not an uncommon occurence for a good date palm to be
exchanged for a camel, the latter being worth more than £12.
On the other hand, a garden planted with common varieties, and
badly irrigated, will not return Is. per tree. The average yield
may be reckoned at 4s. per tree, which, at eighty trees to the acre,
makes £16, as elsewhere stated. Dates are valued l|d. a pound on
the spot. One extensive district has 900,000 palm trees, and more
than 500 fruit trees grown under the shade of the palm trees.
An important question in planting palm trees is that of the space
to be left between them. With regard to this it has been decided
to adopt eighty trees per acre. This puts the trees at an average
distance apart of 23ft., and suffices for the ripening of dates and
for the shade necessary to other plants that may be grown under-
neath. With eighty trees per acre the date palm may yield
annually £16 per acre. Thus it will be seen that the Sahara is not
so unproductive as one might think.


As previously stated, under the shadow of the palm tree other
productions may he grown, which without this shade it would be
impossible to grow were they exposed to the burning sun. In this
way the inhabitants cultivate cereals, barley, sorghum, maize, &c.,
vegetables, red pepper, beans, melons, water melons, &c., fruit
trees, the fig, pomegranate, apricot, olive, vine, &c., fodder plants,
such as lucern, madder, &c., also tobacco. The long silk-cotton
grows extremely well in some of the oases. In the Sahara the
ostrich is famous for its beauty, and in the value of its plumage is
without rival.
As soon as the first oasis of European creation is reached, young
plantations display themselves all along the railway route, and
abound about the French settlements and new villages.
The trading centre of Tougourt occupies a favorable position in
the district by reason of the caravans that branch off there in
various directions; and this traffic will increase more rapidly the
day that it is connected with the railway.
But most important of all are the artesian waters, of which there
are hundreds in Central Sahara.
In addition to the artesian wells, dams should be constructed
according to the modern science of the engineer, namely, dams at
the foot of gorges descending from the hills; also cheaply-constructed
dams at the foot of each catchment area. Later on the locomotive
will supplant the camel, because the transport costs three times
less than camel carriage.
The magnificent basin of artesian waters which forms the riches
of the interior is far from having given the output of which it is
capable or its full productive power for vegetation and providing
support for human life. There is nothing to prevent these borings
being profitably continued, in case that they are under competent
supervision.
With the rapid and economical means of transport by rail the
country will be transformed all along the line and European enter-
prise extended by means of artesian wells and plantations of palm
trees, together with industrial works of various kinds. There will
also be a progressive movement in exports and imports and in
coming and going of passengers, without speaking of tourists, who
already visit the Sahara in considerable numbers and who cannot
fail to take the train.
In fine, at the end of a certain time this railway, if constructed
and worked economically, will, I am convinced, pay its expenses.
It must not be thought that the whole Saharian desert can be
transformed into a cultivable region by boring and the planting of
date palms. It is only in these oases, naturally among the most poor
on the globe, that, by means of the date palm and of the artesian
waters, we possess elements of wealth which can only be found in
territories the most fertile and the most favored by nature and
climate.
Planting an acre of palms at the rate of 10 per cent, annual
profit creates a capitalised value of £160. The outlay on first


establishing and working the plantations, I estimate at £80, i.e.,
when carried out on a large scale. The planting 50,000 palm trees,
as the Batna and South Algerian Company has done, means
creating a value of £100,000. Doubling the number of palm trees
in Oued Rir’, as I have said we hope to do by creating new oases
far from existing ones, means a value of £1,200,000. If similar
planting is done in the other regions of the Lower Sahara, and the
subterranean waters put to a better use which are now lost, it is
not impossible that little by little the value of this part of the
national soil may be increased to £4,000,000.
Every oasis must occupy ground that admits of irrigation, or at
any rate presents sufficient humidity. It is a difficult matter to
give exactly the quantity of water necessary for an acre, so that the
palm trees may prosper. The custom, when a sufficient quantity of
water is available, is to irrigate the gardens, copiously flooding the
soil to a depth of about 3in. To do this, the ground is divided
into sections by trenches, into which the water is conducted.
The watering is managed so that each part of the plantation
may receive water at regular intervals varying from five to ten
days, i.e., under ordinary conditions, and for well grown palms.
The principal thing is to give water at intervals short enough for
the subsoil to preserve a certain moistness necessary to vegetation in
the quick evaporation of the Saharian climate.
Now at eighty trees per acre —the number adopted by us in our
plantations —an average watering of half a pint per tree per minute
equals for a whole year a volume of water of about 420 cubic feet
per acre. It is an important thing that oases well irrigated should
be well drained by means of trenches ; stagnant water is fatal to
the palm tree. It must be applied frequently if artificial, or water
running naturally. It may be mentioned that water in the shape
of rain is not beneficial to palm trees, for, although they require
water at the root, they demand an intense solar heat and extremely
dry air for the purpose of ripening their fruit. Rain is very
injurious, particularly in spring, and in autumn before the crop is
gathered. The waters of some sources are lukewarm or slightly
mineral, with a temperature of 66° to 86° Fahrenheit, and even
reaching 94° at one source. Although slightly saline, these waters
are soft and drinkable. They hold in solution dry salts varying up
to -45oz. per gallon of water.
The king of wells in Oued Rir’ was sunk in 1884 ; it delivers
1,333 gallons per minute. Another well sunk in 1887 turns out
888 gallons per minute, and equals the finest artesian well in Paris
at Passy. Similar supplies are not rare at Oued Rir’; the wells of
660 to 880 gallons are fairly numerous. The “ behour” means a
considerable lake of limpid water that one is surprised to meet with
in these dried-up regions.
As stated before, the irrigation of the desert may be considerably
augmented by constructing dams or reservoirs in the most convenient
spots, which would allow of conserving a large volume of water
when the waters flow down the hills after rain.


There are now 43 oases in one district, with nearly 520,000 palm
trees in bearing—more than 140,000 from one to seven years old—
and about 100,000 other varieties of fruit trees.
There are as many different kinds of palm trees and dates in the
Sahara as there are varieties of pears and apples amongst us. The
fine transparent date, called “deglet nour,” is an unequalled variety,
whose value is much greater than that of the others ; besides, this
fine variety is comparatively rare in the Sahara, and its quality also
varies much in different localities, according to natural conditions
of climate, soil, of irrigation, just like our French wines. The
African dates are coarse, some better than others, and, as there is
no wine in the world to equal the Bordeaux and Burgundy wines,
in like manner, to find really fine, sweet, luscious dates, one must go
to the portion of the province of Constantine and Tunis which lie
the nearest the equator.
The other varieties of dates may be divided into two great classes
—the soft dates, which are pressed in goatskins and which one sees
being sold in the Arab markets, and the dried dates, which do not
stick together, several handfulls being put for the day’s food in the
“ burnoos ” of the traveller. These common dates are, as a rule,
consumed by the inhabitants who are too poor, except in the towns,
to be able to afford the fine dates.
The “ couscous,” another name for a flour procured from wheat
and prepared in a special manner by women, and the date are the
two principal staples of food of the inhabitants as much in the north
as in the south of Algeria ; therefore there is a necessary exchange
of the cereals of the coast region on the one hand and the dates of
the Sahara on the other. As for the superior kind of date, it is
already one of the important exports to Europe, where its consump-
tion is gradually increasing, and where its delicate fruit will be
more and more appreciated on closer acquaintance, arriving direct
from its native land in a natural and fresh state, and known as the
true date of the Sahara. In short, the date is a commodity like
any other which has its markets and finds a buyer. It is no more
ridiculous therefore to grow dates in the Sahara than it is to grow
wheat in France or rice in India. Let each country have its own
products. Planting date palms in the Sahara is just as reasonable
as planting vines on the Algerian coast or in the south of France.
There is longer waiting for a return, but, as a set-off, there is no
disease ; the palm tree has no phylloxera, and lives more than 100
years. The produce of the palm tree is very unequal, according
to the varieties cultivated and the localities in question. In Oued
Kir’ we estimate that, with a sufficient quantity of “ deglet nour ”
variety and with suitable care the palm tree can produce up to a
value of £16 per acre. It will be seen that the Sahara does not
always merit its reputation for barrenness—quite the contrary —
the few scattered portions of the desert that are fitted for irrigation
possess, thanks to the precious tree the date palm, a capability of
production which only finds its equivalent in those fertile parts of
countries more favored by nature and climate.


Such being the case, why then should entry to the Desert of
Sahara be prohibited to European enterprise ?
To cultivate oases of date palms for the growing and sale of
dates, forms an undertaking that may be profitably carried out even
by Europeans.
More than twenty-five years ago plantations of some importance
were started by a French farmer, who, at the same time tried
successfully, and on a fairly large scale, cotton planting. French
companies were immediately formed, and applied themselves to
agriculture in the Sahara—two companies in 1878 and another in
1881. Here oases already in bearing were bought for cultivation
—elsewhere they did better still —they created new oases, sank
wells outside, the native oases, and planted the new oases, where
before there had been nothing, not even a tree or a drop of water.
It was the conquest of the desert in every sense of the word,
and above all, this is the only programme to be followed out in
colonising the Sahara for the development of the resources of South
Algeria.
Captain Tougourt is the first who created a new oasis in the
middle of the open country in the centre of Oued Rir’ in 1879.
To this Frenchman must belong the honor of having led the way in
developing this fertile place. The number of palm trees owned or
planted by French colonists in an outside direction since 1879 can
be put down at 120,000 in number. Many hundreds of acres,
formerly unproductive, have been rendered fertile by French
enterprise, and the total of French plantations in Oued Rir’
already exceeds 60,000 palm trees, representing a created value of
more than £120,000.
At Oued Rir’ the railway will develop our means of action tenfold.
The artesian wells, which contribute the wealth of this fair region,
are far from giving the outcome of which they are capable, or, as
Mr. Elisee Reclus says, “ the full productive results in vegetation
and the support of human beings.”
Let us prosecute our work over the virgin soil surrounding our
present operations and we may double, perhaps triple, the number
of palm trees at Oued Rir’.
Note. —The lowest quantity of dry salts per gallon in the water
of 1’Oued Rir’ is given as - 57oz. per gallon; the maximum at
L07oz, per gallon.
The Conservator of Water, Mr. J. W. Jones, gives the artesian
water at Hergott as containing -29oz. of salts; at Strangways
Springs ‘91oz.; at Coward Springs '62oz.
So that the water in Sahara is more strongly impregnated with
solid matter in solution than in the three bores given above.
