

w —
I
■
HK • » •"••• .’-’ \ '' s ;$t‘! '■• •- IS .
K!v * .. • /. v,*V'A^w-^*-'' ,.’.isv.•«• •• '•■'*r 33wfi«*•■ H- *v: ** * i. '’'Xvk^'': v .** ~i'j - > -. :';■ j>, ■
m . .a*' ~ - } &‘mm PNIitfe, */r Tl"■
■ '"■■*& 5%laMia ■: ; :
■
K
K“ ’ • i . . ■• f ' ' ■-.-- -' . - . ..’■ .» v ;:; •/• „•
K :. : ;.,••■•■■'. - fr-ylAl: ■• ■. "'.. 5,:V,. ;.r<V£^-..' ■■£*••*■ < ..);V-i.--Y Sfelj-'r *1® ,
K
fc • - • ; i ■' •*. • • ...
It
W- 0R» A'SS jBl , vii < ' afe;
i
1 . : . 3-?;': ■ - j : - ■;:
I •"■■■ ■-.- v ■ .;;1;
1 . .. ’ /■ ■"■■. ■ „\- : ,., ■■ ■
i ■>■.•■ '■ '•■■ : :. ' •
K* '..V-A > ••« . - ■ -,*;. 1 • ,w fS!. ,,-■ .* ■ y^--»; ‘ ' •' ■' V-.'i:”- - <-V v ". ■, .' - _ !
' ■’ ‘j'lk ■'>tf-i 1 »>rC: ‘idT i , >t “-r*’,- ~ > * ' ,?
V; •'> ■ ' ,r W' ' ‘ • ■•->'■ TH'.". ■•i'X’-v - ’ ' -. **■>- *•!.<->. '*.- . ’ ■ ';■ * .’ ‘ 7V
Kg. ■ ''~ K - J ’ . . JMl v- v I ■ ; (t . ;«"-■)'-■• ' - -' .=




CULTURE OF THE VINE
WINE MAKIN Gr.
Dr. JULES GUYOT.
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY L. MARIE.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY & CO., 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.
The want-of a practical and comprehensive treatise on vine-growing
and wine-making lias been long felt. It was owing to this want that the
Gape vine grower failed in introducing favourably his products into
European markets. Four years ago, I thought of attempting to satisfy
that want, but as I was far from being sufficiently versed in chemistry to
introduce that science into the subjects I would have had to treat, my
work would have been a simple statement of the facts and practices with
which lam acquainted. What kind of reception such a treatise would
have met with can scarcely be a matter of doubt. The public of the
colonies were, and are still, hut not to the same extent, under the
erroneous impression that wine-making is eminently a scientific and
complicated art. I was still thinking of carrying out my first idea when
Dr. Jules Guyot’s treatise on vine-culture and wine-making fell into my
hands. The worth of the eminent senologue’s work was obvious. It
contained, in my first judgment, which remains unaltered, descriptions of
the best practices of the best vignerons of the world, condensed into a
comprehensive system, explained and supported by science. I resolved
then to give a translation to the Australian vignerons, and, by doing so,
I unhesitatingly state that they are offered an opportunity to become soon
as advanced in that branch of agriculture as the traditional vignerons of
France. Dr. Guyot is, beyond a doubt, the greatest benefactor that
wine producing countries have had. He has promulgated a rational
system for the culture of the vine, although, he admits, there is nothing
new in his book. It is a skilful, concise, and consummate thesaurus of all
the best methods of cultivating vines and making wines. Scarcely any
of the rules he has laid down have given rise to controversy. The
gardener, the farmer, the vigneron of Australia, New Zealand, or Tas-
mania, while studying Dr. Guyot’s treatise, will have no occasion to
discriminate between a labyrinth of processes; he will not be bamboozled


by quotations of innumerable methods and opinions of theorists and
inexperienced men. From its perusal he will learn a clear and incontro-
vertible method that will lead him to success in his undertaking, and,
provided he obtains a little practical assistance, he will soon be on a
level with the best vignerons of wine countries.
For his practical and theoretical labours on the culture of the vine.
Dr. Jules Gujot has been rewarded by the Emperor of the French with
the cross of the Legion of Honour, and intrusted with the important
mission of visiting and reporting on all the vineyards of France. This
mission gave the greatest satisfaction to the vine-growers. With regard
to the testimony of sovereigns on such matters, the London Agricultural
Gazette of last November, when speaking of the opinion of the King of
Saxony on the beneficial effects of Liebig’s theories, says :— ‘‘ Although
we are undoubtedly a very loyal people, we attach no special value to
the testimony or opinion of a king upon such matters, unless he be at
the same time a skilful agriculturist.” It will not be believed for a
moment that a rebuke, so well deserved in that instance, could apply to
the Emperor. He did not assume the judgeship in that matter, but
simply supported and confirmed public opinion. The proprietors of vine-
yards and the vignerons of France are, it will readily be allowed, the
best judges of writings on vine-culture and wine-making. I will men-
tion the opinions of several. On the 28th of December, 1863, a eoncours
(match) for the pruning of the vine took place at Mirande, where a great
number of competitors met. The jury unanimously recommended Dr.
Guyot’s method. The secretary of the society, in his address to the
meeting, observed:—“Your jury of examiners give their preference to
the pruning system of Dr. Guyot; it is the easiest in its execution, and
the most rational in theory. I know that the mode of pruning must
vary according to the soil, its fecundity, and the condition of vines;
but it is possible, nevertheless, to lay down general rules applicable
to all countries. Let us only say that Guyot’s pruning is the type
of pruning, and thaty.it is considerately recommended to you by a
commission composed of special practical men. If to that system
of pruning you add, as recommended by Dr. Guyot, the sulphuring
against the oidium, manuring, shallow, and well-timed hoeings; if
you tie your vines, and stretch the fruit-hearing branch, if you
disbud, nip and clip off the shoots, we can affirm that, under
these excellent conditions of pruning and cultivating, the vineyards
will give everywhere abundant crops, which care in the cellars will trans-
form into wholesome and generous wines.” M. Carreau, one of the most
skilful vigneron proprietors of the Moselle, gave on Guyot’s system the


following account on the 22nd of October, 1863. “ The Tokay (variety
of ipineau grid) produced from 1020 to 1040 gallons per acre; gros pineaxt,
of Burgundy, called vert noir, produced 800 gallons per acre, while the
other pruning produced only 700 for the same number of vines.” M.
Carreau says, that long-pruning is preferable for the fine kinds of vines,
and that the spur-pruning suits best the coarse ones. This fact, says Dr.
Guyot, is proved beyond a doubt, by the old practice of the Moselle. Mr.
Deliasse, a large proprietor, and M. Biarms Barthe, wrote to Dr. Guyot,
from Limoux (Aude) that the long branch gave excellent results on the
Clairette, Carignan, Grenache, &c., and the department had in general
adopted his system of pruning. M. Delcasse has ascertained the identity
of the saccharine richness of the musts produced by vines of the same
kind, and pruned in spurs or long-wood. M. le Comte Delaistre,
(Vienne), Dr. Gonnet, (Beaujolais), M. Barles, professor of agriculture of
the Yar, have all confirmed the superiority of Dr. Guyot’s system of
pruning. M. Dellicot, president of the Agricultural Society at Toulon is,
more explicit. “ On the whole,” said he, ‘‘the Carhenets, Schyras, Melas-
cones, Pineau Beclaus, Pulsards, produce nearly double with the long fruit-
bearing branch; the pineau gris, especially, succeeds admirably. The
Barborou did not ripen under that mode of pruning which does not
suit the white Ugny nor the Chasselas and several others.” I could
give innumerable testimonies from wealthy, honourable, and competent
judges, who have given publicity to their opinions ; and what I have
seen, when in France led me to conclude that Dr. Guyot’s system of
cultivating the vines would shortly be universally adopted. Dr. Guyot’s
treatise, however perfect it is as a system, is still wanting in some details.
The great aenologue wrote for vignerons who understood him, but
intending vine-growers will find him too laconic in several instances. To
remedy what to them is a defect, I at one time thought of supplementing
my translation with an appendix; but this would, I fear, make the
work too cumbrous, and render the publication almost impossible in the
colonies. I have therefore decided to withhold it for the present, but,
should I perceive any desire on the part of the Australian public to
obtain more information on vine-culture and wine making, I shall
endeavour to furnish them with the best that can be gathered from
European vine-growing countries, and which can be drawn from my
careful observations in Victoria.
L. MARIE.
Melbourne,
October, 1864.


INTRODUCTION.
The publication of this essay on the culture of the vine and wine-
making 1 has been brought about by unforeseen circumstances.
After spending thirty years in observations and experiments on vine
culture and farming, I commenced, in 1850, upon reliable statistics,
derived from our best vineyards and our most progressive agriculturists,
the comparative study of vine culture, and farming in soil of poor and
mediocre quality, and I have prosecuted that study with respect to private
interest, and also with respect to the colonizing power of the vine and its
national value. To carry out my views I established, in a locality where
the land was thought unfavorable to the growth of the vine, and little
better adapted to farming—in truth, of little value for any kind of culture
—a vineyard of 84 acres, and a farm double that extent. Wishing to
make a thorough study, and to render it profitable to all, I sought the
assistance of the authorities of each department, and a commission of men
of great attainment in science, and delegates from committees of scientific
societies, watched with care and perseverance the progress of my opera-
tion until August, 1857, when I gave up to the owner the land which
had been the subject of my experiments. In that year, 1857, the vine-
yard of 84 acres, of which one-half only had arrived, not at its full bear-
ing, but at the production of its fifth year (the other half being only in
its third season or leaf), gave a return of 25,200 gallons of wine, two-
fifths of that quantity were the produce of 12 acres, protected with
straw matting. My anticipations were then surpassed, for my vineyard,
scarcely arrived at the third of its bearing capabilities, was giving already
300 gallons per acre. In future, with my mode of culture, I could reason
ably expect a return of upwards of 45,000 gallons. My experiments were
interrupted three or four years too soon, to enable me to show the world


the respective value of vine-growing and farming in poor soils; but as to
myself, I was convinced, and so must have been the commissions of com-
petent men appointed to report on my works, for they did not hesitate
giving publicity to their convictions. In its seventh year the farm still
required subsidy for its keeping and its amelioration; and when it would
have reached its apogee of production, which would be in the twelfth
year, it would only give an annual net revenue of some £l2O or £lOO.
It would then only sustain two families, whereas the vineyard would
keep twenty families, and would give a gross return of from £lO,OOO to
£16,000 for an annual expenditure of from £1,200 to £2,000. Com-
paring the present wealth of the population of the locality with the
poverty which I had observed in my youth, I left Champagne with the
conviction that I now publish in this book for the benefit of all. Fearing
that my statements should be misrepresented, I hastened to make them
public, in a series of articles published in the Journal dJ Agriculture
pratique. Those articles were received in all parts of France with such
favour, such empressement, that I was convinced the majority of my
countrymen love truth yet, and that when it is sincerely expressed it will
meet with powerful and sympathetic echoes. That reception proves also
that the progress of vine culture and wine-making is still in the mind
of the French, and that the time for good wines will be revived. The
discovery of a truth or of progress does not belong to one individual,
or even to a few. A truth and a progress come in their time and
season, as the flower and fruits on the tree; the discoveries and progress
of human societies depend upon the harmony of those societies, and are the
necessary consequences of their development and of their traditional
actions. When a member sees a truth and expresses it the first, he is
understood and accepted by all the other members, because all had
caught a glimpse of that truth, or because all were prepared to under-
stand it, and that is the reason that the revelation of good and useful
ideas, not only honour individuals, but also families, tribes, and nations,
which recognise and accept them with earnestness. For myself I know
of vine-culture only what I learned by observing the vine and vineyards,
by studying the authors, by personally cultivating the vine, and by.
endeavouring to discover the practice, founded on tradition and observa-
tions, that would be best for' vinegrowing, for the vinegrower, and for
all. I declare that, whenever a solution has appeared to me admitted as
the best by experience, I found that that same solution had already been
noticed either by good authors or by practice in our best vineyards.
Thus, I have done nothing that I can attribute to myself, and I claim


no discovery; I have simply recorded in a concentrated form the most
approved system of vine-culture, after long and practical study, on a
large scale.
Ist May, 1860.
This first edition of my treatise was published in May, 1860. In
November of the same year it was exhausted. That unexpected favour,
supported by the approbation of vinegrowers of higher standing,
encourages me to give another edition of my work in all its primitive
simplicity.
DR. JULES GUYOT.
30th November, 1860.


CULTURE OF TIE VINE
WINE MA.K I N Gr.
CHAPTER I.
COLONISING POWER OF CULTURES IN GENERAL, AND
OP THE VINE IN PARTICULAR.
What constitutes the wealth of a locality and
of its soil ? The wealth of a locality is most
truly indicated by the number of inhabitants
which are enabled to maintain themselves
within it in a state of prosperity. The true in-
dication of the wealth of the soil is the amount
of population it supports, or, in other words,
for whose labor it finds employment in the
production of articles, raw or manufactured on
the spot. When large populations, agglome-
rated in certain places, are sustained by com-
merce, industries, arts, or by the funds of the
State, their presence favors the development of
cultivation in the neighborhood, so that even
from the poorest soils is drawn the produce
of which they are in want, by usine the re-
sources and wealth that they derive from other
places. In that case, if. is the population that
enriches the soil to support itself, and not the
soil that supports the population by its natural
richness. This artificial fertility does not ex-
tend beyond a certain circuit, and is limited by
the requirements of the central group, and by
the equilibrium of the prices of its products,
and the prices of products obtained in more dis-
tant localities. Beyond that limit all intention
or attempt to extend great cultures in poor
soils can only result in misery and abandon-
ment of the land. When a soil is naturally
fertile and produces remunerative crops, it
attracts, fixes, and sustains, by itself, a numer-
ous population. It is really then a principle of
wealth ; it is essentially suited for colonisation.
It is very important, in agricultural economy,
not to confound the fertility of soil obtained
from the resources of the population, and the
natural fertility which has created a popula-
tion and its wealth. The first has only a rela-
tive, the second an absolute value, the latter is
the cause of the wealth of the locality, in the
former case the soil absorbs it.
Signs which indicate the colonising
value of a soil.—How can the oolon-
ising value, negative or positive, of
any given soil be determined ? By the
nature of its products, and by the prices
offered for those products in their raw state, or
manufactured on the spot. The gross amount
obtained on the spot; such is the sole and true
indication of the value of the culture, of the
wealth of the colony j the net profit shows only
the amount of private revenue. Whether the
land produces precious metals, whether it yields
tva, coffee, indigo, cotton, the mulberry, sugar-
cane, beetroot, vine, olive, cereals, pastures,
or forests, the basis on which the wealth of the
colony must be estimated remains the same,
and strictly proportionate. For example, the
produce of an acre may be sold for £4O, and
give only £2 of net profit. Another acre’s
produce may be sold for £lO, and still give £2
profit. In both cases, the private interest is the
same, whilst the colonising power of the first
is four times larger than that of the second j
for there has been four times more labor paid
for, and the population has received a sum four
times larger than in the second case, from an
equal area of land.


Different modes'of cultivation,—Taking,'for a
starting point, soils which naturally produce
nothing, the value of the raw products would be
presented in the following order, namely, poor
pastures of wastes j the marshes of which the
grasses are used for litter; the forest; the good
pastures, and meadows. These four first classes
may be designated as products that are ob-
tained with little or no labor. The ordinary
labor or workmanship is represented by the
great class of cereals and artificial meadows.
Then follow the feculent and oleaginous
plants next, the textile, and then the cultivated
fruits and vegetables. The class which may
be designated haute main d'ceuvre, or high
culture, comprises the tobacco, indigo, tea,
coffee, the vine, beetroot and sugar-cane, the
mulberry, cotton, flax, hemp, &c., &c. All
kinds of high cultivation have an essential
colonising power, and its products have always
a high money value, relatively to the products
of low and ordinary cultivation. If high cul-
tivation can be established upon an abandoned
soil, and, if it is made prosperous, even only by
a large expenditure, it will draw a population,
which it will fix, and thereby will force the in-
ferior cultivation, necessitated by human wants,
to prosper also.
Advantages of the culture of the vine in
poor soils.—The raw products of poor soils,
which realise the highest prices, are the best
adapted for the development of any colony,
because, by the culture of such products, the
colonist is certain to insure the cultivation of
all the others. The capitalist, that powerful
agent of progress, will not waste his means in
furthering the cultivation of inferior products.
He will soon discover that one acre of the
Chateau-Lafitte, or of the Clos-Vougeot, gives
more wealth for the public than one hundred
acres of poor wastes, planted with a forest or
turned into an ordinary farm. To speak more
precisely, in poor soils, the production of bread
and meat wiU not create wealth, whereas wealth
will always produce bread and meat. Never
will the cultivation of corn or artificial prairies,
either alone or supported by all the
stock that it will keep, people the
deserts’of Champagne, Sologne, or the Landes,
without some sort of subsidy, and that subsidy
can only be permanent for products of high
cultivation, such as the vine, which suits per-
fectly those kinds of soil, and which
always realised a gross price from
three to eight times as much as the
products of farms of the same acreage.
In 1857, the average gross returjferof an acre
of vineyard was above £6O ; the average gross
return of wheat, the dearest of all cereals, did
not reach £l2, and that on the farms surround-
ing the Champ de Chalons. Taking for a basis
the average of the last twenty years, we are
led to the conclusion that the colonising power
of the vine is from three to eight times greater
than of farming; that in the present cir-
cumstances the vine employs and gives food to
from three to eight times the number of people,
and affords, besides, net profits in the same pro-
portion. If the culture of the vine was as per-
fect as it might be j if the disastrous effects of
frosts and couture* were prevented, the
colonising power of the vine would yet be
doubled. When I said that the wastes of
Champagne, Sologne, &c., were well suited for
the vine I did not mean to say that all those
wastes should be planted; but that, if a small
portion were, say one acre for every twenty-
five, it would start and support all other kinds
of culture. And I unhesitatingly state it as a
fact that capital would be squandered for
twenty-five years, if applied only to the cultiva-
tion of corn and artificial grasses, and that it
would double itself if spent in the plantation of
vineyards.
Comparative returns of one acre of vineyard
and of one acre of farm in Champagne—The fol-
lowing are extracts from my diary—Statistics
of a vineyard and a farm in Champagne,
arrondissement of Rheims :—“ After twelve
years of high cultivation, the farm,
containing sixty acres, gave the following
results:—
* Couture means the dropping, or falling off, of
the grape blossom. Some of the bunches disappear,
others retain only a few berries. Cold rain causes the
couture.


7i acres of wheat, sold standing, £4B 0 0
Do do oats do .. 24 0 0
Do do rye do .. 40 0 0
Do do fallow do .. 0 0 0
Do do barley do .. 28 0 0
Do do artificial grasses, first
year ~ ~ ~ .. 24 0 0
Do do do do, second do .. 32 0 0
Do do do do, third do .. 28 0 0
Average gross return for. sixty
acres £224 0 0
Or £3 14s 8d per acre.
Sixty acres of land, planted with good vines
(known by the name of fine blaeks in Cham-
pagne), give, after eight years of advances, and
deducting for all unfavorable contingencies, an
average gross return, calculated upon twelve
years of produce, of six casks of wine per acre,
the cask, containing 45 gallons, realised up-
wards of £4. The total gross return for the
sixty acres would be, then, £1440, or £24 per
acre. That average price will never decrease,
as facts for the last forty years will prove. It
is needless to illustrate further the advantages
of the vineyard over the farm, it is an un-
deniable fact. But, to convince the most
sceptical that it is not an arithmetical paradox,
it will be sufficient to ask him to compare the
populations of the vine and the farming districts,
In the latter he will see immense plains, dotted
here and there with small oases ;in the former,
rich villages are crowded together in every
valley.
Comparative price of labor in vineyards
and farms.—Another proof of the superiority
of the colonising power of vineyards over farms
is found in the prices of labor. On farms the
annual expenditure per acre seldom exceeds
eight shillings j on vineyards, it is never less
than £5, and it often reaches, as in Champagne,
for instance, as high as £B. These figures show
that the vineyard keeps from five to sixteei
times more hands than the farm.* And, as
» On the river Vesle, between Kheims and Sept-
Saolx, there are about 1500 acres of marshes, the reeds
of which produce a litter of inferior kind. These
marshes are worth about £lO the acre, and give a net
revenue of about four per cent., which is certainly
good for private interest. But this return of sixteen
long as the culture of [the vine'will continue to
improve, more labor will be required. Farming
will be subjected to a result diametrically op-
posed. Machinery for mowing, reaping,
threshing, &c., &c., will greatly reduce hand
labor. Although that must be admitted to be
i decided progress—cheap cultivation gives
cheap produce. But we must take care that
the laborers rejected by the farmer be employed
in cultures of the highest and most remunera-
tive order, otherwise we shall unpeople the
country, and crowd the cities.
Influence of the division of the property.
—The division of landed property, for these
last sixty years, has caused the increase of both
labor and population. But, if that decision at
first rendered agriculture more productive, the
latter soon felt the additional hands that it had
to support; and, at the present day, to produce
more and cheaper, agriculturists are aiming at
re-establishing large farms, to facilitate the use
of perfected machines, and to enable them to
move their flocks and herds at ease. I repeat
it here, and will repeat it again : —“ Bread and
meat are the consequences, but not the prin-
ciples, of colonisation. They constitute neces-
sities, but not riches. They are to the popula-
tion what the wages are to the laborer : an
expenditure, but not the treasury which sup-
plies the pay. The vineyard is, at the same
time, the workshop and the banker of the vine-
grower. It pays a large tribute to the State,
exports to far lands its productions, and yet re-
munerates the proprietor if he be a real vine-
grower.”
shillings per acre is a poor produce for the common-
wealth. Near Ilheims, fifty or seventy acres of those
marshes were brought into garden culture, after large
expenditure of time and money. Each acre is now
worth from £2OO to £240, and gives
annually a gross return of from £2O to £25,
or a net produce of about £B. Certainly, the
proprietor obtains only five per cent., or a trifle more
than he would if the land was unreclaimed ; but who
can doubt of the benefit to the public when
the land is used as in the latter case ? If the 1500
acres were cultivated, it would maintain twenty families
to every one that could live from the produce of the
reeds.


CHAPTER 11.
OF THE VINE IN GENERAL.
LIMITS OF THE CULTURE OF THE VINE —FAVORABLE
SOILS —VEGETATION —METHODS OF CULTURE.
Limits of the culture of the vine in France.
—The vine is the easiest tree to cultivate and
to propagate in all the districts in France com
prised between the Pyrenees and the Mediter-
ranean, and a line starting fromVannes in Brit-
tany and reaching Mezieres through Alancon
and Beauvais. The vine will grow well beyond
that line but its fruit will only ripen in certain
aspects, and that with the assistance of special
means.
Soils favorable to the growth of the vine.—
The soils calcareous, silicious, aluminous, and
magnesious ; the primitive, transitory,
secondary, tertiary, and volcanic soils are all
suitable, provided that they be not impregnated
with water and not situated in low gullies, the
abode of cold vapors. The excess of
humidity, both in the soil and atmosphere, is
prejudicial to the growth of the vine. The
vine thrives well in poor soils, pervious to air
and water, where any other vegetable will
scarcely grow. Before long experience had
taught that the culture of the vine was the
most remunerative of all kinds of culture, and,
therefore, caused its extension to richer soils,
it was considered only suited for abandoned
lands, and our best vineyards actually are
situated on spots unsuited for farming.
Vegetative power of the vine.—The vine is
so hardy and powerful in its vegetation that in
all climes It throws out its shoots to prodigious
lengths. The gigantic vine of Hampton Court,
the vines that arch over the great American
rivers, are living proofs of the vegetative power
and longevity of that plant. Confined to a
limited space by the knife of the vignerons, it
still retains its productive capabilities for
centuries. Upon rocks, trees, against walls,
running over or creeping under ground, wild
or disciplined, free or tortured, the vine lives
everywhere and against everthing, provided
that it can obtain the necessary ratio of soil,
nourishment, air and sun. But it is not suffi-
cient for the vine to live, it must give frilit,
(fruit in abundance and of good quality, and,
under such circumstances that its culture
will leave a profit, large, regular, and per-
manent.
Methods of cultivating the vine —For
centuries the problem ot producing abundance
of grapes of good quality has been solved in a
thousand different manners. E*eh mode of
vine culture is perfectly practised in special
localities, and each is also as well described in
so many excellent treatises, and, if the old
saying, “ there is nothing new under the sun,”
may be applied at all it is certainly in this
particular instance. But are all these modes
of culture necessary ? I think not, and I un-
hesitatingly affirm, whilst acknowledging that
vineyards are generally well conducted for the
interests of both the proprietor and vigneron,
by their traditional systems, that one method
may be advantageously substituted for all those
systems, excepting, however, with regard to
the cultivation of table grapes and certain
kinds of vines cultivated in rich soils and warm
climates, where the cultivation of other crops
may he profitably mixed with that of the vine.
The method that I am going to explain is not
new, and I do not claim it as my own j it stands
on facts and precepts practised from time im-
memorial—l have taken them from our oldest
vineyards! I have selected, controlled, and
practised them according to the principles and
conquests of modern science :
THE PRINCIPLES OF VINE-CULTURE.
Culture on stem and close to the ground.—
The vine must be planted, cultivated, and
maintained on the stem and as near the ground
as possible.
Distance between the vines.—The distance
must be 3J feet at least.
Provignage.—The vines must never be
provigned or underlaid.
Pruning.—Each vine must every year carry
at least one shoot for wood and one for fruit.
The shoot for the fruit carries almost ex-
clusively the grapes j and it must be tied
horizontally to a wire or a stake and near the


|»ifound. 'this sheet must be cut off every year
at the end of the winter. The bearing branch
must be kept clear of laterals, and nipped off
above the sixth leaf. The wood-branch does
not require nipping. That produces only a
small quantity of grapes; its shoots must be
trained vertically and tied up in one bunch. The
wood-branch must carry every year two good
shoots, one of which will replace the fruit-,
branch of the previous year. The other shoot
pruned with two eyes will then become the
wood branch.
Manuring.—The vine must be manured in
direct ratio to the quantity of grapes expected
to be borne by it, and in inverse ratio with re-
gard to the richness of the soil.
Number of bunches of grapes.—Each vine
occupying feet square of ground, and pro-
portionately manured, will carry 16 bunches on
its fruit-branch and 4 on the wood-branch —in
all 20, averaging each in weight a little above
ounce or about 2 lb per vine.
Tying and disbudding.—Three times each
season, the branches must be tied up, and
trained on the supports; and all the unneces-
sary shoots cleared off.
Hoeing.—There must not be any weeds in
the vineyard. The light hoeing should be
often repeated, and the deep one seldom re-
sorted to.
Cuttings.—Vineyards should be planted with
the best kind of vines, which, by a judicious
mode of culture, will produce as much as the
coarser sorts.
Straw-matting.—ln every locality where the
wine will reach an average value of Is per
gallon, the vine should be protected with straw-
matting against frost, hail, and coulure. The
straw-matting would also ameliorate and per-
fect the ripening of the grapes. Without pro-
tection, the vineyard often gives large profits,
but it is subjected to grievous intermissions.
Application of sulphate of iron and flour
of sulphur against the vine disease.—Every
year from the 15th of April to the 30th of
May 16 lb of powdered sulphate of iron should
be spread over every acre of vines. In vine-
yards where the ravages of the disease are
manifest 16 lb of sulphur should be added.
At the same time care must be taken that all
the shoots be nipped off above their sixth
leaf.
I ■■will demonstrate successively each of the
above processes and my demonstration will be
supported by example and practice.
CHAPTER 111.
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE,
In France, the vineyards are planted ill
squares or quincunx. In certain districts the
shoots of the first growth are underlaid in every
direction, so as to fill up all the available
ground, without any regard to regularity. This
kind of planting is called culture en foule*
This method is followed in the Haute Cham-
pagne and in many parts of Burgundy. Such
is the case where the provignage is the basis
of planting. In Medoc, the regularity of the
rows is preserved during the whole existence of
the vineyard. The vine there is cultivated on
the same stem, and it is called culture en
lignes. t These two modes of cultivation
are not always rigorously followed, but
are modified in an infinite number of
ways.
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE ON STEM, AND
TRAINED ON LOW SUPPORTS.
Advantages of the culture in regular rows.—
The cultivation in rows is the best,
Ist. Because it permits the application of all
means, and ■ the use of all instruments
worked either by hand labor or by cattle. The
employment of cattle in working vineyards is
of considerable importance as a measure of
economy; for, in that case, the only hand
labor required is the clearing between the
vines.
* Cultivation in mass. Notwithstanding Dr. Guyot’a
statement, this cultivation is almost unknown in Bur-
gundy ; he should have said, Franche- Comte,
+ Vineyards where provignage is resorted to,
regularity in rows is strictly preserved. Further on,
Dr. Quyot gives better reasons for discontinuing that
operation.


2nd. Because it facilitates the supervision of
the vineyard. At a glance the proprietor can
ascertain the work of his vigneron, and the
overlooker, in turn, can control with the same
facilities the work of each of his laborers. •
3rd. Because the means resorted to for sup-
porting, protecting, and trellising the vines
are much easier, stronger, and more economical
than in any other mode of plantation.
4th. Because, in rows, manures can be
equally distributed at the root of each
vine; the clearing of wood after pruning, or
shoots after disbudding ; the carrying of the
grapes during the gathering j in fine, all opera-
tions in the vineyard are facilitated by the cul-
tivation in rows.
sth. Because the rays of sun warm the
ground between the rows, and that without re-
ducing their beneficial power upon the tied or
trained shoots of the vine, the earth returning
to the vine, when the sun ceases to shine, the
heat which it had received during the insola-
tion.
6th. And because the circulation and renewal
of air, needed for all good vegetation, cannot take
place in a vineyard planted en foule.
Advantages of training the vine near the
ground.—The shorter the stem the more evi-
dent are the advantages of low training, the
work done by hand or by cattle, the importa-
tion and exportation of refuse or produce, the
materials to support or protect the vine, the
supervision, the insolation and airing,—every-
thing becomes easier, more economical and
more efficacious.
Necessity of the insolation.—When the rows
of the vines are low, and directed from north to
south, the sun, from its rising to its setting,
strikes constantly the vines, it heats equally all
the surface of the ground, which then fulfils
the place of a wall, and accelerates vegetation
in its several stages. It is the reverse when
the vines are trained high, and also when they
are planted without any order, for in that case
the ground is always in the shade, and there-
fore damp. This dampness causes the coulure
and impedes the ripening of the fruit.
Necessity of good airing.—The free and
regular circulation of air is still more important
for the fertility of the vine than the insolation
itself. Evident proofs may be obtained by a
simple inspection of the vineyards in Cham-
pagne when the grapes are in maturity. The
paths that separate the different vineyards are
generally narrow and shaded, but they are free
and straight, and the quantity of fruit on the
vines bordering those pathsis mora ttfttn double
chat obtained from the vines in the centre of
.he vineyard. This exuberancy of production
can only be attributed to the superiority of
ventilation, for generally air circulates with
difficulty when there are sixteen thousand vines
upon an acre of land, especially if those vines
are planted en foule.
Disadvantages of training vines ioa low.—
The too low trained vine has a real disadvan-
tage. It is more subjected to the disastrous
effects of winter or spring frosts * ; thus very
low training can only be considered the best
when the vine be preserved from the inclem-
ency of the weather. But, even when exposed
to climatic changes the low trained vines will
be more profitable than the others.
Cultivation of the vine on stems. —The vine
must be grown on a stem, and never underlaid.
This is an absolute condition for the making of
good wine; it is a truth of the physiology of
vegetation as well as an incontestable truth
derived from observation and experience. So
long as the vine is not properly formed, so long,
in fact, as fresh roots keep adding to the wood
of the preceding year, the elaboration of the
juice of the grape is imperfect, and the wine
made,from it is not good. I will not say that the
older the vine the better is the wine ; I do not
know it; but this I know, that a vine under
eight years old never gives a good wine, what-
ever may be the quality of the plant. I know
also that an underlaid vine shoot, even the
growth of an old wine, if roots have been
allowed to grow on the portion under ground,
gives only a wine of inferior quality, and that
* In this colony that drawback rarely exists,
neither is there any danger of humidity. The climate
and soils, seem to have been made for Dr. Guyot’s
method.


that inferiority is in direct proportion to the
number of rootlets rings that grow upon the
productive shoot. All vignerons know that
the wine from a young vineyard, or from vines
subjected to provignage, is of very inferior
quality. To make geod wine the grower
must, therefore, respect old vines, and
not fill up his vineyard with young
plants.
PROVIGNAGE, RECOUCHAGE*, AND GRAFTING,
Provignage.—The provignage consists in
burying in a hole of the extent required for the
replacing of the vines destroyed a number of
one year old shoots ; each vine to be replaced
will of course require one shoot, so that if there
are two or three the buried vine becomes the
mother of so many young ones. The shoots
are covered over with earth, or earth and
manure, according to the requirements of the
soil.
Recouchage,—This operation consists in bend-
ing the stem under three or four inches of soil
and allowing only the bearing shoot or
shoots of the year to remain out. In certain
districts the recouchage is applied to all the
vines and renewed every year. It is even im-
portant in certain places, and in Champagne and
Argenteuil it is the first operation of the spring.
Into a trench, opened with the spade or hoe, the
vigneron bends each stem and covers'it over
with earth as he goes on with the digging ; and
after this operation the vineyard has the ap-
pearance of a field of cuttings. The provig-
nage is executed in different ways, and with
different objects. The first, and the most re-
sorted to, especially in Burgundy, is the bury-
ing of the vine in a hole as described above.
The second is the same as the recouchage with
the object of rearing layers; a third consists in
putting in the ground the extremity of the
shoots so that that portion will emit roots.
There are other modes but all are intended to
increase the production of the vine and as a
substitute for manuring. Provignage, of any
kind, is prejudicial to the quality of
* Eecoucliago is a sort of laying.
the grapes, and is not essential to the
development of its bearing capabilities
which may certainly be affected by
proper cultivation on the stem. Provignage
causes disorder in the ages, the regularity, the
requirements, and the keeping of the vines, and
that to such a degree that old vineyards can
only be profitably cultivated by the original
vigneron or his traditional successor. The pro-
prietor or the purchaser must possess or buy the
vigneron with the vineyard or give up all hope
of improvements.
Grafting.—Recouchage takes the name of
ensouchement when it is employed only to form
a permanent underground stem, supplied with
roots in sufficient number to provide for an
extensive outward development of the vine,
and also when its object is to furnish increased
nourishment to vines planted in uncongenial
soil. Provignage and recouchage should never
be applied to vines, except in thin and shallow
soils, where the process of grafting can be car-
ried out once only in the third or fourth year.
Grafting, although indispensable in the pro-
duction of table grapes, should never be em-
ployed, except in cases of absolute necessity, for
wine grapes.
OPPOSITE QUALITIES OF THE TABLE GRAPE
AND WINE GRAPE.
The qualities sought for in grapes for the
table are exactly the reverse of those re-
quired for making good wine. The Chasselas
of Fontainebleau, or rather of Thomery, the
type of all table grapes, gives the most detest-
able wine that can be imagined. The wine
from all the Chasselas is far inferior to the
Gouais, the least alcoholic of all wines, and that is
the reason why the Gouais is a wholesome grape
to eat. The same contrast exists between the
fruits suited for cider and those suited for the
table; however, the pineaux blancs, the
Mesliers, and the Fromentes, which give the
best wines, are very sweet and very agreeable
to eat, but possess a kind of vinous acridity,
and the smallness of their berries excludes them
from our tables.


EXAMPLES OP CULTIVATION IN ROWS AND
PLANTING EN EOULE OR PELL-MELL.
It is in the magnificent vineyards of the
Medoc, at the Chateau-Lafilte, Chateau-Mar-
gaux, Chatcan-la-Rose, &c., that the oldest
and most intelligent modes of culture on stem
and low training are found. Provignage
there is strictly prohibited. I must men-
tion the peculiar and excellent mode of cul-
tivation followed in the vineyards of Cha-
blis. It is a type of culture on stem re-
markably well understood.* One can compare
the two opposed methods in the neighborhood
of Paris, in the same kind of soil, and planted
with the same kind of vines. On the slopes of
Argenteuil, the cultivation enfoule is adopted;
at Mount Valerien, at Puteaux Suresnes, &c.,
the cultivation on stem, and low training in
regular rows, without provignage. In both
cases the production is the same as to quantity,
but the cultivation on stem is more economical,
and the grapes ripen earlier and better. And,
since Argenteuil resorts to annual provignage,
Suresnes produces better wines. Unfortunately
the best wines of the district are not good, be-
cause the gamai predominates.
DISTANCES BETWEEN THE VINES.
Disadvantages of close planting.—The vine-
yards planted with from 8000 to 16,000 per acre,
are striking instances of mistaken greediness
adopted through ignorance. A vineyard planted
with 4000 to the acre produces even more than
one planted with 16,000. One may imagine
an acre of ground planted with 8000, cherry,
plum, or apple trees, or, to render the compari-
son more analogous, take plants similar to the
vine in arborescence, such as the glycines,
bignonias, or clematises; it will readily be
understood that etiolation, white blight,
scarcity of flowers and fruits, and the develop-
ment of all sorts of injurious insects and
diseases, will be the consequences. No horti-
* Chablis is no exception in Burgundy. There are
but few instances of any other mode of culture. I
cannot understand how Dr. Guyot fell into such a
great error.— Translator.
cnlturist or arboriculturist could expect fecun-
dity and health in his plants under such circum-
stances. Well, the vine is a shrub that
requires more space than any of those mentioned
above. Trained on a trellis, one vine will
cover upwards of 100 square yards, or will
envelope a tree of the largest dimensions.
Such is the natural power of the vine, and it is
only by infinite care and special .contrivances,
that the vigneron [can make it produce fruits in
a limited space. And all modes of cultivation,
the pruning in particular, have for their object
the solution of that problem.
Space required for each vine.—There is a
minimum of space under which the vine cannot
obtain its necessary physiological development,
and observation has demonstrated that in less
than one square yard of ground the vine will
not retain its bearing capabilities without
provignage, and of this process I have already
stated it is injurious to the quality of the
fruit.
PRUNING.
Necessity of keeping a fruit bearing branch
and a spur for wood only.—A single vine, to
which one square yard of ground is allotted,
could cover with its shoots a still larger area;
therefore, to subdue its expansibility and
confine its growth within the fixed space with-
out prejudice to its fecundity, a skilful pruning
m ust be resorted to; one must, so to speak, satisfy
nature by deceiving it, as a squirrel is satisfied
by being allowed to run in a revolving cage
which is not much larger than the animal
itself. It is well-known that trees left to them-
selves require no care, while those trained in
espalier, or in the form of a pyramid, need all
the skill of the arboriculturist. The vine is
similarly constituted.
Winter pruning.—Two, at least, of the
shoots must be kept, and the others cut off close
to the stem. One of the two reserved is then
pruned two or three eyes above the stem, and
the other is maintained in or nearly all its
length. This last is the branch that, cut off
every year in the spring and replaced by
another, better satisfies the activity of the


■vine. The engravings 1 and 2 show the prin-
ciple and effect of the most perfect prun-
ing. A wood-branch, CD (Fig 1), has pro-
duced four shoots; one of them, CE, the
nearest to the old stem, is pruned with two
eyes, at E, so as to give from two to four new
Fiquee I.—Full-grown branch, before winter pruning.
A B—Fruit branch. C D—Wood
shoots according to the vigor of the tree, and
those shoots will be supported by a stake from
3 feet 6 inches to 4 feet 6 inches high. One of
the three remaining branches, DF, is kept to
bear the fruit. It is not necessary that it
should be the largest, but the one which ap-
pears to have the most projecting eyes and that
can be brought easily to a horizontal position,
as AB, (fig. 2.) As to the fruit-bearing branch
of last year, AB, it must be cut off close to
the stem. This method of pruning, the best of
all to insure the fecundity of the vine and to
sustain its vigor, is extremely simple and may
be carried out annually with a marvellous
facility. It is well adapted for vineyards
planted in regular rows, and if it so hap-
pen that the wood-branch does not
throw sufficient shoots, or that the
fruit bearing branch has been destroyed, an
intelligent close pruning will soon bring 1 ack
the vine to its normal state. This method
that I recommend, because I have practised it
with the greatest success, is not new ; it has
been applied from time immemorial, but without
well fouuded principles or rules. The shoot
left in all, or nearly all, their length, bent in
half circle, and tied up to the stem, or planted in
the ground or laid down horizontally, and
fastened close to the soil under the names of
pleyons, pics, racquettes, longs-bois, verges,
hastes, courgees, &c., &0., are nothing else but
the fruit bearing branches and the wood
.branches that I have advocated. I advance
nothing new, but I put in order and bring to
light the best methods, and explain why they
are so.
Relations between the production of wood
and the production of fruit.—With vines as well
as fruit trees, the shorter the pruning the more
vigorous are the shoots and the fruit in smaller
quantity; long pruning gives more fruit, and
weaker shoots. A long branch (A'B 1 ), and one
pruned short CD', (fig. 2) tend to the healthy
production of wood, and to the regular fructifica-
tion of the vine, especially if the fruit bearing
branch is maintained at a length in proportion
to the vigor and age of the vine. Experience
and observation only can guide the vigneron
with regard to the pruning. As long as the
branch kept for wood gives sufficient shoots
for the following year, the vigneron can
lengthen the fruit-bearing branch; and, when
it gets weak, the latter must be reduced in
length.
Fiuuke 2.—Full-grown branch, after winter pruning.
All—Fruit branch before the growth of
the leaves. CD—Wood branch.
O
branch.


Tliis distinction between the fruit-bearing
branch and the wood branch is far from being
so absolute for the vine that it is for most
other fruit trees. For every bud or eye of every
shoot of the year contains fruit and wood from
its base to its extremity. One can always
reckon that two or three bunches of grapes are
in embryo in each bud ; true, sometimes there
is only one, but absence complete is a rare ex-
ception ; and, when the vine does not show any
at the start in the spring, it is evidently the
result of aninternal abortion, or the consequences
of a disease.
Theory of pruning.—lf every eye contains on
an average two bunches of grapes, what reason
can be given for keeping one branch with eight
or twelve buds, instead of three or fourbranches
with two or three eyes upon each? Why the
pruning with long shoot, instead of the cat’s
head or stump fashion ? Why a fruit-bearing
branch,and a branch for wood only? There lies
the fundamental question of the cultivation of
the vine. In all kinds of vines, observation
shows that in the eye nearest to the
extremity of the shoot the embryo of the fruit
is strongest. No vigneron has failed to
notice that the upper buds always give some
bunches of grapes, and that they grow there
healthier and larger than upon any of the lower
eyes. The vigneron knows well that there are
oftentimes no grapes on the lower buds, and
that, if there are any, they are small and slender,
especially on the best kinds of vines. This fact
is so obvious that certain proprietors of vine-
yards, where the old barbarous systems were
followed, have rooted out the finest varieties to
replace them with inferior species that will
give some fruit under any treatment. The
gamai, and several other coarse sorts, have the
singular property of throwing fruit even from
their old stumps. Whether the winter be
severe, the spring frosts destroy the first shoots,
the pruning be long or short, the gamai will
produce some fruit. Well, the finest kind of
vines possess as much, fruit, and can give as
much as the coarsest sorts, only they do not bear
it in the same places, nor give it under
the same system of pruning; it is
in the higher portion of the shoot that the
embryos are the best, and it is at a certain dis-
tance from the soil that they can be preserved
from the injurious influence of humidity, and
snow during the winter. It is on those shoots,
judiciously trained in proper season, and in all
their length, that a good crop will he obtained.
If the vigneron wishes to keep three or
four eyes, he should keep those nearest to* the
extremity of the shoot, and destroy those near-
est to the stem. This mode is preferable to
pruning above the third or fourth eye. In fine
varieties the lower buds are generally barren,
whereas the extreme ones are always fruitful.
When a vigneron adopts the short pruning,
he certainly throws away his best harvest, and
he cannot expect (even with the gamai) to
have preserved anything that will give a pro-
duce of good quality. The shoot kept in all
its length to bear the fruit, is not only ne-
cessary because the purpose for which one
branch is kept in all its length to bear the fruit
docs not consist only in the preservation of the
best eyes, but also because, and this is the main
point, it satisfies the spreading propensity of
the vine, preserves its vigor and therefore its
fecundity. A few weeks ago the savant Payen
was admiring a Pineau vine which had been
kept barren by short pruning, bearing now a
large crop since it had been allowed to run on
a trellis. This fact, noticed by a man not less
eminent than Payen, M. Becquerel, and there-
fore of an indisputable exactitude, comprehend
all my method of pruning.
Time for the pruning.—The latest the prun-
ing can be done the better. It enables the
pruner to judge the vine with more certainty.
If artificial means are employed to protect the
vines against the spring frosts, the pruning
should be effected only when the buds begin to
swell, that is to say from the 15th of March
■ to the 15th of April, under the mean climate
of Paris.
The bleeding of the vine after pruning.—
The bleeding of the vine must not alarm
the vigneron; it does not exhaust it in any way <
The water which then runs in abundance is not
the sap, it is the stream that feeds each bud as


jt passes over it according to its wants and the
elements of its sap. The running of that
stream does not render it weaker nor unhealthy,
hut it simply proves that its power of irriga-
tion works, and works well. Acting upon the
advice of M. Dugue, the engineer-in chief of
the department of the Mama, a man well
learned in the practice and theories of natural
sciences and mathematics, I have experimented
extensively upon the bleeding of the vine; I
selected 120 vines of the same age and in the
same soil, and before the sap had begun to
move I pruned 60 according to the method
advocated, and 60 with three spurs, each spur
having one or two eyes; I then pruned 00 more
with three spurs with one and two eyes, the
vines bleeding freely ; and 60 treated in the
same manner were cauterised with a hot iron
so as to stop the bleeding. And, lastly, 60 were
pruned with a spur and a long fruit-bearing
branch while the vines were bleeding. The
shoots and the fruits of the vines subjected to
the last treatment were not in the least inferior
to those of the vines pruned before the rising
of the sap. The vines pruned spur fashion and
cauterised gave shoots and foliage evidently
inferior, and produced comparatively less fruit
than the others. It is by such experiments and
hy repeated observations as conclusive that I
am now in a position to affirm that the bleed-
ing is more beneficial than injurious to the
vegetation of the vine.
Advantages of pruning whilst the ascent of
the sap is taking place.—Pruning at that parti-
cular time offers to the intelligent vigneron a
very great advantage: that of adapting his
operation to the state of the buds and their
degree of preservation. I have often seen the
three or four lower huds destroyed during the
winter, but in no instances have I seen any of
the upper huds injured by the winter frosts.
In all countries subject to the effects of a severe
winter, pruning must only begin when the
sap rises; and in my opinion it would be yet
too soon if the vineyard is not to be protected
by straw-mattings, or hy any other means.
In the absence of any appliances for protection,
and when it is intended to abandon the vine-
yard to all risks, the pruning may he effected
without any inconvenience or damage from the
15th to the 30th of May, after the huds are all
out. The vigneron can then choose the fruits
and leave only the quantity propor-
tionate to the energy of the vine.
I subjected this method to experiments in 1845,
1846, and 1847, at Argenteuil, with complete
success, and that in an old vineyard which
had not produced any fruit for four years to
my knowledge, and for many more according
to the report of the vigneron. In March I
cleared off all the small shoots, leaving only
from one to three of the best on each stem,
I then gave it a good digging, and planted the
stakes in lines, although the vines were not
regularly planted; I also united the stakes by
passing two wires through. From the 15th of
May to the 15th of June, according to the
season, the spring shoots were from 2 to 5
inches long, and the fruit-bearing ones were
easily distinguished from the barren. Most
of the upper buds had their two bunches each,
and all the inferior ones were absolutely
sterile. I then chose one or two of the best
branches which I hent horizontally and
fastened to the wire, taking care to pull off all
the barren buds, and, lastly, I pruned another
branch, spur fashion, leaving two or three eyes
destined to produce wood for the next year’s
pruning. In three years I rendered the vine-
yard very productive. The vines, far from
suffering from the late pruning, seemed to gain
more vigor every year ; the grapes ripened as
early as in the other vineyards. With regard
to the choice of varieties, ol manuring, and of
the shallow and deep cultivation, I will return
to my experiments and observations made in
the neighborhood of Paris in general, and at
Argenteuil in particular, for the examples and
practical solutions on viniculture, are all to he
found in the departments of the Seine and
Seine-et-Oise.
Pruning of the young shoots.—This pruning
is very simple, it consists:—lst. In stopping
all expansion of '.young shoots on the fruit-
bearing branches, by nipping them off at the
second leaves, above the last bunch of grapes.


2nd. In favoring the growth of the shoots on the
branch for wood, by training them up a
stake, and by taking great care not to cut them
off before they have reached a few inches
above that stake. 3rd. By removing from
both branches all the sterile shoots, which
cannot he of any use to the fruit nor to the
formation of the vine in the following
year.
PINCAGE.
The effects of the pincage, although invented
some fifty years, have only been studied for
these fifteen years, and to this day its applica-
tion to the vine is far from being general. The
benefits derived from the operation, executed
with intelligence and discrimination, are, how-
ever, of great magnitude. I will try to explain
them. The pincage is an operation that consists
in stopping the expansion of a shoot of the
season, by nipping off the top with the nails
of the thumb and the forefinger. The pincage
differs from the “ rognage” f in that respect
Figure 3.—Vine, 15th of May to 15th of June. AB—
Fruit branch. PP P P—Point where
nipped off.
that the pincage suppresses only the extreme
bud of the young shoot (P P, fig. 3), whereas
the “ rognage” suppresses the fourth, the third,
or one half of the shoot The pincage has for
its object —Ist. To prevent the sap and strength
• Nipping off.
+ Cutting or clipping off.
of the vine from bein g wasted in the develop,
ment of useless shoots. 2nd. To divert them
to the fruits and remaining shoots, and to assist
the growth of the latter, and the maturity of
the former. The pinca e, applied to melons,
tomatoes, and other vegetables, has clearly
shown that it fulfils effectually these objects.
In arboriculture Argenteuil has derived great
benefit from its fig trees. By practising the
. pincage, the young figs are saved from the
coulure ; they promptly acquire a large size,
they ripen sooner, and are richer in saccha-
rine matter. The pincage applied to in- 7
crease and perfect the production of figs is an
old and general practice at Argenteuil, and that
practice is a source of wealth for the intelligent
population of that district. They often sacrifice
a large number of the figs that crowd each shoot
to increase the volume of the remaining ones,
and the same operation will be applied
to the vine when the vigneron will dare to
allow it to show all its fecundity, so as to
enable him to choose with ease the quantity
and quality of fruit that he wishes to
obtain. * The pincage has been, and is yet,
applied to the vine by very intelligent vine-
growers ; and it has been experimented and
recommended by eminent professors. Never-
theless, the laws for its application are yet
rather obscure. For my own part, I can
vouch for the facts that follow. If the pincage
is applied to all the shoots of a vine without a
fruit-bearing branch, all the bunches of grapes
succeed well, and the crop is abundant for the
first year, provided, however, the number of
bunches is proportionate to the strength of the
tree ; the second year the grapes are not so
plentiful, they are thinner and smaller; the third
year, the vine has lost much of its vigor, and
its buds are very nearly sterile. It remains in
that state the following years, and only recovers
its fertility by discontinuing the pincage, and
allowing it to grow freely. If the vine upon
which the pincage has been applied is very
strong, the barrenness will take place sooner.
• In all places that I know, in Burgundy, pincage
is a common, and considered a necessary, operation.—
Translator.


The pincage applied to one or two fruit-bearing
branches prevents the coulure, and applied to
all the shoots of the vine causes barrenness and
final destruction.
1 do not know how the vegetable fluids form
the wood and the fruits, nor even if those
fluids can form the fruit and wood; but what
is certain is that, by various chemical processes
a woody substance may be converted into
sugar, and that nature, during a certain period
of the vegetation lignifles and converts into
feculse the saccharine matter of gramineous
plants. It is not less evident in arboriculture
that an abundance of fruit is detrimental to
the growth of wood, and vice versa. Thus,
there is at least some relation between those
two products or results, although differing so
much in appearance j and it is obvious that the
pincage fixes the grape, prevents coulure,
makes it grow larger and ripen sooner. It
is easily proved, also, that, when the shoots are
allowed to grow much above the fruit, it causes
a loss of saccharine matter; for, if those shoots
are pressed and put in a cask, they ferment and
produce a certain quantity of alcohol. I will
relate here an observation that every vigneron
could make, but which was never brought out so
as to attract the attention of scientific men.
A shoot that proceeds from the bud of old
wood, or from an old stem, never carries fruit
the first year, and that shoot, no matter how
healthy and strong it may be, does not even
carry a fertile bud; wood only will come out of it.
It is only the third wood produced from the old
stem that will give - fruit. This fact proves
clearly that there is in the young wood itself
some predisposition, or element, essential to the
production of the fruit, and that neither the
old, nor even the two year old wood possesses
those elements. There are also some shoots
that the vigneron recognises as rarely fruitful
—shoots large and straight with eyes far
apart, and a well developed medullary canal,
or, in other words, a large pitb—their appear-
ance indicating a large production of wood
only. The vigneron prefers a middling sized
shoot with close and well-formed p’ejecting
eyes. I have practised the pincage on a
large scale for several years on the fruit bear
ing branches which always bore a large
quantity of grapes, without affecting in the
least the vigor of the vine. To the contrary
my experiments showed me that the fruit
branch, without the operation of the pincage,
rapidly exhausts the vine of all its fruit-bear-
ing shoots, and their growth, which had only
been checked by a late clipping off (rognage).
The first pincage must be applied as soon as
two small leaves have grown above the second
or the last bunch of grapes, and above the fifth
or sixth leaf, if there is only one bunch. The
rule for its application, after the development
of the two leaves above the second or last
bunch of grapes, is precise and does not allow
of any doubt with regard to the time when the
operation should be. effected in all countries.
Of all the pincages the first is the most im-
portant.
CHAPTER IV.
MANURES AND AMENDMENTS. —NECESSITY OP IMPROV-
ING AND MANURING THE SOIL.
There are soils of a rich nature where the
vine may grow for many years without the
assistance of any kind of manure or of any
amendment, especially if the vines are at wide
distances. But those privileged soils are
scarce, and they are planted so thickly and
expected to give such large returns that in
general the vineyards require the frequent
assistance of artificial nourishment. This
comprises amendments, composts and ordinary
manures.
AMENDMENTS.
Sand, marl or clay.—The amendments con-
sist in putting silicious sands in vineyards
planted on calcerous soil, and reciprocally
calcerous marl, or chalk in sandy soils. In all
countries, and all vineyards, this mixture of sand
or marl adds to the fertility of the vines and
the quality of the wines. A calcerous and
chalky soil always gives the purest
wine and the freest from earthy taste. All


kinds of vine will improve under suck treat-
ment, and it may even be applied to vineyards in
flinty soils—such as those of Medoc —where it
certainly perfects the product.
Earthing.—This operation consists in carry-
ing over the vineyard, the soils washed down
the valley. This soil should remain twelve
months’in heaps, so that the weeds and seeds may
perish before it is spread over the vineyard.
The earthings and amendments must be fre-
quent to supply the place of manures, which,
after all, they never do sufficiently. They are
nevertheless very important, especially in
shallow ground, and their employment is alto-
gether subordinate to their proximity and to
other local circumstances.
MANURES.
Composts.—The manufacture and use of
certain composts are only a sort of onerous
compromise between the earthing and manur-
ing. The labor attached to their preparation,
and the reactions that take place amongst their
elements are a loss, if not also detrimental to
the vine. The stable manure, stratified between
two layers of soil, put in heaps, for six or
twelve months, has lost one half of its power
when it is used in that state. The vine, an
energetic plant, does not require a manure
wholly decomposed ; unlike an annual, which
requires for its rapid development food ready
for assimilation, it derives more advantage from
manures which take a long time to decompose.
Thus, heath, fern, straw, vine shoots, branches
of pine &c'., which, when buried, rot within
two or three years, are excellent manure.
Woollen rags, horns, hoofs and leather are
precious on account of the long time they take
to decompose.
Stable manures.—The.farm manure is on the
whole, the surest and the most regular in its
effects, and it is the only one that can be used
when comparative experiments are made on
the vine. It was by employing farm manure
that I was enabled to study and understand
the wants of the vine, and to find decided rules
(almost certain) to satisfy those require-
ments.
Relation between manuring and the
produce of the vine.—Upon a chalky, silicious,
or aluminous soil, that is to say sterile by
nature, a vine, planted in a hole, one foot deep,
and 15 inches wide, filled up with a compost
containing 8 parts of soil and 2 of stable man-
ure, will be perfectly devolped in the fourth, fifth,
or sixth year, according to the climate. From
that time, 5 lb of stable manure? spread
yearly around the vine, over a surface of about
a square yard, and dug in and mixed up with
the soil when hoeing, will be sufficient to pre-
serve its vigor and to make it produce a large
quantity of fruit. After the eighth year, the
soil having become rich by cultivation and
manuring, 4 lbs of manure will suffice to main-
tain the vineyard in the same state of fertility.
In soils of middling quality, moderately
fertile, I can affirm as the results of my own
experiments, that the vine, without injury to
its energy, will always yield grapes equal in
weight to the quantity of manure used. In
highly fertile soils, manure, one-half in weight
of the quantity of grapes obtained, will be
sufficient. To form an approximate idea of
the expense of manuring, relatively to the value
of the gross produce, one must suppose a vine-
yard planted with 4000 vines per acre, each
vine giving about 2 lb 3 oz of grapes, or in
round numbers, 9000 lb, or 720 gallons of wine,
of a moan value of 9d per gallon. The product
of an. acre would be worth then, £27, and it
would have required 8000 lb of manure in a
soil of ordinary quality, and double that quan-
tity 7 in poor land. The manure costs about 12s
per ton, therefore the manuring in the first
case would cost about 455, and in the second
£4 10s, or from the twelvth to the sixth part
of the gross returns.
Effects of stable manure upon the vine.—The
question of manuring has been agitated for a
long time, especially with regard to the vine-
yards which produce the finest wines :—Ought
the vineyards to be manured, and can they be
manured without altering the qualities of the
wine ? This question suggests another:—
Should they be manured directly with natural
stablemanure ? The double answer is simple and


sure. The vineyards should be manured directly
with natural stable manure, to insure to the
wines their quantity and their normal quality.
The only precaution that ought to be taken
(and yet it is unnecessary in vineyards planted
with regularity) is that the manure should be
spread and dug in after the gathering of the
grapes, and before the following vegetation.
Experience amply proves that for all juicy and
pulpy fruits containing saccharine matter, the
normal and complete development of the vege-
tation is an essential cause of perfection, and
that, when the vegetable languishes (a general
consequence of the poverty of the soil), it yields
fruits possessing much acerbity, and wanting
aroma or other valuable qualities. The first
condition to be observed in order to obtain good
wine is to insure to the vine its normal and com-
plete vegetation, and the surest and most
economical means to arrive at that end is a
judicious manuring. Thomery,* that produces
for our tables the richest grapes, and the most
delicate in perfume, manures its espaliers
abundantly and directly every three years. The
vignerons, who are jealous of the reputation of
their produce, could never perceive any bad in-
fluence from manuring. They suspect, how-
ever, that, in the first year of the manuring,
the skin of the berry rots more easily. But, for
ample compensation, they unanimously state
that the produce of unmanured vineyards is in-
ferior, and more so with regard to quality than
quantity. The prejudice and error concerning
the employment of manures have their origin
in amass of vague observation. Thus, in all
cases it has been remarked that the wines from
vineyards owned by large proprietors, who do
not perform the labor themselves, are better
than from vineyards owned by vignerons. The
former used little or no manure, the latter
resorted largely to all processes of manuring;
therefore manuring deteriorated the produce.
This deduction was arrived at without consider-
ing that the large proprietors trained their
vines on stems, that they seldom had recourse to
provignage, and thus allowed air and sun to
s' A village near Fontainebleau. It enjoys a great
reputation for its Chasselas.
circulate freely ; that they were occupying the
host sites and most favored aspects; and that,
the last and not the least important point, they
never changed their fine varieties for coarse
ones. Therein lies the secret of the superiority
of their wines over those of the vignerons’; and,
if they had manured their vineyards, their pro-
duce would have been considerably improved.
I have heard, for nine consecutive years, the
vignerons and proprietors of Argenteuil repeat-
ing emulously that the s weepings of Paris had
caused their wines to leave the table of the kings
to go to the cabaret des barrieres*. They
forget that, since Louis XIV., they have not
preserved one single fine variety ; they have
rooted them all out to plant the gamai. I make
a mistake, they have left here and there a fe w
vines of Meslier Francois, and those varieties,
of which I fortunately discovered a small plot
in a vineyard that had been the property of
Roquelaure, which gave me, even with the Paris
sweepings, a wine worthy of its old reputation.
The hills and slopes of Argenteuil, admirably
situated, and possessing a soil well adapted to
the growth of the vine, would give, as of old,
if planted with pineaux, morillons, mesliers,
fromentes, &c., some of the best French wines,
even in conjunction with the use of manures.
However, I must confess that I have observed
that the emanations from fresh stable manures
cause a deposit upon the berries of the grapes,
and render them detestable. I, had a trellis,
a branch of which passed in front of a stable
window, that was constantly open. Around
that window, and especially opposite, the grapes
were not eatable ; everywhere else they were
delicious.
But this is the direct action of the fresh
stable manure. This manure, by the absorption
of the roots, or the work of vegetation, will
never impart to the fruit anything else but its
elements of perfection. The utility of stable
manure in promoting the vegetation and fruc-
tification of the vine is established not alone by
the long and sound experience of Thomery, but
also by the facts observed in the finest vine-
* Low inns outside the city of Paris. In general
bad wines are sold in these places.


yards in Champagne at Sillery. During seven
years, for which period lobserved and cultivated
the vine there, I ascertained that the two
largest proprietors who manured the most and
the best have constantly sold their wines to
merchants (the very best tasters) from 10 to 20
per cent, dearer than the other proprietors,
who did not manure so highly.
Method of manuring.—To save labor,
especially in large vineyards, it is advisable to
manure every three years, and to put in at once
the needed quantity for that time, that is to
say, three pounds for every vine on the best
soils, six pounds on soils of medium quality,
and twelve pounds on the had ones, or from
one to four tons of manure per acre. It will
easily he perceived then, that, to maintain the
fecundity of the vine, it requires less manure
than for the cultivation of corn, in the best as
well as in the worse lands, and this proportion
in favor of the vine increases still if earthing is
sometimes applied. The stable manure must
be applied from November till March, and must
be dug in and covered over with not less than
six inches of earth. It is especially when
manuring that the advantage of cultivating in
regular rows may he remarked. Long and
deep furrows are easily opened between t*he
vines, the manure is distributed equally, and
covered over with facility and speed. The
manures deposited on the surface, or near the
surface, are a double cause of disadvantage and
disease to the vine Ist. The weed grow s
rapidly and in large quantities, and these main-
tain a dampness unfavorable to the growth of
the vine, and deprive it of sun and air ; they
cause the dropping of the blossom, and are op-
posed to the development and maturation of
the grapes; and, moreover, they absorb the best
part of the manure. 2nd. The small roots of
the vine are attracted to the surface, where
they grow rapidly, and are exposed to the
mutilation of the hoe and to the droughts of
the season. It is thus that some vineyards
have suddenly turned yellow, and have been
reduced to a sickly growth. After the foregoing
statements had been published in the Journal
d'Agriculture Pratique, M. Joigneaux wrote a
criticism upon it, which appeared in the Feuille
du Cultivateur de Bruxelles, October 1858,
under the title of “ Should the vineyards be
manured with stable manures ?” That criticism
is so much more interesting for all, and serious
for me, that it expresses the traditional public
opinion, in which I as well ns all vinegrowers
had been brought up. M. Joigneaux is not
satisfied with giving hisauthoritytotEtfopinion
that “ stable manures applied to vineyards alter
considerably the quality of the wines,” but he
calls the support of other eminent men, such as
Roger Schabol, Quintinye, Bose, Noel Chomel,
of the Comte Odart, and of the Des Baumes and
Merelot, all men that I recognise as my masters,
and not as my rivals, That opinion is, there-
fore, worthy of respect, and I have neither the
power nor the wish to combat it with an
opinion personal and opposed. Therefore, when
repeating here that “stable manure, judiciously
employed, never gives to the fruit of the vine
anything else hut the elements of production
and perfection,” Ido not put forth an opinion,
I affirm a fact, the result of experience and obser-
vation, a fact that I deliver up to the control
of observation and experience. I have ascer-
tained by several years’ experimenting upon
the chasselas, gamai and pineau varieties, that
vines trained on low stems and kept in good
state by the application of two pounds of stable
manure every year have constantly given fruit
not only larger and more savory, but also
richer in saccharine matter by one degree than
those under the similar condition, hut not
manured. The experiment is simple and easily
carried out, and I earnestly invite the vine-
growers to repeat it, in the hope that in a few
years their testimony will have dissipated all
doubts upon that important subject.
I could confine my answer to the above
statement, but the question is so serious that it
cannot be considered too fully. In 1846, in the
interest of a commercial house in Champagne,
I examined the relative value of the juice of
grapes obtained from different proprietors,
who had sold “to be delivered” (in advance).
One of those proprietors, a very careful and in-
telligent vinegrower, residing near


Epernay, where he possessed large vineyards,
that he manured extensively, was in conse-
quence suspected of increasing his products to
the detriment of their qualities; his vineyards,
compared with others, were clean and well
aired, the grapes were well developed and the
berries large; these two last conditions, of
course, confirmed the suspicions. But the
delivery took place, the juice of his vineyards
showed a density of 1.125; that density was the
highest in the district for that year. Another
proprietor, very scrupulous about stable
manure, brought to his vineyard a large
quantity of rich soil, the vines flourished well,
but the density of the juice was only 1.116
this being below the average of the dis-
trict. By promoting to excess the growth of
the vines in vineyards planted too close, and
therefore deprived of air and isolation, it is
possible to lower the qualities of the wines, as
well by earthing as by the use of composts or
stable manure ; but if only a vegetation suffi-
cient and normal is maintained, the quality of
the wines can be improved as well by stable
manure as by composts or earthing. This fact
was well understood, and perfectly expressed
by M. Ladrey, professor at the Faculty of
Sciences, at Dijon, in his excellent work on the
chemistry of vine culture and winemaking, and
the Comte Odart, a practical man who does
not boast of relying upon science, approves,
however, the manuring of vineyards and often
direct manuring. Therefore, science and
practice recognise the advantages of manuring,
and prove that it is injurious only when exces-
sively and unintelligently applied. In that
respect then, and-still relying directly upon
observation and experiment, I quite agree
with M. Ladrey and M. Odart. The over-
growth of the vine, promoted by earthing, by
composts, or other manures, or by provignage,
lowers the qualities of the wines, by overloading
.the tree with wood and grapes filled up with
albumen and water. But, when I recom-
mend manuring, I do not mean to advise to
make a sewer or a charnel of every vineyard.
Est modus in rebus. (There is a rule for every-
thing).
TRUE CAUSE OF THE FALLING OFF IN THE
VALUE OF THE WINES OF CERTAIN VINE-
YARDS.
It is true now that judicious manuring does
not alter the savor nor the taste of the grapes ;
if it is also true that it does not lower in the
least the value of their juice measured by the
gleucometer, what then is the cause of the
reduction in the value of the wines of certain
vineyards ? The cause lies as I have observed
and asserted, in the close planting, in the
provignage on too large a scale relatively to
the old stems, and above all in the changing of
the kinds of grapes. On that point there can
be no doubt, when the gamai shows 4 ° with
the gleucometer, the pineau shows 10° ;
and when in excellent years the gamai rises to
9 ° the pineau rises to 14 ® ; the chasselas
remains at 3 ° and 6 °. These are stubborn
facts and not mere opinions. Manure as you
may an inferior apple, you will never extract
from it a juice equal to that of a superior
variety. Neither will you, by the the use of
manure, turn the the Mirabelle plum into a pig
plum. On the variety of vine employed
depends the character of a vineyard. The soil
indubitably raises or reduces the quality of the
wine ; it also gives to it a special taste and
bouquet, but it does not transform the produce
of certain varieties, nor does it reverse'heir res-
pective values. No soil will cause the eha«
selas to give a better wine than the nineau ;
the chasselas, gamai and pineau, might ,ive
better or worse wines according to the soil,
season, cultivation and aspect: ' ut they retain
their respective value, or in other words, the
pineau and the other fine plants will produce
the good wine, the gamai and the like, the
mediocre, and the chasselas and other analogous
varieties the bad. I will conclude this
chapter by defending myself from the insinua-
tion of personal interest and partiality that
M. Joigneaux has so very pleasantly directed
against me concerning the re-establishment of
the vineyards of Argenteuil, which I have
declared possible, even with the manuring.
The hills of Suresnes and Argenteuil are admir


ably well exposed, and the soil and subsoil well
suited to the growth of the vine. If the
manures from Paris were the cause of the
decline in the quality of their wines, in less
than two years the intelligent vignerons of
those localities could restore them to their
primitive fineness, by stopping manuring, for
the effect of the manure employed is short-
lived. But the vignerons know that their
attempts in that respect would be fruitless.
They see vineyards unmanured for several
years, either through neglect or economy, and
the wine from the gamai is far from being the
best of Argenteuil. During nine years I have as-
certained those facts on the spot; during nine
years I have obtained gamais, chasselas and
others from the old vine trees of Roquelaure
(the Mealier Francois) at Argenteuil, in an old
and large vineyard that I had rented. The
property in question had preserved its old
vine-arbor, its old stem of chasselas, and its
other old vines, except two acres that a silk mer-
chant of Paris, the proprietor, had allowed to
be planted with gamai by his vigneron. That
proprietor, careless and indifferent, had never
put any manure on his vineyards. In 1842 and
1846 I obtained some magnificent gamais, of
which I made pure wine which I sold, after
ascertaining that I could never drink it. The
wine from the Meslier Francois, made separ-
ately, was excellent, and of a rare quality.
Since 1849, I left Argenteuil to establish a
vineyard of 80 acres at Sillery, in Champagne.
After seven years I left Sillery, the vineyard
being in full produce. I have no wine for sale.
I buy good wines when I find any, which is
rare now-a-days ; I preferred Burgundy wines
to all others, when they contain no juice of
gamais, nor glucose, nor beetroot sugar; the
white wines of Sauterne, Chablis, and those of
Champagne, when they are true and pure,
are also the object of my predilection. Lastly,
I accept, for their bouquet and their valued
hygiene, the good wines of Medoc.
It is with the most complete impartiality and
disinterestedness that I undertake a crusade
for the benefit of French viniculture. I am
quite convinced that the use of French wines
and, particularly those of first and second class >
has contributed from generation to generation,
to found our national character, rich in wit and
generosity. I am also convinced that the
sovereigns of France who have made the vine-
yards a serious object of their solicitude have,
after Noah and the intelligent chiefs of
Abbayes contributed greatly to fraternal utili-
sation and intellectual progress.
Chapter V. '
CEPAGES.
Influence of the cepages upon the products.
■ —lmportance of a good choice of cepages.—
The vine has its species and varieties, qualities
and character essential and distinctive, which
are preserved in all varieties of soils, under all
climates and aspects. The site, the soil, and
especially the climate, enrich or impoverish
their vegetation and products, but do not trans-
form one into another. The idea of the cru *
has absorbed the idea of the cepage, whereas
in reality the cepage rules the cru. If Chateau
Laffitte was planted with gamais it would pro-
duce a very inferior wine, and if the old stems
of the Clos-Vougeot were replaced by that
variety the wine would be worth 50 francs the
cask instead of 1400 or 2000. But if the
Carbenet Sauvignon of Medoc and the frano-
pineau of Burgundy were cultivated at
Madeira, at the Cape, in Spain, in Algeria,
or at Auxerre, in each locality they would pro-
duce good wines which would remind one of the
best Bordeaux or the finest Burgundies; they
will be worth more or less according to the
soil, aspect, climate, season, mode of culture
and wine-making, for each of the above has
unquestionably a great influence upon the
delicacy, richness, taste, and bouquet of the
wine; but the Cape, Navarre, Madeira, or
Auxerre wines will resemble good Bordeaux-
and Burgundies. That experiment has been
repeatedly made, and made on a large scale.
• Cru is employed for vineyard, and also for the
produce of the vineyard. The crus of Tonnerre mean
the produce of the vineyards of Tonnerre,


The sovereigns supply their tables with good
Burgundies and Bordeaux from the Madeira
and the Cape, grown on two of the largest vine-
yards, and the Duke de la Vittoria (Espartero)
can produce some Medoo grown in his vine-
yards of Navarre, which one would declare
to be true Bordeaux, only that it retains the
acrid taste common to most of the Spanish
wines, and that taste is due to a wrong process
of making and keeping. The Auxerrois has
never had a high reputation as a cru. Well,
the wines from the best cepages are as good as
any of the best crus. So in 1858 the gamai
wine was sold at 60 and 60 francs the 45
gallons, and the pineau wines at 300 and 400
francs. It would be idle to allege that those
pineaux are produced on privileged sites.
Those sites would soon lose their reputation if
they were planted with gamais, and the wines
would only realise 10 or 15 francs per
cask of 45 gallons more than the wines of
other crus of the same district. The cepage is,
therefore, the principal basis. We should
speak of wines as the Pineau wine of Burgundy,
Carbenet of Bordeaux, wine of fine cepages of
Champagne, and not Champagne wine, Bor-
deaux wine, Burgundy wine; for under these
three denominations and in the same vineyards
the most exquisite as well as the worst may be
and are produced. Those wines are entitled to
the same brand, but the deceit becomes im-
possible if they are made known under the
names of fine cepages or coarse cepages. . The
renowned vineyards have preserved their high
reputation because they were planted with
superior cepages and kept by wealthy and
intelligent men, and that those cepages have
remained almost an object of worship. This
sort of worship for the cepage preceded that
apotheosis of the cru; the superstition for the
cru has destroyed the respect due to the cepage,
the principle has disappeared in the selling of
a good name. While advocating the cultiva-
tion of the finest varieties, wherever they will
grow in France I do not intend to disturb the
equilibrium of the cultivation and production
now in existence ; it ■ is not destruction
but amelioration that is meant. I have no in-
tention either to become the Don Quixote o
the connoisseurs in wines, by conjuring the
vinegrower to sacrifice the substantial benefits
of the quantity to the chimerical value of the
quality. On the contrary, it is in the name of
private and public wealth that I address my-
self to the vigneron, to the proprietor of vine-
yards, and to society at large.
Increase of the quantity and quality in the
products by the substitution of fine for coarse
cepages.—lf the vigneron receives a higher
salary for his labor, the proprietor higher
interest from his vineyard; if France finds an
article of exchange more advantageous in the
quantity of her wines without quality than in
the quantity with the quality, I shall insist
no longer in my attempt to change the pre-
sent course of ideas on vine-culture, for my sole
aim is to prove that it is possible now to obtain
both quantity and quality. This can be effected
simply by replacing, as the case arises, the
coarse varieties by fine ones, and by planting new
vineyards only with the latter; cultivating of
course according to the method I have recom-
mended. It is scarcely twenty years since
arboriculturists first knew how to make fruit
trees produce as much fruit, and as fine and
good, as they choose; they have extended their
science to the production of grapes, and there
is not one who would be embarrased to make a
vine bear the very sort of fruit that its de-
velopment and vigor would permit. In this
respect the arboriculturist is far in advance of
the vigneron, because he has been better in-
structed, more encouraged, and more publicly
rewarded than the latter.
Comparative value of different vines.—Even
to this day there is nothing fixed on that point;
in fact we have scarcely anything else but
obscure reports upon the comparative value of
the different vines for winemaking, A few
observations with the gleucometer, a few chemi-
cal analyses upon a dozen species of vines—
these are all the acquirements in ccnological
science. In 1819 the Duke Decaze, impres-
sed with the importance of vine-culture in
France, being desirous also of establishing it
upon positive basis, and insuring its progress


by diffusing a knowledge of vines and their
respective qualities had founded the ampelo-
graphic school of the Luxembourg under the
direction of M. Hardy. But that school could
not lead to any practical results which have
their sanction only in the making of the wines.
It was on too small a scale, the observations
were restricted to leaves, wood, and fruit; it
was only a chapter of botany, confused and
obscure, which did not fulfil the purpose of the
illustrious Minister. Since the foundation of
the ampelographio institution by the Duke
Decaze till the publication of the French
Ampelography by M. Rendu, no official attempt
was made to throw light upon the subject of
vine-culture and to give it a progressive impulse.
If lectures have been delivered, and works
published, if the products of vineyards have
been exhibited at agricultural shows, these
efforts were the result of private enterprise, and
consequently have little or no influence upon
the question of vine-culture. ,
Means to procure vine plants.—Until the
comparative value of the different kinds of
vines be scientifically established I shall un-
hesitatingly say to the vignerons : Plant the
new vineyards with the finest cepages that you
know: you alone can distinguish each of them
in your localities. Better than the proprietors
or the scientific man, you know their qualities
and defects. Take the best cepages, cultivate
them carefully, adopt the pruning that fer-
tilises them j give them the necessary supply
of manure, and the returns from your vineyards
will be double; then your vineyards
will keep two families of vignerons instead of
one; the salaries will increase, the district will
be enriched, and you will have contributed to
the wealth of France.
To proprietors.—Buy the cuttings from
renowned vineyards, and save the finest cepages
of your own j plant them in a nursery and you
will then always have a stock of vines to fill
up old or to plant new vineyards. Do not
have recourse to provignage, replace the miss-
ing vines by two-year-old plants. Apply as
much earth and manures as the soil will require;
keep a stem and a fruit bearing branch. Do
not spare' hard labor, and your -wines -will
double in value and equal in quantity the wines
of the coarsest kinds of vines.
To the administration. —Procure during the
pruning season, the cuttings of the finest
cepages, &c ,of the vineyards in France. It is
i*asy and inexpensive to rear millions of vines
in two years These vines sold at low prices
(5 francs per thousand) * would cover all ex-
penses of collection. Create then in Algeria,
in the Landes, in Sologne, as many nurseries
and model vineyards as there will be of deserts
to populate, and after ten years, the capital em-
ployed will give ten per cent, j the colonies will
be established and the French wines will be
bought in every part of the world. By add-
ing to the above immediate means, the importa-
tion and the study of foreign cepages which
have attained celebrity, the science of viti-
culture and anology will be definitively and
firmly established.
BEST CEPAGES IN THE DIVEE3 PARTS OP
PRANCE.
I recommend the following sorts :
In the regions of the south and south-west of
France.
For grapes to make raisins:—Mayorquin or
bourmen; Fanses.
For luscious wines :—Furmint, Grenache,
Macoabeo, Malvoisie, Muscat blanc, Muscat
noir.
For good wines: Carignane, Clarette
Marsanne, Petite-chlraz, Ficpoule, Roussane,
Eousselet, Roussette, Ugni, Vionnier.
In the Region of South West.
For the best wines:—Carbenet, Carbenet
gris, Carmenere, Cruchinet, Museadelle,
Sauvignon, Semilion, Verdot.
For the best brandies: —Folle-blanche
(Gouais).
In the East, Centre, and West.
For good wines:—Epinette and blancs-fumes,
• The lowest price I heard ol in Burgundy was
30 francs. Nurseries such as the one mentioned by
Dr. Guyot do not exist. A few hinds of vines may be
had in the neighborhood of Paris or at Fontainebleau
at from SO cents to 2 francs a-piece.


fVomentes rosea, blancs and gria, Gentila roses,
blancs and gris, Mealiera, Pineaux blancs or
chardenays, Pineaux gris or beurots, Pineaux
de la Loire or de Vouvray, Pineaux noira or
noiriens, Plants dores, Terts and gris, Rieslings,
Savagners.
Some of the names that I have cited are
local names quite unknown beyond their own
district. The same vines are known under
different names in the next department. This
is one of the grievous consequences of the want
of encouragement and instruction in vine-culture.
There are not, in France, forty cepages which
are worth cultivating for the quality of wines
they produce; and those forty kinds are con-
founded under four hundred names enumerated
in divers ampelographies. The distinctive and
relative qualities of those cepages in richness
of must, tannin, acids, salts, coloring matter,
essential oil (ananthse) and bouquet, have
never been ascertained, and consequently
their respective qualities and defects for wine
making are still unknown. With regard to
the vine and its products, we are yet in full
alchemy; but this alchemy is so rich in local
facts and in observations upon the best vine-
yards that it is ready to be drawn out into a
clear nomenclature, and founded upon positive
chemistry.
Summary examination of the relative value
of the fine and the coarse cepages.—A few
facts will suffice to prove the foregoing state-
ments. One hectolitre (22i gallons) of juice of
chasselas contains from two to three per cent,
of alcohol; one hectolitre of juice of gamai
contains from five to seven per cent.; one
hectolitre of juice of pineau contains from
10 to 14 per cent. Therefore one hectolitre of
pineau is worth for alcohol alone two hectolitres
of gamai and four of chasselas. An abundant
crop of chasselas wine during three years is
ruinous; for an empty cask containing three
hectolitres costs often as much as nine hectoli.
tres of wine. Abundance of gamais during
the same period involves the vigneron in diffi-
culties, because the casks are dear and the price
of the wines low. An abundance of pineau,
whatever may be the number of years, is always
fortunate, for the consumption of that wine is
unlimited, and the prices remain constantly
and relatively very high. Three repeated
failures in the crops of coarse wines cause
misery for the vigneron and the proprietor,
because the consumers of that sort of wines
can easily replace it by beer, cider, or by
artificial drinks, and refuse to pay for it beyond
a certain price j besides, the keeping of those
wines is difficult and costly, on account of
the low price relatively to the large expendi-
ture for casks and the management, whilst the
scarcity of the flue wines raises the remaining
stock to indefinite prices; first, because they
can never be replaced by artificial drinks;
second, because they can be kept for many
years; and third, because the gradual increase
of their value amply compensates for the cost
of casks and maintenance. It is unquestionable
that he who plants, now-a-days his vineyards
with coarse kinds of vines, ignores his own
interest.
Variation in the returns of a vineyard, ac-
cording to the nature of the vine cultivated
therein.—The wines have an intrinsic value in
alcohol, and that value is always relative with the
cepage producing the wine. Therefore, supposing
an equal quantity of juice, the revenue of the
vigneron is represented by 3 for the chasselas, 6
for the gamai, and 14 for the pineau. But, by the
value of the taste and bouquet, hy the hygienic and
stimulating effects upon the physical and intel-
lectual powers the difference between the fine
and the coarse wines is more clearly indicated,
and for that reason, even now, the fine wines
are sold for upwards of 200 francs per cask,
when the gamai realises only 25, and other
inferiors 12 francs.
Relation of the value to the quantity of the
produce of fine and coarse plants.—The mean
produce of the vineyards planted with fine
cepages, in the districts of Rheims and Eper-
nay, is about 30 hectolitres per hectare* the
produce of the vineyards planted with coarse
cepages is 60 hectolitres ; when the hectolitre
of the latter is worth 25 francs, the hectolitre
• The hectare is 2 acres 1 rood, 3 1 perches. Nearly
2J acres.


of the former is worth more than 50 francs.
The gross return per hectare of both vineyards,
is, therefore 1500 francs. The expenses of all
kinds do not exceed 750 francs j the net profits
are, therefore, 750 frs. per hectare, and represent
an interest of 10 per cent, on the capital in-
vested, 750 francs being the maximum of the
cost of planting an hectare and keeping it un-
productive for seven years. But, if, through
abundance of crops the fine wines amount to
60 hectolitres and realise only 25 francs per
hectolitre, the net profits remain the same, and
the coarse wines, having fallen to 10 or 12
francs, cease to cover the expenses. When
the crops have failed, the misery in the dis-
tricts where coarse wines only are made is
sometimes terrible, because the consumption of
such wines is annual and local, and large crops
occasion an unremunerative price. To be con-
vinced of the superiority of the fine cepages it
is sufficient to consider the prodigious wealth of
the great vineyards and the relative mediocrity
and poverty of those planted with coarse kinds
of vines.
Chapter VI.
works jto BE DONE IN THE
VINEYARDS.
Weeding.—Hoeing.—Besides the dressing
and tending of the shoots, the staking or trel-
lissing, the cares and operations required to
keep the vineyard in order may he stated as
follows ; —Do not allow any foreign vegetation
around the vines; neither any useless vegeta-
tion upon it. An absolute and permanent clean-
liness of the soil from the first movement of the
sap until the gathering of the fruit is the fore-
most condition for the health, fecundation, fer-
tility, and the ripeness of the grapes. Weeding
a vineyard is clearing the soil in which it
grows, to destroy, with hand or a hoe, the
weeds that interfere with the growth of the
vine. Hoeing a vineyard is to scrape lightly
the surface of the ground, so as to refresh the
foot of the plants and to facilitate the permeation
of the air and sun, which accelerates the vege-
tation. The weeding and hoeing, which are
generally repeated three times in a season,
must be done oftener if necessary j the long
grasses deprive the vine of respiration and
heat, the smallest maintain upon the soil a per-
nicious moisture which prevents the'Sffing and
insolation of the ground. A vineyard planted
upon a lawn, were it mown every day,
would never he fertile. The vine delights in
soils, the surface of which is rough and dry,
even were it rocks or stones. Humidity and
freshness are only favorable to the vine at a
great depth where its roots seek for them; for
that reason deep cultivation is unnecessary,
especially in light soils. Lengthened experi-
ence has proved that fact.
Necessity of superficial cultivation. —Except
to bury manures, or for the performance of pro-
vignage the digging of the vineyard has only
for its object the azotising of a couple of inches
of soil, otherwise, the digging of the soil has no,
importance whatever, for the vine thrives
better in a firm and trampled than in a loose
and light one. This fact can easily be verified
on the rows bordering a footpath.
NECESSITY OF PREVENTING THE SOIL FROM
BEING SHADED BY USELESS SHOOTS.
Those shoots have the same inconvenience as
the weeds. —The vineyards of Tourjaine would
be twice as fertile and its products much
better if the old and respectable stems were
not overloaded with a luxurious foliage which
folds itself into an impenetrable maze. The
thinning out, clipping off, and tying, must he
attended to as carefully as the weeding, and
proportionately to the vigor of the vines.*
PROPER TIME TO WORK IN VINEYARDS
Weeding and hoeing.-—The vigneron must
carefully select the most opportune time to
• Longstakesi


work in his vineyard. Hoeing, for instance,
must never be done when the soil sticks to the
feet or the instrument used. Because, not
only the weeds cannot be destroyed under such
circumstances, but the soil gets so hard by its
ulterior dessication. that it ceases to be per-
vious, and the following operation is very
difficult of execution. No work should be done
after heavy rains. The vineyards should never
be dug or hoed after frost, however light it may
be; for, after a white frost, the ground is in the
same state as if it had rained. It is then neces-
sary to wait for moving the soil, until the sun
has restored it to its normal state; nay, it is
better to wait till the white frosts have cease d,
for it has been ascertained that one-half of a
vineyard freshly hoed is more subject to the
bad effects of frost than the other half which
has not been hoed. I will incidentally men-
tion that the same remark applies to a vineyard
partly manured. The part manured remains
intact, and the other is completely destroyed.
With regard to vineyard works, the vigneron
must be like the good gardener, who
has his days for sowing, planting,
weeding, hoeing, &o. The choice of
the proper time for each operation is one of
the most important conditions for the vine as
well as for the garden. Thinning out, nipping
off, clipping off, and tying, should not be done
after heavy rains, on account of the bad state
of the soil, nor during a very hot day. The
excessive heat would be fatal to the flowers and
fruits suddenly deprived of shade. Dull weather
and slightly humid is very favorable for these
operations.
Chapter VII.
TYING AND PRESERVATION OF THE VINE.
TYING, STAKING, USE OF IRON WIRE.
Pallisage, Tying.—Tying has for its object
the fixing of the shoots to a stake, to a lath or
batten, or to a wire, so as to keep them in the
position required. In most of the French vine-
yards stakes are used ; the length of those
stakes varies from 18 in to 4ft 6 in. Tying is a
physiological condition of the cultivated vine ;
nature has provided it with tendrils, which
enable it to effect that object, even in its wild
state ; it uses them to seek for air and sun, and
to support its branches and fruits. These
tendrils are important for its health and vigor.
We must, therefore, replace hy artificial means
the natural supports that the pruning takes
away from the vine. Good gardeners know
well that the grapes of a vine well tied up are
finer and of better quality than those grown on
a loose vine. The vigneron ties the branches
and spurs afterpruning and the shoots as they
grow.
Trellis and stake.—Of the means of support-
ing the vine, one single stake is the worst,
because when the shoots are tied around it most
of the leaves and oven the fruit are deprived
of air and sun. Tying on trellis is the best. At
Chablis, and in the neighborhood of Tonnarre,
a stake is employed for each branch or spur of
vine, which then takes the shape of a fan. It
must be a very unfavorable season if the fruit
under such conditions does not attain per-
fect maturity. But this intelligent mode is
more costly than trellising with laths or wire.
By the method 1 propose there would be 4000
vines per acre. That number would require 4000
short stakes, from 2 ft to 3 ft long, and which
would be pul into the ground from sto 8 in
deep, according to the soil, and planted in lines
three feet from the vine. The small stake is
used for a double object:—lst. To tie up the
fruit-bearing branch at a distance of sor 6 in
from the soil. 2nd. To fasten a wire batten or
lath at a distance of 20 or 24 in. from the soil.
The shoots of the fruit-bearing branch are tied
up to that lath, batten, or wire. The stakes of
40r5 ft long are fixed close to the stem. The
shoots of the wood branch are tied up to
them.


FIG, 4.
Figure 4 represents the small stakes with the
wire fastened on the head of each one, and the
vine pruned with its fruit-bearing branch and
wood branch, or spur.
FIG. 5.
Figure 5 represents a trained vineyard in full
vegetation; the vines have been thinned out,
nipped off, and tied up in August and Sep-
tember (November and December in Victoria,
Australia). The long stakes support the future
wood for each stem, A A are the fruit-bearing
branches trained on the wire and the short
stakes. B B are the wood branches, trained on
the long stakes.
FIG. 6.
Figure 6 represents an isolated vine, in the
same state of growth as represented in Figure 5.
This system of staking is more economical
than the ope used in Burgundy and Champagne.
It necessitates less stakes and only about 5 cwt
of No. 14 wire per acre.
NECESSITY OF PRESERVING THE VINE
AGAINST SEVERE FROSTS, HEAVY RAINS, &C.
Preservative measures against frosts and
rains are of great importance for the successful
culture of the vine. Those means only whose
efficiency cannot be contested are made use of
by aspiring proprietors. A man of ordinary
intelligence, if told that to preserve an acre of
vines it would require upwards of three miles
of straw mattings, would declare the project
to be chimerical. But that chimera is like the


\ r
railways and the electric telegraph—in less
than thirty years it will be classed among the
realities.
The vine is subject to many draw-
backs, amongst which may be noticed,
especially in the centre and northern
parts of France: —Ist. The spring frosts, which
destroy the fruitful buds. 2nd. The continuous
and cold rains of June, which prevent the fecun-
dation of the blossom, and cause the coulure.
3rd. The autumn frosts, which cause the falling
of the leaves, and prevent the ulterior progress
of the grapes. 4th, The rains of that season,
which cause the grapes to rot.* I do not
speak here of hail, diseases, insects, all of which
have their share of the crops, because they are
not of such a permanent charaster, and not so
connected with the ordinary march of the
season. Latterly the prevention of the vine
against the scourges above mentioned has been
much discussed, and, in particular, preservation
against the spring frosts. But the means which
do not provide against all the four will never
solve the problem of obtaining crops with cer-
tainty and regularity. To preserve an acre it
would require an extra annual expenditure of
£B. The result would be a sure crop, double
in quantity and superior in quality. I would
not, however, recommend these preservative
means in vineyards where the produce does not
realise above one shilling per gallon.
'PRESERVATION BY STRAW MATTINGS.
Vineculture, conducted ’ as stated above,
becomes an industry which gives sure products
and calculable returns. Such is the cultivation
of the peach trees at Montreuil, and the
chasselas at Fontainebleau. It is precisely that
mode of preservation, regular, permanent, and
sanctioned by long experience, such as
the walls and matting of Montreuil
and Thomery, that ought to be applied econo-
mically to the vine cultivated in the open field.
To carry out thatmethod, straw matting of 20 in
• In Australia, spring frosts and autumn rains are
the only drawbacks. The latter are particularly to be
dreaded in the neighborhood of Melbourne and in New
South Wales.— Trans.
wide is necessary. Those mats are rolled up
and unrolled in proper time. From the 15th of
March te the 15th of November the position of
the lines of matting is changed four times.
FIG. 7.
Ist position.—From the Ist of April to the
25th or 30th of May the mats are fixed nearly
horizontally above the pruned vines (Fig. 7).
The mat is supported by a small rafter, one end
of which is planted in the ridge, and the other
fixed by a nail to the long stake.
FIG . 8.


Figure 8 indicates the same disposition as
Figure 7, but the vegetation is more advanced-
In both figures the long stake is to the east,
south, or south-east of the ridge. The stem is
against, or even in the slope of, the ridge. The
inclination of the matting with the horizon is
from 30 to 40 degrees. If the vegetation is too
fierce, more light might he given to the vine, by
putting the long stake nearer to the stem, and
by planting the little rafter lower down into
the ridge. To be preserved against frost, it
is sufficient that buds should he protected ver-
tically.
FIG. 9.
Figure nine represents in perspective several
rows of vines after pruning, covered over
with the mattings. In one day four men can
place the matting as shown in figure eight, over
one acre.
FIG. 10.
Figure ten represents, in perspective, the
vines (with shoots) in vegetation, protected ac-
cording to the dispositions shown by figure
nine.
FIG. 11.


Second position.—From the 30th of May to
the sth or 10th July, the mats are raised to an
angle of 60 degrees with the horizon; and the
angle is opened to the east and south closed up
to the west and north. Figure eleven shows
the elevation of a vine after the above opera-
tion. The ridge is reduced, the shoots are
reaching the upper part of the stake and their
base where the grapes are remains alone
sheltered against the cold of the north-west. Ac-
cording to the season and climate, the inclina-
tion of the matting may be increased or re-
duced. If the temperature is dry and hot, the
matting should not he inclined so much. This
is obtained by putting the stake nearer the
stem.
FIG. 12.
Figure twelve represents in perspective the
relative position of the vines as shown in figure
eleven. The shoots of the fruit-bearing branch
are nipped off, but not those of the wood
branch.
FIG. 13.
Third position,—From the 10th July to the
10th or 30th of September, according to the
season, the mattings are fixed vertically to the
north and west of the vines. Figure thirteen
represents the elevation of the vine in full
vegetation, supported by the long stake. The
matting is fastened to the stake and the ridge
has completely disappeared. The matting
fixed vertically, two inches behind the vine,
strengthens the grape, and increases its size as
if it were grown on a trellis; it accelerates
the maturity by one week at least, and perfects
that maturity in a remarkable manner.


' FIG. 15. _
"*“*“ via ift
figure fourteen represents, in’perspeotive, that
■which figure thirteen shows in elevation. There
is nothing so agreeable to the sight, as vines
trained in that manner; the leaves are of a deep
green, and the black bunches form a beautiful
relief on the matting.
Fourth position,—ln the latter part of the
season, to guard against the autumn frosts
and the rains, the mattings are brought
back to the position they occupied in April and
May. r
FIG. 16,
Figures fifteen and sixteen represent in eleva-
tion and perspective the state of the vine at
that time. This process enables the growers
to leave the grapes on the vine until perfect
maturity * and prevents rottenness. For is
there a vigneron who never found himself in
great perplexity in the gathering season ?
Perhaps the grapes are not well ripe, and the
frosts threaten to cut off the leavtfiff and, per-
haps, the green grapes; or the rains will cause
the grapes to rot. Will he gather ? If he
does, the wine will be bad, if he does not the
grapes will be destroyed. The fourth posi-
tion of the mattings relieves him from his
hesitation.
Disadvantages and insufficiency ofpreventive
means other than straw mattings.—All other
preventive means, are more costly and only
preserve the vine against spring frost j besides
they deprive its young shoots of air and sun,
and thereby induce the couture. Preserva-
tion against spring frosts, without the condi-
tions of airing and insolation is no preserva-
tion, it is almost a complete destruction of the
crop. I can prove this assertion by a very con-
clusive experiment. In 1857, the unprotected
vines suffered little or none from the spring
frosts at Sillery and in the neighborhood. In
the vineyard of 80 acres that I planted the
grapes were showing as well in the 68 unpro-
tected acres as in the 12 protected ones; but
there was no couture in the latter, and their
produce varied from 600 to 800 gallons per
acre, while the former gave only from 200 to
400 gallons per acre. The couture had oc-
casioned a loss of 50 or 60 per cent, of the
grapes, although 15 acres had been protected by
a quantity of pine branches and 15 others by
long marsh grasses. The surrounding vine-
yards, which had been covered with calico,
were also damaged by the couture and did not
give larger returns than the unprotected vine-
yards.
* This system of protection is scarcely applica-
ble to Australia. Gardeners, however, may adopt
the method with advantage, and vinegrowers. in
New Zealand and Tasmaaia will find it indispensable.
—Trans,


Advantage of permanent mattings.—The
agricultural societies of Rheims and Chalons,
and most of the experienced vinegrowers have
ascertained that the permanent use of mattings
was perfectly consistent with the cultivation of
the vine ; that, under their horizontal shelter,
the buds were guarded against frosts, and
develop themselves with more vigor j that the
grapes grew larger, and fecundation was
effected with greater certainty ; and lastly that
maturity was more rapid and perfect. Re-
markable and complete reports upon the sub-
ject were published in November, 1856, and
March, 1858, in the Cultivateur de la Cham-
pagne by M. Dugue, Engineer-in-chief, and
M. Bancalin, Engineer of roads and bridges,
A vineyard protected with mattings is a beau-
tiful sight, a picture. Elegance, propriety,
cleanliness, neatness, richness of vegetation,
everything is shown to advantage, and the
colored wreaths peering through the verdure
appear as reliefs upon the yellow mattings
and form an admirable tableau. These results,
I repeat, are not surprising. The benefits
of sheltering trees are known by gardeners
from time immemorial j I have simply sought to
extend those benefits to the culture of the
vine.
It is not the rising sun that destroys the
chilled buds. —The general acredited idea that
the first rays of the rising sun are the
principal cause of the destruction of the frozen
buds is erroneous. Repeated experiments have
convinced me of it. The direction of the rows
that I planted in 1850 at Sillery is north-
south ; my mattings therefore opened to the
east and received the first action of the rising
sun. In the nights of the 4th and sth May,
1856, and the 6th and 7th, a double and severe
frost struck all the vineyards, in Champagne,
and, in particular those of Sillery. Justly
alarmed by the coldness of the air and the
clearness of the sky in the evening of the 4th,
I had ordered some 300 yards of mattings to
be fixed to the eastward of the protected vines
in case of hoar frost during the night. The
hoar frost having been very thick, my orders
wera executed from five to seven o’clock in
the morning, before the rising of the snn.
The sun rose, shining brilliantly. At ten
o’clock the disaster was unmistakable and
complete upon all the unprotected vines. Those
placed under the mattings as indicated in the
first position, (figure nine) and receiving
directly the rays of the sun, were not injured in
the least) while those that had been sheltered
from the sun altogether were as completely
destroyed as those which had no protection
whatever. The same experiment was renewed
on the following night upon a portion of the
vineyard in a higher situation where the frost
had not destroyed all the buds, although un-
protected. Those buds were frozen the second
night as well as those guarded against the rays
of the morning sun. 1 invite the vinegrowers,
for their own interest, to repeat those experi-
ments.
The cold wind does not freeze the buds.—To
oppose the action of hoar frosts upon the buds
or young shoots of the vine, it is needless to
protect them against any winds, for winds,
however cold, diminish the danger instead of
increasing it. The only thing required is to
prevent the vertical light from falling upon the
vine, and this may be effected by any opaque
body suspended over it.
That body prevents the loss of the caloric of
the plant by radiation. The caloric radiating
into space is not returned by the sky, while the
opaque body does reflect the greatest part of it.
According as the bud cools itself, it condenses
on its surface the vapor contained in the atmo-
sphere, and is thus covered over with hoar frost;
as long as a bud is not covered with hoar frost
before the rising of the sun, there is no danger
of its being frozen. It is by preventing the
condensation of the vapors that the wind reduces
the risks of destruction. If the vines are on
low stems, as I advocate, the preservation is
complete if the vineyard is cultivated in
ridges.
The ridge is parallel to the row i and it must
be from seven to twelve inches high, and close
to the vines (Fig. 7 and 8.) The long stake is
previously planted about seven inches in front
of the vine, and the little rod or rafter is fixed


as shown in Pig. 1 and 8. This operation being
repeated at every vine, the stakes and rods form
a sort of frame ready to receive the matting,
which is then fixed to the rafter, close to the
stake, by a piece of annealed wire No. 14. After
the 25th of May, or the first days of June, the
vigneron, while hoeing, reduces the ridge to one-
third of its height, replants the long stake close
to the vine, and thereby puts the matting in the
second position, which guards against the
coulure (Fig. 11.) In the next hoeing the ridge
disappears altogether, the stake is then planted
behind the stem, and the matting is placed in
the third position (Fig. 13 and 14), or espalier
fashion. In the fourth position the stake is
simply brought back to the front of the stem by
bending the vine, which lends itself easily to
that operation.
Mode of Preservation in Crimea.—There the
vignerons bury the vines in the ground, as the
arboriculturists of Argenteuil bury the fig trees.
This operation, far from being injurious to the
vine, renders it more vigorous. The precocity
and the beauty of the figs of Argenteuil are due
to the winter stratification.
Whatever may be the disposition of the vines
in each locality, the vinegrowers are so ingenious
and active that they will soon find out the best
means of preservation for each mode of culture ;
it only needs that they be convinced of the ad-
vantages derived from the practice of protecting
vines.
CHAPTER vm.
GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR THE FORMATION OF
VINEYARDS.
Sites for Vineyards.—Vineyards to produce
wine can be profitably established everywhere,
provided there be no stagnant water in the
soil, and that the site be not subject to fogs.
All land that can be easily cleared of water or
vapor, either by its natural slope or by winds,
be it plain or mountain, is suitable for vineyards,
if the temperature of the place be high enough
to bring the grapes to maturity. On the heaps
of rocks, as at Fontainebleau, as well as on the
poor sands of the downs, upon the most bdrren
soils of Champagne, Sologne, Landes, &c., -vine-
yards of good sorts of vines may be established,
and will produce wealth by intelligent working
and an outlay of £5O to £lOO per acre in seven
years.
Waste Lands.—Where the vine was never
grown, the soil, however poor it may he,
always contains sufficient nutriffiSnt for it.
There are more of those nut ritive principles if it
is covered with grass, heath, fern, furze, or any
resinous shrubs.
Inclination of the Land.—ln undulating and
mountainous countries the vineyards commence
a few yards above the basin of the valley, and
terminate far from the summits when the latter
are too high. In low countries, the neighbor-
hood of marshes and of clusters of large trees
must be avoided; and the undulating low rises,
well aired, must be selected in preference. A
declivity in the lands from 10 to 30 degrees is
better fitted for the vine than any other inclina-
tion.
Aspect.—The easterly, south-eastern and
southern aspect are better than north-east or
northern j’ but the worst, without doubt, are
north-west, west and south-west.*
Soils Inaccessible to the Plough.—With
regard to the mode of plantation and cultivation,
the soils must be divided into two classes : soils
inaccessible to the plough, and those that can
be cultivated with that implement. The first
contain two other divisions : the soils
susceptible of regular hand culture, such as
those on banks too steep to be cultivated with
the plough, but of an homogeneous nature; and
soils of decomposed granite, or in rocks
naturally or artificially formed in terraces
which contain vegetable soil only in certain
places.
Cultivation of the Vine on Terraces.—The
principles already enunciated, concerning the
selection of cepages and manuring, are also
applicable to the vine when cultivated on
terraces or on rocky ground, but it should be
* To apply this observation to Australia, north mast
be written instead of south, and south instead of north.
—Trans.


pruned, trained and trellised, more like the
garden vine than like that of the open field.
The number of vines per acre cannot be the
same j the planting, the staking, and the
development of the stem, depend upon special
circumstances. One single vine can cover a
rook twenty-five square yards in superficies as
well as a tree. I will only say here that the
vine must receive a quantity of vegetable soil
proportionate to the development which is in-
tended, and a quantity of manure, equally pro-
portionate to the quantity of grapes that it is
expected to produce. With regard to the culti-
vation of the vine on slopes of homogeneous soil,
all the principles already enunciated are ap-
plicable! only the operations of trenching,
earthing, manuring, &c., are more onerous than
on soils accessible to the plough. But that
excess of cost is well compensated by the
hygienic advantages and the superior quality
of the products of vines cultivated on hills.
When the situation for the vineyard is
fixed upon, the first thing to be done
is to make every part of it accessible to
drays so as to facilitate all the operations and
economise labor.
Drainage This operation is of paramount
importance. The drain must be as deep as
possible to prevent the accumulation and
stagnation of fogs and vapors on the surface.
Fogs and vapors accumulate and sojourn
in low situations on any depression of the soil,
just as water does in pools and swamps. But
a strange thing, and scarcely known, is that an
open drain or channel in such situations, and
where the declivity is greatest, will carry off
the fogs or vapors as it would water. Trees
and high hedges are the best harborers for the
enemies of the vine j therefore, they should be
carefully destroyed in its vicinity. The roads
made through a vineyard are so many useful
drains when made in an embankment. When
numerous and deep they will help to pre-
vent the effects of frost and coulure. In most
cases the waste drainage of the roads will be
sufficient, but in strong level lands, systematical
drainage must be resorted to. In some instances
wells will have to he sunk, Before planting a
vineyard every future requirement must be
anticipated, and everything which might dis-
turb the vegetation of the vines must be re-
moved. I have mentioned before, and I will
repeat it again, the vine is a rich tree j
the planting and cultivation are costly, and
its products are a long time coming. Certainly,
after seven years, it brings a fortune, if it does
not stumble during that period of time, but if it
is obliged to recommence its long voyage (and
any displacement would put it in that condi-
tion), it always impoverishes or ruins the
planter.
CHAPTER IX.
PRACTICAL CONDITIONS FOR PLANTING
VINEYARDS,
Plants.
The three sorts of plants.—ln the sixty five
departments of France in which the vine is
cultivated, and where it may be cultivated to
advantage, the diversity of soil and sub soils,
sites and their declivities, temperature and
character of weather, is such that it is impos-
sible to lay down, in all the details, any rule
that shall be applicable to every locality for
planting nurseries and vineyards, or for their
ultimate culture; but there are facts, precepts
and laws, that the vinegrower must know, and
which apply to all countries, and
these I will enumerate succinctly.
The vine is propagated by cuttings or slips, by
layers, or by rooted plants grown from cuttings,
The cutting or slip is simply a portion of a
shoot of the year, put into the ground without
roots. The layer is a shoot buried under
ground, without being separated from the
mother vine, and in which position it strikes
root. The rooted plant is a cutting having
struck root in a nursery. These three sorts of
plants reproduce exactly the characteristics,
qualities, and faults of the original vine.
Vines raised from seeds can only give varietieSj
but it requires many years to prove their quali


ties. This last mode of propagating the vine
is, therefore, neither practised nor desirable.
Cuttings.—ln planting a'vineyard, cuttings,
when practicable, are preferable to rooted
vines, and more especially to layers. 1,
Because if a cutting strikes root well, it produces
fruit one year sooner at least. 2. Because it
constitutes immediately a perfect tree, having
its roots and stem unmutilated by transplanta-
tion ; experience has proved that such a vine
has more vigor and durability. 3. Because the
cutting economises time and labor, and, there-
fore, the expenditure attached to the rooted
plant or layer is saved. Unfortunately, the
cutting does not always succeed well, and rarely
in light and poor soils, so that in such cases it
occasions delay and necessitates replanting,
which results in irregularities of lines and ir-
regularities of ages, both of which are extremely
prejudicial and expensive. A vineyard well
planted requires 5 or 6 years to give any
returns; one or two years more involve a
serious additional outlay, therefore the vine-
yard should be well planted at first at any
cost.
Layers.—These are surer than cuttings, for
generally all the layers succeed ; but to obtain
them, there must be an old vineyard close at
hand, and containing the kinds of vines intended
for the new vineyards. Besides, the layers are
not obtained without damaging the mother
vine; they are also costly and have too many
rootlets under ground. A vineyard well culti-
vated and tended is not fit to produce layers,
and layers do not produce healthy vines.
Rooted plants. —The rooted plant from a
nursery does not present any of the disadvan-
tages of the layer; it is cheaply reared, and
offers the normal constitution of the isolated
shrub; it is lifted with facility when required
for transplanting, and it is as sure to grow as a
layer. The cutting and the rooted plant are
in effect the only good means for planting vine-
yards.
What is a cutting.—Any shoot of the year
freshly cut from the vine after the maturition
of the wood (from the latter part of autumn to
the spring), and having at least two eyes, one
underand one above the ground, is a cutting; two
eyes under ground are better than one, and
three are better than two; a greater number
is unnecessary and even prejudicial, because the
roots of the fourth, fifth, and sixth eye are too
far from the head of the stem, and require to
be too deeply buried; or in the event of the soil
being shallow, the cutting has to be bent,
A cutting having old wood at thtslower ex-
tremity is not so good as one without. The
radiation of the roots as well as the circulation
of the nutritive fluids are interfered with. Such
cuttings, too, are scarce and costly.
How to know good cuttings.—The cuttings
should be made as quickly as possible after
pruning. When everything is ready for
planting, they should be carefully examined; if,
when cut at the end, they do not show any
verdure and humidity, they are of very little
good, perhaps worthless. Their true state is
easily ascertained by putting them for twelve
hours in water and cutting them again, for then,
if they present any verdure, all hope is not lost,
but those cuttings should only be used for
nurseries, their success is too uncertain to justify
their use for permanent planting. The cuttings
having been verified, they ought to be buried
eighteen inches deep in good soil, neither too
dry nor too damp, in regular beds from three to
five inches thick, and the ground should then
be trampled over. Cuttings thus stratified may
remain eighteen months without losing their
vegetative faculties ; on the contrary, a few
weeks, or the first six months, of this stratifica-
tion predispose them for a vigorous vegetation.
The stratification has a double advantage : —lt
prepares the cuttings, and gives the vigneron an
opportunity of selecting the most favorable time
for planting them out.
Time for planting cuttings.—April and May
are the best months. It is the most favorable
time for making a nursery and planting cuttings
permanently. The rooted plants succeed best
if planted at the end of autumn. The cuttings,
when planted long before the advent of warm
weather, and before the sap has begun to cir-
culate, are liable to dry up or rot, for they suffer
equally from the alternative of heat and cold, of


dryness and humidity. A complete plant, having
roots and stem, can profit by all these circum-
stances, but a simple cutting has to create its
own organs, and has only a foetal existence,
which disappears at the least disturbance in the
conditions of its incubation. To succeed well,
the cutting requires continuous warm weather.
The month of May in the northern regions is
therefore preferable.
NURSERIES.
Soil adapted for nurseries.—A fresh and
generous soil, such as that of a meadow, is the
best for a nursery. But poor soil may he
rendered suitable for the same purpose by
mixing in it four pounds of manure and eight
pounds of vegetable earth to every lineal yard
to be planted. However, low but not inundated
land on the banks of creeks, or any humid
place unsuited for a vineyard, ought to be pre-
ferred for nurseries.
Preparation of the land for a nursery.—lf
possible, the ground should be ploughed or dug
to the depth of from twelve to fifteen inches in
November, or, at the latest, in February * j and
hoed or scarified in the spring, to destroy all
the weeds. These preliminary operations may
be dispensed with, and the nursery planted at
the first digging of the ground, but it will then
be more difficult to establish, altheugh success
may probably be attained; but under • any cir-
cumstances the soil must be well dug and
levelled.
Planting.—The cuttings being selected, cut
to the proper length, and their healthy condi-
tion ascertained, the planting becomes a very
simple operation. It must not be forgotten
that the cuttings should not be more than nine
inches deep in the ground, and that they must
be well settled down in the trench which
receives them. The settling or trampling down
of the earth which covers the cuttings is the
principal condition for the success of the
nursery, because the cuttings require an im-
mediate contact with the soil to draw from it
by capillarity the humidity necessary for their
* May and July in Australia.
vegetation. The nursery is divided into beds,
which contain a limited number of rows of cut-
tings, and in such a manner that from each
division path the beds can easily be kept clear
of weeds. To facilitate this, a sufficient space
must be left between each row, but along the
rows the cuttings may be only one inch apart.
However, where land is not scarce, more room
ought to be allowed. After the nursery is
planted the cuttings should be pruned with the
secateur, leaving only one eye put of the
ground, and, if there is any sandy or light soil
available, the whole plantation should be
covered over with it about half an inch thick.
This last operation will insure the success of
every plant and preserve the bud and the ex-
tremity of the cuttings against the effects of
drought, cold nights or sun strokes. In the
worst circumstances, that is to say where the
only soil available is argillaceous, and there-
fore hardens under the influence of rain and
aeration, one half of the cuttings will give
plants of prime quality, about a fourth would
be second rate and the remainder would be
lost. But then, such a result ought to be con-
sidered very satisfactory.
Advantages of two-year old plants.—The
plant should be taken out of the ground, and
replanted after its second leaf; whatever may
be the vigor of the shoots of the first year, its
roots are too tender and too spongy to bear the
severe wounds inflicted in digging out and
replanting. After the second year, the roots
are ligneous and hardy. Notwithstand-
ing these favorable conditions, the pro-
prietor should carefully watch tha digging
out, for the ignorance or the carelessness of the
laborer might jeopardise the existence of the
best plant. In the third year the roofs are too
strong and too deep to escape mutilation when
the plants are being lifted; the two year old
plant is therefore unquestionably the best. The
nursery requires some care during the two
years. The weeds must be well kept down,
to prevent their intercepting the rays of the
sun. If the shoots are too long and too numer-
ous in August (December January,
in Australia) they must he cut off at


Wages
48 francs.
Four cubic yards (or 5000 lb
manure), 7 francs each
28
J1
Cost of cuttings
10
»»
Cartage and planting..
10
»»
First culture..
12
Hoeing, first year
12
>)
Pruning and thinning out,
second year
15
>>
Unrooting the plants and cartage
to vineyard
13
about one foot or 15 inches from the
cutting and the small ones be pulled
off. When pruning in the following spring
one eye only is left on the spur. The
nursery then receives a slight or superficial
hoeing. From the 15th to the 30th June
(November —December) the shoots are
thinned out, leaving only the best, which are
nipped off at one foot or 15 inches. Weeding
as in the first year.
Cost of planting 40,000 cuttings in a nursery.
—Forty thousand require an area of 13
perches.*
To plant 40,000, six men and six boys are em-
ployed. The cuttings are prepared by
women.
Total 148 fr. (£6) +
That nursery will give 30,000 good plants,
which will cover 7 acres. A nursery of two
acres could be planted for £2OO, and would
be sufficient to fill up 200 acres with two-year
old vines. I have established in this manner
nurseries containing two and three millions of
cuttings, which have given me four fold the
quantity required for my 80 acres. The cir-
cumstances under which I established these
nurseries were so unfavorable that I anticipated
* This close planting is decidedly objectionable
Where land is no object.
+ If the cost of the cuttings is left out these esti-
mates of planting will apply to Australia. One man
can plant 3000 per day, and his wages are not more
than 4s per day. True, women and children are not
to be had at the same price, but manuring is not re-
quired, and, the weeding is not so costly.— Tuans,
that one fourth only of the cuttings would
grow. The contrary was the result—three-
fourths succeeded.
The planting of the vine.—The ground
should be cultivated to the depth required.
This depth must be determined by the nature
of the soil. If the layer of vegetable soil is
thin (5 to 7 inches) it must not be turned up
so that it will occupy the bottom, ajidithe sub-
soil the surface. It may, however, be mixed
up with one-third of its own bulk of the sub-
soil. This result is obtained by using the
Dombaste plough, which trenches the ground
to a depth of 9 or 12 inches. This plough
may be followed by a subsoil plough, so as to
break up the ground 5 or 7 inches deeper than
the first. A cross ploughing would
perfect the preparation of the soil.
This trenching costs from thirty shillings to
two pounds per acre. Hand trenching costs
not less than £4 and is no better.* The ground
must be trenched for the planting of cuttings
as well as for the planting of rooted plants, and
it should be done as long as possible before the
planting; in all cases the ground must be
cleared of weeds, well harrowed and rolled
either with the Crosskill or the ordinary
roller.
Laying out the ground for planting.—The
soil must be smooth and firm to enable the
planter to make the squares and the lines,
and to observe a perfect parallel-
ism. One yard more or less in the length
of a rectangle, an angle incorrectly set off,
is sufficient to disturb the order of the whole
plantation, and cause great inconvenience. I
know it because I have been placed in that
predicament by the neglect and inaptitude of
a former vigneron.
Instruments required.—A certain number of
T’s, each side of which is about 10 feet, are ex-
tremely useful. The head of the Tis laid
parallel to the base of operation, the tail indi-
cates the direction of the lines. Two survey-
ing chains, marked at every yard, show the
exact distances of the lines and vines, while
• £l6 in Victoria,


several chains laid parallel at each of the marks
showing the distances show equally the places
for the vines.
Aspect.—Before laying out the roads, foot-
paths, drains, and squares, the orientation must
he decided. Theoretically, the best orientation
is north and south because the rows of vines
receive the insolation east and west, and at noon
the sun strikes directly the ground between
the rows. When the direction of the lines is
E. or W., there is some portion of the ground
and also fruits which are always in the shade.
In certain sites, pre-existing roads or the
natural formation may prevent choosing the
direction. Therefore, it may he varied from N.
to E., S., or W. -But in any case it should
never go from E. to S. to incline from W. to
N., at least in France, where experience has
proved from time immemorial that the western
and northern aspects, particularly the first,
were the worst for vineyards.
The planting.—When the roads and paths
are laid out, and the places for the vines
marked, the planting with cuttings or rooted
plants may he let by contract or done by day
labor, for the operation is simply mechani-
cal, and the intelligence of the vigneron
is not required. [I have even found that
intelligence is sometimes very objectional, so
much so that I have been obliged to renounce
employing vignerons for planting nurseries and •
vineyards, and for the work of the four or five
first years. * French, Belgian, and German
laborers have carried out, to my entire
satisfaction, works that 1 was constrained
to refuse to sixty of the most ex-
perienced vignerons in France because they
would obstinately adhere to their routine of
working. They were right to do so—to do as they
had been in the habit of doing—and I was
certainly wrong to employ intelligent and ex-
perienced men when I was reserving to myself
all the intellectual part of the works, and
when I wanted only willing arms.
• I met with the same difficulty when planting
Tahilk and the Goulburn Valley vineyards.— Tiuks.
Necessity ’of planting the vines level with
the soil.—Should the vines be planted
above or below the level of the surface
of the soil—upon ridges or in holes ?
In healthy soils, the nature of which allows
the water to penetrate to three feet deep, and
retain, by capillarity, the moisture necessary
to vegetation, the vines should be planted, as
should also most other vegetables, level with
the ground. However, the vines require
sometimes to be planted upon ridges, as in
soils too moist in themselves, or through the
proximity of an impermeable subsoil. Under
any circumstances the vines should not be
planted in holes to be maintained there for any
length of time. Provignage seems to establish
a contrary principle founded upon long practice,
but provignage is, properly speaking, nothing
else than a means of filling in vacant places
and manuring the old vines. Vignerons, in
many vineyards, plant the vines in open
trenches, and that with the sanction of long
experience and an appearance of great success,
hut stillit isa condition moreproperfornurseries
or for the first years of a vineyard; it is also a
mode of trenching. But when the vine is full
grown, and in full produce, the soil has been
brought to a perfect level.
Of the roots of the vine.—ls deep planting
necessary or advantageous ? It is neither j it
is injurious and contrary to the constitution of
the vine, as it would be contrary to that of any
other vegetable, the stem of which would be kept
coveredover with earth as fast as it grows, and so
far as to separate its mesophyte,and consequently
the natural origin of its strongest roots. It is
fortunate for those who plant deeply that the
vine has infinite vital resources, and that it
shoots fresh rootlets from each knot buried ; for
the inferior roots could not rise up to the good
soil, they would be wanting warmth, and would
rot for the want of sap and through humidity.
The best roots of the vine are those that spring
from the stem at five or six inches below the
surface of the ground. There they are stimulated
by the exterior temperature at their summit,
while their extremities, spreading and deepen


ing, seek for moisture and nutriment in every
direction, which they grasp with a thermo-
electric force, resulting from the contrast of
temperatures of the two extremities. Deep
planting is nothing elsebut an error perpetuated
by routine. If the vigneron would, every year,
when filling up the hole made for the provignage,
cut off all the rootlets formed above the primi-
tive and deep roots, he would soon see his vines
perish, and thus ascertain the weakness and in-
efficiency of the roots grown in the subsoil; but
he does not do that, and he is right; his vine-
yard thrives, and that is sufficient j only he
attributes that prosperity to the inferior roots,
while it is due to the new and superior ones.
But its expensive work has always retarded
and often compromised the success. How often
a proprietor has been disappointed by a pro-
vignage too deep!
Vine planting compared to asparagus planting.
—Twenty years ago asparagus were also
erroneously planted deep, and a good crop was
the exception. At present the asparagus are
seen growing luxuriantly on the surface. If a
two-year old root is sometimes planted in a
shallow ditch, it is to give the asparagus the
length of white stem desired, for the hole is
filled up in the third year, whilst the head is
growing ; and then, at the end of the season,
the earth is speedily removed, to give the plant
the benefit of the atmospheric influences. M.
Gauthier, a skilful horticulturist of Paris, has
just sent in a report to the Imperial and Cen-
tral Horticultural Society upon the best method
of cultivating the asparagus by seed or young
plants, like all other vegetables, on a level soil.
I have inspected his productions, which surprise
for their precocity and beauty. Well, what I
say of the asparagus, I say also of the vine ; it
should be planted in such a manner that the
first ring of roots be level with the surface of
the soil, whence its roots will dart forth to
any possible or desired depth, according to the
special nature of the soil and the subsoil. The
garden trellis has other exigencies. Sometimes
it has for its object to obtain a vigorous and
long stem, sometimes to grow large bunches of
grapes, well filled up with a liquid, rich in
water and light in sugar. The addition of
roots by layering concur singularly to
those results, but a vineyard is net
a trellis, the table grape is not the
wine grape ; and, besides, if layering has
many disadvantages for vineyards, it has not
the disadvantages pf a deep planting, for the
layers remain within reach of atmoSjSierio in-
fluences.
Care to be bestowed on the vineyard.—When
the planting is done, each vine should be
pruned to one bud only, the ground cleared and
stirred, so as to present a perfectly clean ap-
pearance. A vineyard must be coquettishly
and neatly brought up, and maintained in that
condition. At all times, its toilette must be
a special object of care, for the vigneron and
proprietor should take a pride in the state of
its appearance. The gross annual returns will
be £BOOO for every 247 acres, the expenditure
£4OOO, leaving, therefore, a net income of £4OOO
per annum. The vine cultivated on such a
large scale makes a lordly property ; it creates
mansions and pays numerous servants ; it is a
great and rich lady, who cannot live in
disorder, filth, or abandonment. It must be kept
in a stately style, since it can afford to pay the
expenses.
Vineyard let by contract or worked by day
laborers. —All, or most of the operations re-
quired in a vineyard should be executed by con-
tract. It is often difficult to decide between
daily work (by which good but little work is
obtained), and contract work (which gives
plenty, but generally bad, work). The solu-
tion of that problem consists in the practical
knowledge of what an ordinary laborer or
vigneron can do of the special work in ten
hours. When contracts are let out, the time
required to carry out the work should be always
specified j for if under any ordinary circum-
stances “ time is money,” in cultivation it is
more than money, it is life. The contractor
whothinks he has arightto defer his workcauses
sometimes an irretrievable injury.


CHAPTER X.
HUSBANDRY OP THE VINEYARD PROM ITS
PLANTING TO THE TIME OF ITS FULL
PRODUCTION.
First year.—After the planting, three or four
hoeings or scarifyings are all that the young
vineyard requires; nipping off or disbudding
would be hurtful. If the foliage is well de-
veloped, the roots expand more, and the vine is
more firmly established. The filling up of the
missing plants takes place during the second
year.
Second year.—The second year is less ex-
pensive. The vine requires no staking yet*,
and no manure, for its small roots could not
benefit by it. From the Ist of November to the
15th of December f, the plants which failed
must be replaced by new rooted ones. If the
first planting be carefully done, the failures
will not exceed five per cent. When stable
manure is used for planting, it must not be put
on the roots of the vines, for it would cause
death. There must be always one or two
inches of soil between. When .the vineyard
has been planted with cuttings, and there are
many failures, it is best not to fill up in the
second year, for many of the apparently dead
cuttings may grow vigorous shoots yet. This
fact, which I have often observed,
proves how a vine branch stratified
may retain its force of vegetation.
In all cases where there is no intention of re-
sorting to provignage, or any other system of
layering, to replace the missing plants, a number
of vines equal to the anticipated failures must
berearedinnurseries. After filling up the blanks,
the young vineyard requires no care for the
winter. However, if the land is poor, and if
also there is some good vegetable soil in the
vicinity, the second year is the time to effect e
thorough earthing. Forty, eighty, or as much
* In Anstralia the vine requires staking in the
second year, {or it is then as forward and strong as in
France in the third year.— Tbiks.
t Hay and June is Australia.
as four hundred cubic yards per acre, deposited
in ridges to the north-west * of the rows of
vines, is always an excellent operation, especially
if the soil does not cost more than 5d or 7£d per
yard. If such a large quantity is not
available, twenty yards are not to be disdained.
It will always have a favorable influence on
the vines.
FIG. 17.
Pruning.—Pruning is done in March, April
and May (in France), the latter being the
best. Pruning can be reduced to such a simple
precept .that everybody can practice it. To cut
off close to the stem with the secateur (Fig. 17)
all the branches but one the most vigorous and
the nearest to the ground, and to cut off this last
one, leaving only one eye, that is all the
pruning for the second year. The secateur is
preferable to the pruning knife, not-
withstanding the contrary opinion of
eminent vignerons and arboriculturists.
Such skilful men certainly do more and better
work with the knife, but when the proprietor
is obliged to employ any ordinary vigneron or
laborer to prune his vineyard, the secateur is
preferable. It requires long practice to use
the knife well and quickly. With regard to
the crushing of the shoots by the secateur, the
vine is too robust to suffer from it. When one
* South-west in Australia.


Fourhoeings ..
.. £1
5
6
Thinning and Nipping off
.. 0
5
0
Sulphur and Sulphate . •
.. 0
7
0
Pruning
.. 0
7
0
Replacing dead Vines ..
.. 0
6
6'
Vegetable Soil,. ..
.. 6
0
0
or more shoots spring from the ground, and one
of them has absorbed sap enough to cause its
development, to the detriment of the shoots
above ground, it should be kept to form the
stem, and in that case the earth should be re-
moved from the plant till the origin of the shoot
is reached ; the shoot should then he pruned to
one eye as the other has been. The pruning of
the second year is not worth more than 4s per
acre, and 6s including the gathering of the
Wood. The pruning should be done as late
as possible, because it promotes vegetation and
because the complete hoeing which would fol-
low renders the vine more subject to hoarfrosts.
Hoeing.—A light hoeing immediately follows
the pruning, and, as its object is principally to
destroy weeds, it should be done in dry weather.
Use of sulphur and sulphate.—lf the vine-
yard is situated in a district where the vine
disease exists or is dreaded, 20 lb per acre of
sulphur should be spread along the rows, and
about 30 grains of sulphate of iron applied to
the root of each vine.
Nipping off.—Under the same circumstances
as above, a general nipping off should be re-
sorted to in the latter part of May and the
beginning of June. This operation should
cause no inconvenience, because the second
year is not the one in which two or three whole
shoots are needed. Nipping is unnecessary if
blight is not expected.
Other hoeings.—The second hoeing, super-
ficial as the first, is done in June ; the third in
August, a fourth is sometimes required in Sep-
tember. In fact, the hoeings must be so fre-
quent that the ground will remain bare during
the vegetation of the vine.
EXPENDITURE DURING THE SECOND TEAR PER ACRE.
Total.. £8 10 0
Third year.—The third year is much more
expensive than the second, on account of the
stakes. For it is time to. take care of the
fine shoots to form the vine and to carry fruits.
Manuring.—ln the third year poor soils will
require 24 cubic yards of stable manure per
acre, in November and December. This man-
ure is put in a trench, made with the spade or
plough, and covered over with the soil. After
that operation the vineyard is left for the
winter.
Pruning.—The pruning is still simple. Cut ;
ting off all the shoots hut the best GtiSf which
is pruned to two eyes, such is the pruning for
the third year.
Hoeing and staking.—The pruning is fol-
lowed by a light superficial hoeing. Sulphur
and sulphate are used if needed, and then the
stakes are planted to the north or west of
each vine. Great care must be taken to pre-
vent the destruction of any of the already
swelled buds ; for, if one be pulled off, the dis-
position of the vine would be compromised for
the following year. However, the collar of the
branch, that is to say, its junction with the
stem or old wood, is generally very rich in
under shoots, which grow vigorously, and
repair the accident, since the production of the
fruit is not yet the object to be obtained in that
year. The long stakes must be fixed strong
enough to resist all winds. Nothing is more
dangerous to the vine than the falling down of
the stakes. Nothing shows more the careless-
ness of the vigneron, or the slovenliness of the
overseer or proprietor, than crooked rows and
stakes in every direction.
Nipping off.—The two or three best shoots
must not be nipped off, but this operation must
be practised upon the inferior shoots with great
care especially if the former are not very pro-
mising.
Tying.—After the thinning, and the nipping
off, the two or three principal shoots are tied on
to the long stake, to guard them against the
winds and to draw more energetically the sap
by their vertical position. The fastening
should not be 100 tight, else it would
crush the leaves and prevent the circulation
of the sap.
Other hoeings and works.—The second hoeing
is done after the tying. In the latter part of
July, a second nipping off and clipping taka


EXPENDITURE PER ACRE FOR
THE THIED
SEAR
Manure
.. £6
5 0
Stakes
5
0 0
Pruning
0
6 0
Hoeings
1
5 6
Nipping off ..
0
4 0
Tying
0
4 0
place; then follows a third and fourth hoeing,
so as to destroy any vestige of weed which might
have grown round the vine. The fourth hoeing
is not effected in the same manner as the others.
The surface of the soil is scraped up, arid the
scrapings are drawn into a ridge, which forms
the nucleus of the' one made in the following
spring along the vines on the opposite side of
their best aspect. The stakes are then taken
out of the ground.*
Staking and unstaking ., 0 8 0
£l3 12 6
Fourth year.—ln the fourth year there are
two very important operations : the palissage
and the pruning.
Palissage and short stakes.—Palissageissimple
and economical. Short stakes are planted in
line with, and in the middle of the space between
the vines ; they are of such length that fifteen
inches will remain out of the ground when they
are firmly driven in. When all the stakes are
levelled, a small staple is fixed on the head of
each of them. A wire No. 10 passes through
those staples, and is fastened, at convenient
distances, to. pegs well driven into the ground,
so that it will easily be kept quite tight. About
150 lb of wire is sufficient for the palissade of
4000 vines. The whole cost of the palissade,
including short and long stakes, would amount
to about £l2 per acre. The wire could be a
smaller one, and the price reduced to one-half;
but, when it is too weak, it is often broken by
cattle, or by the hunters. I have known a
general who could not hunt in a vineyard with-
out falling down, so the proprietor took the wire
away. Cleverwinemerchant,butpoor vigneron.f
* This last operation, which has for its object the
preservation of the stakes, is not practised everywhere
and is certainly unnecessary for Australia.
+ This will appear ludicrous. Any man who chooses
to pay for a permit for shooting (£1) can almost go with
impunity about everybody’s property.
Pruning.—The pruning in the fourth year is
the normal one, for the whole existence
of the vineyard; that is to say, a fruit
bearing branch and a spur for wood are left
on the stem.
FIG. 2.
Figure 2 will give an exact idea of the
pruning to be practised from the fourth year,
the fruit bearing branch A B fastened to the
short stake at B, and wood branch or spur
CD intended to produce two or three shoots
which will require to be fastened to the long
stake, spring from a stem represented as ten
or twelve years old and better shown by
FIG. 1.


but the age of the vine does not alter the
principle nor the effect of the pruning -which
must always be executed in the same manner.
However, if the vine is not to be protected by
any moans after pruning, it would be advisable
to effect the pruning at two different periods
in such a manner that I will try to explain by
figure 1. In the course of February or March,
the old fruit bearing branch AB, as well as
the gourmand *, ADF, are to be removed; the
three shoots, D, E and C, are allowed to re-
main on the stake till the 25th or 30th May ;
the small offshoots and the laterals, however,
may be cut off. Then,after the 25th or 30th of
May, one of the branches, D and E, the one that
shows most fruit, is brought down horizontally
to form the fruit bearing branch, while the
other is out off at E and forms the spur or wood
branch, CE.
This mode of pruning offers a
double advantage ; Ist, the upper buds,
being in a drier current of air, are not so sub-
jected to hoar frosts ; 2nd, it keeps back the
vegetation of the inferior buds and renders
them less liable to frost. Everybody knows
that the upper buds draw the sap, and grow
the first and vigorously at the expense of
the inferior ones, which seem to wait till their
turn arrives ; if then the upper buds are
destroyed by frost, the inferior ones will be-
come a precious resource, and, if both are frozen,
the superior counter-buds of fine cepages will
produce grapes. In that case, to accelerate .the
growth of the fruit, it is advisable to allow the
branches to remain in the vertical position fill
the grapes are well out, and have gained some
strength. I would recommend to treat the
vine as above explained, especially when left
to itself without any shelter.
• This glutton or sponging shoot bears no fruit.
FIG. 4.
Figure 4 represents the vineyard after
pruning, before it has been hoed, the ridge
made, or the mattings fixed.
If the system of protection by straw matting
is adopted, the fourth year is the time to apply
it. In that case the pruning must be done
earlier. To illustrate this operation I will
refer the reader to figures 7,8,9, and 10.1 do not
think it unnecessary to insist upon the efficiency
of that system of protection, proved by repeated
experiments upon a large scale, by calling the
attention of the vigneron to the state of vegeta-
tion as shown by figure 8. Everyone will in-
stinctively see the power and merit of such a
shelter, the truth is that a vine so protected
will defy frosts 4 ° or 5° degrees below
zero, and that as much because it is protected
against humidity, as because it does not lose
any caloric by radiation.


fig. 9.
FIG. 8. '
FIG. 10.
FIG. 10.


FIG. 3.
From the 30th of May to the 30th of June,
when the mattings haye been removed to their
second position to prevent the coulure, and the
shoots of the fruit-bearing branch have been
nipped off two leaves above the higher cluster,
the shoots of the wood branch are tied to the
long stake and those of the fruit-bearing branch
to the wire, as soon as they are strong enough
to allow of that operation (figs 3, 11, and 12).
PIG. 11.
PIG. 12.
Figure 3, although inexact, in that it slows
as many clusters as leaves on the shoots of the
wood branch or spur, shoots which often do not
bear any, is nevertheless a good illustration of
the first nipping off of the fertile shoots (pppppp)
This nipping off is done when the removal of
the mattings to their secondposition takes place ;
the ridge is then reduced by two-thirds of its
original height, the long stake is brought nearer
to the vine and the blossoms are exposed to the
influence of the air and sun, and protected
against the sterilising effects of rain and the
west north-west winds. In the course of July,
when the blossom of the vine is faded, and the
grapes are well formed, a complete nipping and
clipping off must be effected. All the sterile
and useless shoots are taken off, the
counter shoots which have grown are
nipped off at the fourth leaf, and the
shoots of the wood branch are cut off
level with, or a few inches higher, than the
summit of the long stake—after having been
tied up a second time. Then, a third hoeing is
done, and the last trace of the ridge disappears,


PIG. 14.
FIG 6.
It is at this time that the intelligent pro-
prietor and vigneron will observe whether
their expectations, founded upon a good flower-
ing, are now realised. The principal causes of
the coulure are, without doubt, the cold rains
and winds in June, and certain meteorological
circumstances that the gardeners call weather
without sap. The mattings are a perfect
remedy against these causes, but the poverty
of the soil and the over-loading the vine with
fruit are so many causes of coulure. If the
coulure takes place when the vines are pro-
tected and the season favorable to the fecunda-
tion, it is a sign that the vineyard requires
manuring. The withering and the imperfection
in the maturity of the grapes are a warning to
the vigneron. Till the falling off of the blos-
som (flower) the soil is always rich enough for
the development of the herbaceous vegetation
of the vine; its poverty is revealed only at the
time of the formation of the fruit. Before
summer pruning, thinning out and tying, the
mattings are raised vertically to the north,
west, or N.W. of the raws, from the Ist to 15th
of July.
Figures 13 and 14 illustrate the 3rd position
of the mattings. They act like walls. At the
end of August another thinning is applied, and
some clusters are buried in leaves ; the latter
should be removed.
FIG. 13.


Figure 6 represents exactly the 'summer
pruning of the fruit hearing branch at the end
of August.
FIG. 5.
Figure 5 represents in perspective the state
'of the vines at the end of August and the
beginning of September. If the gathering has
not taken place by this time and a rainy and
cold weather threatens to spoil the grapes be-
fore they are ripe, the mattings must be re-
placed in the position they occupied in the
spring (fig. 15 and 16.) The last of the opera-
tions for the fourth year consists in a light
hoeing or scraping, and the formation of the
ridges.
Fifth, sixth, and seventh year.—All the
operations indicated for the fourth year, except
the staking and palissage, which is fixed once
for all, are repeated in the fifth, sixth and seventh
years, in the same order and with the same care
as in the fourth; the only difi'erence to be ob-
served is to allow, according to the strength of
the plant, from 4 to 8 clusters in the fifth year (
8 to 12 in the sixth, 12 to 16 in the seventh,
and from 16 to 20 in the eighth year.
Eighth year.—ln its eighth year, in the
northern regions, the vine is adult or full
grown, is in a state of full production, and for
20 years longer it will maintain its vigor and
fertility if on land where it was not cultivated
before, and if the proper nourishment is given
to it. After, 30 years the fecundity may decline
and even be destroyed in certain soils, but a pro-
ductive period of2o years creates so much wealth
that one needs not be pre-occupied by such a
contingency, which, after all, seldom happens,
and which I believe impossible'"’’?! 1 ''care and
adequate nourishment are accorded with regu-
larity and perseverance. In the central and
southern regions, where the soil is good, and
the vine intelligently trained, it is in full pro-
duct when six years old, and gives a regular
crop even at five.
Annual expenses for one acre of adult vine-
yard.—" When the vineyard is planted with fine
eepages, and the soil of a medium quality, the
expenses of culture will be as follows,
namely:—
Manure ... .. .. £3 16 0
Pruning ... .. .. 0 14 0
First hoeing, forming ridges
and staking ... .. 112 0
Wear and tear of stake and
wire ... ... .. 12 0
Disbudding, tying, and clipping
off ... .. ... 10 0
Three hoeings .. .. 14 0
Gathering, carriage, ferment-
ing, pressing, casks and keep-
ing, at 4}d per gallon 352
gallons... ... .. 6 2 5
Unstaking, hoeing, and filling
up blanks ~. .. 13 4
Total .. £l6 3 6
Annual product of one acre of an adult vine-
yard without preserving mattings.—The mean
produce will always be above 350 gallons, and,
if the vineyard is planted with the finest
species, the average price per gallon will never
be below 2s, or £35 4s per acre. Deduct-
ing the £l6 3s 6d expenditure, it would leave
an annual net profit of £l9 0s 6d, representing
5 per cent, interest on a capital of £320.
Annual product of one acre of adult vine-
yard, protected with mattings. If the system
of mattings is applied, the average produce
will be doable, or above 700 gallons, and the


One acre of
and* ..
... £16
0
0
Expenditures
1st
year
16
0
0
n
2nd
»»
8
0
0
3rd
»»
.. 14
0
0
>•
4th
»>
.. 18
0
0
5th
it
9
12
0
a
6th
a
8
0
0
it
7th
a
.. 2
8
0
gross return £7O Bs. But the expenditure
will be larger, namely :
Expenditure of unprotected vine
yard, as above stated .. £l6 3 6
Mattings and fixing same .. 8 0 0
Gathering and winemaking,
casks, &c. .. .. .. 6 2 4
£3O 5 10
Deducting that' amount from the gross returns,
£7O Bs, it leaves a net profit of £4O 2s 2d, show-
ing a great advantage over the ordinary culture
o the vine.
Cost of one acre of vineyard after the seventh
year:—
£92 0 0
Add to the expenditure of the fifth year the
amount realised on the produce of the fourth
year, £3 4s; to the 6th year, the produce of
the 6th, £6 8s; to the 7th year the produce
of the 6th, £l2 16s. Addalso the interest on all
the outlay, about £2O, which, however, is quite
reimbursed by the produce of the seventh
year. In the above calculation, the wine is
only valued at one shilling per gallon, because,
the vineyard, being imperfectly grown, or
under the age of maturity, the quality of its
produce is inferior, and only worth one-half of
what it fis when adult. The above statements
show that a vineyard unprotected will give 17
per cent, upon the capital invested, and if pro-
tected, will give from 35 to 40 per cent. If it
is the vigneron himself, assisted by his family,
who plants and cultivates the vineyard, the
result is still more advantageous, for, during
the seven years, the capital disbursed for labor
amounts nearly to £5O per acre. Therefore, a
• This price is lor laud below the medium
vigneron who can dispose of £3O or £5O, cat!
plant an acre of vineyard which will give him
at the end of eight years from £24 to £4O
annually. But, under any circumstances, the
absolute condition of success, for the vigneron
as well as for the proprietor, lies in the cultiva-
tion of fine species, fit to produce wines of a
real and mean value of 2s per gallon. All fine
cepagesindry situations, where the vine can
mature its fruit, will produce wine of high
value and of certain sale, especially since the
English market has been thrown open by the
new treaty of commerce.
CHAPTER XI.
Creation of a large estate, founded upon viti-
culture.—According to the statements of the
foregoing chapter, from the eighth year an acre
of vineyard will pay annually the vigneron, in
labor alone, upwards of £B, and give the pro-
prietor a revenue of £l6. It will have cost the
latter £96, and given £4B to the vigneron who
has brought it into its normal state. If the
vineyard, created and finished, contains 250
acres, the salaries paid to vignerons during its
period of infancy will amount to £12,000, and
will have cost to the proprietor £24,000,
including all interest and expenses. After the
eighth year the vineyard will pay the
vignerons annually £2OOO, and £4OOO to
the proprietor. Two thousand pounds repre-
sent a good budget for fifty families of vig-
nerons necessary for the cultivation of vineyards
containing 250 acres. £4OOO represents an
interest of 10 per cent, on a capital of £40,000
and there is no land planted with fine cepages
which is not worth £l6O per acre; therefore
the landed property is well worth the capital
invested. But, of the capital there is only
£24,000 expended; the £16,000 remaining is to
be spent in the following manner ; £4016 for
cellars, presses, vats, and implements ; £2024
for the residences of the master, overseer, and
vignerons, for gardens, orchards, fences, etc.
and also for the establishment of a small farm,


which must be annexed to the vineyard. The
produce of the vineyard will then enable the
proprietor to have a lordly vendangeoir * with
a village, mansion, gardens, orchards and farm.
And that is not all, the 250 acres will insure
comfort to 50 families. Such would be the
magnificent result for the capitalist who re-
quires 10 per cent, upon his capital advanced ;
but for the settler, who would be contented
with 5 per cent., a return of £4OOO represents
a capital of £BO,OOO, out of which £24,000 only
have been devoted to the formation of the
vineyard. There would remain £56,000 for
mansion, park, hothouses, garden, and farms
A vendangeoir is the whole of the vineyard
establishment.
of 1200 or 1500 acres, which would support
themselves. A farm of 1500 acres of poor soil
necessitates a minimum outlay of £24,000 be-
fore it can give an annual net profit of £240, or
2J per cent., after paying the wages of fifteen
families at £4O each per annum. The revenue
of such a farm will never afford the expenses
of a mansion, parks, hothouses, and
those who expect it to do so will be de-
ceived ; the vine alone, in France and in the
regions where it brings its fruit to maturity
has the power of creating wealth in poor and
abandoned soils ; alone it can give 10 per cent,
on the capital invested, and alone it will be
found capable of maintaining great and rich
estates.
VINIFICATION.
CHAPTER I.
General principles.
The great art of making wine is of primitive
simplicity. Its best precepts are in the tradi-
tional practice j modem science is of service
only in demonstrating the elements of vinifica-
tion, in measuring their proportions and in
describing the conditions under which it is
effected. Chemistry is to the making of wine
what physic is to musical composition. The
genius of the wine is in the vine, and its
character is stamped in each species of vine.
The soil, climate, season and aspect may
modify the character, but the wine always
will possess peculiar characteristics by which
the vine that has produced it can he recognised.
To make soup for your laborers, plant pump-
kins. To refresh the vulgar, plant water melons.
For the service of yonr table plant cantaloup
melons; but never expect chemistry to trans-
form your pumpkins into cantaloup nor even
into water melons j do notexpect it from the soil,
climate, aspect, Or season j do not expect it even
from God who leaves to your intelligence the
choice of his gifts, but who does not change his
laws to suit the wish of folly or avidity.
Therefore to make good wine, plan,t good
cepages. Gather the fruit when well ripe.
Gather them promptly, cleanly, and
judiciously. Separate the good grapes
from the mediocre, and especially from the bad.
To make white wine carry the grapes speedily
to the press, previously well cleaned. Distri-
bute all the juices from each press in casks well
prepared, without any bad taste or bad
color. Let the wine ferment in £*-
covered temperate place till it is calmed.
After one or two weeks put it down in a cellar


which has a uniform temperature of 51 to 63
degrees. Fill up your casks every eight days, rack
off once or twice at the most each winter, and
in dry and cold weather, and you will always
have the best possible white wines that such
cepages, soil, climate and season can produce.
To make your red wines, crush and press, either
with a wooden shovel or the bare feet well
washed. Then fill up the vats, previously
carefully prepared, to four-fifths of their depth,
level the surface of the grapes with a rake and
beat them down with the back of the
wooden shovel; close the doors of the ferment-
ing house and take care that the temperature
does not go below 59 degrees. Listen two or
three times a day to the sound of the fermen-
tation by applying your ear to the vat;
as soon as silence has succeeded the tumult of
the boiling, draw off your wine by the tap
previously fixed at the bottom of the vat, for
the wine is made and its fermentation accom-
plished, and anything beyond that is detrimental
maceration. Fill your casks with the so drawn
wine, but by successive portions, up to three-
fourths of their capacity; send directly the
murk to the press, and complete the filling up
of the casks in equal quantities with the wine
pressedout of the murk. A few days after put
your casks in cellars below ground, or in those
at the surface. Fill them up carefully every
eight days, rack off in January or February,
and you will thus have the best possible red
wines that the kind of vine, soil, climate and
season can produce. -To make rosy wines,
partridge-eye colored, or, in other words, wines
of intermediate colors between red and white,
the wine must be drawn off from the vat when
the fermentation has reached two-thirds of its
completion, or twenty-four hours at least and
forty-eight at the most after the first sound or
bubbling caused by fermentation has been per-
ceived. The murk is pressed immediately after
the drawing off, and the subsequent treatment
is the same as that of other wines. Under any
ordinary circumstances the foregoing recom-
mendation would suffice to enable any vine-
grower to make good wines, the best wines of
France; but in order further to elucidate the
subject it is neeessaryto reconsider the principal
indications in their practical and technical point
of view. I have included the sparkling and
liquor wines in the general observations,
because they belong, in some degree, to a special
industrial preparation.
CHAPTER 11,
VINTAGE.
The yendange, or gathering, of the grapes Is
the first act of the vinification, and the last and
sole purpose of vine culture. The gathering is
the supreme fact which resumes and sanctions
all the labor of the vigneron,and all the expenses
of the proprietor. An abundant crop of v ell
ripened grapes is a true conquest, the result of
a six months’ campaign, during which spring
frosts, cold June rains, hail, insects, diseases,
autumn frost and rain had to be overcome and
subdued. There is nothing more dramatical,
more exciting, than the struggle of the vine-
grower against the enemies that attack his
work without intermission and to the last. In
vine districts a good vintage is a general
triumph, which cheers up the laborer in his
toils, and heightenstheanimationandjoyfulness
of the whole population. But this unanimous
satisfaction is seldom given by capricious
autumn, to the hazards of which the vigneron
abandons himself with the quiescence and
fatalism worthy of a Turk. Fine and good
vintages are now getting more scarce, and that
is not because of the inclemency of
the seasons, but because of the stupid
ardor of covetousness and desire of obtaining
a crop of any description to make a wine,
whatever may be the quality. Sixty years
ago one used to grow grapes to make wine ;
since, and especially for the last twenty years,
wine is made solely for the money that it realises.
Wine is made with grapes grown from coarse
cepages, crammed on a small space of neglected
soil; it is made with green grapes, and specula


tion, trafficking audaciously in names, destroys
the former reputation of the wines of France.
Oh, manufacturers and merchants of pretended
French wines, how long will your impudent
traveller persuade foreigners that your wines
from gamais, chasselas, gouais, verdillon and
verjuice, qualified by the addition of glucoses,
molasses and raw sugars, are the true and good
French wines ? The answer is ready: English
industry offers similar wines, made with pre-
served grapes, sugar and acids. To re-establish
the trade of genuine French wines, vineyards
must be planted with fine cepages, and the fruit
be allowed to come to perfect maturity. The
French wines are light and generous,inimitable
in their agrceableness, and incomparable for
their hygienic influence on the body and
mind.
Ban de vendange * —Advantages of late
gatherings—Disadvantage of the ban de
vendange.—ln old times an assembly of notables,
assisted by experienced vignerons, fixed for
everybody a day before which gathering grapes
was not allowed, and that day never preceded
the complete maturity of the fruit; the quality
of the wine was the pride of the man and of the
country, and it was very properly thought that
no single individual had a right to compromise
a reputation the maintenance of which was a
matter of general concern.f The desire to
realise the crop as early as possible is permitted
to influence the fixing of the ban de vendange
where it exists. The crop must be turned into
money as soon as possible, and the September
rains and October frosts are dreaded like
irresistible scourges, from the grasp of which
the grapes must be taken, be they only half
• Vendange is used for gathering and also for all the
operations of wine making.
+ Cyrus Redding thinks wrongly that the ban de
vendange is an infringement upon the personal rights
secured by the Revolution to every Frenchman. The
ban de vendange is no law of the code, it exists only in
a few localities, and even there it is not strictly carried
out; in fact, it is a kind of understanding among the
inhabitants of a commune, and any of them who chose
to override it can do so with impunity.—
ripe; what matters the quality, as long asthere
is a sale for produce, and it will always sell, the
wine having become so scarce. This anticipated
fixing of the ban de vendange is, therefore,
exercised without a regard to the quality of the
wine, and for that reason the complete suppres-
sion of the custom is desirable.
Danger of early gatherings.—The inclemency
of the weather in autumn is generally less in-
jurious and less fatal than people believe. For
forty years I have observed with interest most
of the vintages, and their episodes relatively to
meteorological effects. I have often seen the
proprietors in Burgundy, Champagne and
Tourraine regretting their early gatherings,
and I have always ascertained that the tem-
porisers of the same localities obtained better
crops and better wines. To make the good
wines, the true wines of France, except, per-
haps, in some Southern localities, the grapes
must be gathered when in their highest state of
maturity. A perfect maturity is of as great
importance as the choice of fine cepages. For,
in truth, the juice of Chasselas may measure
four or five degrees with the gleucometer, and of
well ripened gamai six or eight degrees, when
the juice of the best black Pineau, if unripe,
may mark zero ; when the Pineau is slightly
red, it marks two degrees, then four, six and
eight, and it is only by longer and complete
ripening that its juice reaches ten, twelve and
even fourteen degrees. It is evident, therefore,
that the perfect maturity of the grapes is the
necessary complement of the fineness of the vine
which produces it. So the vigneron who gathers
his Pineau as soon as it is black outside and
green inside, obtains wine worth one shilling
per gallon, and the vigneron who gathers it a
fortnight or a month later, when it is thoroughly
black, gets a wine worth from three to four
shillings a gallon. The choice of the time for
the vintage is of great moment. For several
years I have seen the finest black grapes of the
great vineyards in Champagne sold at from 24s
to 32s the cwt. Well, a vineyard well tended
will always produce one ton of grapes
per acre, which would give a return of £24 or


Advantages of late vintages.—l have no hesi-
tation in laying down the principle that the
vintage should be late in the season, as late as
possible, and that all the efforts of the dis-
tinguished vinegrowers should not be directed
towards the saving of the fruit from the in-
clemencies of the weather, but to protect it
against those inclemencies till its perfect ma-
turity. An instance of that practice and the
proof of its results are to be found at Thomery;
it is in that locality one may learn in what the
true maturity of the grape consists. When, in
September, one visits the trelliss and espaliers of
Messrs Rose and Charmery, the golden color
and the apparent perfect maturity of the grapes
draws the most emphatic expressions of admira-
tion from the visitor,who is astonished when told
that they will require two or three weeks more to
attain perfection. The admirer is inclined to
think that those skilful vinegrowers are taking
advantage of his credulity; it is not so, however,
for in two or three weeks those grapes will be
double in value; and for that reason care and
trouble are not spared to preserve them against
rain and frost. In many vineyards, such as
Vouvray, Sauterne, and several others, without
the use of any protective means, the vintage is
Commenced as late as possible. In some locali-
ties the proprietors wait till the pellicle of the
grape has reached the state of fermentation and
is covered with mouldiness; to make the best
and most highly esteemed wines I have ascer-
tained myself the excellence of this practice;
in 1846 I made a cask of white wine from
mealier grapes, the surface of which was all
covered with mould, and so much so that when
taken off the vine a cloud of dust would arise
and the grapes fall from the stalk. That wine
had neither a rotten or mouldy, taste and kept
admirably all its fine qualities. Successive
gatherings of the grapes as they reach maturity
would appear at first sight an excellent prac-
tice to make good wine—we shall see farther
what to think of it; but, in any case the un-
ripe or imperfectly matured grapes must be
strictly thrown out. To sum up, when the
vintage has for its object the making of wine
of repute, and of high value, it must be as late
as possible; an early vintage can only produce
wines of middling quality or of no value.
• Musts, and Means to Appreciate them
BY THE GIEUCOMETER.—TRANSFORMATION
of the Musts by the Addition of water
OR SUGAR.
Must.—The must is the juice which results
from the pressing of the grapes before fermen-
tation. The grapes are pressed with the hand
or with the end of a small hand-press.
Hand-press.—To avoid the direct bruising,
and more especially to obtain with more facility
all the juice of the grapes from their state of
verjuice till the time has come when their
state of perfect maturity permits their being
pressed without great effort, I have caused
four small hand-presses to be made.
Fig. 18. Fig. 19.
FIG.IB—EXTERIOR VIEW FIG. 19—SECTION OF
OF THE HAND-PRESS. THE HAND-PRESS.
A is a cylinder made of strong plate perfor-
ated to two thirds of its height and at the


zs
bottom, and corrugated and strengthened at the
top so as to receive the screw frame D which
supports the screw E. When the cylinder has
been filled up with grapes and the screw-press
folded down on one side (this frame moves on
the side hinges) a wooden cylindrical piston, B,
is lowered and pressed down on the grapes
with the hands, and afterwards with the screw
brought back to its verticil position ; if all
the juice is not extracted when the piston is
completely down, the screw is brought up
again and the piston is loaded with the wooden
discs CCC. During the operation the press is
placed in a tub or any other recipient large
enough to hold the produce.
Gleucometer.—The wine-maker must have
recourse to numerous gleucometrical experiments
to ascertain, Ist. The relative value of the
grapes of the different vines. 2nd. The pre-
cise time of their perfect maturity. The must-
weighing instrument, gleucometer or densimeter,
ought to be the indispensable guide of the vine-
grower to select the cepages and determine the
time for the vintage.
When the must from the grapes of a certain
cepage, the soil,, climate, season and maturity
being the same, weigh by gleucometer, a degree
constantly above the must of the other cepages,
it ought to be preferred and classed in the first
rank. As long as the fruit of a known cepage
is improving or will improve in gleucometrical
degrees, it must remain on the vine if it is not
after the Ist November , These two essential
precepts for the production of the best possible
wine cannot be always strictly applied j the
infecundity of certain cepages, their specific
savor and odor, their incompatability with
certain soils and climates, a baneful season, and,
above all, the autumnal rains and frosts, often
modify those precepts; but, still they must
remain in the mind of the vinegrower as the
expression of the ideal perfection which he
ought to seek to realise at any sacrifice. The
gleucometer is a simple and inexpensive in-
strument resembling all the areometers and
thermometer used by everybody.
: FIG. 20.—Gleaco-senometer. FIG.
meter. FIG. 22.—Gauge in which to
instruments 20 and 21.
21. —Gleuco-
immerse the
The gleucometer indicates in an absolute
manner the density of the must, and in a rela-
and in a rela-
tive manner only, the quantity of sugar which
concurs to increase that density; the polari-
meter gives precise results upon the richness
in sugar of the must, but the optical
instrument is not yet within reach
of everybody, and the gleucometer gives ap-
proximative results, quite sufficient for wine-
making, especially if its scale, having for zero
the density of water at the temperature of 53 °
Farenheit is made large enough to show the
hundredth parts of the density. One degree
of the gleucometer represents about two ounces
of sugar per gallon of wine, or one part of
pure alcohol for every 12 gallons of wine.
Therefore, if at any time it is desirable to in-


crease by one degree the proportion of spirit in
the -wine, two ounces of cane sugar must be
added for every gallon of wine. It would
require four ounces of any other sugar to pro-
duce the same effect. But the must of the
grapes contains also non-saccharine and non-
reducible matters in alcohol, which form also
its density. However, those matters have only
an influence of one-tenth or a fifteenth upon
the number of degrees shown by the gleu-
cometer. By substraoting one-twelfth from
that number, the mean quantity of sugar con-
tained in the must will be known. This ap-
proximation is quite sufficient for practical
purposes.
How to ascertain the quantity of sugar with
the gleucometer.—When the juice is pressed
from the grapes and filtered, it is put into the
gauging glass (fig. 22) and the gleucometer is
immersed in it. The gleucometer will sink in
inversed ratio to the density of the liquid, or its
richness in sugar, and the degree marked on
the gleucometer level with the surface of the
liquid indicates approximately the saccharine
matter that it contains. It is only necessary
to substract one from every twelve degrees,
and that will represent nearly the other foreign
matters. The temperature of the juice must
have been previously brought down to 63 ° by
immersing the gauging glass in water recently
drawn from a good well. This operation is ex-
tremely easy in execution and repetition. It
should be applied to all cepages which are
grown in the vineyard, and renewed at the
different degrees of their maturity. The gleu-
oometer is the scale which weighs the richness
of the musts like the alcometer of wines, and
although this ponderable richness does not
constitute the fineness nor the quality of the
juice (properties belonging to the cepages only),
it represents, nevertheless, the most important
element of the wine, the sugar, which will
eventually constitute its strength in spirit.
Each vineyard ought to have a register for
gleucometrical observations. Such a register
would assist considerably the study and
progress of viticulture and analogy.
Relations of the degrees of the musts to the
richness of the wines they produce.—lt is
necessary to know the relations existing
between the degrees of the different musts,
and the correspondent richness of the wines
they produce. Ist. Those relations may be
approximately established in the following
manner :—The musts which do not work above
sor 6 degrees by the gleucometer, are poor
wines and cannot pretend to any reputation in
Prance, and still less in foreign countries ;
they might produce very fine and delicate wines
if made from good cepages, but they are not
strong enough for the great commerce of the
interior or for exportation. 2nd, The musts of
fine cepages which work from 8 to 15 degrees,
produce the good wines, the great wines which
characterise more especially our splendid
viticole production ; it is those wines that
have founded our legitimate fame throughout
the world. 3rd. The musts which rise from 15
to 24 degrees produce wines very rich in
alcohol, in tannin and coloring matter, and are
only fit to blend with other weak wines; or
they produce liquor wines analagous or
superior to some of Spain, Portugal, Italy, or
Madeira, and other meridional countries ; but
those wines cannot be consumed as an habitual
and abundant beverage. They constitute
generous and precious stimulants, when drunk
in small quantity, and they have nothing which
can connect them with the wines of Bordeaux,
Burgundy, Tourraine, and Champagne, which
are the true types of the wines special to
France.
Process by which over rich musts may be
transformed into wines suited for habitual con-
sumption.—The musts, too rich in saccharine
matter, and produced generally in the southern-
most parts of France, have raised a question
relative to the vintage time, and to glen-
cometrical measures. The proprietors who
desired to transform their rich musts into dry
and fluent wines, like those of Burgundy, &0.,
gathered the grapes as soon as the must would
work 12,14, or 15 degrees by gleucometer, and
they were successful. • Other proprietors have
allowed the grapes to come to perfect maturity,
and lowered afterwards the must to 16,14, or 12


degrees by adding before fermentation
the necessary quantity of water to
obtain that result. The second process
complies with the general principle
of gathering when maturity is com-
plete, and is the best, the most rational and ad-
vantageous. It is better, in eifect, to allow the
development of all saccharine matters which
are the fundamental basis of vinosity, and
extend that richness to a larger quantity of
wine, than to suppress it, as well as incur the
loss of the proportion of wine which results
from it. Pure water constitutes generally 75
per cent, of the wine, and, when it is added
before the fermentation, it absorbs sugar,
coloring matter, tannin, salts and acid, which
it requires to form wine, especially if the skins
and stalks are not cast off before the fermenta-
tion.
Increase of the richness of the must by the
addition of sugars.—This grave and dangerous
question has been agitated for a long time, not
with regard to excessive richness, but the
poverty of the musts. Is it possible to increase
the proportion of saccharine matter in musts
by the addition of other divers saccharine
matters? Such is the second question, the
solution of which, affirmatively and absolutely
given without sufficient examination, has con-
tributed as much and more than the planting of
gamais, chasselas, and other coarse cepages, to
tarnish and trifle away the reputation of the
good French wines. There is no doubt that, by
means of saccharine matters, such as glucoses,
molasses, honey, beetroot, and other sugar, the
must may be raised from 2,4, 6 and 8 degrees to
10, 12, 14 and 16 degrees; and undoubtedly,
also, if those additions are made before the
fermentation, they mix well with the wine, but
the results of these mixtures are worthy of the
components. The mixture of chasselas and
glucose produces a detestable drink ; the mix-
ture of gamai with the same glucose produces
a heavy wine, which contains all the qualities
of fecule spirits and the juice of coarse and
vapid grapes. Sugar from grain or fecula, fer-
mented with the pineau, would not be so bad ;
but the must of pineau itself, however weak it
may be, would produce a wine infinitely prer
ferable for taste and health, only it would not
be so strong and intoxicating. Fermentation
draws from the grapes, or rather the must, only
the elements and qualities which are
contained in it. It will never draw from the
gamai what belongs to the pineau alone*
and, notwithstanding the contrary assertions
of several chemists, the different •'"Saccharine
matters contain always the principles of their
origin. With the must from grain, fermenta-
tion will give spirits of grain; by fermentation,
glucose will give spirit of fecula sugar; and
with molasses and divers other sugars it will
give corresponding spirits. If you distil separ-
ately fermented glucose and feeula sugar you
will obtain a spirit undoubtedly vapid and of
disagreeable taste ; if you distil separately
pineau and gamai wine, the spirit from the
former will be far superior to that from the
latter. Every plant, every saccharine fruit, has
its special sugar, which has in its turn its
special alcohol. The characteristics of that
alcohol might be unnoticed or confounded by
chemistry, but neither the palate nor the
stomach will mistake or ignore them.
Vintage in operation.—l will now say a few
words upon the material execution of the vint-
age. The processes vary in each locality, but
they rest upon a principle common to all. The
grape gatherers, women, men, children and old
men, are each provided with a basket, a pruning
knife or scissors, and are divided into proper
gangs conducted by one man, who takes away
the baskets when full, and empties them into
a water-proof recipient, which contains about
22 gallons, and is, therefore, easily lifted by
one man or carried by two. Two of them form
a load for a beast of burthen when carried on its
back. There are different kinds of recipients,
some are made of osier, others of wood. Some
are made to fit on a man’s back; others have
a handle on each side, but the best are unques-
tionably tubs made for that purpose or from casks
containing 45 gallons, cut in two and fitted
with an iron handle on each side. These
gathering tubs must be well cleaned before the
vintage. When they are filled up with grapes


they are carried away on drays to the ferment-
ing house, or emptied at the vineyard into ob-
long vintage vats fixed on drays stationed at
convenient places. This last mode of operation
requires less tubs. In gathering fine grapes
the direct transport in recipients is preferable :
Ist, because it saves numerous decartings, caus-
ing often loss of juice and grapes, and more
labor. 2nd, because the grapes do not under-
go any trituration or immersion, which would
render difficult the examination and sorting at
the fermenting house. 3rd, because these
same grapes being neither bruised nor heaped
in large masses do not undergo any incipient
fermentation before the suitable time far a
good vinification.
Gathering baskets. —These baskets are made
of osier (fig. 23). They ought to measure about
3 or 4 inches in depth at the most, and have a
wide opening, over which a handle is fitted.
They are easily carried; the grapes can be de-
posited with speed and facility, and the overseer
is enabled to detect at a glance any bad ones
when he empties them into the recipients.
This latter advantage is the most important of
the gathering, because the gatherers are always
anxious to fill up their baskets with any grapes
that come under their hands.
FIG. 23—GATHERING BASKET.
Cutting off, sorting and cleansing the grapes.
—lf the sorting is not done immediately after
the cluster is cut off the vine, the gatherer is
only-provided with a pruning knife, but, if it
is done, then scissors are required instead of a
knife, because with them any parts that are
green or imperfectly ripe, shrivelled up, frozen,
or rotten, can be taken off. A supplementary
basket between each two gatherers receives the
refuse, If the sorting is effected when the
basket is emptied into the tub, a double service
of baskets is required, and the most intelligent
of the gatherers are selected for that operation.
But when the weather does not permit the
sorting at the vineyard, it is done at the fer-
menting house, and there it is generally done
more effectually. When the grapes are carried
to the fermenting house in large vats, sorting is
nearly impracticable.
Use of the refuse grapes.—The refuse grapes
which result from the sorting are not entirely
lost; they are put aside, and inferior wines are
made from them. Those wines are generally
used for local consumption. Any proprietor
careful of his own interest will not allow those
wines to be thrown into the great market of the
interior, or for exportation.
Duration of the gathering.—When it lasts
ten days it is a long gathering j an intelligent
proprietor, will always organise a staff to enable
him to do that important operation in less time,
if possible. *
Simultaneous gatherings—Successive gather-
ings.—lf the vineyards have been planted with
the same cepages in the same locality, if they
have been naturally or artificially protected
against frosts, if they have not suffered from
hail, and the gathering takes place as late as
possible, it is advantageous to gather the whole
at the same time. But it sometimes happens
that, either on account of frosts, of coulure,
hail, or a mixture of early and late varieties,
the grapes ripen successively, and at an interval
of several weeks. It is only under such excep-
tional circumstances that it is advisable to get
in the crop at successive periods; but when
that practice has only for its object the gather-
ing of the grapes as they appear to come to a
sufficient degree of maturity, it must be strictly
prohibited, for, whether the grapes be really or
apparently ripe, they may remain advan-
tageously on the vine till there is no doubt of
the maturity of all. It is very difficult to select
the grapes that are perfectly ripe from those
apparently ripe. Gathering as late as possible
in the season, and at one time, such is the rule ;
any other mode of proceeding is a lamentable
exception.


Disadvantages of pressing the grapes at the
vineyard.—ln some localities the presses are
taken to the vineyard, and the grapes are
pressed on the spot. This practice has for its
object to prevent the coloring of the wine,
which is supposed to be caused by the carriage
of the grapes in the tubs, and the bruising
occasioned thereby. The disadvantages of such
a practice are more serious than those intended
to be avoided. The cold and rain, the bad roads,
the necessity of bringing casks to receive the
must, and all the necessary implements to work
the press, occasion a loss of time, juice and
grapes. When the service of transport is well
organised, grapes (even the most colored), may
be brought a distance of fifteen miles, and make
a wine of an unexceptionable whiteness. This
is an operation repeated yearly in Champagne,
where the merchants of sparkling wines buy
the red and white grapes at a distance of twenty
and thirty miles, and know how to bring them
to their own presses by hundreds of tons with-
out causing the juice of those grapes to be
colored in the least. All the operations of the
vinification ought to be performed in the fer-
menting and press houses.
Chapter 111.
OPERATIONS AT THE VENDANGEOIR.*
I will now speak of the operation above
mentioned.
NOTES TO BE TAKEN ON THE ARRIVAL OF
THE GRAPES AT THE VENDANGEOIR.
Duties of the chief of the vendangeoir.—
However simple and primitive be the making
• The word vendangeoir, or vineyard establish-
ment, represents the vineyard and the whole of the
houses which are required for the cultivation of the
vine, and the making of wine ; it is also applied to a
country box, to a house or mansion which has a vine-
yard for its principal dependency. The vendangeo ir is
to the vineyard what the farm-honse is to the farm
lands. One has a vendangeoir in Burgundy, Cham-
pagne, Medoc, Touraine, like one has a farm in
Brie, Normandy and Ficardie. The buildings especi-
ally devoted to the making of the wine are generally
called the vendangeoir. Vendangeoir is pronounced
vendanjoir.
of wines,'it comprises a [series of ideas, and
is composed of a succession of operations, with
which the proprietor, the overseer, or the chief
vigneron, must be perfectly acquainted. The
chief of the vendangeoir, whoever he may he,
must receive the grapes personally when they
arrive, ascertain their production, verify their
state of maturity, their quantity, quality and
richness, and write down all those circum-
stances.
Difference in the richness and quality of the
musts. —We know that the must is the juice
resulting from the pressing of the grapes before
any fermentation has taken place. It is essen-
tial to understand what is meant by the rich-
ness. The richness is an element necessary to
the quality of the must, but it is not in the
least the quality itself. For, let ns compare
some of the musts best known, and of different
origin, as :
The must of fecula of potatoes (transformed into
glucose).
The must of farinaceous substances, do do.
The must of beetroot.
The must of cane sugar.
The must of chasselas.
The must of gamai.
The must of muscat.
The must of pineau.
Those musts might have acquired the same
richness, but they will never have the same
qualities. The qualities reside exclusively in the
potatoes, grain, beetroot, cane, chasselas, gamai,
muscat, pineau, or, in other words, in the
specific nature of the fruits, of the roots or
stalks which produce indirectly saccharine
juices. In each species the richness may be
freed from the qualities and faults it c ontains,
as well as the odor and flavor which deterior-
rate or improve it ; but it always remains
peculiar to its origin. If it were otherwise, if
the richness of all the musts were alike, an ex-
cellent beverage could be made out of the grain
alone, the potatoes, or the beetroot ; good
wines could be made with chasselas, gamai,
gouais, &c., which is materially impossible.
But, if this transformation is absolutely im-
possible, it is also relatively impossible ; and
the fact proves it sufficiently, since the must of


grapes is the indispensable basis which gives
to the produce of those adulterated mixtures
some apparent resemblance to wine; good
sense as well as experience indicates, therefore,
that the mixture would be an average pro-
duce between • the qualities of the sugar of
potatoes, beetroot, grain, cane, and the qualities
of the chasselas, gamai, muscat, and pineau.
The richness of the must is not, therefore, its
quality; however, in the grape as well as in
all sacchariferous plants, the richness of the
must is generally and naturally in direct
relation to the quality, especially when the
cepage is the same and grown under the same
climate. I have said, generally, because the
famed wines oifer in that respect numerous
exceptions, of which the taste, smell and
stomach are the best and even the only judges.
Thus the musts of the Upper Medoc may be
stated at 9 for an average; those of the Rhine,
9; those of Champagne, 10 ; those of Bur-
gundy, 12; and those of Roussillon at 14.
The superiority universally accorded to the
four first-named wines over the fifth, shows
sufficiently that the richness of the musts does
not correspond always to their quality. The
richness of the must is simply the quantity of
fermentive sugar, or sugar convertible into
alcohol that it contains. The quality is the
fineness or the coarseness of the sugar, the
fineness or the coarseness of the juice that it
contains, as well as the acids, salts, essential
oils, and azoted matters, the whole of which
forms the must, which may be poor and yet
of good quality; or it may be rich without
quality. • Chemically speaking, 100 parts of an
average grape must are constituted as follow,
namely:—
Pare water .. .. 78
Glucose, or grape-sugar , .. 20
Free acids (tartaric, tannic, &0.).. 00.25
Organic acids or salt (citrarte).. 1.50
Mineral acids .. .. 0.20
Azoted matters (yeast or ferment)
Essential oils .. .. „ q-
Mucilaginous and amilaceous
(starch) substances..
Those divers elements of the must fromgrapes
varies according to the cepages, their maturity,
the soil, climate and season; and those varia-
tions might double, or be reduced to one fourth
of their average qualities, for the sugars, free
acids, salts, azoted matters, and mucilages;
but each of these divers elements retains its
peculiar and original character; the water of
the pineau is not even the same as of the
gamai, and still less does it resemble ordinary
water, or the chemical water. The bodies have
properties in vegetable and animal functions
that science still ignores, and which daily reveal
themselves by incontrovertible facts. It is thus
that certain special affinities of bodies in chemical
motion, when in a state of formation, have been ad-
mitted ; thus, azone must have expressed a par-
ticular state of the oxygene, a state that the
instinct of gardeners and agriculturists had felt
in the atmosphere long before and designated
by the term etat de seve. The juice of pineaus,
muscat, semilion, cannot be chemically com-
posed any more than the milch from the cow,
and she goat, or the blood of divers animals.
I have stated, at the beginning of the treatise
on vinification, that chemistry was to winemak-
ing what physical science was to musical com-
position. By that comparison I have had no
intention of depreciating the eminent services
that chemistry has rendered and is daily ren-
dering to vinegrowers and to vinification : far
from it, I accord the most loyal homage to
analogical chemists. But all the services ren-
dered by them consist more particularly in the
analysis, in the measure and intelligence of the
constant elements and phenomenons of vinifica-
tion, than in the discovery of facts, of rules
and processes arising to modify, to replace, and
especially to perfect in every respect the wines
of first quality. It is thus that the discovery
of sonorous vibrations, the relations of. their
number with the notes of the gamut, and the
ciphered laws of their accords in virtue of those
numbers were precious conquests for sciences
and for the arts, but long before that discovery
the ear had guessed the relations and the laws
of sounds; the rules of jnelody and harmony
were established, and even now inspiration and
musical genius are still the unique source from
whence spring master-pieces. Science might


have helped and perfected the creations of com-
posers, but it is completely foreign to inspira-
tion and to the special qualities of their produc-
tions. The composer of the wine is the
vine; its spirit belongs to it and not to
chemistry. It is not by a metrical appreciation
that the relations existing between the
vegetable and animal kingdoms should be
judged; chemistry, that magnificent science,
which I love, and have studied and practised
with passion, has not yet found the key of those
relations. Experience, sometimes baneful
to humanity, has ascertained that in
proportion as vegetable or animal products
were reduced into a formula, and analysed with
precision at the laboratories, they became more
and more unfit for animal alimentation; we are
now spared the chemical gelatin. Heaven will
that chemical wine be spared to humanity!
Chemistry tells us: All sugars from fruits are
chemically represented by C l 2 H l2 O' 2 .
Thus, grapes of all kinds, apples, pears, plums,
raspberries, figs, melons, C' 2 H' 2 O' 2 , Chemistry
goes no further. The sugar from grain and the
sugar from potatoes are also quoted by
C' 2 H l2 O' 2 . And the meaning is this; In this
theory those sugars do not differ in anything
from any other sugars from fruits. That is
true with regard to the quantity of carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen which composed those
divers substances, but the sense of it is absurd,
and it is false as to the physiological effects,
as well as it is false that the beetroot sugar,
represented by the formula C l 2 H l2 0 12 , is
physiologically identical to cane-sugar, equally
represented by C' 2 H l2 O' 2 . If chemistry had
to represent the flesh of a partridge, a wild
boar, or an ox, it would only do it with the
formula C’H O'A - , and the same numbers for
exponents and for co efficients, yet the sensual
anddigestive effects of those fleshes differ essen-
tially. If the relations of alimentary substances
cannot be yet chemically analysed and measured
on account of certain known quantities unex-
plained to this day, neither can they be strictly
judged by a simple tasting; gelatin, for in-
stance, chemically extracted, purified and
properly seasoned, gives soup very good to
the taste, and a very acceptable jelly, which
however, will starve a dog in three weeks, and
give diarrhoea to a sick person after using it
for six days. Salts of lead give a sweet and
seductive savor to acid wines, hut they render
them extremely poisonous. In the same
manner, sugar of grain, potatoes, beetroot,
mixed with wines, increase
strength, and might render them agreeable at
the first tasting, hut the use of those wines
will produce the same physiological effects as
the alcohol of grain, potatoes and beetroot;
that is to say, material and deplorable moral
effects.
I must repeat that I do not impugn the
chemical science, which, indeed, I place in the
first rank of modern sciences for its enlight-
ment and discoveries, and for the services that
it has rendered; neither do I question its laws
or its oenological analysis which instructs and
guides surely the vinegrower in his pursuit.
But I will assail with all my power an error
(which the chemists will soon discover them-
selves) —the absolute assimilation of the sugars
from fruits among themselves or with those of
grains, potatoes, beetroots, &c. I will contend
against the substitution of those sugars in vini-
fications as being equally advantageous, Ist,
because that assimilation and that substitu-
tion are a double error, which has already cost
Burgundy, and other vine districts, one half
of their reputation. 2nd, because that error
threatens the future of vine culture in France
by making away with the crus and the cepages
at the same time. 3rd, because it would ruin
ten millions of vinegrowers, if, against all
common sense, it is upheld by a science greatly
esteemed and naturally expected to enlighten
and to serve as a guide to vine culture and
wine making. What matter ? will it be said;
if the similitude is a truth, the science must
make it known. Perish a country sooner than
a truth! Be it so, hut I, a chemist, a physiolo-
gist ; I who, like you all, have made
experiments to supply the deficiency
of wines and to provide good wines of all
kinds for consumption; I who, for some fifteen
years, have studied tho wines of sugars,


without any personal interest; who have seen
thrown upon the public streets the wines made
with water saturated with sugar and murk of
pineau ; I tell you that you are propagating an
error, unconsciously; and, as often happens to
savants, you have been the dupes of your good
faith, in accepting as true, deceptive experi-
ments, and facts incorrectly observed, carelessly
studied and explained. I will not end this
long but important digression, without indicat-
ing the means for testing the correctness of
the foregoing assertions. Take equal quantities
of glucose of fecula, syrup of sugar of beet-
root, and syrup of sugar of cane. Dilute separ-
ately each of the above products with sufficient
water to bring them down to 6 degrees of the
gleucometer. Take an equal quantity of must
of pineau quite ripe, and of must of gamai,
well ripe also, then bring them down to 6 de-
grees. Place each of those liquors in separate
glass vessels, add the necessary quantity
of yeast to the musts which are na-
turally deprived of fermenting principle, then
let them ferment in the same place at 68 degrees.
After eight or ten days of fermentation, distil
successively the five liquors in water-haths
(hain-marie). The tinned alamhio as well as
the warm are to be thoroughly cleaned after
each operation, and the spirits received in
separate vessels. Bring down to 48 centis-
simal degrees each of the spirits obtained, and
put them in bottles hermetically closed.
After three months get tasters not prejudiced
by the origin of the spirits to judge them com-
paratively ; they will find
Spirit of fecula ... very bad.
~ „ beetroot ... bad.
„ „ cane sugar ... good.
„ ~ gamai .. middling.
~ ~ pineau ... very good.
Not one of the above five could be mistaken.
If they are tasted twelve months after the
same differences will be even more distinctly
observed. I have made those experiments
conscientiously, carefully and unprejudiced.
I treated it as a question of commercial
economy, and the results obtained were as
above stated. The differences are not so
sensible if the products of distillation are
raised to 90 degrees to be lowered afterwards
to a potable standard of 48 or 50 degrees;
because for spirits as well as other substances,
the more they are concentrated to the absolute
state of their immediate principle, the more they
lose their original character either vegetable or
animal; the more also they advance to a state
of mineralisation and lose all special odor
and savor, and therefore all quality of nutritive
assimilation. It is for that reason that concen-
trated and rectified spirits diluted with water,
or mixed with wines, do not resume the alimen-
tary qualities which they primitively had in the
fermented juices. I shall now return to the
vintage operations. The production, state,
quantity, quality, and the richness of the
grapes brought into the fermenting and press
house, being ascertained and registered, the
vendange* is discharged, and immediately
placed in the press, if for white, and in the
vats if for rosy or red wines.
Egrapages.—Whether the vendange is sent
directly to the press or to the vat; whether
white, rosy, or red wines are to be made, there
is a previous operation common to all wines: it
is the egrapage, or the separation of the berries
from the stalks. This operation is effected by
the fullage, or the pressing, during fermenta-
tion.
Influence of the stalk upon the quality of the
vine.—When the grapes are well ripe, the stalk
is lignified, and, if imperfectly ripe, it remains
green. If the stalk is preserved during the
pressing, or participates in the fermentation, it
can only impart an astringent principle to the
wine, the principal basis of which is the tannin ;
that principle is useful in white wine contain-
ing a large quantity of albumen, and is ad-
vantageously employed as a preventive of the
disease in white wines, called the grease j it is
neither hurtful to the stomach nor disagreeable
to the taste if it is in small proportion in white
* Vendange has a double meaning. As a general
term, it means the grape harvest; but it is also use<*
to express the quantity of grapes gathered by one
proprietor. One will say: The vendange is fine this
year (the whole product of vineyards) and also, my
vendange, is good, or my vendange is pressed, &c.


or red wine; indeed, it gives it some body, and
is not foreign to the firmness of its taste; hut, if
it contains an excess of tannin, the wine is hard,
astringent, disagreeable to the taste, and heavy
on the stomach. In almost every vineyard
observation and experiment have ascertained
the advantages and the inconveniences of using
the stalk in the operations of wine making; and
for that reason, in one-half of the vineyards in
France, the egrapage is rejected, and in the
other half it is practised with great care. This
diversity of opinion and action is not only
manifested in opposite regions essentially differ-
ing in their wines, but it exists also in the same
districts, in the same commune, and each
vigneron seems to have reason to congratulate
himself upon his own process. I will give, as
an instance of that confusion, the upper. Cha-
mpagne, the department of the Marne, where the
most uniform of all sparkling wines are pro-
duced. This proves that egrapage is not essen-
tially related to the fundamental basis of vinifi-
cation, and, for my own part, I am deeply con-
vinced of the fact.
Influence of the pips and skins upon the qua-
lity of the wine.—The stalk is not so hurtful to
the quality of wines as the pips and skins,
which contain in excess fat oils and albuminous
matters j the pips especially contain the most
injurious elements tothe delicacy and the health
of the wines in which they have been allowed to
macerate a long time. Taking out the pips is
far more important than the egrapage.
Case in which egrapage is useful.—ln vine-
yards which produce hard, astringent, strong in
alcohol and long keeping wines, egrapage is
advantageous, and even necessary. It is injurious
for light wines of a known laxness and weak-
ness, which do not keep long; for white wines
that undergo the pressing process at once, and
of which the juice is not allowed to macerate
with the stalks, skins, nor pips, egrapage is
almost indifferent, since the stalk which resists
the action of the press has not sufficient time
to communicate its tannin to the must, as is
the case when maceration takes place. It is
for delicate light white wines a cause of weak-
ness and sickness, which might be avoided by
putting the stalks in a hag and hanging it in
the must -while under fermentation after
pressing. By that process the necessity of using
tannin extracted from gall-nut, as is sometimes
done, would be avoided. The tannin precipitates
the albumen that certain wines contain in ex-
cess. Whatever it might be, egrapage is a very
simple operation and easy of execution; it is
generally followed by mashing and crushing the
berries. It is easily conceived that for the pro-
duction of white wines the egrapage and crush-
ing of the berries reduce considerably the volume
and resistance of the residues to be pressed.
The stalks which occupy a considerable space
have disappeared, and two thirds of the must
contained in the berries has naturally run out j
the residue to be pressed is scarcely one fourth
of the primitive volume of the vendange.
Thus a press which could only hold seven
hogsheads or two cubic yards of vendange not
subjected to egrapage and mashing, can receive
and press 25 hogsheads of grapes which have
been so treated. Egrapages and mashing are
processes of primary importance for making
white wines of superior character.
Egrapage with the trident.—Egrapage is
practised in different manners. The simplest
is the one shown by figure 24.
FIG 24.—EGRAPAGE WITH THE TRIDENT
AND TUB.
The tub, B, is half filled up, and a man or
woman, armed with the three pronged fork, A,
dips it into the grapes and turns it rapidly j by
these movements the berries are rubbed off from


B
' the stalks and fall to the bottom of the tub, -while
the stalks, being lighter, rise to the surface
when they are picked up and thrown into a
separate tub.
Egrapage by the mill-hopper. —A quieter
process is indicated by figure 25. A hopper,
D, 3 feet long at least, and opening at the
lower part into a half rundle cylinder, wherein
the flier, B B, is fixed.
FIG 25.—MILL-HOPPER FOR EGRAPAGE.
The grapes thrown in the hopper are grap-
pled by the flies and rubbed against the rundles
of the half cylinder; by these movements and
rubbing, the berries are detached and fall
through the half cylinder whilst the stalks
stopped by the rundles remain and accumulate ;
when they are in large quantities so as to
impede the operation, they are taken out by a
small door, E, fixed at the end of the cylinder
opposite to the handle, C. This apparatus is
placed either on the press, vat, or a movable
recipient, which is emptied into the press or
the vat.
Wooden grating.—The best and most
economical method of egrapage is better and
more economically effected by the use of the
wooden grating as shown in fig. 26. It con-
sists of a horizontal frame, on the top
of which there is a wooden grating, B, made
with transverse bars of about one inch square;
they are fixed at right angles and shouldered
so as to present a level surface and square holes
of about an inch. The grating is moveable to
facilitate its clearing, and it rests upon four
legs, AA. The frame, D, projects Bor 10 inches
FIG. 26.-WOODEN GRATING FOR EGRAPAGE.
over it. The grapes are strewn over the grating
and agitated till the whole of the berries have
passed through, which fall on the inclined plane,
C, that directs them, as well as the juice, either
into the vat, press, or hopper of a crushing
mill. The stalks are gathered and thrown
aside in a cask placed alongside the grating.
The stalks are distilled for brandy.
Mushing and crushing.—lf the egrapage is
not indispensable for the making of good wines,
the crushing of the grapes, either with or with-
out the stalks, is necessary, and must be
executed before the pressing for white, or be-
fore vatting for red wines. The direct mash-
ing effected by machinery differs greatly in its
object from the one effected by men with bare
feet, when the mash is in ebullition in the vats.
The preliminary crushing, either by instru-
ments, hands, or feet, is of absolute necessity,
and it is its good execution which renders the
mashing in the vat less indispensable.
Crushing the grapes with the naked feet.—
The preliminary crushing of the grapes with the
naked feet, is the best process ; it is practised
in the upper Medoc, and may be practised
everywhere. The weight of a man is sufficient
to overcome the resistance of all the
berries,' and the suppleness and elasti-
city of the flesh of the soles of the
feet permit the pips to escape being
crushed. In my opinion, it is very important
to leave the pips quite intact, and not to allow


their oily, feculous and albuminous kernels, to
take part in the maceration. There can be
nothing objectionable in the feet of men, where
cleanliness is observed. If so, the use of our
hands should be forbidden in the preparation
of our aliments, and that would be absurd,
since it would be about impossible. Treading
the grapes is best done upon an inclined plat-
form, where two or three men can stand at
ease. If the stalks are not to be taken out, it
is sufficient to crush the grapes in the tubs
used to bring them to the fermenting or press
house, and to throw them directly into the vats,
if they are intended for making red wine, and
on the press if for white. There they may be
trodden before being pressed. The essential
result to be obtained, for white wines, is to
draw from the berries of the grapes as much
juice as possible, and to burst them all so as to
reduce the volume to be pressed, and its resist-
ance to the pressure. For red wines, the
object is to disintegrate the component parts
of the grapes, to mix the juices, ferment,
coloring matter, and to facilitate contact with
the air, so as to insure a rapid and uniformly
progressive fermentation, and also to effect the
best possible dissolution of certain elements of
the wine, and the best combination of others.
If the preliminary crushing is well done, what-
ever may be the means, the mashing in the
vats is rendered easier.
Rollers for crushing. The best and most
used instrument to crush the grapes is the one
invented by M. Lomeni, and improved by
several practical men. It consists of two
wooden cylinders, (BB fig. 27), grooved and
revolving parallel to each other; the hopper D
is fixed on the top.
As the grapes, deprived or not of their stalks,
fall into the hopper, D, fixed to the frame, C, by
two iron brackets', E, they are seized by the
grooves, dragged and crushed in their passage
between the two cylinders, put in motion by
the handle, A, fixed at the extremity of one of
them. The cylinders are placed at a sufficient
distance apart to allow the pips to pass intact.
One such machine will crush a great quantity
of grapes, and can be worked by a boy
FIG. 27.—LOMENI’S CEUSHEE.
Whether the egrapage is applied or not, I
recommend the preliminary mashing as an in-
dispensable operation for speed and for the per-
fecting of white wines. It matters not with
what utensils or machinery it is effected, the
simplest and the most economical are always
the best.
Presses and pressing.—l shall speak of each
special pressing when treating of the different
kinds of wines. But in the meantime I will
treat the general question of presses and
pressing.
Dezaunay’s Press, and operations on open
presses.—l have seen most of the old and
modern presses in operation ; I have myself used
a great number, and I have caused one to be
made in such a form as I thought most
perfect. Yet it is not better than the
others, and certainly not so good as De-
zaunay’s press, and still less so than the
one invented by M. Benoit, called the
Troyan press. Although I have not had an
opportunity of givingDezaunay’s press a trial, I
judge it excellent, because of its cleverly simple
mechanism, and its rational disposition, which
suit so well the majority, of localities. My
opinion is supported also by the approbation of
a most competent man in agricultural affairs,
M. Barral. To explain the mechanism of that
press, I borrow the design and description
given by M. Barral, in his excellent work


presses the'support B, and the block C, which
are both in wood. The block C rests upon a
system of joists and boards,' under which the
grapes are placed. To exercise the pressure
two men turn the fly-wheels, E,E, by the
handles they are provided with. The conical
cog wheels, DD, fixed upon the same axis,
move the wheel, A, which comes down along
the screw with the support, B, and the block, C.
Towards the end of the operation, the men
standing upon the joists to work the fly wheels,
EE, go down into the wooden basin, to act
upon the levers, GG, to« which they give a
vertical and alternative motion, so as to operate
by percussion,”
the “ Bon Fermier,” (the Good Farmer): —
“ A screw is solidly fixed in the centre of De-
zaunay’s press, (fig. 28,) and it is maintained
immoveable by a strong fastening nnderneath
the beam which supports, transversely, one of
the wooden basins of the apparatus. Each one
of L these wooden basinsrestsbesides upon a stone
pillar. A screw nut, fixed in the wheel A,
rises and comes down along the screw, and
Dezaunay’s press is conveniently disposed :
three different speeds can be given to it, accord-
ing to the number of hands employed—but
always in such manner that the pressure will
be the same, and the results obtained identical
with the produce of must.
In operating with this press, as well as with
any other open presses, the grapes, with or
without stalks, mashed or not mashed, fer-
mented or not fermented, are placed in the
centre of the large platform or wooden basin
then dressed in the shape of a large round or
square cheese, of about seven feet diameter or
side, and two, or two feet six inches thick.
Sometimes the sides are supported by boards;
they are morensually left open. When the work is
so dressed,two planks,orjoists, nine feet long,are
placed upon it parallel, and at two feet from the
centre. Upon those a certain number of joists
are fixed so as to form a floor. Other joists are
placed upon the former cross-wise, and then
the block, C, is brought down to bear upon them
and causes the pressure. This pressure, which
crushes and extends the work, must be executed'
slowly to give time for the juice to run out.
AVhen it has ceased running, the joists are
lifted, the work cut up with a spade, and re-
placed as before, to be repressed till all the
juice is out of it. A complete pressing requires
generally four repetitions of the above
operations.
Troyan Press and its working.—The Troyan
press invented by M, Benoit has a more
FIG. 28.—DEZAUNAY’S
PRESS,


complicated construction and mechanism
than Dezaunay’s, and its price is higher.
But it is fixed with greater facility, and can he
adapted to the egrapage, the preliminary crush-
ing, and other operations of wine making.
Fig. 29 will suggest the idea of a movable piece
of furniture, like a piano or a side board, that
may be placed anywhere. That press is as
powerful as a locomotive.
FIG. 29.—TROYAN PRESS.
A rectangular frame, AAKO, formed of four
oak pieces, one foot four inches in height, by
one foot thick, and fastened by strong cast iron
squares, bolted at each angle, both ina : de and
outside, is placed upon four legs as stout as the
frame itself. The sides, AABA, of the frame
and its back-cross beam, hidden in figure 29 by
the side, FF, form a support and a fulcrum to
a box or coffer, the sides of which, as well as
the bottom, are made of grate-frames, main-
tained against the pressure by struts, eight
inches by six inches, placed one foot apart, and
bound together by iron bridles. A lid, G, made
of oak boards, supported by struts, EFBpfolds
upon the coffer, and closes it by the iron grap-
ples seen at FF on the top of the vertical
struts. Each grapple folds on the correspond-
ing struts, EE, of the lid when it is down. A
rectangular piston, D, or block of oak, 1 foot
thick, 2 feet 8 inches in height, and 4 feet wide,
and which has a length of stroke of 4 feet 10
inches, completes the closing up of the eoffer.
The piston is commanded by two enormous cast
iron-toothed racks, CC, strongly fastened by
bolts on the piston, D, from whence they extend
horizontally, in CC, and go through the outer
frame at B. The two-toothed racks are moved
by two roving-frames, fixed on the vertical axis
of the wheels, MM, which are commanded by
the pinion-wheel, L. The three axis are held
by the cross-beam B, and the corresponding one
at the bottom of the frame. On the top of the
axis of the pinion- wheel, L, there isahorizontal
cog-wheel moved by the endless screw J, which
itself receives its motion from a horizontal bar
turned by the handles HH. Under the action
of the two handles, and the powerful mechanism
they command, the piston is moved forward into
the coffer or box, slowly, it is true, but with an
irresistible force. The juice flows through the
grate-frame into the receiving basin 0, whence
it runs into a bucket to be emptied in vats or
casks. A double pale must be fixed near
the handles to hold the transversal
bars of the endless screw, for the
reaction of the work is so strong
that it would slacken the pressure if it were left
unsecured. Besides, those pales are used during
the stoppages, when the juice is allowed time
to run out. The pressures are repeated with
the Troyan press as they are in Dezaunay’s,
that is to say, four or five times, until the mark
is dried. A complete operation of pressing white
wines lasts five or six hours for twenty pieces


of forty-five gallons each; by working two
shifts of men night and day, eighty pieces can
be made in twenty-four hours, that is to say,
3600 gallons, or the produce of ten acres of vine-
yards. For red wines such a press would do
the work of twenty acres. I have observed the
working of the Troyan presses during six years,
and I can affirm that their services are excel-
lent. The grating for taking the stalks off the
grapes is placed on the floor above the press,
and the berries fall into a Lomeni crusher. This
crusher is placed on the top of the open coffer
of the press, which receives the crushed berries
and juice till it is full. No press has appeared
to me so well suited for a large vineyard
establishment as the Troyan press; the
Dezaunay press appears better suited for
ordinary vineyards. It is needless for me to
say that, before commencing pressing, the
press must be well cleaned, as well as the
house in which it is placed. Cleanliness must
be observed during the whole time the press is
at work.
VATS, MUSTS, AND WINES—FERMENTING
HOUSE.
Fermenting vats and musts.—Fermenting
vats are large receivers open at the top ■; they
are sometimes made of stone, but generally of
wood. Contrary to what is observed with re-
gard to presses, the vats play a more important
function in the making of red wines, than in the
making of white wines; it is only necessary
that the latter remain a short time in the vats,
to deposit the gross lees and to clear them a
little.
Glass tube to indicate the level of the must in
the vat.—The vat must be of good oak, bound
with iron hoops, and provided with a glass tube
three quarters of an inch in diameter, com-
municating at the top and bottom with the
interior of the vat, to indicate the level of the
must. Opposite the tube a graduated scale is
placed; each division of the scale marks 22|
or any other quantity taken for unit. The tube
shows the quantity of the must contained in
the vat, and also the time when the lees are de-
posited; for the must which it holds clears tip
by depositing its lees and raising the scum
like the must in the vat. When the must is
clear enough it is drawn off and put into wine
vats or casks.
Pumps and pipes.—The must is carried off
from the press, either by buckets or other
vessels, or a force pump, to which a leather
hose is attached; but, if it is possible, the fer-
menting vats are placed on a lower floor than
the press, and the musts are conducted directly
from the press into the wine-vats by tin pipes
or tinned copper pipes. I will add here that
the quality of the wines does not depend upon
their good or bad execution, or even the
omission of the above operations; they are
good without being essential. Put the wine of
good cepages, in the best possible manner
into new or recently emptied casks, and, pro-,
vided that those casks have only contained white
wines, brandy or alcohol of good taste, be you
rich or poor, well or badly supplied with im-
plements, and living in a hut or mansion,
you will make good white wines. I
insist upon this fact of absolute truth
because a great number of people, of good and
bad faith, extol a mass of unimportant pro-
cesses of details, and, while they affect to be
extremely careful without any regard to ex-
pense, in the making of the wines, they plant
their vineyards with coarse cepages ; resort to
layering, manure to excess, and even add
water and syrups of glucose to their juices.
Those vinegrowera are persuaded or attempt
to persuade that by the egrapage, the deposit-
ing of the gross lees in vats, the use of pumps
and pipes, -they make marvellous wines ; it is
simply knavery or absurdity. If, then, I have
indicated, and if I indicate further, the most
convenient and rational means to secure the best
vinification possible or probable, I do not
think that between the most expensive and com-
plicated processes, and the simplest and
cheapest ones there could be a difference of 1
degree in 12 in the definitive quality of the
wines. Tell me the names of your cepages, the
state of maturity of your grapes when gathered,
assure me that you have not resorted to any


mixtures and that you put your wines into
clean casks, and I will class them according to
their true quality without any information as to
their making.
Vats for red wines.—Those vats must
be made of oak and be as much as possible of
the same capacity. The capacity of the vat
should be 900 gallons, if required to hold
mark for 720 gallons of wine, and 1125
gallons for 900 gallons of wine. A vat
of half and one of a fourth of the above capacity
would be useful. The 1125 gallon vat is the
most suitable. The dimensions are : Diameter
at top and bottom 6 feet 4 inches; 7 feet 6
inches at the exterior of the bulge; 7 feet 6
inches high exteriorly; 6 feet 2 inches in-
teriorly. The vats must be made in the shape
of a cask and not of a truncated cone. That
shape offers advantages for symmetrical solidity
which gives it a superiority over any other
form. Vats made of good oak, without sap,
will last more than a century ; they require no
painting, which, in fact, would be injurious.
Vat-house, or Fermenting-house.—ln a large
vineyard establishment the vats must be so
arranged in the vat house that a dray may
pass easily between the rows. A vat house of
26 feet wide should have only one row of vats,
although each vat might be only 7 feet in
diameter. Ist, because there must be a passage
between the vats and the wall of 20 inches at
least. 2nd, because the cartage of the grapes,
the placing of buckets for drawing off, the
placing of the casks, and all the movements
incident to the making of the wines, necessitate
a space of about 18 feet. Two rows of vats
require a house of 40 feet wide. The
floor should be slightly inclined. The
height between the two floors cannot be
less than 14 feet, although the vats be only 7
feet high, because the vats must be raised 20
or 22 inches from the floor, and the four remain-
ing feet are required for cleaning and taking
the mark out of the vats. The vat-house is
provided with windows, so that it may be aired
or kept warm at will. The vats should be
placed upon strong beams, and in such manner
that they can be inclined when washing them
with water and when drawing off the wine. It
is needless to add that the bottom of every vat
must be made perfectly secure against the
enormous pressure when full. This is done by
adjusting two small cross beams on it, and
causing those beams to rest upon the support-
ing frame.
Heating and airing the cuvees or fermenting
houses.—All fermenting houses where valuable
wines are made should be provided with a
furnace to raise the temperature if needed, and
to maintain that temperature at 68 degrees. It
is a very small expense, and the furnace is use-
ful for other purposes, such as boiling water to
clean the vats. A fermenting house must be
constructed in such a manner that the tempera-
ture may be regulated either by warming the
air inside or establishing draughts to refresh
it. When master of the temperature, the
winemaker can direct the fermentation as he
pleases; but, if the dispositions of the vat-
house do not afford him that advantage, he
must supply it in the best manner he can, or
dispense with it altogether, as it is not an
absolute necessity. If the crop of grapes is
good, the wine will make itself in the vat,
whateverthe temperature may be.
Casks and stands to support them. —
The casks destined to receive the white wines
must be new, or have contained white wines, or
spirits of good taste, because bad casks or
coloring matters, especially those of red wines,
dissolve themselves during the fermentation of
the musts, and alter for ever the color, savor,
and odor of the wines. With regard to the
absence of bad tastes, the casks intended for
red wines require to be in the same condition
as the casks for white wines; but they might
without any inconvenience have been pre-
viously used for red wines. When the casks
are selected, a few days before the gathering
commences, they must be overhauled, repaired,
and well rinsed with hot water, then bunged
up and put in a fresh place, and kept there till
they are wanted. When they are to be used
they must be rinsed again with hot and after-
wards cold water, and then placed upon stands
one foot from the floor of the cellar. The


object of the stands is to keep the casks
at a certain height to facilitate their in-
spection, to discover the leakage, and especially
for racking off. Their object is also to prevent
the contact of the casks and their hoops with
the soil, which would cause them to decay
rapidly.
Racking off.—The object of racking off is to
separate the wine from its lees, and to put it
into a fresh clean cask. This operation is
generally effected by a large cock put in at one
end of the cask ; the wine is then drawn off
and carried by buckets or large wooden
pitchers into the cask prepared to receive it.
At the last moment, when the wine is coming
out slowly, care must be taken that no lees are
drawn off ; this mishap is avoided by allowing
wine to fall into a shallow silver cup, the shin-
ing of which reflects the least cloudiness caused
by a mixture of lees, which a practised eye
would soon detect. The lees are kept for dis-
tillation. A syphon is sometimes used for
racking off, and one which draws the wine by
the bunghole is often preferable, because
it avoids boring the casks at the end, and also
any loss of liquid, often occasioned by the
fixing of the tap. But the use of the syphon
is difficult, it requires great care and practice
to prevent the mixing of the lees ; besides, the
cask into’ which the wine is run, must be lower
than the one whence it comes; very few cellars
offer that advantage.
Fining or Clarification.—Fining has for ob-
ject the clarification of the wines. It is effected
with gelatine, albumine, or some other
glutinous animal matter, such as blood, milk,
isinglass, white of eggs, etc., diluted with a
certain quantity of wine, to which water is
sometimes added. The solution is put into the
cask and well stirred up with a stake. Then
the wine is left for six or eight days. The fin-
ing substance forms a glutinous cloud which
falls slowly upon the lee and carries down all
the matters that would affect the limpidity of
the wine. The best fining for delicate wines
is the white of eggs. Two diluted in a
quart of wine, in which six or ten pennyweights
of common salt has been dissolved, suffice for
fining 45 gallons of 'wine. When the quantity
of wine to be fined is large, the whole of the
fining is prepared in one mass and distributed
in the above ratio.
CnAPIER IV.
CLASSIFICATION OF TIIE WINES.
Elements of the classifying of wines.—So
far the juice of the grape has remained mixed
mostly, if not with the stalks, which were
taken out by egrapage, at least with the skins
and pips of the berries. When making white
wines, the separation of the must from these
matters should be effected as quickly as pos-
sible.
Composition of the stalks. —The stalk is com-
posed of a ligneous substance of tannin and
chlorophy lie whilst it is green; it contains organic
and inorganic salts, especially bitartrate of
potash.
Composition of the skin.—The skin or pellicle
contains the same salts as the stalk, cellulose
tannin, essential oil, and especially a coloring
matter, blue, red, or yellow.
Composition of the pips.—The pips contain
amylaceous substances, a fatty oil, gluten,
albumine, tannin, and organic and mineral
salts.
Action of the stalk, skin, and pips upon the
fermentation. —These three constituents of the
grape contain no element that can be directly
converted into alcohol, that is to say they donot
ferment. But, without actually constituting
the vinous fermentation, they accelerate and
precipitate its periods. One may compare
their action to that of burning wood acceler-
ating the boiling of the contents of the kettle ;
only in this case the wood in combustion would
be placed in the kettle, and would give conse-
quently many of its elements or the products
of its combustion. Would the contents of the
kettle be improved or not ?


The'Tnfluence of the mode of fermentation
upon the wine.—ls the wine improved or
deteriorated by its tumultuous fermentation
with the stalks, skins, and pips ? ‘Without
assuming to solve positively those questions, I
will affirm only that the wine fermented in
contact with stalks, skins, and pips is very
different from the wine fermented without; this
last wine is white, the other is red ; and the
antithesis, expressed hero only by opposition of
its color, does not reside in the least degree in
that color, which is only an accident. The
difference lies in the hygienic and special pro-
perties, and those of red wine differ from those
of white. At present some white wines are made
that possess all the properties of red wines,
and vice versa j to obtain the last result it is
sufficient to ferment the must of white grapes
with their stalks, skins, and pips; by that
process all the effect of a rapid decomposition
and dissolution by maceration of the principles
and products foreign to the juice of the grapes
are obtained.
Wines of low fermentation. —Wines of low
fermentation are those that are produced from
musts fermented without stalks, skins, or
pips.
Wines of high fermentation.—Wines of high
fermentation are those which have fermented
with all the constitutional parts of the
grapes.
Macerated wines.—Macerated wines are those
of high fermentation, which are allowed to re-
main in contact with the musk along time after
the tumultuous fermentation has subsided.
The color has no influence upon the quality
of the wines. Nothing is more foreign and in-
different to the quality of the wines than the
color. It may be a sign, an indication, but it
is never a quality by itself. For the greatest
number of consumers the color is a guarantee
of nature, purity and strength in the wine.*
This error favors the fraudulent commerce in
wines.
* A member of my family, a wine merchant of
Eiceys, when in Paris, drank only red wines, even at
the best restaurateurs’. He was persuaded that water
and alcohol were more frequently used in adulterating
Hygienic property of white winea.—The
white wines are in general diffusible stimulants
for the nervous system ; if they are light, they
act rapidly upon the organisation, of which
they exalt all the functions. It seems that
they escape as rapidly through the excretive
organs of the skin as through the mucous, and
especially through the urinary orgga»f their
action is, therefore, of short duration.
Hygienic property of red wines.—Contrary
to white wines, the red are stimulants, tonic
and persistent for the nerves, muscles and
digestive functions ; their organic action is
more silent and lasts longer ; they do not
augment perspiration, nor the excretions, and
their general action is astringent, persistent
and concentrated.
Public opinion, foundedupon daily experience,
leaves no doubt upon the dissimilitude between
the sensual and organic effects of white and red
wines.
WINES OF EOW FERMENTATION (WHITE
WINES.)
Causes giving priority to white wines.—l
place the white wines in the first
rank among all wines—lst, Because
they are the result of the fermentation
of the juice of the grapes free from all sub-
stances foreign to the vinification. 2. Because
they possess in the highest degree all vinous
qualities, bouquet, flavor, stimulation, nervous,
active, cordial and spiritual; in one word,
because they arc to other wines what youth is
to mature age. 3. Because their making is the
simplest, and because also they are more
directly constituted.
Any grape can produce white wines
Cepages, the grapes of which are black, violet,
white than red wines, and he pretended that he could
recognise the purity of the wine by its color. He ignored
that wines of an admirable color are made at the second
and third washing of the murk of black grapes, and
that certain departments sell their wines of one, two,
or three colors at prices regulated by their capabilities
of coloring one, two, or three quantities of white wines,
or wines without color.


rosy, gray, yellow, or white, can produce
white wines. That result is obtained by
separating the juice of the grapes from the
skins before any fermentation or maceration
and also by separating the juicefrom the stalks
and the pips which sometimes contain a small
proportion of coloring matter. In fine, it
suffices to press the grapes immediately after
the gathering. A colored grape which produces
a bad red wine often gives a white wine more
agreeable and healthy; that is easily conceived
when one bears in mind that the foreign sub-
stances of its juice (to its sugar and alcohol)
which color it, cause the formation of astrin-
gent and tart matters, of odoriferous oil and
azoted principles in excess; hut there is no
colored grape, producing a good red wine, that
cannot produce a good white wine; in other
terms any colored grape that cannot produce
a good white wine, will never produce a good
red wine.
White wine is the best standard by which to
appreciate a cepage. —White wine is the true
sample and criterion of any cepage, soil, climate
and season. When the white wine of each
cepage is well known, well appreciated and
classified, the amologic science will have a
basis, a rational starting point to judge logic-
ally the qualities and faults communicated to
the wine of that cepage by one, two, fifteen
or thirty days of fermentation and maceration
with the stalks, skins, and pips. Analogy
will then lay down rules for the vinification,
and give reliable advice to vinegrowers; but
till then it loses itself in the alchemy of the
most diversified and whimsical costumes, or it
throws itself into a labyrinth of mathematical
systems, totally foreign to the real facts. In
the midst of that anarchy opinion is misled,
the taste is depraved or lost, and the taster
himself does not know what he wants or what
is good. The taste as well as the eye or the
ear, is subject to error and perversion of
opinion. One believes a thing to be good, and
imagines it to be excellent, upon the simple
word of a professed judge, as one believes in the
beauty of an indifferent picture, or an abomin-
able musical composition, upon the word
of the adepts of the fashionable school of
the day; but painting and music have
their scientific and artistic principles,
while gastronomic tasting has none yet to
defend itself against errors, or preserve it from
a false course. Everything is still empirical
in the tasting of drinks and all other aliments ;
tasters, eminent cooks, and individual sensation,
are the despotic arbitrators of taste, and there
are no laws that can be opposed to their
decision, or permit a reasonable discussion.
And what makes the case worse, and adds to
that deplorable situation, is that the taste gets
accustomed to the most detestable savors, and
gradually finds them delicious. This unques-
tionable fact is especially to he remarked in the
use and appreciation of drinks, I have heard
of some vignerons, filling up a cask with murk,
green or half-ripened grapes and water, to
manufacture a . sort of cheap drink called
rappe, proclaiming such beverage excellent, and
even more particularly after a daily use of six
months, when, for a stranger, it had actually
acquired the color, odor and savor of the juice
of manure. The cask of rappa is for the family,
the cask of the Danaides. Every day a pitcher
full of water is poured into it by the bunghole,
and an equal quantity of the juice drawn from
the tap. It is easily imagined what that juice
must be after six months. The different sorts
of beer and cider arc at first very repulsive to the
neophyte, who is about making use of them, and
that to the great surprise of the people
who are in the habit of drinking them, and who
take long draughts with great relish. 1 will
also speak of the modification or perversions
introduced in the use and preparation of a
drink which possesses nothing alcoholic nor
vinous, but which offers an interesting com-
parison with the white or red wines if prepared
with or without a prolonged maceration. Pro-
fessors of hygiene used to say that tea furnished
a beverage, light, stimulating, aromatic, and very
agreeable to the eye, smell and taste ; that the
green teas possessed those qualities in highest
degree; and that to retain those qualities as
pure and complete as possible in the infusion,
it was necessary to pour the water in full ehulli


tion on the tea, and not to allow the contact
to last more than four or fb'C minutes before
drinking the beverage. They told us then that
a prolonged maceration caused the solution of
the coloring matter, and of the resinous
astringent, tart and bitter elements, and caused
the evaporation of the aromatic stimulating
principles, or their destruction by their mix-
ture with the coarse principle common to the
leaves of most plants. They told us also that
the black teas were burnt refuse of the torre-
faction of the black teas, and that they pos-
sessed but few of the stimulating and aromatic,
qualities of the green teas. We had faith in
our masters, and conformed ourselves to their
dictates in the choice and preparation of our
tea, which indeed gave us a very agreeable
and very stimulating drink, of which the
happy effects upon the strength of our bodies
and mind were fully appreciated. But com-
merce, habits and domestic economy have so
thoroughly upset the teaching of the savants
and sages, that now the long macerations of
one third of green and two third of black teas,
and the second and third washings of the same
teas furnish a beverage drunk by all England,
Holland, and the North of Europe, and by imi-
tation, the Frenchmen who use tea. Under
that form tea is only a macerated water,
brown or black, having nothing to please the eye,
odorless, tart and bitter to the taste and little
or not at all stimulating but such as it is, the
consumers are so fond of it that they would
reject as a worthless infusion the tea prepared
according to the scientific and rational formula.
Is there any digestive, tonic, vivifying, or salu-
tary qualities to the health in the coloring
resinous, acid and bitter matters taken away
from the teas by maceration, as there are in red
wines ? and are those qualities preferable to the
vivacity of the nervous stimulation produced
by simple infusions, as it would be produced by
white wines ? That is possible and even pro-
bable ; but everybody will admit that it is ne-
cessary to characterise the action of each pre-
paration to judge their comparative and absolute
value. It is essential to determine what belongs
to the essence itself of the tea, and what belongs
to the resin, tannin and coloring matter con-
tained in it. The same remark applies to the
wine, the specific constitution of which is the
fermented must, pure and simple, and not the
stalk, skin and pips worked by the fermenta-
tion or maceration. The conclusion to he drawn
from the foregoing observations is that white
wine is the pure wine; and I earnestly,invite
all vinegrowers of localities where red wines are
mostly made, to make every year one or two
hundred gallons of white wine ; whatever may
be the fineness or the coarseness of the cepage.
They will derive great benefit by studying what
wine will be the most suitable for the ameliora-
tion of the red wines in future; besides, they
would have a wine that will give them satis-
faction, whether they drink it or sell it. In the
making of white wines, the press has no in-
fluence whatever ; all are good, the best are the
most powerful, those that do the work with the
greatest speed, and necessitate least labor.
Disposition of the casks for white, wines.—
The casks selected to receive the white wines
should be put on stands temporarily disposed as
close as possible to the press. But in any case
they should bo kept in shaded
places, rather warm than cold, and al-
lowed to remain there several days
before being put in cellars. When the musts
are put in vats to deposit their lees previous to
being put in casks, all the different products
from the pressings are mixed up. This is, in
my opinion, the best practice. In many vine-
yard establishments where white wines are
made, the fourth or fifth pressing is put away
and is not even used for filling up. I think it
is wrong, because the greatest proportion of
tannin and free acids contained in these last
products is often necessary to the health and
even the savour of the wines. This rejection is
only profitable when the maturity is incom-
plete, or when the must is extracted from
middling or worse kinds of grapes. What-
ever may bo the means of putting the wine in
the casks, well fixed upon their stands, we
have now to consider the transformation of the
must into wine by fermentation.
Fermentation of white wines.—The fermen-


tation of wine is a phenomenon known from
time immemorial, at least it was known for
centuries that the juice of the grapes, or the
whole grapes, put together in a vessel and in
a certain quantity would become heated and
permit the escape of some air or vapor by rais-
ing at the surface a boiling scum, and causing
an ebullition of greater or less intensity; it
was known that by the effect of the working
that the sweet juice, or must of the grape, was
gradually losing its sweetness and that it was
not sweet at all when the working was terminated.
It was also known that alcohol or spirit did
not exist in the must before fermentation, but
was, on the contrary, in smaller or larger
quantity in the fermented wine. Chemical
science has been enabled, since Lavoisier, for
this last three quarters of a century, to state
precisely the conditions of the phenomena of
fermentation, and to discover the basis, the
effects, and the determinative causes. The
basis of the vinous fermentation is the sugar
of the grape; its effects are the transforma-
tion of that sugar into alcohol which remains
in solution in the liquid, and in carbonic acid
which escapes, or has a tendency to escape,
under the form of gas ; its determinative causes
are the action of the ferment animated by the
oxygen of the air which it absorbs actively at
a temperature of from 09 to 95 degrees. With-
out heat, air, yeast, or sugar, neither fermen-
tation nor its effects can exist, that is to say,
the production of alcohol and carbonic acid.
Science teaches us also that fermentation de-
composes completely, and without any loss,
100 parts of grape sugar into 51.11 parts of
alcohol, and in 48.89 parts of carbonic acid.
It teaches us that a certain portion of the
ferment works and decomposes in that manner
60 parts of sugar at least; that the most favor,
able temperature is comprised between 68 and
86 degrees; that at 59 degrees the action of
the ferment or yeast upon the sugar diminishes;
and that it ceases below 49 degrees; that the
quantity of sugar decomposed at 106 ° to 140 °
or 175 ° is less than at 68 ° and 80 ° ; that
the temperature of boiling water, 212°,
paralyses entirely the action of the ferment in
closed vessels, and that, if that ferment, which
is nothing else but an azoted albumenised
matter, is brought into contact with the air it
will recover its activity and power upon the
decomposition of the sugar ; while, under the
influence of cold, below freezing point, the
action of the ferment is also paralysed, and the
fermentation in closed vessels is also suspended,
but the phenomena of fermentation are repro-
duced, without any contact with the air of the
interior, if the temperature becomes again
favorable. Finally experience has proved that,
if fermentation could not commence without
oxygen or contact with the air, it-could con-
tinue, and does continue, afterwards in must
secured against the effect of the oxygen and
the air. One of the circumstances which has
the greatest influence upon the development
and progress of fermentation, and upon the
good or bad making of the wine, is the volume
of the must, it is the mass of liquid in
simultaneous action in the same vessel. Be-
tween the fermentation in a quart vessel and
the fermentation in a vat holding ten thousand
quarts, there are infinite shades in the character
and the qualities of the wine produced or pre-
served. The larger the vessels that contain the
must the more rapidly the phenomena of their
vegetable existence are accomplished. The
vine, from its birth to its death, by sickness or
old age, is not a chemical being, finite, and
containing principles immediate and fixed; it is
a living liquid, which has its youth, virility, old
age and decrepitude. Large vessels are for
wine what large cities are for men ; there, life
is tumultuous, rapid, full of vices, of diseases,
and other elements of destruction. The wines,
like men, live more steadily and longer in a
small circle and in isolation ; the bottle is the
hermitage of the wine, the cell of the ccnobite.-
Remaining a time in largo vats does not suit
the majority of wines; the light and white
especially go through the different phases of
their life with a rapidity fatal to their qualities;
howeverit is the duty of the intelligent vigneron
to adopt such rational means as may hasten the
progress of the wines towards a fit state for
use or for sale. When the object is to produce


dry wines, to vinify the over sweet and to give
age to the very coarse ones the employment of
large vessels offers to the intelligent wine
maker several very] great advantages; the pro-
prietors who use enormous vats, simply to save
the purchase of casks, commit a sad mistake in
their speculation. If they do not lose their wines
altogether, they reduce at least their value to
a great extent. Experience and theory
have confirmed the general practice of using
casks of a capacity varying from 22 to GO gal-
lons for fermenting the musts of white wines
or to keep those wines for several years before
they are bottled. Undoubtedly the advantages
afforded by casks of similar size for handling and
moving them has been taken into consideration;
but their fitness for the qualities of the wines
was the principal cause of their adoption.
When the wines of Champagne arc kept for
twelve months in casks holding more than 45
ar 50 gallons, they lose their sparkling quality
unless alargequantity of sugar he added to them.
The greatest portion of the French white wines
acquire and retain their fine qualities in casks
holding 120 to 45 or even 22 gallons. The
fermentation, in any vessels, of must freed from
stalks, skins, and pips, is slower and more
temperate than of musts with their murks. I
have verified the temperature of both, and
remarked that the heat developed by the pure
musts never rose over the ambient temperature,
while the beat developed by the murks of red
wines often went up from 7 ° to 15 ° above
the atmospheric temperature. In years of
good maturity, all the periods of fermentation
of red wines are accomplished in the space of
three or five days, while the fermentation of
the pure musts of white wines does not reach
the same degree of completion in less
than fifteen days or three weeks.
By looking through the bung-hole of a cask,
twenty-four or forty-eight hours after the must
has been put in, bubbles will be seen rising up
and bursting successively, producing thereby a
more or loss abundant scum of a dirty grey
color; at the same time the mass of the liquid
swells up, and forces that scum, which renews
itself ceaselessly during several days, to run out
over the outside of the cask. If the ear is
brought close to the cask, a crepitation and a
continual effervescence will be heard ; and, if
the finger is dipped in the liquid, it will be ob-
served that the temperature will rise gradually
and proportionally with the intensity of the
hissing noise, and to the abundance of the
scum thrown out. This phcnomcnonjjkcallcd
the working, which causes the overflowing of
the scum. The bubbling of one hundred casks,
stowed in a close and warm place, is sufficiently
intense tobe heard as soon as the door is opened,
and a strong vinous odor is perceived at the
same time. Here follows what takes place ;
—The azoted matters contained in the must
have been converted into globules of ferment,
which, animated by the presence of the oxyger
of the air absorbed, multiply five or six tir ,s
theirnumber,and their primitive volume attacks,
the sugar and separates it into alcohol and car-
bonic acid ; this last, while escaping from the
liquid under the form of gas, produces the
bubbles and the ebullition which is heard and
seen on the surface ; but the carbonic acid does
not escape alone, it carries away an excess of
ferment and albuminous matters, which form
the scum and leaven which is thrown out by
the working, while another quantity of ferment
falls to the bottom of the cask, and mixes up,
in the shape of small black grains, with the
other precipitates which constitute the lees. In
escaping from the cask, and spreading through
the lower parts of the atmosphere, the carbonic
acid has the odor of alcohol, although it retains
only such a small quantity of it that the waste
is of no importance. The execution of those
chemical and mechanical operations occasions
heat which raises the temperature of the fer-
menting house. According to the theory that
fermentation should continue as long as there is
any sugar in the must to be converted into
alcohol and carbonic acid, and its complete
stoppage should be an indication that the wine
is made and perfected, and especially that it
contains no more sugar. But, practically, such
is not the case. After its first vinous fermenta-
tion the wine becomes calm, and, if I can ex-
press it so, retires within itself, retaining at


the same time some sugar, ferment, acids and
salts, for another fermentation, slower and more
direct, the mysteries of which have not yet
been penetrated by our means of observation,
analysis and induction. Science is on the track,
it presses and guesses at them, and will disclose
them, I am convinced ; but at present the
greatest part of the secrets of the inmost*
vitality of the wine belongs still to alchemy,
aud the rules for conducting them are those
derived from good tradition. Thus, tradition
teaches us that the first fermentation of white
wines must commence in a warm place, 59 °
at least, and 86 °at the most; that, after the
fermentation has lasted for one or two weeks
and more (for the must, containing no foreign
matters, fears not the inconveniences of their
maceration), they can bo put in a cooler place,
which retards or suspends altogether that first
fermentation, indispensable for the vinous con-
stitution. To decide upon the ulterior course
of action with regard to the impulse to be given
to the following phases of the fermentation, it
must -be ascertained whether the wine under
treatment can be ameliorated by retaining its
sugar and working it slowly, or whether that
wine is better when dry and retains as little
sugar as possible. Both of those opposite
results may bo obtained by favoring and pro-
tracting the first fermentation, or moderating it
by lowering the temperature, or stopping it
suddenly by cold. Thus the size of the ferment-
ing and keeping vessels and the temperature,
high, medium, or low, are powerful to modify
infinitely the qualities of the wines in general,
and especially the white wines. To arrive
at that conclusion I have neglected several
questions of secondary importance. I now
return.
Filling up the cask during the fermentation.
—ls it preferable to fill up tire casks with
must, and to keep them always full, in order
that the working overflowing of the froth, or
scum at the bunghole may proceed from the
beginning to the end of the fermentation ; or is
it preferable to fill them to such an extent only
that no barmy matters will run out ? The
answer will be short and peremptory; the
albuminous scum that runs out at the hung
hole has no other nature or injurious qualities
than the ferment and defecations which sub-
side in the cask ; as soon as the first fermenta-
tion of the must is accomplished, the scum
will fall of itself to the bottom to mix up with
the lees. It is therefore quite unnecessary to
allow it to run out in disgusting streams,
which may cause acetation and carry off besides
a large quantity of good wine. In Champagne,
where the wines are the finest and the most
delicate in the world, clear in taste and odor,
limpid as distilled water, working over is not
allowed, and filling up is never practised during
the first fermentation.
Closing the bung hole.—ls it necessary to
apply the hydraulic bung to the cask’s hole, or
simply to put upon it a vine leaf or a piece of
paper, or linen kept down by a small brick, or
a bag of sand P Do whatever you like ; it is
equally indifferent, the carbonic acid fills up
exactly the void in the cask, and that is the
best protection against the oxygen of the air.
With regard to the ideas of preventing the
evaporation of the wine and collecting the
alcohol in the hydraulic bung, it is a delusion.
Vine culture and analogy do not depend upon
those infinitesimal qualities to realise profits ;
the hydraulic bung, which is in itself a good
thing, a very ingenious kind of valve, does not
give one pound of grapes more per acre, and
does not change the gamai wine into pineau.
When the first fermentation of the white wine
is completed or susplfhded by the depression of
temperature, the casks must ho carefully filled
up, and the bung closed, but not too tight,
because fermentation may set in again and
cause the loss of wine, and even the bursting
of the casks ; in that case the hydraulic hung
would be advantageously used, as it prevents
the access of air, and allows the carbonic acid
to escape. It is then the time to decide
whether the casks should be in the cellar or
not.
Influence of cold upon the clarification of
wines.—lf the weather becomes cold, the storing
of the white wines in the cellars may be
deferred, especially if the proprietor wishes to


make them potahle, or, as it is called, market-
able, speedily, A cold temperature of several
degrees below freezing-point, but not sufficiently
low to congeal wine, is very favorable to all
kinds of wines, and particularly to white ones,
the salts and superadded matters of which they
precipitate in such a manner that it whitens
them, and gives them a limpidity that they
could not acquire in less than one or two years
of cellaring in a constant temperature of 49 °
to 53 °,
Filling up the casks during thelatent fermen-
tation (secondary fermentation). —If the filling
up is indifferent or useless during the initial or
primary fermentation, it becomes necessary
when that fermentation is accomplished or
suspended, and that the latent fermentation
replaces it to exist alone henceforward. The
filling up must bo done at least twice a week
till the next racking off, and with wine of the
same age and quality as in the cask. Afterwards
filling up is done once a month till the next
racking off, and then once every three months
till the sale or the bottling off.
Backing off. —The first racking off must bo
done upon the lees without fining, because it
would be very injurious to bring all the
deposited matters (such as agitation caused by
the fining would do), such as the ferment, the
azoted and coloring matters and salts, in contact
with the wine, the first racking off having for
its object the avoiding of such contact. If the
second racking off is dene in March it should
be preceded by fining, * well as all ulterior
racking off, which may bo repeated once or
twice a year according as the wines are more
or less impregnated with foreign matters. One
racking off in the year is sufficient for all fine
wines free from mixtures. The racking off
should be done as much as possible during dry
and cold weather.
wines of man fermentation (rosy and
RED WINES).
Kelative qualities of the red and white
wines.—l have placed the white wines before
all other kinds, because in all teachings one
must proceed from the simple to the compound,
and white wines are the produce of the pure
juice of the grapes. In adopting that course
of classification I did not presume to assert
that they were superior or inferior to the red
wines for ordinary use, and the pleasure and
health of man; the facts of consumption in
France and foreign countries will easily prove
that I should have been wrong to -ctffSblish
a precedence between those two wines. Besides
it is an idea that I have never entertained. I
have stated already that the wines which have
fermented or macerated with all or part of
their accessories are more weighty than the
pure or white wines; they are less diffusible
and less stimulating, but, more tonic and
nutritive, their use is more readily adapted to
the habitual alimentary regimen than
white wines, and when they are the pro-
duce of fine cepages and old stems, the red
wines are not inferior to any other, for the
pleasure of the senses and hygienic influence.
But, as the red wines admit in their preparation
the association of substances essentially foreign
to the progress of the vinification, by the
presence of those substances the fermentation
is so stimulated that it passes through all its
periods in less time and at a temperature
higher than in the making of white wines, it is
therefore evident that the study of the red
should be logically placed the last. The
methodical order will enable vinegrowers to
judge and understand better their differences,
qualities and properties. The rosy, blue, dark
or black wines are a variety of red wines ;
their preparation is the same in its elements;
it differs only in the duration of the contact
with the murk and by the solution of their
soluble principles.
WINES OF HIGH FERMENTATION (ROSY AND BED
WINES.
Depriving the grapes of the stalks to make
high fermented wines is unnecessary.—To make
rosy, red wines of maceration which may be
called blue or black, the abstraction of the
stalks is not indispensable j if the grapes are,
fine and delicate, like those of High Medoc,
in the Bordeaux district, Clos Vougeot, in


Burgundy or Bouzy, in Champagne, the
egrapage deprives them of a certain tonic
action upon the mucus of the mouth, which
action renders the vinosity and houqiutoi those
more sensible to the taste and smell, by fixing
them to the organs so to speak, as alum fixes
the colors to textures. If, on the contrary,
the grapes have a poor juice and deep color, like
the gamai, Orleans, &c., the tannin of the husk is
indispensable to conceal the vinous poverty.
Finally, if the grapes contain in excess all the
vinous, coloring and astringent principles, like
those that give the red wines of Roussillon, Cher,
Rhone, and the South of France in general, the
suppression of the stalks in the fermentation or
maceration would add absolutely nothing to
their qualities, and I am even convinced that the
qualities of the stalks would be wanting. The
stalk is the most wholesome and the most in-
offensive accessory contained in the juice of the
grapes, and if the fermentation and maceration
have for their object to extract from the acces-
sories of the grapes certain substances favorable
to the taste, digestion, and to the muscular and
nervous strengths of the human organisation,
it is from the stalks they will obtain them sooner
than from the fatty oils, starch, and albumen
of the pips and skins; the pip especially is
dangerous ; it is the egg of the vine, containing
all the putrid elements. lam persuaded that,
if the delicate red wines were made in the same
manner as currant jams of Bar, by taking the
pips out before fermentation commences, fine
and more durable wines would he obtained. I
regret that I have not yet been able to test that
process. I recommend proprietors of fine vine-
yards producing red wines to make experiments,
and to compare the results with those of the
other two processes, observing, of course, a per-
fect identity in all the other conditions of the
vinification. The longer the mash is allowed
to remain in the vat, the more marked will be
the differential effects of the three modes of
operation
A preliminary crushing of the grapes is
necessary for the making of red wines.—ln any
case that operation is indispensable before
putting the grapes in (he vats. I have already
indicated the means of executing it in the article
on white wines. Only, instead of fixing the
implements on the press, they are placed near
or above the vats. Before filling the vat, a
sieve, a wicker basket, or a bundle of vine
branches, loosely tied, must he fixed on the
bottom opposite the tap hole, to prevent the
mark being carried away with the must when
drawn off.
A vat should be filled up in one day.—What-
ever he the process adopted for the fermenta-
tion of the grapes, the vat must he filled up as
quickly as possible, and in any case during
the day, in order that the fermentation of its
contents be simultaneous, and as it sometimes
starts in the interval of one night, the subse-
quent addition of grapes would cause an un-
toward interruption.
A vat should not be entirely filled up.—The
vats must only be filled up to five-sixths of
their capacity, because, during fermentation,
the juice swells up, the mark is raised by the
carbonic acid, the scum, ascending between the
vat and the mark, springs out at the top and
accumulates in abundance ; if, therefore, the
mark rises above the sides of the vat, the scum
will run over and waste a large quantity of
wine. The wine so wasted is always filthy
and subject to degenerate into acetic acid,
The consequences would then he most
disastrous. The partial filling of the
casks does not only prevent the wasting of wine,
but its principal object is to leave room for a
thick layer of carbonic acid which always
accumulates there, and which forms a sort of
lid on the mark. This cover intercepts the
access of the air and prevents acetifl-
cation.
Head of the mark.—The head or cap is the
superior portion of the mark, 2 or 3 inches
thick, which dries up and hardens according as
the mark rises and the juice retires, not only
by finding its level, hut also by the weakness
of the capillary force which cannot maintain
humidity beyond a certain height above the
main level of the liquid. Through the sub-
sidence of the capillary humidity, the mark
forms a veritable resisting crust, which
breaks in the same manner as substances partly
solidified. If the cap rises above the vat, the


carbonic acid, being heavier than the air, will
escape and cease to protect it from the contact
of air, ceaselessly renewed by an inverse cur-
rent to that of the carbonic acid ; the alcohol
contained in the cap disseminates itself over
the stalks and skins, absorbs the oxygen, and
passes into the state of acetic acid. This
danger is avoided by filling the vats as re-
commended before. However, for more security,
the vats may be covered over with mats or
tarpaulins. This cover must only be fixed
either for the purpose of intercepting the cur-
rents of air, or to keep the temperature
favorable to the matters in fermentation.
In the last case the cover should be made of
non-conducting substances.
Yats hermetically closed.—These sort of vats,
with their safety valves, tubes, and hydraulic
recipients, do not offer any advantages during
the first fermentation, and have an infinity of
inconveniences, the expense and difficult work-
ing of which are the least. It is, nevertheless,
necessary to have such vats, because they can be
turned into wine reservoirs, like pipes or hogs-
heads. The vats are also useful for the macera-
tion of wines. The lid prevents the acetic
acid from mixing with the tannin coloring
matter and tartrates of potash, the accumulation
of which in wines is the object of maceration,
either to render them saleable for their coloring
properties or to make them last 100 years ; or, in
other words, to make them impotable for 99
years, and allow them to become problematically
potable at a price which, if calculated with
compound interest, should be 64 times their
primitive value. I despise a wine that can
only be drinkable when 100 years old, especially
if its proprietor makes it so through stupidity,
as much as I prize a wine that will keep 100
years always good, and always superior. Make
a wine that will be excellent to drink at from
two to five years old, or sooner if it is in its
nature ; make it so that, like Champagne and
Burgundy wines, it will keep good for 10 or
20 years, and you will have done for yourself
and for others what is reasonable and best; if
that wine becomes good at five and still remains
good at 50 years, like Bordeaux, so much the
better. Those wines bought at two francs the
bottlo will please everybody and will enrich
you sooner than the Tokay and Johannisberg
which at 100 will be worth 50 francs (£2) per
bottle, and which, to indemnify the family who
would have made it, would require to fetch
64 times the value of the first year of its
making. Wine is like money: does
not circulate, it does not exist; one million
kept in a hole for a thousand years is only
valuable in the thousandth year, and in that
thousandth year it has lost a deal of its rela-
tive value.
Conditions to be sought for in a good red
wine.—To produce a good wine, “ that
cheereth gods and men,” that is salutary to
body and mind, in other words a French
wine ; one that keeps well for 10 or
20 years, and bears the voyages and action of
divers climates, such are in France the
three conditions of the problem to be solved by
viniculture and vinification, from the Rhine to
Bayonne, from the Loire to Nice. The
hermetically closed vats go for nothing in those
three essential points.
Condition of the fermentation of red wines.
—The fermentation of red wines is stimulated,
retarded or accelerated, like those of the
white wines, by three principal circumstances :
the temperature of the air, the maturity of the
grapes, and the more or less extended surface
of the vat brought into contact with the air.
The fermentation of red wines is also like that
of white wines, proportionate in intensity and
the rapidity with which it goes through all its
phases, to the mass of the must contained in
the vessel.
Commencement of the fermentation in the
vat. —It follows, from all I have said, that if
the temperature is at 68 ° in the atmosphere,
and at 62 ° or 64 ° in the vat, if all the
elements of the well ripened grapes, which are
in suitable proportion in the must offer a mass
of from 400 to 800 gallons, and if the vat is
open, fermentation will commence within the
first twelve hours. Simple and slow at first, it
will no be long before it be double, that is to
say it will have two seats and two intensities
very different from each other.
Separation of the liquids and solids in the


rats.—The liquid separates itself from the solid
matters, -which rise to the surface, while the
must by a gradual filtration remains pure, lowest,
and underneath the mark; the complete
separation is effected during the first 48 hours,
often after 24, but rarely later than 48, Its
rapidity is in proportion to tho more or less
complete preliminary crushing of the grapes.
When the stalks have not been taken off
the solid mass or mark rises higher and goes
lower into the liquid than when egrapage has
been resorted to. The must occupies two
thirds or one-half of the inferior part of the
vat, a portion of the mark is immersed in the
liquid, another retains a great deal of juice the
capillarity, and the superior portion of it con-
denses itself by the draining of the juice and
soon forms a crust or cap by desiccation.
When the stalks have been removed the same
distribution is observed, the mark occupying
only the fourth or third or the superior portion
of the mass and it does not rise so high in the
vat.
Phenomena perceptible to the ear and feel-
ing ; noise and heat.—When the separation of
the solids and liquids is accomplished under
the first effects of the fermentation, a crepita-
tion similar to the one observed in the fermen-
tation of white wines, will be heard by apply-
ing the ear to the vat; and on tho top of the
vat there is an ebullition forming large bubbles,
very different and more powerful than the
noise produced by the disengagement of the
gas in the liquid portion. If the hand is ap-
plied to the inferior or middle part of the vat a
sensation of relative freshness will be felt; if
it is applied in the middle of the superior
third, opposite the middle portion of the mark,
a noticeable heat will be felt. If the ther-
mometer is employed, it will show from 86 °
to 95 ° in the middle of the thickness of the
mark, and from 68 ° to 77 ° in the centre of
the liquid.
The fermentation of red wines is double.—lf
the mark is warmer than the liquid, it is not
because the heated molecules at the bottom of
the vat rise and accumulate at the top, as is
the law for all heated liquid, it is because the
fermentation of the mark is more active and
more intense than the fermentation of the
juice ; what proves that difference of fermenta-
tion is that the mark of white wine put sepa-
rately rises to 105 ° in its isolated fermentation,
while the fermentation of the juice never rises
over 68 ° in an atmosphere the temperature
of which is 60 °. That is the reason why I
have said that white wines are wines of low
fermentation, and the red wines of high fer-
mentation. That phenomenon of the different
temperature in the liquids and the solids
during fermentation of red wines is extremely
remarkable and sensible. No vigneron
ignores it. There are therefore two different
fermentations in the vats, that of the mark and
that of the liquid ; the one low and slow, tho
other high and rapid, reacting upon each other
to heat and stimulate themselves, and to lower
their temperature retards their progress. In
reality, the object of treading in the vat is
to refresh the mark that gets too
much heated, and to warm up the must that
would remain too cold. There is no vigneron
who ignores that the treading in the vat
reduces and extinguishes the fermentation
and the heat; treading frequently therefore
retards the definitive operation of the fermenta-
tion.
Details of treading in the vat. —Within the
first twenty-four hours the winemaker gives to
the vat a first coup de pied, that is to say, he
treads upon the mush barefooted, with his
trousers folded up only above the knees. In
that first operation he takes care not to let his
feet go through the whole crust of the mark;
his only object being to crush it and stimulate
its fermentation. When that fermentation is
attained and kept for a while at its highest
degree (about the third or fourth day) the wine-
maker goes bodily into the vat, and mixes up
the solids and liquids to stimulate by the heat
the fermentation of the latter, and to cause
them to dissolve the produce of the fermenta-
tion by a complete working of the mark. When
the operation is performed, the tumultuous fer-
mentation has disappeared, the mean tempera-
ture is lowered, and both reappear only in pro


portion as the mark rises again above the
liquid there to reproduce a new heat and fer-
mentation, which will again become extinct.
However, the vigneron, attentive, and desirous
of making his red wines completely, reanimates
once more the fermentation by a last coup de
pied only, because he is aware that, as the fer-
mentation draws to its end, the mark would not
come up again to the surface if it was entirely
pressed down as in the second treading. The
wine, then, that must be drawn off, twelve
hours at least and twenty-four at the most
after this last operation, would be muddy, and
the goutie* would not gladden by its bright and
limpid color. When the grapes are well
crushed before being put in the vat, the first
and last treading may be dis- A
pensed with; but the second |
cannot under any circum- i
stances, if the winemaker |
wishes to obtain the maximum I
of color, tannin and salts that I
can be dissolved during the ;
sensible fermentation of the |
red wines. Instead of treading rw
the mash as described above, [.J.%
the stake, as shown by Tig. 30, Ij|
should be used. HAJ 1
The stake AB is of 6 feet
long, and made of light wood ;
there are six swellings from 4
there are six swellings from 4 H| D
o 5 inch in diameter at e
CCCCC which are reduced to |||
inches at DDDDDD. The IMb
crushing stake finishes admir- / m
q
ably, the operation commenced 11|
by the first stamping of the MI D
feet - dm
Time for drawing off from |j|j
the vat.—The red wines are j-So
perfectly made when the very
sensible heat and ebullition B
cease. When in applying the 3Q
fear to the vat there is no Treading Stake.
* The wine drawn from the vats after fermentation
is called goutte, or vin de goutte ; and the wine ob-
tained from the pressing of the mark is called wine of
first, second, third, &c., presse, according to the
successive pressings.
noise, no ebullition heard, and when on dipping
the hand into the mark there is no heat felt,
the red wine, or wine of high fermentation, is
made and perfect, whatever be its color; it
must, therefore, be promptly drawn off from
the vat to prevent the red wines becoming
wine of maceration, blue or blac^ wines.
It has been repeatedly stated that the best
indication of the proper time to draw off the
wine from the vat, is when it is ascertained
by the gleucometer or distillation that all the
sugars are transformed into alcohol. Such,
however, is not the case, for sugar remains
in the must, and in most red wines, one,
two, and six months, and even longer
after fermentation. Whether there he much
or little sugar to be converted, that
sugar belongs henceforward to the latest
fermentation. As soon as the sensible fermen-
tation has ceased the drawing off must take
place, even if one half of the alcohol be not
yet provided, because, in the absence of heat
and abundant disengagement of carbonic acid
the pips, skin, and stalks, give to the wines
only the produce of the maceration.
Rosy wines.—To avoid dividing the attention
of the reader by the description of incomplete
phenomena, I have been obliged to explain with-
out interruption all the phases of the high fer-
mentation, characterising more especially the
preparation of red wines, carried out in all its
details, but the time has come to say that, before
producing red wines, the fermentation produces
wines which have ceased to possess the stimu-
lating and dlffusable character of white wines,
and have not yet acquired the harshness and
firmness of red wines. Those wines are at the
same time agreeable and wholesome. I will
designate them “ rosy wines ” and this appel-
lation will include all the wines of other colors
between white and red, which have been
baptised under the bizarre names of grey,
partridge-eye, onion-film, straw, &c., &c.
What are the rosy wines ?—The rosy wines
are those drawn off from the vats after 24 or
48 hours, according as the fermentation is more
or less active.
Cause of the scarcity of rosy wines.—The rosy


■wines, (exclusive of white wines colored after
being made) are scarcely known in commerce;
the rich and hospitable proprietors of vine-
yards are about the only persons who make
rosy wines for their own use. They prefer
them to the white and red, and especially to
the wines of maceration, for their agreeable and
wholesome properties. My experience has
convinced me that they were right, but com-
merce and consumers, especially when strangers
to vineyards, declare only for the extremes.
They admit only of two distinct shades, white
or red. It is to be regretted, because they
deprive themselves of the best of wines.
Qualities and duration of rosy wines.—Rosy
wines are generally excellent to drink in the
second year, and if they are kept they improve
as well and as long as the white or red wines.
The preserving principles of wines are exclu-
sively in the alcohol and sugar ; the coloring
matter, the tannin acids and vegetable salts,
the albumen, gluten, &c., are the dangerous
and perishable elements. The rosy wines
possess less of those matters than the white and
macerated wines. Those wines are drawn off
from the vat before any treading or crush-
ing.
Making and drawing off.—Ordinary process.
—ln general, to make rosy wines, the proprie-
tors follow, by listening at the vat, the develop-
ment of the fermentation, and choose for the
drawing off the moment it manifests itself in
the whole mash by a general ebullition and heat.
Sometimes they are guided by tasting. Twelve
or even twenty-four hours after the
commencement of the fermentation the
wine is too sweet to be drawn off; often
also after twenty-four hours it is
too hard. Excessive sweetness signifiies that
the must contains too much sugar and not
enough alcohol, tannin and coloring matter ;
too hard means that the must contains too
much alcohol, tannin and coloring matter and
not a sufficient quantity of sugar. The
right moment for drawing off, as indicated by
tasting, is when the wine gives the same sensa-
tions as a strong or light punch, that is to say
when the saccharine and spirituous principles
exist in such proportions as to render the whole
pleasing to the palate. Everybody understands
that shade of savor ; it is easily appreciated,
for it always manifests itself in the course of a
good and regular fermentation, but it only
lasts for a moment, and it is that moment that
must be seized upon. To make certain of it
the proprietor must renew his tasting every
hour, when the fermentation is very active,
and every other hour when it is slower. To
effect that object a gimlet hole is made, at or
about the middle of the vat. As long as the
savor of the wine improves, the drawing off
may be delayed. As soon as a doubt presents
itself the drawing off must take place, and the
murk be pressed. The distribution of the wine
drawn off from the vat and the wines ob-
tained from the pressing must be effected in the
same manner as indicated for the white and
red wines. If before putting the grapes in the
vat the gleucometric degrees of the must have
been carefully recorded, it will be remarked
that the most favorable tasting of the wine cor-
responds always or nearly so to the apparent
reduction of one-half of the saccharine matter,
or, in other words, that the gleusometer marks
then one-half the degrees of the must if the
wine is weighed at 53 ° .
Sampayo’s process.—l must here enter into
some details of another method of making
rosy wines, which was once more practised in
Champagne than it is now. It was known
under the name of Sampayo’s process, and its
object was to increase artificially the maturity
and the sugar of the grapes; it is a theory
which has not been studied enough, and which
deserves the greatest attention. The grapes
are gathered with care, and put directly into
vessels containing about 22 gallons, without
being trodden, crushed or bruised in any way,
and which are afterwards covered over with a
piece of calico. Casks of 45 gallons are some-
times used. The grapes remain in that state
during 8 or 12 days without fermenting in a
noticeable way, but completing their maturity,
and preparing to furnish a must richer and
more perfect. After eight or twelve days, or
even longer, if the grapes comport themselves


well, that is to say, if they do not ferment or
get musted, they are pressed rapidly, and the
mash is put from the small vessels into a vat, and,
as soon as the fermentation discloses itself by
ebullition, the juice is drawn off and the mark
submitted to the press. By that process finer
and richer rosy wines are obtained than by im-
mediate fermentation. M. de Sampayo has
also applied to the making of red wines the
process of putting up the grapes in heaps after
the gathering, and before the crushing, and he
has obtained richer wines and of better qualities.
That is easily understood, since that practice is
in some degree the one followed to make liquor
wines j the two processes present at least some
analogy, it is that in both cases time determines
the natural development of the sugar in the
grapes separated from the vine. Does sugar
really develope itself in such a short time ? It
might be presumed, if the change which fruits
such as apples, pears, &c., undergo is con-
sidered. I have commenced the study of those
questions, but my experiments have not been
.numerous enough to enable me to affirm any-
thing on the subject. I have left grapes heaped
up for eight and twelve days, and I could not
ascertain with the gleucometer the least in-
crease in the saccharine matter of the
musts i but as the degree of sugar of those
musts remained the same, and they had
a slight vinous odor, I concluded that a portion
of the sugar had already been converted into
alcohol. To ascertain positively that fact I
should have made several experiments by
distillation, but the time failed me. Be that as
it may, I earnestly call the attention of the
scientific wine-makers and intelligent vine-
growers to Sampayo’s process, because it was
demonstrated that the grapes put in heaps of
greater or less size, without being crushed,
make their sugar in four, eight, or twelve days;
the condition of the rosy and the red wines
might be considerably modified; instead of
being previously crushed and the stalks taken
out the grapes should be put in the vats as
intact as possible. Of the two processes by
which rosy wines are made, the first is certainly
the simplest and most speedy, especially if
only one or two casks full are to be drawn from
the vat. I will, therefore, repeat to those who
make red wines the advice I gave them concern-
ing white wines; not only to make CO or 80
gallons of white wines, but also the same
quantity of rosy wines; whatever may he the
coarseness or the fineness of the red or the
macerated wines that you are in thcTSabit of
making; you will gain more than you can
imagine in tasting and causing them to be
tasted as rosy wines.
WINES OF MACERATION (BUIE AND RED
WINES.)
The contact of the juices with the grapes
beyond the duration of the sensible fermenta-
tion constitutes the maceration. —As soon as the
tumultuous fermentation in the vat has disap-
peared the carbonic acid ceases to be heard es-
caping from the liquid, and the heat subsides,
the red wine is made. It possesses all the
elements of its future qualities, and the
vigneron must consider himself fortunate if the
wine has not already s pent too much vigor,
if it has not destroyed its grape perfume,
and if it has not worn out in twenty-four or
forty-eight hours, one half of its
bloom and life to acquire that deceiving
color which has never been anything else than
a quality for the eye and a conventional one ;
the smell, taste, stomach, muscles and nerves
can expect nothing good from it. The wine can
obtain nothing beyond that stage of fermentation
from the pips, skins, or stalks, but an excess of
tannin, salts, starch, azoted matters, and parti-
cularly coloring matter, which constitute the
faults and vices that it will have to clear itself
of, if ever it can, at the expense of long time
and a considerable capital. The macerated wine
will become good only when it will have depo-
sited the coloring matter, tannin, salts, &c.,
which it has absorbed without limit or
reason.
The good wines must not be macerated. —
Maceration must be strictly prohibited for good
wines, even for the admirable Hermitage wine,
which would fetch double its present price if it


•were made without maceration. I have seen
thehest red wines destroyed hy that mischievous
practice, which is applied more and more every
day, under the erroneous conviction that a
macerated wine is a wine of more importance,
and that it will keep longer.
Wine is a living and organic liquid.—White,
rosy red and black—in one word, all wines, are
organic and living liquids, which have their in-
fancy, youth, vitality, old age and decrepitude.
They vegetate within themselves without inter-
mission, and the course of their existence is
hounded by the fulfilment of a certain amount
of work, the best phase of which is the reduc-
tion of their compounding parts into water,
acids, salts, and, lastly, into mineral elements j
when they have reached that point, the wines
exist no more, they are dead.
Sugar and alcohol are the principles of the
vitality and the durability of the wine.—The
vitality of the wine commences by the sensible
and is continued by the latent fermentation.
The two principles of its vitality, the two
elements of its durability and of its conservation,
are the sugar and the alcohol; by transforming
itself, the sugar nourishes the wine, and the
alcohol sustains it, according as it is formed.
All the other organic and inorganic elements,
dissolved in its vegetable water, are preserved
in it hy the sugar and the alcohol, like fruits
are preserved in syrup or brandy ; it is not the
fruits that preserve the brandy or the sugar j on
the contrary, those fruits decompose in the
course of time the two elements of their primi-
tive preservation. The sugar and alcohol only
are in reality the principles of the vitality and
durability of the wines, the other substances
are their antagonists, especially the coloring
matter, real proteus that a sunray may trans-
form. The tannin is not subject to less trans-
formation j but, if it is weak in proportion, it
has at least the merit of fixing the savor of the
wine and of neutralising the albumen when it
it is in excess ; but, as soon as the tannin goes
beyond the limits of that double utility, it
becomes one of the most active causes of the
decomposition of the wines. The samo remark
applies to the excess of the ferment.
The coloring matter, the tannin, and the
ferment are antagonistic to the vitality of the
wine.—Undoubtedly some macerated wines
holding in excess substances foreign to sugar
and alcohol, keep a long time, and become very
good i but this is because they are so rich in
sugar and alcohol that they preserve the color-
ing matter, tannin, &0., as brandy would pre-
serve black currants. But take, for instance,
some juice or water, satured, with 10 per cent,
of reducible sugar, or 5 per cent, of alcohol ;
then, by fermentation or maceration for one or
two months, cause that juice or water to absorb
from the mark all the coloring matter, tannin,
and other substances accessory to the wine ;
and, after six or twelve months, send abroad
the wine so made, or expose it to the sun, in six
weeks it will be decomposed and turned acid;
or keep it in the cellar for twelve months, the
same result will take place. Then macerate some
marks in water satured with 20, or, better, with
30 per cent, of sugar and 10 per cent, of pure
alcohol, and the wine thus made can be kept in
a perfect state. The sugar and alcohol, there-
fore, preserve the substances foreign to their
constitution, and it is not those substances that
keep the sugar and alcohol. Experience proves
clearly that the coloring matter, tannin, acids
and salts in excess give to the wine neither
solidity nor durability j their presence in a solid
and durable wine indicates simply that that
wine has sufficient sugar and alcohol to sustain
it without' peril. But that will become potable
and delicate only when it will have deposited
all its excess of coloring matter, tannin and
salts, either on the sides or bottom of the cask,
or bottles j therefore the presence of those sub-
stances is essentially injurious to the tastes
stomach and general organisation, and, there-
fore, radically opposed to the good qualities of
the wine.
Maceration destroys the wines.—That is not
all: I have stated that the wine was an organised
and living liquid, and I now say that the
tumultuous fermentation and an extended
maceration destroys it by transforming
suddenly into fixed immediate principles all the
vegetable elements, the moderated work of which


forms its vitality, durability, and qualities. A
wine in which the sugar is so reduced becomes
a flat compound of coloring matter, acid and
tannin preserved by alcohol and sugar. I
have ascertained the fact in many instances
by testing daily fine wines made of well
matured pineau, the stalks of which have been
carefully taken out and the fermentation
scrupulously conducted j the casks treated con-
siderately, and vigilantly filled up. The wines
was racked off with assiduity and sold at 7 or
9 shillings per gallon, because they were free
from all mixture, or were what is called loyal.
Well, you taste that limpid wine, with a fine
purple color, you smell it, agitate in your
mouth, you admire it and swallow it, but you
feel only a heavy and flat liquor : that wine
has been destroyed by fifteen days of fermenta-
tion—that wine is dead. In 1846 I saw a fine
vat of black grapes destroyed in that manner
at Bouzy, in Champagne. The crop was in-
comparable, the grapes completely matured j
all had a downy skin and not a doubtful berry
was to be seen. They were crushed and put in
a vat. After twelve hours the fermentation had
set in, after five days it was terminated and the
must would have produced an excellent wine ;
after two days it would have made a rosy wine
above all praise j but this wine was allowed to
macerate for seventeen days to make a great
wine of it. True, it was strong and black, but
heavy on the stomach, flat to the taste and
smell : it was killed. It was extolled, how-
ever, on account of its origin unquestionably
loyal and superior ; it was placed everywhere,
and served to the Emperor as type of the
red wines of Champagne, which the
Emperor had wished to appreciate.
After tasting it as a connoisseur, the Emperor
declared that champagne produces good white
but poor red wines. He was right with regard
to that wine, but he would have thought other-
wise if a bottle of red wine taken from the
cellar of a simple vigneron of Bouzy
had been put before him. The red
wine of that place drawn off directly after the
tumultuous fermentation is delicious. To judge
well a wine the produce of a renowned vineyard
but destroyed by fermentation and maceration,
one must taste at the same time, a white or a
rosy wine of the same production j it will
easily he understood that it is the extinction of
■vitality in the wine that makes it flat, and that
the poorest wine, while retaining any vitality,
is better for the taste and for the health, than
the greatest dead wine.
Why are there any macerated wines made ?
—lf maceration destroys the wine ;if the
coloring matter, the tannin, the salts that the
maceration dissolve in excess, far from assisting
the preservation of the wine, always contribute
to its decomposition ; if those substances, far
from adding to the qualities of the wine,
destroy them or conceal them to such a degree
that they cannot be perceived till the tannin,
coloring matter and the salts have been
eliminated by a tedious and dangerous method
why are there such a large quantity of
macerated wines made ? Some of those wines
are made through a complete ignorance of the
qualities of the wine, and of the means of ob-
taining them, and also through the superstition
and idolatry entertained for the color ; but the
greatest part of the macerated wines are made
to blend with weak wines which have little or
no color. Those wines are sold for their color
and their alcohol, and they are mixed with
white wines to make red wines, and also with
the poorest Bordeaux, Tourraine, Burgundy,
low Champagne, &c., &c., and for that reason
there is an immense demand for macerated
wines; the purchasers, however, are not direct
consumers, but manufacturers and merchants
of blended wines.
Blending.—When the blended wines are the
result of a mixture of pure, natural and not
over macerated wines, they may furnish an
agreeable and sufficiently wholesome beverage
for ordinary use, especially if they are mixed
with white wines, which are always full of
life. They are certainly preferable to wines
adulterated by the addition of glucoses,
molasses, or alcohol produced by the distillation
of those wines j they are even preferable to
the original wines destroyed by maceration.
Unfortunately inferior sugars, now-a-days, are


too often employed regardless of their baneful
influence.
Sweetening the wines.—Artificial wines.—
If it is detrimental to add sugar and alcohol to
wine beyond the equilibrium of its natural
elements and its strength, it is still more so for
the proprietor and even the wine merchant. If
it were possible to bring all the wines to an ex-
cellent type, every vineyard would lose its
character and commerce, its activity and in-
terest. The small wines make the price of the
great wines; the suitableness is found in the
varieties ; the wines of unfavorable years raise
the price of those of good years. When the
wines are light they are drunk in large quanti-
ties; if the wines were all transformed info
dessert wines, the consumption would be reduced
to one thousandth part of what it is at present;
and, if they were made into liqueur wines, there
would not be one hundred thousandth part con-
sumed.
The law should prohibit artificial wines or
require that when sold their composition he
specified.—Vignerons and proprietors of vine-
yards, wine merchants and consumers, should
unite to arrest the career of any man who pre-
tends to make fine wine with sugar and ver-
juice, and also to denounce the proprietor who
pretends to make great wines from the same
plants that produce good ones only under the
most favorable circumstances. The proprietor
who employs sugar deceives himself or deceives,
and certainly wrongs, everybody. But the one
who ought to be severely condemned is he who
makes wines with water diluted with sugar
mixed with some verjuice and macerated with
marks of pressed grapes, he deceives as to the
real nature of the merchandise; he robs like
the merchant who would sell calico for linen
unless he inscribes upon his casks, “ Wine
made with sugar, water and marks of grapes,”
or “ Wine made with one fourth, one third,
one half, as the case may be, of the juice of
grapes, and three-fourths, two-thirds, or half
water and sugar.” With such true brands,
every one remains free to sell whatever sub-
stance he chooses to manufacture, provided it
contains nothing venomous or otherwise danger-
ous to the health. The Legislature should pass
a law to effect that object. Such a law would
protect the vigneron proprietor, the conscien-
tious merchant and the consumer of wine, against
the frauds and the evils with which the com-
munity is threatened by the manufacture of
sugar-wine.
The acidity in wines should not be removed
by artificial means.—When maturity has beet
incomplete, the wine-maker should not attempt
to neutralise the vegetable sub-acids by any
chemical process; nothing impoverishes the
musts more than the use of lime or carbonate
of lime. Such operation takes away the indis-
pensible elements and deprives the wines of
any ulterior amelioration. In course of time
the sub-acids transform themselves and
contribute to the richness and quality of the
wines.
Artificial temperature to be given to the
must and the air to favor fermentation.—When
musts have a suitable richness, 9 or 10 degrees
of the gleucometer, they possess the base of a
very good fermentation, and they possess
besides the necessary amount of ferment to
determine the fermentation ; but that double
condition would not be sufficient if the tem-
perature of the liquid mass and the temperature
of the ambient atmosphere were below 49
degrees, and the fermentation would progress
badly and slowly if the temperature was not
above 39 degrees ; a temperature of 77 degrees
is the best and the most stimulating for fer-
mentation. When the temperature of the
atmosphere is maintained at from 68 to
77 degrees Fahrenheit by a stove, in the place
where the casks containing the musts of white
wines are kept, it is sufficientto heat those musts
within 24 or 48 hours, and to determine the
fermentation, because the vessels are small, and
the absence of matters foreign to the pure
juice permits the heat to penetrate through the
whole mass of the wine. The vats for red
wines, holding from 20 to 25 hogsheads, would
require from three to six days to be heated
throughout, and during that time which would
precede fermentation an unfavorable macera-
tion would necessarily take place ; besides, for


menting houses are not generally fitted in a
manner that would admit of being artificially
warmed or to retain the heat any length of time.
It, would, therefore, be important to find some
means prompt and sure to raise the temperature
of the mass of the must above 59, and, if possi-
ble, from 68 to 77 degrees. To obtain that object
some people increase the temperature of a por-
tion of the must to 120, 170 and 212 degrees. I
condemn this method absolutely,because, besides
being difficult of execution, costly, and almost
impractable in large vineyards, it is exceed-
ingly injurious to the natural constitution and
the vitality of the wines; the must, heated
and especially boiled, reduced, and, above all,
freed from acids, is a dead element with res
pect to wine. With regard to the heat applied
to the vat it is proportionately weak, and it can-
not be maintained. Twenty-two gallons of boil-
ing must raised to 68 degrees, 198 additional
gallons having a temperature of 49 degrees;
therefore, about 100 gallons oi boiling must
would be required to give the proper heat to a
vat holding from 20 to 25 hogsheads ; but that
heat would remain only a very short time in
the must, whatever might be the care taken
to cover up and protect the vat; and, if the
fermentation does not set in, or set in slowly,
within that short time, the operation must be
repeated again until it has fairly started. This
repetition either spoils the wine or makes it
detestable. I have practised that method, and
I as well as my neighbors have had to regret
it. I, therefore, advise all vinegrowers to em-
ploy steam tubes to raise the temperature of
their must when necessary. With steam or
boiling water circulating in tubes appropriately
fixed in the vats the temperature can be raised
easily and speedily from 59 to 68 or 77 degrees;
17 gallons of evaporated water raises the tem-
perature of 20 hogsheads of must 19 degrees ;
and, when covered over with a tarpaulin, 7
gallons of evaporated water will maintain that
temperature tor 24 hours, which is sufficient
to allow the fermentation to establish itself
perfectly.
To accelerate and regulate the fermentation
properly the air in contact with the head of the
mark in the vat must not be cold.—lt is for that
reason that the use of a tarpaulin or mattings
to cover the vat is recommended. The necessity
of putting the must in contact with heated air
to determine a brisk fermentation has been de-
monstrated by numerous practical facts, and
here is one of those facts- To retain the car-
bonic acid when the Champagne wine is put in
bottle, to complete its fermentation,-gfCSt care
is taken that the decanting is made in a place
the temperature of which is kept at about 68
degrees, so that the air left in the bottle (about
one cubic inch) will be of the same temperature.
Without that precaution, and if the air was
below 49 degrees, the fermentation would not
proceed properly, and the sparkling properties
would be lost.
Drawing off the wine.—When the fermenta-
tion of the rosy, red, or dark wines is completed
the drawing off takes place; the wine is put
into the cask and the murk or residue is carried
to the press. Of whatever kind the wine may
be it is advisable to complete the filling up of
the casks with the wine obtained from the
pressing of the murk, and all those wines must
be kept in a warm or temperate place until
their active fermentation bo accomplished, or,
in other words, when well filled up, there is no
more scum thrown off, and no more gas bubbles
are seen escaping through the bung hole.
When the wine is in that state the casks are
put in cellars.
General condition of the vitality in wines.
—The wine being brought into existence and
formed, as I have described it, will hencefor-
ward undergo all the phases of its inner life ;
it will make itself reach its perfect state by
passing through periods more or less extended
and apparent; then it will gradually getweaker
in its qualities, till it loses them all and ceases
to be a wine. Four general conditions
stimulate or retard the ascending or descend-
ing periods of the existence of wines : the
temperature, the mass, the light, and the
motion.
Action of cold upon wines.—The wines ex-
posed to cold without congelation (from 17
degrees above to 5 below freezing point) pro


ceed very slowly in their periods ; the more
they are refrigerated, the more they remain
stationary; if the cold ameliorates them, it is
not by active work, but because the cold
diminishes the volubility of certain elements
that they contain in excess, and which elements
precipitate according as the temperature goes
down. The wines purify themselves in a cold
temperature, and acquire a great limpidity.
For that reason wine may be advantageously
exposed to cold before racking off. Under the
influence of cold, wines do not suffer from con-
tact with the air. I will not speak of the con-
gelation of the wines or of their racking off
during congelation; it is a process of concentra-
tion of the spirituosity which has nothing com-
mendable because it destroys in the wine all
proportion and equilibrium of its elements;
and, if the wine is bad, it will not render it
good ; and, if it is good, that process will alter
it completely and compromise its value and
existence.
Action of heat upon wines.—According as
the temperature rises above 49 degrees in the
wines and in the ambient atmosphere their in-
ternal activity increases; thus the wines ex-
posed to 59, 68, 86 degrees or more, attain their
maturity sooner if they are young; their old
age if they are mature, and their decrepitude if
they are old, than they would reach those
phases at a temperature 10 degrees lower. The
intelligent amologue or the mnophile will con-
clude from that truth, resulting from the gener-
ality of facts, that he must guard the wines
which have arrived, or nearly so, at maturity,
against an excess of heat, and that he must
keep his old wines in the coolest place possible.
On the other hand, if he wishes to hasten the
.maturity of his wines he can attain that end
by keeping them in warm cellars; and if those
wines are young and contain large quantities
of sugar they will benefit more by that treat-
ment and run less risks of misscarrying. For
instance, liqueur wines which are only matured
at 30 or 40 years, will reach that
state in 15 or 20 when exposed to
a temperature of 68 degrees, and in 5 or 10
years at a temperature of 86 degrees, A
Bordeaux or Hermitage wine, which is made
in 8 or 10 years in an ordinary cellar, will cer-
tainly attain the same perfection in 4 or 5 years
if kept at a temperature of 59 or 69 degrees,
and in two or three years at 77 or 86 degrees.
The heat comprised between 105 and 195
degrees is disorganisatrix for a great number
of wines, for red and macerated wines especially,
■but not for all; and when a wine resists
against those high temperatures, it is observed
that at 77 degrees the fermentation is more
active than when the temperature is above 95
degrees. The wine evidently follows the law
which rules the internal activity of the vege-
table, which activity commences at from 49 to 59
degrees, increases up to 68, 86 and 105 degrees;
then it diminishes at that point, and is quite
extinguished at 201 °as it does at 32 ®. As
everybody knows, in April and August the
wine in the vessels which contain it undergoes
internal motions, which correspond to the two
saps of the vine and of the trees in general.
When the wines are confined in impermeable
vessels, hermitically closed, such as in bottles
well corked up, 212 degrees of heat suspend all
action of apparent or latent fermentation, by
fixing certain azoted elements, and by depriv-
ing the ferment and air of their ordinary in-
fluence. Under the influence of a boiling heat
as well as of the cold below freezing point, the
vitality of the wine is what it would be if the
latter had gone through all the stages of its
existence. Extreme cold or heat produces on
the wine the same effects as upon all organised
matters : 1. by the heat in the Appert’s pro-
cess; 2. by the congelation. The preserva-
tion of those matters lasts until they are again
subjected to the influence of air in the first case,
or heat in the second.
Process for preserving in the wines a portion
of their sugar.—By Appert’s process, light and
white wines can unquestionably be preserved
with a portion of their must not reduced.
That process is only applicable during a cer-
tain stage of the fermentation. In opposition
to that heating method, I have heard it said that
at Sillery, in bottling off the wine in Decem-
ber, during an intense cold and a hard frosty


and leaving a small quantity of air in the well
corked bottles, which were kept afterwards in
very fresh cellars, the dry Sillery wine was
obtained. The process of making that wine
is now lost, consequently the conscientious
merchant does not undertake to furnish it.
There might have been a great deal of truth
in that tradition. I had commenced experi-
ments while living at Sillery, but time failed
to conduct my operations to any conclusion.
Influence of the mass upon the wine.—The
larger volume, or, in other words, the larger
the vessels that contain the wine, the more
rapidly it goes through all the phases of its
existence. The smaller the vessels the longer
the wine remains in the state in which it was
put in them. The vessels used for keeping
wines vary considerably in their dimensions.
They may be classed as follows :
I bolding from 220 gallons to 2000 and
Cisterns J upwards.
Pipes ~ 45 to 220 gallons.
Piece or Barrique ~ 35 to 50 „
Half piece „ 22 to 28 „
Octave „ 12 to 15
Baril or Barrel „ 1 litre to 12 gallons,
and at last the bottle and half bottle. The
litre (1-760,773 pints) is the legal measure, but
it is rarely used to keep wines in.
Advantages of vessels of uniform capacity and
legal standard.—lt is to be regretted that the
vessels used to hold the wines have not a
uniform capacity and a legal standard. Com-
merce would be greatly facilitated, and the ex-
penses would be reduced, for the casks would
never require to be made again to suit the
usages of the locality they happen to come in.
Besides, it would facilitate observations upon
the treatment and conservation of the wines.
With regard to the closed vats, tuns and
cisterns, they are immoveable reservoirs which
have nothing in common with the legal
measures.
Large vessels are dangerous for light wines.
—Very few wines can remain a long time in
large vessels without being deteriorated or
spoiled. Wines very rich in sugar and alcohol
or very strong wines, only, improve and keep in
largo vessels. I mean,of course, at the ordinary
and mean temperature of cellars or fermenting
houses where those vessels are usually fixed,
because, at a temperature always equal and cold,
the wino works very slowly in large vessels.
On the other hand, it would work rapidly in a
bottle placed in a temperature varying from 68
to 95 degrees.
WINES OF MACERATION (RED ANDJA'IIIIE
WINES).
Under all circumstances, the variable or con-
stant temperature, the light and obscurity, rest
and motion, and atmospheric pressure, being
equal, the wine will go through all its periods
quicker in large vessels than in small ones,- and,
on the other hand, the smaller the vessels the
greater will be its longevity, and the more
stationary it will be in its youth, maturity and
old age. The consequences of that law are
easily applied to making, improving and keep-
ing the wines. A large proprietor in Burgundy
was expressing to me his intention of building
cisterns with hydraulic cement to keep his
wines in. I advised him to abandon his idea,
because the greatest portion and the best of the
Burgundy wines would not keep three years in
cisterns or vats, containing only 1200 gallons,
and a fortiori, 2500 or 20,000 gallons. The
wine would be dead .before the anticipated re-
sult could be accomplished. The experiment
was made j I have observed several instances
during the course of my life. I have seen the
building of the cisterns of my cousins, Messrs
Douge, of Gye-sur-Seine, my native place ; the
vatsbought and placed by tens and by hundreds
in Burgundy and in Champagne, and I have
noted the progress of light and fine wines in
those large vessels. They mature with a won-
derful rapidity, and this rapidity is sometimes
so great that there is no time to moderate it. I
have seen large quantities of wines lost in this
manner, and under the singular pretext of dis-
pensing with buying casks in years of abundance,
when they are always dear. That is a paradoxical
idea, which has caused serious losses to many
vineyard proprietors. I can imagine the
establishment of large wine vessels in places
where the wines are sold in bottles, as in Cham


pagne; but, -where it is sold in casks, each crop
requires new vessels, which must be bought
sooner or later to expedite or deliver up that
crop. In such a case the storing of the wines
in largevats is only transitory, and the expenses
of that storage, and the wear and tear of the
vats will certainly be greater than the difference
in the prices of the casks. In reality the use
of large vessels, considered only as wine re-
servoirs, is a source of loss to the proprietor,
besides the risk of losing his wines, to which he
is seriously exposed. The large vats do not
permit fining, easy racking off, change of
locality, nor of temperature ; they are incon-
venient and dangerous under any circumstances.
Unless, therefore, it be for practical reasons,
which concern the making of the wines and the
progress of their periods of improvement, fine
wines must not be kept in cisterns, nor in large
vats ; they must be made and kept as much as
possible in the vessels in which they are
habitually delivered and exported.
Diseases caused by accumulation—Law of
Ampere. —Wines, like vegetables and animals,
are liable to diseases, which spread themselves
by means of contact and continuity, and by a
law which the celebrated Ampere has often de-
monstrated to us, in his lessons at the College
de France, a law which really exists, and which
he has called the law of assimilation. He told
us that, “when a certain quantity of water con-
tains in solution the elements of several orystal-
lisable salts, if a formed crystal, the elements
of which are contained in that water, is intro-
duced, a mass of analogous crystals will be
found, and no others. I explain," he used to
add, “ the small pox, scarlet fever, &c., by a
similar influence.” M. Ampere supported his
law by a great number of examples drawn
from the mineral, vegetable and animal king-
doms. That law would find in wines a thousand
confirmative facts. If special circumstances
transformed into vinegar some portion of the
mass of the wine, however small it may be
—be it by the contact of the air at the bunghole,
or by the insertion of a tap —the law of assimila-
tion does not delay long before manifesting
itself, and by degrees the whole mass of the
wine gets acetified. Such an accident is of no
consideration if it has affected only one bottle, or
even one hogshead, but, if it extend to a vat
holding 1000 or 2000 gallons, the loss becomes
serious. The wines which contain only a medium
quantity of sugar and alcohol mature so rapidly
in large vats that they cannot be kept in that
manner even till the end of the first winter, if
their ultimate destination requires that they
should retain a certain proportion of their non-
fermented sugar. Thus, in Champagne, a white
wine, which would be stored in large vats after
the making, would not effervesce, or not, at
least, sufficiently when bottled after the winter,
as it is generally done. The Chablis wine, on
the contrary, which requires to be very dry, and
to give not the slightest sign of effervescence,
can be kept in large vats without any incon-
venience for several months; but, as it ripens
rapidly, and is also a delicate wine, it must
be pirt into small vessels as soon as it approaches
maturity. In Champagne, all the white wines
are kept in casks holding forty-five gallons;
casks holding only half that quantity would be
preferable, but the cellars dug in chalk are so
fresh and so excellent, that the sugar of the
wines is well preserved, even in casks contain-
ing forty-five gallons.
Time when the wines should be put into
smaller vessels.—lf the conditions of the wines
produced necessitate the use of large vats, and
their being kept in a temperate or warm atmos-
phere so as to accelerate their ripening to the
desired degree, that object once obtained, or
nearly obtained, it is time to divide the mass
of the wine by putting it into smaller vessels,
which are then kept in cellars of a lower or
more equal temperature. After that operation
the work of ripening goes on slowly, and it
requires a long time before any amelioration
becomes perceptible ; but it is only when the
wine has attained its quasi-perfection (I except
the sparkling wines) that it can be put in bottles,
and in a place with a constant and fresh
temperature.
The bottle preserves the qualities of the
wines but gives none. —It is an error to believe
that the bottle is the vessel in which the wine


acquires most of its qualities. The special
object of the bottle is to preserve the qualities
of the wines and to preserve them longer than
any other vessel. In the bottle the wine works
slowly, perfects itself by small degrees, almost
imperceptibly, unless it has been bottled too
young, but then the great difference which
might be remarked can only be the result of
many years keeping in bottles. I could give
many other indications referring to the in-
fluence of the mass upon the wines, combined
with the temperature to accelerate or retard
the various stages of the life of the wines; but
I have said enough to call attention to, and to
instigate the use of, the best appliances of
vinegrowers and wine makers for the produc-
tion of the best possible wines.
Influence of light upon the wines.—The
light direct from the sun accelerates the work-
ing of the wines, and especially the colored
wines. Its influence is very prejudicial; it
spoils rather than improves the good composi-
tion of wines; it transforms and destroys the
coloring matter ; and the colored matter, thus
modified, re-acts in its turn upon the other
elements so as to cause the wines to become
acid, bitter or watery. It is not, therefore,
without some advantage, although the practice
might be due to chance, that the wines are put
in bottles of colored and scarcely transparent
glass. And it is not without efficacy either
that the freshness of cellars is combined with a
quasi-obscurity. However, the light is only
injurious when it acta during its full power in
day time, and especially when it acta directly ;
but a partial light, a reflected or polarised light,
the light of the moon or that of artificial means,
is not powerful enough to produce any percepti-
ble effect. I have lighted cellars, the largest
in the world I believe, by immense tin reflectors
upon which the sun light falls directly, and
is diffused at right angles in the axis of the
vaults; that light almost polarised, has not
apparently, during 15 years, modified in the
least the state of the wines in bottles.
Influence of motion upon wines.—Voyages
and transports act upon wines like light,
volume and heat; they accelerate the period of
their existence. The maturity of wines rich
in spirit and sugar is greatly advanced by sea
voyages. The results of such voyages for Port
or Maderia wines are really marvellous. The
high temperature of the tropics is the principal
cause of the amelioration obtained, but the
movement is certainly not foreign to it. But,
if long voyages are favorable to strong and
young wines, they are destructive to'tfie old j
and weak wines, to bear long voyages, must
have naturally a large quantity of non-reduoed
sugar or spirit. The direct and isolated in-
fluence of motion is evidently shown when
wines are removed as soon as they have ap-
parently gone through the sensible fermenta-
tion. If wines in that state are carried on drays
for a distance of a few miles, or even on wheels
barrows for a distance of a few hundred yards,
the carbonic acid is again disengaged and some-
times in such an abundance that it would blow off
the head of the cask if a small hole was not
made near the bunghole to facilitate its escape.'
Influence of noise upon wines.—Another
sort of motion which affects wines is the mo-
tion of vibration or trepidation. Wine does
not live long and does not do well in cellars
contiguous to paved roads where there is a large
traffic ; it is quickly destroyed in cellars of
cities and especially in streets where heavy
vehicles pass constantly and at a rapid pace.
The vibrations of the ground brings age in
young wines and destroys old ones. In fine,
cellars near factories where heavy hammers
play, and near strong and frequent shocks, are
never good. Musical sounds accelerate equally
the inmost work of wines ; most of the old
wines would be destroyed in a cellar that was
transformed into a music hall. Therefore,
wine placed in small vessels in a fresh cellar
without light or noise and in erfeot quiet, is
in the best possible condition to live slowly and
long.
Effects produced upon wines by electricity,
ozone, hygrometry, and pressure of the atmos-
phere.—Electricity has a great influence upon
wines. During storms, the increased breakage
of bottles of champagne proves it sufficiently.
Ozone, or the vivifying state of the atmosphere,


a state that corresponds to the rising of the
sap, starts the working of the wines. Hygro-
metry, or the state of humidity of the air,
seems to have a direct influence upon wine in
bottles, for as soon as the weather becomes
rainy, all the bottles of champagne piled up in
cellars will be covered with humidity. It is a
a phenomenon which is not easily explained,
although it appears extremely simple at first
sight, because one would suppose that the
atmospheres of the cellars became more damp
and more saturated with vapor, but the tem-
perature of the air of the cellars remains
identically the same ; consequently, the atmos-
phere retains the same relation with the
bottles. If the bottles are not cooler than the
atmosphere they cannot condense the humidity.
Does the bottle, then, cool itself by the stop-
page of the latent work which the wine it
contains undergoes ? Is the life of the wine
repressed when the barometer falls, or when the
weather is about to change unfavorably ? I do not
see any plausible hypothesis to explain the hy-
grometric power on bottles full of winej'chemists
will understand me if I say thatjempty bottles
are not affected by the hygeometric phenomenon.
In order to settle the question, experiments
should he made upon bottles filled up with
water mixed with bottles filled]up with wine.
In fine, the pressure, barometrical or artificial,
has a great influence upon wines j the higher
the barometer, the more limpid are the wines ;
they become turbid and thick when the baro-
meter is very low. Under a pressure of three
or four atmospheres the wines clarify better
than under the free air ; it is an ascertained
fact in the case of champagne wines. Some use-
ful applications for other wines, may perhaps
he drawn from the favorable influence of the
atmospheric pressure.
SUMMARY OF THE PRECEPTS APPLICABLE TO
THE KEEPING OF WINES.
It was necessary for me to show the principal
influences of the general modyfying agents
on wines before giving the last observations as
concerning the care to be taken after the first
fermentation ; a few words will now be suffi-
cient. It will he necessary to observe the
following rules, namely : Tofilljup completely
all the vessels containing wine, firstly, every
two or three days, then every week and everj
month, and lastly four times a year, and always
with the same sort of wine, or wine of the same
nature. To rack off once at least upon the
first lees, without fining, in dry and cold
weather, during the first and second winters
expose the wines as much as possible to a cold
air varying from five degrees below the freezing
point to as many above, and effect the drawing
off at that temperature. To fine only wines
which are not limpid before the” racking
off. To clarify and rack off wines which
are to be bottled or removed. To
put in small casks the wines which have
been kept in large vessels when those wines
approach the point at which they become
drinkable, and to place the small casks in fresh
and quiet cellars. To put the wines in bottles
only when they are fit to drink so as to be able
to keep them good long and to wait till they
become better. To pile up the bottles in the
coldest and darkest part of the cellars; each
kind of wine must be properly labelled and a
record of the age and time of bottling must be
noted in a book kept for that purpose. Such
are the most general rules to he observed in
the treatment of wines. If there is one cask of old
wine for which no similar kind can be obtained
to fill up, the ingenious process recommended
by M. de Monny in his book of the Vigneron
is practised. Stenes which do not effervesce
when put in vinegar or acids are put in the
cask, but those stones must be first well boiled,
in water and washed afterwards in cold water.
If after having been one or two years in bottles
the wine deposits an abundant and soft lee, it
should be decanted with great care. To effect
that operation a small tin tube about eightinches
long and slightly bent is used j this tube is in-
troduced into the bottle and against the upper
side so that the air can get in freely while the
bottle is gradually inclined to allow the liquid
to run out. This decantation must only be
practised in case of absolute necessity, and must
not be followed by any other. If the operation


is effected during cold and freezing ■weather
the quality of the wine is not altered. To com-
plete the preparation of wines I have still to
speak of the liqueur and sparkling wines.
LIQUEUR WINES.
The liqueur wines are more particularly pro-
duced in the vineyards of the extreme south of
France, but they could, if needed, be produced
wherever the vine is cultivated. A liqueur
wine may be obtained from any grapes by
evaporating the water from the juice of the
latter, until that juice marks 20 degrees with
the gleucometer ; or, in other words it is made
by a slow fermentation to contain 20 per cent,
to 15, 16, and 18 degrees of spirit, and the sur-
plus in sugar non-reduced. This result is ob-
tained by three different principal methods :
The first, which is only applicable in hot
climates, consists in allowing the direct evapor-
ation of the water by the desiccation of the
grape on the vine ; the desiccation is effected
by twisting the stem of the bunch, or by cut-
ting the bunches and leaving them to dry by
the foot of the vine. Under some favorable
circumstances, two or three days are sufficient to
obtain the partial desiccation of the grapes, a
dessication which is adequate to realise th<
richness sought for in the must ; generally six
or eight days are required to attain the desired
result. The juice of the grapes being thus con-
centrated, they are gathered and brought into
the press house where the most shrivelled
berries are separated from those that are less so:
each are crushed separately j the most juicy of
the berries produce a liquid must which is used
to dilute the thicker must obtained from the
more desiccated grapes. The mixture of the
two musts being effected, the whole is subjected
to the action of the press, and the liquid ob-
tained is the basis of the liqueur wines. The
second process consists in gathering the grapes
when in their highest state of maturity and in
effecting the desired evaporation either by put-
ting the grapes upon hurdles made of wicker-
work, and exposing them to the air, or keeping
them under cover or in ovens made for that
purpose. This method, of course, can be em-
ployed in any country and under any climate.
"When the desiccation reaches the desired de-
gree, the grapes are treated as in the first pro-
cess. These two methods produce the best and
most natural liqueur wines, provided, however,
that no other grapes are used but those from
the finest cepages and those most suited to pro-
duce the most perfect wines of that
kind. The third process, the worst
of the three, is unfortunately the
one most resorted to ; it consists in concen-
trating the must of the grapes hy a protracted
ebullition in vast coppers, until it has acquired
a density greater than necessary ; for instance,
30 ° instead of 20 ° ; it is left to cool down,
and then it is mixed with non-reduced juice
until the density is brought down to 20 ° of
the gleucometer. If the process is carried out
as I have just explained, and especially if
neither marble nor chalk is used to absorb the
acids j if, in fact, plaster is not employed, and
the concentration is obtained by evaporation
only, good liqueur wines may be produced j
the destruction of the natural acids renders
vapid and kills .any kind of wine. Colored
liqueur wines of high qualities are obtained
also by fermenting the must of red grapes with
the skins, and after the drawing off of that
must, mixing it with the prepared liquor.
The more saccharine elements the liqueur
wine contains, the slower is the fermentation,
and they require a long time to reach perfec-
tion, and for that reason they can be kept
in large vessels placed in dry and warm
rooms.
SPARKLING WINES.
Although I have made, for a great number
of years, sparkling wines, and particularly
champagne ; although I have followed that
occupation with delight and employed all the
efforts of my knowledge and intelligence t
that special branch of French industry, I must
only say here a few words on that subject, as
an indispensible conclusion to the rapid and
superficial remarks I have made upon the
various parts of vinification. Most of the
French wines would lose much by being
converted into sparkling wines : the sparkling
wines of the Champagne are one of the great


national sources of wealth, and that wealth is
so much more estimable as it is due to an extra-
ordinary sagacity for observation, a spirit of
progress, and scientific investigation, but
especially to a respect for tradition seldom met
with now-a-days in vine culture and wine
making.
Causes of the superiority of the sparkling
wines of Champagne.—The choice of the
cepagcs has always been the subject of the
greatest solicitude for the vinegrower in
Champagne ; his vineyards are planted with
the finest. The large black and the large white
sorts are strictly proscribed; this is the reason
why the world want wines from Champagne,
as it wants wines from Upper Medoc, and as it
will always want wines from the districts where
regard for the cepage has predominance over
any other considerations. If Upper Champagne
was to cease now to produce sparkling and to
make only dry wines, itcouldnot produce them
in sufficient quantity to supply the demand,
like Sauterne, Montraohet, the beautiful
Chablis, and like twenty other places of un-
tarnished and good reputation. But the de-
light and the luxury of the effervesccnse in
wines, added to that first and solid basis, is an
industrial produce which has its value
and which deserves special remunera-
tion. That produce is equally the fruit
of traditional observation and scientific pro-
gress, and under this double advan-
tage of its fine cepages and its progressive
processes founded upon long experience, Upper
Champagne deserves, and will always retain, the
sceptre for sparkling wines.
Sophistication.—Notwithstanding their fair
name, the oenophiles of Champagne number
among them a few false brothers and several
impostors and deceivers, who make Champagne
wines with grapes bought outside the depart-
ment of the Marne, and who even add to those
wines numerous hectolitres of sugar-water;
but this deception upon merchandise, these very
exceptional sophistications, are yet more rare
in Champagne than in any other renowned
wine districts, the reputation of which is always
a marketable article for audacious speculators.
All these abuses will cease as soon as a law,
severe without being oppressive to industry,
nor restrictive to honest liberty, shall require
that the producer declares the elements of his
produce, and that each produce sold bears the
description of its composition.
Treatment of the grapes.—All grapes, in
any country and under any climate can pro-
duce sparkling wines. In Champagne, the
black grapes, nearly all belonging to the pineau
kind, are preferred, for making the best spark-
ling wines, to the white grapes, which however
belong to the same species. To make sparkling
wines, the grapes must be gathered with care,
cleaned, and crushed before any fermentation
takes place. The juices are either put in casks
immediately or are left to deposit for a while
in the vats. Their fermentation is effected in
casks of 45 gallons, and in rooms with a tem-
perature of 66 or 77 Fahrenheit. The fermenta-
tion proceeds quietly and slowly and lasts from
eight to fifteen days, more or less, according as
the ambiant temperature is high or low. The
essential point to be observed when the wines
are taken into the cellars with a temperature of
55 or 59 degrees, is that those wines retain
about one half of their sugar (non-convertedinto
spirit and carbonic acid) at the time when their
active and sensible fermentation is stopped and
transformed, by cold, into a slow and latent
fermentation. So far, the treatment of the
wines intended to be sparkling does not differ
from the general treatment employed in
ordinary white wines. It commences to be
different when it is necessary to retard the
first fermentation of the intended sparkling
winesbyremoving theminto a fresh place, so that
they can retain a sufficient quantity of sugar
in their must. This faculty of retaining their
sugar and interrupting their first fermentation
is far from being so marked in all wines as in
those of Champagne; a great number of white
wines in the south of France cannot be treated
naturally for sparkling wines. The wines of
Champagne retain their sugar with such a
tenacity, that it is very difficult to make them
dry, even after two or three years of delay; at
every sap they work a little and their sugar


becomes creamy or a little sparkling, if they
are kept in bottles well corked. The wines of
Champagne have therefore a true
over the great industry which has been founded
upon them and of which they are the legiti-
mate standards. The sugar which remains in
the wines continues to reduce itself during the
winter by the latent fermentation to a certain
extent, which must be ascertained frequently
and correctly, if natural sparkling wine is to
be the result of the operation, because the
effervescence depends exclusively on the
quantity of sugar that remains in the wines
when put in bottles.
Effervescing wines put in bottles must con-
tain an accurate proportion of sugar. —If the
wine does not contain enough sugar when it is
put in bottles, the effervescence is deficient; if
it contain too much ot it, the effervescence is
too strong, and breaks the bottles to a ruinous
extent, or forces the liquid through the corks or
between the corks and the glass, and partly
empties the bottles. The first condition to
make effervescing wines is to have some practi-
cal system, simple and sure, to- ascertain the
quantity of sugar which is in the wines when
they are about to be bottled.
Relations of the sugar with the weight
and volume of the carbonic acid gas.—The sugar
of the grapes as well as most of other sugars is
decomposed by fermentation into two parts,
nearly equal in weight, namely, carbonic acid
and alcohol. The alcohol, which is a liquid at
the ordinary temperature, remains naturally
and without effort, mixed with the water of
the wine; but the carbonic acid being a gas
excessively elastic, escapes immediately
from the liquid into the atmosphere if
that liquid is not hermetically closed, and it
remains in the wine, and dissolves in it only
in proportion to the pressure which is opposed
to its escape or expansion. It is therefore the
carbonic acid alone which by the expansive
activity developed to effect its escape from the
wine renders that wine sparkling, and forms the
effervescence by dilating and raising it in an
infinite number of bubbles. But, if the car-
bonic acid alone renders the wine effervescent,
the sugar alone gives the carbonic acid to the
wine, and that gas represents nearly one half
the weight of the sugar ; and the carbonic acid,
representing the 49 hundredths of the weight
of the sugar, gives a volume of gas exceeding
three cubic inches for every fifteen and a half
grains of acid, from which it follows that thirty
grains of sugar giving fifteen grains-*of acid,
furnish nearly a pint of that gas. Sixty
grains of sugar would thus produce nearly one
quart of gas, from which it follows that if
300 grains of sugar were reduced into alcohol
and carbonic acid in a bottle of wine hermeti-
cally closed, the bottle would contain upwards
of four quarts of gas, which, according to
Marriotte’s law, would make an effort equal to
to nearly five atmospheres to break the vessel,
or drive out the cork. That is, in effect, what
takes place in the bottles of sparkling wines in
which the gaseous tension is supposed to be
four or five atmospheres.
Tension of the gas in the bottles.—lf the
volume of carbonic gas retained in the wine or
free in the empty part of the neck of the bottle,
or in the bilge of the bottle, when laid down
horizontally, was not equal to an internal pres-
sure of four atmospheres, the effervescence
would be too weak or defective. If that pressure
exceeded six atmospheres, few bottles, even of
the best glass, could withstand it long without
bursting, and few corks, however well selected
and fixed, could prevent the scape of the liquid.
Quantity of sugar to be left in the wine to
obtain a good effervescence. —To avoid missing
the effervescence and to prevent breakage, it is
essential to bottle only wine which contains
no more and not less than two pounds of non-'
decomposed sugar for every ten gallons. To
ascertain that the above proportion is exactly
in the wine, the following process is employed :
—I will suppose that, after the wine was made,
the casks were put in Trcsh and quiet cellars,
and that the removal was effected when one-
half of the sugar was still in its natural state. I
will suppose also that the must of the wine,
when previously tested, marked 11 degrees with
the gleuoometer, which would show about 1 lb
of sugar for every gallon, allowing one degree


to represent the salts and acids ,• thus, about
three quarters of a pound of non-reduced sugar
per gallon would remain when the wine is put
in the cellars j of that quantity scarcely one-
half would be decomposed before the Ist of
January, which follows the making, and at that
time six ounces of sugar would still remain in
its natural state; that quantity is yet double of
what is required for the bottling. One can,
therefore, wait till that epoch without any
apprehension or care concerning the state of
the wines, except for the regular filling up and
racking off at the winter solstice j but, from the
first fortnight of January, the state of the sugar
must he carefully ascertained weekly in each
kind of wine.
Cuvees in Champagne.—A cuvee in cham-
pagne is a mixture or blending of several wines
which have been ascertained by tradition and
testing to improve by that process. The districts
from which these wines are obtained differ in
sites and aspects, such as the vineyards of the
Mountain of Rheims exposed to the north, and
the vineyards of the Marne exposed to the
south, the vineyards of Vertus, Oger, Semenil,
&0., exposed to the east, and the vineyards of
Cut s, Groves, &0., exposed to the west. These
wines differ also, unfortunately, with those
bought by unscrupulous speculators, in dis-
tricts which nature has not endowed with the
same advantages as Champagne; in truth, a
cuvee is a mixture of various wines which, by
the blending effected after the first and separ-
ated fermentation of each of the components,
forms a perfect homogeneous mass. Thus,
cuvees of 2000, 100,000 and 250,000 bottles
aro made. It is a great art that of making
well the cuvees. There are successful and un-
successful cuvees. It is rarely that the pro-
prietor is not present and presiding at the
making. A correct and minute account is
always kept of the composition of each of them,
save in case of adulteration, for the success
or the failure of a cuvee, its good or bad
ulterior keeping, the favor it meets with when
brought into the market, carefully recorded in
the archives of the proprietor form traditional
and precious instructions for the family.
Method to ascertain the quantity of sugar
which remains in the wines.—Whatever may
be the skill displayed in the making of the
cuvees, they differ in the quantity of sugar
they contain, and in the course of their trans-
formation. It is for that reason that from the
first fortnight of January, I have said that the
stgte of the saccharine matter should be as-
certained weekly. The best process to effect
that object is the following : 750 grammes of
wine (25'78 oz, avoirdupois) are weighed
exactly and put into a porcelain capsule, the
weight of which is previously ascertained.
The capsule is put over a gentle fire, or
in a steam bath, and the evaporation
of the wines is allowed to proceed till it is
reduced to one-sixth part or 125 grammes.
The residue is then poured into a glass tube to
cool itself down to 59 or SO degrees, at
which temperature the gleucometer is immersed
in the liquid, and if it marks 12 degrees it is
time to draw off the etwee. The drawing off is
still good at 11 degrees ; it is less favorable at
10, but it produces yet a good effervesence.
Below 10 degrees artificial means must be re-
sorted to ; above 12, the wine must not be
bottled, no matter how far the season is ad-
vanced. The drawing off may be effected from
January to June.
The wines must be bottled as soon
as they mark only 11 to 12 degrees with the
gleucometer.—Whatever be the epoch of the
winter or spring, when the liquid of a cuvee,
reduced to a sixth by evaporation, and marks
only from 11 to 12 degrees, the drawing off
and bottling can be proceeded with. But it
must not be forgotten that if it is cold, the
effervescence will only be perfect by effecting
those operations under an artificial and constant
temperature of 77 degrees ; and this condition
not only causes the rapid absorption by the
ferment of the oxygen of the air confined in
the chamber or the bilge of the bottle, but also
enable the bottles when filled up in the same
place and under the same temperature, to re-
ceive an impulsion that produces promptly the
formation of the effervescence.
Signal of the formation of the effervescence. —


The signal of the formation of the
effervescence is given by the de-
tonation and the breaking of some bottles in
the pile. That phenomenon manifests itself
generally in the third day after the bottling.
When it, is ascertained that the effervescence
has set in, the bottles must be removed at once
into a very fresh, and quiet place : breakage
which would continue if the bottles were left
in a warm places, ceases altogether if they are
new and of good glass.
The bottles should be new.—l say new
because under the internal pressure of four at-
mospheres during two years, the glass loses its
cohesiveness, and the bottles which have
been used once cannot be trusted a second tine.
This is a fact well established and which was
verifie 1 under my own eyes at a great cost j
out of three thousand excellent bottles which
had contained sparkling wines and filled up a
second time, 14 or 17 only withstood the
pressure. The glass of the bottles
must be very coherent. I say that
the bottle must be of good material, be-
cause the tenacity of the glass and its resistance
to disintegration vary according to the materials
melted in the furnace. Several persons, whose
opinions are authoritative, think that the
enormous adhesiveness of bottles is due to the
great proportion of vitrified oxyde of iron con-
tained in the glass. It may be so, but I think,
according to my observations, that the imperfect
tenaciousness results from the abundant use of
broken bottles ; silicates lose their cohesion by
a second fusion. It is for that reason, I believe,
that the glass manufactories of Sevres and
Bercy which recast an immense quantity of
broken bottles gathered in Paris, could never
furnish bottles that resisted sufficiently the
pressure of sparkling wines.
A slow fermentation saves breakage.—lt is
not sufficient to avoid the breaking of bottles
that the wines contain a proper proportion of
sugar to be converted into alcohol and carbonio
acid, but it is necessary that the latter be
developed slowly, and that the wines have time
to dissolve it. "Water dissolves about an equal
volume of carbonio acid under the ordinary
atmospheric pressure ; alcohol dissolves about
three times its own volume under the same
pressure ; so that wine at ten degrees of alcohol
• dissolves about one and a fifth of its volume of
carbonic acid gas j but the facility which
liquids possess of dissolving the gas increases
proportionately to the pressure; consequently,
under a pressure of four
dissolves four times and four-fifths its own
volume of carbonic acid; whence it follows that
the active pressure is the result of the reaction
of the gaseous atmosphere contained in the neck
or in the bilge of the bottle. To prevent the
pressure being disproportionate in the neck or
in the bilge, the gas formed must have suffi-
cient time to dissolve in the liquid. That time
is wanting if the decomposition of the sugar is
too rapid. This is the cause of the breakage
commencing as soon as the third or fourth day
after the bottling when effected in a warm
place. At that time not one-fourth of the sugar
which is to undergo the chemical transforma-
•tion is yet decomposed, but the small quantity
of gas already formed has accumulated in the
bilge and exercises a momentary pressure of 8,
12 and 15 atmospheres, which bursts bottles that
would not break in a fresh place, because the
carbonic acid would have developed itself
slowly, and would have dissolved in the wine
according as it was formed. Everything that
accelerates the development of the fermenta-
tion, as soon as it has commenced, in such
manner as to insure its continuation, must be
avoided; heat, shocks, noise, sounds that can
vibrate in unison with the bottles. It is
possible, indeed, to increase the breakage at
will, by rendering the fermentation active and
tumultuous, and to reduce it by contrary
influences, independently of the larger or
lesser quantities of sugar to be transformed
into alcohol and carbonio acid. The pre-
sence of acids in the wine greatly diminishes
the solubility of the gas, and accelerates
in a remarkable manner its issue from the
liquid.
Sparkling wines establishment.—The locality
must have a temperature of 20 degrees. Each
cask is previously brought there, and the bottles


re filled directly from the tap or by the aid of
a box mounted with tubes, and a lever that
lets the exact quantity of wine required to
fill one bottle pass through each tube; this
box is supplied by a tap with a floating ball.
In each bottle an empty space of about two
inches must be left to give room for the cork
and the air chamber. One or two boys place
the empty bottles at the tap, and carry them to
the corker, who, with the aid of a machine for
the purpose, puts in the bottle a good cork,
well cleansed, well softened by heat and dipped
in a liqueur wine to facilitate its slipping down
the neck of the bottle. Several ingenious
machines have been invented by which one
thousand bottles may be corked daily with
corks the size of which seems altogether dis-
proportionate to the opening of the bottle.
When the bottle is corked the corker hands it
over to another man, who fastens the cork with
a string. Another man receives the bottles
and fastens the cork again with the wire.
Sometimes a tin capsule is usefully put on the
top of the cork before fixing the wire ; it pre-
vents the latter from cutting the cork, which is
constantly pressed outward by the gas. Under
equal circumstances, respecting the quality of the
corks and their binding, this precaution may
safely be estimated at a difference at least of 10
per cent, for leaking bottles. When the bottles
are so prepared, they are piled up in tae best
manner possible to prevent those bursting from
breaking any more. As soon as, by the for-
mation of deposit, or y the breaking of several
bottles, the effervescing work is known to have
commenced, the bottles are taken down into
cellars which remain at a constant temperature
of 10 degrees ; they are piled up again and left
there for 18 months, two years or more, accord-
ing to the wants of the trade. During the
stay in the cellars the breakage increases
alarmingly at the rising of the sap in May or
June, but it is not so great in August, and still
less in the following spring; it is also noticed
more or less during storms under the influence
of electricity. Breakage was so considerable
not many years ago, under certain circumstances
and in certain cellars, that the loss was some-
times above 50 per cent, of the bottles j the prin-
cipal condition for the production of the effer-
vescence was then unknown. Now, the losses
do not exceed more than 9 or 10 per cent, under
the most unfavorable circumstances, and do not
often go below 2 per cent, under the best con-
ditions. Thp average of the losses occasioned
by breakage is 5 or 6 per cent. ; if it goes
beyond, it is owing to the ignorance or careless-
ness of the manufacturer. After ono anda-half
or two years, when the deposit is well formed,
and the wines are perfectly limpid in the
bottles, they may be prepared for expedition.
They are taken from the pile and fixed head
down in planks bored for that purpose. The
holes must be large enough to permit the
bottles to be pat first in a very slanting posi-
tion, then a little more vertically and at last
quite so. While giving those various positions,
the workman, who is called the stirrer, takes
each bottle by the bottom, and, without lifting
it up, gives it one or two rotatory oscillating
motions upon its axis; the object of the above
operations is to bring gradually the deposit
lying in the bilge of the bottle, down the neck
and on the cork, without disturbing the
limpidity of the wine. In most cases the object
desired is obtained in six weeks or two months.
The deposit is then chared off by a peculiar
manner of taking the cork out. It happens
sometimes that the deposit is greasy and adheres
to the place where it had settled j this accident
leaves a stain called masque, and necessitates
violent shaking of the bottles, and, not un-
frequently, a complete decanting, operations
which are all effected by hand, or by ingenious
mechanical processes, the description of which
does not come within the limits of this
work.
New method of piling up the bottles.—The
breakage is often increased by the mode of
piling up the bottles. The old system was
particularly favorable to that evil. It can
easily bo imagined what were the consequences
of the shell-like bursting of one bottle
amidst 3000 or 4000, laid horizontally on the
top of one another. To avoid those disasters I
have adopted a process which isolates each of


the bottles, although they are piled up in
hundreds upon moveable shelves of pine im-
pregnated with sulphate of copper. On these
shelves, which are called table-tas, the bottles
are inclined 45 degrees ; they are placed there
immediately after the bottling, and are only
removed when wanted for expedition to undergo
the operation of clearing off the deposit. In
that position the deposit settles at once on the
cork, and thus the table-tas saves the pre-
liminary piling up, the temporary inclination
of the bottles, the shaking, the masque, and
reduces the breakage to a small proportion*
This system of piling up, employed for more
than ten years, has given the best possible
results.
The carbonic acid is retained by affinity in
the Champagne wine.—l consider it necessary
to examine why almost the whole of the
carbonic acid remains in the wine in an open
bottle; for during the time the deposit is
being taken from the bottle, the wiping of the
neck, and the re corking, the bottle remains
open. That time, although short, would be
sufficient for a bottle of Seltzer water to lose
three-fourths of its gas, while a sparkling wine,
the Champagne wine above all others, keeps
four-fifths at least of its gas, notwithstanding
that the dissolving power of water for carbonic
acid is 100, and that of the wine only 120; the
difference does not explain the retention in the
wine of three or four times its volume of gas,
capable of producing a pressure of three or four
atmospheres as soon as the bottle is hermetically
closed. There is, in truth, in the Champagne
wine a power of cohesiveness, an attraction
which, when in contact with carbonic acid,
counterbalances the tension of three at
mospheres; but ordinary wine does not possess
that power, for a great number of manufacturers
of wines in Paris and other places treat the
white wines, which do not effervesce, as water
is treated to make sodawater and lemonade. To
poor and weak white wines, from Touraine,
Lorraine, and other places, they add liqueur
of alcohol in fit proportion to imitate the
genuine wines, and then they impregnate them
with carbonic acid, extracted from lime,marble,
or chalk. These wines, which are called
grands mousseux, drive off the cork with a
great noise, but the carbonic acid gas escapes
immediately in the proportion of three-
fourths of its volume, as it escapes from the
Seltzer or other aerated waters. The adultera-
tion is easily detected. The more natural the
sparkling wine, and the finer the cepaifSf the
more its carbonic acid adheres to the liquid,
and the smaller are the bubbles of the effer-
vescence, the less it is acid, the longer it keeps
its sparkling properties. By pouring acids into
wine loaded with carbonic acid, the gas dis-
engages itself rapidly, as if the new acid was
taking its place in some sort of combination ;
points, sharp angles, eleotrictrity, heat, shocks,
sounds, tend to disengage the carbonic acid
from the wine. However, there is no co m-
bination between the gas and the wine, for
the wine of Champagne does not admit,
and is no conductor for, sonorous vibra-
tions, which proves that the gaseous liquid
is a mixture without homogeneity. Any one
can ascertain that fact by filling up a tumbler
with water or ordinary wine,and one with good
sparkling wine, saturated with its gas j the
first glass, struck with the blade of a knife,
will give a clear and long sound ; the other a
dull one, which will immediately die away, as
if the glass was muffled. The longer a
sparkling wine retains its gas, the more it is
natural and of fine origin. A good bottle of
effervescing wine left open for three hours,
when half full, should, if carefully recorked,
drive off the cork with some noise on the follow-
ing day. The above remarks explain how the
bottle may be opened to take Cut the deposit in
the chamber without damaging the wine,
especially if the operation is effected in a fresh
cellar.
Recoulage.—When the wine is the produce
of bad or middling years, it is necessary to add
a proportion of wine of a good year; this addi-
tion is called recoulage. For instance, the
wines of 1847 were blended in that manner
with 10,15, 20 per cent, of the excellent wine of
1846. It is by the recoulages that the wines of
Champagne can be offered every year, and upon


the markets of the whole world, with about
the same qualities; for that reason the large
and wealthy merchants buy at any price the
greatest possible quantity of wines of the good
years; it is their treasure —their essence to
enrich and perfume the wines of poor years.
Without a stock of first-class old wines in a
had year a house is lost for the great commerce.
This fact shows that the production of the
wines of Champagne is an industry, an art and
a science at the same time. It would still be
better shown if I had time to enumerate and
describe all that is identical to the filtering of
the liquids, and to the machinery employed to
bottle them without coming in contact with the
air, the corks and their preparation, the string,
wires, capsules, &o. To make known all the
ingenious process, all the marvellous machinery,
all the invention and observation relative to the
preparation of Champagne wines, several
volumes would scarcely suffice. But I must
confine myself to a succinct and simple descrip-
tion of the practice of that industry, and refer
the reader for further and ample information to
the work of M. Maumene.
Corks.—The cork used for the last bottling
should not be so deeply driven in as it is at the
first drawing off. The corks for expedition
must be new, of first quality, well washed with
wine and softened by steam.
Mode of selling the produce of the vineyards
in Champagne.—Notwithstanding the interest
that the great industry of the Champagne wines
deserves, it is only as an important branch that
it is connected with the general question of the
French wines, and my sole object in giving the
foregoing summary statement of that industry
was to make known the difficulties; that state-
ment will be sufficient to show that it goes far
beyond simple viniculture and ordinary wine-
making, and that it is not easy for the ordinary
vinegrower to annex it to his establishment.
In Champagne, most of the proprietors sell
their grapes to the manufacturers of effervescing
wines, or they sell their wines in wood,
and it is only seldom, and when the wines are
good and too cheap, that they run the risk of
making a tirage. To make a tirage for the
proprietors is to bottle the wines in their own
cellars and at their own expense. After one or
two years, according as the time appears to
them the most favorable to obtain a good price
for their tirage, they cause their wines to he
tasted, and their qualities appreciated, by
professional tasters, who then offer them to the
trade. The manufacturers remove them
to their eastahlishment, and prepare them for
sale. Thus, even in Champagne, the pro-
prietors decline the trouble and risks of the
manufacture of sparkling wines, and I appre-
ciate their prudence. It is for that reason
that I will never advise a proprietor of vine-
yards to engage inconsiderably in an industry
which too often leads to ruin through erroneous
speculation and estimates. I here close the
general description of the preparation of French
wines j I have now to speak of the use of the
lees, low wines, vapid wines, and the mark of
white and red wines.
USE OF THE LOW WINES AND THE MARKS.
Distillation of the low wines and marks.—
The lees obtained from fermented wines must
be washed successively in two waters, and
those waters may be added to the wines in-
tended for distillation. In large rural
establishments, all the marks (residuum of the
pressed grapes), but the marks of white wines
better than those of the red, put in casks or
vats, may be made to furnish a very wholesome
and fortifying drink to be used in the same
year. If the casks in which the marks are kept
are filled up with water in the proportion of
one half of the juice that they have produced,
and they are left to macerate for ten or twenty
days in that quantity of water, the latter will
become saturated with the salts, tannin, color-
ing matter, and 4 or 5 per cent, of spirit. By
adding 10 per cent, of sugar, the beverage can
be doubled in quantity, and improved in
quality by the more active fermentation
that it will undergo; but those products must
be consumed on the spot; for field laborers
they are far superior to water; they are


Even preferable to beer, but they cannot replace
the wine.
Distillation of the waters used for washing
the marks.—To extract the alcohol contained
in the marks which have not been used to
make the beverage above mentioned,
the best method, and the most con-
venient, consists in filling up with hot water
the vessels containing the marks when dried
and cold. When the water has become cold,
it is drawn off as the wine would be, and that
water, distilled in the proper apparatus, gives
spirits of good taste and flavor. The last
residuum of the marks is used to make turf for
burning, or to feed poultry, or it is mixed with
the composts of soil and stable manures to be
used in vineyards.
DISEASES OF THE WINES.
I speak of the diseases of the wines only to
say that it is a very unimportant question, and
that it bears only upon rare exceptions, foreign
to the general production and to the great com*
merce of wines.
Wines well made are never unsound.—l
speak on this entirely under the influence
of Comte Odart’s opinion, and I have myself
ascertained that pure and well made wines, pro-
duced by good and well matured grapes, put
in good casks and kept in good collars, ore
never sick except through caducity, which
disease is incurable. I have noticed that the
medium or bad wines, or even the good wines,
which have been placedin conditions that caused
their mucous, acetic or putrid fermentation,
were deprived of the elements which nourish
them, that is to say, of sugar and alcohol, and
that they never could be made again market-
able wines; their treatment and their cure is
therefore only an affair of domestic economy,
for public hygiene, as well as conscience and
probity, must forbid the sale of vitiated or de-
fective wines, as it forbids the sale of vicious
and unhealthy animals.
Treatment to prevent the grease.—The grease
in wine* is the same as in beer; they turn
slimy. Prevention, says M. Monny de Mornay,
is better than cure. That precept has been
applied with great advantage in Champagne,
where the white, light and delicate wines were
often subjected to viscocity. That disease has
disappeared by the use of tannin in the propor-
tion of 15 to 20 grammes (| to. £ oz) per 22
gallons, added to an alcoholic solution<ttff6e or
four weeks previously to the bottling. The
tannin neutralises and precipitates the excess of
azoted matter, an excess which produces the
viscocity of the wine. That preventive medica-
tion was recommended by M. Francois, a skilful
chemist, who has rendered immense services to
the manufacturing of effervescing wines; he
hud ascertained that the wines, affected with the
grease, recovered their dryness and limpidity
by the addition of tannin, and drew the conclu-
sion, as simple as rational, that the addition of
that substance would prevent the disease. The
same results would be obtained for all the white
wines (the only wines which are liable to that
disease) by immersing in them, after the press-
ing, a portion of their stalks and allowing the
latter to remain during the whole of the latent
fermentation. That practice would be prefer-
able to the use of tannin or gallic nut: Ist,
because the tannin extracted from the stalk is
not identical with the tannin extracted from
the gallic nut; 2nd, because it is more natural
to the wine, less sensitive to the taste, and less
hard to the stomach. I express hero the opinion
of M. Maumene, an opinion which I share
entirely. Other diseases can be prevented in
the same manner by giving to the wines the
elements the absence or insufficiency of which
render them liable to. With regard to the
sulphuring of the casks, although it has the un-
questionable property of suspending momen-
tarily all fermentation and all action of vinous
decomposition, I cannot recommend it, for it
kills the wines, and often gives them a bad
taste. I am still less in favor of the use of alum
milk, and of any other matter, mineral, vegetable
or animal, foreign to wine. However, the use
of good olive oil takes sometimes from the wine
its bad taste, without being hurtful in any
way.


TASTING AND APPRECIATING THE WINES.
In its appreciation the wine is subject to two
jurisdictions; one all sensual, the other all
physiological. The sensual appreciation of the
wine is akin to three of our sensual organs: the
eye, the anterior and posterior nasal fossce,
the posterior and anterior parts of the
mouth.
The wine judged by the eye.—The wine
pleases the eye by its limpidity and its color;
whether it be red, rosy, yellow, or white, it
must always be perfectly limpid and of a deter-
mined color; none of the tints of the wine are
false or doubtful, even when extremely old. If
one should not, or cannot, decide that a wine is
good when it is agreeable and inviting to the
sight, one can always say that it is not good,
or, at least, that it is not in the best condition
if its transparency and shades are doubtful.
The purity of the color and limpidity are favor-
able signs; they are not qualities ; but the con-
trary appearances are proof of real defects in the
wine.
The wine judgedby smell.—The two bouquets
of the wine.—Wine reveals itself by two sorts
of odors or bouquets to the function of the
organ by the inspiration of air. The first is the
general and common odor, although peculiar to
all wines; when the wine is new it is stronger,
but it is always inherent to good wine, and dis-
tinguishes it however old it may be. The first
bouquet of the wines seems to reside in the ex-
pansion of the spirit, which holds in dissolution
an essential oil more or less fugacious, having
more or less strength, and being more or less
characteristic of each species of wine ; that
bouquet is a sign of real quality j it is generally
very strong and very expansive during the first
years; it concentrates itself, refines and attenu-
ates as it gets old. The second sort of aroma,
on the contrary, developes itself with the age
of the wine, and seems to owe its existence to
the reaction of the vinous acids upon the spirit,
a reaction which determines certain ethereal
combinations; that bouquet, whether it be more
or less agreeable, indicates, nevertheless, de-
composition unfavorable to the salubrity and
the durability of the wine j no wine derives its
reputation from that second sort of bouquet, and
the aroma so well known and justly ap-
preciated of the Bordeaux wines belongs clearly
to the first sort, to the only one that must be
generally considered.
The wines are not made especially to please
the eye or the smell.—The aroma as well as the
color is a favorable or unfavorable, agreeable or
disagreeable, sign, but wine is an alimentary
beverage before all; it is good, very good, that
the eye and the smell be flattered, but it would
be absurd and even ridiculous to exalt beyond
measure the satisfaction of the sight and the
smell, and to pretend to found the superiority
of a wine almost exclusively upon the approba-
tion of those two senses, and sometimes of one
only. I make this remark intentionally. I
have seen persons calling upon their guest, with
a disagreeable persistence, to admire the lim-
pidity, and especially to smell their wines and
even the empty glasses during the repast, even
to the risk of causing thirst. The true con-
noisseur, the taster, knows well how to judge
and love wine, but he knows as -well that the
appreciation of the sight and smell must im-
mediately be followed by the introduction of the
liquid into the mouth. The color and the aroma
are two introductive notes of a gastronomical
theme; if they are alone, they have no re-
lative value, and the theme is not under-
stood.
The wine judged by the taste, that is to say,
by the mouth, anterior and posterior.—Before
speaking of the impression of wine upon the
sense of taste, I must say that that sense is the
only one which has a double apparatus of per-
ception, one on the tip and on the edges of
the tongue, the other at the root of that organ,
and upon the palate. The first perceives the
acid or electro-positive savors by the two lingual
nerves, and the other perceives the alkaline or
electro-negative savors by the two glosso-
pharyngeal nerves j the savors perceived by the
anterior part of the mouth, in beverages as well
as in aliments, are not the same as those per-
ceived by the posterior parts of the mouth ; an
alkaline salt, for instance, gives to the anterior
part of the mouth acid, styptical, salted and


sweet savors, and gives to the posterior parts of
the mouth its basic, bitter and amylaceous
savors. I have established those facts by direct
experiments, in 1829, with Dr. Admyrauld, and
by experiments upon animals, in 1833, with Dr.
Cazalis.
Tasting.—All the acid, sweet and styptical
savors of the wine are felt upon the tip of the
tongue when it is introduced into the anterior
part of the mouth. All those shades united
must please the organs by leaving neither acid
sugar, nor astringency to predominate. The
wine is then absorbed in the posterior part of
the mouth, where it is detained by a slight gar-
garismal motion ; it is there that the weakness
or intensity of the alcoholic strength is felt; it
is there that the earthy taste, the insipidity of
the salt, the bitterness, the bad odor of the cask
or cork, are appreciated. If the whole of the
savors pleases the posterior part of the mouth
by the absence of any disagreeable impression,
one must, to complete the tasting, not spit out
the wine, but swallow it, because,
as soon as it has passed the root of
the tongue, the palate and its pillars, a well
marked odor ascends from the pharynx
into the nasal fossae, and carries there a new
and more powerful sensation than the exterior
smell; besides, the last contact of the wine with
the pharynxical mucus leaves a long impres-
sion of savors of which the disagreable sensa-
tion has been designed under the collective
name of distaste.
Good and bad wine judged by the senses.—lf
then, a wine is perfectly limpid and has a pure
color, if its odor is agreeable, and if, on the
whole, the acid, sweet and astringent savors
please the anterior parts of the mouth by a
fusion which seems to form a unique savor as
several notes form a perfect harmony ;
if to that first harmonious impression, the
posterior parts of the month add the sensation
of warmth and vinous richness, exempt from
any alcoholic taste; if, lastly, the deglutition
crown the whole by a natural bouquet without
being followed by any bad taste, the wine is
sensually good. It is imperfect if it is want-
ing in one single point, and it is so much the
worse according as its acids, sugar, and salts
get more isolated and more distinguishable on
the tip of the tongue j according as its vapish-
ness, its essential oils, its earthy taste, and
especially the isolated predominance of spirit,
manifest themselves at the base of the tongue ;
as the after-bouquet is less pleasant and as its
twang, or bad taste, is felt longer and more
disagreably.
Misunderstanding concerning the savors.—
In this explanation of the tasting I have
endeavored to be clear, and I feel that I am not
yet sufficiently so. It will be impossible to
come to a proper understanding about the
savors as long as science has not established
signs or words to represent their different
shades, their peculiarities and their relation to
each other; the science of savors is yet to be
entirely founded. Till then the chefs de cuisine
(cooks), and the skilful caterers will remain
isolated geniuses or quacks; with regard to the
tasters and epicureans, they approve or criticise,
but they do not compose. It would be a
curious collection that contained all the ex-
pressions that tasters, wine merchants, travel-
lers, amateurs, use to express the sensations
they feel in tasting wines. I have known an
Englishman who did not like a wine “ unless it
makes the peacock tail in the mouth" (la
queue de paon dans la houche). Everybody
knows the expression that the Auvergnat (a
native o! the province of Auvergne) used
when drinking a glass of old and generous
wine—“ It is a yard of velvet that goes down
the throat.”
Physiological effects of wines.—The physio-
logical effects do not offer so much difficulty
and uncertainty in their appreciation. The
supreme judges of wine are the stomach, the
muscles, the heart and the head. Whether the
wine has pleased your eyes by its purity of
colors, your smell by its perfume, the anterior
and posterior parts of your mouth by “ making
the peacock’s tail,” whether it has gone down
your pharynx and oesophagus “ like a yard of
velvet,” if you pay for those fugitive sensuali-
ties by heavy digestion, by an epigastrioal
tension, by a muscular prostration, by a torpor


in the head and a general uncomfortahleness of
several hours, you will have a right, dearly
bought, to declare that the wine which produces
such effects is no good. If a host sees a quarrel
arising among his guests, and sometimes worse,
at the end of the repast; if, instead of mirth
and cheerfulness that good wine produces, a
sullen silence and coarse jokes are the only
manifestations of the company, that host may
safely affirm that his wines are not good, and
must exert himself to replace them by others of
better qualities if he wishes to see shine at his
table wit, cordiality and cheerfulness, which
should animate his guests during long evenings.
Drinks not only act upon individuals, but
react also upon families, tribes, nations ; and I
am decidedly convinced that the wines of
France are the true cause of the frankness,
generosity, prowess and gallantry of the
French character, unquestionably superior to
all other nations. The inhabitants of beer
drinking countries will never have the same
liveliness of mind nor the gaiety of the inhabi-
tants of a wine drinking country ; and cider
makers will never have the same frankness as
wine makers; it is not, then, the alcohol which
constitutes the value and quality of wine, since
beer and cider may contain as much, and some-
times more than the former. A good wine is
not a wine more or less spirituous. Any natural
wine, weak or strong in alcohol, is a good wine
if it retains its organic life and manifests it by a
pure odor, by the blending of all its elements
into a savor pleasing to the taste, by an easy
digestion, a sensible increase of muscular
strength, and by a greater activity of the body
and mind. Whether the savor of the wine be
fresh, piquant and light—sweet, luscious and
rich —arid, hot and sharp, the wine is good if it
sustains and increases the corporeal and intellec-
tual faculties without impairing the digestive
organs.
Wine is good relatively, and not absolutely.
—Good ordinary wines should be the first object
of wine making. For sensual, and especially
for physiological considerations, a good wine is
not good absolutely; a wine is good according
to the purpose for which it is and can be used;
an excellent liqueur or dessert Wine becomes
distastefuljwhen used as an ordinary beverage.
It is not, therefore, without reason that wines
are classed as ordinary wines, and liqueur and
dessert wines, which could also be distinguished
as wines of small, medium and large glasses, ac-
cording to the quantity one could and ought to
drink. Good pastry is good if used moderately,
but to eat constantly, and in large quantity,
bread is infinitely superior, and will always be
preferred by all the world. I would pay more
for a cask of Macon, Chablis or Bordeaux than
for one of Lunel, if I was obliged to make it ex-
clusively my ordinary drink, and I think that
everybody would be of my opinion. It is, then,
of greater importance to make good ordinary
wines than good wines of the entremet character,
and more important to make good wines of the
latter class than liqueur wines, and this pre-
cedence concerns the interest of the internal and
external consumption, as well as the interest
of the producer, the consumer, and the public
hygiene. The good ordinary wine, the alimental
wine, for the wine is positive and excellent
nutriment, is not a wine strong in spirit, nor
even one of a first-rate year, it is a wine of fine
cepages, containing not more than ten per cent,
of alcohol, and sometimes only six per cent. In
twenty years of production fifteen at least can
produce naturally good ordinary wines j these
are perfect as a hygienic beverage in their
second year, and can remain so for four or five
years; they become bad and are rejected by the
great majority of consumers if they are raised
artificially to the alcoholic power of entremet
wines, that is to say, to 10° and 14° of
alcohol. There will be an unlimited demand
for light, natural and lively wines if these truly
sensual and hygienic qualities are known, and
if the producers and the merchants cease to
make the quality to consist in alcoholic
richness. They deceive and defraud themselves
by establishing and propagating that false
opinion, for the organic instincts do not remain
duped long ; one may allow himself to be per-
suaded at first, and to buy, but the intrinsic
worth of the wines and their melancholy organic
effects incite well-founded mistrusts, and one


looks elsewhere for qualities which will he
more in accordance with his natural taste.
Assimilation does not take place in a wine
which contains a quantify of alcohol beyond
its strength; such a wine intoxicates brutally,
in the same manner as spirits, but as spirits
diluted in a mass of liquid, and therefore
deprived of the stimulating power which facili-
tates their digestion by a reaction of the
digestive organs, proportionate to their strength.
■With the present means of transport and com-
munication the good ordinary wines can be
consumed over the whole universe, and twenty
years hence, twenty million acres of vineyards,
added to the existing five in France, will not
cause the price of those wines to fall below two
shillings per gallon, a price which insures to
the grower of our fortunate country a magni-
ficent present and future. But these remune-
rative prices can only be maintained under the
strict condition that the best cepages will be
cultivated. IV ith fine cepages the good years
will naturally produce good wines of the
entremet class. With regard to the liqueurs
and effervescing wines, special to the south and
Champagne, they can only gain by being made
from fine cepages, and the increase of produc-
tion of those wines will certainly be propor-
tional to the general movement of the French
wines.
Chapter V,
REMARKS ON THE ORGANISATION OP
VENDANGEOIR.
Of the buildings and implements in refer-
ence to the extent of the vineyards.—The
average production of one hectare (2a 47, or
about 2| acres) of vineyard planted with fine
cepages, well cultivated and well kept, gives
commonly 100 hectolitres (1 beet, is 22£ gal-
lons), of fruit, or about 40 hectolitres of made
wine. To get in the crop in one day it re-
quires 40 gatherers, 8 porters, and one overseer,
besides two draymen, and two assistants to
load and unload. We will suppose that the
transport is effected in vessels containing one
hectolitre, so that the whole materials will con-
sist of 2 horses, 2 drays, 50 baskets, 50 scissors,
and 100 tubs for every hectare and every day
of gathering. We have said that the gather-
ing should be effected in ten days; consequently
the material of each day will suffice for ten
hectares (25 acres). To gather the produce
of 100 hectares in ten days, it would require
for each day 400 gatherers, 80 10
overseers, 20 draymen, and 20 assistants; also
500 baskets, 500 scissors, 1000 tubs, 20 horses
and 20 drays. The number of hands for the
gathering is rarely supplied by the population
of the establishment alone, for the gang re-
quired for 100 hectares (250 acres) numbers
530 or 540 persons, of which 130 or 140 are
strong men, 400 being women, children, and
old men; in other words, from 110 to 140
families; while the best culture of the vine,
entirely effected by handwork, requires, for
100 hectares, only 200 persons, that is to say
100 men and 100 women; occupied and re-
munerated during the greatest portion of the
year. That number is generally found in 60 or
60 families, who will suffice to cultivate well
100 hectares. The extra hands for the gather-
ing come from the neighboring districts, when
the cultivation of the vine is not mixed with
agriculture. It is the culture of cereals, pota-
toes, beetroots, colzas, cabbages, vegetables,
&c., which supplies the vignerons with supple
mental hands, and, reciprocally, the vignerom
of many districts assist the agriculturist
during harvest. A model vineyard should be
so organised that one or two hectares could be
sold out or let annually to each family of vig-
nerons ; the payments to he made by easy in-
stalments. A house or garden could be let or
sold under the same conditions. With the cer-
tainty of being lodged, of obtaining a
remunerative kind of labor, and a piece of land
to cultivate for themselves, the working men
would soon hasten to accept the offer, and form
settled families. This was accomplished under
my eyes in my own establishment, although I
had not anticipated such a happy consequence
of my undertaking. The extent of the buildings
must be regulated especially according to the


number of casks employed for each crop.
Whether the grapes have been gathered to
make white or red wines, or any other variety,
those wines must be put in casks either after
having passed through the press or the vats j if
then each hectare produces annually 40 hecto-
litres (900 gallons), the proprietor must be pro-
vided with the number of casks according to
the number of hectares of his vineyards, and the
produce calculated in the above proportion, say,
five pipes containing 150 gallons, or sixteen
hogsheads containing about 60 gallons, or 20
casks of 45 gallons, or even 36 of 28 gallons. I
take the 45 gallon cask for the basis of my cal-
culations, but I must remark at the same time
that less room is required to store wine in large
vessels than in small ones; in other words, the
area required for casks of 28 gallons is larger
than for pipes. It is, therefore, upon the produce
of a vineyard, and the quantity and capacity of
the casks which are destined to receive and to
keep it one or more years, that the proprietor
must base the size and disposition of his cellars.
I take the 45 gallon cask for basis and type,
because it possesses all the advantages
possible; its dimensions are well suited
for filling up the cellars. Its weight is
moderate, and offers no obstacles to removal,
loading or unloading, and its construction is
easy and not costly. In proportion to its
capacity it is the cheapest and strongest.
Areas of the cellars.—For one hectare of
vineyard twenty casks will be required;
therefore, for one hundred hectares (250 acres)
2000 casks will have to be procured. To store
these 2000 casks, the cellars, built in one or two
vaults, must be 756 ft long, and have a free
width of 36 feetj because casks containing new
wines cannot and should not be stowed away in
superposed rows. The same cellars would hold
double or treble that number of casks con-
taining old wines by superposing the rows.
Number of presses.—lf the produce of the
vineyard is all intended for white wines, a good
Troyen press, which can perform four opera-
tions in twenty-four hours, each operation
rendering 900 gallons, will suffice for four
hectares (six acres) per day, or sixty acres
during the ten days of the gathering. But, if
it is considered that it is not always possible to
work day and night, either for the want of
hands or on account of accidents to the presses,
it will readily be understood that a large allow-
ance must be made for contingencies, and that
four presses in good order will be required for
a 'vineyard of 250 acres. Three double
.Dezaunay’s presses would effect the same
object. To avoid difficulties and confusion,
each single press must occupy a space of 33 ft.
x 20 ft, and the double press 50 x 20.
Number of vats.—As the musts of white wines
should be put in vats for about twenty-four
hours, to deposit the heaviest portion of their
lees and other foreign matters, every press
house must be provided with a double set of vats,
which can contain the double produce of a day’s
work —that is to say, eight vats, holding each
900 gallons ; but, as one of the presses can
remain idle, the number of vats for clarifying
would be reduced to twenty-four for a vineyard
of 250 acres. However, it is advantageous to
have forty vats, each of the capacity of 1200
gallons, because that number is necessary to
hold the murks, whether they be used to make
wine for the laborers, or whether they are in-
tended for distillation. For this double purpose
the vats must have a hoop inside, and about
three inches from the top, to fix the head.
Buildings, accessories and lodgings.—To the
principal buildings are attached a distillery, a
joiner’s and wheelwright’s shop, a forge,
stables, closed and open sheds, the whole being
enclosed by a wall or fence; houses to lodge
the permanent staff of the establishment are also
in the proximity. When the vineyard is some
distance from towns or villages, the staff should
be composed, as near as possible, of workmen
belonging to industries connected with building
and agriculture. The following list will convey
an idea of what it ought to be i—lst, a chief
cooper, commanding eight; 2nd, a distiller;
3rd, a joiner and two apprentices ; 4th, a car-
penter and two apprentices; sth, a black-
smith and one apprentice; 6th, a man to roof
houses and one apprentice; 7th, a mason and
one apprentice ; Bth, a plasterer ; 9th,


a wheelwright; 10th, a painter and glazier;
11th, a tinsmith; 12th, a plumber; 13th, a
well maker; 14th, a lime burner; 15th, a
gardener; 16th, a basket maker; 17th, a
drainer. Those special men must be engaged
to do everything, and work at all operations,
even the most foreign to their trade. It is these
who do all the indoor work, the egrappoirs,
presses, vats, casks, &c.; they treat the wines,
attend to the cellars, buildings, repairs, terraces,
plantations, &c.; and each of them works at his
trade as soon as the general service of the vine-
yard is terminated. A staff so composed, or
composed of other special trades, according to
localities and provisions, gives marvellous re-
sults with regard to economy and speed of
execution. In establishments of viticulture or
agriculture, workmen of exclusive trades are
always a nuisance and a burden. The man of
all works and occasional specialities works with
pleasure and spirit at anything which does not
belong to his trade, and brings into that work
all the resources and contrivances of his
speciality; they improve and perfect each other;
from the carpenter the mason learns to fix a
beam, and the latter teaches the carpepter to
dress a stone. In agriculture, and particularly
in viticulture, men handy in all works, and not
fitters up of trade, are required; but to attract
and to keep them, the proprietor must insure
them board and lodgings before high salary ;
when lodgings and food are insured, permanent
work, if the men deserve it, good treatment,
punctuality and equity in the payment of wages
promised, constitute the most powerful attrac-
tion for the working men. Like all other men,
the workman places above everything security,
consideration and justice; extreme wages is
never, in his estimation, a sufficient compensa-
tion for the indifference,harshness and bad faith
with which they are too often treated.
Necessity of lodging the vignerons.—lf it is
intended to establish a great vineyard in a
locality remote from a town or a village of im-
portance, it will be necessary, not only to
provide lodgings for the permanent staff of
mechanics, but also for the 206 vignerons and
laborers, men and women, of fifty or sixty
families, required for the cultivation of 260
acres of vines. Even in the neighborhood ]of a
large village or town such a provision ought
to he made, because neither workmen nor
good services will be obtained from that village
or town. The village and the town regard
such an establishment as a prey, and, if
the workmen are obliged to seek
there food and shelter, they will splffiS all their
earnings j it is only with time and success that
a large enterprise of that kind becomes recog-
nised and gains respect j when it has imposed
itself by its services and by time, the neighbor-
ing populations accept it and serve it; it has
obtained its rights, but till then the desert is pre-
ferable to the atmosphere of a town.
House for the proprietor.—A house for the
proprietor is necessary to complete a vineyard
establishment. To that house must be attached
gardens, orchards, and pleasure grounds as ex-
tensive as the magnitude of the establishment
will permit. The more decorous and tasty the
master’s residence, the more charming will be
the dependencies, and the more steady and
satisfied will be the workmen. The sight of
what is proper and handsome wins the admira-
tion and attaches all men, even the most simple
minded and the poorest,- they are happy to
see their fine estates, they are proud of the
richness of their good master, and their fair
and good mistress; it is for them luxury and
wealth; the house of the vineyard is the
steeple of the village, the cathedral of the great
cities; it must therefore be proportionate to the
importance of the establishment *
* This may be true for a gentleman creating an
estate which he will manage, as a merchant prince
manages his business. It is recreation for him, besides
he cares little or not whether he gets four or five per
cent, interest upon his capital, for the greatest part of
the returns of his vineyards will be devoted to the
keeping and embellishing of the residence. It is for
him an income which he means to spend for his com-
fort. But it is not the case in a vineyard established
by a joint-stock company. The shareholders’ object
is dividends and not the ludicrous whim of making
a Sardanapalus of their manager. Indeed a company
should do quite the reverse of what Dr. Gnyot recom-
mends. A manager is only a servant, and it would be
idle to expect his fellow workmen to admire him. If he
is good and qualified for his post, he will be respected*


500 baskets
.. £10
0
0
500 scissors
.. 15
0
0
1000 tubs
.. 200
0
0
20 drays
.. 240
0
0
20 horses
... 480
0
0
Ladders, pulleys, accessories ...
... 15
0
0
Sundries ..
.. 40
0
0
Total ..
£1000
0
0
FOB THE YENDANGEOIR.
4 presses, fitted up ..
.. £240
0
0
Estimates of expenses of the buildings and
implements for [a vineyard establishment.—
We have seen (chapter xi.) that a vineyard of
250 acres cost, in planting and cultivating, until
it is in full produce, 600,000 f. (£24,000.) We
have seen that the 250 acres, arrived at that
state of production, would give a minimum
return of £4OOO of net profits j or, in other
words, the revenue of £40,000 at 10 per cent,
or of £BO,OOO at 5 per cent. Thus, upon a
capital of £40,000 or £BO,OOO, only £24,000
are expended. The capitalist expends, there-
fore, or can expend, £26,000 or £56,000 * for
implements, cellars, sheds and accessories, for
men’s cottages and for the master’s residence,
according as he wishes to obtain 10 or only 5
per cent, upon his capital. Of the expenses
for the realisation of the above objects, that for
the implements and utensils is the least suscep-
tible of alteration, for these things must always
be good and complete, especially when profits
are aimed at. Here follows an estimate of that
expenditure:—
FOE THE GATHERING.
50 vats, each containing 1200 gallons .. 600 0 0
2000 casks do do 45 do 560 0 0
5270 feet of skidds, fixed and moveable 96 0 0
Egrappoirs, stamping [stakes, baskets,
small vats, tubs, funnels, syphons, taps,
bits, pumps, gleucometers, &c. .. 80 0 0
Cranes, hand-cars, wheelbarrows, chains,
ropes, cooper’s tools, &c. .. .. 101 0 0
Sundries . • .. s . • •. 120 0 0
£lBOO 0 0
For the Gathering .. 1000 0 0
Total general .. £2BOO 0 0
and he can wish for no more. In effect, a luxurious resi-
dence ■ would only give rise to feelings which would
certainly be contrary to the interests of the share-
holders. —Tran s.
» Dr. Guyot supposes the proprietor possessed of one
or two million francs (£40,000 or £Bo,ooo.)— Trans,
But if the expenditure for the furnishing of
the vendangeoir and for the gathering cannot
be reduced or varied, it is not the same with the
different buildings of the establishment. If
the principal building is reduced to its three
indispensable floors—one underground cellar,
for the casks, one above for fermenting house,
and one under the roof for the cooperage—that
•building may be, if needed, in most coun-
tries, strongly constructed, but without luxury,
for two pounds sterling the square yard, includ-
ing the thickness of the walls; whereas, if there
is an extra floor of cellars and a granary above
the coopers’ floor, or, altogether five floors, and
if the openings in the windows are built with
hewn stones, it will cost nearly four pounds
sterling the square yard. The annexed con-
structions may be reduced to a little under 500
square yards, and built for 25 shillings the
yard. The 200 men can be comfortably
lodged in 900 square yards, at 25 shillings the
yard. In this space the mess-room is not in-
cluded. Or each of the 60 families may occupy
a small cottage wi th yard and garden, costing
about £BO. In a few words, the cost of the
buildings, indispensable to the cultivation of
250 acres, may be only £7600, or may be
raised to £16,060. If to the sum of £7600 the
price of the working stock and implements
(£2800) is added, the total expenditure will
reach £10,400; of £16,000 unexpended £5600
will still remain disposable. In that case,
£2400 or £2BOO may be employed in the con-
struction of a residence for the proprietor, and
the balance would be laid out on the small farm
which would be attached to the vineyard;
upon all the above expenses a return of 10 per
cent, would be insured. If the price of the
working-stock and implements, £2BOO, is added
to the £16,060, the total expenditure will be
£18,860, which, added to the £24,000 spent on
the vineyard itself, will amount to £42,680.
There will remain still £37,320 for the con-
struction of a spacious and fine residence for
the proprietor, and for the establishment of
farms. The interest on the whole capital
would then be 5 per cent.


104
CONCLUSION.
While closing this succinct treatise on Vine-
culture and winemaking, I hasten to say that
I have not pretended to lay down absolute
figures, and indicate infallible results. I ex-
press a personal conviction based upon all the
observations, experiments and comparisons that
I have made, and the deductions I have drawn
from them. I sincerely believe in the truth of
my statements, but I have done too many
things in my life to ignore that reasoning and
observation, and even experiment, are sometimes
brought forward to give to an error the appear-
ance of a truth; time alone judges sovereignly
the good or bad ideas, the good or bad
practices.
m
nd
O (D
CQ - S
d
CO
In
Hi
In
xd
CO
CO
CO
In
ID
00
XD
05
o
05
rH
CD
00
Cl
pH
CO
CO
o
CD
In
o
Hi
pH
rH
1521
28 30
55 48
8 Oj CT 1
1 o g
g Jh
O) fH
S' +3
.■s> a
*s cs 2
s d
d
Hn
»o
CD
XD
in
CO
C5
IN
o
05
pH
O
rH
CO
pH
rH
rH
Cl
Cl
05
CO
CO
Cl
ID
Hi
XD
O
05
1358
1810
<o Hi
CO
H* ID
CM In
40
«4-l
to
00
CD
Cl
00
CO
C5
05
O
pH
CO
Cl
pH
In
CO
pH
Hi
In
Cl
rH
pH
Hi
00
Hi
XD
1095
Cl
Hi
CD
rH
2190
cx O
ffX 05
s|
cs
3
£
£ 0}
S -9
§
-a .a
40
Het
■*t
Hi
00
pH
o
pH
00
rH
rH
XD
CO
pH
Cl
XD
rH
05
CD
pH
CO
CO
CO
IN
o
xd
In
In
CD
1350
2032
2709
2ci
rH
-
o
<8
*5*
Q Q
Hh
In
O
rH
128
150
pH
IN
rH
194
Hi
Cl
00
Cl
Hi
Cl
Hi
CD
XD
ID
CO
1711
2566
Cl
Cl
Hi
CO
® m
rH
£ xd
CO
LU
©
Ho
'■o 'S
S
O 80
»h d
40
•M
Hn
CO
O
Hi
P-H
00
CO
rH
CO
05
rH
223
rH
XD
Cl
05
In
Cl
05
xd
XD
Hi
CO
00
1117
2235
3352
4470
rH
«>lo
pH
>
£
*e>i
£
8
&0 S
0>
O
40
Ho
CO
O
05
rH
00
Cl
Cl
266
304
Cl
Hi
CO
380
o
CD
In
1141
1521
3042
4563
6084
CO
I2C5
pH
Cl
2ci
o
z
l_
8
s
«o
*5
se
£
<5
R
.-a .2
1a H
c3 C
d oj
■40
Ho
Hi
IN.
ci
329
CO
CO
CO
00
CO
Hi
492
00
■HI
ID
1095
1642
2190
o
CO
CO
Hi
o
In
XD
CD
8761
Cl
w !d
Cl
z
<D <D
£*S'
p.S
.
00
CO
00
05
XD
Hi
00
CO
o
In
IN
ID
XD
CO
rH
9905
Cl
C)
Hi
CO
XD
Hi
CO
CD
10628
13690
<N Q)
<
_1
Q.
Cl
Hi
Id
In
pH
pH
~ CO
52
§
HO
CS
g
I 5
•vs>
«0
£
5 DQ
2 h- 3
rd d
“ Js
d r Oi
a Sr
40
Hi
oKi
Cl
CO
IN
914
1066
1219
Cl
In
CO
pH
Hi
Cl
XD
rH
3045
Cl
IN
XD
Hi
6095
12191
18285
Cl
CO
CO
Hi
Cl
o CO
"Hi
In
oj CO
XD
gcg
d>
9 o
e3 <h
d
1711
2053
2395
IN
CO
In
Cl
o
CO
o
CO
Cl
Cl
Hi
CO
6845
10267
13690
27880
o
In
XD
rH
Hi
o
CD
IN
Hi
XD
7 ft 8
889 680
i-d d
*e.1
o O
A. R. Po.
xd
o
o
CO
o
o
IN
o
o
00
o
o
05
O
O
0 0 10
t 05 0 0
0 0 30
o
r-*
O
o
Cl
o
O
CO
O
O
O
rH
1 Acre
THE END.


INDEX
Author’s Preface ... ... ... tl.
Author a Practical Man ... ... yi
Active growth of Vine, how controlled ... 9
Amendments to soil ... ... ... 13
Aspect for Vineyards ... ... 30
Advantages of Late gathering ... ... 48,49
Artificial Wines ... ... ... 81
Acidity of Wines ... ... ... 81,85
Action of Cold upon Wines ... ... 82
Bunches to each Vine ... ... 5
Bleeding of the Vine ... ... 10
Blending Wines ... ... ... 80,94
Clarification ... ... ... ... 65
Comparison between Farm and Vine-
yard ... ... ... vi., vii., 2,3, 46
Colonising power of Culture in general... 1
Cuttings ... ... ... ... 5,32
Circulation of Air, important ... ... 6
Composts ... ... ... ... 14
Character of a Vineyard, on what does it
depend ... ... ' ... ... 17
Cepages ; or, Varieties' of the Vine—their
Qualities discussed ... ... ... 20,19
Comparative Value of different Vines ... 19
Cuttings, how to Test... ... ... 32
Contract Work ... ... ... 36
Cutting, Sorting, and Cleaning the Grapes 53
Chemical Constitution of average Grape
Must ... ... ... ... 55
Crushing and Mashing ... ... 59
„ with Naked Feet .. ... 59
„ by Boilers ... ... ... 60
Casks and Stands ... ... ... 64
Casks, Filling up the ... ... 71,72
„ Position of ... ... ... 69
Classification of Wines ... ... 65
Composition of the Stalks ... ... 65
~ the Skins ... ... 65
„ the Pips ... ... 65
Cold, Influence of, on Classification ... 71
Colour of Wines ... ... ... 79
Champagne Wines ... ... ... 89
Dampness one cause of Disease .... 6
Drainage of importance ... ... 31
Day-work ... ... ... ... 36
Disease of Vine, Treatment of ... ... 38
Danger of Early Gatherings ... ... 48
Duration of the Gathering ... ... 53
Disadvantage of Pressing Grapes on the Spot 54
Difference in Quality of the Musts ... 54
Draining off from Vat, Time of ... 76,82
Distillation of Low Wines and Marks ... 95
Diseases of Wines ... ... ... 96
Disbudding ... ... 5, 12, 22, 38
Earthing, a substitute for Manure ... 14
Excessive Manuring injurious ... .. 1"
Expenditure per acre ... ... 38, 39,44,45
Experiments in Reference to Adulteration 57
Electricity, &c.,lnfluence of, on Wines ... 86
Falling off in Value of Wines, cause of 17
Frosts Preservation against ... ... 24
„ „ by Matting ... 25,26
„ Experiments on ... ... 29
Fog, or Vapour Drains ... .. 31


Future Success of Vine Culture in France,
threatened by the use of Sugar ... 56
Fermenting-hbuse ... ... ... 64
Fining, or Clarification ... ... 65
Fermentation, Action of, on Stalks, Pips,
Skins, &c. ... ... 65
„ Mode of ... ... 66
„ of White ... ... 69
„ Basis of ... ~. 69
„ Effects of ... ... 69
„ Thermometrical condi-
tions of ... ... 69
„ Stimulated, Retarded, or
Accelerated ... ... 74
„ Commencement of ... 74
„ Noise and heat of ... 75
„ Double in Red Wines ... 75
„ by Artificial Temperature 81
Grapes, Wine and Table, compared ... 7
„ Sorts recommended ... ... 20
„ Preliminary Crushing of ... 13
„ Treatment of, for Sparkling Wines 80
Grafting ... ... ... ... 7
Gleucometer ... ... ... 50,51
Gathering Baskets ... ... ... 53
Grease in Wines, how to Prevent ... 86
Good Vintages becoming scarce ... 47
Humidity, Excess of, prejudicial
Hoeing
5, 22, 23, 37, 38
Horse Labour on Vineyards
Husbandry of the Vineyard
... 37 to 46
Healing and Airing Formenting-house
Introduction ...
Insolation, Necessity of
Irregular Planting
Influence of the Stalk on the Quality of the
Wine
„ Pips and Skins do.
Labour, Price of, in Vineyards and Farms 3
Limit to Cultivation of Vines in France ... 4
Low Gullies and Vapours to be Avoided 4
Low Training, Disadvantage of ... 6
Late Pruning ... ... ... 11
Lands, Waste
„ Inclination of
Layers
Laying out Vineyard
„ Instruments required
Lomenis’ Crusher
Lees of Wine, Use of
Marshes brought into Cultivation ... 3
Methods of Cultivating the Vine ... 4
Manuring the Vine ... ... 5,13,14,38
Matting as Protection... ... ... 5
Method of Pruning ... ... ... 9
Manure at Thomery ... ... ... 15
Matting Advantage 0f... ... 25, 26, 27, 28
Musts, and the Means to Appreciate them 49
Mashing and Crushing... .... ... 59
Marc, head of ... ... ... 73
Musts Boiling of, Condemned ... ... 82
Nursery, Soil adapted for
„ Preparation of
„ Planting the ...
Nipping oil
Notes to be taken of all Grapes brought to
press
Origin of the Prejudice against use of
Manure
Orientation, or direction of Hows
Old Usage for fixing Vintage time
Principles of Colonisation ... ... 3
„ Vine Culture ... ... 4
Pips, Composition of ... ... ... 65
Protended Wine-makers Denounced ... 81
Preparation of Ground... ... ... 34
Pullisage, or Dwarf Trellisse ... ... 39
Pincage ... ... ... ... 12
Pruning Vines 4,8, 9, 10, 11, 37, 38, 39
Provinage, or Underlaying ... ... 47
Pruning, Time for ... ... ... 10
Pruning when the sap is rising ... .. II
Plants ... ... ... ... 31,33
Planting, Cost of ... ... ... 34
Planting ... ... . ... 35
Presses and Pressing ... ... ~ 60


Press, by Dezaunay ... ... ... 61
„ the Troyan... ... ... 62
Pumps and Pipes, Fermenting-house ... 63
Quantity of Manure to Vine ... ... 16
Kows, Reason for ... ... ... 6,8
Recouohage ... . ... ... ... 7
Relation between Wood and Fruit ... 9
„ Manuring and Produce 14
Rains, Preservation against ... ... 25
Rooted Plants ... ... ... 32
„ advantage of 2 years old ... 33
Roots of the Vine ... ... ... 35
Richness of Must increased by sugar ... _ 52
Refuse Grapes, Use 0f... ... ... 53
Racking off ... ... ... 65, 72
Soils favourable to the Vine ... ... 4
Sites for Vineyards ... ... ... 30
Space of Vines on Trellisse ... ... 8
„ required for each Vine ... ... 8
Shoots, Pruning ... ... ... 11,12
Stable Manures ... ... ... 14
Staking ... ... ... ... 23
Spring Frosts ... .... ... 25
Sorts of Vines ... ... ... 20
Seccateur ... ... ... ... 37
Sulphur and Sulphate, Quantity per acre 38
Sorting the Grapes ... ... ... , 53
Successive Gatherings... ... .... 53
Separation of Berries frbm Stalk or Bgra-
page ... ... 57; 58
„ „ with Trident and Tub 59
„ „ by the Mill Hopper 59
„ „ by the Wooden Gra-
ting ... ... 59
„ of the Wine from the Marc ... 75
Sweetening Wines ... ... ... 81
Stalks, Composition of ... ... 65
Skins „ ... ... ••• 65
Translator’s Preface ... ... ... hi.
Theory of Pruning ... ... ... 10
Tying and Disbudding ... 5, 23, 38
Trellisse ... ... ••• 8 i 3 i 24
Time for Pruning .. ... ... 10
„ for Work in a Vineyard ... ... 23
„ for Planting Cuttings ... ... 32
Trenching ... ... ... ... 34
Treatment of Vines after Planting ... 36
„ of Wines in Cellar ... ... 87
Temperature of Fermenting house ... 64
„ Action of, on Wines ... 82
Treading in the Vat ... ... ... 75
Troyan Press ... ... ... 62
Vines on Poor Soils ... ... ... -vii., 2
„ Cultivation no Mystery ... ... hi., 3
„ Colonizing Power of ... ... 3
„ Average return per Acre, 1857
„ once considered only suited to Poor
Lands
„ Vegetating Power of ... ■
„ Cultivation, Methods of ... ... 4
„ Distance between the ... ... 4,8
„ Pruning the ... ... 4,8,9,10,11
„ Disease of ... ... ... 5
„ Underlaying not advisable ... 4
„ Experiments on its Bleeding ... II
„ on Terraces ... ... ... 30
„ Sorts of ... .. ... 20
„ Cost of Planting ... ... 34
~ Hoots of ... ... ... 35
„ as Creating an Estate ... ... 45
~ Kinds recommended ... ... 20
Vinification, General Principles of ... 46
Vats, &c., in Fermcnting-house ... 63,64
„ how filled up ... ... 73
„ Hermetically Closed ... 74
Voyages, Influence of on Wines ... 96
Value of Culture, True Test of ... 1
Variation in the Returns of a Vineyard ... 21
Vintage ... ... ... ... 47-52
Vitality of Wines ... ... ... 79
Voyages of Wines ... ... ... 86
Use of Refuse Grapes ... ... ... 53
Wines, Use of, forming the Chaiaclor of a
Nation ... ... ... 18
„ of Low fermentation ... ... 66
„ of High fermentation ... ... 66,72
„ Fermentation of White ... ... 09
„ Temperature of, during Fermentation 81
„ Macerated ... ... 66, 78, 79
„ Artificial ... ••• 81
„ Sophistication ot .. ... 89


Wines, Color of ... ... ... 66, 79
„ White, from Red or Black Grapes 67
„ White, the best Standard ... 67
„ Rosy, What are they ? ... ... 76
„ „ Scarcity of, &c. ... .. 77
„ „ how to Make ... ... 77
„ „ Sampayo’s process ... 77
„ relative qualities of Red and White 72
„ Blending of ... ... ... 80,94
„ Well made never Unsound ... 96
„ Hygienic property of ... ... 66
„ a Living and Organic Liquid ... 79
„ Sweetening of ... ... ... 81
„ Treatment of, in Cellar ... ... 87
„ Acidity of ... ... ... 81,85
„ Preservation of in Bottles ... 86
Wines, Influence of Light upon ... ... 80
„ Action of Cold and Heat upon ... 82
~ Effect of Large Vats ... ... 84
„ Influenced by Voyages ... ... 86
„ „ by Noise ... ... 86
„ „ by Electricity, &c. 87
„ Liqueur ... ... ... 88
„ Sparkling ... ...‘ ... 88
„ Champagne ... ...89, 90, 91,92, 93
Wine Grapes and Table Grapfes compared 7
Winter Pruning ... ... ... 8
Weeding ... ... ... ... 22
Wire Trellisse ... ... ... 23,24
Waste Lands ... ... ... 30
What is a Cutting ? ... ... ... 32
Wonderful Wine-makers ... ... 63




v -' - . : : ' v-.V-X ■ V. ' ' \^ ; v
7 y ■; ■■. Jl ~— *r~t 4 /
/“" w i c * At i C 0» i jpr i^aCL
l „V • . V. J!
hjxtujyty 4j y - ••'*• r>
V fr&dx i \id Wy.x A,,»J b '
1/?, 7 , A^i*^r sv . J i/W-,**- y
. 3 1508 01908192 1
