

( 393 )
Cunningham?s new south wales.
This is both an amusing and instructive book. We are so little habituated
to consider objects which are far removed from us in the light in which they
ought to be viewed, and are so occupied with the cares of to-morrow, that
accounts of phenomena a few thousand miles distant, and not immediately
affecting us, pass wholly unregarded, though every vessel that arrives may
bring intelligence which will be fresh cause for astonishment. In little
more than the duration of the half of human existence, the coasts of a coun-
try nearly as large as Europe, on the other side of the globe, have been sur-
veyed, and settlements formed upon them, which exceed in the rapidity of
their early prosperity any of those founded on the American continent. If
they continue to increase in the ratio they have hitherto done (and there is
no reason why they should not), they may in another century contain mil-
lions of souls speaking England?s language; thus transmitting her cus-
toms, literature, and civilization to a new people,?our antipodes ; and they
in turn being, perhaps, destined to impart knowledge, and the superior
advantages of European refinement to the savage tribes of the Indian Ar-
chipelago, to Japan, and to China. Thus will arise a mighty nation, to com-
plete the designs of the Framer of the universe, in advancing human happi-
ness by those gradual and rational means through which all changes in the
natural and moral world are alone effected. We must indeed agree with
Mr, Cunningham, ? that all the gains ever to be realized by selfish com-
merce,? cannot be compared to the glory of contributing to these results:
neither, we may add, can the empty laurels of belligerent triumph, which
have beggared us for a sound. Still more wonderful is the way in which this
has been achieved. The thief and felon, whom the country threw off as
unworthy of dwelling on her soil, have, by the exercise of a just humanity
in punishment, repaired their errors by laying the foundation of more solid
and lasting renown for England, than her six hundred millions expended
in her crusade to replace the Bourbons on the French throne?than all her
victories and triumphs! So much ampler is the profit resulting from car-
rying into effect objects of moral justice, than from others, at the best, of a
very dubious character.
The present state of New South Wales, as described by Mr. Cunningham,
is such that, so far from condemning, as many do, the sending of criminals
there, we would increase the number deported. Every individual whose
name appeared a second time in the books of a prison for a felony, however
small, should undeviatingly be transported for fourteen years, or for life. If
our population be too numerous, and crimes multiply, there can be no injus-
tice in this. A first offence may be caused by strong temptation, by thought-
lessness of consequences, added to the frailty to which human nature is liable;
a second admits of no such palliation. Justice is repaid, as much as reason
can require, by preventing a continuance of social outrage, and putting it
out of the power of the criminal to offend on his native shores again. The
mode of treatment recommended to be adopted towards convicts on their ar-
rival by the author of this work, in his thirty-third letter, would be amply
sufficient to deter offenders at home from courting transportation. It would
be a sort of purgatory for them on their path to reformation. When the
weakness of our common nature is considered, and that the true end of jus-
tice is the reformation of the criminal, (not, as it is pretended by lawyers, a
satisfaction to the social body, or to something none but themselves know
what,) and a compensation to the injured party, it is magnanimous in the
government of a great nation to overlook that principle of vengeance rather
than justice, which is the too common failing on this question, and to place
the delinquent where he can offend his country no more, and where reform
is an object of emulation. At home, to the majority of offenders, there is
* Two Years in New South Wales ; a series of Letters, comprising Sketches of
the actual state of society in that colony; of its peculiar advantages to emigrants;
of its topography, natural history, &c. By P. Cunningham, Surgeon R. N. Two
Volumes. 1827.


no adequate reward for reformation; abroad it is otherwise, and the punish-
ment of the oifender is made ultimately to contribute to the wealth and
glory of his country, while he has a strong temptation to regain a character
and station in society.
Mr. Cunningham, it appears, has made no less than four voyages to New
Holland in convict ships. He possesses an ample knowledge of the coun-
try, (having also resided in it two years,) of the character of criminals in ge-
neral, and of the defects in their treatment in the colony, or on their passage
thither. It is to be lamented that the number of males is so much greater
than that of females, as he shows it to be. Some method of obviating this
defect should, if possible, be adopted:?but it will be better to follow the
author regularly in the contents of his volumes, premising that a perusal of
the work can alone give the reader an idea of the interest it possesses, and
of the information it contains for the economist and emigrant; its pleasant
anecdote, and its attraction for geographists.
The work opens with a detail of the advantage of New South Wales to
emigrants, and its superiority over America, the misruled and almost ruined
Cape of Good Hope, and others of our colonies. An emigrant with 1200/.
(not less) may in New Holland ensure comfort, fortune, and a fine estate, in
a very little time, by common attention. Mr. Cunningham combats the pre-
judices against New Holland on account of the convicts, who ought to be, on
the contrary, inducements to settlers to go thither from their cheapness as
servants; their conduct not being such as is represented in general, and that
of the worst being exaggerated. Fine wool, Mr.C. thinks, will form the staple
export of the colony almost exclusively. After a geographical description of
the country adjacent. Port Jackson and its scenery are described with great
spirit, and the picture is a highly pleasing one. Sydney has its churches and
chapels, its literary societies, newspapers (one daily), its hotels, and even its
Hyde Park, and a theatre is erecting. The ladies follow the London fa-
shions, despising China crapes and India muslins, as the sex would in Eng-
land, were these commodities equally cheap there. In six years a milliner
lately retired from business in Sidney with a fortune of 12,000// Neatness
of dress and personal cleanliness are remarkable even among the lowest.
Sobriety, however, does not rank among the virtues of the inferior classes.
The markets abound in produce of every description, grain, herbs, fruits,
and vegetables ; and the police is well regulated. Offences, though numerous,
are generally of the less atrocious class, owing to the strict look-out kept
over bad characters, and the surveillance exercised over convicts. Fish
is abundant. Ihe pleasure walks and drives round Sidney are represented
as very beautiful, and there are stage-coaches twice a-day to Paramatta (fif-
teen miles), and thrice a week to Liverpool (twenty-one), and from Para-
matta to Windsor, twenty-three miles. All this in a country that, thirty-
eight years ago, was the abode only of a few of the most degraded order
of savages ; where the axe had never wounded a tree, nor a turf had been
broken, but all lay as at its creation.
The geography of the inhabited parts of the colony is comprised under the
names of and divided into the counties of Cumberland, Camden, Argyle,
Westmoreland, Northumberland, Durham, Roxburgh, and Londonderry.
Thus have our familiar English names marked the divisions of Australia as
well as in North America by the founders of that great empire. On both re-
gions the appellations and language of England are for ever engrafted. Two
penal settlements, north of Hunter?s river, have been also established, named
Port Macquarie and Moreton Bay. The former receives the river Hastings,
and has a soil and climate well adapted for tobacco. The scenery is beau-
tiful. Port Macquarie is about one hundred and twenty miles from Liver-
pool as the crow flies, with eminences, or rather a mountain range, at some
distance, 6500 feet high, Moreton Bay is 480 miles from Port Jackson,
upon the Brisbane river. The temperature of Moreton is nearly that of the
southern provinces of Brazil.
The healthiness of the colony is a singular feature, distinguishing it from
new countries in general. This is ascribed to the small quantity of vegeta-


ble decomposition;, the trees in the forests being all evergreens. Intermit-
tents, remittents, typhus, scarlet-fever, small-pox-, measles, hooping-cough,
and croup, are unknown. Dysentery among the free-livers is the most fatal
complaint, and dropsies, principally affecting the same class of persons. Dys-
peptic complaints, common in the low lands, are relieved by the dry air of
the uplands. Children are liable to worms, and at puberty phthisis is fre-
quent ; but the European species of that disorder is relieved, if not cured, by
removal to this climate. Inflammation of the eyes occurs during some par-
ticular winds, but it is mild in character. Syphilis is unknown. The hot
winds of the northern part of the globe are the cold of New Holland, and vice
versa. The north-west wind is a scorching sirocco, raising the thermometer
twenty or thirty degrees at once, the effects of which are obviated by closing
the window-shutters. The climate, however, is very pleasant. The coldest
month, July, averages 54; the hottest 75 degrees of Fahrenheit; and there
are about a hundred days in the year on which rain falls. The air is re-
markably dry, and therefore less disagreeable than that of summer in Eng-
land, often with the thermometer twenty degrees higher, owing to our hu-
midity. The dews are remarkably heavy, and night follows quickly the
going down of the sun : the beautiful twilight of England is wanting.
The aboriginal inhabitants the author thinks a cross between the Malay
and Oriental negro of New Guinea, and details their personal characteristics.
Some of them are cannibals. The progress of those in civilization who
are most in intercourse with the whites, is scarcely perceptible; yet many of
them understand and speak English so as to be comprehended. Slang and
oaths they have caught in perfection, until they outdo the most profligate
whites in their vociferations. Those tribes most remote from the settlers at
Sidney are the least debased. Yet there are exceptions among them, and
it even appears that individuals are found equal in disposition for work and
in rifle-shooting to the whites; they are proud too of the names given them
by the colonists. They acquire the knowledge of reading and writing as
expertly as Europeans. They are good mimics, and possess some humour.
The wife of one of them being delivered of a mulatto child, the husband, on
being asked about it, shrugged up his shoulders, laughing significantly, and
exclaiming, ?My gin (wife) eatit too much white man?s bread.? The whole
account of these aborigines is exceedingly interesting.
The colonial born children of Europeans are denominated ? currency.?
??The name was originally given by a facetious paymaster of the seventy-third
regiment quartered here, ?the'pound currency being at that time inferior to the pound
sterling. Our Currency lads and lasses are a fine interesting race, and do honour
to the country whence they originated. The name is a sufficient passport to esteem
with all the well-informed and right-feeling portion of our population; but it is
most laughable to see the capers some of our drunken old Sterling madonnas will
occasionally cut over their Currency adversaries in a quarrel. It is then, ?You
saucy baggage, how dare you set up your Currency crest at me ? lam Sterling ,
and that I ?ll let you know !?
? To all acquainted with the open, manly simplicity of character displayed by this
part of our population, its members are the theme of universal praise; and, in-
deed, what more can be said in their favour, than that they are little tainted with
the vices so prominent among their parents! Drunkenness is almost unknown
with them, and honesty proverbial; the few of them that have been convicted hav-
ing acted under the bad auspices of their parents or relatives. They grow up tall
and slender, like the Americans, and are generally remarkable for that Gothic pe-
culiarity of fair hair and blue eyes which has been noticed by other writers. Their
complexions, when young, are of a reddish sallow, and they are for the most part
easily distinguishable?even in more advanced years?from those born in England.
Cherry cheeks are not accompaniments of our climate, any more than that of Ame-
rica, where a blooming complexion will speedily draw upon you the observation,
? You are from the old country, I see !?
?The youths generally marry early, and do not seem to relish the system of con-
cubinage so popular among their Sterling brethren here. In their amorous flirta-
tions, I cannot find that they indulge in exchange of love-tokens, mementos of
roses, shreds of ribbons, broken sixpences, and the like tender reminiscences,
fashionable among the melting striplings of humble birth in England ; the only


approach to these antique customs witnessed by me, consisting of a hock of pickled
pork and a pound of sixpenny sugar, conveyed by way of sap to undermine the im-
pregnable fortress reared by the virtue of one of our Newgate nuns; but whether in
accordance to colonial custom, or to minister to the lady?s refined penchant for such
delicacies, I cannot take upon me to decide,?
1 he phrases and the slang of St. Giles are common in the dictionary of the
colony, and are even taken down in police examinations. The vicious London
mode of pronunciation has been engrafted on the children of the colonists.
? Very?? is ? wery,? ?veal? ? weal,? and ?vinegar? ?winegar.? English
customs, Christmas carols, and Guy Faux mummeries are kept up even in
Australasia. Milling matches and other debasing vices of the parent country,
as it may be conjectured, are not wanting among a convict population. This,
Mr. Justice Best will no doubt relish in support ot his argument (an ai'gument,
however, not really his, being current long before he was born) that it im-
proves our soldiers, and prevents the use of knives in settling disputes!
In proof of the progress of this colony, let the writer speak :
?In December 1789, (one year from the foundation of the colony,) the first har-
vest was reaped at Paramatta : in 1790, the Jirst settler, James Ruse, took posses-
sion of his land : in 1791, twelve prisoners were located upon the Hawkesbury,
who, in 1793, supplied twelve hundred bushels of corn to the public stores, being
the/rst purchase of colonial grain made by the government: in 1796, the Jirst play
was performed : in 1803, th e first newspaper (Sydney Gazette) was printed ;?and
suicide occurred in the same year by a man hanging himself in jail: in
1805, the Jirst colonial vessel was built by Mr. James Underwood : in 1806, the
first great Hawkesbury Hood happened, wheat rising to eighty shillings per bushel,
and bread to 2s. 9d. per pound, while a bushel of seed-maize realized the enormous
sum of 71. : in 1810 was general muster of the population, stock, and cul-
tivated land ; in this year, too, the first toll-gates were built, caterpillars Jirst made
their appearance, Sydney streets were regulated and named, weekly markets es-
tablished there, and the/rst public races instituted : in 1813, the first fair was held
in the colony, at Paramatta : in 1817, the first bank (Sydney Bank) was established :
in 1818, the first crim. con. case tried : in 1820, first colonial tobacco sold : in 1825,
first book (? Bushby on Vineyards ?) reviewed , (a premium for which review was
given); in this year, too, the Jirst breach of promise of marriage (Cox versus
Payne) came before our colonial courts : in 1826, the first public concert was held.?
Again:
_ ? Here, where thirty-eight years ago not one civilized being disputed the domi-
nion of the woods with their savage inhabitants, now forty thousand such exist,
spread over an extent of country of two hundred square miles, having justice ad-
ministered by civil and criminal courts; ?six separate courts of quarter sessions,
and eleven separate benches of magistrates being instituted among them. Where,
thirty-eight years ago, not a single European animal breathed, now upwards of
200,000 sheep, upwards of 100,000 head of cattle, and many thousand horses and
other animals destined for the support and pleasure of man, are peacefully grazing.
Where, thirty-eight years ago, not an ear of grain was cultivated, we now see fifty
thousand bushels advertised for?for the mere annual consumption of one of our
distilleries ; ?while four steam-mills, ten water-mills, eighteen windmills, and two
horse-mills, furnish us with an abundance of excellent flour from our own wheat;
two very extensive distilleries, with several hundred thousand gallons annually of a
pure spirit from our barley and maize; and thirteen breweries, with ale and beer
from our various descriptions of colonial grain,?eight thousand hogsheads being
the average yearly amount of this wholesome beverage supplied to the public.
?On the site of Sydney alone what a change has been effected! Where, thirty-
eight years ago, not a human hut was to be counted, nor the slightest hum of com-
merce heard, we have now a city occupying a mile square, crowded with industri-
ous citizens, and teeming with vehicles wheeling along the varied productions of the
soil, ?the market-dues for this traffic renting, the present year, at 840 Z. and the
toll-gate dues at 1000J.: ?the town containing twenty-two agents for the manage-
ment of shipping affairs; eleven auctioneers for expeditiously disposing of colonial
and foreign wares; a chamber of commerce to push forward and watch over co-
lonial enterprise, effect insurances, and arbitrate in matters relating to shipping ;
two flourishing banks, dividing forty per cent, on their advances ; and three news-
papers, (one weekly, and two printed twice a week,) in one of which I counted
one day 124 advertisements.?


The details of the commerce and shipping are equally surprising. In
1817 the New South Wales Bank was established. A large woollen manufac-
tory, and various manufactures of the same kind by women, are carried on,
and supply clothing. Leather is tanned, ropes, twine, cloth, soap, saddlery,
straw-hats, iron and brass goods, and numerous other trades, exist in the
colony. With the vices of small communities
? Etiquette is, if possible, more studied among our fashionable circles than in those
of London itself. If a lady makes a call, she must not attempt a repetition of it until
it has been returned, on pain of being voted ignorant of due form. Morning visits,
too, are made in the afternoon; afternoon calls near the hour of bed-time; while
cards are ceremoniously left, and rules of precedence so punctiliously insisted on by
some of our ultras, that the peace of the colony was placed in imminent jeopardy
only a few years back, by the opening of a ball before the leading lady of the ton
made her appearance ; ?the hurricane being fortunately smoothed down at its out-
set by the facetious master of the ceremonies assuring the indignant fair, that it
was nothing more than the experiment of a few couples to try the spring of the new
floor, and that they were still waiting her arrival to commence.
? Dinners among the gentlemen,?followed up by tea or coffee, evening parties,
and petits soupes (to include the attendance of the ladies), are the usual routine
here; ?dancing and music winding up the entertainments. The name-cards are
elegantly printed by our colonial press, and sometimes such a fashionable intima-
tion as ? Mrs. B. at Home ? brightens the gloom of our winter evenings."
Mr. Cunningham gives his testimony to the usefulness of the press in colo-
nies, though at the close of his work he seems to qualify what he previously
advanced. Thus, notwithstanding the hatred and fulminations of every
colonial ? Verres?? against newspapers.
? We have the ? Sydney Gazette ? and ? Australian ? published twice a week,
and the ? Monitor ? once a week ;?the two former, at a charge of nine-pence each
paper, and the latter at the charge of a shilling. The former almost equals in size
the Morning Herald, and usually comprises a vast fund of colonial news, as well as
interesting and entertaining advertisements : while the two latter are conducted with
an ability of which few papers out of London can boast. Journals conducted by
men of sound judgment and ability are certainly vast acquisitions to any new co-
lony, and such, in the ?Australian? and ?Monitor,? we undoubtedly possess.
All these journals average from seventy to eighty advertisements in their pages,
and have an average circulation of 650 impressions each, or a total of 3250 im-
pressions weekly. No duty is levied by way of stamps, or on advertisements,
the charge for three insertions of eight lines in the ? Monitor ? being seven shillings
?and of fifty lines, one guinea. Our colonial Almanack is a most useful and
excellent little work, which no settler ought to be without, ?since it contains
short but valuable treatises on colonial farming and gardening; tbe periods for
planting, sowing, and reaping the various local productions; the usual state of the
weather throughout the year; the rates of ferries and tolls, and convenient money -
tables. A good practical treatise on the vine has lately issued from our press;
while a history of the colony, a treatise on sheep-husbandry, a diary of travels in
the interior, and two volumes of poems, (one by Mr. Tompson, a young Austra-
lian, and the other consisting of birth-day odes, songs, and jeux d?esprit, by our ve-
nerable laureate Mr. Michael Robinson,) are all about to appear. In fact, printing
is now executed here very neatly, as our newspapers (to go no farther) manifest.?
The twenty-fifth letter or chapter is devoted to a detail of circumstances
relative to the government of the colony. It appears that Governor Mac-
quarie placed emancipated individuals of good character and the emigrants
upon a footing, in their privileges and eligibility to offices and honours. He
invited them to his table alike, and with that sound discretion which does
honour to his judgment, made no invidious distinctions between them and
those whom inclination or poverty had caused to locate themselves in the
colony. On the departure of Governor Macquarie, the emancipated indivi-
duals were never noticed by the governor, and a feud was created. They
thus became a stigmatized race ; of the bad policy of which proceeding no one
can doubt. The emancipated persons were not allowed to sit on juries, and
on their being anxious to remove the disability, both emigrants and emanci-
pists were excluded, and naval and military officers appointed to form them
in criminal courts: a very objectionable body in cases where the subject


and the government might be at issue. In such an infant establishment, the
decision might be committed to a bench of two or three civilians, appointed
as judges from home, without any jury at all, much more satisfactorily.
The very rules and practices of martial service disqualify the mind for
judging in civil cases ; such courts can be little other than courts-martial. It
is, however, a question of great difficulty to decide, and the free emigrant
has in this respect the worst of it, for the summary proceeding of a court-
martial would be the best for unemancipated convict offenders. Emancipated
individuals of property, and a good character of long standing, ought in fair-
ness to be on a footing with the emigrants, and must ultimately be placed
so. It is curious enough to note the degrees marked by the emancipists even
among themselves. A pure emancipist is one whose conduct has never sub-
jected him to legal censure since his residence in the colony, and he cau-
tiously proscribes his brethren who may have ever incurred it, no matter how
long ago; while the emigrant will suffer neither of these classes to sully the
purity of his table-linen! It requires the firmness and good example of
an enlightened governor to change this system of caste.
? If this is to continue to be a place for the reformation as well as for the pu-
nishment of criminals, why keep these quondam criminals a proscribed race after
reformation has obviously taken full effect, and their time has been served, or their
pardon awarded ? It is a piece of gross impolicy as well as great injustice to do
so; because, by morally elevating a man in society, and infusing into him a proper
pride and respect for himself, you secure him in a great measure against the future
commission of crime;?for who is there imbued with a due degree of personal
pride, and who values the character he has acquired in society, that will readily be
guilty of a base action?? The calling this colony a colony for reform, is a mere
bugbear, as long as the reformed continue to be marked as a race of outcasts. I
see no reason whatever for excluding a man who has been once convicted from any
office the unconvicted now enjoy here, when his period of punishment is completed
and his conduct has been deserving. How obvious are the good effects which
would naturally arise from his admission to equality! A greater inducement
would be thus held out to those already commencing reformation to persevere?
while the still depraved would feel urged onward toward a salutary change, seeing
those who had been as criminal as themselves now restored to honest society, and
becoming as useful as they had before been pernicious.
? This system of exclusion is in fact practised to an extent which few in England
would believe : ?the poacher, political offender, and thief, being all looked upon as
equally degraded. Nor is any difference held to exist between the blackest crimes
and the most venial offences. The man who stole to satisfy the cravings of hunger,
or was excited thereto by sudden temptation,?the hardened rogue proud of his
hundred crimes,?and the bashful booby blushing for his solitary one, are all looked
upon alike, and treated alike too.?
And again?
? Our emancipist body, in honest truth, forms the most useful and enterprising
portion of our communityall the distilleries, nearly all the breweries, and the
greater portion of the mills and various manufactories, being owned by them ;
while they have never, so far as I can learn, disgraced themselves by engaging in
any of the smuggling transactions, whereby many of those who came out under the
proud title of free men have tarnished their reputation. Several of our most respect-
able merchants have told me, that in the numerous matters of business wherein they
have been concerned with the emancipists, their conduct has always proved most
honourable, though some here will endeavour to detract from this praise, by saying
that their principles have suffered no change, the terror of the law and self-interest
alone keeping them honest. This I hold to be an illiberal and unworthy suspicion :
?and if otherwise, what retains nineteen-twentieths of mankind in the paths of
honesty but these two identical things ??honest principle often taking a harlequin
leap from the breasts of even the nearest friends when properly is thrown as a bone
of contention among them. As long as people can gain more by a sort of decent
roguery, than by open unqualified honesty, (without their neck or their future inter-
ests being endangered,) they seldom scruple much. Honesty is, in fact, as much an
acquired habit as a fixed principle; and by our quondam rogues getting into this habit,
like all acquired habits, whether good or bad, it will not be very readily thrown off.?
This is unimpeachably just, and proves Mr. Cunningham to be a man of


impartiality, discernment, and principle. The twenty-sixth letter is well
worthy the attention of our colonial secretary.
The chapter on convict servants should be attentively read by all who in-
tend emigrating to Australia. Convict labour so easily attained, is an ad-
vantage in favour of the colony far overbalancing the ideal disadvantage of
its distance from the parent country. It is satisfactory to find that the great
body of convicts turn out good servants. We infinitely prefer the plan of
banishing the refractory offenders of the colony to Port Macquarie, to that
adopted by the chiefpnagistrate of Van Diemen?s land towards runaways, which
is too vicious in principle even for a convict government. But perhaps the
most valuable part of Mr. Cunningham?s work is that which relates to con-
victs on their passage out, ?to their conduct and stratagems, their profligate
hypocrisy, and the measures which should be adopted in managing them." Of
a convict ship, under the author?s superintendence, we are favoured with
some curious anecdotes, as for example:
? Some of the literary characters occasionally write slang journals of proceedings
during the passage ; and although I never openly sanctioned this, yet 1 never made
any attempts to put the practice down, as I had sometimes the means thereby of
hearing, at second hand, of the malpractices going on. 4 Three peters cracked and
frisked,'* made a frequent opening of the morning's log, when referring to the sprees
of the preceding night, until the institution of the lamp threw a light on such
transactions ; while in one I read this touching observation, penned on gliding past
the scene of many of the author?s former joyous freaks, ?? Passed Margate,?-but
could not fancy myself on board a hoy /? Sometimes they act plays, with a screen
of blankets for the drop-scene, getting together remnants of stolen toggery to deck
out their persons with ; soot, chalk, red-paint, and flake white, being employed to
polish off their complexions. A friend of mine (surgeon of a convict-ship), in
passing across the stage as the performance was about to commence, happened to
inquire the name of it: ? Oh, sir, the Forty Thieves,' was the response of the face-
tious rogue next him. ?lt is well chosen then,? replied my friend, ?as you cannot
be at a loss for actors.?
? Sometimes, too, they hold regular Old-Bailey sessions, and try individuals in
exquisite mock-heroic style. Another friend of mine, who had the heavy charge of
three hundred and seventy-two, happening to be a little short-sighted, glided dis-
respectfully one day into the very middle of the court, with his hat on; and no
doubt felt most awkward on finding himself in such offensive trim in the awful
presence of the chief justice of England, perched upon a three-legged stool, with a
bed under him for a cushion?a patchwork quilt round him for a robe of office
and a huge swab combed over his dignified head and shoulders in lieu of a wig.
Barristers, with blankets round them for gowns, pleaded eloquently the causes they
were engaged in, brow-beating and cross-questioning the witnesses according to
the best-laid-down rules, and chicanery of law; while the culprit stood quaking in
the dock, surrounded by the traps of office, awed by the terrific frowns which the
indignant judge every now and then cast upon him, when the evidence bore hard
upon the case.?
The uselessness of endeavouring to introduce an attention to religious du-
ties in the convict ships is clearly shown.
? If mewing the women up in Penitentiaries seldom produces any other than
mere outward show, too great severity observed at the outset here is rather preju-
dicial than otherwise, those who have been most strictly kept under during the
voyages to New South Wales, have invariably turned out the worst, for a time at
least. The wild buoyancy of their dispositions being bridled by the severe restraints
imposed upon them, they were like wanton colts loosened from the stall when they
landed, and in the fulness of their delight on being at last freed from the galling
yoke, broke out into all manner of extravagancies.?
The airs,, hypocrisy, and tricks of the female convicts are proofs that se-
paration from each other is necessary to effect a change in their conduct.
The fate of religious tracts, and the use of 44 Margaret Stewart?s letter,?
show how artfully the well-meaning may be tricked by the chicanery of these
criminals. Mr. Cunningham exhibits a deep practical knowledge of human
* In English, three chests broken and robbed.


nature in the following passages. We think the earliest possible moment
they can be landed in Australia gives the earliest chance ot reformation.
? Women are in fact one of the best and most patriotic consignments that could
be sent out to our rising country. Even furthering a few shiploads of volunteers
from the streets of overgrown towns in Britain would benefit greatly our convict
community;?benefit also the places from whence they might be despatched ; and
benefit the wretched creatures themselves, by enabling them to begin a new and
useful life in another country.
? The inauspicious issue of the experimental mission of the Twelve Apostles*
some years back has, I fear, operated against future speculations of this kind ; a
goodly proportion of that chosen band having been found in a matronly way (hang-
ing in a sort of sentimental love-trance round the necks of the sympathizing tars)
by the reverend inspector who visited them on arrival, to certify as to their high
state of moral improvement. But even admitting the worst in this case, still the
situation of these unfortunates must be now out of all comparison superior to their
former debased condition in England; while the colony cannot but have profited
by such an acquisition as twelve young healthy females, destined perhaps to become
mothers of virtuous families, and thus to increase the amount of our industrious po-
pulation. Their sudden proliflckness doubtless arises partly from change of climate
producing a corresponding change in constitution, but may chiefly be ascribed to
an alteration of habits. The same effect we see coming into play among the street-
perambulators in England, since it became fashionable to renovate their constitu-
tions by short sentences to wholesome prison diet, and the wholesome discipline of
the tread-mill. The fruitful effects of these measures most of the parishes frequent-
ed by such damsels can abundantly testify. The facetious clergyman of a manu-
facturing village in the North seemed to understand this matter well also :?no
illegitimate children had been for a long while forthcoming in the parish, till
change of times caused a dispersion of the manufacturing establishment , when a
sudden fecundity ensued, A worthy elder, shocked at the scandal of such a nu-
merous illegal progeny being all ? on the stocks? at once, waited on his pastor to
condole upon the subject, and take steps to avert, as he deemed it, the ? increasing
depravity,??but was checked by his reverend friend pulling him gently by the
sleeve, and whispering in his ear, ? No, no, James, no, no ; instead of viewing such
as tokens of increasing depravity , I hail them, James, as the first signs of returning
morality .? So we may say of our female exiled population ; pointing to the fine
and numerous families which they rear as triumphant proofs of their moral regene-
ration.?
We could follow the author much farther with pleasure. His work is the
most useful we have seen on the subjects of which it treats. It is practical,
and will afford numerous hints for managing the depraved individuals who
fall under the sentence of the law. It is amusing to the general reader, and
absolutely necessary for the emigrant to be possessed of. Above all, the phi-
losopher, casting a glance into the future, contemplates there the march of
events in the formation of empires from the punishment of criminals, watches
good coming out of evil, sees the benefits resulting to his country from
making the ? unproductive? offscourings of its population ?productive,?
and acknowledges the truism inculcated by Mr. Cunningham, that at home
a culprit stands no chance of reform; ? when once his fair name is blasted,
he becomes in England an outcast from honest society, is looked upon with a
suspicious eye, and his misdeeds thrown in his teeth.? Self-defence, nay,
the very law of self-preservation must make him who would willingly re-
form, fling himself among the dishonest and debased, and proceed to reite-
rated offences. In New South Wales, it can only be the incorrigible and
really abandoned who in vicious courses; and on landing these,
persons in authority need little discrimination to separate the two classes
and deal them their due. We have not space for farther observation, save
to express our exultation at the honest glory this system of colonization has,
and will in future ages reflect upon our country.
* Twelve unfortunate girls, who had been sent out by some religious society to
get either places or husbands in New South Wales. They were so named by the
sailors.
