

PRICE TWOPENCE.
CURIOUS OATHS.
Extracts from “The Sentinel,’’ Brisbane.
Knights of Columbus
America’s Secret Papist Order,
EXACT WORDING OF ITS OATH.
When any part of the secret work of a society which has private
signs, passwords; etc., is published, there are naturally plenty ready
to retort that the information is spurious, and invented by the sup-
posed informant. They will claim that information by a traitor is
always open to suspicion, and this, of course, is correct. Here, how-
ever, is an oath which was discovered officially, and cannot be de-
nied. The United States Congress instituted an inquiry into this
“Order,” and the words of the oath of its “fourth degree” are in
the Congressional records, and part of the national papers, for all
time. It appears in the “Congressional Record” —the “Hansard” of
America—of February 15th, 1913, on page 3262. Copies have been
printed for distribution by H. S. Burwell, of 509 F-street, N.W.,
Washington, U.S.A.:
I, now in the presence of Almighty God, the blessed
Virgin Mary, the blessed St. John the Baptist, the Holy Apostles St.
Peter and St. Paul, and all the saints, sacred host of Heaven, and
you, my Ghostly Father, the superior general of the Society of Jesus,
founded by St. Ignatius Loyola, in the pontification of Paul the 111.,


and continued to the present, do, by the womb of the Virgin, the
matrix of God and rod of Jesus Christ, declare and swear that his
Holiness the Pope is Christ’s vice-regent, and is the true and only
head of the Catholic or Universal Church throughout the earth; and
that by virtue of the keys of binding and loosing given his Holiness
by our Saviour Jesus Christ, he hath power to depose heretical kings,
princes, States, Commonwealths, and Governments, and they may be
safely destroyed. Therefore, to the utmost of my power I will
defend this doctrine and his Holiness’s right and custom against all
usurpers of the heretical or Protestant authority whatever, especially
the Lutheran Church of Germany, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and
Norway, and the now pretended authority, the. Church of England
and Scotland, and the branches of same now established in Ireland
and on the Continent of America and elsewhere, and all adherents in
regard that they may be usurped and heretical, opposing the sacred
Mother Church of Rome.
I do now denounce and disown any allegiance as due to any
heretical king, prince, or State, named Protestant or Liberals, or
obedience to any of their laws, magistrates, or officers.
I do further declare* that the doctrine of the Churches of Eng-
land and Scotland, of the Calvinists, Huguenots, and others of the
name of Protestant or Masons to be damnable; and they themselves
to be damned who will not forsake the same.
I do further declare that I will help, assist, and advise all or any
of his Holiness’s agents, in any place where I should be —in Switzer-
land, Germany, Holland, Ireland, or America, or in any other king-
dom or territory I shall come to —and do my utmost to extirpate the
heretical Protestant or Masonic doctrines, and to destroy all their
pretended powers, legal or otherwise.
I do further promise and declare that, notwithstanding that I am
dispensed with to assume any religion heretical for the propagation
of the Mother Church’s interest, to keep secret and private all her
agents’ counsels from time to time, as they intrust me, and not
divulge, directly or indirectly, by word, writing, or circumstance
whatever, but to execute all that should be proposed, given in charge,
or discovered unto me by you, my Ghostly Father, or any of this
sacred Order.
I do further promise and declare that I will have no opinion or
will of my own, or any mental reservation whatsoever, even as aj
corpse or cadaver (perinde ac cadaver), but will unhesitatingly obey
each and every command that I may receive from my superiors in
the militia of the Pope and of Jesus Christ.
That I will go to any part of the world whithersoever I may be
sent, to the frozen regions North, jungles of India, to the centres of
civilisation of Europe, or to the wild haunts of the barbarous savages


°f America, without murmuring or repining, and will be submissive
in all things whatsoever is communicated to me.
I do furthei promise and declare that I will, when opportunity
presents, make and wage relentless war, secretly and openly, against
all heretics, Protestants and Masons, as I am directed to no to ex<
tirpate them from the face of the whole earth; and that I will spare
neither age sex or condition, and that I will hang, burn, waste boil,'
ay, stiangle, and bury alive those infamous heretics; rip up the
stomachs and wombs of their women, and crush their infants’ heads
against the walls in order to annihilate their execrable race That
when the same cannot be done openly, I will secretly use the poison-
ous cup the strangulation cord, the steel of the poniard, or the
leaden bullet, regardless of the honor, rank, dignity, or authority of
nrfvafj 80118 ! w , hateye , r . ma y be their condition in life, either public or
private, as I at any time may be directed so to do by any agents of
Soci^y P of°Je S su P s erior ° f Brotherhood of th e Holy Father of the
In confirmation of which I hereby dedicate my life, soul and all
corporal powers, and with the dagger which I now receive I will
subscribe my name, written in my blood, in testimony thereof- and
should I prove ialse and weaken in my determination, may my brethren
and fellow soldiers of the militia of the Pope cut off my hands and
feet, and my throat from ear to ear, my belly opened and sulphur
burned therein with all the punishment that can be inflicted unon
me on earth, and my soul shall be tortured by devils in eternal i e ll
tor ever.
That I will in voting always vote for a K. of C. in preference t,v
a Protestant, especially a Mason, and that I will leave my party so
to do, that if two Catholics are on the ticket I will satisfy myself
which is the better supporter of Mother Church, and vote accord-
i •
That I will not deal with or employ a Protestant if in my power to
deal vith or employ a Catholic. That I will place Catholic girls in
1 ro test ant families, that a weekly report may be made of the inner
movements of the heretics.
That I will provide myself with arms and ammunition that I may
. 3 ' n re admess when the word is passed, or lam commanded to de-
iend the Church either as an individual, or with the militia of the
Pope.
All of which I,
, do swear by the blessed Trinity and


blessed sacrement which I am now to receive, to perform and on
part to keep this, my oath.
In testimony hereof I take this most holy and blessed Sacrament
of the Eucharist, and witness the same further lea/In
with the point of this dagger dipped in my own blood, and seal m
the face of this holy sacrament.
The Jesuit.
(Extract from Annandale’s Imperial Dictionary).
Tesuit (iez’u-it), n. One of a religious order founded by Ignatius
Loyola in the sixteenth century. The Jesuits form the most cele-
brated of all the Roman Catholic religious orders; they have evei
Ee theirorigin been one of the main bulwarks of the Church ot
Rome and have exercised immense influence in the destinies of the
Christian world. So formidable and dangerous was their political
influence supposed to be, even in Roman Catholic communities, that
the troubles occasioned by their presence often ended in their ex-
rmiQinn Thus though the order was founded only in 1536, the
Jesuits’were driven from France in 1594, but recalled in 1605; they
weTe expelled from England in 1604, from Venice in 1606, from Prance
in 1764 from Spain in 1767, and from Naples in 1768. In 1773 the
order was nominally (and as was supposed finally) suppressed by Pope
Glemelt XIV., but it was revived in 1814. They have since been
excelled from various countries. The body is divided into tour
'-lasses' (1) Professed, who, having passed through all preparatory
s ales which commonly extend over ten or twelve years or even a
longer period have solemnly taken the vows, including obedience to
the*Pope■ (2) Coadjutors, spiritual and temporal; the former, who
have completed their studies and been admitted to holy orders,
being designed to assist the professed in preaching, teaching, etc.,
the latter being lay brothers, to whom mental offices are commi ,
(3) Scholastics, who have passed through the novitiate are engaged
for a long series of years, either in pursuing their own studies or m
teaching 1 the various schools of the order; (4) Novices, who are
engaged for two-years exclusively in spiritual exercises, prayer
meditation, ascetic reading, or ascetic exercises, and erallv
a course of disciplinary studies.-2. (Prom the Jes “ r^o^fh f®“ e t
reputed to use art and intrigue in promoting or accomplishing
purposes) A crafty person; an intriguer.


Oaths of the Jesuit.
I now in the presence of the Almighty God, the Blessed Virgin
Mary, the blessed Michael the Archangel, the blessed St. John the
Baptist . . . and to my ghostly father, the superior general of
the Society of Jesus, founded by St. Ignatius Loyola, do by the womb
of the Virgin, etc., swear that his Holiness the Pope is Christ’s vice-
regent, and is the true and only head of the Catholic or Universal
Church, etc. I do now renounce and disown any allegiance is due to
any heretical King, Prince, or State named Protestant or Liberal, or
obedience to any of their laws or magistrates,, or officers. I do fur-
ther declare the doctrines of the Church of England, and Scotland,
and of Calvinists, Huguenots, and others of the name of Protestant or
Liberal, to be damnable, and they themselves to be damned, who will
not forsake the same. Ido further promise and declare that, not-
withstanding I am dispensed with, to assume any religion heretical
for the propagation of Mother Church’s interest, to keep secret and
private all her agents, counsels, from time to time, as they interest
me, and, not divulge directly or indirectly by word, writing, or cir-
cumstances whatever. I do furthermore promise and declare that 1
will, when opportunity presents, make and wage relentless war se-
cretly or openly, against all heretics, protestants and liberals, as 1
am directed to do; extirpate them from the face of the earth; and
that I will spare neither age, sex, or condition, and that I Will hang,
burn, waste, boil, flay, strangle, and bury alive these infamous
heretics; rip up the stomachs and wombs of the women, and crush,
their infants’ heads against the walls in order to annihilate their ex-
ecrable race. That when the same cannot be done openly, I will
secretly use the poisonous cup, the strangulating cords, the steel of
the poniard, or the leaden bullets, regardless of the honor, rank,
dignity, or authority of the persons, whatever may be their condition
in life, either public or private, as I at any time may be directed to
do by any agent of the Pope, or the superior of the Holy Father of
the Society of Jesus. In confirmation of winch I hereby dedicate
my life, my soul, and my corporeal powers; and with this dagger,
which I now receive, I will subscribe my name written in; my blood
in testimony thereof; and should I prove false or weaken in my
determination, may my brethren and fellow-soldiers of the militia of
the Pope cut off my hands and my feet, and my throat from ear
to ear, rip my belly open, and sulphur burn therein, with all the
punishments that can be inflicted on me on earth, and my soul be
tortured by demons in an eternal forever. In testimony thereof I
take this most holy and blessed sacrament of the Eucharist, and
witness the same further with my name written with the point of
this dagger, dipped in my own blood, and sealed in the face of the
holy covennant.
Copied from “The Divine Calendar,” Vol. 11., edited by Augusta
Cook, president of the British Israel League, dnd published by Dank
and Sons, London, 1916.


Alleged Hibernian Oath
A correspondent sends the “Kerry Evening Post” the following
alleged copy of the Hibernian oath:
“In the presence of Almigthy God and thee, my brother, I do
swear that I will suffer my right hand to be cut from my body and
laid at the gaol door before I will waylay or betray a brother, and
I will persevere and not spare from the cradle to the crutch, and
from the crutch to the cradle, that I will not hear the moans ot
groans of infancy or old age, but that I will wade knee-deep in
Orangemen’s blood and do as King James did.
And I further swear to owe no allegiance to any Protestant or
Heretic Sovereign, Ruler, Prince or Potentate, and that I will not
regard any oath delivered to me by them or their subjects, by the
Judge, Magistrate, or else, as binding.
“And I swear to aid as best I can any brother or brothers who
may be on trial for any act or expression of others, before Magis-
trate, Judge, Jury, or else, and to be ready at all times to aid by
every means in nay power to assist in preserving his or their liber-
ation, and if myself a witness, to discard any oath delivered to me
on such occasions by Judge, Magistrate, Counsel, Lawyer, Official, or
else, and that I will not regard such oath as binding.
“By virtue of the oath I have taken, I will aid and assist with
all my might and strength, when called upon to massacre Protestants
and other Heretics, burn British Churches, abolish Protestant Kings
and Princes, and all others except the Church of Rome and this
System, and by virtue of the oath I have taken, I will think it no sin
to kill and massacre a Protestant whenever opportunity occurs.”
Fenian Oath.
COPY OF PAPERS FOUND AT I.W.W. ROOMS, SUSSEX STREET.
1 swear by the Almighty God of all Heaven and upon Earth,
by the Blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God; by her sorrowings and
groanings at the foot of the Cross; by her tears, and by St. Patrick;
by the Blessed and Adorable Host; by the Blessed Rosary and Holy


Beads; by our Blessed Church in all ages; and by our national
Martyrs, to fight upon Irish soil for the independence of Ireland, to
fight until I die, wading in the fields of red gore of the Saxon tyrants
and murderers for the glorious cause of nationality, if spared to fight
until there is not a single vestige, not a trace nor a foot-print left
to tell that the holy soil of Ireland was trodden by Saxon nobles
and murderers; and, moreover, when the English Protectionists, rob-
bers and brutes in Ireland shall be murdered or driven into the sea
like the swine Jesus Christ caused to be drowned; we shall then
embark lor and take England and root out every vestige of the
accursed blood of the heretical adulterers and murderers of Henry
VIII., and possess ourselves of the* treasures of the beasts that have
so long kept our Ireland of Saints, old Ireland, in chains of bondage,
and drove us from our genial shores, exiled in foreign lands; and
shall wade in the blood of Orangemen and heretics who do not
join us, and become one of ourselves. Scotland, too, having given
aid and succour to the beasts, we shall leave her in gore, and shall
not give up the conquest until we have our Holy Father complete
ruler over the British Isles, as he was before the Reformation. To
all, singly and collectively, I swear to fulfil, as before mentioned,
with my eyes blinded, not knowing whom to me administered the
oath. So help me God.
Ancient Order of Hibernians, Molly Maguires, and Ribbonmen
.of Ireland are one and the same thing. The difference between
them is of locality and name only. We publish below the obligations
of a Ribbonman.
.
The oath taken in Ireland by the Ribbonmen is the same as
that taken by the A. C. PI., and the Molly Maguires of Pennsylvania.
The evidence taken by the Judges at the trials for murder of Molly
Maguires, A C. H, and Ribbonmen of Ireland are the one and same
thing, with the difference of name and locality only.
The person is first asked by the Captain of the Committeemen—
Is it your wish with your heart and mind to assume the heavenly
test of a Ribbonman, or any other title you get from the Board?
The person answers “Yes.” The Captain of the Committee then
says “Take the bonk in your right hand, and go down on your
knees. You swear you will never prosecute a Ribbonman or any
other title he may get from the Ribbon Board, before Judge or Jury,
or any other man that can hurt our system.”
The person is again told if it is not his wish to receive the chief
secrets he may rise and go away, but if he answers “Yes/’ the Cap-
tain then orders him to bless himself and take the book in his
right hand, and he is sworn as follows—
“By virtue of the oath I have taken, during my existence I wili
aid and assist with all my mind and strength, when called upon, to
massacre Protestants, put away Heretics, burn British Churches, de-
throne Protestant Kings and Princes, and all others, except mem-
bers of the Church of Rome and this system, and by virtue of the said


t *
oath I have taken, I will think it no sin to kill and massacre a Pro-
testant whenever opportunity serves and virtue of the said oath if
I know any members of this system to be backward in executing any
of the aforesaid orders, I will immediately make it known to the
Captain or some committee man belonging to the Ribbon Board, and
by virtue of the oath I will always attend at one minute’s warning to
execute my commands belonging to the system, and that I will never
see my brother hurt or abused by any not up to this system without
assisting him, nor will I buy anything from a. Protestant at any time
if I can get it from a brother. And I also feel bound to believe that
there is no absolution to> be had from any Pope of Rome or any other
authority belonging to that Church for any part of this solemn test,
or any forgiveness in this world, or that which is to come, for a
breach of this test.”
H. Cook & Co., Printers, 200 Castlereagh St,, Sydney,
