

CURIOSITIES OF COLONIZATION.
Gr. W. RUSDEN.
LONDON.
1874.




CURIOSITIES OF COLONIZATION.
GL W. RUSDEN.
LONDON.
1874.


LONDON; PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS


CURIOSITIES OF COLONIZATION.
CHAPTER I.
There is no more interesting subject to those who study the fortunes
of the human race than the manner in which a people which has filled
its hereditary domain extends itself and occupies new ground by
occupation or by conquest.
Much has been written as to ancient, and especially Greek
colonies ; and it is often asserted that the Greeks understood better
than any modern people the art of colonization.
But the pressure of the main difficulty in modern colonization
was all unfelt by the Greeks. Lost as they are in the dim recesses
of time, and unchronicled by witnesses, the steps taken by the leaders
of the bands which crossed the iEgean or the Hellespont and occu-
pied the coast of Asia, are now beyond our ken; but there is no
reason to doubt that the one great difficulty in modern colonization—
the want of labour—was absent then, as we afterwards find it to have
been in the Greek colonies, in Sicily, Italy, and elsewhere. In a
community containing a proportion of ten or twelve slaves to every
freeman a Greek who desired to try his fortunes abroad could take
with him the whole supply of labour which he needed. A few
Greeks could take with them a respectable population.
There is therefore no fair standard of comparison between ancient
and modern colonization. (Roman colonization may be dismissed with
the remark that it was not a natural extension, but sprung from con-
fiscations of territory, or mere military occupation. To take away
land, as Sylla did, from one class and give it to his myrmidons, may
be rapine or military policy, but is not true colonization.)
No Greek experienced the carking care of the early colonist in
Australia, who, with redundant energy in himself, vainly looked
round for the means of applying to a virgin soil the unemployed
labour which was pining for employment in his native land.
On the contrary, so rapid was the process of importation, that
frequently, in a short space of time, the hive which had swarmed to a
colony became larger and more powerful than the parent state; and it
is a sad lesson in history, but not always taken to heart by some in
high places, that, instead of cementing their union with their off-
spring, the Greeks foolishly wrangled with their kindred, and thus
b 2


paved the way, first, for the invasions of Persia, and then for the
aggressions of Philip and the iron heel of Alexander.
Must it ever be that the watchmen shall be blind,
“ Looking to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter, and
saying to-morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant ” ?
Once already has the scourge of Greece fallen upon England
through the fault of her “ blind watchmen ” : again the slow finger of
time pauses ere it turn the leaf which screens from view the future
of those southern colonies planted by Pitt to remedy in some sort the
crimes of his predecessors : again wise and friendly voices are raised
in England,—friendly, but with accents of warning,—and yet we know
not but that they are raised in vain.
We know not that the watchmen of the time have risen to the height
of the argument, that they feel the full weight of the problem which
they or their successors must solve—whether their precious England
“ set in the silver sea,” shall shine with added lustre from the jewels
she has strewn abroad, or whether she is to be weighed in the dry
balance of shop-keeping selfishness : —whether she is to be “ leased
out like to a tenement or pelting farm” to bidders for temporary
power, or to be renowned abroad among all her kindred as the nurse
of prosperous communities —whether she shall continue to enjoy
the glories of Corinth or subside into the dregs of Gortho.
For her own sake, indeed, the problem is a serious one. The
high-pressure system of trade, if that alone be relied on for national
greatness, must one day fail to see her in the front of all nations.
Although the coal-fields fail not for a time, other countries have
theirs, and are fast pressing forward in the race—such as it is ; and
then, —when profits have abated, when priority is no longer secured in
the much-worshipped markets of the world, when the artificial wens
created by the manufacturing system have lost their accustomed
support, and must prey upon the vital functions of the rest of the body
politic ; —where will be the greatness of the empire, unless England’s
children abroad be found of one family, not only in name but in
fact?
What grander sight, in a national sense, could the world have
shown than that which would now warm the hearts of Englishmen if
Americans had never been severed, but by the Atlantic, from the land
of their forefathers ?
Compared with such a result, how paltry would now appear the
schemes of Grenville and North, if even they could have succeeded ?


CHAPTER 11.
Although slavery was not extinct when Europe attempted to colonize
America, the cost of deportation was so great as to infuse new diffi-
culties into the task: and the solution arrived at by the Spaniards
savoured rather of continuous occupation by a conquering band than of
thorough colonization by Spaniards,
Even now the latest accounts fix the pure Spanish population of
Mexico at about 300,000, and the other Spanish settlements exhibit
much smaller numbers ; while the United States of America, colonized
a century later, possess more than 30,000,000 of British descent.
The Spaniards, therefore, were not successful colonizers. Nor
were the French, whose possessions in North America were so rapidly
absorbed by England and by the United States, and who on one
memorable occasion in the 18th century indiscriminately shipped
12,000 so-called colonists to Cayenne there to suffer from fever and
famine until an equally indiscriminate flood swept away the unhappy
remainder.
The Portuguese population of Brazil tells the same tale as is
written in the records of Mexico and Peru, The creation abroad of a
microcosm of the mother-country was not aimed at, or was at any
rate not attained.
Greatly is it to he regretted that the attempts made by Sir Walter
Raleigh to form another England in America were doomed to failure.
Had his combined daring and sagacity found full scope in Virginia
we might have seen what never has yet been seen, and is now im-
possible,—the result of an experiment having for its object the
founding abroad of a counterpart of the mother-country.
Five times at his own charge did that gallant Englishman essay
the task, and each time unsuccessfully; not meeting necessary support
at home among his jealous contemporaries, who were prone to their
own aggrandisement.
“ The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
The insolence of office, and the spurns ”
that merit takes of the unworthy;—all these were his; but the
earnest help and sympathy which might have enabled him to create a
new empire were denied.
Elizabeth was too sagacious not to use Raleigh’s talent when she
needed it near home, as his deeds against the Armada and at Cadiz
sufficiently show; and one cannot doubt that the services he was called
upon to render against Spain in some sort militated against his
colonizing plans in Virginia. For himself, he never palled in resolu-
tion ; and just before his own fall he wrote to Cecil, “ I shall yet live
to see it an English nation.”
Yet one cannot but dwell with regret on the thought that the
transfer of such a genius, untrammelled, to such a sphere, might have
worked wonders on the earth.


He, who so controlled the spirits of men that for long years his
memory was cherished among the Indians of Orinoco; who was so
conversant with the history of his race that even in prison he could
compile the best History of the World, who was among the foremost
in the graces of wit and wisdom, and yet amongst the most daring in
the field and most consummate in counsel; he might have planted a
colony in which not some only but all the healthful germs of English
law, manners, and religion would have abounded.*
No servile worshipper of rank, he appreciated the true nobility in
which the inherited was joined to the natural honour: no envious
railer at true nobility, he saw that it was an evil under the sun when
“ Folly was set in great excellency.”
But the experiment of colonization under such a Coryphaeus was
not made, and it has been the fate of England to sow broadcast over
the world communities in which one only of her own vital functions is
reproduced.
It is grotesque to observe the remarks which are made in England
about the result of her own proceedings.
Built up by a combination of forces herself, she transplants one
of them to a virgin soil, and then wonders at the growth of the
young tree : nay, some writers taunt the colonists for their democratic
tendencies.
We are what we are made by the act of England.
And such is the deep Nemesis of national acts that if ever the
hereditary and titled order, the grace and glory of the nation, be
extinguished, it will be by the reaction from those communities she has
founded without endowing them with the spirit of her own life.
Whether the defect arose from apathy, ignorance, or perhaps partly
from a low jealousy in some high-born minds of a copy of their own
greatness; whether from the fond idea that so great an order never
had a small beginning, and that human nature has changed since
distinctions were invented; be the fact as it may as to the cause of
the defect, it is one which will rouse an alarum in the fatherland of
us all—when the large majority of English-speaking races shall be
without the graces of rank and distinction, and a crowd of their
relations on English soil shall exclaim,
“ What is good enough for our cousins, is quite good enough for us.”
* “In Spanish America, as we have seen, there existed both the elements of
a nobility and an established church, from want of which England found so little
support in the day of revolution in her ancient colonies, and finds so little of
substantial attachment in those whicli she still possesses.”— (Merivale’s Coloniza-
tion and Colonics .)
One may quote this passage without thinking that either institution would
have stood any such strain as that imposed by the follies of Grenville; yet Pitt,
speaking in 1799, told the House of Commons that the want “ of honours had
tended to accelerate the separation of the former colonies.” (Parliamentary
Debates .)


CHAPTER 111.
Raleigh’s prophecy as to the success of Virginian colonization was
fulfilled, and Virginia was the first permanent English settlement on
American soil.
The history of colonization in America has been so often written,
that it need not here be dwelt upon at length.
The difficulty of supplying labour to colonies, which the Greeks
did not feel, was of course a stumbling-block in America.
The Portuguese were the first to send convicts to their settlement
in Brazil, and the victims of the Inquisition followed the convicts.
Slavery was also resorted to, but not slavery of the cheap kind which
the Greek commanded. Slaves had to be procured abroad, not deported
from the parent country by their owners; and the charges of the
experiment were great.
Convicts were early sent to the English colonies. Captain Smith,
in the reign of James 1., wrote of Virginia that
“ The number of felons and vagabonds transported did bring such evil
characters on the place that some did choose to be hanged ere they would go
there, and were .”
Bacon’s weighty saying—“ It is a shameful and unblessed thing
to take the scum of people, and wicked condemned men, to be the
people with whom you plant”—did not arrest the evil. Cromwell
even enlarged the coercive system by sending his political and military
prisoners as slaves or indented servants both to America and to the
West Indies; and, as all these means failed to supply their labour
market, the colonists resorted to an extensive system of kidnapping,*
in which they found ready accomplices in England, and which did not
terminate until the Revolutionary War.
We must condemn, but we cannot altogether be surprised at the
conduct of the colonists, who were, at least, less blameable than their
accomplices. Placed in a fertile country, wanting, as they said, nothing
but Englishmen to make it the finest country on the earth, they pined
for some means to divert to themselves the redundant and compara-
tively ill-paid labour of England.
They were like the farmer who visits Melbourne and sees streams
of water coursing down the street channels, and reflects that if he
could but divert the abandoned luxury into his furrows his fortune
would be made.
They could divert some population by kidnapping, and they did
so, not thinking themselves more wicked than the minister, who, failing
to secure power by adhering to his principles, steps into it by aban-
doning them.
All these circumstances connected with American colonization
* “Nowhere was this system in such active and extensive operation as at
Bristol. Even the first magistrates of that city were not ashamed to enrich
themselves by so odious a commerce.”— Macaulay, History of England.


concur to prove that the colonists were driven to great straits by the
pressure of the want of labour, and that even at the comparatively
short distance from England which America enjoyed, the natural
supply by immigration was so palpably inadequate, that convicts,
slaves, and their own kin kidnapped, were sought for to alleviate the
wants of the labour market, although at the risk, if not the certainty,
of introducing moral and more lasting evils.
No one appears in those days to have had the sagacity to penetrate
so deeply into the causes of the disturbance of relation between capital
and labour, as it was reserved for E. Gibbon Wakefield to penetrate in
the present century.
Indeed, the whole science of political economy was unknown,
although some of its truths break out in clear sharp sentences from
those great men whose vision swept so far that the crowd could not
follow their teaching.
Moreover, in spite of his wonderful perspicacity and indomitable
energy, it is doubtful even now whether Wakefield’s system is compre-
hended, as he urged it, by the majority of those who refer to it.
His theory is commonly alluded to as one of which it is the very
key-stone that the land fund shall be applied to the purpose of immi-
gration ; as if, in fact, he would sell the land at his “ sufficient price ”
in order to create a fund wherewith to import labour.
But Wakefield’s theory was nothing of this kind.
In his Art of Colonization (1849, Letter LY.) he repeats what he
had urged before a Committee of the House of Commons: * —
“ The putting of money in the colonial exchequer would not have been
designed by the Government.
“ The getting of money by the Government would be a result of selling
land instead of giving it away; but as the only object of selling instead of
giving is one totally distinct from that of producing revenue—namely to
prevent labourers from turning into land-owners too soon—the pecuniary
result would be unintended, one might almost say unexpected.
“ So completely is production of revenue a mere incident of the price of
land, that the price ought to be imposed, if it ought to be imposed under any
circumstances, even though the purchase money were thrown away.”
As to the expenditure of the money he adds:—
“ If the object were the utmost possible increase of the population, wealth,
and greatness of our empire, then I can have no doubt that the revenue
accruing from the sale of waste land, would be called an emigration fund, and
be expended in conveying poor people of the labouring class from the mother-
* “ The object of the price is not to create an immigration fund. You may
employ the fund in that way if you please; but the object of the price is to create
circumstances in the colony, which would render it, instead of a barbarous country,
an extension of the old country, with all the good but without the evils of the old
society. Therefore I see no relation (it is easy to see one which is of no conse-
quence, but I can see no proper relation) between the price required for land and
immigration.” (Wakefield’s evidence before Select Committee, House of Commons.
Parliamentary Papers, vol. xi., 1836.) As a study of intellectual athletics,
Wakefield’s answers to Poulett Scrope and others before this Committee are
well worth perusal.


country to the colonies. . . . Then would he seen a necessity for'altering
the price ; for lowering it from what just sufficed without an emigration fund
to what would just suffice with one.
“ The general conclusion is that a less price would he sufficient if the
purchase money were, than if it were not devoted to emigration.”
Of the waste of human life where no sound principles are followed
Wakefield gives a startling picture when he points out that—
“ Twenty years after the foundation of Virginia the number of colonists
was about 1800, though the number of immigrants had been nearly 20,000.
This rapid decrease of population was owing in some measure to the miserable
state of things that existed in Virginia before the colony was enriched by the
introduction of slave-labour ; but it was in no small degree owing to this ; that,
of the 20,000 immigrants, only a few were females.”
CHAPTER IY.
The day arrived when, in spite of all obstacles, the energy of the
colonists and the ample resources of the country had raised the English
colonies in America to an importance greater than that of many
European States : and, unfortunately, when that day arrived, it found
England under the control of blind watchmen.
The defective system which, professing to plant another English
nation, had sown the seeds of but a part of it, was then exposed.
Because they could not transplant forest-trees, our wise watchmen
declined to sow acorns.
The municipal system had flourished, and had occupied the life
of the colonies. There was no outlet, no scope for the higher
aspirations of the noblest minds.
It is the fashion to say that it would be good to establish heredi-
tary rank in young countries, but that you must wait until they have
become populous and powerful.
It would be as logical to say, “ The thing is good to be done, but
you must not try to do it, until it has become impossible.”
Every day that passes after the first settlement, makes it more and
more difficult to establish a new order of things.
It is reasonable, in the abstract, that it should be so, and in
practice we may see that it has been so.
In the Constitution of the United States its framers were careful to
embody a provision that no title of nobility should be granted.
Yet the Americans had not suffered at the hands of a titled class :
they had many more friends in the House of Lords than in the House
of Commons :* and to this day it must appear wonderful, to him who
* The numbers of Ministry and Opposition in the two Houses (the measures
of the proportion of reasonableness and unreasonableness in each) were about two
to one in the Upper, and three to one in the Lower.— (Smyth’s Cambridge Lectures .)


expects the world to be controlled by right reasoning, that the
patriotism of Chatham, the sound sense and fervour of Camden,
the wisdom and eloquence of Burke, backed as they were by Barre
and Governor Pownall, were set aside by the puerile platitudes of
North and his worthy associates in misrule. An acute observer
(Professor Smyth, of Cambridge) accounts for it by the apathy of
the English people, aided by ignorance of political economy; a blind
disgraceful money selfishness ; an overweening national pride; high
principles of government; and a certain vulgarity of thinking on
political subjects.
“ Our young members of parliament were probably occupied only with
their dress, their equipage, and their clubs; our country gentlemen with their
game laws, and their expected relief from the land-tax; and they all, young
or old, left the affairs of the nation to those wiser heads, which they somewhat
rashly supposed, must of course be found in the cabinet.”
Has the world changed since 1774 ? Is there not now a shameful
apathy as to the real good of England derivable from a hearty one-
ness between England and her colonies ? Are the people of England
duly impressed with the importance to themselves and to their
position in the world, of making one people of the hives which yearly
leave her shores ?
Are the supercilious utterances of some modern statesmen much
wiser than the platitudes of Lord North ?
True, the particular follies of the last century are not likely to bo
repeated. But is this a ground for boasting ? There may be a
present unfitness without a servile repetition of a past crime. But of
the spirit of kindred and of patriotism, which would have rendered
that crime and present shortcomings impossible, what proofs do we
now see ?
Is it not the fact that a wretched impostor, first from Wapping,
and then from a village in New South Wales, attracted more attention
in England than did the growth of communities big with the fate of
the empire ? Was it of so much importance to the nation or to the
public to prove the facts about R. C. Tichborne’s demise, as to watch
the birth, the growth, and the inheritance of a young nation in the
Pacific ?
It may be said that the extended Order of St. Michael and
St. George removes the defect which existed in English colonies.
Short-sighted reasoning !
Long ago, poor Rajah Brooke declared that “ even the fiction that
such titles were conferred by the Queen scarcely made them respect-
able ”: and these ephemeral distinctions, too often bestowed upon
unworthy objects, have little or no tendency to supply what is required.
There is in any hereditary order a deeper and more saving element.
However unworthy individuals may be, there is a soul of honour
begotten and bred in the order itself which is as salt to the people
and an enduring stimulant to its possessors; which creates a spirit of
honour and self-respect beneficial alike to themselves and to the com-
munity of which they are a part.
Of course such an order would require continual renovation from


the ranks of the people; but this is the same in England, where the
bulk of the peerage is of modern date, and where the aristocracy would
long since have fallen from their high estate, but for those large
infusions from the pith of the people which serve the double purpose
of giving new vigour to the order, and making it at the same time a
possession and a part of the people.
Personal distinctions conferred on the mountebanks of the day,
are, as contrasted with the foundation of a permanent order, but as
tinsel compared with gold: the one a bauble, the other a solid in-
heritance.
The maxim—“No taxation without representation” —may be con-
verted into an argument that the mother-country is justified in
withdrawing its segis from a colony which contributes nothing directly
in shape of revenue ; and in 1870 it was contended that to this theory
Mr. Goldwin Smith had made converts in high places; but what has
that maxim in common with the severance of colonists from the
fountain of honour, the Queen ? What has it to do with the conferring
of hereditary rank in all parts of her dominions ? Doubtless more
foresight would be needed in bestowing such honours than in granting
life-distinctions, and with reason ; for the t’.tle given to a temporarily
successful partisan may be found after a few months decorating the
portmanteau of a commercial traveller, or a detached gold-miner seek-
ing his fortune in another colony; nay, even a rebel in one part of
the empire may be singled out for ill-won distinction in another.
Every day which passes in the life of a colony makes it more and
more difficult to do what is right in the matter. William Charles
Wentworth, of whose far-seeing and creative mind his native land,
New South Wales, may well be proud, made a gallant attempt to
found such an order when, in 1853, he proposed the second reading of
a Bill to confer a Constitution on the colony, conformably to the
Report of a Select Committee of which he had been Chairman.
His proposal, sheltered by the great names of Pitt, Burke, and
Wilberforce, was that the Crown should have the option of annexing
to the titles of the first patentees a seat for life in the Upper House,
and that there should be conferred on the original patentees and their
descendants inheritors of their titles, a power to select a certain
number of their order, to form in conjunction with the original
patentees then living, the Upper House of Parliament: and he
“believed that a House framed on this principle, whilst it would be free
from the objections which have been urged against the House of Lords, on the
around of the hereditary right of legislation which they exercise, would lay
the foundation of an aristocracy which from their fortune, birth, leisure, and
the superior education which these advantages would superinduce, would soon
supply elements for the formation of an Upper House, modelled, as far as
circumstances will admit, upon the analogies of the British Constitution.”
“ Why,” he asked, “if titles are open to all at home, should they be denied
to the colonists? Why should such an institution as the House of Lords
(which is an integral part of the British Constitution) be shut out from us ?”
In vain did he point out that Washington himself had anxiously
contemplated the introduction of a titled order into the constitution


of the United States. The work of sowing the seeds of one part only
of the English Constitution had been too well done; the tide was too
strong even for his nervous arm to turn it, and New South Wales was
endowed with a nominee Upper House, so little stable in its essence
that the Minister of the day had the effrontery a few years afterwards
to endeavour to create a majority in it for a particular Bill by a
wholesale nomination of about a score of new members,* and succeeded
in gaining the Governor’s co-operation.
Of such flimsy materials do they build who hope for permanent
good from ephemeral personal nominations.
What the sagacity of Wentworth would have created in his native
land, had no existence in America; and though Washington and his best
compeers began their struggle by aiming to restore the status of 1763,
the tide of events and the disposition of the more ignorant, self-seek-
ing, and turbulent carried the day; and a great disaster to England
and America culminated in a separation embittered by hostile feelings
intensified by the part which the French had taken in furnishing arms,
men, and fleets to the brave colonists. (Our American cousins almost
worshipped Lafayette for his part in the drama, and have constantly
fraternized with France; but with strange inconsistency are highly
irate because some, a minority of, Englishmen, sympathized with the
Southern States in 1861, in spite of Proclamations from the Queen
that strict neutrality should be maintained by all British subjects.)
Whether, as Mr. Herman Merivale hints, the existence of a nobility
or hereditary order would have bound the colonists more closely to
the Crown; or whether, if so bound, the Empire could have been
saved while the people of England were so apathetic under their
blind watchmen, are now idle questions except so far as they may
furnish warnings for the future.
What then was future now is at our doors.
CHAPTER V.
When our blind watchmen had managed to sever America from
England and to leave an enduring crop of bitter remembrances upon
the field of their achievements, England might well appear to alarmists
as if the sun of her glory had sot for ever: and the portentous
aggrandisement of her old enemy France might well fill the hearts of
Englishmen with misgivings.
Perhaps no man was then capable of seeing that the success of
French intervention in America was about to sow dragons’ teeth in
* This notable attempt was only defeated because it happened to be made just
at the time when the five years’ term of existence of the House was closing, and
its President and other members left the Chamber without a quorum, and before
the next sitting-day the House had ceased to exist.


France, and to annihilate in gloom the cunning Court which, hoping
to destroy England, had imported into its own precincts the certain
means of destroying itself.
The would-be strong man had woven for himself the poisonous
shirt which was to eat into his own vitals.
The strong meat of the Anglo-Saxon race was not for French
stomachs. The watchwords of Hampden, Somers, and Washington
chimed well with the liberties of Englishmen and English colonists,
but shattered to atoms the political structure of French bureaucracy
and French privileges.
The whirligig of revenges came full circle upon them; and though
the genius of the genuine Napoleon effected an apparent diversion in
favour of a changed France, the old regime has never since been
instinct with life, and the imposture of a spurious Napoleon has had
its short day and left the ship of the French state rudderless.*
Fortunately England found ere long a fit successor to him who
championed her in 1763. Like his father, the younger Pitt denounced
the blind watchmen who had led the nation into the crime and
disgrace of the American war.
“ These ministers,” he said, “ will destroy the empire they were called upon
to save, before the indignation of a great and suffering people can fall upon their
heads in the punishment they deserve. I affirm the war to have been a most
accursed, wicked, barbarous, cruel, unnatural, unjust, and diabolical war.”
Within three years of his being called to the helm he looked
round for fresh colonizing ground for the nation, and the voyages of
Captain Cook seemed to point to the proper sphere. It may well be
that in spite of the warning of Bacon as to planting with criminals,
the reception of offenders was the main object intended to be secured.
And yet the great distance, and the difficulties of transit, together with
the absence of temptation for free settlers, may at the time have
seemed insurmountable obstacles to the formation of a free colony.
Then, as now, emigrants had their choice of Canada and the
United States, at even a more favourable disparity of cost than now
exists when set against the expense of a voyage to Australia.
It was determined to found a convict colony, and an Order in
Council was issued for the purpose in 1786.
Eleven ships were fitted out, and, after detentions in England and
a short delay at Botany Bay, there were landed safely on the 26th of
January, 1788, on the present site of Sydney, 1030 souls, of whom
nearly 700 were convicts.
It is not my intention to write a consecutive history, but rather,
from various sources, including many MSS., to give a picture of
some of the most startling incidents and pressing difficulties in the
career of the colony founded by Pitt; and some idea of the materials
he had to deal with in England, Scotland, and Ireland before he
shipped off to New South Wales the United Irishmen and the members
of the British Convention.
One fact is quite clear as to the early occupation ; viz. that the
* Written in Melbourne, January, 1872. No alteration needed in 1874.


Home Government had issued instructions under which the Governors
of New South Wales were bound to occupy distant and numerous
subordinate settlements, rather than allow any occupation by other
nations, more especially the French. From MSS. of Governor King
I have selected in a former work * sufficient instances to place
this matter beyond doubt, and the proofs need not be repeated
here.
No sooner had Governor Phillip established himself at Sydney
than he dispatched (14th February, 1788) Lieutenant King (who
became subsequently the third Governor of New South Wales) to
form a settlement at Norfolk Island. The detachment consisted
merely of Lieutenant King, a surgeon, a subaltern officer, and six
marines, with two freemen, and nine male and six female convicts.
The works of Hunter, of Collins, of Flinders, and of Mr. Samuel
Bennett, present a picture of the early vicissitudes of the colony; its
privations, its struggles, the further discoveries made by Bass and
Flinders, the personal rule thrown upon its Governors, and the manly
and dutiful way in which on the whole they acquitted themselves of
their task.
The problem of supplying labour to a new colony was not
attempted to be solved otherwise than by transportation of convicts :
and the assignment of these to employers able to maintain them,
diminished the expenses of the Government while it furnished labour
to any enterprising officers, many of whom, as was natural enough,
settled upon the soil.
There were, nevertheless, attempts to encourage, free settlement,
and thus to enlarge the boundaries of the colony and strengthen its
stakes.
As early as 1792 the English Government provided free passages
in the ‘Bellona’ for emigrants, gave them grants of land, and undertook
to furnish them with all agricultural implements, as well as to supply
them with two years’ provisions, and with the use of convict labour :
each labourer being also rationed for two years, and clothed for one.
Pitt’s ministry therefore is not open to the charge of having
neglected to give encouragement to free colonists.
Had the soil in the immediate vicinity of Sydney been of good
arable quality, the experiment might have had marked success. As it
was, the selection of a site for agricultural purposes within seven
miles of Sydney, could not be expected to result favourably; and after
some time, and much labour, the energies of free settlers were
diverted to the inexhaustible richness of the alluvial flats at the
Hawkesbury.
Had the first selections been made there, and had the success of
the settlers been notified in such a manner as to induce a large
following from their native land, New South Wales would have made
as much material progress in ten years, as it afterwards made in a
* The Discovery , Survey, and Settlement of Port Phillip. 1871. Williams and
Norgate, London.


quarter of a century; and the mischievous antipathy to the free
immigrant population which Governor Macquarie displayed in 1810
would have been precluded by the force of circumstances.
It is sufficient to have pointed out here that Pitt’s Government
made an early attempt to give a free character to the colony, and that
so far as the giving of land, and supplying convict labour could
stimulate immigration of free settlers, the Government adhered to that
attempt.
The enterprising sagacity of Captain John Macarthur might
have forced its way in spite of all obstacles, but it is due to the
Government to state that they did not abstain fx*om encouraging his
far-sighted schemes; for on learning from him some particulars of the
prospects of wool-growing in the new colony, they allowed him to
select five thousand acres of land wherever he might choose, and they
supplied him freely with convict labour.
The sagacity of Macarthur himself was displayed in his mode of
selecting his grant. He was in London at the time, and many men
so situated might have blundered wildly in choosing land at the
antipodes.
But he remembered that a few head of cattle which had strayed
from Sydney in the earliest days, had been found after several years
on the Nepean River, at a place called consequently “ the Cow-
pastures.” Rightly judging that cattle, “ with all the world before
them where to choose,” would settle down where the pasture was
sweet and the soil good, he selected their retreat, and the fine estate of
Camden does justice still to his choice.
Before the close of the century a French Chevalier —de Clambe—
obtained from the English Government a grant of land and convict
labour, for the purpose of introducing the arts of growing cocoa and
cotton. He was a Royalist refugee, and had been a colonel, but could
not find it in his heart to bear arms against his countrymen in La
Vendee or on the Rhine, and he carried his sorrows into the wilder-
ness, determined
“to create branches of commerce and exportation for the colony. I have
but this means left to acquit me of the sacred debt I owe a nation which
sheltered me in the hour of misfortune.”
But it was not destined that the population of New South Wales
should consist only of the chance units thus acquired. Troublous
times were in store. Frenchmen, drunk with a new enthusiasm
which they mistook for a love of liberty, were convulsed themselves,
and rabid for the convulsion of others.
“ The cankers of a calm world and a long peace ”
in England and Ireland were all too ready for the contagion, and it
was doomed that under the iron control of the master-mind of Pitt,
many of them should be shipped off to New South Wales to add to
the troubles of Governors.


If anyone will take the trouble to go to Edinburgh, he will find
on Calton Hill a monument with this inscription :
THE MEMORY OF
THOMAS MUIR
THOMAS FYSHE PALMER
WILLIAM SKIRYING
MAURICE MARGAROT
JOSEPH GERRALD.
ERECTED BY
THE FRIENDS OF PARLIAMENTARY REFORM
IN ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND
1844.”
Short quotations from speeches of Thomas Muir and William Skirving
are added to the foregoing.
Joseph Hume, the House of Commons advocate of retrenchment,
is said to have attended at the laying of the foundation with much
show. Lord Robertson, it appears, granted an interdict *to prevent
the erection of the monument; but on the 4th March, 1845, the
Court recalled the interdict.
Chance has thrown in my way a number of original MSS. about
one of these persons. All of them were transported to New South
Wales. Their trials are recorded as State Trials.
Gerald’s defence of himself cannot be read without admiration;
and no one who reads it will wonder at the statement of Fox, that
“ his elegant and useful attainments made him dear to the circles of
literature and taste or that Curran spoke of the “ genius, character,
and talents,” which in Gerald’s person were “ banished to a distant
barbarous soil.”
He died of long-existing consumption, after a short residence in
Sydney, where we are told that he and all of his companions who
chose to abstain from seditious practices were permitted to live at
ease, and amuse themselves with literary pursuits.
He had the consolation which he thus spoke of on his trial: —
“ To he torn a bleeding member from that country which we love, is
indeed, upon the first view, painful in the extreme ; but all things cease to be
painful when we are supported by the consciousness that we have done our
duty to our fellow-creatures; and a wise man, rising superior to all local
prejudices if asked for his country will turn his eyes from this dim spot
which men call earth, and will point like Anaxagoras to the heavens,”
Concerning Margaret, accident has thrown into my possession a
large quantity of original papers, including journals kept by himself,
which really make it a curiosity of colonization that such a man
should have been ever worshipped, and honoured with a share in a
monument in Scotland.
* Anderson’s History of Edinburgh.


By turns cringing and audacious to his enemies, and false and
fulsomely flattering to his friends, always restless and persevering
in mischief, ever scheming for favour, but soon distrusted by all
who came to know him, —it is indeed a marvel that a people not
usually deemed credulous should have christened him a “ Scottish
Martyr.”
Did it but know the truth, it might repeat with Caliban, —
“ What a thrice double ass
Was I to take this drunkard for a god,
And worship this dull fool! ”
Not content with canonizing him even, some worthy Scotchmen
have invented fables about him, and have published a grave narration
that his wife died of a broken heart singing about her Margarot;—
though I am able to show, under his own hand, that she sailed with
him, lived with him, made as much fuss on washing-days in Sydney
with him as any living partner could be expected to do, and foraged
for tea, sugar, wine, and other comforts, like an industrious housewife.
Briefly I will sketch his history, and then let him speak for himself.
When France was rent by the wildest passions of the Revolution,
there was a band of persons in England, and another in Scotland, so
enthusiastic as to hope that by fraternizing with Marat and Robes-
pierre, and by the help of French bayonets, they might bring about a
state of pure and perfect happiness in England.
As Marat’s recipe for accomplishing the Revolution was
“ Give me two hundred Naples bravoes armed each with a good dirk, and
a muff on the left arm for a shield : with them I will traverse France and
accomplish the Revolution,”
one cannot be surprised that Pitt thought proper to curb the British
Convention, to which Joseph Gerald and Maurice Margarot were
delegated by the London Corresponding Society.
Margarot called himself a London merchant. He had travelled
in France in the early years of the French Revolution, and two of
his New South Wales diaries, which are now in my hands, are kept in
French—partly so kept, I imagine, for his own amusement, or for
secrecy from his wife, for they do not contain more violent language
than his English notes, though they narrate very often the times of
his meetings with persons suspected of sedition. Of late days it has
been stated that the importance of the British Convention and the
London Corresponding Society was unduly magnified by Pitt and his
friends. It is easy to assert this now, but it must ever remain true
that Pitt had before him facts which no one now can see, and that in
all revolutions there is a turning-point, after which that which was
once contemptible becomes serious.
A verj short time before Marat exercised supreme control in
France, his very presence was shrunk from in the Convention, and a
member apologized for naming him. When he said he had “ a number
of enemies ” there, he was met by loud cries of “ All, all! ”
Shortly before Condorcet was hunted to death, he could afford to


speak of Robespierre as a man without an idea in his head ; and had
the British Convention thriven, it may be that Thomas Muir and
Joseph Gerald would have shared the fate of Yergniaud and Madame
Roland.
When Pitt was remonstrated with by a friend who thought in
1794 as his detractors think now, and was urged to become less
repressive, he answered that if he did England would see some
French scenes, adding, coolly, “ My head would be off in six months,
were I to resign,”
In an address from a London Secret Committee to the Executive
Directory of France, I find—•
“ United as we are, we now only wait with impatience to see the hero of
Italy and the brave veterans of the great nation.
“ Myriads will hail their arrival with shouts of joy ; they will soon finish
the glorious campaign! Tyranny will vanish from the face of the earth, and
crowned with laurel, the invincible army of France will return to its native
country there long to enjoy the well-earned praise of a grateful world. . . .
The holy obligation of brotherhood is received with enthusiasm; even in the
fleets and armies it makes some progress—disaffection prevails in both, and
united Britain burns to break her chains.”
How the “ disaffection,” and the “ brotherhood obligation ” could
both exist Mr. Margaret’s friends did not succeed in explaining so as
to overturn Pitt; and Pitt sent Margarot to Botany Bay.
This must have been a terrible blow to the fraternity in France,
one of whom (Lasource) had thus spoken of Pitt in the Convention :
“ The moment is not yet arrived in which may be seen at the bar of the
Revolutionary Tribunal that Orestes of the British Parliament, the madman
Burke, that insolent Lord Grenville, or that plotter Pitt. . . . Let these
conspirators against the human race know this and tremble. We have swords,
and we have men to wield them. They have misrepresented the independence
of the French nation. They have invariably represented us as robbers and can-
nibals. Soon shall they be laid prostrate before the statue of Liberty, from which
they shall rise only to mount the scaffold that awaits them, and to expiate by
their death the evils in which they have involved the human race.”
And how did Pitt, according to Carlyle, now behave ?
“As to Pitt, whoever hesitate, he, suspending his Habeas Corpus, sus-
pending his cash payments, stands inflexible; —spite of foreign reverses; spite
of domestic obstacles, of Scotch National Conventions and English Friends of
the People, whom he is obliged to arraign, to hang, or even to see acquitted,
with jubilee:—a lean inflexible man.”
The votes of the Convention that Pitt was the enemy of the
human race, that no French soldier should give quarter to an English-
man, and that neutral sailors found on board English vessels should
be put to death, do not seem to have disturbed Pitt.
When the French were guillotining daily several scores of French
men and women, they had a tannery at Meudon, and there they tanned
French human skins, “ such,” says Montgaillard, “ as seemed worth
flaying.” They made perruques of French hair, and leather of French


skins; —wkat would they have done to the Englishman Pitt if they
had caught him ?
Fouche, addressing the Committee of Safety in France, said: —
“ Let the Republic act as one great volcano pouring forth its destructive
lava upon this infamous island,”
But we must follow Margarot to Australia.
It seems that on the voyage he quarrelled with Muir, Palmer, and
Skirving, for a letter from them denouncing him will he found in the
23rd vol. of the State Trials. When Gerald subsequently arrived,
Margarot complained, in a letter to England, that—
“ He has fled from my habitation and the fraternal reception I gave him,
—to join others who may perhaps, in return for those good things he has
brought with him, encourage his failings, and feed his vanity with insidious
praise. He will soon feel the destructive effects.”
In a manuscript before me, Margarot writes :
“ Palmer, Muir, and Skirving brought letters of recommendation to the
chief officers in the colony ; why did they not insist upon a trial, why did they
not accuse me here ? Their friends were my foes, as I had, before I came on
shore, already quarrelled with Grosse ; why did the officers hush the matter
up ? Palmer says it is fit that I should know why he separates, but I am
to learn it only two years after, and that by means of the public papers; he
made people take affidavits against me, but never had me summoned nor gave
me any intelligence of it; he did not even pay me what he owed.”
In the same MS. I find :
“ Gerald broke open a letter directed to me, he took out of it a ten pound
note for which he never accounted.”
Apropos of the quarrel with Muir, Palmer and Skirving, I find a
loose memorandum in Margaret’s handwriting :
“ Had their accusation been just, would they not have informed me of
their making it, &c. They brought letters to every man in power here. The
consequence soon appeared; they bought farms and men, they became dealers
in land and in human flesh, they became inmates and intimates with every
one in office*—if they had any complaint this was the place to have it righted.
Justice, as it is called here, is very summary; but justice was not wanted—
here Pishe Palmer wanted the cash—at home the ruin of the Corresponding
Society was endeavoured by every means that could be devised : the firm was
Upton, Joyce, Palmer & Co.”
Margarot was wrong if he thought that Palmer and Skirving had
made no attempt to procure an investigation. I have their original
MS. petition praying for one, and it refutes not only Margaret’s but
many other statements.
Nothing has been more common than to inveigh against the
brutality of Pitt for herding Muir, Palmer, and their associates, with
felons.
* Margarot wrote “ intimates with their both jailers and turnkey,” but erased
these words, and substituted those in the text.
c 2


Mackenzie, in his Reminiscences of Glasgow , alluding to the
transportation of Muir in the same ship with a man whom he had
defended, but who was convicted of “ culpable homicide,” says :
“ Conceive for a moment this wretched prisoner and his amiable counsel
voyaging together and partaking of the same fare, and ultimately landing as
fellow-prisoners there! Is there a painter who can sketch this ? ”
Certainly a painter half as imaginative as Mackenzie might do much.
I now read in the grave pages of history that Muir and Palmer
“ were shipped off among common felons for Botany Bay.”
Yet under the hand of Palmer himself I find this statement ad-
dressed to the Governor of New South Wales, and dated 26th October,
1794;
“ For obvious reasons, your Petitioners did not wish to come out at the
expense of Government; they accordingly caused to be paid to the said Patrick
Campbell for their accommodation as cabin-passengers a sum of money greater
than that allowed by Government for those in the same ship, either in its
immediate employ, or who have come out as settlers.”
How easy it is to tell lies; and how many lies, from simple
reiteration, come to be believed!
Here were these political exiles received as cabin-passengers, and
provided with houses on landing; and Pitt has for more than half a
century been reviled for associating them with burglars.
The document signed by Palmer continues thus;—
“ Towards the conclusion of the month of May, a conspiracy of certain
convicts and soldiers to carry the ship into some port of France or America,
was said to have been discovered. Of this combination your Petitioners were
accused of being the contrivers, the instigators, and the leaders. They heard
this accusation with astonishment, with indignation, and with horror. Ob-
noxious to the ministry of Britain for their political sentiments, and for their
public conduct they undoubtedly are, but in the course of their respective
trials, the morality of their private character was acknowledged by their
official prosecutor. In the various discussions which their cases gave rise to
among the people of Britain and in both Houses of Parliament, their private
honour stood unsullied and unimpeached.
“ Political opinions are changeable. To the victims even of misguided
political opinion the feelings of men attach no moral turpitude. This accusation
of an accession to this pretended conspiracy involving in it crimes of every
kind, if founded in truth, must be attended with terrible consequences.
“ That punishment which the voice of the law may award, is what least
engages the attention of your Petitioners. In the train of conviction they
behold complete ruin of character, and that degradation which in their minds
infinitely surpasses the bitterness of death; —degradation to the rank of those
unhappy objects of moral guilt, whom they are accused of having attempted
to render the instruments of their plot.
“ There can be no compromise between infamy and honour. Their
characters must either be completely blasted, or completely vindicated.
“ Justice, speedy, public and substantial justice is that prayer which to you,
your Petitioners prefer in the deepest earnestness of their souls. Let their trial
immediately proceed.”


This Petition is signed by Thomas Fyshe Palmer and W. Skirving.
What a picture does their evident earnestness give to us, by impli-
cation, of the roguery of Margarot.
His own journals give ample proof that he thirsted for the moment
when French bayonets should deal out death and destruction among
the homes of England, and that a conspiracy to take the ship into a
French or American port could have found no warmer abettor than
himself. It seems that when the vigilance of the authorities was
aroused, Margarot endeavoured to throw suspicion on Palmer and
Skirving.
There is in the British Museum c A Narrative of the Sufferings of
T. F. Palmer and W. Skirving during a Voyage to New South Wales,
1794, by the Eev. T. F. Palmer, late of Queen’s College, Cambridge,’
1797.
In a preface by J. Joyce, it is therein stated that Skirving and
Palmer manifested
“anxiety to bring the matter before the Governor of New South Wales;
failing in that, the same concern for their reputation induced them to hope
that their friends might obtain for them a hearing in Westminster Hall ;
disappointed in this also, their last and only resource is by means of the press
to state a simple relation of the facts.”
A letter from Muir, Palmer, and Skirving (p. xi) states:—
“ It is not their intention in this place to give a detailed account of their
personal sufferings. But that sacred regard to justice which they owe to their
country—that inviolable honour attached to their common situation—call on
them to declare that Mr. Margarot was an accessary to the wrongs they have
suffered, was even an instigator of their accusation, and acted in complete
collusion with the master of the transport.
“ Let not Mr. Margarot therefore complain of caprice in the subscribers.
Let him not presume to expect to pollute the holy and immortal cause of
liberty, by the association of his name with those of its purest defenders. He
knows well, and it is meet that the world at large should know, that upon the
justest grounds he stands a man rejected and expelled from our society .”
Yet, in spite of these statements and of tbeir publication in
London, Joseph Hume and others endeavoured to glorify Palmer and
Margarot with a common memorial on Calton Hill.
The following extracts from Palmer’s Narrative are significant:—
(P. 18) —“ My friend Mr. Ellis, who by the leave of the ministry went out
as a free settler, finding when he came on board that all the free settlers had a
cabin passage paid for * by Government, made application for same to the
Under Secretary of State, but to no purpose. I staid to the last before I paid
Campbell for Mr. Ellis’s passage, in hopes that ministry would. . . . We paid
Campbell forty pounds for our passage, and our table and liquor were provided
by him.”
* As Mr. Ellis was permitted to accompany Palmer by special favour, it was
rather unreasonable to expect that the Government would also pay the cost of his
passage.


(P. 20) —“ On Friday, 31st May, 1794, Captain Campbell pretended to
have discovered a dangerous and bloody plot among the soldiers to excite a
mutiny and to murder himself with the principal officers. . . . Mr. Margaret
had almost from the beginning been paying his court to Campbell, and from
the time of this pretended discovery unblushingly appeared as his counsellor,
friend, and confidant. Whenever he spoke it was in confidential whispers.”
(P. 30) —“ We demanded a speedy and rigorous trial. ~. We demanded
a copy of the warrant of our commitment, but this was refused. . . . Mr. Skir-
ving and I were committed to close custody ; my own cabin was taken away
from me and given to James Ellis, so that at last Campbell paid him at my
expense.”
(P. 33) —“I am sorry to say, but I think myself obliged in justice that
the world may no longer be imposed upon by an adventurer, that Mr. Margaret
enlisted himself into Campbell’s counsels, and was the determined foe ot
Skirving and me. . . . He took every occasion to speak against me and Mr.
Skirving and of our fate, which he was sure, he said, would be a halter. . . ,
Justice compels me also to say that Mr. Muir’s behaviour was the reverse of
Margaret’s ; at the time of my imprisonment we were not on the best terms,
but "the moment he discovered the measures taken by Campbell, his resent-
ment was forgotten; he sent me word that he would join heart and hand
with me in the vindication of my innocence and in bringing my oppressors to
justice.”
(P. 38)—“ I told Page that at the time that Draper lived in the same
part of the ship with myself, i had lost ten guineas out of my trunk, and that
I greatly suspected Draper, who it now appeared had not been suspected
without some foundation.”
At page 55 Palmer presents the reply which the Acting Governor
made to his application (above quoted) for trial:
g IR “ Sydney, 26th October, 1794.
“ The recommendations which you have brought to several gentlemen
of the colony will insure you every indulgence that in your unfortunate
situation can be consistently granted, but as it is absolutely requisite for the
good order and tranquillity of this place that you avoid on all occasions a
recital of those politics which have produced to you the miseries a man ot
your feeling and abilities must at this time undergo, I hope I need not say
more than that it is incumbent on me to be watchful over your conduct in
this particular. Circumstanced as I am, you may readily conceive that I shall
be easily alarmed, and as your comfort in the colony entirely depends on your
own conduct, 1 hope you will never give me cause to alter my present
intention towards you. The letter you have just sent I cannot but consider
as a very inauspicious beginning. The money you state to have paid to
Captain Campbell in addition to the usual allowance for transporting persons
to this country, cannot at all alter the conditions of your banishment. Your-
self and your services are assigned to my care with the other convicts sent out
for the purpose of cultivating the country, and it is but fair I should inform
you that you are no otherwise particularized to me, than as much as has been
thought necessary to excite my vigilance.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Mr. T. F. Palmer, “ Francis Grose.
“ * Surprise ’ Transport.”
(P. 56) —“Things now began to take a very different turn; there was
no resisting the weight of evidence contained in my letters of recommenda-


tion. ... I was released from confinement by the Governor’s orders, and
soon after received a visit from an officer sent by him with the most obliging
expressions, and had liberty to go on shore as often as I liked till a house
could be provided for me.”
(P. 57) —“All idea of our trial was soon given up. We had houses
appointed to us, contiguous to each other, and myself, Skirving, and Mr. Muir
have no cause * to complain of any want of civility, or attention.”
Muir escaped in an American vessel, the ‘ Otter.’ It is stated with
some glee by Mackenzie, in his Reminiscences of Glasgow , that the
American Government dispatched the £ Otter ’
“ for the purpose of proceeding direct to Sydney for the relief of Thomas Muir
in particular, and his fellow-compatriots, it they could be found.”
(It is to be hoped that this is a mistake of Mackenzie’s, for it is
surely not an honourable employment for a friendly power to devote
its subjects to kidnapping prisoners, of whatever degree.) But voyages
were in 1796 more tedious and uncertain than in 1870.
The £ Otter ’ was driven on some rocks near Nootka Sound, and all
on board except Muir and two sailors were lost. (I now quote Mr.
Mackenzie, and cannot vouch for his accuracy.)
Muir was captured by savages, but kindly treated; he escaped
from them and wandered thousands of miles, through the present
California, Mexico, and Guatemala, till he reached Panama, (Mackenzie
says nothing about the fate of the two sailors.) The Governor of
Panama had him escorted across the isthmus and sent to Vera Cruz.
No vessel being bound thence to New York, Muir was sent to
Havannah.
The Governor there thought it his duty to send him to Spain in a
Spanish frigate bound for Cadiz, with a consort. They sighted Cadiz
on the 26th April, 1797, but were at the same moment spied by two
English frigates, the £ Emerald ’ and £ Irresistible,’ and after two hours’
severe fighting, both the Spanish frigates were captured. Muir
fought for the Spaniards, and was wounded, but was humanely sent
on shore (although recognized), to be treated as one of the Spanish
wounded. One of the charges against Muir before the Scotch
Justiciary was the circulation of Paine’s works : this charge he evaded
rather than disproved, and the Loi’d Justice Clerk told the jury that
the circulation of sedition was culpable, although the book circulated
had not legally been pronounced seditious. At Muir’s trial, also,
certificates were produced showing that he was an United Irishman,
and a French citizen, domiciled at Paris in 1792.
The garrulous Mackenzie, however, shows that Muir had peculiar
* This passage, to which he could have easy access, ought to have qualified
Mr. Mackenzie’s statements in his Reminiscences of Glasgow, and shows how
untrustworthy Ids book is on these points.
Palmer’s Narrative concludes with (in Appendix) depositions in his favour by
James Thompson, Surgeon of the ‘Surprise,’ William Patullo, Ensign in the
N.S. Wales Corps, and four other persons.


relations with Paine ; for he gives ns a letter which Muir wrote from
Cadiz to Paine, in the following endearing terms: —
“ Dear Friend, “ August, 1797.
“ Since the memorable evening when I took leave of you at St. Cloud
ray melancholy and agitated life has been a continued series of extraordinary
events. . . . Remember me most affectionately to all my friends who are
the friends of liberty and mankind.
“ Yours ever,
“ Thomas Muir.”
In September, 1797, he was invited to Paris; reached Bordeaux
in December; attended a banquet there, where five hundred persons
were presided over by the Maire ; was toasted as “ the adopted citizen
of France”; reached Paris in February, 1798, and saluted the citizen
Directors most lovingly.
There he busied himself with the darling object of his life, hating
—not wisely but too well —the English Government.
Wolfe Tone’s memoirs inform us that the Irish exile Napper
Tandy, when caballing in Paris against Tone and others, was aided by
Muir, who
“ inserted two or three very foolish articles relating to the United Irishmen in
the Paris papers,”
—that Tone and others consequently waited on Muir to thank him for
his intentions, but to request him not to meddle with their business
in his publications.
“ But of all the vain, obstinate blockheads I ever met,” says Tone, “ I never
saw his equal. I could scarcely conceive such a degree of self-sufficiency to
exist. He told us roundly that he knew as much of our countiy as we
did, &c.”
Neither of these vain men lived long to quarrel together. Muir
died at Chantilly in the same year, and Tone after his abortive descent
on his native land committed suicide in prison, in order to defeat,
as he supposed, the course of the law.
In pitying such men —and miserable indeed they are—the world
is too apt to forget the miseries they entail upon thousands whom
their schemes have distracted or brought to ruin. Scotland has been
more fortunate than Ireland; but how many hundreds of thousands
have been tortured throughout their lives by the plots of Tone
and others in 1798, and of their successors in the middle of this
century !
It appears that Muir, Gerald, Skirving, and Palmer did not
conduct themselves so as to cause any apprehension in the minds of
the authorities. Palmer wrote to England, “We have no cause to
complain of any want of civility or attention.”
Palmer having been transported for seven years, arranged for
the purchase of a ship in which to return at the end of that time.
He sailed from Port Jackson in January, 1800. The young man,


Ellis, who had been permitted to accompany him in his exile, to be
considered as a free settler, and to engage in business in Sydney, still
clung to his fortunes, and became part owner of the ship they were to
return in ; Palmer being principal owner.
This touching friendship was not fated to see a successful end to
the voyage. Going to New Zealand for timber to take to the Cape of
Good Hope, they spent twenty-six weeks and all their stores: steered
for provisions to Tongataboo, where native wars frustrated their plans :
—thence went to the Eeejees, and obtained suppliesgoing to Goraa
they ran their crazy vessel on a reef, but with the assistance of the
natives, repaired her: thence they sailed, hoping to reach China, but,
their provisions failing, and their ship leaking, they took refuge in
Guam, where, on the 10th January, 1801 (a year after their leaving
Sydney), the Spanish Governor made them prisoners of war, declining
to give supplies to the enemies of his country. He treated them
with personal courtesy, however, and Palmer and his five friends re-
sided with the Governor. But Palmer became ill, and lingered only
till June, 1802, when he died without revisiting his native land.
Gerald, as I have mentioned, died of consumption in Sydney, and
Skirving soon followed him, suffering from dysentery ; though Collins
thinks he was also broken-hearted.
“ Remittances he received none: he contracted some little debts, and found
himself neglected by that party for whom he had sacrificed the dearest con-
nections in life, a wife and family; and finally yielded to the pressure of this
accumulated weight. Among us he was a pious, honest, worthy character. In
this settlement his political principles never manifested themselves, but all
his solicitude seemed to be to evince himself the friend of human nature.
Jlequicscat in pace”
Such an enthusiast deserves to be honoured; but hardly in the
same memorial with Margarot, whose character I must now sketch
with the aid of his own manuscripts.
We have seen that he trumped up a charge against his fellow-
exiles on the voyage: and I find in his notes the following remark
made (and I suspect falsely made) soon after reaching Sydney;—
“ Cruelty . —The severest punishment inflicted on board the ‘Surprise’
consisted of twenty-four lashes; but we had not been long on shore, before
Palmer and his man Ellis got drunk together, fell asleep, and were
robbed ; the thieves, when taken, had (at his suit) each 200 lashes as a part
of their punishment, and one of them was amongst the subscribers of the
affidavits published by Joyce.”
The animus of this passage may be inferred from the designation
of Mr. Ellis, as Palmer’s “ man ”; though he was specially allowed by
the Secretary of State (Dundas) to go out at his own charge as a free
settler (while Palmer, of course, was a prisoner), and though Ellis
was established in Sydney as brewer and manufacturer of vinegar,
salt, soap, and other articles.
Bearing in mind Margaret’s attempted treachery to his com-
panions, let us now see how he endeavoured to impose upon, or ingra-


tiate himself with, the authorities when he reached Sydney. On the
29th October, 1794, he thus addressed Governor Hunter:—
“ May it please Your Honour,
“ Brought a prisoner to this colony in consequence of a sentence of
transportation passed against me by the Lord Justice Clerk of the High Court
of Justiciary in Scotland, and approved by His Britannick Majesty, I, with all
respect to those Officers who here act in his name, claim the restoration of my
freedom—freedom the common birthright of Britons, and to which I feel myself
entitled, inasmuch as I conceive my sentence to be fulfilled on my arrival here
—that sentence being transportation and not slavery—the latter unknown to
our laws and directly contrary to the British Constitution as it was established
at the Eevolution of 1688, which placed the present family on the throne for
the immediate purpose of more effectually protecting British freedom. It
would therefore not be doing justice to my countrymen, while cheerfully
undergoing a long exile for their sakes, were I silently to suffer in my own
person so great a violation of their charters.
“ Unused to the more refined language of a courtier, I must entreat Your
Honour not to be offended at the plain manner in which I here express myself
—this case applies not to me alone but to every Briton, for if the executive
power can make one slave it can make all so,
“ Your Honour will I hope perceive the absolute necessity I am under of
making such my constitutional demand—and as Lieutenant-Governor of this
colony you will I trust officially and publickly restore to me my freedom.
“ Should it notwithstanding prove otherways, I must take the liberty,
whatever personal danger may impend, to enter a formal protest against a
refusal, which I apprehend may be supported, but am certain cannot be
justified by those to whom the executive power has been committed.
“ With the greatest respect I remain,
“ Your Honour’s most obedient humble servant,
“Maurice Margarot.”
This argument might appear plausible, but as it was opposed to
the Governor’s instructions, and as it had been previously brought
forward in the House of Commons and set aside as untenable,
Governor Hunter of course could pay no attention to it. I must pass
over a few years, during which Margaret gave as much trouble as he
could, and made entries in his journals of false and defamatory
nature against Governor Hunter; whom however he professes to
eulogize in the following letter to the new Governor on his arrival
in 1800
u g IR “ Sydney, 12>th May, 1800.
“ Hazardous as is this step, my duty to society urges me to take it
and to confide in your discretion—otherwise delicacy towards his Excellency
Governor Hunter, whose most sincere well-wisher I am, would prevent my
paying my respects to his successor, until 1 by his departure and by the intro-
duction of Mr, Commissary Palmer I could do so more conformably to rules
and forms.
“ As I am much confined by sickness, unless you are possessed of any
private orders of ministry relative to me and require my attendance to impart
them, there is little chance of my having the good fortune to meet with an
opportunity of conversing with you. Yet, if you feel yourself inclined to give
birth to any accident which may occasion you at any time to enter my habita-
tion, you shall find that an hour will not be there spent unprofitably, and that


I can throw light on several of the transactions of this colony which may not
perhaps have reached you in the shape they will then assume.
“ I moreover will then submit to your perusal several papers, the contents
of which it is important you should be early acquainted with.
“ I subscribe myself with great respect, Sir,
“ Your most obedient humble servant,
“ Lieutenant-Governor King.” “ Maurice Margarot.
With a view to compress this narrative within reasonable compass,
I must here pass over much of Margaret’s career in order to show his
final dealings with Governors.
After the United Irish rising in 1804 in New South Wales, and
the consequent seizure of Margaret’s papers, it appears, from a copy of
a despatch to the Secretary of State (holograph in Governor King’s
writing, July, 1805), that Governor King sent certain “incendiaries”
from Sydney for the “ preservation of public tranquillity and
frustrating the diabolical schemes of the evil-disposed.”
. . “ suffering those well-known perturbators to remain longer together
would be encouraging their acts, which myself and the colony are so well-
convinced they are capable of.” . . . “ I have at length felt it a duty I owe to
the peace and tranquillity of this colony to yield to the frequent importunities
of the magistracy and the colony at large to rid this part ot it of those incen-
diaries (who have for some years past been employed in promoting discord and
fomenting litigations) by sending them to the different settlements and dividing
them.”
Maurice Margarot, Sir Henry Brown Hayes (transported for
abduction in 1801), and two others are specially described. Of the
first he says:—
“ I have stated the circumstances of my directing Margaret’s papers to
be seized—the contents are too scurrilous and seditious to detail; but if the
most unjust accusations against various people, none of which he could in the
smallest degree substantiate when called on publicly to do so —the most daring
assertions and insinuations against His Majesty’s ministers —his avowal ol the
convicts being justified in rising,” &c. &c.
Margarot being shipped off for Port Dalrymple in H.M.S. £ Buffalo,’
distinguished himself while that vessel was at Hobart Town in the
manner thus described by Governor Collins (who so foolishly evacuated
Port Phillip in 1803).
« g lß} “ Hobart Town, Y.D.L., 14 th December, 1805.
“ I conceive it my duty to lay before you the following particulars
respecting Maurice Margarot, a person who by being on board H.M.S. ‘ Buffalo ’
had an opportunity by her touching here on her way to Port Dalrymple of
exercising that incorrigible propensity in his disposition, which led him to
contemn the constituted authorities of whatever government he might be
placed under. .
“ Upon the morning after his arrival within the limits of this settlement,
I received a letter from him of which the inclosed is a copy, which I had
scarcely perused, before his being at my door was announced. He was of


course denied admittance, and the inclosed answer to his letter was sent
him.
“ I designed to have requested Captain Houston not to suffer him again
to come on shore, hut I perceived that he prudently kept himself on board.
From this conduct I imagined and hoped he had seen his error, but I was
mistaken; for the day after the departure of the * Buffalo,’ the Rev. Mr. Knop-
wood waited upon me with the inclosed copy of a letter from this man, the
which had been cautiously sent to his house after the ship had sailed. Upon
referring to my servant Hopkins for the subject of the conversation which
passed between him and Margaret, I obtained the inclosed particulars which
lie committed to writing, and which at once determined me to lay the whole
before your Excellency.
“ Had he been within my reach I would have endeavoured to convince
him that while waiting for the arrival of the expected Commissioners, there
were other people who would ‘ hear with attention, interrogate with wisdom,
and decide according to justice.’ I know that the wretch is fallen, and would
not have pursued him had his insolence respected myself alone; yet, however
low and contemptible he may be, I think his presumption deserving chastise-
ment when it attacks the person immediately representing the sovereign
authority in this part of its dominions.
“ I have, &c.,
“ David Collins.”
“ His Excellency Governor Collins.
« g lß> “ H.M.S. ‘ Buffalo,’ 6th November, 1805.
“ Linquenda Tellus, et Domus, et placens Uxor.
“ Chance has somewhat blunted the asperity of the shafts of malice by
sending me first to a place where you command. Sir H. B. Hayes and myself
uninclined to receive indulgences, or what might be deemed such on board,
anxiously wish to receive your commands to repair on shore, and pay you our
respects: much we are in hopes of hearing from your mouth, and we may
perhaps also be able to throw in our mite of information. The being who
accompanied you in the * Britannia ’ to England you well know, whatever
of vulgarity or Brutality he then exhibited, would now comparatively pass for
gentlemanlike behaviour —in one thing only he resembles Cfesar —he has
passed the Rubicon; but still more resembling Macbeth —his leaf is on the
sear.
“ Believe me
“ Your Excellency’s most obedient humble servant,
“Maurice Margarot.”
To this Governor Collins replied on the same day,—6 th November.
“ Government House, Hobart Town,
“ 6th November, 1805.
“ Lieutenant-Governor Collins was very much surprised at the presumption
and audacity which could dictate the contents of a letter he received this day,
bearing the signature of Maurice Margarot, such letter being an infamous
libel on the character of the Governor-in-Chief of these settlements. The
Lieutenant-Governor feels himself insulted by Maurice Margaret’s conceiving
for an instant that such a liberty could be taken with him —a liberty that his
former acquaintance with the Lieutenant-Governor does not warrant. He
may be smarting under a rigour that his conduct may have justly brought


upon himself; but the Lieutenant-Governor hopes Maurice Margaret will not,
by his conduct while in this port, compel him to adopt measures which as a
public officer he shall ever feel it his duty to enforce.”
The Governor’s servant Hopkins’ statement was to the effect
that he
“ went on board with a present from the Governor to the New Zealand
Chief. Maurice Margaret called me to his berth. He began by saying :
* I did not think Governor Collins would have served me in the manner he did,
being old acquaintance so long. I could tell Governor Collins more than he
knows, or ever will know, but it is now done away with. Governor Collins
forgets himself. lam sorry to say they have tight hold of him at Sydney, as
well as his officers here, and he is obliged to humble himself to Governor King
—he has forfeited his word —has be not got a sentinel at his door ? Your master
ought to have taken us both in his arms (meaning Sir Henry B. Hayes and
himself) and treated us as his bosom friends, then he might have defied any-
one, —but now he is lost, and he is got hold of. lam Governor King’s pro-
secutor, and that he knows well; he sends me about in this manner that
I may be drowned or lose my life, but lam a bit of good stuff. When the
Commissioners come I shall be sent for; they will hear me, and soon see into
the conduct of the Governor. I have written home to England, laying every-
thing before them, saying the salary is too little, as the Governor cannot live
without selling spirits. I have a letter from the Commissioners saying that a
Governor is coming out with a salary of 3000 Z. per annum, through my repre-
sentations ; nothing has passed unnoticed by me; though lam sent away, my
wife is left behind. Governor King will as sure be hanged as ever Governor
Wall was.”
Margaret’s Parthian shot delivered by Mr. Knopwood was as
follows:
u g IB “ Buffalo, 13th November, 1805,
“ Take your servant to task ; let him recount to you the conversation
that took place between us this day. (I do not mean that it should serve as
answer to your contemptuous note) the one is couched in the language of
friendship, the other must convey the decisions of a Government not any
longer to be trifled with. Commissioners are hourly expected; they will hear
with attention, interrogate with wisdom, and decide according to justice.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your humble servant,
“Lieutenant-Governor Collins.” “Maurice Margarot.
When these papers reached Governor King, who was, albeit per-
sonally temperate in his habits, most irascible though soon appeased,
he referred them at once to the Judge Advocate and the Magistrates,
informing them that,
“ although a thorough sense of the rectitude of my conduct in every point
connected with the advancement of His Majesty’s service and the real welfare
and prosperity of this territory and its inhabitants, together with the due
support of the high situation I have the honour to hold, might operate with
me as a sufficient reason to act according to the dictates of a mind convinced
of its own integrity, yet in the present case, as in most others of moment, I have
considered it necessary to require your advice. . . . The documents I have
this morning (23rd January, 1806) received from Lieutenant-Governor
Collins. . . . The incendiary character of the writer of those documents is


too well known to you and this colony at large to require any notice being
taken of such libellous and infamous papers, but as they have been trans-
mitted officially to me, it becomes my duty to request your opinion and
advice how far it appears to you it would be proper to enter into a public
justification from the infamous insinuation of M. Margaret, contained in the
paper . . . ‘ the Governor cannot live without selling spirits.’ I should not
have imposed this request on you was I not conscious that no transaction of
that kind has ever taken place under this roof, excepting in occasionally
exchanging a part of the proportion of spirits I have drawn in common with
the other officers for domestic uses, with settlers for fowls and other produce
of their farms, excepting grain, &c.
“ Philip Gidley King.”
On the same day the Judge Advocate and Major Johnston,
Ecv, S. Marsden and Thomas Jamison, John Harris, and John
Houstoun, Esquires, reported to the incensed Governor that they were
unanimously of opinion that it
“ would be derogatory to the high office Your Excellency holds to enter into
any justification whatever on allegations coming from a man of Maurice
Margaret’s infamous conduct and principles ; at the same time we think he
has forfeited every pretension to the smallest indulgence. We beg leave to
refer Your Excellency to our opinions formerly given on Maurice Margarot’s
conduct. Maurice Margarot’s behaviour of this day when before the Bench
being so highly insolent and contemptuous, they beg leave to recommend to
His Excellency that he should be put to hard labour.”
This last part of the recommendations of the magistrates it seems
was not carried out in consequence of Margarot’s physical state, for
the Governor thus wrote to Lieutenant-Governor Collins:—
“ Was not this perturbator’s character well known, I might enter into
some remarks on the subject of these libellous attacks and the mischiefs he
has attempted and partly effected in this colony. As his body cannot bear
the punishment he has so often merited, and the contagious principles he
professes and disseminates are of so destructive a tendency, I have sent him to
the settlement at Newcastle to ruminate on his infamous conduct, if he is
capable of entertaining any thoughts excepting those of anarchy and assassi-
nation.”
The letter which accompanied Margarot to Newcastle is cha-
racteristic of the troubles and business of the time :
“ Sir, “ Sydney, 3rd February, 1806.
“ The Governor received your letters containing your request to come
to Sydney to transact your private business, which he would not have had any
objection to at this time, had it not been found necessary to despatch the
‘ Resource ’ with Maurice Margarot, who is well known to you as a troublesome
character. The Governor requests you will keep a watchful eye over him,
and prevent his having any correspondence or conversation with the soldiers,
which you will also intimate to the serjeant.
“ Should he continue peaceable, you will of course let him remain so; but
should he be in any manner refractory, His Excellency desires you will
immediately check it, and if of that nature as to deserve punishment, you will
cause it to be inflicted as far as twenty-five lashes, and work him at public
labour the same as the other convicts. As soon as the settlement can in your


opinion be left with safety, the Governor has no objection to your coming to
Sydney, but wishes it to be by the ‘ Resource,’ which vessel will be sent
immediately after her return from Hawkesbury. Brady is returned, and if his
connections with the storekeeper are of an improper nature, the Governor
desires you to separate them and order him to work in one of the gangs. The
Governor wishes you to send up all the paint, oil, turpentine, and tar you
have. Raby has represented that some of the sawyers have in their own time
procured him about 1000 feet of plank of particular dimensions, which will be
of great service to him in constructing his vessel. His Excellency, supposing
this transaction to be correct, has no objection to its being sent up, upon
paying the established duty, provided you concur therein.
“ I am, Sir,
“ G. Blaxcell,
“Charles Throshy, Esq., “Secretary,
“ Newcastle.”
Nothing further of special interest with reference to Margaret is
contained in the Governor’s MSS. in my hands. King ceased to reign
in August of the same year in which the foregoing letter was written,
and Margaret’s term of sentence expired a short time afterwards. His
return to England is thus mentioned in the 23rd vol. of the State
Trials :
“ Maurice Margarot, who appears to have conducted himself throughout
with the most abandoned and shameless profligacy, was the only one of these
convicts who returned to Great Britain. ... It appears that he remained in
New South Wales until the year 1810, and that the expense attending his
return from that colony to London amounted within a few shillings to 450 1.
This worthless man died soon after (in 1815) while a subscription was raising
for his relief.”
So speaks the editor of the State Trials in 1817. Margarot, how-
ever, was not idle after his return to England. In 1812 he managed
to appear as a witness before a Committee of the House of Commons.
There, as usual, he made the most unblushing statements, amongst
which truth, if found, is but a fortunate exception.
In 1813 he seems to have become a begging-letter writer.
In the same month (January, 1794) in which Margarot had been
tried in Edinburgh, Archibald Hamilton Rowan was tried in Ireland,
having Curran for his counsel.
In the seething caldron of Jacobin elements, Rowan had become
acquainted in 1793 with Margarot. Indeed, in 1793, when a letter of
Rowan’s was produced at Muir’s trial, and elicited some severe com-
ments from the Lord Advocate, Rowan posted over to Scotland to seek
satisfaction like a gallant Irishman, and no doubt saw in Edinburgh
some of Muir’s friends. Rowan, in spite of Curran’s eloquence, was
convicted and imprisoned. He escaped to France and saw Robespierre.
He saw also streams welling through the street from the wounds of
the victims of the guillotine, and found himself standing in a pool of
human blood.
He shrunk from fellowship with the butchers whom Thomas Muir
took to his arms. He escaped to America, whither his wife transmitted
money. The perils of his own voyage made him unwilling that his


wife should run equal risk; but his health suffered from his exile
from country and friends.
His voyage to Denmark was planned in order that he might meet
his wife, Lord Oastlereagh informing her that
“in consequence of the favourable report of Mr, ffowan’s conduct in
America, he would be secured, so far as His Majesty’s Government was con-
cerned, in the refuge which may be granted him in Denmark or elsewhere, so
long as he demeaned himself in such a manner as not to give offence.”
In 1800 he joined his wife in Altona. In 1802 he petitioned the
King in moving terms, which showed that on reflection he preferred
the British Constitution to the wild horrors of which he had been a
witness in France.
Eventually, after legal delays, he was pardoned and restored, and
after living an estimable life, died at the ripe age of eighty-three, in
1834. When he was restored to his family and possessions, he had
said,
“ Were I to be insensible of this clemency, I should indeed be an unworthy
man. All are liable to error. The consequences have taught me deeply to
regret the violences I then pursued.”
This was the amiable man whom Margarot, whose Jacobin malig-
nity knew no abatement, thought it decent in 1813 to remind of their
meeting in 1793, informing him at the same time that he had returned
to England
“ with principles unchanged, a ministerial victim, pinned down to penury in
a place where he can do no good.”
He asked
“ the temporary assistance of 400/., as a chrysalis warmed by the heat of
a genial sun receives therefrom animation, so that assistance will afford new
life, and without producing a butterfly, will nevertheless give me wings.”
Eowan sent him 100/., and Margarot condescended to acknowledge
to his benefactor
“ that sum will enable me, if not to soar, at least to make my way in a more
humble manner, somewhat like an ostrich.”
I subjoin some extracts from Margaret’s diaries which suffice to
show what an ignorant and self-sufficient impostor was able to foist
himself on enthusiastic Scotchmen as a regenerator of their social and
political condition. But without the aid of these papers the volume
of State Trials published in 1817 ought to have saved Edinburgh from
the disgrace of having his name engraved on a public monument laid
with public honours in 1844, and celebrated by a dinner at which the
Right Honourable the Lord Provost of Edinburgh supported the
Chairman, Joseph Hume.
The extracts fiom the diaries, coupled with some of Governor
King’s MSS., will give some idea of the course of events in New South
Wales, and of the difficulties which a Governor encountered—with a
large convict population, a French war, apprehensions of risings


amongst the United Irishmen, and a fear lest the French should
occupy some of the South Land which Pitt had marked out for
England.
1801.
Jan. 17. —King la nnit nous allarma; je lui parlai—“ The moon is but four
days old.” Vide Articles of War.
25. —Le vaisseau de Boston mit h la voile—le soir il en apparut un
autre.
26. —Le vaisseau en question cause d’allarme, mais n’entre point.
27. —Le vaisseau continue sur les cotes.
28. —II a disparu.
29. —Les conjectures varient.
Feb. 4.—L’Americain est parti. McCarthy, &c. &c., cherchant k echapper
on dte pris, ramcnfe, mis en prison, et aux fers! ! ! *
14.—Tout le jour il se comporta en enrage.
20. —Rien de nouveau—point de cannons tires.f
March 1. —Mr. Barnes dina avec nous, et nous rapporta une conversation qui
eut hier dans I’Eglise an lieu de sermon par cette conversation
nous avons sujet de croire quo la Revolution est achevde en
Angleterre, et que ces messieurs en sont trfcs persuades.
8. —Tunicam novam imposui—ma petite montra semences de jalousie.
9. —le gouverneur s’enferma pour dcrire.
14.—Brady revint.
April 12. —Brady confirma la bataille decisive en Irlande.
14.—les rapports multiplies et varies, mais toujours favorables.
May 9. —La courte ration commenca.
19. —Palmer (Commissariat Officer) m’envoya sept livres de beurre et
quatre et demi gallons de Rum ; Smith m’envoya demander une
Bde Rum! ! !
23.—King raya mon dpouse de la ration ! ! !
25. —Un vaisseau apparut—King s’en fut!
27. —Le vaisseau ‘ the Greenwich’ est entrd—porte la nouvelle que les
Russes ont extermines la marine Anglaise.
28. —Les nouvellcs se confirment —King revint.
The Governor does not seem to have been dismayed by the reports
from Ireland, for Margarot writes on
June 4_ —Grande rejouissance, Union avec Irlande proclamee, &c.
July 21—Semper idem King revint de Parramatta.
* I find, amongst Governor King’s MSS., petitions from McCarthy, one of
which (4th Feb., 1801) says:—“ When the American captain made me the offer
of taking me away, the idea of my family at that time so forceably occurred to my
mind that I thought it would be even criminal in me to refuse seizing the oppor-
tunity. If your Excellency will look over this imprudent step of mine, I will to
the hour of my death entertain the most grateful sense of your Excellency’s good-
ness, and shall ever pray for your Excellency’s happiness.”
On this the laconic minute of the Governor is—“ Florence McCarthy, to be
forgiven. He was. 4th Feb., 1801.” McCarthy was not proof, however, against
the wiles of Margarot 'and others, and there are various subsequent statements
about his troubles.
t A sarcasm, perhaps, because Governor King had no salute fired to com-
memorate the killing of Louis XVI.
D


July 24.—Aujourdhui je complete ma cinquante et unidrae annee —protege
par la Divinite jusqu’ ici qu’aurai-je k craindre pour I’avenir? —
rien—ma plutot tout a esperer.
Sept. 8. —Kennedy vint nous raconter la fatale decouverte.
Margarot’s diary does not say what the “ fatal discovery ” was, hut
at this period Governor King sent a number of convicts to the Hunter
River, with the following instructions to Corporal John Wixtead:
“ You will observe the inclosed orders as far as they concern you,
and if any vessel comes to the River without my license, you will
confine the crew, and detain the vessel by scuttling her until you
receive my orders,”
Nov. 4. —Barnes me fit une confidence touchant I’Angleterre.
B.—Par tons les rapports quand on les compare il paroit que Ton
clierche a effacer le souvenir de I’ancienne tyrannie.
14. —L’on nous envoya de la viande pourrie que je garde pour la faire
manger par le scelerat qui vole a la fois le Gouvernement et le
prisonnier.
Dec. 31. —Ainsi finit I’annee 1801.—La protection Divine est trop
pour que j’aye a craindre; au contraire la Providence paroit me
designer & une rolle peu commun et a travers les difficultes me
conduire comme par la main.
1802.
Feb. 11. —Allarme.
Mar. 26. —Le soir grande allarme —King pret de s’enfuir.
27. —Plusieurs prisonniers venus de Parramatta.
April 12.—King, au poltron et fou, desarma tousles habitans (pour renforcer
ses ennemis les officiers).
24.— Un vaisseau Stranger apparut—la peur les d&nonta.
26. —King revint de Parramatta—tres rassure en apparence.
28. —Desvines m’apporta une ordre de Mr. King de me rendre a Parra-
matta.
May 1. —La scene commen9a ; les atrocitds pratiquees en Irland recomraen-
cerent ici aujourdhui.
3. —Tousles Irlandais sont ramenes, mis en prison, &c.
4. —Madame Rose passa, et le pauvre Jenny ; on mit tousles Irlandais
aux fers—douloureux.
10.—Smith m’apporta une lettre de Paine.
July 19. —Bnvoyai un permit a signer au Gouverneur —il le dechira sans mot
dire.*
Margaret’s journal of 1803 has not fallen into my hands, but
amongst Holt’s seized papers there is sufficient proof (in fragments of
letters, quoted elsewhere) that Margaret was still “ spitting himself
abroad ” in venom.
1804.
Jan. 16. —Bonnes esperanees de partout.
21. —Les natifs ayant fait rapport d’un vaisseau dans Botany Bay nos
guerriers prirent I’allarme —le Gouverneur s’y rendit a cheval
avec quelques officiers—les troupes se mirent sous les armes—
les dames firent des lamentations, eussent des dvanouissemens,
&c. &c.
* See this circumstance told at greater length in English, subsequently, p. 36.


Jan. 22. —II est entre un vaisseau .. . rapporte que tousles hommes sont eu
requisition en Angleterre, &c.
23.—Sir H. H(ayes) passa trois fois apprimer le massacre du premier
juge (sic) d’lrlande et d’autres.
31.—St. Leger s’evada dans I’Ame'ricain ‘la Rose’ qui fit voile
aujourdhui avec ‘la Ferret ’ d’aujourdhui je compte deux
mois pour I’arrivee de bonnes nouvelles.
Feb. 23. —Jour maudit de blanchissage ; commengait bier a faire mon cour-
rier pour etre envoye par le * Calcutta.’
March 4.—A minuit Ton tira le cannons —battit la generate et King s’en fut k
Parramatta avec un detachement de 100 soldats centre les
Irlandais insurgens.
5. —Loi martielle publiee par proclamation.
10.—King revient de Parramatta—deux Irlandais furent pendus k
Sydney—et je suppose que cela finit la trajedie. Delivra mes
lettres a Sir H. B. Hayes pour les confier k Mr. Tuckey,* pre-
mier lieutenant abord du ‘ Calcutta.’
14.—Ecrivis une seconde lettre a milord Stanhope.f
28. —La ‘ Lady Nelson ’etla ‘ Resource ’ avec les infortunes firent voile
pour le Coal River.
29. —Le vaisseau Americain ‘ I’Union ’ recut ordre de sortir du port
pour n’avoir point baisse pavilion a la * Lady Nelson.’
April s.—Beau temps. B(etsey) humeur du diable.
30. —Ainsi finit le mois d’Avril; d’un cote la peur augmente et du mien
I’espoir—car certainement le retard des vaisseaux promet beau-
coup. Dieu la veille!
May 8. —Les nouvelles transpirent, et toutes tendant a une fin fatale mais
attendue; il paroit aussi que le Gouvernement va envoyer ici
un nouveau Gouv. et des Investigateurs,
30. —Parlai a Hayes, qui me dit avoir trouvd Allcock a la porte bier au
soir ecoutant.
Whether Margaret (who had falsely accused Fyshe Palmer and
Skirving) was now suspected by Allcock of a design to betray the
conspirators; or whether it was intended to betray Margarot, or
whether Hayes merely told his brother rogue a lie, cannot now be
determined. Many disclosures made by the captured insurgents
implicated Margarot in treasonable correspondence, and his papers
were seized.
Amongst them were found charges about which he was questioned.
He had accused Mr. Commissary Palmer of various peccadilloes and
cruelties.
From the MS. report of a Board of Inquiry, I find that he was
unable to substantiate any of his statements; but his journal show
that at the very time in which he was backbiting Mr. Palmer he was
receiving favours from him.
* Mr. Tuckey, who was at Point Nepean with Governor Collins in 1803, when
the first settlement was formed (and at once abandoned) at Port Phillip, could
hardly have known the seditious character of the man whose letters the convict,
Sir H. B. Hayes, carried to him.
t Lord Stanhope in the House of Lords sympathised almost as strongly with
the “ Convention ”in Edinburgh as Lord Daer. The latter attended the Con-
vention and ostentatiously discarded his title, begging to be saluted as Citizen
Daer.


1801.
April 23. —Ecrivis a Palmer; il passa a cheval et m’apporta une bonteille de
Genevre; nous arrangeames que je passerois cliez lui demain
matin.
Dec. 25.—Palmer m’envoya 10 lbs. de mouton et deux bouteilles de vin.
1802.
Jan. s.—Betsey [Mrs. Margaret] fut chez Palmer.
6. —Palmer nous envoya trois livres de the, douze livres de savon et
28 lbs. de sucre.
15. —Betsey fut chez Palmer.
16. —Palmer nous envoya une piece de cotton.
18, —Palmer m’envoya un boisseau de bled.
Feb. 4.—Palmer nous envoya un boisseau de bled.
March B.—Betsey fut chez Palmer, qui nous envoya 5 gall, d’eau de vie,
5 gall, de vin du Cap, 2 livres de the, 20 livres de sucre, et un
boisseau de bled.
As Margaret’s own journal states that this was at a time of short
rations, some idea may be formed of the heart of this “ friend of the
people,” who drily recorded kindnesses with the same pen which
inscribed lies for future publication.
In the same manner I find that his diaries enumerate many
presents from Holt—General Holt, as he calls him sometimes —of
United Irish celebrity; yet he also notes against Holt that he allowed
himself to be unlawfully engaged by his employer in selling liquor.
A few remarks from other note-books kept by Margaret may be
amusing, as showing the kind of creature who hoped to be one of the
controllers of British affairs after disposing of Pitt and Dundas.
“On the 19th July, 1802,1 sent in to the Governor a request of a permit to
land and house 20 gallons of rum for my own use; he tore the paper in refusal.*
“ Ellis came out as Palmer’s footman, but has been indulged beyond any
English settler.
“ To publish a weekly paper intitled the ‘ People’s Friend,’ price one penny.
“ At Penny Cuike there are 174 men for a reform, and four against it;
viz. the Parson, the Precentor, the Exciseman, and the Schoolmaster.
“ Chaos might plead precedent and condemn creation as an innovation.
“ Much I have travelled, but one advantage have I here alone enjoyed;
during a six years’ residence I have never witnessed absolute distress—if this
can take place in a Gaol, and under the very worst management, what name
shall we give to the governments of Europe ?
“ A fishing village must be established.
“ Settlers must not be allowed to choose their own site, but must take up
with portions appointed by Government.
“ A maximum to be fixed upon every article sold by retail.
“ It has been fortunate for Britain that the rulers of France have never
thought of calling in all the English guineas in circulation there, and new
coining them into Republican money.”
This almost rivals the wisdom of the man who burned a Bank-note
with a view to damage the Bank.
“ No wheat ought to be deemed legally purchased but what is sold in an
open market after being examined and entered by the clerk of that market.
“ Oblige every settler to deposit a certain proportion of his harvest in a
* See this occurrence, supra, in French Journal, p. 34.


Government store or barn, to receive it again at a future period when grain had
become scarce, under such restrictions and regulations that if he wanted it not
for the support of his family he should be obliged to sell it at a stated price.
N.B. Said wheat to be the property of the settler, but to be untransferable to
any individual, and all contracts or bargains wherein the said wheat was
included, to be null and void.*
“ Why should America be allowed to send her bad butter to New South
Wales, and sell it there at two shillings per pound? has England or Ireland
none for exportation ? ....
“ There might be a law compelling every person to reside with his family
on his farm ; another establishing the rate of interest. Pawnbroking ought to
be totally suppressed.
“My object would be to keep Latin and Greek out of this colony . . .
“ England has sown the seeds of destruction in this new colony, by sending
out pettifogging lawyers and Old Bayley solicitors : they have already instilled
a spirit of litigation in the minds of the settlers and other inhabitants.”
Margarot anticipated Goldwin Smith and some others now in
England when he wrote: —•
“ This colony must sooner or later become independent, not only for its
own sake, but for the interest of the mother country; while dependent it will
be a constant running sore, when detached it will be a useful wooding and
watering place.
“ Attorneys and counsel who undertake flagrant causes to be liable to
severe punishment.
“ To make this colony flourish credit must be put a stop to, or else the Gaol
will ruin all the settlers and the settlement. Sydney must be reduced, also
Parramatta.
“ When a revolution at home takes place it will afford a fine opportunity
of introducing a number of books here, and also of directing the public atten-
tion to the perusal of those of a proper and salutary tendency.
“ I might have done this colony much good had my country (not basely
deserting) kept me in countenance; as it is, I have kept the Junto both in
fear and respect, how much more so had those ungrateful I and pusilanimous
men whose cause I had so warmly espoused countenanced and upheld me;
but, alas, they proved by their behaviour they were fully deserving every
oppression,
“ Gerald f broke open a letter directed to me; he took out of it a ten pound
bank note, for which he never accounted.”
The last quotation I have to make from Margarot concerns his
wife: —
“ July 6th, 1801. —Ecrivis a Chapman deux billets. Mon epouse malade.’’
One of the original “ billets ” is now before me.
“ Sydney, 6th July, 1801.
“ Elizabeth Margarot came here in the ship ‘ Surprise,’ in the year ’94,
with the consent and authority of Government, as a settler, but (the reason I
know not) all the advantages so promised her have been withheld.
«T. Chapman, Esq.» “ M “ Makoaeot.
* Surely Joseph Hume would have rebelled against the application of these
principles to Scotland.
f One may surely pronounce this to be an atrocious lie; nevertheless, Mar-
garet’s name precedes Gerald’s on the Calton Hill monument.


Governor King has endorsed the letter, “M. Margarot, respecting
his wife.”
Joseph Holt, the United Irish general, in his memoirs speaks of
Margarot and his wife, whom he often visited in Sydney; they “ were
both of hasty tempers and very irritable.” This assists us to under-
stand the “ maudit jour de blanchissage ” and the “ Betsey humeur
du diable ” of the journal.
Yet, with all this evidence as to Mrs. Margaret’s presence in the
flesh in Sydney, I find in Mackenzie’s ‘ Reminiscences of Glasgow ’ —a
work well fitted to propagate the foolish statements on the Cal ton Hill
monument —the following paragraphs: —
“ Margarot was a light-hearted Englishman, with a sprightly wife, who
died in grief soon after his banishment, uttering these words, from an old
Scotch ditty:—
‘ Ye cruel, that combined
The guiltless to pursue ;
My Margarot was ever kind,
He ne’er could injure you.
A long adieu ! but where shall fly
The widow all forlorn,
When every mean and cruel eye
Regards my woe with scorn ? ’ ”
If Oxenstiern were alive now, he might say to his son, “Go to
Scotland, and learn how gravely men may tell lies on monuments and
in memoirs,”
No direct advantage can be gained by exposing such a shabby
jackdaw as Margarot; but indirectly good may be done if the exposure
of his brazen impudence can be made a warning to other impostors.
CHAPTER VI.
Let me now give a sketch of a very different and much more
respectable character —Holt, the Irish rebel general in 1798. His
‘ Memoirs ’ * are very interesting, and were, I doubt not, intended to
be truthful; but vanity and a strong imagination ran away with his
pen sometimes.
Mr. Croker remarks that the historians of the Irish Rebellion
have paid but little attention to Holt’s proceedings; yet with the
means at his disposal he did far more than was done by those whose
names have been trumpeted to the world. His own account of him-
self is, that when the insurrection was breaking out, he was falsely
accused of being an United Irishman —that the accuser burnt Holt’s
house—that in mere desperation and bent on revenge he associated
himself in May, 1798, with the United Irishmen—that by the end of
that month he assumed the title of colonel, having 960 Wicklow men
* London: H. Colborn. 1838. (Edited by T. C. Croker.)


under his command—that the battle of Vinegar Hill was lost by the
incompetence of the rebel Commander-in-Chief, Edward Eoche —that
at Ballyellis he found the advantage of being commander himself, and
that he then assumed a distinct command.
His hairbreadth escapes, the treachery among his followers, his
own fidelity to them, his humanity, his disclaiming any participation
in robbery, are all borne out by contemporary records. He relates
that when General Moore invited him by letter to a conference, Holt’s
men were so enraged that they seized himself and his wife and were
about to kill them ; that finding that a miller and not Mrs. Holt had
brought the letter, they relented a little, but fixed a watch upon him.
He says:
“ I would have embraced General Moore’s humane proposition if I could
have done so safely.”
“Nothing would have given me more pleasure; my heart leaped with joy
at the mere contemplation of it; but 1 was trammelled and burthened with the
fate of others, whom I would not desert if I had been free to do so. Had I
been so fortunate as to have had the proposed interview, I should have stipulated
for all my followers as well as myself, and should have saved many from
further crime, and others from a disgraceful termination of their existence. It
was, however, ordered otherwise. Men often blindly struggle hard to effect
their own destruction, and to bring on punishment for their sins.* So it was
with my people.”
Eventually his men divided into parties, and Holt, who had heard
that Lord Powerscourt had spoken kindly of him on parade, and who
knew from his wife that a Mrs. Latouche had said that if Holt would
write a letter stating his willingness to surrender to Lord Powers-
court, she, Mrs. Latouche, would interest herself for him, wrote the
following letter to Mrs. Latouche (i. e. it is contained in his own
memoirs): —
“ Dear Madam,
“ God and you are my dependence; and as you are so good as to take
my case into your hands, I hope it will prosper, as every thing does you
undertake to perform.
“ Let the result be what it may, at your request I will surrender myself
to Lord Powerscourt at his house on any given day, and am Madam,
“ Your obedient humble servant,
“Joseph Holt.”
Lord Powerscourt immediately promised that Holt’s life should
be spared, and that he should be protected from further pursuit.
Holt assembled his few remaining men; recommended them to return
home, as there was no price set upon their heads; told them that none
need fear that he would give information against any of them ; “ that
part of my oath,” he said, “ is still binding on me.”
He says :
“ Tears stood in their eyes, while they shook hands one by one, and my
own eyes were not dry.”
* Evertere domos totas optantibus ipsis, Di faciles. Had Holt been an educated
man, some subtle critic might have charged him with plagiarism.


Lord Powerscourt was as good as his word, and Holt’s life was saved.
The following extracts from the newspapers of the day show that
Holt’s importance was really considerable :
“ The rebel Holt has been greatly strengthened by deserters. Upon General
Craig offering a reward of 300 1, to any who would apprehend him, Holt issued
a counter proclamation, offering 600 Z. for the General on his being delivered up
at the camp.”*
“ The rebel leader Holt still continues with impunity to keep the whole
County of Wicklow and the borders of the counties of Kildare and Dublin in
a state of ferment; every day his activity, his boldness, and his numbers
increase; his army, it is said, amounts at present to fifteen hundred men,
well armed and inured to hardships; he does not make a single movement
with a force of less than five hundred men. Most of the principal families of
the County Wicklow have fled to town.”f
His surrender and imprisonment are thus noted in the Courier,
19th November, 1798:
11 “At length the rebel hero of the mountains—the man who has so often
died in so many kinds of way on paper —who was so often taken—who was so
often wounded, and who, like Othello, has had so many hairbreadth ’scapes—
the celebrated General Holt has at length surrendered to Lore! Powerscourt.
He was escorted to town in a coach, by a formidable troop of his Lordship’s
cavalry. The multitudes who followed him through the street were very
great, and he frequently seemed to address them from the windows very
politely. When the coach came to the castle-yard, few w T ere permitted to
enter by the guards. Holt seems to be about forty years of age; has a
smartness in his aspect which approaches almost to ferocity; he seemed
perfectly at his ease, and in very good health; wore a scarlet coat faced with
blue, and had the general aspect of a military man, who went through much
fatigue in the field.
“ What the terms are on which this man surrendered are not generally
known, but they are supposed to be transportation for life.”
While imprisoned in Dublin Holt states that inducements were
offered to him to join the forces of the authorities, but that he
answered (amongst other things) —
“ I was before the late insurrection a faithful subject; and had I not been
driven from my loyalty, I would cheerfully have ventured my life in the
service of my king and country, as I often did, to bring offenders to justice;
but how could I now go against those whom 1 have influenced, and perhaps led
into rebellion ? I could not do it from the conscious feeling that 1 should be
committing an unpardonable crime; I would think every projecting rock one
of my old friends presenting a musket at my head, and I should in my sleep
be haunted with a thousand guilty horrors; but, sir, if I were proof against
all these things, there is a circumstance, above all other considerations, which
renders such an act on my part impossible. I have sworn. I should be guilty
of perjury —a crime against my Maker. lam a Protestant, sir. I have called
God to witness my truth, and I cannot be absolved from my oath. ... In
becoming a rebel 1 acted contrary to my inclination, and against my wishes, in
defence of my life ; in that 1 felt myself right, whether justly or not I cannot
say. . . . Let me go an exile to a foreign land, rather than remain at home
banished from an approving conscience.”
* Courier Newspaper , 28th September, 1798.
f Courier Newspaper, 3rd October, 1798.


Holt says that the Marquis Cornwallis, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, was present when he thus spoke, and that his Excellency
“ expressed himself much pleased with my sentiments.”
Holt obtained permission for his wife and family to accompany
him, but says that it would have been of little use,
“ had not my guardian angel Mrs. Latouche stepped forward and paid it for
me ; may she be rewarded in heaven for this act! ”
He had applied to her for aid, and when her letter reached him,
he says :
“ I read it over as well as I could; but my eyes were full of tears—the
excess of my feelings of gratitude blinded me, I could not see through the
shower. I asked for a pittance; she supplied me with the means of comfort
and even affluence ; she did more, she gave me back my wife to my bosom, and
my children to my knees. .. . Peter Latouche, Esq., the happy husband of
this angelic woman, asked my wife how she could get to Cork (whither Holt
had been sent in a small vessel).
She answered: —
“ I have no other way of going but on my brother-in-law’s horse and car.”
“ My poor woman, said he, you would most likely be robbed and murdered
on the way! Take this,” giving her five guineas, “ that will pay for coach
hire.” . . . Any words of praise from an unlettered man like myself (Holt
adds) must fall far short of their merits; but if it was in my power to do so,
I would hand down the names of Mrs. and Mr. Peter Latouche in the annals of
history, for admiration and imitation, as illustrious patterns of excellence, to
the remotest posterity.”*
On the voyage from Dublin to Cork Holt and others had been
cruelly used by the master of the vessel. They complained; an
inquiry was instituted, and the man was discharged. Holt thus
moralizes on this result: —
“ We were all made loyal men by this act of justice, and began to find out
that the laws were good, and that we should have rebelled against the under-
strappers of power, who substituted their own villainous dispositions and
tyrannous wills for good laws. As my experience made me acquainted with
the higher functionaries of Government the more just and equitable was my
treatment, and I must say that I never made a complaint of ill-usage to the
higher powers which was not treated with respect, fairly considered, properly
investigated, and immediately remedied. It therefore now appears clearly to
my mind that the government and laws we wished to subvert would have
been succeeded, had the United Irishmen been victorious, by nothing half so
good. The individuals who would have been placed in power not feeling so
just notions of right as those in authority. It was the corrupt and bad dis-
positions of the lower officers of the Government, and perhaps the innate
depravity incident to man, we ought to have rebelled against, and not the
British laws and general government, which are certainly grounded in perfect
equity, however they may be abused.”
* The following extract from the Dublin Courier , 27th October, 1798, shows
that others agreed with Holt in his opinions:—
“ Mrs. Peter Latouche, who interested herself so much about the unfortunate
young man lately murdered in the Glen of the Downs, has been long emphatically
styled ‘ The widows’ and the orphans’ friend/ ”


Before accompanying Holt to the scene of his exile, it may be well
to take advantage of the foregoing sentence, partly to explode a
common error, and partly to explain some of the miseries to which
Holt was afterwards subjected by reason of his position as an United
Irishman in 1798, and of his acquaintance with Maurice Margarot.
It is the fashion with some to impute all Irish disturbances to
Saxon misrule and Protestant ascendency. Under the shade of the
Irish upas-tree, schemes for the annihilation of ministers have ripened
into action.
Glib subordinates and literary understrappers are prone to scoff
at Pitt and Pitt’s measures, and condescendingly admit that he was a
fair specimen of a statesman as statesmen were then, but far beneath
the altitude attained in modern time.
If a man will go far enough from a mountain, he may reduce it,
apparently, to the size of a mole-hill, and only thus 'can Pitt be
dwarfed to the proportions of the statesmen who are now extolled to
his discredit.
Through times of disaster and dismay the English and Scotch,
and the true patriots of Ireland, supported Pitt, because they trusted
that he was advocating what in his heart he believed to be right, and
thought him the worthiest man to lead them.
In 1846 the House of Commons discarded Peel, although they
knew he was the worthiest leader, and was proposing what he believed
to be right.
There is a third course open; to support a minister who is
believed to be proposing what he himself thinks to be wrong, and has
often opposed. One distinguished member of the House of Commons
has, indeed, already accused the House of voting for what they them-
selves believed to be injurious. But this must have been a violent
figure of speech. To such a craven surrender of what is believed to
be right there could be but one end. Providence might in its mercy
avert any immediate catastrophe, but history affords no ground for
believing that the causes which sapped the commonwealth of Borne
would work less surely in England than they did in Borne.
English institutions might make the progress slow; but fifty
years are a trifle in the life of a nation, and, even in Borne, it was long
after the people were debauched by Marius that they reaped the full
effects of the tyranny of Tiberius and his successors.
Pitt did not make the era in which he lived: he found it. He
was bent on reforming English institutions, and one of the charges
most persistently made against him was that he had abandoned his
original views. This he himself denied, and retorted that the crimes
of the French Bevolution, and the dangers of the time, imposed upon
him, and on all lovers of England, a special duty.
The critical period through which ho conducted the government
from 1792 to 1799 can only be estimated by those who have patience
to wade through the detailed history of the time, especially as shown
in the Beports of the Committees of Secrecy to the Houses of Lords
and Commons in 1798 and 1799.
When a paper found in the handwriting of Lord Edward Fitz-


Gerald exhibited 279,000 men as the quota of men furnished by
Ulster, Munster, and Leinster for active rebellion ; when in the single
county of Kildare 12,000 pikes were seized by the Government;
when the disaffected found means to fan the flame of the mutiny at
the Nore; when several ships deserted from Admiral Duncan and
joined the mutineers, although at the time his fleet was sorely needed
to clear the Channel of the French and Dutch ships provided by the
French Directory to cover the invasion of England or Ireland; when
the “ Army of England ” was pompously organized by the French
with the avowed purpose of giving up England to plunder ;* when
the so-called “ Constitutional Society ” in London elected Barere an
honorary member, and avowed fealty to the 'principles of the French
Convention; when the “ Corresponding Society ” in London was in
conspiracy with the British Convention in Edinburgh and with the
United Irishmen in Dublin, and was busily plotting for the creation
of a treasonable Convention in England ; when the so-called “ United
Englishmen ” had parcelled out England into revolutionary districts,
had tampered with the soldiery, and were in earnest correspondence
with those who hoped to stimulate the mutiny at the Nore until the
Government might be paralyzed and the French might successfully
invade England, while the home traitors simultaneously attacked the
Houses of Parliament, the Tower, and the Bank; when these things,
and many others like them, were the daily announcements to Pitt;
what wonder was it that, under the strong necessities of the time, and
confident in his own integrity and loyalty, he thought it right to
show a firm front to the enemy abroad, and to lay an iron hand upon
traitors at home ?
It does not follow that because he succeeded in maintaining order
by stern measures, he could have equally succeeded by the less pro-
nounced means which his critics, judging after tbe event, are so fond
of declaring sufficient; neither can any man now living be in so fit a
position as Pitt was in to decide whether, if he had been less deter-
mined, the leaven of the French Eevolution would have found force
enough to stir the whole mass in Great Britain.
As it was, there was a strong party arrayed against him in Parlia-
ment, and a few failures on his part would immediately have made it
stronger.
In the British Convention in Edinburgh, whence Margarot and
Muir and others were transported, the young Lord Daer was an
honoured member, although he ostentatiously merged his title and
became Citizen Daer; nor was this merely the eccentricity of an
individual, for crowds of sympathisers brayed their applause of the
wretched impostor Margarot, who was only known to them as an
approver of the atrocities of the sans culottes.
* “ You shall seize the immense heaps of gold in the Bank of London ; the
prodigious wealth contained in their shops, their warehouses, and their magazines ;
the riches contained in their gilded palaces and their stately mansions; the accu-
mulations of public and private property; the treasures, in short, of every species
that are to be found in that opulent country, and you will return to France loaded
with the spoils of the English.”


True, it was under the guise of reform that the conspirators pro-
ceeded, and thus obtained a leverage amongst many more honest than
wise. It is also true that Pitt, a reformer on principle, was attacked
for his so-called tergiversation. It is known that, as the compilers of
the Parliamentary History were unfavourable to him, it is difficult
to trace his speeches, and in the Quarterly Review (1810) it is stated
“ that no distinguished speaker of the day seems more to have suffered
from the inaccuracy of reporters,”
Such a statement, made when so many thousands were competent
judges of the facts, is at least of some value.
Yet there are extant some proofs of the manner in which he
haughtily defended himself while he conducted the government, and
it is only just to reproduce a portion of one of his speeches. Mr.
Grey had moved that a petition from the “ Friends of the People ” be
referred to a Committee, and on the 7th May, 1793, Pitt spoke as
follows: —
, . . “ I feel more particularly desirous on account of the share which I
have had in agitating the question of a Parliamentary Reform, to state fully
and distinctly the reasons which induce me to resist the motion which is now
brought forward. The question at the present time involves the fate of all
those who have hitherto been so long protected by the British Constitution;
nay, it involves the fundamental principles of every society and form of
government. But first I shall beg leave to remind the House of the grounds
upon which 1 opposed the notice of a Parliamentary Reform when brought
forward last session. The opinion which I then entertained is confirmed by
what has since occurred, and has even received strength from the petition now
on the table, and the motion before the House. I then considered the agitation
of the question as capable of producing much mischief, and likely to be
attended with no good. Such was the conclusion which I formed from experi-
ence. I had myself on different occasions proposed a reform in situations
which seemed favourable to my object, and supported by persons of the highest
respectability, and had even then failed. Several gentlemen, from a dread
of the consequences of innovation, and from a doubt whether the advantage to
be obtained was such as would compensate for the risk incurred, opposed my
views. If such arguments had formerly succeeded, how much force had they
last year acquired from the dreadful lesson afforded in the example of a neigh-
bouring kingdom ! The scene of horrors which it then presented exceeded
imagination, far short as it stopped of what has since occurred. I perceived
forming within the bosom of the country a small but not contemptible party,
who aspired at something more than a moderate reform, whose object indeed
was nothing less than to introduce here those French principles, which from
their consequences I could not regard but with horror. I saw, therefore, that
while none of that good of which a moderate reform might be productive was
to be obtained, much danger might be incurred, and an opening afforded to
wicked persons to subvert that very constitution which we were desirous
to improve, only in order that we might preserve; or, though the attempt
to reform might not be attended with the total subversion of the constitution,
yet it might lead to a state of confusion and distraction, which at least would
disturb the enjoyment of those blessings of which we were in possession. I
thus found the probability of good but little, while the mischief was of a size
so gigantic as to exceed calculation.
“ And upon this reasoning, even if I had rated as high as ever the advan-
tages of a reform, and had seen a greater probability than had hitherto


appeared of accomplishing such a reform, I would rather have abandoned my
object than have incurred or increased the danger. I would rather forego for
ever the advantages of reform, than risk for a moment the existence of the
British Constitution.
“ Besides, I considered the necessity for a reform, in consequence of circum-
stances which had since occurred, to be considerably less than when I had
brought forward my original motion. But how then was the question argued
on the other side ? The danger which I stated was not denied. But it was
alleged that this was precisely the time to bring forward a moderate reform, as
the best means to quiet violent spirits, and the surest remedy against ruinous
innovation. The gentlemen who now come forward in the cause of Parlia-
mentary Reform, I have no doubt were encouraged in their first exertions by
the hope that they should be enabled to overawe the violent spirits, and that
moderate men, who might otherwise have been misled, would be induced to
join their standard. 1 have learned from their publications, that they not
only proposed to guide the minds of the people, but also to be guided by
them, and that they were resolved to drop their views if they should find that
they did not meet with a pretty general concurrence. Such was the situation
of the business at the last session. I will now inquire what has passed since.
And here I shall enter, along with the noble lord, into the protest against not
being allowed to introduce the subject of the affairs of France, which I con-
sider as intimately, essentially, and inseparably connected with the present
question.
“ Another year has now passed in that country, disgraced with excesses
and outrages so horrid that they efface the memory of those which formerly
occurred, and leave of them only the faint traces, and the image hardly
visible.
“ The conduct of the French, in all its circumstances, bore a peculiar
application to this country; it presented the fruits opening in due season—the
legitimate offspring of those trees, under the specious pretext of liberty, planted
against this country and its allies. The French had disclosed a system of
disseminating their principles, and procuring proselytes in every part of
Europe —a system which they had particularly followed up with respect to
this country.
“ Such was the case without—what was the situation of affairs within ?
Societies had been formed in this country affiliated with the Jacobin clubs in
France, and though they had since assumed a different shape were then
employed for the purpose of spreading Jacobin principles. In this object they
proceeded with a boldness and confidence proportioned to the success of the
French arms. We thus beheld the scheme which we had anticipated as the
result of the new constitutions in France opening upon us. We had more
immediately an opportunity of seeing what were the views of the legislators in
France with respect to this country, and what their instruments in England
were endeavouring to effect. For while in France they always mentioned the
pretext of a Parliamentary Reform as the medium by which they were to intro-
duce their principles} their instruments here always took care to connect the
system of Parliamentary Reform with all those delusive doctrines upon which
was founded the newly-raised fabric of French freedom.
“ Nothing [less than a national convention was held out as a sufficient
remedy for the abuses which prevailed in the representation, and the sole
organ through which a more perfect form of government was to be obtained;
namely, such a government as should acknowledge no other source of autho-
rity, and no other rule of conduct, than the will of the majority. In short,
French principles were inculcated as the true standard of political belief,
and the example of the French government proposed as a worthy object of
imitation.


“ I now proceed to the events of a more recent date. The spirit of dis-
affection which had been thus raised was happily kept under, and prevented
from breaking out into action by the seasonable interference of the Legislature,
by the vigilance and exertions of the executive power, by the loyalty, vigour,
and unanimity of the people, and likewise by the interposition of Providence,
in the turn lately given to affairs on the Continent, and the check experienced
by the French arms. The admirers and supporters of French policy in this
country felt a depression of spirits from the defeat of their friends and allies,
which for a time gave a fatal blow to their hopes, and compelled them to con-
ceal their views, and to assume a veil of caution but ill suited to the ardour
of their temper and the boldness of their enterprise.
“But though they had thus been forced for a while to relinquish their
schemes, it was not to be presumed from this that they had by any means
abandoned them.
“ No: they still indulged the same hopes, they still meditated the same
plans, and only lay by to watch for an opportunity favourable to the accom-
plishment of their designs.
“ For that purpose they had looked peculiarly to the question of Parlia-
mentary Reform. Previous to the bringing forward of the present motion, a
great number of petitions had been presented to the House, equally singular in
their form, expression, and the manner in which they had thus been submitted
to notice. They had been introduced under the auspices of the gentlemen who
supported the motion. They were all of three descriptions, except that one
upon which the motion was more particularly founded, and a petition from
Nottingham, conceived in exactly the same terms with one which had been
received from that place in 1782.
“When it had first been received, it came after a long war, which had
harassed and exhausted the country, and the calamities of which it stated as
a proper ground for the reform of Parliament; unfortunately it still employed
the same language, and gave the same description of the country, after a long
and prosperous peace. All these petitions came either from England or from
Scotland, or from places in England and Scotland that seemed to have no
natural connexion or likelihood of communication. Yet, coming from these
different places, they were all the same in substance, and nearly the same in
style ; whatever little difference there might be in the expression, they seemed
all to proceed from the same hands—
‘ Facies non omnibus una
Nec diversa tamen ; qualem decet esse sororum.’
They all, it must be confessed, betrayed a strong family likeness. Almost the
only difference was, that those from' Scotland expressed their surprise at the
immense load of debt, notwithstanding the extent of the taxes, which they
stated at twenty millions—four millions above the truth.
“ All of them were the same in prayer: they concurred in praying for the
right of universal suffrage, as the basis of that reform which they desired.
“ With respect to these petitions two questions arise : first, what weight
they ought to have with the House, and how far they ought to be allowed to
go in influencing their judgment; and, secondly, whether this is a season
proper for the consideration of that object which they claim, and favourable to
a temperate reform?
“On the first point, when petitions came to the House, fabricated in
appearance, similar in substance and expression, it did not require much time
to determine in what point of view they were to be considered. There was
every reason to suspect that they were the work of a few individuals. They
had certainly much more the appearance of the design of a few individuals than
of the general expression of the sentiments of the country. If it were asked,


then, what weight they ought to have, the answer is easy. None. What w T eight
ought to belong to petitions coming to this House in those circumstances,
carrying every appearance of concert and system, combined in the same prayer,
and expressed nearly in the same language ?
“ The fraud is too gross and palpable, and it is evident from what quarter
they come, and with what views they are presented.
“ All the circumstances in France and in this country point out the present
as a season unfavourable to a temperate reform.
“ The gentlemen who support the motion have been engaged in a society
for the purpose, as they themselves state, of allaying the violence of those who
might be misled by a blind rage of innovation and enlightening the people with
respect to the nature of their true claims.
“ Such had been the objects which they had held out at their commence-
ment : they had proposed to make a fair experiment to allow the people of
England a full opportunity of procuring a rational and moderate reform ; and
if they should find that they could not succeed, and that the people should be
disinclined to any plan of reform, and not disposed to prosecute the measures
which they should recommend, they were then to abandon their purpose.
“ They had now gone on for upwards of a twelvemonth, publishing to
enlighten the people, and using every means to promote their own influence,
and during all that time they had not been able to make a convert of one man
in England. They had been obliged at last to come forward with a petition of
their own, introduced to the House on the very day that the debate was to take
place. The other petitions which united in the same object of demanding
Parliamentary Reform carried a suspicious and dangerous appearance. Ought
they not then, consistently with those principles which they had avowed at the
outset, to have come forward upon this occasion, to have acknowledged their mis-
take, and their conviction that the people of England were not desirous of a
reform, to have given up their object in which they found they could not
succeed, and to have joined with us in opposing a reform which is not even
desired, and which could not be granted with any propriety in the present
moment, or even with the chance of advantage to those for whom it is
demanded ?
“But what are the grounds upon which they now bring forward this
question of reform ? First they state that from the general burst of loyalty
expressed by the nation upon the first alarm, there is no reason to fear that the
people will pass beyond the bounds of discretion, and that no season can
be more favourable for a temperate reform than that in which they have so
strongly testified their attachment to the established order of things, and their
reluctance to any change. Of this temper they recommend to us to take the
advantage. But how stands the case ?
“ The fact, I grant, is indeed true. But it is also true that societies in this
country have been anxiously seeking not to obtain reform, but to find cause
of dissatisfaction : not to allay the violence of innovation, but to inflame
discontent.
“ Is it then out of deference to that small party, actuated by such prin-
ciples, and pursuing such a line of conduct, that we are to grant a reform; and
not out of respect for the great body of the people of England, animated by a
spirit of the purest loyalty, and too much attached to the blessings of the
Constitution and the present Government to wish to hazard them by a
change ?
“ What then is the question at issue ? It is the same question which is
now at issue with the whole of Europe, who are contending for the cause
of order, of justice, of humanity, of religion, in opposition to anarchy, to
injustice, to cruelty, to infidelity.
“ I am sensible that ninety-nine out of a hundred of the people of England


are warm in those sentiments, are sensible of the security which they enjoy for
these blessings from the frame of our excellent Constitution; and, so far from
wishing to touch it with an innovating hand, are prepared to defend it against
every attack,
“ Are we to yield then to the clamours of dissatisfaction and discontent ?
and are we to disregard the voice of satisfaction and gratitude ?
“ Are we, in order to gratify the caprice or soothe the insolence of a few
disaffected, to neglect the benefit of the common body ?
“ Are we, at a moment of emergency like this, when the great cause of all
is at stake, to suspend our cares for the public welfare, and attend to the dis-
cussion of petty claims and the redress of imaginary grievances ? Are we at
such a moment, in order to please a few individuals, to hazard the consequence
of producing alarm and distrust in the general body, firm and united in the
common cause ? This would indeed resemble the conduct of those who at the
moment their citadel was besieged should proceed to the discussion of points of
difference, rather than attend to providing the means of defence.
“ The next ground alleged for bringing forward the motion for reform at
present was, that this was a time of war, and that, from the situation of com-
mercial credit, the country was in a state of alarm and distrust. These certainly
were very strange reasons for such a measure. If we are engaged in a war for
the purpose of defending ourselves against a foreign enemy, is this a reason why
we should hazard the consequences of any distraction at home ? This, instead of
diminishing, would be the most effectual method to add to the evil. Of the
state of credit I shall say nothing,* though the reason as applied to it stands in
the same predicament: certain it is that considerable embarrassment has lately
taken place, a circumstance at all times very apt to result from an extensive
commerce. The Legislature, much to their honour, have stepped forward, and
made an exertion for the aid of the merchants, which, as it is extraordinary, so
I hope it will be successful; but can this embarrassment be ascribed to the
Constitution, except by making the Constitution the cause of that extent to
which commerce has been carried ? Can this period, and this state of affairs,
however, be brought forward as grounds for reform by gentlemen who last year
stated on the same occasion the duration of a long peace, and the high state of
public prosperity, as their motives for calling the attention of the House to that
subject ? These are certainly novelties which require to be reconciled before
the gentlemen can make any pretensions to consistency of reasoning.
“ I shall next proceed to remark on the precise nature of the motion itself.
The motion is to refer to a committee one of those petitions for a reform which
have been presented to this House. Whether the honourable gentleman who
made the motion means likewise to refer them all, is a point of which I am not
ascertained. (Mr. Grey here nodded assent .) If he means to refer them all,
my reasoning on the subject is reduced to a very short compass. Ought we to
refer to a committee to deliberate on this measure of unlimited suffrage ?
“ The circumstance of having moved to refer the prayers of the petitions
without having pointed out any specific plan for obtaining their object, clearly
renders it improper to go into any discussions on the subject. This circum-
stance has a tendency to excite discontent, without affording the means of
allaying it. Though I formerly moved for a general inquiry, I was afterwards
convinced that it would be attended with no good effect, and I abandoned the
motion. I became sensible that there was no chance of obtaining any advan-
tage but by bringing forward a specific proposition. If I thought so then, how
* In our time, when imports and exports are principally venerated, and the
budget is worshipped as the be-all and the end-all instead of the means, it is to
be feared that Pitt would have here spoken over the heads of a majority of his
audience.


much more must I now be confirmed in the same opinion ? If any object is
proposed for discussion it ought to be a specific object.
“ The contrary mode can tend only to perplex the discussion, and to render
it productive of mischief.
“ I shall now shortly observe on the manner of introducing this business.
The honourable gentleman stated fairly and candidly that he brought forward
the present question not on the ground of right, but of expediency. I think so
too. To talk of an abstracted right of equal representation is absurd.
“ It is to arrogate that right to one form of government, whereas Providence
has accommodated the different forms of government to the different states of
society in which they subsist. There are as many different rights as the causes
which occur to diversify the modes of government. There is one right for a
Roman, another for an Athenian, and a third for a Lacedemonian.
, “ But though the honourable gentleman disclaimed the ground of general
and abstracted right, he has so far enlarged his ground of expedience as to
embrace the mode of reasoning by which that wild theory is supported. He
has declared himself ready to take even universal suffrage—that mode which
he approves the least —rather than to suffer the Constitution to remain as it is.
I so far differ with him that I would rather abandon what I conceive to be the
best plan of reform, than risk the consequences of any hazard to the Constitution
as it at present subsists.
« Can I then embark in the same Committee with the honourable gentle-
man, while he rejects the only plan on which I have contended for reform, and
is ready to give in to that which he himself deems the worst ? I must confess
myself alarmed at the extent to which he carries his object; and I cannot help
looking at the society with some degree of suspicion, in consequence of a letter
which I find signed with his own name. This letter is addressed to the people
of Sheffield. These people have so well benefited by those lessons of caution
and moderation which they received from their patrons, the Friends of the
People, that they lately addressed to the House a petition for Parliamentary
Reform, conceived in such terms as rendered it improper to be received.
“ They early communicated to the Friends of the people their plan for a
Parliamentary Reform, by assembling a convention of national delegates. The
answer to this is nearly expressed in the following words : —‘ On the plan which
you have suggested we do not think it yet a fit time to deliberate. In a more
advanced stage it may become a proper subject of discussion.’ The honourable
gentleman in’ his ideas of reform proceeds upon grounds directly opposite to
mine, not indeed less hostile to my views than they are to the present form of
the Constitution. Upon the whole, from the method which he proposes, I see
no probability of a temperate reform; and if granted it would not even answer
the end for which it is demanded. So far from satisfying those who now solicit
it, it would only extend their views and multiply and encourage their claims i
they want not a Parliamentary Reform for itself, but for something else in
which they have a prospect. They consider it not as the end of their wishes,
but only as means which may lead to their accomplishment.
“ But here we are told that by refusing this reform, we are acting upon the
same principle by which we lost America, by not complying with the demands
of that country.
“ The Americans desired specific relief;* they pointed out a definite object
with which they pledged themselves to be satisfied. It was refused to them,
because it was said it would only encourage them to ask for more. Ido not now
* Pitt may have been restrained by the presence'of many actors in the scene
from urging, that in spite of his own father’s eloquent remonstrances the constitu-
tional freedom of the American colonists had been in the first place invaded by
Grenville.


mean to enter on the propriety of this refusal, or a discussion of the means by
which America was lost; but I cannot help remarking that there is a wide
difference between the two cases.
“ Here no specific relief is demanded, no definite object is pointed out. You
are desired to give what nobody asks; and to those who tell you that even if
you give it them, they will not be satisfied.
“ It has been asked who were the ‘ they ’ so often alluded to in the course of
the debate. The answer was short.
“ They were those who had signed the petitions. They claim that which
can be resolved into nothing but a deduction of French principles ; that which is
termed the will of the majority, the will of the multitude. The motion requires
you to be prepared to deliberate whether it is right or not to give individual
suffrage. On this question lam not prepared to deliberate; first, because it wants
no deliberation, and secondly, because I have deliberated upon it long enough
already. 1 have not been so inattentive to what has now passed in a neigh-
bouring kingdom, nor have I been so unaffected by the transactions which have
there occurred, as not frequently to have taken this subject into consideration,
“ I shall now give my reasons why I am not prepared to deliberate on the
question; and first, because my plan went to give vigour and stability to the
ancient principles of the constitution, and not to introduce into it any new
principles.
“The merit of the British constitution is to be estimated, not by meta-
physical ideas, not by vague theories, but by analyzing it in practice. Its
benefits are confirmed by the sure and infallible test of experience. It is on
this ground that the representation of the people, which must always be
deemed a most valuable part of the constitution, rests on its present footing.
In the history of this country, from the earliest period down to that in which
I now speak, the number of electors has always been few in proportion to
that of the great body of the people. My plan went to regulate the distribu-
tion of the right of electing members, to add some, and to transfer others.
When such was my plan, am I to be told that I have been an advocate for
Parliamentary Reform, as if I had espoused the same side of the question
which is now taken up by these honourable gentlemen, and were now resisting
that cause which I had formerly supported? I affirm that my plan is as
contrary to that of the honourable gentleman, as his is to the constitution;
nay, Igo farther; I agree with the honourable gentleman (Mr. Windham) that
to adopt the system now proposed is to adopt the principles of the French
code, and follow the example of their legislators. As these principles are
unknown in the history of this country, it is to France only that we can look
for their origin. The same principle which claims individual suffrage, and
affirms that every man has an equal right to a share in the representation, is
that which serves as the basis of that declaration of rights on which the
French legislators have founded their government. We ought to recollect that
there are two hundred and fifty persons who possess an equal voice in the
Legislature with that of this House ; that there is a King, who, to the third of
the legislative, adds the whole of the executive power; and if this principle of
individual suffrage be granted, and be carried to its utmost extent, it goes to
subvert the peerage, to depose the King, and in fine to extinguish every
hereditary distinction, and every privileged order, and to establish that system
of equalizing anarchy announced in the code of French legislation, and attested
in the blood of the massacres at Paris.
“ The question then is, whether you will abide by your constitution, or
hazard a change, with all that dreadful train of consequences with which we
have seen it attended in a neighbouring kingdom ? Abide by your constitution,
did I say ? It cannot be necessary for me to add a word more. But I would
not stop there if it were possible to go farther. If it were possible for an


Englishman to forget bis attachment to the constitution, and his loyalty to the
sovereign—if it were possible for him to lose all those generous feelings* which
bind him to his country, and secure his obedience to its laws—if it were
possible for him to sacrifice all these to those principles which are brought
forward to support a change of government; yet if he should only attend to
reason, he would find them wild and illusive theories. He would find the
principle of individual will powerful and efficient for the destruction of every
individual and of every community; but to every good purpose null and void.
He would find that those lights which entitle all to an equal share in the
government are rights which only serve to remove them from useful labour,
•from sober industry, and from domestic connections; and which abandon
them to be the slaves of every idle caprice and of every destructive passion.
“ The government that adopts such principles ceases to be a government; it
unties the bands which knit together society; it forfeits the reverence and
obedience of its subjects; it gives up those whom it ought to protect to the
daggers of the Marseillese and the assassins of Paris.
“Under a pretence of centering all authority in the will of the many, it
establishes the worst sort of despotism. Such is the state of that wretched
country France, the detestable policy of which has added new words to the
dictionary—such as the phrases of municipalities declaring themselves in a
state of permanent revolution, and the nation itself in a state of sovereign
insurrection!
“ In what is called the government of the multitude, they are not the many
who govern the few, but the few who govern the many. It is a species
of tyranny which adds insult to the wretchedness of its subjects, by styling
its own arbitrary decrees the voice of the people, and sanctioning its acts of
oppression and cruelty under pretence of the national will. Such is the nature
of those principles connected with the right of individual suffrage, and how
far you are prepared to give countenance to that measure, by referring it to a
committee as a subject of deliberation, you are now called to determine.”f
As a counterpoise to so long a citation from Pitt, it is fair to
exhibit some of the statements of Paine, who thought himself able
to regenerate England, and make her worthy to fraternize with France
under the Eepublic.
“ The present happy union of the States (in America, 1777) bids fair to
extirpate the future use of arms from one quarter of the globe.”
“ Canada never will people.” (1782.)
“ Those who talk of a counter-revolution in France show how little they
understand of man. There does not exist in the compass of language an
arrangement of words to express so much as the means of effecting a counter-
revolution. The means must be an obliteration of knowledge ; and it has
never yet been discovered how to make a man unknow his knowledge or
unthink his thoughts.” (1791.)
* In 1870 it had become quite possible to do this. More than one author can
court the disruption of every English colony from the parent state, and the “ Civis
Romanus sum ” is now so far from being an Englishman’s boast that a Bill to
denationalize everybody with everybody’s consent lias become the law of the land.
f It may be said that this speech proves that Pitt must have been well reported.
Perhaps the reporters took more pains than usual in transcribing from their notes,
because Sheridan in reply stated that Pitt’s speech “ was an extraordinary effort
of his splendid talents and of his noble and vigorous mind. He had applied all
his powers to this subject, and had appealed with his utmost skill to the pride
and passions of the assembly,” &c., &c.
Pitt carried his point, on a division, by 282 votes against 41.
E 2


Yet even Paine in five years unthought his own thoughts, or, what
is worse, belied them. The last quoted sentence is from a work he
dedicated to Washington, whose “ exemplary virtue hath so eminently
contributed to establish principles of freedom.” In 1796 Paine thus
addressed Washington: —
“ I know that had it not been for the aid received from France * in men,
money, and ships, your cold and unmilitary conduct would in all probability
have lost America; at least she would not have been the independent nation
she now is. You slept away your time in the field till the finances of the
country were completely exhausted, and you have but little share in the glory
of the final event. It is time, sir, to speak the undisguised language of
historical truth.” (1796.)
“ It has some time been known by those who know him, that Mr. Washing-
ton has no friendships, that he is incapable of forming any; he can serve or
desert a man, or a cause, with constitutional indifference.” (1796.)
“ All that period of my imprisonment (in Paris in 1794) at least, I owe not
to Robespierre, but to his colleague in projects, George Washington.” (1796.)
“ If there is sense enough left in the heart to call a blush into the cheek,
the Washington administration must be ashamed to appear. And as to you,
sir, treacherous in private friendship, and a hypocrite in public life, the world
will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an impostor ? Whether
you have abandoned good principles, or whether you ever had any ?” f
“In the situation England now is, it is impossible she can increase in
money.” (1791.)
“ In consequence of the Revolution the annual interest of the debt of
France will be reduced at least six millions sterling, by paying off upwards of
one hundred millions of the capital; which, with lessening the former expenses
of government at least three millions, will place France in a situation worthy
the imitation of Europe.” f (1791.)
“ The instant the form of government was changed in France the republican
principles of peace and domestic prosperity and economy arose with the new
government; and the same consequences would follow the same causes in other
nations.”§ (1791.)
“ 1 do not believe that monarchy and aristocracy will continue seven years
longer in any of the enlightened countries of Europe. If better reasons can be
* Paine in his vindictiveness against Washington may not have intended to
confine himself to the truth here, but yet may by accident be doing so. If France,
indeed, through the independence of the United States, hoped to stab the heart
of her old rival, and effected her immediate purpose by her “men, money, and
ships,” she was bitterly rewarded. Strange retribution ! It was the French
Court which favoured the intervention in America, and by the French Court was
the cup drained to its bitterest dregs at the hands of the Jacobins whom French
policy had furnished with such new and potent watchwords.
The honours which the Americans always paid to La Fayette (in 1825 Con-
gress voted him, in addition to former grants, 200,000 dollars and a township of
laud in Florida) denote that they too recognised, with (Tom) Paine, the value of
French intervention during their revolutionary struggle. Well would it have
been for the French if they, like the Americans, had been trained to constitutional
usages before they began constitution-mongering.
t Letter to Washington, 1796,
j In a few short years France was hopelessly insolvent.
§ So much the worse for other nations, for the consequences in France within
three years of Paine’s writing this sentence were indiscriminate fratricide of those
who were sworn to fraternity, and continual unrest till the strong hand of Buona-
parte was imposed.


shown for them than against them they will stand ; if the contrary, they will
not.”* (1792.)
“All the constitutions of America are on a plan that excludes the childish
embarrassments which occur in monarchical countries. No suspension of
government can there take place for a moment, from any circumstance
whatever.” f (1792.)
In 1792 also, Paine speaks of the “approaching harmony of the
two nations,” England and France, when they were shortly to be
locked in a struggle for life and death, almost without intermission
for more than twenty years.
His contempt for Pitt’s statesmanship he thus expresses:—
“It is not my intention (o predict anything; but I will show from data
already known, from symptoms and facts which the English funding system
has already exhibited publicly, that it will not continue to the end of
Mr. Pitt’s life, supposing him to live the usual age of a man. How much
sooner it may fall 1 leave to others to predict.” (1796.)
“ The amount of bank notes is only another debt under another name, and
the probability is that Mr. Pitt will at last propose funding them, in that
case bank notes will not be so valuable as French assignats. ... I have now
exposed the English system of finance to the eyes of all nations ; for this work
will be published in all languages. ... I conclude with retorting on Mr. Pitt
the expression he used against France, and say, that the English system of
finance ‘ is on the verge—nay, even in the gulf of bankruptcy.’ ”t
“ The English Government may amuse itself with forming coalitions as long
and as often as it pleases, but they will all come to the same fatal end. . . .
That Government must now abide by its fate., for it can raise no more
coalitions. There do not remain powers on the Continent of Europe to form
another. The last that could be raised has been tried and has perished.”
(December, 1806.)
Yet within a very few years a triumphant coalition struck down
Buonaparte, and controlled France.
When Paine returned to America, in 1802, he said :
“ I have no occasion to ask and do not intend to accept any place or office
in the Government. There is none it could give me that would be any ways
equal to the profits I could make as an author.”
In January, 1808, however, he submitted claims to Congress, and,
irritated at a reference of his demand to a Committee of Claims, he
wrote (7th March, 1808) to the Speaker of the House of Represen-
tatives :
“After so many years of service my heart grow T s cold towards America.”
A victim of vanity and drink, he yet lived to a great age, but died
* Yet Paine was enraged beyond measure because Burke did not speak
respectfully of opinions which were so egregiously absurd, and which could not
come to pass unless the world would submit itself entirely to Paine’s dictation.
What vanity but Paine’s could have expected to annihilate the Governments of
Russia, Austria, and Prussia within seven years?
f Perhaps Paine would have denied the fact of the attempt at secession of tha
Southern States had he lived in 1861.
I Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance, 1796.


a miserable sot. His brother Republican, Wolfe Tone, who saw him
in Paris in 1797, says :
“.Thomas Paine is vain beyond belief, but he has reason to be vain, and for
my part I forgive him.”
Paine had the vanity to tell Tone that his writings had broken
the heart of Edmund Burke. But Tone, who had known Burke, knew
also that the death of his son had shattered his mind.
“ I have seen,” he says, “ the workings of a father’s grief on his spirit, and
I could not be deceived. Paine has no children. . . . But to return to Paine :
he drinks like a fish—a misfortune I have known to befall other celebrated
patriots.”
Alas ! for Paine’s short-lived influence: he vaunted that he had
struck down monarchies and revolutionized Europe ; and that his
name would be all-powerful with the people in England, and yet*
Hunt at his trial in 1819 said :
“ I here declare in the face of Heaven, that among the reformers, rich or
poor, I never recollect to have seen one line of the theological works of Thomas
Paine—why then identify the reformers with such doctrines?”
But, though so soon forgotten, Paine’s works had an enormous
circulation during the disturbed close of the 18th century, and it
seemed to many at the time that Pitt would fail in repressing their
evil effects. Many prosecutions failed in England, but in Scotland,
under a rather different condition of the law, and the energetic manage-
ment of Duudas, they were more successful, although according to
Margaret’s Diary,
“ At Pennycuike there are 174 men fur a reform and four against it, viz.,
the parson, the precentor, the exciseman, and the schoolmaster:”
and although Arthur O’Connor, writing from London (13th February,
1798), stated, “Scotland is Irish all over”—and although, when
Maurice Margarot was tried in Edinburgh,
“ a vast crowd assembled (on the 9th January, 1794) in front of his lodgings,
forced him and his friends into a chaise and drew the carriage to the
Parliament Close.”
Again, on the 13th January,
“A great crowd assembled at his lodgings, in Leigh Street, about ten
o’clock, and he was conducted with a wreath or arch held over him, with
inscriptions of ‘ Keason,’ * Liberty,’ &c.” f
It seems, however, that the Lord Provost of 1794 differed in
opinions from him of 1844, who assisted in paying posthumous
honour to Margarot, for he met Margaret’s cavalcade, demolished the
arch, arrested its supporters, and escorted Margarot to the court.
And all the while that whatever disaffection existed was simmering
in England, Scotland, or Ireland, agents were at work in Paris to pro-
mote the invasion of England.
What that invasion was to have been is now well known. The
* Vide Bamford’s Radical , vol. ii. p. 85.
f Annual Register , 1794.


instructions to Humbert told him to move the English poor to insur-
rection by distributing money or drink, by ascribing to the Government
the public wretchedness, and by instigating them to pillage of the
public granaries and of the property of the rich.
“ These calamities, which those of the Republic compel us to inflict, and to
which a ferocious nation compels us to expose it, will induce many of the
labouring people to espouse our cause.”
“ ‘ Provisions must be taken wherever they can be found, and if any town or
village refuse immediately to afford a necessary supply of provisions it must be
given up to pillage‘Spies must be punished with death.’ ‘Villages near
the legion which do no not send intelligence or ring their bells on the approach
of troops destined to act against the legion, must be burnt.’ ‘ Deserters and
prisoners are to be invited ‘to enlist into the new corps. If they should refuse,
their hair and eyebrows must be cut off, and if they should happen to be
retaken they are to be shot.’ ”
All these, and similar threatenings, fell into the hands of the lean
inflexible Pitt, who persevered in his course.
Wolfe Tone was scarcely kinder to Ireland than the French meant
to be towards England.
“If,” he says, “the men of property will not support us, they must fall:
we can support ourselves by the aid of that numerous and respectable class of
the community, the men of no property ” (March, 1796.) *
To ensure the support of General Clarke with the French
Directory Tone felt justified in attempting to bribe him with 1000 Z.
a year for his life, “and I rely on the nation to make good my
engagement.”
“ I cannot but observe,” he says, “ that I transcribed with the greatest sang
froid the orders to reduce to ashes the third city (Bristol) of the British
dominion, in which there is perhaps property to the amount of 5,000,000/. But
such a thing is war. . . . The truth is, 1 hate the very name of England ; I
hated her before my exile, I hate her since, and I will hate her always.”
Now, as Tone was allowed by Pitt’s clemency to leave Ireland on
his undertaking to go to America, and as, with reference to that cle-
mency, Tone, before leaving Ireland, wrote :
“ This assurance was given me unclogged by any stipulation or condition
whatever; and I have ever since, to the best of my judgment, observed a strict
neutrality
one may form a fair idea of the difficulties which beset Pitt, with
regard to pardoned Irishmen who would not act honourably; to
enraged Frenchmen, who denounced him as the enemy of mankind,
and were preparing armies of invasion to carry fire and slaughter
* It is amusing to observe (in confirmation of Trench's remarkable work,
Realities of Irish Life,) that Wolfe Tone, hearing in France that in 1781 there
had been a proposition in the French Court to invade Ireland, says, “So it seems
we had a narrow escape of obtaining our independence fifteen years ago. It is
better as it is, for then we were not united amongst ourselves, and I am not clear
that the first use we should have made of our liberty would not have been to have
begun cutting each other’s throats.” Fearing the effect of bribes among the
French, he adds, “ Pitt is as cunning as hell, and he has money enough, and we
have nothing here but assignats; I do not like it at all.”


into England; and to distant young colonies, where nine-tenths of
the male population were prisoners, and only small garrisons existed
to preserve internal order, or to resist an attack from abroad. I find
in Governor King’s MSS. the following memorandum of the population
at Hobart Town during his government.
Men. Women. Children.
Civil 6 3
Military .... 74 8 18
Prisoners victualled 129 20 175
Not victualled
12 7
210 33 200, or 443 in all.
What front could a Governor present to an enemy with such a
force, and such a domestic duty for that force to perform? Is it
wonderful that, with French Jacobins proselytizing among convicted
United Irishmen, a Governor was sometimes compelled to resort to
prompt or stern measures? or that Pitt, with the web of English
treachery and French conspiracy in his hand,* laid an iron hand on
those recreants who addressed themselves as “Yours fraternally” to
Frenchmen who were concocting schemes for ravaging English homes ?
The difficulties of a Governor of a colony in 1794 and 1806 could
not be estimated at their true value without some reference to this
condition of affairs: and if Joseph Holt was falsely accused of com-
plicity with the United Irish rising in New South Wales in 1804,
still, as he was accused on oath the Governor can hardly be blamed
for endeavouring to secure him.
CHAPTER VII.
As Holt’s Memoirs are in print it is needless to dwell upon his
career, except so far as the original MSS. in my hands throw light
upon it and upon the events of his time. In the same ship (the
‘ Minerva ’) which conveyed Holt to Sydney sailed Mr. William
Cox, the ancestor of so many much respected colonists of the pre-
sent day at Mulgoa and other places in New South Wales, and in
Tasmania.
Holt, though exiled, and subject to constraint if necessary, was
allowed to work on his own account, and after serving Mr. Cox as
farm manager, became himself a prosperous settler. He had unfor-
tunately been intimate with Margarot and other disaffected persons:
and his daring character and tact in command had endeared him to
the new arrivals from Ireland, who knew of his reputation.
Thus, when Governor Collins arrived at Port Phillip in 1803 to
form a settlement, one of the prisoners sent to Holt, by a boat, a
• Vide Reports of Committees of Secrecy, 1798 and 1799.


letter, of which (as it was afterwards seized with Holt’s papers in
1804) the original is in my hands. The style of it may be gathered
from the following extracts.
“ Sullivan Bay, Port Phillip,
“ Dear Joe November sth, 1803.
“ You will, I dare say, be surprised to hear that your unfortunate
Friend is a Convict at this horrid desolated place.
“ I was tried last December twelvemonths for Sedition in London, and
sentenced to be transported for seven years, so that I have five years still to
continue in this wretched situation. Would to God, my dear Holt, I was at
Port Jackson, Sydney, or any place where I could enjoy the company of some
of you my fellow-sufferers and friends. I have no particular news to inform
you of, only that our friend John Neil has turned out a Villain!—he resides
at the Castle with the bloodhounds, and is a most notorious common informer,
Harry Downs, Antrim Jack, Conway, Moore, Whitty, Billy Byrne, and many
others, have suffered death, but to the last behaved as men.
“ 1 had the pleasure of seeing Mick Reynolds in London; he was per-
fectly well, and beyond every one’s expectation recovered of his wound. If
you are acquainted with Phill Cunningham, Bill Leonard, John Bowen, or
any of them who were transported from Clonmel in the year ’99, remember
me most kindly to them, and let them know I expect to hear from them per
return of Bearer . . . The boat is just going to sail, so have not time to say
more than that I remain with the most fraternal respect
“ Your sincere friend,
“ Robert Walsh.
“ N.B. —Do not neglect writing per return of Bearer, and let me know
everything worth relating. Adieu.”
As it was in 1803, so it is in 1872. An Irishman is not allowed
to live in peace. Wolfe Tone, in spite of his compact with the
Government, did nothing but stir up strife, well knowing how many
Irish homes would be ravaged.
Poor Eobert Walsh and others were among his victims, and even
at the other end of the world Holt’s home was to be broken up. The
evidence of the captured rebels, coupled with Walsh’s and other letters,
consigned him to Norfolk Island; more perhaps on account of the
danger of having so able a soldier claimable as their leader by rebels,
than on account of any overt actions of his own.
With French emissaries abroad, French ships expected to aid
rebellious convicts, thousands of convicts guarded by but few troops,
it behoved Governor King to leave no obstacles in his path which he
could lawfully remove.
Holt denies that he was an accomplice in the rising in 1804. In
his autobiography he says:—
“ In February, 1804, the devil was as busy in New South Wales as ever
he had been in Ireland, and exerted all his evil influence. The lower people,
convicts and others, both English and Irish . . . conceived an opinion that
they could overpower the army, possess themselves of the settlement, and
make their escape from it . . . Some of them hinted to me that they thought
such a thing might be done. I thought so too, and that it might come to a
head, and therefore pointed out in the strongest language I was. master of, the
folly of such an attempt. * You saw,’ said I, *in Ireland that even there you
could not depend on each other, and lam sure it would be worse here. An


insurrection will only add to your misery and bring you to the gallows.’ . . .
I told them I would have nothing to do with the business, and if such a
scheme should be put into execution I would act on the side of the govern-
ment and the laws.”
He hints, however, with that fatal vanity which probably led him
to keep up a correspondence with his Jacobin admirers, that, had he
been disposed to take the lead, he “ could have made a short job of it.”
On the 14th March he avers that he saw some men standing together,
and suspected something ; and that, receiving a friendly warning from
one Timothy Holster to keep at home as the Irish were about to
break out, he proceeded to warn Mr. Cox, and took to Mr. Cox’s
house his own wife and child, and there kept guard all night. He
gives an incorrect version, from hearsay, of the Castle Hill skirmish
(on the sth March), and says that his having visited a Frenchman
(Francis Duliatt) was made a cause of suspicion against him; that
he was sent for by Governor King, to whom he explained that he had
gone to Duliatt for money due to him, and to whom he exhibited the
note of hand of the transaction.
“ The Governor looked at me with the enraged countenance of a she-bear
robbed of her whelps, and said, ‘ Go home, sir, take care of yourself, or I will
hang you.’ ”
Twice, Holt says, his house was searched for papers.
On the 19th March he was again brought before the Governor—
this time in charge of a constable. He complains that the Governor’s
conduct was overbearing and passionate. Holt was sent to Sydney
gaol, and on the 22nd March was brought before the Bench. His
account implies that he successfully baffled all witnesses brought
against him, but it was probably penned from memory, long after the
event, and it would be unfair to blame him for its inaccuracies.
On the 23rd and 24th March he was again brought up, and he
gives the following portion of an address, which was unfortunately
interrupted.
“ I thought I lived in one of His Majesty’s islands where the well-founded
and glorious law of England would be allowed to flow in its full and free
course of impartiality, sweeping away by the strength of its tide all the
impurities of our nature; bat instead of this, I see the current of justice
impeded by hatred and malice, and overshadowed by a dark design against
my life. 1 only wish for a man-like trial, and I desire only British law.” *
* It is a pity that in editing Holt’s memoirs, Mr, Oroker took upon himself to
correct the spelling (except as to names of persons and places). The document
which I have to quote in Holt’s own writing, gives a different idea of Holt’s
acquirements from the above high-flown and well-spelt production. But in pro-
portion as Holt was uneducated, so does his natural ability become more prominent.
Mr. Oroker’s book furnishes an amusing instance of the mistakes which even
a practised editor may make when not conversant practically with the subject
treated of. Holt says (vol. ii., p. 163) the natives “take a weapon called a Nula-
nula, which is a kind of battle-axe made of very hard wood,” on which Croker
remarks in a note, “ Although Collins has collected a list of the names given by
the natives of New South Wales to no less than twenty-six varieties of spears,
clubs, and other implements of war, no name bearing any resemblance to Nulanula
is to be found therein.”
In Collins' list, nevertheless, I find “ Gnal-lung ulla ” as “ name of club,” and


More witnesses were examined, and he was sent to gaol. His
wife sought the Governor, and Holt says that she was told that if Holt
gave bail for 4000 Z. he might stay: that Mr. Smyth, Mr. Cox,
Mr. Marsden, and Mr. Hobby offered themselves as bail; but that the
Governor hearing this, said, “ No, he has too many friends in the
colony, and shall go; ” on which Mrs. Holt exclaimed,
“ It was both a sin and a shame to send a man away from his family upon
charges which could not be proved against him on a fair trial; ”
and in the bitterness of her heart she added,
“ May God requite you as you deserve. He will be with you wnen you
will be out of this.”
(A letter of Mrs. Holt’s, dated 3rd April, at this period, will show
that Holt does injustice to his wife’s character and prudence in this
passage: but who can wonder if his indignation be a little blind; and
if here, as elsewhere, he recounts stories to Governor King’s prejudice
which have no truth in them ? How many others are there who circu-
late stories on hearsay, and yet have not half Holt’s provocation !)
On the 19th April Holt sailed in the ‘ Betsey ’ for Norfolk Island :
“ I was put on board early in the morning, and was thus cruelly separated
from my faithful and affectionate partner, leaving her behind me in a strange
country, on my way to a stranger one, a barbarous island, the dwelling-
place of devils in the human shape, the refuse of Botany Bay, the doubly
damned.”
At Norfolk Island he was for a time doomed to labour. He nar-
rates that on a fleet of several ships coming in sight, he and sixty-five
others were put in the gaol, the French flag being then “ victorious
in many parts of the world,” and Holt believes that the intention was
to burn the gaol with the prisoners, if the ships should have proved
to be French. Captain Piper, the then Commandant, of whose kind-
ness Holt speaks gratefully, disclaimed to him all knowledge of such
an intention however. Of Mr. Wentworth, the surgeon (father of
W. C. Wentworth) Holt speaks gratefully, as having saved him from
the harsh impositions of Major Foveaux, Piper’s predecessor.
In 1805 Holt left Norfolk Island, after a stay of nineteen months,
and was taken to Van Diemen’s Land, and Governor Collins showed
great kindness to him, and according to Holt’s statement, offered him
the post of superintendent of the Government stock and cultivation;
but his wife was disinclined to leave Sydney, and Holt returned thither
in February, 1806.
“In a few days His Excellency Governor King sent for me. I waited on
him accordingly, and thanked him for allowing me to return to my family.
as Europeans nearly always call the club “nulla nulla” this is evidently what
Holt meant to write. No doubt “ nulla nulla ” scarcely expresses the true sound ;
neither does Collins' spelling; but knowing Holt’s mode of spelling, Oroker
might have avoided so gross a mistake as denying that Collins gave a name
bearing any resemblance to the one given by Holt.
The club itself was a common one before the natives were “ improved ” off the
face of the earth by their invaders. A sound between “ nullanulla ’ and “ gnahla-
gnahla ” best expresses the name so far as our English letters suffice—the letter
a having a broad sound as in Italian.


And I have this proud consolation, that he told me with his own lips he was
sorry I had been unjustly punished. He was pleased to say that he would
hereafter be my friend. I replied that it was too late to offer physic to a
dead man, nor could I restrain myself from making impertinent answers to
His Excellency.”
Holt then made an oration against Major Foveaux (Commandant
on his arrival in Norfolk Island): —
“ The Governor heard me patiently to the end, and then told me that he
never gave orders to put me to labour. He then said that he thought I might
turn preacher instead of Crookes (who was a little swaddling fellow, that
taught in the school at Parramatta), The Governor concluded by saying, ‘Go
home, Mr. Holt, and beware of rocks and quicksands,’ which latter words he
repeated three times over, and then asked me if I knew what he meant? I
told him very coolly that I could not be certain what he meant, hut I believe
what he intended to say was to warn me against bad company. He answered,
‘ Yes, I see that you do know.’ Upon which I bowed and departed.”
Of Governor King himself it is proper to say a few words. He was
bora on St. George’s Day in 1758; went to sea as a midshipman in
H.M.S. ‘ Swallow,’ at twelve years of age ; and was in active service
from 1775 to 1784, after which there was an interval of peace. In
1786 he was appointed Lieutenant of the ‘Sirius,’ Phillip being
Commander.
Phillip himself speaks of King as
“An officer much esteemed by Phillip; as of great merit in his profession,
and highly spoken of in his letters as a man whose perseverance in any service
might fully be depended upon.”
King had arrived with the first ships in 1788, and had soon after-
wards, as Lieutenant-Governor, founded the settlement at Norfolk
Island.
In 1790 he had sailed from Sydney with despatches, no intelligence
having been received from England for more than two years. Provi-
sions were scarce: the Governor fared no better than others, but drew
his weekly allowance of 2 V lbs. of flour, 2 lbs. of pork, a pint of peas,
and 1 lb. of rice. The tender ‘ Supply ’ was sent to Batavia to procure
food, and by such a roundabout conveyance King started with his
despatches for England. He returned thence in 1791, in the ‘ Gorgon,’
bringing the Territorial Seal with him. In 1796 he was again Lieut.-
Governor at Norfolk Island, but returned in that year to England, and
in April, 1800, he arrived in Sydney in the ‘ Speedy,’ to assume the
post of Governor there.
He was passionate, but kind-hearted; he has been charged with
permitting many things which neither he nor any other Governor
could have prevented in the then state of the colony. Dependent as
he was upon a few to maintain discipline amongst many, he yet saw
much improvement during the term of his government.
He it was who broke through the monopoly in selling wine and
spirits, previously confined to commissioned or non-commissioned
officers. He completed a battery at George’s Head in 1803;
having always a keen eye to the exclusion of the French, he formed


almost simultaneously settlements at Hobart Town, Launceston, Port
Phillip, and at Hunter’s River; he was the first to sanction the holding
of public worship by dissenters from the Church of England, but he
was most punctilious in his instructions to his subordinates that they
were to have Divine Service duly performed.
That he was determined, he showed within a few months after
assuming his government; for I find it recorded that in December,
1800, when the use of ardent spirits was producing frightful conse-
quences, he compelled two spirit-laden vessels to leave Sydney without
landing their cargoes.
He founded The Sydney Gazette, in which he issued his general
orders, including the first proclamation of martial law in Australia.
He was the warm friend of Flinders, who in return entertained
the sincerest affection for him.
He first displayed the Royal standard in the colony. He fostered
the sealing trade and whale fishery, and stimulated commercial inter-
course with New Zealand, and with the South Sea Islands.
In a word, he was hearty, frank, honest, faithful, but rough and
impulsive.
On one occasion an able-bodied man waited upon him for charity,
pleading past military service as a claim.
The Governor, after questioning him, concluded his interview at
his door by saying, “You are military, are you? Well, let’s try if
you remember your drill.” With that he gave the necessary word of
command, which set the man marching “ double quick ” to the gate,
whereupon the Governor marched in and shut the door.
Some settlers, who had been flooded out, petitioned in person to bo
allowed to exchange their allotments. King said they must abide by
their choice, and after long colloquy they sorrowfully retired. They
had not gone far before his heart was moved, and he called to them to
come back, and granted their petitions.*
His term of government saw the early stages of the wool-growing
interest established by the celebrated John Macarthur, with whose
descendants King’s descendants were to be allied by marriage.
He encouraged the settlement of free immigrants on the rich
alluvial lands of the Hawkesbury and Nepean Rivers, and when he
retired from office he carried with him the good wishes of the great
bulk of the community.
His last act before embarking was to review the military and the
volunteers known as the Loyal Association.
In little more than eighteen months his successor, Bligh, had
quarrelled with John Macarthur and others, and was deposed by the
military who had been so loyal under King.
No complete account of the United Irishmen’s rising in 1804
having met my view, and many original papers respecting it having
fallen into my hands, it seems proper to give some idea of its extent,
* When a similar application was made to Sir George Gipps in 1844 by
sufferers at Gundagai, he replied that when men bought land they took it as they
did a leg of mutton or a wife —for better or worse.


the preparation which preceded it, and the action of some of the
principal characters concerned.
At two o’clock in the morning on 28th September, 1800, I find
John Macarthur writing to Governor King that he has arrested several
men; that as
“a knowledge of their intentions being discovered might induce these mis-
guided people to make an immediate attempt upon the detachment under my
command, I thought it prudent to guard against the possibility of any surprise
by ordering my company under arms.”
He adds that he has arrested several persons,
“ and I have yet some hopes that an attempt will be made before morning to
rescue them ; if there should, 1 am confident that I shall be enabled to give
you a very good account of them in the morning.”
Later in the day he writes another letter:—
“I am sorry that the Irishmen could not be prevailed upon to show
themselves either last night or this morning; but notwithstanding this
disappointment I have hopes that there will be sufficient evidence obtained
to convict a number of them.”
Continual attempts were made to escape in French ships.
In November, 1802, I find the Rev. Mr. Marsden writing to
Governor King that Mr, Palmer’s boat is to be seized
“ the next time she goes round to Botany for lime for the gaol; the
prisoners intend to take her, with a view of getting on board the French ships
when they leave Port Jackson.” “ Perhaps it would be as well to permit them
to make their attempt, and take them in the act if possible. 1 expect to hear
more of their measures in a day or two ; one of the lime-burners for the gaol,
who always goes round to assist in lading the boat, is one of the men;
his name is Norris ; a very active daring fellow.”
It must be admitted that in Captain Macarthur and the reverend
chaplain the Governor had found able coadjutors; nor were their
services lightly esteemed by the convicts.
I find a MS. letter to Governor King, dated 16th September, 1800,
detailing a scheme for a rising. Pikes were actually made and con-
cealed. Every settler’s
“arms were to be seized at the first onset. Every soldier in lodgings was
to be surprised. To arm a number they would not intrust with the business
before they rose. Every man is sworn to secrecy by receiving a ticket in such
a manner that he cannot convict any person of administering an illegal oath.
Mr. Marsden was to be cut off at the first. ... If defeated to fly into the
woods, subsist on the wild cattle, and make frequent descents in different parts
of the colony. If forced to the woods, a party of three or four hundred
natives to be brought from a distance to join them. (In this part of the
business a name is mentioned that is hardly to be credited, Lieutenant
Cummings.*). . . . Two committees have sat, one at Sydney, the other
* Lieutenant Cummings was originally in the New South Wales Corps as
ensign; on the 31st December, 1792, he received a grant of twenty-five acres of
land. Holt says that he was “ a man well acquainted with the natives.” Hence,
probably, his name was used as in the text to encourage disaffection.
I find a MS. letter from Cummings complaining of his arrest in 1802. “ I was,


at Parramatta, one if not both of my own servants were at the latter. They
rejoice that Martin Haden will convict Harold* of duplicity, that the rest will
to my unspeakable astonishment, made prisoner by the Provost M, and a magis-
trate by your Excellency’s warrant, led from my own house as such, and detained
for some hours, when I was as unaccountably liberated, though with an injunction to
consider myself a prisoner. It would be painful, and I hope unjust, to suppose but
for a moment that a man in so eminent a situation as your Excellency could act
from caprice, or place any man of character in an auquard situation, without the
most presumptive prove and the maturest consideration I expect from your
Excellency’s justice and humanity a speedy and legal examination. As a british
subject I demand it. Your Excellency has marked me. lam branded as a traitor.
Let it therefore be made publickly manifest that I am so, or let the charge be as
publickly retracted Justice to yourself, to the community at large, and to
the character of a man who has been hitherto as a soldier and a gentleman.
Your Excellency will no doubt show that the grounds of your conduct have been
at least plausible, and that your Excellency is in more haste to clear than to con-
demn. I cannot but anticipate and congratulate your Excellency on the pleasure
it must yield you. In expectation of which I have the honour to remain,
Your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
W. Cummings.
Though Cummings stumbled a little in spelling, he wrote a fine bold hand.
No doubt the Governor had some strong statements on which he acted. In Mar-
garet's journal I find that on the 27th March, 1802, many prisoners were sent from
Parramatta to Sydney; that there was in Sydney “ grande allarme ’’ on the 26th ;
that on the 12th April, “ King, au poltron et fou, de'sarma tousles Habitans pour
renforcer ses ennemis les officiers ”; on the 25th April, “toujours peur,” the
French ship ‘ Naturaliste ’ arriving on the same day. On the 28th Margarot is
ordered to report himself at Parramatta; on the 29th the order was discharged.
On the 30th, “ Tousles Irlandais s’enfurent aParramatta—point de vaisseau Anglais
encore!!! ” On the Ist May, “ les atrocites pratique'es en Irlande recommencerent
ici aujourd’hui.” On the 3rd May, “ Tousles Irlandais sont ramene's, mis en
prison.”
Holt states that when he was unlawfully distilling (in 1806) Cummings
obtained his confidence and then informed against him; but Holt may have been
mistaken.
* Father Harold was a fellow-passenger with Holt in the ‘Minerva,’ in 1799,
together with a clergyman of the Church of England, a captain in the army, and
a doctor. “ These gentlemen,” says Holt, “ were all exactly circumstanced as I
was, and were going on their travels for the same reason.” .... “I asked why
they were rebels. Did you sustain great losses by oppression ? No. Were your
houses burned ? No. Were you taken in battle ? No. Did you rob any one ?
No; we were taken too soon. Well,” said I, “ you deserve to be transported if it
was only for your stupidity. You had nothing to complain of. You have not,
like myself, earned what you have got; you should have done something to entitle
you to have your passage paid by the Crown.”
“. . . . Father Harold had a parish also, but he wished to make his faith
ascendant; that, perhaps, was a good reason for his disaffection; but would he
have been better off had the rebellion been successful ? I think not Cap-
tain John St. Leger on full pay from a good king! what could induce him to
desert his honourable commission?” (Margaret’s diaries show that he was in
constant intercourse with St. Leger, which of itself implies that St. Leger never
abandoned his proneness to sedition.) “So of all this chance medley,” continues
Holt, “ but one, and that one was myself, had any good reason beyond their own
fancy to become disaffected.”
The priest Harold eventually returned to Ireland; but he had been found so
troublesome that in 1805 I find he was at Norfolk Island, and thence petitioned
Governor King to be allowed “to have recourse to the Ministry of a Priest.” “ I
have presumed to address three or four petitions to your Excellency, dubious


escape without suspicion, or be able to rally again. My informer is a
volunteer; from the first I told him to coniine himself strictly to truth.
I would make him no promises; but as it was an act of public justice, his
reward or punishment will be according to the truth of his information. This
day will collect and arrange what information I can, and personally wait on
your Excellency to-morrow.”
Mr. Marsden who “ was to be cut off at the first,” was busy mean-
time. From MSS. letters from himself to the Governor, I find that
on the 7th September he had instituted a search for pikes; that on
the evening of the 9th Harold had given information of the finding of
eight or ten pikes, hut wanted
“a reasonable time to gain what he wishes. I suspect he may wish to
amuse and gain time to effect his diabolical plan. 1 think the time for his
stay ought to be fixed. What his intention is we cannot tell. He may be able
to do much mischief here in a short time. If a given number of hours are
allowed him to do the business he is come up upon, it may alarm him and compel
him to bring the matter to an issue. Should he give me the pikes tu-morrow
morning, I will send them down.”
To this the Governor replies—
“In answer to yours, you will be so good as to send for Mr. Harold, and
inform him by reading this note that it is expected he gets every information and
collects all the pikes by sunset this evening; he is to be confined at the barrack
as yet, persuaded rather of your not having received them.” He writes badly and
spells thus; “imagin,” “Privihdge,” “paralel”; he tenders his service, “without
any emolument from the Government or the people, that your benevolent views
may be extended to the Catholicks of this Island, who join all the other Inha-
bitants in Sentiments of highest Esteem and tenderest affection for your Excel-
lency. James Harold. Eeb. 16th, 1805.”
The last sentence was too effusive for the Governor’s faith it seems, for I find
his endorsement on the petition thus: —“ Petition of James Harold. No answer.
Seditious.” The last word may only indicate the drawer in which the petition
was to be deposited : for I find other MSS. similarly endorsed.
Captain St. Leger was occasionally arrested. I find a letter from him in
prison thanking the Governor for “ ordering off my irons; should my conduct in
time induce you to order me to an employment less laborious, my whole study
shall be to merit such indulgence. Your Excellency, lam sure, dislikes pro-
fessions ; I will, therefore, only with truth assure you that if I did not drink, no
action of mine upon the most severe scrutiny should ever give offence; and
drunkenness shall necer more be laid to my charge. John S. Leger.” St. Leger
wrote an excellent hand. Whether he succeeded in the task of conquering him-
self I know not.
Dr. O’Connor, one of Holt’s fellow exiles, appears to have been imprisoned in
1802 for some presumed seditious proclivilies. I find a MS. petition from him in
“ Sydney Gaol,’' praying that certain words might be excused—“ my feelings were
wounded, but I trust to your clemency to pardon any impropriety they might
have hurried me into.” Thomas Prosser, another United Irishman, also petitions
from Sydney Gaol (16th Feb., 1801) that be may not be sent to Norfolk Island,
“ and my future behaviour shall ever be such as to meet with your sanction.”
Margaret’s French journal shows that the order for Prosser and McCarthy
“de partir pour Norfolk” was issued on the 16th, and that on the 19th, “Prosser
and McCarthy furent liberes et passerent.”
Prosser and McConnor both wrote excellently, and were evidently educated
sufficiently to make them dangerous if they were disposed to be seditious, as Mar-
garet’s private journals imply that they wore.


guard this night, and brought down here to-morrow morning, as we are in pos-
session of fresh information, which proves that if he does not make an instant
discovery and delivery of the pikes, he must take the consequences. This you
will be so good to read to him wherever he may be; I would not have him
sent for, as that may be a plea for stopping his researches. When he comes
down let him bring what pikes he has with him, but you must be careful that
fresh ones are not forged to deceive.”
On the 10th (twelve o’clock at night), Marsden writes—
“ Harold cannot obtain a single pike by any means. He positively
declared to me he had some the last night. He has had his full liberty to-day
to search where he pleased, and to examine whom he pleased. A man named
Bryan Fury, he says, told him he had made eight, and had only two more to
make before he had completed his quota. I had Fury apprehended this
evening, and desired Harold to examine him privately in one of my rooms, and
got Dr. Thomson secreted* in the room, in order to learn what past between
Fury and the priest. Fury denied everything respecting the pikes. He had
neither made any, nor knew of any being made. Harold tried every means
with him to no purpose.
“ Harold then examined Fury before me, and several of the officers here.
He still persisted in his ignorance of the pikes, and declared in the most
solemn manner he had never told Harold he had made any. He said Harold
wanted him to make some the last night, and told him it would be the means
of saving his life and many others, but Fury told him he could not.”
Harold referred to other men, Scott and Murray, with no better
success; and Marsden adds :
“ All parties shall come down to-morrow—Harold, Fury, Murray, and
Scott, if he can be found. ... I have my doubts of the truth of what has
been both said and sworn. The priest wanting Fury to make pikes, and
asserting he had got some which he would bring me in the morning, makes me
believe there are none in existence, and that a good deal of the affair has been
some vague idle conversation among themselves.”
All was not over, however. On the 30th September, 1800, Richard
Atkins, Captain of a Loyal Association, writes to the Governor:—
“ The present alarming state of Parramatta requiring every aid that can
lead to security, I beg leave (authorized to do so) to offer the services of the
Loyal Association, as a night-guard, under such orders and associations as your
Excellency may approve of. This may be considered as adding something to
the protection of the town, as well in preventing a surprise, as in keeping the
night-watch vigilant to their duty. I flatter myself your Excellency will at
all times find the LoyaFAssociation ready to stand forward in support of his
Majesty’s Government, and your authority, and that individually I shall on
every occasion approve myself, your Excellency, &c., &c.
On the 2nd October, 1800, Richard Dore, Judge Advocate, writes
“i n reply to your Excellency’s letter received yestereven, lam of
opinion that the offenders in the late intended insurrection cannot be capitally
tried by a court of criminal judicature, no overt act being proved against any
of them to establish a conviction.”
* It would seem by his thus imitating Louis XI., that the Governor had read
Philip de Comines.
F


A grim memorandum from Marsden * (who was “ to be cut off at
the first ”) shows that some offenders were punished summarily :
“ The prisoners have received their punishment as much as they could
bear. . . . They shall be sent down as soon as the doctor thinks it safe for
them to be removed.” (Oct. 4th.)
On the 24th December, 1800, the Governor, “ from some circum-
stances which have come to my knowledge,” sends a detachment to
Captain Macarthur’s assistance at Parramatta :
“ If it comes within your directions or observation, my desire is that the
supposed insurgents may be permitted to come to some point. If you are
possessed of the orders I gave you on a former occasion, they will suffice on
this. If not, I have such dependence on your prudence that lam assured
you will act and do for the best.”
On the same day Captain Macarthur replies that he is endeavouring
to “ learn more,” adding—
“It may not he improper to observe that this being the day on which my
company receive their month’s pay, many of them will most probably be drunk
to-morrow, unless I take some particular measures to prevent it, and to do so
would most probably create an alarm that might soon reach the ears of those
turbulent wretches who create so much trouble.”
King’s endorsement on this MS. is, “ United Irishmen, Captain
Macarthur, 24th December, 1800.”
On the 25th, Macarthur reports that the night has passed quietly.
He sends back the re-inforcing detachment, and has
“great pleasure in saying that the company doing duty here were perfectly
sober, with only three exceptions.”
On the same day Atkins takes the deposition of one Edward
Morris, that at twelve o’clock on the night of the 24th, Richard
Norris and Thomas Dunn had compelled him to go with them to a
place where one Clarke and other were assembled, and informed him
of a plot to seize Parramatta;
“ that they had 150 pikes ready; that with the muskets they should get
from the settlers, and the ammunition they had they could easily take Parra-
matta ; that there were 300 English and the same number of Irish, and that
there could he no doubt of succeeding in their attempt; that they were all to
meet at the Park gate, and that Joseph Holt and William Henry Alcock were
to meet them and give them instructions.”
* The Rev. Mr. Marsden was a conspicuous character in the early period in
New South Wales: —active, determined, and zealous in the service both of religion
and of the State. One of the convicts tried a singular plan in order to get rid of
Mr. Marsden, who was known to be a humane man. The convict, who could
swim well, pretended to be drowning, in the hope that Mr. Marsden would plunge
into the water to save him, and that then the convict would be able to drown his
rescuer. The ruse succeeded so far as to induce Mr. M. to plunge in, but he was,
in spite of corpulence, strong enough to overpower his assailant, and to drag him
to the shore.


As Edward Morris’s informants were “ much in liquor,” he had
given them the slip, and proceeded to give information to Captain
Atkins, who apprised Captain Macarthur, at the same time “ putting
the Loyal Patriotic Association under his immediate command.”
When brought before Justices in Sydney, Richard Norris denied
the truth of Morris’s statement: hut one Abell Purvor had made
depositions at Parramatta which agreed with that of Morris as to
Clarke’s part in the sedition.
Early in 1801 further information was obtained by Mr, Marsden: —
“ If your Excellency would wish to see my informer, he shall wait upon
you this evening, and I will attend him. If what he relates be true, there is
not much time to be lost.”
Again in 1802 some serious disclosures were made.
On the 27th March arrests of United Irishmen were made by
Marsden. Pikes and pike-handles which “ Carrol was seen by
Jennings and Sergeant Bradley to cut to their proper lengths” were
seized. “ I hope by apprehending the above men a stop will be put
to their intention at present.” James Butterworth deposed that
Pat. Cottney frequently told him that there was to be a rising of the
Irish ; that they had 400 pikes ready ;
“ that Mr. Marsden and Mr. Cox would be put to a cruel death ; that they
would massacre those men who had formerly been known to give information ;
that Mr. Cummings was to be commander ; that they had as much as 800 or
900 guns and blunderbusses and pistols ; that Sydney was to be first attacked,
a strong guard being placed by the rebels to intercept communication between
Sydney and Parramatta; that Mealmaker* was highest in command at Parra-
matta ; that the English would be placed in the front, and in such a situation!
they would be compelled to fight or be put to death by those behind them
that when the colony was taken, a ship was to be sent to Norfolk
Island to relieve the prisoners there, —with much more of similar
purport.
John Jennings deposed that he concealed himself by Mr. Marsden’s
directions under the bed at Butterworth’s house; that he there heard
a conversation, about the rising, between Butterworth and Cottney.
“ That Cottney seemed very careful of his conversation being private,
and got up, and went out, and looked around the place; that the English
were to be placed in front, and compelled to fight; that Mr. Cox and Mr.
Marsden were to be killed ; that if they got Sydney every other place would
surrender.”
Corporal John Cregmore deposed that he also was posted by order
under the bed at Butterworth’s house, and heard Butterworth ask
Carrol, “What news?” who replied, everything was right, but that
he rather supposed the soldiers smelt a rat (which must have highly
amused Cregmore) ; that Mr. Cummings was to be principal in com-
mand, &c., &c.
Sergeant Jonas Bradley also deposed that he was concealed in
* A great friend of Margaret’s,
f A truly Irish mode of obtaining friends in battle.
F 2


Butterworth’s house with John Jennings, and heard similar conversa-
tion. Mr. Marsden, Mr. Cox, and Richard Rice were to be killed; and
Butterworth asked who was to be the fourth, and
“ Carrol replied he would be Mr. Moore ; that Butterworth observed he was
a big man that would take two or three men to kill; that Carrol replied * No,
no! a little boy with a pike would do his business; ’ that Butterworth remarked
it was a dangerous attempt; that Carrol replied * Yes, it is; death or liberty.’ ”
All the witnesses agreed that one Hume was said to be in the
plot, and, on doubts being expressed as to his sobriety,
“ Carrol said there was no fear, for that he would be a different man when
he had the command.”
The Report to the Governor was as follows: —
“ From what has appeared in the preceding testimonies which we have
deliberated upon, we are of opinion that it was manifestly the intention of
Carrol and Cotney with others to overturn his Majesty’s Government in
this territory, to sacrifice the lives of many of his Majesty’s subjects, and
generally to disturb the peace and tranquillity of the country; and we are
further of opinion that some vigorous and effective measures should be speedily
adopted for the purpose of preventing similar attempts.
“ 28 th March, 1802.
“ W. Paterson.
“ Richard Atkins.
“ Samuel Marsden.
“ J. Harris.
“Jas. Thomson.
“ Wm. Cox.”
The first signature is that of the Lieutenant Governor (under
King). The second is that of the Judge Advocate, and the tenor of the
Report is a sufficient answer to those who have of late years en-
deavoured to make light of the difficulties with which Governor King
had to contend.
Many persons were at once apprehended. Margarot’s French
Journal (28th March) records:—
Browne passa; le soir on lui fit des avanies sous de miserables pretextes.
April Wu —Les nouvelles commencent if voir le jour.
April Bth.—La torture continue.
April 9 th. —Ditto.*
On the 31st March Mealmaker sends a petition showing that
he was
“ taken out of his bed on the night of the 26th and carried to the guard-
house, Parramatta, from which brought down to Sydney jail, where he now is,
on a charge of being concerned in some plot or other against the State; what
the plot is or who is the makers of it he knows not, or whether there is one
at all; though sent to this country as convicted of sedition, he ever would
have spurned with indignation the man who would mention a plot or Rebel-
lious movement to him; that your petitioner hath never beenjactuated by any
* One useful hint derivable from Margarot’s journal is the sound of the native
name “ Walla moulla,” corrupted now to “ Woolloomooloo ”


principles but the love of his country and of mankind in General; if he hath
been mistaken his Mistake hath been that of many Good and Great both in
this and the last age, (he is) agrieved by his present situation, as he never hath
Given any cause in word, write, or act to bring his name in Question, but hath
lived in the retiredst manner posible, having no correspondence nor no con-
nection with nobody but as your Business led him. . . . That if the life,
liberty, and happiness of your petitioner may be taken or destroyed by the
villainy or perfidy of any one, then is your petitioner Miserable indeed, for
never can he Give less ocasson than at present he hath done. . . . May it
theirfor please your Excelency to take the above into your consideration, and
Grant that Justice which his extraordinary case requires, and your petitioner
shall ever pray, &c. . M Geoege MealMaKEß .»*
Hume, whose sobriety had been questioned among his fellows,
also petitions that he may be released, from confinement to his house
(3rd April), and hopes that his explanation will perfectly satisfy the
Governor that “ the epithet vagrant can in no way be annexed to my
carrector.”
Cumming’s letter of the same date has already been given in a
note,f and on the 6th April he writes to the Judge Advocate to say
that he has friends who are willing to vouch for his principles as a
loyal subject,—
“ And I beg to know from you, sir, what is the nature of the recognicene
lam required-by his Excellency the Governor to enter into.”
On the Ist May, Margaret writes;—
“ Les atrocites pratiquees en Irlandc recommencerent ici aujourd’hui.”
On the 3rd May—
“ Tons les Irlandais sont ramends, mis en prison.”
On the 4th May—
“ On mit tousles Irlandais en fers, douloureux.”
On the Ist May, the Lieutenant Governor (Paterson), and Messrs.
Atkins, Harris, Thomson, and Jno. Palmer examine the evidence
against one Edward Dogherty, charged with seditious expressions,
and find
“ that as no overt act has been committed, Ed. Dogherty cannot suffer
death, but we consider it necessary that the most exemplary punishment
should be inflicted on him. Therefore agreeable to your proclamation bearing
date 2nd April, 1802, it is expressed that whosoever in this colony (conform-
able to Act 37, Geo. III.) shall not discover any unlawful combination or
illegal act done or to be done, shall receive 1000 lashes. We consider the
crime of Ed. Dogherty coming within the said order, do therefore sentence
him to receive 1000 lashes, and in order to deter others from similar offences,
that he be further transported for five years and kept in heavy irons in the
jail gang.”
* Mealmaker appears to have been commissioned by the Dundee Friends of
Liberty to attend at the General Convention in Edinburgh in 1793. On the
21st November, 1793, he was appointed on a Committee with Margarot and others ;
on the 27th he was in the chair as President (State Trials, vol. xxiii,), and no
doubt thought himself worthy to supersede Pitt,
f Page 63.


Dogherty appears to have fabricated a story to obtain favour, or
to bave been awed into truth-telling, for on the next day (2nd May),
before a bench consisting of the same persons, with the exception of
Marsden in place of Palmer, Dogherty deposes at great length to his
knowledge of the conspiracy; incriminating Mealmaker, and Mr.
Cummings, and others on hearsay.
As a sample of the kind of work which the Governor had to do,
and of the assistance rendered by his reverend coadjutor, the following
letter, though unconnected with the United Irishmen, may here be
given. Mr. Marsden writes on the Ist November, 1802 :
“ In consequence of the inquiry on Saturday morning at Castle Hill, it
will be necessary to make some alterations in the task of the working people
at that settlement. There are a number of very idle characters there, who do
not perform half a day’s work, and greatly discourage those men who will
work. I have directed Nowland to put all the good working men into gangs
by themselves, and all the idle by themselves, The men who can and will
work will have no cause to complain of doing the task of the idle. Govern-
ment task of fire-making is 63 rods per week. Your Excellency will find from
Nowland’s account that some of the men did not burn off more than 15 rods ;
63 rods is rather too much. The Bench of magistrates, when the rations of
dry provisions was reduced, fixed the task of the settlers’ men at 40 rods each
man per week. This was conceived to be a fair and moderate task. I think as the
number of men will be very great, that some established regular task,
according to the strength of the gangs, must be fixed upon, and the super-
intendant enjoined to see that task performed. All the idle are anxious to be put
to day’s work, and then they will idle the whole of their time away. There
were two pit-saws sent down which were past work six weeks ago, none were
sent up in lieu of them ; we have only six saws at Parramatta, and two at the
Hawkesbury ; we could employ two pair more at Parramatta and two pair at
the Hawkesbury if there were saws for the people to work with. We have no
iron to make the axes of, &c., at Toongabbee.”
Early in 1803 there was another outrage committed by the Castle
Hill gang. The house of Chevalier de Clambe was attacked. A
letter from him lies before me written in clear bold characters: —
h j) EAR g IB “ Hermitage, February 15 th, 1803.
“ I am very sorry to inform you that this evening before I came from
Parramatta many men did come at my house and did robb all my plate, cloth,
linen, fire-arms and amunition, coutelas, &c. &c., and struc and threat with
pistol on the breast my housekeeper. Some men in employment at Castle
Hill’s settlement are very much implicated in it, but I fear for it to secure
them; so if you would be so kind to come you self to-marrow mourning, 1 will
not move noting so that you shall see the all by your one eyes.
“ I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
“ Le Chev. De Clambe.”
On the 17th February, Mr, Marsden informs the Governor of the
capture of two of the robbers, after violent resistance: and on the 19th
further captures are reported by Mr. Arndell from the Hawkesbury,
who says:—
“ Your Excellency need be under no apprehension for us here, provided
you will be pleased to send about six muskets with bayonets, and two pairs


of horse pistols, with a sufficient quantity of powder and lead to make buck
shot of.” ... He sends “ John McCormack, a runaway, also three men, who
put eleven of the runaways over the river at Portland Head.” . . . Thompson
and a party just returned traced them to the mountains, over or around which
they mean to go, under a false idea of finding a new settlement, but declared
their intention not to injure any person except such as may attempt to take
them. A party is just going off towards the Grose to intercept them ; they
will be soon taken if they do not penetrate the mountains, which if they do,
they will soon fall a prey to hunger and misery.”
Again on the 18th August, 1863, Mr. Marsden writes: —
“ Two constables whom I sent after one Hughes have not returned, nor
can I hear of them; unless some information is received in the course of the
day I shall be apprehensive something has happened to them. I find the
Irishmen were collecting what lead and gunpowder they could lately. Three
counties of them have united together, if my information is correct . . .
Colonel de Clambe is amongst the number of those intended to be murdered
when they break from Castle Hill again. Ido expect to-morrow, if Hughes
is apprehended, to come at some further knowledge of their intentions.’
On the 19th he writes:—
“ Hughes has escaped from two constables after they had him secured
with handcuffs. I was afraid he would not be easily brought in ... I have
obtained from one of the men in gaol what information 1 can . . . Hughes I
am informed was a captain in the rebel army, and a most hardened man.”
Governor King’s endorsement on this letter is, “ Croppies,
August 12th, 1803. Mr. Marsden.”
The fire which had so long been smouldering was destined to
burst into notice in 1804. On Saturday, the 3rd March, Captain
Abbott incloses some information to Ensign and Adjutant Minchin
which
“ you will be so good as to communicate to the commanding officer. The
man who gave it to me bears a tolerable good character.”
On Sunday he sends down formal information obtained from three
persons.*
On the 4th Mr. Arndell writes from the Hawkesbury
“ We are under strange alarms here by several mysterious informations
about an intended insurrection which is said to be intended to take place
to-night, but such measures are now taken as I hope will prevent such wicked
* The information was precise. One Sloane, an overseer, was tempted by
Keogh and Poor, but “ he had suffered so much before on account of the Rebellion
in Ireland, and had seen so many shocking circumstances,” that he left Poor with
a resolution not to be concerned in the business. John Griffin informed that ho
had been tempted by Cunningham, who gave him a paper about the rising, and
that one Bulger persuaded him to destroy it. Cunningham told him to give the
paper to Bryan Fury (formerly charged with pike-making); that to the best of
his knowledge the paper stated the 4th was the day to rise, and the pass-word was
St. Peter. Bulger stated to Mr. Marsden and Captain Abbott that he had seen
the paper in Griffith’s hand, and persuaded him to destroy it. There were about
four lines in the paper —the day to rise, pass-word, &c. The information reached
Governor King at 12 at night, as shown by his endorsement.


designs from taking place, although we have neither arms nor ammunition
to make much resistance, if it comes to the push, unless I get seme now sent
for to Parramatta.”
We have seen that it was the policy of Pitt to secure as many foot-
holds in Australasia as possible and thus exclude the French; and we
have seen that Governor King’s custom was to send unruly and seditious
persons to Norfolk Island or other settlements to keep them from
mischief: —but he had to control some hundreds who could not all be
so dispersed : —and these had now determined to hoist the United
Irishmen’s standard. At midnight on the 4th March the Governor
was on the road to Parramatta, and Brigade Major Johnston at half-
past one o’clock a.m. on Monday, the sth, marched after him with
2 officers, 2 sergeants, and 52 rank and file of the New South Wales
Corps. At Parramatta the Governor found it needful to issue the
following Proclamation, having inserted the words “ Hawkesbury and
Nepean ” in MS. after the printed Proclamation had been brought to
him:—
“ PROCLAMATION
“ BY PHILIP GIDLEY KING, Esquire, Captain-General
and Governor in Chief in and over HIS MAJESTY’S
TERRITORY of NEW SOUTH WALES and its
DEPENDENCIES, &c, &c. &c.
“ WHEREAS a Number of Labouring Convicts of Castle-Hill, and other
Parts in this District have assembled, and in a Rebellious and daring manner
have Attacked and Robbed several of His Majesty’s peaceable and loyal
Subjects of their Property and Arms, and proceeded therewith to great Acts
of Outrage, which the Preservation of the Lives and Property of His Majesty’s
liege Subjects demand an immediate Stop being put to, by the most effectual
means;
“ I DO therefore Proclaim the Districts of Parramatta, Castle-Hill, Toon-
gabbee, Prospect, Seven and Baulkham Hills, Hawkesbury and Nepean to be
in a State of Rebellion;
“ And do Establish Martial Law throughout those Districts.
“I do therefore strictly Charge and Command all His Majesty’s liege
Subjects to be assisting in apprehending and giving up to the nearest Officer
or Magistrate every Person they may stop, who is unprovided with a pass,
under pain of being tried by a Court Martial.
“ And every Person who is seen in a State of Rebellious Opposition to the
Peace and Tranquillity of this Colony, and does not give himself or themselves
up, within Twenty-four Hours, will be tried by a Court Martial, and suffer
the Sentence passed upon him or them.
“ And if they, or any of them give up the Ringleaders to Justice, it may
be an effectual means of procuring them that Amnesty which it is so much my
wish to grant.
“ Given under my Hand at Head-quarters, Parramatta,
. “ this sth of March, 1804.
“PHILIP GIDLEY KING.
“ God Save the King.
“ By Command of His Excellency,
“ W. N. Chapman, Secretary.”


The Governor’s instructions to Major Johnston were as follows :
“ Major Johnston is directed to proceed along the Castle Hill road to that
place, and should he fall in with any of the insurgents, or other persons who
fly from him, he is to cause them to be apprehended, and if it is necessary to
fire on them.
“ Philip Gidley King.
“ Parramatta, 4 th March, 1804.
In a memorandum to Lieutenant Davies the Governor tells him to
“ keep a good look out to the right and left, and if he should receive any
certain intelligence he will pursue and follow up any advantage, keeping in
view strengthening Major Johnston’s detachment and joining it if possible.”
At 2 p.m. on the sth the Lieutenant Governor Paterson writes to
King
“We are all very anxious respecting the result of your Excellency’s
journey to Parramatta. I had hardly returned to the Parade when I found
Captain Woodriff with about 150 men (seamen and marines). . . . Both
Captain Woodriff and myself thought it prudent to keep them as well as the
corps under arms until daylight this morning, and should I not hear from
your Excellency before dark, I shall request Captain Woodriff to keep his
men in readiness in case of alarm, and the whole of the corps will be ready to
fall in at a moment’s notice.”
The Government, it appears, gathered in arms from various settlers,
“ so as to disappoint the intentions of the rebels.”
Meanwhile Major Johnston, from the field of action, wrote hastily
thus to King:—
“ I beg leave to inform your Excellency that about half an hour before
eleven, the detachment under my command came up with the runaways
very near the last ponds. I rode up to them accompanied by one trooper, and
remonstrated with them upon the impropriety of their conduct, and desired
them to surrender, which they peremptorily refused. I went up a second
time with the trooper, and desired to speak with their two leaders, who came
up to us, when we forcibly drove them into the detachment with pistols to
their heads ; the rest to the number of 250 dispersed in every direction, and we
have been under the necessity of killing nine and wounding a great many; the
number we cannot ascertain. ... It is with great pleasure I mention to your
Excellency the good conduct of Mr. Laycock, the non-commissioned officer
and men under my command; also my thanks are due to the two troopers,
the activity of Mr. Smyth, the constables and other men that accompanied us
from Parramatta. The detachment under my command is excessively
fatigued* from the long march they have had, and as I understand another
party of runaways is expected from Castle Hill, I should think a reinforce-
ment necessary to meet us to-morrow morning, as the present detachment will
feel the fatigue more to-morrow than they even do at present.” ,
The Governor received these tidings about 5 in the afternoon: and
on the following day (6th March) the victorious Major announces his
* When they reached the rebels they had marched about 45 miles in 9 hours.


intention to return to Parramatta on the 7th if he finds everything quiet
at the Nepean, “ leaving eleven of the party who are unable to march.”
“ I have this moment returned after marching above three miles with the
detachment, to fall in (as I was informed) with sixty of the rebels, but upon
coming to the ground, 1 found it was a false alarm. Upon my return to head-
quarters, I found five more desperate fellows brought in, each having loaded
muskets taken from them with a quantity of shot and ammunition, and I beg
to assure your Excellency that I never saw more zeal and activity than what
has been displayed by the officers and men of this detachment for destroying
and securing the runaways. . . . Cunningham, one of the rebel chiefs, who
was supposed to he dead on the field, was brought in here alive, and I imme-
diately (with the opinion of the officers) ordered him to be hung up.” *
A more formal report to bis commanding officer in the corps was
written by Johnston in Sydney, on the 9th March. Stating that he
took command of the detachment about half-past one o’clock on
Monday morning,
“by his Excellency Governor King’s orders, I proceeded immediately to
Parramatta, where we arrived at the dawn of day. I halted at the barracks
about twenty minutes to refresh my party (2 officers, 2 sergeants, and 52 rank
and file), and then marched to Government house; and agreeable to his
Excellency’s orders, divided my detachment, giving Lieutenant Davies com-
mand of half, and taking Quartermaster Laycock and the other half with one
trooper with myself. Having the Governor’s instructions to march in pursuit
of the rebels —the Toongabbee Road—l proceeded that way, and directed
Lieutenant Davies to take the road towards Castle Hill, On my arrival at
Toongabbee I was informed the rebels, in number about 400, were on the
summit of the hill. I immediately detached a corporal with 4 privates,
and about 6 inhabitants armed with muskets to take them in flank,f whilst I
proceeded with the rest up the hill, when I found the rebels had marched on
for the Hawkeshury ; and after a pursuit of about 10 miles I got sight of them.
I immediately rode forward, attended by the trooper, and Mr. Dixon, the
Roman Cathelic priest, calling to them to halt, that I wished to speak to
them; they desired that I would come into the middle of them as their
captains were there, which I refused, observing to them that I was within
pistol shot, and that it was in their power to kill me, and that their captains
must have very little spirit if they would not come forward to speak to me;
upon which two persons (Cunningham and Johnston) advanced towards me
as their leaders, to whom I represented the impropriety of their conduct, and
advised them to surrender, and that I would mention them in as favourable
terms as possible to the Governor; Cunningham replied they would have Death
or Liberty. Quartermaster Laycock, with the detachment just then appearing
in sight, I clapped my pistol to Johnston’s head, whilst the trooper did the
same to Cunningham, and drove them, with their swords in their hands, to the
Quartermaster and the detachment, whom I ordered to advance and charge
the main body of the rebels then formed in a line ; the detachment immediately
* The cool way in which the Major writes of surrounding some 300 rebels
with the aid of 11 men , and of “ ordering Cunningham to be hung up,” entitles his
despatches to be quoted as specimens of the man and of the times.
f In that usually accurate work, Bennett’s History of Australian Discovery and
Colonization , I find it erroneously stated that when Johnston captured his namesake,
Cunningham was killed by Laycock on the spot with one blow. The proceedings
of the court-martial prove that Cunningham was “ executed ” as shown in the text.


commenced a well-directed fire, which was but weakly returned; for, the
rebel line being soon broken, they run in all directions; we pursued them
a considerable way, and have no doubt but that many of them fell. We have
found 12 killed and 6 wounded, and have taken 26 prisoners. Any encomium
I could pass on Quartermaster Laycock and the detachment I had the honour
to command would fall short of what their merit entitles them to, and I trust
their steady perseverance (after a fatiguing march of upwards of 45 miles) to
restore order and tranquillity will make their services acceptable, Mr. Provost-
Martial Smith, the inhabitants and constables, who voluntarily accompanied
the detachment, are equally entitled to my thanks, nor can I be of
the very soldier-like conduct of the trooper who accompanied me.”
He reports 26 musquets, 1 fowling-piece, 4 bayonets on poles,
1 pitchfork, 1 pistol, 8 reaping-hooks, and 2 swords, “ taken from the
rebels.”
I find a MS. list of persons who accompanied Major Johnston from
Parramatta. Win. Evans (sheriff’s officer) and Richard Partridge
(tailor) head the list, which principally consisted of “ overseers, if
one may judge from the Governor’s endorsement. They must have
made Johnston’s party of 26 rank and file look imposing, for I find 45
names, including six mentioned as “ settlers.”
It was but at midnight on the 4th that information of the rising
reached King at Sydney, and on the Bth a court-martial sat at head-
quarters, Parramatta.
Capt. Edward Abbott, President, Capt. Kemp, Lieutenants Davies,
Brabyn, Meuzies, McCallam, and Quartermaster Laycock, formed the
Court.
“ The several warrants appointing a President, the convening the Court,
and appointment of a Deputy Judge Advocate being read, and the President,
Members, and Deputy Judge Advocate sworn”—
the MS. gives the arraignment of ten prisoners, for that they,
“ with others, did, on the 4th day of this instant March, in the year
of Our Lord, 1804, and at divers other times riotously, tumultuously, and
traitorously assemble at Castle Hill and various other places. . . . with
intent to overturn his Majesty’s Government in this territory . . . and the
said William Johnston, Charles Hill, Samuel Humes, John Neale, John Place,
John Brennan, George Harrington, John Burke, Timothy Hagan, and Bryan
McCormack stand further charged with resisting, opposing and attacking
his Majesty’s Forces in opposition to his authority, while said Forces were on
their march from Parramatta to Hawkesbury, by Order of His Excellency the
Commander-in-Chief. Plea not guilty.”
The witnesses deposed to seeing Johnston, Humes, Cunningham,
Place, and Neale exercising command among the rebels; to seeing
Major Johnston capture Johnston, and generally as to the affray, and
to acts of violence committed by the rioters in forcing men to join
their party.
“William Johnston acknowledged giving himself up to Major Johnston,
and throws himself on the mercy of the Court.
“ Charles Hill says he was forced by the rebels to join them ; that be was a
free man, and had no occasion to fight for it. Mr. Kennedy says that he has
known him 20 months, and he is a hard-working man.


“ George Harrington says the same.
“ John Burke says the
same.
“ Timothy Hogan says
the same.
“ Bryan McCormack says the same.
“ William Johnston ..
Guilty.
“Charles Hill
Guilty,
“ Samuel Humes
Guilty.
“John Neale
Guilty.
“John Place
Guilty.
“ John Brennan..
Guilty.
“ George Harrington ..
Guilty.
“John Burke
Guilty.
“ Samuel Humes says he was forced by Cunningham to join the rebels, and
that he gave himself up to Mr. Hume on Monday night at 10 o’clock.
“ John denies one part of the charges, and admits the other part,
that of being with the rebels.
“ John Place denies the charge.
“ John Brennan says he was forced to join the rebels.
“ Timothy Hogan .. Guilty.
“ Bryan McCormack., Guilty.
“ Richard Atkins, Deputy J. A.
Death. .. Hung in chains.
Death.
Death. .. Hung in chains.
Death.
Death.
Death.
Death.
Death,
Death.
Death.
“ Edward Abbott, Captain
and President.
“ I approve the above proceedings and sentence, and dissolve the Court.
“ Head Quarters, Parramatta, March 8, 1804.
“ Philip Gidley King.”
Opposite the names of John Burke and Bryan McCormack I find
in pencil the word “ pardoned ” in King’s handwriting ; and one would
fain hope that they never again fell within the clutches of the law—
victims to the mad folly and malignant machinations of their own
countrymen, Wolfe Tone and his associates. What hecatombs of
Irishmen did the United Irishmen succeed in sharpening all the ills
of life for! as Smith O’Brien and the Young Ireland party, well aided
by the Fenians, have embittered them seventy years later.
The grim result is embodied in
“ A Return of the Men that suffered Death for Rebellion, being taken
in Arms, March Bth, 1804.
Charles Hill,
Samuel Humes,
John Place,
Executed at Parramatta, on the Bth March.
William Johnston,
John Neall,
George Harrington,
Executed at Castle Hill, on the 9th March.
Timothy'hagan, } Executed at S y dne y» on the 10th March.
Philip Cunningham, Executed at Hawkesbury.
“ Corporal Punishments.
John Griffin, Five Hundred Lashes. Received 150.
David Morrison, Two Hundred Lashes. Under sentence.
Neal Smith, Five Hundred Lashes. Do. do.
Connor Dwyer, Five Hundred Lashes. Do. do.
Bryan Burne, Five Hundred Lashes. Do. do.


Cornelius Lyons, Two Hundred Lashes. Under sentence.
Owen McDermot, Two Hundred Lashes. Received 96.
Dennis Ryan* As many Lashes as he could bear. Received 164.
Bryan Reiley,* As many Lashes as he could hear Received 100.”
Loyal addresses flowed in upon the Governor. On the 6th March
twenty-eight persons in Sydney had subscribed their willingness to
take up arms, and subject themselves to the command of any person
appointed by the Governor, and
“ assist to suppress the enemies to our Government with that alacrity becoming
Englishmen.”
Their names were collected early in the morning, and they had not
delayed to obtain names of others not then at home or too distant.
“ The chief of those who have put their names will he ready at any hour,
and the greater part can take a confidential servant with them.”
Amongst the names are J. Wilshire, Isaac Nichols, John Driver,
Daniel Cubitt, William Roberts, with others well known by means of
their descendants in New South Wales.
On the Bth March Mr. Arndell sends down seven more runaways.
“ More have been seen at the back of Mr. Hobby’s farm at night; but from
the great and praiseworthy exertions of all the settlers, freemen, and English
prisoners they will no doubt soon be destroyed or taken, there being great
parties in the mountains and in all directions after them. ... A little more
ammunition is wanted, if you please.”
A petition of the ironed prisoners in the gaol-gang at Parramatta
states: —
“ Your Petitioners, emboldened by your unprecedented clemency and emi-
nently distinguished philantrophy, which we, the deluded people distinguished
by the name Croppies, have happily distinguished at a time that our conduct was
such as to render our Lives forfeited both to Law and Justice, wherefore we
thank Heaven that your Excellencies clemency preponderated our evil infati-
cated offences, of which we sincerely repent, . . . humanely vouchsafe to
extricate your Petitioners out of Irons, wether we who may he deemed objects
of your humanity’s compliance to our humble prayer, do solemnly promise
before God and unto your Excellency that our future conduct shall be upright
with Loyalty and Propriety.”
A special memorial on behalf of Patrick Sloan, who gave notice of
the rising to Mr. Arndell, prays that the Governor “ will look favour-
* The Governor’s warrant for these sentences is before me. “ Whereas, pre-
vious to the execution of Samuel Humes he declared in the presence of the
magistrates, &c., that Dennis Ryan and Bryan Reiley were in possession of every
circumstance attending the late tumultuous and rebellious proceedings that have
so much disturbed the tranquillity of this Colony, and as these men have been
principally concerned therein, You are hereby required and directed to cause the
said Dennis Ryan and Bryan Reiley to be punished at the discretion of the magis-
trates and according to the opinion of the surgeons of the number of lashes they
can bear without endangering their lives.
“Given under my hand at Head Quarters, this 9th day of March, 1804.
“ Thomas Smythe, Esq.,
“ Provost-Martial."


ably on him, as he is a prisoner for life.” It is evidently signed by
labouring men.
There is also a memorial signed by thirteen persons, declaring
that one
“ Martin Short’s house has at all times been a receptacle for the most
disloyal and abandoned description of Irish, and that it is proved that
Cunningham (who was executed here) slept in his house a few nights previous
to the rebellion breaking out, ... we are firmly of opinion that he is a
dangerous character, and is unfit to be at large amongst a class of people like
us, who are so comparatively few in number and unprovided with the means
of defence. We understand that Place (since executed) frequently slept in his
house, and for these reasons we humbly pray that your Excellency will please
to remove him from hence. Hawkesbury, March 10th.”
Short’s bouse seems to have been searched, for I find a letter to
him from one Cogan, dated 28th January, 1804, stating—
“ Parramatta is all in confusion this morning; the constables are out in
every quarter taking up everybody, with pass or without one. The reason is,
as we suppose, the Governor has ordered the Americans out of the harbour
in so many hours ; so do not know what to think.”
Margaret’s journal (24th January) says :
“II est entre un Americain nomme le ‘ Marie,’ de Boston, et un autre
de ITsle de France the ‘ Rose,’ Captain Carey.”
On the 18th January I find “Ton libera Sir H. Hayes,” and that
only one day elapsed between that day and the 31st without Sir H.
Hayes passing two or three times or taking tea with Margarot. On
the 30th “ Querellai Betsey.” On the 31st:—
“ St. Leger s’evada dans I’Americain la ‘ Rose,’ que fit voile aujourd’hui.'
It is a remarkable thing that any nation can see such meanness
committed by its citizens, without expecting to lose a reputation for
honourable conduct.
The Governor had good reason for suspicion and “ ordering the
Americans out of the harbour in so many hours.” Short, it appears,
who was “by trade a carpenter,” was apprehended; for I find a well-
written letter to the Governor stating his case, and praying for
consideration: —
“ He was removed, and in irons, and chained to another man “ and if it
should appear proper that I be removed from Hawkesbury, give me leave to
hope that my situation here will not be continued so truly painful as at
present, and that I may have opportunity afforded me to preserve in some
manner the property I possess, that those whose representations have occa-
sioned my removal may not utterly distress me, the ground I hold having been
long sought for by others. I beseech you to suffer me to secure what it has
already produced.”
One can but hope that he deserved and obtained pity.
Informations, confessions, and dying confessions implicated Holt.
One Smith, coerced by a Frenchman armed, deposed on the 12th
March that he heard Cunningham tell the Frenchman that when the


rioters reached Parramatta “ he would be joined by Holt and Hume,
who were at the stone-quarry;” all thatched buildings were to be set
on fire, and in the confusion a rush was to be made “ to take the
barracks.” From a statement in Mr. Marsden’s handwriting, it seems
that at Castle Hill “at dusk they rang the bell and set fire to the
house,” using force and snapping firearms at all who would not join
for “ death or liberty.” Johnston’s dying confession was that he was
informed that “Holt was present at the meeting in Parramatta on
Saturday.”
Farrell Cuff, at Norfolk Island, confessed—
“ Mr. Holt told him as he was going to Parramatta that he intended to
push the business forward as soon as possible. , . Holt intended to bring
Mr. Alcock, as soon as they would be prepared, to head one party and himself
the other, for Alcock knew how to manage the cannon.”
Cuff said it was impossible to take Sydney so long as H.M.S. ‘ Buffalo ’
lay there.
“ Holt said he thought nothing of that, for he would have the Governor
and the gentlemen secured, by that means he could take the ship.”
Holt often spoke of Margarot—
“ The best natured man he ever met, and the warmest republican, and
hoped he would very soon be relieved from his misery. , . Soon as the cannon
and magazine is secured, there will be very little trouble afterwards; he said
he had every hope of surprising them this time.”
John Welch confessed that one Purcell told him that one Kelly had
told him he had to “ proceed to Holt’s farm, and that by Holt or his
son he could forward some of his despatches” about the rising.
Kelly, however,
“ had remarked to Purcell that there were doubts entertained of Holt’s
joining them, as he was displeased with delays that had been used in the
accomplishment of their designs.”
These and other statements made King direct the seizure of Holt’s
papers. Mr. John Savage writes on the 18th March:—
“ In consequence of a letter I received last night from Mr. Atkins, I had
anticipated your Excellency’s commands by despatching Jennings and a
constable, at daylight this morning, to search for Holt’s papers. The result
has not been so satisfactory as I wished, he having torn the letters your
Excellency requested, and I find some of the pieces are missing ;* they were
torn previous to the search, and Holt appeared to be aware that Brady’sf
letters were particularly sought after. I transmit all the fragments that
could be collected.”
* One of the letters was that of Robert Walsh sent from Port Phillip on the
sth November, 1803, and quoted in the text previously. Of this letter all the
pieces were seized.
f Often mentioned in Margaret’s journals. On 6th February, 1804, “Brady
et Holt dinerent avec nous.” 4th March, 1804, “Brady et Brady passerent.”
sth March, 1804, “Barnes et Brady passerent.” 7th March, 1804, “Barnes,
Brady, Sir H. Hayes, et Captain Simpson passerent.”


On the 19th Mr. Savage writes that on examination of the papers
he retains that of Robert Walsh at Van Diemen’s Land, as serving to
“ show his character, with those of his associates here,” but that others
are of no importance, “ and I shall therefore return those remaining
to Holt.”
One of Brady’s letters (of 12th August, 1803), torn to many shreds,
is before me; but the only allusion to Ireland is to be guessed at: —
“ Mr. and Mrs. Margaret’s compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Holt; commis-
sions me to inform you she will send you surprising news at the arrival of the
next King’s ship from England.”
Fragments of a letter of December 14th, 1803, contain more direct
statements
tary on that head, yet shews
eck that has been made and
given up since we left it, I have
on from the first authority of this Colony
rish Rebels has weried they Military
ughout all the Kingdom. and
and the preparation throughout England to obtain
a revolution is carried on with great vigor, and is
lly and generally thought here to be accomplished
. The breaking out of the present War
to tyranny: we proclaim now aloud
loyal Inhabitants, to step forward
their lives and their properties
intended Invision of
will soon arrive
Mr. and Mrs Margaret’s
best wishes to you.”
These, with other documents, were referred by the Governor “to
the Lieutenant-Governor and Bench of Magistrates.” They sat on
the 22nd March, and their MS. report is before me. They were the
Lieutenant-Governor, the Judge Advocate, Rev. S. Marsden, Thomas
Jameson, Charles Throsby, and John Savage, Esquires; and Holt was
brought before them on that day.
One James Grice swore to Holt’s seditious conversations with him.
John Moore and John McEwen gave evidence implicating Holt,
Part of the plan communicated to Moore was that “ Capt. Macarthur’s
house was to be set on fire to draw the soldiers from the barracks.”
McEwen swore that Cunningham told him on the Thursday before the
outbreak that “ Holt had sent word to Cunningham that ho had nothing
to fear about H.M.S. ‘ Calcutta ’; that the marines and sailors would
secure the ship for them as soon as they attacked Sydney.”
On the 24th the Bench sat again. (Holt, in his memoirs, gives an
account of his examination; but he is at fault as to the witnesses, and
the order in which they were called, and he must have trusted much
to after memory and imagination).
In the record of the Court I find: —
“John Welch, sworn, says that Purcell, Mr. Palmer’s gardener, informed
him that Thomas Kelly, the overseer at Toongabbee, had brought three letters
to Sydney, the purport of which were the insurrection that was to take place


up the country, that Purcell further informed him on his pressing Kelly to
dine with him on the Sunday, he refused it, saying that he had some letters
to carry up, and that he was to call at Holt’s farm, and they were to be
forwarded by him or his sons to whom they were directed.”
Holt erroneously says that Welsh was
“ the first witness. He swore that he was at the Hawkesbury on the 3rd
March, and that he met me coming towards the Green Hills; that he asked
me when I would be at home, and that I told him not until I had got my
business done, and that 1 could not tell when that would be.”
Holt adds a cross-examination by himself, under which Welsh
quailed as to the fact of seeing Holt; but as the man’s evidence
referred to no such thing, I fear that Holt’s account must be dismissed.
Again, Laurence Dempsey’s evidence was to the effect: —
“ McEwen * asked me if I had seen Holt at the Green Hills ; I replied I had.
He then requested me to find him, and ask him to come and take part in a
bottle. I went in quest of Holt, and overtook him near the Green Hills,
I delivered my message, to which Holt replied that he would not come and
drink, but at the same time desired me to inform McEwen that if he was not
home by Sunday evening, he, Holt, would give him a d—d good thrashing.
Dempsey further said that McEwen informed him that the business
was to take place on Sunday.
Holt in his book says that Dempsey deposed that Holt “ was to
take Parramatta, and then he was to go to Sydney and take that,” &c.,
and that Cunningham told the rebels that Holt was to meet them.
Nothing of the kind appears in Dempsey’s statement, however, and we
are driven to the conclusion that Holt’s imagination coined the
evidence, in order to show how adroitly he shook the witness, so that
Judge Atkins said, “Holt, they will not swear against you.”
Holt also states that McEwen said that “ he saw Holt in company
with Cunningham;” but there is no such statement in McEwen’s
evidence. Holt devotes two pages to a cross-examination of McEwen
on this point, although the evidence of McEwen, attested by the
original signature of Atkins (the Judge Advocate) is now before me,
containing not a word of the kind imputed to McEwen.
I find that Holt stated that he went to Hawkesbury on the Ist
March, and returned on Saturday night; and that on Sunday he went
to Parramatta, and called at the Frenchman’s | and “ asked if he had any
news. He said, ‘No ; but there might soon be some.’ ” Thence Holt
went to the house of Timothy Hollister, who told him —
“ It was reported the Croppies were to rise on that night; that Government
were informed of it, and that they were prepared, for that a light-horseman
had come up from Sydney.”
* Mr. T. Crofton Croker says that Holt’s “orthography in many passages
required some time on the part of the editor to decypher.” In his work “ McEwen ”
figures as “ M‘Keown.”
t This man was to have been one of the leaders if Cunningham had been able
to reach Parramatta with his force.


Further, Holt admitted that
“ About a month ago the Frenchman informed him that four persons were
to come to him from Castle Hill for the purpose of asking his advice, as a
number of them were associating with an intent to rise, but no person whatever
came to him on the subject.”
Holt “heard the Frenchman’s wife tell him, that if she saw any more
whispering or anything suspicious she would quit the place, for it was by such
means the misfortunes of her family as well as those of Ireland were occasioned ;
and Holt further told him, that if he had any connection with such people as
he saw him with they would bring him to the gallows, to which the French-
man replied, that he would not suffer them to come there any more. That he
does not know who those persons were.”
The MS. containing the foregoing statement is endorsed by
Governor King, “ Questions respecting J. Holt.” Holt is made by
Mr. Croker to call the Frenchman Duliatt, and says that on being
“ called upon to state what had brought him to the Frenchman's house, he
told the Governor the truth (that he had been to get payment of a debt), and
took out of my pocket the note of hand for the payment of the 81. which
I received.”
For this statement there is no colour in the MSS. in my hands.
Having analyzed the evidence alleged by Holt to have been given,
it is fair to show from a MS. in his own handwriting what defence he
set up at the time, before his memory was dulled and his imagination
was called upon.
“ The Humble Piticon of Jos. Holt—and statement of his Case.
“On the twenty ninth of January last been told by the frienchman
Durinalt that he was told there was four men to com to me that day* I ask
him for what he answer that there was a set of men to rise in arms and the
wanted my opinion I answered him did the think i was mad and then told
him if he tuck my advice he would let no one come with such storeys to him
that it was a very nice way to have him hanged—l then purceeded to Sydney
and my business was to Mr Tough to sell him three tun of potatoes—l
returned on the thirtyeth at Night and related the hole to Mr. Cox that I
trown myself in the way of several peopple at Sydney to see if any of them
would hint me of the same and none did which gave me the like opinion of
that I hard. lon the same week went to the hawkbury and no person in all
my travils ever maid the laist apperrence of any such I then told Mr Cox
when I came home and at the same time I hope it was false what I hard any-
thind more he should be told —yet the terar of such nuse had not left my
brest —that on the leventh of febuary my time ended with Mr Cox and I told
him that I would not wish to go to my own farm while any dout was in my
mind that the peopple was oneasy for if ever the get hold of me the would put
me to Death f if I refused going with them he told me that was his opinion
also and bid me live where I was. on the third of March returned from
Hawkbury and been told by my son that he was as glad as twenty guinneys
that I had come home I ask him the reason he told me he was informed by
Nicholas Bryan a government man from Cassle hill that his opinion was that
there would be a rising of men that very night or next night said Bryan came
* It will have been seen that on the previous day Martin Short was informed
that Parramatta was all in confusion—constables taking up everybody with pass
or without one. . . . The Governor has ordered the Americans out of the harbour
in so many hours.”
f What Venetian tyranny was ever worse than this !


in at the same time—l then asked him what reason he had for saying so
he told me there was a passell of laisey mounstermen had been taulking of it a
long time and that was all he new about it I then hope ed he had no hand in
such bisiness he told me that he and John Troter and all the County Wicklow
men had refused haveing any thing to do with them—l then that very
moment went over and walked in to Mr Cox house and told him the hole as it
is ritten and told him we had better put out watchmen and then called William
Carty gave him a musket put him on his watch telling him if he seen one man
to fire at him and if he seen a gange to come and alaram me and Mr Cox also
put Darby Murphy on the same bisiness. On the fourth we was in dout but
put watchmen out on that night I been tould in Parramatta by tim hollister
it was to he I went under arms and also Mr Cox —James King—Henry
Ashford Wilm Carty Darby Murphey and I made Mr Cox go to bed at twelve
o’clock and myself half after three at which I time I taught the hole was
faulse 1 went to bed and was there only about ten minutes when my son and
shephard came and told me the had been at my own house I then leped out of
bed tuck out my musket and ran over called Mr Cox told him as my son told
me then he and me and the other four men tuck our place at the gate where
we every moment exspected theire approach I then told Mr Cox that I taught
I was able to fight and conker fifty and that I would not surrender myself to
one hundred stateing to him which way I taught best to ingage them—but
alas to my sorrow the villions Did not come
“ Consenting James Grice—
said Grice and Edward Ellis been charge some time ago by me for stealing
some of Mr Cox sheep and put them on tryal for same after been acquited 1
told Grice I was sorry the evidence fail in theire prosecution as I seen he was
guilty I then told him to never let me see him on any ground that belonged to
Mr Cox or me for if i did that 1 would prosecut him he at the same time swore
he would be revenged of me.
“On the Satterday after the rough* tuck place the wife of Edward Ellit
came to •James Dabbs and brought a bottle of rum and gave him to Drink
beging of him to sware something against Holt that it was the only time to
hange him because he Holt taught to hange grice and my husband—then
some few days after Grice came to Dabbs and beged of him to sware something
against Holt and wished it was in his power that he would soon hange him
that this is the only time to Do it.
“ Dabbs told him he had nothing to sweare agains said Holt unless he
pergered himself and ask him was it because Holt prosecuted him for stealing
Mr Cox sheep that he wanted to get revenge.”
On the margin of Holt’s statement he has made side notes:—
“ Proof Mr Cox ” —“ Proof Mr and Mrs Cox ” —“ Proof said Bryan ”
“ Proof Mr Cox, James King, Henry Ashford, Carty and Murphey ” —“ Proof
Mr Cox Henry Ashford and John Wyatt”—“ Proof James Dabbs.”
It is doubtless highly improbable that Holt would refer so con-
fidently to Mr. Cox, unless as to the facts stated Mr. Cox could
corroborate him.
I have no trace of any statement by Mr. Cox; but the finding of
the Bench was :
“ We are of opinion that there is not sufficient evidence to convict Joseph
Holt of treason before a criminal court. But taking into our consideration that
the said Joseph Holt by his general conduct together with the influence such
conduct and character may have on the deluded multitude (and has already
* Presumably a novel spelling of ‘‘ row.”


had, by the dying confessions of the persons executed), and by the evidence
and documents now produced, submit to His Excellency the expediency of
removing him to some distant part of this Territory or its dependencies, and to
remain in jail until such removal shall take place; the tranquillity of the
Colony requiring such a measure. W. Paterson. Bichd. Atkins. Sami.
Marsden.* Thos. Jamison. Chas. Throsby. John Savage.”
The recommendation of the Bench was carried into effect. It may
be remembered that Holt declares that Mrs. Holt saw Governor King
and denounced his cruelty —“ May God requite you as you deserve.
He will be with you when you will be out of this”—but I must do justice
to Mrs. Holt by producing the following touching letter in her hand-
writing :
“ Sir, “ April 3rd.
“ Overwhelmed with afflictions which admit of no relief but such as
must immediately proceed from your goodness and favour; as my only
resource I thus venture to address your Excellency, hoping that the characters
which I sustain as a wife and mother will invite your attention for a few
moments to my pitiable case.
“ By the special favour of the Lord Lieutenant I was permitted to accom-
pany my husband from Ireland to this colony; more than four years have
elapsed since our arrival; the means we brought with us, improved by an un-
remitting industry, held forth the pleasing prospect that the miseries of the
past would be succeeded by future permanent felicity : the untoward circum-
stances of fny husband’s situation now banishes every hope I had formed of
those comforts, whose attainment is necessary to render life desirable. Domestic
calamities are easier to be conceived than described, I can therefore only say
that I severely feel the mental distress of a painful separation from an affec-
tionate husband, and my offspring the loss of an indulgent father, whose
constant care was their happiness and support. It’s needless to represent to a
gentleman of your Excellency’s superior understanding the distresses that
must ensue to a family circumstanced as mine, from the removal of its main
support. Of the unhappy cause which may have led to this calamitous change
I can say nothing. I should, as a wife, hope and believe that my husband’s
provident attention to domestic duties left no time for the pursuit of a conduct
that should justly excite the most exemplary censure, and entail consequent
ruin to those most dear to him; but should there remain doubts as to my
husband's criminality in your Excellency’s benignant mind, let me hope that
a commiseration of domestic woe will rescue an unfortunate father and his
afflicted family from the pending consequences of established guilt.
“Let me humbly beseech your Excellency to restore my husband to a
participation in those benefits in common enjoyed by the industrious, and
from the sympathy of commiserating friends I have no doubt but I can pro-
cure satisfactory sureties for his future conduct, should such be deemed
requisite, and your Excellency’s gracious acquiescence with my fervent and
humble wishes will engage the incessant prayers and thanks of a whole family.
“ Sir, I beg leave to subscribe myself, with the greatest respect.
“ Your Excellency’s most obedient and distressed humble servant,
. „ “ Esther Holt.
“ His Excellency Governor King, &c.
As the finding of the Bench had been that there was “ not sufficient
evidence to convict Joseph Holt of treason before a Criminal Court,”
’ * Holt asserts that Mr. Marsden offered bail for him; but this is clearly incon-
gruous with the facts implied by Marsdcn’s signature to the decision of the Bench.


it may be doubted whether a more cogent appeal could have been
prepared by counsel than in the fulness of her heart Mrs. Holt uigcd
for her husband. It is a pleasing task to rescue from a fading MS.
the pleadings of this heroine of humble life. They were unsuccessful,
however. The endorsement on the letter of King is—“ Mrs. Holt
respecting her husband. A request that public safety prevents being
granted.” . ,
Holt’s departure to Norfolk Island has already been mentioned.
Thence he went to Hobart Town, and after twenty-two months’ separa-
tion he rejoined his wife.
“ I was not seen or recognised by any one until I was in the court before
my own door. The dogs began to bark at me, and Mrs. Holt came to the
door. The sight—the unexpected sight of me completely overpowered her
with ioy, and she swooned away. I ran forward and took her up in my arms;
she fainted a second time. Pleasure and sorrow, however differently they may
affect the heart, are alike overpowering to the human frame. ... My children
dung with their arms round my neck, crying with joy at seeing their lather
once more, and on their little knees they gave their curses to Governor King
for separating me from them.”
Holt remained in New South Wales during Governor Bligh’s rule,
which was terminated by Bligh’s forcible deposition in January, 1808.
Major Johnston, whose Castle Hill exploit has been given already,
assumed the Government, until he could communicate with Lieutenant
Governor Paterson, then in Van Diemen’s land. The latter,
declined to intervene without more precise knowledge of the desire of
the Home Government: and in July, 1808, Lieutenant - Colonel
Foveaux arrived from England with the appointment of Lieutenant
Governor, superseding Johnston, and being in turn displaced by the
arrival of Paterson early in 1809 from Van Diemen’s Land; the next
Governor, Macquarie, arriving in December, 1809, and being sworn in
as Governor on Ist January, 1810. _. . „
On the 4th June, 1809, the King’s birthday, Lieutenant Governor
Paterson appears to have signalized His Majesty’s clemency by giving
free pardons to deserving persons, and, according to Holt, Major
Abbott of the New South Wales Corps, interceded with the Lieutenant
Governor on Holt’s behalf. Holt received a pardon and a grant of
one hundred and ten acres of land* On Macquarie s arrival he called
in the pardons issued during the interregnum following Bhgh s
deposition, and Holt’s was amongst the number: but after the lapse
of a year Holt states that the Eev. Mr. Marsden, Captain Piper, and
Mr. Wentworth strongly advocated his claims on the ground of good
conduct, and he again received a free pardon. He sold property
to an amount exceeding 2000 Z. and took ship for Ireland in December,
1812, but was wrecked (February, 1813) on the Falkland Islands,
succeeding however in landing his wife amongst the first: Lieutcnan
Richard Landin, of the 73rd Regiment, with a Mr. Brookes passenger
(but formerly master of a vessel), started in a boat feet long, and
reached the River Plate on the 26th March. Thence Lieutenant
* Holt says he sold his land to Martin Short, a carpenter, for £5O, when Holt
left Sydney; we may presume, therefore, that Governor King yielded to the
prayers of the carpenter, Martin Short, arrested at the Hawkesbury in


Landin returned to the Falkland Islands in H.M. brig ‘Nancy’ to
relieve the castaways. Meantime in April an American vessel had
arrived, and Holt and the other passengers (including Sir Henry Hayes,
with whom Holt appears not to have been on good terms) were making
arrangements for leaving with the Americans. In May, however,
H.M.S. ‘ Nancy ’ arrived, and Lieutenant D’Aranda made the Americans
prisoners of war. The American vessel ‘ Nannina ’ being despatched
to England, D’Aranda permitted Holt to sail in her, but “feared
the accommodation was not fit for me or my wife.” Staying at Rio
Janeiro Holt seems to have been cordially entertained by an American
General Sumpter, but to have mistaken some one else for Lord
Strangford, who says,
“ Holt is wrong in many of his statements. I cannot conceive that I
could have spoken to him of Ballyartlmr, where I never was in the whole
course of my life.”
Eventually Holt, his wife, son, and his servant, John Byrne,
sailed in October, 1813, in the ‘Venerable’ brig. Three of H.M.
frigates and two brigs, he says, convoyed the merchant vessels, thirty-
two in number; and on the 22nd February, 1814, he reached Liver-
pool. He had taken more than twenty parrots from Sydney, most of
which were lost at the Falkland Islands. Four were saved, and “ I
sold three at Rio de Janeiro for ten pounds, and the other is at
Mr. Peter Latouche’s,* at Bellevieu, in the County Wicklow.”
The end of Holt’s journal shows that he thought himself ungrate-
fully treated by his countrymen, who reviled him so that “ it was a
noral impossibility for him to command his temper and passion,”
He had to abandon his house, “ for I saw that it was impossible for
me to live as a publican in Dublin.” He built a few houses at Dun-
leary, and on the rents lived till the 16th May, 1826, dying at the
age of seventy; having, we are told, always “ repented bitterly of his
folly in having left New South Wales, where he was prospering and
was generally respected.”
Governor King received from Hunter’s River, not many months
after he sent Holt to Norfolk Island, a declaration which was calcu-
lated to confirm his worst suspicions, and of which he writes:—
“ This declaration of Maum’s was sent to me by Mr. Throsby, Commandant
at King’s Town. Maum would not sign his name to it for fear of its being
discovered. On the receipt of it, I ordered Margaret’s papers to be seized.”
Maum, of course, was one of the convict Fenians of that day, and
French officers appear to have displayed the same lax notions as to
decency which in modern time some so-called American statesmen
have not been ashamed to evince.
Maum writes on Ist September, 1804 :
“ Some time since, when the French vessels were in Port Jackson, two of
the officers belonging to the ‘ Naturaliste’ came to see me, and in a seeming
friendly manner informed me that they were desired by a friend of mine
* To Mr. and Mrs. Latouche Holt was indebted for his safe departure with
his good wife from Ireland, and it is pleasing to observe the above trait of kindli-
ness, so perseveringly pursued.


to apply to me for information for their Log for this Colony, &c., and that
they would reckon it as a peculiar favour, and appointed a day to wait on me
for that purpose. I wrote out in the Latin language such information as
I judged most proper for a Log, such as the Colonial Government, how Justice
was administered, the number of Settlements, and such general information as
that.
“ Two officers returned to me in a few days, one of whom was the Captain,
to receive what I promised to perform, and were apparently chagrined at what
I wrote, as they expected some other more useful intelligence; consequently
we commenced a conversation, the purport of which was—of the population of
the colony —their general opinions—how they endured slavery—how many
English—how were their sentiments—the Irishmen’s sentiments he was assured
of—and particularly whether the English in general were seamen or soldiers,
who had been transported for any offence, after their discharges, as they may
he easily worked on; they informed me that the peace would be of no dura-
tion, and that it struck them that, after their representation to the Chief
Consul of the great number of persons in this colony who were desirous of
Innovation, and a change of condition, that he would, if a rupture took place,
commence an attack on one of the East India Settlements, first taking Sydney,
and procuring all the prisoners to enter into the French service; and that in
general there were a good many vessels in the port, and that the Governor and
officers were always in a tranquil calm when vessels appeared off, generally
imagining that they were either convict ships or whalers ; they said that one
or two vessels could totally destroy the colony, as by keeping out until dusk
they could get into Botany Bay, and take the garrison in their beds, and that
the stores, provisions, &c., independently of the political advantages to their
nation, by obtaining seamen and soldiers, would amply compensate for the
enterprise, and that the vigilance of a" great part of his Britannic Majesty’s
fleet on the India station would be counteracted : they told me that they
would take me, if I pleased, to the Mauritius, and procure me rank in the
Republican service, mentioning at the same time the name of Governor
Maclaury—l think that is the name —who had before carried on a private
correspondence with Tippoo to the prejudice of the British Government, and
that he would certainly promote me, but that I should, if such an expedition
was ever formed at the Mauritius, return with it to Sydney. He said that there
must be some knowing ones here, and particularly mentioned Governor King,
who prevented the Freemasons’ meeting on board one of the French ships; as
that, if it were allowed to continue its sitting, the candidates would be after
their third step in masonry initiated into the principles of the illuminati, which
would speedily beget republicanism. This conduct of Governor King they
could not account for, but attached much blame to Mr. Brabyn, who they said
informed Governor King, he being a mason. I further have some cause
to believe that Captain Constance of the ‘ Adele ’ was a spy here, and under
a semblance of trade entered into an agreement with Mr. Lord, who is
intrinsically honest and unacquainted with political intrigue, to be able to
carry on his stratagems,
“I informed the officers that I then was under peculiar engagements which
I could not think of breaking, and that 1 suffered many expressible hardships
in Ireland in consequence of the French Government’s deceitful promises to
that Island. They did not allow me to proceed when they informed me that
the present established Government of France would amply atone for the
villainies that lost Ireland to them. They showed me a list of the officers,
non-commissioned, and privates of the corps, in no wise questioning their
attachment to their Government, but as if proving the insufficiency of their
number to protect this colony. They asked me Holt’s character; they said
they received here a high character of him; I gave him the character of


a murderer and robber, with which they seemed rather pleased than otherwise,
and many other topics of the above kind. When Mr. Lord’s brig was proceeding
to the Isle of France, Alcock was influenced to make an application to His
Excellency to proceed there; that poor man little knew the snare that was
laying for him, and they even wished to take him away by stealth. A certain
person who left Sydney in her, informed me that, if possible, if there was a
war, preparations for which Constance told him were making, that he would
not be an idle spectator, &c.,and there were the certain reasons specified in his
letter to me, which I believe Governor King has received.* Let no person
presume to say Mr. Lord knew anything of this. I solemnly affirm he did not.
“ It has long been a question here whether Sir H. Hayes was implicated in
the late insurrection ; I declare, if he was, that I knew nothing of it, and
I think that he would tell me something about it, if he was—the cause of
his being spoken of was as nearly as I can conjecture the following; When
he was in confinement the last time, a certain gentleman visited him often, and
read with him English newspapers, &c.; this gentleman told Holt that there
was such and such news about Ireland. Holt not having sense or under-
standing took it in a consummate light that Ireland was taken, that Buonaparte
demanded and received the Irish prisoners from the King of Prussia. This and
other language of an inflammatory nature was circulated by Holtf and his
agents throughout Castle Hill, Hawkesbury, &c., and always gave sSir H, Hayes’
name to the people (he being popular). I therefore am certain of his never
having knowingly or advisedly contributed, but am confident that Margaret
knew from Holt the entire of it, he and Holt being remarkably intimate. Sir
H. H. could not abide Holt.”
Whatever Maum thought, and even if he wrote what he thought,
Margarot’s Journals show how intimate he was with Hayes. On the
30th May, 1804, I find, “ Parlai a Hayes, qui me dit avoir trouve
Alcock a la porte hier au soir ecoutant; ” and no less than ten times in
the same month does Margarot narrate his having conversed with Sir
H. Hayes, or that “ Sir H. H. prit le the avec nous.”
The captured United Irishmen had been scattered to different
settlements. By MS. letters of King’s, 7th June, 1804, I find that
some of them had been troublesome at the Hunter Eiver. To Lieu-
tenant Menzies, of the Eoyal Marines, Commandant, he writes :
“ We have but little to expect than to be constantly harassed by the schemes
of those whom it is our duty to guard against by every means in our power.
I feel much gratified at the discovery which has been made as preventing any
bad consequences, and I can but approve of the measures you have taken
respecting the conspirators; nor should those who are now in double irons
be released from that situation and hard labour until they have given the
most unequivocal proofs of their amendment.
“ Respecting the six ringleaders you will be pleased to send two of the
worst here in separate vessels, double ironed and handcuffed ; the others you will
punish with two hundred lashes each, and if you think they will be more secure
they may be put on Coal Island; for his diabolical proposal of murdering
* Of this letter 1 can find no trace in the MSS.
t That Holt received from Brady and from Margarot many seditious state-
ments is clear enough ; but that he really was active in the insurrection may yet
be doubted: although bis fatal vanity prevented him from keeping aloof. He
alleges indeed that a refusal to join the rebels might have cost him his life (vide
MS. quoted in the text) —an allegation quite incongruous with his published
memoirs which he compiled afterwards.


the officers and soldiers should receive five hundred lashes, or as many as he
can take without endangering his life. I hope these examples will prevent
any more of those desperate plans, and that I shall find by the next report they
are again quiet.”
“ 2nd July, 1804.—1 am sorry the reduced state of the number of soldiers
at this place will not admit of my sending you any reinforcement from the
N.S.W. Corps. I think by embodying those you can depend on as an Asso-
ciation, you will greatly add to your security, but care should be taken not to
put arms into the hands of improper people. ... I have also directed another
six-pounder to be sent and some shot, but must recommend your placing it in
as secure a situation as possible, to prevent its being made an improper use of.”
On 2nd March, 1805, it seems that William Maum, and our old
friend, Martin Short, with seven others, were sent for from Newcastle ;
though on the 26th poor Short was sent back to work at a wrecked
vessel, “ to save the copper and iron.”
In August, 1805, King wishes “ to know if you consider Florence
McCarthy’s life in danger by remaining at Newcastle.” In December,
“ I have no objection to Florence McCarthy coming here, if he can
divest himself of his seditious practices.”
It will be remembered that Margaret was sent by Governor King
to the Hunter Eiver in February, 1806, with special instructions to
prevent his seditious correspondence, so that it appears that long after
the rising in 1804 a strict watch was maintained. In fact, during the
whole period of King’s government he was on the alert to guard
against the open hostility or the treacherous dealings of the French,
as well against the visits of American merchant vessels nominally “ to
refresh,” but really to tamper with the convicts.
CHAPTER YIII.
In August, 1806, King’s successor, Bligh, arrived, and King took
charge of H.M.S. ‘ Buffalo ’ and proceeded to England. His Order
Book, on board the ‘ Buffalo,’ is before me, and shows that in the
management of his ship, his providence in laying in stores, slops, &c.,
and in the control of officers whom he conveyed to England by
Bligh’s directions, he displayed the utmost diligence and care.
By direction of Bligh, King received on board the ‘ Buffalo ’ as a
prisoner at large one Captain Short, placed under arrest by Bligh
“ for disobedience of orders by refusing to give up the command of
the ‘ Porpoise.’ ”
Short applied for “one double hen-coop and a goose-coop, and
a portion of room for pigs and sheep.” King instructs Lieutenant
Oxley to
“give my compliments to Captain Short and inform him that there are
but six able hen-coops on board, which arc not sufficient for the fowls pro-
cured by the captain and officers belonging to the ship, who are nevertheless
inclined to give one up to Captain Short. Goose coop there is none belonging


to the ship. The only small sheep pen there is and the long boat are occupied
by the sheep laid in by the captain and officers, but if Captain Short judges
his sheep will be safe between the guns, such of those spaces as are not
in the way of the ropes may be so occupied, &c., &c.”
Bligh’s order (15th January, 1807) to a Lieutenant and Master
who were sent to England is as follows :
“ You are hereby required and directed to embark on board H.M.S.
* Buffalo,’ under Captain King’s command, to proceed to Engl end in order that
a court martial may be held on Captain Short and yourselves for the charges
in your respective letters transmitted to me, and obey all such orders as you
may receive from Captain King, for the good of H.M. Service.”
At Rio Janeiro, on May 27th, King accedes to Short’s request to
be allowed to go on shore, consenting—
“ To your enjoying that temporary enlargement after so long a voyage, on
the presumption of your considering yourself under a parole of honour to sleep
on board the ‘ Buffalo.’ ”
Short still begging to be allowed to reside on shore, King says :
“ However unprecedented it may be for any person under arrest to absent
himself from the ship or place of arrest, yet 1 have no objection to taking on
myself that responsibility during the * Buffalo’s ’ repairs and fitting, provided
that I have your parole or promise in writing that you will not 1 absent your-
self from the city or its environs, or go on board any other ship than the
‘ Buffalo.’ ”
Underneath this letter is written :
“ To this letter Captain Short never thought proper to give me an answer.”
Short went on shore, however, for on the 30th June he is allowed
to remain there until Friday night.
On the sth September, 1807, King directs Captain Houstouu and
Lieutenant Oxley
“ to assist the carpenter in inspecting into the visible defects of the ship’s
hull and masts, and to assign the probable cause of her making six inches
of water an hour since the third day of her leaving Eio Janeiro.”
Their report being given on the same day, King requests answers to
the following queries.
“ Do you consider that the leaks owing to the defects you state, and that
which cannot be ascertained are of that present apparent consequence to the
ship’s safety, as to require her going into port to be surveyed, and incur the
very heavy expense and delay of heaving down, taking the copper off,
caulking her bottom throughout and new sheathing it with wood or copper,
and, in fact, to give her a total repair to be assured of her not leaking ?
“ 2. —Do you conceive that the ship’s upper works, decks, and mainmast
are sufficiently good in their present state to trust to in heaving down ?
“ Or whether you are of opinion that the good of the service (and the
apparent safety of the ship) requires that the voyage should be persevered in,
unless future events may render other proceedings necessary in the course of
the passage ? ”
The reply was (on the sth September) —
“We certainly are of opinion that there is no necessity for going into
port.”


“ We are of opinion that the ship’s upper works and mainmast are not
capable to bear the strain of heaving her keel out.
“ We are of opinion that the ship in her present state is perfectly capable
to perform the voyage.”
On the 26th October, however, I find King requesting the Com-
manding Officer of the detachment of the 88th Regiment
“ to spare an officer and twenty men, the crew being greatly fatigued from
the continual working of the pumps, owing to the very leaky state ” of the
‘ Buffalo.’
In November the old ship reached Portsmouth Harbour, and King
was engaged in the usual correspondence with the Commissioners for
Victualling the Navy. In one letter he explains, as to tobacco, at
the request of the purser, that the price had ranged at Sydney from
7s, in April, 1800, to 9 \d. in November, 1801; subsequently to Gd. in
1803; 2s. in 1804 and 1805 ; soon after to Bs.; and to 15s. at the
date of the departure of the ‘ Buffalo’ in 1807.
From a small notebook full of statistics written principally by his
own hand, Governor King must have been enabled to supply all infor-
mation required* Before he left Sydney he had received from Lord
Castlereagh a despatch which contained these words :
“ The appointment of a successor to you having arisen from your personal
request to be relieved from the fatigues of your government, I am happy when
1 thus recommend Captain Bligh to your attention to express His Majesty’s
entire approbation of the conduct you have manifested in the important charge
committed to you, and His Majesty’s pleasure at the great improvement which
the colony has received under your superintendence.”
From Sir Joseph Banks too he had heard (20th Sept., 1806): —
“ As I am now to see you so soon, I need not make this letter a long one;
but I hope I may say that for the quiet disposition of the colony, and which
you brought about after so much labour and difficulties so very discouraging,
your merit has been very great, and your conduct such as in my opinion
deserves much reward. I trust the fluctuations of administrations will not
act agaiifst you. . . . Your good deeds will speak for themselves, my dear sir,
and I beg you will be assured that whoever it may be who fills the Colonial
Department when you return, you may be sure of my earnest and active
solicitations that such things may be done for you as you deserve, and that in
my mind is not a little.” f
And so the old man passes from our page, as an honest hard-
working Englishman of the olden time, and as the probable ancestor
of many thousands of Australians. Jotting down the number of his
descendants with one of his grandsons a few days ago, I was able to
enumerate more than one hundred and thirty.
His son lived to be Admiral Philip Parker King, after an active
and respected career. He it was who, as Captain King, accompanied
♦ This note-book, now the property of W. Essington King, Esq., of Gipps
Land, ought to be procured and preserved by the University or some other public
library in New South Wales. Hereafter such relics will be inestimable.
f In one of Sir Joseph Banks’ letters I find the expression (August, 1804) :
“ There is only one part of your conduct as Governor which I do not think right—
that is your frequent reprieves.” Happy he whose principal fault is mercy.


Governor Bourke in 1837, when the site of Melbourne was formally
approved of and laid out: just thirty-six years after Grant had, under
King’s instructions, coasted to the westward of Western 1 ort and
entered Port Philip : just thirty-five years after Governor King had
sent his Surveyor General, Mr. Grimes, to survey the harbour
discovered by Grant and by Flinders in 1802 ; and thirty-four years
after Governor Collins (in spite of the careful survey, made by
Grimes, shewing the course of the Yarra-Yarra River) abandoned the
settlement at Point Nepean because he could not find abundance of
fresh water close to the open sea.
CHAPTER IX.
It is worth while to take a rapid glance at the group of colonies
thus founded in the south, .
Created as they were in the first instance by the sagacious mind of
Pitt, under no national impulse, and but slightly stimulated by private
enterprise, the length of the voyage to them could not but retard their
progress. . „ . , .
Possessing convict, the equivalent of servile, labour, they were
exempt from one form of difficulty which free communities would have
encountered.
But the presence of convicts in great numbers entailed numerous
social and political evils; and though it is convenient to have convict
labour rather than none, it is not highly productive.
No one who has seen much of our convicted fellow-countrymen
will deny that amongst them were to be found hard-working and
honest and sober men, far more moral than many unconvicted
countrymen who remained at home, —some of them in posts of honour.
But the control of convicts, so as to profit by their labour to the
utmost and do one’s duty to them as fellow-creatures, is a task for
which few men have the talent j and amongst the mass of the prisoners
there were so many hardened in guilt, and repulsive of control or of
respect, that the machinery and care required to constrain them made
the labour of the mass comparatively costly.
The power which the master had over his assigned servant was by
evil-disposed masters too often abused.
A high state of education on the part of the master afforded no
guarantee that he could be safely entrusted with the control of his
fellow-man in the multiform aspects which the assignment system
presented, , , ~ „
With a low education the truculence and petty meannesses of
many masters not unfrequently drove the convict to the bush or to
the gallows.
I remember an instance in point.
An ex-soldier, a young athletic man, was assigned to a butcher of
low character. Convicts under sentence for seven years, fourteen


years, and for life, could, after good conduct during four, six, or eight
years respectively obtain a ticket of leave, which enabled the holder
to hire himself within his district, and enjoy the privileges of
freedom therein. The ex-soldier had served nearly the term which
would have entitled him to a ticket of leave. The butcher wished to
retain his services, and picked occasion of quarrel in order that the
servant, by being flogged, might forfeit his claim for reward for un-
broken good conduct.
The man murdered his master in revenge, and was hanged in the
slaughter-yard attached to the master’s shop.*
No care that any Government could take as to the character of
masters could guard against such disasters; although, to do our
colonists justice, it must be admitted that the large majority of the
masters treated their servants kindly, and that in the large majority
of the assigned servants the system bore wholesome fruit so far as
their reclamation from theft and many other vices was concerned.
Numbers of them became employers of labour in their turn, and in
special cases raised themselves or their descendants into notice, and
were admitted by governors into the then coveted precincts of
Government House.
But a fatal familiarity with the sinner and a sympathy for the
kindlier part of his nature cannot but blunt repugnance to the sin.
On the worse-managed holdings disgraceful scenes were common as
the day; convict and convict-master were alike; and the accumula-
tions of the worst criminals in gangs were plague spots too terrible to
be described. Scenes which no well-nurtured child ought to see or
hear of were daily observed by almost every colonist’s children.
Expressions from which the pure-minded would “ shrink as from
a blow ” were current as common coin. A disease of habit could not
but degrade all but the rarer minds. If a man rubs shoulders in a
campaign with none but the filthy he cannot prevent his own clothing
from being soiled; and even the spirit of man, as Shakspeare finely
tells us, is almost subdued to what it works in, as the dyer’s hand.
No wonder then that the best settlers set their faces against the
* Strange circumstances connected with the man’s case have impressed it on
my memory. He was defiant, if not insolent, at his trial: reckless and daring
after sentence. He repelled the clergyman, who did not cease, however, to visit
him. One day his manner was changed. He had, in dream or vision, or in thought,
been visited by his mother from whose kind care when a mere child he had
absconded and taken to wild courses. He was now “in his right mind ”; penitent,
but not less bold. The clergyman, whom I knew well, interested himself to obtain
a reprieve, and it was understood that it could be procured. But the convict
firmly declined it. With no braggadocio, no complaint, but a humble sense of
his own unfitness to live, and a penitent hope that the gates of mercy might not bo
shut against him, he died as calmly and collectedly as ever man died ; he sat on
his coffin in the cart which conveyed him two miles to the place of execution, and
at the temporary gallows erected in the yard, where the rope was fixed, he quietly
told those about him that the rope must be shortened or his feet would reach the
ground ; invited the brother convict who attended to knock the irons off his legs—
“ Come on, Joe, I shall bear you no ill-will ” —requested the clergyman to tell
people that he attributed his crimes to neglect of his parents’ advice, and to
sabbath-breaking, and passed'away amidst the sympathy, terror, and admiration
of the small crowd collected to see the execution. It was ascertained that he had
been right about the necessity to shorten the rope.


reception of convicts or the children of convicts in society; and that
when Governor Macquarie endeavoured with a high hand to coerce
the recalcitrant, he was resisted to the uttermost.
It is said that he declared that he recognized only two classes —
those who had been convicted and those who ought to have been—a
slander, doubtless, anywhere, and one which Macquarie must have
known to be a slander in Sydney.
Some people wonder that in a community where criminals were so
numerous, there should be as it were an affectation of horror of con-
tamination ; for it must be admitted, and the contests with Macquarie
prove that the community did, as a whole, vehemently abhor associ-
ation with the convict class, the freedmen amongst whom went by the
name of emancipists. Why, it was said, should the settlers be less
willing to mix with emancipists than Macquarie was ?
They knew much better what they were doing. The instincts of
parents could not but warn them that if society at Government House
(where, outside of official occasions at least, the company should be
select) were open to the emancipist class, the proverbial endurance
would be changed into pity, and at last all barriers would be broken
down.
Macquarie’s contests with the settlers and the military only
shewed that he and not they belonged to the class which, if sympathy
be a guide, ought to have been convicted. The singular spectacle was
seen of a governor endeavouring to degrade society, and employers of
convicts, with the aid of young officers fresh from the Peninsular
War, battling in the interests of morality.
The victory, I think, remained with the settlers and the soldiers.
True, the Governor succeeded in making the officers meet an emanci-
pist now and then at Government House; and the Colonel, by
meddling with the invitations at the instigation of the Governor,
managed to invito an emancipist to a public dinner given by the
officers ; but the latter so comported themselves to the guest thus
forced upon them as one of the Governor’s suite, that though there
was no special act to be complained of, the experiment was never
repeated; and it seemed to me when I arrived in the colony some
twenty years afterwards that the hard and fast line of demarcation
was maintained with strictness on one side, and submitted to without
resistance by the other.*
Macquarie’s conduct was rather illogical. Railing at free people
and elevating emancipists, he seemed to think that he could change
enemies into friends by inflicting unlawful punishments. Thus this
friend of the oppressed, when two young free men were found walking
with two young free women on a part of the Government domain
prohibited to strangers, immediately, on the ex parte statement of a
* An amusing instance was told of Ihe horror of the free with regard to the
convicted. A lady was about to visit England with her family. She assumed
that a young woman who was employed in the nursery would accompany her.
Finding that the girl declined to go, the lady said, “ What can be your reason ?
I thought you would have liked it.” “Oh ! no, ma’am, I could not think of going
to England. That’s where all the bad people, the convicts, come from.” So true
is it that there are two sides to every question.


constable, sentenced the women to be imprisoned and the men to be
flogged. But this was too flagrant an act to be passed over, and a
Commissioner (Mr. Bigge) was sent from England to examine the
administration of the affairs of the colony.
That Macquarie should have been removed is less surprising than
that he should have been allowed to remain so long.
He was only reprimanded for his arbitrary act of flogging free
men, and imprisoning free women. The “ Civis Eomanus sum ” was
not strong enough as a principle to cause the fall of a Governor. But
other causes w r ere deemed sufficient; and Macquarie was recalled,
leaving the colony, as he said, prosperous materially, but having
intensified its evils as a convict settlement.
It would have been well if the Home Government had then re-
solved upon discontinuing transportation. No sane person could
advocate or expect a perpetual system of relieving one country of its
criminals by deporting them wholesale to another; and whatever the
right system of dealing with criminals may be, the sooner it is
adopted the better. But Mr. Bigge contented himself with recom-
mendations for the diminution rather than the removal of the evils he
saw, and the classification and assignment of convicts were thence-
forward better regulated.
Grants of land were still given to capitalists, able and willing to
receive assigned servants, and many men of good family and ample
means immigrated to the colony.
Convict labour supplied to them, in one sense, the place of the
slave labour of the Greeks. There was plenty of it. But there was
a repulsiveness about the convict which did not attach to the slave.
There was a slow but sapping degradation of the free by contact with
the criminal. Not of all, but notably in some sad instances. In
process of time the purer-minded could not but hope for a stoppage of
the evil: and as time increased the free population in proportion to
the bond, concurring influences brought about the abolition of trans-
portation ; first to the most populous colony, New South Wales, then
to Van Diemen’s Land (now Tasmania), and lastly to Western
Australia. To South Australia and to Victoria no convicts had ever
been transported.
The great momentum for the abolition was imparted to the move-
ment in New South Wales, by jealousy on the part of the free labouring
class, against competition by convict labour. This jealousy was of
course made use of by opponents of transportation; by some honour-
ably, by some for mere party purposes. Logically, or patriotically,
transportation could not be defended, and when it became unpopular it
soon fell to the ground. Had it fallen sooner it would have been better.
By the time it fell large private establishments had been created which
were so entirely dependent upon its continuance that its withdrawal
brought many generous spirits to ruin. The more frugal and penu-
rious settlers suffered less: and anyone personally conversant with the
colony at the time can call to mind numerous instances of the destruc-
tion of the worthy and the generous, and the raising up of the selfish
and penurious.


It is easy to say that those who succumbed were bad men of busi-
ness ; yet it may be better to bo a bad business man than to board up
selfishly rather than contribute generously to churches and schools and
to institutions which benefit the community.
The bad men of business had no reward in this world; but their
ruin came to them from the fact that the world itself was managed by
men who were such bad men of business themselves that they were
never long in one frame of mind.* If the system of assignment had
not been promoted and fostered by the Government, the reaction on its
abolition would not have entailed so much ruin.
But man departs, or is ruined, and his property remains. That
which had cost one man ten thousand pounds fell into the hands of
some novus homo for a tithe of the sum : and in the hard scientific lan-
guage of a political economy which deals only with material elements,
the colony remained prosperous. A change of ownership had ab-
stracted no intrinsic value. Cattle and sheep, corn and wine, were still
reared and produced ; merchants and bankers throve upon the results
of long years of labour of many an early pioneer whose family was
dashed down from affluence to misery: and political economists who
cannot look beyond a rent-roll or a table of imports and exports saw
not that the novi homines , less identified with the religious and social
happiness of the community than their predecessors had been, were
but a poor substitute for them in point of ownership of property.
Some of the duties which cluster around property find no place in
statistical tables ; but their absence leaves effects which surely bring
about a deterioration of society, and must sooner or later be legible
in the statistics of crime.
Then, if the community be sound at heart, comes the reaction.
The vessel of the state swings with the prevailing tide. Happy they
who are earnest and honest enough to use it with advantage for their
voyage; who are not content with the part of that “ common body
which
“ Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide
To rot itself with motion.”
The shock to the adjustments which regulated the industrial ma-
chinery was in process of time abated. The application of the land
revenues to immigration mitigated in some sort that want of labourers
which would have retarded not alone the local development of the
colonies themselves, but the extension of British commerce. (It was
assumed by many persons that this was the whole of Wakefield’s
theory, but I have already shown this to be a false assumption.) Va-
rious were the efforts made by employers to secure labour. The
remnants of the convict system, at first numerous in proportion to the
whole population, dwindled to a small fraction: many of them, how-
* The celebrated saying, “ Quantula sapientia gu’>ernatur mundus,” attributed
to Oxonstiern, was anticipated by Sixtus V., who, according to Sir Walter Raleigh
(History of the World), answering a friar who wondered at the success of Sixtus
in attaining the Papacy, said—“Hadst thou lived abroad as I have done, and
seen by what folly the world is governed, thou wouldst wonder at nothing.


ever, still stung by their old dislike of settled habits, squandered in
a few days or weeks the wages they had purposely allowed to accu-
mulate for months, sometimes for years.
The progress in a material sense of such a community must have
been slow under any circumstances. The fluctuations of the wool
market made it variable.
The discovery of gold in California seemed to take away even that
labour which existed.
A wide territory, without funds available for making roads for
transport of wool grown at long distances from the sea, seemed for a
short time about to be abandoned by the scanty stock of active labourers
found on the soil in 1848.
It was possible that there might have been in a few years an almost
primitive society with all the difficulties and none of the advantages
of patriarchal life in the wilderness. Euin, doubtless, was the goal to
which all encumbered owners were hastening: when, in 1851, to use
William Charles Wentworth’s words, the discovery of gold in Aus-
tralia turned the tide of events, and “ precipitated the Colony into a
nation.” That gold existed in Australia had been known for many
years. Geologists in England, scientific men who visited Australia,
all concurred in declaring that Australia must be a gold-producing
country. In one district a shepherd annually obtained considerable
sums for the granules or flakes of gold which he daily searched for and
frequently found. Some years before gold was discovered in Cali-
fornia, Dr. Me William, well known for his great services on the Steam
Boat Expedition to the Niger, visited the Murrunbidgee, and, after
examining the rocks, declared his positive conviction that gold was
there.
Scientifically, such strong assertions are sufficient. Practically,
they do not discover; but they may lead to such a discovery of gold
as may influence the condition of a colony.
It was the rush to California that jeopardized the industries of
Australia; and it was observation of the process of washing gold drift,
that induced one of the Australians in California to return to Australia
and wash the alluvium in some of its creeks.
Of such a practical test there could be but one result. Any
simpleton might have tried it, but he who did try it was deservedly
called a discoverer, though he was so only in a humble sense, and he
received considerable grants of money from the legislatures of New
South Wales and of Victoria.
The quantities of gold found in both colonies redressed the balance
of immigration. The influx of population in two or three years was
enormous.
In Victoria in 1850 there were 76,000 souls. In 1854 there were
312,000.
But though immigration was on an extensive scale, the labour
market was not abundantly supplied.
The profits of individual miners were great, and by the standard
of those profits, generally speaking, the rates of wages were roughly
regulated. In many cases wages rose four and five hundred per cent.


Largo sums were still expended from the public funds, but it may be
questioned whether, except in introducing families, and in diminishing
the frightful disproportion of the sexes, any real good was done. An
able-bodied single man generally betook himself to “ the diggings,”
and was ready at a moment’s notice to betake himself to California or
elsewhere, to a “ new rush,” as now gold-fields were called. To pay
the passage for such a man was throwing money away. Called upon
by Sir Charles Hotham in 1855 to take temporary and honorary charge
of the Immigration Department in Victoria, the writer of these pages
then urged that the disparity in numbers of the sexes “ could not but
be looked upon as deserving the efforts of statesmen to counteract by
all legitimate means; ” and that
“ to give an impetus to immigration of those whose friends remit money
in aid of their passage seems to me the proper function of the Immigration
Department, except with regard to all wholesome efforts having as an object
the equalization of the sexes in the census, and the consequent elevation of
the moral tone and social comfort of the community. These two directions
afford ample field.”
At that time the males were 234,000, the females 129,000. Nor
did the disproportion speedily diminish. In 1858 there were 323,000
males, and 180,000 females; and it was not until 1870 that there were
327,000 females in a total population of 726,000.
The views of the writer were not sympathized with by those who
controlled affairs after Sir Charles Hotham’s death, and the same wild
payments continued to be made in paying passage-money for mere
birds of passage. The uselessness of doing so was practically enforced
upon the community some years later, when, on the discovery of gold
near Port Curtis, in Queensland, some thousands rushed thither from
Victoria, and being there disappointed, applied to the Victorian
Government to pay for their return.
Such events, and a jealousy of workmen against other workmen,
coupled with a large influence on the course of legislation, were sure to
terminate assisted emigration; but the population of the various
colonies in the South having reached (in 1872) about 1,900,000, it
may be said that the elements of solution of the labour problem are
already on the soil of Australia.
What no private efforts, no government grants, no system of legis-
lation could have effected, has been brought about by “ the yellow
slave that puttest odds among the rout of nations.”
Gold was the loadstone that reversed the law of attraction for
emigrants from Europe. They came to gather gold, not to found a
dominion; but a higher law than any they had any conception of has
overruled their actions.


CHAPTER X.
The population of Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand has grown
in about twenty years from some 400,000 souls to 1,900,000. For
weal or for woe the great South land is occupied. The policy of
Pitt has been so far pursued, that the flag of England flies over all
Australian soil. Settlements fringe the coast almost conterminously;
flocks and herds roam over the wide interior even to the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and no acre exists over which some form of English
government has not been set up.
What that form of government shall eventually be has been
guaranteed by the abstinence of the English Government as to found-
ing any hereditary order. The one seed sown has produced and will
continue to produce a hundredfold.
The representative principle, dominant in England, though modified
by reverence, “ that angel of the world,” by some veneration for past
greatness, and for the means by which it was achieved, has been made
the sole element in her colonies.
Philosophical writers may insinuate that there was no necessity for
the colonies to make the suffrage universal, when the creatures of that
suffrage were to be all-powerful; but what philosopher can cast a
stone at Australians ?
Did not Mr. J. S. Mill print in 1865 a People’s Edition of a work
containing these passages?—
“ I regard it as wholly inadmissible that any person should participate in
the suffrage without being able to read, write, and, I will add, perform the
common operations of arithmetic. . . . Universal teaching must precede
universal enfranchisement. No one but those in whom an a priori theory has
silenced common sense will maintain that power over others, over the whole
community, should be imparted to people who have not acquired the com-
monest and most essential requisites for taking care of themselves; for
pursuing intelligently their own interests, and those of the persons most
nearly allied to them.”
And did not Mr. Mill vote in 1868 for a Bill which gave “power
over others, power over the whole community,” to those whom he
believed unfit to use it ?
May not a colonist look over the hedge when others break through
it without remorse ?
Most fortunate has it been that, as a rule, the immigrants who
have sought Australia have been intelligent and cultivated far above
the average.
But for this —and for this no human counsels can claim credit—
the future of Australia might have been dark indeed.
No traveller sees a gathering in Australia, fairly representative, with-
out remarking the superior intelligence and demeanour of the people.
Yet even the material successes of a population are fraught with
some danger. Even in colonies the elevation of a nouveau riche is
h 2 •


concurrent with the downfall of some one else; and a self-confidence
may be built up, a reliance on money may be created, which bodes
no good for the future. “ Fisk ” has been possible, even in New York.
It cannot be doubted, moreover, that the transfer of property which
takes place in young communities is of a nature which tends to lower
the tone of society. The purse-pride of an upstart is proverbial; and
one of the sweetest morsels to a man of low mind is the ever-recurring
reflection that by his own right arm he has gotten himself the victory
over superior advantages and education.
In the dim distance other events are looming, when this point has
been reached.
What Goldwin-Smith proposes is carried forward by very different
men from himself. He whose patriotism is confined to his pocket,
and whose learning is only in his ledger, has no pride in being the
countryman of Shakespeare, no reverence for the great deeds of the past.
He can oppose no successful resistance to the insidious designs of
those who, to gratify their own propensities, are ever on the watch for
causes of dispute between a colony and the mother country.
The consequence is that an active or forward man can move and
carry resolutions, the ultimate outcome of which not one of his sup-
porters had in view when they gave him their support.
He invokes their aid in the grand names of English liberty, an
Englishman’s privileges, an Englishman’s rights;—the majority un-
questioningly follow. The wiser few fear to lose popularity by seem-
ing hostile to liberty—they join the crowd (wise, if at all, in their
own generation only), and the seed has been sown for future crops of
doubts and bitterness.
If one man, more sagacious than the rest, is warned of the probable
consequence of his vote, he admits its tendency, but hopes “ it may
not come to that, at least not in my time.”
Such a case is not colonial only. While these words are written,
the Times gravely announces that it is well known in England that
not more than one-sixth of the House of Commons was really in
favour of the Ballot Bill, which it passed by overwhelming majorities.
If these things are done in the dry tree, who shall wonder at their
being done in the green?
It is not only in colonies that the common sense and the wisdom
of a people is overborne by the restless forwardness and energy of the
less wise amongst them. It is as old as anything in history that
the selfish plotting of a demagogue puts forward as a boon to the
people what is really a scheme for his own aggrandisement.
But such schemes, one by one repeated, eventually frame the laws
and mould the sentiments of the masses.
It is not the Fates who spin this web of destiny: it is the un-
wisdom of the many, worked upon by the cunning self-seeking of the
few ; and, unless all aspirations for better and more general education
are Utopian, the future must be merely a repetend of the past.
Such being the dangers ahead, what should be the policy of the
Home Government towards her colonies ?


Mr. Herman Merivale* declares that —
“ The object of our statesmen has been twofold: to encourage the colonies
to prepare for independence for their own sake; and at the same time to
relieve the people of this country from the share which they formerly bore in
contributing towards their administration and defence Now, I am not
criticising the wisdom of these economies. It is needless to repeat the irre-
fragible arguments which have been urged in Parliament and the press as to
the impolicy of taxing ourselves for purposes which produce no tangible return,
and teaching flourishing young communities to rely on us instead of on them-
selves. At the same time it is possible that this line of policy has been
avowed and acted on in a somewhat ostentatious manner, not exactly calcu-
lated to soften what there was of disagreeable in the operation itself by the
mode of using the knife.” f
Now, one can understand an English statesman saying—(as many
a private economist has to say when he gives up a pleasure or
abandons the cultivation of a long-cherished family sentiment)—“ My
circumstances no longer enable me to gratify my desires ; I must
retrench in this or that direction.” But it is, to use Mr, Merivale’s
own expression, “ not easily explicable that it should be the case ”
that one so well informed as he should be driven to broadly state that
“ the object ” of British statesmen had been “ to encourage the colonies
to prepare for separation ” ; and, apparently as provocative of such a
conclusion, to shrink from committing the Imperial Government to
any responsibility, even in defence of a colony from an enemy. This
was said, it is true, in 1870; and since that date some very different
pronunciarnentos have been made. The labours of the Royal Colonial
Institute, discussions on colonial questions, questions and motions in
Parliament, and speeches elsewhere, seem to have roused a different
feeling, or to have shown to the Government that a different feeling
existed ; and we have been told (1872) by an under-secretary that
it is no less than a crime to impute to any of Her Majesty’s Ministers
a desire to aim at what Mr. Merivale in 1870 publicly declared to be
their “ object.”
If the imputation be criminal, what is the nature of the act ? And
how has it happened that the repulse of the imputation only became in
1872 earnest enough to be intelligible?
It is fortunate for the colonies and fortunate for the reputations
of some English statesmen that public attention has been aroused by
Fronde and others; that the dangerous course which had been entered
upon was exposed at once; that the genuine good feeling between the
brothers at home and the brothers in Australia has been evoked, and
* Fortnightly Review , Feb., 1870.
f This is a pregnant admission from Mr. Merivale, who disavows all sentiment
in such matters. In the same article he says, “To suppose that either Americans
or British, to any serious amount, choose to abide under one flag more than
another from patriotic motives and to their pecuniary loss, is to read the lessons
of history by what I must term sentimentalism.” Yet the Secession War in
America, the yearning of Italy for Rome, and the fervour of Germans for the
Rhine, combine to prove that what is termed sentimentalism is a great power
among nations still.


has put to shame the shabby opinion of those who would reduce an
Englishman at home or abroad to a walking catalogue of price lists.
At any rate, whatever condition our countrymen are coming to in
the fatherland, there is not the slightest desire amongst the mass of the
people of the colonies for severance. This has been affirmed in many
ways and by many persons in official documents and in public; and such
affirmations are no doubt useful for the information of people at a dis-
tance. On the spot, no sane man could allege that there is any desire
for separation or independence. But because there is no such desire, it
does not follow that by a continuance of suggestion or solicitations
from England the idea might not be forced upon the colonists. They
themselves cherish their kinship; in spite of the Naturalization Act
of 1870, there is yet a glory to the Englishman horn; but affection
cannot endure on one side only, and if all patriotic feelings should be
repudiated as sentimentalism in England there might come a time
when they would be obsolete in Australia. Then would the much-
enduring public discover to what unwished-for results a course of
misrepresentation had reduced them ; then would they vainly regret
that in the nineteenth as in the eighteenth century they had permitted
“ blind watchmen ” to guard the temple of national honour, and had
neglected the warnings which are given by Froude now, as they were
once vainly given by Chatham and by Burke.
Take the Alabama case from a Canadian point of view. Re-
peatedly was Canada threatened with a Fenian invasion; none knew
the size of the armies to be employed, hut if they had corresponded
with the tone of the General Orders and Proclamations issued in New
York and elsewhere, their importance could hardly have been magnified.
There was no secrecy apparently, and an invasion took place.
During the struggle of the Confederates to dissever their country
because they were beaten at a presidential election, some Southern
agents, acting in conspiracy with some unworthy Englishmen,
managed surreptitiously to procure vessels with which to wage a
disgraceful course of unlawful rapine and arson on the high seas.
The property found on board American merchantmen was “ con-
veyed” to the uses of the robbers, without any formalities of prize
courts.
For this America demanded satisfaction, and in process of time the
present Lord Derby agreed to abide by arbitration conducted on the
basis of existing international law.
The Canadians meantime were seeking satisfaction also.
The American Senate, however, rejected the Canadian-Johnson
treaty.
What follows ?
Were the Canadians treated as cives Romani ? In the Washington
Treaty of 1871 were their claims dealt with as if an Englishman in
one place was entitled to be recognized as a fellow-subject by
an Englishman in another? Quite the reverse. To oblige the
Americans, it was agreed that all the acts done ten years before under
international law scrupulously studied at the time by various go-
vernors, consuls, and captains of ships throughout the world, should


be decided not by tbe international law respected at tbe time, but by
a new set of propositions laid down in 1871, of which, unless those
governors, consuls, and captains had desired to prophesy England’s
humiliation, they could never have dreamed.
True, the Canadian claims were mentioned at Washington, but
only to be peremptorily dismissed.
Is this giving to the Canadian in the eyes of the world the same
consideration as a British subject, which the Americans asked and
obtained for their scattered merchantmen as Americans on the high
seas ? If the Canadian claims were untenable, what could the United
States suffer by going to arbitration on them ?
To say that subsequently, when their abandonment was denounced,
it was agreed that England should purchase pardon by guaranteeing
a Eailway Loan does not mend matters, though it may prove that the
ignominy was not ignorantly procured.
The only logical defence of their abandonment can be made by
those who are ready to aver that if an expedition from New York had
been openly fitted out, had landed and done damage in Liverpool,
England could have had no set-off against the alleged depredations of
the marauders in the ‘ Alabama.’
He who cannot take that ground betrays the want of patriotism
and allegiance to the Empire which is complained of by Froude.
It cannot be urged that it is hard to do what the prophet com-
mands. What is it that Froude desires ?
“ There is no occasion for present change, if it be understood that we have
no desire to part with them, and if colonists are admitted freely to such
honours and privileges as the State confers on distinguished subjects.
Healthy confederations must grow, and cannot be made. The [only stable
bond of union isjnutual good will.” *
Nor is Froude the only philosophic historian who has scanned
this question from a national or patriotic point of view. In the article
already quoted, Mr. Herman Merivale says :
“ Let philosophers deem of it as they may, the bestowal of public honours
affords one of the noblest incentives to public virtue which the community has
it in its power to furnish. And the feeling of possessing such honours
in common would be specially conducive to that sense of national unity which
we wish to foster. We seem in my humble judgment to have thrown this
advantage, which was within our reach, deliberately away. We have created
a colonial order of knighthood, as if to give express sanction to the doctrine
attributed to us by the discontented, that mother country and colonies are not
to be classed together. Every honour which the Crown can bestow should be
Imperial, in my opinion, and open to every subject of the Crown, in all its
dominions peopled by Englishmen. And, in the next place, such honours as
colonists do enjoy are only bestowed by the Crown (in self-governing colonies)
on the advice of the Colonial Prime Minister, tendered through the Governor.
It would be difficult to suggest any contrivance calculated to render them less
valuable. The prime minister in a colonial democracy is the creature of the
* Short Studies on Great Subjects, Second Series, 1871.


day. He is absolute for his time, but he knows that his time is short. He is
nearly exempt from those national cares and interests to which the rulers of a
great country are subject, and which create titles to public honour independent
of party. His highest concern is to manage well the local affairs entrusted to
his charge : his lowest, but most ordinary and most engrossing, to keep his
party together, and to bold his place. And it is this last purpose, lam afraid,
which be will have chiefly in view in distributing such honours as he can
dispose of. I speak in the future tense, because the conferring colonial
honours under responsible government is as yet too novel an experiment to
admit of more positive commentary. But 1 can entertain little doubt that the
machinery must work in the way which I have anticipated. If I were to
affirm, broadly, that the established usage under which the Crown distributes
honours under the advice of party leaders at home as well as in the colonies
deadens the public appreciation of these chivalrous rewards, gives them an
ineffaceable stain of vulgarity, demoralizes patriotic impulse, tends to lower
even the standard of popular respect for the Crown itself, I should doubtless
be charged with gross exaggeration. But I should appeal to the judgment of
such as will throw aside inveterate prepossessions, and consider the question
with impartial philosophy.”
When Froude and Merivale agree so closely, can their opinions
be sneered at as nothing worth ?
Is it ever to be the case that the books of the Sibyl shall be
despised and the value of their contents lost to the despiser ?
Must the local successes of the hour for ever blind the citizens of
a great empire to the wider questions of the day?
What will be the value of those small successes when the neglect
of imperial interests shall have so pruned down the functions of an
English ministry that the outer world is careless about them ?
It is true that if the pulsations at the heart be disordered the
whole body will suffer: but it is equally true that if healthy circula-
tion throughout the limbs be not secured, the heart itself must be
affected: and in time the disease of the extremities will palsy the
action of the heart.
The statesman who dreams that there can be one kind of English-
man for' the colonies and another for the mother-country is no wiser
than the physician who for a disease in the blood would busy himself
only with local applications ; or than the architect who, when the dry
rot is consuming the supports of a building, contents himself with
smearing its outside with varnish.
LONDON; PRINTED BT WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


It


*
