

RECORD OF A VOYAGE
FROM
AUSTRALIA
TO
LONDON.
IN THE
Orient R.M.S.S. “CUZCO,”
APRIL—JUNE, 1890.




The
CUZCO NOTE BOOK
CONTEMPLATION
by Perry.R.A.




The Cuzco Note Book.
“ Morn, in the white wake of the morning star,
Come furrowing all the Orient into gold.”— Tennyson.
No. 1.
( S.S. CUZCO. |
1 (treat Australian Bight.)
May 10, 1890.
OURSELVES!
'y'HIS is the first appearance of the “Cuzco Note Book” and
inexoiable custom demands that, laying aside that modesty
which is the peculiar virtue of all editors, we should give the
raison d'etre the “ reason why ” of our existence. And this we
will proceed to give—notwithstanding that a funny subscriber says
he doesn’t care a fig, not even a Queensland banana, for the
raisins and dates, so long as he gets his paper. Well, the reason
why we appear is that, ever since the poet Cowper described
the post - boy spattered with mud, twanging his horn, and
biinging into the village the news of the world, so every man
and woman now look for their paper the men interested in
pounds and politics—the ladies in marriages and fashions. The
New South Welshman looks for his Sydney Morning Herald—the
Victorian for his Argus—and we, whose home for the present is
the rolling deep, look for a record of “the days doings,” of the
microcosm in which our fortunes are cast for the time being—we,
too, must have our paper. Our journal will be run on the lines
of that wise and wholesome assertion, that “ a merry heart doeth
good like a medicine.” The “ Cuzco Note Book” will not be like
a Sydney cab, a “ vehicle for abuse ”—but a vehicle for the in-
formation and innocent amusement of all. We promise our
readers that our pen shall never be dipped in gall—our object
will be to entertain, not to scold—therefore our ways will not be
rail- ways. We shall try to furnish a record of all the events
connected with our voyage, give faithful reports of our games and
amusements, furnish a column in which the Englishman can
“ write t 0 the papers ” and grumble to his heart’s content —and
find a corner for the poet. Under the head of “ Moonshine ” our
Special Lunatic will provide pungent points, and in our Agony
column our advertisers can give vent to their feelings.


We trust that the engagement of our Special Artist by whose
pencil these pages will be enriched with illustrations, may prove
a happy ex-Perry-ment. For any shortcomings connected with
this first issue, we crave our readers’ forbearance. Our editorial
sanctum is not so steady as it might be —and the rollers now
coming in are not the ink-rollers to which we have been accustomed.
In our next issue we purpose to enlarge our pages —but at the
present time we have produced as much matter as circumstances
would allow.
In conclusion —the Orient Company have launched many a
splendid liner: and not the unworthiest among them—the good old
Cuzco in which we are sailing. Let us wish success to all their
ships, their officers and men —but not forget to wish a successful
launch and pleasant trip to the last and latest Orient (penny-a)
Liner!
The Editor.
PUBLIC MEETING.
We are indebted to our energetic Secretary of the Sports Committee
for the following particulars: —
By notice and invitation a large and enthusiastic meeting of
passengers was held in the Saloon of the Cuzco, on Wednesday
evening last, while the vessel was on her passage from Largs
Bay. The chair was taken by Archdeacon Wilson, who explained
the objects of the meeting:—to make systematic arrangements
for spending the balance of the voyage in a pleasant and profitable
manner. Conducive to this end there were many games and
amusements, some of which could be held in the way of Tourna-
ments in the day time; and others, such as Concerts, Draughts,
&c. in the evening. After some general conversation the following
Officers and Captains of Games, &c., were elected ;


Mr. J. Watson .. as General Secretary.
Mr. Hackforth Jones .. Treasurer.
Archdeacon Wilson •. Editor of the MS. Journal.
Mr. Perry .. .. . • Artist of the same.
Mr. Harbison . . .. Captain of Draughts & Chess.
Mr. Ker .. .. .. Captain of Card Games.
Messrs. Lewis & Smith .. Musical Directors.
Mr. Hackforth Jones .. Leader of Debating Club.
Mr. Willatt .. .. Captain of Quoit Games.
Mr. Rhodes .. .. Captain of “Bull” & Athletic Sports.
Mr. J. Watson .. .. Captain of Cricket.
Mr. E. Watson .. •. Dramatic Director.
Messrs. Gibbs, Macdonald and Lloyd, were elected to act in co-
operation with the above.
To form a Fund, it was decided to make a levy of one shilling
on all male passengers. It was also decided to open up a Special
Subscription List to assist the Fund. After some votes of thanks
the meeting closed.
COMMITTEE MEETING.
In order to lose no time the Captains and Directors of the
various departments held a meeting in the Smoking Room, the
following morning, Thursday May 8. There was a full atten-
dance, every officer being present. After some discussion in order
to avoid the clashing of events, several fixtures were made of
Tournaments and Amusements for the coming week, a detailed
list of which appears in another column. A resolution was
carried that all Tournament Fees be paid in to the General Fund,
and the prizes be purchased by the Committee; also that the
entrance fee for each contested event be 3d. It was resolved that
an invitation be issued to the hirst Saloon passengers to compete
in, and become spectators of, any of the spoits. this finished
the business of the meeting.


MOONSHINE!
Manufactured by our Literary Lunatic !
Britannia is still “ruling the waves,” but since we started
across the Great Australian Bight she has not been ruling
them very straight, but rather unevenly, something after this
The consequence has been, the absence from the saloon table of
much of our beauty and fashion. The little dears have been
musing on the instability of mundane things —the sea especially!
Even the “ lords of creation ” have not been so devoted in their
attentions to pork and beans as usual. They have been much
given to looking over the ship’s side, not because they are sick,
Oh no! but perhaps to ascertain the vessels progress, or to study
the wonders of the ocean, or wrapt in poetic meditation ! Look
at our frontispiece on the cover. The subject is “ Contemplation .”
How beautiful is the sea ! don’t-cher-know !
Appropriate Songs for Suitable Occasions.
For many restless souls under present circumstances:
“ Anchored ! ”
Song for the night: “ Rocked in the Cradle of the Deep ! ”
Song for those who lie awake listening to the surges knocking
at the port holes: “ What are the Wild Waves Saying? ”
Song for rough times (with an obligato of smashing
crockery) : “ Oh ! dear, what can the matter be ? ”
Our Literary Lunatic was offered a bet that he could not make
a pun on the word “Adelaide.'' He says there is no difficulty in the
matter, and that he certainly would have won the wager if he
had a laid it ! He was also challenged to play on the word
“ Orient .” His response was— “ lam either able or I ain't
See the point ?


OUR GOOD SHIP.
We are informed that “ Cuzco ” is the ancient capital, and
still one of the chief cities of Peru. Before the recent destructive
war with Chili it had a population of 40,000. It is in latitude
13 0 3 0// S., and longitude 7 1° 20// W. Our capital floating city
of Cuzco is situated somewhere about latitude 35 0 19// S., and
longitude 119 0 E., and has a present population of 320 souls,
all told.
Since her departure from Sydney the vessel has had some
enforced waits at Melbourne and Adelaide, owing to the new Mail
arrangements. This gave the passengers an opportunity of
seeing the “lions” of the Victorian and South Australian capitals,
and, like Jack ashore, they took every advantage of the chance.
The best run of the ship has been the three days from
Adelaide to Albany, viz:— 309, 310 and 321 knots. Unfortunately
the steering-gear carried away, and with four men at the wheel
the vessel was navigated into Albany Harboui, with stiong
southerly wind and heavy sea. She took up her moorings at 8
p. m., and was followed by the P. & O. boat the Valetta, which
dropped anchor a few minutes later, hearty cheers being inter-
changed between the vessels. Ihe Valetta is on the inward
voyage from London to Sydney.
THE WEATHER.
The early part of the voyage was exceedingly pleasant, sunny
skies, smooth seas, and level decks prevailing, hoi the last thiee
days wet decks have been the order of the day, and passengers
have been sliding about like human avalanches. The livery of
the sea has been a dull uniform prison grey, emblematical of the
passengers confined to their cabins. T. o-day the ocean has donned
brighter dress, and is now attired in blue surge with white
trimmings. The cold nights on deck have snggested a “ freeze ”
costume, but the thermometers in the sleeping cabins have
registered a range of 65° to 70 .


LOST !
On Sunday evening, somewhere in the region between Albany
and Cape Ceeuwin, a 1 ravelling Cap. Any fisherman, whale,
shark, triton, mermaid or other denizen of the sea, will be amply-
rewarded on returning the lost cap to the Lewis-er.
[the Editor does not hold himself responsible for this pun,]
GREY ’AIRS!
A certain young lady-passenger has issued a brigade order to
the effect that she will decline to speak to any gentleman who
neglects to shave, and whose chin is consequently in the condition
of a stubble field. Under the circumstances we may expect quite
a stampede to friend Morgan’s tonsorial studio, or a regular
sharpening up of unused razors among hirsute (her suite)
individuals.
FIXTURES of the SPORTS COMMITTEE.
At the Meeting of the Executive held on Thursday, May Bth,
the following fixtures were unanimously agreed to. For Evening
Amusements in the Second Saloon :
Draught Tournaments: under the directions of Mr. Harbison,
on Mondays from 7.30 to 9.30 p.m.
Debates and Impromptu Speeches: superintended by Mr.
Hackforth-Jones, on Tuesdays at 7.30 p.m.
t Whist and other Card Games: conducted by Mr. Ker, on
Wednesdays from 7.30 to g. 30 p.m.
Concerts : arranged by Messrs. Lewis & Smith, on Thursdays
at 8 p.m. y
Reading the current number of the “ Cuzco Note Book ” by
the Editors, on Saturdays at 8 p.m.
For Open-Air Deck Sports :
Quoit Games: under the direction of Mr. Willatt, on Mon-
days and Saturdays at 10 a.m.
“Bull” and Athletic Sports: arranged by Mr. Rhodes, on
Tuesdays and Fridays, at 2 p.m.
Cricket: supervised by Mr. J. Watson, on Thursdays at 10 a.m.
It was arranged that a “ Scratch ” Concert, be held on Friday
evening. (N. 8.) this was ultimately carried out on Saturday
night in Albany Harbour.


SECOND EDITION !!!
CUZCO, Monday, May 12.
Latest Telegraphic Intelligence, by Cable, picked up somewhere off the
Leeuwin, by our deep sea fisherman.
London, Monday, 12 noon.
Russia wants a piece of Turkey. England is determined to
keep the piece.
“ We dont want to fight, but, by Jingo ! if we do,
We’ve got the ships, we’ve got the men, and we’ve got the
money too! ”
Germany, i p.m., Monday-
The price of sausages has riz.
[The last time it was produced on the Cuzco tea-table “it went down” con-
siderably! Ed.J
Ireland, Monday, 6 p.m.
Mrs. Maguire has declared in favor of Home Rule. Mr. M.
has had to deliver up his latch key, and will have to keep dacent
hours for the future.
A marble cenotaph has been erected to the memory of
Maloney’s cat.
INTERCOLONIAL.
Melbourne, Monday.
Six people committed suicide in the Yarra to-day. Caused by
the perfume, no doubt.
Sydney, Monday.
Federation is in the air, so is influenza.
Brown, Hon. Sec. of the Help-Mysclf Society has bolted with
the funds. That’s just like Brown !
An offer by Victoria to buy “our beautiful harbour” has been
refused.


LOST !
Overboard, near Cape Leeuwin, on May n, three of the
Cuzco’s Life-Buoys. Anybody picking them up is requested not
to circulate the idea that the ship has foundered, as such a
suggestion would be wwfoundered.
£s REWARD !!!
Will be paid for the discovery and conviction of the young
lady who, on Saturday evening last, sewed up the extremities of
sundry Pyjamas. Apply to the aggrieved parties.
CONCERT.
A very pleasant Musical and Literary Entertainment was
given in the Second Saloon, on Saturday evening, while the
Cuzco lay moored in Albany Harbour. Those who imagined that
a “scratch” concert was synonymous with “ cat-erwauling” were
agreeably surprised. Most of the numbers were most efficiently
rendered. Archdeacon Wilson having been voted to the chair,
the entertainment opened with a pianoforte selection by Miss
Gertrude Leftwych, after which Mr. Smith sang “The Castle
Gate,” in fine style. Mr. E. Watson followed with the amusing
recitation, “ Here she goes and there she goes ! ” Two clarionet
solos were rendered in masterly style by Mr. Lusher, a member
of the Cuzco band ; much applause was elicited and an encore
demanded. Mr. Lee afforded much amusement by his comic
song, “ Killaloe,” as did also Mr. Lloyd in his Irish recitation,
“ Maloney’s Cat.” Miss Hetty Gray sang with exquisite taste,
two pretty songs, “Old Madrid,” and “At Eventide.” Mr. Willatt
contributed “ They all love Jack.” Mr. J. Watson rendered Will
Carleton’s poem, “The New Church Organ,” in a most effective
manner, imitating the “sister good and true” to the life. Mr.
Lewis sang “ I fear no foe,” in fine style, and “Anchored ! ” well
sung by Mr. Smith, and the National Anthem, successfully con-
cluded “ our First Concert.”


CORRESPONDENCE.
[lt must be distinctly understood that the Editor in no wise identifies
himself with the opinions expressed by Correspondents. Correspondents
must in all cases append their names to their communications, not
necessarily for publication, but as a guarantee of good faith.]
To the Editor of “The Cuzco Note Book.”
Sir, —May I be allowed through the pages of your valuable
journal to call attention to the condition of the stray dogs in
Sydney. I was much struck and horrified at the number of stray
dogs suffering from various skin diseases, especially mange, being
allowed nnmolested to lie about the railway station and other
prominent public places of our most picturesque city. Surely,
Sir, while we are sending annually sums of money to support a
home of rest for cabmen’s horses, and finding funds for the home
for strayed cats, we might remember our best and most valuable
friend at our own doors. I am sure, Sir, that your readers’
attention need but be drawn to this matter to effect a remedy,
viz : —to establish a home for lost dogs. There is, lam told,
in London, an institution of that nature, and if you, Sir, will
undertake to receive subscriptions for so worthy an object, I
shall be pleased to forward my mite.
Apologising for trespassing on your most valuable space,
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
"A LOVER OF DOGS.”
CHURCH NOTICES.
Divine Service was held in the 2nd Saloon of the R. M. S.
Cuzco, on last Sunday afternoon. A large number of the 2nd
Saloon passengers availaled themselves of the opportunity to
attend, but owing to the arrangements being of a somewhat
hurried character, passengers from other parts did not put in an
appearance. The musical portion of the service was kindly con-
ducted by Messrs. Lewis and Smith.


We are pleased to announce that at the invitation of Captain
Anderson, regular morning service will be conducted in the First
Saloon, every Sunday forenoon, by Archdeacon Wilson, the precise
hour being notified each week in the Saloons and Steerage. This
will afford an opportunity for all on board to attend who wish
to do so.
Arrangements will duly be made by those who have charge of
the musical arrangements to hold choir practices, and the co-
operation of singers is invited.
“THE REASON WHY!”
On Sunday evening we sat at the table,
Each trying his supper to eat;
But with appetites some few were able
To more than look at the meat.
The ship she pitch’d, and then she rolled while we chatted in
tones quite sad —
Young W*ts*n with doleful face then told —“even he felt a little
bit bad,”
“Of course it isn’t the sea , you know, that causes this feeling
so queer! ”
And all agreed that it “ couldn’t be so ! ’’—but he looked quite fit
for his bier!
Our masher grew thoughtful, then cried —“Ah! I know
What has injured my digestion—
’Twas that boiled chicken to-day! ” and—well,
All smiled at this happy suggestion !
ARGUS.
The Cuzco’s Run, to Noon, Monday, May 12: —289 knots.


PERSONAL.
W. X. is requested to return the gingham umbrella, and the
pair of pattens, and all will be forgiven.—
Y. Z.
Dear Mrs. B . Chops and Tomato Sauce. Don’t
trouble yourself about the warming-pan.—Yours,
PICKWICK.
MATRIMONIAL.
A young man with red hair, green eyes, and an exceedingly
bad temper, desires to correspond with a good-looking young
lady possessing an angelic disposition, and plenty of money, with
a view to matrimony. —Address E. W., S.S. Cuzco.




The Cuzco Note Book.
“ Morn, in the white wake of the morning star,
Come furrowing all the Orient into GOL'D.”Tennyson.'
No. 2. The Indian Ocean.
( Latitude iq°, 28 S. I
( Longitude 86550 E. \
May 17, 1890.
“OCEAN GREYHOUNDS.”
THIS expressive phrase has been brought into being to denote
the improvement made in the sailing or steaming qualities of
ships of the present day as compared with vessels of the past.
Our mail-boats of the last ten or a dozen years especially—lithe
and slim in build, and furnished with engines of the latest con-
struction —excel in speed our old-fashioned boats as a greyhound
is superior in swiftness to a fat, over-fed poodle. Hence it is no
misnomer to apply to such fast vessels the title “ greyhounds of
the sea.”
Competition—as in every other branch of business has
brought these qualities to the front. In this nineteenth century
the proverb, “ time is money,” has a keener meaning than ever
before. Business men crossing the ocean look upon each day
consumed in the passage as so much money lost; pleasure-seekers
are in a hurry to reach “ fresh fields and pastures new, and when
the tour is over are just as eager to get home again. The
multitude is eager for fresh news, and the processes of business
and politics require that swift messengers should convey tidings
from shore to shore. It was but the other day we were looking
at a reprint of Bayard Taylor’s “ Views a-foot.! It is a record
of travel in Europe forty-five years ago. Speaking of the voyage
across the Atlantic from New York to Liverpool he says:—“a
contrary wind dashed to the ground our hopes of making a speedy
passage of twenty-eight days!” One of our Orient liners would
compass in the same time two-thirds of the distance between
Sydney and London. Old dwellers in Sydney, of thirty-five years
ago, will remember some of the American steamers which used
to lie in Darling Harbour. The “ Golden Age” and the “ Moses
Taylor,” with their huge side paddle-wheels, and cumbersome


beam-engines working high above the level of the decks. For
size, accommodation and speed they were regarded as wonders of
the age, but were as little deserving of comparison with our
modern system of mail-boats as a canal barge to a racing yacht.
The competition to secure the Australian Postal Service, and
the constantly increasing passenger traffic, has called into requisi-
tion an entirely new order of vessels. The best ship building and
engineering skill, backed up by enormous capital, is taxed year by
year to pioduce something superior to that which has gone on
before : and now the great oceans of the world—the Atlantic, the
Pacific, and the Indian—are day and night coursed by what have
been aptly termed “ greyhounds of the sea.”
THE CUZCO.
Ihe following particulars concerning our floating home will
doubtless prove interesting to our fellow passengers. The steam-
ship “ Cuzco ” was built at Govan, Co. Lanark, in 1871, by the
John Elder Co.; re-engined in 1888 by the Fairfield Shipbuilding
and Engineering Company, Govan.
The engines are triple expansion, direct acting, inverted, of
650 horse power.
The dimensions of the Cuzco are as follows
Length over all .. .. 384 feet 2 tenths.
Main Breadth .. .. 4.1 a
■pv ,1 ” *+ »
De P th 35 ~ 3 „
The gross tonnage is 3,898 tons, and register or nett tonnage
2,506. &
The Officers are :
J. F. Anderson Commander.
R. Hoare .. .. Ist Officer. A. T. Baker .. 2nd Officer.
P. Stretton .. 3rd „ P. Raymond .. 4th „
G. H. Pennell .. Surgeon. T. V. Dinnis .. Purser.
W. Inglis.. .. Ist Engineer. N. Campbell .. 2nd Engineer.
L. Kingsbury .. 3rd „ W. Speedy .. 4 th „
P. Weir .. ..sth „ J. Macnab .. 6th „
E. Doyle .. .. .. Chief Steward.
The total of Ship’s company, including Commander, is 120.


CUZCO MOCK PARLIAMENT.
Debate on Home Rule.
A debate on the above subject came off in the Second Saloon
on Tuesday evening last. There was a considerable gathering of
passengers, who appeared to listen to the proceedings with great
interest.
The Speaker having explained the principle on which the
discussion would be conducted, called on Mr. Hackforth-Jones
to open the Debate affirming that “ Home Rule should be granted
to Ireland.” The opener laboured under considerable disad-
vantage, as during nearly the whole of his speech there was
considerable commotion on the deck overhead. Having explained
what he considered the “injustice” under which Ireland laboured,
and the reasons why Home Rule should be granted; the opener
having consumed his allotted time, Mr. R. A. Ker rose to move
the direct negative. After a few preliminary remarks, he read a
lengthy extract from a speech of Lord Selborne shewing the ulti-
mate drift of the Home Rule question, and that the design of its
leaders was not representation but separation. Mr. Lloyd followed
in a vigorous and eloquent speech in favour of granting Home
Rule, and for force his address was certainly the speech of the
evening. The other speaker in favour of the Resolution was
Mr. Logan, and those on the other side were Mr. Cadman (who
caused considerable amusement by his onslaught on the claims of
the Irish leaders), Messrs. Lewis, A. Smith, J. Watson, and
Archdeacon Wilson. Mr. Jones having been called to reply, the
Speaker put the question to the House. A large number of those
present did not vote, but the hands shown were, 9 in favour and
12 against.
The Leader of the Government then tendered his resignation.
The Ship’s Run, Saturday, May 17.
Latitude .. 19° 28// S. Longitude .. 86° 50// E.
Distance, 314 knots.


MOONSHINE!
By our Literary Lunatic.
Appropriate Songs for Suitable Occasions.
For the Officer in charge at 12 p.m., “ I stood on the Bridge
at Midnight.” &
For Brown, who inadvertantly squats down on his wife’s last
fashionable bonnet: “ I’m sitting on the Style, Mary ! ”
For the passenger enjoying the electric lamps on board the
Cuzco and comparing them with the ship’s oil-lamps of lons
ago : “ The light of other days has faded.”
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is Buddhism like the sea over which we are voyagintr ?
Because it is an Indian notion ! J & 5 '
To which officer of the Cuzco is our ship’s cat most likely
to be attached ? —The Purr-Sir! J
In looking over our fiiend Morgan’s list (of the Cuzco
Hairdressing Saloon) we find that absolute necessity for an ocean
voyage, “ Eno’s Fruit Salt,” figured. If any of our passengers
desires to obtain a bottle he knows where to get it!
The striped figure-head projecting from Morgan’s establish-
ment shows where shaving is going on. Strolling in that direction
the present week, we found it beseiged by sundry Cuzco Esau’s.
Why this desire to hurry their commodity into the hair market ?
Whence this activity in the barber business ? Proceedeth it from
the Brigade Order issued in our columns last week concerning
stubbly chins ? As much eagerness has been displayed in “ going
to the poll as if our passengers had become Arctic navigators,
or aspirants for Parliamentary honours.
An anxious parent, Mr. E. W*ts*n, is very much exercised
about the salety of his precious infant, for fear that the precocious


six-foot urchin should lose himself about the ship, or tumble over-
board. He regrets that Mr. Morgan does not keep in stock such
a necessary article as “ Infant’s Preservative.”
Mr. Lewis is making headway with his choir practices. He
talks of a surplice choir, but in this we think he is rather prema-
ture, as we understand there are no surplus members at present,
more helpers being re-choired.
Our Masher, who is fond of dividing his attentions among
sundry fair ones, says the “ time of day ” he likes best of all is
“ Eight Belles.”
We are once more gliding over blue water, much to the
detriment of the Company’s larder, as our young men are be-
ginning again to grapple with the eatables, and to curry favour
with Oriental delicacies. The ocean has begun to assume the
deep azure of the Mediterranean, as though Mother Neptune were
engaged in getting up the family linen, and using the “ blue bag ”
ad lib.
(VERY !) ORIGINAL POETRY !!!
Revised version of “ Mary had a Little Lamb.
“ Court a woman—she denies you ;
Let her alone —she will court you ;
Say are not women truly then
Styled but mere shadows to us men !”
OLD AUTHOR.
(Not named for fear of female vengeance.)
N.B.—Here follows the Original part.
Mary knew a nice young man,
Who would not be controlled,
And everywhere that young man went
The maiden gently strolled.


She followed him to town one day—
He was not such a fool
To let her have the laugh at him,
So he treated her quite cool.
And so he took an Orient boat,
But still she lingered near,
And waited patiently about
Till he did re-appear ;
And then she hastened to his side,
And seized him by the arm,
As if to say, “ You’ll not escape,
You need not be alarmed ! ”
“Why does the maid love that young man ?”
The passengers all cry.
Because he does not love the maid,
That is the “ reason why.”
N.O.S.T.A.W.
A LITTLE LOVE ROMANCE.
Grey was the morning, Gray her name, and dressed in grey was she;
Of all fair ones aboard our ship, she ought our belle to be!
She was mashed by all the mashers, of which we had a few,
Including “ Infant,” Mr. T****,’’ and “ Infant’s Papa ” too !
With each in turn she had a walk, up and down her deck,
But her heart it sighed for one alone, I mean the “little check.”
This youth he for a paper drew, of salary he drew none,
So up she chucked this little game, poor “father’s ” only son !
SMALL BOY.
CONTRIBUTED CONUNDRUM.
Why would Mr. Palmer make the best conjurer aboard this
ship ? —Because he was always a good old “ palmer.”
[Note.— The gentleman who hammered out this item on the anvil of his wit should
have explained that the ability to “palm” cleverly, that is to conceal coins,
cards, etc., in the palm of the hand while performing tricks is one of the most
necessary qualifications of a good conjurer. We do not undertake to make
these explanations on behalf of jokes whose point is not as obvious as the
business end of a tack when you suddenly sit on it.— Editor.]


NOTES ON CURRENT TOPICS
We have had an opportunity of seeing a Presentation Address,
neatly engrossed on vellum, which was handed to one of our
fellow-passengers, Sergeant-Major Matthews, on the occasion of
his leaving Perth, Western Australia. It was presented and signed
by the officers and men of the Battery, and is couched in language
highly appreciative of Sergeant-Major Matthews’ ability as Artillery
Instructor.
Bravo! Men are regarded as untidy animals, having no place
for anything, and leaving everything out of its place ; but we have
it on good authority that, in the official inspections, the gentlemen
“ take the cake ” for tidiness of cabins. We would suggest a
“ tidy tournament,” in which a prize might be given for the best
kept cabin.
Mr. Jolly Nash, who was a visitor at the late 2nd Saloon
Concert, has personally expressed to us the pleasure afforded to
him by that entertainment, and has generously promised his
valuable assistance on the next occasion.
While there is truth in the fore-going paragraph, there is none
in the rumour that certain thirsty souls are arranging a quartette
entitled “ Bless the little bar round the corner ! ”
A prize is hereby offered for the best conundrum, on any
matter connected with the voyage, the Orient Company and its
vessels, or the places on the voyage. Conundrums must be sent
in by noon on Friday, May 30, with an initial or non de plume
attached; also real name of the author, which latter will not be
published.
TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE.
London, Saturday 12 noon.
It is generally supposed that the Hon. Jas, White’s “ Kirkham ”
will be in front of all the horses that are behind him, at the next
English Derby.


ADVERTISEMENT COLUMN.
LOST!
2s. 6d. Reward. —Lost between Sydney Harbour and lat. 27 S.,
long. 96 E., a Black Leather Strap. Any person returning the
same to the owner will receive the above reward. Apply (after
4 p.m.), to J. H. W. F., 75, Starboard Alley, S.S. Cuzco
LOST!
On Friday afternoon, between Starboard Alley and Main Deck
Road, a Silver English Lever Watch, No. 46,841 ; maker,
Durden. Fenchurch Street, London. —Apply Office of this Paper.
Cork, Saturday, 4 p.m.
Butter is not so firm as it was a few days ago, but a firmer
sample can be obtained from the Cuzco’s freezing chamber.
A good deal of blarney has changed hands lately ; there have
also been several transactions in soft soap, consequently it is
believed that a general election is approaching.
Cairo, Saturday , 9 a.m.
News has reached us that the Messrs J. and E. Watson are
in the Cuzco, on their way to “do ” the Pyramids. The Arabs
are preparing to *‘do” the Messrs. Watson.
Naples, Saturday.
Intelligence of the approaching advent of the Watson Bros,
has evoked intense enthusiasm. Naples is enfete. TheContinong
is to be illuminated. It is proposed to get up a special eruption
of Vesuvius in honor of the occasion.
Melbourne, Victoria, Saturday.
Tea has advanced.
[Allusion is probably made to the pound brought on board at Largs Bay by
Jones & Co., which has since advanced, all that is left of it, some two or three
thousand miles.]
Interruption in the cable; Mrs. Neptune has borrowed it for
a clothes line, on which to hang out the family washing.


FOUND !
An antiquated article resembling a Silver Watch, with iron
chain and brass hook attached. Owner may have same by stating
number and paying expenses. —Apply to J. Nostaw, No. 36 East
Street.
RIFLE MATCH.
A Rifle Match was fired on the deck of the R.M.S. Cuzco this
Saturday afternoon, with the following result: —
Points.
Mr. E. Watson .. .. .. • • 22
Mr. Logan .. . • • • • • 21
Mr. Lloyd .. .. • • • • 21
Mr. J. Watson .. .. .. •• 18
Sergt.-Major Matthews .. .. .. 17
Mr. Rhodes .. . • • • • • I 4
Mr. Mullinger .. .. .. •• 11
Mr. Burke •. • • • • • • 11
MATRIMONIAL.
The young lady who this morning conveyed a token of affection
in the shape of some sour fruit to a gentleman in No. 39 Cabin,
is anxious for an interview with the said gentleman, with a view
to the above. —Address Eitteh Yarg.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[Notwithstanding our notice to correspondents that real names
must accompany contributions, two letters have reached us this
week neither of which have real names appended, therefore we have
to adhere to our rule and regretfully exclude them. They both bear on
the Irish question. “Tim Murphy’s” is a rather clever production,
but as Mr. Murphy’s name does not figure on the passenger list of the
Cuzco we must conclude the signature assumed.]


CHURCH NOTICES.
Divine Service will be held on board the Cuzco to-morrow,
Sunday, May iB, as follows; —
In the First Saloon at 10.30 a.m. All in the ship are cordially
invited.
An Open Air Service on the Steerage Deck at 4 p.m.
An Evening Service in the Second Saloon at 7.30.
SUBJECT FOR NEXT DEBATE.
We have received a communication from the Hon. R. A. Ker
to the effect that the subject for discussion next Tuesday evening
by the Cuzco Parliament will be, u That the Suffrage be not
extended to Women.”
SPORTS COLUMN.
The various tournaments arranged by the Sports Committee
last week are progressing. The first heats of the Quoits, under
the direction of Mr. Willatt, and of “ Bull,” superintended by Mr.
Rhodes, are through. The Whist game, arranged by Mr. Ker
will probably be completed in time for us to announce the result
in this issue. The Draughts Tournament was brought to a finish
after some well-contested games had been fought out. The report
furnished by Captain Harbison is appended.
DRAUGHTS TOURNAMENT.
The first Draughts Tournament was commenced after leaving
Adelaide, and concluded last night. There were sixteen com-
petitors, and several players exhibited skill in the game. After
several close contests the final games lay between Messrs. J.
Watson, of Sydney, and J. Harbison, of Melbourne, the latter
winning by two games to one, whereby he became victor in the
Tournament.


CELEBRATION OF QUEEN’S BIRTHDAY.
The Sports Committee have been holding several meetings to
take steps as to the best method of celebrating Her Majesty’s
Birthday in a suitable manner. It has been determined to cater
for the amusement of all, as far as possible. The forenoon and
afternoon will be devoted to deck games and athletic sports, the
rough programme of which has been adopted ; and should we be
favoured with “ Queen’s weather” on the auspicious occasion, we
can promise our friends a good day’s entertainment, and plenty of
that variety which French folks say is so charming.
The evening’s festivities have not been definitely arranged, but
will probably include a Concert and Dramatic performance. In
any case the best will be done to make the whole day’s entertain-
ment worthy of the occasion.
CONCERT.
The Musical and Literary Entertainment given in the Second
Saloon on Thursday evening last, was, in every way, an improve-
ment on its predecessor. I here was a large and appreciative
audience, the saloon being well filled. The piano was moved to
the centre of the room, but while this brought the performers into
the midst of the visitors, we doubt whether this movement was
altogether desirable. A pianoforte solo by Mr. C. Lewis opened
the proceedings, and was followed by the favourite old song, “ In
happy moments,” rendered by Mr. Willatt. Miss Hettie Giay s
sprightly little song, “ Fenicula,” was well rendered, and met with
merited applause. The humorous recitation of “ Peterkin Peep,”
in which the evil effects of jealousy are well pourtrayed, was
excellently given by Mr. E. Watson. “ Queen of the Earth,”
by Mr. A. Smith, was one of the gems of the evening. This was
succeeded by “ When Sparrows build,” by Miss Palmer ; this
young lady has a nice voice, and only needs a little more con-
fidence to be an acquisition to our musical helpers. “ A Vision,”


excellently rendered by Mr. C. Lewis, was another of the best
items of the evening, and received an enthusiastic encore. “ The
Dream of Eugene Aram,” by Mr. Lee, was a very fair specimen
of memorising, and was given in blood-curdling style by the
reciter. A violin solo by Mr. Wilkes (one of the Cuzco band,)
was so well played that a repetition was demanded. “ Never to
know” was touchingly sung by Miss Gray, and a piano solo was
played by Miss Leftwych. “ The Bridge,” by Mr. Colban, was
succeeded by a humorous recitation by Mr. J. Watson; this
gentleman is very happy in his mimicry. Miss Palmer filled up
another number by singing “ The Old Lock,” and “ Ora Pro
Nobis,” sung in splendid style by Mr. A. Smith, finished the items
on the programme.
The usual vote of thanks to those assisting having been passed
by acclamation, the singing of a verse of the National Anthem
brought this most successful entertainment to a close. The next
will probably be held on Queen’s Birthday.
THIRD CLASS PASSENGERS’ MUTUAL
IMPROVEMENT SOCIETY.
On Thursday evening, the 15th instant, an animated discussion
took place in the Dining Room of the third-class passengers of
the R.M.S. Cuzco, the subject being: —“Is Pugilism beneficial
under any circumstances ? ” Mr. Watson, in the temporary
absence of Mr. Nevison, occupied the chair.
Mr. G. Bowman introduced the subject, ably affirming himself
in favour of the “ noble art,” arguing that it was the fairest way
of settling disputes, as compared with the methods of other
countries, especially the practice of duelling. He also contended
that it was an excellent bodily exercise. He further alluded to the
generosity of a gentleman in the saloon who had promised the
loan of gloves, &c.


Mr. Iredale, who followed in reply, opposed the proposition,
and argued that the law was a sufficient remedy for the adjust-
ment of disputes. Pugilism ought to be relegated to the dark
ages from which it sprung, and was not worthy the name of a
science. As a sport it might interest sporting people, but it was no
good to society generally, except to promote disturbances.
Mr. Wilcocks, Mr. Sullivan and several other passengers
having advanced their views, and Mr. Nevison,(wlio now occupied
the Chair,) having humourously reviewed the arguments pro. and
con, the question was put: —“Is Pugilism beneficial under any
circumstances?” and resulted in the following vote —Ayes n ;
Noes, 12. The motion affirming its desirability was therefore lost
by a majority of one.




The Cuzco Note Book.
“ Morn, in the white wake of the morning star,
Come furrowing all the Orient into gold,”— Tennyson.
No. 3. The Indian Ocean. {LsngitudV s f° } May 24 > 1890 -
THE QUEEN—GOD BLESS HER.
'T'HE “ 24th of MAY ” is a day memorable to all Englishmen, in
whatever quarter of the globe they may be, as the Birthday
of our beloved Queen Victoria. Her reign has been, indeed, a
long and prosperous one, and the prayers of her subjects that she
may long be spared to exercise her queenly influence for good over
the British Empire have been signally and abundantly blessed.
On the 20th of the coming June it will be fifty-three years since
Victoria —then the girl princess of eighteen —received intelligence,
late at night, that the wheels of providence in their intricate
workings had brought her into “ the fierce light that beats upon
a throne,” the throne of an Empire whose extended dominions,
wealth, power, and intellect, have placed it in the vanguard of the
world. Small wonder, then, that the youthful monarch feeling
the weight of sovereignty, and the awful responsibility of such
high office, called for the aged Archbishop of Canterbury, and
besought that his petitions might be mingled with her own that
like Solomon of old —she might have given to her “ a wise and
understanding heart ” to rule so great a people. That wisdom
was first displayed in the choice of a prudent and discreet partner
—“Albert the Good” —the Prince Consort. The nation will
probably never know the extent to which its destinies were
moulded by the great moral influence and judicious counsels of
that deserving Prince; but his conception and inauguration of
the great federation of the World’s Art and Labour, in 1851,
—over which Sir Joseph Paxton raised his fairy temple of glass—
was an evidence of the Prince Consort’s genius and world-wide
sympathy with all that goes to make up the nobility of work. He
was a prince of whom an eminent American visitor to England,
the “learned blacksmith,” Elihu Burritt wrote: —“For him


more genuine wet tears of sorrow fell than were ever shed
for all the English sovereigns that preceded him to the grave since
the Norman Conquest. He did not in his life-time wear a crown
himself, but the great world crowned him with a diadem that out-
shines the lustre of a hundred that have been worn by royal
brows in Europe.”
Her Majesty is one of the four British Monarchs who have
attained to a reign of over fifty years. When her “Jubilee” was
celebrated, in 1887, throughout her wide dominions, it was but
a tribute of admiration not only for her queenly qualities, but also
for her virtues as a woman. Whatever blurs and blemishes may
attach to court life, onethingmust be admitted, —that the influence
of Queen Victoria has always been thrown into the scale of
morality and religion. The combined virtues of herself and
husband have shed a lustre around Royal Windsor, of which one
writer says : —“ The white mantle of their purity has covered the
black character and history of many royal generations within
those walls. * * * Here lived Queen Victoria—here she
first became a mother —here she was made a widow; here a new
race of English Kings and Queens were born and bred and trained
in the nurture of a purer life than any that ever filled the British
throne in past generations! ”
Echoing these sentiments, we, officers, crew and passengers, in
a British ship, on the Indian ocean, between two points of British
dependencies, do honour to the Anniversary of her Natal Day, and
with united hearts and voices cry —
“ GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.”
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
[Several communications have been reluctantly held over, owing
to want of space, but we will do our best to have them dealt with in
next issue.]


DEBATE ON FEMALE SUFFRAGE.
A meeting of the Cuzco Mock Parliament was held in the
Second Saloon, on Tuesday, May 20, for the purpose of discussing
the question “Should the Suffrage be extended to Women?”
Mr. R. A. Ker, as Leader of the Government, opened the debate
in the negative by maintaning that it was not desirable that the
suffrage should be so granted. He held that woman’s sphere was
home, and after painting in glowing language his ideal of domestic
happiness, portrayed the dismal results which would arise from
divided political opinion at the home fireside. Mr. Cabman
having seconded the motion pro forma. ' Mr. A. A. Smith
followed in favor of granting an unrestricted franchise to the
gentler sex. He contended that woman was quite the intellectual
equal of man, and able to form an intelligent opinion on matters
political.
Mr. Lloyd, in his usual eloquent and forcible style, moved
as an amendment that a partial power of exercising the franchise
should be granted to women. There were many municipal
matters/m which spinsters and widows were well qualified to vote.
Mr. Lloyd interspersed his speech with apt illustration and
anecdote, and concluded with a magnificent peroration in which
he pictured his ideal of woman’s sphere and mission.
Mr. Cabman ridiculed the notion of women dabbling in politics,
and instanced Charles Dickens’ character of “ Mrs. Jellyby, as
a fair result of women neglecting home duties to engage in public
matters.
Mr. C. Lewis, in a neat speech, supported the contention that
the franchise should not be extended to women.
Mr. J. Watson (Secretary) made a very good speech, dwelling
on the different temperaments of man and woman. The latter
did not follow a slow and logical process of reasoning, but formed
op irions more based on her feelings and sentiment.


Mr. Hackforth-Jones indulged in what Artemus Ward calls
Sarkazzum,” hinting at the close study some of the debaters
had evidently been lately giving to the subject of “lovely woman.”
He instanced Her Majesty, the Queen’s, ability in considering
State questions as a proof that women were well able to grapple
with political subjects.
Mr. Drought contended that only one argument had as yet been
introduced by any of the speakers who advocated the granting of
the franchise to the feebler sex, and that was her intellectual
equality. He deplored the barreness of reasons why it should
be granted.
Mr. Ker having replied in one or two sentences, a show of
hands was taken on the various propositions, resulting as follows:
Mr. Lloyd’s, 13; Mr. A. A. Smith’s, i ; Mr. Ker’s, 7. The
Speaker therefore declared that Mr. Lloyd’s amendment, that a
partial franchise relating to municipal matters be granted to
spinsters and widows possessing the necessary qualifications was
carried.
SPORTS.
We are always anxious to give the fullest publicity to all
matters connected with our Sports Committee. They are the
representatives of the people, at all events of the population in-
habiting Central Cuzco: and, as such, must expect to have their
doings and misdoings impartially reported. We are sure that the
Members of the Committee desire no less, and we consider that
those who placed them in office should expect no more.
In our last issue we gave the result of the first Draughts
Tournament, and another is now in operation, but is at present
unfinished.
1 he Chess 1 ournament is proceeding.


LOST!
On board, a rug, possibly taken in mistake as one like it has
been hanging in the Second Saloon during the last few days.
Appearance made to represent fur on one side, black on the other.
If passengers will submit rugs of this description, owner can
identify.—Apply William Logan.
With regard to the Deck Quoit Tournament Mr. H. Willatt
writes us, that, “after several good contests, the game was brought
to a climax, leaving Mr. Bourke the winner.”
Mr. Rhodes has furnished us with the following memoranda.
“The first heat in the “ Bull” Tournament was commenced on
May i, and was very closely contested all the way through, up to
the final heat, which was brought to a close on Tuesday, the 20th
instant, the winner turned up in the person of Mr. Marriott.
Mr. Spriggs ran Mr. Marriott very close, but ultimately lost the
game which was a very exciting one.
Of the first Whist Tournament, Mr. R. Ker furnishes a report.
He writes: “ There were 22 entries, and four rounds were played,
the winners being found in Messrs. Lee and Hanks, the runners
up being Messrs. Lloyd and Palmer, who played a vigorous game
all through the tourney. A Cribbage Tournament is now in pro-
gress, and a fresh Whist Contest is being arranged. The prizes
are to be purchased as far as possible from Mr. Morgan’s establish-
ment in Middle street, at the sign of the Striped Pole. Mean-
while the funds are “ all there.”
CONCERT.
An enjoyable concert and literary entertaiment was given on
Friday evening last, in the Music Saloon of the R.M.S. Cuzco, by
several of the Second Saloon passengers, assisted by “Jolly Nash”
and the purser Mr. Dinnis. It opened with a ballad, “ The Old


Old Words,” by Miss Palmer, and was followed by a song,
“ Stranded,” by Mr. A. Smith. The recitation, “ Papa’s Letter,”
was very nicely rendered by Miss Leftwych, and then came one
of the gems of the evening a serenade, “ Sleep on, dear love ! ”
by Mr. Dinnis, this was most rapturously applauded. A comic
scene, “Nice Old Maid,” by Mr. “Jolly Nash,” kept everybody in
a simmer of merriment, and a recall was generously responded to.
The song “ Lullaby,” contributed by Miss Gray, was successful,
as was also the evergreen “ Trial Scene—Bardell v. Pickwick,”
which was given by Mr. J. Watson, in excellent make-up. Mrs.
Ker sang “ Pierrot,” very nicely. A clarionet solo by Mr. Lusher
took the fancy of the audience. Another comicality by Jolly
Nash “ Sister Mary,” brought the house down, and “ Alice where
art thou ? ” was splendidly given by Mr. Dinnis. The reading,
“ A Cellar in Soho,” was effectively contributed by Mr. Jones.
Mr. C. S. Wilkinson presided.
PRESENTATION.
A very pleasing incident occured amidships on last Monday
afternoon, when the talented baritone and one of the lady-
choristers were presented with a Silver Service,by “thelnfant” and
a near relative of the young lady. The present consisted of a
pair of spoons, and was intended to remind them in days to come
of cosy nooks and moonless nights. The Infant made the
presentation in a few pathetic remarks and volunteered to supple-
ment the gift with a picture of the spoons (not the silver ones),
in their latest Romeo and Juliet attitude. Taken by surprise, the
baritone was, for a moment, unable to give expression to his
emotions; the lady blushed in the most picturesque manner, and
they assured the deputation, that “ oft in the stilly night ” they
would be gratified by the recollection of the incident.
A few other couples on the ship feel that their claims have
been overlooked, and it is probable that further presentations will
soon be in order.


ORIGINAL POETRY.
“WAITING FOR THE MAIL!”
Breaks a sun-streak through the casement, streams its glory on the floor,
And the crisp and matted leafage rustles round the cottage door;
Where the truant buds are climbing, tapping on the glass, and chiming
With the sounding burst of billows breaking on the shingly shore.
Watching by the open window where the starry blossoms cling,
Listening to the weary song the weeping waters ever sing,
Sad and thoughtful sits a maiden, for her peaceless breast is laden
With the wish for news of one whose memory makes the tear-drops
spring.
So she watches where the sun is fading on a distant sail,
Where the scattered sea-spray drifts and tosses in the summer gale,
And her girlish heart is throbbing like the cold wave’s ceaseless sobbing,
O ! for weary Youth and Beauty waiting—waiting for the Mail !
Let us track the steps so longed for, o’er the parched Australian plain,
Mark the spot that heard the death calls of his raving, thirsty pain,
See the iron-bark, unalter’d sheds its leaves where footsteps faltered,
Footfalls that shall never greet the watchful glance of Love again !
When wild dreams of brattling creeks thrust in his ears their phantom
tones,
Here he fell, and clutched for water at the burning sand and stones,
Till the tortured spirit wrestled forth its flight—then ’possums nestled
In the branches, shyly wondering at the heap of brightening bones !
There he sleeps—and mouldering rags are wasting in the heated gale,
Peering from the drifting sand they flutter forth a fearful tale.
Love may watch and wait for ever—but the wished for voice will never
Tremble in the ear of her who watches—waiting for the Mail!
F. S. WILSON, AUSTRALIA.


MOONSHINE!
By our Literary Lunatic.
For some days we have been engaged in “Crossing the Line,”
that is according to the views of our nautical amateurs, who
appear to have very undecided views as to the whereabouts of the
Equator. There has been, also, a considerable diversity of opinion
as to what the line is like, a number of the passengers having
never seen it before. Several who sat up were disappointed, the
nights being too dark to see anything clearly. Some have an im-
pression that they experienced a sort of “bump” during the night,
as though the Cuzco had caught on the line. All agree that we
are “well over it.” Neptune and his retinue did not come on
board, consequently our beards are safe, and the growers of in-
cipient moustachios have their crop so far to the good.
The monotony of sea-life was somewhat varied the other day
by the appearance on deck of an auctioneer and his clerk. Under
the disguise of powdered faced, Indian-ink wrinkles, and carmined
noses, it was somewhat difficult to detect the usually solemn
Watson and the esthetic Jones. Their make-up was excellent,
and in this the hand of our local artist was a-Perry-ent. The
motif was to carry out a “ Calcutta Sweep.” Why this sporting
“ chimbley-cleaner ” should hail from this particular Indian
Presidency, we cannot fathom. Why not “ Madras ” or “ Bom-
bay ” sweep? We would say, consult our friend Lee. At all
events a good deal of amusement was created by the running fire
of pleasantries maintained by the auctioneer, his able clerk, and
the “ chucker-out,” whose imposing presence soon put an end to
all disputes and interruptions. We have not the official record
at hand, as to the winning number, but will it be incorrect to say
that Mr. Willatt was the lucky speculator?
Appropos of the above we may say that the conversation on
board the Cuzco for the last week has been quite of a police-court
character. All about Aden and a betting you know !


The Conundrum season has set in. We have a few choice
competitive riddles sent in, which will be published in our next,
provided we can keep them safely until that date. Some of them
are certainly outrageous enough to require chaining up, but we
will do our editorial best to keep them, even if we have to obtain
permission to have them locked up in the purser’s strong-room, or
preserved in the freezer. Meanwhile we turn off a few of our
own special non-competitive.
When is a clergyman like a sailor? —When he is engaged
in making “knots” and “splices.”
[N.B. —Matrimonial ones—of course.]
What sort of food is supplied several times a day to the fishes
of the Indian Ocean by the stokers of the Cuzco ? — Dry Hash."
Why do the Wine Bars on the Cuzco occupy their proper
position ?—Because they are both on the Port side.
Which of the ship’s engineers is most likely to insure the
Cuzco a quick passage ?—Mr. Speedy.
Why is a Scotch laddie rising out of his teens like the storms
we have been encountering ? - Because he’ll be a mon-soon !
Speaking of that, most of our folk on board have had an ex-
cellent opportunity of exercising their “Mark Tapleyism” by
being jolly under difficulties Instead of seizing this glorious chance,
some have indulged in “blowing up” others, as if the sth of Novem-
ber were hanging round instead of the 24th of May. A Special
Gunpowder Plot was got up on Friday, when the Sports Committee
were called to the bar of the House to answer the terrible charge
of not imparting to others information which they, the Sports
Committee, did not themselves posses! The attacked vessels
came off with flying colors, but the Chairman was evidently on a
Lee shore!
On Thursday night Mr. Bourke interested the passengers in
some good round games on deck. Among others, the Ghost
produced some most startling effects. We understand that most
who indulged in this game were considerably upset.


The “ wise man ” says there is “ a time and season for every
purpose under the sun.” Some of our friends of the whistling
and humming fraternity seem to get this time and season terribly
mixed. The place in which to exercise human penny whistles is
down in the coal bunkers. Those playing Whist, Cribbage or
Draughts, are in no way assisted by the piping of some adjacent
admirer of his own musical abilities. At such times, “ Killaloe ”
may become a bore, and “ Killarney ” an infliction. It is also
bad “form,” when a lady is at the piano, for any fiend of the male
persuasion walking on two legs, to assist the performance (un-
invited) in a voice eminently adapted for selling sprats. We would
say with Hamlet “Oh ! Reform it altogether.”
And while we are on the war-path let us remind some gentle
individuals that Night was made for sleep (when you can get it.)
The ship’s rule that saloon lights are extinguished at 11 p.m.
indicates that quiet is to be “ the order of the night." People who
wish to indulge in dark seances should keep on deck when the
“ spirits ” are uproarious. There are people on board suffering
from nervous prostration, who are taking this voyage in hope of
getting restored health. For the doctor to order such patients
rest and sleep and quiet, is like Bumble offering a starving pauper
a pair of iron spectacles with which to satisfy his hunger.
If our illustrations are fewer in number this week than usual
it must be put down to the indisposition of “ the Infant.” Our
artist is suffering from a sort of “ all-overishness,” and says,
speaking technically, that he is a little “off color.” Under the
circumstances the diminution in number of our sketches becomes
imPmytive.—Ahem !
A STEERAGE ENTERTAINMENT.
[We have been supplied with the following item by a steerage passenger, to whom
our thanks are due.]
Under the auspices of the Mutual Improvement Society of the
3rd class passengers, a concert was held on Friday evening, the


17th inst., which had the effect of bringing to light some decided
talent in the forepart of our floating home. The absence of the
fair sex from the programme was much to be regretted, but it is
hoped that future occasions will see them to the fore. Un-
doubtedly the chief features of the entertainment were the violin
solos by Messrs. Tanora and Nicholson, while most efficient aid
in the vocal line was rendered by Messrs. Watson, Iredale and
others. Mr. Nevison, who occupied the chair, gave a rendering of
“ My Pretty Jane,” which, if not quite up to the standard of Sims
Reeves, was very near it. Mr. Harris, an energetic member of
the band, delighted the audience with two comic songs in true
Music-hall style. Altogether a very pleasant evening was spent,
and we understand it is intended to be the forerunner of similar
weekly re-unions until the close of the voyage.
F. G. CRUTCH, S.S. CUZCO.
“ Small Boy ” is informed that his verses are too personal,
and cannot be inserted.
Original Conundrums are invited to be sent in by noon next
Friday. The subject should have some bearing on our ship or
voyage. A prize will be given for the best.
The Ship’s Position, at Noon on Saturday.
The following calculation, interesting to passengers, has been
kindly supplied by the Chief Officer, Mr. Hoare.
Distance from Sydney . • • • • • 6139 knots.
~ ~ Melbourne .. • • >>
„ ~ Adelaide .. .. • • >>
Distance to Suez .. • • • • • • 2 3 »


SECOND EDITION.
TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE.
Monday, May 26, 1890.
N.B. The line has been a good deal interrupted by the operators at this end
looking out for land.]
Cape Guardafui, (African Coast,) 12 noon.
R.M.S. Cuzco in sight; whereat sundry passengers thereon
rejoice.
Indian Ocean Floating Station.
f S? 3 ] 8 are by some 1,500 tons, than when the Cuzco
, t Sydney. Ashes are lower, by a good many fathoms, all alone
the track.
Ceylon, Monday, 4 p.m.
Coffee is dearer, on account of rise in the chicory market. We
believe there are “ grounds ” for this complaint.
Arabia, Monday, 5 p.m.
Dates have altered since the day before yesterday.
Aden, Monday, 3 p.m.
Sundry speculators in Ostrich feathers and other curios on the
look out for the unwary, have heard that the Cuzco does not
intend calling at Aden this trip. Great indignation prevails.
Passengers, Cuzco, Monday.
Things are quieter in the interior.
A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS.
We 1 egret to record an accident to our popular fellow passenger,
Mr. E. Watson, by which his leg was severely injured. Under
the care of Dr. Pennell we are glad to say Mr. Watson is pro-
gressing fairly. Miss Gray i-s suffering from a cut hand, and Miss
Palmer from a sprained foot. All these sufferers have our
sympathy.


The Cuzoco Note Book.
“ Morn, in the white wake of the morning star,
Come furrowing all the Orient into GOLD. n Tennyson.
No. 4. Gulf of Suez.
( Latitude.. 1
(Longitude )
May 31, 1890.
ENGLAND’S POWER AND INFLUENCE.
PERHAPS no better opportunity could be afforded of observing
England’s power and influence, how they belt the globe,
than is furnished by the voyage in which we are now engaged.
England has always been—in modern days—the' colonizing power
of the world; but she has never evinced a grasping spirit, although
during the last hundred years she has had many chances of en-
larging her territory. Wherever she has planted her dominions,
her wealth and national influence have caused such colonies to
develop into settlements of permanence, progress and prosperity.
The Dutch, the Spaniards, and the Portuguese, bold navigators
as they were, never possessed this power. Even our Australian
and Tasmanian possessions prove this, showing by their nomencla-
ture where these early discoverers left their mark on the fringe of
our northern and western shores without effecting any peimanent
settlement. Nor have the French or Germans done anything
remarkable in the way of trans-oceanic colonization, with all
their increased facilities.
But England,—setting aside her magnificent Indian depen-
dencies, her African territory at the Cape, and her enormous
British Columbian possessions, with Canada, has dotted thewoild
with points of vantage by which she holds the keys of her various
positions. For instance, take the case of her Australian Colonies,
that “new Britannia in another world! —mark what England
has done to preserve her rights, and strengthen her position. It
is superfluous to dilate on the wealth and importance of the
Australian Colonies. But we ask the question, how was it that
in the earlier days when England was assailed by the combined
powers of almost the whole of Europe, her Antipodean territoiy


was perfectly safe ? It was because, even then, the paw of the
British Lion was recognised as a far reaching one. But, setting
that aside, see how her capital and foresight have been exercised,
to stimulate, facilitate and protect Australian trade ! The oceanic
highway has been shortened, and guarded, all along the line.
Coaling stations at convenient intervals to replenish the bunkers of
her mail boats, and telegraphic points to carry back and forth the
news on flying feet, have been secured by conquest or purchase.
All along our present route we notice this. Colombo, proclaimed
a British Colony in 1798 was, and is, a most important connecting
link. Aden, sterile and uninviting, is a point of vantage of
extreme value. Even the little island of Perim, would prove its
utility in troublous times, as “a strong rock and house of defence.”
The noble procession of steamers met by us, coursing one
after another down the Red Sea, what do they indicate ? In
almost every case British capital and British influence uniting in
one the northern and southern hemispheres.
The acquisition of the Suez Canal, and its almost entire con-
trol. is another instance of English sagacity, backed up by millions
of English specie.
Malta, and impregnable Gibralter are further guard-houses
along the watery road; and to any thinking mind, from Sydney
Harbour to Tilbury Docks, England has buoyed the whole way
with her purse and her power.
TO BE LET-BY TENDER.
For the remainder of this voyage, the use of a double-magni-
fying, back-action, Deck Chair, free from vice. The highest, or
any tender, not necessarily accepted. The owner of this chair
having recently refitted same, at great expense, for the sole use
and benefit of his fellow-passengers, is most anxious to place this
vehicle at the disposal of same. —Apply, “ Philanthropist,”
K.M.S. Cuzco.


“THE COMING EVENT.”
“ Good luck to you, C is the wish of a friend,
On the eve of your forthcoming wedding—
May happiness ever your footsteps attend
In the path you will shortly be treading!
And you, pretty G , whose sweet little song
So often has set young hearts beating—
I timidly step from the midst of the throng,'
A stranger, to offer a greeting.
So let the bells ring, let the passengers sing,
For Hymen will soon of two hearts be king!
RETLAW YDEEPS.
ILLNESS OF Mr. J. WATSON.
We regret to record the very severe indisposition of Mr. J.
Watson, our respected and popular Secretary. On last Thursday
night he was suddenly seized with illness and for a couple of days
was completely prostrated. His condition excited most alarming
apprehensions for some time, but we are happy to say that under
the skilful treatment of the ship’s surgeon, Dr. Pennell, he is now
almost completely restored. Dr. Pennell was unremitting in his
attention to the patient, and numbers of Mr. Watson’s fellow-
passengers vied with each other in their efforts to further his
recovery by sitting up to watch with him, etc.
Mr. Watson desires us to convey publicly to Dr. Pennell his
obligations to that gentleman’s skill and kindness; and also to
express his appreciation of the attention and sympathy of his
fellow-passengers.


SPORTS COMMITTEE.
DRAUGHTS.
The Second Tourney included seventeen competitors, the
winner of the First Tournament standing out. The players had
improved considerably by practice, and the final heat lay between
Messrs. Watson of Sydney, and Logan of Broken Hill. The
former was, as in the previous event, second, and the “ Silver
King ” won the contest.
CHESS.
For the Chess Tournament not so many players were found
as in the case of Draughts, but the first competition brought
seven contestants to the front. These were divided by lot into
three pairs and an odd man. Eventually the deciding game was
won by Mr. Lee, who carried too many guns for his opponents.
AN UNPLEASANT RUMOUR.
An unpleasant rumour has reached us that it is intended the
Cuzco shall remain at Naples for only an hour or so ! We can
hardly attach credit to this report, for as the Orient Company’s
Agents well know, the most of the passengers on board took their
passage believing in good faith that a reasonable stoppage would
be made at the various points of interest along the route. We
have hitherto been exceedingly unfortunate in this respect.
Colombo we knew would be missed, but Aden has also been
avoided ; no landing allowed at Suez, and only three or four
hours in the dead of night at Port Said.
NOTES ON CURRENT EVENTS.
Up to Monday, June 2 at noon.
Many points and objects of interest have been passed during
the past week.
The dreaded passage of the Red Sea did not prove so formid-
able as many of our passengers were led to anticipate owing to


traveller’s tales. Either we were blessed with exceptionally fine
weather, or the aforesaid travellers had been familiarising them-
selves with the proverbial “ long bow.”
One of the most startling items of news which awaited us on
our arrival at Suez, was that of the wreck of the 8.1. Steamer,
“ Dacca,” on the Daedalus Reef, about a fortnight ago. Little did
we think while watching its bright beacon that we were passing in
the vicinity of so noble a vessel —sunken over a thousand feet deep.
Under Divine Providence, with a good ship splendidly officered,
our voyage has not been signalised by any startling event of fire
or wreck. People sometimes complain of the monotony of a sea-
trip : but it is more profitable in the long run to have the ship’s
journal unpunctuated by any of those terrible calamities which
cause a day’s sensation in the papers, but are not any the more
acceptable to the chief actors because of novelty.
During the trip up the Gulf of Suez many an ancient land-
mark came into prominence, connected with ancient Bible history.
However much men’s minds may waver, and opinions change, the
configuration of mountain ranges altereth not, or but little, and
it is a wholesome reminder when one is permitted to look upon
these granite witnesses of written Truth.
A few flying-fish, darting round the corner to avoid the clutches
of some sea bailiff, came on board without paying their fare, and
are now in high spirits and pickle-bottles.
Swarms of Egyptian locusts were observed floating in the sea,
having just “ dropped in ” while on an extended tour, and are now
extended in preserving cases as specimen grasshoppers of the sea.
Ismalia is truly an oasis in the desert, its green setting gives
it quite an agreeable appearance, and we can scarcely agree with
that passenger whose young woman’s front name is Susan, and
who says that Ismalia is not so pretty as Sue is !


We are unable to give an account in this issue of the Queen’s
Birthday Sports, which didn’t come off; monsoons were at the
bottom of the disappointment. The Sports Committee certainly
spared no pains in arranging for a good day’s amusement, but as
Burns says:—
“ Pleasures are like poppies spread,
You seize the flower, its bloom is shed/’
even before you can seize it, especially when monsoons are around.
TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE.
Received at Cock-crowing (and considerably later) by Roosters’
Cable.
Sydney, Monday. 3 p.m.
Considerable regret is expressed at a message from England
to-day stating that the Cuzco is to be chartered for a pleasure
excursion in the Mediterranean, and consequently will be out of
the Australian running for some time. She and her officers were
always popular in the Colonial trade.
London, Monday , 4 p.m.
Professor Binks is about to perform before the half-crowned
heads of Europe.
[N.B.—Two Shillings and Sixpence admits to the Professor’s “ show.”]
Melbourne, Monday , noon.
Candles are lighter, after dark.
. There i s a tendency in Kerosene to go up : also in the servant
girls who light the fire with it.
London, Monday , 5.30
There is great demand for colours “ warranted not to run • ”
consequently there is a brisk business in British Union Jacks. ’
There is great activity in hops. Malt is easy; easier than
the people who dealt in Maltese yesterday, and who found after
visiting 1 01 1 Said that the prevailing colour was dun brown.


MOONSHINE!
By our Literary Lunatic.
Since we last enjoyed a literary ramble we have been through
the Canal, that wonderful work, “ which like a narrow sea divides ”
Egypt from Arabia. The sun was exceedingly hot while we were
coming through, and we “improved the shining hour” by learning
the language of the natives, Egyptian or Arabic, whatever it may
be. We made considerable progress in our studies.-
It is an easy language to learn, especially that half of it which
consists of the one word “ Bucksheesh! ” We noticed that this
" Bucksheesh ” dropped in conveniently as every second word, so
we picked up that half very quickly.
We noticed that the natives don’t put on all their clothes at
once. The family washing had evidently not been brought home,
or a great many trousers were out on loan. Many of the natives
appeared “in the garb of old Gaul,” a shirt, and nothing more.
In this scant garment several of them raced the Cuzco, and stuck
to us as adhesively as postage stamps, hence we put them down as
gum Arabics.
At intervals numbers of donkeys graced the landscape. At
such times there was a great rush of passengers to the poit side,
anxious to identify some missing relative no doubt!
We also saw a great many “ ships of the desert; ” someone
struck up The Camels are coming,” and we immediately cast
our attention on sundry animals consisting of a humped back held
up by four legs, one at each corner. The balance of power is
maintained by a neck wagging at one end, and a tail dangling at
the other. We also saw how the Arab boys assist a loaded camel


up a steep ascent, they hold on by his tail. We are informed that
a camel can go for several days without “ a drink ; ” in this respect
he is better than a good many men.
The girls, had a great treat coming through the canal; they
watched the channel attentively, in fact, could hardly be persuaded
to take their eyes off the water. The “ reason ” was because
there were so many buoys in the Canal.
Yesterday afternoon three bad boys, not those which mark out
the channel, determined to go in for a swim. Their names were
Singing Charlie, Will of the Quoits, and an older lad who was
generally called “ Uncle ” by his schoolmates. Now these boys
all attended the Cuzco Academy, and they had not obtained the
Master’s permission to have a “ boguey,” so you see the little
swim which they were in was not “By order,” as we usually say,
on the school stairs. So all in their best Sunday “ Pyjamas,”
they crept down a ladder over the ship’s side, and jumped into the
Canal when the ship was going to be tied up. “ Will ” was the
first to “ pull for the shore,” and although he thought he egg-shelled
in swimming he reached the bank in a very eggs-hausted condition,
but he did reach it, and sat down without waiting for a deck chair.
“ Uncle ’ followed, and in the first dive lost his pretty red cap,
but did’nt stay to look for it. He also pulled for the shore, and
seemed glad when he could feel the bottom, what our classical
master calls the tcvYu-fyU'ici. “ Uncle ” says he admits that the
terror became less the firmer he could feel the bottom. Will, see-
ing him puffing, addressed him in these remarkable words, “ You
he Mowed!” to which “ Uncle,” when he had saved up a lot of
bieath, replied You re another ! ” WTile this was going on,
Charlie, who ought to have seen that “ discretion was the better
part of valour,” dived in, and, daring boy that he was ! swam to
the shore and swam out again, but not being able to restrain a
musical opportunity even in the Canal, began to “ sing out ” “ a
boat! a boat ! haste to the Ferry ! ” Some of the very old lads
belonging to the Cuzco school took Charlie in, as one of our nice


FOR SALE.
A double-barrelled Deck-Chair, copper-fastened, fore and aft.
As it is constantly occupied by others the owner is unable to make
further use of it. —Apply Y.Z., office of this Paper.
POUND.
In the Red Sea, a mother-o’-pearl neck stud, and a black lead
pencil with india-rubber attachment ; supposed to be the outfit of
the Special Correspondent with Pharaoh’s army. —Apply to the
Office of this Paper.
LOST.
Missing since last Wednesday, a lizard skin purse, containing
two sovereigns and a little silver; also a miniature photograph.—
Will the finder kindly return same to Mrs. Carrara, berth 41.
LOST!
One volume of the Ship’s Library, “Little Dorrit,” No. 165.
Finder refer to Miss Leftwych, No. 13.
old school-books says —“ they pulled him out, but he was wet and
cold.” They also took in Will and “ Uncle,” and there was an
illustration of “three men in a boat,” not counting the dawg.
They were nearly being placed in the doctor’s hands, which would
have been indeed a Pennell-ty. The only excuse they could give
was that they went in for divers reasons, and came out again for
sun-dry motives. They also want to blame De Lesseps for making
the canal so wide.


ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE.
Stamer “ Cuzco,” May 29, 1890.
Dear Rory, —Here I am on me way home afther all thim
long years, and I find new wonders aich day on our thrip. Seeing
I have made me little pile I thought it better to come home
Second Class, though I have to be a bit pertikler of me manners,
seein’ lam among such nice people. How different all is since I
kirn out! This ship, but I forgot, she isn’t a ship, but a stamer
druv along by a big thing at her starn, called the “schrew.” She
is awful big, as big as Widow Murphy’s back meadow, which I
remimber so well! We kim out to her in a young stamer called a
tinder, so you will see she is too big to go up to the kay herself.
She is called the “ Cuzco.” I don’t know why, but I suppose it
is because she is a cuss to go. A ticket is pasted up every day,
givin’ the number of knots she runs —I think it manes miles, but
lam not sure—it’s a “ notty ” quistion ! I don’t like axing too
minny quistions as it shows me ignorance, so I purtind to know all
about the quare things I see around me on ivery hand. The captain
and officers be all rale swells, and covered wid gold buttons and
lace, and bein’ very attintive to the ladies. I intind posting this
at a place called Napels (on the Frinch coast, I think) and as it
goes by the train, yez will get it long before I get home. At dinner-
time, whin I find any Frinch names on the card I jist pint to one
ov thim and the feller brings it along, if I want more, I say “ a
little more ov that same, av yez plaze.” Most perlite are thim
young fellers as sarves the grub, an’ alway says “Sor” to me,
showin’ they considers me as good as the other folks. A young
lady axed me to pass the salt one day, an’ I said “ yis honey! ”
She seemed, as did the others, sorter sheared ; an’ if I said
“ Ma’am ! ” it would seem as if I was a sarvant, an’ if I said
“ Miss” she might be a “ ma’am.” Oh ! Rory, me boy, its hard
to keep from puttin’ your fut in it now and thin ! The ladies, God
bless thim ! I feel me hart bate against the inside av me ould
waistcut whin I look at their pritty faces, specially one colleen as
wears ra’al min’s shirts and collars, and a nate scarf.


The fire-bell rung one day, quite suddin, an’ faaling that me
suvrin-belt wuz safe, I made for the boats, whin I found they wuz
on’y purtindin’, or practisin’, as they calls it. The fellers as I
tould yez helped at table wuz there, aich wid a blanket tucked
under his arm, an’ whin I axed what they wuz fur ? I was tould
thim chaps was called “flay-catchers ! ” I kin tell yez, Rory, it
wuz an unbecomin’ name, for thim poor chaps is very hard worked,
an’ have not the most sunshiniest av times.
I could spin out this litter, but I’m afeard av tirin’ you, so will
kape the rist ov all the sthrange things I have to till you till I get
back to the ould counthry.
Hopin’ this finds you as it laves me, well an’ hearty.
I remane, yer ould frind,
DENIS MALONE.
CONUNDRUM COMPETITION.
1. Why is the “Cuzco Note Book” like the largest Steamship Com-
pany in the world ?—Answer: Because Wilson manages it.
2. Why was the dance on the after deck like bad bitter beer? —
Because there were only a few hops in it.
3. Why do washerwomen resemble the crew of the Cuzco ?
Because they are continually crossing the line and running
from pole to pole.
4. When may the passengers on the Cuzco be said to breakfast
before they get up ? —Answer: When they get a roll in bed.
5. Why is a Texas judge’s discharge of a prisoner like an offer to
charter this steamship ? —Answer: Because it is to let the
cuss go !
6. What is the nearest approach to cider on this vessel? —Answer:
Perry.
7. In what way does the steamer Cuzco resemble “ The Cuzco
Note Book ?—Answer: because both have a good man at
the head of affairs, able officers in each department; and
being well supported, and liberally patronized. Besides,
both have made a good start and hope to finish well, seeing
they must sink or swim together.


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of The Cuzco Note Book.
Dear Sir. —Fermat me through the columns of your journal
to express my gratitude to the captain and officers of the Cuzco,
and to our passengers generally, for their practical help and kind
sympathy shown towards me during my recent illness. Among
the officers of the vessel it would be ungrateful on my part were
I not to mention the name of Dr. Pennell, upon whose skill
and watchful care my well-being largely depended.
I therefore take this public opportunity of thanking him
sincerely for his goodness.
It is said by Shakespeare, that —
“ He who is thy friend indeed,
He will help thee in thy need.”
This truism, many of my fellow-passengers, I am pleased to
say, have amply demonstrated by their exhibition of sacrifice,
practical assistance and kind sympathy. I shall ever remember
with sincere gratitude, the kindness of my fellow-passengers,
especially (and I am sure I shall be pardoned for mentioning their
names) Messrs. Perry and Burke, whose help during my illness
materially assisted in restoring me again to health and strength.
Above all this, to The Great Physician I give thanks that His
servants were so far thus successful.
I am, Dear Sir,
Gratefully yours,
JOHN WATSON.


The Cuzco Note Book.
“ Morn, in the white wake of the morning star,
Come furrowing all the Orient into gold.' Tennyson.
xt *r ( Atlantic Ocean. ] T 10 -.oqq
No - 5 - {off the Coast of Portugal.) JuNE 10> 189 °'
Latitude 39°32" N. Longitude g° 25" W.
ANCHORED!
A FEW brief weeks ago we made our introductory literary bow
to our fellow-passengers of the Cuzco, and now in the
course of events it has come about that our journalistic careei
has to be closed, and our final bow to be made. We lay down
our pen with regret- To us, the editing of the 1 Cuzco Note
Book” has been a labour of love, and has often beguiled an hour
which otherwise might have proved wearisome. We are sure that
amusement has been afforded to some, and that we have not
intentionally offended any. We have endeavoured to present an
impartial record of the events of our voyage—which record if we
are able to produce it in a more enduring shape, will form a
pleasant reminder of the trip.
Under no other circumstances is it possible for a company of
people to become so rapidly acquainted with each other, as on a
sea voyage of some few weeks duration, ihe dinner-table con-
versation, the constant meeting on deck, the interchange of
civilities, the participation in amusements, the assimilation of
tastes; all these factors soon break down the barriers of reserve
which, under other circumstances keep people strangers.
Even old Ocean teaches us a lesson in this respect, that, with
all our social distinctions, we are common kith and kin. Old
Ocean is no “ respecter of persons,” and the king in his state
cabin has to yield to mal de mer as much as the labourer in the
steerage.
Speaking more immediately of ourselves we are happy to say
that in the Second Saloon the greatest harmony has prevailed,
and that there has been a general effort to render the whole
voyage pleasant. Strangers have met who will remain strangers


no more, friendships have been formed which will continue though
seas may divide those who have become acquainted, engagements
have been entered into which will affect the contracting parties
for weal or woe throughout all time.
But, foi the present, we are called upon to separate, and how
many of us will meet again is written in the unknown future.
Charles Dickens somewhere observes that “the world is too small
loi people having once met never to meet again.” However this
truth may hold good individually, one thing is quite certain, that,
as 9. company the people who part at Tilbury will never be
associated again as they have been during the last six weeks.
Feeling this to be inevitably so, it is with emotions of sadness
and regret that we lay down our editorial pen, and wish our
fellow-passengers, one and all, an affectionate
FAREWELL !
SPORTS.
The Deck Amusements which were arranged for Queen’s
Biithday, but which were postponed on account of monsoons
being around, were carried out last Thursday. The programme
was somewhat modified to suit a half-day, the attendance of
onlookers was large, and all appeared to thoroughly enjoy them-
selves. The Stewards exerted themselves in their various
departments, and the duties of Judges and Umpires were com-
mitted to the Chief Officer (Mr. Hoare) and Archdeacon Wilson.
The proceedings opened with marking the Goose’s Eye, and it
was singularly interesting to note the diversity of opinion existing
as to where a goose usually has her eye, some attempts being
made to locate it a dozen feet from her body. Miss Morrison was
the successful competitor in this event, Mr. Lloyd coming in
second. Ihe Egg and Spoon Race for ladies fell to the successful
lot of Mrs. Rhodes. The Standing Long Jump was cleverly won
by Mr. Lloyd who distanced all competitors. The Potato Race


for ladies, after an exciting contest in the final heat between Mrs.
Rhodes and Miss Morrison, resulted in favour of the latter. The
Skipping Contest was won by Mr. John Watson, and the Wheel-
barrow Race was decided in favour of Messrs. Drought and
Leighton. The Obstacle Race was a most exciting and amusing
item, the various barriers having been arranged by the men of the
ship, under the direction of Mr, Hoare. It was in heats, Messrs.
Drought and Burke being the final contestants, the former being
victorious.
The Potato Race for gentlemen was won by Mr. Rhodes, and
Mr. Lloyd came nearest among gentlemen in their efforts to mark
the Goose’s Eye.
The Passengers’ Tug of War was won by the team selected by
Mr. Perry. The Sailors’ Tug of War was decided in favour of
the Port Watch, and a final “Tug” between a team of passengers
and a team of seamen resulted in an ignominious defeat for the
non-professionals. Too much praise cannot be awarded to Mr.
Hoare (Chief Officer), who devoted all the spare time of his
afternoon to seeing everything successfully carried out. The
Committee thank him heartily.
MOONSHINE!
By our Literary Lunatic
While the Cuzco was coaling at Port Said we had ourselves
conveyed ashore to inspect the town, and affoid the inhabitants
thereof a treat. The first thing we noticed was that the smells
of the place were very distinked. Another mental note we made
was that half the population seemed to consist of guides. We
invested in a crimson “tarboosh” or “Fez,” intending to pose
as General Gordon, Hobart Pasha, or Arabi Bey, but finding the
next morning that half our passengeis had been stiuck by the
same brilliant idea, we abandoned our intention, and the cap.


What a habit the consuming of tobacco has become; the
average mortal clamours for his cigarette as a baby for milk. Even
the mountains follow the fashion. As we passed by, Etna,
Stromboli, and Vesuvius were all smoking!
We took our idea of the Neapolitans from Massaniello, and
expected to find the fishermen of Naples attired in bare legs,
velvet doublets, immaculate shirts, and red night-caps. We were
disillusioned. The Neapolitan is what Artemus Ward would call
an “ or’nary cuss,” and fishes from passengers with a bag net on
the end of a bamboo rod, his bait being straw baskets and fans,
always taking care to secure the coin first. Naples is full of dark
arches, and of narrow slits of lanes apparently leading nowhere.
Every third house is a cafe or restaurant, and nobody in Naples
appears to be at home after dark. The women fruit-sellers, “child-
like and bland,” sell the guileless traveller half a basket of cherries
or oranges for the same price as a full one, and give him the under-
padding of oak leaves or other refuse vegetable matter for nothing.
The Neapolitan officials are made up of two-thirds of cocked hat,
epaulettes, and silver or gold braid, the other third is man !
We have lost some splendid opportunities through some of our
passengers neglecting to come on board until a late stage of our
voyage was reached. Their names have not come under review
by our learned pundii, although he has been Hitchin to spread his
Loftie sentiments respecting them. One gentleman by his late
advent amongst us, to use a proverbial saying, has just “ saved his
Bacon! ”
It rejoiced us exceedingly when our obliging Commander
signified his intention of giving us, if practicable, a few hours’ stay
in Gibraltar. Our arrival at the Rock, and the official notice
posted at the gangway, dispelled all fears that he would “jib ” or
alter his mind ! ”


ARRIVALS AND DEPARTURES.
Since leaving the Australian coast our numbers have been
supplemented by the embarkation of several ladies and gentlemen
at various points along the line. Among the new arrivals our
ministerial staff has been strengthened by the addition of the
Rev. W. T. Loftie, 8.A., F.S.A., the Rev. Mr. Hitchin, and the
Rev. Mr. Bacon.
The departures consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Ker, Mrs. Carrara,
and Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, who all disembarked at Naples, and from
whom'we were sorry to part.
THANKS.
Before we separate we desire to express our most cordial
thanks to Captain Anderson for his unwearied efforts to promote
the safety, comfort, and pleasure of his passengers. In this he
has been ably assisted by all the officers under him ; a more genial
and obliging set of men, from the Commander downwards, it would
scarcely be possible to meet, and we take this opportunity of
expressing to them one and all our sense of their courtesy and
kindness.
CHURCH SERVICE.
On Sunday last the final Ship’s Service was held, and oppor-
tunity was taken of the occasion to make the usual collection in
aid of the Marine Charities. The Prayers were read by the Rev.
Q. Bacon ; the Lessons by the Rev. W. T. Loftie, and the Sermon,
from Ecclesiastes XL- i, “ Cast thy bread upon the waters,” was
preached by Archdeacon Wilson. The collection amounted to
£5 U - 3 d -


A REUNION.
On Monday, June g, the popular Mr. Jones entertained a select
party of friends to “ afternoon tea,” and strawberries and cream,
m the Second Saloon. After the repast Mr. C. Lewis sang with
great feeling, - The Death of Nelson,” which was most appro-
priate, as we had just passed that famous Bay in which England’s
greatest Hero fell. Several gentlemen made able speeches
descriptive of what they had seen in Gibraltar. Our host very
much deplored that one gentleman present who had travelled so
many thousand miles had been so unfortunate as to miss the
greatest of sights there, the “ Bull Ring,” situated in the centre
of the “ Spanish Town,” in fact, in Spain. Mr. Jones further
offered on behalf of his guests and himself (who had seen this
great and never-to-be-forgotton sight) their condolences.
This little re-union was admitted by all to have been one of the
most enjoyable spent on board our good ship “ Cuzco,” and one and
all felt more than ever the geniality and good nature of our highly
esteemed friend, Jones. After singing the “ National Anthem,”
and “ Auld Lang Syne,” our pleasant party came to an end.
FINAL SETTLING MEETING.
A General Meeting of the Second Saloon Passengers will be
held to-morrow, Wednesday, at 8 p.m., to receive Report and
Balance Sheet from the Sports’ Committee, and to decide how
the balance of funds in hand shall be applied. A full attendance
of all persons interested is particularly requested.
OTHER WINNERS OF PRIZES.
The Boxing Contest, on the day of the Deferred Sports
resulted in a win for Mr. R. A. Ker, who displayed a considerable’
amount of science. Mr. Drought made a most plucky stand,
defeating two opponents, but being knocked out by Mr. Ker.
Mr. McDonald came off a victor in the cribbage tournament.


THE LOSS OF THE “ DACCA.”
The “ Dacca,” of the British Indian Line, was totally lost on
the Daedalus Shoal, in the Red Sea, while outward bound with
emigrants for Queensland, on Friday morning, the 16th May,
at 5.50. The ship, after striking the reef, drifted away about a
mile and a half, and went down about 7 o’clock, in 350 fathoms.
The emigrants were landed on the reef, and were eventually con-
veyed safely to Suez in the “ Palamcotta,” another ship of the
same line. I visited the “ Palamcotta ”on the 20th May, and
from conversations with the Doctor in charge, and with the Matron,
and frdm my own recollections of a visit to the Daedalus, which
I made last year, I am enabled to offer you in a narrative form
particulars of what seemed at one time likely to prove a disaster
almost unparalled.
The Daedalus is a reef of coral which rises to the surface in
the centre of the Red Sea, and is usually out of sight of land.
Though the sea is here from two to four hundred fathoms in depth
at a few yards distance from the edge of the reef, the rocks are
plainly visible at low water, and consist of white coral, marked
here and there with large rounded stones of an intense blackness,
for which reason the Arabs call it “Abu Kisan,” that is, “ The
Father of Pots.” It was discovered and surveyed by H.M.S.
Daedalus, under the command of Captain (afterwards Sir George)
Nares, of Arctic fame, about 50 years ago, and one of the great
Mail Companies put a lighthouse upon it, an odd-looking structure
containing on a solid platform of masonry three storeys of iron,
rising to a height of eighty feet. Three light-keepers are always
here immured, a fourth being on leave for three months every year.
The “ Dacca ” struck the northern side of the reef, and rebounded
at a shock which stove in her forward compartment. She carried
429 emigrants, under the superintendence of Dr. Hickling. Of
these 200 were young girls, in charge of a matron. When the
vessel struck most of the emigrants were below. It happened
that during their voyage, so far, it had been the practice of the
Doctor and Matron to put them at brief intervals through fire
drill. When the Matron was informed in her cabin that the ship
was sinking she went to the women’s quarters, and desired them


to put on their clothes, their bonnets or hats, or cloaks, and
to take any small valuables they possessed. This they did at
once, imagining it was some new manoeuvre in fire drill. As
each little party came on deck, they were directed to get into the
boat ready for them, and many of them were actually well away
from the ship’s side before they had any idea of what had occurred.
The men, meanwhile, who had been equally well-drilled, stood in
a line on the deck, the doctor observing quietly, as he handled a
revolver, that he would shoot the first who stepped out before the
women, the married couples and the children had been placed
in safety on the rock, where, indeed, they were all landed ; if that
can be called landing, which consisted in stepping out into three
or four feet of water and wading across 20 or 30 yards of rough
stones to the lighthouse—and not a single casualty occurred.
The crew and captain, 83 in number, were the last to leave, and
immediately afterwards the ship went down.
Meanwhile, the Rosario, of Hull, under the command of Capt.
Brown —on her homeward voyage—approached the rock and took
off the whole of the refugees, all very wet, but not otherwise
hurt. The women and girls had been lodged by the light keepers
in the three storeys of their lonely tower, but the men had to
remain on the rocks below, in water gradually rising, and so deep
that the matron told me it was up to her chin when she stepped
into it. Captain Brown lodged as many women and girls as he
could in his cabin and chart-room, and served out all the colours
in his locker to make aprons for them while their clothes were
dried.
By this time the Palamcotta had arrived on the scene, and
once more the emigrants were transferred —having eaten up every-
thing on board the hospitable Rosario ; which had to be literally
re-stored when she reached Suez. She then took the captain and
crew on towards England, and the Palamcotta which came up at the
same time, namely on Saturday night, anchored in the Roads,
where she still remained when the Cuzco went by.
It is remarkable to reflect that had this terrible wreck occurred
the next day, when it was blowing a gale of wind, all must have


been lost, even if they had been successfully put on the shoal. As
it is, we cannot too highly commend the courage of the officials
who were able to apply the discipline so recently acquired by the
motley crowd of emigrants under their charge, and to make three
transfers from the open sea to the half-submerged reef, —from the
reef to the Rosario —and finally to the Palamcotta, and all in the
compass of some four hours, and without a single casualty greater
than a bare foot cut by the coral.
To courage and discipline, therefore, under Providence, we
must ascribe it, that 500 persons were not hurried into eternity
at a few minutes’ notice, on that awful May morning in the middle
of the Red sea.
W. J. LOFTIE.
TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE.
LATEST CABLEGRAMS.
[Through the kindness of Mr. Dinnis, Purser, the following Cablegrams were placed
in our hands immediately after arrival at Gibraltar. —Editor.]
London, 4 th June.
The Derby—Sanfoin Ist, Le Nord 2nd, Orwell 3rd.
The prisoners who were acquitted at the Panitza Court Martial
have been forcibly expelled from Bulgaria. Others resolved to
appeal to the Supreme Court.
The Duke of Orleans has received a free pardon and was
conducted to the frontier.
London, 6th June.
The Oaks—Memoir Ist, Signorina 2nd, Pouza 3rd.
A Bill has been introduced in the Commons for the Channel
Tunnel.
A crowded meeting at the Mansion House resolved to appeal
for funds to place a steamer on the Victoria Nyanza.
[The following were not handed to us by the Purser—but by “ Uncle.”]
The Markets—Steel is hardening. Lead, soft. Boots are tight
(new ones). Gloves, easy. Pitch keeps well on hand. Gun-
powder is going off well.
Naples, June sth.
The Cuzco received forward supplies of Bacon.


PUZZLES AND PARADOXES.
BY OUR BACONIAN PHILOSOPHER.
Knowing the interest taken in “ That man’s father was my
father’s son,” we have invited the help of a gentleman who
recently came on board and he has furnished us with the following
“Thought-Teasers.”
If a goose weighs 10-lbs. and half its own weight, what is the
weight of the goose ? Answer : 20-lbs.
How many days will it take to cut up a piece of cloth 50 yards
long, one yard being cut off every day ? Answer : 49 days.
A man runs round a pole on the top of which is a monkey. As
the man moves the monkey also turns so as to still keep face to
face with the man. When the man has gone round the pole—has
he, or has he not, gone round the monkey ?
A body must move either in the place where it is, or in the
place where it is not. Now a body in a place where it is is
stationary and cannot be in motion —nor, obviously, can it be in
motion in the place where it is not; therefore it cannot move
at all !
If your aunt’s sister is not your aunt, what relation is she to
you ? Answer; your mother.
Two brothers walking down the street one day—one said
“ Here are my nephews and neices, I will stop to speak to them.”
The other brother said “ I have no nephews or neices,” and
walked on. How was this ? They were his children.
Suppose three snakes each of which is swallowing another by
the tail, so that the three form a circle; then, as the swallowing
process continues the circle evidently grows smaller. Now, if
they thus continue to swallow each other, what eventually becomes
of the snakes.


POSTSCRIPT.
The sth, and final, issue of the “ Cuzco Note Book ” was read
to the assembled passengers on Tuesday evening, June 10, when
we were off the coast of Portugal. This was followed by a most
successful Concert, in which all our old friends and some who
came on at later ports (notably Miss Thompson and the Rev. Mr.
Bacon) took part. Opportunity was taken on this occasion to
present the prizes to winners at Tournaments and Special Sports
throughout the voyage.
An Address was also presented to Archdeacon Wilson, of
Dubbo, of which the following is the text: —
“ To the Venerable Archdeacon Wilson, of N.S.W.
We, the undersigned, fellow passengers of the S.S. “ Cuzco, on
her voyage from Australia to London, desire to express our hearty
appreciation of the services rendered by the Venerable Archdeacon
Wilson, as conductor of our Divine Services —also as Editor of the
Cuzco Note Book, and Vice-President and Chairman of our General
Committees. We feel that he has unremittingly devoted himself to
the furtherance of the happiness of all, by his many acts of kindness,
consideration and forethought; and we, one and all, will look back to
this trip with many pleasant recollections. In bidding farewell to
Mr. Wilson we wish him complete restoration to health, and that
by Divine Providence he may return with renewed vigour to his native
land.” June 10, 1890.
[Here follow the signatures of 50 passengers.]
On June 11, at a General Meeting, the Report and Balance
Sheet of the Cuzco Amusement Committee, were read by the Hon,
Secretary, Mr. John Watson, and the Hon. Treasurer, Mr. F. W.
Hackforth-Jones. The Reports were unanimously adopted as
most satisfactory, and the balance in hand (£5 18s. od.) was
disposed of in donations to the band, the Boatswain, and the
Marine Charities, by a majority vote of the General Meeting
Votes of thanks were passed to the various officers.


As the parting day approached, many little social gatherings
and afternoon teas were held by little knots of particular
friends. Thursday, June 12, was the great “packing-up day,”
and at 5 p.m. the white shaft of Eddystone lighthouse hove in
sight. The ship dropped anchor for an hour off the beautiful
coast of Plymouth, .whose hills of lovely summer green gave a
welcome greeting to eyes weary of Egyptian and Arabian barren-
ness. A number of passengers landed here in the steam tender,
and u Auld Lang Syne ” and an interchange of cheers, signalled
the first dispersion of our floating household. Resuming her
voyage, the Cuzco passed up Channel, and at 6.30 p.m. on Friday,
June 13, entered Tilbury Docks, four days in advance of contract
time, after a pleasant and prosperous voyage. The Customs
passed, the train whirled the balance of passengers to Fenchurch
Street Station, and those who had been associated for so many
weeks had at last to say
“GOOD-BYE!”


LONDON.
Zapp & Bennett, Printers, 52A, Bow Lane, Cheapside.


