

PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
CYCLISTS' TOURING GUIDE
OF
New SOUTH WALES.
ROADS, DISTANCES, HILLS, SCENERY,
TOWNS, HOTEL ACCOMMODATION,
ROAD MAPS.
BY
JOSEPH PEARSON
(MEMBER OF THE SYDNEY BICYCLE CLUB).
Sydney :
W C. PENFOLD & CO., General Printers,
183 Pitt Street.
1896.


EAGLE CIGARETTES =-
ARE NOW MANUFACTURED BY THE MOST
IMPROVED MACHINERY
Hrotn the I3est
Virginia Gold lUeaf.
ALL CYCLISTS SHOULD SMOKE THEM.
They are the Purest, Sweetest and Best.


J) A* J<»
Li »
THE TAILOR,
Opposite Town Hall,
SYDISTEY.
CYCLING OUTFITS A SPECIALITY.
ESTIMATES GIVEN FOR CLUBS.
Patterns and Self-Measurement Forms sent on Application.
The New Dress
Jacket, Made to
Measure, Silk Lined
Front, 42/-
The New Walking
Suit, now so
fashionable, made
from Vicuna and
Worsted. The Suit
to Measure, 65-
V v
Gentlemen’s Sac
Suit, in Tweed or
Serges. Made to
Measure, 50-
All our Goods are thoroughly shrunk and
examined before leaving the Establishment.
SEND FOR PATTERNS.


CYCLING
SHOES
a Speciality.
J. okuNl>v.
IBoot and |3hoe iVlaker,
71 OXFORD ST., SYDNEY.
All kinds of Ladies’ and Gent.’s Boots made to Order.
THE REASON WHY
Lots of People do not RIDE A BICYCLE is because they
think the PRICES MUCH TOO HIGH.
THUSTGS ARE ALTERED!
We can build you a
Pirst Class Machine
(Any WEIGHT or Design) for £l7 10s.
which would cost £26 anywhere else.
IjIFHIHI/m HWMPDHN
IS THE BRAND.
D, BURRELL & CO.
Manufacturers and Importers,
37 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY.
Correspondence Invited.


IDIHSTB
(Leading Commercial Restaurant)
482 and 484 GEORGE STREET.
Pitt Street Entrance next Tattersall’s Hotel.
Manning River Oysters, New Zealand Whitebait,
Scotch Findon Haddocks, Vancouver Salmon,
New Zealand Smoked Blue Cod, &c;, &c.,
on our Daily Menu;
WM. ADAMS, Manager.
THE BEST
TOBACCO
DARK & AROMATIC
Seat au comers
world’s fair
c^/cao°


“GRAND CENTRAL’’ HOTEL, immediately facing the G.P.O.
250 Bedrooms. First Class Accommodation. Meals or Bed at option.
The Premier Position in Sydney.
For Terms please address J. J. SMITH, Manager.
'HE following Hotels are highly recommended to
Cyclists touring, or other Visitors to the district,
where they may depend upon good accommodation
combined with attention and civility :
ALBURY—
Ohler’s Club Hotel ... J. Outer, Proprietor
APPIN—
Imperial Hotel ... ... E. Spearing, Proprietor
ARMIDALE—
Imperial Hotel ... ... J. Kickham, Proprietor
BERRY-
COMMERCIAL Hotel ... J. G. Lambert, Proprietor
BOMBALA—
Imperial Hotel ... ... Mrs. Rowley, Proprietress
BELLI—
Dickson’s Family Hotel... W. T. Dickson, Proprietor
BREADALBANE—
Breadalbane Hotel ... T. Aprs, Proprietor
BRAIDW GOD—
White Swan Hotel ... J. Allen, Proprietor
(For continuation of this list, see over.)


What Better Proof is Required?
DOCTORS ARE NOW RECOMMENDING
G-ILBEY’S
SILVERSTREAM SCHNAPPS
AS THE BEST IMPORTED.
ASK FOR
GILBEY’S DRY GIN.
SPECIALLY RECOMMENDED FOR ALL
KIDNEY COMPLAINTS.
Beware of Imitations. Obtainable Everywhere.
THE FASHIONABLE PASTIME,
CYCLING is the most delightful and health-giving exercise in
the world, and has undoubtedly become the fashionable Pastime
amongst all ranks of Society.
A Bicycle is the most easy thing to learn to ride, and once
mastered, is an everlasting source of Health and Pleasure.
For Elegance & Design, For Comfort & Speed,
For Safety & Strength,
THE JAMES AND R. & P. CYCLES
ARE UNRIVALLED.
Write for our Descriptive Catalogue, post free. Full of interest-
ing information to all Cyclists and would-be Cyclists.
Sole Agents fob New South Wales —
W. C. FALLICK & SONS,
PITT ST. (near Market St.). SYDNEY.


“GRAND CENTRAL’’ HOTEL, immediately facing the GLP.O.
250 Bedrooms. First Class Accommodation. Meals or Bed at option.
The Premier Position in Sydney.
For Terms please address J. J. SMITH, Manager.
BATHURST—
Park Hotel
LIST OF HOTELS—Continued.
... ... T. Cashman, Proprietor
BEGA—
Bank Hotel
BO WR AE-
Geand Hotel
CAMDEN—
Commercial Hotel
CAM PBEL LTOWN—
Forbes Hotel
... F. A. Hall, Proprietor
... Bond, Proprietor
... Mrs. French, Proprietress
... W. S. Targett, Proprietor
CRONULLA BEACH—
Crondlla Hotel ... ... S. Giddings, Proprietor
COBARGO—
Cobargo Hotel ... ... — Graham, Proprietor
COOMA—
Prince of W ales Hotel... G. Rolfe, Proprietor
COOTAMUNDRA—
Club Hotel
... J. Cambourn, Proprietor
DAPTO—
Dapto Hotel
DUNGOG—
Bank Hotel
-E Reed, Proprietor
... S. Brady, Proprietor
FORBES—
Tattersall s Hotel ... E. Brown, Proprietor
(For continuation of this list, see over.)


A WARNING TO CYCLISTS!
Be very careful of your Tyres, and when “ tyred,” be equally
careful of your Stimulant. The greatest authority on HEALTH,
The Lancet, says : —“When fagged, drink
GALLEY WHISKY.
It is an absolutely safe Stimulant.” Therefore, in wheel and
whoa, stick to GALLEY, for it will never “ scorch ” you.
Put up in Flasks, Half Flasks, and Quarter Flasks for convenience
of Cyclists when travelling. Please note.
Beer is THE thing for Hot Weather, and you will find
THE ROYAL ALE
Brewed in Edinburgh specially for Australia, a delightfully light
beer, refreshing to a degree, without causing heaviness.
THE MALLO CIGAR
Is the Very Best Value ever known.
It has a fragrant Aroma and a delicate Flavour, is reliable, and
at all times a credit to the smoker and a pleasure to his friends.
TRY ONE, AND YOU WILL NOT REGRET IT.
APRICOT BRANDY
(PAGE & SANDEMAN)
“TIETIIE KIHG OIF LIQT7EIJBS.”
Original and Only Genuine.
A soothing and Stimulating aid to Digestion. Try a glass with
your “ Mallo.”


[?]


I Ih
Cycling Hose
Checks
Navy
S ih'
THESE
GOODS
ARE
ALL
OBTAINABLE
Ready-Made Cycling
Suits, Tweed or Serge
IN VARIOUS PRICES
AT
Racing Suits for League
or Union Riders.
J. PERRSON’S,
Cyclists’ Outfitter and General Athletic Provider,
21 KING STREET ARCADE, SYDNEY.
Hatter,
Hosier
Glover
radii
Shirt Maker
■//,
Scarfs
Bows
I
Collars
nil
all
the Leading
Styles.
< I
WEITE
FOR
Waterproof Cycling Capes.
_ Training or Road Riding Sweaters, wit!
FRILL Lihl. Turn-down or Stand-up Collars.
In White or Grey.


[?]


LINDEMAN’S CAWARRA WINES
.....
.
‘
- •
\' ■■. t T
.... . _
. . . ■ ...
,
mMmm
VINEYARD, TTYJISrTEE RIVER.
CITY DEPOT - - - EXCHANGE CELLARS.


[?]


FRANK HOWES,
MERCHANT TAILOR,
95 KING STREET,
SYDNEY.
GARMENTS,
WELL-CUT,
HAND MADE,
That KEEP THEIR SHAPE
And WEAR WELL,
From Goods which for Quality and Price have
won a Reputation and a Great Trade
for this House.
We are alive to the fact that Customers must be pleased ,
and this we guarantee to do in every instance.
CALL FOR PATTERNS AND INSPECT.
Kindly note the Qualities , then compare the prices with
other firms, and ice feel confident that you will
decide in our favor.
HONEST GOODS,
STERLINGr VALUE.
Only Address-
-95 KING STREET,
Next Door but One to Sydney Arcade.


[?]


BENNETT & WOOD,
(ESTABLISHED 1882)
159 (&lavencz
Cycle Suppliers to His Excellency THE BIGHT
HONORABLE YISCOUNT HAMPDEN, and Gov-
ernment Telegraph Department of N.S.W.
SOLE AGENTS tor the Famous
«« ” * “ P.HM M
•• pepwipiMp pcißpip 59
SAFETY BICYCLES.
In these three makes of machines we embody Cycles
suitable for all requirements.
Our Machines are ridden by Mr. J. PEARSON, Editor
of this Work, and all the Oldest and Most Experienced
Cyclists in N.S.W.
Lists and Teaching Free.
Sundries of the Latest Patterns.
BENNETT & WOOD, 159 Clarenee Street, Sydney.
PRELIMINARY NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
We are pleased to inform our Customers that, owing to
the increase of our business, we are now having erected
a new four-storey building at
33V GEORGE STREET,
(BETWEEN KING & MARKET STREETS),
Which we hope will be ready for occupation about
February Ist next.


(^l^6)
g)fbtratrb bn Remission
filS pXCELLENCY JH E PoVERNOR,
The I(ight honourable Viscount hampden.
(9^T(pQ)


BY
JOSEPH PEARSON
(Member of the Sydney Bicycle Club).


CONTENTS.
Introduction ... ... ... ... ... ... Page 1
Short Bides- —Places round Sydney ... ... ... Page 13
Tour No. 1, occupying 2 days ... ... ... Page 18
Parramatta, Penrith, Mulgoa, Luddenham, Bringelly,
Narellan, Camden, Campbelltown, Liverpool, Banks-
town, Sydney. Distance, 102 miles.
Tour No. 2, occupying 2 days ... ... ... Page 19
Parramatta, Baulkham Hills, Windsor, Pitt Town, Wise-
man’s Ferry, Dural, Eastwood, Ryde, Gladesville,
Sydney. Distance, 119 miles.
Tour No. 3, occupying 2 days ... ... ... Page 20
(Take train to Maitland), Cessnock, Wollombi, Laguna,
St. Albans, Wiseman’s Ferry, Sydney. Distance,
143 miles.
Tour No. 4, occupying 2 days ... ... ... Page 21
Parramatta, Blacktown, Windsor, Richmond, Kurrajong,
Penrith, Prospect, Sydney. Distance, 116 miles.
Tour No. 5, occupying 3 days ... ... ... Page 23
(Take train to Mittagong), Bowral, Moss Vale, Fitzroy
Falls, Kangaroo Valley, Cambewarra, Nowra, Berry,
Gerringong, Kiama, Dapto, Wollongong, Bulli,
Clifton, Waterfall, National Park (Carrington Drive),
Audley, Loftus, Sutherland, Tom Ugly’s Point, Sydney.
Distance, 180 miles.
Tour No. 6, occupying 3 days ... ... ... Page 26
Canterbury, Belmore, George’s River, Liverpool, Camp-
belltown, Camden, Razorback Mountain, Picton,
Menangle, Campbelltown, Appin, Bulli Pass, Bulli,
Clifton, Stanwell Park, Waterfall, Tom Ugly’s Point,
Sydney. Distance, miles.
Tour No. 7, occupying 3 days ... ... ... Page 28
(Train to Newcastle), Hexham, Maitland, Paterson,
Dungog, Stroud, Gloucester, Raymond Terrace,
Hexham, Newcastle. Distance, 200 miles.


Tour No. 8, occupying 4 days... ... ... ... Page 30
(Train to Bathurst), Kelso, O’Connell, Oberon, Jenolan
Caves, Hampten, Hartley, Mount Victoria, Blackheath,
Katoomba, Wentworth, Lawson, Springwood, Emu
Plains, Penrith, Sydney. Distance, 168 miles.
Tour No. U, occupying 4 days ... ... ... Page 32
Bankstown, Liverpool, Campbelltown, Camden, Picton,
Mittagong, Bowral, Moss Vale, Robertson, Jamberoo
Mountain, Jamberoo, Mount Terry, Albion Park,
Dapto, Wollongong, Bulli, Clifton, Stanwell Parki
Waterfall, Sydney. Distance, 195 miles.
Tour No. 10, occupying 5 days ... ... ... Page 34
(Take steamer to Moruya), Bateman’s Bay, Termeil, Milton,
Nowra, Berry, Bulli, &c., to Sydney. Distance, 207 miles.
Tour No. 11, occupying 5 days ... ... ... Page 35
(Steamer to Eden), Eden, Pambula, Wolumla, Bega,
Brogo, Dry River, Cobargo, Tilba Tilba, Punkalla!
Bodalla, Moruya, Mogo, Bateman’s Bay, Termeil,
Milton, Tomerong, Nowra, Sydney. Distance, 222
miles.
Tour No. 12, occupying 5% days ... ... ... Page 37
(Train to Goulburn), Tarago, Braidwood, Araluen, Larry’s
Mountain, Moruya, Bateman’s Bay, Termed, Milton,
Tomerong, Nowra, Berry, Gerringong, Kiama, Dapto,
Wollongong, Bulli, Bulli Pass, Appin, Campbelltown,
Sydney. Distance, 285! miles.
Tour No. 13, occupying about 6 days ... ... Page 38
(Train to Goulburn and return from Moruya to Sydney by
steamer), Tarago, Bungendore, Queanbeyan, Michel-
ago, Bredbo, Cooma, Rock Flat, Nimitybelle, Colombo,
Bega, Brago, Qualma, Cobargo, Tilba Tilba, Punkalla’
Bodalla, Moruya. Distance, 286 miles.
Tour No. 14, occupying 7 days ... ... ... Page 40
Liverpool, Campbelltown, Camden, Picton, Mittagong,
Bernma, Marulan, Goulburn, Tarago, Braidwood,
Nelligan, Termeil, Milton, Tomerong, Nowra, &c., &c.[
to Sydney. Distance, 409 miles.
Tour No. 15, occupying 7 days Page 42
( Train to Goulburn), Gunning, Yass, Bowning, Binalong,
Murrumburrah, Cootamundra, Junee, Wagga Wagga’
Tarcutta, Adelong Crossing, Gundagai, Coolac, Jugiong,
Bookhany Bowning, Yass, Queanbeyan, Bungendore’
Tarago, Goulburn, Sydney. Distance. miles.


Tour No. 16, occupying S days ... ... ... Page 44
(Train to Goulburn), Tarago, Bungendore, Queanbeyan,
Michelago, Bredbo, Cooma, Adaminaby, Kiandra,
Tumut, Adelong Crossing, Gundagai, Coolac, Jugiong,
Bookham, Bowning, Yass, Gunning, Breadalbane,
Goulburn (train to Sydney). Distance, 378 miles.
Tour No. 17, occupying 9 days Page 46
(Take steamer to Grafton), Grafton, Woolgoolga, Coff’s
Harbour, Raleigh, Deep Creek, Nambucca, Clybucca,
Kempsey, Port Macquarie, Taree, Tinonee, Gloucester,
Stroud, Raymond Terrace, Hexham, Newcastle. Dis-
tance, 502 miles.
Tour No. IR, occupying 10 days Page 48
(Train to Bathurst), Peel, Wattle Flat, Sofala, Hill End,
Mudgee, Wellington, Molong, Orange, Bathurst,
Newbridge, Trunkey, Abercrombie Caves, Rockley,
Bathurst, Mount Victoria, &c., to Sydney. Distance,
529 miles.
Tour No. 19, occupying 11 days Page 50
Liverpool, Campbelltown, Camden, Picton, Mittagong,
Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn, Tarago, Bungendore,
Queanbeyan, Michelago, Bredbo, Cooma, Rock Flat,
Nimitybelle, Bombala, Cathcart, Candelo, Bega,
Brogo, Cobargo, Tilba Tilba, Punkalla, Bodalla,
Moruya, Nowra, Bulli, Sydney. Distance, 650 miles.
Tour No. 20, occupying IS days ... ... ... Page 52
Wiseman’s Ferry, St. Albans, Laguna, Wollombi, Cess-
nock, Maitland, Singleton, Muswellbrook, Denman,
Merriwa, Cassilis, Mudgee, Wellington, Molong,
Orange, Bathurst, O’Connell, Oberon, Jenolan Caves,
Hampten, Mount Victoria, Springwood, Penrith,
Sydney. ’ Distance, 667 miles.
Central Tours —
Goulburn ... Page 56 Coofamundra ... Page 59
Maitland ... „ 57 Albury „ 60
Bathurst ... „ 58
Intercolonial Tours —
Sydney to Melbourne (Inland) ... ... ... Page 60
Melbourne to Sydney (Coast line) ... ... „ 66
Sydney to Brisbane (Coast line) ... ... ... „ 67
Brisbane to Sydney (Inland) ... ... ... „ 69
Index Pages 78, 80, 82, 83, 84


INTRODUCTION.
A S is known, I have done a considerable amount
of cycle touring in New South Wales, and as I
have been frequently interviewed by intending tourists
for information about the state of roads and various
distances in the country, I have decided to issue this
book for the information of those who occasionally
desire a country tour. I shall, therefore, endeavour
to give to my readers hints and advice likely to be of
service to them in this health-giving enjoyment. I
strongly desire to create amongst my cycling friends
a taste for an occasional tour in the country, as I
consider that there is no equal to it. The great
pleasure of cycling in the country consists in the
perfect freedom in the direction and distance travelled,
and in being away from the conventional trammels of
society, in the peaceful country amidst delightful
scenery, and breathing the pure atmosphere.
Of course, the roads of Australia are not as good as
cyclists could wish, yet there are not many parts of
New South Wales where a rider of average ability
cannot do his fifty to seventy miles per day with
ease.
After I had taken several tours, the thought occurred
to me, how little I knew of my own country until I
took to spending a few days in this fashion. If you
travel by train, how much do you see ? Really


nothing to speak of. You rush through, and no
sooner is a stretch of scenery exposed to view than
you have passed it. Only on a cycle can you see it to
perfection. With this there is no hurry. You carry
no tickets and no fares. You can choose your own
speed, your own healthy places, your own time.
On some of my tours, I have often been accosted
with the question, “ How far have you come to-day ? ”
as if the cyclist's object was solely to reel off so many
miles. I advise those touring never to be tempted to
over-exertion for the sake of scoring distances. Let
your object be to enjoy yourself and see the country
intelligently. I would also recommend my fellow
cyclists never to undertake a trip of any distance,
extending for several days, without some physical
preparation, for the first essential towards a successful
tour is to start in proper condition. The neglect of
this consideration would completely spoil your holi-
day, making the work a toil instead of a pleasure, and
too often doing harm instead of good to the health of
the rider. If through want of time the tourist has not
had an opportunity of getting himself thoroughly
“ fit ” by the day of starting, I should strongly advise
him to be satisfied with short distances for a day or
two —say not longer than 40 to 50 miles. He will
then find himself improving wonderfully as he
progresses. I know this from experience. On several
trips when I have started in want of condition, I have
made over 80 miles the first day and had to be
satisfied with a much shorter distance the following day.
On other occasions I have been content with the shorter


distances for the first day or so, and could afterwards
do 80 or 90 miles a day without in the least distressing
myself. Probably at the early stage of his tour, the
rider may find himself at the close of the day very
stiff and sore, and at night feverish and unable to
sleep. If the symptoms are only slight, they may be
left to cure themselves, but if acute, a dose of ia
grains of salicylate of soda, taken in water at bedtime,
will prove very beneficial. To relieve the soreness of
the muscles, sound rubbing will be found an excellent
thing.
Another essential thing is to have a suitable com-
panion, one who is prepared to do as many miles per
day as circumstances allow. If you are in a hilly
country, take your time and enjoy the lovely sur-
roundings. One whose sole desire is to cover as much
ground as possible, regardless of the beauties of
Nature, you are better without. I have had several
tours by myself, but when I have had company, I
have each time been fortunate in having a pleasant
and entertaining companion, which has made the trip
in every way enjoyable.
HILL RIDING.
As most parts of New South Wales are of a hilly
nature, I will give one or two hints which I have
no doubt will prove useful to my riding friends. In
descending hills, the greatest elements of danger are
gradient, length of descent, and bends, and often the
termination is a stream of water, with deep sand, or
boulders of stone. Then, passing vehicles, droves of


cattle, and often a waggon drawn right across the
road, with the object of resting the horses, will be
met. Unless the machine is well under control, an
accident is almost certain. Therefore, never go at too
great a pace down the hill; always apply the brake
at the commencement of the descent, and keep the
machine well in hand till reaching the bottom. On
approaching a hill, if you feel at all distressed,
dismount and walk up. You will find that you will
benefit by it before the day’s journey is over.
WHAT TO DRINK ON TOUR.
If you are not very thirsty, do not drink for the sake
of drinking. I know that on a hot, sultry day it is a
great temptation, on reaching a running stream, to
dismount and drink, but avoid it if you feel you can
do without it. However, when you require a drink, I
believe water is the best On an extended lour, I
always carry a small canvas water bag, as in many
parts water is not obtainable for, perhaps, 20 miles or
so, especially in the summer season. I also carry a
small portion of oatmeal to mix with the water;
I find it quenches the thirst, and is also very
strengthening. After the day’s journey is over,
perhaps a drink of weak whisky and water may prove
a benefit if much exhausted.
CLOTHING.
One of the most important requirements is to have
proper clothing. Discard everything of a cotton
substance, let everything be of a woolly nature. The


sweaters, now so much used for general riding and
touring, I have worn for years, and have always found
them most comfortable. They allow a free current of
air through, and no matter how damp they may get,
always seem to be possessed of considerable warmth.
LUGGAGE.
It is always advisable, in fact indispensable, to have
a change of clothing when you reach your destination
at night, to resist a cold and make yourself comfort-
able ; therefore take as many necessary articles as
you can conveniently carry. Included in the list should
be a pair of good flesh gloves, for a rub down after
the bath. The best way to carry the heavy part of
your luggage is to have it wrapped up in a piece of
waterproof material and strapped on the crossbar of
the frame. A wallet on the handle bar is very
convenient, but as there is sufficient strain on the
front forks of the machine, I should not advise you to
carry anything of much weight there. A waterproof
cycle cape should also be carried.
CHOICE OF MACHINE.
Do not be persuaded, on account of cheapness, to
get a common make of machine. It is poor economy,
even if short of funds, to have one that is constantly
in want of repair. Nothing is more annoying to the
tourist than when miles away from a railway station,
or even habitation, to have a break down. So
take advantage of the advice I offer. Before
starting each morning, or, what is belter, the night
before, if possible, carefully examine all nuts, screws.


tyre, brake, &c. ; oil your bearings, and see that all is
correct, and you will probably save much trouble
thereby, as you are not much inclined to attend to
these matters in the middle of your day's journey.
THE BEST TIME TO RIDE.
There is great objection by many to summer riding
on account of the excessive heat, but there is no
doubt about it being the best time of the year to tour,
as the roads are usually unrideable in winter time,
especially in some of the country parts. I usually
make an early start, even at daylight, and ride,
perhaps, 20 miles before breakfast, then an hour's
rest, and another 20 before the sun gets too powerful,
making another start about four o’clock, and covering,
perhaps, 25 or 30 miles more before dark. It is,
perhaps, a little objectionable to do such a long
distance before breakfast, but, as in most places you
can arrange for some milk and eggs beaten up before
getting away, the rider will find that he can easily
accomplish the distance without fatigue. Most
emphatically would I impress on the tourist to make
every effort to reach an hotel before dark, as it
certainly is not safe to travel on an unknown road at
night, and probably prevents you getting your meal
comfortably, which is of great importance, for without
proper food, you will not be in a condition to do the
work that is needed.
TOURISTS’ ROAD MAPS.
At some trouble and expense, I have had prepared
for the “Guide' 5 a road map of the colony, and


several district road maps. The ordinary maps are
quite useless to the cyclists, for what few roads are
given are so hidden in a confused mass of names of
towns, mountains, railway stations, creeks, &c., as to
be quite useless, I have often felt the need of a
map that would give the roads freed from all this
superfluous matter.
TOURING FOR LADIES
Any book dealing with cycling at the present day
would be incomplete without some reference to lady
riders, for ladies are taking to the bicycle in such
numbers, and with such eagerness, that they are
forming an important body, with needs and interests
quite their own. Of course, I cannot pretend to give
much information that will be of service exclusively to
ladies. However, on the authority of a well-known
lady tourist, I can say that wool is the best material to
use for outer as well as for under wear. The skirt is
an important part of the ladies' costume, and this
should be a clear 4 inches from the ground, and
about 3 yards in width; but the important part is the
cut, to have right what the tailors call the “ spring.'
Short elastic bands passing round the ankles, and
sewn to the skirts, are of service. A straw hat,
and blouse with soft collar, complete an effective
toilet. Shoes should always be worn. It will be found
refreshing to wash the hands and face with hot water
at the close of a ride. Have the water as hot as
possible, and put into it about a tablespoonful of
brown Fuller’s earth. This removes the immediate
sting of sunburn. A lady will always welcome a


change of garments at the end of a day's ride. As a
rule, a change can be sent on by coach or by train,
and thus be in readiness. This will be found a better
plan than carrying a lot of luggage on the machine,
for any additional weight of this kind interferes greatly
with the rider’s comfort. In conclusion, ladies are
recommended not to tax themselves with trying to
ride too long a distance per day. For them, some of
the tours in this book would have to be modified, but
as all the towns of importance along each route are
mentioned and the distances given, this is easily done.
FINAL HINTS.
Always carry sufficient money to enable you to
reach home from any place, in case of breakdown.
Drink as little as possible till the day is over. Keep
your mouth closed while riding, and breathe through
the nostrils ; by attending to this mattei you will have
less inclination to drink. -Smoke as little as possible,
and never while riding, as tobacco depresses the
heart's action.
Saddle soreness is a most troublesome complaint.
This, as also pains in the knees, may be often pre-
vented by placing the saddle in a different position ;
shifting it a little forward or backward will effect the
purpose. Another matter to which I would like to
refer is in descending some of the mountain ranges.
Always carry a stout piece of line with you, and by
attaching this to a piece of sapling and connecting it
with the saddle, it acts as a splendid brake. I have
found this often very effectual. Finally, wherever you
go, behave as a gentleman and keep up the prestige
of cycling.


TOURING IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
TOURING GOSSIP.
And now it is my intention to give some valuable
information on various distances and conditions of the
roads of the colony, so that those of my cycling
friends may undertake a journey occupying as many
days as they may have to spare. But before doing so, I
will give a short resume of several long tours under-
taken by some well known cyclists.
The first long distance ridden in this part of the
world was accomplished by Mr. E. Timewell, who,
at that period, eleven years ago, was only 19 years of
age. The journey was from Sydney, through
Brisbane, and on to Rockhampton, in Queensland, a
distance of nearly 1,500 miles. On the trip he was
beset by great difficulties, on several occasions meeting
Aboriginals, who were by no means desirable com-
panions, and at times being compelled to camp out,
through not being able to make a habitation by
nightfall. This tour will long be remembered as one
of the most creditable for perseverance and deter-
mination ever taken in this part of the world. A short
distance of the journey he was accompanied by
Mr. E. C. Hughes, now of the N.S.W. League of
Wheelmen, but the greater part of the tour he was


alone. The first to do the journey to Melbourne was
Mr. A. Edward, of the Sydney B. C. Mr. C. E-
George, of the same club journeyed as far as Yass
with him, but for various reasons abandoned the trip
on reaching that town. Mr. Edward continued the
journey, and reached Melbourne safely, the last day-
rattling off 86 miles. Of course, at the present time
these performances I am now referring to seem
nothing much to boast of, but my readers must bear
in mind that these trips were done on the old high
solid-tyred machines. The honour of being the first to
ride all the way to Melbourne rests with the late
Mr. J. Copland, 1 as Mr. Edward was compelled, on
account of the Bargo River being swollen, to take the
train a short portion of the distance. Mr. Copland
essayed the journey on a tricycle. Not only did he
reach Melbourne in very fair time, but after spending
a few days in the Southern City, returned to Sydney
in the same manner. The trip was considered at
that time not likely to be accomplished, but “ Cop
proved himself equal to the task, and Lord Loftus,
who was then Governor of the Colony, interviewed
and praised him for his pluck.
In 1888 Messrs. Bloxham and Betteridge, of the
Speedwell B. C., and Mr. J. Hitchcock, Suburban
B. C., rode from Sydney to Brisbane, and although
they spoke of the journey as one that tested their
powers of endurance very much, yet the beautiful
scenery met with fully compensated them for any
discomfort. The following year Mr. Allen, of the
Redfern B. C., left Sydney for Melbourne, to establish


a record between the two places. He was very
successful, covering the 578 miles in just under 8
days. The next year Mr. A. G. Chapman and myself
did the same journey, but it being solely a pleasure
trip, 9 days were occupied. About this period the
trip was undertaken by several others, including
Mr. F. Moor, the Brothers Ives, Brabazon, and
Messrs. Budd and Rugg. The two latter, accom-
panying each other, did it in excellent time. All old
cyclists will recollect the trip from Adelaide to
Sydney by Messrs. George Whatmore and Cutbush,
the trying difficulties they laboured under, the want of
proper rest, insufficient food at times, and bad
weather, yet, notwithstanding all this, they made a
marvellous record, as they rode from Melbourne to
Sydney in under 7 days.
On cushion-tyred machines Messrs. Mark Long
and Macgreggor covered the distance between the
two capitals in splendid time. With the advent of
pneumatic tyres, the times have been considerably
reduced. Amongst the riders of the more modern
cycles who have journed across, may be mentioned
Messrs. Armstrong, Yeend, Robinson, Young, Clouting,
Stewart, Burston, Mr. T. Watson and myself.
Mr. and Mrs. E. A. Maddock have accomplished this
journey, as well as the tour to Brisbane and back
again. As a description of these roads is given later
on, no further reference will be made to them here.
It is not my intention to refer to long distance rides
by cyclists in the Old World, but this section would
hardly be complete without making mention of the


nde through England, Ireland, and Scotland, also
across the Continent, and a considerable portion of
the Holy Land, by Messrs. G. W. Burston and
H. Stokes, two Australian tourists, who did this
journey on machines of the tall, ordinary and solid
tyred style, made in Melbourne.
It is possible in what follows that I may mark out a
holiday tour for 3 days, and some of our “ scorchers”
may like to accomplish it in two. Of course, if they
feel inclined they may do so, but my object is to
arrange trips for those who think with myself, that
the true ideal of the enjoyment of cycling is to tour
intelligently and get some idea of the country you
are travelling over, thus benefiting your health,
physique, and mind. A rider who tours in this way
finds that cycling has brought him fields for explora-
tion, which would otherwise not be known to him,
and he exercises a great pleasure in noting everything
of interest that strikes his fancy, and appeals to his
taste. Compare this rider with the “ scorcher. The
latter will start racing as soon as ever he mounts his
machine, duck his head at every hill, and remain
silent, as a rule, till he arrives at his destination.
However, every man to his own bent. My idea is to
get the maximum of pleasure with the minimum of
discomfort.
The reader will no doubt observe that in several
instances the tourist is recommended to take train to
Bathurst, or Goulburn, or, perhaps, Maitland. If the
cyclist's time is limited, this is unavoidable. My
reason for suggesting the train is that the country


beyond these places will be more interesting, and in
almost every case give an improvement in the roads.
However, by referring to the map, all distances are
given, and if the rider decides on riding all the way
from Sydney, there is nothing to prevent him doing
so. But, if limited to time, the tour will not be such
an extended one.
SHORT RIDES.
PLACES WITHIN A SHORT RADIUS OF SYDNEY,
THE VISIT TO WHICH WOULD OCCUPY ONE
DAY ONLY.
This series is for the benefit of those who have only just
Jearned to ride, and are perhaps not acquainted with the various
resorts mentioned.
A —46 Miles.
North Shore, Chatswood, Gordon, Pymble, Pearce’s
Corner, Thornleigh, Pennant Hills, Parramatta,
Dog Trap Road, Bankstown, Sydney.*
From Milson’s Point follow the tram line till
reaching the Reserve, about 2 miles away. Then work
to the left to the Lane Cove Road, and follow this on
for another mile, where it inclines to the left (the road
straight on goes to Willoughby). At about 5 miles
from Milson’s Point is Chatswood, 3 miles further is
Gordon, and another mile on is Pymble. Here you
cross the line, and climb a steep hill. When at the
top, dismount and look back towards Sydney, for the
view is very fine. About 3 miles further Pearce's


Corner will be reached, where you turn to the left,
and a little over 2 miles will bring you to Thornleigh.
Still continue the road, which is all good, to what is
called Thompson's Corner, branch to the left, and
descend the hill, which is not steep; but before
reaching the bottom dismount and look toward the
west, where Windsor and Penrith are visible in the
far distance. Three and a-half miles further, take
the road to the right, which will carry you into
Parramatta, 12 miles from Pearce’s Corner, thus
making 24 miles from Milson’s Point. Have dinner
at Parramatta, and follow the road straight through,
which will bring you to the Dog Trap Road. After
leaving Parramatta nearly 6 miles behind, you will
meet the Liverpool Road. Turn to the left, and 4
miles further you will be in Bankstown, 12 miles from
Sydney.
B. —40 Miles.
North Shore, Spit Road, Manly Heights, Narrabeen,
Rock Lily, Newport.
Follow the tramline, as in No. 1. Continue the
road 200 yards further, then turn to the right, and
follow what is called the Military Road as far as
Snudden’s Hotel. Take the road to the left, which
will carry you to the Spit Punt at Middle Harbour,
about 4 miles from Milson’s Point. On reaching
the other side, a good rise will be negotiated, but it
is easily ridden. When on the top, continue about
another mile and turn to the left, through what
is called Greendale. By keeping on, you would get
to Manly. This would bring you on to Narrabeen,


but through Greendale is a short cut. About two
miles further you will meet the Narrabeen Road.
Turn to the left, and a few miles beyond brings you to
Narrabeen. Nearly three miles on is Rock Lily
Hotel, and Newport, where there is good accommo-
dation, is 2 miles beyond. The road between these
two places is a trifle hilly, but the views are grand.
The distance from Sydney to Newport is 20 miles.
If desired, the steamer may be taken to Manly. The
distance from Manly to Newport is about miles.
C.—33 Miles
Tempe, Rockdale, Kogarah, Tom Ugly’s Point,
Cronulla Beach, or Port Hacking.
At Newtown, when you cross the railway bridge,
follow the left' hand tram line. Continue this road
across the dam at Cook's River, past Rockdale and
Kogarah, and a short distance past Moore field Race-
course, turn to the right (the left-hand road takes
you to Sandringham), and, 'after going a couple of
miles or so, turn to the left, which will lead you to the
punt across George’s River at Tom Ugly’s Point, 12
miles from Sydney. After crossing the water, leaving
the punt one mile behind, turn to the left, and about
2 miles further, take the road which has an inclination
to the left. About miles further brings you to
Cronulla Beach, where dinner may always be had at
the hotel. This is miles from Sydney, making
33 for the day.
By keeping on the road you left miles back, you
will get, after a couple of miles, to Port Hacking.


The hotel is on the distant side of the water, but by
hoisting a flag on a flag pole there for the purpose, a
boat will be sent over to take you across. Good
accommodation is to be had.
D. —45 Miles.
Canterbury, Belmore, George’s River, Liverpool,
Bankstown, Sydney.
This needs no description, as all information is
given in hour No. 6, which extends for several
days. But, for the rider with only* one day to spare,
it is a pleasant ride, and you do not cover any portion
of the road twice. Dinner at Liverpool.
E. 31 Miles.
Balmain, Drummoyne, Gladesville, Ryde, Rydalmere,
Parramatta, Sydney.
A very easy distance, even for the novice. Yet the
views are superior to many met in long distance rides.
The most unpleasant part of the ride for cyclists
coming from the city and the eastern suburbs is
through Ultimo, across Glebe Island Bridge, and
through Balmain. From there, every mile is interesting
and enjoyable. Continuing this road, you pass over
Iron Cove Bridge, Parramatta River Bridge, and then
pass the Gladesville Asylum. The road a couple of
miles further may be a bit confusing, but at Ryde you
turn to the left, down a rather steep hill, to the
railway line. A couple of miles or so, after crossing
the line, take the road to the left, which is called
Victoria Road, leading through Rydalmere. You are


now at the head of the Parramatta River. A couple of
miles from Rydalmere, Parramatta will be reached.
A return to Sydney may be made, as in A, or by
Granville, Homebush, Burwood, &c.
The distance to Parramatta may be extended a few
miles or so by continuing straight on, and not turning
down Victoria Road, through Rydalmere.
F.—34* Miles.
Tom Ugly’s Point, Sutherland, Waterfall, Helensburg.
After the rider has improved somewhat, and he
feels that he is in condition enough to extend the
distance, I would recommend a visit to a place which
is not mentioned in any of the tours, namely, Helens-
burg. At this place is situated the Metropolitan coal
mine, the nearest coal mine to Sydney. By procuring
an order from the office in the city, the visitor will be
allowed an inspection. A very short distance from
Helensburg there is also a pretty waterfall, and the
general surroundings of the place are attractive. To
Tom Ugly’s Point (which might be reached in time
for breakfast) is 12 miles, thence to Sutherland
another 5 miles, and to Waterfall by the upper
(Heathcote) road about 10 miles. After you have
travelled about 6 miles from Waterfall you will
arrive at the junction of two roads. The one to
the left leads to Stanwell Park, Clifton and Bulli.
The other road leads to the Bulli Pass, but it is
very bad. About 100 yards before reaching the
junction of the roads mentioned, you take a sandy
road to the left to get to Helensburg, which is distant


about a mile and a half. Have dinner here, and you
will have time to have a look at the coal mine and water-
fall, and get on to Clifton in time for tea. The rider
may return to Sydney by train that evening, or if he
prefers, stay the night and ride back the day following.
TOURING ROUTES.
Tour No. 1, occupying 2 Days.
Parramatta, Penrith, Mulgoa, Luddenham, Bringelly,
Narellan, Camden, Campbelltown, Liverpool,
Bankstown, Sydney. Distance, 102 miles.
First Day, 6o£ miles —Sydney to Camden.
Of course every cyclist knows how to reach Parra-
matta, 15 miles, through Burwood, Homebush, &C.,
and the road to Penrith, 19 miles further. They
therefore need no description; but for the benefit
of riders who have not been over the ground, we
may say: Take the road to the left after getting
over the brow of the hill, just before getting
properly into Parramatta. This is called the Western
Road. All the way to Penrith is very good road.
Have dinner at Penrith. From here you will get on
to the road to Mulgoa, 8| miles, at Tattersall’s Hotel.
Be very careful to get proper information at Mulgoa,
or you may easily go astray. Some of the road to
Luddenham is like a bush track, but once on it, you
are all right. The road from this place to Bringelly,
and even to Camden, is bad if wet, but in anything


like fine weather it is excellent. I might mention that
another road may be taken at Mulgoa through the
Oaks, but it is longer and more hilly. From Mulgoa
to Camden is about 18 miles.
Second Day, 41 \ miles—Camden to Sydney.
As you have only miles to cover to-day, it can
be spent very pleasantly. About a couple of miles
after leaving Camden, you will pass through Narellan
again, and a short distance further along take the road
to the right (the road straight on would take you to
Liverpool by what is called the Cow Pasture Road
but it is usually bad). Just before reaching Campbell-
town (8i miles), you will ascend Kenny Hill, from
which a magnificent view is obtained. It is well worth
while dismounting. A splendid run down this hill,
which has a very good surface, brings you to Camp-
belltown. From here to Liverpool is about 121- miles.
In wet weather this is a very bad road. Have dinner
at Liverpool. In the afternoon, ride to Bankstown
(81 miles), and to Sydney (another 12).
Tour No. 2, occupying 2 Days.
Parramatta, Baulkham Hills, Windsor, Pitt Town,
Wiseman’s Ferry, Dural, Eastwood, Ryde,
Gladesville, Sydney. Distance, 119 miles.
First Day, 63 miles— Sydney to Wiseman’s Ferry,
In the old days, it was the height of the rider’s
ambition to go to Windsor, 35 miles, but the mere
tyro of to-day accomplishes it very easily. The views


between Parramatta and Windsor are well worth
seeing, and the road very good. Really you do not
go as far as Windsor, but take the road to the right at
McGrath’s Hill, about a mile this side of the town,
but it will probably be worth while to go the extra
mile and return after dinner, as you will receive better
accommodation. The distance from Windsor to
Wiseman’s Ferry is about 28 miles, a very fair road ;
a bit rough and steep near the Ferry.
Second Day, 56 miles — Wiseman’s Ferry to Sydney.
For a few miles you return by the same road, then
take the road to the left through Dural and Eastwood
to Ryde. The country all about here is very charming,
and some of the views very fine indeed. You will
have a few patches of sand to get through, but nothing
very troublesome.
Tour No. 3, occupying 2 Days.
(Take train the evening before to Maitland.)
Cessnock, Wollombi, Laguna, St. Alban’s, Wiseman’s
Ferry, Sydney. Distance, 143 miles.
First Day, 70 miles — Maitland to St. Albans.
This journey is not to be recommended except to
those who are in good condition and are fair average
riders, as although you will come across some of the
best road for a cycle it is possible to imagine, there is
a portion for miles some of the worst I have ever been
over.


After leaving Maitland and passing Bishop’s Bridge,
you will be assisted by good road through Cessnock
and on to \\ ollombi, 34 miles from Maitland. Have
dinner here, and fortify yourself well, as the after-
noon’s journey will be rather trying, as it is on Mount
Manning—which is crossed over—where the bad road
will be met with. Be careful about getting the road
to St. Albans. I should say it is about 15 miles after
leaving Laguna that you take the road down the
mountain, to the right, which will bring you to an
accommodation house at the foot. From there to
St. Albans, where you spend the night, is about 13
miles.
Second Day, 73 miles—Sx. Albans to Sydney.
The next morning, endeavour to make Wiseman’s
Ferry for breakfast, a distance of about 10 miles. The
trip from here has been described in Tour No. 2. If
you happen the day before to have passed the St.
Albans turn off without observing it, by keeping
straight on you will reach the Ferry and escape
St. Albans, but it is a very, very bad road.
Tour No. 4, occupying 2 days.
Parramatta, Blacktown, Windsor, Richmond, Kurra-
jong, Penrith, Prospect, Sydney. Distance, 116
miles.
This will take the tourist to Windsor over a different
road to that traversed in lour No. 2. It is considered
a very good road, but the scenery does not equal that


of the one previously given. However, if the rider
prefers a change from the Baulkham Hills route, it
will prove worth trying.
First Day, 51 miles— Sydney to Kurrajong.
The distance to Parramatta is, as you are already
aware, 15 miles. Then take the Western (or Penrith)
Road for about 3 miles, where the Blacktown Road
turns to the right. Continue this for 4 miles and it
will lead you into Blacktown. Another 9 miles brings
you to the turn off to Windsor, and 3 more
Windsor will be reached, thus making 34 miles for
the morning. After dinner, which will be partaken of
here, a pleasant ride of 4 miles will bring you into
Richmond. Continue the road through the town, and
after leaving the latter 11 miles behind, an accommo-
dation house will be reached, where, if you desire, the
machine may be left, and the rest of the ascent
finished on foot; but as you have not had an excessive
distance to do in the afternoon, and as it is only a
couple of miles or so more to Powell’s —where you
will spend the night —you may prefer to take the
bicycle with you.
Second Day, 65 miles—Kurrajong to Sydney.
It is less than an hour’s delightful run down to
Richmond, and this might be ridden before breakfast.
This, however, is not necessary, as you will only have
about 18 miles more by what is called the Castlereagh
Road to Penrith, where have dinner. Hence through
Prospect and Parramatta again to Sydney, as in d our
No. 1, reversed.


Tour No. 5, occupying 3 Days.
(Take train the evening before to Picton.)
Mittagong, Bowral, Moss Vale, Fitzroy Falls,
Kangaroo Valley, Cambewarra, Nowra, Berry,
Gerringong, Kiama, Dapto, Wollongong, Bulli,
Clifton, Waterfall, National Park (Carrington
Drive), Audley, Loftus, Sutherland, Tom Ugly’s
Point, Sydney. Distance, 180 miles.
This is one of the finest trips it is possible to take,
as you will pass through some of the most beautiful
scenery of the famed Illawarra district.
First Day, 59 miles— Picton to Kangaroo Valley.
Arrange to have breakfast at about 7.30, and get
away about an hour afterwards. There will be 26%
miles to cover before reaching Mittagong, a rise of
1,500 feet from Picton. However, the grade is very
easy, and all the hills rideable. After leaving the
latter place behind, you cross the Bargo River, which
is easily forded. The next miles to Mittagong is
fairly good metalled road. The whole distance
should be covered in 3 hours, and then through
Bowral, 4 miles, and Moss Vale, another 6|, should
bring you in by about half-past twelve, giving time for a
rest before dinner. Leave here about 2 o’clock, and
at 12 miles out Fitzroy Falls will be reached, where
a great surprise is in store for the rider. Without
the least indication, the whole view opens out
before you, and the sight is really amazing. The
scene might be termed wildly beautiful, with the
deep chasm, the mountain chains outlined against


the blue sky, and the luxuriant foliage. No wonder
it is called one of the beauty spots of Australia
After riding along a fairly good road for about
2 miles, you see the Kangaroo Valley lying thou-
sands of feet beneath you, an immense expanse
of beautiful country. The descent of this moun-
tain, called “ The Barrangarry,” will necessitate
some care, as it is very steep. A short distance from
the bottom. Kangaroo Valley, distant about 10 miles
from Fitzroy Falls, wall be reached, which will be
your stopping place for the night.
Second Day, 62 miles— Kangaroo Valley to
Wollongong.
Have some refreshment or a light breakfast before
starting. Shortly after leaving the valley, the Cambe-
warra Mountain will be ascended. Some exertion
will be needed to reach the top, but when there, you
will be amply repaid. The view, if possible, eclipses
the one of yesterday, as the valley you have just left,
and the one to which you are about to descend, lie on
each side, forming a magnificent panorama The
same amount of care will be necessary, as in the
descent of the Barrangarry, but at the bottom a good
road will carry you past the village of Cambewarra,
and about 4 miles further, or n in all, Nowra will be
entered. Here some refreshment, or even a second
breakfast, will be acceptable. To reach Berry (10
miles), you will have to return and recross the bridge
you crossed over just before getting into Nowra. It is
a splendid structure, costing to build. Here
leave the Cambewarra Road to the left, and in about


an hour's time Berry will be reached. A hilly ride of
another 10 miles, but through beautiful country, will
bring you to Gerringong, and another 6 miles, even
more hilly, to Kiama, where have dinner. If you
have time, visit the Blow Hole or have a dip in the
Basin. In the afternoon the start is made, and after
getting over Bombo Hill and past Shellharbour, where
you turn to the left, and shortly after cross the
Minnamurra River. Proceed down Stoney Range,
and along a good road to Dapto, miles, and 8£
further over good metalled road to Wollongong.
Third Day, 59 miles— Wollongong to Sydney.
Leave about 9 o’clock. Bulli, miles (good
road), and Clifton, more, will be reached in good
time. Have a little refreshment here, but do not
delay. The road now will be very hilly and trying,
but the views are very fine, as you are in sight of the
ocean for a long time. After getting on top of Bald
Hill (which cannot be ridden), you will be assisted by
a fairly good road to Waterfall, 14 miles, where
dinner may be had at the refreshment room. Leaving
here, take the road to the right, which leads through
the National Park (Carrington Drive). This will
bring you to Audley, about 10 miles. The ride
through here is charming, as the lovely foliage, the
singing of birds, and the occasional glimpses of the
Port Hacking River, delight the tourist. From
Audley, where the river is crossed by a dam, is about
3 miles to Sutherland, and to Tom Ugly’s Point, 5
more, and on to Sydney, another 12, will complete
the journey.


Tour No. 6, occupying 3 Days.
Canterbury, Belmore, George’s River, Liverpool,
Campbelltown, Camden, Razorback Mountain,
Picton, Menangle, Campbelltown, Appin, Bulli
Pass, Bulli, Clifton, Stanwell Park, Waterfall,
Tom Ugly’s Point, Sydney. Distance, 1531
miles.
First Day, miles — Sydney to Picton.
The Canterbury Road is not difficult to find. After
passing the tram stopping place at Dulwich Hill about
miles, take the road to the left, which passes
through Canterbury. The St. George Hotel, at
Belmore, will be passed about 10 miles from Sydney.
Follow the road straight on for about 6| miles, pass
through a gate (in fact, several will have to be passed
through before the main road is reached), and shortly
after George’s River will be met. Along here a good
deal of it is bush track, but fair travelling. About 4
miles further and you are on the Liverpool Road,
nearly 4 miles from the town. As previously des-
cribed in Tour No. 1, Campbelltown is iz| miles
from here, but when you leave Liverpool 3 miles
behind, the Cross Roads will be met. Take the one
to the left (the other is the Cow Pasture Road,
previously described)* Have dinner at Campbelltown.
As already mentioned in Tour No. 1, Camden is 8|
miles from here. A little over 3 miles or so from
Camden, you come to the foot of Razorback Moun-
tain. The hardest work of the day will now commence,
but it will probably be getting cooler by this time, and


the ascent may not be very distressing. However, on
reaching the summit a grand scene awaits you, as the
Camden Plains, extending for many miles, are clearly
visible, and if the season happens to be favorable, the
sight will not be readily forgotten. After a short rest,
the descent is undertaken, and a little caution will be
necessary, as a creek is crossed at the foot. A fairly
good road of a few miles, with a splendid run down
brings you into the town of Picton, 12 miles from
Camden.
Sfxond Day, 441 miles —Picton to Bulli.
After breakfast and a rest, ask your landlord for the
Menangle Road, and once on it you cannot very well
get astray. After dry weather it is a fairly good road.
When you have covered 19 miles you will again be in
Campbelltown. Take the road to Appin, which will
be on your right, and 10 miles of excellent surface —a
little hilly perhaps —will bring you to the latter place,
where have dinner. In the afternoon, do not go
straight on, but take the road sharp to the left.
This is a favourite place for cyclists to go astray;
the road straight on is so good that riders fancy
it must be the main track. You will now have
occasional patches of troublesome road to the top
of the Bulli Pass, a couple of miles before
reaching which,’the Loddon Falls, which are just off
the road, are passed. The machines may be left by
the roadside and a walk to the Falls indulged in, they
being only 200 yards away. The Bulli Pass is about
12 miles from Appin. The view from here has so


often been described by many writers that I need not
dwell on it; suffice it to say that it matters not
what difficulty the tourist has had to reach the spot, he
will be amply repaid for all his discomfort. As the road
down the mountain is exceedingly steep, keep your
machine well in hand all the time, as if once it gets
away with you, an accident is certain. To the township
of Bulli from the top of the Pass is about 3I miles.
Third Day, 51! miles—Bulli to Sydney.
The trip from Bulli to Sydney is reported in Tour
No. 5, but the rider may vary the course at Waterfall,
by going straight on instead of branching to the right.
This will take him through Heathcote and on to
Sutherland. The road is bad in a few places, but
there is a fair distance of it down grade. This route
makes it about z\ or 3 miles shorter. Note in after-
mentioned trips the distance is given as by the
National Park route.
Tour No. 7, occupying 3 Days.
(Train to Newcastle.)
Hexham, Maitland, Paterson, Dungog, Stroud,
Gloucester, Raymond Terrace, Newcastle. Dis-
tance, 195 miles.
This is a trip that should be in every way pleasant,
for it is over good roads and through pretty country.
It lacks the grandeur of the mountainous parts, but
the tourist will be in no wise disappointed, as in many
places it rivals Warwickshire, in England, for its
lovely scenery. It will be necessary to take return


ticket for train or steamer to Newcastle. Of course,
the rider is always ambitious to do all his tour by
the cycle, but, when confined to time and desirous to
see new country, this cannot be done. Several trips
I have arranged in this book in the same way, for
those confined to time.
First Day, 54 miles—Hexham, Maitland, Paterson,
Dungog.
The road to Hexham, 10 miles, has nothing very
much to recommend it. However, it is not a bad road.
Probably the next 10 to Maitland has no particular
beauty, but after crossing the Belmore Bridge, where
you may branch off to the right and go through
Bolwarra Farms, or go straight through by the main
road. You will be highly pleased with Paterson,
it being through 12 miles of lovely country, by a good
road. Twenty-two miles further, through much the
same country, to Dungog, will finish up a day advan-
tageously spent.
Second Day, 60 miles—Stroud, Gloucester.
It is 25 miles to Stroud, a beautiful little place,
where a couple of hours may be pleasantly spent.
Thence to Gloucester is 35 miles, nearly all splendid
road.
Third Day, 81 miles—Stroud, Limeburners, Raymond
Terrace, Hexham, Newcastle.
We have 35 miles of the same road traversed
yesterday back to Stroud, which is unavoidable.
From here to Limeburners is 14 miles, and this


place should be reached in time for dinner, as the
road is all good. To Raymond Terrace is 16 miles,
still excellent road. Another 6 will bring you back to
the Hunter River, where the punt is taken, landing
you at Hexham, on the other side. The remaining
10 miles to Newcastle you are acquainted with.
Tour No. 8. occupying 4 Days.
(Train evening before to Bathurst.)
Kelso, O’Connell, Oberon, Jenolan Caves, Hampten,
Hartley, Mount Victoria, Blackheath, Katoomba,
Wentworth Falls, Lawson, Springwood, Emu
Plains, Penrith, Sydney. Distance, 161 miles.
This tour, like some of the others, may be extended
into a few extra days, by riding all the way from
Sydney, but, as the rider will be traversing a part of
the road twice and some of it is very bad, it is not to
be recommended. Therefore, providing that you
have taken the train to Bathurst the evening before,
get an early breakfast, or a snack before starting, and
breakfast at O’Connell.
First Day, 48 miles — Bathurst to The Caves.
After leaving Bathurst, and crossing the Macquarie
River, a couple of miles from Bathurst, Kelso will be
made, then take the road to the right for O’Connell,
which is about 13 miles from Bathurst. As you near
O’Connell, a steep hill will have to be ascended and
descended; when you have reached the foot turn sharp to
the right, and a mile further you are in the village. The
road all the way is excellent and the country charming,


in fact, during my tour through England I saw nothing
finer. As two or three roads branch off from here,
ask your landlord for the Oberon Road, and then you
are all right. One or two roads branch off from it,
but keep straight ahead. The distance is 17 miles, and
the road good, although you will have a couple of
very stiff rises. Have dinner here. The distance now
to the Caves is 18 miles, and very fair road indeed.
About 3 miles from the Caves, you commence the
descent. It is very steep, and continues all the way.
The greatest caution is necessary. It will be too late
to have a view of the Caves that afternoon, as by the
time you have reached there, and had a bath, &c., it
will probably be between four and five o’clock, and
after the day’s exertion, a rest will be acceptable.
Second Day —Viewing the Caves.
If you confine yourself to the time I have arranged,
endeavour to get shown either the left or right
Imperial Cave in the morning, and the Lucas Cave in
the afternoon, but if you can spare an extra day, see
the Imperial you have not inspected, and the Nettle
Cave.
Third Day, 65 miles — The Caves to Springwood.
There will be no difficulty about getting a light
breakfast before starting, say at six o’clock. The road
for over 5 miles is a continuous rise, but every bit is
rideable, the grade being easy. On getting near
Hampten, 18 miles from the Caves, a magnificent
view of Kanirnbla Valley is obtained. It is well
worth dismounting and stopping a while, as the scene


is very grand. Before leaving Hampten, some refresh-
ment should be partaken of, as the road to Mount
Victoria, where you should have dinner, is 18 miles
and a little hilly, especially from Hartley, where a
walk of about miles will have to be done. From
here, through Blackheath, &c., to Springwood, 29
miles, is very bad in parts, but, as there is a consider-
able portion of it down grade, it is not so trying as
journeying the other way. Springwood should be
made in good time for tea.
Fourth Day, 48 miles— Springwood to Sydney.
This need not be a hurried one, as the rider may reach
Parramatta for dinner easily, but if you make an early
start from Springwood, and get to Penrith for
breakfast, 14 miles nearly all down hill, the forenoon
could be spent very enjoyably on the Nepean River.
As the road between Penrith and Sydney is mentioned
in Tour No. 1, it is not necessary to repeat it here.
Tour No. 9, occupying 4 Days.
Bankstown, Liverpool, Campbelltown, Camden, Picton,
Mittagong, Bowral, Moss Vale, Robertson, Jam-
beroo Mountain, Jamberoo, Mount Terry, Albion
Park, Dapto, Wollongong, Bulli, Clifton,
Stanwell Park, Waterfall, Sydney. Distance, 195
miles.
First Day, 53! miles— Sydney to Picton.
The rider will observe that the distances are not
very extensive, but they are quite far enough for the
tourist who has not done a great deal of riding, or


who is not in the best of condition. The trip to
Picton has been described in Tour No. 6. For the
new rider, perhaps it would be advisable to go through
Bankstown instead of Canterbury, which will make it
4 miles shorter. This place is easy to find, and the
road continues straight through to Liverpool and to
Picton, as in Tour No. 6.
Second Day, 491 miles —Picton to Robertson.
I need not repeat the information about the road to
Moss Vale (see Tour No. 5). From Moss Vale to
Robertson is a good metalled road, a trifle hilly, but
all rideable. The distance is just over miles.
Third Day, 44 miles —Robertson to Bulli.
To the top of Jamberoo Mountain is very fair road,
with a few bad patches. Shortly after leaving the top
of the mount, a glorious view of the farms of
Illawarra is discernable, somewhat to be compared
with the sight of Cambewarra. The mountain is steep
in many places, care being needed to keep the
machine under control. On reaching the foot,
Jamberoo will be seen. It is not necessary to go
through the town. Branch off to the left (by going
through Jamberoo and straight on, Kiama, 7 miles
distant, would be reached). If the rider has time to
spare, Jamberoo is worth a visit; it is only a little
distance from the road. Across Mount Terry to Albion
Park is about 23 miles from Robertson. To the lover
of the -beautiful, the ride across Mount Terry is
delightful. If the tourist feels inclined, he can push
on to Dapto, and have early dinner and ride out to


Lake Blawarra, the home of Beach, the ex-champion
sculler, as there is plenty of time to get to Bulli,
where the night is to be spent. From Albion Park to
Dapto is 5 miles, and to Bulli, through Wollongong,
is 16 more.
Fourth Day, 48 miles — Bulli to Sydney.
For information about the road from Bulli to
Sydney, see Tour No 5 (page 23).
Tour No. 10, occupying 5 Days.
(Steamer to Moruya.)
Milton, Berry, Bull}, Sydney. Distance, 207 miles.
This is a trip that should be in every way enjoyable,
some of the country passed through being exceedingly
pretty, and the roads very good.
The first day will be taken up with a trip by steamer
to Moruya.
Second Day, 57 miles- — Moruya to Milton.
Leaving next morning, a ride of 19 miles will bring
you to Bateman's Bay, passing en route through a
small place called Mogo. At Bateman's Bay you
cross the River Clyde by punt or boat, thence to
Termed, about 20 miles, over road a trifle hilly, but
of splendid grade and good surface. Have dinner
here, and you need not hurry away, as I should advise
you not to go past Milton, 18 miles, that night, as
Tomerong is 26 miles further, and the road a trying
one.


Third Day, 50 miles — Milton to Berry.
As I remarked, Tomerong is 26 miles from here,
where you might have luncheon, and thence on to
Nowra, 14 miles, over a road measured and marked
every half mile. At Berry, 10 miles further, you will
make your stopping place for the night.
Fourth Day, miles — Berry to Bulli.
Fifth Day, 511 miles — Bulli to Sydney.
For road from Nowra to Sydney see Tour No. 5
(page 23).
Tour No. 11, occupying 5 days.
(Steamer to Eden.)
Eden, Pambula, Wolumla, Bega, Brogo, Dry River,
Cobargo, Tilba Tilba, Punkalla, Bodalla, Moruya,
Mogo, Bateman’s Bay, Termeil, Milton,
Tomerong, Nowra, Berry (train to Sydney).
Distance, 222 miles.
This is an excellent trip. The scenery is hardly to
be surpassed in the colony. The roads are well
maintained, and in anything like favourable weather
are always in splendid order. The first day and
a-half will be occupied with the trip in the steamer to
Eden. It is a pleasant one, as she calls at a number
of the ports on the way. The steamer generally arrives
at Eden early in the morning, and the rest of the
forenoon may be pleasantly spent rambling about the
bay. After dinner a start can be made for Bega,
about 38 miles, which should be easily accomplished,
as the road is a very good one. The first place


passed through is Pambula, 14 miles, prior to which a
bridge is passed over, thence to Wolumla, 12 miles,
and to Bega, another 12. Stay here the night.
Third Day, 63 miles — Bega to Bodalla.
Get away as early as possible after breakfast, or
have breakfast at Brogo, about 10 miles along the
road, then to Cobargo, passing Qualma on the way.
Cobargo is 25 miles from Bega. I would recommend
the rider to have luncheon here. It will be rather
early for dinner, and the next place, Tilba Tilba, 17
miles, is not such a nice place. To Punkalla is'
another 9 miles. Your stopping place for the night
will be Bodalla, 12 miles further.
Fourth Day, 71 miles — Bodalla to Milton.
Arrange for a snack before getting away, and make
Moruya, 14 miles, for Breakfast. Ido not think you
will find it too far, as the road is very good. Before
reaching Milton you will pass through Mogo, Bate-
man's Bay and Termeil.
Fifth Day, 50 miles— Milton to Berry.
(Train to Sydney.)
From Moruya to Nowra, see Tour No. 10 (page 34).
From Nowra to Sydney, see Tour No. 5 (page 23.)
This number of days has been arranged, anticipating
that the tourist will take train from Nowra or Berry;
but if.he has the time, and has not previously been
over the course, the ride will prove very enjoyable.


Tour No. 12, occupying 5½ Days.
(Train to Goulburn.)
Tarago, Braidwood, Araluen, Larry’s Mountain,
Moruya, Bateman’s Bay, Termeil, Milton, Tome-
rong, Nowra, Berry, Gerringong, Kiama, Dapto,
Wollongong, Bulli, Bulli Pass, Appin, Campbell-
town, Sydney. Distance, 2851 miles.
To the tourist who wishes for variety of scenery,
this trip will give him every satisfaction. He
will also have an opportunity of seeing one of the first
of the alluvial gold diggings, Araluen.
First Day, miles — Goulburn to Braidwood.
For description of the road through Tarago and on
to Braidwood, see Pour No. 14 (page 41).
Second Day, 52 miles — Braidwood to Moruya.
From Braidwood to Araluen, 17 miles, is nearly all
down grade, the last few miles being very steep. It is
advisable that you should have dinner earlier than
usual, not later than (say) 12 o’clock, as you have 35
miles to cover before reaching Moruya, about 28 of
which is nearly all up grade. However, for about 24
miles the ascent is very gradual, but the 4 miles or so
up Larry’s Mountain is very trying The last 7 miles
is a gradual fall.
I hird Day, 57 miles — Moruya to Milton.
Fourth Day, 66 miles—Milton to Kiama.
Fifth Day, 38 miles—Kiama to Campbelltown.
Next day, Campbelltown to Sydney, 34 miles.
Sydney will be easily reached by midday.


For Moruya to Nowra see Tour No. 10 (page 34).
For Nowra to Bulli see Tour No. 5 (page 23).
For Bulli to Sydney see Tour No. 5 (page 23).
Tour No. 13, occupying about 6 Days.
(Train to Goulburn, and return from Moruya to
Sydney by steamer.)
Tarago, Bungendore, Queanbeyan, Michelago, Bredbo,
Cooma, Rock Flat, Nimitybelle, Colombo, Bega,
Brogo, Qualma, Cobargo, Tilba Tilba, Punkalla,
Bodalla, Moruya. Distance, 286 miles.
To confine this tour to six days it will be necessary
to take train to Goulburn, and after reaching Moruya,
return by steamer. To ride all the way would take
4or 5 days extra. Take evening train to Goulburn.
First Day, 60 miles — Tarago, Bungendore,
Queanbeyan.
The road to Tarago, about miles, is given in
Tour No. 14, where mention is made about it being a
splendid road. It continues good to Bungendore, 19
miles further, where dinner should be partaken of.
It is 18J miles more of good travelling to Queanbeyan.
Just prior to reaching the latter place, a long and
rather steep hdl is descended. Stay at Queanbeyan
the night. The distance may seem short for the
afternoon, but there is no accommodation between
here and Michelago, 30 miles further.


Second Day, 71 miles— Michelago, Bredbo, Cooma.
Arrange for early breakfast, and endeavour to get
away not later than eight o'clock. Shortly after
leaving, a long hill called Stringy Bark will have to be
ascended. This was the scene of a terrible coach
accident some years ago, when several persons were
killed. After reaching the top, no very troublesome
hills are met till nearing Cooma. To Michelago is 30
miles, where have dinner; but arrange for it early, if
possible, as 41 miles more will have to be covered
before the day is over. The road to Bredbo, 19 miles,
is an easy ride. The river Bredbo is now spanned by
a good bridge. The road for a few miles may be a
trilie heavy, but once over it, it will continue good to
Cooma, 22 miles further.
Third Day, 53 miles — Rock Flat (Soda Springs),
Nimitybelle, Colombo.
This should be a very enjoyable and interesting
day’s tour. The road to Rock Flat was a few years
back a very bad one, mostly black soil, but it is a fairly
good metalled road now. After covering 10 miles
you will arrive at the Soda Springs, where the tourist
may partake of soda water ad lib., but it would be
advisable not to indulge too freely, as it possesses very
relaxing properties. Thirteen miles more will bring
you to Nimitybelle. With the exception of Kiandra,
this is about the coldest town in New South Wales.
After having dinner, get away as early as possible, as
a fair amount of climbing will be necessary before
reaching the top of Brown Mountain, which is perhaps
10 to 12 miles away. The rider will now have a
continuous descent for 7 miles. Some of the views


from the mountain side are truly magnificent. I
presume I need not remind you to exercise care here.
On reaching the bottom a river will be crossed, and
after leaving Nimitybelle 30 miles in the rear, you will
arrive at Colombo, where spend the night.
Fourth Day, 50 miles—Bega, Brogo, Qtjalma,
Cobargo.
The ride to Bega, 25 miles, although hilly, is most
picturesque, the district being renowned for its beauty.
The Kamerooka estate is between these two places. A
couple of small villages, Benbooka and Nambugga,
are passed on the way. Have dinner at Bega, and
by evening make Cobargo, the road to which you have
already been made acquainted with in Tour No. 11.
Fifth Day, 52 miles —Tilba Tilba, Punkalca,
Bodalla, Moruya.
The approaches to all these towns have been
described in Tour No. n.
Sixth day, steamer to Sydney. If the rider desired,
he might save a day by taking steamer from Bermagui,
which is not many miles from Cobargo, instead of
from Moruya.
Tour No. 14, occupying 7 Days.
Liverpool, Campbelltown, Camden, Picton, Mittagong,
Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn, Tarago, Braidwood,
Nelligen, Termeil, Milton, Tomerong, Nowra, &c.,
to Sydney. Distance, 401 miles.
This tour is to be highly recommended for good
roads and splendid scenery. The accommodation is
fairly good, and the attention given to the riders very
satisfactory.


First Day, miles— Sydney to Picton.
This has been reported on in Tour No. 6 (page 26),
Second Day, 63 miles— Picton to Marulan,
All information has been given as far as Mittagong.
Thence to Berrima (where dinner should be partaken
of) is a good road, but one or two hills are crossed
over. About 9 miles separates these two places.
About 28 miles of fairly good road is ridden before
Marulan is reached. Very little is to be seen on this
road, only a few habitations being passed on the way.
Stay here for the night.
Third Day, 7 1£ miles— Marulan to Braidwood,
1 his need not be an alarming distance to even a
moderate rider, as it is a really good road all the way.
I here is no necessity to make a hurried departure
from Marulan, as the road to Goulburn, 19 miles
distant, is by no means trying, excepting, perhaps,
over Governor’s Hill, a couple of miles from
Goulburn. from the top of this a great view of the
City of the Plains is obtainable. The road to Tarago,
about 22\ miles, branches off to the left, but there will
not be much difficulty in finding it, nor should there
be in reaching the town, as the road is usually
excellent. Have dinner here, and although the
distance to Braidwood is 30 miles, it will prove a very
easy afternoon s ride, as the road still continues very
good.
h ourth Day, 43 miles — Braidwood to Termeil.
I his should be one of the pleasantest days of the
tour, the scenery being very grand, and a tour
over this part of the country will ever be remembered.


The road for several miles after leaving Braidwood is
fairly level, but an occasional rise will bring the cyclist
to the top of the mountain range, the view from which,
if the weather is clear, baffles description. The very
greatest care will be required to descend the mountain
pass, the fall being continuous for 5 miles. After a
run through the valley, over several creeks and water
courses and a climb or two, another eminence is
reached, from which Nelligen is seen in the distance.
Another descent of about 3 miles, and Nelligen,
25 miles from Braidwood, prettily situated on the
banks of the Clyde River, will be made. Dinner
will be had here. From Nelligen to Termed, where
you should stay the night, is about 20 miles, very fair
road, with good scenery. After going a short distance,
the road from Bateman’s Bay will be met.
Fifth Day, 58 miles— Termeil to Nowra.
Sixth Day, 51 miles — Nowra to Wollongong.
Seventh Day, 59 miles — Wollongong to Sydney.
For the distances, &c., from Termeil to Nowra, see
Tour No 10 (page 34,) and Nowra to Sydney, lour
No. 5 (page 23).
Tour No. 15, occupying 7 Days.
(Train to Goulburn.)
Gunning, Yass, Bowning, Binalong, Murrumburrah,
Cootamundra (see Central Tours), Junee, Wagga
Wagga, Tarcutta, Adelong Crossing, Gundagai,
Coolac, jugiong, Bookham, Bowning, Yass,
Queanbeyan, Bungendore, Tarago, Goulburn
Sydney. Distance, 426 J miles.


This will be a splendid circular route. A lot of the
road has lately been opened up by the cyclists of
Cootamundra, one of the most prominent being Mr.
W. H. Pinkstone, who delights in the visit of a cyclist
from the metropolis.
First Day, miles — Goulburn to Yass.
The particulars 'of this road are given in the tour to
Melbourne (page 60).
Second Day, 66 miles — Yass to Cootamundra.
From Yass to Bowning, 8| miles, is also described
in the Melbourne tour, but you will now avoid the
Bookham road and make for Binalong, which is about
14 miles from Bowning; thence to Murrumburrah
another 20, and finally to Cootamundra, 23 more.
There is a great portion of this road unmade, but it is
a very good travelling road if the weather is not wet.
Third Day, 58 miles — Cootamundra to Wagga.
To Junee is 36 miles, and on to Wagga 22 more,
making 58 for the day. The road is considered very
good, but it is only macadamised in places.
Fourth Day, 62 miles— Wagga to Gundagai.
From Wagga to Lower Tarcutta, which is about 30
miles, is a very fair road. To Mundarlo is 9 miles, to
Adelong Crossing 13 more, and to Gundagai another
10 miles, making 62 for the day. The road between
Tarcutta and Gundagai is described in the Melbourne
tour.
Fifth Day, 66 miles — Gundagai to Yass.
For this see Melbourne tour.


Sixth Day, 60 miles —Yass to Queanbeyan.
This is by no means a bad road, rather hilly, but
excellent travelling. The country passed over, if the
season is favorable, is very good.
Seventh Day, 60 miles—Queanbeyan to Goulburn.
See Tour No. 13 (page 38).
(Train to Sydney).
Tour No. 16, occupying 8 days.
(Train to Goulburn.)
Tarago, Bungendore, Queanbeyan, Michelago, Bredbo,
Cooma, Adaminaby, Kiandra, Tumut, Adelong
Crossing, Gundagai, Coolac, Jugiong, Bookham,
Bowning, Yass, Gunning, Breadalbane, Goulburn
(train from Goulburn to Sydney). Distance,
378 miles.
This tour will take the rider through some of the
hilliest country that New South Wales possesses. The
majestic grandeur of a number of the views is striking.
The tourist need have no fear of accident, if he profits
by the advice given in the introduction, relative to
keeping the machine well in hand descending hills.
Considering the mountainous country, the roads are
very good and the grades easy. Take train the
evening before to Goulburn.
First Day, 60 miles—Tarago, 22\ ; Bungendore,
19; Queanbeyan, 18^.
Second Day, 71 miles —Michelago, 30 ; Bredbo, 19;
Cooma, 22.
For information relative to these roads, see Tour No. 13
(page 38).


Third Day, 51 miles—Adaminaby, 30; Kiandra, 21.
A very hard day, being a lot up hill; but, con-
sidering the altitude of Kiandra, not so difficult as
might be imagined, the grade being easy. Of course,
it is advisable to leave Cooma early, and make
Adaminaby, 30 miles, for dinner, and get away as
soon as possible after dinner for Kiandra, 21 miles,
which should be covered in good time for tea. .
P'ourth Day,- 10 miles, and View the Caves.
These are the famous Yarrangobilly Caves, con-
sidered by many who have visited them to surpass
those at Jenolan. It is possible that the cyclist may
be so pleased with them, he may feel inclined to take
an extra day; if so, the time will be well spent. You
may still have the extra day here and confine the trip
to 8 days, by taking the train from Gunning to
Sydney, instead of from Goulburn, as arranged.
Fifth Day, 40 miles —Tumut.
This distance looks short for a day, but the country
passed through is very hilly and very beautiful, and it
is a pity to hurry. However, if you feel inclined,
Adelong may be included in the programme, and the
mileage of the tour not much increased. Therefore,
if you make Adelong your stopping place for the night,
the distance next day will be reduced by 4 miles or so.
Sixth Day, 71 miles (or if Adelong, 67 miles) —
Adelong Crossing, 16 ; Gundagai, 10; Coolac,
10; Jugiong. 15; Bookham. 20.
The road to the Crossing is very good, and for
description of the other part of journey, see the
Melbourne Tour (page 60).


Seventh Day, 75 miles —Bowning, Yass,
Gunning, Breadalbane, 15; Goulburn, 15.
For these towns, see the Melbourne Tour.
Eighth day, train to Sydney; or the rider, if he
wishes, can ride along and pick up the train at Marulan,
Mittagong, or Picton. These distances are given in
Tour No. 14 (page 40).
Tour No, 17, occupying 9 Days.
(Take steamer to Grafton).
Grafton, Woolgoolga. Goff’s Harbour, Raleigh, Deep
Creek, Nambucca, Clybucca, Kempsey, Port
Macquarie, Taree, Tinonee, Gloucester, Stroud,
Raymond Terrace, Hexham, Newcastle. Dis-
tance, 502 miles.
A most interesting and pleasant ride, crossing, as
you do, all the northern rivers as far as Grafton,
through scenery of a most varied character. The
Bellinger River, where some of the finest timber in
New South Wales is grown, is a splendid stream. A
person who has not previously seen the rivers of the
north will be amazed at their extent. Where the
Hastings and Wilson Rivers meet is an expansive
stream, and this is characteristic of some parts of the
Clarence. The roads (if we except one or two places),
are very good. In fact, a tourist with the necessary
time at his disposal, could hardly cho.ose a better trip.
The first two days (or at least a day and a half) will be
taken up with the trip in the steamer to Grafton. As
the steamer leaves Sydney on Saturday night, and


usually arrives at Grafton about midday on Monday,
you have the afternoon to see the place and prepare
for the journey next da) r .
Third Day, 6o miles—Grafton to Coff’s
Harbour.
The river is crossed, and the 22 miles to Tuckey’s
Hotel, if the weather is favourable, will be easily
accomplished in a couple of hours. It would be
advisable perhaps to have some refreshment here, as
there is little or no accommodation at Corinda, 10
miles beyond; but at Woolgoolga, another 10 miles
further, it is very good. If the tourist has made a
fairly early start from Grafton, Woolgoolga should he
reached for dinner. The next place, Coff’s Harbour,
is 18 miles, where you will probably spend the night.
Fourth Day, 74 miles— Coff’s Harbour to
Kempsey.
To Raleigh, 14 miles, and on to Deep Creek, about
15 more, where you will have dinner, is a fairly good
road. There are no very troublesome hills in the last
29 miles. The next place, Nambucca (prior to which
you cross the river of the same name) is about 17
miles, the road being very good. Clybucca will be
the next place passed, another 17 miles; then to
k rederickton, winding up at Kempsey, 74 miles for
the day. Nearly all of it is good road.
Fifth 79 miles — Kempsey to Coopernook.
From Kempsey to Telegraph Point is 20 miles
(good road) ; then to Blackman’s Point and to Port
Macquarie 13 miles, the good road continuing. Have


dinner here, and be on the move as early as con-
venient. To the Stables (or what is now called Kew)
is 22 miles, very fair road, and with another 24 miles
the rider will reach Coopernook, a long stretch for the
day probably, but the road is a good one.
Sixth Day, 65 miles— Coopernook to Gloucester.
There is 15 miles of splendid road to Taree, passing
Cundletown, which is 3 miles from Taree, en route.
You then cross the Manning River to Tinonee,
which is 4 miles from the latter place. The next
place, Kramback, is nearly 20 miles, where you
will have dinner. In the afternoon, over 26 miles of
good but very hilly road, you will reach Gloucester.
Seventh Day, 81 miles— Gloucester to Maitland,
For Gloucester to Hexham see Tour No. 7 (pages
29 and 30.) From the latter place to West Maitland
is 10 miles.
Eighth Day, 70 miles — Maitland to St. Albans.
Ninth Day, 73 miles— St, Albans to Sydney.
For Maitland to Sydney, see Tour No. 3 (page 20).
Tour No. 18, occupying 10 Days.
(Train to Bathurst.)
Peel, Wattle Flat, Sofala, Hill End, Mudgee, Welling-
ton, Molong, Orange, Bathurst, Newbridge,
Trunkey, Abercrombie Caves, Rockley, Bathurst,
Mount Victoria, &c., to Sydney. Distance, 529
miles.
A journey full of interest nearly all the distance.
Although the roads are very hilly in places, they are
very good, and as for scenery, I do not know where it


is finer. The names of Peel, Wattle Flat, Sofala, and
Hill End (Tambaroora) are reminiscent of most
flourishing times.
First Day, 56 miles —Bathurst to Hill End.
From Bathurst to Peel is 10 miles, and on to Wattle
Flat another 15; and thence to Sofala another 5,
where dinner will be had. In the afternoon a move
will be made to Hill End, 26 miles further. When
you arrive at Hill End you will be quite content with
the day’s work, as it is an exceedingly hilly road, but
the scenery en route is very grand indeed.
Second Day, 50 miles —Hill End to Mudgee.
The road to-day will be somewhat of a repetition of
yesterday. Acccommodation will be procurable about
20 miles from Hill End, and to Mudgee is another 30
miles, making 50 miles for the day.
Third Day, 62 miles— -Mudgee to Wellington.
Fourth Day, 42 miles — Wellington to Molong.
Fifth Day, 60 miles—Molong to Bathurst.
For these roads see Tour No. 20 (pages 54 and 55),
Sixth Day, 56 miles— Bathurst to Abercrombie
Caves.
ToTerth is 5 miles and to Newbridge is 15 more,
and from the latter place to Trunkey is another 20
miles, and on to the Caves a further 16 miles. The
road, especially if the weather is favorable, is very
good, and the scenery splendid. Another route con-
sidered by many to be better travelling is by going
through Caloola. This road will be met 4 miles
beyond Perth, where it branches to the left.


Seventh Day—Viewing Caves.
To one who has viewed the caves at Jenolan these
will not be so fascinating, yet the tourist will not
consider his time wasted in viewing these “ freaks of
nature.”
Eighth Day. 56 miles — Caves to Bathurst.
All good road, especially if the weather is fine, and
nothing like so hilly as the Hill End route. From the
Caves you will return to Trunkey, 16 miles, and
thence to Rockley, 18 miles more, and to Bathurst, an
extra 22 miles.
Ninth Day, 68 miles — Bathurst to Mount Victoria.
Tenth Day, 77 miles— Mount Victoria to Sydney.
A preferable route, especially if the rider has not
visited the Jenolan Caves, is to ride to the Caves from
Bathurst the ninth day, view the Caves the tenth day,
back to Mount Victoria on the eleventh day, and take
train the rest. This would only occupy one more day
than at first arranged.
Tour No. 19, occupying 11 Days.
Liverpool, Campbelltown, Camden, Picton, Mittagong,
Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn, Tarago, Bungendore,
Queanbeyan, Michelago, Bredbo, Cooma, Rock
Flat, Nimetybelle, Bombala, Cathcart, Candelo,
Bega, Brogo, Cobargo, Tilba Tilba, Punkalla,
Bodalla, Moruya, Nowra, Bull!, Sydney. Distance,
650 miles.
First Day, 80 miles— Liverpool, Campbelltown,
Camden, Picton, Mittagong.


Second Day, 56 miles— Berrima, Marulan,
Goulburn.
Third Day, 60 miles—'Tarago, Bungendore,
Queanbeyan.
Fourth Day, 71 miles —Michelago, Bredbo, Cooma,
For information about these roads, see previous
■tours.
Fifth Day, 53 miles —Rock Flat, Nimitybelle,
Bombala.
The road through Rock Flat and to Nimitybelle has
been described. The road from the latter place to
Bombala is trying in wet weather, a lot of black soil
causing the trouble, but in summer time it is usually
good; in fact, I would not advise a tour through this
part of the country in winter, as the cold is excessive.
From Nimitybelle to Holt’s Flat, where there is an
hotel, is 13 miles, and another 12 miles will bring the
tourist to Bibbenluke, which is about 5 miles from
Bombala.
Sixth Day, 46 miles —Cathcart, Candelo, Bega.
All the road from Bombala to Bega is very good, but
at times great caution will be very necessary, there being
between the former place and Candelo a hill 9 miles
long. After 11 miles of good road has been covered,
Cathcart will be seen, and it is 7 more to Mountain
Top, and another 16 to Candelo (most of it down the
mountain), and 12 more of splendid road will bring
the rider to Bega.


Seventh Day, 51 miles—Brogo, Cobargo, Tilba
Tilba, Punkalla.
Eighth Day, 65 miles—Bodalla, Moruya, Mogo,
Bateman’s Bay, Termeil.
Ninth Day, 68 miles —Milton, Tomerong, Nowra,
Berry.
Tenth Day, 56 miles —Gerringong, Kiama, Dapto
Wollongong, Bulli, Clifton.
Eleventh Day, 44 miles—Waterfall, Heathcote,
Sutherland, Tom Ugly’s Point, Sydney.
All distances, &c., from 7th day have already been
given in other to.urs.
Tour No. 20, occupying 13 Days.
Wiseman’s Ferry, St. Albans, Laguna, Wollombi,
Cessnock, Maitland, Singleton, Muswellbrook,
Denman, Merriwa, Cassillis, Mudgee, Welling-
ton, Molong, Orange, Bathurst, O’Connell,
Oberon, Jenolan Caves, Hampten, Mount Vic-
toria, Springwood, Penrith, Sydney. Distance,
667 miles.
This tour may be reduced two days by taking train
to Newcastle, or even three days by doing the same
from Mount Victoria on the return to Sydney.
First Day, 72 miles— Sydney to St. Albans.
Second Day, 70 miles — St. Albans to Maitland.
From Sydney to Maitland is Tour No. 3, reversed


Third Day, 6o miles—Maitland to Muswellbrook,
This day should be very enjoyable, as the road
nearly all the way to Muswellbrook is very good.
A few hills are met, but most of them may be ridden.
After passing Lockinvar, miles from Maitland,
Harper’s Hill will be negotiated, the view of the
valley of the Hunter from the top, being magnificent.
Another miles further, Branxton will be passed
through; and about 15 miles more to Singleton.
The latter place will be visible from the top of a
hill 6 miles away. Have dinner at Singleton, and n
thh afternoon a ride over good road to Muswellbrook,
30 miles, where spend the night.
Fourth Day, 47 miles—Muswellbrook to Merriwa.
There will be no necessity to hurry away in the
morning, as you will have an easy day’s riding;
therefore, say at ten o’clock you make a start. The
15 miles to Denman should be ridden in a little over
an hour, the road surface being splendid, with no hills
worth referring to. If you do not feel inclined to wait
for dinner, have some luncheon and away. Although
the road to Merriwa is not as good as that just passed
over, yet it is a very fair one. just before getting into
Merriwa, 32 miles from Denman, a big hill called
Woppengui will have to be walked up. Stay for the
night at Merriwa.
Fifth Day, 28 miles—Merriwa to Cassillis.
On this road you are indeed at the mercy of the
weather. It may be possible to be fortunate enough
to have it fairly good, but very unlikely. Mr. Watson


and myself, who did this particular tour I am describ-
ing, were very unfortunate. It took us nearly 6 hours
to do the distance, and when we reached Cassillis we
had had sufficient for the day. A bush hotel is passed
at Bow, 7 miles out, where the river is crossed, and an
accommodation house is met between here and your
destination. Although I report so unfavorably of this
particular part, it should not deter the tourist, as the
trip all through is as good as it is possible to get,
especially over such a long distance.
Sixth Day, 58 miles—Cassillis to Mudgee.
A couple of miles out from Cassillis the river has to
be forded, and a few miles further on, a road that
will gladden the heart of the tourist will be ridden
over at a pace that will be surprising. It is just as
good as yesterday’s was bad. If a start has been
made fairly early, Mudgee will be reached in good
time in the afternoon. Accommodation may be had
on the road at Green Hills or Ulan. We had lunch
at the latter place. Ten miles from Mudgee, a small
bush town called Budgee Budgee is passed through.
Seventh Day, 62 miles—Mudgee to Wellington.
The road may be difficult to get on to here, as
there are several branching from it, and you may get
astray; but your course shapes to the left in each case.
Before leaving, get it explained to you. Mr. Lester,
the local chemist, will give you every information.
The surface of the road is good nearly all the way to
Wellington. You will pass through Guntawang and
Yamblc goldfields, and to Coolma, where dinner will


be very acceptable, and Wellington will be reached in
good time. The road for the last ten miles into
Wellington is like a racing track.
Eighth Day, 64 miles— Wellington to Orange.
For about 10 miles or so, the road is quite as good
as yesterday, but a bit rough for a short distance
afterwards. It improves again, but at a place called
Baket s Swamp it is rough, but only for a few miles.
When in the electorate of Molong, the rider will have
no cause for complaint, for the road right into Molong
is splendid. This is 42 miles from Wellington, which
is a good stretch for the morning, but if you have
made an early start, say not later than eight o’clock,
you will be in good time for dinner here. In the
afternoon, the tourist will have for the 22 miles to
Orange, one of the best metalled [roads he has ever
been over, aud the country is charming; in fact, all
the way to Bathurst and O’Connell it is difficult to
imagine anything more beautiful, especially if the
season is favorable.
Ninth Day, 51 miles— Orange to O’Connell.
A very easy day's ride to-day. Bathurst, 38 miles,
ma ) be reached in good lime for dinner, and if vou
desire, O'Connell, 13 miles, for the night, but of
course the accommodation at the latter place is not as
good as at the former. But if you make O’Connell,
the Caves will be reached in sufficient time to have an
afternoon inspection on the following day.
Tenth Day, 42 miles, from O’Connell to Oberon
and the Caves for dinner, and an inspection in the
afternoon.


Eleventh Day— lnspecting Caves.
Twelfth Day, 65 miles— The Caves to Springwood.
Thirteenth Day, 48 miles — Springwood to Sydney.
The road from Bathurst on this route has been
given previously in Tour No. 8. As I mentioned
before, this trip could be curtailed by taking train to
Maitland, and by doing the same from Mount Vic-
toria to Sydney, thus reducing it by 3 days.
TOURS FROM VARIOUS CENTRES.
An excellent plan is to make an important town a
centre, and indulge in trips to the outside districts,
returning at night or the following day, and in the
next ride branching off in a totally different direction.
Goulburn, Bathurst, Maitland, and Cootamundra
form admirable centres of this kind, for the roads
surrounding these towns are very good.
GOULBURN.
Goulburn is the starting place of many of the best
cycling runs in the colony. The cyclist who is in
search of fresh rides, and has the necessary time to
spare, can be strongly recommended to proceed there,
and make himself familiar with this district. The
town has roads branching in every direction. They
lead to many interesting places, and taken as a whole,
are in excellent condition. This, of course, is of
paramount importance to the touring cyclist. It would
be hard, for instance, to get a finer road in the colony






than that from Goulburn to Tarago, 22\ miles, and
this road may be continued on to Braidwood, 30 miles
further. The road to Queanbeyan, 60 miles, has been
mentioned in one of the tours, and is very good. By
the road to Taralga, 28 miles, the Wombeyan Caves
(40 miles) are reached. The first portion of the road
is fairly flat, with gravel surface, and the remainder
rather hilly, but of good surface, with the exception of
about 20 miles past Taralga, where it is bad. To
Crookwell. 26 miles, is a fairly good road, with
gravel surface, but hilly. There is a rough bush track
from Taralga to Crookwell. To Yass, miles, which
is described in the tour to Melbourne, is a good road.
Short rides to Lake George and Lake Bathurst are
available, as well as more extended trips, such as
through Bungendore to Cooma, and through Braid-
wood to the coast by Araluen or Nelligen. These
are a few of the places to which Goulburn acts as a
sort of centre.
MAITLAND.
It would be almost impossible to discover a finer
centre than Maitland for touring. The roads branch
out to many places of interest, and nearly all are in
first class condition. In very dry weather some of
them get loose and dusty, but, as a rule, they are
capital for cycling. All the way to Singleton, 30
miles, which is described in tour No. 20, is highly
interesting From there the tourist might branch off
to Broke, 15 miles, all good road, and on to Wollombi,
20 more. This part, though not so good, is fair,
From this place to Cessnock, and back to Maitland,


34 miles, is described in No. 3 Tour, mention being
made of the good state of the road, especially about
Cessnock. From Maitland to Paterson, Dungog,
Stroud, Raymond Terrace, Hexham, and back to the
starting place, would make a pleasant 2 days’ run,
even for a new' rider. These places are all mentioned
in Tour No, 7.
To Port Stephens is a good road. To Raymond
Terrace through Morpeth, is 12 miles, and to Port
Stephens, 18 miles further. Newcastle (20 miles), and
Lake Macquarie 12 miles on, and Gresford, 30 miles
from Maitland, are reached by good roads.
BATHURST.
In one of the tours in another portion of the book
some information about the roads around Bathurst is
given, but, as that tour occupies about to days, it may
not directly interest the tourist who has but a few days
at his disposal. By taking a return train ticket to
Bathurst two or three days can be well spent. For
instance, a run out to Sofala and back (about 60 miles)
would be a very pleasant trip for one day. \ou would
go through Peel, to miles, and Wattle Flat, another 15
miles, and 5 miles to Sofala, exactly 30 miles, returning
to Bathurst at night. Or a trip might be made to the
Abercrombie Caves. All these roads are described in
Tour No. 18. Then there is the trip to Oberon
and the fenolan Caves, through O’Connell, which is
so favourably mentioned in Tour No. 20. Another
journey which should prove very interesting is the
ride to Sunny Corner, over very fair roads. Glanmire,




7 miles, is the first place reached, and the next,
Yetholme, is 8 miles beyond. Shortly after leaving
the latter place, take the left-hand road, which will
bring you to Sunny Corner, .7 miles from Yetholme.
Thence to Meadow Flat, 6 miles, and again to
Yetholme, 7 more, making a pleasant circular tour.
Back again to Bathurst is, of course, 15 miles, thus
making exactly 50 miles for the day. The Jenolan
Caves may be also reached from Rydal, through
Hampten, or from Tarana, through Oberon. These
routes are shown on the map The roads within a
considerable radius of Bathurst are all first class,
and as a large number of enthusiastic wheelmen are
in the town, a rider from the metropolis would no
doubt spend a few pleasant days there.
COOTAMUNDRA.
Many enjoyable trips maybe made from this centre.
In Tour No. 15 several of the places are described
and distances given, but a couple more may be
specially mentioned for the benefit of the rider who
visits the town. From Cootamuudra to Young, 33
miles, is all very good road. Another ride is to
Temora, 34 miles, returning by a different road, over
about the same distance, to Junee. Then there is a
trip often taken by the local cyclists, to Garangula
Gold Fields, 23 miles away. All these places would
be a thorough change to the metropolitan cyclists, and
our country friends would always extend to them a
hearty welcome.


ALBURY.
Most of the roads around Albury are in very good
condition, the town being an excellent centre for the
cycling tourist. You are within a couple of days’
comfortable ride to Melbourne, although it is nearly
190 miles to the latter city. As mentioned in the tour
to Melbourne, the country nearly as far as Seymour,
which is 130 miles from Albury, is mostly level, and
makes very good travelling. A splendid trip in fine
weather is by following the course of the Murray River
through Corowa, 20 miles, and to Tocumwal, another
40. From the latter place to Deniliquin is the same
distance, over very good road, and 50 miles more will
bring the tourist to Moama, on the border again, and
thence to Melbourne, if desired, and a return made
by the road which passes Tallarook, Benalla, &c., as
described in Melbourne tour.
INTERCOLONIAL TOURS.
TOUR TO MELBOURNE (Inland).
The road all the way to Melbourne by this route,
considering the distance, nearly 600 miles, is by no
means a bad one. There are several mountain ranges
to be crossed over, but if the rider has got himself in
fair average condition, there is no particular part that
will tax his energy severely, As on all tours in New
South Wales, a great deal depends on the weather,
but parts of the country travelled over, have roads
splendidly formed and of good surface, rain not


affecting them very much. I look on the ride to
Melbourne as a not very difficult task, and if the
tourist is not anxious to hurry through, it should prove
a holiday very well spent. The distance I have cut
out for the first day may appear too long, but, if
assisted by favourable weather and you get a good
start, a moderately able rider will cover it all right.
First Day, 8o miles, Liverpool, Campbelltown,
Camden, Picton, Mittagong.
Have some light refreshment before starting, and
make Liverpool for breakfast, 20 \ miles. Get away
a little before 9 o’clock from here, and Campbelltown
should be reached about 10, Camden before 11, and
Picton in time for dinner, about 54 miles. A good
rest may be taken here, and leave, say, at 3 o’clock.
Mittagong, 261 miles, will be made in plenty of time
for tea.
Second Day, 56 miles—BEßfeiMA, Marulan,
Goulburn.
Make Marulan, 37 miles, for dinner. A rather short
day probably and an easy one, as the road is good,
but it is worth while having a few hours in Goulburn.
As you have already been informed about this road,
I need not repeat it.
Third Day, 541 miles —Breadlbane, Gunning,
Yass.
This is another easy stage, but, as I am giving
distances for the tourist who has made up his mind for
a pleasure trip, Yass is far enough, especially as the


accommodation at Bowning or Bookham is not so
good. You will, therefore, have plenty of time if you
get away about an hour after breakfast. The first
place reached is Yass and Collector Hotel, miles
out, where the road turns to the right. Be careful not
to mix this place up with Collector, which would take
you quite on the wrong road. Another miles
further over level and good road, will bring you to
Breadalbane. Between here and Gunning, where you
will have dinner, is 15 miles; part of the road is hilly,
but none of it troublesome, and the surface is excellent.
In the afternoon, about a mile after leaving Gunning,
you may be in doubt about which road to take, Do not
take the road to the left, as that leads to Gundaroo,
and consequently not your way. The road between
Gunning and Yass, 2\\ miles, where the night will be
spent, was formerly the worst portion between Sydney
and Melbourne, especially in the days of solid tyres,
as it was exceedingly rough, but it has been much
improved, and it is now very good, yet there are a few
hills somewhat trying.
Fourth Day, 66 miles— Bowning, Bookham, Jugiong,
Cooi.ac, Gundagai.
Nearly every mile of it splendid road —a bit hilly,
perhaps, but nothing severe. They all look much
steeper than they really are. Arrange for breakfast a
little earlier than the usual hour, and get away about
half-past eight. The road to Bowning, about 8|
miles, is good, but its altitude being much higher than
Yass, it is, of course, a rise all the way, but all


rideable. Thence lo Bookham, iz\ miles, is a good
road, which continues, with a few hills, to Jugiong, 20
miles further. This place should be reached by about
half-past twelve, giving the tourist time to have a dip
in the Murrumbidgee, which is close by, before dinner.
A climb for about a mile or so after dinner, and a fair
to excellent road to Coolac, 15 miles, and another 10
of good travelling to Gundagai, where the night should
be spent.
Fifth Day, 82 miles—Adelong Crossing, Mundarlo,
Lower Tarcutta, Upper Tarcutta, Kelvyn
Grove, Kyamba, Billabong, Germanton.
If the weather is favourable, this distance will be
accomplished without much trouble, but if it happens
to be wet, Billabong will be as far as you are likely to
get. However, we will conclude it is fine weather.
Get away early and have breakfast at Adelong Crossing,
which is 10 miles distant, over a splendid road.
From this place your course branches to the right (the
other road leads to Adelong, Tumut, &c.) The road
now is nearly all unmade for a good many miles, but it
is not bad travelling. Mundarlo, 13 miles, is the next
place passed through, and then to Lower Tarcutta, 9
miles, and to Upper Tarcutta, 7 more, hilly, but
with plenty of good travelling. Have dinner here.
Take the road to the left for Kelvyn Grove, miles.
There is only a cottage here, but all the tourists of the
old days had a spell here, where they had a welcome
from Mrs. McKenzie, who died recently. Over a fair
to good road, but hilly for 6 miles, is Kyamba. There


is only a post office here, but a short distance away is
Kyamba sheep station. Billabong, 9 miles, is next,
where accommodation may be had if you desire to
spend the night, but if you are well up to time, push
on to Germanton, 16 miles further. Some of the road
is a bit trying, especially if it is wet.
Sixth Day, 60 miles—Bowna, Albury, Wodonga,
Barnawatha, Chiltern.
A splendid road (excepting a few patches) all the
way to Bowna, 26 miles, and a very good one 12 miles
further, to Albury, where have dinner. This place
should be reached in good time, and a couple of hours
ramble about here after dinner will give the visitor
ample time to complete his journey afterwards. Across
the Murray bridge to Wodonga, 3i miles, where, if
you have not made prior arrangements with the
Customs, considerable trouble and delay will be
experienced ; in fact, duty may be demanded. Before
leaving Sydney, an interview will procure a letter from
the Collector of Customs which will obviate all the
difficulty. Barnawatha, miles, and Chiltern, about
5 miles further, will complete the day s riding.
Seventh Day, 79 miles — Springs, Wangaratta,
Glenrowan, Winton, Benalla, Baddaginnie,
Violet Town, Euroa.
A good deal depends on the weather about doing
this distance, but if fine, it is not a bad travelling road.
Push on to the Springs, 9 miles, for breakfast, and
then to Wangaratta, over 15 miles of fair to good road.


Glenrowan, where you have dinner, is nf miles fur-
ther, some of it very good road. You are now in the
heart of “ The Kelly Country,” and right away, as far
as Euroa, you will be entertained with their exploits.
Winton, 8£ miles; Benalla, 6|; Baddaginnie, yf;
Violet Town, 8|; and Euroa, will complete this
day.
Eighth Day, 70 miles —Longwood, Avenel, Sey-
mour, Tallarook, Broadford, Kilmore, Wallan
WALLAN.
Excellent progress will be made to-day. A short
distance after passing Longwood, miles, it is nearly
all made road to Melbourne. Before leaving Avenel,
14 miles, get explicit directions, or you may lose your
way. The next place, Seymour, is miles. The
rider will have noticed an entire absence of any hills
of a steep nature from the time he left Germanton till
reaching here. Have dinner at Seymour, and thence
to Tallarook, 7 miles. A good blue metal road will
be met all the way from here to Melbourne. Next
come Broadford, 9 miles, Kilmore, 7, and Wallan
Wallan, 10 miles further, where spend the night.
Ninth Day, 28 miles.
By getting away shortly after breakfast, Melbourne
will be reached in about 2\ hours at the outside,
bringing the tourist in well before dinner. The road
will take you right into Elizabeth street, in the heart of
the city.


TOUR FROM MELBOURNE TO SYDNEY
(Coast Line).
Mr. Thorne, of the Melbourne Bicycle Club,
pioneered this journey in 1889. The train was made
use of from Melbourne to Sale, in Gippsland, 150
miles, and from Kiama to Sydney, in N.S.W., for
want of time. The rider should accomplish the
distance between Melbourne and Sale easily in a
couple of days. The following day Stratford (10
miles), over a good gravelly and level road, should be
reached for breakfast. The next stopping place is
Bairnsdale, 32 miles further, on a road not very
interesting. Nicholson is 7 miles beyond, and Swan
Reach, another 10 miles, will probably be made the
night's stopping place.
Third Day, 49 miles.
An early breakfast should be procured, and at
Roadknight’s Hotel, at what is called the Lakes
Entrance, 14 miles away, some refreshment will be
acceptable. Another 20 miles, over rather indifferent
road, will bring you to Hall’s Half-way House. Much
the same sort of road continues to Orbost, 15 miles,
where the night will be spent.
Fourth Day, 41 miles.
You are now in the vicinity of the Snowy River.
By a ride of 11 miles, which will be easily accomplished
before breakfast, Mario will be reached. The next 18
miles, to the Yerang River, is a dreary and altogether


unpleasant ride through the wilds of Croajingolong,
At the Bemm River, 12 miles, stay the night, as the
next place is 20 miles further.
Fifth Day, 55 miles.
Although 55 miles will be your extent of travelling
to-day, get away as early as possible, as it will be a
hard day s work. Morgan s Cann River Station is
20 miles away. The Tara River, 10 miles, is next
passed ; then across Drumner Mountain, which is not
very troublesome to negotiate ; then Wingan Creek,
and finally Genoa, 35 miles from Morgan’s Station,
will close the day.
Sixth Day, 59 miles.
After leaving Genoa 8 miles in the rear, the
dividing line of N.S.W. and Victoria is marked by two
trees, one with V. over a broad arrow, the other
N.S.W. over a broad arrow. Timbelica, 10 miles, is
the first place passed, then to Kiah River, 25 miles
further, over fairly good bush road, and 10 miles
beyond is Eden. Between the two latter places the
Tawomba River is crossed, but that is only possible at
low tide. Pambula, 14 miles further, or 59 miles for
the day, will no doubt satisfy the rider.
Another 4 or 5 days should complete this very novel
tour. You have already been made aware of the
distances and towns between Eden and Sydney. See
Tour No. 11 (page 35).
TOUR TO BRISBANE (Coast Line).
For information regarding distance, &c., to Grafton,
see Tour No. 17 (page 46).


The next place of any importance will be Lawrence,
a distance of 22 miles. The road has nothing to
specially recommend it, but it is by no means a bad
one. To Small’s Hotel, 13 miles further, is very
good. To Myall Creek, 7 miles, very level road, but
sandy in many places. Dinner may be had here. To
Myrtle Creek, another 12 miles, you will have very
much the same class of road. To Casino, 20 miles
past Myrtle Creek, is very good road indeed, hilly at
the start, but good travelling afterwards. Rest here
the night. The next place visited will be Lismore, 18
miles from Casino, all good road ; and to Bexhill, 5
more, is the same. To Clunes is another 6, this being
somewhat hilly, which continues a portion of the
distance to Bangalore an extra 10 miles. Byron Bay
from Bangalore, is 8 miles, hilly road, but good
surface. You will probably wind up the days’
exertion at Brunswick, 9 miles beyond. The following
day, after you have covered 26 miles, Tweed Heads
will be reached, where it will be necessary to signal
the ferryman to take you across, when you will then be
on Queensland territory. Burleigh Heads is 8 miles
from here, and Southport another 9. From Bryon
Bay to Southport is ridden on the seabeach, and this
can only be done at low tide. Several creeks will
have to be crossed between the two places, some of
them very wide, and a couple rather deep. The
last one is called Tallebudgera. If the rider desires,
he may avoid the sea beach, and go from Clunes to
Southport, via Murwillumbah, but it is a very trying
road, excessively hilly and rough. The tourist must


now watch for the coach tracks, and at Nerang Creek
will be assisted across by punt. To Oxenford is 14
miles, over rough and hilly road, and Pimpama is
another 6. To Beenleigh, 10 miles beyond, is over
good road, and another 22 miles brings you to
Brisbane.
FROM BRISBANE TO SYDNEY (Inland).
From Brisbane to Ipswich, 25 miles, is a splendid
hard road of a good undulating character. This con-
dition of road will continue, only occasionally more
hilly, through Peak Crossing (12), Numbilla (10),
and Fassifern, 6 miles, and also on to the foot of the
range, another 12 miles. The next 20 miles, to
Maryvale Station, will prove to be an exceedingly
tiresome journey. It is not only rough, but moun-
tainous. If the weather is favorable, over the next 20
miles to Warwick the rider will make good headway,
as although there is not a properly defined road, it
makes pleasant riding. There is another route from
Ipswich to Warwick which many prefer, namely,
Ipswich to Rosewood (12), Calvert (5), and Grand-
chester, another 4 miles. This is good in dry weather,
excepting some sandy patches. Between here and
Laidley (good accommodation), is 4 miles, the Little
Liverpool Range is crossed, which is very rough. To
Gatton (12 miles), Grantham (8 miles), and Helidon
(5 miles), is a flat road, but inclined to be sandy. The
accommodation is good here, as also at Toowoomba,
12 miles further, After leaving Helidon, the rider
will have about 7 miles of good level road, but the


other 5 to Toowoomba is all up hill, and very steep in
parts. Greenmount is reached after 18 miles have
been covered, over good road if the weather is fine,
but if wet it is almost impassable, owing to the black
soil. The next 16 miles, to Allora, is much the same,
and 17 more will find you at Warwick. Dalveen will
be reached after travelling 17 miles. The first 7 miles
is over a good level road, the other 10 is very hilly,
and a considerable part of the distance will have to be
walked. There is a boarding house here. The next
distance is 14 miles, over good level hard road, to
Stanthorpe (good accommodation). Another 13 miles
to what is called Wilson’s Downfall, is a fairly good
road, sandy in parts perhaps, but not troublesome.
Boonoo Boonoo is 20 miles beyond, the road being
fairly good, somewhat undulating, (one hotel here),
The next 10 miles, to Tenterfield. is mostly down
grade, and the road good. Bolivia, 18 miles, is the
next place to make for, with the same character of
road, but one long hill is ascended. Between Bolivia
and Deepwater the distance is 16 miles. The road is
good, but hilly. When leaving Deepwater, enquire
carefully as to the road to Glen Innes, or you may get
astray. Between the last two places the road is good,
distance 26 miles. The good road will continue to
Glencoe, another 15 miles (hotel). The next place is
Guyra, 27 miles. Between Glencoe and Guyra the
tourist will cross over Ben Lomond, which is 4,47 1
feet above sea level. No accommodation is obtainable
for the distance of 27 miles, which separates these two
places. Four miles before reaching Guyra, a finger


post points to Kookarabooka, which is not your way.
The next place to be reached is Armidale, 27 miles,
good road and nearly all down hill. The hills are
very steep, necessitating care.
Uralla is another 15 miles over good undulating
road. It continues the same to Rocky Flat, 24 miles
(Accommodation House only), and also to Bende-
meer, another 8 (hotel). To Moonbi is 12 more, over
good road, but Moonbi Range lies here. It is not
necessary to go into the town, but keep to the right
and on to Tamworth, 14 miles further, all down hill.
To Goonoo Goonoo is 15 miles. It is a good level
road. Between these two places several gates are
passed through. There is no accommodation house
here, but a meal may be obtainable at one of the
shearer’s cottages. To Wallabadah is 18 miles.
The first 8 or so is not a very defined road, but the
rest of the distance is good macadam. To Willow
Tiee is 12 miles, all of it very good, and to Doughboy
Hollow is 8 more, good but hilly. Between here and
Murrurundi is 7 miles, passing over the Liverpool
range, the last three being all down hill into the town.
Wingen, 12 miles, over good road, but hilly, will be
next visited, but the next twelve miles to Scone is very
good, and all an easy down grade, which still con-
tinues through Aberdeen, 9 miles, and Muswellbrook,
8 more. To Singleton, as described in tour No.
20, is 30 miles. From Singleton the rider may go
through Broke, 15 miles, and Wollombi, another 20
miles, but it is a much pleasanter trip and the road is
also better by Branxton and Greta, &c., to Maitland,


30 miles. From Maitland to Sydney has been
described in a previous tour, but if the tourist
desires a change, he may take the following route :
Maitland to Buchanan, 12 miles, a fair road but . hilly.
Between here and Mount Vincent, 8 miles, a steep
range is ascended, and to Coorambong is 14 miles
more, the road being very rough and very bad in wet
weather. To Morrisetis 4 miles over good road, but see
that after leaving the latter place 1 mile in the rear and
just before the hill is descended, you take the rough
bush track to Wyong, 10 miles. To Wyee, 6 miles, is
much the same, but improves towards Ourimbah,
which is another 6 miles. The next 3 miles to Gos-
ford is splendid. The 30 miles to Hornsby should be
taken by train, and thence by Pymble and Gordon and
Milson’s Point to Sydney. But if the rider is fortunate
in getting a boat at Gosford and taken across to New-
port, it would be a much more enjoyable finish to the
trip.




APPENDIX.
'PVERY care has been exercised in the compiling
of this book, and every effort taken to give dis-
tances and condition of the roads as accuiatel} as
possible. It is just possible that a few apparent errors
may be observed in some of the distances. koi
instance, I may have measured, say, from Mittagong to
Goulburn, and a slight inaccuracy be observed, as
Goulburn being a good sized town, one tourist v ill
calculate the distance to one point in the town, and
myself to another, making perhaps a mile difference.
FINGER POSTS.
The absence of these very useful guides on our
roads is the cause of considerable inconvenience, not
only to cyclists, but travellers generally. During a
tour through England of several thousands of miles
undertaken by Mr. Watson and myself, we never once
got on the wrong road, as these welcome guides were
met everywhere. This is a matter that should
agitate the governing body of , cyclists of New South
Wales. With the immense number of riders at the
present time, and with the prospect of a large increase,
their influence should be felt, it should not be long
before some action is taken in this direction.


LOCAL MAPS.
To the following gentlemen I am very much
indebted for their valuable assistance in compiling
the district maps :
Dr. F. A. Bennett, of Morpeth ;
F. A. Drury, Esq., of Goulburn ;
A. E. Ashworth, Esq., of Bathurst.
A FEW POINTS WORTH ATTENTION.
HEIGHT OF GEAR.
If it is your intention to use your machine princip-
ally for touring purposes, do not indulge in a gear too
high. For touring in New South Wales, which is
considered a hilly country, a 60 gear is quite high
enough. If it is higher than 60 the strain on an
average rider is very severe. It may not be felt for
the first 20 miles or so, but it certainly will be before
the day’s exertion is over. Especially will this be the
case if the road is heavy or if there is a head wind to
contend against.
gear cases.
I consider the introduction of the gear case one of
the best of the modern cycle improvements. It is
only necessary to be caught once in bad weather on a
country road to prove its great advantages. Without
the case, in muddy weather the chain gets clogged
with mud and cannot run free, but with the gear case
as a protector the state of the weather and condition
of the road may be defied.


BRAKES.
No machine for touring purposes is complete with-
out a brake, yet the rider should not depend on his
brake alone. Every rider should endeavour to be as
expert as possible in back-peddalling in case the
brake should prove ineffective at the critical moment.
But, on the other hand, back-peddalling is a big strain
on the rider’s endurance if the hill happens to be a
long one. Immediately the rider finds the machine
getting beyond his control, he should insert his righ
foot between the front forks of the machine and push
with all his force. This will bring it to an immediate
standstill.
THE CHAIN.
Particular care should be exercised in adjusting the
chain wheel. If the chain does not run true, it con-
siderably increases its wear, and gives it a tendency to
mount the cogs. Occasionally one of the back nuts
may get loose, causing the back wheel spindle to
slip. This should be immediately rectified. In case
of a rivet of the chain breaking, it can be replaced
with an ordinary wire nail, one or two of which should
always be carried in case of emergency.


W. KERR, 544 George St., Sydney (Opp. Town Hall),
WATCHMAKER & JEWELLER.
TAKE
MARSHALL'S TONIC NERVINE
PILLS,
IPOTXOLL S,
PLASTERS.
EVERY MEDICAL REQUISITE FOR CYCLISTS.
Our ROYAL EMBROCATION is unequalled
For STIFFNESS, SPRAINS, BRUISES.
Price 2s.
MARSHALL BROTHERS,
Corner of PITT and PARK STREETS,
SYDKEY.


Billiard Table Manufacturers, Ivory aijd Wood Turners.
216 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY (Near Bathurst St.)
BALLS, CLOTH, CUES, TIPS, WAFERS, CHALK, Ac.
E. T. WALSH,
MERCHANT TAILOR,
418 GEORGE STREET.
New Goods per Every Mail.
YCLISTS in want of a First-Class Suit at a Moderate
Price should inspect these Goods, which have been
bought direct from the manufacturers, and which enable us
to imake for 635. a Suit equal in Style, Workmanship and
Fit to that supplied by credit tailors for four guineas.
Country customers should write for Samples and our
Self-Measurement Forms.
Parcels sent to all parts of the country free.
Highest Award Chicago Exhibition, 1893.
Experienced Workmen sent to all parts of the
Colonies to Repair and Fit Up.


INDEX.
Page
Introduction ... ... ... 1
Hill Riding ... ... ... 3
What to Drink on Tour ... 4
Clothing .. ... ... 4
Luggage 5
Choice of Machine ... ... 5
The Best Time to Ride ... 6
Tourists Road Maps... ... 6
Touring for Ladies ... ... 7
Final Hints ... ... ... 8
Abercrombie Caves ... 49, 58
Aberdeen ... ... ... 71
Adaminaby ... ... 45
Adelong ... ... ... 45
Adelong Crossing ... 43,45,63
Albury ... ... 60, 64
Albion Park ... ... ... 33
Appin ... ... ... ... 27
Araluen ... ... 37, 57
Audley ... ... ... 25
Armidale ... ... ... 71
Bathurst ... 30,49,50,58
Bateman’s Bay ... 34,36
Bankstown ... ... 14, 16, 19
Bangalore ... ... ... 68
Baulkham Hills ... ... 19
Berrima ... ... 41,51
Berr y 25,35
Be g a 36,40,51
Ben Lomond... ... ... 70
Bermagui ... ... ... 40
Bexhill ... ... ... 68
TOWNS, &c.
(Continued on Page 80.)
Page
Touring Gossip ... ... 9
Finger Posts ... ... ... 73
Reference to Local Maps 6, 74
Height or Gear ... ... 74
Gear Cases ... ... ... 74
Brakes ... ... ... 75
The Chain ... ... ... 75
Railway Rates for Cycles ... 85
League of N.S.W. Wheelmen 87
N.S.W. Cyclists’ Union ... 87
Belmore ... ... ... 26
Bibbenluke ... ... ... 51
Binalong ... ... ... 43
Billabong ... ... ... 63
Blacktown ... ... ... 22
Blackheath ... ... ... 32
Bowral ... ... ... 23
Bowna ... ... ... 64
Bombala ... ... ... 51
Bowning ... ... 43,62
Bolivia ... ... ... 70
Bookham ... ... ... 62
Bow ... ... ... ... 54
Bodalla ... ... 36,40
Bottle Forest Road ... ... 17
Braidwood ... ... 37,41,57
Branxton ... ... 53,71
Breadalbane ... ... ... 62
Bredbo 37,44,51
Bringelly ... ... ... 18
Brunswick ... ... ... 68
8r0g0... ... ... ... 36
Broke... ... ... 57,71


HIS EXCELLENCY
LORD HAMPDEN
RIDES A
HUMBER.
JHustralasian JUjrnts:
PPERS, x
RALEIGHS, | Austral Cycle Ageijcy,
PREMIERS, | 393 GEORGES!.,
Etc. SYDNEY.
W. J. C. ELLIOTT, Manager.


Page
Bulli 25, 28, 34
Bulli Pass 17,27
Buchanan ... ... ... 72
Bungendore ... ... 44,51,57
Burwood ... ... ... 17
Budgee Budgee ... •••54
Byron Bay ... ... ... 68
Caloola ... ... ... 49
Camden ... ... 19,26,50
Campbelltown 19,26,37,50
Cambewarra ... ... ... 24
Canterbury ... ... 16, 26
Candelo ... ... ... 51
Cathcart ... ... ... 51
Casino ... ... ... 68
Cassillis ... ... ... 54
Cessnock ... ... 21,57
Chatswood ... ... ... 13
Clifton ... ... ••■25
Clunes ... ... ... 68
Clybucca ... ... ... 47
Coff’s Harbour ... ... 47
Cook’s River ... ... ... 15
Coolma ... ... ... 54
Cootamundra ... 43, 59
Corowa ... ... ... 60
Coopernook ... ... ... 48
Coolac ... ... ... 63
Coorambong ... ... ... 72
Colombo ... ... ... 40
Cooma ...39,44,45,51,57
Cobargo ... ... 36, 40
Cundletown ... ... ... 48
Cronulla Beach ... ... 15
Crookwell ... ... ... 57
Da pto 25, 33
Page
Deniliquin ... ... ... 60
Deep Creek ... ... ... 47
Deepwater ... ... ... 70
Denman ... ... ... 53
Dog Trap Road ... ... 14
Doughboy Hollow ... ... 71
Dungog 29, 58
Dural ... ... ... ... 20
Eastwood ... ... ... 20
Eden 35, 67
Emu Plains ... ... ... 30
Fitzroy Falls... ... ... 23
Frederickton ... ... ... 47
Garangula ... ... •••59
Germanton ... ... ... 64
Gerringong ... ... ... 25
George’s River ... 15, 16, 26
Glencoe ... ... ... 70
Gladesville ... ... ... 16
Glanmire ... ... ... 58
Gloucester ... ... 29, 48
Glen Innes ... ... ... 70
Goulburn ...38,41,45,51,56
Goonoo Goonoo ... ... 71
Gordon ... ... 13, 72
Gosford ... ... ... 72
Grafton ... ... ... 47
Greendale ... ... ... 14
Greta ... ... ... ... 71
Gresford ... ... ... 58
Granville ... ... ... 17
Gundagai ... ... 43, 63
Guntawang ... ... ... 54
Gunning ... ... ... 62
Guyra... ... .., ... 70
(Continued on Page 82.)
INDEX — Continued.


If you want a Cycling, Tourist, or any kind of Suit, try
G. M. SUMMERFIELD & CO.,
THE KING OF TAILORS,
690
Late Cutter
for
JOEL
EDWARDS,
Hanover
Square,
London.
THE CYCLISTS’ TAILORS,
CYCLING
GARMENTS
for Ladies
and
Gentlemen a
Speciality.
Ladies waited
upon by Mrs.
Summerfield,
late of
Madame
Garner’s,
Leicester
Square,
London.
X
(
m
We have a
Splendid
Variety of
Serges and
Sergerettes
to select from
Our Elastic
Fitting
Knickers are
a Wonder.
No Strain!
No Pull!
Entire
Comfort.
No Seams to
chafe or
annoy you
when riding.
By appointment to the League of N.S.W.
Note the Address —
G. M. SUMMERFIELD & CO.,
690 George St., Sydney.
N.B.—Samples and Self-Measurement Forms sent to all
parts of Australasia,


. Page
Hampten ... ... ... 3 1
Hartley 3 2
Hexham ... ... 29, 48, 58
Heathcote ... ... ... 28
Helensburgh ... ... ... 17
Hill End 49
Homebush ... ... ... 17
Holt’s Flat S 1
jamberoo ... ... ... 33
Jenolan Caves ... 31, 5°
Junee ... ... ... 43> 59
Jugiong 63
Katoomba ... ...
Kangaroo Valley ... ... 24
Kempsey ... ... ••• 47
Kelso ... ... ••• ••• 3°
Kiandra ... ••• 45
Kiama 25, 33, 37
Kogarah ... ... ••• 15
Kurrajong ... ... ••• 22
Kyamba
Lake George ... ... ... 57
Lake Bathurst ... •••57
Lake Macquarie ... ••• 5^
Laguna ... ••• ••• 21
Lawrance ... ... ••• 68
Larry’s Mountain ... ... 37
Liverpool ... x 6, 19, 26, 50
Lismore ... ... ••• 68
Loddon Falls ... ... ••• 27
Loftus
Lochinvar ... .., ... 53
Luddenham 18
Manly ... ... ••• 14
Marulan ... ... 41, 5 1
Page
Maitland ...21, 29, 53, 57, 72
Merriwa ... ... ... 53
Meadow Flat... ... ... 59
Menangle ... ... ... 27
Milton... ... ... 34, 37
Michelago ... ... 39, 51
Mittagong ... ... ... 50
Moama ... ... ... 60
Moss Vale ... ... ... 23
Moruya ... 34,36, 37,40
Mogo ... ... ... 34, 36
Molong 55
Morpeth ... ... ... 58
Morriset ... ... ... 72
Moonbi ... ... ... 71
Mt. Terry ... ... ... 33
Mt. Victoria 32, 50
Mt. Vincent ... ... ... 71
Mudgee ... ... 49, 54
Muswellbrook ... 53, 71
Murrumburrah
Murrurundi ... ... ... 71
Mulgoa ... ... ... 18
Mundarlo ... ... ... 63
Myall Creek ... ... ... 68
Myrtle Creek... ... ... 68
Narrabeen ... ... ... 14
Narallen ... ... ... 19
National Park ... ... 25
Nambucca ... ... ... 47
Newbridge ... ... ... 49
Newport ... ... is> 7 2
Nelligen ... ... 42, 57
Newcastle ... ... ... 29
Nimitybelle ... ... 39> S 1
Nowra 24, 35, 42
IN DEX — Continued.


Page
Oberon ... ... 31, 55
O’Connell ... ... 30, 55
Orange 55
Ourimbah ... ... ... 72
Parcamatta ... ... 14, 18
Pambula ... ... 36, 67
Paterson ... ... 29, 58
Peel ... ... ... 49,58
Perth ... ... 49
Penrith ... ... 18, 32
Picton 23,27,41,50
Port Hacking ... ... 15
Port Macquarie ... ... 47
Port Stephens ... ...*-58
Prospect ... ... ... 22
Punkalla ... ... 36, 40
Pymble ... ... 13, 72
Qualma ... ... ... 36
Queanbeyan ... ... 38, 44, 51
Raleigh ... ... ... 47
Raymond Terrace ... 30, 58
Razorback ... ... ... 26
Richmond ... ... ... 22
Robertson ... ... ... 33
Rock Flat ... ... 39,51
Rockley ... ... ... 50
Rockdale ... ... ... 15
Ryde ... ... ... ... 16
Rockey Flat .. ... ... 71
Rydalmere ... ... ... 16
Rydal 59
Sandringham... ... ... 15
Scone... ... ... ... 71
Page
Singleton 53,57,71
Sofala ... 49, 58
Springwood ... ... ... 32
St. Albans ... ... ... 21
Stroud 29,58
Stanwell Park ... ... 17
Sutherland ... ... 17,25,28
Sunny Corner ... 58,59
Tamworth ... ... ... 71
Tarana ... ... •••59
Taralga 57
Tarcutta 43,63
Taree ... 48
Tarago ... 38,41,44,51,57
Temora ... ... ... 59
Termed ... ... 34,36,42
Thornleigh ... ... ... 14
Tilba Tilba ... ... 36,40
Tenterfield ... ... ... 70
Tinonee ... ... ... 48
Tomerong 34,35
Tom Ugly’s Point ... 15,17,25
Tocumwal ... ... ... 60
Trunkey ... ... 49,50
Tumut ... ... ... 45
Tweed Heads ... ... 68
Uralla... ... ... ... 71
Wallabadah. ... ... ... 71
Waterfall ... ... 17, 25
Wattle Flat ... ... 49, 58
Wagga Wagga 43
Wellington 54, 55
Willow Tree ... ... ... 71
Windsor ... ... ... 19
Wingen ... ... ... 71
INDEX — Continued.


Page
Wiseman’s Ferry ... ... 20
Wolumla ... ... ... 36
Wollongong ... ... 25, 34, 42
Wollombi ... ... 21, 57, 71
Wombeyan Caves ... ... 57
Woolgoolga ... ... ... 47
Wyong ... ... ... 72
Page
Wyee ... ... ... ... 72
Yass ... ... ... 43, 62
Yarrangobilly Caves... ... 45
Yetholme ... ... ... 59
Yoim £ 59
INDEX — Continued.


Royal Agricultural Ground
MOORE PARK.
Under the patronage of the N.S.W. League of Wheelmen.
THE HAMPDEN
CYCLING TRACK
Is NOW READY for TRAINING
and MEETINGS,
Training Fees: One Guinea per annum.
Private Lockers: Five Shillings per annum.
All information may be obtained from
F. WEBSTER, Secretary.


THE LEAGUE OF N.S.W. WHEELMEN,
(FOUNDED sth SEPTEMBER, 1893.)
Headquarters —League Rooms, No. 420 George Street, Sydney.
T. H. BAEKELL, General Secretary.
Patron ; Dr. COLLINGWOOD, M.D.
President : T. H. HASSALL, EsQ., M.L.A,
Vice-Presidents :
Hon. S. A STEPHEN, M.L.C., Messrs. QUONG TAET, C. W. BENNETT,
D. BEAHAM, E. C. HUGHES, J. GEEGG, and J. E. FAIEI AX.
Captain: Mr. J. WILLIAMS. Sub-Captain ; F. EATHGEN.
General Secretary :T. H. BAEKELL. Hon. Treasurer :F.G. C. HANSLOW.
Bugler : H. HAEEIS. Color Steward : T. H. BAEKELL.
Committee :
Messrs. P. E. WOOTTEN, W. C. FEEEMAN, J. B. BUCK, E. E. LAZAEUS,
A. GEAEME, G. W. WYNNE, F. HAWLEY, S. E. SHAW, and
N. MATTEESON.
Racing Board :
Messrs. P.E. W'OOTTEN, L. OSBOENE, W. C. FEEEMAN, J. WILLIAMS,
F. G. C. HANSLOW, E. E. LAZAEUS, and E. C. HUGHES.
Official Handicapper : Mr. L. OSBOENE.
Secretaries of Country Branches.
Armidale, T. W. Gordon; Albury, F. C. Blacklock; Bombala, F. W. Hare;
Ballina, Forest Finlay; Bathurst, H. D. Nicholson; Bega, J. Spence, jun.;
Bourke F. W. Eothwell; Brewarrina, Jas. Patterson; Broken Hill, r. W.
Shepherd; Bulh, J. Duhig ; Cobar, W. Foster jCoonamble D. Imlay;
Cootamundra, W. H. Pinkstone; Cowra, G. A. McGrath; Demliqum, J.
Taylor; Duhho, J. Donnelley; Emmaville, J. W. Watson; Glen lanes, J.
Souter; Goulhurn, W. E. Qnartley; Grafton, Y. T. Stears ; Grenfell, C. J.
Clear ; Hillgrove. M. Stephens ; Inverell, S. Eowlands, ]un.; Lisraore, O. J.
Coghlan; Maitland, F. Mears ; Mndgee, Harold A. Clark; Murrumhurrah
and Harden, John C. Cocker; Nowra, E. W. Henry; Newcastle, W. Lauer ;
Narrahri, E. J. Farrell; Parramatta, H. Miller;; Queanbeyan, C. L. Little;
Singleton, W. H. Sparks; Sunny Corner, Y. M. Novell; Temora, H. Lakei ,
Tamworth, E. A. Briley; Tenterfield, J. Parker; Young, A. D. Price;
Yass, A. P. Thompson.
15.3. W. Cyclists’ Union.
Headquarters
61 Druitt Street.
Patron: Hon. S. E. LEES, M.L.C.
President: JAMES MAETIN, Esq.
Vice-Presidents :
W. E. GEOEGE, A. EDWAED, E. SHUTE, F. W. C. CEANE, J.P.
Hon. Secretary ; AETHUE S. JONES. Assistant Secretary. LOUIS BEELYN
Hon, Treasurer; GEOEGE A. EICHAEDSON.
How. Handicapper: SYDNEY J. WYATT.


DUNLOP *■
-* TYRES
Are used by the Best Riders in
Every Country.
WH Y 9
Because they are Fast, Durable and
Easy to Repair.
OViHlsO? TNRE.S
Are Best for both Buyers & Sellers,
because their Merit sells the
Machine in many cases.
How is it you seldom see a Bicycle
fitted with any other than
«!• DUNLOP ♦ TYRES>


ESTABLISHED 1883.
Raglaq,
Budge,
AND
Pljiz
Cycles.
"BUDGE" '
Si
Bicycles Built to Order any Weight or Tyre.
w
mciM
I. PHiZACKERLEY,
Bicycle Manufacturer aqd Importer,
61 Druitt Street, Sydney.
TELEPHONE 1920.
