

THE
Bttle of Gettysbury
AS EXHISITED BY
THE SYDNEY MCLORAMA CO.LTD
GEORGE ST.,
OPPOSITE THE RANWAY
ALLTRAMS
PASSING THE RAILWAY AND ALL GEORGESIREET BUSSES
STOP OPPOSTE THE ENTRANCE
PRICE THREEPENCE




Distilled from the Leaves of the
Citron-Scented Eucalyptus.
(Eucalyptus maculata, var. Citriodora )
The distinguishing qualities of this Oil above
all other productions of the Eucalypti are
Ist—Absolute Purity.
2nd—An Aroma equal to the Finest
Perfumes*
j. EDNIE BROWN, Esq.,
Director General of Forests,
Writes :
I have much pleasure in stating that I am well
acquainted wirh the tree known as Eucalyptus Citriodora, or
the scented gum, and am convinced that the oil produced by
you of that name is a genuine extract from its leaves.
Ask your Chemist for it, and insist upon
getting it.
GENERAL AGENCY
337 KENT STREET,


CYCLORAMA
OF THE
BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG
(The Cyclorama Painting is from the Studio of Messrs. Reed & Gross,
of Chicago, U.S.A.)
Full Description
or THE
I Great Battle , and Diagram of the Painting on Exhibi-
tion in the Building. The most thrilling sight ever
presented to the human vision. Thousands of men and
horses amid the mad rush of a terrific battle. Everything
life size.
SPECIALLY ERECTED IN
GEORGE ST. (Opposite Railway),
STTia Untie ■5T-
ADMISSION—Adults 1>-
„ Children 6d.
PRZ QM TSEEE VBSrOB.
printer cmfr VuMteJter:
J. W. EEDY, 227 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY.
1891.


n
tRAR.O
b
*
s
b
-\b
(j
m
LIMITED
&
mf/
<?\ o
M
ms
%
tw
m
<f
> i’
-~L
ft
PALI
■• ,/i^
5
mi mm
i\ \i -j*
sh-
'/?
liiwsiy
'**&*&' -
>3l
:? i
SMiSRJ?
.--for/. ■•/ !
W# vt
'ACE N'TS^F^ORi
§teinway»Sons,Ekard &6°J.FEURieH,
ANO 'OTHER Hi C H CIASsHa K ER S .
LARGE STOCK to SELECT PROM
L OHTEST.PRICES EASY TERMS
ski 2jor3
/^‘VlCtbß’PlANOgiy^a/g/^J


INTRODUCTORY
Abraham Lincoln.
NE of the most terrible
internecine conflicts re-
corded in history was the war
for the Union between the
American States. The con-
test lasted over four years,
and was waged with a deter-
mination and zeal seldom
equalled, and perhaps never
excelled.
For years prior to the
beginning of hostilities a
bitter sectional strife had
President of the United States of America, existed between the States
forming the southernmost part of the Union, and those States
to the north. Locally, these sections were known as “ The
South ” and “ The North ” respectively; for convenience we will
so designate them.
In politics they were divided upon every issue, each wa3
distrustful of the other, and both were full of hatred and strife.
Of all questions that ever arose irs American politics, none were
so vexatious, perplexing, or difficult of solution as the Extension
of Human Slavery. Like Banquo’s ghost—it would not down.
By many in the south slavery was regarded as a “ Divine
Institution —the natural and proper condition of the black race.”
Others, both of the north and south, looked upon it as a “ neces-
sary evil,” wrong per se; but, by reason of its being so long
established, so wide spread, and surrounded by conditions peculiar
to itself, that “ The Government would not at that late day be


justified in interfering with it.” A large percentage of the
people believed Human Slavery to be wrong , and with the
courage of their conviction they boldly denounced it in the
strongest terms.
In Congress, the representatives of the slavery section were
trying in every way to force legislation favourable to slavery
while at the same time the northern members were divided, some
of whom were seeking to placate the south by compromises and
concessions. The majority, however, were outspoken, and
advocated measures hostile to the slave interest. As the settle-
ment of the country moved westward, the territories were, one
after another, acquiring population sufficient to entitle them to
admission to the Union as States, and to be fully represented
in Congress. The pro-slavery and anti-slavery members of
Congress were quite evenly divided, so much depended upon
whether the prospective States were to come in as Free States
or Slave States. While the people of the north were generally
disposed to tolerate slavery where it already existed, they were
determined it should not he extended. The people of the south
were equally in earnest and persistent in the attempt to force
slavery upon the new States, especially such as were in their
latitude, and those near the border line, notably, the State of
Kansas.
The sections were further and hopelessly divided upon the
relation of the States to the Union. “ The Southern Idea,” as it
was called, may be thus stated : —I hat the State was so\cieign ,
that the general Government had no power to coerce a State ;
that the original States forming the “ Union,” or compact of
Federation, entered, upon that condition freely, and that any
State might, for reasons satisfactory to itself, withdraw from the
Union. Per contra : The people of the north held that in the
Federal Union the nation was an integer , of which the several
States w r ere fractional parts ; that the Federal Constitution v r as
the supreme law of the land ; that the General Government had
the power to preserve the Union by force if necessary ; that
secession w r as treason.


In the memorable Presidential campaign of 1860 the two
great contending parties were known as Republicans and
Democrats. The latter had control of the National affairs, it
dominated the entire south, and had a large following in the
north. At this time, however, there were grave dissections
among its leaders ; in fact, the party was split into three factions,
between which much bitterness and jealousy existed. After a
prolonged and unsuccessful trial to agree upon a candidate to
stand for the approaching election, the factions found themselves
hopelessly divided. Three candidates were afterwards named,
to wit, Douglas, Breckenridge, and Bell, the former having the
principal following.
The Republicans on the other hand were united and hopeful.
For a candidate Abraham Lincoln was named amid great enthu-
siasm. The election resulted favorably to the Republican
candidate. This result was not expected by the south, and by it
the people there were driven to desperation, nothing else was
thought of or talked about, meetings were held all over the
south, and these were addressed by fiery, intemperate speakers
who vied with one another in urging extreme measures. The
War Department of the Government was presided over by a
southern man, who was in full sympathy with the sentiments of
his section. In his official capacity he secretly sent large
quantities of arms, ammunition, and equipments to convenient
points in the south where they might readily be, and afterwards
were captured by southern forces.
The month following the election, South Carolina passed
her famous Ordinance of Secession. She was soon followed by
her two sister States. The incoming President found a treasury
nearly empty, a shattered public credit, and nearly half the
people armed for rebellion.
Hostilities were begun in April, 1861, by the South, then
calling themselves “ The Confederate States of America,” with
Jefferson Davis as President. For two years offensive and
defensive operations were carried on with vigour along the
nearly two thousand miles of border line. The Confederates
being the better prepared, and acting upon the defensive, were
rather more successful than the Union forces in the early part
of the war. The ultimate result of the conflict was in doubt
until the battle of Gettysburg was fought. After this brilliant
victory, the success of the Union cause was assured.


15 Park
it,
City.
Gentlemen’s Boots, Best Quality,
Best W orkmanship, and Lowest
Prices.
r/i
Is the Sydney Gentlemen's Bootmaker. Originator of the
Porpoise Hide Boot.
Factory and Wholesale Warehouse
STA!
ST
Porpoise Hide Boots 13s. 6d.


The Battle Of Gettysbrug.
OUTLINE FACTS.
Major-General George Gordon Meade.
Commanding the Federal Army at
Gettysburg.
Place. The battle was
fought in and around the
the village of Gettysburg, in
Adams county, Pennsylvania,
about 70 miles north of Wash-
ington City, and 40 mips
south-west of Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania. The village
at the time contained about
3,200 inhabitants, many of
whom remained at home
during the terrible conflict.
Time. —The several engage-
ments included under the
general name of the battle
occupied a portion of three
days, the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd
days of July, 1863.
Commanders. —The “ Army of the Potomac ” (Union) was
commanded by General George Gordon Meade, who superseded
General Hooker but three days before the battle. The “ Army
of Northern Virginia ” (Confederate) was commanded by General
Robert E. Lee.


NSON
STEVENSON
BROTHERS,
Jewellers, Silversmiths,
AND
Watchmakers,
382 GEORGE ST„
BETWEEN THE POST OFFICE AND KING STREET.
Lowest Prices in Australia.
Busiest House in tlie Trade.
The STOCK is of the Very Finest Description, and comprises
DIAMOND RINGS, GOLD ALBERTS, BANGLES, BROOCHES,
WATCHES, EARRINGS, PENCIL CASES, MATCHBOXES, &c., &c.
Also a Magnificent Stock of MARBLE CLOCKS and all kinds of CLOCKS,
The SILVER ELECTROPLATE is especially choice. SALAD BOWLS.
TEA KETTLES, DESSERT SETS, FISH KNIVES, TEA and COFFEE
.SERVICES, SALVERS, SPOONS, FORKS, KNIVES, &c., &c.
Every Article Marked in Plain Figures.
GOTO STEVENSON BROS.’,
Watchmakers, Jewellers, Silversmiths, and Diamond Setters.
352 Q-EIORGrE ST.,
Between Post Office and King Street.
STEVENSON BROTHERS’ Celebrated Plate Polish Cleans and Polishes Old Plate,
L Gold and Silver Jewellery, and makes each article New. Price, Is per box.


Numbers Engaged. —Much, discrepancy of testimony exists
in regard to the number of troops engaged on either side. It is
probable, however, that tbe Federal and Confederate forces were
nearly equal, and each army not far from 75,000 men.
Losses. —General Meade reported his losses in the three
days fightingat 2,834 killed, 13,713 wounded, and 6,643 missing,
making an aggregate loss of 23,190. Nothing like an official
report of Confederate losses was ever made by General Lee, but
his loss has been estimated at 5,000 killed, 23,000 wounded, and
13,733 captured, about 8,000 of the latter being included among
the wounded. Aggregate, 33,733.
THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF THE BATTLE.
By common consent the battle of Gettysburg has come to
be regarded as the pivotal battle of the Great Rebellion. In
the language of General Doubleday, “ There the Southern Con-
federacy reached high-water mark.” Considering the condition
of public sentiment at that time* it is difficult to determine what
results would have followed a defeat of the Union arms at
Gettysburg. The Confederate leaders, as least, fully believed
that such an event would have secured for them a final triumph.
General Fitz-Hugh Lee said, “ On the heights of Gettysburg, on
the 3rd day of July, the Confederate cause was within a stone's
throw of peace.” E. A. Pollard, the brilliant author of “ The
Lost Cause,” said, “ Gettysburg may be taken as the grand
climacteric of the Southern Confederacy.” And Jefferson Davis,
writing after the mature reflection of years, said, “It may be
regarded as the most eventful struggle of the war. By it the
drooping spirits of the North were revived. Had their army
been there defeated, those having better opportunity of judging
than I, or any one who was not among them, have believed it
would have ended the war.


CONFEDERATE MOTIVES IN THE MOVEMENT.
The earlier policy of the Confederate administration was
that of a strictly defensive warfare ; but in the progress of
events, the same popular impatience which so often drove the
Federal generals forward to defeat, overcame the prudence of
the Confederate leaders, and a retaliatory invasion of the North
became with them a fixed idea that only awaited a favorable
moment for execution.
In June, 1868, the favorable moment for such a policy
seemed to have fully arrived. Six months previously the army
of the Potomac, under General Burnside, had met a crushing
defeat at Fredericksbui’g; a defeat so demoralising that for
some time afterwards the desertions from the Union ranks
averaged 200 a day. Only a month before the commencement
of the Gettysburg campaign, the same army, under General
Hooker, had received another staggering blow at Cliancellors-
ville. These events had not only discouraged the army, but
had greatly affected the entire North. The price of gold, the
index of public confidence, had risen enormously. Voluntary
enlistments had almost entirely ceased, and the conscription
measures of the Government, themselves an evidence of distress,
were being evaded and resisted to a degree that threatened a
rise of a new rebellion. The Peace Party had grown pro-
digiously, and, both in and out of Congress, was clamorous and
threatening. Added to this, there were growing rumors of an
approaching interference in behalf of the Confederacy by
England and France. Loyal sentiment at the North was at a
point of anxiety almost amounting to despondency, and it
seemed as though the period had arrived when a single great
victory won for the Confederates upon Northern soil would
settle the war, and shatter the Union in hopeless and irremediable
defeat. Such at least was the view of the Confedei’ate leaders.
In his “ Rise and Fall of the Confederate States,” Mr. Davis


thus expresses the Southern expectation:—“lt was decided by
a bold movement to attempt to transfer hostilities to the north
side of the Potomac, by crossing the river and marching into
Maryland and Pennsylvania, simultaneously driving the foe out
of the Shenandoah Valley. Thus, it was hoped, General
Hooker’s army would be called from Virginia to meet our
advance toward the heart of the enemy’s country. If, beyond
the Potomac, some favorable opportunity should be offered to
defeat the army on which our foe most relied, the measure of
our success would be full.”
In his report of this campaign, General Lee says, “The
legitimate fruits of a victory, if gained in Pennsylvania, could
be more readily reaped than on our own soil. We would have
been within a few day’s march of Philadelphia, and the
occupation of that city would have given us peace.”
THE FORWARD MOVEMENT.
Elated by their xecent victories, the 3rd of June the
Confederate columns swung out from their position on the
Rappahannock and started upon the Gettysburg campaign. It
was a grand army. Poor indeed in mere equipment, ragged and
ill-fed, but passing rich in those soldierly qualities which are
the surest presages of success. Seventy thousand strong, the
flower of all the South, accustomed to victory, inured to hard-
ship, and with that perfect confidence in their Generals which
had ripened through long and uninterrupted association, it was
no wonder that General Longstreet should j have said as he
looked upon them, “ This army is in a condition to undertake
anything.”


(Established 1860.)
9
m
LI4
(Including the Gold and Silver Medals), for
HATS & FEATHERS
fit the ‘‘ Intercolonial and International Exhibition,’
awarded to
. F.
9
s^riouynE^r-
Gentlemen’s Clothes, Hats and Feathers
Cleaned and Dyed. Highest and Only
Prize awarded toy the Judges—“ Wealth
and Industrial Exhibition.”
———
Parcels by Rail and Post punctually
attended to and returned.
No connection with any other House in the Colonies.


General Robert E. Lee,
Quietly slipping away
from Hooker’s front at
Fredericksburg Lee swiftly
marched northward by
Culpepper Court House,
entered tbe Shenandoah
Valley, swept Milroy out
of Winchester, and had
successfully crossed the
Potomac, and was ravaging
the fair fields of Maryland
and Pennsylvania before
the Federal commander
missed him. A whole
week’s march had been
Commander of the Confederate Forces gained ; and even then the
significance of the movement was not understood, and Hooker
fell back toward Washington, wrongly conjecturing that the
National Capital was the objective point of Lee’s campaign.
Words are impotent to express the surprise and alarm of
the North as the truth became apparent. The populous and
affluent cities of Harrisburg, Philadelphia and Baltimore trembled
with apprehension, seeming to feel already the jarring tread of
the approaching invasion. Even Pittsburg and New York
shared the general trepidation, and Washington itself appeared
no longer safe. Frightened rumour greatly multiplied the num-
bers of the enemy, while the mystery of their movements added
to an anxiety that was rapidly becoming dismay. This, then,
was the end ! After enormous and repeated draughts upon the
public credit that had brought the Nation to the verge of bank-
ruptcy ; after the terrible struggles and fearful losses of the often
defeated but always heroic army of the Potomac, the anxious,
startled North saw the Confederacy, apparently stronger than
ever, rising into an attitude of supreme defiance, and sweeping
the red billows of war up to their own doors. The loyal people


of the North knew that very soon a great and decisive battle
must be fought; and, though their purpose to sacrifice and be
sacrificed never faltered for a moment, they looked back at the
still smoking fields of Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville, and
attempting to forecast the future by the past, the prospect sobered
every br-ow and saddened every heart. It did not appear impos-
sible that Robert Toombs should realise his boast that he
would yet “ call the roll of his slaves at the foot of Brunker Hill
Monument.”
The honour and the perpetuity of the Union were staked
upon the army of the Potomac, and right nobly that army res-
ponded to the call. Its commander, “ Fighting Joe Hooker,”
having once penetrated the real design of his skilful adversary,
proved himself deficient in neither courage nor address. Rapidly
gathering in his outposts he put his army on the road and went
streaming back across the Potomac, and on northward to inter-
cept Lee’s march toward Harrisburg.
At Frederick City, on the 28th of June, Hooker, who had
been refused the service of a body of troops then posted at
Harper’s Ferry, resigned, and General Meade was appointed by
telegraph to succeed him.
Meantime, the position in which Hooker had placed !is army
seriously threatened Lee’s rear, and forced that General to arrest
his onward movement and take steps to concentrate his troops.
Neither Meade nor Lee intended to fight where they did nor as
they did. Lee had promised his lieutenants not to risk an
offensive battle on nothern soil, and Meade had determined to
take up a defensive position on Big Pipe Creek, miles away.
The “ strategy of Providence,” however, decided otherwise. At
daylight on June 30th, some of Pettigrew’s Confederate infantry
and Buford’s Federal cavalry came in collision near Fairfield, 10
miles south-east of Gettysburg. A sharp conflict followed, when
both parties fell back to wait reinforcements. General
Reynolds, in command of Doubleday’s (Ist) and Howard’s


(11th) corps, of the Army of the Potomac, in pursuance of
orders, was at that time approaching Gettysburg. He was a
Pennsylvanian, and boiling with shame and indignation at the
invasion of his native State, he hurried forward, encountering
the enemy at 11 a.m., July Ist, at Willoughby Run, three miles
north-west of Gettysburg. The struggle at once began, and
soon the galloping couriers and the booming cannon were
summoning the scattered commands of both armies to the
fiercest and most grandly picturesque battle of modern times.
Properly speaking, there were three battles of Gettysburg,
fought respectively on the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd days of July,
1863.
FIRST DAY’S BATTLE.
As we have seen, the first day’s battle began three miles
north-west of the village. Buford’s cavalry went in first from
the Federal side, successively drawing into the fiery vortex
Doubleday s and later, Howard’s corps. The fighting was
desperate in the extreme, and the losses on both sides terrible.
The gallant endeavors of the Union troops, however, were in
vain. The heroic Reynolds fell dead with a sharpshooter’s
bullet through his brain, and at 4 p.m. Doubleday’s and
Howard s corps, outflanked and shattered, were bea,ten from
their last foothold on Seminary Ridge, just west of Gettysburg,
and retreated eastward through the frightened village.
A mile and a half east of the Confederate position on Semi-
nary Ridge, and just east of the village, is another ridge called
Cemetery Ridge, which is somewhat higher than the latter, and
extends mainly north and south. At its southern extremity it
terminates in two elevated sugar-loaf hills, called “ Round Top ”
and “ Little Round Top.” At the northern end the ridge doubles
eastward on itself, presenting three knobs, called Wolfe’s Hill,


66
THE CELEBRATED
55
Kwanloo 99 Blend
CKUT TEA,
In Half and 1-lb. Cartoons.
WMOLESAIX A&F.NTrs,^.
After much consideration, and many
trials of blendings of Teas,
TILLOCK & CO.
have at last hit the popular taste with the
above justly-celebrated Tea, which consists
of a blend of the finest descriptions of leaf,
in the exact proportions necessary to make
the most satisfactory and refreshing cup
of tea the most fastidious connoisseur
could desire.
The packages 'are elaborate, yet neat,
and make excellent shelf goods, besides
being so constructed that the exquisite
flavour of the tea is preserved.
The demand being now very large, we
are enabled to sell at a price which leaves
a good margin to the Storekeeper, and
gives him the finest “TWO SHILLING
TEA” he can procure, without the
expenditure of time and trouble in blend-
ing and packing.
We respectfully solicit the favour of a
trial order.
TRADE ONLY SUPPLIED.
TlttOCK * CP.,
WAEEHOTJSE =
Kent and Liirerpool Sts.,
BULK STORES =
Bathurst Street,
9TDVIT.


NORTH
WEST.
| tMM? / f—Round Top. 2—Little Round Topi '
/ g Qen. Sedgwick’s headquarters, 6th A.C. N&E
«?/ / .4 Summit where Gen’ls. Weed and Vincent and Lieut. Hazlett were killed, >k
y, / CoL O’Rourke killed, Wheeler, 20th Ind., killed. \
* / 6—Grand repulse of Longatreet by Penn. Reserves and BucktaOa. \ \S
f 14-Gen. E. J. Farnsworth killed-Devil’s Den. 6-Gen’L Donbteday and Staff \
/ 7-General Hancock and Staff. 8-Gen. Alex. Hays. 9-Gen. Gibbons. \
f 10—Gen. Webb. 11 —CoL Cushing mortally wounded, and near to where V
Gen. Willard, Gen. Ward, Cols. Ellgood, Willard, Merrill, P. Rsyere and Cross, all killed. \
12 Wilcox brigade, C. S. A. 13-Gen. Stannard’s grand charge.
15—Gen. Sickles lost his leg, and Gen. Barksdale (Miss.) killed.
18 —Gen. Armiatead mortally wounded. 17-New Orleans Washington artillery, C S, A.
18 —Codori House ; wounded and sick at the windows 19-Gen. Pickett and staff,
_ . , . _ 21—Lieut Hateltona hor®«.
20 —Confederate prisoners. .•-» ■
22-Portion of Pickett’s command. 23-Explosion of ammunition caisson.
MMGmmetsburg road, picketed by Bth and 12th 111. cav. 25-Mason’s Virginia artillery, C. S. fiu
26—Lynchburg S. A. 27—Millerstown road! 29—Burning building; BUsa place.
30-Lieut. Montgomery, comd’g. 69th Penn. inft. 31-Portion of Pickett’s command.
32 Portion 71st and 60th Peon.
33— Opening oi engagement by Buford’s, Farnsworth’s and Gamble’s cavalry.
3—Seminary tower; headquarters Gen. Lee; Gen. Reynolds killed, and staffs of Gen’ls. Hill and Ewell, C. S. A
!36-24th Mioh. * Iron Brigade.’’ 38—Gettysburg. 37—House, defended by our Col. Thompson.
8 -Charge of the “ Iron Brigade”; Gen. Fairchilds, of Wis., lost his arm ; Gen. Paul lost his eyes, and Gen.
j S£Robiasba wounded. 39—Charge of 12th New Jersey, CoL R. S. Thompson.
40-Capt. Hazard, chief artillery. 2d A. C. .41 -Cemetery Hill, Gen. 0. 0. Howard, comd’g.
42^—Culp's Hill,' 12th A. C., Gen. Williams Comd’g.
43—Powers’ Hill, headquarters Gen. Slocum, oomd’g. right of lines.
44—CoL D. W. Flagler, chief ordnance officer, with reserve ammunition.
45 —Camp wagons, used as ambulances, carrying off the wounded.
48 —3trawstacks used as temporary hospitals. 47—Field hospital. 48 —Artillery coming into action.
. 49—Mead’s old headquarters. 60—Wounded soldiers stationed to shoot deserters. 1
\ 51—Gen. Hunt and Col. Osborn. 52—Custer’s grand cavalry charge. /
\ 53—Baltimore road. 54—Mead’s headquarters. /
\ 65 —Bimey’a headquarters, 3d A. C. / /
( , \ 66 —Gen. J. S. Robinson, KospitaL / }//
Sk. \. 67—7th Mich. voL. 3d div., 2d A.C., CoL N- J. Hall oomd’g. / f/j
EAST.
SOUTH.


Culp’s Hill, and Cemetery Hill, the latter being the site of the
village grave-yard. Howard’s keen eye had perceived the feasi-
bility of establishing on this ridge a new line of defence, and in
the midst of the final misiortunes of the day, he had sent Stein-
wehr and his shattered brigade to occupy Cemetery Hill. Here
the retreating forces'were rallied and partially entrenched, and
thus the main battle-field was selected, a service for which
General Howard afterward received the thanks of Congress.
By some fatal mischance Lee thought it best to further
concentrate his command before delivering a final blow, and no
further attack was made that day. It was indeed a fatal mis-
chance, for late in the afternoon Hancock arrived, confirming the
position and cheering the exhausted soldiers on Cemetery Hill;
and all through that hot July night, through clouds of blinding
dust, parched with thirst and trembling with fatigue, Meade s
gallant men were hurrying to the field of conflict. By morning
Slocum’s and Sickles’ corps were in line with their comrades,
and Cemetery Ridge was strongly occupied.
SECOND DAY’S
BATTLE.
Lieutenant-General Janes Longstreet,
Busied with preparation,
the Confederates did not
attack until near 4 p.m. of
the next day, July 2nd,
when Longstreet’s troops
furiously assaulted the
Union left, hoping to seize
Little Round Top. Here,
at “ Devil’s Den ” and the
“ Peach Orchard,” North
and South were again at
death - grips. The 3rd
Commanding the First Corps (the Right win g) desneratelv strug-
of the Confederate Army at Gettysourg. corps, P ) n


gling, was driven back before the fury of their onslaught, and in
attempting to rally his broken lines, the gallant Sickles lost his
right leg, and, falling, saw his men retreating, with the prospect
of involving the whole Union army in. their rout. And here, at
the critical moment, came the sth corps to the rescue, and by 6
p.m., the tide of Confederate victory was stayed, and the Round
Tops saved.
Scarcely had the battle ceased at this point when it re-
opened furiously on the extreme right, where Ewell’s Con-
federates assaulted the Federal position on Culp’s Hill. Here,
also, the Confederates for a time seemed invincible, and storm-
ing forward through the moonlight succeeded in occupying a
portion of the coveted hill. At 10 o’clock p.m. it had grown
too dark for further operations. The Confederates, satisfied
with the advantage obtained, paused for the night, and blue
and gray lay down among the dead and dying to await daylight
and the final struggle. The result of the day’s operations, upon
the whole, had been favorable to the South, and General Lee
said in his subsequent report: “ These partial successes
determined me to continue the assault the next day.”
THIRD DAY’S BATTLE.
Early on the morning of the 3rd, the ]2th corps attacked
the Confederates and drove them from the position which they
had gained on Culp’s Hill. Compared with the preceding
engagements the fighting was not severe, and by noon the last
sputter of musketry ceased at the base of the hill. Then came
an hour of ominous silence. What could it mean ? Were the
Southerners retreating, or was this “the silence that precedes
the storm ? In the Confederate lines on Seminary Ridge, a
mile and a half westward, a cloud of dust could be seen pro-
gressing toward the south. Were the Confederates indeed


retreating, or was it some new strategy which Lee was
inaugurating P About 1 p.m. suddenly the answer came. The
Confederate chieftain had quietly massed 150 cannons opposite
the Federal left-centre, and now, upon a preconcerted signal,
their voices broke the silence in tones which seemed
‘ ‘ As though the fiends from Heaven that fell,
Had pealed the banner cry of hell.”
Instantly the Union artillery replied, and for two hours the
startled hills around the little Pennsylvania village witnessed
such an artillery battle as has never before been equalled on the
continent, nor perhaps in the world.
It was Lee’s purpose to play upon the left centre of the
Union line until he had shattered it sufficiently to allow an
assault. At 3 o’clock that purpose seemed to have been accom-
plished. General Hunt, Federal Chief of Artillery, had ordered
his batteries to cease firing in order to allow the guns to cool
and to husband his ammunition for the crucial struggle, which
he felt was approaching. Supposing that the Union batteries
were silenced, General Lee prepared to deliver the final blow, to
which the artillery attack had been merely preliminary. At
3.30 p.m., Pickett’s division of Longstreet’s corps, arranged in
two lines, and consisting of Garnett’s, Kemper’s, and Armistead’s
brigades, emerged from the wooded crest of Seminary Ridge.
They were supported on the left by Pettigrew’s brigade, and on
the right by the brigades of Wright and Wilcox. Altogether
the assaulting force amounted to about 17,000 muskets, and
braver men never faced death. With splendid precision they
swept down Seminary Ridge and out across the open fields.
One-third of the way across, the ground begins to ascend
toward Cemetery Ridge, and here the Confederate batteries,
which had been raining iron upon the Union line, were compelled
to cease firing for fear of injuring their own troops. Then
came the opportunity for the Union artillery, and from all along
Cemetery Ridge an awful converging cannonade was opened


upon the advancing columns, shot and shell at first, then, 'as the
range grew closer, grape and canister in double charges. Great
rents were torn through and through them, and soon the ground
was dotted with an ever-increasing harvest of their wounded
and dead. Prom his position on Cemetery Ridge, directly in
front of the assaulting force, General Webb saw the terrible
execution of the Union artillery, and rising in his stirrups
shouted, “ Boys, they are ours !” His confidence was, to be
justified, but not before Pickett and his Virginians had exhausted
the last measure of heroic endurance and endeavor. On they
came, closing their riven ranks, as with increasing momentum
they swept up the fatal slope, and soon the crash of deadly
musketry joined the terrific chorus of battle, and the death-roll
on both sides mounted with ghastly rapidity. Nothing, how-
ever, seemed sufficient to check the headlong valor of Pickett’s
charge, and they advanced until at last the Union line was
broken, and its bleeding fragments were driven eastward over
the crest of the ridge. The blue flag of the Virginians waved
triumphantly in the breach ; Webb’s last batteries were for a
moment in their grasp, and as the Confederate General
Armistead leaped forward and laid his hand upon one of the
abandoned guns, “ the tide of Southern Rebellion reached high-
water mark.”
But it was only for a moment. Greek had met Greek, and
Webb and his bluecoats meant to win or lay their bodies with
those of their dead comrades. His command w r as indeed broken
into fragments, but each fragment was alive, and with fierce
tenacity they clung to the enemy, often struggling hand to hand,
until help should come. And soon it came. Woodruff’s battery
from the grove on the Union right was run forward, turned to
the left and swept the hillside ; Hays’ division rose from behind
a stone wall and delivered a sheet of flame; Hall’s and
Stannard’s brigades, from Webb’s left, charged to the rescue,
and a withering blast of musketry concentrated upon the
disorded Confederate column almost swept it Erom existence. In
a few minutes the work was done. Of Pickett’s three brigadiers


Garnett was dead, Armistead mortally, and Kemper seriously
wounded, while their commands were riddled and shattered
beyond all hope. Over 4,500 Confederates threw down their
arms and surrendered on the spot, and the remainder retreated
through a fire almost as destructive as that through which they
had advanced. Here the hattle virtually closed. Lee, indeed,
succeeded in withdrawing his army across the Potomac, but it
had received a mortal hurt, and thenceforth could do little more
than struggle desperately back toward the last ditch.
A day later the telegraph brought to the relieved nation
news of double victory —the battle of Gettysburg and the fall
of Vicksburg. Mr. Lincoln, reviving an old colonial custom, set
apart the 6th day of August as a day of thanksgiving to
Almighty God for His mercies, while Mr. Davis appointed the
21st day of the same month as a day of fasting, humiliation and
prayer for the South. Upon the one side it was a confident
assertion of victory, and upon the other a tacit acknowledgement
of defeat. Both proclamations were prophetic of the final result
of the war; and to-day the whole civilized world echoes the
sentiments of Mr. Lincoln, uttered at the dedication of the
National Burrying Ground on Cemetery Hill:
“ In a larger sense we car mot dedicate, we cannot consecrate,
we cannot hallow this spot. The brave men, living and dead,
who struggled here, have consecrated it far above our power to
add or detract. What we say here the world will little note nor
long remember, but what they did here the world can never
forget.”
The Gettysburg Cyclorama was painted at the studios of
Messrs Heed and Gross in Chicago, U.S.A., by the following
eminent artists, under the personal direction of Mr. Howard
H. Gross Messieurs Albert G. Reinhart, John 0. Anderson,
Josef P. Birrens, and Paul Wilhelmi, composition and figures.
Mr. Edwin W. Denning, and M. Peyrand, horses. Mr. E. J.
Austen (of London), still life ; Messieurs John H. Twachtman,
Thaddeus C. Welch, Cephas H. Collins, and Henry A. Vincent,


Royal Standard Printing Works.
J. W. 111 Y,
STEAM LITHOGRAPHIC
LETTERPRESS PRINTER,
227 Casfleireagh St,
SYDNEY.
(Nearly opposite Protestant Hall.)
Estimates given for Newspapers,
Journals, Periodicals, Pamphlets,
and every Description of Litho-
graphic and Letterpress
Printing,
Good Workmanship—lowest frices.


landscape. The landscape is rue to nature. It was painted
from photographs and sketches taken upon the field. The com-
position was most carefully made, after months of research upon
the field, in the archives of the War Department at Washington,
and the voluminous histories of the conflict by the Compte de
Paris, General Doubleday, E. A. Pollard, and the Government
Historian, Colonel J. B. Batchelder. Patrons may feel assured
that the scene presented is as faithful and accurate a portrayal
of the climax of this great battle as it is possible for art to
give.
KOW CVCLDRARIAS ARE PRODUCED.
The general public can have but a vague idea of the methods
employed, or the vast amount of labor necessary to create and
set for view a great Cyclorama.
In the space alloted, the writer can give in outline onlv
some of the means employed, and the successive steps as they
are taken in the work.
A battle Cyclorama, to be a success, must be trne to nature,
true to history, a complete and harmonious whole. It must be
spirited, every figure must be doing something, and doing it
well —to use an Americanism, there must be plenty of “go” in
it. The landscape should be like “holding a mirror up to
nature.”
The undertaking is one far too great to be done by any one
man. The best results are gained by the colaboration of a dozen
or more artists, each of whom is a specialist, trained and fitted
for his respective work. There must be no jealousies, and no
favourites ; but rather a willingness to unite for a common
purpose, and work as one man.
Those who know something of the sensitiveness of great
artists, their strong individualities, not to say eccentricities, may
have some conception of how dangerous and thorny is the path
of the directing artist, who for month after month supervises,
arranges and details the work as it progresses.


Preparatory Work.
The first duty of the leading artist is to exhaust the subject
chosen by close, careful study of all reliable history, a personal
inspection of the battle field, make or secure a topographical
survey of it. He must gather from the war archives and
museums the various implements of warfare used. He must
understand thoroughly the military tactics of the combatants,
and above all, have a genius for the work in hand.
From the ever shifting scenes, from the kaleidoscope of the
battle, some one view is chosen and the position of observation
is selected ; this is known as the ‘ initial,’ and it must be fixed
upon the field. From this point the artists now work. Sketches
and studies are made here from nature, the tones, values,
atmospheric effects are carefully noted.
The landscape is so photographed in sections, that by
joining the several prints (16) the entire horizon is shown.
From these prints, all objects such as houses, barns, or roads,
placed there subsequent to the battle, are removed. Buildings
torn down and trees cut away since the battle are restored.
These photo prints are carefully joined so as to show, without a
break or overlap, the entire landscape as seen from the “initial.”
The prints are then ruled into squares of about one inch. These
squares are numbered from right to left, and lettered from the
bottom to the top. These squares are referred to, as for
example, G 74 or K 56.
The horizon line of the landscape of the cyclorama to be
made is fixed to be 20 feet from the bottom of the painting. The
leading - landscape artist prepares a canvas 20ft. x 4ft. mounted
upright, the top serving as the horizon of this study from
nature. Upon this he paints very carefully a small section of
the landscape (about 2>\ degrees wide, and extending from the


horizon to the “ initial,”) this is the principal study, and known
as “ The Key.” The use of this will be explained hereafter
The Work Begins.
A large canvas about 50 by 400 feet is carefully stretched
in a circular building just as you see it on exhibition, except,
there is a tramway all around close to the canvas, upon which
are movable staging or carriages of different heights to enable
the artists to readily reach any part of the great canvas. This
canvas is lined off into squares, numbered and lettered to exactly
correspond to the squares of the photo prints, to which they
relate. The landscape artists draw' in black with charcoal the
landscape as shown by the photo prints, being exceedingly careful
that every object is drawn to its proper scale, and placed
accurately in its particular square. This requires several
months’ time. When this is finished u the key already
described is brought out, and the top, or horizon of the key, is
hooked into the large canvas at its horizon. The key thus hung
reaches the bottom of the canvas, and shows at once the tones,
inflections, strength of shadows, character, and quantity of
detail, etc., required to guide the artist in the use of his brush,
whether he be painting the delicate, hazy distance of the
horizon, the sunny fields of the middle distance, or the strong,
rugged foreground at your feet.
The Composition of the Conflict.
So far has been given only the modus operandi of the land-
scape artist. We shall now speak briefly of the work of com-
position, a task far more arduous than anything else in the
whole work. The composer must conceive and create an ideal
conflict of mighty proportions that shall fairly bristle with the
spirit of the times, that must in a striking and realistic manner
portray the mad furious rush of war; and yet, hardest of all, he
must keep well within the lines of authentic history that nothing
inharmonious or incogrous may appear. The composer must


i
m \
Undertaker, &c.,
JE3L&S3L&. Offl.oe:
189 & 195 Devonshire St.
STATE & REFORM FUNERALS
Respectfully conducted under my own supervision, on the
Shortest Notice and upon the most reasonable terms.
A Large Stock of Cedar, Polished Oak, and Leaden Coffins
always on hand. Wreaths and Memorial Cards to any
design.
Branch Establishments —
ASHFIELD—RaiIway Station.
BURWOOD—Railway Station*
KOGARAH—Railway Station.
telephone 1003.
ALB. The Trade supplied m all its branches
A large stock of Hearses and Mourning Coaches for Sale
or Built to Order to any design.
COUNTRY ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
Letters and Telegrams to be addressed to Head Office-


be a living cyclopaedia upon the subject in hand ; he must know
all abou,t it. To assist him in his work, his associates have
prepared a canvas 5 by 40 feet (being one-tenth the dimensions
of the large canvas). Upon this is carefully placed in water-
color the entire landscape one-tenth the required size. This
canvas is carefully laid out into squares, and upon it the com-
position is made. Figures are drawn in and rubbed out, again
and again ; the work of weeks sometimes wiped out in a moment.
To aid him, hundreds of instantaneous photographs are taken of
men and horses in action and in attitudes. It may be one time
a dozen or more men in Federal uniform charging an imaginary
Confederate battery, or perhaps, a dying soldier being borne
from the field by his faithful comrades. When the composition
has been satisfactorily made (the reader can never realise what
this means), the canvas is photographed, and the prints are
lined into squares properly numbered and lettered, and from
these figure the artists draw and paint. When the work upon
the large canvas is completed, a seam is opened from top to
bottom. A large hollow, iron roller, 18 inches in diameter by
50 feet long, is mounted in a vertical, position at the side of one
of the tallest carriages. The carriage is moved along very
slowly a few inches at a time, as the canvas is loosened from its
fastening at the top, and tightly wound upon the roller. To
roll the painting properly requires great care and skill, and is
not unattended with danger.
If all goes well, in five or six days the dozen trained men
will have the great painting rolled up and covered with water-
proofing material, boxed up and ready to be sent away to its
destination, where the operation of hanging the painting is
similar to that of rolling it up, only the operation is reversed.


X A. BULL & C
•«
TEA MERCHAIITS,
172 Clarence St
LADIES, DRINK THE
EIFFEL TOWER BLEND
mm
The Purest, Strongest and Best 2s. lea in the
Colonies.
Ask your Grocer for it.


John Burns of Gettysburg.
(from the Cyclorama picture.)
Probably no figure in tbe
Gettysburg Cyclorama attracts
so much attention from visitors
as that of the old farmer, a true
citizen soldier, immortalised in
Bret Harte’s feeling sketch. The
enthusiasm with which the little
poem has been received by
visitors to the Cyclorama in
Sydney has led to its inclusion
here. *
1 ‘ Have you heard the story the gossips tell
Of John Bums, of Gettysburg? No ? Ah well,
Brief is the glory that hero earns,
Briefer the story of poor John Bums :
He was the fellow who won renown—
The only man who didn’t baek down
When the rebels rode through his native town ;
But held Ms own in the fight next day,
When all his townsfolk ran away.
That was in July, sixty-three —
The very day that General Lee,
The flower of Southern chivalry,
Baffled and beaten, backward reeled
From a stubborn Meade and a barren field.
I might tell how, but the day before,
John Bums stood at his cottage-door,
Looking down the village-street;
Where, in the shade of his peaceful vine,
He heard the low of his gathered kine,
And felt their breath with incense sweet;
Or, I might say, when the sunset burned
The old farm gable, he thought it tiurned
The milk, that fell in a babbling flood
Into the milk-pail, red as blood ;
Or how he fancied the hum of bees
Were bullets buzzing among the trees.
But all such fanciful thoughts as these
Were strangle to a practical man like Bums,
Who minded only his own concerns,
Troubled no more by fancies fine
Than one of his calm-eyed long-tailed kine
Quite old-fashioned and matter-of-fact,
Slow to argue, but quick to act.


That was the reason, as some folks say,
He fought so well on that terrible day.
And it was terrible. On the right
Raged for hours the heavy fight,
Thundered the battery’s double-bass—
Difficult music for men to face ;
While on the left—where now the graves
Undulate like the living waves
That all the day unceasing swept .
Up to the pits the rebels kept—
Round-shot ploughed the upland glades,
Sown with bullets, reaped with blades ;
Shattered fences here and there
Tossed their splinters in the air ;
The very trees were stripped and bare ;
The barns that once held yellow grain
Were heaped with harvest of the slain ;
The cattle bellowed on the plain,
The turkeys screamed with might and main,
And brooding bam-fowl left their rest
With strange shells bursting in each nest.
Just where the tide of battle turns,
Erect and lonely, stood old John Bums.
How do you think the man was dressed ?
He wore an ancient long buff vest—
Yellow as saffron, but his best;
And buttoned over his manly breast
Was a bright blue coat, with a rolling collar
And large gilt buttons —size of a dollar —
With tails that country-folk call “ swaller.”
He wore a broad-brimmed bell-crowned hat,
White as the locks on which it sat.
Never had such a sight-been seen
For forty years on the village-green,
Since John Burns was a country-beau,
And went to the “ quilting,” long ago.
Close at his elbows, all that day,
Veterans of the Peninsula,
Sunburnt and bearded, charged away,
And striplings, downy of lip and chin—
Clerks that the Home Guard mustered in—
Glanced, as they passed, at the hat he wore,
Then at the rifle his right hand bore,
And hailed him, from out their youthful lore,
With scraps of a slangy repertoire :
“ How are you, White Hat r” “ Put her through !”
‘‘Your head’s level!” and “ Bully for you !”
Called him “ Daddy,” and begged he’d disclose
The name of the tailor who made his clothes,
And what was the value he set on those ;
While Bums, unmindful of jeer and scoff,
Stood there picking the rebels off —•
With his long brown rifle and bell-crown hat
And the swallow-tails they were laughing at.


’Twas biit a moment-: for that respect
Which clothes all courage their voices checked ;
And something the wildest could understand
Spake in the old man’s strong right hand,
And his corded throat, and the lurking frown
Of his eyebrows under his old bell-crown ;
Until, as they gazed, there crept an awe
Through the ranks,, in whispers, and some men saw,
In the antique vestments and long white hair,
The Past of the Nation in battle there.
And some of the soldiers since declare
That the gleam of his old white hat afar,
Like the crested plume of the brave Navarre,
That day was their oriflamme of war.
Thus raged the battle. You know the rest:
How the rebels, beaten and backward pressed,
Broke at the final charge and ran ;
At which John Bums, a practical man,
Shouldered his ride, unbent his brows,
And then went back to his bees and cows.
This is the story of old John Burns —
This is the moral the reader learns:
In fighting the battle, the question’s whether
You’ll show a hat that’s white, or a feather.
ROSTERS
OF THE
FEDERAL & CONFEDERATE ARMIES
Engaged in the Battle of Gettysburg, Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday , July Ist, 2nd & 3rd, 1863.
febismjli mm.
Major-General GEO. GORDON MEADE, Commanding.
STAFF.
*Ma job-General JOHN F. REYNOLDS, Commanding the First, Third,
and Eleventh Corps on July Ist.
Major-General HENRY W. SLOCUM, Commanding the Right Wing on
July 2nd and 3rd.
Major-General W. S. HANCOCK, Commanding the Left Centre on
July 2nd and 3rd.
’"Killed, and succeeded by Major-General 0. O. Howard.


FIRST CORPS.
Major-General JOHN F. REYNOLDS, Permanent Commander (killed).
SECOND CORPS.
Major-General WINFIELD S. HANCOCK (wounded).
THIRD CORPS.
Major-General DANIEL E. SICKLES, Commanding (wounded).
FIFTH CORPS.
Major-General GEORGE SYKES, Commanding.
SIXTH CORPS.
Major-General JOHN SEDGWICK, Commanding.
ELEVENTH CORPS.
Major-General OLIVER O. HOWARD, Permanent Commander.
Major-General CARL SCHURZ, July Ist.
TWELFTH CORPS.
Brigadier-General ALPHEUS S. WILLIAMS, Commanding.
CAVALRY CORPS.
Major-General ALFRED PLEASONTON, Commanding.
ARTILLERY.
Brigadier-General HENRY J. HLNT, Commanding.
COMFIBTOimJM'ffi SBHY.
General ROBERT E. LEE, Commanding.
FIRST CORPS.
Lieutenant-General JAMES LONGSTREET.
SECOND CORPS.
Lieutenant-General R. S. EWELL.
THIRD CORPS.
Lieutenant-General A. P. HILL.
CAVALRY CORPS.
Lieutenant-General J. E. B. STUART. // V
ARTILLERY. II q
General W. N. PENDLETON, Commanding.
II >-


OVER A CENTURY OF PUBLIC FAVOUR,
PLEASE ASK FOR
EVANS’
P
Ts\ BOAR’S
*
HEAD
ESTABLISHEU ±733.
n
n
AND INSIST UPON HAVING THEM.
DiArou mean Evans’ Crochet Reels ?
Yes ! And their SIX-CORD MACHINE COTTON too.
Then get their PATENT GLACE, BLUE LABEL,
and for Fancy Work, to be in the fashion, you must have their
MALTESE THREAD.
See little books on the Counters:—“LlGHT WORK FOR LEISURE
HOURS,”
AND THE VERY BEST OP
WHITE AND COLOURED CROCHET BALLS,
But, above all, see that you get
Evans’ Coloured Machine Cotton Six-Cord,
And then you’ll be “real happy” as our American Cousins say.
DON’T FORG-BT !
EVANS’ wEoar’s Head-® COTTONS.


SATO 25 PIS CENT.
By Patronizing
THE LARGEST BOOT & SHOE
Manufacturer and Importer
11ST AUSTRALIA.
BRANCHES.
)o(
New South Wales.
Oxford Street
Darling-hurst
Glebe
Balmain
Pyrinont
North Shore
Newtown
Petersham
Leichhardt
Padding-ton
L lima in West
Waverley
Summer Hill
Burwood
Parramatta
Wollongong
Newcastle
West Maitland
Goulburn
Bathurst
Orange
Tam worth
Armidale
Inverell
Young
y -
s&£-
*
c&i r
-. *
- o
FOOTPRINTS
When made on the seashore soon fade away, but
others impressions made by the pretty shoes at
JOHN HUNTER’S last for ever. They will im-
press you very favourably and the sizes and styles
will surely please.
branches.
)o(
South Australia.
Adelaide Palace
North Adelaide
Port Adelaide
Kapunda
Moonta
Kadnia
Hindmarsh
Glawler
Norwood
Queensland.
Brisbane (5)
Valley
Maryborough
Toowoomba
Ipswich
Clarence
Town Hall
Kangaroo Point
Red Hill
Rockhampton
Wholesale Stores.
47 York st., Sydney
Ann St., Brisbane
Rrndle Street,
Adelaide
Factories ' —Redfern, N. S. W., Adelaide, Brisbane
The Renowned
BOOT PALACE,
CORNER OF
