

Dacey
Garden
Suburb.


,1, V^' >


Dacey Garden Suburb.
ISSUED BY THE .HOUSING BOARD.
Hon. J. S. T. McGOWEN. Chairman.
_ „ „ Hon. J. D. FITZGERALD, )
F. F. Hall, Manager. I Members.
W. H. Fooott. Architect. J ' W ' HOLLIMAN. LS.O. ]
SYDSKY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE CULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1918.




Dacey Garden Suburb.
HE proposal to establish a Garden Suburb was first made by the Hon.
Carmichael, who was at that time Assistant Treasurer in the
' McGowen Government. The matter was subsequently taken in hand
by Mr. Carmichael’s successor in office, the late Hon. J. R. Dacey, and
finally took shape by the appointment of the Housing Board on the 24th
April, 1912; although work had actually been commenced on the proposed
site some time previously under instructions from Mr. Dacey. It was
decided that the name of the new suburb should be the Dacey Garden Suburb,
out of compliment to the Minister.


The suburb is situated about 5 miles from the centre of the City of
Sydney, and adjoins the suburb of Kensington. The land appropriated
comprises a total area of 336 acres, and is situated in the Municipalities
of Mascot and Botany.
At the time of appropriation the greater part of the area was vacant
Crown land; the remaining portion having previously been resumed for
the conservation of water, and in connection with the preservation of
the Botany Dam.
The contour of the land is of a more or less undulating character,
the soil being of a light sandy nature with an almost entire absence of
rock or clay.
The value of the land at the time of appropriation for purposes of
the suburb was fixed by the Government, on the advice of the Govern-
ment Land Valuer, at £65 per acre.


Ac es
Roads
70
Parks and open spaces
2lJ
Allotted to houses and shops
169J
,, to public buildings and churches
7
,, to Public School
5
Total
• 273
The original lay-out plan was prepared by Mr. John Sulrrtan,
F.R.1.8.A., and Mr. John Hennessy, Architects, with Mr. J. D.
Fitzgerald, barrister-at-law, first Chairman of the Housing Board. This
first hastily-prepared plan has been varied in the light of experience,
though its main features have been retained, and a new lay-out
plan was prepared in 1917 by Mr. W. H. Foggitt, the Board’s Architect.
A copy of same is appended hereto. This is apportioned as under :
leaving an area of 63 acres yet to be dealt with.
7
Dacey
Garden


The total number of houses on the 273 acres will be 1,673, averaging
6-65 to the acre, including roads, but excluding parks and open
spaces.
Before the Board could do much in the way of building cottages, a
large concrete drain had to be constructed through the area, and this
was completed at a cost of £ll,OBO 14s. 2d.
The actual operations, as far as the building of cottages was con-
cerned, were commenced on the 6th June, 1912.
The names adopted for the first streets were those historically
associated with the Captain Cook’s and La Pcrouse expedition-;, viz.,
Solander, Banks, Endeavour, Boussole, Astrolabe and Cook. Later on
names of Generals and others engaged in the great war have been
used.


Corporal Jacka* avenue was named after the first Australian awarded
the Victoria Cross ; Sergeant Larkin Crescent and Colonel Braund
avenue being named after two gallant members of the New South
Wales Parlirment who were killed on active service.
Burke and Wills Crescents are so named after two of the early
explorers of the Continent.
The size of the building allotments was at first fixed at 45 feet
frontage, with an average depth of 133 feet; but later on experience
showed that these allotments were too large, in the majority of cases,
for tenants to keep up effective gardening, and in subsequent sub-
♦JACKA, Lance-Corporal Albert, V.C., 14th Battalion. Australian Imperial Forces. Received the
V.C. for most conspicuous bravery on the night of May 19-20. 1915, at “ Courtney’s Post,” Gallipoli
Peninsula. While holding a portion of the British trench with four other men he was heavily attacked;
when all except himself were killed or wounded the trench was rushed and occupied by seven Turks; he
at once most gallantly attacked them single-handed, and killed the whole party, five by rifle fire and two
with the bayonet. Has been awarded the £5OO and the gold medal offered by John Wren to the first
Australian to win the V.C.


divisions the allotments have been reduced to as low as 35 feet frontage
with varying depths, but the land saved has been thrown into parks
and open spaces.
Designs of the first houses erected were prepared by the Government
Architect, Mr. G. Mcßae, the work of construction being carried out by
the Department of Public Works under the day labour system. As the
cottages erected in this way cost more than the Board considered
desirable, the system of erection by contract was resorted to, which
resulted in a considerable saving; and a further saving was effected by
the Board themselves undertaking the ejection of the cottages unde)
the day labour system. All the cottages are erected in a substantial
manner, either in brick or concrete, with roofs of tiles or slates.
The largest type of cottages have approximately qio superficial
feet of floor space, with back yard space of 2,750 superficial feet, and


front and side garden 1,670 superficial feet. In the smallest type there
are approximately 706 superficial feet of floor space, back yard 1,750
superficial feet, and front and side garden 1,380 superficial feet.
Each cottage contains in addition to the ordinary living rooms,
laundry, bathroom, pantry, W.C., fuel-shed, &c., with verandahs suitable
for sleeping out. The height of all rooms is 10 feet. The cottages are
lighted throughout with electricity, and gas is laid on for cooking pur-
poses. Fuel stoves arc also provided in the majority of the cottages.
The dwellings are let on weekly tenancies under an agreement;
and as the good appearance of the suburb largely depends on
the manner in which the gardens are looked after by the tenants, the.
Board considered it advisable to include in the tenancy agreement a
condition that the gardens should be kept in good order to the satis-
faction of the Board.


As a further, incentive to the tenants to maintain their gardens
in a satisfactory and pleasing condition, the Board gives prizes
annually for the best-kept gardens, with a champion prize for the whole
village.
At the end of the financial year terminated on the 30th June, 1918,
the total number of cottages erected was 267, the rentals for which
range from 12s. gd. to 18s. gd. per week; the average rental for the
whole of the suburb being a little less than 15s. 6d. per week, pro-
ducing a gross annual rental of £r 0,933.
In addition to the cottages, the Board has erected six shops and
dwellings at a cost of £5,950, which are let at rentals ranging from £2
to £2 12s. 6d. per week. A picture theatre has also been erected, and
is let under lease for a term of five years at a rental which gives a satis-
factory return on the cost.


The amount expended to date is £164 050 ; £117,204 being
absorbed on cottages; £8,944 on shops and picture theatre, and the
balance £37,902 in construction of the storm-water channel, road
formation, kerbing, guttering, &c.
It is estimated that a total expenditure of £877,000 will be required
to complete the suburb, so far as the area of 273 acres covered by the
lay-out plan is concerned.
The birth and death rates for the suburb have been very satis-
factory. For the year 1917, only five deaths took place at the suburb,
for an estimated population of 1,170, equalling 4 2 per 1,000. The
number of births for the same year was 28, equalling 24 per 1,000.
These figures compare more than favourably with the vital statistics
for Sydney and Suburbs for the same year, which were 26-30 per thousand
for births, and 9-75 per thousand for deaths.


The streets are all planted with avenues of trees, and in the main
streets provision has been made for garden plots in the centre.
Flowering trees and shrubs will be the main feature of the adorn-
ment scheme.
The appreciation by the tenants of the general conditions obtaining
at the suburb, is borne out by the fact that in a number of cases in which
tenants have had to give up their cottages owing to the acceptance of
employment in other States, they have, on their subsequent return to
this State, at once re-applied for houses at the suburb.
It is seldom that there are less than 300 names of applicants on the
Board’s register, awaiting their turn for consideration for houses.


In fixing the rentals, the Housing Act requires that the following
shall be provided for :
(a) Interest at not less than £4 per cent, on the capital value
of the land and buildings.
(i b ) Cost of insurance, rates, taxes, repairs and maintenance.
(f) The proportionate part of the expense of management
which is payable out of the Housing funds.
(d) Sinking fund in respect of the capital cost of the building.
Each year’s operations has shown a surplus after providing for the
above fixed charges. For the year ended 30th June, 1918, the surplus
was £428 4s. id.
Under the Housing Act the Board is not empowered to exercise
any discrimination as to the class of persons to whom the cottages may


be let; the only disqualification being the possession of land in the
State of New South Wales having a dwelling thereon. The tenants, as
may be expected, include representatives of practically every occupation
in the State, not omitting a member of Parliament, and a policeman.
Some fifty cottages are occupied by soldiers’ widows or returned
incapacitated soldiers. The rents of these cottages are paid by the
Government, the occupants of these premises living rent free.
The first Board consisted of Mr. J. D. Fitzgerald as Chairman, with
Mr. T. H. Nesbitt, Town Clerk of Sydney, and Mr. J. W. Holliman, 1.5.0.,
Under Secretary for Finance and Trade, as members. The present
Board consists of the Hon. J. S. T. McGowen as Chairman, and Mr.
Fitzgerald and Mr. Holliman as members.














Detached 4-room Cottage (no hall). Cement Tile Roof. Cost, £300; Rent, 14/- per week.










Detached Cottage, 5 rooms, showing a well-kept front garden. Rent, 17/6 per week.




Group of 2 Houses and 2 Cottages. Cost, £1,880 Rents 18/6 and 16/- per week.


















BIRD’S EYE VIEW OF DACEY GARDEN SUBURB WHEN COMPLETED.
