

fj
CONSTANCE MACKNESS


M , i|KkbQ^
| WARWICK.
< Hugh Millar
| Bookseller & Stationer


Tal.
If 6%
DAFFY-DOWN-DILL Y


By the Same Author
THE YOUNG BEACHCOMBERS
THE BLOSSOM CHILDREN
CLOWN OF THE SCHOOL
GROWING UP




■ . I i
Jr 1 / j
. ? iyv
“ Aunt Jessie liberally watered with vinegar what remained of
her slice.” (Page 27.)
Daffy-Down-Dilly ] [Frontispiece


CONSTANCE MACKNESS
WARD, LOCK & CO. LIMITED
LONDON AND MELBOURNE


First published 1937
Mackf'® 55 ’ Ji
” cfu-do""'
°^lABol3l°
£ «*> 3A "
MADE IN ENGLAND
Printed in Great Britain by
SHERRATT & HUGHES, THE SAINT ANN’S PRESS, TIMPERLEY,
CHESHIRE


TO ONE WHO LOVES DAFFODILS
MY MOTHER
IN THE HOPE THAT
SHE WILL FIND SOMETHING
TO LIKE IN THIS ONE


.


Alison Deane, who thought there was rather too
much of her.
Jack, a cheerful inventor of ejaculations, her step-
brother and ward.
Jill, his twin, who was not jealous—oh ! dear, no 1
Daphne, alius Daffy-Down-Dilly and Dill, who once
made a pal of a commentary.
Old Mrs. Dalwood, who turned out to be sainted.
Young Mrs. Dalwood, Daphne’s mother, who was
not so sainted, after all.
Gerald Wallace, alias Jerry, a widower who once
put his foot down.
Elizabeth, alias Little Bits, whose happiness depended
on the down-put foot.
Stan Pratt, who once used a pepper-pot effectively.
RS ‘ a^as Aunt Jessie, who used a vinegar-
bottle righteously.
Nan Carter, who was a singing grasshopper.
And some who matter little.




CHAPTER I
IT was two days after the funeral, and Alison Deane
and the twins sat round the dining room fire, for
the September evening was wet and chilly. Mrs.
Birks, the charwoman, who had been slipping across
from her little cottage in the back lane to sleep in the
lonely big house every night, was already making her-
self a bedtime cup of cocoa at the kitchen stove. When
it was despatched, she slipped her cheery, shiny face,
framed in a frizzy grey fringe, in at the dining-room
door.
tl Well, I m off to bed, dearies,” she announced,
for it s gorn half-past seven, and early risers must be
early bedders, I always says, less they want to be early
diers. There ! Drat me now ! What for did I want to
go upsettin’ you pore young things with silly talk o’
dym ? You forgit it, dearies, ’cause my ole head’s no
better than a melon for mindin’ things. See now. Miss
Alison! I wish you dup and play the planner or
somethmk: it s fair heart-breakin’ to hear you all sit—
hn’ there and never sayin’ boo. Just look at the lovely
bed o coals you've got there for makin' toast: I
always says there’s somethink about hot-buttered
toast and cocoa for supper as’d cheer you up if
you was as blue as a common castor-oil bottle and
as limp as a lump o’ butter dumped down on the
stove.
“ Well we’ll make toast, Mrs. Birks,” said Alison
rousmg herself guiltily from sorrowful thoughts.
Cjood night, and thank you for coming across
again.
mat, dearie. There s many a little gift I’ve had from


this house while I’ve washed and cleaned here Mon-
days and Thursdays, and frocks new enough and grand
enough to go husband-huntin' in, if it wasn’t that I’d
had one man too many for me comfort already, and
treated like a lady, too, not like a doormat, as some
stuck-up pieces treats them as works for ’em. Good
night, dearies."
“ Good night, Mrs. Birks," they cried in chorus.
But that kindly old soul had not yet finished the dose
of cheerful conversation she felt their case called for.
" Yes, dearies," she continued, " I had enough o’
men ten times over and then some in Albert Birks,
as wasn’t a bad ole sort when sober, but sober so
seldom that his own mother wouldn’t of known him if
she'd seen him able to walk straight and talk straight,
as he never did most times, ’cause he’d call the cat
Sarer Rann after me and ask it not to look sour at a
pore chap, and sing out ‘ Drat that cat! ’ and throw a
boot at me, as was just givin’ him the rounds of the
kitchen, as he certainly deserved."
" I am sure he did, Mrs. Birks," agreed Alison,
grateful to see that Jack and Jill were actually smiling
again after the long days of strain and sorrow.
The comforter herself saw the smiles and slipped out
without further farewell, first a shiny face, then a
shinier nose, then a frizzy fringe.
" Put another little log on, Jack," said Alison. " It’s
too early for toast and bed yet."
" And I hate bed," said Jill, with a shudder that
told of sleepless fretting in the dark.
Alison flung a pitying arm round her shoulders, for
Jill was on the footstool at her feet.
" And I want to talk things over with you —every-
thing," she said.
"About w ? hat we’re going to do?" asked Jack.
" I’ve been wandering some, old girl. Mr. Stack told
us yesterday —at least, he told me and I told Jill —that


Father made a new will when you were twenty-one last
May, and left you our guardian, as Mother—as Mother
had been in the old one.”
"Oh, Alison!” Jill blurted out miserably.
" Mother last year, and now Father! And I haven’t
got used to being without her yet. I actually called out
when I was getting up a week or two ago, ‘ Mother,
which middy had I better wear with my new tunic ? ’
and then I remembered and felt just awful ”; and she
buried a choking sob and her little unhappy face
against her sister's knee.
Other fellows have their fathers and their mothers,
too, Jack added bitterly. ” Things aren’t fair a bit,
old girl, and Stack said, as if —as if he enjoyed it —he
said—you know, what Father said that last time he
talked to me —about my having to grow up soon
and help you, because we wouldn’t have much, you
know.”
He paused to blink a tear away behind a hand that
pretended to be pushing his fair hair back. He remem-
bered only too well that last and rather terrifying
speech of his father’s —‘ Old son, lam trusting you to
grow up soon and help Alison. And grow into a wiser
and more thoughtful man than your father. I didn’t
expect to have to let go at fifty-seven, but I should
have been more careful and saving and left you all
provided for. There isn’t even any insurance.’ Alison
had broken m then: ‘ Don’t worry, Father dear; I’ll
‘tu C^ re „°f J ac k an d Jill: I know we’ll be all right.’
lhank God there is you, my dear, and that you are
a manager, not a thriftless fool like your father,'
the dying man had answered. ‘Jack, remember
that many a girl would shirk the task I am leaving
your sister, and never you be graceless enough a
scamp to make it harder for her.’ A queer thing to
say to him, Jack reflected. As if he and good old
Alison had not always been the best of pals ! As if


any fellow would want to worry such a rattling good
sort!
“ That Mrs. Stack is a horrid, clucking old Biddy-
hen,” he declared suddenly. “ I loathe her,”
“ Mrs. Stack ? But what's wrong with her ? ” asked
wondering Alison.
“ I heard her talking to a couple of women about
Father and Mother, and when she was here in our
house, too,” he explained angrily. “ What right has
she to say things about Mother ? ”
“ None,” said Alison, with equal warmth, ” and no
cause to do so either. What did she say ? ”
” She said that Mr. Stack —why doesn't she call him
Bob and be done with it? —well, she said he said there
would be nothing but the house and a few hundreds
left for us, and wasn’t it disgraceful when Father had
made over a thousand most years. Then somebody
whispered something, and she boomed out, ‘Yes, that
flighty little wife of his, of course. A pity he ever mar-
ried such a giddy, extravagant creature, but he’d have
given her the lining out of his heart to play with if she
had asked for it. She lived up to every farthing he
earned and spent what he had saved, and now it s her
own children who will suffer for it. Alison is provided
for in a way, but the twins will soon find that they can
no longer have the moon for the asking.' ” Jack
paused for a moment and then went on hurriedly:
“ Alison, Mother wasn't—she jolly well wasn’t like
that, was she ? ' ’
“Of course not,” said Alison, with comforting
definiteness. “ I don’t suppose they were worldly-wise,
either of them, or they would have provided for a rainy
day; but, if ever you hear people blaming them again
because they didn’t, just you remember, both of you,
that you had eleven years of the sweetest, gayest,
darlingest little mother anyone ever had, and twelve
of the kindest, dearest, best father anyone ever had;


and, if they did spend all their money, they gave us a
good time with it, didn't they ? "
“Yes, indeed," said Jill; “ and I never did like
Mrs. Stack’s poky sort of nose and chin, and her pre-
tending to be such a friend of ours, too ! "
“ And, if things are a bit different for us now, we
aren’t ever going to blame Father, are we? " asked
Alison.
“ Not on your life, nor Mother either," said Jack.
“ After all, Dad had to make his own way in the world,
and I don’t see why I shouldn’t."
“ We all will," said Alison, “ and we’ll knock some
fun out of it, too."
“ Fun ? ’’ queried Jill drearily.
“Yes, fun," said Alison firmly. “We shan't always
feel like this —that nothing matters now or ever could
again. He’d hate us to, so we just have to put our backs
into bucking up. That’s why I want to talk things
over."
“ Are we going to keep on living here at Strath-
dene ? " asked Jill.
“No," answered Alison. “ That is why I let Mary
go yesterday. She had the offer of a good place if she
could go at once."
“ Will we sell Strathdene, then? " asked Jack.
Mr. Stack says we have no hope of selling such a
big place in this time of depression," explained Alison.
“ However, the Willises would like to lease it for three
years. They offer a very low rental —only thirty
shillings a week —but he says we are lucky to get a
tenant at all."
“Thirty shillings for this place furnished! " pro-
tested Jack.
“Not furnished," corrected Alison; “ they want to
bring their own things in. That means that we must sell
anything we don’t want, and sell it for a song, I
suppose."


“But where ere we going to live? demanded
Jill. .
“ That is what we have to decide on, said Alison.
“We certainly can’t afford to stay on here, with
two maids, a gardener, and a charwoman on odd
days ’ ’
“ What shall we be able to afford? ” asked Jack.
“Nothing very grand, I am afraid,” explained
Alison, “but I'll tell you just how things stand.
Father left all he had to me, not for myself, but to
hold in trust for you two, as I have my own tiny
income.”
“We didn’t know that,” said Jill.
“ Grandmother Summers, my own mother’s mother,
left a fair amount of property,” Alison explained.
“ She left her big house at Bondi and some ready
money to my mother’s elder sister that s Aunt
Jessie. The rest of what her estate realised was in-
vested on behalf of various hospitals and charities,
on condition that a hundred pounds a year was to
be paid to me for life, and a similar sum to Aunt
Jessie.” ~
“ And have you got all your hundreds saved up? ”
asked Jill
“No, dear,” Alison explained. “ When I was
under age, the money went into the ordinary house-
keeping fund. I have the fifty that has been paid
directly to me since I came of age, and every quarter
I’ll get another twenty-five.”
“ And we’ll have the thirty shillings a week for the
house ?” asked Jack.
“ And about a thousand pounds in cash, so Mr.
Stack thinks, when everything is settled up. He sug-
gests it should be spent on your education now—that it
would keep you both at boarding-school for four years
or so.
Jack looked up with real interest: there was a magic
14


sound about the word boarding-school. “ Are you
going to ? "he asked.
Alison shook her head.
“ You’d have no home in the holidays," she said.
" Have you thought of that? "
Jack had not.
" Besides," she went on, “ that is not my idea of
holding the money in trust. I want to invest it in some-
thing safe, like Commonwealth bonds. That should
bring in another forty a year and, with my hundred
and the rent-money, we could have a little home some-
where where there are plenty of good State high
schools. You two could get your schooling free and
work for University scholarships perhaps, and still
have that precious thousand to give you a start at
whatever profession you choose —you anyhow, Jack."
" But I’d hate to leave the good old Prep, and go to
a State school," said Jack, “ when I’ve always talked
of going on to the Grammar here."
"If we stopped here, you would," agreed Alison;
" that is why I'm thinking of Sydney."
" Sydney ! Oh ! Alison, really ? I’d love that," cried
Jill.
And we could get surfing all through the
season, said Jack eagerly. " Are you sure we can
™ to old & irl ? House-rent’s bound to be stiff in
." Aunt Jessie thinks we should live with her," said
Alison. She rang up from Bondi this morning to
suggest it." 5
~ The twins looked at her with faces all consternation.
Alison! Jill squealed, "Oh! Alison, you
wouldn’t! Oh ! you wouldn’t! "
" She isn’t our aunt, anyhow," said Jack indig-
nantly. " She’s only yours, and you are jolly well
welcome to the poor old sour-face."
But we are so short of relatives—not a single
15


solitary other one to offer to take us in," replied Alison,
4 4 and people seem horrified at the thought of our living
alone, even if lam twenty-one ’’ _ „ , T ,
44 Let them mind their own busmess, retorted Jack.
“ You squashed Aunt Jessie’s loving idea absolutely
flat I hope, or you can look out for squalls.
Alisonsmiled at his fierce aspect. ‘ I told her we
preferred to be quite independent," she answered,
“ but I have practically arranged to rent one ot her
flats —you remember the unfurnished side one, don t
p ) }
y °"’l do," said Jill; “ but aren’t they two guineas a
wee ] C "? } }
44 The furnished ones used to be," admitted Alison;
“ but flat-owners seem to have had a bad time in
Sydney lately. The young couple in our flat have gone
home to live with his parents till times are better, and
Aunt Jessie has a furnished one empty, too, even
though she has put them down to thirty shillings. urs
is only a pound now, and think how pretty we could
make it if we took our best bits of furniture and our
prettiest rugs and ornaments and china."
44 There’s a side garden that goes with the flat, isn t
there ?" asked Jill. . ,
44 Yes; it was Grandmother’s house m the days
when people liked big homes and plenty of
grounds. Aunt Jessie sold the back half o e
garden, and another big block of flats has been erected
on it." . .
44 And I bet she spent the proceeds on missions or
reformatories," put in Jack. .
“Well, let her," said his twin. The thing that
worries me is this—won’t she be for ever popping m to
reform us ? ’’ , . ~ , • „ j
44 Lhe flats are quite self-contained, explained
Alison. “ Aunt Jessie had the building completely re-
modelled. She will be near enough to advise us it we
16


get into difficulties —her own flat is one of the front
ones —but she'll have to ring our door-bell like any
other visitor."
“ And, of course, we can be a bit deaf on occasions,"
said Jack, with almost a grin, " and we'll be close
enough to the surf to get there without wasting tram-
fares; that’s something."
" Still, a flat is a bit poky," argued Jill.
“ It is," admitted Alison; " but that's one of the
things we are not going to growl about. We just can’t
afford a big place and have enough over for clothes
and food and things."
"And surfers can’t go slow on the tucker," ad-
monished Jack.
" And it is not such a tiny flat after all," argued
Alison. " There’s a sitting-room, a wee breakfast-room,
a kitchenette, and a scrap of a laundry downstairs, and
upstairs there’s a bathroom, a big bedroom for the two
of us, and a tiny one for Jack. I think we could make it
very homely and comfy."
And would our maid have to sleep out? " asked
Jill, not quite reassured.
Maid Why! we’ll have none, of course," said
Alison, 111 do the work, and now you see why a small
place will be a real advantage."
" Pretty dull for you, old girl, small or not small,"
opined Jack, feelingly; " that side of it didn’t strike
me before—the cooking, and burnt pots to clean
up "
" But who is going to burn the pots? " demanded
Alison cheerfully. " The work won’t kill me, I am sure.
Flats are planned on labour-saving lines, and there’s
even an electric cooker to make cooking a joy. I am
glad I wasn t brainy enough to get through in maths
and go on to the University, as Father rather hoped.
My domestic science course at school is going to come in
nandy at last. I know how to cook and sew and wash,
E jy


and I count on enough leisure to look for something to
do to add to our income, so that we shan t have to do
without holidays and treats altogether.
‘ ‘ What sort of thing ? ’ ’ asked J ill.
“ I’m sure I don’t know, chicken. I type rather well,
so I’ll keep Father’s little portable machine and try to
get some typing to do at home, or perhaps 111 try tor
feme sewing; I’ve made your frocks and mine often
And ducky ones,” agreed Jill. “ Cecily Rivett just
doted on my green figured tabralco, and you said it cost
six-and-something.” , A1 * _
“ I haven’t thought of it before,” answered Alison,
“ but perhaps I could call on Miss Bennett and Miss
6 “ Mother’s two friends that have the shop in Pitt
Street? ” interrupted Jill.
“ The same,” said Ahson. “ They call themselves
children’s outfitters and have rather a swanky place.
You know what good holidays your mother used to give
them up here—well, why shouldn’t they be ready to
help us along by selling girls’ frocks and undies for me
on a profit-sharing basis ? ” , . ,
“ They’ll be lucky if they get you, declared Jill.
“ Miss Bennett was ever so struck on the lemon Fu]i
you smocked for me, and she’s a straight-out person
that says what she means. ”
“ Well, I’ll see how much of it she meant, when we
get properly settled down,” said Alison. It win take
me a week or two to get into the hang of things, I sup-
pose.”
“ And when do we go? ” inquired Jack.
“What about next Monday?” replied Alison.
“ We’ll turn to to-morrow and pick out what furniture
we want and get someone to pack it and send it by train.
You can help me go through Father’s papers, Jack, and
destroy what we are not taking wiui us it just has to
18


be faced, old chap, and we might as well get it over.
Mr. Stack will see to the sale and everything else after
we go.”
“ We'll be in Sydney by Tuesday, then,” calculated
Jill.
“ Not if we keep Little Aussie,” said Alison. "Fd
take about three days to drive down.”
“ Little Aussie ? Good-oh ! ” applauded Jack. " It
would be pretty flat coming down from two cars to
none. That's what that Biddy-hen Mrs. Stack was
cackling about too—Mother having Little Aussie for
her own and getting Father to spend so much on Hefty
Hup for all of us. I don’t see what it would have to do
with her if we had a dozen cars, and anyhow Aussie
was on the ancient and shabby side when we got the
Hup.”
"That’s why we can keep her,” said Alison.
We’d probably get no more than fifty pounds for
her, so it isn’t extravagant to keep her.”
"Yes, but where can we keep her at Bondi ? ” de-
manded Jill.
" Aunt Jessie has one big garage behind all the flats,
and she has promised to house her for us,” explained
Alison.
" The drive down will be a bit of all right. We’ll
take eats and camp out at night, eh ? ” asked jack.
"That’s what I thought,” agreed Alison. "It is
cheaper than hotels, and we needn’t tell Aunt Tessie
tilHt is safely over.”
" She’d take a blue fit if she knew,” grinned Jack—
a real grin this time.
" Alison, I think you are downright clever,” said
Jill admiringly, " the way you have it all planned out
so nicely.”
“ Ma ke the toast for her, then,” said Jack, with a
yawn " I bags buttering it, to be sure I get it nice
and dnppy."


“That means the cocoa is my job, I suppose,
said Alison, with a sad little smile, as she watched
the children bustling about m a mood that antici-
pation of the new days and new ways made almost
happy.


CHAPTER II
MRS. JESSIE ROYLE, a widow of long stand-
ing, had a good head for business, but the
twins thought her a freak. Once she had been
normal enough, living the easy, happy, comfortable
life of one with sufficient means and few worries. She
had one child then, an idolised boy a few years older
than Alison. He was a handsome, curly-headed, black-
eyed, winning scamp, though wilful and over-indulged,
and his mother, blind to his faults, centred her very life
in him. Then tragedy came. The pair were holidaying
in the country, and the little lad went fishing and swim-
ming one day in deliberate defiance of his mother’s
orders. It was his drowned body that a group of terri-
fied boys brought home to her; and the woman who
had been his mother was buried in his grave.
In her stead lived on the Aunt Jessie whom Jack
described as “ a hoty terror, a really holy one ” —a
narrow female Jeremiah, who saw suffering following
on sin as the paramount law of life. She had killed her
boy, she said, by over-indulgence, by encouraging him
to take his own sinful way, so she became the sworn
enemy of indulgence of any kind, indulgence of self or
of others. She lived alone and meagrely, spending her
income on good works, and shunning pleasure of every
kind.
Alison rather dreaded the first meeting with her rela-
tive and landlady. Her father’s death was so recent
that she still found sympathy hard to bear, and she
feared that it might be supplemented by attempts to
point the moral of his life. That first meeting, however,
passed off without any untoward happening. It was
late on Wednesday afternoon when the Deanes arrived.


Alison had been nervous about driving through the
city when she was used to Queensland roads and traffic
regulations, so she had delayed on the outskirts of
Sydney to ring up a garage and get a man to take
Little Aussie in, while she and the children transferred
to a taxi, as the baby car could not possibly squeeze a
fourth person into its single seat. They arrived at the
flat to find the furniture unpacked and partly arranged,
a table set, a kettle on the boil, and Aunt Jessie in
possession. She had tea with them, insisted on helping
to wash up the dishes, explained that she had arranged
for all her own tradesmen to call for orders, and then
slipped away.
“ I didn’t know Aunt Jessie had it in her to be a
dear ever; honestly I didn't,” said Jill in amaze.
“ Don’t you worry,” said Jack ungratefully; “ she’s
saving up some Mrs. Stackish remarks for us, I bet.”
The three young people spent two whole days re-
arranging their furniture, putting up their pictures, and
making the fiat into the attractive little home Alison
had seen in imagination as she chose her furniture,
then they invited Aunt Jessie for afternoon tea, a tour
of inspection, and dinner.
“ I’d rather come to breakfast,” she said. “ I’ll
maybe get a plain Christian meal then. Young girls go
in too much for kickshaws at tea and dinner —snares of
the Evil One, all of them.”
Alison smiled. ” Good plain food is what I plan to
give our kiddies,” she protested. ” It is better for their
health and the family purse alike. To-day, it is brown
bread-and-butter and a sandwich-cake for tea, and
Irish stew and sago custard for dinner.”
” I don’t hold with cake in any form,” said Aunt
Jessie firmly; ” I’ll come to breakfast.”
” It’ll be plain enough to suit her, anyhow,” grinned
Jack, when Alison reported the reception accorded her
invitation, “ seeing you have cut out everything but


porridge and toast, old stingy —not even a poached egg
or a fish-ball to keep a fellow's aching void quiet for a
bit. You're some economiser, you are."
“ I am," agreed Alison amiably, “ but I undertake
to keep you and myself fat on it, Mr. Podgy-Podge.”
" What about young Jill ? " asked Jack.
Alison looked from her plump young brother to his
thin, long-legged twin. " She is lean by nature, the
lucky little thing," she said. “If Mary's best kick-
shaws couldn’t fill her out, don’t blame my cooking.
And don’t forget, you two, that you will have to be
good at breakfast to-morrow. If Aunt Jessie says
things that get your backs up, remember that she is an
old lady, and our guest into the bargain."
"And not quite all there," added Jack, with a
meaning tap on his forehead. " Now listen, Alison—if
her visitation isn’t to-day after all, and we’ve got the
jolly place absolutely shipshape, and it’s school for us
next week, what about a surf this after ? We can have
tea on the beach and let the cooker look after our
dinner."
"So we can," said Alison, always ready to fall in
cheerfully with other people’s wishes. " The stew will
simmer aw r ay once I get it to the boil, and the custard
will cook after we get home. You collect our bathers,
Jill, and I’ll pack up the tea."
Used to the warmer Queensland surf, Alison found
the water rather chilly and soon came out, but the
twins stayed in as long as she would allow them.
When they were all dressed, they had tea on the sand
and then strolled home, Jack already interested enough
in the next meal to be wandering audibly how the
cooker was doing its duty.
Alison was not very interested in dinner, but she set
her breakfast-table next morning with loving care —
gold-bordered cloth, shining silver, the gold lustre cups
and plates that she had done herself when she learned


China-painting at school, and a central black bowl full
of creamy-gold roses from the garden. Though small,
the breakfast-room looked bright and attractive. The
walls were covered with a plain rough paper of a light
stone tint, with a deep Oriental frieze above. The cur-
tains of embroidered silk net from the Strathdene
dining-room toned in excellently with the wall-paper,
and Alison had looped them back with bands of
Oriental ribbon that matched the frieze. From the old
home, too, came the Morris chairs, the sideboard, the
china-cupboard, the dainty water-colour sketch, the
two framed etchings, and the long wooden window-
seat, carved in dragons and lotus-flowers, its seat up-
holstered in dull brown leather. The fireplace held a
gas-heater that gave out a ruddy glow from its asbestos
bars, and above it ticked the cuckoo clock Jack and
Jill had grown up with.
In spite of a sniff at the room’s air of comfort, Aunt
Jessie was taken on the promised tour of inspection.
The sitting-room had creamy walls, broken by two or
three gilt-framed landscapes, the carpet and uphol-
stered suite were both in dull blues and browns, the
heavy silk curtains repeated the same notes, the book-
shelves in the alcoves on either side of the fireplace
were filled, the gramophone so dear to the children
rested on its familiar music-cabinet, the gate-legged tea-
table and the writing-desk were surmounted by dark
blue bowls of cream roses, and the shelf that ran round
one side of the room held a few good brasses and orna-
ments.
Aunt Jessie sniffed again at the general air of com-
fort and beauty. “ You’ve missed your chance, child,’’
she remarked to Alison. “ This big change was just
your opportunity to get away from frippery and lum-
ber and face life seriously.”
“ I have certainly had to do that, Aunt —the facing
things,” said Alison soberly. “ It is a big responsibility


to be guardian to Jack and Jill, and I am honestly
scared of the mistakes I may make. I want to be the
best and wisest of guardians, but it isn’t always easy to
know what is good and wise.”
" This luxury certainly isn’t,” began Aunt Jessie
eagerly; and then the expected sermon came. ” Hasn’t
your poor father’s life taught you that, my child that
we are here to-day and gone to-morrow, and therefore
should not value the things of to-day? He was one of
those poor fools of whom the Bible talks —planning to
build bigger storehouses and bams and not aware that
his life would be required of him all in a minute. Teach
Jack and Jill to despise the things of this world and to
set their affections entirely on the world to come. ”
Alison ventured no protest, for fear of provoking her
aunt into a fuller criticism of her beloved father, but
she thought rebelliously that his sunny religion was the
best. She could almost hear him telling her that God
had surely meant His children to enjoy this world, to
spread its sunshine for others and bask in it themselves,
else He would never have made sunbeams that danced,
lambs that frisked, and birds that greeted each new
day with happy song. Please God, she would try to
keep Jack and Jill kind and true and merry-hearted, as
that father had left them to her; she would try to make
them happy, as he had done; she would try to be
happy herself, as she once had been: that was the vow
in her heart.
Upstairs, Aunt Jessie’s eye was not quite so disap-
proving. The bathroom was just a bathroom, and
Jack’s room w r as unadorned, save for a large framed
photograph of his father and mother. The big bedroom
that Alison and Jill shared was dainty enough, how-
ever, to call forth censure. Aunt Jessie looked at the
white enamelled bedsteads, wardrobes and dressing-
tables, the bedspreads of exquisite eyelet embroidery
over a mauve silk that was repeated in the curtains, the


easy chairs and pictures, and exclaimed, with a con-
demnatory wave of one arm, “Frippery, my dear!
Worldly frippery! You have always been a sweet-
natured girl, Alison, but beware that you are not led
astray by the fleshpots of Egypt —the fleshpots of
Egypt, my dear, that do their deadly luring right here
in Australia.’'
Alison’s acute sense of fun nearly betrayed her into
wondering aloud if the surplus avoirdupois that wor-
ried her came from sampling those same fleshpots.
“ Do the fleshpots of Egypt make one fat, and is that
what is the matter with me? ’’ she asked herself, and
giggled aloud.
Aunt Jessie looked mystified and indignant. “I am
sorry, Aunt,’’ Alison apologised hurriedly. “ I was
stupidly thinking of something funny that I want to tell
the twins. Shall we go down to breakfast now ? Jill is
looking after it.’’
Seated at the table, they discovered that Aunt Jessie
took her porridge without sugar and with very little
milk —a form of self-denial, as she explained.
“ I call doing without cream self-denial enough for
anybody,’’ grumbled Jack. “We had whips of it at
home —our own two cows, you know; but now we live
according to Mrs. Birks, our charlady, who used to
say, * Beggars can’t be cream-chewers, ’less they want
to end up in gaol for debt, and perhaps a bilious-attack
into the bargain, and havin’ to go out washin’, splittin’
head and all.’ ’’
When his creamless porridge was duly disposed of,
Jack presided over the electric toaster, which was a
new toy to him. “ Toast all piping hot and crisp, eh,
Aunt ? ” he inquired, offering her the first slice ready.
“ Thank you,’’ said Aunt Jessie, in the mournful
voice with which she always accepted food, as though
eating were a sinful necessity. “ I really prefer it cold:
it takes less butter.’’


Jack grinned, distributed slices to his sisters, but-
tered himself one, generously overspread it with mar-
malade, then asked politely, “ Jam, Aunt? "
“ It's marmalade," corrected Jill.
** Well, marmalade. Aunt? " asked Jack.
"No, thank you, my boy! " cried Aunt Jessie
righteously. " Jam on top of butter is wicked waste."
" It isn't jam, really; it's marmalade," repeated the
young sinner, " and it doesn’t taste wicked, though I’d
rather have brains, or scrambled eggs, or even sardines
on mine."
The old lady gave him the look of sorrowful condem-
nation she reserved for the incorrigible, then answered
a question Alison had hurriedly put about one of her
pet missions. She grew quite eloquent explaining how
her decreased rents were cutting down her charities,
and Jack seized his chance, deftly dabbed a spoonful
of marmalade on her toast, gave it a quick spread, and
winked triumphantly at Jill.
Absorbed in her conversation, Aunt Jessie cut off
several mouthfuls and ate them mechanically. When
she had almost finished the slice, Jack decided that his
joke was falling too flat, so he butted in with the inno-
cent query, " More jam, Aunt? "
Aunt Jessie looked at her plate with. a start. " Jam !
What a careless, wicked old woman I am ! See how I
have actually helped myself to marmalade without
noticing it! And I have been eating it, too —good
butter, with wasted jam on top! "
As she spoke, she rose from her seat, abstracted a
vinegar-bottle from the cruet on the sideboard, and
liberally watered with vinegar what remained of her
slice. " That will teach me! " she explained grimly.
“ Good jam wasted on good butter, indeed ! "
“ Vinegar costs as much as marmalade," suggested
Jack impishly.
Aunt Jessie looked exasperated enough for tears.


and Alison came to the rescue by suggesting that he
should make more toast instead of being such a chatter-
box.
“Sorry/' he grinned. “Will you have another
piece, Aunt? ’’
“No, thank you/' she said. “ A little hunger will
do me good; and I sincerely hope you children are
going to profit by your reverses of fortune and learn
that we should stint our bodies if we want our souls to
grow.''
“I'd rather mine didn't grow too big for my body,
though/' objected Jack. “I'd hate it to be as tight a
fit as my best shoes are."
“ Jack ! " protested Alison.
“You may laugh, my poor dear misguided boy/'
said Aunt Jessie sadly; “ but mark my words ! there’ll
come a time when your body ’’
“ Will be as fat as old Alison's, if I keep on over-
eating, eh, Aunt? " interrupted Jack sweetly. “ Now,
if she tried vinegar on her toast ’’
“ Jack,’’ Alison interrupted in her turn, “ you are
just trying to be silly. Be quiet, or you’ll have to help
me with the washing-up.’’
“ Oh, will I ? " retorted the culprit, quite cheerfully,
but quite firmly. “ Washing dishes is w r omen’s work:
young Jill can help.’’
“ Really? ’’ cried Jill indignantly. “ I know which
one of us eats the most, anyhow.’’
Aunt Jessie regarded them more in sorrow than in
anger. “ And little they know, these dear young things
that disobey and go their own wilful way, how retribu-
tion will smite them in a moment! " she murmured to
the ceiling.
“ If you think old Alison will smite me,’’ grinned
Jack, “ don’t worry any, because she won’t; and, if
she did, I’d tweak her arm till she squealed, I bet
you.’’
28


" Please, don’t take any notice of him, Aunt,” said
Alison unhappily. “ All boys go through a horrid
stage, when they suffer badly from swelled head and
rudeness, and he is just getting to his.”
“ I merely pity him,” said Aunt Jessie nobly, ” for
I know —I know ! ’ ’
She took her leave forthwith, and Alison came back
from letting her out to remonstrate with Jack. “ Old
son, you are a little horror,” she said. ” I have half a
mind to spank you, really.”
“ I’d like to see you try,” said Jack. Then he
crammed a last piece of toast into his mouth, for he was
still at the table, got it down with half a chew and a big
swallow, unmindful of Jill’s reproving glances, and
burst out in a loud guffaw: “ A new idea for a death’s
head at a feast —Aunt Jessie with the vinegar-pot! Oh,
Alison, stop looking like her niece and grin good and
hard ! I bet you wanted to when she popped the vine-
gar on.”
Alison tried to keep her gravity, but in vain, and her
first attempt at disciplining her young charges ended in
guilty explosions of mirth, in which they heartily
joined.


CHAPTER 111
A GOOD State school was found for the twins,
just one tram-section from home, and Alison
saw them started there on the Monday morning.
They were bright youngsters, without her own weak-
ness in mathematics, and she was assured that they
would both be ready at the end of the year for their
remove into a high school. But she was not quite
happy about them: Jack would miss the importance
and exclusiveness of his beloved “ Prep.”, with its own
blazer, hatband and cap, and Jill would draw painful
comparisons between the bare playground to which
she had just been introduced and the well-kept gardens
and big playing-fields of her Toowoomba College —
yes, she told herself, they would both come home un-
happily aware of their changed fortunes.
To keep herself from worrying, she boarded a city-
bound tram and called on the Misses Bennett at their
Pitt Street shop. The genuine kindness of their greet-
ing warmed her heart. Not only did they plan mutual
visits, but they readily agreed to take her work for
sale, and she left them for a cheerful hunt round the
big shops for cheap remnants of dainty materials to
make up. She was busy machining a wee girl's party-
frock of palest blue when the twins came racing and
laughing home from their first day at the new school.
“ Well, my dears ? " she asked, with a sigh of relief.
" It’s not a bad old hole,” remarked Jack —and that
was high praise from him. ” What is there to eat, old
girl ? I’m starving. ’ ’
“ And how did you like it, Jill? ” Alison inquired,
jumping up to produce a nut-loaf and butter.
“M-m! Not so bad,” said Jill. “ Miss Taylor is an


awfully good teacher, and some of the girls are very
nice. It's not as homely as the Coll., but —oh! well,
you know.”
Alison accepted the qualified praise of the new school
gratefully and was glad to notice that even Jack, w T ho
w r as sometimes a bit of a shirker, tackled his homework
each evening with interest. While the twins worked
out sums, drew maps or learned facts, she sat with
them, doing the hand-sewing on frocks that she
machined by day. So eager was she over the new work
that she devoted every spare minute to it in that first
week, but Jill damped her zeal on Saturday morning
by remarking, “ Alison ! You are getting fatter ! You
really are ! ' *
Jack looked her over judicially, as she turned a face
of startled protest upon his twin. “ Can't have too
much of a good thing, they say, old girl, but there
really is a biggish bit of you,” he teased.
“ I suppose it's sticking at that machine all day and
taking no exercise,” said Jill, remembering the golf
and tennis of the old days.
“ But I do exercise,” protested Alison. “ I do our
housework, and on Wednesday I went right in to the
markets to lay in a cheap supply of fruit and vege-
tables.”
“ But that was exercise for Little Aussie, not for
you,” reproved Jill, “ and the work here doesn't take
you more than two jiffies, and then you just sit and sew
and sew.”
“ Oh, dear ! ” exclaimed Alison mournfully. ”Do
I really look fatter —really and truly ? ' ’
“Oh, dear, no!” teased Jack. “You are as
slender, old girl, as an elephant that has eaten a whole
banana-plantation for brekky.”
“ And you are a stumpy lump of rudeness yourself.
Jack Deane,” said Jill indignantly. “You know she
hates being teased about her size, and Myrtle Cresswell


asked me only yesterday if that dumpling boy was my
little brother, and how much younger you were. _
“ Well, I wouldn’t be a skeleton out for an airing in
a pimply skin coat like you,” retorted Jack
“ Oh! Alison, isn’t he horrid? And just because 1
have one weeny-teeny pimple on my chin! cried
Jill;.. o cm l l n a nrl P
Ahson made peace between them with a smile and a
quick change of subject. “ Well, I propose that, in-
stead of sparring at one another, Jack and i thin
ourselves down a bit digging, and Jill clears
pimple out of her system in the same way. We really
ought not to have neglected our garden so long. Come
on, Jack, and slaughter snails instead of sisters.
Jack returned her smile with an amiable grin, but
grumbled at her programme. “Digging’s a mugs
fun,” he objected. . . .
“ And your best chance of catching up with Jill s
extra inch,” insisted Alison.
“ Well, if I help, you’ll have to let us go surhng
this after.” .
Alison accepted his terms. “ Right! ” she exclaimed
“ You dig the front of the long bed, and Jill and I will
each dig one of the doorstep beds. I am glad we
brought our gardening-tools.”
The ‘ long ’ bed looked very long indeed to Jack.
It stretched from the side-gate —their entrance right
back beyond the level of the kitchenette, where an end
of the garage separated it from the back garden. Up
its entire length, a hedge of lagerstroemia-bushes hid
the side-fence, still gay with mauve, rose, or white
blooms. In front of them ran a line of dwarf polyanth
roses, but the front foot of the bed was bare. Between
it and the wide gravelled path was a six-foot strip of
turf, just wide enough to hold a small camphor-laurel
dowm by the garage. On the other side of the path,
there was a strip of grass, varied by two small rec-


tangular beds on either side of the stone steps that led
to the entrance-door of the flat: the sitting-room
flanked one, the breakfast-room the other. On the low
trellises against the stone wall of the building grew
cream-and-gold roses; otherwise the two beds were a
tangle of tall weeds and dead stocks.
“ We'll dig everything out but the roses,” said
Alison to Jill, “ and we'll freshen the soil up by leaving
it empty for a week. Next Saturday, we'll put some
summer-flowering plants in—asters and zinnias, say.
In the spring we'll try pansies, daffodils and larkspurs,
and we'll plant a bignonia beyond our laurel-tree, to
hide the ugly old garage better.”
Jack came along just as they had got under way.
What do I want to dig up the long bed for at all ? ”
he demanded. ” It looks quite tidy.”
“ But it is half-empty,” protested Alison. “I'd like
blue lobelia in front of the pink roses, and carpet-
of-snow in front of that. We'll have to wait for
spring ' ’
“Good!” interrupted Jack. “I’ll have a read,
then.”
Not if you want that surf,” said Alison firmly.
“I’m going to makeshift with portulaca there for the
rest of the summer. Go on, old lazybones: take the
big fork and dig into it.”
“ Smoke-oh at eleven, then, with cake for the poor
working-man? ” he bargained.
Alison agreed, with a laughing comment on his ap-
petite, and she and Jill got to work again energetically,
while he strolled down to the gate, surveyed the quiet
street, and then poked the fork half-heartedly into the
mould of the bed. Soon an ill-used feeling took posses-
sion of his mind: the sun was hot, the soil was hard,
and he had no one to talk to. Pausing to feel properly
sorry for himself, he saw a thin, brown-faced little girl
ot about eleven peering at him through the hedge that
c 33


ran up on the other side of the path and then across to
the front corner of the building, separating the front
garden from the side one.
“ Hullo ! ” he cried, grateful for any diversion.
“Hullo!” came the answer. “What's your
name? ”
“ Jack Deane. What’s yours? ”
“ Daphne Dalwood.”
“ My suffering cats ! What a jingle of a name I
“ Tisn’t.”
“ 'Tis; the two Da’s do it —Daphne Dalwood ! Might
as well call yourself Silver Sixpence, or Curried Cut-
lets.” , T -I
“ Pooh ! Daphne Dalwood sounds better than Jack
Deane, anyhow.” „
“ Get out! What’s wrong with my old handle i
“ My grandma says people with a short surname
should have a long Christian one, or it’s uneuphomous.
so there! ”
“That jawbreaker’s a new one on me,” grinned
Jack. “ Talk English, infant.”
The little brown-faced thing squeezed through the
thorny hedge, crossed the path and came over beside
Jiim. “ JJneuphonious means that it doesn t sound
nice. Fancy you not knowing that! ’ she exclaimed.
“ Two monosyllables together are not melodious.”
“ Monosyllables ! My sainted bantams ! How many
leaves of the dictionary did you have for brekky ? de-
manded Jack.
“ I had porridge and bread-and-jam. You are a
duffer if you haven’t learned monosyllables at school
yet —you know, words with only one syllable in them,
like boy and ass .” „ , ,
“ And girl, and cat, and goose, and sauce, retorted
Thereupon, they both laughed, as though they had
invented some first-rate joke. Jack occupied the pause


in looking her over interestedly. A girl who took such
a lordly tone of reproof with him was a novelty, for Jill
usually took his lead meekly. And this audacious
young person was evidently younger than Jill. She
was shabby, she was plain —where did she get her self-
assurance from ?
“ What shall I call myself to oblige you, then, Miss
Particular? ” he asked.
“ Oh! Anthony Deane would do, fatty —or a long
name in between the two scraps you have. ’’
“ Well, that’s me already —John William Deane is
my proper name, skinny.”
“ All right, John Willie. Don’t be too puffed up
about it to dig properly; forks are meant to stick in the
ground, not to scrape the surface smooth.”
“ Perhaps you would like the job yourself? ” he in-
quired, with deadly sarcasm.
“ Wouldn’t I just! ” she answered eagerly. “ There
isn’t any garden appertaining to our flat, and I never
have a thing to do on Saturdays, when there’s no
school.”
Jack handed over his fork with a grin of relief.
“ Haven’t you anyone to play with or go out with or
talk to at home ? ” he inquired, watching her re-dig the
patch he had scamped.
I( There’s only Granny and me,” she answered.
My father is a missionary; he is up in New Guinea,
and so is my mother, and Fm down here with Granny,
to go to school and shake off my old fever.”
Jack drew away from her in alarm. “Fever! What
sort of fever ? Is it catching ? ’ ’
“ Si % ! Of course, it isn’t—except from the right
kind of mosquitoes. It’s malaria I still get a touch of
every now and then. They kept me up there too long,
you see, not wanting to part with their only offspring,
and I haven’t quite outgrown it yet. I run a great big
temperature all at once, I do —from normal right up to
35


a hundred and three, just while I’m washing my face,
maybe.”
“ Then wash it oftener, and it won’t be such a shock
to it, maybe,” grinned Jack.
She grinned back amusedly. “ Pity to run the water-
rates up, when no amount of washing will wash the
brown off me,” she said. “ I just get dosed with
quinine, and lie down, and feel like a fried lizard, and
then in an hour or two I’m singing out for food and
wanting to get up. Are you going to dig all day
to-day ? ”
"My shiny stars ! You must think I’m mad,” ex-
claimed Jack, lying down on the grass to watch her
energetic fork-work. “ WeTe going surfing this after.”
“ I can surf. I’ve got black togs with red stripes
on.”
“Where do you go in? Bondi Beach, or Little
Coogee, or where? ”
She shook her head mournfully. “ I haven’t been
yet. Granny won’t let me go in by myself, and I
haven’t anybody to go with. I’ve got my togs, though;
Mother sent them to me last birthday.”
“You live here, don’t you ? ” asked Jack.
“Yes, of course; we’ve got a flat on the top floor.
Granny likes to live all on one floor, with no climbing
stairs unless she goes out.”
“You can come surfing with us sometimes,” he pro-
mised grandly. “If we drive, you can sit on top of
young Jill, or I’ll ride on the running-board, if Alison
doesn’t make a fuss about it.”
“ Really and truly, John Willie? ” asked Daphne
eagerly.
“ Really and truly, but my name is Jack.”
“ John Willie to me,” she declared firmly.
“ Daffy-down-dilly to me,” he retorted. “ Will your
grandmother let you go with us this after ? ’'
“ ’Scuse me, and I’ll go and ask her this very


minute," she said. “ Don't go away, John Willie, if I
don’t come out again at once. Granny, she’ll go fuss-
ing round, asking Mrs. Royle if you’re ’’
“ Respectable, eh ? " grinned Jack. “ Do you think
Aunt Jessie could give anybody a good character,
though? She thinks I’m doomed to hang some day, I
think."
" Is Mrs. Royle your aunt? "
" Well, she’s Alison’s, and Alison’s my stepsister,
so we call her Aunt Jessie."
“ It ought to be all right, then," said Daphne
happily. “ Granny says Mrs. Royle is a devoted saint."
‘ ‘ A saint, perhaps, but she never seems very devoted
to me," grinned Jack. " Give me the fork while you're
away."
Daphne looked somewhat doubtful. “ I’ll only have
to dig it over again after you," she remarked, then
went, crawling back through the hedge, then running
in through the open hall door and up the stairs.
Jack found it very tame without her. What a funny,
cheeky, interesting Daffy-down-dilly she in her
faded brown frock ! And he had forgotten to ask her
about her New Guinea experiences—lucky youngster to
have lived among cannibals and gold-mines and coco-
nut-plantations !


CHAPTER IV
HAVING finished her bed, Alison sat under the
camphor-laurel, preparing French beans for
the pot, while Jill carted the weeds and dis-
carded plants round the corner of the garage and down
to a rubbish-heap at the bottom of the back garden.
Her barrow was still rumbling along the path when a
single-seater Chevrolet backed out of the garage, with
a smiling, gipsy-faced girl at the wheel. Opposite the
solitary tree, the girl stopped, jumped out of the car
and, with a friendly smile and nod, took the three
steps that separated her from Alison.
“ Good morning, Miss Deane," she said, slim and
attractive in a frock of figured navy Shantung. “ May
I be neighbourly and introduce myself? I am Nan
Carter. Linda Lowe and I share the modest back flat
just round the corner from you.' ’
Alison stood up to take the offered hand, smiling back
in gratitude for the first friendly sign from the
city-w T orld of which she had come to make a part. It
is kind of you to look us up. Miss Carter," she said.
“ Are you and Miss Lowe the two teachers of whom
Aunt Jessie told me? "
"Yes, we both teach at Fort Street High School.
Please don't take us quite at Mrs. Royle’s estimation,
though. I am afraid she regards us as too frivolous for
words."
Alison offered the unoccupied deck-chair. " I know
Aunt Jessie," she said, and smiled again.
“ Ah ! well, you won’t despise us because she credits
us with living worldly and selfish lives. Linda and I
work hard in our working-hours, then perhaps we do
try to extract all the fun out of life that we can. We
38


motor, we golf, we surf, we like a theatre occasionally,
and even a dance."
“ And my aunt labels it all wilful waste on worthless
things, I suppose ? " inquired Alison.
“ All that and worse," smiled Nan. " Since taxes
have gone up and salaries have come down, she often
quotes us the fable of the Ant and the Grasshopper—
you know, the grasshopper that sang all summer and
then appealed to the ant for food, just to be told that,
if it had sung all summer, it could go and dance in the
winter."
"As if everybody were not more attracted to the
singing grasshopper ! " commented Alison. " The ant
was a selfish old thing, for all her thrift.
" I own up that singing grasshoppers can be selfish
too," said Nan. "I know I don’t go round hunting for
lame dogs to help over stiles, though I hope I give the
lift-ups that come in my way with a fair amount of
goodwill. You see, I am not lucky enough to have an
aged parent, or a little blind brother, or any of the regu-
lation calls for self-sacrifice."
" Are you all alone in the world ? " asked Alison.
" No —just have agreed to disagree with my step-
mother. I need not even fear the singing grasshopper’s
fate, for the wise ant in my case —my dear old dad —is
comfortably off and ready to welcome the wanderer
back any old time; so I keep on saddening Mrs. Royle’s
soul by trying to have a good time."
" She described you as a dear young thing," smiled
Alison.
" That’s nothing to the pretty things she said about
you," confided Nan. "You have a heart of gold and,
but for the misfortune of being brought up by a
worldly-minded stepmother "
" A darling," interrupted Alison. " She couldn’t
have been sweeter to me had I been own sister to Jack
and Jill. You will come in and meet our twins, will you


not ? I promised Jack tea as a reward for digging, and
it is time I saw about it."
"Not this morning, if you will excuse me," said
Nan; " I have to drive across to Coogee and see some-
one before lunch. I saw you in the garden and just
stopped to say how-de-do and ask if you would join us
at tennis sometimes —there is quite a good court at our
disposal in the back garden, you know —or if you would
care to join my golf-club."
"I’d love die tennis," said Alison, " but I have de-
cided to give up golf, thank you."
" A pity," demurred Nan.
" If one is lucky enough to have a Jack and Jill to
think of, and a purse that has limitations, one must not
expect to be a golfing grasshopper, at all events,"
Alison explained frankly, for Nan’s bright face encour-
aged frankness.
" Are those two Jack and Jill? " asked Nan, with a
demonstrative nod towards the long bed.
“ Jack, but not Jill. I was just going to ask you who
she is."
Nan took a more careful look. "Why! it’s little
Daphne Dalwood," she said. " Her parents are mis-
sionaries in New Guinea, and Daphne lives here with
her old grandmother. I suppose funds wouldn’t
run to boarding-school for the poor mite, or else
they want someone with old Mrs. Dalwood—she is
seventy-five, you know. If your Jack and Jill take to
Daphne and you let her play with them, you will
be doing a very great kindness, I assure you, Miss
Deane."
‘ Is she a lonely child ? "
"Lonely? I should say so ! Mrs. Dalwood is too old
to be bothered with a child’s chatter, and Daphne is
not allowed to invite other girls to play. Besides, she
doesrt’t make friends easily. She lived in Papua till she
was seven and got used to ordering native servants


about. I fancy she orders other children round when
they play together, and they resent it."
“ Jack doesn’t seem to," smiled Alison; " but he is
a lazy young scamp, and that energetic little wisp of a
thing has dug half-way up the bed for digging which
I promised him tea and cake; no wonder he appreciates
her."
" She is a dear little kiddie," declared Nan, " very
old-fashioned and full of her granny’s theology and big
words, but plucky and straight and good-tempered.
There has not been another child in these flats since she
came here, and she hasn’t even a supply of books to
exercise her quick little brain on. Singing grasshopper
or not, I find myself impelled to give up an hour or two
to her entertainment occasionally; she is such a forlorn
little soul."
" I’ll see what we can do about it," said Alison
kindly. " The twins will probably welcome a play-
mate."
“ That is good of you," said Nan, rising. " Now,
don't forget the tennis. What about singles with me on
Monday afternoon? I could be ready about five."
Alison accepted gratefully. She had holidayed in
Sydney several times, but had no young friends there;
besides, the smiles from Nan's black eyes were very
winning.
When Nan had gone, Alison carried her beans in-
side, made the tea and cut the cake. Then she carried
the tray out and set it down on a stool under the tree.
Jill came along hungrily and noticed the extra cup and
saucer.
“ Is the lady you were talking to coming back? "
she asked.
. “No," said Alison; “ the extra cup is for the little
girl helping Jack."
Jill did not look entirely pleased. ‘‘ She is only a tiny
youngster, Alison —about nine," she protested.


" Some people like cake even at nine, chicken,”
smiled Alison.
“ She’ll maybe make herself a nuisance if you en-
courage her: little children often do,” cautioned Jill.
“ I think we must risk it,” smiled Alison. ” She lives
in one of Aunt Jessie’s fiats with her grandmother, and
Miss Carter—the lady you saw—says she is very lonely.
We must be kind, mustn’t we, chicken ? ”
“ Ye-es, I suppose so,” admitted Jill; ” but, Alison,
she doesn’t seem to realise Jack's my twin: she has
been hanging on to him for over an hour, and I’ve had
no one. I call it pushing in, I do.”
Alison knew how dearly Jill loved lordly Jack and
realised that she was feeling hurt, so she tried gentle
persuasion. ” It must be miserable to be so lonely that
you have to push in, mustn't it? ” she inquired inno-
cently. “You have Jack, and Jack has you, and I
have both of you, so we’ll have to be extra kind to
Daphne, to make up for the fact that she has no brothers
or sisters of her own.”
“ She goes to our school,” said Jill, a trifle more
amiably. “ She’s very clever, they say. She’s top girl
of the class below mine, but Ida Grier, my best pal,
says she’s a bumptious bounce.”
Alison laughed. “It sounds funny, that title for a
thin, long-legged, lonely little girl. Now, you be nice
to her, chicken: I’m going along to invite her.”
Jill helped herself to a cushion from one of the chairs
and flung herself down on the grass, in a resigned, if not
very welcoming, mood.
“ It is the working-man’s smoke-oh at last, Jack,”
said Alison, from the gravel-path. “ I think you had
better ask your little new friend to come to tea with
you; she certainly seems to be chief workman.”
” She actually likes it,” exclaimed Jack. ” She’s
Daffy-down-dilly, Alison, and she lived in New Guinea
for years and years and years, and she can talk their


funny lingo, and she's coming surfing with us this
after: her grandmother says she can if you ask her."
" Why ! certainly," said Alison kindly. "We shall
be very pleased to have you join us, Daphne. So you
can swim ? ''
Daphne looked up —all legs and a smile, as Alison
privately thought. " Yes, thank you; at least I haven't
tried yet, but I've got my togs. Mummie sent them from
New Guinea."
" Then, come along and dispose of this tea, young
folks," said Alison. " I haven’t much time to spare
over it, as I have to press a frock for Jill and see about
dinner for my hungry twinnies."
"Hungry twinnies, indeed!" snorted Jack.
"You’ve got a fair appetite yourself, old girl."
" And I have earned it by digging," said Alison,
cheerfully. " I am not as lucky as someone I know
who has found someone else to work for him."
" Daffy-down-dilly likes it," argued Jack, "so I
had to be kind and let her have a look-in."
" Jill. dear," said Alison, seeing they had got down
to the camphor-laurel, " this is little Daphne Dalwood;
my sister Jill, Daphne."
Daphne smiled, bowed formally, if jerkily, then held
out a friendly hand.
"Oh! hello!" said Jill, taking and immediately
dropping the hand. " Where wall you sit ? "
Daphne plopped down beside her. " I like the grass,
thank you," she said. " I like gardens so much that
perhaps I was a cow or a caterpillar in my last incarna-
tion, don’t you think ? ”
Alison laughed, but Jill turned up her nose with evi-
dent disdain.
" A caterpillar in a carnation sounds sensible,"
roared Jack, " but in a cow! My stars! you are a
scream of a kiddie ! "
" Where did you get that idea of a previous incama-


tion from, little woman? ” asked Alison, pouring out
the tea. “ Not from your missionary father, I'll be
bound.”
“Nor from Granny,” explained Daphne. “She
says it isn't in the Bible. It was Miss Carter said it one
day to Miss Lowe when I was there. She’s a lovely lady
that gives me books to read, and twice she took me to
the talkies, only Granny doesn’t quite like them, be-
cause they shoot people a lot and kiss them more —well,
Miss Carter, she said that Mrs. Royle was working so
much pure piety out of her system in this incarnation
that she’d possibly be a flibbertigibbet in the next, and
she explained to me about it, when I asked her, but
she said it was just a fancy, most likely.
“ Have some cake, then,” said Jack, with a grin.
“It isn’t fancy; it’s painfully plain. You might have
run to mock cream at least between the bits, Alison, in-
stead of old raspberry-jam. I see you economising us
out of eats altogether some day.''
“It looks perfectly alluring,” said Daphne. She
took a bite and smiled. “ It is, too. What more do you
want ? ' ’
“ Thick whipped cream, all squishy-squashy, in be-
tween, and jelly and more cream and blanched almonds
on top,” said Jack.
“You don’t know when you are well off, John
Willie,” said Daphne severely. ” I get bread-and-jam
at home. Granny says missionaries and cake don’t go
together, and Mrs. Royle goes one better —she says God
and cake don’t go together.”
” Piffle ! ” commented Jack.
Daphne’s tone grew severer. ” It’s wicked to laugh
at saints,” she said. “ Don’t you remember the she-
bears that destroyed the bad boys that called Elisha old
bald-head? ”
” And what saint did I cackle at, pray ? ” demanded
Jack, helping her and himself to more cake.


"At Mrs. Royle," said Daphne. " She helps mis-
sions a lot. She helps my daddie’s mission, and the one
in the South Sea Islands just where my grandfather's
sphere of divine service was. Granny says a woman
that stints herself to do that is a true handmaid of the
Lord."
" If Aunt Jessie is a saint, I guess the angels must
slip a few baddies into heaven now and then, to liven
things up," grinned Jack.
“ Oh! Miss Alison! Oh! he’s wicked, isn’t he? "
asked Daphne, appalled at his flippant tone. " Isn’t
that what you call gross irreverence ? ' ’
"Well, I don’t think we should ever make jokes of
holy things," agreed Alison.
" We must not make our foolish fun out of anything
that concerns Him in whose hands our very lives are,"
said Daphne, in the tone of one repeating some wise
authority.
" Well, everything concerns Him —even the mos-
quitoes," argued Jack, who objected to being put in the
wrong. " I suppose you’d turn up your toes and die if
I spoke disrespectfully of an old skeeter. You’d have
us all sour-faced and long-faced, you would. Mother
made jokes, and Father made jokes, and I bet they
were a million miles better than Aunt Jessie; and look
at all the money Father used to give the Benevolent
Society, and all the sheets and things Mother made for
the Linen League at the hospital."
" You don’t understand, John Willie," said Daphne,
in a tone of grandmotherly superiority.
“ He does," said Alison, " and is just pretending
not to, so take no notice of him, my dear. So your
grandfather was a missionary, too ? "
" The savages on his island killed him," said Daphne
proudly: "he was a noble martyr."
" Why did they? " asked Jack.
" They got measles, and black men and brown men


can’t stand up to minor ailments like we can: they just
lie down and die. When they get hot and fevery, they
haven’t sense enough to keep the blankets well up
round their necks, so they pop into cool creeks to cool
down, and then they get bad chills and die.”
“ First they pop in, then they pop off,” interrupted
Tack.
J - - . . - « • • . . • t e i
Daphne took no notice of his interruption. “ Grand-
father was nursing them, and Grandmother was nur-
sing them, and they were all good Christian converts;
but ignorance dies hard in the savage mind, and so does
superstition
“ How do you know? ” interrupted Jack, teasingly.
” Granny says so. She says they got the idea that
debbil-debbils were tormenting them for having turned
Christians, and they blamed Grandfather for that, so
they killed him,”
‘ ‘ How terrible for your poor grandmother! ’ ’ said
Alison, pityingly,
“ Oh! they didn’t touch her or my daddy,” said
Daphne. “He was only a baby then, and they came
and cut wood for her and everything. Next week a
boat came in, and the captain brought Granny and my
daddy back to Sydney. I don’t know whether the
Christian converts ate my grandfather or not. I’ve
wanted and wanted to ask Granny, and somehow I
don’t like to, ’cause she knew him, you see. Miss
Alison, do you think it would be wrong to ask her? ”
“ I shouldn’t, if I were you, dear,” advised Alison.
" It might stir up memories that were very terrible.
Why do you want to know ? ’ ’
“I’d like to be able to tell the girls at school: I’m
sure there isn’t one of them ever had a grandfather
eaten by cannibals. They are very exclusive, the girls
at our school; they don’t take any notice of you. I
have to take books to school to read at playtime. I’m
reading a Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles
46


now. I don't like it as well as a story, but Granny's
books are all big fat ones like that, and I’ve read my
own six story-books a hundred times, I have."
“ FH lend you The Boy Crusoes, and Tom Sawyer ,
and The Jungle Book, and The Bush Boy's Book, and
tons more, if you like," said Jack.
“ Oh! John Willie, will you really? ” asked Daphne
rapturously. "I’m sorry I had to correct you for your
own good when you laughed at saints, and I'll take the
greatest care of them, and use my pretty Christmas-
card bookmarker with the bunch of roses on in them."
“ And you’ll have young Jill to go to school with
and run round with now," continued Jack grandly.
Daphne’s big eyes lighted up anew and she turned to
his twin hopefully; but Jill was not looking pleased.
7 Jack, you know perfectly well the big girls and the
little girls don’t mix much at school," she protested.
‘‘ We big ones go round arm-in-arm and talk, and the
little kiddies like Daphne play hide-and-seek and baby
games like that."
Daphne's face fell momentarily, then she hid her
disappointment under a plucky smile. " Well, I
haven’t finished the Acts of the Apostles yet, and I
could go to school with you, John Willie, couldn’t I ? "
At that suggestion, it was Jack’s turn to look uncom-
fortable. “ I meet a couple of the fellows in the tram,"
he explained, " and what sort of an ass would I feel
if they saw me with a girl tagging on to me ? But we
can all walk up to the tram together, and young Jill has
no one to sit with in it."
7 I look through my lessons in the tram," said Jill.
But you would like Daphne to sit with, would you
n °h chicken? ’’ Alison put in.
Oh ! if she likes," said Jill ungraciously.
Daphne attacked her cake in doubtful silence. When
they h a d ah finished, she remarked, " Come on, John
Willie. We have half that bed to do yet."


“ No, you don't 1 ” exclaimed Jack. “ Enough is as
good as a feast at that job. I was only doing it for the
cake, and we’ve eaten that now. ,
“ John Willie, did you promise to do a bed or only
half a one? ” demanded Daphne sternly.
“ Oh ! I dunno; ask Alison,” replied Jack, stifling a
yawn behind his fingers. u
“A whole one,” said Alison; but we 11 let him off
with half this time: it is getting rather warm for
digging.” {(
Daphne was relentless, however. “ Oh, no, we
won’t,” she said. “ A bargain is a bargain. Come on,
John Willie, and I’ll help you break its back and bring
it home beaten.” ~ .
“ You’re a caution for work, you are, said Jack,
“ but I suppose we may as well get the silly old thing
done while you’re here to help. We’ll start from each
end of the bit left and have a race to see who gets to the
middle first.” , _ i
“No scamping your end, then, cautioned Daphne.
“ You’re a bit of a shirker if you’re not watched, you
9 9
are.


IK ffm jrfPr #0^3
“ They were all good swimmers, and quite at home in the water.”
Daffy-Down-Dilly] \P aS e , Q
[Page 49




CHAPTER V
ALISON had arranged midday dinner for Satur-
days, so that she would always be free to take
l. the twins out in the afternoon. They were all
good swimmers and had had plenty of surfing at Cool-
angatta and other Queensland beaches, so they were
quite at home in the water.
Daphne, though a novice, walked out into the Bondi
surf with the confidence of an old hand. It was only
when the first low breaker caught her face on, toppled
her over, buried her head in the sand, and released her,
kicking, gasping, and astonished, that Jack realised she
knew nothing of his favourite sport. Thereafter he
enjoyed himself immensely, instructing her and show-
ing off for her benefit. He taught her to float and,
holding his hand, to dive through a breaker and come
up squealing with triumphant joy on the other side of
it. He even got her to swim a few strokes, though he
told her loftily that dog-paddling was swimming for
pups but not for people.
Jill watched their fun enviously. She felt so left-out
that even Alison's comradeship could not make things
right. “It's chilly, Alison; let us get out," she said, a
wee bit peevishly.
“ Right! " said Alison, who guessed what was really
wrong, “ but not till we have a competition with Jackie
boy. Listen, Jack ! here’s a challenge for you; we’ll get
out just as far as we can, the three of us together, and
then 111 say ‘ Go! ’ when a big breaker comes, and
we 11 see who can ride it in farthest. First on shore
wins, and last in has to unpack the tea-basket.
Daphne, you stay in the shallow water till we come
D 49


back, dear. You are to judge the winner, mind, so
keep both eyes open.” . . . ~ ,
Daphne entered cheerfully into the spirit of the
thing; calling out to Jack, “ Now then, John Willie,
you win, ’cause I’m backing my mate
Even that remark could not spoil Jill s pleasure in
her fleeting share of Jack’s companionship. _ ihey
waded and swam out together, chatting, occasionally
splashing one another, the small interloper s very exis-
tence forgotten. And Jill won the competition. Alison
laughingly grabbed Jack at the start, declaring that
he was getting away too soon, and Jill shot yards into
the lead on the crest of a tall wave, while the other two
were still arguing. Then Alison, a much stronger swim-
mer than either of the twins, put every ounce ot
strength into her strokes, got picked up and carried
in by a later breaker, and left Jack to come in a bad
third. Jill had had her cup of humiliation to dram,
and it would not hurt the young man who mixed it for
her to take a wee sip himself, so their worried guardian
arened.
But Daphne spoiled that disciplinary scheme.
“There! I knew John Willie would let the ladies
win! ” she cried. “ Men have to be chivalreeous. Let
me go for the hot water for you, John Willie, but I
haven’t any money to pay for it, Miss Alison.”
“ Goodoh, Dill!” said Jack, cutting down his
nickname for her affectionately. “ We’ll have a race
now to see who can get dressed first, and then we 11
both go.” , .
“What if Jill wins again?” asked Alison, trying
hard to keep that young lady in the fun.
“ Well, she may: she’s pretty spry,” agreed Jack;
“ but you won't, old girl: you'll waste time powdering
the shininess off your nose or ladling sunburn-cream
on like plaster.” .
“ You never know,” said Alison smilingly. Let


us join hands, all four of us, and we start when I
shout ‘ Go ! ’ ’ ’
Daphne found in it the thrill of a child starved for
play with her fellows. Squeals of anticipatory delight
broke from her as they lined up and waited for the
order to start.
“One to be ready!" cried Alison. “ 00-ooh! "
squealed Daphne. “Two to be steady! " continued
Alison. “ O-o-oh ! " breathed Daphne. “Three to
be off!" concluded Alison. “ Ooh, John Willie!
Ooh! " squealed Daphne, starting late, running at
full speed up the wet sand, then stumbling at
the edge of the dry and falling headlong. Alison
waited to pick her up, secretly happy to let the twins
have the rest of the race to themselves.
“Never mind, Daphne dear," she comforted the
little girl: “we’ll have the fun of watching Jill tumble
into her clothes like a whirlwind while we take it easy.
Come along, or she’ll be out of the shed before we get
there."
But it was Jack who got out first, and that by carry-
ing his coat and footgear. He had loudly claimed the
victory, had collected the billy-can, and was waiting
while Alison delved in her purse for a sixpence for the
hot water when Jill came out, dressed. “My sainted
silver sixpence, but you are a slowcoach, Jill! " he
cried. “I’ve been out so long that I’m starved to
death waiting for you. You race? So you can —with a
fat old porker, or a waddly duck! "
Jill was possessed of such frayed nerves after hours
of jealous brooding that her eyes filled with ready
tears.
“ John Willie, I’m surprised at your lack of com-
prehension!’ ’ cried Daphne, with quick sympathy
for his victim. “Jill didn't try, of course: she wasn’t
such a pudding-head as to want to win when the prize
was the trouble of going for the tea."


Jill looked at her with the first trace of liking. “ I
would have been green to try, she agreed.
Unable to think of a sufficient answer, Jack snorted
his indignation, then remarked, “Well, come along,
young Dill, and well get the billy filled, and hope
hard that Alison’s brought enough to fill us up,
too 9,
"No thank you, John Willie, if you’ll excuse me,’’
said Daphne. “You had all the gloat this time, so
you ought to do the work on your own.
“Of all the—of all the ’’ began Jack; but once
more words failed him; he turned on his heel and
went. . . , .
It was not the indignation, but the surprise in ms
look that melted Daphne’s heart: she could not bear
to fall short of what he expected of her, so she ran
after him. “I’m sorry, John Willie,’’ she said,
wanted and wanted to come, but I just felt I ought to
back Jill up a bit; she’s got the hump over something,
and she’s feeling bluey with you —kind of exasperated,
you know.’’ ~, , ,
“My shiny stars! What on earth for? he de-
manded. “ What has she got the sulks over? t
like young Jill, that: she’s always so —well, she’s al-
ways there when you want her, you see —never says
she can’t be bothered. She’s rather a corking
youngster, young Jill, though you mightn t think it,
seeing how huffy and lahdy-dah she has been to-
d.3.y 9 9
“ She—she doesn't like me,’’ said Daphne, with
miserable comprehension.
“ Get out! Why shouldn’t she? ’’ he asked.
“ People never do. I go out of my way to impress
the girls at school, and they all cold-shoulder me, they
do.’’
“Rot!’’ said Jack, made her
forlorn tone. “ You’re a jolly nice youngster.


“ Do you think so, John Willie? Do you really? ”
she asked happily. “ I'll tell them at school that you
say so.”
“ And I’ll boil you in oil and dram you on a nut-
grater, if you do,” he declared savagely. “My good-
ness ! You’d make a chap look a prize gander if you
got a chance, you would.”
“ All right, John Willie; if you don’t want to know
me at school, don’t,” she answered proudly. “I’ve
got my Commentary on the Acts for company, so
what do I care? ”
In dignified silence they got a can of water for
the tea and began the walk back. It was almost
finished when Jack growled, “You needn’t be so
prickly.”
“Me?” she demanded. “I was just waiting till
you recovered your composure, John Willie. A
bad temper comes from the Evil One, Granny
says.”
At that, Jack had to laugh, and he was still at it
when they got back to the others. “ Dill has been
lecturing me ! ” he exploded. “ The size of her, and
the cheek of her! It’s a wonder she isn’t afraid I’ll
gobble her up in one mouthful.”
“You’d find me inclined to be tough, John Willie,”
she answered gravely.
Alison laughed gaily. “ I hope you won’t find my
cake the same,” she remarked. “ I mixed it up
rather too moist, and it doesn’t cut well. Pass
the sandwiches first, Jill, and I’ll preside over the
billy.”
“Ought—ought I to have brought any —any con-
tribution to the refreshments, Miss Alison?” asked
Daphne haltingly. “ I —l didn’t think there’d be any,
you see.”
“Nonsense, dear,” replied Alison. “A little girl
like you couldn’t prepare for a picnic, and nobody


could dream of letting an old lady like your grand-
mother have the trouble."
“ But you gave me tea this morning," protested
Daphne. " I'll try not to eat much."
“ Then you’ll hurt my feelings," smiled Alison, dis-
pensing the tea. " Every cook likes to see her cooking
appreciated, and those little almond-cheese cakes are
one of my special specials."
" They look lovely," said Daphne, politely begin-
ning with a sandwich. "I wish missionaries did go
more with cake. Granny says good plain fare is better
for us, but I w r onder sometimes if it makes you plain.
Do you think Jill’s prettier than me because she gets
prettier things to eat ? ’ ’
Jill perked up graciously at the compliment, but
Jack roared with amusement. " Young Jill's not much
in the beauty line," he declared. " Now, Alison, if
she weren't fat as butter, she’d break hearts by the
dozen: her grin always gets ’em somehow."
Jill's face fell again. "My mouth isn’t as big as
yours, anyhow, Mr. Smarty," she said, " and my
hair isn’t the colour of dirt."
"My troubles ! " said Jack. “As long as you are
a boy, it doesn't matter w T hat you look like."
" Boys, of course," commented Alison, with a smile
that was to take the sting out of her words, " are little
tin gods on wheels, and girls just have to sit down and
sigh that they are only girls."
“ Pity they have more sense than the boys nine
times out of ten, then," said Daphne scathingly.
"I’m sure John Willie couldn’t make cakes like
these."
"Not going to try," said Jack: "that's women’s
w’ork. I’ll have another cheese-cake, though, just to
show 7 there’s no ill-feeling, Alison."
They made a good meal, all four of them, for
Daphne's determination to eat little was not proof


against cheese-cakes, then they strolled home in
leisurely fashion. Jack was always in the lead, and
the tireless energy of long-legged Daphne kept her at
his side. Snatches of chat and laughter drifted back
to the slower pair, and the kinder feeling that had
started to grow in Jill’s heart died down into helpless
bitterness.
Jack made it worse when they were home and
Daphne had gone off happily to her own flat. He
flung himself into an easy chair in the sitting-room,
and exclaimed, “ My blessed barley-bread and ban-
tams ! What a jolly old time you can have at the sea-
side ! And isn’t that Daffy-down-dilly a dear little
trick of a youngster? ”
“ The quaintest young person I have met for a long
time,” assented Alison.
” If she weren’t so bumptious,” demurred Jill.
” Bumptious your grandmother 1 ” objected Jack.
“ And such a little bounce,” continued Jill, quoting
shamelessly.
“ Bounce? You see crooked,” snorted Jack.
“ Well, look at the way she bullied you and ordered
you about,” argued Jill, carefully keeping her own
wrongs in the background.
“ But, when she's such a snip of a thing, all skinny
legs and arms, that’s funny,” objected Jack. “Just
think of the spunk of her! She’s a well-plucked one,
she is, all skin and bones and spirit.”
“Really?” said Jill, with an upward tilt to her
chin and nose.
“Yes, really,” insisted Jack. “I bet, if a fellow
were in a tight place, she’d help him out, while
you’d sit and howl. Anyhow, you needn’t show the
poor youngster you dislike her so much: I call it
rude.”
“ I didn’t,” said Jill. “ I was as nice as I could be
to her.”


" I don’t think much of how nice you can be,
then,” commented Jack. “ You hurt her feelings,
anyhow: she told me you didn’t like her, and she was
dumpy about it.”
Jill said nothing more; in fact, her conscience
worried her with reminders of Daphne’s eager friend-
liness.
When Alison went upstairs that night, she found the
child weeping softly into her pillow. "Why! old
chicken dear, what is the matter? ” she asked, sitting
down on the edge of the bed and caressing the bowed
golden head with her fingers.
“ I —l wasn’t nice to that Daphne girl,” Jill sobbed.
“ I tried to be, really, but I just couldn’t. Oh ! darling,
what did she want to come butting in for? We didn’t
want her: we could have been so happy here, just you
and me and Jack, but she is sort of grabbing hold of
him and spoiling him.”
All pity for the hurt under the jealousy, Alison was
worried as to what she should say. She wanted to deal
tenderly with Jill, while yet helping her into a right
mood. Being a guardian, when no extra wisdom was
left one with the responsibility, was not an easy task,
she reflected.
“ But Jack has had pals before, dear, and you
haven’t minded,” she ventured at last.
“ But boys, Alison —they were boys.”
“ I don’t see much difference, old chicken.”
“Oh, Alison ! And her John-Willying him, and all
that! ”
“Chum up with her and make it a three-friendship,
then, instead of a two one.”
“ And me the tagging-on one, not the main one with
Jack any more ! ”
“ And when Jack and Peter Keist were such pals
last year, you seemed to enjoy it.”
“ But Peter was a boy,” argued Jill, impatient with
56


Alison’s apparent denseness, “ and boys, when they
eet together, always look down on girls.”
“ Look down on girls, indeed! ” protested Alison.
” You shouldn’t let them, chicken. I can’t see little
Daphne letting Jack look down on her too openly.”
“Oh! Alison, are you enamelled of her, too?’
asked Jill miserably. “Are you turning on me,
too?” i ,
Alison held back a smile for the queer variation ot
enamoured. “No one is turning on you, dear, least
of all, Jack,” she declared. “ Don’t you know that
twins’ hearts are linked in some special way ? ’ ’
“Jack evidently doesn’t: that’s what makes me
miserable,” sobbed Jill.
“ Give it a month to come right, chicken, and don’t
get Jack's back up by being cross with him. I think
you’ll be laughing at your worries in a week or two, ”
said Alison. Then she kissed her and went downstairs
to think out the triangle that had developed in a day.
It was difficult to know what to do that would be fair
to both twins and not unkind to the lonely little
stranger. “Jill must fight it out for and with herself,”
was her final conclusion.
However, she slipped upstairs again and peeped in
at Jack’s door. It took some pushing to get the
door open, for the young scamp was reading an
adventure story in bed, and had stuffed a towel under
the door and draped a rug over the fanlight, to
keep the tell-tale glow of his reading-lamp confined.
“ Jack, you scamp! ” she exclaimed. “It is nearly
eleven.”
He grinned up at her, quite unrepentant. “ The
poor clock can’t help it,” he said, “so don’t go
treating it to any Aunt-Jessieish growls. This is a
good-oh yarn that Bill Edmunds gave me as a fare-
well.”
" And he didn’t pick a good-oh boy to give it to,”


said Alison, with an attempt at severity. “ Good-oh
boys don’t turn their lights on after they are supposed
to be asleep. Besides, you have been a bit mean to
Jill to-day.”
‘ ‘ My squeaky scissors ! What have I been and done
to that j'oung grizzly now? ”
“You have left her out in the cold while you played
with Daphne.
“She could join in if she wanted to, couldn’t
she?”
“ Not if she felt unwanted, Jackie boy.”
“ I never said I didn’t want her.”
“ Deeds talk more clearly than tongues, though.”
“Tell you what I think,” he burst out irritably:
“ I think she’s a thin-skinned, soft-headed little don-
key.”
“Soft-hearted,” corrected Alison. “You see, old
chap, she loves you so dearly that ”
“ Loves me? I’m not going to have people loving
me: I’m not a sookey sentimental girl.”
“You are going to have them loving you,” said
Alison firmly, “ and just because you can't stop them,
young man. I love you, and what are you going to do
about that?”
“That’s different,” he grinned affectionately, and
sat up in bed to hug her.
“ And I’m worried about Jill, and you promised to
help me, old son,” whispered Alison, holding him
tight for a moment.
Swift remembrance came to Jack of the sorrow he
had been forgetting with childhood’s quick power of
recovery. Alison felt a tear on her hand. “ All right;
I haven’t forgotten,” he said, pulling himself free and
turning his head to the wall. “ Now, clear out and
don’t bother a chap, can’t you? ”
Alison discreetly did, but she took his book with
her.


“And I bet you," he called after her, “if I go
down on my knees and ask young Jill to join in, she'll
turn her nose a mile nearer heaven than it naturally
is and squash me fiat with, ‘No, thank you; I don’t
care for baby games.’ ’’


CHAPTER VI
IT certainly is time for bed,” said Alison to
herself, as she went downstairs, “but I am
going to copy Jack’s bad example and steal
half an hour for reading.” She settled herself com-
fortably among the cushions of the sitting-room couch
and opened the novel she had begun in bed the previous
evening, but only ten minutes had passed when she
heard a footstep on the side path and then outside her
window.
“ Are you still up, Miss Deane? And may I come in
for a minute? ” asked Nan Carter’s voice.
Alison went out promptly to unbolt the door and let
her belated visitor in, “Is there anything wrong? ”
she asked.
“No, and yes,” smiled Nan. “I have come to see
if you can help my friend Mrs. Fitz out of a hole.”
“ Yes ? ” queried Alison. “ But do come in and sit
down.”
Nan followed into the sitting-room and took the easy
chair offered her. “ Mrs. Royle told me —as one of
your failings, of course —that you are very fond of
amateur theatricals, that you are a bom actress, in
fact, and that you can memorise a part in next to no
time.”
“ I like that sort of thing immensely,” admitted
Alison, “ but her report is exaggerated, I warn you.”
“ We’ll have to risk the exaggeration. It is this way:
Mrs. Fitz —that is, Mrs. Fitzgerald, who was a brilliant
elocution-teacher in her spinster days, and now solaces
her comfortably-off widowhood by writing and pro-
ducing plays —well, she is getting up a big dramatic
entertainment for The Women’s Hospital. It is to be
60


in the city next Friday night, and she has roped in
half a dozen leading society lights to make sure of an
audience, while her own Dramatic Society is respon-
sible for the harder parts. There are four one-act plays
on the programme. Linda and I both belong to her
Society and both had parts, and now Linda has tele-
phoned from the place where she is spending the week-
end to say that she is developing mumps. I rang Mrs.
Fitz up, and here I am —her deputy to ask you to step
into the breach."
"Hasn't she anyone she knows?" asked Alison
doubtfully.
"No one she can depend on," explained Nan. " I
know you probably don't feel like play-acting just now,
if you will forgive my blundering way of putting it—•
but poor Mrs. Fitz! She nearly wept through the
'phone. She is having a frantic, hectic time of it —
rehearsals and costumes, a couple of pretty society girls
who have to be pushed through their parts, two good
girls who have had to draw out unexpectedly, and now
this last straw. If you can help her out "
" I’ll try," promised Alison. " I’ll probably love it,
too. I merely hesitated from fear of letting your friend
down. Success in school concerts and in a country town
mayn’t mean all that Aunt Jessie has made you
expect."
" Thank you ever so much," said Nan. " First re-
hearsal at ten on Monday morning. May I drive you
out past Mrs. Fitz’s Coogee home to-morrow afternoon,
so that you will have no difficulty in finding it? She
won’t be in then, unfortunately."
When they had made arrangements for the drive,
and Nan had said a grateful good-night and gone,
Alison was young enough to forget grief and worries
in joyous anticipation of what lay ahead. Life in the
flat, with the twins away at school all day, and little
to do but sit and sew, had promised to be rather tame.
61


Rehearsals would mean fresh interests —fresh friend-
ships, perhaps.
A steady uninviting drizzle greeted the little family
on Sunday morning. “ Let us stay home instead of
going to church," pleaded Jack. “ We can read Bible
stories for a bit."
Alison, remembering her new responsibilities, vetoed
his suggestion. " We can drive to church," she said.
And shabby little Aussie out in the road advertising
us," grumbled Jill.
Who cares if she is shabby ? " smiled Alison. " She
is a little Briton."
But Jill was young enough to be acutely sensitive to
public opinion and ashamed of the family’s changed
fortunes. “ I care," she said.
“ More donkey you," remarked Jack. "If any old
Biddies want to turn up their noses, let them: she won’t
care."
“ I must take two trips each way," said Alison, " for
we must offer Aunt Jessie a lift. Wet or shine, she never
misses church."
“ Most likely she will refuse the drive," grinned
Jack: “ she’ll think getting wet a special act of good-
ness."
“ She had a car herself till a few years ago," said
Alison.
' Why did she give it up, then? " he demanded.
“ Her income fell, and she preferred to suffer herself
rather than let her good causes suffer," explained
Alison. " Jack, don’t grin in that horrid way: self-
sacrifice is noble, whatever you think of it."
“ It’s a wonder you don’t give Little Aussie to some
mission and walk yourself," retorted Jack.
“ I should, if I felt called on to do it," said Alison.
“ Surely I can admire the wholehearted way Aunt
Jessie lives up to her principles, even if I don't share
them all? "


" Well, Dill’s granny does,” said Jack, “ and she
would sooner get swept into a gutter and drowned than
miss church for the rain, so Dill says. You can give her
a lift with Aunt Jessie, and Dill can squeeze in with us.”
“ Of course,” said Alison. “lam glad you thought
of it, old son.”
Breakfast and the washing-up and sweeping over,
she bustled over her dinner preparations, made a junket
and stewed some pears, left vegetables ready for boil-
ing, put her mutton in the cooker and started it baking.
Then she slipped off her cotton overall, found her hat,
gloves and hymn-book, took Little Aussie round to the
front of the building and went in to invite Aunt Jessie
and Mrs. Dalwood to drive.
Mrs. Dalwood was a frail old lady of seventy-five,
older-looking even than her years. A few minutes in
her company made Alison sorry for Daphne and able
to understand the mutual admiration of the two elderly
ladies. Each had the death of a loved one as the centre
of her life, and each had been made narrow by it. Mrs.
Dalwood lived in a world of her own, with memories
of her heroic husband as her chief mental recreation.
Beside him, even the missionary son in New Guinea
seemed far-away and commonplace. Alison gathered
that she rarely went out, save to church, and that
missions were her supreme interest. And Daphne was
so full of eager curiosity and quick fancy. What un-
suitable housemates they were —the old lady, with her
dreams of the past and her impatience of noise and
chatter, and the young child, with her dreams of the
future and her natural longing to share in the eddying
life about her! “We must let Daphne find in our flat
the youth that gets stifled in her own,” mused Alison,
as she drove back for the children, after depositing
their elders at the church door; but she sighed to
see how ungraciously Jill accommodated the little
stranger on her knee. “ How can she be such an


unkind little stupid ? ’ ’ she asked herself with pardon-
able impatience.
The minister in the big grey church was famous for
a long second prayer, with twenty minutes as its mini-
mum duration. Alison did not hear one word of it, for
she was busy with her own petitions to the great Fount
of Wisdom. Over and over she prayed that it might be
given her to guide Jack and Jill wisely and to know
what was best for them. Especially she pleaded that
she might find a way to restore Jill's happiness without
curbing Jack's friendly instincts or hurting the lonely
little creature so glad to be sitting in church beside him.
By the time the service was over, the rain and clouds
had gone, and the sun was shining warmly down on
a drying world. Mrs. Dalwood and Aunt Jessie chose
to walk, and the former collected a disappointed
Daphne off Little Aussie's front seat. Alison was glad
to have the one trip only, as she had the dinner to get
over before two, when she had arranged to run across
to Coogee with Nan. She hurried with her final prepa-
rations, but the junket and stewed pears had only just
been served out when there floated in through the open
window a wistful, “ John Willie ! John Willie ! Come
out and play ! "
“ Little Poke-your-nose-in! " said Jill, in a whisper
that was not very low, and poked her own up.
“ Half a mo, Dill! " Jack called out cheerily.
“We haven’t quite finished dinner yet, Daphne,
so come in and wait,” said Alison: “the door is
open."
Daphne walked in with a smile of general greeting.
“ We didn’t have anything to cook for dinner —just
lettuce-salad and cold meat —so we’re done long ago,"
she announced. “ Granny says it's wicked to cook
what you can do without on the Lord’s Day.”
Alison smiled at the information, but Jill took it as
a direct attack. “ There's more work in preparing a


salad than in letting your cooker cook a meal,” she
retorted. . , ~
“ But cooking is cooking, and a salad isn t, said
Daphne, in the tone of one presenting an unanswerable
argument. .
Alison thought it wise to switch the subject off.
“ Jill dear, I am afraid I’ll have to leave you to wash
up," she said. “ It’s ten to two, and I simply must
get out of these shoes: they draw my feet. I’ll only
have time to clear the table. Jack, you’ll wipe up for
Jill, won’t you? "
It was a task that Jack had sometimes volunteered
to perform since coming to the flat, but he felt it infra
dig. as a public performance —fancy Daphne seeing him
girt in Alison's big blue apron and wielding a tea-towel!
“ It’s girls’ work," he complained.
“ It’s all right, Alison," said Jill, always kindhearted
when jealousy did not distort her vision. “ I’ll wash
and wipe too: I don’t mind a bit."
“ Oh! Jill, let me help you," cried Daphne. “ I’d
love to do it for you."
“ Don't bother, thank you," said Jill coldly.
“ Ah! just let me do John Willie’s share," pleaded
Daphne. “He hates girly work, the old silly-billy !
And no work is menial. My granny says the scullion
that scours the King's saucepans serves him as nobly
as the Prime Minister that makes the laws for him."
Alison smiled and Jack laughed outright at the quaint
air of solemnity with which she passed the maxim on;
but Jill remarked acidly, “ The Prime Minister does
not make the laws; Parliament does; Miss Boyd at my
last school said so."
” Well, he does something about it," said Daphne,
unabashed. "Jill, mayn’t I help you, please ?’’
Alison saw ungracious refusal in Jill’s eyes, so put in
quickly, “ It doesn’t seem fair, dear, to let you help
here, when you probably did the dishes at home."
E 65


" Granny washed and I wiped," answered Daphne,
" but I do want to help Jill. My granny says, if I did
things for other girls, they'd like me; and, 'stead of
that, they just shoo me away and spurn my proffered
assistance and won’t like me at all."
" Jack likes you," said Jill bitterly.
" John Willie? But he’s only a boy," said Daphne,
giving him a grateful smile, all the same.
He roared with amusement at the contempt for his
sex implied in her tone, and even Jill seemed mollified.
"You may wipe up if you really want to," she said.
When Alison came down gloved and hatted for her
outing, the task was over, and Jill was hanging a rinsed
tea-towel on the clothes-horse.
" We can play games, can’t we? " asked Jack.
" Not noisy ones, old fellow, please," cautioned
Alison. " It is Sunday, and some people in our building
may want an afternoon nap."
" Well, what will we play, Jack ? " asked Jill, used to
following his lead.
Jack reflected, but Daphne broke in, " Oh! John
Willie, you are as slow as a lame dog running away from
his dinner. I’ll think of something. Let's play pirates."
" Won’t that be noisy? " objected Alison.
" Not the w T ay I’ll manage it," promised Daphne.
" We’ll be wary pirates, boarding the enemy when he
is asleep and carrying off his goods under his very nose;
we’ll have silent gloats and Oh ! come on, you
two."
" Right! ’’ said Jack.
But Jill’s hard-won graciousness could not go the
length of following her rival’s lead. " No, thank you,
Daphne; I don’t care for baby games," she said.
" Oh! come on," entreated Jack, remembering his
promise of the night before.
" No, thank you; I don’t care to," replied Jill loftily.
Jack turned to Alison, and his grin, half chagrined,
66


half gloating, said plainly, “Told you so ! ’ ’ But Alison
smiled back coaxingly. “ Jill’s a lady,” she explained:
“ therefore she says no just for the pleasure of being
asked twice.”
Jack snorted his disapproval. “ Well, if she thinks
I'm going ”he began.
Daphne interrupted. “If you don’t, John Willie, I
will,” she announced; “I’ll ask her again, and wel-
come. Jill, will you play with us, please? ”
“ I’d really rather read, thank you,” said Jill, and
marched upstairs to nurse her grouch in solitude.
“ Two's no good for pirates,” sighed Daphne.
“ What’ll we do, then? ” asked Jack.
Daphne pondered the problem for a moment, then
whispered excitedly to him.
“ Alison, may we have two big raw potatoes? ” he
asked then.
“ Whatever for? ” she demanded.
“ For a game.”
“ I hope it is not one that Daphne’s grandmother
would disapprove of on Sundays,” she demurred.
“ Go on, old girl; don’t be mean,” he urged. “ It’s
a special Sunday game Dill invented, and it comes out
of the Bible.”
“ There are no potatoes in the Bible.”
“ But there are sacrifices, aren’t there? You wouldn’t
like me to shanghai a poor bird and offer that up, would
you? ”
The threat had its desired effect: Alison handed over
the potatoes. “ Don’t get into more mischief than you
can help, while I am out,” she requested. “ There is
Miss Carter for me now.”
Nan waited to exchange a friendly greeting with
Daphne and get introduced to Jack. “ A Jack without
his Jill, eh? ” she remarked. “ And so he was when I
caught a glimpse of him yesterday. This will never
do.”


"Jill is upstairs reading," Alison explained un-
happily.
“ And Dill’s not a bad young substitute," grinned
Jack. .
" She looks a different child already —not nearly so
wistful and forlorn," Nan commented, as they drove
away. " You like her, don’t you? "
Alison admitted it, but did not confess that Daphne
was a problem, all the same. She was not away above
an hour, as Nan had another engagement for the after-
noon. Jack and Daphne were nowhere to be seen on
her return; but they evidently saw her arrival, for Jack
came running in.
" Hey, old girl! What about some pepper and salt
and two big dabs of butter? ’’ he inquired.
" What for? " she asked.
"For the potatoes, of course."
" You told me they were sacrifices," she objected.
" You surely can’t eat them now."
" But the sacrifice wasn’t accepted," he explained.
' ‘ How do you know that ? ’ ’
" Dill knows; she says if the smoke rises up to
heaven, it’s a sign your sacrifice is accepted; if it won’t
rise, well, the sacrifice isn’t accepted, and there’s no
sense in wasting two perfectly good potatoes baked in
the ashes in their jackets, if God shows He doesn’t
want them. Dill says so, and her father’s a missionary,
and she ought to know."
Alison meekly found the salt, pepper and butter,
wondering all the time what a guardian’s attitude ought
to be to such a proceeding. Then a new thought struck
her. " Where did you bake them? " she inquired. " In
the cooker? "
"Oh ! have a bit of sense, old girl! You want a fire
of sticks outside, to give the smoke a chance to rise."
" Oh, dear ! What will Aune Jessie say if you have
made a fire in her pretty back garden ? ’ ’
68


“ And have her sermonising at us and telling Dill’s
grandmother? Not much! ” snorted Jack. " We got
into that vacant allotment up the street. It’s full of
fuzzy little shrubs, mostly dead, and nearly all dried up
again after the rain, and we had a first-rate fire there.”
“ And I wonder someone didn’t see the blaze and
summon the fire-brigade, or that a policeman didn t
bring you home with a warning,” exploded Alison.
“ Oh! Jackie boy, you can’t do that sort of thing in a
city.” . .
“In an extra-quiet bit of a quiet seaside suburb,
corrected Jack.
“ Have you put the fire out properly? ”
“ It pretty well fizzled out itself, and Dill’s keeping
an eye on it; but I’ll stamp it clean out, if you are feel-
ing so fussy and won’t growl if I burn the soles of my
shoes,” he promised.
Even as he spoke, Daphne appeared, red-faced and
panting. “Oh, John Willie ! John Willie ! ” she cried.
“ I forgot the fire, and the wind caught some more
crackly bushes when I was peeping through the hole in
the fence to see if you got the butter, and all the pad-
dock’s afire now ! ”
They ran after her, out through the back garden and
up to the fence of the next allotment but one. The two
children squeezed through where a paling was loose,
but the hole was no fit for Alison. A glance through it
was sufficient, though; it showed a tall young man in
shirt-sleeves beating out the last embers of the fire.
Presently he came down to her, mopping his brow
with a handkerchief that had evidently come into con-
tact with smoke-blackened bushes. “ Hot work,” he
commented cheerfully. “ It is the third time this month
I have had to put a fire out here after tramps.”
“ I thought tramps belonged to the bush only,”
smiled Alison,
“Not these days,” he said. “ There are often work-
-69


less men camping out in countrified bits of the suburbs
and boiling their billies wherever they get a chance."
Jack forestalled Alison’s confession with a question:
" How do you know they were boiling a billy? "
"Well, I trod on a bit of their dinner that got left
behind —a fine fat potato," said the young man, “It
burned me right through my not-very-elegant slippers.
I’ll have to advise my grandfather, who owns the block,
to get it cleared of furze-bushes, unless he wants to burn
his posterity out of house and home —we live next door,
you know."
"And we are in one of Mrs. Royle’s flats," said
Alison, " and I am afraid your tramp was this pair of
mischievous children."
" A tramp, I assure you," he said.
Alison shook her head.
" Well, no harm was done, at all events," he urged.
It is good of you to say so," said Alison, and apolo-
gised for the trouble the children had been, after which
a somewhat subdued Jack and Daphne accompanied
her back.
" You’ll have to make us tea now, old girl," said
Jack. "It won’t be half as nice as the potatoes would
have been, though. What say we slip back, Dill, for
the unsquashed one, as soon as that chap that thought
we were a tramp has stopped sticky-beaking ?''
Alison vetoed his scheme firmly. " Those potatoes
have done enough damage," she said. " Come inside
and find something safe and quiet to occupy you."
" He wasn’t a stickybeak," protested Daphne. " He
saw me, and he just made up that about tramps for fear
we’d be scolded. I call him chivalreeous."
" He was certainly very kind," said Allison, " for
you w r ere young scamps, you especially, Jack, for you
are older than Daphne."
" But please, Miss Alison, it was all me," Daphne put
in eagerly. "It was my game, not John Willie’s, and


it was me left in charge of the fire and forgetting all
about it."
"No need to be noble and shoulder the blame,"
laughed Jack. " Alison barks a bit, but she never bites.
Let's play snakes-and-ladders till we get tea."
"Jill may be tired of reading," said Alison diplo-
matically. " When lam putting my hat away upstairs,
I’ll see if she would like to join you."
" Tell her to get a move on, then," cautioned Jack.
" We want to start before the cocks crow to-morrow."
But Jill was not reading; she was lying, red-eyed and
miserable, on her bed. Alison’s feelings were a mixture
of pity and irritation —poor Jill! But, if only she would
be less of a donkey, how much pleasanter things would
be for everybody!
Alison sat on the bed and lifted Jill up to lean against
her. " Silly old chicken ! " she said, " Shall I turn to
and shake you for being such a goose ? ’ ’
"I —I want Father," sobbed Jill, seeking pitifully
for a worthy excuse for her tears.
"Just at present you don’t, darling; you want
spanking," said Alison, kissing her while she scolded.
" Do you love Jack? "
"Oh! Alison, you know that’s why I’m so miser-
able."
"You love yourself more, anyhow, for you grudge
him a new friendship that gives him pleasure. Can't
you love him well enough to want him to have what
makes him happy ? ’'
" But I’m letting him have it; I’m up here, all alone
and miserable, leaving him to her," protested Jill, in
an injured tone; " and I just ached to say something
nasty to her, and I didn’t say it. When she talked about
people cooking on Sunday, I did want to say, ‘ Fancy
accepting our hospitality and then insulting us ! ’ and I
didn’t say it, I didn’t."
“I am glad of that," said Alison. " It would have


been rudeness, and making a mountain out of the
tiniest molehill, too. Now, listen to me, Jill —Daphne
is a dear little girl; it is just jealousy that makes you
dislike her. Are you going to give way to a mean old
fault like that? ”
“Oh ! I’m not jealous,” sobbed Jill. “ It’s just that
Jack's so interested in her, and —and ”
“ And you are jealous of her power to interest
him,” insisted Alison.
“ But —but I can’t think of games and things all in
a minute, like —like she can, and funny names to call
him, and —and ”
Poor little forlorn thing, with her heart aching for
her twin’s defection ! Alison held her tight and kissed
her again, but she saw how it was —Daphne inspired
Jill with an inferiority complex, and it always has been
human to dislike what makes us feel inferior and un-
comfortable —human, but not right—human, but
petty.
“ Darling,” she pleaded, “ be big; don’t be petty in
your feelings. Try to admire in Daphne any quality
that you lack. Don’t be dog-in-the-mangerish, dear.
You have plenty of brains and charm yourself, with-
out grudging Daphne hers.”
“ If —if she’d only leave Jack alone,” sobbed Jill.
“We are back just where we started,” said Alison
dismally. “Jill, I will shake you presently: you are
worrying me.”
‘ Oh ! Alison, I’m sorry. I will try,” sobbed Jill.
“ There ! That’s a good chicken ! Come down and
play with the others, then.”
“ But my nose is all red, I know.”
“ I’ll give you some powder to rub on it, and then
you can help me make tea. By that time you'll be
equal to a game.”
Jill washed her face and powdered her nose
obediently. A sort of uplifted feeling, the consciousness


that, for Jack's sake, she was going to be big and noble
in her dealings with Daphne, came to her help and
enabled her to recover her composure, though some-
times she felt the gnawing of a feeling that she was
being cheated of what was rightfully all hers.
And then, Daphne did not seem conscious of her
nobility. Instead, it was the tea that worried her.
“Oh, dear! if you’ll excuse me now, Miss Alison, I'll
have to go,’’ she said, when they brought it in.
“ Why, dear? ’’ asked Alison.
“ My granny said I was inclined to be a nuisance,
’cause I’m such a chatterbox, and above all I mustn’t
stop for meals and inflict on kind strangers the trouble
and expense of providing for me, so I was not to
have another bite to eat in your flat for a week at
least.’’
“What a shame!’’ exploded Jack. “Tell you
what, Dill —let’s have it out under the tree; that isn’t
in the flat.’’
Daphne beamed. “ That won’t be disobeying, will
it? ” she said.
Then out came tumbling the scorn Jill had prided
herself on keeping back. “ I wonder a girl so par-
ticular about doing right that she lectures us in our
own house for cooking on Sunday —insulting, I call
it—l wonder she’d stoop to deceive her grandmother
by acting lies! My father used to say acting a lie was
meaner than telling one.’’
Daphne’s sunbrowned face flushed a dull red and
she hung her head. “ I’ll go now, John Willie,’’ she
said. “I’m a wicked backslider since I left my
mummie and my daddie, I am, ’cause I get so lonely
all on my lonesome, I do. And I’m awfully sorry, Jill,
about what I said about the cooking. My tongue
is a menace to my happiness, it is; Granny says
so sometimes. I suppose that's why nobody loves
me.’’


It was the little interloper’s complete abasement
that suddenly shamed Jill. "Oh! Daphne, I didn't
mean to hurt you," she apologised, " I —l was only
joking, of course. We didn’t mind what you said
about the cooking, did we, Alison? "
" Of course, not," said Alison.
"So do let us all have tea under the trees," urged
Jill.
But Daphne shook her head mournfully. " It’s de-
ceiving Granny, deceiving her most culpably," she
said; "and Mummie says a little girl can be a big
handful for an old lady, and I must be a regular angel
to make up for it; and angels don’t pretend cake-
eating in the garden isn’t cake-eating at all, they
don’t."
" Daphne is quite right," said Alison; " but cheer
up, little woman: I’ll go home with you and ask your
grandmother, as a favour to us, to let you stay now
and any time you children want to play together."
"Oh ! will you? " cried Daphne happily. "Oh ! I
do love you ! ''
When they had gone, Jack leaned out of the win-
dow, watching anxiously for the result of Alison’s
mission, but vouchsafing not a word to Jill. At last
she could bear the silence no longer.
" I’m sorry. Jack," she said.
" Are you? " he retorted. "I’m fed up, that's what
I am."
Jill told herself she deserved it, but a sob of self-pity
broke from her, all the same —she knew that tears al-
ways melted Jack’s wrath.
" Well, stop sniffing about it, then," he bargained,
turning a forgiving face upon her.
" And you won’t be —you won’t be mad at me? "
she sobbed.
"No; I said it was all right, didn’t I? ’’ he growled.
" But, for goodness’ sake, can the cat, old girl."


“ I —l'll try, but I'm not —not catty, really.”
“Well, stop clawing at Dill's eyes, then; and, if
you don't stop sniffing I'll —oh ! here they come, with
young Dill dancing for joy. I knew Alison’s grins
could get round the old lady; they’d make a crocodile
eat cabbage instead of calf for dinner, they would.”


CHAPTER VII
\ S she waited on Monday morning at the door of
I \ the Coogee house Nan had pointed out, Alison
certain she was fated to be the ugly sister,
the ridiculous old maid, or at best the plump cook
with rolled-up sleeves, flour-daubed nose, and cheerful
grin. Even at school it had always fallen out that
way. Miss Pratt, who acted as producer, would look
her over in a considering manner and say, ‘ Now let
me see —you had better be the mother, Alison; no one
else has the dignified presence and the figure for her,'
or, ‘ My dear, I want you for the old charwoman: if
she isn't good, the whole play will fall flat.’ Looking
back, she could appreciate Miss Pratt’s tact. Never
once had she been unkind enough bluntly to remark,
‘ You are too fat to be the heroine but Alison had
always known that her avoirdupois was responsible
for her humiliation. What mattered it if she had a
rich and pleasing voice and definite dramatic talent ?
What mattered it if she had a complexion of milk and
roses, a sunshiny smile, wavy brown hair and regular
features? She was fat, and that was all about it. What
mattered it if she had the kindest and bravest of
hearts, a joyous sense of fun, and a capacity for
love and sacrifice ? Who ever heard of a heroine
with the suspicion of a double chin? Fat? It was
bloat, indeed! Let her accept the fact with the
best grace she could, she reflected, and cease sighing
after the sugarplums reserved for sylphs of the slim
outline !
She did recognise it, did laugh bravely at it, even
there on the doormat. Yet her secret self knew the
longing to be a heroine just for once. It was impos-
-76


sible, of course; the parts would be shifted round;
someone else would be the lovely young heart-breaker
of the piece, and she, Alison, would provide the comic
relief, as usual.
“ I have an appointment with Mrs. Fitzgerald,” she
told the trim maid who opened the door.
"Miss Deane, is it?” answered the girl. “Mrs.
Fitzgerald is in the library waiting for you. Come this
way, please.”
Alison followed, telling herself again that she knew
how it would be —a fat cook, or a soured spinster, or
the dowdy old landlady. A tall, handsome woman,
smartly gowned, and radiating energy and self-assur-
ance, rose to greet her.
"It is good of you to come to my rescue, Miss
Deane,” she said. “That that absurd child, Linda
Lowe, should go down with the mumps was only the
last of the week’s many setbacks for me.”
The words were gracious enough, but Alison felt
that she was being scrutinised with some doubt. “ Of
course, I cannot guarantee to manage the part to your
satisfaction,” she said.
“The trouble is, I can’t change the part to suit
you,” said Mrs. Fitzgerald; “ and, if you will excuse
my outspokenness, you have not exactly the build for
it.”
“ My size? ” asked Alison guiltily.
“ Heroines are conventionally petite ,” said Mrs.
Fitzgerald.
“I am sorry,” answered Alison, hiding a wince
under a smile. “ Since I cannot promise to reduce on
the spot, there is no use my wasting any more of your
time, is there? ”
“ Now, my dear, don’t turn me down in that hoity-
toity way,” laughed her hostess. “After all, why
shouldn’t we have a plump heroine for a change? Nan
assures me you can act; and, if so, with that com-


plexion and that smile, you ought to be able to bowl
over hero and audience alike/’
“ Is it a difficult part? ”
“Not for the right girl. It is a one-act play, a
duologue indeed —A Marriage has been Arranged , one
of Sutro’s. You are Lady Aline de Vaux, a penniless
society beauty, ready for the family s sake to marry
Harrison Crockstead, a self-made millionaire. By
taking your consent for granted, he rouses your pride,
and you turn him down, telling him just how
you despise him. He gets a glimpse of the real you,
likes and respects you and, in his apology, shows you
the real him—lonely and eager for affection and
understanding. The scene ends with genuine liking
and an engagement based on something more than
convenience. It takes about forty-five minutes, but, if
you are a rapid learner ’’
"I am sure I can memorise it in time, if you
think
“No; I refuse to think till I try you out,” said Mrs.
Fitzgerald, with a frank smile. “ Jerry Wallace is the
middle-aged vulgarian you have to work your spells
on. I left him smoking in the garden till wanted.
Excuse me, and I’ll find him.”
Alison's wait was sweetened by anticipation of a
heroine’s part at last after an over-dose of dour old
dames and gawky domestics. In her teens, that over-
dose had worried her as an evil omen —no heroine in
the world of make-believe, no heroine in real life, she
had argued. Romance would pass her by, just because
she was big and plump and looked several years older
than she should. Other girls might dream of lovers
and husbands and homes of their own, but she would
have to be satisfied with a career. And, quite definitely,
she had known that she did not want a career: born
with a strongly developed mother-instinct, she wanted
a family to love.
78


"Mr. Wallace, Miss Deane," said Mrs. Fitzgerald,
breaking in on her smile of anticipation.
Seeing before her a tall dark man in the early
thirties, Alison offered her hand and smiled more
brightly still, and all because a quiet sorrow lurked
visibly behind the stranger’s pleasant brown eyes.
"This is your part, Miss Deane," said Mrs Fitz-
gerald, handing over some typewritten sheets. " I am
going to take you right through, to let you get the
spirit of the thing. Jerry knows his speeches, and you
can read yours. As the scene is a conservatory off a
ballroom, any evening-frock you already have will
do for your dress, but we must rehearse every morn-
ing. Can you make ten-thirty suit you ? "
"Easily," said Alison.
Then one side of the library was arranged to repre-
sent the stage, and the rehearsal began. Alison threw
herself into it with all her heart, determined not to
waste her only chance as the heroine. Besides, the
hero had dramatic ability too, for all his sad eyes and
quiet manner, and was well worth acting up to. Mrs.
Fitzgerald was pleased to approve of them both.
Jerry,, you have played up better than ever this
morning," she said. " Sometimes you have been too
bored to let yourself go properly, you know. As for
you ; Miss Deane, you’ll bring the house down if you
don’t get cold feet between now and next Friday. I
haven’t a girl in my amateur company who can hold
a candle to you."
Please bow for us both, Lady Aline," smiled
Jerry Wallace. "Deportment will come natural to
you, of course, but grace is not included in the list
of a self-made millionaire’s assets."
Alison dropped a laughing mock curtsy, her heart
glowing with the praise. " I’ll try not to let either of
you down," she promised.
“ Good girl! " said Mrs. Fitzgerald. " Memorise all


you can by to-morrow. Now let us forget the play and
have a cup of tea together: rehearsing is dry work.
Terry, be amiable to Miss Deane while I round up the
teapot, the eatables, and that troublesome new maid.
When she had gone, Jerry Wallace looked at Alison
with a whimsical smile. “ When one is ordered to be
amiable, does one begin with the weather? ” he asked
“ Supposing we make it the play, suggested
Alison. “ I am a bit scared of it, you know. Do I say
any parts in a way that cuts the ground from under
your feet —robs you of the tone you think called for in
your answers? ”
He smiled. “You say it all so naturally, Miss
Deane, that you will have me imagining I really am a
millionaire before the week is out. Where did you
learn to act ? ”
She had no chance to answer. The door was pushed
open at that very moment, and in marched a little girl
of three, dragging after her a child’s blackboard and
easel. She was no cuddlesome picture-child, that was
Alison’s first impression. An untidy mop of straight
brown hair was caught up with a bow of crumpled
ribbon, and the little face was brown and thin, but
the brown eyes were eagerly bright, and the mite s
manner was marked by calm self-possession. It was
not just her colouring that reminded Alison of Daphne
Dalwood; in spirit, too, they seemed to be akin.
Unheeding a stranger’s presence, the child
across to the man, eagerly demanding, “ Mitter
Wallet, Mitter Wallet, how does you dwaw a duck?
She clambered on to his knee then, as though quite
at home there. He put a protecting arm round her and
looked down into the bright brown eyes with a tender,
amused smile. “ How does one draw a duck, Little
Bits? ” he repeated. “ The trouble is, one doesn’t, if
one happens to be the donkey I am with a pencil or a
bit of chalk.”


“Just one wee little duck for Little Bits," she
coaxed.
“Honestly, chickabiddy/’ he objected, “my
quack-quack would probably turn out a frying-pan.”
“ A duck, not a quack-quack,” she corrected. “ Oh !
please, Mitter Wallet, how does you dwaw a duck? ”
Over her intent face, he looked at Alison in helpless
appeal. “ Ask this lady,” he suggested. “ Little Bits,
otherwise Elizabeth, Miss Deane.”
Alison was not very proud of her artistic skill, but it
was impossible to refuse a wee girl to whom it mattered
so much. Besides, a duck was an easy task —a sort of
triangle for the beak, a dot inside a semicircle for the
eye, a curve for head and neck, a flatter one for the
back, a double triangle for the tail, strokes for legs,
something to suggest webbed feet and water, and there
you were. “ Let me see,” she said, taking the chalk
and righting the blackboard on its easel, while the
child jumped down and stood beside her, her little red
tongue curling out of the corner of her mouth in the
earnestness of her contemplation. “ Now we are ready
Let me hold your hand, Little Bit. ”
“Little Bits,” corrected the child gravely, putting
the wee fist that had just received the chalk back into
the offered hand.
There s his beak, said Alison, guiding fist and
The little head tilted to one side. “ Where him
tongue to quack with? ” she asked.
Alison obiiged with a stroke through the middle of
the first triangle. ‘ There,” she said; “ and here’s his
bead, and now his neck, and now we pop in an eye and
a lovely big eyebrow.” y
lonkT” g leeful, y- “ Mitter Wallet,
look; she cned. Him are gwowing up a duck, him
die.
y reall y a &reed; and Alison, glancing


up laughingly, saw his eyes alight with simple kind-
ness and happiness, though somehow the sadness was
behind them still.
“ I hope you don’t charge for lessons, Lady Aline,
he smiled, catching her eye. “ I admit that I am taking
one, in case I am called on to understudy you in your
absence.”
“ I’d advise a better teacher,” she smiled back,
thinking, ‘ I like him: he is the sort of man who would
be good to babies and animals and all weak things.’
“ And now his back, Little Bits,” she continued aloud.
“ And now up we go, and down we go, and out again,
and in again and there’s his tail, and a curl under here
for his big breast-bone, and a fat leg here, and a fat leg
there, and wishy-washy water all round, and some
straight-up strokes for reeds and rushes over here —oh !
and a curly-wurly sort of thing with strokes through
it for his foot, and there he goes, quack, quack ! quack,
quack ! gobbling up baby froggies for his dinner.”
“Little fwoggies for him dinner,” repeated the
child, her face aglow. “ Mitter Wallet, that am how
you dwaw a duck, see ! ”
There was triumphant pride in her tone, but it was
destined to be extinguished, for Mrs. Fitzgerald
bustled in at that moment, followed by a maid with a
laden tray.
“ Elizabeth, you are a naughty little girl,” she said
severely. “ Off you go. Miss Cragg is looking every-
where for you to give you your bread-and-jam and
milk.”
“ I think —I think I’d wather dwaw a duck,” said
the child, her lower lip quivering.
“ But you can’t, my dear,” said Mrs. Fitzgerald,
putting a firm hand on the small shoulder. “ Come
along at once.”
“ If she sat on my knee, and I went bail for her good
behaviour,” the man put in coaxingly.
82


" Now, Jerry, don’t interfere every time someone
tries to train her. Men always spoil little girls,” Mrs.
Fitzgerald replied, a kind of patient impatience in her
voice. Then she turned to the maid, who had just
spread a cloth across the end of the table and moved
the tray on to it. “ Grace, take Miss Elizabeth out to
Miss Cragg, please.”
The man sighed and submitted, but the mite
looked back, as she was led away, with a wistful last
appeal.
“I’d wather —I’d weally wather dwaw another
duck, she said.
Alison pitied the hurt helplessness in the man’s look,
but the child’s brave little attempt at dignity reminded
her again of Daphne. “ Perhaps it will be strawberry
jam, Little Bits,” she said comfortingly.
“ If you knew Miss Cragg, you would not make such
rash promises, my dear Lady Aline,” said the man.
“Jerry, what a horrid thing to say!” protested
Mrs. Fitzgerald. “Cream, Miss Deane? and sugar?
She is an excellent housekeeper and is training the
child most carefully.”
Alison’s kind heart ached somewhat for the little
one. It had surprised her to find Mrs. Fitzgerald with
a child at all. That ultra-smart lady of the wide
dramatic interests did not exactly suggest motherhood,
and the little girl had an unmothered look,
“ I am afraid I was not trained carefully,” she
ventured. “ I got the strawberry jam in my youth,
so I naturally like a chance to pass it on to other
children.”
Jerry Wallace looked at her gratefully. “Why
everything it wants should be considered bad for a
kiddie, I don’t know,” he said disgustedly.
/You, Jerry ! ” cried Mrs. Fitzgerald, handing him
Alison’s tea to pass on. “ If you had your foolish way,
you would feed her on chocolates and chicken and let


her sit up till she dropped asleep. Didn’t I hear, Miss
Deane, that you are guardian to two children? ”
Alison admitted it.
“ Take my advice, then: keep the strawberry jam
for birthdays —by which I mean don’t make trouble
for yourself by over-indulging the little monkeys.”
Deftly she changed the subject then, and presently
Alison was driving home, not quite sure that she liked
Mrs. Fitzgerald, certain that she pitied Little Bits, and
curious as to Jerry’s standing in the home. Him, she
did like; she was sure of that, even though he had
taken little part in the conversation. She put him
down as a man with only a small fund of small talk
who would expand interestingly in intimate conversa-
tion. He would improve on closer acquaintance, she
was sure.


CHAPTER VIII
AMONG Jill's week-end tasks was a composition —
L\ Explain and illustrate the proverb, ‘ A man
A. against his will is of the same opinion
still.' When she had attempted it on Friday evening,
she had professed herself unable to find an illustration
of its truth, and Alison had had to manufacture one for
her.
On Monday morning, though quite unconscious of
the fact, she provided an excellent proof of its truth
in her own person. She wakened up with an uncom-
fortable sense of something unpleasant ahead. She
called it a headache at first and was petted and dosed
by Alison; but at ten to nine, when it was time to leave
for school, she suddenly realised that its proper name
was Daphne Dalwood. Jack had not only promised
that his new-found friend might walk to the tram in
her company, but had gone on to suggest that she,
Jill, would have no other company in the tram. He
ought to have known that she looked up her lessons
then —in any case, that she would rather do so for the
future instead of listening to the silly baby-talk of a
little girl. It was horrid of him to encourage that plain-
faced, bumptious child to go tagging on to her, just
because they had chosen to be kind to her on the
week-end!
Daphne was waiting at the gate, all legs and smile
again. She gathered up her belongings—a bag of
school-books and lunch, and a fat volume that had
refused to fit into the bag —and then they started up
the street.
" What on earth is that book, Dill? ” asked Jack.
“ It’s Acts —Acts of the Apostles, you know,"
85


explained Daphne. " I can't get it and my mug both
into my bag, and Granny makes me take my own mug
to drink out of."
" You’re a mug yourself to carry that load
around," declared Jack.
" It’s a solace when I’m lonely," said Daphne.
“ Next week I’m changing over to the Commentary
on St. Luke. He’s quite little, thank goodness ! Would
you like to borrow this one, John Willie ? "
“ Not much 1 " laughed Jack. " Why didn’t you
bring one of the story-books I lent you ? ’'
“ I might get the cover soiled," she replied.
Things that are lent to you must be treated with the
greatest respect, John Willie. I fear you are a thought-
less boy in some ways."
“ They are his books," said Jill acidly. " I sup-
pose he can do what he likes with his own."
"That’s just what he can’t do," said Daphne
triumphantly. " Nothing is really our own; it is lent
to us as a sacred charge from heaven, and we have to
give an account of how we use it. You had two corners
turned down in the Jungle Book, Jofjn Willie, and
scribbling over one of the pictures. And look at you
now! You shouldn't kick stones off the footpath;
you'll wear out the toes of those perfectly good shoes."
"And you’ll wear the tip off your perfectly good
tongue, young Dill," retorted Jack, with an amused
laugh. "You ought to be bottled up and sold for ser-
mons, you ought."
Jill was tilting her nose and her chin up in the way
that signified contemptuous disapproval, but Daphne,
quite unconscious of having offended, changed her
place to get next to her. " Let me carry your books,
Jill, please," she pleaded.
The offer made Jill feel more wrathful. " Don't be
silly. Daphne," she said; "you’ve got a load for a
camel now."


" But I'd love to carry something for you.”
“ Well, you won’t.”
Daphne sighed. She would not have found it easy
to explain why she was in love with prickly Jill, but
of the fact she had no doubt. Perhaps it was Jill’s
exceeding fairness, such a contrast to her own tan,
that fascinated her. Honey-coloured hair, rosy cheeks,
creamy-white complexion and forget-me-not blue eyes
more than atoned for a nose inartistically moulded and
a mouth on the big side. To Daphne, at all events,
Jill was a lovely vision, while Jack was just a jolly
boy.
The walk to the tram-stop was short, and the tram
arrived almost as the children did. Jack swung him-
self into a compartment full of boys and left the girls
to find seats for themselves. Jill deliberately took a
vacant single seat next to an old lady, and Daphne
had to sit by herself. At the very next stop, how-
ever, the old lady alighted, and the seat was imme-
diately appropriated by Daphne. “ What luck ! ” she
beamed. “ I thought I wouldn’t get a chance to sit
beside you after all, Jill.”
The pleased light on her face aggravated Jill’s re-
sentment —did the child actually think she would enjoy
having her ?
“ I always look up my history and things in the
tram,” she announced.
“All the way? ’
“Yes.”
Daphne sighed. “ I must makeshift with Acts,
then,” she replied, “ but I did hope you would want
to talk, Jill.”
“Well, I don’t.”
After that there was no further attempt at conver-
sation in the tram, and Jill joined one of her class-
mates as she alighted and walked up with her, ignoring
the very existence of the younger child who miserably
87


kept pace with them. Subconsciously, of course, her
ungraciousness worried Jill’s conscience all day, while
she was consciously resenting Daphne’s tagging-on.
Brooding over her grievances, she muddled her work,
got two of her five sums wrong, and put Canada in
South America. Miss Taylor, who usually had a word
of praise for her, requested her to put her mind into
her work and stop dreaming, and she blamed Daphne
for the humiliation she felt —that horrid little Dalwood
child was spoiling everything, she told herself. At
recess and in the lunch-hour she kept close to her new
friend, Ida Grier, with no eyes for the girls of lower
classes, but she could not avoid occasional glimpses of
a forlorn little figure and a fat theology book under a
tree in the playground.
“ She’s making a parade of her lonesomeness, just
to make me feel uncomfortable,” Jill told herself,
“ and, after all, what is it to do with me if she is so
bumptious that nobody will be bothered with her? ”
After school was dismissed, Jill made a bee-line for
Joyce Edwards, a girl who walked down to the tram-
stop. She talked so animatedly to her that Daphne,
who had fallen into step at her side, humbly drew
back and followed them. At the tram-stop, however,
she swooped down joyously upon Jill die moment
Joyce caught her city-bound tram.
“ Do you like that Edwards girl, Jill? ” she asked.
“Yes.”
“ Very much ? ”
“Yes.”
‘ ‘ More than you like me ? ’'
It was on the tip of Jill's tongue to answer, “ A
million million times more,” but conscience con-
quered desire for once. “ I don’t properly know you,
Daphne,” she said. “You can't like people when you
don’t know them.”
“ I can,” declared Daphne. “ I liked you the very
88


first moment I saw you, the identical first moment.
Still, I’m glad that that’s why you don’t like me. I
thought it might be something about me you didn t
like —me being ugly, or talking so much, or some-
thing. As it is, I’ll see you soon do know me, and
then it will be all right, won’t it ? ”
Jill’s inner self said, “Will it? I don’t want to
know you at all,” but she restrained the impulse to
put her feeling into words. Besides, her mind was
diverted to a more pressing subject, and her answer
really was, “ Daphne, did you notice this morning
where I put my tram-pass after I showed it to the
conductor? I can’t find it anywhere.”
“ You just shoved it into your bag,” said Daphne.
“Well, it isn’t there now,” replied Jill worriedly,
“ and our tram will be along any minute. Help me to
shake my books out and see if it has got into one.”
Daphne dropped her own bag and her Commentary
to shake energetically, but no pass rewarded her
efforts. “ And I didn’t bring any money,” lamented
Jill. “ Can you lend me some ? ”
Daphne’s face clouded; here was a chance to serve
her heroine, and she must let it go by! “I haven’t
any; I’m so sorry,” she apologised. “You take my
pass, and I’ll walk; I’d love to, really.”
“ Don’t be silly,” said Jill ungraciously.
‘' But you could take Acts for me; really you
could,” pleaded Daphne.
Jill did not condescend to answer —horrid little
thing, trying to heap coals of fire on her head and
make her feel uncomfortable ! Instead, she walked
over to Jack, who had just arrived with a half a dozen
pals. “ Have you any money with you, Jack? ” she
asked.
“Not a bean,” he answered. “ I had threepence,
but I banged it on three ice-cream licks off a cart that
went by at lunch-time. Why ? ”
89


“ I’ve lost my pass.”
“ You’ll have to hoof it, then, old girl,” was Jack’s
unfeeling comment.
Jill trudged off without a backward glance. She had
scarcely expected him, in masculine company, to dis-
grace his assumption of lordly indifference to her sex
by offering to keep her company; but the lack of
sympathy in his tone hurt, and a wrathful tear made
her blink one eye. Scarcely had she started, how-
ever, when Daphne came panting up beside her.
“Jill, why didn’t you tell me you were off ? ” she
cried. ” I’m coming too. It’s not so far for two, but
it’s a whale of a way for just one. Oh, dear! that’s
slang, and my granny says slang is the dull person's
way of trying to be smart. ’ ’
” Don’t be silly, Daphne,” said Jill irritably. “ Jack
would have walked with me, of course, if I had wanted
company. Go back, or you’ll miss the next tram.”
” I don’t exactly see John Willie walking with his
sister —not with those fatheads of boys grinning at him
from the tram, anyhow,” replied Daphne sagely.
” Won’t I do, Jill ? I'll talk to you all the way.”
” I don’t care for magpies.”
“ Oh, dear ! my long tongue again ! Does it really
annoy you? 'Cause I’ll be as quiet as an old baa-
sheep if it does.”
” Daphne Dalwood, can’t you take a hint? I don't
want you dogging my footsteps, so there! ” cried Jill
in desperation.
Daphne stopped dead in the street, while the home-
bound tram whizzed by with indifferent Jack on
board, and suddenly Jill could bear no more. “He
never even looked at me ! ” she sobbed.
Daphne moved up to her again, her face still red
under its tan from Jill’s direct rebuff. “ He’s only a
boy,” she said gently, " and boys are like that. You
can’t depend on them in a criterion —no, crisis, I


mean. It’s only girls who’ll stick to you when things
go wrong. Don’t you really like me a teeny bit yet,
Jill? You know me nearly a day better now.”
Till did not, but she was ashamed again of her un-
graciousness. “ Saturday till Monday isn t knowing
anybody,” she said, “ but I think you are very kind.’’
Daphne beamed. “Do you ? ” she asked. That s
lovely of you. My granny says kindness is a homely
virtue, but it gets you into heaven safely, 'cause it’s
the charity in the Bible —you know: faith, hope, and
charity, but the greatest of these is charity. Now me,
I think you are lovely: that's why I want you to be
friends.”
Jill made no reply. Surely even Alison could not
expect one to keep on being sweet to the little nuisance
for ever 1 Daphne was silent too, chewing some dis-
turbing thought inwardly. At length her rumination
found vent in words.
“ What I said wasn't the whole adulterated truth,
JiU,” she confessed. “ I do think you are lovely and
I do want to be friends on that account; but there's
another reason: I feel that, if I had one girl to like me,
the others might take me up too. You’d be the thin
end of the wedge, see ? ”
“Thin enough —both of us, for that matter,” said
Jill» trying to be amiable.
“Yes, aren’t we?” replied Daphne hopefully.
“It’s a sort of link between us, isn’t it? Only I’m
scraggy, and you’re the pretty kind of thin, like a
darling sapling in among the fat-trunked granddaddy
trees.”
Jill liked the comparison: she said it over, to make
sure of remembering it for home repetition. “ You’re
a funny little dot, Daphne,” she approved.
“And you like that about me, don’t you? ” in-
quired the child eagerly. “ Miss Carter says I’m a
cure. You like cures a bit, don’t you ? ”


“ If they’re not conceited about it," Jill conceded
darkly.
Daphne reflected solemnly. " I don’t think I am,"
she said. "My granny thinks funny things are silly,
and that flattens you down a bit. ’ ’
“ I didn’t say you were," said Jill; "I wouldn’t be
so rude. Why ! there’s Alison coming in Little Aussie.
Jack must have told her about my pass."
Alison pulled the wee car up beside them. " Hop
in, chicks," she commanded. " Daphne, how nice of
you to walk with Jill! ”
'' It was a lovely chance for me," said Daphne.
"Jill nearly likes me a teeny bit now."


CHAPTER IX
DEVOTING every possible minute to the memo-
rising of her part, Alison could not enjoy in-
terruptions. Her lunch consisted of a five-crown
apple munched as she learned, and she peeled potatoes,
cut up cabbage, stewed steak and prepared a macaroni
custard for the evening meal with her part beside her.
Even as she drove to meet Jill she was saying over
various speeches to herself, trying them with different
intonations. Then, when Jill was safely home and re-
freshed with milk and biscuits, Jack came pleading for
a pre-dinner dip in the sea, and for once she felt very
much like refusing.
“ It’s so late, Jackie boy,” she pleaded. “ I have
dinner to see to and ”
“ With a cooker that keeps working when the boss’s
back is turned, old lady! Now, don’t be mean. It’s
quite warm this after, and I feel all hot and grubby.”
“ Have a shower,” she suggested.
“Have a heart, old girl! It’s far too cold for
showers, and the bath-heater uses a fearful amount of
gas. People oughtn’t to waste gas when they’re poor
as a chicken that’s just a beak and a bunch of tail-
feathers. Ah !be a sport! ”
Suddenly Alison remembered the self-righteous
spirit in which she had told Mrs. Fitz that she liked
to give her children strawberry jam, and here she was
shirking the surf that was Jack’s idea of strawberry
jam on life’s menu; for the sake of the imaginary Lady
Aline, she was grudging a joy to a flesh-and-blood
young scamp left in her care. She laughed ruefully.
“All right, old son: we’ll make time if we haven't
any. Coming, Jill ? ”


“ And we’ll ask young Dill,” said Jack; ” she’s a
scream in the water.”
Alison noticed how Jill's face had lighted up and
now fell again.
"Not to-day,” she said. “We have no time to
wait for other people. This is just a flying dip and
straight home again, remember.”
Jack was satisfied to leave it at that, and Jill went
dancing upstairs for her bathers. Alison took none;
she sat on the sand and studied her part while the
children sported in the waves. Home again, she hur-
ried dinner on and then sat down to study. She had
to invent the verb to strawberry jam to encourage her-
self to take a real interest in the children's questions
about their work. Even when they w r ere in bed and
she was busy embroidering a tiny tot’s pink linen
frock and sunbonnet, she was away in their conserva-
tory with Harrison Crockstead and Lady Aline.
On Tuesday morning, proud of the fact that she had
memorised almost her entire part, she left Little Aussie
in the street and walked up through the garden'd! the
big house where Mrs. Fitz lived. It was an old-
fashioned garden, full of shady trees and of beds where
larkspurs, poppies and pinks ran riot. Beside the path,
not far from the house, was an archway covered with
pink bignonia. The great creeper hung down in trail-
ing masses, and from the dim cavern under it came the
sound of a child’s heart-broken sobs.
Alison stooped down and peered in. ” Why ! Little
Bits! Little Bits, dear! ” she said, as she saw the
child prone on the ground, “ What is the matter, wee
woman ? ''
The child crawled out from under the mass of foli-
age and rubbed a rather grubby hand over her tear-
stained face. The other clasped a teddy-bear grubbier
than itself.
“ Tell me what the matter is, darling,” said Alison,


taking the rickety seat beside the arbour and lifting
the child into her lap.
“We were being fairwies, Teddy and me," ex-
plained Little Bits, with an occasional dry sob to
punctuate her words, “and fairwies, they live in
flowers, always and always and always. Mitter Wal-
let, him did tell us, did tell Teddy and me.”
“So you and Teddy played fairies among the
flowers, eh ? " encouraged Alison.
“ Teddy and me did get in the flowers to be pwoper
fairwies," said Little Bits. “ I show you."
She slipped to the ground, took Alison's hand, and
led her up to a bed of misty blue delphiniums near
the front entrance. “ Teddy said, ‘ Let’s be fairwies
here,’ and we did," said Little Bits, bursting into fresh
sobs, and pointing to the result of the game —a flat-
tened patch in the middle of the bed. “ Teddy did tell
me to be fairwies, and him was a fairwy too," went on
the sobbing tale, “ but nobody did catch hold of Teddy
tight and hurt him and call him a bad, bad girl —only
poor Little Bits. Look ! "
The child held up her little bare arm, and there, be-
tween wrist and elbow, were the marks of angry fingers
that had grasped the culprit roughly, bruising the ten-
der flesh. “ Miss Kwagg not like fairwies; her
angwy," sobbed the child.
“ There, darling! You let Alison kiss the poor old
arm and make it well," said Alison gently, suiting her
action to the words. “ Better now ? "
“ Better now,” echoed Little Bits. Then she laughed
through her tears. “ How does one dwaw a fairwy ? "
she demanded. “ Come on ! Come on, quick, and we
dwaw a fairwy."
“ My sympathy, Miss Deane, but it is your own
kind heart that has let you in for such a treat," said
a man's voice behind them.
Alison turned with a welcoming smile, but Little


Bits ran to Jerry Wallace, who picked her up and
began fondling her.
“ Bad Hitter Wallet! Bad Hitter Wallet! ” stormed
the babe. " Little Bits and Teddy did want you and
want you and couldn’t find you. Us did cwy and cwy.
Us were being fairwies, and Hiss Kwagg ”
“ I know, poor wee chickabiddy; I heard all about
it when you were telling Hiss Deane,” he put in.
"Not Hiss Deane; Alison,” corrected Little Bits.
" Teddy and me, us do like Alison.”
" Well, you and Teddy are not bad judges, are
you, chickabiddy?” he inquired, with a smile for
Alison.
" Look, Hitter Wallet! Look ! You kiss it and make
it better too,” the child commanded, holding up her
reddened arm.
He obeyed, then led the way in. "It makes me
savage enough to feel like doing justice to Harrison
Crockstead’s blackest moods to-day,” he confided.
" And what is a garden for, if not for a child to play
in? And —sorry, Hiss Deane; no need to inflict my
genuine cranky feelings on you, is there? If you will
be good enough to wait in the library, TU see this wee
woman into kind hands and then hunt up our coach.”
But Hrs. Fitz —everybody called her that, and
Alison did to herself —came in while he was still away.
" Good morning, Hiss Deane,” she cried, beaming
graciously on Alison. " Now where is that trouble-
some man ? He promised to be on the spot,”
Alison explained, picturing the grief of Little Bits
in pitiful colours, hoping that Hrs Fitz VKpuld resent
the treatment meted out to her child and see the un-
wisdom of leaving her to hirelings and wasting her
own interest on the shadowy figures of drama.
" Bother him ! ” exclaimed Hrs. Fitz. " Now he’ll
be as sulky as a bear with a sore head and blame poor
Hiss Cragg! Anyone with sense could excuse a little


impatience on her part under the circumstances. Chil-
dren are aggravating little monsters, aren't they?"
Alison disliked her sentiment so much that she
longed to tell her aggravating was a wrongly-used
word. Instead, she looked polite surprise.
"Ah! there you are at last, Jerry! " cried Mrs.
Fitz, seeing him at the door. "And who is spoiling
that troublesome child for you this time ? ''
" I sincerely hope Janet is," he smiled, as he came
in. "I can generally rely on her."
" If she paid a little more attention to her pastry
and her boiled potatoes and a little less to Elizabeth,
she would be a better cook," said Mrs. Fitz. " What
a man you are to have the management of a child."
"The management of her! " thought Alison, sur-
prised.
" The management of her ! " he queried aloud. " I
like that! It's what no one ever leaves me. Whatever
I do, I am sure to be told that it will be the ruination
of her."
"But she calls you Mr. Wallace." said Alison,
mystified.
" Milter Wallet," he corrected. "It was her baby
attempt at copying Miss Cragg. The poor wee mortal
has never heard anyone say Daddie."
" I should hope not! " exploded Mrs. Fitz. "An
absurd baby name, worse than her own Little Bits."
" And you wouldn't let her copy you and call me
Jerry," he complained smilingly.
" I should think not! " exploded Mrs. Fitz again.
He actually liked it, Miss Deane ! That will tell you
how much idea of discipline he has, and all children
want discipline."
" The trouble with you, my dear aunt," grumbled
Jerry, "is that you have never had any children of
your own. If you had six, now, you might not be
such a fine amateur producer, but "
G 97


“ But I’d be as stupid a parent as you, I suppose,”
she finished for him. “And you know I object to
being called Aunt by an ancient-looking widower like
you, Jerry.”
“My apologies, Jane,” he smiled. “ When I am
feeling savage, I enjoy annoying those who won’t feel
with me, I fear. In spite of you, my dear lady, there
will be a sudden change of housekeeper here before
long.” , ,
“ And I’ll wash my hands of you, my dear man,
the very day you get rid of Miss Cragg—an excellent
woman, and so entirely trustworthy and sensible. A
nice housekeeper you’d choose, if left to yourself ! But
all this is very boring for Miss Deane, and we must
get on with our rehearsal. Put that couch and chairs
in position for it, Jerry, please.”
Then Alison forgot even the woes of Little Bits and
her own surprise at the child’s parentage. Once more
she was Lady Aline de Vaux, and once more her Lady
Aline met with warm approval. It was only when she
was home again and had reached the stage of making
tinned cherries into a pie for dinner that her mind
busied itself again with her new acquaintances. So
Jerry Wallace was a widower? That probably
accounted for the sad look behind his brown eyes.
No doubt, he had worshipped his wife —he looked the
sort of man capable of deep and unselfish feeling—
and her untimely death had left a wound that would
never heal. How tenderly he loved her child, too !
and how they worried him, those women, with their
stupid talk of discipline ! As if a baby did not want
love more than anything else in the world! They had
him scared, too. Faced with the task of bringing up
a little daughter, he felt helpless, and they confused
instead of helping him.
“ I don’t like Mrs. Fitz,” said Alison to her rolling-
pin, as she rolled out the crust for her pie. “ And I
98


shouldn’t,” she added grimly, as she slapped the crust
into place and cut its edges, “if she^ were twice as
smart-looking and ten times as clever.”
Down at the tennis-court before breakfast next
morning, she inquired of Nan Carter, Do you know
the man I am acting with, Mrs. Fitz’s nephew ? ”
“Jerry Wallace?” queried Nan. “Why, yes. It
is through the Wallaces that Linda and I first got to
know Mrs. Fitz. Kit Wallace, his sister, was at the
Varsity with us. It is a great pity marriage took her
to South Africa, for she is a dear, and Jerry has no
other womenfolk to come to his rescue, except Mrs.
Fitz; and they don’t see eye to eye, those two.”
“ I don’t wonder,” said Alison.
“ Oh ! Mrs. Fitz is all right,” Nan assured her, with
a laugh. “ Jerry is a dear old thing, but he does fuss
too much over that unprepossessing baby of his.”
“Little Bits unprepossessing?” exclaimed Alison.
“She is not exactly pretty, but she is a dear, quaint
little mite —winsome, I call her. How sad that she lost
her mother so soon ! ”
“ Sad ? ” echoed Nan. “A jolly good thing for poor
old Jerry! Don’t look so horrified. I knew Sybil
Smart —Mrs. Jerry Wallace —and you did not.”
‘ ‘ What was wrong with her ? ’ ’
“Oh ! nothing —except herself. She was a shallow,
frivolous little creature, with not as much heart as a
mosquito boasts. She jilted Ted Brownlie to set her
cap at Jerry’s cash —he is well-off, you know. She
was as pretty as a picture, and as wily as a politician,
and slow old Jerry fell for her at once. They get it
bad, too, those quiet young men, when they do fall
in love. She married him in three months and ignored
him from the church door, letting him see that all she
wanted was his money for a gay fling with her own
silly set. He was an angel to the little cat, too, gave
her anything she wanted and tried to keep up with her


whirl of pleasures, till she let him know that she pre-
ferred his room to his company. After that, he stayed
home, smoking a solitary pipe, I suppose, while she
went flying round with her crowd, as she called
them."
" Poor Mitter Wallet! " sighed Alison.
"You have evidently made his baby’s acquain-
tance," smiled Nan. "What cut him up most, I
believe, was to find she had no more time for it than
for him. The night she died, he tried to persuade
her to stay home, for he got in to find the child sick
and no doctor summoned. She refused —said there
was nothing wrong with the ugly little monkey but a
cold and a bad temper. Fie rang up his doctor, of
course; Little Bits was rushed into hospital with diph-
theria, and the doctor was operating on her —a nasty
tracheotomy case —when the news came that Mrs.
Jerry had been killed instantly in a motor collision."
" Poor man! He has had a miserable time ! " said
Alison pityingly.
" Lucky to get off with only two years of such a
wife," declared Nan. "Kit told me all about his
troubles —you’d never get a word out of Jerry, of
course."
" And Mrs. Fitz lives with him ? ’’
" Only now and then, to keep an eye on him. She
has a flat of her own right in town and doesn’t like
living out in a suburb, so she found him a capable
housekeeper and never stays out there very long at a
time. She wanted him to give up the Coogee house,
put Elizabeth in a nursing home till she is big enough
for school, and live at a good city hotel."
" And he wouldn’t, of course."
"You seem to have taken his measure quite well,"
smiled Nan, "He won’t give up the baby, and he
won’t give up sea-breezes and a garden for her. Be-
sides, though he is a dear, he is a bit stodgy, you


now _ wou ld rather moon round with a dog or a book
or a gardening-fork than cultivate other people's
society. What he badly wants, seeing what a stay-at-
home old stick-in-the-mud he is, is another wife; but
I suppose his first mistake has left him too scared for a
second try.”
“ Has he been a widower long? ”
“ Two years —perhaps a bit more,” said Nan.


CHAPTER X
THE set of tennis being over, Alison went in to
see to breakfast. When it was over, the chil-
dren set off for school, and she hurried
through her morning tasks, then went to rehearsal,
word-perfect in her part.
It was an uninteresting morning, however, tor Mrs.
Fitz read the opposite part, her nephew being detained
by business, so it was not till the full-dress rehearsal
on Thursday night in the city that hero and heroine
acted together again. The entire performance was gone
through then, and so much time was taken up arrang-
ing and shifting scenery and properties that the last
play, A Marriage Has Been Arranged, did not get its
try-out till almost midnight. Alison had done her
best to look her aristocratic part. As black suited
her plump fairness better than anything else, she
wore a black lace gown relieved by nothing but
a large brilliant buckle and the ivory fan that she
earned
“ Who is the stately dame who looks so like a hand-
some duchess? ’' she heard a young man ask, as she
and Jerry waited in the wings.
“A Miss Deane, I believe,” a shrill-voiced girl
volunteered. “ She is taking Linda Lowe s place, and
Mrs. Fitz says she is only twenty-one.”
“ Twenty-one your grandmother ! Thirty-one more
likely,” came the scornful answer. “ She’s a stunner,
though, for all she looks so matronly. If I weren t
such a shrimp, Td wangle an introduction to her,
but I don’t see myself running round with such an
armful—too much of a good thing for my modest
• ) 9
size.


The two young people went off laughing, leaving
Alison with flushing cheeks, but Jerry smiled her
embarrassment away: . . , , M
“Harrison is looking up—aspiring to a duchess
now! " he smiled. “ I’m^ going to be lucky for one
night of my life, anyhow.” .. . ...
“That sounds unduly pessimistic, said Alison.
'' How is Little Bits ?
His eyes lighted up at the inquiry. _ .
“Little Bits? She is quite well: quite well physi-
cally,” he said.
‘ ‘ Why the qualification ? ”
“ I was away for a couple of days, as you know
from my absence from rehearsals, and my poor
chickabiddy went the two days unkissed. They kept
her away from Janet, the motherly old cook whom
she adores. Miss Cragg highly disapproves of her
affection for a menial, as she puts it; and, as tor
kissing a child herself —well, if she had one of her
own and were dying, she’d farewell it with a limp
handshake. There is no doubt she is hard, and I feel
we are going to part company soon, in spite of my
aunt. Do you know, I found one of the maids, a mere
bit of country child, weeping to-day: Miss Cragg had
just given her notice —no warning, no second chance,
nothing.”
“And why?”
“ It seems the maids cannot be out after ten-thirty
without special permission, and poor Maisie was guilty
of coming in at eleven. She has no home in Sydney,
no money, and no friends to go to, her father is out
of work, and she is helping her mother. It was her
first little taste of romance, too. Janet’s nephew, a
sailor lad in port, took her to the talkies, and she was
enjoying his company too well to remember the
hour.”
‘ ‘ And you interceded ? ’ ’


“ I didn’t: I put my foot down,” he said, looking
uncomfortable at memory of it,
“ One has to be firm sometimes,” Alison encouraged
him.
“Yes; but it is rather unpleasant —at least, I find
•j 9 y
it so.
" Are you two ready to go on? ” Mrs. Fitz called
to them. “Do let yourselves go,” she pleaded, as
they joined her. “You saw how that little stupid, Mae
Westmacott, just spoiled that pretty little piece of
Barrie’s. You two have last place on the pro-
gramme, and you must make up for her jack-in-the-
box stiffness and send the audience home in a good
temper.”
“ That means, wither me even more than you
usually do, Lady Aline, when you fling my vulgarity
in my ugly face and assure me you would not
many me if I were the last man on earth,” smiled
Jerry.
" Please, try to look deserving of it, then,” she
said. " Don’t turn away from the audience and give
me a cheerful, teasing grin, as you did the other
day-” .
‘ ‘ It amuses me to watch you assuming a bitterness
so foreign to your real nature.”
She smiled with pleasure at his kindly judgment.
"You are not a bad hand at this assuming business
yourself,” she said: "it ought to be a big help to
you when you do occasionally have to put your foot
down.”
"Jerry, is that chair rightly placed?” Mrs. Fitz-
gerald called from the stage, to which she had with-
drawal.
He moved its position slightly and returned to lead
Alison in, as the curtain went up. At once she forgot
the other performers, who were watching, Jerry’s
problems, and everything else. She w r as Lady Aline,


Lady Aline passionately alive to the humiliation of her
position, with her quivering pride, her frosty scorn,
and her poor, hurt feelings. And there before her was
not the Jerry Wallace for whom she had developed
such sympathy and liking, but Harrison Crockstead,
offering his ironic compliments, making his proposal
in insulting words, taking her acceptance for granted.
She writhed at his tone, then set herself to cut him on
the raw too. And presently, they were not engaged,
he was telling her the heartache behind his cynicism,
and she was pitying him, actually liking him. So they
worked up to their emotional climax, the curtain came
down, Mrs. Fitz was telling them how splendid they
were, and Alison needed half a minute to realise who
Mrs. Fitz was, and that she herself was no proud
English patrician, but simple Alison Deane, guardian
to Jack and Jill.
“The duchess is some actress, isn’t she?” they
heard the young man who had given her that title
exclaim. “ She’s a peach, that girl, even if she’s a bit
riper than she admits. If I were as tall as Jerry
Wallace, I’d set my cap at her in dead earnest.’’
To Alison his words were painfully audible, but
Jerry assumed complete unconsciousness of them,
“How are you getting home, Miss Deane?’’ he
asked. “ May I run you out to Bondi while I am wait-
ing for the lady who is probably too jaded to object to
Aunt Jane as a title to-night? She will be at least an
hour getting all this mess on the stage sorted out and
stacked away.’’
“ Thank you,’’ said Alison, “ but Miss Carter
brought her car in and is waiting for me now, I sup-
pose.’’
“ Bother Nan! ’’ he ejaculated. “ I wanted to pre-
sume to ask your advice about something, and to-
morrow I’ll be too much in demand as errand-boy,
porter, scene-shifter, and what not, to have time for


my own affairs. Are you likely to be in town any
morning next week, Miss Deane? ”
“Tuesday,” said Alison, remembering an appoint-
ment with Miss Bennett.
“ Will you honour me by having lunch with me that
day ?” he asked.
“ I could, if you think my advice will be of any use
to you: I am not a Solomon, you know.”
“I should value it very much. Where may I
pick you up, then? And where would you like
lunch?”
Alison arranged a place of meeting, left the
restaurant to his discretion, and then hurried away.
Next morning she wakened up with an effort when
her alarm went off. Quickly she sprang out of bed:
Jack and Jill must not be late for school or set out
hungry even if the eventful Friday had come and her
mind was afire with the thrill of it. It was good to
know that Mrs. Fitz thought her a real discovery, that
Nan Carter called her a born actress, and the whole
Dramatic Society united to praise her; but it was
better still to be acting Lady Aline to Jerry Wallace's
Harrison Crockstead. A quiet joy was singing in her
heart because the play had brought her a friend, be-
cause the man whose brown eyes smiled so sadly was
not to slip out of her life at once and soon be no more
real to her than the millionaire whose part he was
taking. It was that lunch appointment for Tuesday
that really made her heart sing as she hurried into her
clothes and downstairs.
She had been too sleepy to notice Jill’s empty bed,
but in the kitchenette she found Jill packing the
lunches for school.
“ I put your clock back an hour and a bit,” said
the child proudly. “I got our breakfast and washed
up.”
“Jill, you darling! ” said Alison.
106


“I’d die if you didn’t look your best to-night or
were tired enough to make your voice hoarse, and
so would Jack,” said Jill: “he thought of the clock
first.”
Who would not be a girl guardian, thought Alison,
with such a pair of twins to guard ?


CHAPTER XI
JACK and Jill had their own thrill out of that event-
ful Friday. Alison had booked seats for them, and
they had joyous anticipations of the outing and
were proud to own one of the performers.
“ Couldn’t we ask Dill? ” inquired Jack at dinner,
suddenly aware that he w T ould like to dazzle his new
pal with his sister's undoubted talent. “ I’ll open my
money-box and shout.”
“We haven’t a seat for her,” objected Alison,
“ and her grandmother would probably disapprove of
her being out late at night: she is only eleven, you
must remember.”
“ But nothing would hurt young Dill: she’s as wiry
as a clothes-line. Go on, Alison ! There are bound
to be some seats not booked: I’ll have one of those,
and Dill can sit with Jill.”
Jill merely looked disapproval: she was schooling
herself to be outwardly kind to Daphne.
“Well, you two wash and wipe up the dishes for
me, and I’ll slip up and ask her grandmother,”
promised Alison.
But she did not go altogether happily. She sus-
pected that Mrs. Dahvood shared Aunt Jessie’s dislike
of things dramatic, and she doubted if it were kindness
to raise the child’s hopes only to see them dashed to
the ground.
“ Thank you, Miss Deane, but I have just said no
to Miss Carter, who came in with the same kind invita-
tion,” said Mrs. Dalwood. “ I think Daphne’s parents
would rather I did not let her out at night while she
is so young, for little heads are very easily turned. At
108


the same time, may I let you know how grateful I am
for all your kindness to the little one ? ”
Alison felt there was nothing more to be said, but
Daphne put in, “ Please, Granny, might I just run
down to see Jill’s frock, then ? It’s got no sleeves and
no neck, and it’s all shiny silk, and she says it’s a
pink with so little pink in it that you can’t hardly tell
it’s pink, and I know she’ll look a dream.”
“ I suppose you may, if you won’t be a nuisance
to Miss Deane,” conceded Mrs. Dalwood; “but you
think too much of outward appearance, Daphne child.
Beauty is often a snare of the Evil One.”
“Yes, Granny; but not with Jill,” said Daphne.
“ She’s too sweet to be snared.”
Walking downstairs hand in hand with the child,
Alison was smiling to herself at that epithet sweet as
applied to the side of her character Jill had shown her
young admirer. Still, things must be improving. Jill
had evidently been confiding in Daphne, if only to
boast of the party frock that was to get its first Sydney
airing that evening.
The twins had disposed of the washing-up, and Jack
was sitting on the kitchenette floor rubbing a cream
into his patent leather shoes, while Jill was upstairs
changing.
“ Jackie boy, how did you get finished so soon? ”
asked Alison.
He grinned.
“ We’re a bit slimmer than you, old lady, so we can
be slicker with the dishes,” he said.
Alison looked into the sink. “Not a pot washed!
Oh! you excitable pair! We have half an hour yet
before we need start.”
As she spoke, she poured all the hot water left in
the kettle over the pots and put on a fresh supply to
warm.
I'll do them,” said Jack resignedly. “You go


and get into your glad rags. We are not going to have
you getting flustered by too much scurry/'
" I have everything ready, and dressing won't take
me more than five minutes," she assured him.
But he took one spring from floor to sink, and
Daphne seized the towel; so she gave in gracefully
and went upstairs to brush Jill’s fair shingle into silky
waves and help her into the shell-pink silk that went
so well with her perfect complexion. Jill maided her
then, and the two sisters went down together, to find
Daphne helping to lace Jack’s shoes,
"I’m sorry you can’t come, Dill," said Jill, happy
enough to be amiable.
Opening wide eyes of admiration, Daphne bent her
thin brown head first to one side, then to the other, to
take the vision in.
"Oh, Jill! you're like a princess," she exclaimed,
‘ ‘ like a fairy princess in a book ! ' ’
"She's not bad in that rig-out," admitted Jack;
" but isn’t her ladyship here the stunner in her black-
and-white affair ? ''
Alison smiled her frank enjoyment of his approval.
She had slipped a short evening coat of ivory chiffon
velvet, with puffy sleeves, over her black frock. " I
must look all right, if Jackie boy passes me," she said.
" Daphne dear, we are all sorry that you cannot come.
We’ll tell you all about it to-morrow when we go surf-
ing together.
" Plays are wicked," sighed Daphne: "I wish they
needn’t be."
"They aren’t," declared Jill. "Plays are only
stories that people talk at you."
" But my granny says "
" I don’t care if all the grumbling old grannies in
the world say so," retorted Jill. " Alison wouldn't be
acting if plays were wrong. Now, do you think she
would ? ''


“No-o,” admitted Daphne doubtfully; “ but God’s
people have to give up lots of things.”
“ Then, it’s time you gave up criticalising your
elders,” said Jill sternly.
“Jill, dear! ” reproved Alison, letting the wrong
word pass in concern at the spirit behind it.
“Oh, dear!” sighed Daphne. “It’s my tongue
again; it’s always vexing Jill, the way I let it wag
along, Mrs. Royle, she says, if I find it tripping me
up like that, I should go straight to the mustard-pot,
eat a spoonful of mustard, and burn the silly old
waggle-tail into remembering; but we haven’t got any
mustard, we haven’t. Condiments of all kinds are bad
for the physical system, they are.”
“Well, Alison hasn’t quite economised us out of
them yet, so I’ll let you have some mustard, young
Dill,” grinned Jack.
“ Thank you, John Willie,” she answered meekly;
“ it may make me remember.”
“All the same, you are not going to try it, my
dear,” said Alison, patting the brown head kindly.
" Jack, put that cruet away, you unkind little scamp !
Now run upstairs, finish getting ready, lock your win-
dow, be sure you have the ticket for your seats and a
clean handkerchief, and don’t leave the light on.”
“I'd better be going, then,” said Daphne, with
forlorn resignation.
“I have a Treasury of Plays for Boys and Girls:
111 lend it to you to read, dear. It will make you love
plays,” said Alison.
“Oh! thank you, Miss Alison,” cried Daphne
happily. “ The trouble about me is, I’m too prone to
love the things of this world as it is.”
Alison found and handed over a fat volume.
“Good night, dear, and happy dreams,” she said,
then stooped and kissed the child, whose face had
grown forlorn again.


At that, Daphne's self-control broke down for once.
“ I don't care —I don’t care if plays are wicked,” she
sobbed. “ I just wish and wash and wish I was going,
I do.”
“ It’s a shame,” growled Jack darkly.
“ Never mind, Daph,” consoled Jill, moved by a
sudden impulse of pity: “I'll tell you every single
thing about the plays to-morrow.”
‘‘Jill darling, really?” cried Daphne, radiant
through her tears. “ That will be nearly as good as
going, won’t it ? After all, I haven’t a pretty frock to
wear, and I’d hate you to feel ashamed of my raim-
ent; so I’ll just go up and makeshift with St. Luke, I
will; and, when I wake up to-morrow, I’ll read the
Treasury of Plays in bed. I hope you have a good
time, and John Willie too, and Miss Alison.
‘‘l’d like to take Dill’s grandmother and Aunt
Jessie and tie them up in a bag together and drown
them in something they’d think wicked —ice-cream-
soda, say,” said Jack vindictively, when Daphne had
gone. . . f
“ Hush, dear ! ” commanded Alison, in a guardian s
voice. “ All the people in the world can’t be expected
to think alike, not even all the good people, and we
must try to respect one another's views. Besides,
Daphne is a very little girl, and I dare say she often
applies wrongly what she hears her grandmother say.
“ Don’t you believe it,” said Jack. “ Young Dill
knows enough big words to know what a preacher
means, let alone a preacher’s widow.”
“ Well, let us lock up and go. and forget the poor
chick’s disappointment, since we can’t help her this
time, and just see that we enjoy ourselves,” advised
Alison.
They acted on her advice, getting home almost at
midnight, sleepy and happy. The whole performance
had been what Jack called “the lion’s mane, the


whale’s tail, the shark’s tooth, and then some,” but
A Marriage Has Been Arranged was the “then
some Everybody enjoyed it best, and Jerry and
Alison were recalled again and again.
“You’ll get a splendid write-up,” Nan Carter
prophesied, as they parted fof the night. The Herald's
dramatic critic was there, and he told Mrs. Fitz you
could beat anything on the regular stage out here at
present. We'll see you there yet.”
“No,” said Alison very decidedly. “One can’t
lead an actress’s busy life and be a successful guardian
at the same time; and I know which means the more
to me.”


CHAPTER XII
DAPHNE’S Sunday afternoons had been some-
thing of a burden to old Mrs. Dalwood.
Sunday-school was unfortunately held in the
morning, and that left a long afternoon with little to
fill it. The old lady would provide the child with a
theological work from what remained of her husband’s
library, then settle down for the nap she seemed to
need after her chief weekly exercise, the walk to
church; but half an hour was apt to seem an eternity
to Daphne, who would soon be wandering round the
little living-room, drumming drearily on its window-
pane, or peeping into the bedroom, to see if her grand-
mother were awake enough for answering questions,
and often rousing her just as she was yielding
to slumber. A scolding and a remorseful apology
would follow, and probably the old lady, unable to
recapture sleep, would come out at last and find her
little tormentor asleep on the floor from very bore-
dom.
Hence Mrs. Dalwood, with some secret misgivings
about Sunday visiting, was glad when the Deanes came
to live in one of her landlady’s flats. When surfing
with the twins on Saturday, Daphne was therefore able
to remark innocently, “ I can play on Sunday after-
noon, if you can, John Willie, and if I don’t play
games, and if I don’t go inside and be a nuisance to
Miss Alison. We could play Sundayish things under
the camphor-laurel, couldn’t we? ”
“ Good-oh ! ” approved Jack. “ But sacrifices are
off, Alison says; and, when she puts her foot down,
it’s big enough to stay put."
That was on Saturday; but Sunday brought an


unkind touch of malaria for Daphne. She came home
early from church with a temperature, made her dinner
of quinine, and went off to bed.
By three o’clock she was almost well again, for her
temperature always ran down quickly. Mrs. Dalwood
gave her a glass of milk and two biscuits to satisfy
the pangs of reviving hunger and promised that she
might read her plays, as a compensation for the
miseries of her brief attack. Daphne spent a wonder-
ful hour with The Little Princess, Frances Hodgson
Burnett’s pitiful picture of Sara at Miss Minchin’s
boarding-school. As she followed the heroine’s for-
tunes from petted star-boarder to ill-treated slavey,
then back to wealth and happiness, the real world was
far away, and smiles and tears chased one another
across her face in a far-away dream one. It left her
“ too stirred-up inside ”, as she put it to herself, to
start on another play. It left her also in a mood of
doubt.
” Granny,” she asked, “ are you awake? ”
Mrs. Dalwood roused herself with an effort: an in-
valid must be indulged, not scolded. “ Yes, dear;
what is it? ” she inquired, stifling a yawn.
Are plays bad ? ' ’
"Well, not all of them: Shakespeare wrote plays,
of course.”
Is it bad to read the ones that are not bad ? ”
“ No; of course not.”
“ Would it be bad to talk them —to dress up and
say the speeches, like Miss Alison does? ”
“ I suppose not, my dear.”
“ Why is it bad to go to plays, then? ”
“Well, some plays are bad: they are vulgar and
sneer at good things. Because of them, it is wiser for
God’s people to have no dealings with dramas at all.
You know what the Bible says— f If thine eye offend
thee, pluck it out.’ ”


Daphne sighed. “ Would it be bad just to write
plays that weren’t bad? ”
“ I suppose not, my dear.”
“ Then, Granny, I know what I’m going to do when
I reach man’s estate—l am going to write good plays.
like Shakespeare.”
“ But aren’t you going to be a missionary, dear,
like your grandfather and your father ? ’ ’
“ They’re men.”
“ But your father has no son to take up his noble
task; he has to look to his daughter.”
Daphne sighed again. “Oh, dear! seems as if I was
sort of earmarked to be one of God’s brave banner-
bearers,” she said. “ All the same, Daddie and
Mummie had better not build on it. They’d
better pray for a son and make sure. They d better
wait till they come home, though: I wouldn t like him
born in Papua and black. I was lucky getting born
just before they went up there, wasn t I? If I d been
a bit later and been a black child, I don’t think Jill
would ever have liked me.”
“ Your father and mother are British: their children
would be white wherever they were bom,” explained
Mrs. Dalwood. „
Daphne shook her head. “ I don’t think so, Granny,
if you’ll kindly 'scuse me,” she insisted. ‘ If you are
bom in Papua, you are a native of Papua, and natives
of Papua are black: my teacher says so, and I know,
only they’re a browny-black, not a blacky-black.
Mrs. Dalwood let the argument drop, to woo slumber
again. Daphne respected her silence for a short time,
then demanded, If I have to be a missionary when I
grow up, Granny, don’t you think I might have some
fun now? Couldn’t I get up and go and play with
John Willie? Mummie always let me up soon as my
old temp, was gone, and she used to give me dinner,
too.”
116


The latter suggestion scared Mrs. Dal wood. “ I sup-
pose you may get up and run down to keep your little
friends company,” she conceded, “ but it would be
most unwise to take solid food an hour or two after
you were running a temperature of a hundred and
two, my child. A lightly-boiled egg at tea-time,
perhaps ’ ’
“ If it could be a drumstick of the hen that laid it,
Granny, Td appreciate it more,” sighed Daphne.
“ Such a very little girl should not want big meals,”
reproved the old lady.
Daphne pondered the point for a moment. “ How
will I ever grow out of being little, then? ” she asked.
“You will grow in God's good time,” said her
grandmother wearily. “ Now, my dear, do get dressed
without any more chattering, and put a warm frock
on, and remember what I told you about not bother-
ing Miss Deane.”
“ She's not easily bothered, Granny.”
“ How do you know ? ”
“ Easily-bothered people, they pucker up between
their eyes when you talk to them; she smiled.”
“Well, you remember, child. I shall have to keep
you in if I find you are being a trouble to other
people.”
“I wish I wasn’t a trouble to myself sometimes,
Granny, not knowing what to do with me on Sunday
afternoons and long times like that.”
“ Child, child, will you be quiet and get dressed? ”
asked Mrs. Dalwood.
“ Yes, Granny, and I’m sorry. I wonder why God
gave me a long tongue? I’d rather it wasn’t to preach
with. I’d like Him to have meant me to act in plays,
like Miss Alison —good plays, of course. If He meant
it, it wouldn’t be wrong then, would it? ”
“ Daphne, you would try the patience of a saint.
Go, child, if you are dressed.”


“ Yes, Granny. I’m sorry about my tongue, I am/’
answered Daphne from the door.
She longed to ask why one of Job’s trials had not
been a little girl with an ill-hung, over-oiled tongue,
but forced herself to refrain. Presently she was out-
side the Deanes’ flat, somewhat pale of face, and
worried by an insistent sense of hunger.
_ .... . ... . « 1 / / T 1 TTT'II • I T 1
" John Willie ! ” she chanted. " John Willie ! John
Willie! ”
Jack, reading a boy’s magazine on his bed, poked
a head out of the window to inquire, “ Hullo, nipper I
Thought you were sick? You looked pretty green
about the gills when you had to go out of church,
anyhow."
“ I had a touch of fever," explained Daphne
proudly. “ Nice Mr. Burton drove Granny and me
home. Come out and play, John Willie."
" I'm reading a tophole yam," he teased her.
“ John Willie," she stormed, " how can you be so
unchivalreeous? I'm s’prised at you, I am. Here’s
me —had a nasty quinine tab, and a temp, of a hun-
dred and two, and no dinner at all, and how would
you like that? "
• / . . • -r , i 1 e € T 111 1 J
“ All right," said Jack nobly; "I’ll come; but you
think out something interesting to do, mind —no wishy-
washy girly games."
On his way downstairs, he paused to invite Jill,
who had the big bedroom to herself, as Aiison was
entertaining Nan Carter. " Dill's here," he an-
nounced.
" Is she? " remarked Jill, stifling a yawn.
" Aren’t you coming down, then? We ought to play
with the poor youngster, seeing how sick she was."
" If you feel that way about it, go and be a martyr,
but leave me in peace," said Jill, reopening her book
at the place where she had kept a marking finger in it.
She did not realise that the demon of jealousy was
n8


taking possession of her again: she merely felt acute
pleasure in adopting such a lofty tone.
“ Oh! all right; be a meow-meow if you want to.
We can get on quite well without you, young turn-
up-me-nose," said Jack, departing indignantly.
Tears smarted in Jill's eyes. Her pleasure had gone;
remained only a worrying doubt of her own motives,
a doubt inspired by that accusation of cattishness.
And presently doubt became certainty, and she was
sorry and anxious to atone. Alison had already dealt
out afternoon refreshments to the children —a wedge
of cake and an orange each —for she felt that Nan had
enough of children at school and would enjoy tea
better without their company. Jill had not eaten her
orange, so she put it aside for Daphne and went down-
stairs to see what else she could collect in the way of
eatables. In the kitchenette she found Alison putting
away what she and Nan had left —fingers of buttered
toast, egg-sandwiches, rainbow-cake.
“ Oh ! Alison, poor Daphne had no dinner, and Jack
and I ate our cake before she came. Do you think I
might take her out something ? "
“ Of course, dear," said Alison, pleased that it
should be Jill to ask. " What about the toast and
sandwiches off this tray? I rather want the cake for
your school lunches to-morrow."
Jill thanked her and happily fixed up a fresh tray —
toast, sandwiches, some ginger-nuts out of the biscuit-
barrel, the solitary orange, and a cup of hot cocoa.
Then she carried it out to the garden.
" I heard you say you had no dinner, Daph," she
remarked, " so I made you a snack."
“ Well, you might have made cocoa for us all, old
m i n gy/’ grumbled Jack. " I’m just about starving
again, and young Dill couldn’t get away with all that
toast in a month of Sundays."
“ I can easily make you a cup now, if you’d like


it," said Jill, jumping up from the seat she had chosen,
and eagerly preparing to improve on her self-imposed
penance.
"Jill Deane, I think you are just an angel," said
Daphne adoringly. " Let John Willie have this cocoa,
or half of it, and you come and play with us, and
that’ll be better than a party, it will. We’ll play it’s
one of those religious feasts in the Bible: that’ll be
Sundayish enough for anybody, and it’ll let me eat a
lot, too, ’cause you always do when you’re eating to
the Lord."
But Jill was getting such pleasure out of being noble
that, when the feast was over, she kept the other two
waiting while she washed up the dishes as a pleasant
surprise for Alison.
" It’s you that ought to be the missionary, darling,"
said Daphne humbly: “ you’re so sweet and good."
Jill felt the joy of those who know they deserve a
pat on the back, and who do not fail to get it.


CHAPTER XIII
IT was a delicious celery soup they began with,
and the roast duck and green peas that followed
were young and sw r eet. Alison told herself that
she was enjoying it so well just because she had had
nothing to do with the cooking, but Jerry Wallace
looked happy about it too.
“ I love this restaurant,” said she. “ The tables
are not all crowded together, the waiters don’t seem
rushed, the music is bright without being loud, and
everybody seems so attentive to you.”
He smiled. “It is one of my own shops, you see,”
he explained.
She looked bewildered. “ Didn’t you know? ” he
added. “You see, I run a quartette of more-or-less
exclusive restaurants and sell expensive cakes and
pastry.”
“ I didn’t know,” she murmured. It w r as rather
difficult to reconcile such a prosaic occupation with the
sad-eyed young widower about whom she had been
weaving sympathetic dreams,
“You must not condemn me quite because of my
prosy trade,” he said, with a whimsical smile for her
bewildered look. “ High quality and efficient service
is our motto,” he added teasingly.
“ And you mustn’t misread my surprise,” she re-
plied, somewhat uncomfortably. “It is just that I
imagined you in some learned profession. Mrs. Fitz
told me you did a University course.”
“And dainty cakes and differential calculi don’t
go together, eh?” he smiled. “My father left me
the business when he died. Though I didn’t take to
it at first, I rather enjoy managing it now, and it


obligingly leaves me free whenever I feel like playing
truant.”
“ So now I need have no qualms about choosing
that sundae marked two-and-six,” smiled Alison. "I
have been hankering after it, and telling myself to be
less extravagant in my tastes.”
‘ ‘ Shall we have it served up on the roof-garden that
other people use at tea-time only ? ” he asked, beckon-
ing a waiter. "We can have tea or coffee up there
too, and a chance of an uninterrupted chat.”
When the order was given, he led the way to the
lift, and so up to the deserted roof-garden, which
looked over the city and its harbour, dominated by its
great bridge, which at that time was not quite
finished.
A pretty waitress in a dainty pink-and-white uniform
brought the ice, and then coffee, biscuits, and a special
cheese for which Jerry had asked. When they were
alone, Alison insisted on pouring out his coffee at
once.
" My sundae looks so interesting and enormous that
I know I shall never get past it,” she said, " and I
want to get you up to talking-point as soon as pos-
sible : I can't help being curious as to what you can
possibly want my advice on.”
“Many things,” he smiled. "Don’t you know.
Miss Alison, that there are some people in whose wis-
dom and goodness we instinctively trust? ”
" That sounds a bit frightening,” she declared. " A
girl couldn’t be guardian to my Jack and Jill without
having occasion to doubt her own wisdom frequently.
You don’t know how scared of going wrong I am at
times.”
" Not nearly as scared as I am,” he confessed.
"If it is Little Bits, trust your heart,” she coun-
selled, with a pitying recollection of the mite’s forlorn
look.


“ That organ has not always proved very trust-
worthy,” he objected. “I am going to own up that
I made a failure of my married life, and I started that
with all my heart in it.”
“She is a dear little girl,” insisted Alison, “and
she is too sensitive for harsh discipline: she wants
loving and leading.”
“Aunt Jane swears that I’ll ruin her —make her
wilful and selfish and that sort of thing.”
“ Fiddlesticks ! —if you will forgive my saying such
a thing.”
“ She says she is like her mother. I suppose I must
be quite frank about things, if you are to understand
and help me, so you must know that my wife was not
the happiest of women. She was very beautiful and
had been spoiled all her life; so she wanted the moon
to make her happy, and I was a dull sort of dog, no
possible good at building bridges to the moon. Aunt
Jane says Little Bits must have the moonshine cut out
of her moods.”
“ Is —is she like her mother ? ” asked Alison.
“ Not a bit. She is a Wallace through and through,
so I think —reminds me always of the queer little cuss
I was, so eager about things, so easily hurt, so anxious
for affection. Sybil was as lovely and as fair as a lily,
so even Aunt Jane has to own up there is no physical
resemblance: it is similarity in disposition that she
holds over my defenceless head.”
“You ought to be the best judge of whether that
similarity is there or not,” she maintained; “ and, if
it is, I still say that love never hurts anybody, if wis-
dom goes with it.”
“ My lack of faith in my own wisdom is the real
difficulty,” he admitted. “You don't realise what a
helpless creature a man feels with a baby girl. All the
same, I did trust my heart —or my anger —this morn-
ing, for I gave Miss Cragg notice.”


“ Was she unkind to Little Bits? ”
“ Well, she got rid of Janet, the good-natured cook
I’ve had for years —paid her off at a moment’s notice,
and just for petting the child when she got into trouble.
It appears that the poor mite couldn’t sleep on Satur-
day night, and she isn’t allowed a light. Lying in bed
awake, she got scared —says a big spider kept peeping
in at the window, as big as Mitter Wallet’s watch. So
she popped out of bed, which is fiat disobedience, and
went looking for the watch’s owner. Unfortunately, I
was out, and the mite was caught and sent back to
bed, with a scolding, I am told —with a shaking, I
suspect. Janet heard bitter sobs in the dark, investi-
gated, and carried the wee one off to her own room.
The kind-hearted girl was packed off next morning,
Miss Cragg preferring to cook the dinner herself rather
than endure one further hour of service from an in-
solent, defiant woman.”
“So Janet said a few things? ” said Alison. “ Good
for her! ”
” I gather she did,” he said. " I have got into
touch with her, and she is coming back next week.
Miss Cragg is a good woman according to her lights,
and it would not be easy for her to get another position
—she is nearing sixty, you know. So I offered her a
place as book-keeper in one of my shops.”
” Well, I suppose figures and fines are not hurt by
being made entirely correct,” conceded Alison with a
smile.
” But she refused it, and made me feel rather small
by assuring me that she would not care to serve me
one hour longer than she enjoyed my confidence. Aunt
Jane is in town at her flat, resting after Friday’s
success: I’ll have to worry her with the task of per-
suading the poor old soul to sacrifice her pride to
her empty purse. In the meantime, what am Ito do
about my baby? Janet’s heart is all right, but her


grammar is too queer to trust her with a child’s up-
bringing.”
‘ ‘ What do you feel you want to do about it ? ”
“ Provide a trainer for her who is young in soul,
and not too wise to be human and affectionate,” he
replied, without hesitation; “but Aunt Jane would
object to a young and charming lady in charge of my
housekeeping.”
“ Couldn’t you run to an elderly housekeeper to
lend an air of sobriety to the place, and a young and
charming nursery governess to make life brighter for
Little Bits? ” suggested Alison.
“ There ! I knew you’d find a way out! ”he cried
delightedly. “ I hadn’t thought of that wise idea.
Now you must complete your kindness by choosing
her for me. I dare not trust myself to do it, and Aunt
Jane isn’t to have even a look-in at it.”
“ I may make a mistake,” she demurred.
“ Then you’ll have the fun of choosing over again.
Will you do it for me, Miss Alison, please ? Remunera-
tion, terms —all that I leave in your hands; and there
are two to choose, the' housekeeper and the girl with
some smiles left in her make-up.”
“ If you really want me to.”
“ Want it? Indeed, I do. And please believe that
lam very grateful,” he assured her. “ But what shall
I do with my babe in the meantime ? ’ ’
“I’d like to suggest that you lend her to me for a
little visit,” she replied; “but perhaps you scarcely
know me well enough to trust me so far.”
“ Don’t I?” he cried. “ That is the kindest thing
anyone has done for me for a long, long time.”
“ I’ll love to have her,” she assured him, her heart
singing within her at the mere chance of helping him.
“ Our flat is very small, though, and I’ll have to ask
you to send her cot along with her.”
“ I’m afraid it will mean a great deal of trouble for


you/’ he said. “Aunt Jane certifies that she is a
handful. It was selfish of me not to turn your offer
down.’’
“ When you have two children on your hands
already,’’ she smiled, “ a third makes little difference,
Mr. Wallace.’’
“ My name is Jerry,’’ he informed her, “ and you
are not going to be such a friend to me and expect me
to address you as a mere acquaintance, are you,
Alison? It is a lovely name, that of yours. My
tongue enjoys it. May it keep on doing so ?’’
She gave her consent, and then, uncomfortably
aware that she was blushing, added quickly, “ I grew
up in Toowoomba, you know, and no one ever called
me Miss Deane there, so I have not yet learned to feel
at home with the name.’’
Afterwards she drove home happily beside him,
having arranged to expect Little Bits later in the after-
noon. She was only aware that it was a delightful
day, and that life was very kind and wonderful: she
did not pause to analyse her feelings and try to dis-
cover why the sunshine seemed so golden and the
sky so blue. Only one tiny worry lurked in her
mind —Jack and Jill had to be told of the visitor,
and there was no knowing how they would take the
news.
“ A baby thing? ’’ growled Jack. “ Don’t you let
her go poking up in my room among my things, old
girl, that’s all! ’’
But Jill was enraptured. “Oh! Alison, how
sweet! ’’ she cried. “ I’ve wished and wished and
wished we had a baby of our own. You will let me
dress her and put her to bed, won’t you ? ’’
“ She isn’t a pretty little dolly thing,’’ Alison in-
formed her, to prevent future disappointment.
“As if that mattered!’’ cried Jill. “My bed will
move right over into the comer to make room for her
126


cot. I wish she was called Eulalie, though; it’s just
the loveliest name in the world. Elizabeth is too great-
auntish, and Little Bits is babyish. I think I’ll call
the darling Eulalie.”
Alison smiled to herself: perhaps Little Bits would
cure the heartache Daphne had caused.


CHAPTER XIV
JILL’S bed had been squeezed right up against the
wall, and between it and Alison’s stood a white-
enamelled cot. The plain bed-coverings of Miss
Cragg’s choice that came with it had been discarded.
The blanket was now a soft blue one besprinkled with
white rabbits, a well-preserved relic of Jill’s nursery
days, and the eiderdown had been hurriedly recovered
with pale blue silk appliqued with white ducks and
pink chickens.
It was Jill who presided over getting-up and going-
to-bed hours. All her life she had longed for a baby
to love and pet, and she was making the most of her
chance. The bathing of Little Bits was a solemn cere-
mony. The water must be so absolutely right that
its temperature was actually taken with a thermometer,
and the towel was religiously warmed in the cooker,
in spite of the summer weather. The child, accustomed
to a hurried tubbing from a silent or scolding Miss
Cragg, after which she would be deposited in her cot,
told to be a good girl for once, and left to go to sleep
in the dark, blossomed out under different treatment
into hilarious merriment. It was wonderful to play
games with the sponge in the warm water, to be
lovingly poked on a shiny wet tummy with a tickling
finger, to splash with impunity, to be kissed rap-
turously on the creases of a little brown neck, to be
lifted sky-high with a “ Now then, honey-bird, up
you fly ! One, two, and up-a-daisy-oh ! ” and then to
be rubbed dry and hugged tight and slipped into
pyjamas, with liberty to squeal and laugh all through
the process. And then, what a happy game in the
bedroom ! and not a big dark dingy room, where your
128


" She glanced up to see Daphne’s wistful face peeping in enviously
at the open door.”
, Da ffy■ Down-Dilly] [Page 129


.


cot seemed so little and lost and all alone! No; a
pretty, crowded room, where cupboard doors swung
open to show dainty frocks all in a row, and where
there was a darling little night-light to make a happy
glow while you wandered off to a sleepy-bye full of
happy dreams and smiles! Jill would toss you first
on to her own bed for a glorious romp in which you
jumped over high-piled pillows, or even stretched lean
little brown arms out and tried to fly, secure in the
knowledge that loving arms would catch you and keep
you safe.
Then you were tucked into your own cot, where
you pretended to shut-little-eyes-and-go-bye-bye, then
popped a wee brown head wickedly up, laughing
in utter abandon and crying, “ Just a teeny-weeny
wee story, Jill, all about this lubberly little duck! ”
And what wonderful adventures Jill could give those
misshapen birds!
It was such a highly-coloured narrative that she was
half-way through on Friday evening when she glanced
up to see Daphne’s wistful face peeping in enviously
at the open door.
“Hello!” she greeted the intruder ungraciously.
“ Jack’s downstairs.”
“ Ye-yes, Jill.”
“So is Alison. She is washing up, but Jack isn’t
busy. He never starts his home-lessons till I do. You
can talk to him now.”
“ But John Willie, he —he’s only a boy.”
“ Well, he can’t help that.”
Little Bits felt that she had been neglected quite long
enough, so she laughed aloud and held up the comer
of her eiderdown. “ This little duck are named
Dandy,” she volunteered. “ Jill knows about him.
He has apple-tart and bully-fwog sauce for bwekfast
on his birfday.”
“Hello, Little Bits, darling!” cried Daphne
I 129


devotedly. “Oh! Jili—oh! isn’t she a delicious
darling? ’’ T -n •
“ I’m just putting her to bed, remarked Jill, m
a tone of dismissal.
“Oh! Jill —oh! if I could just help you some
night! ’’ pleaded Daphne.
“ Oh ! don’t bother, Daphne, thank you,’’ answered
Jill, wilfully misunderstanding. “ It’s one of those
jobs much easier for one to manage than two. If
you’re so keen to help somebody, wipe up for Alison.
I can’t be down in time.’’
“ Ye-yes, Jill,” replied Daphne meekly; but it was
with lagging steps that she started off.
“ Little pink chickie has pink-iced cake for his
dinner; that’s why he are gwown pink,’’ Little Bits
called after her, hoping to recall a second willing
slave.
But Daphne dared not, in face of Jill’s silence,
accept the implied invitation. Going down forlornly,
she had just reached the foot of the stairs as Jack let
in an early visitor. It was Jerry Wallace, who had
come in time to catch his wee daughter awake for a
good-night kiss. . . t
“I'll tell Alison,” said Jack, ushering him m. Or
would you like to pop up first and see the nipper
before young Jill lets her go to sleep? ”
“ If Alison will excuse me, I’ll go up to Little Bits
first,” he said.
“ She'll probably be glad of a chance to powder
herself up again after sand-soaping the pots clean,”
said Jack amiably. “ Up this way, then.”
But Daphne broke in, “Oh! John Willie, let
me show him, please. I did so want to kiss her,
too.”
“ Well, why on all earth didn’t you when you were
up there? ” he demanded. ,
“ But Jill was telling her a story, and I didn t like


to interrupt,” she explained. “ Butting-in is a repre-
hensible habit, it is.”
“You are getting very polite in your old age, young
Daffy-down-dilly,” grinned Jack. Then he added, for
the visitor’s benefit, “ This is Dill Dalwood, Mr. Wal-
lace: she’ll show you where the nipper hangs out at
night.”
“ Thank you,” said Jerry, with a friendly smile for
both of them. ” Lead on, please, Miss Dill.”
“My name is really Daphne,” she explained, “ It’s
only John Willie calls me that —Daffy-do wn-dilly, you
know. Oh ! I do wish Little Bits had come to stay with
Granny and me, Mr. Wallace. We’ve never, never
had a baby to stay with us. It takes the tender infant
touch to lend a dash of heaven to old earth, doesn’t
it?”
He smiled at her quaint quotation from some senior
or other; but they were already at the bedroom door,
and Little Bits had espied him.
Mitter Wallet! Mitter Wallet! ” she shouted rap-
turously, springing up in her cot. “Us been having
fun, us been.”
” So I see, old chickabiddy,” he said, picking her
up.
Little Bits hugged him tightly round the neck, while
he smiled down at her entertainer. “ Miss Jill, is it? ”
he inquired.
“ Mr. Wallace, Miss Jill Deane,” said Daphne
primly.
Jill’s fair hair was rumpled, her face alight with
joy. “We were having fun,” she agreed. “She is
just a heavenly baby, Mr. Wallace.”
“ A delicious damsel,” put in Daphne, determined
not to be left out of things.
“ Thank you both very much on her behalf,” he
smiled. “ I think she is a tip-top little old chicken
myself, when she is good; but I am afraid you kind


young people will be making her think that Bondi is
heaven, if you don’t look out.”
“ Hitter Wallet! Little Bits are not going to bed
to-night,” announced that young lady excitedly. ” Us
go down and see Alison now. You and me likes
Alison.”
“Just for a wee while then, young woman,” he
promised. “ Good little chickies go to bed when the
dark comes.”
“ But it are not dark,” she cried triumphantly,
pointing out the window to where the sweet summer
twilight lingered round the camphor-laurel.
“ And it are not,” he admitted. “ Come along,
then, and we’ll see what Miss Alison has to say to bad
little girls who pop out of bed after they are tucked
• > y
in.
“ I don’t see how she can say much,” laughed
JiU, " seeing she lets young Jack take her down every
night. He pretends not to care for babies —boys are
like that —but, as sure as I leave her to sleep, she calls
down to him, and he glowers at me and says, ‘ Fancy
leaving that poor little nipper up there by herself, and
her as wide awake as a dicky-bird at dawn! ’ Then
he brings her down, rides her round on his shoulder,
and plays with her till she tumbles asleep.”
“ John Willie is chivalreeous, you see,” explained
Daphne, as they descended the stairs in single file.
Jill led the way into the sitting-room, where Alison,
who had actually left two pots to soak, sat sewing,
having hurriedly discarded a flowered-sateen apron
and paper cuffs. But Little Bits, observing Jack at
work in the breakfast-room, shouted invitingly across
the tiny hall, “ Jackie ! Jackie ! ”
His face alight with gratification, he came out to
inquire, “ Hello, nipper! Whose best jam tartlet are
you, eh? ”
“ Jackie’s! Jackie’s! ” she cried, shamelessly put-


ting out her arms to desert her father for a more
energetic playmate.
Jerry looked after her a wee bit ruefully.
“It is play she wants, you know,” urged Alison,
rising to greet him with outstretched hand and under-
standing smile.
“ I know,” he replied; “ and what a bear I should
be to grudge her any that her starved little nature
can get! You make me feel too grateful for words,
Alison.”
They sat and chatted for half an hour, while the
breakfast-room rang with sounds of hilarity, Daphne’s
thin voice piping in as happily as anyone’s, for, being
in no awe of mere John Willie, she buzzed round him,
stealing her turn at paying court to the little queen.
Then Jack paused at the door, with a sleeping child
in his arms, to apologise, “ I meant to bring her along
to say good-night, really, but she tumbled asleep
all in a minute. I’ll just dump her in her cot
now: young Jill has gone ahead to turn it down, or
some foolery.”
No sooner had he gone than Daphne appeared to
say her prim good-night. “ Pleased to have met you,
Mr. Wallace,” she remarked, with a solemn hand-
shake.
“ Are you coming surfing with us to-morrow after-
noon, Daph? ” asked Alison. “We plan to have tea
on the beach.”
“ But, please, Alison, won’t you consider a plan of
mine first? ” asked Jerry. “ I often steal a Saturday
for Little Bits. We drive off somewhere and have a
day of it. I hoped that you and the children would
join us to-morrow in a run down the South Coast. It
is months since I last did the Bulli Pass, and it is a
delightful trip. I have a comfortable sedan car in
which you won’t feel the heat very much. If we could
start about ten, now? ”


" And collect enough eatables for my family's hefty
appetites by that early hour? " demurred Alison.
“ But I loathe billy-boiling when I take a holiday,"
he hastened to assure her. " I have planned the drive
so that we shall meet up with tea-rooms and a hotel
at the right times."
" Oh, strawberry snakes! " exclaimed Jack happily
from the doorway, at which he and Jill had arrived
in time to hear or guess what was afoot. " Don’t be
a sneak, Alison, and make objections. We’ve never
done Bulli: you know we haven’t. Besides, Fd be
jolly glad to go a chocolate-eclair or a squashy cream-
cake again after all your economy-sponges and
poverty-buns."
" We’ll take the cream-cakes with us, old man, to
make sure we do meet up with them," promised Jerry.
" Please, Alison."
" There isn’t anything to say but ‘ Thank you very
much.’ We shall all love it, I am sure," she told
him.
" Indeed we shall," said Jill: “ we'll have a simply
heavenly trip."
" I feel sure you will," said Daphne, biting a lip
that was inclined to tremble. " I hope you have per-
fect weather for it."
Jerry looked at Alison. " There is plenty of room
in the car," he insinuated. "We could take the front
seat, and half a dozen kiddies could be comfortably
stowed away inside."
Alison had seen the child’s brave little attempt at
unconcern, so she passed the invitation on with
genuine pleasure. "You will come with us then,
Daph, will you not? ’’ she asked.
"Oh!" sobbed Daphne, in glad relief. "Oh!
may I? ’’
" Well, you needn’t howl about it, young Dill, you
old donkey," reproved Jack, " I’d have told Mr.


Wallace you were in the family if he hadn’t seen it
for himself.” . .
“And you’ll ask Granny, Miss Alison? Daphne
pleaded. “Oh! please, you’ll ask her, won’t you?
And, if you let her say no, I’ll die of bearing up and
taking disappointment with dignity, I will.”


CHAPTER XV
BUT Daphne was not called on to die at such a
sadly early age. She was with the happy party
that set out at ten next morning; and the only
tiny blot on her bliss w y as the fact that Jill had
manoeuvred her into one corner of the wide back seat,
and Little Bits into the other, and had put herself and
Jack in the middle.
It was a perfect morning, bright and clear, yet not
really hot. ■As they slipped over wooded ridges and
round green hillsides, the little bays with their shining
beaches shone like green gems set in silver. Emerald
or peacock-blue, shading to eau-de-nil in shallow
parts, a dull purple over sunken rocks, how they
danced and sparkled in the glad sunlight! Jerry was
often called on to stop for a time, and die young
people clambered out to exclaim about some charming
view, while munching the delicious sweets he had pro-
vided. At Cronulla there was a halt for morning tea,
with another at Thirroul for lunch, and most of the
afternoon was spent on top of the Pass.
‘ ‘ I could stop here and watch the darling baby bays
holding hands or trying to for ever and for ever," de-
clared Daphne enthusiastically.
“ I guess you'd soon be wanting to hold hands
yourself —with a fair-sized teacup," said Jack. " I
know I’m pretty well feeling like it now,"
Jerry took the hint and started back for a fern-
adorned wayside kiosk which they had marked down
as their halting-place for tea. After that, it was home
again in the pleasant cool of early evening.
With the children excitedly chattering behind them,
the two in front could talk quite freely. Alison won-
-13 6


dered unhappily once or twice if she were boring
Jerry, for he would drop into sudden fits of silence.
However, the peeps she stole at his face showed it full
of quiet content) so she w r ould sit silent too, drinking
in the beauty of the lovely scenes that flitted past; and
presently he would be talking again, and in such
spurts of confidential talk they managed to find out
much of one another’s history and tastes.
It was on the last stage of the run home, when they
were almost back in the city, that Jerry broke a final
bout of silence by leaning closer to his companion to
say, “My dear —my dearest, I have been trying to
keep it bottled up till you know me better, but I just
can’t. You have guessed —haven’t you? that I care
for you.”
Alison’s heart was beating in a queer quick way.
“ I —l hoped we were friends,’’ she faltered.
“ I want much more than that, dear little girl,’’ he
said. “If you could just learn to care enough to
marry me.’’
But she was silent, too full of a quick rush of
choking happiness for words; and he went on
worriedly, “ I am a clumsy ass to startle you like this.
I knew I should let you get used to me by degrees,
and I knew you might not realise how my heart went
out to you that very first day we met, and that you
might think I was just a selfish creature, wanting your
sweetness and kindness and wisdom to make life
smooth for Little Bits and me. Please believe that it
isn't that, my dear—that it’s just that I love you and
want you.’’
Alison looked up, with a smile that tossed a tiny tear
off an eyelash.
“ I —l just felt you cared when you called me little
girl,” she murmured. It was dear of you when I so
hate being a mountain.’’
“ Little girl, you will, won’t you? ’’ he pleaded.


" If —if you remember that those children behind
can see, Jerry, and if you realise that you have pro-
posed to a whole family, seeing Jack and Jill are as
much my responsibility as Little Bits is yours, and
if ” she began.
But he broke in happily: "Why, my dearest, if
there were half a dozen of Jack and Jill, they would
be very welcome, though I could find it in my heart to
wish all our young folks farther just this minute when
I want you all to myself. My dear, you have made
me very happy, and it is going to be my business,
from now on, to make you happy too.”
"Oh ! but lam now,” she protested. "Oh ! Jerry,
I don't know what you see in me. You haven't for-
gotten how fat I am, have you ? ”
At that he laughed out merrily. " How can I forget
what I haven’t yet discovered? ”he demanded. " I
never did admire over-slim girls; and, seeing how dear
you have become to me, I am glad there is a reason-
able amount of you.”
“ Reasonable? ” she sighed. " I know I ought to
think seriously of dieting; but the twins need nourish-
ing food, and I don’t seem to find time to prepare non-
fattening dishes just for myself.”
"You couldn't be so kind to other people and have
much time left for yourself,” he smiled; " and now I
am going selfishly to see that I steal a fair amount of
it.”
When they parted at a quarter to six, it was already
arranged that they should marry early in the New
Year, and that Little Bits should stay at the flat in the
meantime. Jerry insisted, too, that he would be
returning in the evening.
"Jill dear,” said Alison, when he had driven off,
" I do wish you would be a kind little girl and get tea
ready to-night.”
"Of course,” said obliging Jill. "That is,” she
138


added, " if anybody has any room left for even half a
meal." , ..
“ Why! it’s ages since we had our last snack,
expostulated Jack. "I’m starving, so none of your
just-a-cup-of-tea business, young Jill."
" Some of the cold roast and a tomato salad, sug-
gested Alison. "As for Little Bits, she is so tired that
I am just going to give her a pretence of a sponging
and put her to bed."
" And I’ll make the darling some bread-and-milk
and give it to her there," promised Jill.
" And if Jack could just forget for once that he is a
boy and set the table," insinuated Alison.
"And two women-creatures running round loose!
I like that! " he grumbled. " Anybody would think
it was going to take an hour to scrub the poor nipper
clean."
" But I want to change, old son: I feel so grubby
after a day in the bush," she pleaded.
" When we didn’t even boil the billy or wash a
cup ! " he protested.
She noticed, however, that he washed his hands at
the sink, wiped them unblushingly on the tea-towel,
and proceeded to lay the cloth. When she got down,
rosy from a cold shower and a hurried dressing, to
announce that Little Bits was already asleep, tea was
actually ready.
"The new blue organdie!" commented Jill.
" Alison, are you going out? "
" Going out? Why, no !
" Well, my sausage and sardines ! Who on earth
is coming here, then? " demanded Jack.
" Mr. Wallace said he might be looking in some
time this evening."
"As if he hadn’t had plenty of the nipper for one
day already! " protested Jack. "Come to think of
it, however, he didn’t bother much about her. Even


at dinner, it was Jill spooned her soup up and
tucked her serviette in. He just yarned away to
you."
“ He —we ” stammered Alison.
" Get it off your chest, ducky," Jack advised.
"What scheme have you two got up your sleeves?
Hope it's another long drive: Little Bits’s pater does
his guests proud."
"You mustn’t mind about it, twinnies," pleaded
Alison: "it will be rather jolly for you, really —
cream with your porridge again, Jackie boy, and —
and ’’
"Now, what wall be rather jolly? And what are
you scared we’ll get the wand up over? ’’ demanded
Jack. "Come on, old girl; no more beating about
the bush."
"We are thinking of getting married about New
Year," she blurted out.
" Whew-w-w-w ! " Jack whistled. "My sixpenny
silk hat! ’ ’
" Oh! darling, how absolutely lovely! ’’ cried Jill.
"Why! w'e’ll have Little Bits for keeps now'! Oh!
Jack, aren’t you glad about it? ’’
" He’s not a bad old stick," confessed the lad;
"but he’s a bit ancient, isn’t he? Strikes me as a
solemn old owd, anyhow."
" He is only thirty-three," said Alison indignantly,
" and lam almost twenty-two. Oh! Ido think you
might be nice about it, Jack.”
"You may have him, old girl, if you’re dead sure
you w r ant him," he answered grandly; "but that
doesn’t mean he’s going to start in bossing me,
though. I bar two guardians."
" Jerry can’t marry me without becoming your big
brother," said Alison firmly.
" And, if you had any sense, old donkey," added
Jill, " you’d know that he is going to be a tiptop


brother. I think he’s a dear, and you are just being
stupid." . , j
"Oh, my crumply kittens, listen to her! roared
Jack. " Anybody'd think she was young Dill the way
she hauls me over the coals for nothing. And I don't
mind telling you both I'd rather be'growled at by a
hundred long-faced Jeremiahs than jawed at by a
pack of girls."
" Jerry’s name is Gerald ," reproved Alison.
" Aunt Jessie'll preach you a Jeremiad about him,
all the same," he prophesied.
" Don’t mind him, Alison," urged Jill. “We had
that word in our reader the other day, and he is just
trying to show off by dragging it in."
But Alison was smiling. "If she does, you will
have to stand by me, Jackie boy," she declared. "If
you have finished tea, Jill dear, slip round to her flat
and see if she can come round to meet Jerry."
Jill insisted on washing up the dishes first, and then
left Alison putting them away. When his twin had
gone, Jack lent a hand awkwardly, then hugged Ali-
son, rather red of face, and muttered, " You go ahead,
old girl, and have him if you want him. I think he’s
a bit of all right, really."
She hugged him back, " We’ll just be a happy big
family again, old son," she said.
But, as she waited alone in the sitting-room for
Mrs, Royle, she was conscious of a sudden aching
desire for her own mother. It was hard to have only
Aunt Jessie to whom she could pour out her happi-
ness and her glad hopes for the future, for how could
such a Job’s comforter sympathise with her rosy
dreams ?


CHAPTER XVI
YOU poor dear young thing! ” Aunt Jessie
moaned, folding Alison in her arms. “You
little know the worries and sorrows that lie
ahead when you give up your carefree girlhood for
married life.”
“ But, Aunt, there wouldn’t be so many girls ready
to make the change if there weren’t compensations,’’
protested Alison, with a smile. “ Jerry and I mean
to be very happy.”
“ Ah! that’s the very thing you must beware of,”
said Aunt Jessie darkly. “ Never trust a fair sky, my
poor dear child: the worst storm-clouds develop in it.
It is when your cup of happiness seems brimming over
that tragedies fall plop into it.”
“ We’ll fish them out together,” Alison declared
staunchly.
“ So you think, my poor child; so you think,”
groaned Aunt Jessie. “If it were a poor man you had
chosen, now, and there was poverty to chasten your
over-confident spirit —but you tell me Mr. Wallace is
rich.”
“ From what he tells me of his income, he is,”
admitted Alison; “but money has little to do with
happiness, Aunt. The twins and I have been quite
happy here in our little flat. We thought we never
could feel light-hearted again when Father left us, and
we often miss him painfully still; yet we have had jolly
times together here, even if we have had to watch the
pence and cut out the chicken and cream.”
“Poverty?” snorted Aunt Jessie. “You don't
know the first word about it, my child. Wait until
you are hungry and don’t know where to get a meal:


wait until you are poor enough to wear the cast-off
clothes of strangers/’
“ I should hate that, of course.”
“ Then think, when you are rich, of those who have
to face such things, and do without the chicken and
cream to give them bread and meat. It may save you
from worse things than cast-off clothes.”
Alison smiled again: “ I don’t think Jerry is selfish,
and I don’t mean to be; but the disposal of his money
will be his business far more than mine.”
At that, Aunt Jessie’s snort was terrific. ” When
your sweet mother’s child, a clever, good-looking
girl like you, wastes herself on a dull, dried-up
widower ” she began.
But Alison broke in: “ Dull? And dried-up? Just
you wait till you know how dear and interesting he
is! Oh! I didn’t realise why I felt so happy when I
was with him; but I do now, and I don’t care who
knows I love him back; and we are going to be happy,
Aunt —just you wait and see ! ”
Aunt Jessie sniffed. “ They were marrying and
giving in marriage in the days of Noah, when the
Flood came,” she said; ” and they boasted they were
going to be happy, I suppose.”
At that point, Jill created a diversion that was not
altogether unwelcome. “ Oh ! Alison,” she cried, pop-
ping her head in at the door, “ you’ve clean forgotten
that you were going out to their school concert with
Miss Carter and Miss Lowe to-night. Miss Carter has
just called for you.”
” How stupid of me ! ” lamented the culprit. “ Jerry
said he would be here at seven-thirty, and it is just
on that time now. If Miss Carter will be good enough
to wait till I explain to him
" And steal you two from one another to-night? ”
cried Nan, following Jill into the room. “My dear
Miss Deane —my dear Alison, what a suggestion! Jill


has just told me your exciting news. No wonder you
forgot our concert! All I want to know is, may Jill
come in your place? It seems a pity to waste a re-
served seat.”
“ Are you too tired for another jaunt, old kiddie? ”
queried Alison.
“ Tired? When it’s a concert? Oh, Alison! ” cried
Jill.
“ That means, cover up your gingham picnic frock
under the daintiest wrap you possess and fly back
downstairs, little woman, or we shall be late,” said
Nan. Then, as Jill hastened to obey, she remarked,
“ Please give Jerry my sincere congratulations, Alison.
Not that I don’t think you lucky, too: he really is a
dear. There is the child, of course ”
“ Little Bits? ” protested Alison. “ But we all love
her.”
“ And Jerry will be just as ready to welcome your
jolly little twins, if I know him,” prophesied Nan.
“ He always was a great hand with children —much
more eloquent in their company, I have noticed, than
in mine. Gay young things in the twenties rather scare
him, I fear.”
“And, of course, I am a Methuselah,” smiled
Alison.
Nan apologised laughingly. “Honestly,” she added,
“lam delighted about the engagement. Jerry’s friends
have all been hoping that, seeing he was bom for
home-life rather than the social whirl, he would marry
again. Why! ” she broke off, “ here is Jill back al-
ready, and in her party-frock, and with brushed hair!
If you let her take your latchkey, I’ll see her safely
inside the door.”
Alison murmured her thanks, as she saw them out
and let Jerry in. While he listened to Nan’s felicita-
tions, she was hoping fervently that Aunt Jessie would
not be too mournful, and congratulating herself on


having already mentioned that lady’s chronic pessi-
mism to him. What she had not counted on was that
Jack should be the one to mortify her.
The young scamp appeared suddenly in the hall,
grinning all over his face and offering a lordly hand.
“ Jill and I have agreed to give you a try-out,” he
announced; “ but you take it from us —Her Elephan-
tine Ladyship is some girl, as you would find out if you
tried to lift her; and, if you are not jolly good to her,
I’ll wait till I catch you asleep and dot you one on the
cranium.”
“Oh, Jack ! ” cried Alison.
" Don’t get your hair off, old girl,” grinned Jack.
“ I’m the only man in the family, and it’s the-man-in-
the-family’s job to see he knows how lucky he is.”
“ He does know, old fellow; and you are welcome to
do your dotting with a sledge-hammer, if it is called
for,” said Jerry soberly.
“ Aunt Jessie is waiting in the sitting-room to meet
you, Jerry,” said Alison, and carried him off.
“ I just waited to tell you I am sorry for you, Mr.
Wallace,” said Aunt Jessie, when introductions were
over.
Alison felt very close to tears or hysterical laughter.
“ There, Jerry ! If that is what my own family think
of me, you had better be warned in time,” she cried.
“ It is not your faults I was thinking of, my dear,”
said her aunt. "It is just that a man who looks so
happy is bound to pay for it in some way. We none of
us escape, none of us, till we learn to set our hearts
on
“On ice-cream, or something w r e’re sure of getting if
we have the cash,” broke in Jack, who had invited
himself to be one of the party.
“ You little know, my poor lad, how you will be
called on some day to answer for all your light and
foolish words,” reproved Aunt Jessie.
K 145


“My sainted swallow-tails ! Anybody'd think I was
a heathen,” he objected.
“ I believe you are, old son,” said Alison unhappily.
” Well, I have made you look blue enough to escape
some of Aunt Jessie's woes for the over-happy: that's
my good deed for the day,” he remarked virtuously.
“ Now I can go off to bed with a clear conscience.”


CHAPTER XVII
THE next afternoon —Sunday —Jack and Jill
were entertaining Little Bits under the cam-
phor-laurel, when Daphne invited herself to
join them.
“ How lovely to find you all outside when Granny
said I was not to go in! ” she cried. “ Hello, every-
body ! ”
“ Oh ! Good afternoon,” answered Jill, without the
least enthusiasm.
But “ Hello yourself, young Dill! ” cried Jack, with
real welcome in his voice, which Little Bits echoed in
her glad ” Taffety ! Taffety-town-tilly ! ”
It was to the one who seemed to think her an in-
truder that Daphne turned, her brown face full of
eagerness to interest and please. ” I had fever last
night, Jill —went up to a hundred and four. What do
you think of that? ” she demanded.
“ A hundred and four what? ” yawned Jill.
Daphne was somewhat disconcerted. “ I —l don’t
know. Just a hundred and four —on the thermometer,
you know. I had the luck to get my tea first, though.
I felt queer when we got home from Bulli, but I didn’t
acknowledge my feeling of malaise till I had a scone
and a bit of bread-and-jam. Granny says my fever
must be more excitability than malaria now, ’cause I
always go out to it when I have gay times.”
” Go out where? ” countered Jill indifferently.
But Daphne rose to the occasion. “ Out on a sea of
misery I hope you never sail on, Jill darling,” she said
sweetly. “ I was very bad: I felt like nothing in this
vale of woe.”
Jill changed the subject abruptly, convinced that it


was her turn to be important. “ Alison is engaged,”
she said.
“ Got a caller? ” inquired Daphne, with a polite
show of interest.
“ Got a feller,” roared Jack. “ That’s what Mrs.
Birks, our charlady at Toowoomba, used to call it,
anyhow. She’s going to be Little Bits’s new mamma.”
“ Your charlady? ” asked Daphne honestly mysti-
fied. “ Does she know Mr. Wallace? ”
Some people think they are funny! ’ ’ snorted
Jack.
“ Our sister AHson is engaged to be married to Mr.
Wallace,” explained Jill loftity, " only w’e call him
Jerry now.”
“ Oh! ” said Daphne, and was silent for a time to
take the startling news in; then she added, in a worried
tone, “ There isn’t room for him to live here, unless
you do without a sitting-room.”
“ He is not going to live here, you goose,” answered
Jill, in a tone of triumphant superiority. “We are all
going to five in his big house at Coogee. It is to be done
up any way Alison would like it. He was here for
lunch to-day, and they’ve gone out for a drive now,
and Jack and I can pick our own rooms and have them
done up any way we like.”
“Jerry had better start doing one up for me! ”
growled Jack. “ I’ll throw any frippery bedspreads
and pretty-pretties out the window, I can tell you.”
“ I think I’ll have a primrose room,” said Jill
grandly, “or pale-blue and silver. How would that
go, do you think? ”
But Daphne’s lean little face seemed all tragic
eyes.
“ Oh ! Jill, you aren’t really going away, are you? ”
she pleaded. “ Won’t you be living in the same flats
as me any more ? ”
“ Not after January, and this is the very end of
148


November,” said Jill, with secret satisfaction. She was
no longer jealous of that poor little shabby Dalwood
child, she told herself, but it would be fine to have Jack
all to herself again and to run no risk of losing Little
Bits’s affection to an intrusive stranger.
Daphne stood there, miserably twisting her hands
together, but saying nothing —what was there to say
in face of such a calamity ?
“My dandy dishcloths! young Dill, what is there to
look so like a sick lizard about? ” comforted Jack.
“ Coogee isn’t the other end of the world, is it? You
can come and see us, can’t you? ”
“ I was too happy,” gulped Daphne. “ Mrs. Royle
is right: it gets you then, it does. I oughtn’t to have
let myself love you like I do, Jill. Granny says God
breaks our idols for our own good. But you’re so
lovely and so sweet ”
Jack roared again. “ I say, young Dill! cut that
tommyrot out,” he commanded. “ She’s not plain
enough to haunt a chap in his nightmares, is young
Jill, but she’s no beauty —and she’s got the average bit
of bite in her, too.”
“ You’re a rude, unappreciative boy, John Willie,”
said Daphne sternly. “You don’t deserve to have the
darlingest sister in the world.”
Jill was touched by such open admiration, as she
often was, in spite of lingering grudges. “ Don’t be
scared by what Aunt Jessie says, Daph,” she advised
kindly. “You’ll see me at school —unless I leave, as I
suppose I will now —and we can pick you up when
we go surfing, and you can stay with us now and
then.”
“ January is so bitterly soon,” came the forlorn
answer. “ Oh ! Jill, don’t you think —don’t you think
you might let me come round and put Little Bits to
bed just one night, as I’ll never have her no more after
January? ”


“ Why! of course,” agreed Jill, with real kindness.
" I'll keep an eye on you, Daph, so that you can’t go
wrong.”
Daphne had been forbidden to stay for more than
half an hour so she said a forlorn good-bye at that
point and started up the gravel path; but she went
with lagging steps. Back in her own fat, she got down
a book and made a pretence of reading; but she forgot
to turn the pages, and sat on in a study browner than
her lean little self, while her grandmother lay on the
couch reading.
“ Granny,” she remarked at last, “you'd think —
you’d think a girl ought to be able to return hospitality
of the most generous and open-handed order; you'd
think she ought to.”
“ Well? ” inquired Mrs. Dal wood. “ What is it this
time, my dear? ”
“ Oh ! Granny, might I just ask Jill and John Willie
and Little Bits up to tea to-morrow —a sort of party
tea, with cake and things? ”
Mrs. Dalwood pondered the unusual request. “ I
don’t think so, Daphne,” she remarked at length.
“ For one thing, I can’t afford parties; for another, I
am too old for children in a bunch now; their noise
makes my head bad. Finally, the Deane children seem
to be very indulged by their sister; they would prob-
ably enjoy an ordinary meal at home more than our
best.”
To Daphne it seemed a matter of life and death, with
Jill going away so soon and not won yet. She thought
for a moment or two, then took what seemed an inevit-
able but terrifying plunge.
“ Oh ! Granny, you’d think —you’d think a poor girl
might be let for once, when it was her birthday,” she
pleaded; “ you’d think even the heathens where my
sainted father works would be let then.”
“ Your birthday, dear? ” inquired Mrs. Dalwood.


“ Isn’t that next week or the week after? I know it’s
not far from Christmas, but my old head forgets things
now.”
Daphne hung her head. “ You’d think —you’d
think a girl would know her own birthday, Granny,
wouldn’t you? ” she asked tearfully.
“Well, there then, dear! I didn’t mean to forget
it,” said the old lady. “You may invite your little
friends, and I’ll make you a cake and some sandwiches
and jellies, and we’ll put hundreds-and-thousands on
your bread-and-butter.”
“And tarts, Granny?” pleaded the child. Jill
loves tarts.”
“ Pastry is bad for children,” demurred Mrs. Dal-
wood; “ but perhaps, just this once ”
Daphne broke in with a joyous hug. “ Oh! thank
you, Granny ! ” she cried. “ And may Igo down and
invite them now? ”
“If they are still out in the garden playing. If they
have gone inside, you must not be a nuisance; you
must wait till you see them to-morrow morning.”
Daphne went eagerly, but came back disappointed.
Alison was back, and the Deanes were inside having a
belated afternoon tea. Then, on Monday, neither Jack
nor Jill put in an appearance at school. The latter had
an unromantic bilious attack, and the former had
seized his chance to pose as a martyr, keeping an eye
on the invalid and enjoying romps with Little Bits
while Alison kept an appointment in town with Miss
Bennett. Daphne came home at four, to find the table
half-set for her party, and her guests still uninvited.
Mrs. Dal wood, remorseful for forgetting the birthday,
had exceeded her promises. The big cake was iced
and decked with candles, the jellies were garnished
with whipped cream, and there were lemon-cheese
tarts, date-cookies, half a dozen cream-puffs, and a
dish of home-made sweets. It was rather a breathless


little girl who inspected the preparations and then ran
down to secure her guests. She found Alison in the
kitchenette mixing up pastry.
“ Please, are John Willie and Jill in? ” she asked.
“ Poor old Jill is sick —only a bilious attack, but we
have had to starve her all day,” Alison explained,
“ and she is still in bed. Jack has taken Little Bits for
a walk on the beach.”
Daphne’s face fell pitifully, ” And —and I was
having a party-tea,” she lamented; “ I did want them
all to come.”
“I am sorry about Jill,” said Alison; “ but Jack
will be home soon, dear, and I am sure he will be de-
lighted at your invitation.”
At heart, she was not so certain, for Jack had the
healthy appetite that prefers beef and pudding —and
plenty of them —to cake and kickshaws: he liked
parties that were fixed early enough to leave room for
dinner afterwards.
“ And Little Bits? ” asked Daphne anxiously.
Alison caught the pitiful eagerness in the young
voice, and hesitated; but Little Bits was Jerry’s babe
and must be kept w T ell and safe. “It would not be
good for her, dear,” she explained gently. “ She does
not sleep well unless she has a very light tea. We
generally give her bread-and-milk.”
Daphne’s lower lip quivered. " And won’t —won’t
Jill be able to come at all? ” she quavered.
“Not to-day, dear,” replied Alison.
“ I’ll ask Granny please to put it off till to-morrow,”
said Daphne, but not very hopefully; and she was back
soon, with a negative answer and a woebegone face.
“ The cream in the things won’t keep,” she reported,
and she says she has even put cream between the two
layers of the birthday-cake.”
“ Why! is it a birthday-party? ” inquired Alison.
“ Ye-yes, it’s for my birthday.”


“ Many happy returns, then, dear! Have you any
other little friends invited ? ”
Daphne shook her head sadly: “ I—l haven’t any
other friends.”
“ Then, you and Jack must have a very happy time
together,” said Alison brightly, wondering all the time
what present she could provide at such short notice for
him to take along.
“ But John Willie is only a boy,” lamented Daphne,
“ and Jill—oh! I did want to do something for Jill:
she’s so sweet and so lovely, and I do love her so
much, and sometimes I think she only loves me a
fragmental bit yet.”
“ She will be very grateful when she hears how you
planned to please her,” said Alison, registering a vow
to coax her young sister into a right attitude. “ And
will you invite Little Bits and me up, just to see the
candles lighted on your cake and sample it and wish
you joy? ”
“Oh, please ! And will you bring John Willie? ”
“ At what time, dear? ”
“ Half-past five. Granny said.”
“ We’ll be there: Jack is sure to be back in time,”
promised Alison. And to herself she added, as she
watched the child walk forlornly away, “ Poor friend-
less mite ! If only that monkey of a Jill were a bit
more appreciative of her devotion ! ’ ’


‘' A guest pays for the hospitality he receives by being
entertaining, you know."
“ Well, why didn’t you tell me what to say before
we went up?" he grumbled. "And I thought you
might let the dinner get stone-cold, too. And why
didn’t you stop up to run the thing, old girl, if you
didn’t want it to be a frost? It was all that —a real
wash-out, I call it. I did stick it as long as I could,
honest! "
Alison dished him up curry-and-rice and mashed
potato without further comment, but she thought un-
happily of the lonely, disappointed mite in the upstairs
front flat. An hour later, she had seen him off to bed,
had tucked Jill in with a comforting good-night kiss,
and had settled down by the open window of the
sitting-room to embroider a slip for her trousseau. Sud-
denly, she heard a sob outside, and there was Daphne
on the edge of the flower-bed, several parcels in
her arms, and a washed-out crepe kim over her
pyjamas.
“ Please, Miss Alison," sobbed the child, " I’ve
brought back the presents."
"Why! Daph, whatever is the matter?" Alison
asked. Then she rose and opened the hall-door.
" Come in to me, dear." Putting an arm round the
weeping child, she led her into the sitting-room, de-
posited her parcels on the table, and sat her down on
the couch. " Poor little old chicken, tell me all about
it," she coaxed, sitting beside her.
"Oh ! I —l just rebominate that Sapphira woman ! "
Daphne sobbed unexpectedly.
" Sapphira? ” repeated Alison, in a puzzled tone.
"You know —Ananias and Sapphira," explained
Daphne. " I just rebominate her."
" Because she told lies, dear? "
" N-n-no. ’Cause she got found out and killed clean
dead for it, to scare —scare me."


“ And what have you been saying, little woman,
that doesn’t sound quite true to you now? ” asked
Alison, beginning to see light.
“ I —I —I said it was my birthday: ’tleast, I acted it
was and made Granny think it was and let me have a
party to —to ask Jill to.”
“ And it wasn’t your birthday? ”
“ N-no; not till —not till next week: that’s why —
why I brought the presents back.”
“But, chickabiddy dear, you must keep them:
people often get their gifts before the right date,” ob-
jected Alison.
“ But —but if God makes me —makes me die to-
night for—for acting a lie, I’d be getting them without
having a birthday to get them —get them for. And oh !
Miss Alison, I don’t want to —don’t want to die till I
see my sainted mother again. I think perhaps she just
went —went to Papua ’cause she loved my daddie, and
maybe she isn’t —isn’t very sainted at all, ’cause I re-
member she used to sing a lot —not just hymns, but
funny things like A Policeman’s Life is not a Happy
One ; so perhaps she’d love me, ’spite of —’spite of my
reprehensible ways, if she was to see me again. But
now I’ll die, and then she won’t —won’t know me when
she comes to heaven, ’cause I was ever so different
when she saw me last; and I’ll never, never have any-
body to love me then.”
“ But, darling, God will forgive you: He always
forgives us when we are sorry.”
“ But —but what about Sapphira? ”
“ Perhaps He thought there was no use giving her
another chance; but He always gives boys and girls
one, be sure of that, my dear. He knows they are only
small, and that it is easy for them to forget and do
things they oughtn’t to. Don’t you know that com-
forting verse, God is love ? ”
“ There’s that other one, though —Be sure your sin


will find you out. Granny says that means that He
always makes us pay."
" But He doesn’t kill us off for little-girl faults, old
chicken. He has made laws to keep us in the right
path, and we do hurt ourselves if we break them, but
in natural ways."
" Natural? How, Miss Alison? "
" Well, look at His physical laws. They keep the
earth in its right place and give us the seasons and the
sunshine and the dark, but we can’t disregard them
without paying for it."
" How? "
“ Well, supposing you defy that good old law that
fire bums and poke your hand in the flame "
" It works all the same and frizzles up my fingers;
but that isn't the same sort of law as Lying lips are —
you know."
"It works the same way, though: you break it, and
you suffer."
" But I haven’t suffered yet; that’s why I’m so
scared to go to bed."
" But you have suffered in God’s natural way that is
meant to make us wiser, dear. You didn’t enjoy your
party, and your conscience has worried and frightened
you ever since. That’s how our sin always finds us
out; but God is just sorry for us, for He loves us and
sees how foolish we are to go bumping into His laws
and hurting ourselves. When we are sorry, He forgives
us and takes the hurt away."
"I’m sorry all right; I’m as sorry as can be, and I
told Him I was. I explained it was just because I
simply couldn’t wait to try to make Jill love me more,
and I thought He made her sick just to punish me, and
I told Him I’d have fever every day for a month, I
would, if He'd only let her get well and wouldn't kill
me with a lightning-flash to-night; but I just couldn’t
feel a bit sure about it, I couldn’t."


“ Jill’s bilious attack was just an unfortunate coin-
cidence, if you know what that is, dear,” Alison
assured her.
” I know —she copied it off somebody,” cried
Daphne, quite cheerful again.
Alison looked puzzled. “ I don’t think she was quite
such a little goose,” she smiled.
” Well, when Gertie Dennis copied my sum when I
had it wrong, and gave in the same silly answer, Miss
Lemon looked up her nose and said, ‘ A remarkable
coincidence, my child!’ ”
” She was being sarcastic, chicken,” Alison ex-
plained, and went on to give the meaning of her big
word. Then she added, ” Anyhow, Jill is right again
now; she was almost asleep when I came down, and
she had managed some dry toast and tea.”
“ Oh! Miss Alison, you do know how to make
people feel better, when their hearts are all marrowed
like cornfields. I think my sainted mother is a bit like
you, though I can’t remember exactly. What more do
you think I’ll have to do so as God will forget about it
quite? Will I have to tell Granny? ”
Alison, smiling to herself at the child’s queer perver-
sion of harrowed, was seeing a sudden vision of her
grandmother’s somewhat stern outlook on life, so she
shook her head. ” I don’t think it would be right to
worry her,” she said, ” for she is just a frail old lady
of whom you must take great care. If your mother
were here, you would tell her, so you will just have to
pretend that I am Mother to-night. Then, when your
real birthday comes, you must cheerfully put up with
having no notice taken of it at all. When is it? ”
“ Next Sunday. You see, parties on Sunday are
wicked, and Granny mightn’t have let me have one
another day when it wasn’t really my birthday. That’s
what made me fall into temptation, and oh! I seem to
be getting off too easily, I do.”


" Fathers and mothers and our Father in Heaven
like to let us off easily when they can, chicken. Now
you must get home to bed. How did you get out? ”
“ I waited till Granny was asleep; then I slipped
downstairs and out by the big front door: it never
shuts till ten.”
” I’ll see you safe inside it, then,” said Alison, hand-
ing back the parcels. When they were there, she
stooped and kissed the child kindly. ” Happy dreams,
dear little woman ! ” she wished her.
“ You are nearly as sweet as Jill, you are,” was the
grateful answer. ” I don’t wonder Little Bits’s father
loves you. Oh! if only you didn’t love him back and
want to take Jill to live away at his place, instead of
here near me, how happy we could all be ! ”
So that was it! thought Alison pityingly, as she
walked back through the dark garden.


CHAPTER XIX
THE following Saturday afternoon the Deanes
went to look over their future home, and
Daphne was invited to go with them.
Solidly built of mellowed Hawkesbury sandstone, it
overlooked the Pacific, which dashed itself for ever
against a rampart of rocks and cliffs, churning itself
into foam, ever-varying, ever-lovely, often grand in
its seething fury. The house itself was set far back in
its rambling garden, and its rear balconies looked over
a short, grassy slope to the sea.
"We call it Acewall,” said Jerry, "which is just
Wallace the other way round."
They had got out of the car right by the front door,
and Little Bits suddenly realised where she was.
" Want to go home! Want to go home! Take poor
Little Bits home, Alison," she cried.
" But, darling, Alison just wants to see the pretty
rooms inside, and then we’ll go home," urged Jill.
The child ran to her. "Naughty! " she stormed.
" Naughty ! Take Little Bits home ! "
‘ We’ll all go soon, darling," promised Alison.
But the child sought another refuge. "Jackie! "
she cried, running to him. " You take me home! You
take me ! Whose best jam tartlet are I? "
"Mine, you poor little weepy duck! ’’ cried Jack,
picking her up and hugging her openly. " Jerry, what
on earth’s wrong with her ? ’’
" Only that she had a stupid father who let him-
self be talked into letting her be very unhappy in this
house," said Jerry miserably. " Chickabiddy, won’t
you come in with me to see Janet and get a cup of
tea?" & *
l 161


The child stretched pleading arms out to him.
“ Hitter Wallet, please, how does one get away home
from here ? ” she sobbed.
He took her into his arms. “ Listen, chickabiddy ! ”
he coaxed. “ Miss Cragg has gone away —right away:
there is no Miss Cragg here now."
“ No Miss Kwagg now ? ” she repeated quaveringly.
“And no Aunt Jane: Aunt Jane has gone away,
too.”
“ No more Aunt Jane at all? ” she asked, incredu-
lity struggling with relief in her tone.
“No more Aunt Jane: only nice kind Janet in the
kitchen, waiting to see my chickabiddy. Won’t you
trust me, sweetheart, to take you in to her and then
take you home again with Alison and Jill? ”
The child looked up heroically, as one braving
dragons for love’s sweet sake. “ Little Bits twust Hit-
ter Wallet,” she said.
“ Say Daddie, darling,” commanded Jill.
“ Daddie,” repeated Little Bits obediently. “But
where are Daddie ? ”
Daphne touched his sleeve. “ This is Daddie,” she
informed her.
Little Bits crowed through her tears. “It are Hitter
Wallet,” she corrected.
“ But who else is he ? ” persisted Daphne.
“ Jewwy! Him are Jewwy! ” cried the child,
laughing in shrill delight at the exquisite joke of
using the name Miss Cragg and Aunt Jane alike had
forbidden.
“ I am anything you like, chickabiddy, as long as
you love me a big bit,” said Jerry; whereupon she
hugged him, to show that she did.
‘ ‘ I am afraid you are bound to get that name from
her sometimes, with Jack and Jill using it,” said
Alison.
“ What does it matter? ” he smiled. “ Well, hav-


ing reconciled the young woman to the home of her
fathers, shall we look it over and see what improve-
ments you can suggest? "
But Alison was gazing reflectively at the front
of the house. " For an Australian home, it has a
delightful air of solidity and antiquity about it/’ she
commented.
" It was the first house built out here/’ he ex-
plained, “ but it had a different name in its early days.
My grandfather bought it sixty years ago from the son
of the original owner. An old scoundrel he was, I am
afraid, or so my grandfather led me to believe when I
was a youngster. Sent out as a convict —for forgery, I
believe —he made a fortune in rather crooked ways
when, after six years of servitude, he became a ticket-
of-leave man, and was free to work for himself. The
house was not built till he was a fairly old man, but
even then this part of Coogee was quite unsettled, and
he had to make his own road out here."
“ I didn't think they built up-to-date-looking places
in those wild days," commented Jill.
" My father remodelled the place considerably," ex-
plained Jerry. " It was he who pulled down the old
wooden stables and put in a stone garage, to match the
house. He also put in those wrought-iron gates be-
tween stone pillars, which you think such an imposing
entrance, Alison. One thing he didn’t do, though—
and this will interest you young people —he didn’t find
the secret exit which my grandfather had reason to
believe existed."
"A secret way out? Oh, jolly! " exclaimed Tack.
"But why?"
The first owner evidently had good reason to fear
the police," explained Jerry. "In case they made a
raid, he had an underground passage dug. It con-
nected with a secret stairway inside one wall —the back
one, I think, for it is remarkably thick. He could
163


escape by it, coming out in the garden or on the cliffs,
I suppose.’ ’
“ Didn’t his son tell your venerable grandfather
where the passage was, Mr. Wallace?” inquired
Daphne.
“ He didn’t know himself,” he smiled. “ There was
some quarrel, and the old man turned him out when
he was a mere boy. Till he found himself owner of
the place, he didn’t see Coogee again.”
“ But surely, Jerry, you could have found it your-
self before this, if you took the trouble to look,” said
Jill.
“ Don’t condemn me as a slowcoach until you see
how you fare yourself,” he laughed. ” When I was a
boy I wasted far too much time hunting for it —made
a regular nuisance of myself tapping stones for the
hollow ring that never came. You and Jack are wel-
come to take up the search now.”
” I’d begin outside,” said Daphne. “I’d find the
hole where the passage comes out, and then it would
be as easy as kicking the toes out of your shoes.”
“ Outside is a vague place to scour thoroughly,”
replied Jerry. “ I have always fancied the opening
must be over the side of the cliff. ’ ’
“ And have you been over, having a hunt for it? ”
asked Jack.
“ Several times. Where there is no path down the
cliff, and none under it, I have even had myself
lowered over on ropes.”
“ And no luck? ” asked Jill.
“ Not a bit.”
“ Well, you pick your room first thing, young Jill,
and we’ll get on the warpath this very afternoon,”
commanded Jack.
“ But not near the cliffs,” bargained Alison. “We
don’t want any broken necks and legs this week, old
son.”


“Oh! get out!” he protested. “You might be
your own ghost, old girl, you’ve got so little backbone
in you.”
Daphne was indignant at his tone. “ Don't be such
a rude boy, John Willie,” she protested. “ Anybody’d
think you were a bear, and not a nice cuddly Teddy
one, either. Surely we can be satisfied poking round
the garden this first day.”
He greeted her lecture with his usual amused laugh,
and they all went in and upstairs in search of a room
for Jill. Jerry had already picked out two which he
thought likely to appeal to her. One of them, on the
south side, had quaint bow windows and a charming
window-seat, and with it she fell in love at first
sight. .
“ It’s the darlingest room ever,” she declared, “ but
very big for just me, Jerry, Can it really be
spared? ”
“ So well that it is yours now, and you merely have
to make up your mind how it is to be fixed up and tell
Alison about it,” he assured her. “ I have arranged
with a firm of furnishers and decorators to have a man
out here to get her first instructions on Monday morn-
ing: if they were left to me to give, I might mull
something.”
“You are just encouraging me to be extravagant,”
Alison reproved him, but with a happy smile.
“You are to be just as extravagant as you like,”
he insisted. “ I want the old place to be as nearly the
home of your dreams as you can make it.”
“ My darling room is to be blue-and-silver, Alison,
but you’ll think out details for me, won’t you ? I’m
like Jerry —I know I’d mull something.”
While Alison made an entry in the note-book Jerry
had provided, Jack and Daphne went poking round
the room. “My sainted slippers, young Jill! ” ex-
claimed the former. “You’ll want a pack of fine
165


frocks to fill these cupboards: they run all up this side
of the wall."
" There are built-in wardrobes in all the bedrooms,"
explained Jerry. " They are made of such fine cedar,
too, that repairs have never been necessary."
" And such big ones? " exclaimed Daphne, who had
climbed right into one, with Little Bits after her. "Jill
darling, you could give Little Bits one for a dolls’
house."
" Dolls’ house for Little Bits," echoed that young
lady, "with a twee in for Teddy to climb. Teddy-
bearses likes twees."
"Oh ! come on ! Let’s go and hunt for the secret
exit," cried impatient Jack. " I shouldn’t be surprised
if it came out under one of those statue things down
by the lily-pond."
The girls followed him eagerly enough, and Alison
and Jerry were left to decide in peace on the
refurnishing to be done in the ground-floor rooms.
They were busy with the library when Jill came in,
looking rather worried.
"Jerry, Little Bits did stop in with you, didn’t
she ? ’’ she asked.
" Why, no, Jill: I thought she was with the rest of
you," he answered. " But don’t worry. The little
puss knows her way round. She is probably in the
kitchen with Janet, or out hunting for the gardener’s
dog."
"Well, we can’t find either her or Daphne," said
Jill. " They went out with us, but they seem to have
disappeared."
"There is no need to worry, then," said Alison,
who had looked anxious at first. "It just means that
Daphne has taken her chance, while you and Jack
were intent on the hidden staircase, to get Little Bits
to herself."
" But we have looked for them everywhere," per-
-166


sisted Jill. " Jack is poking long sticks into the lily-
pond now,"
" We'll try the kitchen together," suggested Jerry:
" it seems to me the truants' most likely haunt."
Alison went with them; but Janet, embroidering a
tray-cloth in cineraria design to present to her future
mistress, had seen nothing of the missing ones, and a
fresh search of garden and house alike proved fruit-
less.
"We must have missed them somewhere," said
Alison. " Daphne is a good child, and I am sure she
would not go out of the grounds without asking our
permission first."
" I think she is just hiding somewhere for a lark,
seeing she's not drowned in the pond," declared Jack,
who had joined his elders. " We’ve cooeed and
shouted all over the place."
" She might play a joke on you and Jill," said Ali-
son, "but Jerry and I have called too, and she
wouldn’t deliberately worry us. No; we must just go
over every inch of the place again."
They were down where the gardener’s stone cottage
stood guard over a side-entrance to the grounds when
their cooees won a first answer, and it came from in-
side the cottage.
" Now, how did the little beggars get in there? "
demanded Jerry. " Thomson locked the place up at
noon and went off with a fishing party for the week-
end."
Daphne pushed a window up and poked her head
out. "Hello!" she cried. "What do you think?
What do you think ? ’ ’
"We think you are a jolly nuisance, getting lost
and worrying the women-folk into blue fits," replied
Jack.
‘ ‘ And how on earth did you get in there ? ’ ’ de-
manded Jerry.


“We didn’t! We didn’t get in here at all! ’’ gloated
Daphne. “We’re coming out here —out from the
secret exit! ”
“ Sec wet eggsit,” repeated Little Bits, bobbing up
beside her. “Us been having fun, Mitter Wallet.’’
“Fair dinkum, Dill ? ” cried Jack. “ I say ! What
larks ! Where did you get in ? ’’
“ Jill’s cupboard,” explained Daphne. “ Little Bits
found a forked stick on the path by the rose-garden,
and she wanted me to put it in straightway for her
Teddy-bear to climb, and I didn’t think it would hurt
Jill’s cupboard, and we went up to it again, and the
stick was a bit too long, and I stood up on the shoe-
shelf at the bottom and tried to bend the stick, and I
must have pressed it against some special part of the
wall, for the back of the cupboard slid along, and
there was a mysterious void yawning at our feet—
leastways, it was a musty, dusty staircase.”
“ Well, I’m jiggered ! ” exclaimed Jack.
It’s very narrow, and it looked all steep and dark,
so I ran down and borrowed your torch out of the
pocket in the car, Mr. Wallace,” Daphne continued.
I didn’t think you’d mind, seeing it was so Little
Bits wouldn’t trip. We got down into a sort of stone
room, and there was a tunnel on from it, then a little
door that pushed back, and we came out into a big
pot-cupboard and then into this kitchen. We tried the
door, but it was locked, and the key wasn’t there;
then we heard you.”
“ Let’s have a squiz,” cried Jack, pulling himself
up to the window and climbing into the room. “ Did
you find anything exciting ? ’ ’
Money —whips and whips of it! ” she answered
proudly. “ It’s not here, but in the under-the-house
room. The old convict must have stolen it and then
forgotten all about it; but there is nothing hid that
shall not be uncovered: the Bible says so.”
168


“ I think we had better all look into this," said
Jerry. “ Come along, Alison and Jill: I’ll give you a
hand up to the window-sill."
They were all inside presently, looking in vain for
an opening into the tunnel. Daphne opened a large
cupboard, moved aside a rusty bucket and a frying-
pan, and touched a button that was painted the same
drab tone as the wall in which it was set. Immediately
a panel of the woodwork slid backwards, and there
was a flight of stone steps down to the tunnel.
" Now all you have to do is follow us," said Daphne
grandly, brandishing her torch with one hand and
leading her tiny fellow-explorer by the other.
When they came out in the inner room, they noticed
that it was far less musty than the tunnel. ‘ ‘ There are
ventilators in the roof and down near the floor. We
must find out afterwards where they come out. Well
now, where is the money, little woman? " said Jerry.
"In that corner cupboard," said Daphne. "He
didn’t even take the trouble to lock it up."
" He died more than sixty years ago, the old con-
vict," said Jerry grimly, as he pulled out a bundle of
banknotes. "These are Commonwealth banknotes,
and there was no Commonwealth in his day."
" And the cigarette-ash on the floor is quite fresh,"
added Jack, bending down to examine it.
"It is certainly Thomson who is the culprit,” said
Jerry, turning the notes over. " Here is a bundle
wrapped in a Herald that bears his name."
" Your gardener? " asked Alison.
"Yes," said Jerry. "I took him on six months
ago, without a reference too, as he was a grandson of
the original coachman here."
" That explains his knowledge of the secret hiding-
place," said Alison.
"I suppose his grandfather was a second old lag,
and hand-in-glove with the one who built the place.
169


That is why the exit could lead through his cottage,"
said Jerry. “ I had better take a careful look round
and then ring up the police."
He lifted the contents of the cupboard all out, and
the rest watched excitedly.
“ Jerry, look at the number on that top ten-pound
note ! " Alison suddenly exclaimed. " It is one of those
taken in last Monday’s sensational train robbery."
Jerry had no recollection of the numbers quoted in
the daily Press, but Jack could verify Alison’s suspi-
cion, for every child about had heard something of
the daring theft in question. An evening train from
Sydney to Canberra, conveying banknotes to the value
of fifty thousand pounds, had been stopped not far
from Liverpool by a passenger who pulled the chain
appointed for use in emergencies. Instantly, four
masked and armed men sprang into the van that car-
ried the notes, overpowered the two officials on guard,
got out with their booty to a waiting car, and drove
away, leaving no trace behind them.
I’ll take your word for it," said Jerry; " but what
is this behind the notes? ’’ As he spoke, he was pull-
ing out a cardboard box, from which he speedily ex-
tracted black masks, false moustaches, and other bits
of theatrical make-up. " Thomson is evidently some-
thing of an artist at crime," he continued. " I thought
it was his incompetence as a gardener that prevented
my taking to him, but perhaps it was his deceitful
smoothness."
When the children had finished exclaiming over the
contents of the box, everything was carefully put back,
even the chairs in the kitchen and the pots in the pot-
cupboard being arranged exactly as Daphne had first
found them, then the rest followed her lead to the stair-
way and to Jill’s room.
"The library is exactly under your room, Jill,"
said Jerry. "The stairway is evidently in a space


concealed behind its cedar shelves, and not inside a
wall at all, as we wrongly supposed.”
“Anyhow, it’s gorgeously exciting, said Jack,
sitting on Jill’s window-seat. “My jumping Jew-
lizards, young Dill! you’ll get a reward from the
Government or the bank or something for finding all
that money.” .
“ But—but won’t they put the poor man m gaol i
inquired Daphne, looking most unhappy about it.
“Poor man, indeed!” roared Jack. “ He’s a
crook, and a bad one. Of course they 11 put him in
gaol—his mates, too, if they have the luck to catch
them.”
“ Then I couldn’t! I couldn't! ” she cried pitifully.
“It would be blood-money, John Willie. How could
I contaminate my clean hands with that ? ’ ’
“Clean?” he roared again. “If you could only
see them, after all your grubbing round in robbers’
dens! ’'
“ But —but ” she stammered.
“You are quite right, little woman,” said Jerry.
“ No one belonging to you would want you to take a
reward for getting a fellow human being into trouble,
though it is my unpleasant duty to set that trouble
working straightway.”
As a result of his telephoning, half a dozen police-
men arrived while tea was being despatched in the
library. The treasure was removed to a safe place,
and the men lay in wait to catch Thomson on his
return.
“ Where is this fishing-party of his ? asked the in-
spector in charge of the case; “ and when is he to be
back?”
“ Woy Woy, I believe,” said Jerry. “He is sup-
posed to be back to-morrow evening.”
“We’ll send a launch full of plain-clothes men to
keep an eye on him there,” said the inspector. “ W T e


don’t intend to arrest him the minute he returns, for
we want him to lead us to his fellow-thieves, so we
must ask you to conceal us about the place, and to see
that you yourselves and your servants let not a
whisper out till we have acted.”
Jerry gave the promise required, both for himself
and for the rest, and then he was allowed to take his
guests home.


CHAPTER XX
TT Z7HO is my neighbour? That was the text the
\X/ minister chose for his Sunday-morning ser-
’ * mon. Jack, unable to get the previous
day's excitement out of his head, thought far more of
the secret stairway than of the Good Samaritan; but
Jill always made a point of listening faithfully to
everything said in church. She felt a glow of self-
righteous indignation against the priest and the Levite
who passed by on the other side, and saw herself
stooping with the Good Samaritan to relieve the
wounded traveller.
As for Daphne in the seat opposite, she was quite
certain that failing to concentrate her thoughts on the
sermon was a wicked sin, but she was too miserable
to care, and all because of that secret stairway that so
thrilled Jack. When she had discovered it, she had
been thrilled too, for she had dared to hope that Jill
would admire her. Yet, when tea was over on Satur-
day evening, and she had come round hopefully to
play, she found Jill cherishing some secret grouch.
Even Jack had noticed how unresponsive his twin was
to her admirer's humble advances.
“Leave her alone, Dill,'' he had said at last:
“she has swallowed a thistle-patch, or a camel's
hump, or a dose of bad manners, or something dis-
agreeable.”
What the ‘ something ’ was, Daphne had found out
when she was going home and Jill, at Alison's request,
showed her out.
“ Good night, Jill dear,” she had said wistfully,
“Oh ! Good night,” Jill had answered coldly. Then
she added in a quick rush, as if unable to keep her


wrath to herself any longer, “ I do think, Daphne Dal-
wood, seeing Jack's a boy, and that it's not you but
him going to be related to Jerry, and that it's Jerry's
secret staircase, that you might have called him first
and let him share in the fun of being first down. Me,
I don’t care: I’m a girl. But boys love being in things,
and you might have remembered that, seeing what a
good friend Jack is to you.”
Overcome by remorse and shame, Daphne had not
dreamed of pointing out tliat Jack did not seem in the
least ill-used, or of pleading that she had been too ex-
cited by her discovery to think of anything. No; Jill
was pleased to disapprove of her action, therefore
that action was wrong and selfish, and she, Daphne,
was a horrid girl who did not even know what
was the proper thing to do; no wonder nobody loved
her!
While the fat man with the bald head and the thin
man with the long hair took up the collection, they
stole furtive glances at one another. Jill’s were full of
unconscious superiority. Daphne was such a thin,
plain, shabby child; and she, fair and slim, with her
honey-coloured hair, blue eyes and pink cheeks, had
on a most becoming apple-green muslin with hem-
stitched frills and embroidered white collar and cuffs.
And Daphne was such a queer child, using such funny
big words and saying such strange things; perhaps
she would grow up a freak, and nobody liked freaks.
Daphne’s glances were full of mute adoration and wist-
ful appeal. She was a horrid child, she knew that
now, but she hadn’t meant to be; and Jill was so
sweet and lovely —surely she would forgive her soon.
And how pretty she looked in that soft green frock!
She was like a fairy of the springtime woods, with
gold sunshine for hair, bits of blue sky for eyes, rose-
leaves for lips, and the green of the woods for her
gown. Oh !if only one could tell her —if only one


could tell her it was one’s birthday and ask her to
forgive one on that account!
In the afternoon Jerry came to collect them all for
a promised drive to Kuringai Chase, and Jack was
sent for Daphne. He returned alone.
“Dill’s not coming,’’ he reported. “She says to
thank you very much, Jerry, but she had better stay
home with her grandmother for once.’’
“But Mrs. Dalwood promised she might come,’’
said Alison: “ I asked her after church.’’
“ Well, some bee has been and bitten young Dill,
then,’’ said Jack disgustedly.
“ Little Bits will stay home with poor Taffy-town-
tilly, ’ ’ announced the babe sympathetically.
“ But I do want Daphne to come,’’ insisted Alison.
“ She was so disappointed last Monday because Jill
and Little Bits couldn’t be at her birthday party that I
planned a special afternoon tea in her honour to-day.
We can’t have a real party on Sunday, but I got up
early this morning and made savouries and cream-
puffs and orange-cake, and there are all the sand-
wiches you helped me cut, Jill. What if you ran up
and asked her, dear? She is so fond of you.’’
It was on the tip of Jill’s tongue to inquire acidly,
“What has Daphne’s birthday got to do with us? ’’
when Jerry added, “And hurry, please, Jill, if you
are going to be the Good Samaritan in your little
neighbour’s case. Inspector Grimes asked me particu-
larly to be home by dark.”
“ And who is my neighbour? ” —Jill had a sudden
horrifying vision of herself in the long-ago of far Judea
asking that of the very Son of God. “Of course I’ll
go,” she said. “ I’ll make her come, too.”
Why did Daphne make her so disagreeable ? That
was what she asked herself vexedly as she walked
round to the front entrance and up to the Dalwoods’
flat. It was not jealousy: dear no ! She had quite got


over that silly, wicked feeling. It must be what books
called an inborn antipodes: you just couldn’t like
somebody, no matter how you tried. It was like those
things that set no one else’s teeth on edge but yours —
an inborn antipodes, that was it. But Daphne was not
responsible, and she must just force herself to be
kinder to the poor little thing.
Through the open door of the flat’s living-room she
could see Daphne doubled up in a deck-chair on the
balcony, weeping soffly, while snores from the inner
room proclaimed that Mrs. Dalwood was already
asleep. She walked on tiptoe through the room, set
her teeth firmly for an unwelcome task, and stooped to
kiss her ‘ inborn antipodes ’.
“ Come on, Daph,” she said, letting her lips lightly
touch the child’s forehead. “ Don’t be an old goose
about it. We are going to have a lovely drive, and
Jerry says he has something interesting to tell us.
Come on, and I’ll say I’m sorry for being snappy last
night.”
Daphne stared up at her with flooded eyes that
registered the deepest emotion. “Jill,” she gasped,
did you really kiss me after I was so horrid and all ?
Did you really ? ’ ’
Jill repeated the endearment, and with more heart
than before: Daphne was giving her back the noble
feeling she found so enjoyable. “ Come on, old
goose,” she said; “of course I have forgiven you —
quite.”
Daphne stood up. “ I think —I think you are ’most
nearly an angel,” she said. “ I was staying home as a
sort of penance —to pay myself out for forgetting John
Willie. But I’ll go now, if you want me to —at least,
after I own up something. I got off too lightly
last Monday, I did. I felt it at the time, and I knew
God would punish me some other way; so now I’m
going to be all above-board and tell you about it; and,
176


#9 'V .-.ve;: 4 .
“ ‘ I’ll bring you a meal now : We have plenty left.’
Daffy-Down-Dilly]
[Page iS*




if you hate me, Jill, I’ll just have to bear it as my
punishment/’
“Hate you? Why?” asked Jill. Daphne was
queer, and she got so worked up that she made you
feel quite uncomfortable.
“ I made you sick last Monday, darling; I gave you
that dreadful bilious attack.”
Jill laughed out in amused astonishment, then re-
membered the sleeper inside and put a hand over her
mouth. “Oh, Daph, you funny kiddie, you didn’t!
Jerry had tea with us on Sunday night, and Alison
made two things I know I can’t eat —her best salad-
dressing, with cream and condensed milk both in it,
for the salad and cold beef, and a lovely dish of maca-
roni cheese. I had some of both, and that’s why I got
bilious next day.”
“No,” insisted Daphne; “I did it. I pretended
Monday was my birthday, just so Granny would let
me ask you up to tea, and God made you sick, just to
show me it doesn’t pay to be wicked.”
Jill was really somewhat shocked; a he —well, you
just didn’t do that sort of thing, of course. “And
wasn’t it your birthday really? ” she asked.
“ No: to-day is.”
“Then, Alison ”
“ She knew r . She was an angel to me. I think she’s
nearly as sweet as you.”
jm’s scorn melted again. “ I don’t believe you did
make me sick,” she said; “and, anyhow, I forgive
you for it. Do wash your face and come, Daph:
Jerry’s in a hurry. Will you leave a note for your
granny?”
“ I don’t need to. She w r ent to sleep before I de-
cided I could face staying home, so she thinks I’m
going.”
Tw'o minutes later the two girls went downstairs
together and found the rest of their party already in
m 177


the car. Soon they were speeding through the city, to
cross on a vehicular ferry and then travel up the lovely
Milson’s Point Line and on through Hornsby to
Kuringai Chase, the reserve that is famous for its
lovely wild flowers in spring and summer. They
stopped at Cowan Creek for the special afternoon tea
Alison had prepared in Daphne's honour.
“ This is an extra birthday-party for you, young
Dill," Jack explained, " though we are pretending it's
only tea because it's Sunday.”
“ We are not pretending anything," said Alison in-
dignantly. "We are celebrating Daph's birthday with
this little roadside tea, to make up for the fact that she
was a bit unlucky with her party the other day. You
are the hostess, Daph; and Jill and I are going to help
you dispense the goodies."
" And it was only yesterday I w r as told anything
about this special day," said Jerry, seeing the child
was too overcome to speak, '' so I have brought my
present to-day. I hope you like hankies, Daph: Alison
tells me these are the right size for a little lady a whole
year older than she used to be."
Daphne fumbled with trembling hand at the string
that bound the box he produced, untied it and
revealed half a dozen fine linen handkerchiefs
with a tiny basket of pink flowers embroidered in the
comers.
Their daintiness rejoiced her starved, beauty-loving
soul. “Oh ! " she cried. "Oh ! Oh, Mr. Wallace ! "
‘ ‘ And we all wish you health and fun and happy
days in your new year," said Alison, administering
an affectionate pat on the head.
" And we hope you won’t keep us all waiting for our
tea while you have a private howl, young Dill," added
Jack. "You look like it, but I warn you that I’ll run
off with the cream-puffs if you keep me pining for
them."


It was at Alison that Daphne looked, her eyes shin-
ing with happy tears. “ And you said and you said
I’d just have to put up with it cheerfully when no one
took any notice of to-day, and then and then
“ And then the handsome hero eloped with a cream-
puff,” interrupted Jack, opening up the lunch-basket,
to make his statement come true. “ But what’s all
this about taking no notice of to-day? ”
“ I’m not going to tell you,” said Daphne, recover-
ing from her emotion. “ I told Miss Alison, and I told
Jill, but you are only a boy, John Willie; and, when
God has been so kind to me about it. He wouldn’t
want me to humbiliate myself to a mere boy, I’m
sure.
“So am I,” smiled Jerry, “whatever the trouble
is; so let us get these good things out. The tea in the
thermos for us, I suppose, Alison, and these bottles of
soft stuff for the kiddies ? ”
Alison and Jill helped him at once to unpack, while
Daphne spread the pretty linen cloth that was worked
in gay cross-stitch, and opened wide eyes of delight
at the cakes and sweets they gave her to put in place.
When all was ready they fell to, with healthy young
appetites and eager chatter, but Daphne’s happily ex-
cited voice rang out above everybody else’s.
They were at the end of their meal before Jack
remembered to ask, “ Jerry, what interesting thing
did you promise to tell us out here ? ’ ’
“ Why ! just that the car you have ridden in to-day
is probably the one that held up the mail-train,” he
answered. “ The police tell me the guard saw the car
distinctly —a new, dark-blue Buick. That fits this one
and explains why it struck me as very dirty last Tues-
day morning. Thomson evidently borrowed it from
my garage for a joy-ride —or a crime-ride.”
“ But don’t you keep the garage locked? ” asked
Jack.


%
“ An ordinary lock doesn't daunt an expert thief:
he has skeleton keys, I suppose.”
“And is the poor sinner caught yet?” inquired
Daphne.
“No; he is not expected back till to-night. Even
then he will not be arrested at once. The police sus-
pect that his fishing-mates are his accomplices, and
they hope to get hold of them too by delaying. One
detective is to hide in Thomson's cottage, another in
the secret room, and several about the grounds. Of
course, anyone who goes down into the secret room
will be seized, for that will be sufficient proof of his
guilt.”
“Wish I could be in at the fun,” sighed Jack.
“ What about taking me home with you, Jerry? ”
“John Willie, you are an unfeeling monster to call
it fun,” reproved Daphne.
Jerry looked at Alison for his cue, but her eyes
plainly said ‘ No.' “ Better not, old man,” he replied
dutifully. “ Thomson and his pals may be nasty cus-
tomers.”
Alison changed the subject before Jack could get a
word in. “ Look at that poor lad under the big gum
tree, with a leaning shelter of sticks and boughs for a
camp,” she remarked. “He has a swag there. Fancy
such a mere boy having to turn tramp! He looks
hungry, too. I am going to see if I can give him a
meal without hurting his feelings.”
“ He may be only a city lad camping out for the
week-end for amusement,” suggested Jerry.
“He looks too miserable,” replied Alison. “ There
are so many unemployed nowadays that such mere
boys may have to tramp it at times. Anyhow, I am
going to see.”
Walking over to the lad, wLo sat dejectedly beside
his poor shelter, she said a pleasant “ Good after-
noon ”, and added, “We have just had tea. I am
180


sorry I did not notice you in time to invite you to join
us, but may I give you something now? ’’
“ Thank you very much," he answered gratefully,
standing up to return her greeting. “ I ana hungry
enough to do with a meal. Fact is, I haven’t had a
bite to-day."
“Oh ! I am sorry," she said. " Are you tramping
in search of work ? ’ ’
"Yes," he replied, "though I suppose it’s not
much use: there’s no work going these days. I’ve
tramped from Cloncurry, way out in North-west
Queensland, and all I’ve struck is a bit of wood-chop-
ping, with a meal for my pay."
" Queensland? We come from there too," said Ali-
son, more interested than ever. "I'll bring you a
meal now: we have plenty left."
As she got together sandwiches, savouries and cake,
she passed on his story to the rest. " I don’t believe
he is sixteen yet," she declared. " Oh, Jerry, isn’t it
sad to think of such a boy reduced to such want ? ’ ’
" Don’t look so unhappy, little girl," said Jerry.
" We’ll have to see what we can do for him."
He helped her carry the food across, and then asked
a few kindly questions that brought out the lad’s full
story. He was called Stan Pratt. His father had been
a grazier out between Winton and Cloncurry. Two
years of drought had killed his sheep and mortgaged
his run. The bank that held the mortgage had fore-
closed, and he and his big family had walked out,
homeless and penniless.
"We used to think the unemployed were fellows
too lazy to work," said Stan sombrely: "we know
better now. After four months Mother landed a job up
near Cairns, cooking for some cane-cutters till the
sugar-mill closes down about Christmas, and Dad is
minding the other six youngsters. I thought I’d try
another State."


“ And what work could you do? " asked Jerry.
“Dunno; but I’d have a pretty good try at any-
thing I could get, from cleaning knives to preaching
sermons,” the boy answered.
Jerry gave him his business card. “ Come and see
me at that address at ten on Tuesday morning, and
I’ll try to have some sort of a job waiting for you,” he
promised; “ and you must let me give you a little pay
in advance, to tide you over till then.”
When they were back in the car and driving home,
Alison added her thanks to the lad's somewhat husky-
voiced ones. “ I just couldn’t bear to see anyone else
so miserable when I am so happy,” she explained.
“I know,” said Jerry gently. “We talk of re-
covery, but the country is in a bad way yet —the whole
world is, indeed —and one is always being saddened by
coming up against the hard fact that no one seems to
have brains enough to mend the social order, that the
best we can do is to put tiny patches on a shabby,
worn-out garment that wants replacing by a new one.
But there, don't worry this time, little girl; I’ll manu-
facture some job for your young Queenslander.”
“ He has such a dear face,” said Alison, “ a jolly,
cheeky boy’s, with a hurt look over the twinkles; and
that hurt me: what if it were Jackie boy grown
older? ”
“My simpering steak-and-onions! how you do go
on, old girl! ” cried Jack, with the sublime self-con-
fidence of boyhood. “I’ll always be able to knock up
a crust for myself without loafing on you and Jerry;
but give a chap time to grow up first, can’t you?
What about making Stan Pratt gardener in Thomson’s
place, Jerry ? ”
“If he knew anything about gardening, that might
be a good suggestion,” replied Jerry; “ but that
garden is going to be Alison’s soon, so I want it to be
a very lovely one. It is in bad order now, thanks to
182


Thomson; and good gardeners are not born: they
want training."
However, when Jerry called in at the flat on Mon-
day evening, he told them he had decided to use Stan
in the garden, after all, with an old man called Proust
to train him.
“ Proust was my father’s gardener," he explained,
“ but he retired five years ago. I gave him a few
hundred as a parting gift, and that, with the sayings
of his lifetime, he invested in government securities.
With his small regular income, he rented a room in
a niece’s house and settled down to enjoy an old age
of leisure. Unfortunately, he enjoyed it too well, took
to killing time with drink, lost his little capital, and
has nothing left. He is Janet’s great uncle, and from
her I heard about Thomson. I found him on my door-
step this morning, waiting to beg me to take him
back. He is too old and tottery to do hard work, of
course, but an old-age pension seems to him a dis-
grace; so I am going to house both him and Stan in
the cottage and let him train the boy. An old man’s
wage and a boy’s won’t come to much more than I
have always given a gardener, anyhow."
“I am glad we are going to have him about Ace-
wall," said Alison gratefully: “ I like that boy. And
how he will love being able to help his people ! What
of that poor rogue, Thomson, Jerry ? "
“ They arrested him last night. Three of his pals
did come home with him, and the four went straight
to the secret room. Detectives took them by surprise
there, and all four were captured."
"Did they fight? Was anybody hurt?" asked
Jack.
" Thomson managed to get his revolver out before
they grabbed him, and he wounded a detective
slightly. The rest saw the game was up and offered
no resistance."


“Oh, dear!" sighed Alison. “People make life
very hard for themselves sometimes.”
“ And for Little Bits,” put in that wee woman,
“ when Mitter Wallet comes, and her has to go to bed
and doesn't want to.”


CHAPTER XXI
JILL honestly tried to keep herself in remembrance
of her vow to be good to her ‘ inborn antipodes .
On the following Wednesday morning, when her
sums were finished in arithmetic class and she had a
few moments of leisure, she wrote in her scribbler, “ I
am going to be kind to Daphne Dalwood; lam going
to make myself be nice to her.” Then she bit her
pencil and wondered how she could set about it.
Walking round the playground at recess, arm-in-arm
with Catherine Small, she noticed Daphne alone under
the Moreton Bay fig-tree, reading Captains Coura-
geous, a book Jack had lent her. The child certainly
looked happy and absorbed, for she found Kipling’s
young heroes more interesting than the fat volumes of
theology with which she had once solaced herself; but
Jill was reminded of her vow and determined to put it
into immediate execution.
“ Oh! Catherine, do you mind if we ask that little
Dalwood girl to walk with us? ” she inquired. “ Some-
how, no one takes to her: she hasn’t a single, solitary
chum at school, and I do feel sorry for the poor young-
ster, even though I suppose it’s her own fault.”
Daphne, looking up at first sound of the voice she
loved, distinctly caught the patronising words, and
flushed under her tan, as the two girls walked towards
her. She had wanted Jill’s love, but pity, mingled with
contempt was a different thing.
“ Come and walk with us, poor old out-in-the-
cold,” invited Jill, with noble condescension. “We
were going through our history together, but we can
stop and talk about something else for you —or are
you doing Cromwell in your class, too? ”
ISS


“ No, thank you,” said Daphne; then dropped her
eyes to her book and turned a page at random.
Having schooled herself to be kind, Jill was indig-
nant at such a curt refusal. “ Don’t be a goose,
Daph,” she commended. “ Come along and walk with
us, instead of moping there with an old book.”
“ No, thank you,” repeated Daphne.
“ Oh ! all right,” retorted Jill loftily. “ If you don’t
like me any more, I guess I’ll get over it without water-
ing my ink-pot with tears.”
" I do like you,” replied Daphne miserably. “ I
wish I didn’t, Jill Deane.”
“ Well, then, what on earth is the matter with you,
young Long-Legs? ” inquired Catherine curiously.
Perhaps I don’t feel up to Cromwell’s company,”
Daphne answered, in the biting tone that came easy
when it was not Jill to whom she spoke.
Oh ! let the cranky little thing alone,” Catherine
cried crossly. “ I’m sure we don’t want her tagging on
to us against our will.”
But Jill had caught an uncomfortable form of her
friend’s discarded curiosity: what could be the matter
with the little nuisance? ‘‘ Look here, Daph ! what on
earth are you grumpy about? ” she demanded. “I'm
sure I haven’t done anything to make you turn your
nose up like that. You are always getting stirred up
over something.”
“ I’m sorry,” said Daphne meekly. “ I didn’t know
I was a nuisance to you, Jill, I thought you really
liked me a little bit. I know now you’re only sorry
for me, and being nice to me because I haven't any
pals, and you’re so kind and sweet you couldn’t bear
to see me ostrichised. And I’d rather you didn’t, I
would; I’d rather you didn’t bother about me.”
“ Oh, I say ! She heard what you said, Jill! ” com-
mented Catherine, made uncomfortable by Daphne’s
evident distress. “ Poor old Long-Legs ! ” she added.
186


“ Don’t get worked up about it: we’d like your com-
pany, really.” , . , <C Till
“No, thank you,” was the forlorn reply. 1h—
I’ll always know now.”
Till felt righteously exasperated at the turn events
were taking. What did the little nuisance want to go
making such a fuss about a mere trifle for? And what
right had she to go pricking up her ears and listening
to a private remark not meant for her at all. L mess
she had been deliberately listening, she could not have
heard it, so there! “Listeners never hear good ot
themselves,” she quoted sagely. “If you like to go
craning your neck out to catch what isn t meant tor
you, you should grin and bear what you do hear. Any
how, I don’t call it honourable to go listening m to
private conversations.” . ~ T j-j
“ Oh, I didn’t! ” cried Daphne tragically. I didn t
listen at all. It just came floating over to me, and I
heard it before I saw it was you even.
“ Anyhow, what harm was there m what I said?
demanded Jill. “ You haven’t any pals at school,
Daphne Dalwood; you know you haven't; you ve
often said so yourself. All I said was, I was sorry about
it. Is that a disgrace to me? ”
“ N-n-no,” sobbed Daphne. . }f
“ Well, don’t make such a stupid fuss about it,
reproved Jill. e
“ I —I —I’m sorry,” apologised the culpnt.
“ Don’t be upset, little Long-Legs, please,” Cath-
erine put in kindly. ” Jill didn’t mean to hurt you,
I’m sure. And me, I’d like to have you come round
with us any time. You are clever, everybody says, and
I think you’d be a very interesting girl.”
“Would I?” exploded Daphne. “I’m a horrid
animal, I am, that people only put up with out of pity
—you ask Jill, if you don’t believe me and your old
Cromwell wouldn’t take to me a bit, and you needn t
187


start in being sorry for me too, you needn’t, ’cause I
won’t stand it, I tell you. You can go away and look
sorry for somebody else, you can.”
” All right,” said Catherine, “I’m going; but don’t
think I mind you flaring up. I'd be mad, too: only, I
do think you might bite Jill’s head off instead of mine.
She’s the one that was nasty to you.”
I wasn't,” denied Jill angrily. ” She’s always try-
ing to put people in the wrong, Daphne is. Perhaps
that’s why she hasn’t any friends.” And she turned
on her heel and walked away.
( JiF Deane is spoiled,” said Catherine indignantly.
” She might have apologised, instead of making herself
out the injured one. Why don’t you tell her to go to
Jericho, and make friends with somebody who is not
such a selfish piece of self-importance? I am going to
drop her like a hot brick after this.”
“ If you stand there calling my friend names, I don’t
care if it is wicked. I’ll throw my book at you,”
stormed Daphne. ”Go away! Go away, you whited
sepulchre! ’'
y All right, if you want to be a doormat, be one,”
said Catherine, flaring up in her turn. “ I hope she
wipes plenty of her nasty brand of mud on you, too.
You haven’t the spirit of a wet rag.”
Over their wrath pealed out the school bell, and
Daphne had to force her tears back and put some
semblance of her mind into analysis and geography.
She was not the only child miserable in class for the
rest of the day. Catherine, indeed, got over her spurt
of temper easily, and in retrospect was almost amused
at the episode—what a queer child the little long-
legged Dalwood girl was! Rather an interesting one,
though ! Give her time to get over her sulks, and it
would be fun making friends with her. Such were her
thoughts as she wrote an essay on Oliver Cromwell.
It was Jill whose head seemed a whirl of angry
188


thoughts of Daphne’s conduct and uncomfortable
doubts as to her own. After school, she hurried
home alone, too wretched to want company, yet
bearing Daphne a grudge for the loss of Catherine’s.
“ She spoils everything for me; she has been doing
it ever since we first knew her,” she told herself
bitterly.
Alison saw how upset the child looked, coaxed her
to dispose of a cup of milk and a lemon-bun, and then
begged to know what the trouble was. Convinced of
her own innocence of the least wrongdoing, Jill readily
told the story, trying to make it just to the absentee.
“ She was unreasonable —a silly little fuss-pot —
wasn’t she? ” eagerly followed on the last word of the
tale.
Alison was silent for a minute, wondering as usual
how a guardian ought to act when brought up against
childish prejudice and vanity. Then she remarked,
“ But, of course, you wouldn’t stop to think of that,
old chicken, when you had hurt someone who loved
you so unselfishly, would you? ”
“ But, Alison, she —she makes such a fuss over
nothing.”
“ I see; she stormed and stamped, did she? She re-
fused to listen to your apology even when you told
her you were ever so sorry ”
” Alison, you know she didn’t. I told you what she
did. And I —you don’t really think I had any call to
go eating humble pie to her, do you? I didn’t ask her
to listen to what I said to that disagreeable Catherine
Small, did I? ”
” If I trod on your toe and squashed it flat, I could
say I hadn’t asked you to poke it under my big foot;
but you’d probably think I ought to be ashamed of
my carelessness too, and so sorry for hurting you, even
inadvertently ’ ’
“ There ! I wish I hadn’t told you,” interrupted the
189


child. “You always take sides against me; you put a
stranger before me every time, you do."
“ Not in my heart,” said Alison, gently. “ It is just
that silly old jealousy of Daphne that won’t let you see
straight, darling.”
“ That’s not true,” protested Jill. “I have looked
at the thing just fair and square, and all I can see is
her upsetting herself and me for nothing.”
“ Supposing we tell the tale to Jerry when he drops
in this evening, tell it without names and let him
judge? ” suggested Alison. “You shall be A, and
Catherine B, and Daphne C.”
“ And you'll poor-little-C her and make him take
her side ! I know you ! ’ ’
“ Well, you may tell the story, as long as you don’t
poor-little-A yourself.”
“Asif I would! ” protested Jill.
Jerry came soon after seven, that he might be in
time to catch Little Bits awake. It was Jill, as usual,
who was putting the mite to bed; but, when the tired
little eyes really were tight-shut, she joined her elders,
who were enjoying the twilit coolness under the
camphor-laurel, and out came her tale.
' ‘ Which one are you really and truly sorriest for ? ”
she asked wistfully. Surely he would say, ‘ For A, of
course,’ proving to Alison she was not jealous ! Surely
he would!
“ For A,” he answered obligingly.
Jill smiled her gratification.
“ Because she is such a green goose,” he added,
“ that she hadn’t sense enough to see she had been a
bit of a cat as well. She hurt a friend, and what did
she do then? Why! dig the knife in deeper, get an-
noyed because C didn’t pat her on the back for it, and
go round wondering why she didn’t feel too joyful
herself.”
Jill's face fell. “You looked at Alison,” she ob-


jected, " and she told you with her eyes which one to
stick up for.”
" Not guilty,” he declared. ” I shouldn’t be above
that sort of thing, but the light is against it to-night.
You don’t mean to tell me you are A, Jill ? That is not
like the pretty sight I saw upstairs a few minutes ago—•
a little woman all tenderness and patience to my young
imp, I didn’t know I was digging my knife into her.
All the same, if you are A, Fd give myself a good
shaking, if I were you. And is C-our little friend
Daphne by any chance? ”
“ C is,” sighed Alison; ” and what makes it hard
for her is that she adores this prickly young A.”
” So that is why your Aunt Jessie told me, when I
picked her up down the road and gave her a lift home,
that Daphne had gone off to bed, as soon as she got
home from school, with a bad bout of fever? ” Jerry
remarked. ” Poor kiddie ! ”
“ Jerry, she didn’t? You are only saying that,
aren’t you? ” demanded Jill, unhappily.
But he assured her it was true.
Jill wandered in forlornly to begin her home-lessons.
She was angry and conscience-stricken at the one time.
Evidently she had hurt Daphne badly. But what a
nuisance the child was, fussing herself into a fever and
making other people feel needlessly upset! It was an
unfair advantage to take —most unfair. And Jerry had
not understood the thing at all —men never could un-
derstand girls, of course; everybody knew that.
Visions of a sick child tossing in pain on a hot pillow
soon conquered such irritation, however, and Jill
asked permission to go up and see Daphne.
“ If Mrs. Dalwood will let you, old chicken,” said
Alison. " Please give Daph my love and tell her how
sorry I am that she is sick.”
“I am going to pretend I love her, too,” said Jill
to herself, as she walked round; “it’s the only way.”


Daphne was at first reported asleep, but a peep into
the bedroom on her grandmother’s part showed her
weeping into a very wet pillow, and Jill was promised
a few minutes with her. But Daphne turned her face
to the wall when she saw who it was.
“ Why —why did you trouble, Jill? ” she asked.
“ I —l didn’t want —want you to bother.”
Jill’s lurking grudges fled when she saw how crushed
and miserable the child was; for a moment she felt a
rush of real affection again. “ I just wanted to tell you
I was sorry about it all, Daph dear,” she said. “ I do
love you, really; I was just talking big to Catherine —
not wanting her to know I really wanted a little girl
like you along. Ah ! Daph dear, don’t keep on being
cross with me.”
“ You —you needn’t say it, Jill,” sobbed Daphne.
“I'm getting —getting better, I am. My temp—tem-
perature’s ’most —’most nearly down.”
“ Oh ! Daph, how can you be so mean as not to be-
lieve me?” pleaded Jill. “I’m ever so sorry, and
Alison thinks I was dreadful, and Jerry says I want
shaking, and —oh ! Daph dear !
Daphne sat up in bed and gazed at her with un-
naturally bright eyes. “ On your solemn, solemn word
of honour, Jill, do you like me a little bit, really and
truly, not because Alison tells you to be nice to me,
and not just because you don’t want me to be
miserable? ” she demanded.
“ Of course, I do,” said Jill, and thought she meant
it.
Daphne flung an arm round her in glad relief.
“ You tell Mr. Wallace —you tell him it’s un —un-
chivalreeous to shake girls,” she sobbed, “ and that
there never —never was anybody as sweet —as sweet
as you.”
JiU went home with her conscience eased and with
the conviction that even nuisances had their good


points, if you were patient with them and tactful. But
stirred-up feelings are fatal to sleep. As she lay awake,
somewhere towards morning, and lived the foolish dis-
agreement over, there came an ugly, insidious thought
that would not be pushed out of her aching head—
what if that child had got sick on purpose, just to put
her in the wrong again and make her feel bad?


CHAPTER XXII
WHEN the trial of the train thieves came off,
a fortnight later, Jerry had pulled strings so
effectively that Alison and the children did
not have to appear as witnesses. He himself explained
all about the secret room and the discovery of
the notes in it, while various police-officers de-
tailed what had happened after they had been
summoned by him. The culprits, deciding that
their best hope lay in confession, made no
attempt to deny their guilt. When sentenced to ten
years’ imprisonment each, three of them took it
philosophically; but Thomson, who seemed to have
an ungovernable temper under his pleasant manner,
broke out into wild ravings and swore to get even with
“that black-hearted sneak that gave away a poor
cove that worked for him.” Alison shuddered when
she read his threats, but Jerry said, “Don’t worry,
my dear: the poor fellow will forget it before his
weary term of punishment is over,’’
Three days later, however, came news of Thom-
son’s sensational escape from the country gaol to
which he had been transferred to serve his sentence.
All over the State, the police were on the watch. Now
and then they picked up traces of the escapee, where
food or clothing had been stolen, and all such clues
pointed to the fact that he was working his way back
to Sydney. At last, a meal and a loaded revolver
were stolen only thirty miles from the city. Jerry was
rather annoyed then to find that the police thought him
in need of protection. They stationed a couple of
plain-clothes men out at Acewall, and another to
watch his city office; but he told Alison nothing


of it, for he could see how alarmed she already
was.
The renovations at Acewall were already well under
way. Dainty new wall-papers, curtains and up-
holstery had made the fine old rooms brighter than
Jerry had ever known them. But one alteration he
himself supervised: he had each entrance to the secret
passage securely walled up. On the Saturday after-
noon immediately before Christmas, when the Bondi
party were out to inspect the renovations, he showed
them what he had done.
"Oh! crumpets and cow-bells! What a jolly
shame!" grumbled Jack. "Now you've got an
ordinary old house, like anybody else."
"But what about Jill?" inquired Jerry. "How
would she like sleeping in a room, however blue-and-
silvery, when people could come popping up the secret
stairway by night to run off with her treasures ?' ’
" Ugh ! Jerry, it makes me scared just to hear you,"
said Jill. " Anyhow, we still have a sealed passage:
that’s mysterious enough, isn’t it? ’’
" Umph! for a girl! " grunted Jack scornfully.
Afterwards they went out to look round the garden,
which Stan Pratt’s energy had already robbed of some
of its neglected appearance. Paths were chipped and
swept, empty beds planted with asters or zinnias for
late summer flowering, straggling creepers cut back,
and lawns cut.
" Some worker, Stan Pratt," smiled Jerry. " Proust
is full of his virtues —says ‘ he has gardening gumption
and isn’t above learning from them that has more.’
If that doesn’t prove your Cloncurry lad worthy of
your interest, Alison, what would ? "
The garden inspected, they went into the kitchen,
to arrange with Janet that the tea-tray should be sent
out on to the lawn, where a high lattice covered
with velvety red Marion Manifold roses shut off the


sun’s warm rays and filled the air with fragrance.
They found the two gardeners enjoying what the old
man called smoke-oh —tea, beef-sandwiches, cold
fruit-tart. Alison noted with pleasure the lad’s new
cheerfulness of expression and stopped to talk to him.
“How are you liking gardening, Stan?’’ she in-
quired.
“ Suits me down to the ground, thank you, Miss
Deane,” he replied. “ It was always me that grew the
cabbages and tomatoes at home, though our bore-
water didn’t suit them very well. Besides, a chap
couldn’t help getting keen on a lovely place like this.
We are going to make it a sight lovelier for you
next year, if I manage to cany out instructions
properly.”
“Oh! he’ll do —he’ll do all right, the young ’un
will,” put in old Proust quaveringly. “There’s that
sunken croquet-lawn —we’re going to cover its sloping
banks with mesembryanthemum —reds and yellows
and pinks that’ll shine there on spring days, one
splash o’ beauty. In my time, too, we had a rockery
near the bush-house, and rare irises round the water-
lily pond. He’ll put ’em back, this young feller-me-
lad; you’ll see.”
“ It all sounds very lovely,” said Alison; “ but you
must be kind and leave me just one bed to play round
in myself —one I can put pansies and primroses,
mignonette and daffodils, and little things like that
in.”
Jerry laughed. “ Proust will think you as much of
a nuisance as I am, my dear,” he said. “ I am
always spoiling some fine plan of his by filling up
some pet bed with old-fashioned flowers, but I go in
for larkspurs and snapdragons for choice, with a
border of sweet Alice or heart’s-ease. They were my
mother’s favourites, and I grew to love them when I
pottered round in her wake. Proust would sigh after
196


one splash of vivid red salvia or misty blue del-
phinium-spires.’ ’
“ And now it’s young Pratt here as can do the
sighin’,” said the old man cheerfully. “Im past it,
’cept for me own foolishness.”
Seeing that Susan, the pretty housemaid, had tea
ready, Jerry carried the heavy tray out for her, and
Jack took possession of a small brass stand that held
hot tea-cake and pikelets, while she went ahead to
spread a cloth on the rustic wooden table. There was
a garden seat on which Alison sat to preside over the
teapot, but Jerry and the children preferred the
grass.
They were in the middle of their picnic-meal, all
laughing at Daphne’s declaration that pikelets were
heavenly if they were a lure of Satan, when a sudden
wild sputtering and then a thud behind the roses
startled them. Jerry was round the lattice at a run,
and the rest followed him.
All the colour drained away from Alison’s face at
what she saw: Thomson, the escaped criminal, was
lying on the ground, his sneezing, sputtering head
right in amongst the lowest blooms. Stan, his face
set in grim resolution, held on to the man’s feet, while
the latter struggled to regain the revolver he had
dropped. Jerry picked it up, put it in his pocket some-
what gingerly, and seized the prostrate man’s arms.
“ Let me hold one,” pleaded Jack.
“ Supposing you call Detective Lyons instead,”
suggested Jerry. “He is somewhere round the other
side of the house,”
“No; he is coming now,” said Jill. “Susan is
with him: she must have gone for him.”
The officer was indeed approaching at a run, and
his colleague was seen racing up from the front
garden,
“ In spite of us, he got in, then? ” inquired Lyons,


handcuffing the captive. "Who caught him? and
how? "
" This plucky lad did," replied Jerry, indicating
Stan, " and with a pepper-pot, of all things."
" How? " asked the puzzled detective.
" I was just leaving the kitchen and I heard Miss
Deane laugh," explained Stan awkwardly. " She has
such a jolly laugh, and she's so awfully pretty, that I
—well, I just stood still and sticky beaked. And then
I spotted this fellow creeping up along the plumbago
hedge, but still a good way off. I guessed who he
was, poked my head in at the kitchen window, asked
Janet to throw me her big aluminium pepper-pot,
and sent her and Susan after you two."
“ And our man obligingly came over and asked
you to choke him with pepper and grab his legs,
eh? " grinned the second detective.
"Well, I had to do a bit of stalking, to keep out of
his sight and get in right behind him. Then I un-
screwed the lid of the pot, of course, and threw the
contents fair in his face, just as he got behind the
lattice and got his revolver out. He dropped it —
sneezed it out of his hand, I reckon —and all I had
to do was grab him by the heels and pull him over.
It was just luck I noticed that pepper at smoke-oh,
for the fellow might have got a shot in if it hadn't
blinded him."
"I probably owe my life to you, my lad," said
Jerry feelingly.
"Oh! it —it was just a lark," stammered Stan;
" and —and if Miss Deane is glad about it "
" I'll never be able to thank you enough, Stan,
never," she said shakily.
" Then, that's all right," he answered, with re-
gained composure. " Even if Mr Wallace hadn't been
so good to me, I’d feel awfully bucked at being able to
do a little thing for you."
198


“ So, if you want any dragons killed —or noses
punched —my dear, just call on Stan, and he’ll be
ready, and I’ll be grateful,” smiled Jerry, while the
two officers bundled their prisoner off.
“Oh ! Look ! I say ! ” cried Stan. “ She’s going to
faint!”
“No; oh! no,” protested Alison, white of face and
swaying on her feet.
Jerry supported her to the garden seat, and Jill
rushed off for a glass of water. Soon she felt better
and they took her into the library, where she was
tucked up on a comfortable couch and listened to the
children’s excited comments on the incident that
might so easily have been tragic.
“Jerry, you will do something to reward Stan,
won’t you? ” asked Jack.
“As if Alison would let him forget!” cried Jill.
“ I think I shall manage it without any reminders,”
declared Jerry. “It is quite likely the lad would re-
sent being offered money for himself, but he is for-
tunately devoted to his parents and young brothers
and sisters, so I can do something for them. He
asked me to keep back most of his wages to forward
monthly to his father. I said it must be a joy to him
to be able to help the family, and what do you think
he said in his confidential sort of way? ”
“ Go on, Jerry: tell us,” ordered Jill.
“He said, ‘You bet! But it isn't so shiny-sweet
for the poor old dad: it’s maddening for a man full
of go like him to have to live on Mum or me.’ It
must be, too.”
“ And what are you thinking of for him, Jerry? ”
asked Jack.
“ I own some farming land on the North Coast that
I rent out. I could let Pratt Senior have a block and
provide the capital to see him started. Men do well
up there at mixed farming.”


“And, Jerry, if you can let him know before
Christmas ” pleaded Alison.
“What are telegraph-offices for? “ he smiled.
With that promise to help them forget sterner
things, the Bondi party went home. When Alison
heard, a few days later, that Thomson had been shot
down on a second attempt to escape and was dead,
she tried to be sorry for his fate; but all she could
really feel was that some dark cloud of fear had lifted
from her life and let the sun shine out again.


CHAPTER XXIII
WHEN Jerry first pleaded for a wedding in
January, Alison protested, “But I can’t
possibly get a trousseau made in time.”
“ Buy it,” he suggested.
“ All very well for a bloated capitalist like you to
talk in that way,” she laughed. “ but I have only a
tiny income, and it comes in quarterly.”
“ Well, wait till we are married, and buy stacks of
pretties then.”
Young enough to be conventional, she exclaimed in
horror at such a suggestion. She was quite certain
that every self-respecting bride went to her new home
with a full stock of dainty things for herself and with
an adequate supply of house-linen as well. Jerry
cured her of the latter obsession by actually showing
her the contents of bulging linen-presses at Ace wall,
but she was obstinate about the trousseau itself. He
showed his resourcefulness then by a private call on
Aunt Jessie.
Having told her of the stumbling-block in the way
of a January wedding, he insinuated, “ If I relieved
you of your sense of responsibility to certain mis-
sions and charities, Mrs. Royle, would you feel free
to give Alison half the amount of my cheques for
this trousseau that is worrying her? She has no father
or uncle to come to the rescue, you know, and I hate
to see her wearing herself out with all this sewing.”
“You would give me? ” encouraged Aunt Jessie.
“ Say a hundred pounds: more, if you think what
is left of the trousseau will take over fifty.”
“ Every mission and every charity could do with
the whole hundred in these hard times,” said Aunt


Jessie. “ What does Alison want with more frocks?
She has plenty of neat and pretty things now—some
of them wickedly fine, indeed/’
" She won't many me without more, and I don’t
want to wait a day longer than I need for my wife.”
Aunt Jessie shook her head. “It doesn’t seem
straight to me, young man,” she said,
Jerry was beaten by that argument. “If it worries
your conscience, Mrs. Royle, I shan’t ask you to do
it,” he said. Then he added generously. “May I
subscribe to those good causes of yours all the same?
It will please Alison, I know.”
Aunt Jessie took his cheque, telling him that he
could expect little credit in heaven if his motive for
giving was mere sentiment of the worldliest kind. A
day or two later, however, he w T as happily surprised
to hear from Alison that her aunt was insisting on
providing the trousseau not yet in hand, and that he
could go ahead with arrangements for January.
“ Dear Aunt Jessie! ” she exclaimed, with tears in
her eyes. “ I knew she rather liked me, even if she
does think me frivolous; but I didn’t dream she cared
enough to stint her good works for my sake. I felt
positively guilty when she took me out to-day and
made me buy the darlingest shoes and silk stockings,
and we are to look at frocks to-morrow.”
“ Well, don’t grudge her the pleasure of being
human for once,” he smiled. “ Next year you will be
able to repay her.”
“ As if you didn’t spoil me more than enough, with-
out her starting ! ” cried Alison. “Oh! my dear, is
it wicked to be so very, very happy? ”
“ I don’t believe you could be happier than you
deserve,” he assured her. “ Certainly, you couldn't
be happier than I wish you to. There !we are getting
sentimental, and we are always promising ourselves
not to be. Put away that unkind sewing and let us


have that uproarious game of animal grab we promised
the kiddies. Then we must plan our Christmas —a
joint one of some kind, mind you; I insist on that.”
Animal grab was popular with the twins, and there
was much merriment over Jerry's attempts at the cry
they insisted on as characteristic of a hippopotamus.
He refused to play at last.
“No; lam done,” he declared, “ beaten every time,
and no breath left in my lungs. You young barbarians
may have another game on your own, if you like, but
Alison and I are going to discuss Christmas.”
“ Me too,” said Jill, with eagerness that disregarded
grammar. But suddenly a change came over her
bright young face, and big tears filled the blue eyes
Daphne thought so lovely. “Oh! Alison,” she
pleaded, “ don't let us have a proper Christmas, with
a Christmas-tree and all, and no darling Dad there to
be Santa. Oh ! I couldn't bear it! ”
“ Don't let’s have Christmas at all,” agreed Jack
savagely, “ and for goodness’ sake stop howling,
young Jill. We’ll make it spring-cleaning day, and
I’ll get all the pictures down for you, Alison.”
Daphne’s eyes filled in sympathy with Jill’s. “You
leave Jill alone, John Willie,” she commanded: “ I’ve
told you often it’s unchivalreeous to bully ladies.”
“ I know what we’ll do,” said Alison, one arm
caressingly round Jill’s shoulders: “we’ll hang our
stockings up: we never have before. We’ll leave them
all down in the breakfast room. Jerry, you must bring
a sock and leave it, and you too, Daph. We’ll put
each other’s presents in, and no one will take the tiniest
peep at his or her own gifts till we meet for breakfast.
Here and now, we invite you two to that meal.”
“ Little Bits will love it, anyhow,” said Jerry.
“ Last year I hung one up for her, though Aunt Jane
lectured me for teaching exploded myths to an infant,
and we had a jolly time. I hung my own up, to keep


the wee one’s company, and to give her the right
happiness-all-round Christmas feeling.”
And did you have to put things in your own stock-
ing? ” asked Daphne. “ How bathetic ! ”
“ I did, except that it happened to be a sock,” he
grinned.
“Poor Jerry!” said Jill, cheering up somewhat.
“ What presents did you give yourself? ”
“ A pink jujube duck and a red rubber ball. We
ate the duck between us and had competitions as to
whether my red ball or her parti-coloured one could
bounce best. The red one got badly beaten, of course,
and was sent away in disgrace to Janet’s youngest
nephew.”
“ I’ve seen Christmas-trees in books,” said Daphne,
“ and Christmas stockings in the shops, but I’ve never
had one myself. My sainted mother sends me a souve-
nir of the festive season, though, but the post never
brings it just on Christmas Day.”
“ Well, you will have one of your very own this
time, Daph,” said Jerry kindly. ”Be sure you bring
your very largest one along.”
She fetched a monstrous sigh, whereat Jack laughed.
“ What are you being a mournful mopoke about now,
young Dill? ” he demanded.
“ I've just remembered that I have only sevenpence-
halfpenny,” she answered sadly. “ That w'on’t go far
for buying presents, will it? ”
Little visitors are never allowed to bring presents
to a Christmas party, though,” explained Alison.
” That is one of the rules.”
Is it really? ” asked Daphne. “ I wish it wasn’t,
though, and that my sevenpence-halfpenny wxmld
pour out presents and presents ”
“ Like a well-fed old cow pouring out milk and
milk? ” suggested Jack.
Daphne looked scorn at him and continued: “ Like


the widow’s cruse pouring out oil and oil till the
famine was over.”
“No more sighing, little woman: it doesn’t fit in
with Christmas,’’ said Jerry. “ Now it is my turn to
make a proposal.”
“ Goodness! We thought you got that over long
ago,” grinned Jack.
“Some cayenne pepper to go with your sauce, is
what I’ll put in your stocking, young man, if you
don’t look out,” threatened Jerry. “This is what I
suggest: instead of a regulation Christmas at home, we
drive up to Mount Victoria, arranging for dinner at a
hotel there, and taking light refreshments with us as
well.”
“ A big water-melon,” suggested Jill.
“ And we could pack an ice-cream can round with
blocks of ice and have ices instead of silly old tea,”
remarked Jack.
“ And I shan’t have a dinner to cook after all: how
lovely ! ” cried Alison.
“ And your granny won’t have to provide one for
your big appetite, young Daffy-down-dilly,” added
Jack.
Daphne looked at Jerry, eager-eyed, but diffi-
dent.
“ Of course you are coming with us, little woman,”
he assured her. “ Aren’t we being one big family for
the day? ”
“I wish I did belong to a family,” she sighed, “ and
it wasn’t just me on my own and Granny. Sometimes
I wish I had brothers and sisters, even if they had to
be born in Papua and be browny-black. It’s sort of
lonely on your own. Not that I should complain,
though. I’ve had John Willie and Jill for a couple of
months now, and Little Bits for weeks, and all the
books John Willie has lent me, and Acts of the
Apostles to fall back on; and there’s poor things that


have no friends, and no sainted grandfather’s library,
either.”
“ Let us all count our blessings, like Daphne, and
smile,” suggested Alison.
“ I’ve got a blue-and-silver room coming to me,”
said Jill, “and you have the pony Jerry promised
you, Jack.”
Alison said nothing, but she looked at Jerry and
found him looking at her. They courted one another
in secret, and their smiles were very tender.
“ I wish you two wouldn’t make sheep’s eyes at one
another,” reproved Jack.
“ Young man, that just reminds me it is your bed-
time,” said Alison. “And, Daph dear, we promised
your grandmother faithfully that you would be taken
home at eight, if she let you come down in the
evenings and do lessons here. It is a minute past, I
fear.”
“ I’ll take her round to-night,” said Jerry, anxious
to have a word with Mrs. Royle.
When he had handed his little charge over to her
grandmother, he knocked at the entrance-door of the
opposite flat, and was invited in. “I merely wanted
to thank you for being good to Alison and me,” he
said.
“ Your subscriptions were all handed over to the
causes we discussed,” said Aunt Jessie loftily. “If I
have chosen to make my niece any little gifts, it is my
own concern, I suppose —and myself that will have to
answer some day for the wicked, wilful w r aste.”
“ And be rewarded for the kindness underlying it, I
hope,” he smiled, then bade her good-night and
started down the main stairs.
He had gone but a few steps when she called him
back and held out her hand. “It was my wicked
worldly pride you hurt the other day, not my con-
science,” she confessed. “Time and again, I think I
206


have trampled it under foot, and it lifts its venomous
head once more and strikes my heel.”
"Pride?” repeated Jerry. "How do you make
that out, Mrs. Royle? ”
" I wasn’t going to have you paying for my niece’s
trousseau, if she never had one,” she declared; " so I
have been wasting my substance on that poor dear
child’s vanity, to my shame, be it said.”
" We are both grateful, anyhow,” he assured her.


CHAPTER XXIV
WHEN the Christmas vacation began, Alison
called on Mrs. Dal wood and asked her to let
Daphne play every day with the twins.
‘ ‘ I know she wants other young things for com-
pany,” the old lady admitted, “ but she is so fond of
your brother and sister that she would be a nuisance
to you if given the run of your home.”
“ But she is never in the way,” Alison assured her.
” We are going away very soon, and she will have no
youthful company left here. Won’t you please let the
three young things be together now as much as the}'
like?”
” If you are sure her talking does not tire you, and
if you will be sure she comes home for meals,” Mrs.
Dalwood stipulated gratefully. “ And thank you very
much, my dear Miss Deane; your kindness has made
her a much happier child.”
So Daphne came and went at the side flat as she
pleased. Often she was down in time to help Jill with
the breakfast washing-up; and Alison, busy with her
trousseau, had frequent cause to bless their willing
hands. Romantic by nature, Jill was thrilled by an
engagement in the family and an approaching wed-
ding. If she had had her way, Alison would have sat
about all day in her prettiest frocks, waiting to enter-
tain Jerry. Especially, Jill developed a pretended pas-
sion for cooking, convinced that it spoiled nicely
manicured hands. Her excuse was that she must learn
before she went to live at Acewall, where Janet might
object to children who wanted to be messing round
in the kitchen. And Daphne loved Jill so that she
was all eagerness to help her: besides she was
208


young enough to enjoy trying her hand at anything
new.
One morning Jill got up before Alison was awake,
made a batch of scones and a cake, and then sliced
beans and peeled potatoes. When Alison found the
cake after breakfast, she exclaimed gratefully, “Jill,
you are a darling little sister for a busy engaged girl
to have; I don’t know how I should manage without
you.”
“ But I like cooking,” declared Jill stoutly, “ and
Daphne and I are going to make the curry and
the sago-custard later on. She really is improving,
that child, isn’t she? She gets on my nerves some-
times still, ordering people around and thinking
she knows everything, but she’s so ready to help
that ”
She got no further, for Daphne came rushing in ex-
citedly at that very moment to the kitchenette,
where the twins were doing the washing-up between
them, and Alison was pressing some of Little Bits’s
frocks.
“ Look ! ” she cried excitedly. “ Look ! ” and held
up a ten-shilling note.
“ Been robbing a bank or writing a poem —which,
young Dill? ” asked Jack.
“ It’s a present.”
“Who from? ” he queried.
“ Whom from,” corrected Jill.
“ Get out! ”he retorted. “ Anybody’d think you
never made howlers yourself. Who said Henry II
had to let himself be scoured by the monks at
Becket’s tomb, or have the Pope send a bull after
him, eh? ”
“ Don’t be horrid, Jack,” Jill protested. “I was
little then, and it was just an accident I left the * g *
out of scourged, and there are papal bulls, too—see,
meanie? Who from, Daph? ”
o 209


“ Who from? Who from? Yah 1 said it yourself! ”
he gloated.
“ You are forgetting yourself, John Willie, are you
not?” demanded Daphne. “Treat him with con-
tempt, Jill dear. I don’t know who it’s from: it just
came in a registered envelope, with a typewritten mes-
sage pinned to it.”
“What was the message?” inquired Jack, who
rarely got annoyed at reproof from her.
She produced it from the top of her stocking and
read it aloud: “ *To a missionary’s daughter, from
one who admires brave missionaries—a Christmas
gift to help her with her own Christmas gifts.’ ”
“How jolly!” said Jill. “Can’t you guess who
sent it ? Do you think our minister did ? What was on
the envelope ? ”
“Just my address —typewritten, too. Isn’t it
romantic ? I feel ever and ever so belated about it.
“ I think you mean ‘elated ’,” said Jack. “ What
are you going to do with it? Shout us all to the
talkies? ”
Daphne shook her head. “ It’s Christmas gifts, not
talkies, in the message,” she said: “ I’rn to buy
presents for my friends. Granny says it’s a lot of
money to fritter away, and that I ought to put some
in one of Mrs. Royle’s mission-boxes, as a thank-
offering to God, especially as Christmas is His birth-
day.”
‘ ‘ Are you going to ? ”
“Would you want to? Anyhow, when it came so
mysteriously, it seems a gift from Him, and to give
Him some of it would be giving Him back His own
gift, and that sort of thing simply isn’t done. If
Granny gets at me again, and I’m argufied into put-
ting something into a box, it’ll be my own sevenpence-
halfpenny.”
“ Where are you going to spend it? ” asked Jill.


“I'd like to go into town, where things are really
elegant and exclusive, but Granny says she can’t take
me in, so I’ll have to be satisfied with Bondi Junction.
It seems sacrilege to spend a banknote in a suburban
shop, doesn’t it? ”
Alison looked up from her task with a kindly smile.
She rather fancied that Jerry must know something
of Daphne's mysterious gift, for she remembered that
he had been present when the child bemoaned her in-
ability to buy gifts for her friends. “ I have to run
into town this afternoon to help Jerry choose a carpet
and curtains for the drawing-room,” she said, “and
Jill has promised to keep house and mind Little Bits.
If your grandmother is willing, you may come in with
me and potter round the big shops.”
Daphne rushed away eagerly to ask permission, and
was soon back with it. “ Thank you very much, Miss
Alison,” she cried. “ Some days things work out just
like in a story-book, don't they? ”
” Only in a story-book you’d be lady enough to
grab the towel and wipe up,” insinuated Jack. ”It
isn’t a man’s job, and I’m supposed to be minding
the infant, anyhow. She is supposed to be playing
with blocks up in my room, but I bet she's licking
the paint off them or drinking my ink or something
by this.”
” Oh ! John Willie, I am sorry: I know you think it
humbiliating; and me, I love helping Jill,” she cried,
relieving him of the hated towel.
All the rest of the morning the two girls worked and
played together quite cheerfully, but Daphne went
home obediently when the table was set for lunch. She
was back almost as soon as the meal was over, dressed
in the new white linen that already seemed too short
for her thin arms and legs, and so excited that she
hopped about on one leg in the garden while Alison
finished dressing.


Seated in a city-bound tram, Alison got out her
faithful note-book and pencil and found a page that
neither contained furnishing notes nor had lists of
underclothing on it. “Now, little woman." she
remarked, “ how many people do you want gifts
for? We must make a list and calculate how much
you can spend on each one. We’ll cross them off
as we get them, so making sure that no one is for-
gotten."
“ There’s my sainted mother and father, Jack and
Jill and darling Little Bits, Mr. Wallace, and—and
another one, a secret one." jf
Alison smiled at the air of high mystery. “ Seven,
she counted up. “ Seven into ten and sevenpence-
my dear, I can’t do sums, but it is about one-and-six
ea ch . }}
“ Seven into ten shillings only," corrected Daphne.
“ The mission-box just stared at me on Granny’s table
till I had to drop my sevenpence-halfpenny in. I didn t
give it to my sainted father s mission either, that
seemed sort of too much in the family, so I gave it to
the A.1.M.”
“ Say one-and-five each, then," said Alison. “If
we get some articles for less, we can be extravagant
with your father’s and mother’s gifts."
“ And with Jill’s: she’s so sweet."
“ Well, we’ll see what we can do," promised
Alison.
They went first into the basement of a big Pitt Street
shop, where there were bargain-tables of gifts at vari-
ous prices. Strolling round the shilling table, they
found for Little Bits a cake of coloured soap that was
shaped like a cat and rolled in a cat-adorned washer,
for Jack a book called Twenty Simple Conjuring
Tricks, for Jerry a handkerchief with a big ‘ G ’ in
one corner.
“ Now there is the mystery gift," said Alison, with


a smile for her own idea as to its destination. Is the
somebody secret a lady or a gentleman ?
“ A lady,” said Daphne, then added, with a great
parade of casualness. ‘‘ What do you think she would
like?”
“ But she might not like what I like,” said Alison
meanly. . ...
“ And then again she might,” said Daphne, with
her former parade of casualness. ‘‘What sort of a
thing would you really like? ”
“ A new note-book. I saw some beauties at the six-
penny table.”
“ Sixpence isn’t very much for her,” demurred the
child. ‘‘She’s a truly estimable lady, very kind and
sweet.”
“ In gifts, it’s never the price that counts: it’s get-
ting what you really want, and from people you
like.”
“ I see. Then, would you please show T me the note-
book you think the very nicest.”
Alison chose one with a green cover. ‘‘Now w r e
have your father and mother and Jill left,” she
announced.
“ It’s so hard to decide on Jill’s: I want something
ever so sweet for her,” sighed Daphne. ‘‘ Do you
think we might look in a few windows first, so as I
shan’t go buying a chaste gift and seeing a chaster
afterwards? ”
Alison thought they might spare a little time in pre-
liminary investigation, so they went upstairs and out
into the street, then through the Strand and the Syd-
ney Arcade and up a part of King Street. Daphne
stopped at last, fascinated by strings of coloured glass
beads marked ‘‘ Choice Necklets, 2s each.”
“Oh! let us get one of those lovely green neck-
laces,” she cried.
Alison was sorry for the choice, knowing that Jill


rather despised cheap trinkets, and fearing that she
might not trouble to conceal her lack of appreciation;
however, she did not want herself to damp the child’s
joy in giving, so she remarked cheerfully, “ Right,
dear! I think you had better give me the two shillings
and let me choose one while you have another look
at those handkerchiefs you thought of for your
mother."
Daphne was at heart reluctant to trust another's
choosing where Jill was concerned, but was too polite
to say so; so Alison was able to add a little from her
own purse and get a short, imitation jade necklet that
was really pretty.
" This one looked the best when I got inside,” she
reported. " It is a better quality than the big strings,
don’t you think? "
" Y-yes, thank you," answered the child, doubt
struggling with politeness. " Do you think my mother
would rather have that lovely pair of blue garters
with pink rosebuds on the sides than some hand-
kerchiefs? "
Alison seemed to weigh the matter judicially. " The
only thing is," she remarked at length, " Papua is so
hot that the no-stockings craze may have caught on
there; if so, she won't want garters. Perhaps hankies
would be safer. What about a good white linen one
with an embroidered corner? "
Daphne preferred three tiny mauve muslin ones with
pink rosebuds in each corner, and was, with tact, per-
suaded to change the bright purple tie she had chosen
for her other parent and get him one less startling in
hue.
"Now we must hurry round to George Street," said
Alison. "Jerry is waiting for us at a shop there —or
soon will be."
They found him there when they arrived. Alison
did not think he looked exactly pleased not to have


her to himself, but she explained the situation, and
he quickly found a welcoming smile for the small
intruder.
" I hope you will take my side, little woman, if we
differ about the best match in carpets and curtains,"
he remarked solemnly.
"Oh! I will," said Daphne, "and Miss Alison's,
too."
At that they both laughed, and Alison told of the
mysterious gift that had made the shopping excursion
possible. Over the child's head her eyes questioned
him, and found him guilty.
" That is splendid news, Daph," he said. " I hope
you spent all this wonderful gift.''
" It seemed at first 'most too much to know what to
do with," she confessed; " but, when I got all in
among the lovely things, I could have spent more
even, I could."
" And she would have had the joy of doing so," he
told Alison, when the child had wandered away to
look at choice lamp-shades, " if I had not been a bit
scared as to how Mrs. Dalwood would react to a
pound note. Anyhow, I hope I got my modest
money’s worth in joy for the child."
" With compound interest," Alison declared. " She
is too proud and glad for words."
" Let us get this carpet choosing over, then, and
leave the little woman time to over-eat at tea," he
suggested.
Twenty minutes later he had found them an empty
table in a fashionable tea-room, and a dainty waitress
was bearing down upon them. He looked inquiringly
at Alison.
" Something I shouldn’t eat," she smiled, "some-
thing fattening or indigestible. What about cof-
fee and toasted muffins, or crumpets all hot and
buttery? "


" Crumpets for me," he decided. " How about Miss
Eleven-and-a-Wee-Bit?"
But Daphne was too overcome by the splendour of
the place to do more than smile vaguely and murmur,
" Yes, thank you."
" Coffee and crumpets, very buttery ones, for three,
please," he ordered of the waitress, who had just
arrived.
He and Alison chatted as they despatched theirs,
but Daphne just enjoyed hers, listening to the music,
or gazed round the great room in a happily dazed
way.
What about a chocolate eclair next ?'' suggested
Jerry. “Or an ice? "
" The other one, thank you," said Daphne, waking
up from her dreaming to smile at him. " I don't
know what it's like at all; and ices—well, I have
partaken of those on festive occasions before, you
see."
"No sweets for me, thank you," said Alison.
"Oh! dear! I s’pose I should have said f No,
thank you' too," sighed Daphne. "It must be
shockingly expensive in here: I should have thought
of that."
" Glad you didn't," said Jerry heartily: "I want
an eclair, too."
And he not only ordered it, but ate it into the bar-
gain.
" Some of the things that have happened to me
lately seem too good to be true for a missionary's
child," said Daphne solemnly, as Jerry fished in his
pocket for a tip for the waitress. " Missionaries are
truly noble, but they are always in financial narrows —
or is it straits, Mr. Wallace? "
Jerry thought it was, and she went on: " Once,
when I was very, very wicked because I wanted to go
to Jenolan Caves, like Ida Grier did, and Granny said
216


we couldn’t afford holiday trips, I prayed I might
wake up and find my father wasn’t a missionary
at all, but kept a poultry-shop, and sold Christ-
mas turkeys by the million at nearly two pounds
each, like in the shop at the Junction, and was as
rich as rich could be. God didn’t let him change,
though: He doesn't answer wicked petitions, you
see."
The waitress having arrived with the bill, they went
out into the light of common day again. Jerry had an
appointment at his office, and could spare time only
to see the others into their home tram. “ See you for
a wee while again this evening," Daphne heard him
say to Alison, though; and he arrived out soon after
dinner to find her waiting to intercept him in the
garden.
“ Oh ! Mr. Wallace, please ! " she cried.
" Hello! Enjoying the twilight, little woman? ’’ he
asked.
“ I’m not enjoying anything: I’m too wicked to,"
she told him forlornly.
" Why ! what have you been up to, Daph, that your
conscience doesn’t approve of ? "
“ I forgot my grandmother, I did. It’s most repre-
hensible to forget your own grandmother, when she
lets you live with her, and puts up with your questions,
and all. No wonder people never love me much. A
nice girl couldn’t get so excited about having friends
at last that she’d go and forget her grandmother,
even if her grandmother lacks fascination and isn’t —
isn’t sort of jolly, you know."
"In what way have you forgotten her, little
woman ? ’’
" I didn’t remember to buy her a Christmas present,
I didn't, and now I have only twopence left, I thought
of taking one of my sainted mother’s lovely lemon
hankies for her; but it doesn’t seem right: they seem


to belong to Mother now I've bought them specially
for her."
And you are going to let me be your banker, eh,
and lend you the cost of another gift? What about
having me for a sort of uncle, Daph, and letting me
give it to you? "
“ I wouldn’t mind myself, Mr. Wallace. I’ve been
properly introduced and all, and I think you a
most estimable gentleman, and I really love you very
much. But there's Granny: she wouldn’t let me
accept money, and she wouldn’t let me borrow it
either: she says Mr. Borrow lives in Mr. Steal's back-
yard."
Then how am I to help you out of this big diffi-
culty? "
“ Oh ! please, do you think I could use your present
for Granny and give you an lOU instead? You see,
I bought you a handkerchief with ‘ G ' in the corner,
and ‘ G ' stands for Granny as well as Mr. Gerald Wal-
lace, and Granny likes big white hankies better than
little pretty ones. It’s funny, but she does. If you let
me give it to her, I’ll save up and save up, and then
I’ll get you another, good linen in it and all, only you
won’t mind a fairly long wait, will you? "
“ I think that is quite a clever idea of yours, Daph,
and very pleasant for me; instead of getting all my
gifts at once, I'll have one to look forward to
when other people have forgotten Christmas and its
fun."
She heaved a big sigh of relief. " I knew you’d be
nice about it," she said. " I wish you were my uncle,
I haven’t got a single, solitary one; and, if I had,
he'd be bound to be a missionary and be no good to
me."
“ Well, I’m ready to be adopted, chicken —Uncle
Jerry, at your service," he assured her.
“ Granny might think it very presuming of me, and
218


—and perhaps Jill wouldn’t like me butting into the
family like that; but in my heart you always will be
that from now on. I think you have most estimable
qualities, and eyes like the pats on the back that
cheer you up when you’re feeling as blue as blue
ink."
With that she left him to pursue his way into the
flat.


CHAPTER XXV
CHRISTMAS passed just as they had planned it.
There was much fun over the stockings before
breakfast. Alison had refused to let Jerry give
any but small presents, but he had evidently spent
much thought over their selection, and in her own
case had stretched her price-rule far enough to make
a string of blue crystals possible. Jill had silk stock-
ings from him, Daphne a dainty handbag, Little
Bits a huge picture-book, Jack a knife that contained
many queer contraptions besides its two blades. The
other gifts were less expensive still, but all gave
pleasant thrills, and Daphne almost wept for joy when
Jill was pleased to approve of the green necklet and
wear it with her muslin frock. Little Bits had a tin
trumpet from Jack, and breakfast was partaken of to
a music most unmelodious, but quite in keeping with
the spirit of the day.
The trip to the mountains proved a success too. Jack
heartily approved of the cook at the Mount Victoria
hotel, and tried in vain to show his appreciation by
working right through the dinner menu. Then, after a
run to Mount York, and a pause to enjoy the view
from another lookout, they drove slowly back along
the ridge, enjoying the cooler air and the beauty that
waited at every turn in the road. Once they had
climbed down to the coastal plain, Jerry quickened his
speed, for Little Bits had already fallen asleep in Jill’s
arms. It was almost dark when he left them at Bondi.
" The jollier the day is, the tireder it makes you,”
grumbled Jack. “My elegant elevators! but I’m
weary! What say we all go to bed without any
tea?”


“ Seeing we had cold chicken and bread-and-butter,
cakes, melon, nuts and sweets at five, I don’t see
where the without comes in,” said Alison, “ but I
second your proposal most heartily: the fresh air
makes one so very sleepy.”
But she was not destined to get to bed for some
time. She had only just unpacked the lunch-basket
when Daphne came panting along to call her through
the open window. “ Why, dear, what is the matter? ”
she asked, noticing the child’s scared face and hasten-
ing out to open the door for her.
“Oh, please, Miss Alison, I’m frightened,” cried
Daphne. “Granny is lying on the couch, but she’s
all in her Sunday dress yet, and her eyes are wide
open, but she won’t wake up, and she’s all cold and
—and —and —oh, I'm frightened ! ”
Alison left the child with Jill while she herself went
round to investigate. The Dalwood flat was open, and
one glance at old Mrs. Dalwood, cold and white and
peaceful on the couch, told that she would never wake
again.
“ She had dinner with me,” said Aunt Jessie, when
Alison fetched her, “ but nothing that could upset her
—just a bit of roast beef and mashed potato and peas
with some stewed cherries and junket and a cup of
coffee. She seemed quite well, too, though she did say
she was very tired and glad that you had asked
Daphne for the day, as it would let her have a good
rest.”
“ She had evidently lain down for a nap and died
peacefully in her sleep,” said Alison. “ I suppose we
should ring a doctor and our minister.”
“ Not you, my dear,” said Aunt Jessie kindly: “ it
has been a shock to you, I can see. You see to
Daphne, and I’ll see to anything else that is necessary.
Poor, dear Mrs. Dalwood ! She hasn’t a living relative
except her son in New Guinea, his wife, and Daphne.


We can’t reach him by cable, either, but the church
will see to everything.”
Alison went back with heart aching for the news she
must break; but Daphne was so heavy with sleep that,
after a first bitter cry, she quickly sobbed herself to
sleep on her hostess’s bed, while the latter lay on the
sitting-room couch, all sleep effectually banished, liv-
ing over her own bereavements. Early in the morning
she slipped round to Mrs. Royle, to find out what
arrangements had been made.
" Church Offices will let the Reverend John Dal-
wood know,” said Aunt Jessie, " but there is no know-
ing when a boat will leave Port Moresby for his station
up the coast, and it may be five or six weeks before he
hears. Mr. Benson has asked Daphne to stay at the
manse till word comes from him. The funeral is ar-
ranged for four this afternoon, and some members of
the Guild are going to pack and store all the things in
the flat here.”
" The Bensons are very kind,” said Alison; " but,
when Rita came to tea with Jill, and Daphne was down
with us, I could see hostility in her look. I am afraid
poor little Daph, eager to secure recognition somehow,
has been boasting at Sunday School about her mis-
sionary father, facing fever and cannibals in Papua,
and her martyred grandfather, and Rita has got the
idea into her head that the remarks were meant as re-
flections on her father, as a man who stays comfortably
at home.”
“ And does a very fine work there,” put in Aunt
Jessie.
I don’t doubt it,” said Alison, "and I am sure
that Daphne offended quite unconsciously. Still, I
think I had better ring up and suggest that she stay
with us first. We really have nowhere for her to sleep,
but ” y
" But she could slip up to me every night, or Jack


could have my spare room,” suggested Aunt Jessie.
“ Mr. Benson is going down to see Daphne after break-
fast: arrange it with him then.”
But Alison went straightway and rang Jerry up, and
he advised that she should keep the child until her
parents came to claim her, letting her move on to
Ace wall with the twins and Little Bits.
“ Jerry, you dear ! I rang up hoping you would sug-
gest it,” said Alison. “I just couldn’t bear to turn
the poor little mortal over to strangers.”
He scolded her gently for waiting to consult him
when her own mind was made up. “I’ll send a big
wreath in Daphne’s name,” he added. "Being very
young, she will find comfort in giving it.”
When Mr. Benson called at ten he was easily per-
suaded to let Daphne remain where she was, but he
insisted that the child should go not just to the service
at the church, but to the funeral itself.
" It doesn’t seem right that there should be none of
her own kith and kin to follow that good woman’s
mortal remains to their last resting-place,” he argued.
" The child will go in her father’s place. I am sure
he will be glad to know it afterwards.”
Alison protested against his idea, but he had made
up his mind. " The service will not be sad, but beau-
tiful,” he protested. "The child’s discovery of the
body made her realise the terror of death, but the
service will show her how beautiful is the death of the
righteous who go to their reward, full of years and
good works, honoured and lamented.”
All Alison could do in face of his persistence was to
ring up Jerry again and ask him to take the poor little
chief mourner on after the service at the church. “Jill
and I are going to that, she said, but ’’
" I know,” he said gently. "I’ll take care of the
wee woman for you, little girl; and don’t worry
about her: the service will not upset her as it would


an older person: in fact, she will enjoy it in a kind of
way.”
“Oh, Jerry ! ” she protested.
“Yes, she will,” he insisted. “ I was almost her
age when I lost my mother, and her burial was like
some solemn play-acting to me: I just felt important.
It was afterwards that I cried myself to sleep night
after night, to relieve the ache in my heart.”
And he was right. To Daphne the whole day was
unreal —a pageant in which she was at once actor and
onlooker. She was taken by Mrs. Benson for a last
sight of the coffined form; but that reclining waxen
statue framed in snowy flowers was not her grand-
mother —how could it be ? She wept at the church ser-
vice, certainly, but some of the Guild ladies did, when
the minister spoke of “ our dear sister, gone where
pain and death can never trouble her again ’', and she
felt that it was expected of her; but mostly she was
deaf to his words, awed by the presence of the oaken
casket up in front, and thrilled by the feel of Jill’s
comforting hand in hers. The only thing her mind was
definitely busy with was Jill’s explanation of Jack’s
gruff refusal to attend: “ He’s a boy, you see, and
boys can’t cry in public, even when things remind
them so that they must cry.” What did Jill mean?
And, yes, she was crying herself, silent tears of misery
stealing down her fair face that looked so —so sort of
queer. Daphne got her handkerchief out of her hand-
bag and dutifully did what seemed to be the expected
thing.
She wept again quite naturally at the graveside,
when an aged minister, who had been her grand-
father’s best friend, spoke; but he was very near the
grave himself, with a quavery voice that communi-
cated its emotion to her. She shed a few tears again
when he shook hands with her and murmured, “ Poor
little lamb left all lonely! ” It seemed so pitiful,


though void of personal meaning to one who had the
twins and Little Bits waiting at home to welcome her.
It was when they had got back to Aunt Jessie’s big
block of flats that Jerry, getting out of his car to open
the gate, remarked cheerfully, “Well, here we are
back again, little woman,” and suddenly saw her eyes
open in a kind of helpless terror, then flood with tears.
She bit her trembling lower lip, but in vain: a storm
of sobbing came.
He patted her bowed head, but said nothing.
“ Grandmother ! ” she sobbed, “ she —she —oh ! she
isn’t coming home any more ! And —and —oh ! they
put dirt on her! ”
“No, dear,” he told her gently; “she isn’t there
under the soil; it is just her body, the body she was
tired of.”
“ Tired? ” she sobbed, as though not understanding.
“ People do get tired of living, little one.”
“ But how could she? You couldn’t ever get tired
of being alive.”
“ Not when you are young and happy, dear. It is
different when you are old and weary, and the ones
you loved best have gone on before you.”
“Grandfather?” asked the child. “Oh! do you
think Granny has found him yet? ”
“ I should think so,” he said.
Daphne wiped her eyes to think about it; then she
burst out suddenly, “ Oh ! I do hope he doesn’t tell
her that I nearly forgot about her Christmas gift. She
was so pleased about me giving it to her. She said,
‘ What a sensible present, my dear! I was afraid you
would waste your money on rubbish.’ Oh ! I do hope
he doesn’t tell her.”
Jerry thought it a very unlikely contingency, and
the child wiped the last traces of her grief away.
“ Granny must be very happy if she has my sainted
grandfather again,” she remarked. “And did you
P 225


notice, Mr. Jerry, that Mr. Benson called her sainted
too? It's funny how, when you live with people, you
don’t notice about them being saints, isn’t it? To-
night I must write a long, long letter to my sainted
father, to tell him all about my sainted grandmother’s
beautiful end, and how good everybody is to me.”
“That is a splendid idea,” said Jeny heartily.
“And now we must not keep dinner waiting at the
fiat. You see, I have been promised that I may stay
if I am good and go home early, and I may not be
counted good if I get you home too late.”
“ And I’m hungry,” confessed Daphne, as he
pushed the gate open and got back into his seat. Then
she added, with a fresh quivering of her mouth:
“ Ought —ought a girl to be hungry when —when ”
“If she is brave,” he said. “Brave people are
never crushed by trouble.”
“ And a missionary’s child ought to be brave,” she
decided solemnly.


CHAPTER XXVI
IT was Jill who was waiting to fling a loving arm
round Daphne and entice her back into the world
of everyday living. Alison smiled a little as
she saw it. Once more pity had conquered secret
jealousy.
Vividly reminded by Mrs. Dalwood’s death of the
anguish of her own last bereavement, Jill felt that
Daphne was showing wonderful courage. She had
been too young to realise fully what her mother’s
death meant; but her father —she shuddered still
to think of those nights when going to bed had
meant lying awake with the bitter knowledge that
he would never wake again on earth. He had
always been her best-loved comrade, the centre
of all the joy and jollity home stood for, teller
of stories, organiser of games, and no one would ever
quite fill his place in her heart. Under her calm.
Daphne must be suffering as she herself had when he
was taken. That old Mrs. Dalwood, living in memories
of her past, and her little charge, full of eager dreams
of the future, had never really belonged to the same
world at all, that they were like circles that intersected
but followed very different paths, was something she
could scarcely be expected to understand. It was easy
for her, then, to forget her grudges and let her heart
flow out in sympathy and actual love for one who
was evidently being brave enough to keep silent
about the sorrow that must be gnawing at her all the
time.
To Daphne Jill’s kindness made life a glorious
thing. She had loved her grandmother, as duty de-
manded, but the old lady’s passing had meant no


tearing up by the roots of any part of her real life;
and she answered Jill’s advances with such eager love
that the old prejudices somehow died a natural death,
and a warm and wonderful friendship remained. It
was Jack who was now left out in the cold at times,
though he was such an independent young man that
it worried him little.
One evening Alison saw the two girls playing
happily with Little Bits and noticed that Jack had
had to retire to his room to read. A protest was
called for, so it seemed to her. “ Why not get poor
old Jackie boy to join in your game, girls? " she
asked.
"Well, boys, Alison, you know what they are,"
Jill answered guiltily. " They turn up their noses at
the nicest games and, when you do get one they’ll
play, they get rough, or they start fooling and spoil
everything. We are telling stories for Little Bits now
about the pictures in her Christmas book. One of us
begins a tale, and the other has to finish it. Young
John Willie would just make nonsense out of anything
we started."
" Why not play snakes-and-ladders or ludo? " sug-
gested Alison. "He can’t spoil those, and Little Bits
can manage them if you all help her a bit. So Jack
is John Willie for both of you now, eh?" And she
smiled to remember a time not very long ago when
any Daphne-invented name was bound to be an
anathema to Jill.
" He’s so self-important and bossy lately; a double-
barrelled name suits him," declared Jill.
" Poor old John Willie ! he may like a game," put
in Daphne. " What say I go up and invite him to
choose our next diversion? "
" If you like," said Jill, " but you are a little softy:
he’ll just yawn and say he can’t be bothered with
girly games."


And Jack, luxuriously stretched on his bed, with
his feet up on the bottom rail, and a book propped up
on his chest, did actually remark, “ Can’t be
bothered, young Dill,” and then opened his mouth in
a big expressive yawn.


CHAPTER XXVII
NEW YEAR came and went. It was the eighth
of January, and Alison’s wedding was just a
week off. Nan Carter had gone home for
Christmas, but was back at her flat, declaring that
she could endure her stepmother for ten days, but that
the eleventh in her company would spell civil war.
Being rather at a loose end, with no teaching to do,
and Linda Lowe away holidaying in Tasmania, she
had got into the habit of slipping into the side flat
each day, to enjoy Alison’s company and to help her
sew. Sometimes she took the children out instead.
It was so on the eighth. Jack and the two girls had
gone with her to a cricket-match, and Alison counted
on a busy time with her sewing-machine, knowing
that Little Bits, so long used to loneliness, would play
happily by herself. But the door-bell rang some time
before three and Mrs. Fitz came sweeping in, pouring
out apologies for the fact that she had not called
earlier.
But you know how busy I am, my dear," she
remarked, as her hostess ushered her into the sitting-
room, painfully aware that her volunteer house-
maids had left a ragged duster which had once been
a silk shirt of Jack’s hanging over the back of a tub
chair.
I haven t yet forgotten the work and worry
play-producing means,’’ said Alison, restraining a
sudden impish impulse to add "Aunt Jane," and
seating the visitor where the duster would not be in
full view.
Ever since Jerry rang up and told me of his en-
gagement, I have been meaning to call; but, what


with rehearsals of my new play at the Repertory and
social engagements —well, you know, my dear, ex-
plained Mrs. Fitz.
Alison murmured polite agreement, slipping into tne
tub chair herself and stuffing the offending duster m
between the seat and the upholstery of the back part.
“ And I hear you have saddled yourself with Eliza-
beth in advance, my dear,” continued the guest.
“ Very good of you, I am sure, for she is like her father
before her when he was a boy —good as a rule, but
mulish on occasions.”
Too angry to remember Jerry’s dictum that it was
always more peaceful to let Aunt Jane have her head,
Alison protested warmly. “ Little Bits mulish? Why I
she is most biddable—such a dear wee mite that she
will do anything for anybody ! ''
“ I am glad you find her so —so far. If you are
wise, mv dear, you will be firm with that child from
the beginning. If she is like her mother, she will want
discipline to crush the selfish wilfulness out of her,
and, if she is like her father, as I rather suspect, and
you stand any nonsense from her, she will grow up
a bit of a crank, as he is.”
“ I haven’t seen any signs of the crank in Jerry,”
said Alison, feeling far less amiable than her tone of
gentle surprise implied.
“You’ll discover them quickly enough when you
marry him —a most provoking man, my dear. I hope
you are going to be a sensible girl and put your foot
down firmly from the beginning.”
“ In what respect? ”
“You must make him take more part in social life,
my dear —make him dance, play bridge, entertain
more. What right has a man with his means to moon
about in the garden, or spend his evenings smoking
and reading? If he goes for a holiday even, he pokes
about after ferns or shells, or photographing birds,


when other people are golfing or taking a hand at
bridge.’ *
“ Fortunately, I rather like quiet enjoyments, too,”
smiled Alison. “I am fond of gardening, bush walks,
books, and games with the kiddies.”
“But you play golf, my dear? ”
“ I used to, but I have had to be content with tennis
lately, and lam going to stick to it now. Jerry dis-
likes golf, but he likes a game of tennis.”
" Tennis ! ” jeered Mrs. Fitz disgustedly. “ A game
for shop-girls and milk-boys ! Golf is a much more
civilised pastime, my dear; and Jerry could easily be
made to play now that he is infatuated again.”
That last phrase rankled so that Alison’s indignation
found vent in a somewhat defiant tone. “ Jerry and
I are not sentimental,” she declared: “we are both
too practical for that; but I hope I shall have more
consideration for his comfort than to drag him into
doing things he dislikes.”
What a devoted young wife we are going to
make! ” said Mrs. Fitz with heavy playfulness.
Alison forced a diversion by asking to be excused
while she put the kettle on; but Mrs. Fitz replied,
“No tea for me, my dear. lam going on to a bridge-
afternoon, and that is why I arrived at such a weird
hour. I must run away now—at least, after I take a
look at Jerry’s precious infant, I suppose.”
Alison stepped to the door and called across the tiny
hall into the breakfast-room, “Little Bits, come in
here, darling.”
“ Little Bits and Teddy are coming this minute,
Alison,” came the child's cheerful voice. “Teddy
wants to see who it are.”
But a transformation came over the smiling face
when its little owner got to the door, and Alison took
her hand to lead her in, remarking in rather a coaxing
tone, “ Come and see Aunt Jane, dear.”


“ No! ” cried Little Bits fiercely. "No ! Go ’way !
Go 'way home ! "
“ But, darling, this is Aunt Jane," said Alison re-
proachfully. " Just come and give her a kiss."
“ Teddy no like Aunt Jane," came the clear little
voice. “ Little Bits must take poor Teddy away."
"Never mind Teddy now, darling’. Alison wants
you to be a good little girl and come and shake hands
with Aunt Jane."
" Teddy are too little to shake hands. 'Sides, him
sick. Little Bits are sick too; her got headache: her
going up to bed." At that, the small rebel pulled free
and marched off up the stairs.
“ I think she really isn't very well this afternoon,"
said Alison apologetically: " I let her have just a wee
bit of cherry-tart at lunch."
"That will explain it, of course," said Mrs. Fitz,
but not very heartily. " Pastry is bad for children—
I wonder you did not know that, my dear —and a
bilious child is bound to be a cross one. All the same,
you will find that obstinacy comes natural to that little
monkey. Her father laughs at it—just says he used
to get his own back up at times when he was a
youngster and interfering people would not let him
call his soul his own. Did you ever hear the like?
I pity you, my dear, with the two of them on your
hands."
" Thank you," said Alison, " though I am not con-
scious of needing pity. Indeed, lam very happy and
very proud at the prospect of having them both on
my hands."
" Let us hope you don't meet with that fall pride is
supposed to go before, my dear. And what is this
I hear about your inviting another child —a stranger —
to share your life at Acewall? Are you and Jerry
setting up a menagerie by any chance? His un-
mannerly little puss and your two wards are on your


hands whether you will or not, I suppose; but a
stranger ! Are you wise, my dear? Aren't you afraid
Jerry will buck at such a mob of noisy youngsters?
Of course, a young wife can do anything at first,
but "
Alison smiled sweetly. " I am rather glad Jerry
invited Daphne to Acewall," she said: “I believe I
am almost as fond of the child as he is."
“ Oh! well, I suppose you know your own business
best, my dear," replied Mrs. Fitz, somewhat non-
plussed. “ Now I really must run away, if you will
excuse me. I merely slipped in for a minute to tell
you how pleased I am about your engagement, though
I don't think it was at all nice of you to decide on
having no wedding-reception."
Alison felt somewhat guilty, though it was Jerry
who had insisted that he would not have the day
spoiled by Aunt Jane’s disapproving presence. "It
is only a matter of months since I lost my father, you
know," she explained at the door.
“ Of course, my dear; and a quiet wedding is less
expense for the bride’s people, isn’t it?" said the
departing guest sweetly, turning back to add, “ though
that won’t trouble you much longer, will it? "
“ Jerry was right when he vowed that his respected
aunt belonged to the feline tribe both in her clawing
and in her purring," reflected Alison, watching her
guest away. “ She couldn’t have told me more plainly
that lam marrying him for his money. Ugh ! I’d
grow catty myself if I had much to do with her."
Then she saw the funny side of the call and laughed
all the way upstairs after the small truant, who was
discovered in Jill’s bed, having been unable to climb
into her cot.
f< “Aunt Jane has gone, darling," said Alison,
“ Aren't you and Teddy better now ? "
“ Is her gone wight away? "


“ Yes, darling.” . ,
“Then Little Bits are quite wight now, and poor
Teddy are feeling a bit better.” ~
“ I think we had better dress you, then, said.
Alison, with equal solemnity. “You can put Teddy
to bed in your doll’s pram downstairs till he teels
quite strong again, can’t you? ” _ .
Little Bits accepted the suggestion with alacrity.
She further ventured the opinion that the battered
bear’s health would be restored at once if he were
offered “ a weeny, teeny piece of that nice, nice tart
him had for dinner.” Alison meekly promised it, put
the child back into her clothes, and took her down to
the breakfast-room.
Ten minutes later, there came another knock at the
door. It was Jerry, and in the middle of an afternoon
when his office should have claimed him. ,
“No, there is nothing wrong, beloved, he said,
smiling into her alarmed face. I have just been
saying to myself, ever since noon, ‘ This time next
week Alison will be my wife— mine—mine ! ’ and I
just slipped out to tell you what a blessed, blessed
feeling that is, and to bring you these roses.”
As he spoke, he stooped to pick up a basket of
apricot and dark red semi-double roses.
“Oh!” cried Alison, burying her nose among
fragrant blooms and red ribbons, “ Oh ! how lovely!
How delicious I ” .
“ You are,” he said, putting an arm round her m
the tiny hall; “just lovely and delicious”; and he
kissed her down-bent face.
“ Jerry ! ” she protested, blushing and laughing at
once. “ And I have just been telling Aunt Jane that
we are not sentimental —not either of us! ”
“ Well, we are not,” he declared; “ but that doesn’t
prevent my loving you more and more every day;
does it ? ”


“ But wait till you hear about my sins,” she
laughed, leading the way in to the sitting-room couch.
“ Aunt Jane means to tell you, I am sure, that you
have chosen a wife who will kill Little Bits off with
bilious attacks by not knowing that pastry is bad for
babies.”
What happened ? ’'
She told the tale of the babe’s rebellion and ended
laughingly, “ And Aunt Jane made me feel so cross
and catty that, though I had a guilty conscience over
giving the poor lamb tart at lunch, I actually let her
have another bit to celebrate our visitor's departure.
Nan was here to lunch, you know, and the bad young
thing brought her contribution —a big tin of cream.
It made Jack enjoy his tart so that the young
scamp disgraced the family by licking his lips audibly.
After that, how could I refuse Little Bits a tinv
wedge? ”
“ She’ll weather it,” he laughed: ”we are tough,
we Wallaces. What sins of mine did Aunt Jane offer
condolences for? ”
Alison laughed again. ”lam to put my foot down
firmly on you, sir, from the start: I am sorry it is
rather a large one. First, I am to make you play
bridge.”
Disgusting waste of good time,” he groaned;
“ but, if you want me to, beloved ”
“ Don’t be so meek,” she laughed. “ I might take
advantage of it, you dear old donkey. You see, I was
warned that you would be pliable just now’, while you
are infatuated, but that afterwards ”
Infatuated! ”he roared. ” Look here, my girl,
you cut that aunt of mine next time you meet her! ”
“ No,” she smiled. ” I am going to help you
endure her nobly. And, now that I have been catty
in my turn and have given her away to you, I feel
quite amiable again, and I promise you you won’t be
236


worried to turn into a social butterfly-man when you d
rather be happy in your own way.
“ My dear, I’ll play anything you want me to:
don’t you go forgetting that. But one thing I won t
do to oblige you —I won’t buy you a sewing-
machine.” , ,
“ I am taking my own with me,” she
“I’ll pack it off to an auction-room to be sold.”
“ And I’ll buy a new one out of the housekeeping
money and give you no pudding for dinner till it is
paid off,” she threatened.
But Little Bits had heard his voice and came run-
ning in. “Hello, Mitter Wallet!” she cried de-
lightedly. “Us been bad, Teddy and me. Us don’t
like Aunt Jane: us wouldn’t kiss her: us got sick.”
“ Don’t wonder,” he laughed. “ Come and give
me a big hug, chickabiddy.”
He kissed her and then kissed Alison. “ I must
fly,” he explained: “have just remembered an
appointment in town at four. May I come to dinner
this evening ? ’ ’
“ No,” she told him firmly; “ it isn’t dinner; it’s
tea. Now the twins are not at school I have it that
way, so that Little Bits may share the evening meal
with them. In fact, it is generally boiled eggs, so that
she may share in the whole menu: it makes her feel
delightfully grown-up. And I am not going to leave
my poor neglected sewing, Jerry, to cook you a dinner
when a vastly superior one is probably being prepared
for you this very minute at Acewall.”
“ But I had a very good apology for a dinner at
lunch-time, and I adore boiled eggs, and nobody ever
gives me one,” he grumbled. Then he smiled his most
ingratiating smile. “Do me a nice brown one,” he
pleaded; “lam certainly coming.”
They stood at the door and waved farewell to him.
Little Bits was advising Teddy to copy his walk, and


Alison was saying to herself, “ I just couldn't tell him
how Aunt Jane thought I was marrying him for his
money. How could I spoil our love that is so beauti-
ful by such an ugly thought of hers? Oh ! Jerry, dear
Jerry, if you only knew how I care ! "
Little Bits broke in on her silent raptures. “ Teddy
warver likes Jewwy,” she said. “ Does you, Alison? "
For answer Alison hugged her tight.


CHAPTER XXVIII
\ LISON hurriedly inspected her stores in the
/ \ kitchenette cupboard, made a junket, opened a
i m. tin of peaches that had been meant for the mor-
row, planned to vary boiled eggs with omelets, of
which she knew Jerry was fond, and decided that a
batch of scones should be mixed up and baked at the
last minute. Then she went back to her neglected
sewing.
While she was still busy in the kitchenette, a young
woman, fair-haired and blue-eyed, had walked into
the front hall of the flats, with an infant in her arms.
Finding no one in the office on the ground-floor, she
accosted a fat Jewess, who was descending the main
stairway.
“ Can you tell me which is Mrs. Dalwood s flat.''
she asked
“ Mrs. Dalwood? Why, didn’t you know she was
dead —died on Christmas Day ? ’ ’
The stranger seemed somewhat staggered by the
news.
“ And the little girl with her, little Daphne? ” she
asked.
“ Daphne? Oh, she is with the Deanes down in
one of the side flats. I’ll show you the way round, if
you like. Friend of the family? ”
“ Daphne’s mother.”
“Dear me, now! What a shock for you! ” ex-
claimed the kindly Jewess. “And you not long out
of hospital, I gather.”
“Oh ! Baby is nearly a month old now,” said the
attractive-looking little woman. “ I have only just


arrived in Sydney, though, and I shall be very grate-
ful if you do show me the way.”
A few minutes later she was knocking at the Deanes’
door, and Alison inside was sighing, “ Who is it this
time ? ’ *
“ Miss Deane, is it? ” inquired the stranger, as the
door was opened to her. “ I am Catherine Dalwood,
Daphne's mother. They tell me you have been kind
enough to take my little girl in.”
“Why! Mrs. Dalwood, please come in,” said
Alison heartily, offering her hand. “ What a happy
surprise for Daphne! A double one, I see. She is
out just now, and won’t be in till six o’clock. We
didn’t expect to hear from you yet, let alone see
you.”
“My coming was to be a surprise for Daphne and
for John’s poor dear mother, too,” said little Mrs.
Dalwood sadly. “ I have only just heard from your
kind neighbour who brought me round that he has no
mother now. Poor John! it will be a sad disappoint-
ment for him. He hopes to be down in May himself,
and has been so looking forward to the reunion. I
scarcely knew her, except from letters, yet I feel her
passing a big loss.”
Alison settled her down in the most comfortable easy
chair.
“ I am going to slip out and make you a cup
of tea,” she said, for the newcomer looked such a
scrap of a thing, and so thin and white of face.
“ Please, don’t bother,” she said; “ I am just tired
from travelling, I have come all the way from Towns-
ville by train, and Baby didn’t take kindly to the
trip.”
Alison would take no refusal, and soon they were
drinking tea and eating sandwiches together, while
Little Bits solemnly admired the sleeping babe, and
pointed it out to Teddy. Alison gave her visitor full


details of old Mrs. Dalwood's death, and the arrange-
ments made after it.
“ What I can't understand,” said young Mrs. Dal-
wood gratefully, “ is why you have been so good to
my little girl.”
“ We are all so fond of Daphne that we just enjoy
having her,” Alison explained.
“ Her father will be as grateful to you as I am,”
said Mrs. Dalwood. “ Daphne has been very fortu-
nate in her friends.”
They made a bed of pillows and rugs on the sitting-
room floor and put the baby down to sleep, then
they continued their talk in the kitchenette, where
Alison had to get busy with arrangements for the
evening meal. The scones were ready, the omelets
done a golden-brown, the table set, and only the
tea to make, when Jerry walked in on the tick of
six, and Nan Carter and the children followed hard
after.
Alison had taken her visitor back to the sitting-
room, to let her have a private first meeting with
Daphne, though Little Bits, still keeping happy guard
over the wee sleeper, refused to be dislodged. “ Daph
dear, run into the sitting-room,” she said, as she heard
the children’s steps. “ Someone is waiting to see
y° u •” ...
‘ ‘ A visitor for me ? ’ ’
“No; two visitors, dear; so run along quickly. It
is tea-time, and I give you only three minutes before
the bell goes.”
Daphne went, wondering. At the door she paused.
Someone fair, blue-eyed and slim, familiar-looking
somehow, walked towards her, the hope of recognition
in her eyes.
“ Daphne ! ” she said. “My little baby girl that I
had to leave behind ! ”
“ Mummie! ” cried Daphne, for the voice struck a
Q 241


chord in her memory at once. “ Oh ! Mummie ! ” and
flung herself into her arms.
After a long embrace she drew back and stood on
one leg shyly. “Oh, Mummie, poor Granny —oh!
why didn’t you come when she was here? ’’ she blurted
out. “You didn’t even send her a Christmas-box this
y ear i”
“ I was bringing it, dear,” said her mother.
“ Daddie planned that I should be with you both be-
fore Christmas ’’
“And how is my dear sainted father?” put in
Daphne.
“ Well, dear,” her mother smiled, and went on with
her tale. “ Our coastal boat struck bad weather and
got to Port Moresby late, so I missed the steamer on
and had to wait a whole month for another. Then,
darling, I was stupid enough to get sick at Townsville,
so I had to go into hospital there for three weeks, but
here I am at last.”
Daphne changed on to the other leg, overcome with
shyness still, and painfully wondering what she ought
to say. “ We —we went to a cricket-match,” she
hazarded.
Mrs. Dalwood drew the child’s arm through her
own.
“ Come over now and look at your little brother
asleep there in the corner, dear,” she said.
In her excitement Daphne had been blind to the
presence of Little Bits even. “Oh, Mummie! Oh,
Mummie!” she cried, with pitiful eagerness. “You
didn’t get him in New Guinea, did you? Oh! you
didn’t, did you? ”
“ He was bom in Townsville, dear,” said the mysti-
fied mother.
“Oh!” cried Daphne, shining-eyed in her relief.
“Townsville’s in Queensland, and Jill comes from
Queensland, and she’s as white as a lovely lily-flower;


so that’s all right. I didn't really think you’d hum-
biliate me, Mummie, by getting a browny-black one
in New Guinea; yet I was scared inside me all the
time that you and Daddie might get so lonely up at
the mission-station, with no little boys and girls of
your own there, that you’d think a black one better
than none.”
“ Baby’s like me,” said her mother, with quick
understanding of her child’s queer fancy; he is very
fair, with eyes like blue forget-me-nots, the wee
precious! ”
She lifted the sleeping bundle of boy and filmy
shawl and put it in Daphne’s arms. “ Our own
little darling boy,” she said. “What shall we call
him, dear? ”
“John Willie’s a lovely name,” said Daphne
eagerly.
“John for his father, and William for his grand-
father,” smiled Mrs. Dalwood tenderly. “It is what
I was thinking of myself.”
“ And then he’ll sort of have to grow up and be
a missionary, and be no use to me at all,” said
Daphne.
But her mother had no time to discover what her
meaning was, for the threatened tea-bell was ringing
softly, out of consideration for the wee sleeper, and
there was Alison at the door.
“We can’t give you any longer, Daph,” she ex-
plained. “ Tea is waiting, and all the rest are waiting
to meet your mother. Shall we leave Baby, Mrs. Dal-
wood? ”
They did, and soon, introductions over, they were
all seated at tea, though it was not very easy to fit such
a large party into a table built for six at most. Mrs.
Dalwood could not place them all at first. The twins
were Alison’s brother and sister, she knew; but who
was Jerry, who seemed to be the adored of all the


children? And what relation was Little Bits to the
other children? And who was the pretty, gipsy-like
girl the grown-ups called Nan?
By degrees she sorted them out, though she kept a
few questions for Daphne’s private answering. She
told her own plans too. Her husband had had such a
bad bout of fever that he had at last been persuaded
to give up his work in New Guinea. He was relin-
quishing his post in May and hoped to get a church in
Sydney. She had come on before him.
“ And the first thing I must do,” she said, “is to
look for lodgings, or a flat. Why ! I have no arrange-
ments made for to-night even.”
“You must let me put you up,” said Nan kindly.
“ Alison hasn’t an inch of spare room here, and I am
bored with my own company.”
Mrs. Dalwood gratefully accepted the offer for the
night.
“I’ll try to-morrow to arrange for a small flat
here,” she said.
‘ ‘ They are all taken —people down at the seaside for
the summer holidays, you know,” Nan told her,
“ But this flat will be vacant next week when we
leave,” Alison put in.
“Of course,” said Nan. “ Let me put you up till
then. This is the comfiest flat in the whole of the
building: Alison got favoured, being Mrs. Royle’s
niece.”
“You people overwhelm me with your kindness,”
said Mrs. Dalwood. “Why! I am a stranger to
you.”
“ But you are Daphne’s mother,” said Nan, “ and
Daphne is a special friend of mine.”
“ And you used to tell me you had no friends,
Daph! ”
“ That was before I got to know John Willie and
Jill, Mummie,” said the child happily. “And now


we have our own John Willie, and he’ll grow up to
love me too/'
“Um-m-m! will he? Grow up to fight you more
likely, young Dill,” said Jack darkly. “ You’ll be
sure to boss him round, and a boy won’t stand
that,”
“ And why are you leaving such a charming flat.
Miss Deane? ” asked Mrs. Dalwood.
“ I am the happy reason for it,” said Jerry.
“My cats’ eyes and kerosene!” ejaculated Jack.
“ If you haven’t seen them looking soft soap at one
another, Mrs. Dalwood, you’ve been too polite to
watch, that’s all. They’re getting married this day
week, and we’re all going to live at Acewall, Jerry’s
place at Coogee.”
“ And I was going too,” said Daphne with a half-
sigh —one good thing was apt to rob one of another.
“ It is a palatial residence, Mummie, where every pros-
pect pleases.”
“ And the only man is vile, Jerry: that’s how it ends
up,” grinned Jack saucily.
“I’m surprised at you, John Willie,” said Daphne
indignantly. “Uncle Jerry is a prince among men,
and you know it.”
“Well, it’s a jolly pity you’ll miss our honey-
moon with him, if that’s what you think of him,” said
Jack.
“Oh ! ” said Daphne, suddenly forlorn. “ I hadn’t
remembered that —our lovely honeymoon to Mel-
bourne and Mount Buffalo.” A mother was all very
well, a new baby, too; but one was nearly a stranger,
the other entirely so.
Jerry saw her mother’s puzzlement, and explained.
“You see, Mrs. Dalwood, Alison and I both have
young people to look after. We have no relatives to
leave them with; at least, we each possess one aunt,
but our young folks are not keen on aunts, for some


queer reason. Hence, Miss Carter here, a friend of us
both, has nobly promised to be shepherd to our stray
lambs at Acevvall while we have one week together.
She goes on to friends in Brisbane after that, so we are
picking up our young people and taking them with us
for a trip to Melbourne and Mount Buffalo. That is
what they have christened their honeymoon. The
point is, Daphne was to come with us, and she has
never been to Victoria. Do you think ? "
“ My dear," said Mrs. Dal wood, with actual tears
in her eyes, as she patted Daphne’s arm, “ it will be
a long, long time before your father and mother will
be able to offer you such a trip. Anyhow, you will
probably grow up to marry a missionary and be poor
all your life: it is in both sides of your family, for my
father and brother are in Central Africa now. If Mr.
Wallace and Miss Deane have really been so good as to
invite you, you take your honeymoon when you can
get it.”
“Oh! Mummie,” cried Daphne rapturously, ”1
am just about the happiest girl in the world, I am.”
“ Thank you, Mrs. Dalwood,” said Jerry. “We
should all have missed Daphne very much,”
“ But why you should want to shower such kindness
on me and mine,” she began.
“We have told you,” he smiled. “ Daphne is a
dear little friend of everybody here. Besides, there are
some of us, perhaps, who very much admire those
noble men and women who have missionary zeal in
their blood.”
“ Good-oh, Dill!” applauded Jack; “it would
have been a bit stale without you pecking at a chap’s
eyes. And Stan Pratt is coming, too: that’s another
little bit of all right.”
“ Jerry’s gardener-boy that caught the thief? ” in-
quired Nan. “ Rather an awkward arrangement,
won’t it be? ”


“ Not with Stan," said Jerry. “He has too much
self-respect ever to lose his respect for others."
“ But why take him, anyhow? " persisted Nan.
“ Nominally, to look after the luggage, and drive
the second car while Alison and I try out her new
single-seater," smiled Jerry, and be a sort of male
nurse, watching that our young folks break no bones.
In reality, because the lady who is doing me the
honour of marrying me is more of a sentimentalist than
she admits, hopes I am going to make rather a good
sort of husband and, knowing she owes my life to
Stan, wants him to have the holiday of his young
life." ,
“ And a good thing he is coming," said Jack.
“ With so many women-creatures about, a chap would
take to giggling and simpering if he hadn't another fel-
low to talk to now and then."
“My objections are withdrawn," smiled Nan. ‘ If
you are taking two cars, Jerry, and the lad is capable
of driving one and keeping the kiddies from accidents
and civil war, it is a good arrangement."
“ He learned to drive in a cranky old Ford on bush
roads that were no roads," said Jerry. ‘ Since then
I have tried the lad out, and he has his licence ready
for the trip."
And what will happen to the garden that was to
have been in such apple-pie order for Alison? " asked
Nan.
“ She has made up her mind that she wants to have
a finger in that pie herself," he said; “ so Proust is to
potter round till we come back, and then take orders
as to what is to grow where."
“ It’s a good thing you’ve got swelled head natur-
ally, old giantess," grinned Jack, “ or they'd grow
you a fine fat one at Acewall, with all this kowtowing
to you."
‘ * Perhaps it is a good thing I have had a rude young


“ I am," vowed Alison. " And what have I had to
make me tired? Why! Jill brought me breakfast in
bed, if you please, and Jerry calmly commandeered
my sewing-machine and took it to Acewall two davs
ago."
“ I am glad he insisted on sending men in to do all
the packing here," said Nan. " I rather like your
Jerry, you know, my dear."
"Little Bits and Teddy warver likes him too,"
announced his small daughter solemnly.
" Oh ! Nan, what have I done to deserve so much
happiness? " asked Alison.
"Well, don't howl about it, old girl," cautioned
Jack from the doorway, where he had just appeared
with Daphne, and stood, full of secret admiration for
the stately vision of loveliness, which must be Alison,
but looked a duchess at least.
Don't worry, old son: I am not dropping
tears on this darling frock," she assured him. " Jill,
my dear, I am proud to have such a bonny
bridesmaid."
Jill twirled round before the mirror. Her frock was
quite simple, but she certainly looked very well in it.
Of primrose organdie, all tiny frills and ankle-length,
it made her look very tall, and old for just-about-
thirteen.
My gummuts and goannas ! Don’t start buttering
her up now," pleaded Jack, not liking the little-brother
feeling Jill's added inches gave him. " A lamp-post
giantess with a baby face —that’s what she looks like
in that silly rig-out."
Poor John Willie!" teased Nan. "She dwarfs
you, doesn’t she? We must buy you some invisible
elevators for your shoes, and then you won't feel so
bad about it. Jill looks a picture, indeed. I don't
wonder you told me her frock was ravishing, Daphne.
\\ hen you get into your quaint primrose poke-bonnet.


Till and carry your gilded basket of autumn leaves
and gold and tawny flowers, that grown-up best
man will be losing his heart to you, if you don t look
out.” , ~ ,
“Oh! Nan darling, you wont forget that you
promised to talk to him at the breakfast, so that
won't have to, will you? ” cried Jill. „
“ Don't worry, chickabiddy,” laughed Alison. It
is just ordinary lunch, and Nan will take the best
man off your hands. Besides, Jerry says he is very
interesting, and I like what little I have seen ot
“ People with two names scare me,” confessed Jill.
“ ‘ Trenton-Smith ' sounds so important, and he may
think I am grown-up in this frock.”
“ I don't think he will if he takes a peep at your
face,” laughed Nan consolingly. “Is Mrs. Royle
coming on to Acewall for the breakfast that isn t a
breakfast, Alison? ”
“ Poor Aunt Jessie! She thinks that would savour
too much of the fleshpots of Egypt,” smiled Alison,
“so she is returning here from the church, to have a
Christian cup of tea and bread-and-butter ' at home,
so she tells me.”
“ Bread-an-scrape, and no sugar in her tea, to save
more for missions,” growled Jack. My singing-birds
and soup! Don't some donkeys enjoy being miser-
able ? ” . ,
“My selfish boys and their sauce ! mimicked
Daphne. “ Don't some noble natures make you look
small, John Willie? Mrs. Royle goes hungry to feed
the poor, and my sainted father works among canni-
bals and malaria and mosquitoes; and they enjoy it,
not because they are donkeys, as you seem to imagine,
but because it’s serving God. Have you anything to
say to that ? ”
He had not exactly. Her wrath produced his usual


amiable bellow of amusement. Then he burst forth:
“My sentimental centipedes! Just hear that skinny
scrap going off pop! When a baby battery starts
crushing, it can crush some, can't it? "
“ You need it, John Willie," declared Daphne.
“ When Uncle Jerry starts in to keep you in order it's
exceedingly probable that he will find it necessary to
spank you at times."
“ Spank me ! " roared Jack indignantly. “ I'll spank
you if you don't look out, young Daffy-down-dilly,
so silly, so silly."
“ Oh ! John Willie, dear," she answered, changing
her tone to affectionate entreaty, “ I didn’t mean to
ruffle your composure, really; but can’t you stop try-
ing to be funny even on the day, when Alison looks
like —like ’'
“ Like a mountain, a snow-clad one," he suggested
wickedly.
Daphne took no notice of the interruption. She had
found the image her mind was searching for, even
if it were a somewhat mixed one, and declaimed
it grandly, like a poet proudly reciting his own
lines.
“Like a misty white moonbeam," she said, “all
silver-shining, which the angels have dropped down
from heaven to make sunshine in Uncle Jerry’s life."
“ A moonbeam making sunshine!" jeered Jack.
“ I suppose you mean she looks a bit freakish in that
lacy thingamajig. No; I don’t really think she’s as
bad as all that."
“ She looks Junoesque, as Mrs. Fitz declared, when
she saw her in the black evening frock she wore for
A Marriage has been Arranged,” said Nan. “ I believe
Mrs. Fitz is pleased that it has been arranged, too,
Alison, although she isn’t coming to your wedding-
breakfast. I met her in town yesterday, and she said
you and Jerry had asked her "


“I had to make him do it, though,” interrupted
Alison.
“Well,” continued Nan, “she said she would see
the poor fellow married, of course, but that you were
being so shockingly informal that you were going home
from church to a regular children’s party, and you
couldn’t expect her to endure that.”
“ And it isn’t a party at all,” smiled Alison. “ Jerry
made Jill give him a list of my favourite dishes, for
Janet’s guidance, and I suspect you will be lunching
on celery soup, baked lamb and green peas, angels
food, ices, and the cake. Nobody but Jerry and Mr.
Trenton-Smith are to be allowed to make speeches,
and they are to have one minute each; and there will
be no one to listen to their speeches but you and me,
the four children, and Daphne’s mother.”
“ And Janet and Susan and Stan Pratt and old Mr.
Proust are coming in to hear the speeches and try the
cake and drink your health, Alison,” Jill reminded
her.
“ And, when we get the old married people photo-
graphed and off on their honeymoon, children, we’ll
celebrate,” promised Nan. Jill wants a holiday
after all the housekeeping she has been doing in
these last busy weeks, and we’ll go out every
single day.”
“ And we won’t come home till morning,” chanted
Little Bits, repeating what Jerry had taught her in one
of his nonsensical moods, and not in the least realising
its amusing aptness.
“Anyhow,” said Jack, when their laughter had
subsided, “ if we do go out a lot, we won’t miss Alison
so much; but you be back at the end of the week,
Mrs. Elephant, or ”
“ Door-bell! ” interrupted Jill. “ I suppose it’s an-
other telegram, Alison.”
“Ora note from Jerry to tell her not to be a second


late, ’cause he can’t wait to tell her how much he likes
elephants,” jeered Jack.
Down the stairs he rushed to get the missive, pleased
with his deadly sarcasm, and very far from guessing
that his words were almost literally true.




/




Brisbane College of Advanced Education
RESOURCE CENTRE KELVIN GROVE CAMPUS
DUE DATE SLIP
Fines apply if this item is not returned or renewed
on or before the most recent date indicated below.
Renewals may be requested by telephone
Al4sli 3 l OB


,
«
-
*


