

Insure With BBBSBBBBBBBBBBBBB
e tl.i: 10 1 iTii- ».. B
i The Liverpool & London & Glooe Insurance to. Ld. |
I ( “ THe ° reat .w^ of
Queensland Branch: Queen and Eagle Streets, Brisbane.
O. HARGRAVE Local Manager.
□ Assets Exceed 1*500,000- B
I Fire : Accident : Live Stock;: Motor Vehicle |
□ -—r CStc. (Sbc. ®,c. £}
A<vt pA i£ *M// !
“Highland Cream*’
'■A


Babcock & Vilcox Ltd.
Power Specialists.
Steam and Oil Power
Over
10,000,000 H.P. Installed.
Sydney Office:
Brisbane Office:
N.Z CHAMBERS.
HAYMARKET.
BBBSBBSBSBSBBBSBBBBBBBBBBBSBBSBSBBSSBBSSSSBBBBBBBBSBBBBB3
GUARDIAN
Assurance Company Limited.
FIRE .... Established 1821 ACCIDENT
£6,500,000.
Assets Exceed
FIRE ACCIDENT, EMPLOYERS 5 LIABILITY (Workers’ Compensa-
tion Act), and FIDELITY GUARANTEE and PUBLIC RISK
INSURANCE, at LOWEST RATES.
LIBERAL. PROMPT. SECURE.
APPLICATIONS FOR AGENCIES INVITED.
Queensland Branch: 377-9 Queen Street, Brisbane.
LOCAL BOARD :
JAS. STODART, Esq., M.L.A., E. C. BINGEMANN,
Chairman. Manager.
Don. G. W. GRAY, M.L.C.
'■P 4 ' y T* v-






Smith-Premier
N „ N . EW i o Typewriter wo ™
MODEL. - BEST.
Absolutely
VISIBLE
Writing
Absolutely
VISIBLE
Writing
A Magnificent Production. A Perfect Combination
of Visibility, Durability and Simplicity.
Australian Typewriter Supplies Co
IT BRISBANE,
Proprietors of
The SMITH-PREMIER BUSINESS COLLEGE
“ Individual Instruction College.”


“DAILY MAIL”
Beautiful Brisbane
Its Sights of Interest, Attractions,
Pleasure Resorts, &c., and how
to see them ... A Guide for
Exhibition Visitors and Others.
With Illustrations and Map.
Specially compiled for the “ Daily Mail.”
Published by
THE QUEENSLAN DAILY MAIL” LIMITED, BRISBANE,
and Printed by
W. H. WENDT & CO., Ltd., Edward Street, Brisbane.
July, 1912.


QUEENSLAND
THE WONDERLAND OF AUSTRALIA.
UNRIVALLED IN AGRICULTURAL, PASTORAL, AND
MINERAL RESOURCES.
LAND SETTLEMENT
Queensland has over H millions of agricultural, dairy-
ing, and grazing lands available for intending settlers, on
the most liberal terms and conditions in the Commonwealth.
The remarkable richness of the soil, the equable rainfall,
and the varied climates in xhe different portions of the States
enable the agriculturist to grow almost every class of crop
profitably.
Full particulars in regard to price, conditions, and plans
of land thrown open or about 10 be thrown open for selection
may be obtained on application to the Officer-ln-Charge,
Inquiry Office, Lands Department, Brisbane.
TOURIST RESORTS.
Queensland is now recognised as: “The Winter Paradise
of Australia,” and every year, during the months —April to
September—thousands of tourists from all parts of the Com-
monwealth journey thither to view its innumerable Beauty
Spots and to enjoy its salubrious climate.
Cairns and its hinterland has been aptly designated “The
Wonderland of Australia,” because of its great wealth of Scenic
Glories. The famous Barron Falls are 21 miles by rail from
Cairns.
The world-renowned Mount Morgan Gold and Copper
Mine, which has paid over ,£8,000,000 in dividends since its
discovery in 1886, is 24 miles by rail from Rockhampton {Cen-
tral Queensland). It is one of the wonders of the industrial
world.
Along the North Coast Line, between Brisbane and Gym-
pie, the tourist is enabled to obtain a splendid view from the
train of the Glasshouse Mountains and the profusion of beau-
tiful flora.
The famous Darling Downs, _ which contains 4,000,000
acres of exceptionally fertile land, lies to the south-west of
Brisbane, and Toowoomba, the capital, can be reached in four
hours. Delightful climate, charming scenery, numerous well-
equipped farms.
Full information and descriptive booklets, &c., can be
obtained on application to
THE DIRECTOR, INTELLIGENCE and TOURIST BUREAU
Corner QUEEN and GEORGE STREETS, BRISBANE
or from the BRANCH OFFICE on the Show Grounds


Contents
X
Y
X
I I
PAGES.
i t
X Beautiful Brisbane .... sto . X
; Panoramic Views ... .... .... 7to 11 y
Brisbane’s Attractions —Public Buildings, Y
'■> &c., &cc. .... .... ... 11 to 41 £
;> Places of Entertainment .. . ... 35 to 37 X
Modes of Land Selection .... 48 to 50 X
Exhibition Programme.... .... .... 47 y
V Tram and Train Services, and Bay
v Excursions .... .... .... 41 to 45 y
Y General Index y
(Where to Buy, &c.) .... .... 51


fire “Mu Mmir
In 1903 Queensland asked for a “ morning paper ” to be
established in the metropolis that should reflect, ably and im-
partially, every phase of political, commercial, and social life.
The result was the “ Daily Mail,” floated with Queensland
capital, established for a Queensland public, guided by a
Queensland directorate, and having as its sole policy, State
progress.
The first number, in spits of many initial difficulties, was
issued on Saturday, October 3rd, 1903, and the public welcome
accorded proved that the “ Daily Mail ” was both needed and
appreciated. At that time, however, the State was only
slowly emerging from the shadow of a terrible drought. It
was difficult then for well-established businesses to keep
afloat, and the troubles of launching a new venture were more
than usually severe. But the patience and optimism of its
founders, the enthusiasm and skill of its staff, and the public
support readfly given and continued all combined to enable
the “ Mail ” to triumph over its early troubles, and to-day it is
read with increasing interest by all classes of the community,
and is recognised as a strong, healthful, indispensible, and
permanent influence in Queensland journalism.
The present Directorate are :
Mr. T. B. CRIBB (Chairman).
Hon. E. D. MILES, M.L.C.
Hon. G. W. GRAY, M.L-C.
Mr. R. J. ARCHIBALD. *
Mr. H. ROBERTSON.
The “ Daily Mail ” contains all the latest Market Reports,
and is now geneially looked upon as the Leading Paper on afl
matters connected with Produce, Farming, Political and Social
Life, and Commerce. It contains all the latest Cables, as well
as Interstate and Country news, and anyone who wishes to
keep up with the times finds it necessary to read the “ Dailv
Mail ” —the most up-to-date paper published in Queensland.
Published at 294 Queen-street, Brisbane,


Beautiful Brisbane
Beautiful Brisbane, the Capital of the State of Queens-
land, and the Seat of Government. It is beautiful in every
acceptation of the term. Picturesquely situated on a
beautiful and noble river, it is surmounted by numerous
charming suburbs, beauty spots, delightful watering-places,
and health resorts. From an architectural point of view
Brisbane is also beautiful, many of the public and mercantile
buiMings in the city and the residential villas in the suburbs
possessing elegant as well as uhtarian qualities. Industrially
ahd commercially Brisbane is a veritable be'e-hive of activity,
and prosperity and go-aheadism is written large over the
portals of every avenue of trade and industry. Work of all
kinds is brisk, wages are high, and peace and contentment
reign supreme in every walk of life. The city and its suburbs
are expanding in a remarkable manner, and new mercantile
buildings and suburban residences are being erected in all
directions. Extensive wharfage accommodation has been
provided on the river frontages at Bulimba and New Farm,
while in the city proper the shipping facilities are now of the
most ample character. When the Hamilton Basin project
is carried out by the Government Brisbane will be able to
boast of having one almost unbroken stretch of wharfage
accommodation from the Hamilton to Victoria Bridge. * The
value of the oversea imports received or transhipped at the
port of Brisbane in iqti totalled £"6,212,588 ; oversea exports,
,£8,380,284; total, £14,601,872. At high tide the depth of
the Brisbane River is 30ft.; consequently vessels drawing up
to 28ft. of water can berth with perfect safety at any of the
city wharves. In 1845, there was a population of 829 souls.
To-day the population within a ten-mile radius numbers
141,342. According to the latest official figures the death-rate
for IQII was only 12.23 per 1,000 ; and the birth-rate, 28.64
per i,ooo-
*These figures represent the imports and exports transhipped from
the port of Brisbane for the whole State. Official statistical information
in regard to the trade and commerce of the port of Brisbane alone is not
obtainable.—Ed.
The mean summer temperature of Brisbane is 76.7, and
the mean winter temperature, 5Q.4.
The Capital contains two City Councils—-Brisbane proper
and South Brisbane—both of which are vested with loca'l
governing powers. Within the metropolitan area there are
five town or borough councils and twelve shire councils-


£
3
o
U)
3
2
■3
C
«
(A
c
0)
G>
3
O'
■n
c
I
i.
®
o
c
o
o
c
o
J 5
£
X
LU


In the State Parliament the metropolitan area is repre-
sented by sixteen members ; the electorates and their repre-
sentatives being as follows Brisbane (Mr. M. J. Kirwan),
Fortitude Valley (Mr. D. Bowman), Merthyr (Mr, T. Welsby),
Ithaca (Mr. J. T. Gilday), Windsor (Mr. H. D. Macrossan),
Paddington (Mr. J. A/Fihelly), Enoggera (Mr. R. Trout),
Toombul (Mr. A. L. Petrie), Nundah (Mr. T. Bridges),
Toowong (Hon. E. H. Macartney), South Brisbane (Mr. T. W.
Bouchard), Kurilpa (Mr. J. Allan), Maree (Mr. W. Bertram),
Buranda (Mr. J. Huxham), Oxley (Hon. D. F. Denham,
Premier), and Bulimba (Hon. W. H. Barnes, Treasurer).
The business centres of the capital are—(i) Queen-
street, (2) Fortitude Valley, (3) South Brisbane—from the
Victoria Bridge to the Fiveways in Woolloongabba. All the
retail shops are open for business from 8 a m. until 6 p.m.
daily, and on Friday evenings (the shopping night) until
9 p.m.
On the succeeding pages will be found a brief description
of the principal public buildings, places of entertainment,
seaside, tourist, and health resorts, tram and train services,
&c.
Panoramic Views of Brisbane.
The configuration of the country around Brisbane and
suburbs is of such a character that numerous coigns of
vantage are provided, from which their many charms may be
viewed to the fullest advantage. Goldsmith’s “ Iraveller”
attained the solitude of the Alps in order to spend a pensive
hour. The visitor to the metropolis of Queensland, however,
has a more pleasant object in view when he or she ascends its
heights—it is to feast his or her eyes upon the glorious pano-
ramas unfolded therefrom. First, the city proper and its
many charming suburbs, with a noble river winding round
them like a huge silvery-hued ribbon, are brought under the
telescopic eyes of the sightseer ; then, the delightfully verdant
and fertile agricultural districts outside the metropolitan area,
with the ranges of mountains in the background ; and
the island-studded' Moreton Bay, with its vast expanse of blue
arid green tinged waters. These are all realistic pictures
in Nature’s Art Gallery, and he or she who gazes upon them
carries away a pleasing and lasting impression of their
beautiful settings.


5 at
fe c
i v a
n
$ .22
Z
I ffi
f £
B 3
I O
I K
I "3
i c
«
I M
I "5
H Z
M “
J «
■ Z
£ c
H .
$ >
I to
.? C
I i
g o
1 j:
3 trt
H Cl
I £
T «
£ >-
f- o
H c
r? «
:- C.


These observation spots are enumerated in detail in this
booklet, with a few guide notes as to the best m elans of
reaching them.
(i). The Observatory, Wickham Terrace, five minutes’
vyalk up Edward-street (or id. tram from Queen-street)
Built in 1829.
; (2). Bowen Terrace, five minutes’ walk from Petrie’s
Bight, round the Convent Hill. Prom the tower of All
Hallows’ Convent a splendid view can be obtained- The
highest point of the Terrace is at the flagstaff near the
corner of Harcourt-street. Private houses on the summit-
cbmmand an almost unrivalled view.
(3) Paddington Tram Terminus (3d. from Queen-
street). Half-a-dozen heights are available here, from
which magnificent stretches of scenery from Toowong to
A foreton Bay can be seen.
(4) Highgate Hill (3d. Gladstone Road tram from Queen-
street). From the Reservoir reserve towards every point of
the compass beautiful views meet the eye.
(5) Toowong Tram Terminus (3d. from Queen-street).
Get out at the terminus, and climb up steps to hill on the
right- On a clear morning a grand view is revealed to the
sightseer.
(6) Galloway’s Hill (East Brisbane tram 3d. from Queen-
street, thence a ten minutes’ walk ; return over Brunswick-
sfreet feiry and catch New Farm tram, 2d. to town). A com-
prehensive and charming view.
(7) Fildon Hill (Enoggera train to Wilston ; or Bowen
Bviclgf tram., 3d. from Queen-street, and a quarter-hour walk ;
or Lutwyche ’bus from William-street every half-hour). A
fine view of the city and its environs.
(8) Hamilton Hill. Take Ascot tram, 3d. from Queen-
street, to Toorak Road ; walk up Toorak Road to the summit of
the hill, then look north, south, east, and west, and gaze
enraptured on the scene.
(g.) Teneriffe (Bulimba car 3d., or id. ’bus from Queen-
street). Easily accessible, and commands a capital view of
Brisbane and the distant suburbs.
(10). Albion Heights (Clayfield car 3d. from Queen-
street). Here in this suburban arcadia the beauties of Bris-
bane are seen to advantage.
(11) Bartley’s Hill (Clayfield car 3d. from Queen-street) ;
then get off at Butler-street, and five minutes’ walk will take
the traveller to one of the best observation spots in the
riietropolitan area. From the reservoir reserve one of the
finest panoramic pictures possible can be obtained.
(12) Ipswich Road, Annerley (Ipswich Road-New Farm
car 3d. from Queen-street). Grand view of the' peaks of the


c
o
Q.
O
O
i_
£0
SO
c
ce
■a
c
A
la.
as
>
let
as
C
A
XI
07
’iZ


Main Range in the distance, with the sinuous Brisbane River
below.
(13) Any of the city towers ; —Town Hall (South Bris-
bane, Parliament House (George-street), Telegraph Chambers
(Queen-street), and Executive Buildings (George-street).
(14) One Tree Hill, four miles by tram, motor-bus, or
motor-car. Take Toowong car to Cemetery gates, and a
walk and climb up a well-made road will take the sightseer
to the summit of Mount Coot-tha. Then a magnificent pano-
rama is disclosed—one which amply compensates the
“ Alpiner ” for his or her climb. Refreshments can be
obtained at all hours at the kiosk.
(15). White’s Hill, six miles from Brisbane, can be
reached by motor-bus or motor-car. From this elevation an
unequaflel view of Brisbane and the surrounding country can
be gained. The wants of the “ inner man and woman ” are
also provided for here.
Brisbane’s Attractions.
An Alphabetical List of Places, Public Buildings and In-
stitutions, Pleasant Drives, Landmarks of Interest, Recreation
Resorts, &c.:—
ART GALLERIES.—NationaI Art Gallery is located on
fourth floor of the Executive Buildings. For years the Art
Gallery was housed away in the Town Hall, pending removal
to the Exhibition Building. After many vicissitudes, in
which the collection narrowly escaped being sent away from
the metropolis altogether, the pictures are now in the Execu-
tive Building (entrance, George-street). Open daily, 10 to 5,
and Sunday afternoon.
South Brisbane Municipal Art Galler}/, which is situated
on the second floor of the South Brisbane Free Reading Room,
contains a fine collection of paintings from the brush of
Randall and others. This Art Gallery is at the corner of
Stanley and Vulture streets, and can be reached by tram.
Open daily.
BANKS.—Following are the chief Queen-street banks,
beginning from the North Quay : Bank of New South Wales,
corner of George-street ; Royal Bank of Queensland, Limited,
between Albert and Edward streets ; Commercial Bank of
Australia, near Edward-street ; Austialian Bank of Commerce,
Limited, between Edward and Creek streets, nearly opposite
G.P.0.; Bank of North Queensland, between Edward and Creek


C
(5
£
DC
crT
c
■o
L.
cs
C
o
c
re
■c
c
re
cc
■c
c
re
DC
a;
£
I-


streets ; Queensland National Bank, corner of Creek-street ;
London Bank of Australia, corner of Creek-street ; Commer-
cial Banking Co. of Sydney, corner of Creek-street ; Union
Bank of Australia, corner of Creek-street ; English, Scottish,
and Australian Bank, between Creek and Eagle streets ; Bank
of Australasia, corner of Wharf-street.
BLIND, DEAF AND DUMB INSTITUTION, Cornwall-
street, South Brisbane (Gladstone Road tram 3d. from Queen-
street, or train from Melbourne-street to Boggo Road Junc-
tion), established 1883. There are two separate schools for
the education of the deaf and the blind. The place is a h(ve
of unexpected industries—mattress making, basket making,
halters, door mats, brooms, brushes, &c., and is well worth
a visit. Goods for sale at the school. Visitors admitted
at any time, preferably Tuesday and Friday afternoons. i
BREAKWATER, HAMILTON.— Take Hamilton tram (3H.
from Queen-street). This long wall of stone has been con-
structed with a view to better defining the river bed, lessening
the cost of dredging, and forming a gigantic scour for tide «or
flood waters. Large areas of low-lying land on both banks
are being reclaimed, and will at an early date serve as wharf
frontages. At present vessels of large tonnage can come
comfortably up the river. The breakwater incidentally offers
a vantage ground for fishermen, who find good sport all along
the Hamilton Reach. Refreshments at the kiosk and a long
ramble along the breakwater, with the river lazily rolling past,
and the salt tang of the bay breezes in your face, are a con-
stitutional enjoyed equally by young and old.
CAFES AND DINING ROOMS. —Three good meals a
day and some times a trifle extra between whiles is doubtless
what the healthy visitor to Brisbane needs. All his wants 'in
that respect are easily and tastefully supplied by the numer-
ous refreshment rooms all over the city. Cafe Eschenhqgen
(Queen-street), Rowe’s Cafe (Edward-street), and Webster’s
numerous refreshment rooms are well known for the excel-
lence of their tables and for the attention they bestow on
customers.
CHURCHES —The leading denominations have fine
structures in the city, and also handsome buildings in the
suburbs. Brisbane has two cathedrals—St. John’s (Angli-
can), and St. Stephen’s (Roman Catholic).
St. John’s (Anglican) Cathedral is on a commanding
position in Adelaide and Ann streets and is an edifice of much
architectural beauty. It is under the ministry of Archbishop
Donaldson. D.D. Cost of cathedral, which is only half
finished, In the bell tower a splendid set of chimes
has been installed. The Diocesan Chambers and Church




Institute and St. John’s Day School are on the Ann-street
frontage of the cathedral. Other churches : All Saints’,
Wickham Terrace ; Trinity Church, Valley; St. Andrew’s,
South Brisbane, &c. Services at 11 a.m. and 7.30 p.m.
St. Stephen’s (Roman Catholic) Cathedral is in Elizabeth-
street, immediately opposite the G.P.O. In the cathedral
yard is a campanile', in which is hung a bell weighing two
tons. Services, 7 a-m., 9 a.m., n a.m., and 7-3° P- m -
Archbishop Dunne, Coadjutor-Archbishop Duhig, and the Rev.
Fathers in the metropolitan diocese. There are also hand-
some and large structures in the Valley (St. Patrick’s), Kang-
aroo Point, South Brisbane, Red Hill, and other suburbs, &c.
Baptist. —The City Tabernacle stands at the corner of
Upper Edward-street and Wickham Terrace. A large dome-
topped building ; erected on similar lines to Spurgeon’s Taber-
nacle in London. Cost (including the land), £20,000. Ser-
vices at 11 a.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Methodist. —The principal city church of this denomina-
tion is in Albert -street, at the corner of Ann-street. A very
handsome edifice of red brick, the spire of Oamaru stone-
Cost, £11,500. A magnificent organ is within, and the
Albert Hall is adjoining. Services n and 7-30. A pleasant
Sunday afternoon at 3 p.m. The churches at Valley
(Brookes-street) and Princess-street (“ Wesley Church ”) and
West End, are also splendid buildings.
Presbyterian. —Three lar.ge striking churches are in the
city. St. Paul’s is in Leichhardt-street, and has the highest
spire in the city. Cost, £17,000. Built of stone from the
Leichhardt-street quarries near by, in Gothic Early English
style. St. Ann’s in Ann-street, near School of Arts. St.
Andrew’s, in Ann and Creek streets, is a new commanding
building of severe style, in red brick. Cost, £lB,OOO. Ser-
vices at 11 and 7.30.
Congregational. —The cl ief church in Wharf-street, at
the corner of Adelaide-street. Services 11 and 7.30-
Salvation Army Temple. —ln Ann-street (next to Techni-
cal College). Erected in 1891, at a cost of £9,600. The
headquarters of the Army in Queensland. It contains a large
hall (to seat 1,000 people), book depot, and administrative
offices.
There are large German Lutheran Churches in North
Brisbane and East Brisbane.
The Sweedenborg Church is on Wickham Terrace, near
Wharf-street.
Christian Science, Edwards’ Buildings, Petrie’s Bight.
Christodelphians, Charlotte-street.


CJ
os
&0
■3
C
a
co
l.
cS
CL
CS
i-
o
o
2


Jewish Synagogue —is in Market-street. Services
every Saturday morning.
The majority of the above religious denominations have
also places of worship in the suburbs.
CLUBS.—Johnsonian Club, Adelaide-street. Estab-
lished 1878 for literary comradeship. Qualification. —Pro-
fessional connection with literature, journalism, art, science,
drama or music, law, or medicine. Handsome premises in
Adelaide-street. Gentlemen visiting the State may be
admitted as honorary members under special rules. Secre-
tary, Horace Earle. Tel. 444.
Queensland Club.— ln well appointed buildings overlook-
ing the Botanic Gardens, at the corner of Alice and George
streets. A Brisbane rendezvous for distinguished citizens
from all parts of Queensland. Honorary privileges to visiting
members of other Australian Clubs. Tel. 210.
Brisbane Club. —Housed in their new well-appointed
buildings, 249 Queen-street, between G.P.O. and Edward-
street. A daily social centre for leading business men. Sec-
retary, R. T. Kennedy. Tel. 1454.
Commericiai Travellers’ handsome spacious
and weil-furnished club, where kindred spirits meet from all
over the Commonwealth, is situated in Ehzabeth-street, close
to Creek-street. Secretary, H. Courtenay Luck. Tel. 242.
Brisbane Tattersali’s Club. —These spacious and well-
equipped rooms are conveniently situated in the heart of the
city—Edward-street, a few doors from Queen-street. The
club holds meetings chiefly at Ascot (old ‘‘Eagle Farm”)
racecourse. (Tram from Queen-street to the course, 3d., or
train from Central). Secretary, Maurice Baldwin. Tel. 635■
Qusensjand Irish Association,— Established 1898. Rooms
(reading, billiard, refreshment, &c.) in Queen-street, opposite
G.P.O. Tel. 773.
Oeutscher Turn Verein, Woolloongabba.
Among other clubs is the United Service Institute, a club
for Military and Naval men. There are also rooms in the
city and suburbs in connection with the different sporting
bodies, who cultivate the social as well as the recreative side
of their out-door life.
COLLEGES, SCHOOLS, &c. —Queensland can now boast
of a University, where her gifted sons and daughters can
receive the highest expert education.
Secondary education is also well represented by the
Grammar Schools, Technical Colleges, and other institutions,
which are doing excellent work.


3
C
£
w
03
H
£
C 8
w
H
>i
a
3
O'
s.
{ O
z
*■>
<D
<L>
i-
CO
C
<y
o
3
&


The Queensland University, originally Government
House, adjoins the Botanic Gardens at the foot of George-
street. It is surrounded bv 37 acres, and has a frontage 1 to
the Brisbane River. The Central Technical College, which is
in course of erection, will occupy a prominent position in the
University grounds.
Beys’ Grammar School. —On College Road, Gregory
Terrace (id. tram up Edward-street, or a pretty walk from
Queen-street, up Albert-street and round Wickham Terrace
and Leichhardt-street to the school gates. The present build-
ings are substantial—of brick and stone —and admirably
suited to their purpose. There is a hne assembly hall, in which
trophies of thirty years back are to be seen, and the class-
rooms are lofty. The picturesque grounds and gardens are
well kept, and on the level hill top are laid out ant-bed tennis
courts. A well-equipped boarding-house adjoins the school.
In the grounds are also a gymnasium and sanitorium. Across
the old railway line is the well-used sports ground. Scholars
from different State schools throughout Queensland compete
yearly to gain the Government Scholarships, which give*
entrance to the Grammar School. An Old Boys’ Association
has been flourishing for many years, and has its club rooms
in Adelaide-street.
Girls’ Grammar School. —On an eminence opposite the
Boys’ School. Entrance, Gregory Terrace. Boarding School,
tennis courts, and gymnasium. Large day-rooms. From the
Balconies extensive views may be obtained of Brisbane
and suburbs.
Christian Brothers’ College. —A substantial conventual
building of stone, beautifully situated on Gregory Terrace.
The college has a good record in sport and education, and
there is a flourishing Old Boys’ Association, which meets
regularly to perpetuate school friendships.
Brisbane High School for Girls. —Wickham Terrace
(id. tram from Queen-street). Founded October, 1899,
and now takes its place amongst the foremost educa-
tional establishments in this State. Buildings healthy,
and centrally situated. Spacious playground, assembly hall,
drill and dining hall, lofty class-rooms ; curriculum from
kindergarten to university. A house and day school com-
bined.
All Hallows’ Convent School. —Bowen Terrace. Beauti-
fully situated, overlooking two reaches of the Brisbane River.
Seven acres, tastefully laid out with flower beds, shade trees,
three tennis courts, etc. Convent and chapel on west side of


OJ
c
a
JO
.<£■
k
m
in
to
c
3
m
0»
>
3
O
<u
X
Ul


buildings, school on east. Foundation stone laid New Year’s
Day, 1881 ; first building cost Additions costing
£7,000 in 1900. Three stories, with wide balconies on all
sides. Class-rooms lofty and well equipped, large dining-
room. On second story, splendid concert hall (100 feet long)
.and interesting studio. Third floor, dormitories, etc., spacious
and well ventilated, with picturesque view of Brisbane on every
side. Curriculum, Sydney University (senior and junior),
Public Service Board examinations, all music examinations,
and all ordinary school studies.
Technical College (Brisbane) —Ann-street, opposite School
of Arts. A splendid brick building, erected 1898 at a cost of
lndustrial classes in the different arts, sciences, anc
trades are regularly held here. Under the administration of the
State Department of Education.
Technical College (South Brisbane). —This substantial
and most useful brick structure is in Stanley-street, opposite
Town Hall (id. tram from North Quay). Classes in art,
science, commercial, and general industrial subjects are regu-
larly held and well supported. In the buildings there is a fine
assembly hall, and adjoining this is a large municipal library.
St. Anne’s Industrial and Technical School. —Conducted
by the Sisters of Mercy. The substantial four-storey building
stands in Ann-street, on an eminence commanding a fine view
•of the river, and is a veritable hivd of industrial and technical
work. Dressmaking, millinery, fancy work, lace making, and
embroidery are taught, and banners, regalia, etc., made, of
exquisite pattern and finish. Provision is also made for
thorough tuition in music. Address : The Sister Superior, St.
Anne’s Industrial and'Technical School, Brisbane.
Moreton Bay High School.— -A boarding and day school
for girls. Established 1901. Situated oh a beautiful health-
ful site at Wynnum, 12 miles from Brisbane- Spacious class
rooms, music rooms, and bedrooms—all well ventilated, and
lit with acetylene gas. A kindergarten and preparatory school
are attached. In the grounds are also tennis courts and a
gymnasium. Physical culture and swimming are included in
the school course. Special preparation for all music and
university examinations. Principal :* Miss Alison-Greene,
certificated science teacher, of South Kensington and London.
Stott & Hoare’£ Business College, Queen-street —Founded
1885. Branches in all the capitals of the Commonwealth
(headquarters at Sydney). Expert instructor in each depart-
ment of commercial training. Thorough and careful prepara-
tion given in all mercantile subjects.
Denominational schools are also established in connection
■with some of the churches. The beautifully situated Roman




Catholic College at Nudgee, the Church of England Day School
in Ann-street, Presbyterian College on Wickham Terrace, and
a large number of private schools in the suburbs all testify
to the high value placed on educational facilities in this city.
DALCETY’S WOOL AND CRAIN STORES ranks
amongst the finest of the kind in Australia. The same firm’s
Sydney stores are said to be the largest in the Common-
wealth. The new Bulimba block of buildings, though not
having so many stories as the Sydney one, is superior in point
of floor space, and consequently affords much better oppor-
tunities for the display of wool and other produce. The
massive red brick structure, in spite of its huge proportions,
is of neat design. It stands within an area of over 6 acrco,
having a frontage of about 1,100 feet to the Brisbane River,
along which substantially-burit wharves provide : accommo-
dation for the largest steamers likely to come to Brisbane.
The Executive Buildings. —A magnificent stone structure
between William and George streets, across Elizabeth-street
from the Treasury, covering I h acres of land. Here are the
new Land Offices (with complete departments), Income Tax
Office, Government Analyst, National Art Gallery, Office of
the Chief Secretary, Executive Council Chamber, etc. Whole
building cost £141,000 —the largest single contract ever let
in the State. Freestone from Helidon and Yangan quarries.
Style—classic. On the south-western side of the building there
are the Queen’s Gardens, in which there is a huge bronze
statue of the late Queen Victoria.
The Exhibition. —Corner Bowen Bridge Road and Gregory
Terrace (2d. car from Custom House or id. ’bus from Queen-
street). In the annexes, and in the well-appointed adjoining
grounds, the yearly Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition,
under the auspices of the National Agricultural and Industrial
Association of Queensland, is held, beginning the second
Monday in August. A fine sports ground—for cricket, foot-
ball, and other games, with a bicycle track laid down —is pro-
vided, and hdre Interstate contests are frequently arranged.
CARDENS AND PARKS. —Brisbane’s genial climate in-
vites citizens to live as much as possible in the open air, and
in almost every suburb public spaces and recreation parks
offer every facility for out-of-door amusements. On Saturday
afternoons and general holidays most of the parks are alive
with merry humanity—-here a cricket match with its hundreds
of spectators, there a tennis court or croquet lawn or bowling
green in full swing, yonder a picnic party, and further on a
group botanising or—it may be—discussing federal politics
while they stretch themselves on the sweet grass and drink in
the balmy air.




Most of the parks are well kept, and tastefully laid out
with countless ornamental and shade trees and flowers. The
Botanic Gardens take pride of place, and are a home of
tropical beauty for all who delight in plant life. In these Gar-
dens there is a large aviary, and the nucleus of a zoo, in
which are to be seen kangaroos, wallabies, an Indian ante-
lope ; and in a cemented pit two Japanese brown bears.
From August until May the Gardens are lighted by electricity,
and are thrown open to the general public. Band recitals are
given on Sunday afternoons and evenings throughout the
year.
Other Cardens and Parks. —On the north side : Acclima-
tisation Gardens, Bowen Bridge (near Show Grounds) ; Alex-
andra Park, Gregory Terrace; Victoria Park, Gregory Ter-
race ; Wickham Park, Wickham Terrace ; Albert Park and
Gardens, with band rotunda and kiosk, Albert-stre'et (near
Roma-street railway station); Petrie Terrace Park, on the
Red Hill and Kelvin Grove tram routes. On the south side :
Musgrave Park and Gardens ; Dutton Park, on Gladstone
Road tram route ; Davies Park, West End ; Mowbray Park
and Gardens, on East Brisbane tram route ; Norman Park,
East Brisbane ; Highgate Hill Park, close handy to West End
or Gladstone Road tram routes.
GOVERNMENT HOUSE The residence of Sir William
MacGregor and suite is temporarily located at “ Fernberg,” in
the suburb of Paddington, and can be reached by the Padding-
ton tram. Queensland’s Governors have been : —Sir George
Bowen (1859-1868), Colonel Blackall (1868-71), Marquis of
Normanby (1871-74), Governor Cairns, C.M.G. (1875-77), Sir
Arthur Kennedy (1877-83), Sir Anthony Musgrave (1883-88),
Sir Henry Norman (1889-95), Lord Lamington (1896-1901),
Sir Herbert Chermside (1901-05), Lord Chelmsford (1906-09).
Government Intelligence and Tourist Bureau. —Comer of
Queen and George streets, where full information in regard
to the resources and tourist resorts of Queensland can be
obtained from 9 a.m. until 4.30 p.m. daily, except Saturday,,
on which day the Bureau is open from 9 a.m. until 12 noon.
Government Printing Office. —Between William and George
streets, next to new Lands Office. This is one of the fo»r
largest printing establishments in the world- Erected *m
1885-89 at a cost of £31,950. Recent improvements make it
now an extensive establishment for the execution of all Gov-
ernment work. The total cost of the building, with additions
and plant to date, is nearly £ 100,000. By permission of the
Government Printer visitors ma}' be shown through all the
departments.




Brisbane Gymnasium, Turbot-street.—A wooden structure
pleasantly situated in Albert Park Gardens. Principal
Director and Gymnastic Instructor :J. J. Betts, The hall
is a favourite place for dances in connection with various
sporting clubs. The public schools of the city also have
gymnasia in their grounds, notably the Brisbane Grammar
School, which is specially well-equipped.
Halls. —Brisbane is well off for public halls—with two
exceptions. There is as yet no Town Hall worthy of the name,
and there are too few large meeting rooms in the city proper.
For big political addresses, either the Exhibition Hali, or some
vacant square in the city under the canopy of heaven is gener-
ally chosen. Large concerts (Melba, Paderewski, and the
like) are held, too, in the Exhibition Buildings, where also
recitals from time to time are arranged. The suburbs are
well provided with halls, where lodges meet and tea-meetings
or dances are frequently held.
Albert Hall, in Albert-street, next Methodist Church- Lec-
tures, meetings, and church concerts.
Centennial Hall, in Adelaide-street, between Albert and Ann
streets. Picture entertainments.
Foresters 5 Hall, in Brunswick-street, Valley. Lodge meet-
ings and political meetings.
Masonic Hall, in Alice-street. A handsome structure over-
looking the Gardens.
Oddfellows’ Hall, Caxton-street, Paddington.
Protestant Hall, in Ann-street, near Petrie’s Bight. Meet-
ings, concerts and dances.
Exhibition Hall, at Exhibition. Largest and best concert
hall in the city ; magnificent organ ; has held an audi-
ence of 3,5°°- Organ recitals given regularly.
Temperance Hail, in Edward-street, a substantial brick
structure, opposite Central Station. Saturday evening
concerts and popular entertainments, lodge meetings,
and committee rooms.
Town Hall, in Queen-street ; erected in 1864. A building
now far too small for the city ; chiefly comprises Coun-
cil Chambers and Mayor’s Room (upstairs), and pro-
fessional and business offices.
Trades Hall, in Turbot-street. Head-quarters of the Labour
Party ; meeting place of Unions and Amalgamated
Societies ; political and other committee rooms ; dances.
South Brisbane Town Hall, corner of Vulture-street West
and Stanley-street ; erected in 1894 ; cost £ 8,000• A
conspicuous and handsome red brick building, with a
high tower and time-piece. Contains the offices and
chambers of the South Brisbane Municipal Council. All




Stanley-street trams and ’buses pass within close dis-
tance.
HEALTH AND TOURIST RESORTS. —Tambourine
Mountain, 27 miles by rail to Logan Village, South Coast
Line ; thence 8 miles by vehicle.
Mount Cravatt, 6 miles by motor ’bus or motor car from
Brisbane.
Cuannaba Falls (Tambourine Mountains).—3s miles by
train and vehicle from Brisbane. Train to Logan Village,
thence by vehicle»
Enoggera Reservoir. —B miles by road from Brisbane ;
motor ’bus or other vehicle.
Seventeen Mites Rocks. —By boat or other vehicle.
Brookfield. —lo miles by road ; motor ’bus or other
vehicle.
In the Nerang District, South Coast Railway Line, there
is a wealth of arcadian beauty spots, including many water-
falls. Weeping Falls, Pearly Brook Falls, Cave Falls, Egg
Rock, Beechmpnt plateau possess beauties of a unique nature-
This district is also an ideal health resort. Nerang is 49 miles
by rail from South Brisbane, and the sights of interest can
be reached by road without any difficulty.
HOSPITALS. —Houses of healing in Brisbane are many.
The metropolis has advantages in climate and in medical skill,
which make its hospitals practically base institutions for the
whole State, and sufferers from as far north as Thursday
Island, and as far west as human habitation goes, are some-
times found in one or other of Brisbane’s health-recovering
institutions. Both public and private hospitals have a high
reputation.
The General Hospital. —Bowen Bridge Road, opposite
Exhibition (2d. tram Custom House, or id. ’bus Queen-street).
Most suitably situated on the side of a healthy hill overlooking
Victoria Park on the one 1 side, the Acclimatisation Gardens on
another, and on a third the diversified scenery towards Eildon
Hill, Albion, and Enoggera. The grounds are large, and the
buildings spacious. The wards are airy and numerous, but
extra accommodation is badly needed. Visiting days :—Wed-
nesday and Sunday afternoons ; emergency, at any time.
Supported by voluntary aid and Government endowment.
Convalescent Home at Sandgate, where patients can recuper-
ate from typhoid and other serious illness.
Children’s Hospital. —Herston Road, near the General
Hospital, overlooking Victoria Park. Children received over
1 year and under 12 years, on ticket of qualified subscriber


o
c
03
A
CO
o
0
k.
CO
1
i
CO
c
3
k.
CD
O
c
o
o
O
CO


(£\ is. per annum). The buildings are in a splendid position,
and a new wing was added a few years ago, but the number
of patients urgently needs additional wards. The hospital is
well managed by a ladies’ committee, and is supported by
voluntary donations, subscribers, and Government endow-
ment. Open daily. Sanatorium at Sandgate for young con-
valescents.
Mater Misericordiae Hospital. —This handsome structure
occupies a commanding position on College Hill, South Bris-
and, being a semi-public institution, is open for the
treatment of all cases.
Lady Lamington Hospital. —Leichhardt-street, near the
Quarries. 2d- Bowen Bridge tram from Custom House).
This newly-built hospital for women is well situated, and in
dvery way equipped for its work. Opened July 18th, 1905,
at a cost of ,£5,000. Telephone, 1204 ; (Sec.), 1657.
Diamantina Hospital (for Chronic Diseases). —Ipswich
Road, South Brisbane (3d. tram from Queen-street). A pleas-
antly-situated group of buildings in an area of 30 acres.
Formerly, it was the Diamantina Orphanage. Converted into
a hospital, and opened August sth, 1901- Visiting days :
Wednesday and Saturday, 2to 4.30 p.m. Telephone, 1059.
United Friendly Societies’ Hospital. —Wickham Terrace.
Open daily to members of thd B.A.F.S. Medical Institute, j
Other Private Hospitals. —St. Helen’s, Victoria (South
Brisbane), Alexandra (Wickham Terrace), and several others.
LIBRARIES AND SCHOOLS OF ARTS. —Free Public
Library, William-street, in the old Museum Building, one
minute’s walk from Queen-street. The most popular reading
hall in the city. Here are some 30,000 volumes, classified on
the Dewey system, and affording daily mental food for hun-
dreds. Open all day ; Sundays, 2to 5. The building is in the
classic style of architecture, and cost ;£i 0,900 to erect in
1 877-79- The present library is the result of much endeavour
on the part of progressive citizens, and is already a collection
of books of which the city may be proud.
School of Arts, Ann-street.—A two-storey brick building
with spacious verandahs. Library of 33,000 volumes and
chief monthly reviews and magazines. Ladies’ and general
reading rooms, lecture hail, etc. Hours, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
(except Tuesday 1 to 8 p.m., and Saturday 10 a.m. to 9. p.m.)
South Brisbane Municipal Library and Technical College.
Stanley-street. 6,600 volumes. Free to the public.
West End School of Arts and Free Reading Room—Boun-
dary-street, South Brisbane.


THE PUBLIC SUPPLIED AT THE
Civil Service Stores
(TEL. 508.)
Wholesale and Retail Merchants.
Retail Department:
ADELAIDE STREET, BRISBANE (between George and Albert Sts.)
Every conceivable article and requisite of Household use. including
Wines, Spirits, Tobaccos, Boots and Shoes, and all edibles, stocked
and sold. Write f r Price List. (See Page 36.)


Other free libraries and reading rooms are at the Tem-
perance Hall (Edward-street), and Oddfellows’ Hall (Bruns-
wick-street, Fortitude Valley).
MUSEUM, Bowen Park, which is open to the public from
10 to 5, and Sundays 2 to 5, is full of myriad objects of
scientific, historical, and general interest. The Scientific
Library (open to students, week-days, 10 to 4) has a splendid
collection of valuable books treating on all branches of
scientific research. Cost of the building,
THE OBSERVATORY.—Do you want the be'st view of
Brisbane and suburbs ? You can get it for nothing in five
minutes from Queen-street —on the top of the Observatory.
Brisbane itself hardly knows what a magnificent sweep of
scenery can be obtained here. The building is on Wickham
Terrace (walk up Edward-street —or id. tram), Spring Hill—
or as this part used to be known, “Windmill Hill.”
PARLIAMENT HOUSE.—At the south end of George-
street, five minutes’ walk from Queen-street. In 1864,
Queensland began to build a home for its legislators ; later
in 1889 and again in 1891 the structure received many addi-
tions ; and to-day it is a finished imposing structure, costing
in all about ;£ 12 5,000. The building covers 5 acres of ground.
Style, French Renaissance. Material, mostly freestone from
Goodna quarries. From either of the domes of this building
magnificent views of the city and suburbs can be obtained.
The Legislative Council Chambers are in the southern portion
of the building ; the Assembly meet in the part near Alice and
George streets. The library and reading-rooms are among the
best in the States. Library 34,000 volumes. Librarian. Mr. J.
Murray. Refreshment-rooms manager, Mr. W. M. Williams.
Permission to visit the buildings can be obtained through any
of the members, or direct from the President of the Legislative
Council, or from any member of the Cabinet. Visitors may
be shown over the building on applying to the chief messenger
at either end of the ground floor. While the House is sitting
they may also listen to the debates.
PINKENBA.—Port and Government wharves, 8 miles
down the river from the city. Railway line to Central. The
large oversea mail steamers (Orient liners, Vancouver boats,
and others) berth here, the distance from the mouth of the
river being short, with a good channel. Queensland Meat
Export Co.’s Works close to wharves.
PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT.—Throughout the year
Brisbane is well catered for in the way of evening amusements
of a varied character. Visitors to the Show, in quest of
amusement, have a wide range to choose from, all of the
undermentioned playhouses being open nightly.


Aulsebrooks Limited.
'(Established 1888).
Manufacturers of every description of
Plain and Fancy Cardboard Boxes
Drapers’ Shelf Boxes, finished in cloth ; Hat Boxes ; Costume and
Suit Boxes ; Boot Boxes ; Watch, Postal, and Jewellery Boxes ; Con-
fectionery Boxes ; Wedding- Cake Boxes ; Universal Cabinets for Office
use. Stationers, Drapers, etc. ; Cardboard Fillers for packing- eg-grs;
Strawberry Boxes ; Wreath and Florists’ Boxes ; Pint, Quart, or any
other size Bottle Cartons.
Metal-Edged Leather Board Boxes
A. Speciality.
Tank Street, BRISBANE..
Opp. GEORGE ST. POST OFFICE.
Carefully Packed and Promptly Despatched by Land or S
Enquiries Invited. Quotations on Application. Telephone 538.


His Majesty’s Opera House. —Queen-street, between
Edward and Albert streets. A very large structure, built to
hold 2,000 people. Electric lighting, and every modern acces-
sory. The principal companies and artists usually perform
here. The Show attraction is J. C. Williamson’s New Comic
'Opera Company.
Empire Theatre —Albert-street ; seating accommodation,
7600 ; cost, £22,000. Holland and St. John’s Vaudeville
JEntertainers.
Theatre Royal. —Elizabeth-street; seating accommoda-
•tion, 1400; cost £26,000. Brennan’s Limited, Vaudeville
Players.
Palace Cardens. —(Open air), North Quay and Ann-
street. Holland and St. John’s Pierrot Costume Comedy
Company, Seating accommodation, 2000; cost £ 11,000.
Cremorne Open-air Theatre. —Stanley-street, South Bris-
ban (near Victoria Bridge); seating accommodation, 1800.
The Dandies Musical Comedy Company.
Olympia Theatre. (West’s Pictures), corner of
Queen-street and North Quay; seating accommodation, 2000;
cost £BOOO.
Lyceum Theatre. —(King’s Pictures), George-street;
seating accommodation, 1650; cost £9OOO.
King’s Ltd. Continuous Picture Theatre, Queen-street.
Seating accommodation, 1000 ; cost £23,000.
Princess Theatre. —(West’s Pictures), Annerley-road,
Woolloongabba ; seating accommodation, 1200.
Cook’s Crystal Cardens. —Brunswick-street, Valley
-{near railway station) ; pictures ; seating accommodation,
2500; cost £2OOO.
Cook’s Picture Palace. —Brunswick-street, Valley ; seat-
ing accommodation, 1000.
Cook’s West End Picture Cardens. —(Open-air, Boundary-
street, West End; seating accommodation, 1500.
Woclloongabba Continentals —(Open air) ; Brisbane
•Cricket Grounds; seating accommodation, 6000.
Spring Hill Picture Palace. — (Open-air); Wharf and
Leichhardt streets ; seating accommodation, 2000.
Normanby Picture Palace. —(Open-air), Musgrave-road,
Ned Hill; seating accommodation, 2500.
Dutton Park Carden Theatre. —(Open-air), on Gladstone-
-road tram route; seating accommodation, 2000.


It is not generally known that the Brisbane Civil Service
Stores —a very old established Company—are open for the-
suppiy of goods to the General Public. This, however, is
the case, and a visit to their hne premises in Adelaide-street
will amply repay the connoiseur who has a taste for rare
viands and choice delicacies from all parts of the world,,
potted, tinned, salted ;> :ui otherwise preserved. The stores
a speciality of Iheir teas and coffees, besides doing a.
large business in groceries and household requisites of every
description. Boots and shoes of every make and shape are
stocked in great variety. Everything is packed carefully to
stand long journeys all over Queensland, and the goods are
fresh and clean. A complete price 'list, we learn, may be
had post free on application.
CANNON & 6RIPPS,
andcrl.lk«rs- BRISBANE.
Town Office— 401 (late 154) GEORGE ST. Telephone 514.
Valley Office—WICKHAM ST. (near Gipps Street). Telephone 130.
South Brisbane Office—STANLEY ST. (near Vulture St.). ’Phone 1040'
All Funerals performed at the most Reasonable Prices. Orders
taken any hour, day or nipfht. A larg-e variety of Wreaths, Crosses,
Memorial Caras, always H stock. Best En,sr’ish Polished Carved Oak
and Queensland Cedar Coffins always in stock.


Exhibition Continentals. —(Open-air), Exhibition Grounds,-
seating accommodation, 10,000.
Buiimba Picture Palace. —(Open-air), Ann-street and
Commercial-road; seating accommodation, 3000.
Scarlet Ramblers’ Comedy Company. —Moray-street, New
Farm; seating accommodation, 3000.
Austral Pictures. —Centennial Hall, Adelaide-street ;
seating accommodation, 1000.
Cock’s Fiveways Picture Cardens. —(Open-air), Logan
road, Woolloongabba; seating accommodation, 2500; cost
C 2900.
Paddington Pictures. —(Open-air), Caxton-street, seat-
ing accommodation, 2000.
Earl’S Court Pictures. —(Open-air), Brunswick-street,
New Farm; seating accommodation, 1000.
Toowong Picture Pavilion. —(Open-air), Church-street
and Sherwood-road; seating accommodation, 1000.
Palace of Amusements (Pictures). —(Open-air), Vulture-
street, West End ; seating accommodation, 1000.
Elite Skating Rink. —(Open-air), Melbourne-street, South
Brisbane.
Olympia Stadium. —Albert and Charlotte streets ; weekly
prizefights for championships are held.
POLICE BARRACKS. —These are situated on Petrie-
terrace (2d. tram or id. ’bus from Queen-street), and are
amongst the oldest and quaintest buildings, within and with-
out in the city. There are also barracks at Roma-street.
(Telephone 4), and at Grey-street, South Brisbane.
GENERAL POST OFFICE. —Queen-street, between
Edward and Creek streets. This imposing block of buildings
standing a little from the pavement, is in two main parts,
the Post Office (with surmounting clock), and the Telegraph
Office. The Deputy Postmaster-General, the Superintendent
of Mails, and other leading officials, have their offices in this
building, and can be interviewed daily. The Telephone Ex-
change—a nerve centre for the whole city, with long ’phone
thrills reaching to Gympie, Maryborough, Bundaberg, Too-
woomba, and Warwick.
There are neat and commodious post office structures
in each of the suburbs, and the system of posting letters on
.the tramcars has been introduced, with success.


Valves, Cocks, etc,
Robey & Co., Celebrated Portable
Wm. Allchin Ltd., Traction
Engines and Steam Lorries.
“ Aermotor ” and “ Globe ”
Fielding & Pratt, Gas
Suction Plants.
Petrol Engines
Snow Duplex Steam
Manchester Steam
and prompt
attention is paid to'
Station Orders.
IMPORTERS of all kinds of MACHINERY
Wrought and Cast Iron Pipes and Fittings for
Steam and Water. Gun Metal Steam Fittings,
Asbestos and Rubber Packings, Beltings
Plummer Blocks, Shafting, Pulleys, etc.
when in BRISBANE


QUEEN’S STATUE. —A beautiful statue in a beautiful
garden, between William and George streets. This taste-
fully designed memorial—the work of Brock—is at thp side of
the new Executive Buildings and was unveiled by Lord
Chelmsford 23rd June, 1906. Cost: Statue, £1000; pedestal,
contributed by school children’s pennies, City Council
grant, public subscriptions, and balance from Government.
RACECOURSES. —Ascot —Four miles from the city.
Train from Central, or Ascot tram, 3d. from Queen-street, to
gates of course. Area, 125 acres ; racing track, ii miles.
The Q.T.C. manage the course, and hold regular meetings
here; show races (three days). Tattersall’s Club also use
the ground frequently. Q. F.C. Secretary, G. Dyson-Holland ;
Telephone, 35. TattersalTs Secretary, Maurice Baldwin;
Telephone, 635, Totalisator, ios- and 2s. 6d.
Q.T-C. Races (Show Week), August 10, 14, and 17.
Breakfast Creek. —Tram 3d. from Queen-street. A
picturesque area, formerly known as the Breakfast Creek
Sports Ground, now termed Albion Park, or more familiarly
“The Creek.” Area, 30 acres; racing track 6 furlongs.
Easy distance from the city either by Ascot or Clayfild tram.
The Brisbane Jockey Club (Secretary, 0. H. Hocker) hold
meetings regularly twice a week.
Kedron Park. —Four miles from the city, and can be
reached by train, motor-bus, or motor-car; area, 37 acres;
racing track, 6 furlongs. Meetings held weekly.
Sandgate Course. —Train from Central, 10 miles from
city- Sandgate Jockey Club. Secretary, O. H. Hocker.
Totalisator, 10/-.
Woolloongabba Course. —(2d. tram from Queen-street).
South Brisbane Jockey Club meetings held weekly under
electric light.
RECREATION AND SPORTS GROUNDS.—Brisbane
Cricket Grounds —Woolloongabba; area, over 12 acres.
Bowen Bridge Sports Grounds. —Near Show Grounds;
Davies Park, West end, South Brisbane; Toowong Sports
Grounds; Nundah Sports Grounds; Craceville Sports Grounds;
Auchenflower Tennis Courts; Booroodabin Bowling Green.
The majority of the bowling clubs in the suburbs have
their own bowling greens, and all the principal lawn tennis
clubs ha\'
The golf links are situated at Yeronga, 4 miles from
Brisbane, on the South Coast Line.
Albion Park (during show week), pigeon matches are
held under the auspices of the Brisbane Gun Club. Tram or
train to grounds.


PURELY AUSTRALIAN.
The UNITED
INSURANCE COMPANY Limited.
FOR
FIRE, MARINE and ACCIDENT INSURANCES OF
EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Head Office for Queensland :
Comer CREEK and ELIZABETH STREETS, BRISBANE-
Branches:
ROCKHAMPTON and TOWNSVILLE.
Agencies in all Principal Towns.
ERNEST WICKHAM, Resident Secretary.
S Defective Eyesight
Has been described as one of the penalties of civ-
Nearly ail defectg of vision can be corrected
by means of properly fitted Spectacles.
MY SYSTEM OF SIGHT-TESTING
is as perfect as modern science can attain.
CHAS. GAMIN,
(25 Years’ Practical Experience.)
OPHTHALMIC AND MANUFACTURING OPTICIAN,
MOSES WARD CHAMBERS - - - QUEEN-STREET.


SUPREME COURT. —Entrance GeO;rge-street, with
frontages to Ann-street and North Quay. Here sits the
High Court of Australia, and the Full Court, Supreme Courts,
and District Court of Queensland. The building, erected on
the site of the old hospital grounds in 1857-79, at a cost of
£39,400, is in Italian Renaissance style, and both within and
wthout is a home of law and justice worthy of a capital city.
A very valuable and extensive law library for the use of the
profession is found upstairs—Librarian, Mr. F. T. F. Keogh.
TREASURY BUILDINGS. —A magnificent block of public
offices bounded on its four sides by Queen, William, Elizabeth,
and George streets. Italian Renaissance style. Built of
freestone from Highfields and Helidon quarries. Cost
£lBO,OOO. Departments (entrance, Queen or Elizabeth
•streets), Treasurer, Home Secretary, Mines, Audi 4 -, Electoral,
Registrar-General, Statistics, Births, Marriages, and Deaths,
Agricultural Bank, Advertising Board, etc.; (entrance
George-street), Justice, Education, Titles, Savings Bank,
Public Works, Intestate Estates, etc. Hours, 9to 4.30;
Saturdays, 9 to noon.
Victoria Bridge conects North and South Brisbane, and
is 1022 feet long, and 74 feet wide. It is one of the longest
and most handsome structures in the Commonwealth, and cost
£109,326.
Young Men’s Christian Association. —Exceptionally grand
building, situated in Edward-street, close to the Central Rail-
way Station.
Trams, Trains and Steamer
Excursions.
TRAMS.
To ASCOT, —Pass Post Office ever 10 minutes.
To WEST END—Pass Post Office every 10 minutes.
To BULIMBA FERRY—Pass Post Office every 10 minutes.
To PADDINGTON —Pass Post Office every 10 minutes.
To ROSALIE—Leave Adelaide-street every 30 minutes.
To CLAYFIELD —Pass Post Office every 10 or 15 minutes.
To GLADSTONE ROAD—Pass Post Office every 10 or 15
minutes.
To KELVIN GROVE—Leave Edward-street every 20 minutes.
To NEW FARM—Pass Post Office every 6 minutes.


Crowned


To IPSWICH ROAD—Pass Post Office every 12 minutes.
To LOGAN ROAD—Pass Post Office every 12 minutes.
To NORMAN PARK—Pass Post Office every 12 minutes.
To RED HlLL—Pass Post Office every 10 minutes.
To BOWEN BRIDGE—Pass Post Office every 10 minutes.
To TOOWONG—Pass Post Office every 15 minutes.
On several of the routes, trams do not run so often on Sun-
days.
TKAINS.
Frequent services at cheap rates to all suburban and sea-
side stations. The Department issues a complete guide.
Price, one penny.
Fares to seaside resorts are as follow:
To WYNNUM (12 miles)) —Single 1/4 and iod.;Return, 2/
and 1/4.
To MANLY (13 miles) —Single, 1/6 and 1/ ; Return, 2/4 and
1/6.
To WELLINGTON POINT (19 miles)—Single 2/4 and if 7;
Return, 3/10 and 2/8.
To CLEVELAND (23 miles) —Single, 2/6 and 1/9 ; Return,
4/3 and 3/.
To SANDGATE (13 miles) —Single, 1/3 and iod,; Return 2/
and 1/4.
To SOUTHPORT (50 miles) —Single, 6/ and 4/ ; Return, 10/
and 6/6.
To CURRUMBIN (64 miles), single, 8/10 and 5/11 ; Return,
1 5/ and 9/10.
To BURLEIGH HEADS (68 miles) —9/3 and 6/2 ; Return, 15/8
and 1 of.
To COOLANGATTA (69 miles) —Single, 9/11 and 6/6; Re-
turn, 16/ and 10/.
To TWEED HEADS (69 miles) —Single, 10/ and 6/6; Re-
turn 16/ and 10/.
Week End Excursion Tickets are issued at a reduced rate.
BAY EXCURSIONS.
Throughout the year, and particularly during show week,
excursions to the islands, etc., in Moreton Bay, are made
regularly.
Humpybong Steamship Company’s steamer Emerald
runs frequently every week to Woody Point and Redcliffe.
Brisbane Tug Company’s boats Koopa, Beaver, Grey-
hound, Boko, etc., also make regular trips to Bribie Island,
South Passage, etc.


Brisbane)
• ■ 2/-
i/4
Manly (13 miles from Brisbane)
. . 2/-
i/4
Queensland Railways.
Handy Seaside Resorts.
When in Brisbane visitors to the Exhibition should not
miss the opportunity of making a trip to one or more of the
Seaside Resorts which are easily accessible by rail.
Sandgate (12 miles from Brisbane) .. . . 2/- 1/4
Wynnum and Wynnum South (12 miles from
Wellington Point (18 miles from Brisbane) . . 3/1 2/1
Cleveland (23 miles from Brisbane) . . . . 3/6 2/6
Southport (50 miles from Brisbane) ~ .. 7/6 5/-
Currumbin (63 miles from Brisbane) .. 11/4 7/7
Tweed Heads (69 miles from Brisbane) .. 12/6 8/6
From Qth until 18th August, 1912, first-class season
tickets available for one week at a specially reduced rate of
8/6 will be issued as under, viz. :
BRISBANE CENTRAL—SANDGATE,
SOUTH BRISBANE—WYNNUM,
SOUTH BRISBANE—WYNNUM SOUTH,
SOUTH BRISBANE—MANLY.
In addition to above special cheap Saturday and Sunday
excursion tickets, available for day of issue only, will be
issued from BRISBANE AND INTERMEDIATE STATIONS
to Sandgate, 1/6 first class and 1/- second class return.
SOUTH BRISBANE AND INTERMEDIATE STATIONS
to Wynnum, Wynnum South, and Manly, 1/6 first class and 1/-
second class return ; and to Wellington Point and Cleveland
2/6 first class and 1/6 second class.
For further particulars application should be made to the
Traffic Superintendent, George Street, Brisbane.


Interstate Kailway Journeys.
Brisbane to Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide—Daily.
Brisbane •. dep.
Toowoomba arr.
Ditto . . dep.
Wallangrarra arr.
Ditto . . dep.
Newcastle .. arr.
Ditto . . dep.
Sydney .. arr.
Ditto .. dep.
Albury V. arr.
Ditto .. dep.
Adelaide to
Adelaide .. dep.
Murray Bridge arr-
Ditto .. dep.
Servicetown arr.
Ditto . . arr.
Ditto ■ • dep.
Ballarat .. arr.
Ditto .. dep
Melbourne—
(Spencer St.) arr.
Ditto .. dep.
Seymour .. arr.
Ditto .. dep.
Albury .. arr.
7.50 a.m. Melbourne—
-11.15 ~ (Spencer St
(Spencer St.) arr. 12.51 p.m
12.15 p.m. Ditto .. dep. 4.30
5.45 ~ Ballarat .. arr. 7.23
6.10 ~ Ditto .. dep. 7.40
Ditto .. dep. 7.40
7.34 ~ Servicetown arr. 3.0 a.m
8-0 ~ Ditto .. arr. 2.30
11.10 a.m- Ditto .. dep. 2.42
7.25 p.m. Murray Bridge arr. 6.27
7.5 a.m. Ditto .. dep. 6.55
7.54 ~ Adelaide .. arr. 9.56
Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane—Daily.
4.30 p.m. Albury .. dep. 10.46 p.m..
7.18 ~ Moss Vale .. arr. 8.19 a.m.
7.45 ~ Ditto .. dep. 8-44
11.33 ~ Sydney .. arr. 10.55
12.8 a.m. Ditto .. dep. 5.10 p.m.
12.16 ~ Newcastle .. arr. 8.21
7.27 ~ Ditto .. dep. 8.46
7-43 ~ Glen Innes arr. 8.10 a.m.
Ditto .. dep. 8.30
9.59 a.m. Wallang-arra arr. 11.0
5.0 p.m. Ditto .. dep. 11.3;
Ditto .. dep. 11.35
6.40 ~ Toow'oomba arr. 4.45 p.m
6.55 ~ Ditto .. dep. 5.5
10.21 • Brisbane Central arr. 9.5 p.m
FARES:
Brisbane to Sydney—.£4, £2 12s. 6d.; Return, £ 6, £4
Melbourne —£1 ss. 6d, £4 10s. 6d.; Return, ,£l2, ,£8 ss.
~ Adelaide—,£lo, ,£6 10s.; Return, ,£l5, ,£9 15s.
Berths—New South Wales : 10s.
The above information is compiled from the timetables,
of the various States, but is subject to alteration.


The Leading House for Motor Cars
Commercial Vehicles. Motor Cycles. Bicycles. And Sporting Goods.
We are able to give you the soundest advice on this subject, being
the largest dealers in Queensland ; we are also able to supply you with
the car or vehicle you want.
“AUTO-CARRIER.”
“FLANDERS '2o’ ”
“ INVINCIBLE
M.F. ’30.”
TALBOTS.”
“RENAULTS.’
“HUMBERS.”
STANDARDS.”
RUSSELLS.”
“ALBION” and “COMMER” COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
THE WORLD FAMOUS “ 8.5. A.” and “HUMBER” Motor Cycles,
also “ N.S.U.” and “ MOTO REVE.”
BICYCLES.
“MASSEY SILVER RIBBON,” “IMPERIAL,” “IVANHOE,”
“ 8.5. A,,” and ENGLISH PATTERN MACHINES.
SPORTING GOODS.—Everything for Outdoor Games
FOOTBALL, CRICKET, TENNIS, LACROSSE, CROQUET, etc. etc.
CITY SHOP—2BO Queen Street (opp. G.P.0.), Brisbane.
CANADA CYCLE and MOTOR AGENCY (Queensland) LTD
CORNER CREEK AND ADELAIDE STREETS, BRISBANE
For Vehicles of every description, call at —
JOLLIFFE & CO. Ltd.
Showrooms and Registered
Offic e :
464-68]Queen St.
Petrie’s Bight. |
Nearly opposite Custom House
Over 100 to select from, including Waggonettes
(private and public), Abbots, Dogcarts, Corning
Buggies, Phaetons, Buckboards (single and double),
Sulkies, in great variety, Farm Waggons and Carts.
Visitors to Brisbane are specially invited to inspect our stock
at SHOWROOMS and our large Factory at 145
LEICHHARDT STREET, SPRING HILL.


Programme of Events
AT THE
EXHIBITION
AUGUST 12th to 17th.
MO N DAY Judging- fat cattle and fat sheep. Trotters and Pacers,
and Maiden Hunters’ Cup.
TUESDAY;—Judging stud horses and ponies, stud beef, cattle, dairy
cattle, stud sheep, dogs and poultry, district exhibits, and all
other divisions within the anexes. Trotting and jumping events.
WEDNESDAY:—Judging miscellaneous horses. Trotting and jump-
ing. Official opening ceremony by His Excellency Right Hon.
Lord Denman, Governor-General of the Commonwealth, at 12
noon. Guard of honour from flagship and military. Takes place
in ring opposite grandstand, and the general public are allowed
free access to ring to hear and to take part in opening ceremony.
At 12.45 p.m. Official Luncheon in Exhibition Concert Hall,
graced with the presence of their Excellencies Right Hon. Lord
Denman and Lady Denman, Right Hon. Bryce and Mrs. Bryce
(British Ambassador to Washington), Lord and Lady Chelms-
ford, Sir Wm. and Lady McGregor, Sir Arthur and Lady Mor-
gan, His Excellency Admiral King Hall and Lady Hall.
Grand Parade of Horses and Cattle in Ring from 2 to 3 p.m.
THURSDAY :—Ladies’ Day. Judging all ladies’ events. Jumping and
Trotting. Woodchopping. Horticulture Exhibition on Show in
New Grounds at back of Grandstano.
FRIDAY :—Ponies’ Day. Judging of all ponies. Trotting and jumping.
High Jumping.
SATURDAY;—Sheep dog trials and Wood Chopping in morning ;
Boy Scouts in afternoon, and Fire Works at night.
The Public are specially notified that Show will not be open at
Night, except on Saturday, for the Fireworks.


Modes of Land Sale.
AGRICULTURAL SELECTlONS.—Agricultural Farms,.
The largest area that may be acquired by any one person
as an Agricultural Farm is 2,560 acres, but so large an area
is not likely to be allowed except in remote districts. The
notification opening the land specifies in each case how much
any one person may select. The purchasing price may range
from 1 os. an acre upwards, as may be notified. The term
is twenty The annual rent is one-fourth of the pur-
chasing price, and the payments are credited as part of the
price.
In cases where the condition of personal residence applies r
the selector must reside on the selection personally for the
first five years of the term, and thereafter his registered
bailiff may perform the condition of occupation. In other
cases the land must be continuously occupied by the selec-
tor residing on it personally or by registered bailiff. Within
five years from the issue of the license to occupy, or such ex-
tended time as the Court may allow, the selector must enclose
the land with a good and substantial fence, or make substan-
tial improvements on it of a value equal to the cost of such
a fence. On the completion of the improvements the selec-
tor becomes entitled to a lease of the farm, and may there-
after mortgage it ; or, with the permission of the Minister,
subdivide or transfer, or sublet it.
An Agricultural Farm, subject to the condition of per-
sonal residence during the first five years of the lease, cannot
during such period be mortgaged or transferred.
After five years of the term have elapsed, the prescribed
conditions of personal residence or occupation and improve-
ment having been duly performed, a deed of grant may be
obtained on payment of the balance of the purchasing price
and deed fees, A small discount is allowed on accelerated
purchase.
’“Agricultural Homesteads. —Land open for selection as
Agricultural Farms is not available for the Agricultural Home-
steads unless so specially notified. The area allowed to be
selected as an Agricultural Homestead cannot exceed 320
acres. The price for an Agricultural Homestead is 2s. 6d. an
acre, the annual rent 3d. an acre, and the term ten years.
The land must be continuously occupied by the selector
residing personally thereon.


Within five years from the issue of the license to occupy,
or such extended time as the Land Court may allow, the
selector must enclose the land with a good and substantial
fence, or make substantial improvements on it of a value equal
to the cost of such a fence. On the completion of the im-
provements the selector becomes entitled to a lease, which,
however, is not negotiable in any way.
At any time after five years from the commencement of
the term, on the selector proving that the conditions have been
duly performed, he may pay up the remaining rents so as to
make his total payments equal to 2s. 6d. an acre, and obtain
a deed of grant of the land in fee-simple. A deed fee must
be paid.
* Land's for Agricultural Homestead and Free Homestead Selection are
not available except in localities somewhat remote from existing-
settlement.
Crazing Selections. —The greatest area which may be ap-
plied for or held as a Grazing Homestead or a Grazing Farm
under any circumstances is 60,000 acres, but, as in the case
of other modes of selection each notification opening land for
grazing selection declares the maximum area which may
be selected in the area to which it applies. In the event
of lands open under different notifications, and of a total area
exceeding 20,000 acres being applied for by the same person,
a rental limitation of £2OO per annum must be observed as
well as the maximum areas declared by the several notifica-
tions. Thus, of lands, open at 2d. an acre, the greatest
area obtainable would be 24,000 acres ; at an acre,
32,000 acres, and so on. The term may be any number of
years not exceeding twenty-eight, as the opening notification
may declare. The annual rent for the first period of seven
years shall be as notified or tendered- The rent for each
subsequent period will be determined by the Land Court.
During the first five years of the term of a Grazing Home-
stead the condition of personal residence applies, and prior to
the expiration of such period, or the earlier death of a lessee, a
Grazing Homestead is not capable of being assigned or trans-
ferred. Unless with the special permission of the Minister
a Grazing Homestead may not be mortgaged during such per-
iod of five years.
A Grazing Selection must be continuously occupied during
the whole term of the lease by the Selector residing on it per-
sonally or by bailiff.
Within three years from the issue of the license to occupy,
or such extended time as the Land Court may allow, the Se-
lector must enclose the land with a good and substantial fence,
and must keep it so fenced during the whole of the term. In


the case of two or more contiguous farms, not exceeding in
the aggregate 20,000 acres, the Commissioner may by Spec-
ial License permit the selectors to fence only the outside boun-
daries of the whole area. If the notification declaring the
land open for selection so declares, the enclosing fence must
be of such a character as to prevent the passage of rabbits.
When a Grazing Farm is enclosed in the manner required,
the selector becomes entitled to a lease of it, and may there-
after mortgage it ; or, with the permission of the Minister,
may subdivide, transfer, or sublet it.
Prickly Pear Selections. —The area of a Prickly Pear Se-
lection must not exceed 2,560 acres. The term of lease is
fifteen years, divided into two periods, the respective lengths
of which are declared by the notification opening the land
for selection. During the first period the lease is subject to a
peppercorn rent, and the prickly pear on the selection must
during that period be eradicated in not less than equal pro-
portions each half-year. The notified purchasing price must
be paid in equal annual instalments during the second period-
The land from which the prickly pear has been eradicated
must be maintained clear till the end of the term of lease. The
respective periods may be shortened at the option of the se-
lector by accelerated eradication of the prickly pear or pay-
ment of the purchasing price of the land, but two years must
elapse after the eradication has been completed before a deed
of grant can be obtained. In the case of selections subject
to the condition of personal residence a deed of grant cannot
under any circumstances, be obtained until five years of the
term have elapsed.
In the case of very badly infested land the opening noti-
fication, instead of declaring a purchasing price to be paid
by the selector, may offer a bonus to be paid to him in equal
instalments as the eradication is effected, and two years after
the eradication is completed, provided the land has been
maintained clear, the selector will be entitled to receive a deed
/of grant without any payment except the deed fees.
No condition of improvement, other than the eradication
of the prickly pear, is attached to Prickly Pear Selections, and
the selector is only required to reside if his selection is ob-
tained under the Group system or if he secured priority by
offering that the condition of personal residence should apply.
The liability to reside ceases after five years.


GENERAL INDEX
Our Advertisers - - - - Where to Buy.
Aulsebrooks, Limited (Cardboard-Box Manufacturers) 2
Australian Typewriter Supplies Co On Map
Babcock & Wilcox, Ltd. (Power Specialists) Inside Front Cover
Brisbane Milling - Co. (“ Sea Foam ” Flour Mills) 42
Butler Brothers (Saddles, etc.) Inside Back Cover
Canada Cycle and Motor Agrency 46
Cannon & Cripps (Undertakers) 36
Chapman & Co- (Drapery, House Furniture, etc.) On Map
Civil Service Stores (Wholesale and Retail Merchants) 32
Crown Lands (Farms, Selections, etc.) 48 to 50
Finney, Isles & Co., Ltd. (Drapers, House Furnishers, etc) 36
Camin, Chas (Eyesigdit Specialist) 40
Guardian Assurance Company, Ltd - Inside Front Cover
Hislop, John (Funeral Director) 51
Intelligence and Tourist Bureau 2
Joliffe & Co., Ltd. (Coachbuilders, etc.) 46
Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance
Company, Ltd • Outside Front Cover
New Zealand Insurance Company, Limited .' Outside Back Cover
Rothwell’s, Limited (Men’s Complete Outfitters) 52
Smellie & Co., Ltd. (Metal and Hardware Merchants) 38
Teacher’s Whisky Outside Front Cover
United Insurance Company, Limited 40
□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□
JOHN HISLOP,
Jjunerai jpimtor.
Queen St., Petrie’s Bight, Brisbane
Telephone 205 . . . Office Always Open.


We are Between
These are His Boots
No. 2142: Men’s best black Glace Kid,
Lace ; straight cap; new Roosevelt
last; as illustrated, 25/-.
Also in Tan and Willow, 25/-. In
White Buckskin, 21/-.
Hints for Visitors.
THIS GENT IS SMARTLY DRESSED*
The Suit he is wearing depicts a Grey
English Flannel. It gives a tone to
his whole appearance. YOU may have
one like it. Here’s a description ;
GREY ENGLISH FLANNEL SUIT—
-1 hree Garments; Silver Grey or Mid
Grey; White Stripe relieving the Grey »
Coat has Four Pockets, so has the
Vest; the Trousers, too, with Gauntlet
Buttons. It’s very light in weight;
fashionable either South or North.
READY NOW—YOUR SUIT—SO/-
The Central Station
—and—
Queen Street.
Ask for our Catalogue before
you go home. It’s such a
comprehensive volume. It’s
yours for the asking .
ROTHWELL’S, LTD.
Where well-dressed men meet.
237-39-41 Edward St. : BRISBANE


Key-Head Saddles
80,000 In Use
Every man who rides should have the
“ Key-head Saddle.” By an ingenious
little patent the gullet of a “ Keyhead ”
will stand over half a ton greater strain
than any other Saddle, and this costs
y6u nothing extra.
Besides, the tree does not spread and
cause sore backs. We have published a
little illustrated Booklet showing exactly
how this great strength is obtained. It’s
wonderfully simple and intensely strong.
These Saddles can be bought at any
Saddler’s where good brands are sold. If
you Have any difficulty, write to us for
name of nearest Agent.
Butler Brothers
BRISBANE.


■*
-M-
*
*
*
which includes Damage to Car, Third Party Risks, Fire, Burg-
*
*
*
*
-H.
lary and Accidents to Owner, Driver or Passengers- ,di.
*
*
*
*
■M-
*
Superintendent for Australia and Tasmania:
*
*
*
•if
*
EDGAR W. WALKER.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
■*
■*
BRANCHES: •>
ir
*
*
*
•W-
-if
South Queensland — North Queensland —
*
*
*
Brisbane (W. H. Sagar) Townsville (E. T. Grose)
*
★
*
-if
Maryborough (H. M. Waker) Cairns (H. E. Wilson)
*
*
*
-if
Rockhampton (L. J. Cran) Charters Towers
*
*
*
-if
Toowoomba (A. T. Parrot) (S. P. McCready)
*
*
*
-If
Warwick (W. H. McClymont)
■*
*
*■
. ,
*
*******************************************
*****s***4c*********** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ** * *
I NEW ZEALAND ""ST AWt 1
* *
* FIRE
* MARINE
*
* ACCIDENT
STATE OF QUEENSLAND:
* Head Office : Brisbane.
*
J rsjr>joo
* Also—
* i
; Motor Car Insurance
W. H. WENDT Co., Ltd., Edward Street ,
