

Pprnd
GOVERNMENT COOL
STORES, MELBOURNE.
INTRODUCTION
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.
For the past 20 years Dairy Farming in
Victoria has been steadily advancing to the
position of one of the chief of our farming
interests. It has proved very successful, so
that thousands of our farmers are not only
making a comfortable living from it, but in many
cases it has raised a hard-working family
into a position of comparative wealth. The
markets supplied are those of the other States of
the Commonwealth, Great Britain, South Africa,
India, and the East. At present the industry
is only in its infancy. It is capable of almost
unlimited expansion. So far, farmers have
confined their attention almost exclusively to
butter, but the first steps have also been
successfully taken to manufacture cheese and
condensed milk, and to open up a regular
market for fresh pork, hams, and bacon.
The exports of Victorian butter have risen
from 254,000 cwt. in 1903 to 410,000 cwt. in
1906.
Owing to its fertile soil and genial climate
Dairy Farming may be carried on in every
district in Victoria. For the most part the
cows are fed solely on the natural pastures,
little provision either in the way of food or
shelter being thought necessary. Progressive
farmers, however, find that it pays them to
grow fodder for their herd and to shelter the
animals in the winter, and any one beginning
in Victoria is advised to make up his mind to
cultivate a certain area of his land from the
first, instead of trusting to grazing alone.


DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.
The southern half of Victoria is divided,
roughly speaking, into the Western District
and Gippsland. Two-thirds of the dairy cows
are kept in these portions of the State. The
Western District is famed for its rich soil of
volcanic origin. Every town and hamlet has
its butter factory. Some idea of farming con-
ditions here will be gathered from the section
on “Australia Felix’' which follows.
Gippsland is a district of rolling hills and
dowms, and of a comparatively heavy rainfall.
Many parts were once covered with dense
forests, but these are rapidly passing away
before the pioneer. Every railway station has
become a centre of the dairying industry, and
cans of cream are always in evidence on the
platforms. Owing to its suitable climate
Gippsland has become the centre of maize
growing in the State, and much of this crop
reaches the market in the form of butter and
pork.
In the North the summers are warmer and
drier, but the soil is perhaps even more prolific
than in the southern parts of Victoria. In the
following pages Part I. gives an idea of a well-
managed dairy farm which depends on the
natural rainfall, and Part 111. shows what
results may be achieved off a small area under
irrigation.
The manufacturing and marketing of the
butter is carried on, to a very large extent, on
a co-operative basis, the factories being owned
and managed by the farmers who supply the
cream. Two hundred factories are scattered
throughout the State, the largest of them
producing upwards of forty tons of butter per
week in the height of the season. Where the
farm is close to the factory the milk is taken to
the creamery, where it is separated, and the
corresponding quantity of skim milk is returned
to the farmer. In other cases the farmer owns
his separator, the milk is passed through the
machine as soon as the cows are milked, and
the cream is sent to the factory by road or rail
every day or two according to the size of the
farm.
Government Assistance to the Farmer.
Every branch of the producing interests is
steadily fostered by the Government of Vic-
toria in a way that may sound strange to the
British farmer. Besides the facilities for
acquiring farms and homes (particulars of
which are given on page 3 of this cover) the
Government employs dairy supervisors, who
assist the farmer with information and advice
on matters relating to the farm and herd. The
produce is conveyed by the railways (which
belong to the Government) at special low rates.
It is received into the Government cool stores,
where it is graded and frozen ready for export.
The State has made a contract with the White
Star and other lines of steam-ships, securing
regular despatch, a minimum temperature, and
a very low rate of freight for the British
markets. It costs less to send butter from a
farm in Victoria to London than it does to send
it from a farm in Ireland.
We do not attempt to compare the advantages
of Victoria as a field for dairy farming
with those of other countries. The following
pages tell their own story. They show what
has been done in every part of the State, and
give the would-be emigrant an idea of what he
may himself aim at and accomplish in a few
years if he keeps steadily to sound lines of farm
practice.
Emigrants intending to start dairy farming at
once on a closer settlement farm should have at
least available when they land in Victoria.
Those with less capital than this may start
under the provisions of the Improved Small
Floldings Act, or else work for a time on a farm,
and thus gain experience and save money.
There are always plenty of good openings for
willing farm workmen in Victoria.


No. ].]
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA
A STORY OF SUCCESSFUL WORK.
I.—AN UP-TO-DATE DAIRY FARM
GENERAL VIEW OF FARM BUILDINGS.
Some of the dairy cows in lucerne paddock.
After driving about 6 miles south of the city of
Bendigo, along a bush track through thinly-timbered
country, it is a igreat treat to meet with a practical, go-
ahead, and up-to-date dairy farmer in the person of Mr.
George Lowe, of “ Kedleston Dairy,” Mandurang, the
owner of the farm under review. The farm, which
consists of 260 acres of land, is securely fenced and
subdivided into convenient paddocks, ranging from 10
to 80 acres, each paddock being provided with a sub-
stantial gate painted white. The Sheepwash Creek runs
through the property, and it is on the flat near the creek
that Mr. Lowe cultivates about 40 acres for hay. Por-
tions of the flat have been under constant cultivation for
forty-five years, returning on an average
2\ to* 3 tons of hay to the acre. These
good returns are largely accounted for by
the practical and sensible method of con-
serving the whole of the farm-yard and
liquid manure, and turning it to account.
The balance of the farm, with the excep-
tion of 2 acres of orchard adjoining the
homestead, and 3 acres of lucerne,
is devoted to grazing the dairy herd.
Last year the 3-acre paddock was
sown with a crop of oats, drilled
in at the rate of 1 bushel to the
acre; the lucerne was sown broadcast
at the rate of 10 lbs. to the acre. The
oats were cut for silage, and the lucerne was at once
irrigated, and grew splendidly, giving three cuttings
during the first year. The owner, with the aid of irri-
gation, intends going in strongly for rye grass, clover,
and lucerne growing.
1176.
NOTES BY THE WAY.
Dairy cows of good milking strain may be
bought in Victoria at from £8 to £lO each. The
hay grown for winter feeding is made chiefly
from oats or wheat. These crops are harvested
a little before maturity. The same crops are
also used for silage.
Thirty-seven Good Cows.
The dairy herd consists, of thirty-seven head of good
dairy sorts, the Ayrshire strain predominating. They
return on an average 2% to 3 gallons per. day, and the
milk is retailed in Bendigo with two delivery carts daily,
being sold by the quart. Mr. Lowe has built up' the
herd by constantly culling the duffers, and never losing
sight of the fact that it is necessary to have a pure sire,
descended from a milking strain, to breed from. The
cows are stall-fed over night, thoroughly groomed every
day, and bedded down with plenty of straw. Mr.
Lowe finds this system gives handsome returns, inasmuch
THE MILKING-SHED AND BYRE.
that it provides one of the most: valuable products of the
farm, abundance of farm-yard manure for cultivation
purposes, besides the benefit of not having to go out into
the paddocks on a cold, frosty, or wet morning to yard
the cows.


The cow byre is built with lofty walls, is well lighted
and ventilated, and opens on to a splendidly paved and
beautifully drained court-yard. There are twenty-eight
bails, 5 feet wide, paved with nice flat blue sandstone,
with a gutter i ft. 6 in. at the rear of the cows. A drain,
which is i ft. 2 in. wide x 4 in. deep, conveys all drain-
age from the cows and farm-yard buildings generally into
a 6-feet brick underground tank, puddled with clay, and
afterwards cemented. On this tank there is erected a fairly
THE HOMESTEAD.
high pump, and when full, which takes about six weeks,
the contents are pumped into a tank on wheels, made
for the purpose, and distributed on the land, or on a
large heap of soil, which is turned and well mixed at
various intervals, and makes splendid manure. This
simple and effective method of conserving this valuable
product at a minimum cost is worthy of the attention
of every dairy farmer in the State.
Irrigation as an Aid.
Every dairy farmer knows the value of
an unlimited supply of fresh water con-
served for growing green fodder for his
dairy herd during the hot, dry months of
summer. Here a large dam has been made
with a holding capacity of about a, million
and a half gallons of water, built 20 feet
above the level of the homestead. A 2-
inch main pipe from the darn is laid on to
different parts of the buildings, and is
found a great convenience for flushing down
the bails and drains. For irrigation pur-
poses, the water is drawn, over the bank by
a 4-inch syphon, which gives an ample sup-
ply for irrigating the lucerne and maize
crops during the summer months.
Feeding Methods.
The Silo. —The method of conserving and converting
into silage the green succulent feed, which is so plentiful
everywhere, as a rule throughout the spring, must in the
near future be adopted by every dairyman. Mr. Lowe
is so pleased with his short experience that he intends
erecting another overhead silo. The one now in use on
the farm has a 70-ton capacity, being 18 feet high, 16
ft. 10 in. in diameter, with 4x2 uprights, and
3 x i- battens, and lined with 2 2-gauge
galvanized iron, riveted. The roof is
constructed of thatch, tied down to ordi-
nary saplings secured from the bush close
by, and it throws the water off splen-
did 1 v.
Growing the Crop for the Silo. —The 6
acres of cultivation land are manured with
sixteen loads of farm-yard manure to the
acre, and are well ploughed and worked to
a fine tilth. It was sown in May with oats
at the rate of ij bushels to the acre, and
the crop was taken off about the end of
November; the 6 acres were immediately
reploughed and sown broadcast with maize,
and irrigated from the dam three times
during the season. Last year it grew to
a height of 10 feet in some places; but,
taking the crop as a whole, it averaged 7
feet, being so heavy that the maize binder-
won Id not cut it.
1 illing the Stlo. — Ihe chaff-house is quite close to the
silo, and has a door in the roof for the elevator, which
worked with a chain belt running on two sprockets,
" ith cups about 1 foot apart. The green fodder is
carted up to a big door in the top of the wall, ana
thrown in almost on the chaffcutter, doing away with the
double handling. The chaffcutter, which, keeps the
ENGINE-ROOM, CHAFF-HOUSE, SILO, AND HAY-STACK.
2
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


carters going, is driven by a 3I horse-power oil engine,
and cuts about f inch long, working the elevator at the
same time. The silo is filled twice a' year, once with
the oats, and then with maize.
Fceding.— The fodder, which is taken from the silo
by means of a chute, is used at the rate of eight bags
a day. It is mixed with 3 bushels of bran, and
feeds 28 cows dajiy during the summer months. During
the winter the fodder is used at the rate of six bags
of maize silage, four bags oaten chaff, and 6 bushels
of bran. The silage was found to- be so succulent that
it contained enough moisture to sufficiently damp this
ration of feed without any addition of water. Mr.
Lowe speaks very highly of the great benefits to be
derived from always having abundance of silage for both
summer and winter feeding, and the condition of his
herd speaks volumes for the soundness of his methods.
The whole of the farm work is carried out by Mr.
Lowe and his two sons, except during harvesting, when
a casual hand is employed. Within a radius of 15
miles of Bendigo, there are thousands of acres of waste
lands similar to this farm, which are eminently adapted
for dairying and intense culture. In its unimproved
state it does not look very inviting, but I am convinced,
after inspecting this farm of Mr. Lowe’s that, with the
aid of water and manure, and not a great deal of labour,
this vast wilderness could be converted and trans-
formed into smiling and lucrative dairy farms. This
would give employment to thousands of men, who would
be comfortably settled and enabled to earn a livelihood,
besides helping to maintain and build up’ the city of
Bendigo.
HINTS FOR THE
NEW SETTLER.
The foregoing account of
a dairy farm in the northern mF' A'
district in Victoria is se- \
district in Victoria is se-
lected because it shows what
has been accomplished under
much less favorable condi-
tions than those which
obtain throughout the
greater part of the State.
Bendigo, one of our great
quartz mining centres, is
surrounded with compara-
tively poor land. The rain-
fall is about 20 inches a year,
yet it is seen that with in-
dustry and Judicious man-
agement there is no difficulty
in maintaining a comfortable
home. The construction of
a dam to hold from 5,000 to
10,000 cubic yards of water,
like the one described above,
may be carried out on most
farms, and the advantages
which accrue are such that
every farmer should aim at
accomplishing this as early
as possible. All through the
northern parts of Victoria
marvellous results are obtained by irrigation carried on during
the summer months. Lucerne, maize, and various species of
sorghums are the crops most generally grown. The great
irrigation districts of Victoria lie still further north. In them
the water is supplied from channels constructed and main-
tained by the Government.
Another point in which Australia differs from other parts of
the world is in the fact that of artificial manures phosphoric
acid alone is required to produce exceedingly satisfactory
crops. The amount required is remarkably small, averaging
for wheat only £ cwt. superphosphate (containing 20 per cent,
phosphoric acid) to the acre, and for fodder crops from 1 to
2 cwt. to the acre. Throughout the north of Victoria sufficient
nitrogen and potash may be supplied with the farm yard
manure to fulfil all requirements of the crop. The use of
nitrate of soda or of sulphate of ammonia, the two most
expensive forms of artificial fertilizers, is not necessary in
most of the northern parts of this State.
3
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


IT—AUSTRALIA FELIX.
Perhaps few places can be found where the people are
more industrious and thrifty or the land more fertile
than in the district of Koroit. It is an accepted axiom
that the capital value of land is determined by the amount
—or rather the value —of produce it can be
made to grow yearly, and when it is men-
tioned that the price of land in this district
ranges between £4O and per acre,
some idea may be gained of the returns se-
cured from it. In the borough of Koroit,
the municipal valuation averages per
acre, and a strip of country from Den-
nington to Rosebrook, about 12 miles long, H
with a varying width averaging miles,
and comprising about 30 square miles in W&f J
area, is just as fertile, its continued fer-
tility being chiefly due to splendid man- jPu-rMr'dfC?
agement. Each farmer notes closely not only l'^----L. r -
the result of his own efforts, but also care-
fully observes the methods practised by the
leading cultivators in the neighbourhood. Therefore, if
a new variety of seed be successful, it isi only a matter of
a couple of seasons when it has spread throughout the
THRASHING GLENROSE BARLEY AND OATS.
entire district; or, if any new development in tillage or
the order of the rotation of crops takes place, or the use
of improved implements or stock, the lesson is not lost.
Unless people are up early in the morning and watch
every opportunity they cannot profitably hold such high-
priced land. In this connexion it may be mentioned that
some of the land which 20 years ago was deemed to have
been exhausted has now been made by forethought and
management to yield crops as good as are obtained from
the best of it. By slipshod methods the soil became
hungry, and poor crops of barley, hay, even potatoes and
grass, were the rule. The potatoes were impoverished
and blistery, and the cereals showed yellow and sickly,
clumps of more vigorous growth here and there through
the paddocks. The pursuit of a comprehensive scheme
of rotation of crops, and the adoption of dairying and
rational cultivation have brought the fertility of the farms
up to a very high point; in fact, instances may be found
where the problem of “ how to prevent the undue growth
GLENROSE DAIRY COWS.
of straw in the barley and oaten crops ” is being seriously
studied, for, when too heavy, the rain and wind spread
the crops flat on the ground.
In order to convince readers in other
districts of this State or elsewhere, I
have obtained permission from certain far-
mers to mention their names; consequently,
the systems of cultivation and their re-
sults may be seen by any one. Of
course, in doing, this, I owe an apology
to hundreds of others who grow equally
good crops and secure similar returns. I
would recommend any one interested in
the rotation of crops to pay a visit to
the district at any time of the year, but
preferably during the months of Novem-
ber or December, for a more sugges-
tive object-lesson, as far as closer settle-
ment and thorough farming are con-
cerned, cannot be seen in- any part of the Com
monwealth.
GLENROSE FARM.
Mr. D. Mooney’s Glenrose Farm, Illowa, of 155 acres,
was the first I visited. Prior to last year it consisted of
112 acres, when 43 acres, costing 10s. per acre, or
;£ 2 >47 2 > were added; whilst about seven years before
only 82 acres were occupied. The growth of this farm is
specifically referred to, as it is typical of the district that
all the most successful farmers began in a small way, and
after having thoroughly mastered the management of their
little properties added to them as opportunity occurred.
4
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


Glenrose Farm is subdivided into 13 paddocks, 72 acres
under grass, and 12 acres of lucerne, making 84 acres
chiefly devoted to dairying; and 30 acres of potatoes,
27 acres barley, 14 acres oaten hay account for the re-
mainder. The pasture consists of English rye-grass and
white clover, but, on account of the green and vigorous
growth of cow-grass knee-deep on a neighbour’s farm, it
it believed that an addition of cow-grass to the mixture
would be an advantage. This cow-grass was sown with
a mixture of rye-grass, but the former had evidently taken
complete possession, and at the moment was showing in
full bloom. Mr. Mooney states that the legumes are not
“ so hard on the ground” as rye-grass, as they cover the
surface and prevent loss of moisture through evaporation.
In ploughing, the rye-grass sod turns over dry, and has
a skin requiring more cultivation to make a good seed
bed. When such is secured, it is powdery and hungry
in appearance, unlike that after cow-grass and clovers.
When turned up after the latter the soil remains more
open, free and crumbly,and altogether in better heart
and condition; it seems to hold the moisture better, and
does not require the same amount of cultivation.
Sometimes a paddock of rye-grass is saved in the spring
and cut for hav, and although lucerne does not do as
well here as I have seen it in many other parts of the
State, it is regarded as a great adjunct to the other
pastures. The lucerne was cut twice this season, the
second cutting being left on the ground. It is intended
to graze it until next spring. The stack of 12 tons saved
MILKING TIME AT GLENROSE FARM.
will be given to the cows before winter comes on. Mr.
Mooney is well satisfied with lucerne, and intends sowing
down another paddock. He also adds that “ every dairy
farmer should have lucerne.” When grazed in winter it
has a tendency to swell the cattle, but this is counteracted
with the hay fed. No ill-effects have been noticed in the
milk, and doubtless this is accounted for by the care
taken in feeding. The cows are not at anv time allowed
the free run of the lucerne paddocks, being turned in
for a couple of hours each day, when an increase in the
milk supply always follows. Forty-eight dairy cows, 50
sheep, 8 two-year-old and 10 yearling" heifers are kept.
The sheep act as scavengers in clearing up the paddocks,
and supply mutton. When all the flock are fat, they are
sold and replaced with another lot of stores. The heifers
are to replace old cows and culls, and a margin is pro-
vided, allowing for some not coming up to expecta-
tions.
The cows are all crossbreds (Ayrshire and Dairy Short-
horn), with the Ayrshire blood predominating. Calving
occurs mostly in the months of May. June, and July,
with other cows coming in at different periods, so that
milking is carried on all the year round. At present a
Durham bull is kept, and 43 cows are milked, a couple
of months’ spell being given each member of the herd
before calving. Up till June last, onlv 25 cows were
kept, but with the increase in the size of the farm, other
cows were bought, and through the pressure of increased
work and responsibility, together with the unreliability of
outside labour, Mr. Mooney is making ar-
rangements for the installation of milking
machines before the opening of another
season.
All the milk is delivered to the Koroit
Butter Factory, and the results were as fol-
low :
Month. Gallons. Test Price. Cheques.
Jan. ... 877 4.3 421 lB 2
Feb. ... 439 4.3 221 gd. 859
Mar. ... 280 4.5 141 rod. 517 6
Apr. ... 168 4.7 89 i4d. 5 3 J o
May ... 173 4.0 76 366
June ... 926 4.0 411 rogd. 17 19 7
July ... 2,314 4.0 1,027 rod. 42 15 11
Aug. ... 3,075 3.9 1,330 iod. 55 8 4
Sept. ... 3,101 3.8 1,306 5l 13 io
Oct. ... 3,623 3.8 1,525 iod. 6q 10 10
3,623 3.8 1,525 lod. 63 10 10
Nov. ... 3,425 4.0 1,519 9sd. 60 2 6
Dec. ... 2,957 4.0 1,312 gAd. 51 18 8
2,957 4.0 1,312 gid. 51 18 8
Bonus ... 3 5 9
21,358
Total v. ... 7 2
5
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


Twenty-five cows was the extent of the herd for the
first half of tthe year, and 48 for the latter half. The
average return comes out in the neighbourhood of
per head ; of course, as the larger number were milked
for the flush portion of the season, the true average_can-
not be ascertained.
Mrs. Moonev
oney’s average pocket money per week from this
rould certainly not be less than 10s. Some
of Leghorn fowls are on the place. Of
othing is purchased for them, grain seconds and
being the only food prepared. No old fowls are
d a simple and ingenious method is followed to
source would
50 head
course, nothing
potatoes
kept, and
determine the ages of each season’s birds.
A pig-ring is attached to the right ankle of
the first year’s chickens; the birds of the
second year carry rings on the left ankle,
whilst the third year’s birds are left with-
out any ; then, as the next brood of chickens
comes in, the old birds with the right ank-
lets are all fattened for the pot. The
next year the left anklet poultry are treated
likewise, and so on, the flock thus being
kept in full profit.
CROPS.
The 30 acres of potatoes are of the New
Zealand “ Pink Eye ” variety, with the ex-
ception of 1 acre of “ Brownell’s Beauty.”
The latter turned out a failure, having
missed, although they did fairly well, but
not so good as the “ Pink Eyes,” during
the previous year. The yield of the main
crop just dug comes out at 6 tons to the
PENS FOR EGG PRODUCTION.
PIGS.
Mr. Mooney grew 27 acres of Battledore barley, re-
puted to be grub-resisting, but he naively added: “In a
bad year the caterpillars do not respect the reputation.”
He thrashed from the whole area 1,275 bushels, or 47
bushels to the acre; 13 acres of it averaging 55 bushels,
the estimate for the Avhole Koroit district being from 45
to 50 bushels. The crop is said to be light on account
of the severe weather experienced, but of course the
absence of grubs this season is in the farmers’ favour.
A few years back, 68 bushels to the acre was the yield
on this farm, and the nonrest crop grown averaged IS
bushels. Formerly “ Chevalier ” barley was cultivated,
but as it had to be cut too green on account of grubs, a
good sample was impossible, and conseouentlv it was
abandoned. Bariev is invariably grown after the potato
crop, and is followed with oaten hav. About the Ist of
Tune, the barlev is sown, and the paddock is cleared again
for the run of pigs and cows by the first week in January.
Last season the stock had possession before Christmas,
and in a favorable vear, after the pigs get the run of
the paddock for nicking uo. a green growth of barlev
comes up, providing splendid green stuff for the cows,
and helping materially to tide over summer, autumn, and
early winter.
Some 60 pigs are kept, all reared on the farm from five
brood sowsi. Berkshire sows and a white Yorkshire boar
form the breeding stock. Until quite recently, BerkshTes
were practicallv the only pigs reared in the district, but
continued in-breeding weakened their constitution, and
now a first cross of the white Yorkshire, Berkshire, and
Tamworths is in general demand, as the progeny are
more robust, Quicker growing, and better fattening pigs.
The bacon curers like them very well. Two litters a year
of from 8 fi> 12 are secured, with an average (after allow-
ing for accidents and deaths) of not less than 8 at a
time, or 16 pigs for each sow. When rearing the young,
sows are given bran and lime-water in the food to keep
up a good flow of milk, and make the voung pigs healthv
and vigorous. After providing for bran and other food,
&c., the pigs bring in considerably over ,£lOO per year.
POULTRY.
On asking about the poultry, Mr. Mooney at once went
in search of Mrs. Moonev, as she has sole charge of that
particular department. It was quite a treat to meet such
an enthusiast. Although no account was kept of the eggs,
I learnt that, in addition, to a plentiful supply for the
house, at least £1 worth per week is frequently sold, and


ROTATION SYSTEM.
The rotation system most suitable to dairy
farming in Victoria is as follows
First year . Oats.
Second year . Peas or Beans.
Third year.. .. Fodder and Root Crops.
Fourth year Barley.
Fifth and Sixth Grass.
For the fodder crop a mixture of oats, barley,
and peas may be sown in March and used as
green feed during winter, followed by maize
sown in October.
PLANTATION 2\ YEARS OLD
Fourteen acres Algerian oats for hay are
grown, yielding about 3I tons to the acre.
Hay is spread in tire paddock for the cows
in the winter, as well as providing chaff for
the horses. Last season it was chaffed and
fed to the cows in boxes, in addition to
being given whole on the pasture, the pad-
dock system affording the better _ results.
The barlev straw stacks also provide feed
and shelter. In addition to the cows do-
ing better outside, the pastures on which
hav and straw are spread benefited, and
showed much improvement as compared
with the areas not touched. Particular
emphasis was laid on the paying aspect of
feeding hay to cows. Mr. Mooney
warmly pointing out that “ it keeps them strong in the
winter, and they come in in better condition and fuller
profit.”
SHELTER.
All the cows were rugged last winter with rugs home-
made of two bags, with beneficial results. Boxthorn
hedges are grown for shelter, and four groups of 5 chains
each, as well as blue gums, are situated in favorable
angles of the paddocks, those where the cows are chiefly
kept at night being particularly sheltered with plantations.
The blue gums were grown from seed set in boxes, and
then planted out.
SUMMARY.
None of the crops or yields are exceptional, for the
returns from the cows have been eclipsed in the State
and elsewhere —both in and beyond the Western District.
The estimate for the potato crop is not heavy, neither is
there anything remarkable about the farm. The fact
that intelligent and thoughtful cultivation has gradually-
enhanced the value of the property to an extent probably
unequalled elsewhere is the most impressive point.
YANGERY PARK HERD. “ A COW TO THE ACRE.”
Although it would be inquisitorial to supply definite re-
turns, enough has been adduced to convince any one that
with such management a loss would be impossible. In
making up the results at the end of the year, the question
resolves itself into one of relative profit depending on
the season and prices. Although the capital sunk in the
farm is large, there will be a considerable margin on the
right side after interest on outlay, wages, wear and tear,
and all expenses are provided for. While in a very bad
season it may not amount to more than a couple of hun-
dred pounds, in a good year it may run into over three
times that sum.
YANGERY PARK FARM.
Across the road from “ Glenrose,” is the property of
Mr. John Lindsay, Yangery Park, lllowa, which consists
of 81 acres, with an additional 21 acres adjoining, mak-
ing 102 acres altogether. He has also' some 65 acres of
bush land a few miles away where some of the young
stock and dry cows are grazed. Sixty-seven acres are
under grass, 60 being occupied by cattle, and 7 by horses.
There are 13 acres of potatoes, 16 of barley, 3 of oaten
bay, 1 of mangels, and 6 of garden, trees for shelter,
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA


pig paddocks, &c. A mixture of English rye-grass, cow-
grass, and white clover comprise the pasture. There are
at present 55 cows on the property, 53 of which are
milking, whilst up to 60, or a cow to the acre of grass,
have been kept on the place. Some 60 head of poultry,
including a few ducks and turkeys complete the live
stock equipment, and keep the house going, bringing in
about 1 os, in cash per week.
SEASONABLE SUGGESTIONS.
A feature in connexion with Mr. Lindsay’s management
is that he not only feeds all the hay and straw to h's
stock, but also buvs fodder from the neighbours. Last
year he purchased 10 tons of oaten straw at 10s. per
ton, and 5 tons of bran at making a total of
for cow fodder. The straw is chaffed and fed with
bran, and sometimes oats. Fifteen pounds’ worth of
wheat and £lO worth of pollard were purchased for pig
FLOWERFIELD HERD. MILKING TIME.
feed. Mr. Lindsay is a firm believer in buying feed for
cows and pigs, and in this respect he is following the
practice of the most scientific countries in the world.
Denmark, according to last year’s figures, which have just
reached me, imported maize, oil-cake, &c., as fodder for
cows to the value of and exported to Great
Britain worth of manufactured food,
almost wholly dairy products —butter, ham, bacon, pork,
lard, &c. This is a lesson that ought not to be lost sight
of by Victorian farmers. There is a desire to find a
market abroad for hay, chaff, and other kinds of fodder.
In this case it has been found economical to feed hay,
straw, chaff, and bran to cows, grain and pollard to pigs,
and thereby make more money than by selling the fodder
outright.
GENERAL FEATURES.
Clumps of hedges and trees provide shelter in winter,
and in this respect Yangery Park is well provided, there
being any amount of timber grown by the former owner
of the property, and now wisely conserved; consequently
it is not considered necessary to- rug. The farm is divided
into some eleven paddocks, and the rotation is typical of
the system throughout the district, viz., potatoes, oats,
barley, and four years’ grass. It will be noted, however,
that the barley is sown after the oat crop. Only two
calves were reared this year, whilst last season twelve
was the number. Thirty pigs, including five Berkshire
brood sows, are kept. One hundred fat pigs were sold
during the last twelve months at over £2
' I per head. There is an average litter of
about eight to each sow, with two litters
for each season.
The following is a list of Mr. Lindsay’s
milk cheques for the last twelve months,
with full particulars:
Month. Gallons. Test' Price. Cheques.
Jan. ... 2,484 4.2 1,164 856. 3
2,484 4.2 1,164 £4l 3 9
Feb. ... 1,480 4.4 729 gd. 27 6 9
Mar. ... 1,217 4.6 687 rod. 28 7 6
1,317 4.6 687 lod. 28 7 6
Apr. ... 793 4.5 400 i4d. 23 6 8
May ... 1,244 4-3 599 io£d. 26 4 1
June ... 1,709 4.2 800 rojd. 35 o o
July ... 1,946 4.1 887 rod. 36 19 2
Aug. ... 2,449 3-9 1,059 iod. 44 o 6
Sept. ... 2,924 3.9 1,264 956. 62 o 7
Oct. ... 3,861 3.6 1,534 lod. 63 18 4
Nov. ... 3,886 4.0 1,725 gjd. 68 5 7
Dec. ... 3,600 4.2 1,687 956. 66 15 6
2 7>6g3
Bonus
7 r 9 11
Total
8 4
POTATOES.
Mr. Lindsay finds the New Zealand Pink Eye the best
cropper by a couple of tons to the acre. The old red
(i.e., Brown’s River) has not yielded well during late
years. The unfavorable winds are deemed to be to some
extent responsible. The stalks of the red potato are
smaller, and get greatly tossed about, growth being thus
retarded, whilst, as the New Zealand Pink Eyes spread
closer to the ground, the leaves only are affected by the
high winds. The unsaleable small potatoes are fed to
cows and pigs.
8
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


FLOWERFIELD FARM.
About a mile north from the Koroit Post-office is situ-
ated Mr. J. Martin’s Flowerfield Farm, of 316 acres —
241 are under grass, 39 potatoes, 22 oats, and 14 wheat.
Twenty acres of the grass are reserved for meadow hay.
Thirty cows are kept, and have brought in monthly
cheques as follow :
Milk „.
(Gallons). Cheques.
(Gallons). Che( l ues -
£ s. d. £ s. d.
1,640 ... 27 3 3 J >33 6 ••• 22 16 9
1,293 ... 23 5 9 2,733 ••• 37 12 6
1,198 ... 25 15 10 2,971 ... 50 II 9
815 ... 24 11 2 17,201 57 17 5
806 ... 18 12 9 Bonus ... 7 7 5
600 ... 13 11 3
695 ... 13 TO to
£339 13 4
908 ... 16 16 8
FLOWERFIELD PIGS.
Mr. Martin’s method of rotation is similar to those
already described. A number of very fine Shrop-
shire sheep are kept. Some 200 sheep and no
lambs were fattened and sold to the butchers last year.
£5O worth of wool was also disposed of, and the
YEARLING SHROPSHIRE EWES.
“ Flowerfield ” rams and ewes are regular prize winners
at all the district shows.
OLOVERDALE FARM.
Adjoining Mr. Lindsay’s property is Mr. W. Stacey’s
“ Cloverdale ” Farm, of 105 acres, 40 acres of which
are under pasture, 30 potatoes, 20 barley, 11 oaten hay,
2 mangels, and ij maize, 1 acre being leased to a neigh-
bour. The 30 cows kept yielded £2BO for the year.
Seventy pigs brought in £ l5O, and deducting £2O for
food, &c., A l 3° ne L Different varieties of potatoes are
grown, embracing 11 acres of “ New Zealand Pink
Eyes,” 13 acres of
“ Brown’s River,” 5 acres
of “ Snowflake,” and 2
acres of “ Brownell’s
Beauty,” but Mr. Stacey
has made up his mind to
drop the last-mentioned in
future, as they have not
come up to expectations.
Thrashing was just com-
pleted;, and one paddock
of Battledore barley yielded
63 bushels to the acre, the
average for the whole crop
•coming out at 56 bushels.
In the barley-stubble is
appearing burr, white and
Japanese clovers. Mr.
Stacey intends to feed pigs
on the barley if it does
not realize ss. per bushel,
and he is satisfied from
past experience that it will
pay him to do so. It may
be mentioned that 14 head
of young stock, 6 horses,
and the pigs are grazed on
the farm.
9
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


GENERAL COMMENTS.
For the many now beginning to farm under the Closer
Settlement scheme, it will be opportune to give further
particulars of cultivation and of the seed sown per acre,
&c., &c. The chief purpose of this rather rambling nar-
rative is to indicate the methods practised by farmers in
POTATO DIGGING AT MR. W. CROWE’S.
a locality famed for its high-priced land. So far, it will
be seen that the profitable cultivation of the soil, the svs-
tem of rotation, and the feeding of hay, grain, and straw
to' the stock are the points most commended. In addition
to these, however, it should be mentioned that the imple-
ments, machinery, and horse-power have been studied
closely with a view to increased efficiency and greater
economy in working.
I can recollect as a lad when the Clydesdale horses were
in general use. The heavy work in connexion with farm-
ing, viz., the carting of produce by road to Warrnambool
or Port Fairy, favoured this breed. Carting operations
began in January, and continued daily right through to
the end of April—the commencement of the ploughing
season. Sellar’s single-furrow ploughs were used for put-
ting in potatoes, each row requiring three sods of gh
inches. An acre per day was considered good, and it
required a smart team long hours and constant work to
sow r J acres in a dav. Very heavy double-furrow ploughs
were also the rule, and SO' with all farm appliances and
operations they were heavy, slow, and cumbersome.
Now the Clydesdales are being supplanted by the Suffolk
Punch, and a cross of these breeds, the animals being
powerful as well as more active and possessing greater
stamina.
In sowing potatoes, a plough of half the weight of the
old-fashioned implement, of much lighter draught and
turning a 14-inch sod, is used, so the two furrows cover
each row of potatoes instead of three as before.
HEAVY CEREAL GROWTHS.
As further evidence of the weight of cereal crops
grown, it may be mentioned that the twine taken to bind
an 11-acre paddock of oats was 19J balls of 45 lbs.
weight each, or a total of 88 lbs. at yjd, which comes
to exactly ss. per acre. A 25-acre crop of parley required
48 balls, or a sum of ss. 3~5d. per acre fcr twine. Both
these crops were grown where for 50 yeas the land has
been cropping and grazing l alternately wthout artificial
manure.
PROPORTION OF CROPS T) PASTURE,
FIVE FARMS.
Total Acres Grass. Potatoes. Barley Oats.
J Fodder.
280 164 46 25 33 T 2
'55 84 3° 27 ... i 4
io 6 67 13 16 ... 10
ios 4° 3° 20 ••• 1 1
ioo 40 22 17 20
746 395 141 10 5 53 53
It will be seen that on an average 51 aces out of every
100 are under grass, 20 acres under pohtoes, 14 sown
with barley, 7 with oats, 6 with hay, and 2 of mangels,
maize, &c.
POTATO MEMORANDA
Potato land is usually ploughed twice, and the early
seed planted to a depth of 4! inches. The crops are
generally dug before the stalks have witheud, or any hot
weather experienced to injure the tubers. Vith the latter
crop, however, an extra inch in depth, 01 5?, inches, is
made for the seed in order that a good covering against
the hot February sun may be secured, lows are sown
28 inches wide, and sets planted from iS to 20 inches
apart.
The crop is usually drill-harrowed three times; on each
occasion the implement is fitted with different tines.
When the plants appear above the ground a drill-harrow
is used, then hand-hoed between. The second drill-
harrowing, as well as repeating the former operation, puts
a little earth up h> the stalks, and the last harrowing is
done as the rows are about to close. With hoeing, weed-
ing, and hilling-up, cultivation operations are completed,
and a clean, healthy and attractive-looking crop is the
result. Probably not more that a few solitary stalks of
“ fat hen ” (Chenotodium album), or docks, show to the
acre when digging time arrives. Sometimes, however,
rain falls after hilling-up and before the ground is
covered with the stalks, when a luxuriant crop of “ fat
hen ” is the result. In heavy ground a two-horse scarifier
is used to burst up the soil, instead of the drill-harrow
for the second cultivation, the practice being varied accord-
ing to the condition of the land and its requirements.
10
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


CATTLE ON THE BANKS OF THE MURRAY.
Under the shade of Red Gum Trees (Eucalyptus Globulus).
and the rainfall is thereby
supplemented on at least a
portion of the holding.
I would like to mention
that, although the areas in
many cases seem large in
proportion to the number of
cows kept, it must be under-
stood that only a small part
of each farm is fully de-
veloped. The milking herds
are confined to the lucerne
patches and sorghum plots
for their food. I have en-
deavoured to obtain the area
on each farm under these
two magnificent fodders:
Farm No. i.— Area, 160
Acres.
Pasture (natural grass) 75 acres
Pasture (lucerne) ... 30 acres
Cultivation (wheat)... 50 acres
Orchard and Garden 5 acres
10 Dairy Cows.
140 Ewes and Lambs.
70 Lambs (sold).
10 Calves.
7 Horses.
3° pi g s -
lII.—DAIRYING UNDER IRRIGATION.
Unlike the farmers in the rich Western District who
started on small areas, the farmers of Swan Hill dis-
trict commenced on large holdings, and have yet to learn
much of the secret of getting the maximum return out
of a limited area, or, in other words, the adoption of
a system of intense culture. The progress and en-
thusiasm shown by many of the settlers, however, bid
fair to bring the state of productiveness of this district
up to the position which it should have attained years
ago, and to which it was originally intended owing to
its great fertility.
The land is a dark, grey loam, resting on heavy clay,
and forming what are termed the “flats,” or “Murray
Flats.” The chief feature of this land generally is its
richness, growing prolifically almost any crop sown on
it, provided sufficient moisture is made available. The
great difficulty, however, is the low rainfall —about 12
inches per annum —which renders artificial watering
necessary. This is now being done on a small scale,
and almost everv farm has its channels and its checks,
CROSSBRED (LINCOLN MERINO) LAMBS.
(A good type for export.)
11
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


WHEAT EN ROUTE FOR THE RAILWAY STATION.
The Malice scrub is seen in the background.
Whilst no definite record was kept of the dairy herd,
I was assured that the total return for cream for the
season covering eight months was over The calves
reared are valued at the modest sum of 30s. each, and
would represent ; the whole of the pigs were reared
on the place (no sales were effected during the season)
and are now worth an average of 15s. each, or a total
of M 22 ios. The progeny of 100 ewes, viz., no
lambs, some of which were sold at 12s. per head, equals
±,66, and to this must be added net for the wool
clip. The enhanced value of the ewes, which are now
all fit for the butcher, should be estimated at least at
another
The area under crops was not looking promising, and
was consequently cut for hay, of which there were 100
tons; this may be roughly valued at £2 a ton, repre-
senting £2OO standing. It will, therefore, be seen that,
whilst any of the different branches above-mentioned
did not give abnormal yields, the total sum received was
£441 lOS - The labour of working this farm, according
to its area, would not require more than the services of
a man and a boy. The cost of irrigation for crops is
2s. per acre if pumped, and is. if by gravitation; for
lucerne land a similar charge is made, and for pasture
(grass), is. and 6d. respectively. In the worst year
three waterings are the most that are required, and
usually the first tivo are by gravitation. As previously
mentioned, the grass land is rarely watered, so the cost
of irrigation on this farm would be confined to the culti-
vation and lucerne, costing for water,
and about £ 2 for labour in irrigating,
leaving a net return of 10s, for the
year’s operations.
Farm No. 2.
No. 2 farm is situated on the Murray,
about 6 miles from Swan Hill, and con-
sists of 100 acres, the whole of which is
under natural grasses. This farm is
readily irrigated from the river up to No-
vember by gravitation, but last season only
some 60 acres were irrigated once, at a cost
of 6d. per acre. Tire following are seven
months’ results:
Butter. £ s. d.
Aug. ... 12 cows —586 lbs. ... 22 o o
Sept. ... 14 „ 622 ~ ... 23 7 o
Oct. ... 14 „ 617 „ ... 23 3 o
Nov. ... 20 „ 783 ~ ... 29 7 o
Dec. ... 28 ~ 800 ~ •••32 2 6
Jan. ... 28 ~ 595 ~ ... 24 o o
Feb. ... 28 ~ 522 ~ ... 19 7 o
Ihe total yield for cream alone amounts to
£ x 73 6s. 6d., and if the average number of cows is
estimated, it will be found to be twenty, and the aver-
age return for each cow for the seven months under
review would be £8 13s. 3d., truly a remarkable return
from cows fed on natural pasture only. Whilst there
were 28 cows on the farm, it would not be fair to debit
the farm with that number until all were in profit, but
after the first year this should be done. The above,
however, demonstrates how prolifically the cows yield
when in profit.
In addition to the return for cream, 27 calves, worth
/,4o tos., and 27 pigs, worth £1 per head, were reared,
making a total return from 28 cows of £240 16s. 6d.
for seven months. Assuming that the milk yield is but
7-i2ths of the year’s yield from the cows, another
£ x2 3 16s. id. would be added, making a total of
2s. 7d. In one week in November, 239 lbs. of
butter were produced, representing within a fraction of
12 lbs. per cow for the week.
As before mentioned, no artificial fodders were grown,
but should a proportion of this farm be devoted to lucerne
and sorghum growing, the carrying capacity would be
doubled, with the aid of irrigation. The cows are of
mixed breeding, but are chiefly too beefy in appearance
to be high-grade dairy cows.
12
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA


Farm No. 3.
This farm consists of 320 acres, all under natural
grasses, and has a frontage to the river Murray. Two
hundred acres were irri-
gated by gravitation last
November at a cost of
per acre, the labour
volved costing another
per acre.
No of r
Cows. L s -
January 18 14 9
February 18 13 g
March x 8 12 2
April 18 13 12
May 18 7 4
June 18 6 18
July 20 12 15
August 22 21 12
September 24 32 3
October 27 31 8
November 27 27 o
December 27 34 6
Total 4 11
If the actual average of cows in milk in the above is
estimated, it will be found to run out at 21 cows for
the whole year, and the average yield from the cows
would be close up to £ll per head. Although the
average is 21 cows, it would not be fair, in this case
also, to debit the herd with cows that were not on the
farm during the whole of the year. As already stated,
nine were added during the second half of 1905.
The cows milk for ten months each year, and even
then great difficulty is experienced in drying them off.
No special attention was given the cows on this farm;
lucerne or sorghum is not grown, so the cows had to
depend entirely on the natural pastures. The milking
was done by the farmer, assisted by a boy and a girl; the
latter was engaged to assist in housework.
The area of the farm may appear large for a return
of 4s. nd., but other stock were fattened at an
estimated profit of Twenty calves, valued at
were reared, bringing the total up to 14s. nd.
This, however, is only a fraction of the possible yield
of land under a system of closer cultivation, and growing
of lucerne and other green fodders, for which the dis-
trict is so splendidly adapted. The owner assured me
that if tire land was under lucerne and properly attended
to, one dairy cow could be carried for every 2 acres
of pasture. This is not a high estimate of the carrying
capacity of this class of land under proper treatment,
and it is the opinion of many that if proper records
could be obtained it would be found that in many in-
stances one cow to the acre is carried.
The Murray frontage is at present an undeveloped province
of Victoria. It is being gradually brought under irrigation,
with most encouraging results. The three farms here described
will give an idea of the possibilities of this region. Further
down the river at Mildura an irrigated area of 10,000 acres
supports a prosperous settlement of 4,500 souls. New irrigation
areas, chiefly dairy farming, are now being established. Each
farm will have an irrigated area of from 30 to 50 acres, to be
devoted chiefly to the cultivation of lucerne and maize. A few
miles back in the Mallee an area of four or five hundred acres
will be attached to the frontage block for wheat growing. The
combination of wheat and dairy farming is likely to give most
satisfactory results. For particulars apply to the Agent-
General.
13
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


Gippsland forms the
South-Eastern Province of
Victoria, and is a country of
fertile hills, dense forests,
and heavy rainfall. Three-
fourths of this area are still
undeveloped. The efforts of
the pioneers have been ham-
pered by their taking up too
much land. The results ob-
tained from a small farm
such as that described be-
low show what can be done
by the combination of culti-
vation and grazing in most
parts of Victoria.
After the forests have been
partially cleared and the
scrub burnt off a mixture of
rye grass, cocksfoot, and
clovers is sown in the ashes.
A luxuriant growth of pas-
ture results. The fodder
crops are oats, maize, and
roots. Phenomenal crops of
maize are obtained in the
valleys, the average yield
being about 60 bushels to the
acre.
This farm consists of 46 acres, near Yarragon, Gipps-
land. The whole of the land is now cleared. The
last 9 acres are just being brought under the plough
for summer fodder crops for the dairy herd. These
crops are to consist of maize (flat red), mangels, and
sugar beet. The land was purchased about eight years
ago, being then in its natural state; the price paid was
something like per acre.
To the inexperienced it would appear that the amount
of labour entailed in reducing it from a wilderness to
its present state of high productivity was sufficient to
purchase the land without any capital whatever. This
is not the case, however, and the owner is thoroughly
satisfied with the result of his labour. Few men of his
vears can lay claim to having performed the pioneering
work he has done, and be able to take things com-
paratively easy on the fruits of his own efforts. We
believe this result is due, in the first place, to the in-
domitable pluck and energy of the man, assisted by the
fact that only a small area of land was worked upon.
Many men with five times the area of similar land failed
during their own lifetime, and even their families after
them have not arrived at the stage of advancement as
is seen in the case in the farm under review. Much
better would it have been had the original selectors been
allowed in densely-timbered country like this to take up
IV.—DAIRY FARMING IN GIPPSLAND
smaller holdings, say, 50 acres for each adult male in
the family. The same efforts concentrated on a smaller
area would produce quicker returns, and owing to the
prolific nature of the soil the produce taken off the
cleared portion would not only supply the necessaries
of life, but also help to pay for the portion of the
clearing of the remainder, and thus relieve the selector
of the necessity of the heavy toil of subduing and re-
claiming the whole of the land himself. He could
employ his time more profitably in the cultivation of the
land already cleared, and in tending his stock. This
feature stands out prominently in the case of the farm
under review.
The farm is divided into thirteen paddocks, varying
in size from 2 to 8 acres, and when asked the rea-
son for such close subdivision, we were informed that
as a certain area, no matter how small, was cleared and
made ready for the plough, it was placed under culti-
vation, so that it might be producing revenue, whilst the
remainder was being prepared. In this way prompt
returns were secured, and in the owner’s own words
“ the wolf was kept from the door.” Due care was taken
in the clearing of small areas that no unnecessary fencing
was erected, and those erected could be allowed to stand
permanently.
14
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA


Cows
in Milk.
Gallons
Milk.
Test.
Price
per lb.
Cheque.
£
d.
13
622
4.8
9 d.
I2
12
6
!3
568
4-7
8d.
to
I
4
13
5 2 4
4.8
8d.
9
9
2
10
482
4-3
7fd-
7
9
6
10
47 1
4- 1
7?d.
6
19
10
12
611
3-8
8d.
8
11
6
14
1,002
3-9
8d.
14
8
10
14
1,072
4-
7l<l.
iS
7
3
16
4-
7fd-
16
12
3
16
1,217
4.1
8d.
18
10
0
16
1,032
4.4
8|d.
18
10
8
16
729
4.6
lojfd.
16
1
11
16
679
4.6
lod.
14
12
6
In addition to clearing, the land is all underground
drained. Trenches about 2ft. 6in. deep are made every
chains, running north and south the full length of the
A COMFORTABLE FARM HOME, WELL SCREENED BY YOUNG TREES.
The yield for the season, from June to end of May,
is as follows. Payments are made every four weeks,
hence the inclusion of thirteen payments in the year:—-
June
July
A 169 5 7
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Jan.
F eb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
May
io,i68
farm. These are filled with split rails and covered with
tussocks, and the soil spread over the top. Little evi-
dence of this work can be seen on the surface, as the
grass is growing as thickly as on any other part of the
paddock. The result of this work, however, is apparent
in the healthy hue and the magnificent growth of the
grass. It is intended to intersect these drains with
others running east and west, so as to more thoroughly
drain the land.
The principal pastures grown are alsyke, cow grass,
and rye grass, a luxuriant growth of which is seen in all
the paddocks. Up to the present the whole of this farm
has been devoted to dairying, with the exception of about
2 acres that were sown in potatoes and onions last year,
and a similar area will be devoted to the same purpose
this year. Maize and root crops (mangels and sugar
beet) are the fodder crops grown, the former is fed in
the summer and autumn green, and the surplus conserved
in the form of ensilage. The method of making silage
is cheap, and evidently gives good results. The maize
is cut and carted into a stack, packed between upright
posts and well weighted; little or no waste takes
place, and the stock relish the food and yield well
on it.
The actual average yield of each cow taken from the
number of cows in milk each month is 726' gallons,
the value of which was £l2 is. lod. per cow per
year.
Amongst the herd were five heifers with their first
calf, and three of the cows aborted, but were kept
in milk. Some of the best of the cows are now very
old, but still continue to yield profitably; the whole are
of mixed breeding. A Shorthorn bull from a good dairy
cow is used for breeding purposes. In addition to the
twenty-one cows milking and to calve, there are ten head
of other stock, including three horses and one bull.
Last year fifteen poddies were sold, realizing jQi Bs.
each, and two fat cows were disposed of at each.
A two-year-old draught filly, the progeny of one of the
farm mares, is now valued at jQso.
o is the actual amount estimated as profit from
pigs.
The product from half-acre under onions was
and three-quarter acre potatoes Yorkshire hero
peas (5 bags) were grown and sold, realizing -£ 8 15s.
net.
Onions and potatoes were used for household pur-
poses, and 2 tons, of potatoes, are kept for seed, the
value of which is not taken into account.
The total result from sales as enumerated above is
jQil l 155., added to milk cheques os. qd. from
a 46-acre farm in one year. The enhanced value of the
two-year-old draught filly could for the year safely be
calculated at jQio. The 2 tons of seed potatoes would
give another bringing the total up to os. yd.,
or the respectable average of £6 12s. yd. per acre per
annum.
15
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA.


V.—A SUBURBAN HOMESTEAD.
One of the most striking instances of
what one man can accomplish successfully
by systematic rotation of crops came under
my notice lately when inspecting Mr.
Leonard FairhalFs dairy herd at Bur-
wood. The farm in question consists of
io acres of land, composed of grey sandy
loam, with a red clay subsoil. It is sub-
divided into three paddocks, varying from
2to 5 acres. The whole is drained by
underground pipes, Mr. Fairhall attribut-
ing a good deal of his success to thorough
drainage. Five acres are devoted exclu-
sively to intense cultivation. The balance
is sown down with grasses, and grazed by
the dairy herd. The farm has been carry-
ing 13 cows in full milk, 3 dry cows, and
1 horse, the dry cows coming in at varying
times of the year, and keeping up the milk
supply. The cows are in splendid condi-
tion, rather larger-framed than the general
run of herds, and of robust constitution.
They are milking at the present time 112
quarts daily; 80 quarts are sold wholesale
at yd. per gallon on the farm, the balance being
separated, and returning 21 lbs. of butter weekly,
which is sold on an average of is. per lb. all the
year round. The milk payments are 3s. fortnightly,
and with the sales of butter bring the monthly returns
from the 13 cows to £2O 10s.
The only feed purchased outside the crops grown on
the farm is star branning, which is used at the rate of
one bag per week, at a cost of 3s. 6d. per bag. It is
mixed with the green chaffed fodder. Mr. Fairhall does
not believe in carrying all his eggs in one basket, and
always has a crop of vegetables for sale coming on. At
the present time there are | acre of carrots (James in-
termediate and Belgians), \ an acre of millet and amber
cane, 1 acre of maize, and ij acres of oats. As soon
as the crops are harvested, the land is manured at the
rate of twelve loads of farm-yard manure (all produced on
the farm), and J cwt. of superphosphates to the acre, the
ground being thoroughly tilled and brought to a fine
tilth before sowing. The maize crop sown in March was
5 feet high, and ready for cutting in June; it grew to
a height of 6 feet, and fed the whole of the animals
during that period, and was fed at the rate of four loads
each day. The land was immediately re-sown with
barley. There are also 2J acres of oats and Jan acre
of cabbages (early Easthams), at the rate of 5,000
EARLY EASTHAM CABBAGE, lIJ LBS., 5,000 PLANTS TO THE ACRE.
plants to the acre. The cabbages were an enormous
size at the time of my inspection, and the owner informed
me that three plants were a sufficient meal for one cow,
as they weigh from 8 to 12 lbs. each. The owner
expects crops sown at present to yield ample feed for
his cows right up to the winter. During the summer
months, starting from January, he irrigates the culti-
vation crops by gravitation with the Van Yean, using
10,000 gallons, at a cost of 10s. per week, giving the
land a thorough weekly soaking until March. Besides
keeping the herd, the owner, for two months, sold
parsnips, returning 15s. per week. All the calves are
kept for a few weeks and then sold at Bs. per head.
Eight pigs, which cost ss. each as suckers, were fattened
and sold at 275. each. In season the owner always has
a crop of onions, carrots, parsnips, cabbages, French
beans, potatoes, gooseberries, and rhubarb, and the pre-
sent crop of the latter is very advanced, owing to re-
peated applications of liquid manure, caught in a pit
from the milking shed. The cows are fed in the open,
and appear to be thoroughly contented. The homestead
and farm buildings are neat, and one receives, upon
entering the premises, an impression of contentment and
prosperity. The receipts are at least per annum,
which, from so small an area, must be regarded as very
satisfactory. The rent paid is ,£4O per annum.
By Authority : J. Kemp, Acting Government Printer, Melbourn
16
DAIRY FARMING IN VICTORIA


INFORMATION FOR THE EMIGRANT.
A GLIMPSE OP VICTORIA.
Fifty years ago Victoria, or as it was then called, Port
Phillip, was a household word to most Englishmen. The
largest and richest find of gold that has ever been made
on the face of the earth had been discovered a few years
before that period, and tens of thousands left their native
land to seek their fortune on the other side of the world.
The Victoria of to-day has developed out of this great
■stream of emigration, for Australia has been colonized in
the true sense of the word. Those who went out
seldom returned. They have founded a new England in
the southern seas.
Victoria is nearly equal to Great Britain in size. Its
■climate and productions closely resemble those of the
south of France, Melbourne, its capital, corresponding
to Marseilles. When the first portions of the deposits
•of gold, those within easy reach of the surface, had been
more or less worked out the colonists turned their attention
to the agricultural wealth of the country. It was soon
discovered that Victoria possessed one of the richest
and most favoured soils to be found in any part of the
world. Roughly speaking, one-fifth of the country consists
■of mountain ranges, one-fifth is a vast field of volcanic
soil, and the remaining three-fifths are alluvial plains,
•sloping to the sea on the south, and to the River Murray
on the north. Originally nearly the whole surface of the
■country was covered with dense forests, and, although
judged by European standards, Victoria is still heavily
timbered, large tracts have been cleared, and now are used
for cultivation and pasture grasses. As an illustration of
the fertility of the soil, cattle and sheep are invariably
fattened for the market on the natural grasses alone.
The average elevation of the mountain ranges and
elevated plains is under 2,000 feet, but towards the east
the main range and its numerous spurs become somewhat
more elevated —a few of the peaks reaching 6,000 feet.
The rivers on the southern slope drain into the ocean;
those on the north forming the chief feeders of the Murray.
It is at the northern and southern slopes of these ranges
that most of the gold-fields are located. For the most part
the rangy country is still heavily timbered, but in every
direction where the forest has been cleared it has been
found that the valleys and the slopes of the hills will grow
almost every kind of European fruit and deciduous tree
luxuriantly. All the ordinary English fruits are grown in
abundance throughout the State; and the export of apples
has already reached large proportions. In the northern
districts grapes, oranges, lemons, and figs are grown to
perfection; wheat, oats, barley, potatoes, root crops, maize,
pumpkins, and tobncco are all extensively cultivated.
Water conservation and irrigation works are steadily being
pushed on by the State, and promise speedily to completely
transform large areas of the drier regions of the north
The area of Victoria is 87,884. square miles, or
56,245,760 acres. This is just about equal to the area
of England, Wales, and Scotland (88,266 square miles).
The mean population in 1905 was 1,212,517, which gives
only fourteen persons to the square mile, as against 498
persons to the square mile in England, 135 in Scotland,
144 in Ireland, and 99.66 in Europe. It is apparent,
therefore, that there is still plenty of room for popula-
tion. Of the total area of the State, less than 26,000,000
acres are alienated or in process of alienation. Of the
balance (a shade over 30,000,000 acres), after allowing
for roads and permanent forest and other reserves, unsold
land in towns, and pastoral leases, about 12,000,000
acres are available for selection under one or other of
the provisions of the Land Act.
Under the Closer Settlement and Small Improved
Holdings Acts, an expenditure of per annum
has been authorized for the purpose of resuming estates,
and furthering the settlement of the people on the land,
and has been set aside by the Government for
the improvement of the lands of the Crown.
Rich agricultural land, near to the railways, with free
schools, and every advantage of civilization close at hand,
is being thrown open for selection in farms of from 80 to
300 acres. You may secure the freehold of one of these
by paying 3 per cent, of the capital value of your farm
every half-year for thirty-one years. Thus, suppose you
select a farm of 150 acres, valued at, say, The
half-yearly payments will be But a year is a
very small rental for such a farm in Victoria. Yet under
the terms of the closer settlement Act, this rent is paid
only for half a man’s lifetime, and then the land becomes
absolutely his own. No better opportunity of acquiring
a beautiful and prosperous country home exists in any
part of the Empire.


Bulletin No. 1.
DAIRY FARMING.
No. 1.
DAIRY FARMING.
Commonwealth of Hustralla.
DAIRY FARMING
VICTORIA,
THE GARDEN STATE
OF THE
- - EMPIRE - =
A STORY
SUCCESSFUL WORK.
a
c
>
O
05
rH
.#
n g
Ph 9
O
H
O
i—i
> |
• O id
H - g
O >.
to n '■§
►r h |
P P 3 S
O g
S H i
% £
* -
ha §
8 £ *
O o §
p o
R
02
Ph
H
P*
Ph
0
o
PR
O.
O
o
<D
W
i<HO®iOOOOffIOMWO
'JCOOTtlt'OOiOfflOt'fflO
(S O 1> O (M n®««(SMX(S
rjf 50 00 U 5 CD HS r-T CO Oof »C O
CO (M 05 (N «5 00 J) rH ri
rT i-T tjT of so
Q CO IO O H o CO O M uo o H CO r -0
O5
(M GO rH GO 00 CO 1-- 05
v co co" of oofofh rH rC i-T co" o co
CD CM CO rH h CO OOh I -
t- CO CM O
rH of
43
o
s
to
COOOOIOOOIOCOOGOCOO
. I CC
I>GOCOOOSOIOSCOOS
*-£ t'f o' lO GO r-T 00 o 00 rH of of CO iO pCJ
05050 bHOiOOHHGO
£ JO rT -f «f 'O
CO W
CO
o
(O O uo 00 Q GO l> h o (M ic CC
. x o' of of of of co co 10 of o' 10 o'
t- Ttn rt Ol GO 0 05 GO
H oi 05
i—■
HOIOGOiOIOOOOONQO
tJT
rH GO h CO OI 'O H o
00 rH of of r-T CO CO
CM
0)
c$
CO
J§ -~ S ® „„DCCC® <B CO
£ - "§ja - -gs-a&s
rg H 3 J S(U
u
o
o
CO
lO
o
o
CO
. . d . . .. . I . £ , .
• . rH , , o . . |_j . .
• • g ■ • o • -p -W • -
S-H ~ . 1 rrH -s
o w
H § =3 S 2
5h W rH cc [jj
s ££ a-3
3 £&CO =3 O ,<» Pa;s? £ S
mo^ppmWph^smppph
0(MOO(MOWCJO)iOI>COCO(M
(MHOOKNOOOWi^^Ci^
m
5 OCM 00 HGO O OGO
M lO r-i
> of
FOR LAND AVAILABLE
= = Hpplp 10 = =
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR VICTORIA,
QUEEN VICTORIA-ST., E.C.
THE AGENT-GENERAL,
QUEEN VICTORIA-ST, E.C.
