

DANCING AS A FINE ART
By
Prof. J. Bolot
F.A.R., E.A.D.M.
Price 1/-
20th EDITION -
- COPYRIGHT


PRDf IHHIK, i \L , Leading Instructor nr.d Authority on Modern
Ballroom Dancing


Face To Face
WITH
PROFESSOR BOLOT
F.A.R., E.A.D.M., N.D.T.A.
A Foreword
ROFESSOR BOLOT has long been recognised as Aus-
tralia’s Leading Dance Instructor, and Sydney dance'
lovers need "no introduction to the popular and hand-
some principal of their foremost Academy and favourite
rendezvous —the French Dancing Academy. Moreover,
the tremendous success of Professor Bolot’s Remarkable Corres-
pondence System of Instruction has made him famous amongst
dance-lovers throughout the world, and thousands have won suc-
cess (and often fame) as a result of learning by this simple, yet
wonderfully thorough method of instruction, by which DANCING
is made as EASY AS WALKING, and by which anyone caii
learn at home IN PRIVATE, without music or partner.
Tributes from the Press
The following editorial extracts, quoted from leading Sydney
newspapers, illustrate better than any words of mine in what high
regard Professor Bolot is held by Press and Public alike.
“Budget”: “Professor Bolot’s Correspondence System of Instruction
has been remarkably successful —but one expects that from such a renowned
exponent of the art of dancing as is the popular Principal of the French
Dancing Academy,” etc.
“World’s News”: “Those who are anxious to be really first-class dancers
cannot do better than consult Professor Bolot. His correspondence methods
are marvellous, and his success in this direction is wonderful. His system
of instruction has ma’de graceful dancers of thousands throughout Australia
and New Zealand.”
“Budget”: “Australia’s most successful Dance Instructor, and leading
authority in the southern hemisphere on Modern Ballroom Dancing, is Pro-
fessor Bolot, F.A.R., E.A.D.M., the popular and charming Principal of the
French Dancing Academy at 66 Oxford Street, Sydney.”


“Himself a famous exhibition dancer who has delighted audiences of
thousands, and holder of diplomas from the world’s leading academies (in-
cluding the highest Gold Medal of the famous Fe Doisie Academy of
Russia), Professor Bolot has a wonderful knack of imparting his knowledge,
which is at once the delight of his fortunate pupils, and the despair of his
rivals in the profession.
“Furthermore, he teaches other teachers, and has himself invented a
number of dances, including the Virginian and ‘Bolo’ Fox-trot (prize-winners
in America).
“One could not do better than learn from such a renowned exponent
of the art, and thousands in all parts of Australia will welcome this oppor-
tunity to learn dancing from Australia’s leading Instructor at a nominal
cost.”
“Sydney Opinion”: “Famous Exhibition Dancer, Instructor of world-
wide repute, and Principal of Sydney’s popular Dance Studios—The French
Dancing Academy—Professor Bolot is also a popular clubman, a Life-
governor of Prince Alfred Hospital, and well known in Sydney business
circles.
“He is considered to be one of the world’s leading authorities on
Modern Ballroom Dancing.”
“World’s News”: “The ‘Bolot’ Correspondence System of Dance In-
struction deprives one of any excuse for being unable to dance, for the
system is guaranteed to teach ANYONE in an amazingly short time, wher-
ever he or she might live.
“Whereas Sydney folk flock to his popular Studios, those at a distance
from Sydney can learn just as thoroughly, and at less expense, AT HOME.”
“Exporter” (New Zealand): “Thousands of New Zealanders are avail-
ing themselves of the chance to learn dancing at home by the easy ‘Bolot’
System. This simple correspondence system is never known to fail."
“The Mirror” (Perth): “After years of study both in this country and
abroad, Professor Bolot has perfected a remarkable chart system of instuc-
tion, which enables everyone, wherever he or she might live, to learn dancing
at home, without any assistance other than that provided by his remark-
able Charts, Diagrams, and Illustrated Directions.”
These are hut a FEJT extracts, but they will suffice to illustrate
my statement that Press and public alike proclaim' Professor Bolot
4USTR.IU.rS LEADING DANCE INSTRUCTOR."


DANCING
as a
Fine Art !
By
Professor Bolot
PROF. J. BOLOT
Before the dawn of recorded history, dancing was man-
kind’s chief recreation.
Before music or painting or writing, men and women,
boys and girls expressed themselves in the art of dancing
—the earliest of the arts.
The popularity of dancing has not waned —on the
contrary, it has never been so important in the social world.
Dancing has become the principle means of introduction,
the means of widening the circle of friendship.
There would be many lonely people in the world to-
day if dancing had not broken down the barriers of strict
etiquette.
For while it is impertinence to speak to a stranger in
the street, it is politeness itself to say to any lady in a ball-
room : “May I have the pleasure of the next dance?”
Thus apart altogether from its attraction as an enjoy-
able exercise, dancing is a means to other ends.
You can make more new friends in two hours at a
dance than you could find in two years hedged in by the
conventional restraints of everyday life.
But it is no use merely shuffling round the ballroom,
thinking that will pass muster for dancing. You are judged


by the quality of your dancing, and poor dancers are pitied
and avoided just as their more graceful rivals are sought-
after and pursued by the opposite sex.
That is why some people find themselves always “wall-
flowers” and “outsiders”—because they cannot dance grace-
fully, and, consequently, seem awkward and nervous. They
lack the poise and confidence of the Finished Dancer, and
go through life marvelling at the success and popularity of
people they know to be their inferiors in other respects.
But dancing is an art and has to be learned like any
ether art. Once mastered, it is enjoyable, healthful and the
key to many social pleasures.
And the art of dancing is easy to master by the re-
markable correspondence course of dancing introduced
twenty-five years ago by Professor Bolot, as thousands of
past pupils have proved.
Not only to dance—but to dance gracefully should be
your aim. This booklet explains how easily this accom-
plishment may be attained.
Four of Prof. Bolot’s Instruction Staff.


The “Bolot” System
Easy as A.B.C.
THE step illustrated here is known
as the “Hesitation Slide,” being
the first part of the One-Step:
and, being chosen at random from
the course, will show you how
easy it is to follow my charts and
directions.
Glance at the chart, and note
Left Foot by shaded footprint.
Right Foot by plain outline foot-
print.
Commence Left Foot.
Step forward with your Left
Foot (step 1); now step forward
with your Right Foot (step 2),
again forward with your Left
Foot (step 3), again forward with
your Right Foot (step 4). Step
diagonally forward with your Left
Foot so as to place it a little to the
left of the line (step 5). Now
instead of stepping forward a full
step with your Right Foot as you
have been doing, bring your Right
Foot just back of your Left Foot,
so that the right toe touches your
left heel, putting the weight of
your body on your Right Foot
(step 6), again step forward with
your Left Foot (step 7). Now
step forward again with your Right
Foot (step 8). Repeat, this time
just following the chart, without
reading these directions. This com-
pletes one movement, known as
the Hesitation Slide.
The balance of the One-Step,
and all the other dances of my
Course, can be followed just as
easily, although many of them are
considered very difficult by other
methods, and are, of course, much
more fascinating when you have
mastered them, as you will do,
easily, quickly, and pleasantly, by
my Simplified System.
Hesitation slide
Gerctlemarc'sPart


Posed by PROFESSOR BOLOT, with Miss Ruth King, beautiful dancer and
theatrical, who has appeared with great success in J. C. Williamson's pro-
ductions and at St, James’ Theatre.


Pi nil Il> >1 Pi nil --<>l I PH Hi
]•' \II FA 11 M NII T \ I- 1 . I’’ I» S
HO LOT HOM E I)\M ING < <>l )' SI
TIPS a ml( lit *he fil'd tun lin
lemotis 111 it All HA tl'llll till Itnln'
Hillin' 1 1,1111 rni Puui-n H nh"" -
tin ninipii. 1 1\ lit tin 'i-lui, iml huv
ea s\ it 1 til it Jilt tile At (A At 1 1 i i
couple of Imp \ nil will tin I'tolllehcd
to find til it < mitideiii n h, i min to
you .mil Hut \nu m iniioth lit o m
yom tiit aid following tin ib v t hui ol
ttm (1 UK n w.t h JH 1 fn< t I me
SIMPI I* AM) VITUA< Tl\ I,
The second lesson is just as simple
and all those that follow have been so
arranged by Professor Bolot as to
make dancing a simple and attractive
art, instead of a laborious and mono-
tonous undertaking.
The chart on the right gives the
gentleman’s part of the Jazz Waltz,
one of the most popular and entrancing-
dances of the present time.
The second lesson is the "Hesitation
Slide,” being the first part of the
Quick-Step. It is chosen from the
course and will show how easy it is
to follow charts and directions.
GENTLEMAN’S I’ART
Step forward with the left foot
(count 1), then with the right (count
2); then bring the left foot up along-
side the right (count 3), and lean the
weight of the body on it.
Now step straight forward with the
right foot (count 4), with the left
(count 5), and then bring the right
foot alongside the left (count (1).
Repeat this movement, following the
chart only.
The Jazz Waltz
THL WALTZ
Gentleman's Part


Why Good Dancers Are
Popular - Sought After - Admired
THE ability to dance well im-
parts a certain poise—a cer-
tain grace and assurance of
manner, as well as a graceful
bearing which people cannot
help admiring.
Learning to dance gracefully
does far more than simply show
you how to go through certain
steps on a ball-room floor. It
teaches you physical and men-
tal co-ordination, gives you bal-
lance, confidence and self-re-
liance, which stand you in good
stead everywhere.
After following the Course
described in this book, the "ner-
vous” dancer becomes more con-
fident, the awkward dancer more
graceful and commanding.
When you can dance well,
people ccurt your company, and
like to have you present when
they entertain, because they rea-
lise that you will help to make
the party “go with a swing."
You will be courted by the
opposite sex, who will realise
that by dancing with you they
are improving their own danc-
ing, and will consequently have
to respect you for your extra
knowledge and regard you as
SOMEBODY WHO REALLY
MATTERS.
After all, why should your
friends of the opposite sex
bother dancing with you if you
are not a good dancer? It is a
REAL DELIGHT to them to
dance with a perfect dancer,
but just a bore dancing with a
clumsy or old-fashioned one:
and by not learning correctly
you are really slighting them,
inferring that the pleasure you
get from their company is not
worth the trouble of a few
hours study to make yourself a
really PERFECT DANCER
and PARTNER.
Through the Bolot Correspondence System you can easily become an
accomplished finished DANCER, and a real SUCCESS—a credit to your-
self, and to me—your Instructor.
This you can achieve in a FEW DAYS ONLY by practising for a few
minutes daily, without music or partner, without any assistance other than
that provided by the comprehensive Charts, Diagrams, and Easy-to-follow
Instructions contained in the “Bolot" Correspondence Course of Dancing.


The Proof !
20,000 Graduates and Pupils praise my System of Home Instruction.
Here are extracts from just a few unsolicited letters of appreciation—PßOOF
INDISPUTABLE of the marvellous success of the ‘‘Bolot" System every-
where.
LETTERS! LETTERS! LETTERS!
“They Speak for Themselves.”
‘‘SIMPLY GREAT”
“I am writing to tell you that I have received your course of study. Have learned
my first course very quickly and successfully, and certainly do enjoy it. I am very
tnankful to you, and like your way of instruction. The LESSONS ARE SIMPLY
GREAT. ’, M.T. (Mr.), Sourabaya, Java. *
‘‘SIMPLE AS A.8.C.”
“I must drop you a line thanking you for your wonderful system of teaching dancing.
The first dance I went to after taking your lessons I danced all night. Everybody was
surprised to see me on the floor. Your system is simple as A.B.C.”—E.T. (Miss),
Honolulu, Hawaii.
“EASY TO GRASP”
“T received my Dancing Lessons a few days ago, and am more than delighted with
them. Everything is down to the minutest detail. It is so easy to grasp. I can now
dance the One-step and Fox-trot. I think it is a wonderful system. I thought dancing
was so hard to master, but now I see that it is not.”—M.M. (Mr.), Ipswich, Queensland.
“LEARNED IN ONE EVENING”
“Received the instructions this morning, and I am very much pleased with them.
I learned the One-step in one evening, and am confident I shall soon be a proficient
dancer.” E.T. (Mrs.), Auckland, New Zealand.
“BETTER THAN I EVER DREAMED OF”
“I can’t restrain myself in praising your system, as my dancing ability is now far
better than I ever dreamed of.”—C.T.S. (Mr.), Macleay River, N.S.W.
“IN RAPTURES OVER THE COURSE”
“Just a line to let you know I received your course in time, and I AM IN
RAPTURES OVER IT. I attended my first dance on Saturday night, and really, Professor,
I danced like an old hand, although I say it myself. Again I thank you, and will
always recommend your course to anyone desirous of becoming a good dancer.” H.O.M.
(Mr.), Newcastle, N.S.W.
FROM A FIRST PRIZE-WINNER IN AMERICA
“Before leaving for the Continent, I wish to thank you sincerely for the advice and
assistance I have received at all times from you in my dancing. I have always found you
a most conscientious teacher, and I have found that in learning to dance it is a pleasure
it executed gracefully. ‘A thing worth doing is worth doing well.’ When dancing jn
foreign lands, I shall with pleasure recall many happy hours spent at your Academy.”
Maisie Sinclair-Bowker, Bellevue Hill, N.S.W.
“LESSONS CAN’T BE BEAT”
“Your courses received. I have already mastered the One-step, and will start on
the Walts immediately. I don’t think they can be beat—words can’t describe them.
Thanks tor your help in teaching me to dance.” M.P. (Mr.), Waverley, N.S.W.
“BEST SYSTEM IN THE WORLD”
“I think your Course is the best way for any person to learn to dance. The steps
are so distinct that one can’t help but understand them. Your way of keeping time with
the music, too, is wonderful. There is a big family of us, and we all spend pleasant
hours of an evening practising the steps of your course. ”__J.L.A. (Mr.), Gladstone,
Queensland.
(These are extracts from a FEW letters picked out at random from the file.
These and HUNDREDS of others may be seen at my Studio at any time.)


“My wife and daughters tell me you dance divinely, Jones,” said the
Colonel, extending his hand to me. “They insist that you attend our
party next week; and I’m sure I heartily endorse the invitation. You must
be always dancing to have attained your present proficiency!”
“On the contrary, Colonel,” I said. “I dance very seldom; but what I
do I like to do well, and that applies not only to my dancing, but in sport,
in public life, and in business. I never care to bungle anything I attempt.”
“Excellent sentiments, my boy,” responded the Colonel warmly. Well,
I’ll see you at the house on Thursday week.
Invitations like this are invariably extended to pupils of the Bolot
Dancing Academy.
Good Dancing Leads To Social
Introductions


Even Ginger Rogers and Fred Astair
R.K.O. Pictures Sensational Dancing Stars
Had to LEARN to dance
YOU ALSO CAN LEARN BY
PROFESSOR BOLOT'S EXCLUSIVE
METHOD


IMPORTANT QUESTIONS PUPILS SHOULD ASK!
“Can anyone —can I —learn to dance expertly by the Bolot
System of mail instruction?”
Emphatically yes! Even if you’ve never danced a step before in your
life. Anyone who can walk can master dancing surprisingly quickly and
with amazing ease by merely following my famous, simplified, short-cut,
clear, complete method.
I POSITIVELY GUARANTEE YOU WILL BECOME AN ACCOM-
PLISHED DANCER—almost before you tealise it! —able to step out on to
any dance floor with the utmost confidence with any partner —and immedi-
ately dance the Fox Trot, Quick Step, Jazz Waltz, Rumba and modern Old
Time, and all the very latest popular ballroom dances—as gracefully as any
expert. Over 20,000 pupils, in every part of Australia, owe their ability
to dance gracefully to my famous, successful, BOLOT SYSTEM of Mai!
Instruction.
“Do you guarantee that I can qualify.?”
Yes! I positively, legally guarantee to refund your tuition fee without
delay if you are not more than satisfied—yes, if you are not exceptionally
delighted. This refund guarantee is part of my contract —it is your absolute
protection against even the slightest possibility of loss of any kind. In view
of this, there is not the faintest reason for you to hesitate or delay a single-
day. Men and women who have failed by all other systems, quickly and
easily attain success by my simple method.
“Is mail instruction more thorough and easier than personal
instruction?”
Positively yes! By my simple, easy-to-understand, easy-to-follow mail
system you set your own pace—you take your time —you learn each step
thoroughly—you master each step —at home—in private. You need no
partner—no music—no personal assistance.
There is no fussing with confusing mechanical contraptions—no tech-
nical terms —no music or partner needed. You are not rushed by hurry-
ing instructors—you are not embarrassed by the presence of others. You
practise until perfect—you acquire grace in every step and develop perfect
confidence.
The astonishing clearness and simplicity of my short-cut, COMPLETE
SYSTEM enables you to instantly understand the exact and distinct reasons
for each and every step and movement. The whole idea immediately be-
comes so clear to you that it is simply a matter of little leisurely, pleasant,
interesting practice to completely perfect yourself as a natural, graceful, ac-
complished dancer. This is one of the major reasons for the success of
my 20,000 graduates and students in every part of Australia.
If anyone tells you dancing cannot be successfully, easily, quickly
mastered by mail, I ask you to show them my refund guarantee and my
testimonials from graduates everywhere.
Then remind them that to-day nearly all the most intricate professions
and arts are successfully being mastered by thousands of students through
the mail system. Remind them that institutions teaching by mail to-day
comprise one of America’s largest, greatest, most successful accomplishments.
“How long before I become an accomplished dancer?”
My pupils tell me my simplified, easy method makes practice genuine
fun instead of dull work. You go about it leisurely and it grows on you
step by step. In no time you are instinctively dancing with unexpected
ease and grace. The first evening you will complete the first captivating
steps. After that it becomes the most interesing, alluring, pleasant occupa-
tion of the day or evening.
Inside of a week or so of fascinating practice—a few minutes a day—
ANYONE should be a charming, graceful, accomplished dancer. There


is nothing confusing— no hard study—not a single difficult feature in my
entire courses. My personalised, simplified system actually makes dancing
as easy as walking.
“What dances will I learn?”
All the popular dances danced everywhere—and all the latest, most
captivating society ballroom dances.
The complete FOX-TROT, QUICK STEP, JAZZ WALTZ, RUMBA
and MODERN OLD TIME, comprise my combination courses.
When you finish my remarkable simplified, short-cut courses you can
dance expertly and confidently with ANY partner. You will be a finished,
accomplished, graceful dancer—able to know all about dancing and will
be surprised, amazed and relighted with the ease and grace with which you
dance.
“Are your courses sent complete?”
YES! BY RETURN MAIL! Immediately upon receipt of your
enrolment the entire four courses—all complete—in simple, delightful,
easy-to-master lessons—in a plain wrapper, if you choose. AH come at
once, so that you can begin without a moment's delay.
The complete courses mailed at once are really a good idea for you —
it enables you to advance as rapidly as you please. It eliminates the annoy-
ance of waiting for your lessons.
“I already dance. Will your courses improve my dancing?”
Decidedly yes! You’ll instantly say so. You'll be simply delighted
with the new grace and ease with which you can master new steps. You'll
be able to step out with any partner and instantly fall right into step and
dance as you’ve never danced before.
There’s a tremendous difference between merely dancing haphazardly
and EXPERT, ACCOMPLISHED dancing. THOUSANDS of my students
and graduates loudest in their praise for my simplified, thorough method are
those who had danced for years BEFORE taking my new-way, easy-to-follow
courses.
Your new ability and grace will certainly pay you many times the low
cost of my course in the new found joy in dancing and your new found
popularity.
“Are the dances you teach danced everywhere?”
Yes, indeed! MY COMBINATION COURSE CONSISTS OF THE
STANDARD FOX TROT, QUICK STEP, JAZZ WALTZ, RUMBA and
MODERN OLD TIME. The very same dances danced in every city, town
and village in every civilised country in the world.
When you finish my complete courses you are an accomplished, finished
dancer in every respect —qualified to step on to any dance floor—anywhere
with - any partner—and dance all the most popular dances.
“Is dancing good exercise and beneficial to the health?”
THE BEST! THE VERY BEST! Any time exercise is combined with
pleasure, that exercise is FULLY beneficial. ANY physician will tell you
that. You must be in good spirits to fully benefit from any exercise. And
WHAT exercise conceivable is so joyous, so exciting, so captivating, as
dancing.
“Can I learn to dance in private by the
BOLOT SYSTEM?”
Yes, Indeed! Behind closed doors, if you choose. Right in your own
room—without a soul ever having an inkling of what you are doing until
you are ready to surprise them by your accomplished, graceful dancing.
HUNDREDS of my students do that.


“What are Professor Bolot’s qualifications?”
Unquestionable! Lauded by Australia’s other eminent Teachers.
Unstintingly praised by over 20,000 happy and well-satisfied pupils in every
part of thr •«orld.
The French Dancing Academy has been established in Sydney for more
than 25 years, and Professor Bolot has always been recognised as the
leading Dancing Master in Australia.
But that’s not all. Before coming to Australia I gained the highest
Gold Medal at Fe Doisie Academy, Russia, and was then recognised as a
Dancing Master of Merit. Since then I have travelled numerous parts of
the world with the same renowned success.
Furthermore, I teach other teachers.
I am a Member of the Leading Academies in the world.
I have invented a number of leading dances, among them the Virginia,
8010 Fox-Trot and the Gipsy Tap, Roberta (prize-winner in America) and
many others. Also a book entitled “How to Dance," and published by
W. H. Paling 6? Co. Ltd.
The fact alone that the BOLOT SCHOOL OF DANCING IS AUS-
TRALIA’S GREATEST INSTITUTION of its kind is bona fide guaran-
tee of superiority and thoroughness. Merit —unusual merit only—could
achieve such a monumental success. You CANNOT make a mistake by
enrolling for my new-way, simplified method.
“Is a partner necessary?”
By no means! You don’t need one! My new-way, easy-to-follow,
simplified diagram system instantly makes dancing the easiest, simplest thing
you’ve ever tried. Any novice immediately starts right in to follow my
visible, understandable steps, just the same as though he were already an
accomplished dancer.
Of course, two persons together can easily follow my remarkable chart
system if they choose. That’s up to you, but a partner is by no means
necessary. By my new method you KNOW what a partner should do, so
that when you start dancing you will be able to lead; and even help your
partner improve in dancing.
“Is music necessary?”
Absolutely no! I’ve worked out my now-famous, new-way, chart sys-
tem to eliminate music entirely.
With my ingenious method of counting you can keep perfect time
without the slightest difficulty—even easier and better than with music.
Students and graduates and experts tell me this is a wonderful new inven-
tion—a world-great help to students and a boon to the profession. EVERY
feature of my courses is a great improvement over usual methods —so much
simpler, clearer and easier.
BUT —If you have a pianist in your home, or a gramophone, it will
get you accustomed to dancing by music and following the rhythms.
“Will I be able to lead?”
Easily. Instantly! With perfect ease, grace, and fullest confidence.
You’ll start right off leading gracefully—instinctively you’ll glide around
correctly with the swinging rhythm of the music.
Leading—that’s SIMPLE and pleasant by my easy-to-follow method.
I’ve worked leading out to perfection so that anyone can instantly lead
now. I’ve given leading particular attention because leading is really one
of the SECRETS of correct and graceful dancing.


IRortbecn
2)ance ZTeacbers' SUsodatton,
Founder: lED E. LEVEY. jMeML He.dqu.rtm-
P«t Officid Ejaminw. N.A.T.D. *||sj||||) M.nor Home Rokl Awerably Rooms.
Winner National Association YoniSMßrffißy ~ ,
Newcastle-upon - lyne.
Dancing Shield, 1919.
HIS DIPLOMA /4 & dfia/
professor Holot
G 6 tjjpasfoxcl
JjllxL^foaluL.
df6/t an*/ S/fflerffr
@fta/f otretn { ofmcr»y.
22*&pr;UV22
The above is a miniature of one of Professor Bolot’s Diplomas. There are
others hanging on the walls of the Studio in 66 Oxford Street.


PROFESSOR BOLOT AND A FAIR PUPIL
A pleasing study, showing how dancing conduces to grace and poise.
The “Bolot” System can make you, too, reader, a Graceful, Finished Dancer
in an amazingly short time.
THE “Bolot” System makes FINISHED Dancers!


WHAT THE “BOLOT” BOOKS AND CHARTS
WILL GIVE YOU
Correspondence tuition in the art of dancing was introduced in Aus-
tralia by Professor J. Bolot twenty-five years ago. No other method can
equal the simplicity of this course.
During twenty-five years, Professor Bolot has perfected this system and
from time to time brought it up to date by including the latest steps.
The present course covers tuition in etiquette, deportment and the
latest popular dances.
The following is an outline of the subjects taught:—
THE ONE STEP (OR QUICK
STEP) BOOK
Correct Position to Hold Partner
in Open Position.
The One Step.
The Hesitation Slide. (Lady’s &?
Gentleman’s Part)
The Right Progressive Turn.
(Lady's Gentleman’s Part)
Quarter Turn
Natural Turn.
How to Count.
The Difference Between a Danc-
ing Step anu Walking.
How to Turn a Corner.
How to Lead.
Hints to Follow at Your First
Dance.
Ballroom Etiquette and Behavi-
our, including the following:
Introductions.
Asking a Lady to Dance.
Don’t Leave Partner on
Floor.
Accepting Invitations.
Overcoming Nervousness.
Conversation.
THE FOX TROT BOOK
Correct Position to Hold Partner.
Fox-Trot. (Lady’s and Gentle-
man's Part)
The Moochi Stomp. (Lady’s and
Gentleman’s Part)
Cross Rumba (lady’s and gentle-
man’s part).
Drag Step (lady’s and gentle-
man’s part)
Walking Stomp. (Lady's and
Gentleman’s Part)
Conversation Walk (Lady's and
Gentleman’s Part)
Time or Tempo.
Style.
THE WALTZ & TWO STEP
BOOK
Correct position to hold partner
for waltz.
The Jazz Waltz. (Lady’s Part)
The Jazz Waltz. (Gentleman’s
Part)
The Circular Waltz. (Lady’s Part)
The Circular Waltz. (Gentleman's
Part)
Reserve Circular Waltz. (Lady's
Part)
Reverse Circular Waltz. (Gentle-
man’s Part)
Waltz Time or Tempo
Leading and following.
Rhythm.
Your First Dance.
CHARTS
Tango. (Lady)
Tango. (Gentleman)
Sideway Promenade.
The Cortez. (Lady)
The Cortez. (Gentleman)
Cross Point.
The Midway Rhythm.
Boston Two Step. (Lady)
Boston Two Step. (Gentleman)
Scissors.
The Walking Pivot.
The Round Pivot.
The Popular Rumba.
Walking Breakaway.
The Blues.
Reverse Circular Waltz. (Lady)
Reverse Circular Waltz.
(Gentleman)
8010 Rhythm.
Grape Vine.
The Barn Dance.
The Bon Ton.
The Circular Waltz. (Lady)
The Circular Waltz. (Gentleman)
The Two Step. (Lady’s and Gen-
tleman's Part)
Time or Tempo.
Correct and Incorrect Positions
for Dancing.
CHARTS
“BOLOT” spells nothing but “Success”


One of Professor Bolot’s pupils
WHO IS NOW AN EXHIBITION DANCER.


Your Opportunity
THE same success that 20,000 other pupils have won so easily by
my system can now be YOURS; what I have done for them
I can do for you.
There is absolutely NO POSSIBILITY OF FAILURE and my
Guarantee protects you IN EVERY WAY.
Men and women who have failed by all other methods quickly .
and easily attain success by my simple method; so, whether you
are a fairly good dancer, or on the other hand, have never danced
in your life, my Correspondence Course can make you a PERFECT
DANCER AND PARTNER—the Tcind of dancer you have always
wanted to be.
Diplomas
EVERY pupil who enrols during this season will be entitled to a
handsome Diploma upon completion of the course.
This will proclaim you a Finished, Successful Dancer, and will
give you just cause for pride that you are graduate of the greatest
Dance Academy in the Southern Hemisphere, able to dance with
the best dancers, and to more than hold your own in any society.
How to Enrol
TURN now to the Enrolment Form accompanying this book,
read it carefully, and fill in according to instructions thereon.
The Complete Course of Dancing will be prepared and for-
warded to you immediately I receive your enrolment. Send it to
me now —you will never regret it —in fact it will be a source of
satisfaction for years to come—for in a very few hours after you
commence to practise you will realise the joy—the pleasurable
thrill —of being a Graceful, Finished “Bolot” Dancer.


Well-Known
Dancer Pays
Tribute to
The “Bolot”
System of
Mail
Instruction
MISS NANCY LANG
MISS NANCY LANG, popular Sydney dancer, writes:—
Good dancers are always popular and assured of a good time wherever
they go.
"Girls love to dance with accomplished dancers; and THE MAN ll'HO
HAS MASTERED THE ‘BOLOT ’ SYSTEM WOULD RE ACCLAIMED
AN ACCOMPLISHED DANCER ANYWHERE.
“Anyone—even a child—could not fail to become a good dancer after
consistently following the ‘Bolot’ Course of Instruction; and no finished
‘Rolof dancer need ever fear being a ‘wallflower’ or 'outsider ’ at a party.
"I should advise all men who want to be popular with our sex to learn
to dance thoroughly; and I always advise my men friends, whether they
dance well, or even if they cannot dance at alt, to become FINISHED
dancers by studying this simple Home-study System of Instruction.
"The average person who has never danced before should learn in a few
hours by this system; and no one could possibly fail to master the Course
in a very short time. Moreover, even good dancers should study the System
in order to gain added proficiency and versatility."


Portion of Studio 2
BOLOT FRENCH DANCING ACADEMY
66 OXFORD STREET, SYDNEY
Established 25 Years
Dancing Space ... 7,000 Square Feet
Pupils of the Bolot Correspondence System under the personal
supervision of Professor J. Bolot, receive the same tuition as is
given in the Academy of Dancing. Correspondence pupils who
may visit Sydney at any time are invited to call at the Academy
and receive a free lesson from the Professor in person.
TAP DANCING
Professor Bolot will teach you in six simple lessons| this
fascinating art.
TAP :: TAP :: TAP
Nothing could so rapidly ensure your popularity as proficiency
in the art of tap dancing. Write for particulars of the Bolot
Tap Dancing Course.


PROFESSOR J. BOLOT, Principal
French Dancing Academy
66 OXFORD STREET
SYDNEY
FOREMOST DANCE AND THE
ORIGINAL OF DANCING.
/ex y .jl x <f \
Staplcrriill jgt'7. '“'Newtown
✓
