

DANGEROUS DILEMMAS:
STARTLING BUT TRUE.
BY
JAMES PEDDIE,
AUTHOR OF
“SECRETS OF A PRIVATE ENQUIRY OFFICE,”
ETC., ETC., ETC.
LONDON:
CHARLES H. CLARKE, 11 RED LION COURT,
FLEET STREET,


$ c r t!):
3. COWAN AND CO., STRATHMORE PRINTING WORKS-


DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.
CHAPTER I.
THE ORIGIN OR “DANGEROUS DILEMMAS."
The gambling tables at Spa —Compulsory mud hath —Saving
one's life by exchanging an overcoat —A fortunate ship-
wreck.
“ You are in a vein of luck and jet cease to play,” said the
Dutch hanker Oppenheim to me oyer my shoulder at the
roulette table at Spa.
Since that bright autumn day both Germany and Bel-
gium have seen the evil results attending public gambling
when practised by weak-minded individuals, and have
banished the too fascinating game to Monaco, to the great
delight of the prince of the smallest kingdom in Europe.
Man, being a speculative animal by nature, finding trente
et quarante and roulette forbidden by a paternal govern-
ment, has had recourse to ecarte and baccarat, and instead
of playing at the kursaal in the sight of everybody he
now stakes his money in the seclusion of a club. The
facilities for gambling are more numerous than of yore,
hut you cannot always depend upon the fairness of your
opponents’ game, nor on realising your winnings. At the
public tables there could be no cheating, and when you
won you could rely on getting your money .
The bankruptcies and suicides accruing from the gamb-
ling mania have not diminished, but they are now at-
tributed to other causes. A man does not care to bespatter
the Turkey carpet of the club house with his brains, and


a severe loss or a grand coup made at a club is not usually
the subject of a newspaper paragraph. When a Garcia
broke the bank at Baden Baden the fact was commented
on by the whole European press. A public gambling
table is to some people’s thinking an outlet for the over
speculative and a check against folly, but what is the use
of discussing the question, has not the fatal decree gone
forth, and the clink of the ivory ball and the “ faites le
jeu ” of tbe impassable croupier are no longer to be beard
in the richly decorated balls of the kursaal at Spa. But
at tbe time tbe above remark was made roulette and
trente et quarante were in tbe heyday of their dangerous
career.
“You are in a vein of luck and yet cease to play,” tbe
Baron repeated.
“ I don’t care to waste my mornings at tbe tables,” I
replied.
“ Superior attractions elsewhere ? ”
“ iN"o, not what you mean ; the bright sunshine lures me
out of doors for one thing, and you know I never play
long in the morning.”
“ Why ? ”
“ Because it would be making a toil of a pleasure. I
enjoy my days in the open air and speculate in earnest in
the evening.”
“ Perhaps you are wise. At my time of life men are
only too willing to profit by the smiles of the fickle goddess,
come they at any hour of the day or night; they have had
too much occasion to fear her frowns.”
“ They are no doubt right, and I am wrong to neglect
my chance, but in the morning I only venture a little to
test the fallacy of the last new system, and if possible to
win enough money to cover the day’s expenses.”
“ Praiseworthy objects both, and if you are satisfied,
what say you to get our horses and have dejeuner at the
restaurant in the wood. We will find ortolans there, and
the trout are quite equal to those of your Loch Leven.”
“Delighted,” was my answer, and in a few minutes we
were cantering gaily along the heights above Spa.
Before reaching the charmingly situated restaurant we
met with an accident which nearly cost my companion his
life.
When least expected how often in our progress through
2
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


life do we suddenly come face to face with a grave diffi-
culty, which the most acute of intellects would have failed
to foresee. Here’s an illustration of what I mean. To
shorten our journey by about half a mile the Baron and I
left the main road and struck into the forest. The shade
from the trees was fully appreciated after the heat and
dust. There were numerous glades of surpassing love-
liness, and we had but little difficulty in finding a path
for our horses. We had enjoyed the agreeable change
for some time when the question arose whether we had not
lost our way. It turned out that neither of us knew any-
thing about the intricate windings of the forest. The
scenery was certainly very pretty, but the wealth of the
variegated foliage only gladdened the eye, and the trout
in the streams wanted catching and cooking; we were
two hungry men in search of something to eat. Our
watches told us that we had been nearly an hour endeavour-
ing to reach our destination, which by the longest route
would not have occupied more than half the time. We
had undoubtedly lost our reckoning, and were making for
some unknown region. A philosopher, partial to offering
words of advice in season would write here, “ beware of
short cuts.”
We altered our course and rode to the left instead of
the right, and coming to a large open space we set our
horses going to make up for the mistake. The open
space was beautiful to look at, but proved as treacherous
as a lovely but deceitful woman. This simile is not mine
—the fair sex has no more devoted champion than myself
—it was suggested to me by Wormald, who has just re-
turned from India to go through the Divorce Court. Be-
fore we had ridden many yards we found ourselves in the
middle of a morass, and—pleasant sensations —horses and
riders felt themselves gradually sinking out of sight.
Shouting for help seemed useless in such a solitude, and
our escape evidently depended on our own exertions.
The Baron was a heavy man and weighed quite sixteen
stone in the saddle. He was mounted on a stout black
cob about fifteen hands, which was making extraordinary
exertions to get out of the mire, but the horses’ .flounder-
ing only made matters worse. My steed, a light-made
thoroughbred mare, standing 15 — 2, having only to carry
about ten stone, did not sink so deeply as the Baron’s cob,
3
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


and after a desperate scramble we managed to retrace our
steps and regain sound ground. My trouble over, I fastened
my muddy horse to a tree and hastened to see what I
could do for my companion. His position had become very
serious. The cob was lying on his side and had got the
Baron under him,
“ I cannot move,” he called out; “ this brute will be the
death of me,” and from all appearances what he said was
not unlikely to happen.
I could see nothing of him except his head, and only the
back and head of his horse were visible. I tried to enter
the morass at a more favourable place, but I could not ad-
vance any distance before I sank up to the middle in
nasty sticky slime. It was terribly annoying not to be
able to render any assistance to the drowning man. A.t
the critical moment when the Baron’s head was disappear-
ing from my sight I shouted as hard as I could “If you
don’t make a tremendous effort, Baron, you are a lost
man; get free from your horse somehow ; kick him.”
My advice was not given a moment too soon. An op-
portune blow separated horse and rider, and benefited
both.
The Baron waded with difficulty to a tree growing in
the middle of the bog, and some friendly charcoal burners
arriving on the scene we got a supply of ropes and soon
pulled the Baron and his cob out of the quagmire. Having
washed and dried our clothes the best way we could, we
did not look quite so presentable as when we started, but
felt none the worse, and guided by a native we were not
long in reaching the welcome shelter of the
where we found that our appetites had not suffered from
our compulsory mud bath.
That was a novel experience,” remarked the Baron as
we sipped our Moulin a bent on the verandah of the
restaurant.
“ More novel than agreeable,” I replied, “it looked all
up with you, and I began to think of your heirs.”
“ Ah, they little imagine how near they were to handling
my money. Do you know that my senses were fast leav-
ing* me ? ”
“ Really, and did the dark deeds of your life pass in
gloomy procession before you ? ”
“ Ho, it was rather pleasant than otherwise, I felt like
4
DANGEROUS f


going to sleep ; your shout woke me up to my great
danger. If I had been alone I would have certainly been
a dead man.”
“ A nice predicament I would have been in if I had re-
turned to Spa by myself; they might have thought that I
was interested in your death, and put me on trial for
murder.”
“ You would have been considerably inconvenienced, and
if not arrested, you would have found yourself under police
surveillance.”
“ Whatever the result of the trial, my enemies would
have maintained to the end of my days that I had done
for you, and I might have had to leave England and
change my name.”
“You are exaggerating now,” replied the Baron smiling.
“ Let us rejoice that we both escaped and are free from
these undesirable complications. Only twice in my life
have I been so near death,”
“ Indeed ! Are the particulars interesting P If not of a
private nature, I should like to hear them.”
“ There is no reason now, whatever there may have
been, why I should not satisfy your curiosity. The nar-
ration will not occupy much time.
“ Early in life I was sent to Java tolook after the branch
of our Rotterdam banking house. On one occasion it was
my duty to visit a gentleman who resided a short distance
from town, for the purpose of collecting a large sum of
money. Whether this fact got abroad I know not, but
one thing is certain, that I was followed to my friend’s
plantation by two sinister-looking individuals, who seemed
to be very much interested in my movements. When I
saw the men dogging my steps I regretted that I had
chosen to walk. , The planter would have gladly lent me
a horse, but I could frame no valid excuse for asking the
favour, I did not feel inclined to be thought a coward.
At the plantation I met an acquaintance who was engaged
to one of the proprietor’s daughters, and I made sure he
would return to town with me, and that consequently my
money would be quite safe. Contrary to my expectations,
the lover was not ready to join me when I started, and I
went back alone. It was getting dark and I kept a good
look out, but I reached my house without molestation,
and I came to the conclusion that my suspicions had been
5
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


groundless. Early next day, however, I was horrified to
hear that the acquaintance I had left at the planter’s,
making love to his sweetheart, had, on returning to town
later in the evening been brutally stabbed to death, and
robbed of everything of value. Before leaving the planta-
tion I had taken the precaution, without saying a word to
anybody, to change my light overcoat for a dark one hang-
ing close beside it. It seems that the murdered man had
been unfortunate enough to put on my coat. The exchange
of garments no doubt saved my life.”
“ It was a lucky thought,” I said ; “ they meant robbing
you.”
“Yes, and the idea only entered my mind at the moment
of departure, when I saw the two coats together.”
“Bate was kind to you, but it was a near thing; you
mentioned that you were in deadly peril on another
occasion.”
“ That was on the return journey to Europe. You have
heard I daresay that the voyage is both long and dangerous.
On board with me I had the head of our firm and his
eldest daughter, but as I was only a cashier at the time
they kept me at a distance. In the midst of a terrific
storm our ship got out of her course and was driven on to
some rocks close to an uninhabited island. The captain
told us that the vessel was doomed, that nothing could
save her, and that we must shift for ourselves. The boats
that were not smashed when we struck were seized by the
sailors. I was a good swimmer and saw that I would not
have much difficulty in reaching the shore, but what was
to become of the feeble old banker and his helpless daugh-
ter ? In the hour of trial they looked for me to do some-
thing for them. But what was Ito do ? I could save
one of them, I thought, but which ? There was no time
for deliberation. Scarcely half an hour elapsed before
the vessel broke in two and we were thrown into the
water. The poor banker made a heartrending appeal to
me to save him. ‘ Oh, haste, I am drowning,’ he cried,
and on seeing me hesitate between him and his struggling
daughter he added, ‘ Come to me, I have another daughter.’
I put a piece of the wreck in the young lady’s hands and
assured her I would soon return. The banker was much
exhausted when I reached him, and in the strong surf we
were as nearly as possible drowned, but after repeated
6
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


efforts I at last managed to drag him up to a place of
safety.”
“ And the daughter you saved ; she became your wife ?”
“ Not so, alas ! When I went back for her she had dis-
appeared.”
“ Is that all, Baron ? ”
“Not quite. The banker was grateful; I was made a
partner in the firm and received the other daughter in
marriage.”
“ You. do come out of difficulties with flying colours. It
would I suppose have made a great difference to you if
you had saved the young lady instead of her father ? ”
“ Immense ; that was the turning point of my life ; the
poor girl who perished was betrothed to her cousin, so you
see she could not have rewarded me with her hand.”
“ Lucky Baron! ”
“It is true fortune has not been unkind to me, but I
believe some such accidents occur to everyone and that
they make,or mar the future.”
* * * * - * * *
These striking narratives made a lasting impression on
me, and first put into my head the thought that a collection
of such dilemmas would not be uninteresting. Much ex-
perience of men and cities has forced me to the same con-
clusion as the Baron —viz., that at various periods of his
life man holds his destiny, so to speak, in the hollow of
his hand, and by his conduct at these critical moments his
future prosperity or adversity is assured. The proofs of
this theory are now before you. When my last witness
has spoken I hope you —the jury—will at least admit that
I have not been negligent in hunting up my evidence.
CHAPTER II.
THE CHRISTMAS WINE-HAMPER FRAUD.
Advertising pays —giving a Dinner with an object—obtaining
the confidence of the public —an extraordinary bargain—
a great swindle.
The tricks of “ the trade ” in London never fail to amuse
me. When a fraud is thoroughly exploded and no longer
pays, it is dropped until it is forgotten, and then revived.
Solomon was quite right in saying there was nothing new.
7
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


Akin to the fashions, these combinations to deceive the
ever-confiding public have their apogee, their decline and
fall. Like the gourd, they spring up in a single night,
and never fail to secure their victims. Am I not acting
the part of a public benefactor in dealing with such
matters P And will not some complaisant clergyman, of the
Pennington stamp, think it his duty to draw attention to
the benefits to be derived from reading them ? Opprobrium
will be heaped on me by a certain class for speaking the
truth, but I am quite prepared to figure as a martyr.
It is a melancholy fact, and I have no doubt about it,
that if every one had, say £5,000 a year, crime would be
banished from the land. But the millenium is not here
yet, and we must take the world as we find it. It is the
monetary difficulty which occasions men to whet their
wits to get by fair means or foul a necessary supply of the
circulating medium.
It is not everyone who can, like a certain racing noble-
man, fall back on a horse to pull him through. When it
got into the middle of the racing week, and Lord W
found the bookmakers had had the best of him, he used to
telegraph to his training-stable, “ Send Indian Star,” and
that trustworthy animal almost invariably won some little
race on which his lordship would plunge.
:A man in the City (surely that is vague enough), not
having a horse to relieve him from his monetary dilemma,
was got out of the difficulty through a Christmas wine-
hamper.
If what I am told be correct, his Christmas wine-
hamper business was quite as legitimate as the concern
known in these days as the “American Singing Bird.”
Hot having heard the following conversation myself, you
must take it as it was given to me. The scene took place
in a novelty store, between the proprietor and his shop-
man :
Proprietor (to shopman)—Much business this morning F
Shopman—Quiet; very quiet.
Proprietor—What! Ho demand for nose machines ?
Shopman —H one.
Proprietor —Hor cork legs ?
Shopman —Hot any.
Proprietor —Very sad! Something must be done. Of
course you’ve got rid of a number of home knitters ?
8
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


Shopman — No I
Proprietor —Not sold even a baby ?
Shopman —There has only been one man here this morn-
ing, and he wanted a glass eye of a green colour; but I
think it was only his fun.
Proprietor —Tut, tut! This is dreadful! Heavy ex-
penses and no returns ! Out with the Canary !
The canary, when wound up, can really sing not only
for a minute or two, but, by a secret contrivance, its me-
lodious voice goes on without a break for hours ! So ray
informant tells me. It always attracts large and admiring
crowds, many of whom become purchasers, not only of the
bird, but machines for hatching chickens, feeding them,
pulling off their feathers, roasting them, and many other
wonderful contrivances ! The only thing wanted to make
these shops perfect is a market-for wives and an assort-
ment of coffins. The ingenious plan of keeping the canary
in full tune so long as considered desirable is simple. It
consists of a flexible tube attached to the bird, at the end
of which is a whistle. This is put into a basin of water
and blown through. It is not a horse this time, but a
mechanical bird, that brings grist to the mill.
I will now proceed to show you how much money was
made by advertising a Christmas wine hamper. The wine
trade has always been popular with men who could not
succeed in any other profession or business. Everyone
fancies he can drive a mail-phaeton, edit a paper, and is a
judge of wine, the belief being that there is nothing won-
derful to learn. If he has a connection of friends and ac-
quaintances in London, especially at the West End, so
much the better. The method usually adopted to ensure
success is to give recherche dinners, and mention incidentally
the quality and price of each wine as it is produced on the
table.
He can say, “ Yes,” as if in an answer to some one, “it
is a first class Amontillado! Only a few dozen left!
Cheap at 605.!” Again, “ I hope you like that Chateau
Margaux ! A rare vintage ! There is not much better in
Her Majesty’s cellar ! Increases in value every year ! Did
you ask had I any to spare F Not quite sure. It is giving
it away at 100 s. 1” If this delicate way of putting it does
not attain the desired end, a conversation about the various
vintages and the recent ravages amongst wines can be
9
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


started; and, on seeing your friends off, you can say, “ You
had "better let me send you the remainder of that sherry—
just a small parcel of six dozen !” Then, again, you can
observe, “ If you really are so pleased with that claret, I
will see what there is left, and will try to oblige you !” These
and similar remarks generally prove more or less effectual.
When the “ man in the City” found his balance at his
bankers rather low, and a confidential note from the
manager having been received apprising him of the fact,
he looked round for some method of making both ends
meet. After leaving the army he had taken to the wine
business, and had hitherto done no good. He had plenty
of wine in his cellar, but no demand for it; and being
rather young in the trade, he had been made a victim. Ali
his stock was of an inferior quality, and his friends declined
having any more after the first trial. A bright idea crossed
his mind —Christmas approaching, he would advertise it.
Accordingly, “ Christmas Wine Hampers at Two Guineas!”
appeared in all the leading newspapers in town and country,
and proved eminently successful. In this case his pur-
chasers had quantity, not By the commencement
of the year he had got rid of all his bad stock, and realised
a good round sum of money to his credit. But some men
are never satisfied where money is concerned. When he
saw the last lot of wine carted away from his house he
called himself some pretty names —such as “ Fm a stupid
dolt!” “A confounded fool!” —and avowed he should do
better next time. The lesson he got in this instance he
meant to utilize at the expense of the public the first
opportunity. A chance had escaped him but another
would occur. In the meantime he had established a good
reputation with innumerable clients in town and country,
which was like so much capital.
When next Christmas approached his plans were fully
matured, and he was ready for action. The chance of
making a large sum of money he resolved should not be
unsuccessful this time. On the Ist of November he published
the following advertisement: —“ Christmas Wine Hamper
for Two Guineas ! The firm whose Christmas wine hamper
last year gave such universal satisfaction, are prepared, on
this occasion only and on the following conditions to supply
six bottles of sherry, six bottles of claret, and six bottles of
champagne, all of guaranteed sound quality, packed in
10
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


hamper, and sent free to any metropolitan railway station
for the unprecedented small sum of Two Guineas ! Orders
accompanied by remittance will be registered as they
arrive, and if the stock of wine is exhausted those who sent
first will have the preference, and the money returned to
those who cannot be supplied. The hampers will be for-
warded one week before Christmas-day, and all remittances
will be promptly acknowledged. References to customers in
every part of the world. Bankers —London and West-
minster Bank. Cellars—Coleman Street. All letters td
be addressed ‘Messrs. Hanbury, Robarts & Co., Moor-
gate Street, London, E.C.’ ”
The orders arrived daily by hundreds, and a large staff
of clerks had to be employed to register them and answer
the letters. Clever people could not see how the thing
could be done at the price, but came to the conclusion that
the firm wanted a good advertisement. The two guineas,
however, came rolling in, the public evidently looking
upon it as a golden opportunity to save money.
As can easily be imagined, the men at the cellars were
busy. Thousands of hampers began to accumulate. They
had all to go out at the same time. Before the appointed
time for delivery a notice w T as inserted in the newspapers
that no more orders could be received after a certain date.
The rush on these final days reminded one of the period of
the South Sea bubble. Men and women with tears in their
eyes and money in their hands, entreated as a favour to
be registered.
To keep faith with his clients, the “ man in the City ”
duly sent away his thousands of hampers on the day
named, each hamper containing the number of bottles
enumerated in the advertisement. You will doubtless turn
round in surprise and ask where the profit came in, and
whether the “ Man in the City ” was not a little touched
in his “ upper story ? ” Rot at all. By the transaction he
cleared close on £5,000 ! As will be seen, he had profited
by his previous year’s experience, and was enabled to
afford many holidays on the Continent.
Well, as my readers may be anxious to know the secret
of his success in this “little business,” I will tell them.
It lay in the bottles being small in size, and containing
about two glasses of wine each !
The quality had been guaranteed, not the quantity !
11
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


CHAPTER. III.
MI FIRST AND ONLY APPEARANCE AS AN AUCTIONEER.
The force of Circumstances —An infallible System —Led to
Ruin —Getting Out of One Scrape into Another—A
Luehy Escape.
In my lifetime I have played many parts, successfully and
otherwise, but it was only on one occasion I officiated as
an auctioneer. The circumstances connected with this
position were too many for me, and I ascended the rostrum
much against my inclination. The rostrum consisted of a
small table, uncertain about the leg’s, with a worm-eaten
desk upon it. It would have been a piece of good fortune
if that shaky article o£ furniture had, like my friend’s
system of breaking the bank, broken down; but no
surreptitious stamping would bring it to the ground.
Putting the best face I could upon the matter, and
assuming the air of a Tattersall about to dispose of a two-
thousand-guinea yearling, I proceeded to sell the various
lots printed in the catologue, making a few preliminary
remarks to be in keeping with the style and manner of the
Knightsbridge people.
But was I not an auctioneer ? Not at all! That was
the fun, or rather the difficulty of the thing. It was, how-
ever, a nasty scrape, and I was more than glad to see the
last of Doncaster for that year. It was the infallible
system of Peter Dodd which created the mischief.
“ What on earth are you trying to do ? ” I asked him
one day in the latter part of August, more years ago now
than I care to remember. He was the sole occupant of the
room, was Peter, when I entered, and seemed deeply
engaged in playing roulette with himself and noting the
results —the colour and the numbers —on a slate beside
him.
“ Studying how to make your fortune ; and yet you
sometimes doubt my friendship!” replied Mr. Dodd,
continuing to spin the ball and add to the results on the
slate,
“ Fiddlesticks 1 what nonsense are you up to ? It seems
nANGEJJODS DILEMMAS.


to be cheerful work. Perhaps the spell will be broken if
you are disturbed.”
“ Don’t go, old fellow; let me finish the series. I know
you are an unbeliever ; but I shall be able to convince the
most sceptical.”
1 sat down much amused at my friend’s earnestness and
excitement, and waited patiently the end of the experi-
ments. He was soon satisfied, and, starting up, ex-
claimed—
“ Perfect, and a marvel of simplicity ! ”
“ Not hereditary in the family, I hope ? ” I asked.
“ When the attack is on you, you don’t fly at your best
friends ? ”
“Yes, I bite them! While you have been gadding
about town, doing no good, here have I been making
my hair turn grey by testing the various chances at
roulette.”
“ Might I suggest,” I said, “that you should vary the
monotony of the roulette —toujowrs d&s perdrix —with a
little solitaire. I can recommend that as a lively game.”
“Go to Jericho ! ” he rather impolitely answered. “ I
am the working bee ; you are the drone. While you were
whispering absurdities into the ear of Maine I have dis-
covered an infallible system.”
“Anything to do with keeping one’s temper ? ”
“It is a system,” he said impressively, “ which will
break any bank.”
“Is that all ? That is nothing. I met three men at
Baden Baden who each professed to know a different but
sure method of effecting that desirable feat; but some-
thing must have gone wrong with their calculations. To
number one I lent a Napoleon to make up his railway fare;
number two was escorted to the frontier at the expense of
the State ; and the third —what did the third do P Let
me see—it was something ridiculous, I know. Oh ! 1
remember. When he had lost his last franc he frightened
the ladies in the rooms by blowing out his brains ! I anj
disappointed in you, Peter Dodd. I know your sanguine
disposition, but I did think you had more sense.”
“ Then the secrets of the world are all used up, and
there is nothing new to be discovered.”
“ What do you mean, wise Peter ? ”
“Be serious if you can; my system has extraordinary
13
DANGEEOUS DILEMMAS.


advantages, and can be applied with equal s access to any
game of chance, be it pitch-and-toss or blind hookey.”
“ Eureka! That is the correct exclamation, I think.
Then we are to have no more flights nf uncertain bills, the
dread of Monday’s settling is about to cease for ever, and
I can promise Marie that saddle horse. Permit me, Peter,
to congratulate you that you still retain a little of the
verdure of your early youth, and believe in something,
even if that something is only an infallible system.”
“Pooh! so do you, you want to make yourself worse
than you are. If anyone dared, for instance’, to malign a
certain young lady ”
“ Stop ! what has my confidence in a young lady to do
with the question? Young ladies have nothing to do with
making money; it is the spending department they know
most about. You are endeavouring to shirk the matter,
and you are aware that all the arguments in the universe
would fail to prove the truth of infallible systems.”
“ dust so; but you will admit that one system of gamb-
ling is better than another, and that it must be greatly to
the advantage of the player to reduce the chance in favour
of the banker to the smallest possible limit.”
“ True ! 0 wise Peter, you speak as if you were quoting
the head line of a copy book.”
“ The greatest discoveries of all ages have been treated
in a similar manner. Sneer away. It is quite tme, though ;
I have found a system which reduces the risk to the
minimum, and puts you on all but a level position with
the banker.”
“ Double or quits, I suppose.”
“Nothing of the kind; quite a new idea. The St. Eeger
is approaching.”
“ So is Christmas.”
“But the St. Leger means Doncaster, stupid, and Don-
caster implies roulette in the subscription i coins, and—
breaking the bank.”
“ Oh, I see now why you are in full practice —getting off
superfluous flesh and laying on muscle.”
“Yes; and I want you and Pred Somers to join me in
the speculation. A pile of money might easily be made.
Draw yonr chair, take the slate, and I will condescend to
show you —which is more than you deserve —how the
thing is done.”
14
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


The system when worked out, was really ingenious, ana
was not devoid of merit. It was imperative that there
should not be the slightest deviation from a particular
plan of operation. The human being became a simple
calculating machine, and his judgment was dispensed with.
And it had the charm of simplicity. With pardonable
curiosity you wish to know the particulars of Peter Dodd’s
infallible system, but I shall not gratify your desire, as it
might lead to your ruin.
After many trials of the system and much deliberation,
Dodd, Somers, and myself arranged to go to Doncaster.
Our available capital was lumped together, and shared
equally. We were to play independently of each other,
and compare notes when the night’s work was finished.
Owing to the action of the police at a later period, gambling
in the subscription rooms is no longer permitted, but when
Marquis won the St. Leger for Mr. Hawke and John Scott
it was in full vogue. We had a successful day on the race-
course, and were in excellent spirits and anxious to set
about breaking the bank.
• There must have been something good in Dodd’s system,
because we managed to play without being entirely “broke ”
from 9 p.xn. to 4 a.m., but casting up accounts at the
latter hour was not an agreeable operation. We had all
lost heavily. In fact we had only a few sovereigns left,
barely sufficient to pay our expenses.
“I never believed in the infernal system,” said Somers,
as we walked home to our hotel in the bright autumn
morning ; “ we must have been asses.”
I could not help laughing at the disappointed expression
on poor Dodd’s face,
“It wants looking into,” muttered Peter.
“ I mean to have a dance on that roulette wheel when I
get back to town ; no more systems for this infant. What’s
to be done about money ?” said Somers.
“We must back a winner to-morrow,” I replied; but
whether it was the tiring effects of the night’s gambling
or not I cannot say, we were very unlucky with our in-
vestments, and finished the day as nearly cleaned out
as possible. Circumstances were now very grave, and the
question was how were we to pay our hotel bill and get
back to London ? Three more disconsolate-looking men
did not walk the streets of Doncaster. We put our
15
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


heads together in vain—no good idea came out of them,
and in the hope that night would bring good counsel we
retired to rest.
But the morning found us without any solution to the
problem, and Dodd, who took the greater part of the
blame on himself —went out into the town to see if he
could meet any friend who would lend him a few pounds.
The time Dodd was gone Somers said he would look into
the public room, and I was left in my bedroom writing
“ copy” for the Weekly Clarion. Somers soon returned
with a beaming countenance.
“ You have been fortunate ?” I said.
“Yes, but not in the manner you think,” answered
Somers.
“ But do you see your way out of the difficulty ?”
“ Certainly, but it all depends on you,’''
“ Well, explain. lam ready to cTo anything.”
“ I thought so. Now, listen. There is a sale on in the
yard, and the auctioneer has not turned up. When I saw
the dilemma the farmers were in, I said my friend would
be glad to officiate —meaning you. Dodd would make a
•regular mess.of it, and my squeaky voice would never be
heard.”
“You cannot be serious, Somers,” I exclaimed.
“ Never more serious in my life.”
“ But I have never acted as an auctioneer.”
“ That don’t matter.”
“ But are you aware, my friend, that a licence is neces-
sary, and that the penalty for not having one is vert
heavy ?”
“ Bother the penalty. Don’t we return to London
to-night? I’m off to get your name printed. Any pre-
ference F Will Robert Scott, auctioneer, Mark Lane,
London, do ?”
“ Really, Somers, it is too risky.”
“ I’ll back it to beat Peter Dodd’s idiotic system. Tiiis
is a certainty. It means £5.”
Imagine me, then, if you please, standing on that shaky
table, catalogue in hand, extolling the merits of a feather
bed, a cart-horse, a Carron grate, a brindle cow, some pigs,
a threshing machine, a chest of drawers, and other mis-
cellaneous articles of property.
Naturally I was a little nervous at first, but my courage
16
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


came back to me, and I got excellent prices for every-
thing. When Peter Dodd returned from his fruitless
quest he did »ot see me, being a little short-sighted, until
Somers pointed me out to him. When, by the aid of an
eye-glass, he did realise the fact that I was making myself
so useful, the situation was too much for him, and he
rushed into an hotel.
Towards the end of the sale the real auctioneer made
Ids appearance !
The train by which he travelled had broken down.
He was for ousting me from my rostrum without ceremony,
but backed by the “Ho ! no! ” of my audience, I refused
to move. He looked daggers at me, and took a note of
my newly-printed name and address. This did not bode any
good, and I was not sorry to get to the end of the catalogue.
Joining my friends with the hard-earned “fiver,” I
suggested that the sooner we left Doncaster the better.
The bill was called for and a time-table examined. But
before our preparations were finished a row broke out in
the room where the farmers were having their dinner, and
Somers went down to see what it meant. He returned
immediately, looking pale as a ghost.
“ Old fellow,” he said, addressing me, “ that wretch of
an auctioneer has had a telegram from London to say you
are not licensed, and he has just gone to acquaint the
authorities.”
(: In that case, you will excuse me leaving by the back
door. I will see you at the station.”
Whether they sold the live stock and implemerats of
husbandry over again I never heard, and since then I have
discarded all belief in Peter Dodd’s infallible system, and
have not officiated a second time as an auctioneer.
CHAPTER IV.
THE TWO MYSTERIOUS DOMINOS.
Peter Dodd maizes another proposal Carnival time at
Boulogne—The scene in the supper-room —“ All’s well
that ends ivell.”
While I am about it I may as well relate to you another
of the scrapes into which I was led by the volatile but
good-natured Peter Dodd. It was not a question of making
17
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


or losing money this journey, hut the peace of two
families which was threatened. When yon learn the sur-
prise that was so carefully planned for us, you will admit
that most people similarly situated would have lost their
heads and blundered. We were fortunate enough to
understand the delicate position in a moment, and were
consequently able to smooth down in a very short time the
ruffled plumes of our two dominos.
What promised at first to furnish matter for two cases
in the Divorce Court, ended in a rather riotous supper. I
know that I had to take a long walk on the Boulogne
sands next day before I could get rid of a violent headache
—the effects of too much sweet champagne. He does not
mean it I am sure, but it is a strange thing that a fatality
attaches itself to all the propositions of Peter Dodd.
The jokes about the “infallible system” had all been let
off, and my ears were no longer greeted with the “ going,
going, gone,” of an auctioneer, when Peter came in with
his tempting proposal to me.
“ Jack,” he said, his eyes beaming with the antici-
pated pleasure, “ I’m going to treat myself to a little
holiday.”
“Well, Peter, you have my permission; take care of
yourself. Remember you have given hostages to fortune,”
I replied.
“ It is too bad of you to he always reminding me that I
am married, as if that fact is not ever patent to me ; just
as if a certain young lady would permit me to forget it.”
“ I would not have mentioned the pleasant bond, you
may be assured, without a good reason.”
“ Stuff and nonsense ! What reason P ”
“ You have not been so long married, and already I
begin to notice a return of some of your former levity.
You have commenced to give back with interest the
glances of a pretty girl as of yore. What was that you
were whispering to the brunette you met at Regent Circus
last Friday—no appointment ? Fie, Peter, what would
your charming little woman say ? ”
“ She would go mad with jealousy. She is bad enough
as it is.”
“ She loves you immensely, Peter, and you ought to
prize such affection. I hope you will enjoy yourselves.”
“ But I am not taking Clara with me.”
18
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


My reply was not delivered in words, it was whistled.
This form of answer evidently did not please Peter.
“ Yon are always lecturing me,” he said hotly. “ Sup-
pose I turn round and ask your wife how she enjoyed
herself in that private box at the Gaiety the other night,
what would you say F The plaintiff is expected to come
into court with clean hands.”
“ Relations from the country must be shown a little
attention.”
“ Especially when they are young and pretty.”
“ Not a drawback, certainly, lam older than you,
Peter, and if the advice is not palatable, don’t swallow it.
Knowing your quicksilver nature, I ventured to turn on
the danger signal. I shall not stand idly by with my
bands in my pockets and see that nice little woman of
yours neglected.”
“It is ridiculous to talk of neglect. But because a man
happens to get married does it follow that he should be
tied to his wife’s apron-strings for the rest of his natural
life. In my opinion an occasional absence has a salutary
effect, and brightens up the old love.”
“ I daresay that even the devil himself can find some
plausible argument for his conduct. Go your own way,
Peter. I only hope that-the motive power for this' freak
is not a lady. You do not usually go away to enjoy your-
self when the snow is on the ground.”
“ There is no lady at all in the case. The sole reason is
that I want to see the carnival, and as Boulogne is about
the nearest place lam going there. Won’t you join
me ? ”
“Not possible, I fear, I ought to have run across last
autumn. A man there owes me a hundred pounds.”
“ Why not arrange to come. Kill two birds with one
stone. Enjoy the carnival, draw your money. Away
only three days.”
“The ‘ copy ’ might be got ready,” I answered, “by a
night’s sitting. But there is another obstacle.”
“ I have made up my mind to take you with me, so you
must manage it somehow. What is the other difficulty ? ”
Before answering, I took the precaution of opening the
door to see whether we were favoured with a listener,
Although there was nobody visible I heard the sound of
retreating footsteps, which made me a little suspicious.
19
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ That’s it,” said Peter*, pointing with his thumb over
his right shoulder.
“ Yes,” I replied; “don’t talk loud. What excuse
could I give ? What have you said ? That you are going
to masquerade at a carnival ball ?”
“hTot likely. lam depending on you for a satisfactory
reason.”
“As usual. To begin with, it will not do to tell our
wives we are going to France.”
“ FTot at all. One of the papers would be sure to do a
gushing article on the frolics of the carnival, and we
should be found out and settled.”
“ Do you transact any business with Liverpool ?” I asked.
“ Sometimes. I see your drift.”
“ Well, we can pretend to go there, you to see a mer-
chant, and I to forward the interests of the Clarion .”
So it was agreed, and this piece of deception was care-
fully arranged and duly carried out. My better half was
unusually complaisant when I told her my intentions, and
even went so far as to say I had been working too hard,
&nd the charge would do me good. She was glad, she
added, that my great friend, Peter Dodd, was accom-
panying me ; he would prevent me feeling dull. She was
so very kind in the matter, asking whether the theatres
were good at Liverpool, and how I would dispose of my
evenings ; I felt quite guilty at deceiving her. “ You had
better take your dress clothes,” she said; “ you never
know what may happen. You might be asked out to
dinner,,”
Declining the proposals of our wives to see us safely in
the train for Liverpool, Peter Dodd and I took a cab to
Charing Cross Railway Station and booked to Boulogne-
sur-Mer. lat one time had my suspicions that my “ better
half ” 1 was not without a knowledge of our real destination,
but her anxiety to see that my portmanteau was properly
packed disarmed me ; and her last words at parting were,
“ Don’t work too hard. Amuse yourself a little —you want
a change.” Peter and I were both quite certain that Mrs,
Dodd had not the least idea of our plot, and to perfect the
scheme we had letters sent to a friend iu Liverpool, to
be duly posted, acquainting our wives with our arrival,
and expressing our sorrow at being separated from them
even for such a short space of time.
20
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


Dull care we threw to the winds, and no two men could
have stepped on French soil more bent on enjoyment. The
very air seemed to exhilirate us ; it was like quaffing a
bumper of champagne. Of course you know Boulogne.
Need I describe to you the beauty of the sands, the anti-
quity of the old town, the village fetes at Pont-des-
Briques and Portelle, the quaint costumes and massive
ornaments of the fish-women, or the particular class of
Englishmen you are bound to meet there in and out of
season P
You are, perhaps, as well acquainted with its features as
I am. Perhaps you have made love on the ramparts in
the moonlight, and had your breakfast at the little
restaurant on the jetty. Morning has found you at the
English Library in search of the latest gossip; and possibly
you have seldom when there missed the two important
events of the day—the arrival and departure of the mail
boats.
Small as it is, Boulogne circulates more scandal than
any town twice its size. It may be an extraordinary mar
riage, cheating discovered at the card-table, the sudden
disappearance of a friend’s wife, the elopement of a young
lady with a married man, or rumours of a duel about to
take place on the Belgiafl frontier. Something startling
is sure to turn up, and natives and foreigners alike enjoy
the humours of the carnival quite as much as the people of
Paris or Lyons,
The carnival commenced the day following our arrival.
The proper thing to do was to hire two fancy costumes,
and, duly masked, go to the ball at the theatre in the
evening. We selected our dresses with great care. We
were, indeed, laughable to look at —I dressed in a Turkish
costume, and Peter, capitally got up like a Frenchman of
the Paris boulevards. We flattered ourselves, however,
that our most intimate friends would not have guessed
wiiowe were—feeling safe from detection even from our
wives.
After dejeuner on the jetty, I went in search of the mar
who owed me the hundred pounds. He was not in the
least surprised to see me, which seemed strange; in fact,
he looked as if he had rather expected me to drop in
than otherwise. One thing he was not prepared with, and
that was my money. Instead of offering to liquidate th?
21
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


debt to some extent, he, with all the coolness imaginable,
proposed that I should lend him another ten pounds. I
would not regret it, he said; he might be able to do me a
good turn. His audacity made me angry, and I marched
out of his office in anything but a pleasant temper. Meet-
ing an acquaintance shortly afterwards, he told me not to
expect to realise my hundred, that the man’s wife had
bolted with her husband’s most intimate friend a few days
before, and that he, my debtor, was fast drinking himself
to ruin and death. Dismissing this miserable business
from my mind, Peter and I, picturesquely arrayed, took a
voiture to the theatre about eleven o’clock. The fun had
not yet become fast and furious, but the signs of the mad
revelry to come were visible on all sides.
Much abler pens than mine have described the kaleido ■
scope lights and shades of a carnival ball, and I will confine
myself to the very objectionable dilemma which occurred to
me and my friend. Having flirted a little and danced once
or twice, we took our unknown partners to the bar to get
some refreshment, and were standing there, when my
attention was arrested by the appearance of two ladies in
black dominos on the scene who seemed to be greatly in-
terested in our movements. They had a small piece of
white satin ribbon attached to each of their shoulders for,
I presumed, the purpose of recognition if they were
accidentally separated.
The volatile Peter was too busy whispering nonsense in
his best Prench to the girl he had been dancing with to
notice these inquisitive dominos. I was about to leave the
buffet when a tall man in a hideous mask joined the two
ladies, who evidently knew him, and, from the direction of
of their looks, it appeared that what the three individuals
were talking about related to us.
An uneasy feeling stole over me, which I could not shake
off. I endeavoured to reason with myself that no end of
mistakes took place at every masked ball, and that the
two dominos who persisted in hovering- near us were on
the wrong scent. But this did not quite set my mind at
rest. I took Peter aside and told him that I thought we
were watched ! “ What fun ! Let’s go and ask them to
dance ! ” was all the reckless man answered. Ho sooner
said than done ; he went up to the ladies and requested
that honour for himself and friend, but they shook their
22
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


heads in reply, and put themselves in the care of their tall
friend. Peter, not a whit abashed, suggested that they
thought themselves too respectable to do anything but
look sarcastically on other people’s folly, and departed in
search of fresh adventure.
As the heat was stifling, I went out of the theatre and
entered a restaurant close to it. What I saw there
astonished me. There was the tall man who had been in
conversation with the two dominos, without his mask, and
he turned out to be the worthy individual who owed me
the hundred pounds!
His remark, that if I lent him another ten pounds he
might be able to do me another good turn, arose in my mind.
It was strange he showed no surprise at seeing me enter
his office.
Was it possible that my wife, who knew I had at one
time business relations with this man, had sent to have me
watched ? Or, horror of horrors ! had she followed me
herself ?
I was never quite satisfied about the noise outside the
door when Peter Dodd first proposed the unfortunate
trip to Boulogne.
I soon, however, learned the worst. The tall man, who
apparently did not perceive me, was drinking with some
persons at the bar, and was relating to them with great
glee, how nicely I was being done; and Peter Dodd’s wife
and mine were the two dominos who had watched us, and
who had engaged this drunken fellow to assist them !
Heedless to say, these revelations came upon me like a
thunderclap in a summer sky. I immediately rushed back
to the theatre to inform Peter of the dreadful discovery I
had made. To my utter amazement, I found him waltzing
with his own wife, the other domino (my “better half”)
looking on !
Immediate action w'as necessary to prevent a scene, and
I whispered to Peter as he passed me —
“ Something serious has happened; take back your
partner and come instantly to me.”
Peter, for once, did as he was told, but not without
being stupid enough to say to his partner that he hoped
to have the pleasure of dancing with her again, and that
he expected the two ladies to join him and his friend at
supper. He was sure his friend would be delighted.
23
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ That’s the nicest girl I have danced with to-night,”
said Peter, considerably excited, “ but I cannot get her to
talk.”
“ Come out, you idiot,” was all I could say.
“ That is polite, I must observe; Boulogne air is not
agreeable to some people.”
“ Tell me, what rubbish have you been talking to your
partner, and how did you manage to get her to waltz with
C J f i
you P
“ Cool! jealous ! of course all the best girls must be
reserved for the Sultan. Don’t be cross ; if you fancy my
partner, take her. Perhaps you will be able to make her
speak, and I will transfer my attentions to her friend,”
replied the incorrigible Peter.
“ Talk sense one second; you will be serious enough
when I tell you what I have discovered. I ask you if you
have the slightest notion who we are dancing with p”
“ Not I, she would not open her mouth, but she is a
deuced fine girl.”
“ Why, madman, that girl is your own wife; they are
both here.”
The only plan was to bribe more than the opposition,
and, reluctantly enough, I went and made terms with my
pleasant debtor. What he knew did not amount to much;
the enemy had said it was a lark to see what ave were
about, and by making him a present got him to assist them.
He kindly found out for them where we were stopping,
and the hideous dresses in which we were ,to disfigure
mrselves.
Peter was of no assistance to me in the dilemma; the
startling intelligence had quite upset his equilibrium. No
more jokes now about the nicest girl he had danced with
\hat night. I made use of the tall man, however, as he
Aad been paid by both sides. He obtained for me a blank
lelegram for a message received, and on it I had written a
request from the proprietor of the Clarion asking me to
be certain to forward my carnival article on the following
day, so that it Avould appear in that week’s issue. This
was for my Avife —she was so partial to things being proved.
A private letter would ensure the insertion of an article
Avhich I must write.
The only way out of the difficulty was to state that i
was obeying instructions from the office, and to oavu that
24
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


a harmless piece of deception was used in case our darling
wives would not approve of foreign doings and masked
balls.
The ladies were brought to us by our drinking friend,
there was a stormy five minutes, and a good many tears,
bub all unpleasantness was forgotten before the supper was
finished.
But as I said before, Peter Dodd’s ideas have a tendency
to lead one into mischief.
CHAPTER V.
THE FIFTEEN POSTAGE-STAMP PUZZLE,
The two Conspirators —The Destitute state of the Finances —
Swindle concocted —A polite Speech —The golden
Harvest.
It is a threadbare saying, but a very true one, that
nothing succeeds like success. Be the money made in
questionable ways, such as by a little piracy in Chinese
waters, selling guns never intended to shoot to North
American Indians, or by a quack medicine, which professes
to cure all diseases humanity is heir to, the man himself,
the millionaire, will be glorified. As in America, so in the
mother country, the money-bags cover a multitude of sins.
It is pitiable, and does not give one a high impression of
the multitude’s brains, that the most glaring imposition, if
thoroughly well advertised and persisted in, is bound to
yield large profits.
It may not have been overlooked, although not noticed
much in the newspapers, but the most satirical thing done
in the present century of the Christian era has been the
erection of an asylum for imbeciles by a gentleman who
shall be, for obvious reasons, nameless. The act speaks
volumes, and ought to be worth a cartoon by Tenniel as a
lesson for thousands. The donor has been behind the
scenes, and knows our little weaknesses and is ashamed cf
us ! After putting away all the money he cares about, he
devotes the surplus to the more benighted and helpless
of his immense clientele. A statue ought to be erected to
such a man; his head has evidently been fitted to his
shoulders in a correct and proper manner. Early in life he
found out the immense advantage of advertising, and also
25
dilemmas.


the gullibility of a vast majority of the earth. There are
other men, no doubt, just as sharp as our asylum friend,
who know quite as well how to reap considerable profit
from this knowledge, and the Fifteen Postage-stamp Puzzle
is a case in point.
It was a miserable room of one of those dilapidated inns
near the Strand that the stamp project was hatched.
Two men, shabbily dressed, were seated opposite each
other at an old table, on which was a pewter-pot. They
were both smoking clay pipes and drinking beer, and were
in anything but a happy mood, to judge from their
appearance and general aspect; and one might safely con-
clude they could not boast of having a superfluity of cash.
I will now introduce these two men by the names of
Bathurst and Penn. Bathurst is a tall, dark-looking man,
with a hooked nose and teeth remarkably white. His
family got him into Her Majesty’s Navy as a midshipman,
and he was in a fair way to promotion when something
occurred connected with a gambling transaction which
caused him to resign. Penn is also tall, but very fair.
His parents gave him a good education, and he was getting
a decent salary as a shop-walker in a Regent Street firm
when a young lady mysteriously disappeared, and along
with her went furs and silks of much value. Suspicion,
for which, no doubt, there were good grounds, pointed to
Penn as the young lady’s confederate, and the place
became too hot for him. These two men, who were in
that uncertain age between 30 and 40, first met in a
billard-room, and immediately struck up an alliance offen-
sive and defensive.
They have been living on their wits ever since, but
things have evidently notbeen prospering with them latterly,
as the following conversation will show:
Penn —What money have you got ?
Bathurst (turning out his pockets)—There ss. 3|d. !
What have you got ?
Penn (opening a purse)—There, only half-a-crown !
Bathurst —Well, it’s no good having ideas if that’s the
extent of our capital!
Penn —But what is the notion ? We must laise money
somehow!
Bathurst—How ? Where ? If that brute of a horse
had only won to-day we would have been all right.
26
dangerous dilemmas.


Fenn —Can’t we go to that tobacconist’s shop and have
a game of Napoleon ?
Bathurst —No ; the last time we met in his back shop
the police heard the row between Brown and that fool
Peter, and he don’t intend to risk it again—at least for the
present. There is more to be made at pool in Beak-street
if one had only a little luck.
Fenn —Yes, the marker is all right; but some of the
players were inclined to make remarks.
Bathurst —That must be risked. Here, take the
money; your luck is better than mine. If yon can
manage to net two or three sovereigns, I see my way to
hundreds !
Fenn —But yon have not told me your idea. Is it a
secret ? Perhaps it requires registration.
Bathurst —Yon won’t be so cheeky when yon find the
stamps come rolling in.
Fenn—Oh! it is a case of stamps, is it? I suppose
some recipe for restoring beautiful hair to the baldest
heads, or creating an aversion to drink, or perhaps a plan
as to how to make a fortune out of baked potatoes !
Bathurst —Oh, stop your chaff !
Penn —Well out with the infallible remedy for filling
empty pockets.
Bathurst —The idea is to advertise to send fifteen dis-
connected stamps for twelve connected ones !
Fenn (starting up and doing a breakdown) —Oh, Jeru-
salem ! that will be profitable.
Bathurst —Yes, stupid ! The idea is as good as gold.
You go and make the small capital required, and you will
see wonders,
Fenn —But what are the particulars ? How is it to be
carried out ?
Bathurst —For further particulars see our next. Come
along now and play your best.
G-ood fortune attended Fenn’s exertions that evening,
and he came away the winner of more than the required
sum. The following morning the scheme was fully dis-
cussed and final arrangements made for carrying it out.
It is right to state that Bathurst’s project was not
altogether original on his part, the idea being taken from
the “Arabian Nights Entertainment ” —the exchanging of
new lamps for old ones. The next day the following
27
DANGEBOUS DILEMMAS.


advertisement appeared in all the newspapers, and was
circulated extensively:—
“ Strange, but true! —A gentleman of position has good
reasons of his own for wishing to exchange Fifteen
disconnected Unused Penny Postage Stamps for
Twelve Connected Ones!—Letters answered at once.
—Address, ‘Secretary, Box 44, No. , Strand, London,
W.C.’ ”
Many who read this extraordinary advertisement doubt-
less thought that the advertiser must have made some
strange wager ; others that he had probably been paid
a debt of a large amount in disconnected penny stamps,
which the Post Office declined to receive ; others came to
the conclusion that he was some eccentric philanthropist,
who desired in his original way to benefit his fellow
creatures; and there were others,no doubt, who pronounced
the £k gentleman of position ” a swindler, and the whole
affair a fraud. The last-named were not a little astonished,
however, to hear that the advertiser really kept his
word —that fifteen stamps were actually returned for
twelve !
What assisted to make the scheme popular and to draw
particular attention to it was the arrival at most of the
principal towns of secret agents, whose duty it was to
frequent bar-parlours in the evening, take occasion to read
the advertisement aloud to those present, and enter into
conversation upon it, eventually proposing, just to test its
genuineness, to forward the twelve connected stamps—
procuring and enclosing them at the bar. The answer
would, of course, promptly arrive conveying the advertised
number of stamps. Needless to say others followed the
example, and with a like result, it becoming subsequently
quite a popular amusement in many towns to send twelve
stamps to London to receive in return fifteen! In fact,
if you wanted a stamp to post a letter, you were jocularly
asked why you did not send to London for one ? These
secret agents “ did ” many publichouses each night, and by
the end of three or four days took their departure for
“ fresh fields and pastures new,”
There were altogether about twenty agents, and before
despatching them on their mission Mr. Bathurst con-
sidered it necessary to appoint a meeting at his chambers,
now suitably furnished, and addressed them as follows;
28
DAXGEROHS DILEMMAS.


“ Gentlemen, I believe yon have received your instructions
detailing the plan of procedure and bow you are to con-
duct your correspondence with tbis office. Before start-
ing, however, I wish, with the concurrence of my partner,
to say a few words to you. You have been selected,
gentlemen, out of many hundred applicants, on account of
your good characters and respectability, and we trust you
will do nothing to forfeit that good opinion. The business
you have in hand, gentlemen, requires tact and a certain
amount of secrecy. It is not for us to discuss with you
the merits or demerits of the whim which actuates our
client. We have simply to obey and carry out his orders,
as we expect you, gentlemen, in like manner, to carry out
and obey ours, being, as it were, soldiers obeying, not
questioning, the orders of their superior officers. There
may be, gentlemen, for aught we know, a large sum of
money depending on the result of your exertions. But
whether that be the case or not, it will have nothing what-
ever to do with the punctuality with which you shall be
paid your respective salaries. Now, gentlemen, as regards
the genuineness of this announcement, it is easily ascer-
tained —you or your friends can test it for yourselves. If
people were not so incredulous or hard of belief, so much
afraid of being hoodwinked or humbugged, we of course
could have relied on our advertisements alone and dis-
pensed with your services ; but this is an unbelieving age,
gentlemen, and we have some trouble, nowadays, to con-
vince people that we really wish to do them a service,
Therefore, to show the public that this is a bona fide trans-
action, and that our client means what he says, will be
your especial duty. In conclusion, gentlemen, allow me
to offer you my best wishes, with that of my partner, for
your immediate success, feeling quite sure that our con-
fidence has not been misplaced. Good day, gentlemen;
the cashier will take your receipts for salary as you leave
the office.”
As may be supposed, the opinions of the agents were at
variance regarding the affair. It was thought, however,
by the majority that probably some jolly and wealthy
sportsman like the famous Marquis of Waterford had
staked a large sum of money on the result; but as they
had half the first week’s salary in advance and their letter
of instructions, they considered they were on the profitably
29
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


side of the project, and so decided to proceed on their
mission.
They, therefore, separated and started for their respec-
tive districts. Certain newspapers in some towns would
not insert the advertisement, hat there were others not so
particular, and so the scheme was successfully launched.
It was met at first with some rough suspicion, no doubt,
but keeping it well before the public by means of advertis-
ing, together with a little energy, it turned out a complete
success, and flourished like the proverbial green bay
tree.
My readers have now read how Mr. Bathurst’s stamp
idea was successfully worked out of doors. I will now
narrate how it was managed in his office. There was £5
worth of penny postage stamps purchased and disconnected.
As the answers came inthey were immediately answered, the
applicant’s twelve stamps with three extra returned in each
case. This continued until the bank (£5!) was exhausted.
Thus far they carried out the terms and conditions of the
advertisement, at the same time keeping faith with the
public. They now worked very cautiously, as it required
delicate handling and steady manoeuvring, and they did
not mean to expend another penny. It was necessary, at
the same time, to keep the business afloat so long as
there was no chance of exposure. They accordingly
kept back a certain number of letters, writing on
each the day it arrived. The stamps in these delayed
letters made up the extra three required for each of the
others, which were duly forwarded. On the following
morning the detained letters were immediately sent off,
with a note of apology explaining that pressure of business
had caused the delay. This mode of procedure went on
for a short time, when one day they found they were
irretrievably in arrears, so numerous were the applications !
ISTow came their dishonest harvest ! There were no more
letters of apology ! Business suspended ! During the five
or six days Mr. Bathurst’s “idea” was in existence the
applications came in by hundreds, and resulted in the
round sum of £SOO !
It is scarcely necessary to add that there was soon an
office to let in that particular inn near the Strand, and
that the whereabouts of Messrs Bathurst and Fenn was
not easily obtainable for a considerable time afterwards.
30
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


CHAPTER VI.
A HEAD DEFEAT; AN ATTEMPT TO WIN THE CAMBRIDGESHIRE
Th i great trial—the light weight apportioned by the Admiral
—the heavy commission successfully worked —newspaper
reports about the horse —his short price in the betting—
the sudden unaccountable opposition to him—a young
lady discloses the plot —the Jew outwitted, and obliged
to give up the scratching order—standing to win a
fortune to nothing —a very reliable partner.
No, my inquisitive friend, a pair of blue eyes did not oc-
casion the difficulty ; on tbe contrary, my partner and my-
self would have been ruined if a certain young 1 lady had
not given information which enabled me to circumvent the
schemes of the enemy, who, I may tell you, was a Jew.
The circumstances caused a sensation at the time, and a
number of the men who overlaid their books in the belief
that the horse would never go to the post would not have
“ weighed in ” for that, to me, memorable Cambridgeshire,
provided we had run first instead of second.
It all came about in this way.
Picture to yo irself two men seated, after dinner, in an
old-fashioned notel of quant, sleepy Hampshire town.
The elder of the two was my partner, and the other your
humble servant. We were anxiously waiting the arrival
of a telegram of the utmost importance to us. If favour-
able, an immense fortune was within our grasp.
This message was to contain the weight of a horse for
the Cambridgeshire. In the morning we had roughed up
the team, and a four-year-old had opened our eyes to his
merits by simply cantering away from some good trying
tackle. For many years we had vainly striven to pull off
a large race, but mishaps were sure to crop up at the
wrong time. It now depended upon the judgment of
Admiral Rous whether we were going to land the big
stake at last.
To pass the time we amused ourselves by writing the
horse’s probable weight on slips of paper —which were to
be kept folded up till the telegram came—and betting
about them. Instead cf arriving at the hour expected,
31
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


the message was very late; it had been delayed owing to
a disarrangement of the wires, caused hy a thunderstorm.
When the all-important missive did reach us we were
more than satisfied. The four-year-old was weighted at
6st. 71b. If I mistake not, we drank long life to the
Admiral in an extra bottle of Irroy. Fortune’s wheel
was, we thought, about to turn in our favour, and our
long suffering patience was at length to be rewarded. One
of us talked philosopically, as if he had foreseen this
splendid chance, and, shaking his head with an air of wis-
dom, muttered : “I told you so; everything comes to the
man who waits.”
It was, however, a long time to Cambridgeshire day,
but that weighty consideration, the impost, was all right.
The horse must now be carefully looked after, and got to
the post fit and well. As regards the betting, we arranged
to secure all the long prices, 100 and 66 to 1, without
being suspected, and had an arrangement how much we
were each to stand to win. As may be easily imagined,
we had pleasant dreams that night of gorgeous establish-
ments and endless parcels of Bank of England notes.
Yon never knew my partner. Ail this happened before
your time. He belonged to a good family, and was an
excellent boon companion. A mutual friend first made us
known to each other at one of the Hewmarket meetings.
He wanted to get a confederate to join him in forming a
small stud; and, after a deal of correspondence it was at
length decided to enter into partnership and try for a large
handicap. As most money could be made over the Cam-
bridgeshire, we selected that race. Our attempts previous
bo the trial of Santonin had been, as stated already, utter
failures. When I signed the deed of agreement I did not
know that my partner was in a very embarrassed position
in regard to money, and was in the hands of the Jews. He
ought to have explained this to m.e. He was a good
enough fellow, but he had a serious failing—the slightest
obstacle in his way he was bound to refuse, he would not
face a difficulty. If I had been informed of his circum-
stances I -would assuredly have steered clear of the en-
tanglement, and there would be no story to relate to
you.
A woman plays a part in this narrative of fact. A
member of that sex usually has something to do with most
32
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


mundane affairs. My partner was married, and had
several young childen. For the purposes of education a
niece lived with the family and acted as governess. It
was the niece who revealed the plot and saved us from
ruin.
A charming, refined girl was the niece—Elizabeth
Emerson —alas ! now dead. You think lam prejudiced;
judge for yourself —her photograph is before me. As I
open the album sad thoughts arise in my mind of joys de-
parted, of friends and sweethearts estranged or “gone
before.” Miss Emerson had a beautifully formed head,
resembling that of Clytie, whose bust I presented to her
for her own little sitting room. Her head was crowned
with a luxuriance of brown hair, wayward locks of which
would persist in straying from their proper position as if
they wished to be caressed ; forehead not too high, not
that of a strong-minded woman —only the head of a pretty
girl, and partly hidden by the hair as in the bust mentioned.
Her eyes were peculiar—they were so large and luminous,
and had that almond shape so much admired. The nose
was not severely classical, but it was all but straight.
The lips were not too thin, the mouth was exceedingly
small, she had the whitest of little teeth, the tiniest of
shell-like ears, and a rose-tint complexion, betokening
health. Heed I add that when her feet were visible they
were in keeping with the features of the girl who was at
this period just budding into womanhood, and who,
although diminutive in stature, was magnificiently propor-
tioned—a model for a sculptor.
Fond of amusement, she was anything but fast; under-
lying her careless, laughing, satirical manner, there existed
sound sense, a great respect for other people’s feelings and
one of the finest natures man could wish for in a wife.
But I must proceed with my story. The Cambridge-
shire was nigh at hand, and Santonin had gone on well —
had not been sick nor sorry a single day, the commission
had been worked to our entire satisfaction, and an ex-
cellent jockey—now at the head of his profession—retained
to ride the horse. The largeness of the commission,
coupled with the lenient weight began to attract public
notice to Santorin. Touts, amateur and the reverse,
arrived to watch his movements and despatch their reports
daily to employers and friends. One of the best judges
33
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


on the turf paid our training ground a visit on behalf of
the journal he represented, and wrote thus about the
horse : —“ Santorin is a brown horse, with black points,
standing quite 15 hands 3 inches high, with splendid fore-
quarters, and in galloping he places his hind legs well under
him, showing all that hare-like action so admirably adapted
to get him up the somewhat severe Cambridgeshire hill.
No exception can be taken to his sire or dam—a combina-
tion of endurance and speed. At the weight he is a very
dangerous competitor, and if I couple him with Hymet
and Kelfesia, I think I have named the winner.”
The horse soon made a noise in the betting, and when
the Cesarewitch was decided as little as 8 to 1 was taken
about him.
Our commission averaged 40 to 1, and we stood to win
between us nearly £BO,OOO.
It was within a week of. the race, when to my utter
astonishment I received one day innumerable telegrams
from friends asking me what was the matter with Santorin.
The messages all contained the same intelligence, that
certain bookmakers at the Wellington Club had been
taking liberties with him and had driven him back to 16
to 1.
This antagonistic movement I could not understand, as
a letter from the trainer had reached me only that morning
stating that the horse was in excellent health, and a tele-
gram would at once have been sent to me if there had
been an accident. I put the movement down to a clique,
who had overlaid and were desirous of making themselves
safe.
Next day the horse was brought to his former position
in the quotations, when it was seen from the sporting
journals that he had done his usual work on the previous
day, but just befoi’e three o’clock the opposition commenced
again with renewed vigour, and this time he receded to
20 to 1.
At that period my partner and I both lived in the
country, but I was nearest to the place where Santorin
was trained. On the following day I hastened to have a
look at the horse, and endeavoured to get some explanation
from the trainer. I saw the horse stripped and witnessed
him gallop, but could find nothing wrong with him,'-his
eyes shining like diamonds, his coat as bright as satin, and
34
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


his every step showing perfect health. The trainer, a
most painstaking, trustworthy man, said the betting was
incomprehensible, and he could make nothing of it, but it
had made him extra careful with the lads.
In order to get some clue to this affair, I asked a friend
at the club to send me the names of the men who were
operating against the horse, and was alarmed to find that
it was some of the largest bookmakers who had led the
opposition. There was no time to lose, as the day was
fast approaching.
The mystery I determined to solve, and with that view
I went, post haste, to my partner, who, strange to say, had
not troubled himself about the horse’s retrogression in
the betting. I had not seen him for a few weeks. When
we last parted he seemed in good health and capital
spirits, but he now looked as miserable as a sick dog, and
had scarcely any life in him. "In so short a period I never
beheld such an alteration in any man, What is the matter
here ?—another mystery, I thought. And I wondered if
there was any connection between the opposition at the
club and the great change in my partner!
I related to him everything in connection with the
affair, and plied him with questions, but his invariable
answer was, “ I cannot make it out! ”
I was anything but satisfied, as his failure to send in-
quiries about the hrrse was suspicious. Going into the
garden to get a blow of fresh air and collect, my ideas, I
met Miss Emerson, who seemed by her manner to be ex-
pecting me.
“This is very strange about Santorin,” she said, at once
commencing the conversation.
“It is unaccountable,” I replied. “ And what makes it
worse, your uncle is in such a wretched state of health.
Not having heard of his illness, I was greatly surprised at
his changed appearance.”
“ Is not worry sometimes worse than illness ? ” she con-
tinued.
“ I have no doubt of it, Miss Emerson,” I replied.
“But Mr. Marston is not in any grave difficulty, I
hope P ”
She made no answer to this, but startled me by asking
the following question:
“ Tell me,” she said, “would one be justified if, for the
35
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


purpose of preventing a great wrong, and upsetting a
wicked design, one were to betray a secret ? ”
“What do you mean, Miss Emerson? Without
learning more, T scarcely know how to answer you.”
“ Then come back here in half an hour and I may be
able to tell you something of great importance ! ” she said,
and then ran into the house.
This short conversation stunned me. I wondered
whether the mystery surrounding Santorin would now be
cleared up ! The suspense, although of short duration,
was exceedingly painful. At last the much-wished-for
figure advanced across the lawn.
“ I have consulted my aunt,” she said hurriedly, scarcely
able to speak with excitement, “ and she agrees with me
that you, who have been so kind to us all, should be in-
stantly informed that there is something seriously wrong
going on in this house, and it affects you as well as my
uncle ! ”
“You don’t mean to tell me so, Miss Emerson?” I
replied, with some anxiety.
“It is so,” she continued, still somewhat excited. “And
from what I have heard, it is about Santorin ! ”
“You do surprise and astonish me !” Miss Emerson, I
remarked, beginning to get warm. “ But you will, I trust,
me what you have heard? What was it? You will
surely save me from ruin ! ”
Miss Emerson hesitated a moment, but seeing how
anxious and excited I was becoming, she resumed :
“ Well, Mr. ,my aunt and I have considered the
matter over, and have come to the conclusion that there is
a dark plot g’oing on against this horse, and that it would
be only just we should apprise you of it, and by doing so
you would possibly be able to defeat the wicked designs of
these men.”
“How shall I convey my gratitude for such kindness,
Miss Emerson ? ” I said, with emotion.
“ There has been a very bad-looking Jewish man coming
here very often latterly, and on the last occasion Mr,
Marston and he had a terrible quarrel; and my aunt be-
coming greatly alarmed, requested me to go to the dining-
room and see what was the matter. When I got close to
the door I heard this strange-looking man speaking very
loud and excitedly, and exclaiming, in a threatening tone
36
DANGEROUS DILEVMAS.


of voice, * Ton must give me an order to scratch the horse
or he utterly ruined ! ’ ”
“ Good heavens ! ” I exclaimed, “ who would have
thought of such base treachery ! ”
“ Ye«, and that from your partner ! ” said the young
lady.
“Well, you have done me the greatest service, Miss
Emerson,” I gratefully observed, and, taking both her
hands in mine, remarked that time would show how deeply
and sincerely I would appreciate it.
A nice partner to be associated with ! I here found
the true reason for the opposition given to Santorin. The
all-important question now was, had the order to scratch
the horse been given P Unfortunately the nomination was
in my partner’s name. Every moment being precious. I
immediately sought Mr. Marston, and taxed him with his
duplicity.
When he saw that concealment was of no use, and that
I was aware of everything, he confessed to a very pretty
piece of business. A Jew, to whom be was heavily in-
debted, had compelled him to sign a letter to Messrs.
Weatherby scratcldng Santorin !
Now the question arose, how to get out of the dilemma P
In the then state of the market hedging was simply an
impossibility. Bat I was not going to let the Jew beat us
without a struggle, if I could help it. I wanted to save
our Cambridgeshire money, if possible; and although the
Jew had played on the weakness of my partner, I resolved
on making some attempt at getting our money back.
My partner having told me the amount of the bill he
owed the Jew, I now considered the best thing would be
to endeavour to settle it, and finding I could do so, I
desired him to telegraph to Abrahams, and request him to
come down to his house the following morning, stating
that a matter of the utmost importance required his
presence; and when he arrived to ask him how much he
was going to allow out of the laying commission ? I also
desired him to detain the gentleman till my return at
luncheon time, if possible, as I intended in the meantime
running up to London to procure the money.
When I got to town Santorin was quoted at 33 to 1
offered, and there was nothing about his scratching in the
papers. So far good. I saw two men I could implici ty
37
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


trust, and I arranged that they should be in waiting to
attend to my telegrams next day.
In the morning I got the money required, and was back
again at Marston’s house before luncheon time. The Jew,
who had duly arrived, did not seem at all delighted to see
me. He evidently began to think that things looked queer.
“ I have been asking Abrahams how much he is going
to stand us out of his heavy laying commission,” said
Marston, “but he declares everything has been grossly
mismanaged.”
“ It’s the truth, really,” answered the Jew; “a complete
muddle. lam very sorry I took the affair at all, as I am
almost certain to lose by it.”
“Perhaps,” I said as if in a joke, “you would prefer
returning the scratching order and being paid Mr, Mar-
ston’s debt.”
“Would I not, if I had the chance,” replied the Jew,
taking the valuable slip of paper out of his pocket book.
This was exactly what I wanted. It was no good pro-
posing to pay unless the Jew had the scratching order
with him.
“Well, here is your money,” I said, handing him the
notes with one hand and taking possession of the order
with the other. “We prefer to win the Cambridgeshire.”
You never saw a man look so amazed as that Jew did in
all your life. I went instantly to the window and nodded
to a groom who had had his instructions, and he galloped
away with my telegrams. No entreaty on our part would
induce Abrahams to partake of luncheon. An important
engagement in town prevented him. He had come down
at great inconvenience to oblige Mr. Marston, and now he
was anxious to get back to business. Would Mr. Marston
send him to the station, a distance of five miles, in the dog
cart ? He was anxious to get back to stop the lay com-
missioners he had set to work. The dog cart was ordered
round, but a strange thing happened —a wheel came off
which delayed the impatient Abrahams some time. From
the unpleasant way he looked at me, he appeared to think
he owed the detention to me. When he did get to London
Santorin was quoted in the evening papers at 6 to I taken
and wanted, and it is highly probable that Abrahams went
to his home in an unpleasant frame of mind.
A sporting journal of the next day said, in reference to
38
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


the previous afternoon’s betting: “ There has evidently
been nothing the matter ■with Santonin, as there was an
unlimited commission in the market } r esterday to back him.
The training reports speak very favourably of the work he
is doing from day to day, and his present condition; and
those who, from some unexplained cause, have been taking
liberties with the horse must be in an uncomfortable posi-
tion. The getting out will be ruinous.”
There is little more to tell —the Jew was outwitted, and
has kept aloof from the turf ever since.
Santonin started for that year’s Cambridgeshire at the
shortest price ever known, and as the hedgingwas so good
we stood to win a large fortune to nothing. It was ex-
cessively provoking to get beaten on the post by a head, by
a horse two years older and carrying the same weight.
Thanks to Miss Emerson the difficulty was overcome,
'and if that young lady had not caught scarlet fever when
attending to her cousins and died, she might be sitting
opposite me now bearing another name, and I might be
leading a more profitable life.
Mr. Marston behaved very badly, and I was justified
after the Cambridgeshire in severing all business connec-
tions with such a very unreliable partner.
CHAPTER VII.
THE STRANGE DISAPPEARANCE AND STRANGER RECOVERY OF
THE COUNTESS’S DIAMONDS.
A barefaced robbery —The police at fault —I form a theory
—success crowns my efforts —the restoration of the
valuable dressing case.
All London was talking about the robbery. It was the
most barefaced theft attempted for many years. In broad
daylight at a busy London station a dressing-case con-
taining jewels of the value of £50,000, some of them im-
possible to replace, vanishes as if by magic, and notwith-
standing the extraordinary exertions of detectives both
public and private, not a trace of it can be found.
It was the duty of the lady’s maid not to lose sight of
this valuable dressing case on the journey, and while she
waited for the train she took the precaution to sit on it.
It was to the bookstall for a paper or to the refreshment
39
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


room for a bun she went, but tbe interval was long enough
for the thief —daring the few seconds she was absent the
dressing case had been spirited away and no trace of it
could be found of it in the station. The poor girl who
had served her mistress, whom she adored faithfully, for
several years, was distracted, and it was feared she would
go out of her mind. She was a well conducted girl, and
came from the same district as the countess. It was im-
possible after the most diligent enquiry to connect the
servant with the theft. There was a man servant, but he
was in a different part of the station at the time, and no
collusion could be attributed to him. The large reward
of £2,000 was a temptation, but its announcement in all
the papers yielded no results. Agents scoured Europe in
search of the missing property without getting the smallest
clue to its recovery.
The affair was in this unsatisfactory state when I hap-
pened to run against D , one of the smartest officers
of the Metropolitan police.
“Nothing has been heard of the countess’s jewellery P”
I asked.
“Nothing whatever; we are beaten ; everything has
been tried and a large amount of money spent , on tbe
enquiry,” D answered. “ The eaid said we were tc
spare no expense. Several articles of the jewellery were
heirlooms, worth double their real value.”
“ It seems extraordinary ; have you formed no opinion ?”
“ I suspected one of the servants to be in communication
with the thief,.but a month’s close surveillance-upsets that
theory. The servants are innocent.”
“ Did none of the less valuable jewellery eve? find its
way to the pawnbrokers ?”
“ Not a single thing’. Everybody has been on the alert,
but we are just as far forward as when we commenced.” .
“ Your advertisements were peculiarly worded. Did they
bring no replies ?”
“ Only some ridiculous suggestions.”
“ You see you labour under this difficulty. You cannot
offer through the public prints to compound a felony; that
would he illegal; and the thief is not such a fool, after
running the tremendous risk and getting such a magni-
ficent haul, to take the bait. He fancies the large reward
hides a trap which will hold him fast for many years.”
40
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ In all sncli cases that is the difficulty we labour under.
In offering a reward we rely chiefly on a dissatisfied ac-
complice turning Queen’s evidence, but it is almost certain
that there was only one man in this business.”
‘‘ How do you arrive at that conclusion ?” I enquired,
“ Five minutes after the robbery took place the investi-
gation commenced, and everybody was questioned. The
porters did not see any two men near the spot but there
were several men lounging about singly by themselves.”
“ I suppose a woman had no hand in it.”
“ The act was too daring ; only a man could have walked
off with that dressing case in the daylight with a station
full of passengers.
“Tell me,” I said, “after the dressing-case disappeared,
when did the next train leave the station.”
“In five minutes. The countess intended to travel by
that train, but the loss of her dressing-case prevented her.”
“You have my address; send me a list of the stolen
things and a company’s time table, with the train which
started five minutes after the robbery marked in ink, and
take care there is no mistake about the train. I have
been thinking a good deal about this matter, and have set
up a theory of my own.”
“ There is one thing you may be certain about. You
have no ordinary criminal to deal with.”
“ I am not quite of your opinion, but if anything comes
of my researches you shall have a portion of the reward.”
Whether it is my peculiar bent of mind or not, I cannot
sav, but I have often in the course of my lifetime amused
myself by taking up mysterious cases where the police
were at fault, and not always without success. The
countess was one of the most beautiful women of her
time, and as good as she was beautiful. She was natu-
rally much grieved at the loss of the family jewels, and
the numerous valuable presents she had received from
royalty and others on her marriage. The earl was
terribly annoyed at the theft, and blamed the countess
for losing sight of the dressing-case. Every assistance,
so far a publicity was concerned, was given by the press,
and the Times had a leader about one' of the missing
atones, which had once been the eye of an idol in India.
The list of the stolen valuables and the marked time-
table were promptly sent to me, and as I had some leisure
at the time I went immediately to work to test the
41
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


soundness of my theory. The robbery was committed
five minutes before a certain train started, and the culprit
may hare left by that train.
1 commenced my researches by boohing by the same
train to the first station at which it stopped. Here I
made copious notes of the families living in the neigh-
bourhood, and whether any of them had journeyed from
London on the day in question. The station-master, an
intelligent man, ran over the different names and referred
to his books, but could not enlighten me. To the best of
his belief, he could say that no first-class passengers
arrived by that train. Next day I took the second station
at which the train stopped, but with the same result.
The third station did not advance me in the slightest
degree, but I was not discouraged. I was determined to
follow that train to its journey’s end, and ascertain as well
as I could what passengers alighted from it at the different
stations. As it was an express train my task would soon
be finished. When I had done the last station I found
from my note-book that about eight first-class and some
seventy or eighty passengers of an inferior class had
travelled from London by this particular train.
1 began with the first-class passenger’s, and took them
in rotation as they resided nearest to London. The
excuse I made for calling upon them was that I had lost
a valuable dog on the day named by his jumping out of
the carriage at the station, and that perhaps their servants
might have seen something of him. Everywhere I was
treated with courtesy except when I intruded myself on a
nervous old gentleman living in an old-fashioned villa
about sixty miles from London.
He commenced by saying he did not keep a diary, so
could not say whether he was in London or not that day ;
he was not in the habit of looking after stray dogs ; he
was astonished at my troubling him on such a trifling
matter, and rather rudely wished me good-day.
I wrote under this man’s name : “ Manner peculiar and
suspicious.” Nothing could be gleaned from the re-
maining three first-class passengers, who turned out to
be old ladies, sisters of a clergyman. Before tackling the
second-class passengers I resolved, notwithstanding his
repulsive manner, to pay the nervous old gentleman
another visit. But this time, however, I made up my
42
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


mind to adopt different and bolder tactics. There was no
doubt that he had returned home by the 5.10 p.m. train.
His start of surprise at seeing me again gave me
hope.
“It is not a dog this time I have come to ask you
about, but as you were at the London station at the
moment the disappearance occurred I am here to enquire
whether you saw the dressing-case referred to in this
advertisement,” I said, handing him the announcement
from the Morning Post. He shook like a leaf in a stiff
breeze.
“ Who are you ?” he nervously inquired. “ Are you a
detective P ”
“ That is my card.”
“ Then you don’t belong to the police ? ”
“ Certainly not.”
“ Then, may I ask what brings you here ? Your
dog was a subterfuge; I suppose. Do you suspect me, a
man who has held Her Majesty’s commission, to be guilty
of theft ? ”
“ Hot at all,” I answered, “ but I have a theory that the
countess’s dressing-case was not stolen, but carried off
by mistake, and that the present possessor of it is, after
all the outcry, either ashamed or afraid to send it
back.”
“ A fine theory. Suppose it correct, could anything bo
done to the man who gave it up P ”
“Nothing whatever.”
“You, perhaps, don’t know the law. Are you sure of
that ? ”
“ Quite sure.”
“ Well,” he whispered, “I have got the dressing-case,
and the possession of it has almost killed me. Come, and
I will show you how the infernal error occurred.”
He took me into his bed-room, and produced two
dressing-cases so exactly alike I could scarcely distinguish
them.
“ This one,” he said, “ belonged to my deceased wife,
and I had it with me in London. When the train was
about to start I saw what I thought was my case lying on
the platform, instead of being placed in the carriage by
the porter, and I immediately went and took possession of
it. I did not discover the stupid mistake until my
43
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


arrival at home. I was the only passenger in the railway
compartment, and my servant took everything out as a
matter of course. The question is how is it to be restored
safely, and without publicity. It would kill me with
shame if nay name appeared in the papers in connection
with this affair.”
I could see that my irascible friend spoke the language
of truth. The advertisements were withdrawn, the en-
quiry stopped, and the countess I’eceived her valuable
dressing-case intact, and with apologies without number
from the hands of the man who had carried it off by
mistake.
What he would have done with it had I not appeared
on the scene, I cannot guess.
CHAPTER VIII.
CREMORNE: A ROMANCE OF THE DERBY.
ify Bad Derby 800k —Backing Gremorneat Ruinous Prices — •
Death of Agent in Derby Week — Lossof £lO,OO0 —Agent
comes to Life —Detection of the Gross Fraud,
The extraordinary circumstances about to be related for the
first time in print occurred in my green and salad days, and
had a lasting influence on my life. Some of the particulars
are known to a few men in London, and they own, as will
the public when they learn the facts, that a more carefully
concocted fraud has seldom been heard of. The man at the
bottom of it is dead now, and my promise of secrecy is nc
longer binding.
By the death of a relation I came into a large sum ol
money, and started what turned out to be a ruinous specula-
tion—a yearling book on the Derby ; i.e., I commenced to
lay against the candidates for Epsom honours when they
were a year old, and continued the process until the judge’s
decision was known.
Amongst others, I laid heavily against Mr. Savile’s horse,
Cremorne. When Cremorne came out as a two-year-old and
won his engagements in such gallant style, he became im-
mediately first favourite for the Derby, which he eventually
won, and my book was anything but an object for admira-
tion. If the horse kept well through the winter months the
“ getting out ” would be fearful. The price during the
Goodwood week in the previous July was so short, it was
much better to waff the chances of accident,
44
dangerous dilemmas.


When I saw there was no hope of the horse breaking
down, I gave orders to the man who usually did such busi-
ness for me to pick up quietly the necessary £IO,OOO to put
my book straight. He carried out the transaction in a
satisfactory manner ; and my position then -was this, that
if Cremorne proved successful I would neither win nor
lose.
It was not pleasant taking 4 or 5 to 1 about ahorse you
had laid 100 to 1 against. Still everything seemed to favour
his victory, and the bitter pill had to be swallowed nolens
volens. And if I had not been the victim of a gross fraud,
I should have pulled through.
The Monday before the Derby broug’ht mealetter and a
telegram from my agent, the first comparing the bets he had
made for me (which list I found correct), and the other an-
nouncing that he was down with typhoid fever, and would
not be able to attend Epsom. As I had shut up my Derby
book, his inability to be present on that eventful Wednesday
did not so much matter. I went to see the race, and, as
everyone is aware, Cremorne won; and I congratulated my-
self on not losing over one of the worst books ever seen.
A genial companion turned up in the ring, and avg drank the
health of Cremorne in the wine of Champagne.
On the Oaks day I received a telegram intimating the
death of my agent, and later on came a letter from the
doctor who attended him, and who w r as much mixed up
in betting matters. He went by the name of the “ Red
Doctor,” In his letter he gave me details of the illness,
and informed me the funeral would take place on the
following Tuesday, at Norwood Cemetery. He proposed
that I should meet him (the doctor) at the Gaiety Res-
taurant on the following day (Saturday) to go over the
betting books.
The sudden death of my agent staggered me —it might
mean utter ruin ! Everything depended on whether my
agent had booked the Cremorne bets to himself or to me.
If his own name had been used I would never receive a
penny of the £IO,OOO.
As my readers can easily imagine, the interval between
Friday and Saturday, though short, was a period of the
greatest anxiety to me. I cursed my stupidity in not
having had a clear understanding with my agent about
the booking of bets; but my suspicions had not been
45
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


aroused, and there never had been the slightest mis-
understanding between us in onr transactions.
I did not keep the “ Red Doctor” waiting on Saturday.
I met him at the appointed time, and we immediately
retired to one o£ the tables, when he produced the only
betting book that, he said, could be found. I turned
eagerly to the Derby entries, but could not see my name
anywhere, and the “doctor” could not give me any ex-
planation. There were items up to about £B,OOO booked
in favour of Cremorne, but underneath each bet was
written “ For Jessop,”
“ Who is Jessop P” I enquired, “ I don’t seem to know
the name,” and the reply was that he was a new comer on
the turf, an owner of horses, and reputed very rich,
“ There must be another book,” I suggested, showing
the last letter 1 had received from the dead man.
The “ doctor” shook his head, saying the agent’s wife
had searched everywhere.
“ But this means ruin to me,” I whispered. “ For Mon-
day’s settling I shall be short of £10,000.”
“ My dear sir, lam very sorry ; but what can I do ?”
“You see his letter,” I said. “What would you advise
me to do P”
“ I should go to the club on Monday and make enquiry.
You will have got his letter to show. It is quite possible
that you may find your Cremorne bets booked in your own
name. The more cautiously you go about the matter the
greater chance you will have of getting your money.”
“ But there must be another betting-book,” I replied
angrily.
“One would think so, but such does not appear to be
the case.”
“ I must see his wife,” I said hastily.
“ Let me persuade you not to do that. The poor woman
is heartbroken. Are you coming to the funeral ?”
“It is hard lines,” I said, “ after such a struggle to
square the confounded book, that there should be any
doubt about these bets. If that £IO,OOO is not forth-
coming I shall have to be declared a defaulter,”
“ I wish,” he said, “ I could give you any comfort, but I
know nothing. Your agent was a very secretive man, and
kept all his betting transactions to himself.”
* Has he died rich ? ” I asked.
46
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ No,” lie replied; “ tlie widow will only hare a mode-
rate income, but there are no children.”
“ It is very strange,” I continued, “ that all these Cre-
morne bets should be for ‘ Jessop.’ Whereisheto be found ?”
“I have no doubt he will be at the club on Monday.”
That black Monday came. I could not find the slightest
trace of my Cremorne bets, and there was nothing for it
but to suspend payment. For the £lO,OOO I had only the
letter of the deceased man to show, and that was of the
value of so much waste paper. I made the acquaintance
of Mr. Jessop, and did not like him. He was profuse in
his sympathy with me, and shed a tear over his> departed
friend. He readily showed me his book with the Cre-
morne bets all duly entered, and I saw him receive the
money. There was nothing for me to do but retire.
It seemed to me that my agent had been grossly care-
less, or had premeditated a fraud.
Idid not attend the funeral, which duly took place on the
Tuesday —a paragraph to that effect appeared in the sporting
papers—but some days afterwards I wended my way to
Streatham, where the agent resided, to see if anything had
been heard of another betting-book. The house was shut
up, and the neighbours told me that desolate widow
had gone away, immediately after the. funeral, to some re-
lations in the country. In answer to my question, they
told me she had left no Address, but promised to write.
A few weeks elapsed, and I paid another visit to Streat-
ham. The furniture had been sold, and the house was
occupied by another tenant. Nothing had been heard of
the widow.
Walking through Fleet-street one day, two years after-
wards, I met a man the exact counterpart of my agent
The height, manner of walking, and colour of hair, all
corresponded, and his appearance gave me quite a shock,
and it he had worn a moustache, and did not use blue
spectacles, I would have sworn that the dead was alive.
I stared at him, and I thought he started on seeing me,
hut I put that down to imagination. Still the man haunted
me, and considering the suspicious circumstances, I deter-
mined next time I should meet this individual to watch
his movements. During the two years the mystery of the
Cremorne bets remained as much in the dark as ever, and
I had heard nothing of the widow
47
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


The “Streets of London” was being 1 played at the
Princess’s Theatre, and one evening I went to have a look
at the piece. Who shonld I see in the stalls, arrayed in
evening costume, bnt the man I met in Fleet-street.
“ This time,” I said to myself, “ yon shall not escape. If
nothing comes of it there may be some amusement.” I
kept well in the backgronnd. He still wore the blue spec-
tacles, and there was no moustache, but when he took the
glasses off to wipe them, there was no doubt any longer in
my mind as to the strong resemblance. “ The man must
be his brother,” I thought. After the performance he
went to the nearest public-house and had a soda and
brandy, and on coming out he hailed a hansom and left.
I was in readiness, and followed in another cab. It was a
long ride, and we did not stop until we were quite in the
centre of the East-end. His cab had been drawn up at a
large corner public-house, blazing with light, and I saw
him discharge the cabman and enter.
It was quite evident he was at home here, for he lifted
the lid of the counter and went into the parlour. Did my
eyes deceive me P As large as life behind the counter
stood Jessop, superintending the drawing of beer and
measuring out gin, and, if my eyes did not deceive me,
the “Red Doctor” was enjoying a glass of grog in the
sanctum beyond. My excitement knew no bounds. I
did not know well what to think ! A faint glimmering
of the fraud began to steal into my mind. I had dan-
gerous men to deal with, ard must act cautiously. If the
agent’s wife would only appear on the scene the quartet
would be complete; and sure enough, just as the house
was being shut up, she came down to the bar from the
upstairs regions.
Next day I told all these particulars to a staunch
friend, and together we paid a visit to the Norwood Ceme-
tery, and beheld the grave with a modest stone at its
head, “ Sacred to the Memory of,” &c., but if I had not
made a grievous error, the clergyman who had conducted
the service had not prayed over the right man. It was a
deep plot, and had been very successful. The question
arose now, how was Ito benefit by the discovery P After
much cogitation my friend and I decided to beard the lion
in his den, and one evening when Jessop was out and the
14 Red Doctor ” not visible we entered and addressed my
48
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


agent by his name. He said we were mistaken, but when
we enquired about the health of his wife, Mr. Jessop, and
the “ lied Doctor,” he saw that he was discovered, and
the game was up. He asked us into his parlour, and had
the impudence to become jocular over the infernal
game.
“ I was hard up,” he said, “ and was obliged to stand
to win both ways over that Derby.”
My money had been booked to Jessop, who would have
received my money to pay with if the horse had not won.
The timely reputed death of the agent saved all explana-
tion.
“ Who was the man buried ? ” I asked.
s: Hobody ! Only some stones ! I saw that everything
was conducted properly myself, and often run up to have
a look at the grave.”
“ But how did you get the certificate ?”
“ The ‘ Red Doctor ’ managed that! ”
“ A nice conspiracy ! You know that you settled me !
What money am I going to have ? ”
It was difficult to get the three conspirators to come to
terms—the law was powerless —and I had to content my-
self with £I,OOO. Cremorne’s Derby calls up anything
but pleasant recollections to the writer of these memoirs.
CHAPTER IX.
HOW TO SATISFY ONE’S CREDITORS WITH WASTE PAPER.
Payment suspended-—Sympathy for the ruined man —An
important letter—Jioio worthless shares enabled a man
to deceive his creditors and mahe a fortune.
The following unpleasant circular was placed in my hands
one morning some ten years ago; —
“ Dowgate Hill, E.C.,
“ February, 7th, 1870.
“ Sir, —It is my painful duty to inform you of the
suspension of my business. The liabilities are more than
covered by securities, but which, unfortunately, cannot be
realized at present. I have placed my books in the
hands of Messrs. Bowen, Young & Co., the accountants. —
I am, &c., Alfred George Gibbs.”
On turning up my ledger I found that Mr, Gibbs owed
49
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


me do less than £3,560 14a. 6d. He had never been in
my debt so nmch before, and the heaviest of his accept-
ances were on the eve of becoming due. It was a piece
of bad luck for me that he should fail at this time. A
few days more would have made all the difference. The
business we transacted was in soft goods, which he ex-
ported to Australia.
If ever a human being appeared to carry his character
plainly written on his face that man was Mr. Gibbs. He
was openness itself; nothing secretive or cunning about
him. His whole manner invited confidence. His age
was about thirty-five, and he had in the course of seven
or eight years made a great name for himself, and his
dealings must have been on a large scale, as after an
examination of his books the accountants announced that
the liabilities amounted to £125,000, against which they
could only place real property amounting to £9,000 and
some doubtful assets.
The failure took everyone by surprise, and the questions
immediately asked were, How has the money gone ? He
always seemed such a careful man. Does he keep a
mistress P Has he been betting or dabbling on the Stock
Exchange ? As the money involved in the crash was
considerable, certain wrathful creditors instituted a
searching examination into Mr. Gibbs’ mode of life, in
the expectation of finding that he had been leading a
double existence —playing propriety in the City and the
fast man at the West-End, but they were disappointed.
He was a model husband and his establishment was con-
ducted on anything but extravagant lines. There was no
young woman of doubtful virtue inhabiting an elegant
villa at South Bank, with sets of valuable diamonds and
elegant equipages in the background. He was unknown
on the turf, and nobody had ever seen him bet even half-
a-crown. The result of the enquiries showed that the
bankrupt was a steady man, not given to drinking nor to
dissipation of any kind, and that he was most punctual in
all business matters. The people he employed were never
tired of singing his praises, and no man was better served
in the City of London.
How such a perfect business man could fail was a
mystery until the accountants came to write on the credit
aid# of the balance aheet the particulars of the doubtful
50
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


assets. There never was such a lot of rubbish; the secret
was revealed at last. He had been speculating in stocks,
but such stocks ! Every rotten Company for many years
hack seemed to have had him for a subscriber. He had
embarked his money in the wildest schemes; Honduras
bonds, Peruvian loans, Colorado mines, Spanish railways
and Turkish waterworks. Nothing unsound came amiss
to him, and the shares, which came to an immense
amount, were simply unsaleable.
If men will go into things which they don’t understand
they must put up with the results. Poor Mr. Gibbs may
have had a thorough knowledge of his own business,
which, taken by itself, showed handsome profits, but he
was evidently not an adept at “ bulling ” and “ bearing.”
He was terribly “cut up” at his downfall, and no creditor,
however irate, could listen long to his explanations and
laments without feeling some sympathy for the man. He
owned his fault, and said he had acted the fool and must
take the consequences, but that it was hard luck after
having the ball at his feet to have to commence the world
afresh. His bankruptcy did not make him seclude him-
self at home as it would other men; he kept his usual
hours at the office, and was always ready to see any one
and to give any explanations.
Before the first meeting of his creditors was held he
did a very politic thing. He called on each of them and
asked how to act in the, to him, grave emergency. One
or two wealthy firms were so convinced with his state-
ments that on his promising to leave the Stock Exchange
alone in future, they offered to advance him money to pay
a dividend, and said they would do what they could to
get his name taken off the list of bankrupts. An over-
whelming majority agreed to the terms proposed, and
Mr. Gibbs was reinstated in his former position. He had
been unfortunate everyone thought, but not culpable, and
the dividend of 2s. 6d. in the pound was duly paid.
The loss I incurred through Mr. Gibbs came at an
inopportune time, and crippled my financial affairs to
such a degree that had it not been for the assistance of a
friend I must have paid a visit to Basinghall-street
myself. However, I managed to weather the storm, and
had never any occasion to regret my future transactions
with Mr. Gibbs, whc was, strange to say, soon doing
51
DANGEROUS Dll EMMAS.


double bis former business, and making a fortune rapidly.
He was not forgetful of the kindness of his creditors, and
when it was in his power they had always the preference
in his dealings.
Years rolled on, and the loss I sustained had been
erased from my mind, when in the latter part of 1879 I
happened to run against a Mr. Murray and the whole
proceedings wore revived. Murray had been on the Stock
Exchange, but “bearing” Egyptians settled him, and
he was now not in the best of circumstances, doing what
he could outside thf sacred precincts. The man had been
useful to me on different occasions, and I took him into a
wine place and gave him some sherry. After he had
finished the narrative of his own difficulties he all at once
said :—• •
“ What a fortunate man is Gibbs. Do you still trans-
act business with him P ”
“ Occasionally,” I replied. “ Since he dropped specula-
ting on the Exchange everything has prospered with him,
and he is now reputed very wealthy.”
“What is that you say about the Stock Exchange?
He never speculated there to my knowledge, and I ought
to know, as we were at one time very intimate, and I
lived next door to him for many years.”
“ But you are surely aware that it was his losses on the
Stock Exchange which compelled him to pay 2s. 6d. in
the pound.”
“ Ho, and I don’t believe it. I never could induce him
to try a single time bargain. I understood the bank-
ruptcy was quashed, but I never heard the particulars.”
“ Well, it is a fact that when he suspended payment he
had in his possession an immense number of worthless
shares. There never was such a stack of rubbish, and
nobody could understand how a man with his wits
about him could have thrown his money away on such
abominations.”
Mr. Murray laughedloudly, and I looked at him in surprise.
“You have not got a list of his valuable shares?” he
asked.
“I believe I have,” I answered; “the accountants’
balance sheet contains one.”
“ Bring it here to-morrow and I will meet you. We
may be able to make some money.”
52
DANGEROUS DILEM&/A6'.


My suspicions were aroused, and you may be sure 11 at
I kept my appointment with Murray, who was punctual.
I had been successlul in finding the list, and handed it to
him.
He laughed loud and long, and it was some minutes
before I could get a word out of him. When he had
exhausted himself, he observed
“This, is a splendid joke. After deducting the dividend,
how much did you lose by our unfortunate friend ? ”
“ I had to write off £3,115, and could ill afford it at the
time. Why do you ask ? ”
“This is a business matter between us. How much
will you stand out of that sum if I show you how to
get it P ”
“ I know there is no hope of that; but what would
satisfy you ? ”
“ Will you give me 25 per cent ? ”
“ Willingly, but what chance is there ? ”
“Never mind; you go to him with a letter I will write,
and if he does not pay you there and then I shall be
astonished.”
The letter came next day. It was addressed to Mr,
Gibbs, marked private and sealed. It seemed a ridiculous
errand, but still, as I had promised to deliver the missive,
I took it round to Dowgate Hill. I found Mr. Gibbs in
his private office, and he welcomed me with the usual
smiles.
“ What can I do for you P ” he asked, in his blandest
manner, pointing to a chair.
“ I want to see if there is any answer to this letter ? ” I
answered.
He took Murray’s espistle from my hand, and on
perusing it he became terribly pale and shook like a leaf;
when he spoke I could not recognize his voice. His
eyes would not meet mine, and were fixed on the desk
before him.
“ On your honour do you know the contents of this
letter ? ” he asked, hoarsely.
“ I do not.”
“I believe you,” he said. “ Now that I have recovered
my position I shall have much pleasure in paying your
account in full with 5 per cent, interest, on one condition,
that you say nothing to my other creditors.”
53
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


To this I willingly agreed. It takes a man all his time
to look after his own affairs.
In exchange for my receipt he handed me a cheque for
the proper amount. On rejoining Murray, who was close
at hand waiting the result of the experiment, I tried to
get an explanation, but did not succeed then.
A few days afterwards, however, when, to the astonish-
ment of everybody, Gibbs sold his business and went to
South America, the mystery was cleared up. He bad
cleverly managed to throw dust in the eyes of his creditors.
The bankruptcy had been carefully planned so as to
enable him to put an immense sum in his pocket. The
various stocks, which he returned as assets, and which he
alleged had ruined him, did not cost more than a few
pounds. The worthless shares were not purchased from
time to time as the various companies were launched, as was
imagined, but were bought by weight in one lot through
Murray a few months before the bankruptcy occurred, at an
average price of 4ss. the lb.
CHAPTER X.
LORD SEAMORD’S FALSE FUNERAL,
The stealing of the body—The large reward—The tragical
and mysterious disappearance—Teath of Mdlle. Bousell
—The dead lord comes to life in New York—The ex-
traordinary disclosures.
“ I never was so astonished in all my life !” said D ,
the well-known detective, whom I met accidentally in the
Strand.
“ I thought men of your experience were never sur-
prised at anything,” was my answer.
“ But this is such a peculiar, out-of-the-way case.”
“ It is not the loss of a dressing case, then, nor a mys-
terious murder ?”
■ “ No, a body has unaccountably disappeared from the
family fault !”
“ That is an American trick,” I replied. “ How much
money do they want for the safe return of the corpse ?”
“ None at all. Heavy rewards are offered, but without
response. It does not appear to be a case of black-
mailing.”
54
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


“ How, then,” I asked, “was it discovered that the
corpse had walked ?”
“ By an anonymous letter,”
“Just so —from one of the thieves, no doubt. To re-
gain possession of the body, you must bid higher—it is a
question of money.”
“ There you are wrong. The writer of the anonymous
letter has been found.”
“ Well P”
“He is a respectable tenant on the deceased man’s
estate.”
“ What explanation does he give ?”
“He says he was returning from market late one night
when he was greatly alarmed by seeing lights in the
family vault. It was rumoured at the time of the funeral
that certain valuable relics were interred with the body,
and he thought robbers were despoiling the dead. Next
morning he did not know what to do. He was afraid his
statement would be laughed at, so he decided to send the
unsigned letter. Here is a copy of it. It is addressed to
the family solicitor. “ Passing Lord Seamord’s last
resting place,” he wrote, “ between nine and ten p.m.
yesterday, the writer was greatly astonished to see lights
in the vault, and an examination will prove that the dead
has been disturbed.”
“ And how long ago did this happen P” I asked.
“ Three months.”
“ Did you confine your advertisements to any particular
newspaper ? This is the first I have heard of the
occurrence.”
“ When it was proved that the body had really been
carried off, a communication was at once sent to the chief,
who decided on secrecy. Like you, he thought it was a
question of money, and daily exoected that the thieves
would open up a correspondence with the family. But
nothing of the kind has taken place. When two months
had passed without any sign, we tried the advertisements,
but nothing has come of them.”
“ In what hole-and-corner papers did you insert the
advertisements ?”
He handed me a slip on which was printed the fol-
lowing ;
“ Craigmillar.—On the night of the Lsth November last
55
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


something valuable disappeared near this place, and the
family are prepared to pay a large reward for its return,
or for a correct intimation where it can be found.—ln-
formation, which will be treated as strictly confidential,
to be sent to R. B. Johnson, Esq., solicitor, Craig miliar.”
“ Did you over try naming a sum of money F”
“Yes, first £I,OOO, and then £5,000.”
“ Would the family go higher than that F”
“I am sure they would. What can the thieves mean ?”
“There is some hidden mystery. You are right in
saying the case is peculiar.”
Here was a complication after my own heart. Awake
and asleep the subject haunted me. I worked out all
manner of solutions, but none of them brought me any
nearer the secret; and when you learn the marvellous
particulars you will not blame me for my stupidity. Of
all the extraordinary revelations made known to the
public, this one, it will be readily admitted, takes a
prominent place.
Who was this Lord Seamord P For obvious reasons, I
use an assumed name. At Elliott and Fry’s I got his
portrait for a shilling. It is lying before me now. Hot
a man to make an enemy of. His chin betokens resolu-
tion ; lips, firmness ; nostrils, daring; eyes, cruelty ; fore-
head, intellect. He was a tall man I ascertained, and
dark enough to have been taken for a Spaniard. Debrett
told me that he had been an only child; that he married
a duke’s daughter, that there was no issue of the marriage,
and that when his decease occurred he must have been
thirty-five years of age. From private sources, from men
who had frequented the same clubs as his lordship, I
received a very bad account of him. He was, according
to them, an individual to be avoided. The girls he had
seduced, the friends he had ruined at play, the duels he
had fought, some of them with fatal results, would fill a
volume. He took no active part in politics, and seemed
to live entirely for his own amusement. His wife, who
was very pretty, and wh it was said, worshipped him,
was sadly neglected; and he resided principally on the
Continent.
The next heir to the title and estate was a cousin, who
was not a little surprised to be informed that everything
that money could be raised on had been mortgaged. This
56
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


was all the more strange when it was known that Lord
Seamord was unusually careful in monetary matters, and
that most of his speculations resulted in an addition to his
large fortune. What had become of these immense sums
of money ?
This was the first question I set myself to answer, I
was charmed with the insurmountable difficulties sur-
rounding the case, and entered on the investigation with
great relish. You may ask what business it was of mine,
and the only reply I think it necessary to give is that the
enquiry interested me, and that if success crowned my
efforts I could if I chose earn a large sum of money.
I went down to Craigmillar,but the information I gleaned
there did not amount to much. No one could say how
the money had gone. His lordship was at Milan when he
died, and he had with him a servant called Robert Sim-
mons. This man had been in the family for many years,
but he was much disliked. Like master like man. There
was nobody to say a good word about either. It was
thought that Simmons was a ready and willing assistant
in the many villainies perpetrated by Lord Seamord. To
my enquiry as to what had become of Simmons, I was
told that he left soon after the funeral, and had not been
heard of since. This was suspicious. There were now
two questions in my note book—first, how had the money
been disposed of ? and the second, why had the servant
disappeared P
I may or may not have had an interview with the
family solicitor, but at all events I went on the Conti-
nent, and traced his lordship on his last journey to the
town in which he died. Up to reaching Milan I found
nothing remarkable. His stay in Paris was short, and
presented no feature of interest. The people at the hotel
knew him well, and I had no trouble in getting at his
daily doings. At Milan the case was different. It as-
sumed the mysterious at once. To begin with, he dropped
the title and used a feigned name. He kept changing
his hotel, and finally rented a house of his own. Alto-
gether he remained in this rather dull Italian town up-
wards of six months. There must have been a powerful
reason, I thought, for his prolonged stay and erratic con.
duct, but neither the people he came in contact with nor
the authorities were aware of it. Simmons was with him
57
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


all the time, and could no doubt explain many things,
but the man was not available. In despair, I asked for a
file of one of the daily papers, to see if anything remark-
able occurred about the first of November, and my atten-
tion was arrested by a thrilling paragraph relating to the
death of a young lady. It ran thus :
“Murder or Suicide F —lt is our painful duty to notify
the death of the daughter of M. Rousell, the famous
sculptor. The young lady was only nineteen years of
age, and had shown great promise as a painter. Her
voice would have insured her a hearty welcome on the
operatic stage. A more accomplished, beautiful and
fascinating young lady it would be difficult to find, and
much sympathy is felt for the bereaved father, the more
so on account of the manner of his daughter’s death.
She was found in the public gardens stabbed to the
heart.”
A few days afterwards another short paragraph ap-
peared on the subject. It read as follows :
“The Death of Mdlle. Rousell. —We have nothing
fresh to communicate regarding this unfortunate occur-
rence, except that her father had noticed that her mind
seemed much disturbed about the period of her death,
and the police state that it is now shown that she was
accustomed to keep appointments with some strange man.
It was understood that in January she was to be wed to
a gentleman holding a high position in the Government,
and who has been in a raging fever ever since his great
loss was communicated to him. The authorities are
making extraordinary exertions to clear up the mystery.”
This murder or suicide took place a few days before the
death of Lord Seamord. Knowing Iris partiality for the
fair sex, and his unscrupulous character, it was possible
that there might be some connection between the two
events. Was he the unknown man that Mdlle. Rousell
met by stealth ? It did not take me long to discover that
his lordship in his assumed name was a frequent visitor to
the studio of the sculptor, and he had undoubtedly seen
the daughter there, but I could not make out for certain
that there had been any acquaintanceship between them,
or even an introduction, and, however bad the man was,
I could not believe for a moment that he would take
away the life of this charming gixd. He lived in good
58
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


but not extravagant style in Milan, and the money ques-
tion was as much, involved in obscurity as ever. One
thingthe banker told me, which only made matters more
mysterious still, and that was that very heavy sums had been
remitted from England, and that his balance was nearly
all drawn out immediately before his death. It was no use
stopping any longer in Milan, and I returned to England,
determined to have a little explanation with Robert Sim-
mons. He could at the very least give me some account
of the missing money.
Hone of the Craigmillar people had heard anything of
the man, but I succeeded in getting his portrait and ad-
dress of his parents, who resided near Carlisle. I hunted
them up, but it was somewhat akin to pulling stubborn
teeth to extract information out of them. They had evi-
dently been warned not to let anyone know their son’s
whereabouts. There was no getting a direct answer out
of them, and this reticence only made me the more anxious
to have a few minutes’ private conversation with Sim-
mons. They were old and ignorant people, and I made
sure that if any correspondence was going on a third party
conducted it for them. This proved to be correct. The
village schoolmaster wrote their letters, and on the plea
that Lady Seamord had a small legacy to pay the man, I
had no difficulty in obtaining the wished-for address.
The letters were addressed the Poste Restante, Hew York.
So Simmons had thought it advisable to take up his abode
on the other side of the Atlantic. Another suspicious
circumstance.
A Cunard boat soon landed me in America, and I im-
mediately stationed a trustworthy detective at the Poste
Restante, while I made some cautious enquiries in the
town. On the fourth day a man answering the descrip-
tion of Lord Searaord’s servant called at the post office
for letters from England for Robert Simmons, and was
followed to one of the best hotels in Hew York. Possibly
he had secured employment there as a waiter. As he did
not know me from Adam I had no hesitation in taking up
my quarters in Fifth Avenue Hotel. Up to dinner time
nothing occurred. I did not even catch a glimpse of
Simmons, and none of the other servants knew him by
that name, but I was on the brink of a startling discovery.
When the gong sounded for dinner there walked into
59
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


the room an exact counterpart of the late Lord Seamord.
From the portrait in my possession the most unbelieving
would have sworn that it was the man himself. Tall, dark,
and cruel-looldng, the resemblance was, to say the least of
it, extraordinary, and this was a phase in the enquiry
which I had not anticipated. The fact of Simmons being
also in the hotel convinced me that I was about to fathom
some terrible mystery. The bookkeeper in answer to my
question said the tall, dark gentleman was an Englishman
named May hurst, and had been living in the hotel with
his servant for a month or two. A few days convinced
me there was no mistake —that the real Lord Seamord
and his servant was residing in the hotel under feigned
names. What did that false funeral at Craigmillar
mean P who was the man interred ? why was the body
stolen ? and what all powerful motives had compelled
Lord Seamord to adopt such an unheard-of line of con-
duct? The plan had been thought of and matured at
Milan, and the large amounts of money were no doubt
in the hands of the rightful owner. Had the violent
death of Mdlle. Housell anything to do with these mar-
vellous disclosures P
When I was certain that there was no mistake about the
two men, I telegraphed to Mr. Johnson, the family soli-
citor, asking him to come to Hew York at once, as some-
thing of the greatest importance connected with the
disappearance of the body at Craigmillar had occurred.
He replied promptly, and was with me in less than a
fortnight. I took him to a different hotel, but close to
where I was staying; and when I had prepared his mind
a little for the startling news, I told him what I had dis-
covered. The old man was horrified, and flatly declined
to believe me, but before the end of the day I had placed
him in a position to convince himself that what I had
stated was perfectly correct. Lord Seamord he had
known all his life, and therefore, although T might, he
could not well be mistaken. Nothing was decided that
night; Mr. Johnson was too incapable of acting in a sane
fashion ; but next morning after a long conversation be-
tween us, in the course of which I produced the Milan
journals concerning the two paragraphs about the death
of the sculptor’s daughter, he elected to seek an interview
alone with his lordship.
60
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


Hot.r after hour passed, and Mr. Johnson did not re-
turn to his hotel, where I was waiting for him, and I
began to get alarmed. I was just about to set out in
search of him, when he arrived, looking crushed and
heartbroken, and there was appearance of tears on his
blanched cheeks. It must have been a terrible meeting,
but I never heard a full account of what took place ; he
was only authorised to tell me what had been carefully
written for him on a sheet of notepaper. The following
is a copy of the statement, which was in Lord Seamord’s
handwriting: —
“ Mdlle. Rousell was the innocent cause of what has oc-
curred. I fell madly in love with her, and determined to
carry her off. Under a promise of marriage she met me
clandestinely, unknown to anyone. My plans were com-
plete when her death occurred. It was my blame, but I
have never in my life raised my hand in violence to a
woman. To save her honour she stabbed herself to the
heart. I had good reasons for believing that I was being
watched by the police, and to prevent the disgrace to my
family of my being tried for murder, I, with the assistance
of Simmons and a doctor attached to the hospital, pre-
tended to die, and a dead body was secretly conveyed into
the house and interi’ed at Craigmillar. It was my
wishing to make assurance doubly sure, and destroy all
possible traces of the deception which has led to the dis-
covery. I shall never resume the title again, and to all
intents and purposes lam legally dead. My wife may
rejoin me if it pleases her. Mr. Johnson has my instruc-
tions.”
He did not deserve it, but his wife, on the pretence of
entering a convent, soon hastened to his side. Women,
always excepting mothers-in-law, are so forgiving.
CHAPTER XI.
TAKING A MEAN ADVANTAGE OF A FIRE,
Important disclosures—The fire at the theatre—The evidence
of the opera glasses —The startling meeting at the
Inns of Court Hotel.
The dreadful disaster at Vienna brings back vividly to
my mind strange incidents connected with the burning
61
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


down of tie Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, sixteen years
ago.
“ I am in a terrible mess, old fellow !” exclaimed
Augustus Graham, as he hurriedly entered my office in
Edinburgh one morning in the year 1865.
“ Sit down,” I said, “ and let us put our heads together.
Perhaps a way may be found out of the maze.”
“ Impossible : things have gone too far, and the climax
has come to-day. My bills will be protested.”
“ Then you favour me with a visit when your circum-
stances are desperate beyond relief.”
“ I have been buoyed up with false hopes, but now I
must inevitably sink.”
“ There is one thing you have done well —you have
kept up appearances ; nobody suspects anything.”
“ But at what a cost! Eor months I have not known
w r hat it is to have a good night’s rest.”
“It is entirely a financial difficulty, of course —
much ?”
“Yes, and without remedy; the amount is so large.
But there is another dilemma.”
“And what is that ?” I enquired; “the other is bad
enough.”
“ You know I am engaged to Miss Kingston.”
“Sol understood. She has money ; why not frankly
explain your position to her father, and, if there is no
objection, marry her.”
“ I have just posted a letter resigning her hand.”
“ That was a very unwise step, I think; if appears to
me to be your only chance. I should make haste to with-
draw that letter.”
“ But I could not marry Miss Kingston, even if she were
willing.”
“ Another complication. I knew you had a tal-.at for
getting into scrapes.”
“ No, it would be a mockery to pretend that I have any
feeling but that of friendship for Kate. She is much too
good for me. The fact is, Jim, lam over head and ears
in love with old Murray’s wife.”
“ And not ashamed to own it ?”
“If you knew our histories you would pity us. We are
separated by a cruel wrong.”
“ Oh, I daresay ! Disappointment in early life, I sup-
62
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


pose ; the miscarriage of a letter, or she found yon making
love to another yonng lady who afterwards turned out to
be your own sister, and in a fit of jealousy made haste to
marry a man old enough to he her father.”
“ Her grandfather.”
“ His age does not prevent him being her lawful hus-
band. Now as you are at it, you may as well confess
whether Mrs. Murray reciprocates this much-to-be-re-
gretted passion.”
“ I have reason to believe she does.”
“ Well, you won’t get absolution from me. You are a
bad as well as an unfortunate man, Mr. Augustus
Graham.”
“ If you only knew everything yon would, I am sure,
think differently of both of us.”
“Doubtful, very; the lady is married. What license
have you to interfere with her husband’s happiness ? No
sophistry will make me think that marital bonds should
not be respected. I have seen too many lives and pro-
mising careers blasted by such impudent intrigues.”
“ Don’t judge us so harshly without a hearing.”
“ Do you recollect your putting a peculiar question to
me one day some months ago, and asking what I would
do under the embarrassing circumstances ? I see now you
were the A of this skeleton case, and Mrs. Murray the B.
What was my answer ? Did I not tell you it was the
duty of any man, calling himself a gentleman, to hold his
friend’s wife sacred ?”
“ I tried hard, but it was all in vain.”
“ You used to be clever in getting out of as well as
into scrapes, but you seem to be caught fast this time. I
am really sorry, for the sake of old school days, that you
must go to the wall. Is there nothing I can do for
you ?”
“Yes, you can lend me—your opera glasses.”
“Is that all ? Keeping it up to the end —going to the
theatre ?”
“ Yes, will you come ? I have a box; lam taking Mr.
and Mrs. Murray.”
“ I am engaged this evening, and after what you have
disclosed to me I would not feel comfortable. Take the
glasses, and go your wicked way.”
Before I saw those glasses again a dreadful calamity
63
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


occurred. The Theatre Royal to which my friend and
Mrs. Murray went was burned down, and many lives were
lost. It was impossible to recognize the charred bodies,
but as they were never seen again the presumption was
that the two lovers perished in the flames. A pair of
opera glasses much damaged by fire were shown to me by
the Procurator Fiscal, and I proved by the initial that
they were my property. I need not say that I carefully
preserved them. Poor Murray, who did not accompany
his wife, became distracted over his loss, and only lived
two or three years after her unfortunate death. She was
mi exceedingly pretty and amiable lady, and however much
her affection for my friend was to be deplored, no one
could help feeling sorry for her frightful end.
It was found after the disaster that Graham’s affairs
were in a helpless state, and when a balance sheet was
drawn up it was seen that the estate would not pay more
than sixpence in the pound. He had displayed immense
ability in tiding over from time to time the difficulties
which were ultimately bound to ruin him. We had been
schoolfellows together, and the friendship formed in those
happy days ended only with his life.
I was always afraid his daring speculations would bring
him to grief—he was in such a hurry to get rich. Mon-
taigne informs us that, if you look carefully for it, you
will discover there is some consolation to be derived even
from the death of a dear friend. ~
In some respects the sudden termination of the two
lives was a blessing —the honour of Mrs. Murray remained
inviolate, at least so far as the public Jcnew, and Graham
was saved a world of trouble with his exasperated credi-
tors. Good and evil are so mixed together in this
world of ours that it is impossible to keep them apart.
If my readers will turn to the papers of that day they
will find all the particulars of the burning of the theatre
a id a list of the persons that perished, for “taking a mean
advantage of fire ” is, with the exception of the names, a
faithful record of what actually happened.
Ten years passed quickly away in the worry and tur-
moil of a daily increasing business, when a morning
delivery brought me a strangely-worded invitation to din-
at the Inns of Court Hotel. I had transferred my
business to London by this time. The note I cannot put
64
DANGBROtfS DILEMMAS.


my hands on for the moment, but it was to the effect that
a gentleman who was once well acquainted with me, and
who had been ont of the country for some years, would
be glad if I w r ould dine that day with him and his wife.
The signature was not familiar to me, but I had so many
clients it (the invitation) might have emanated from one
of them. I decided to accept, and wrote a line to that
effect to my unknown host.
A few minutes to seven —the hour mentioned —I pre-
sented myself at the hotel, and was ushered into a
sitting-room on the first floor, where preparations had
been made for dinner, but there was no one present. In
a minute or two, however, the door of the room opened,
and a heavily-bearded man entered, whom I did not know
from Adam, who heartily shook hands with me.
“ So you don’t recollect me ? ” he said with a laugh.
“I have not that pleasure,” I answered. “A client, 1
presume.”
“ Why, Jim, you are more stupid than I thought ; has
ten years made such a difference in your old schoolfellow,
Augustus Graham P ”
It was a few minutes before I could speak —I was so
utterly taken by surprise. He was the very last man I
expected to see on earth. When the film of doubt had
at length been removed from my eyes, he went into the
next room, and came - back leading a lady.
“My wife ! ” he said.
“We are old acquaintances,” said the lady, smilingly.
It was Mrs. Murray, looking as beautiful as she did ten
years before.
“So you did not perish in the theatre that night,
after all ? ”
“ Hot a bit of it. Are you sorry? You can pinch us
if you like —we are really flesh and blood; and you shall see
us eat, for here comes dinner. The Richmond air has
given us an appetite.”
After dinner I heard their wonderful story. Early in
life they had loved each other, but a malicious friend, in
the interests of Murray, separated them. When they
again met, a few words of explanation from both sides
showed them that they had been made the victims of a
clever plot; but, unfortunately, Isabella Crighton 'had in
the interval —in a mad fib of jealousy—changed her
65
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


name, and given herself to a man nearly thrice her
age.
They agreed that the proper thing to do was not to
refer to the past again, and meet as seldom as possible.
But such resolutions, wherever they were recorded, were
soon broken ; and now that it was necessary that there
should be restraint, the old passion revived with re-
doubled force. The husband originally intended to
accompany his wife to the theatre on that eventful
evening, hut was prevented, owing to a sharp attack of
gout. The piece—it was “ Othello ” —did not have much
of their attention, their conversation was to them of far
deeper interest. Graham told Mrs. Murray of his despe-
rate circumstances, and that in a day or two he would be
off to Australia.
There were tears shed, as is usual on such occasions,
and the lady never expected to see her lover again, when
such a vast waste of waters lay between them. As many
of my readers probably remember, when the fire did
break out, the theatre was consumed in an incredibly
short space of time. Graham saw his opportunity—l
told you he was good at getting out of scrapes —and
when his startling proposal was whispered into the ear of
his fair companion, I am afraid there was not much
resistance. In the confusion they got to the Waverley
Station unobserved, and took the first train going
south.
In Australia Graham soon recovered his position, and
when the death of Mr. Murray was announced he im-
mediately married the partner of his flight. He was
now arranging with his solicitor to pay his creditors in
full, and settle down in the neighbourhood of London.
I spent a gay and pleasant evening with my two “ de-
funct” friends, and rated them soundly for not letting
me into their secret. On rising to depart, at a very
late hour, Graham said, with all the old mischief beam-
ing in his eyes—
“We have often laughed over your evidence in the
Scotsman. We are deeply indebted to you. You
settled us both in the most conclusive manner. By the
way, I owe you some recompense.”
What for F ”
“ I kept the programme, but sacrificed your glasses.”
66
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


CHAPTER XII.
THE ATTEMPTED MURDER IN THE AIR,
The proposal to go up in a balloon accepted —Green s young
and pretty wife —A very strange conversation —An
unpleasant looking knife Jealously —Madness and
attempted murder.
People may have thought differently, but there was
really no occasion for his jealousy; the man was mad.
Knowing his eccentric habits, you ask me how I could
have been so foolish as to accompany him alone in that
terrible balloon ascent, and I reply that it never occurred
to me that he believed that I was in love with his wife.
He had gone up in balloons fifty times without meeting
with any accident, and when he pressed me to join him
in that midnight voyage I had but little hesitation in
accepting the invitation.
As you are aware, I have done a few things in my
time, and the idea of a new sensation was agreeable to me.
It may come with the infirmities of old age, but as yet
fear has not entered into my composition. It appeared to
me that my nerves were quite as good as his.
It was a scientific experiment to test certain air currents,
and you no doubt recollect that the result was watched
with considerable interest. But few people know the
dreadful scene that was enacted in mid-air in an unusually
dark night. Unmistakable signs of insanity showed
themselves a few days afterwards, and he had to be taken
to Hanwell. I went to see him the other day, and he
told me in the greatest confidence that he was the Devil,
and that he had sat to Martin for his famous painting of
“ Satan in Council ” from him. It was a sad case; he
was a man of infinite talent, and the doctors gave but
little hope of his recovery.
Yes, his wife is to be pitied. She is not more than
twenty-five, and there are no two opinions about her
beauty, and I can testify that her mind is quite in keep-
ing with her person. A more fascinating woman I never
met, and it may be strange to say that I have only
67
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


admired her as a sister. I have known tier since she was
two years of age, and she has never taken any important
step in life without consulting me. She was early left an
orphan, and there never was a brother nor a sister.
Green first met her at Harrogate, and was soon over head
and ears in love.
I never saw a man so deeply influenced with the tender
passion. H-s position and wealth there could be no
mistake about, and when Lizzie Norton asked me whether
she should accept his offer of marriage, I thought it a
good chance for the friendless girl. It was her frequent
consultations with me about her husband’s daily increasing
eccentricities which created the scandal, and the state of
his health may have to some extent influenced me to
ascend with him into the clouds.
Light a cigar and I will endeavour to bring back to my
memory what took place. The balloon was a new one,
called the Sunbeam. We went up from the Crystal
Palace.
It was a beastly night, raining in torrents, and
nearly dark. The lamp which was lighted at starting
went out from some cause or other (he may have ex-
tinguished it on purpose before we had ascended many
hundred feet), and an attempt made to kindle it did not
succeed.
The sensations of the ascent were certainly novel, if not
pleasant. We hung over London for some time, and then,
after rising to a considerable height, drifted towards
Brighton, where I was fortunate enough to be landed
safely. But when you hear the particulars of the trip
you will say that it was long odds against my ever
reaching the earth alive.
It was an anonymous letter that first aroused his mad
and groundless jealousy, and he had watched my inter-
views with his wife —arranged for his good —and believed
that we were deceiving him. I repeat that we were both
innocent of any such intention, although appearances may
have been against us.
The man or woman who penned that ill-natured epistle
was as near as possible being the cause of a murder.
Green had provided himself with a cook’s knife, a nasty
weapon to look at, and it was by the merest chance he
did not thrust it in my heart. Scientific experiments are
68
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


all very well in their way, hut I prefer not pursuing such
studies in mid-air in the company of a maniac.
One of the first things he said to me was —•
“ Life is not worth much up here.”
I agreed with him that we were running some extra
risk, and added that I hoped the construction of the
balloon was not deficient.
“ The balloon is right enough,” he hissed in my ear, as
we rushed through the air at the rate of forty miles an
hour; “there are other things to dread.”
There was a peculiarity about the tone of his reply
which I did not like. I enquired what was the nature of
the other risks, but he gave me no answer, and busied
himself for a few minutes with the mechanism of our
serial car.
“You have faced death before P ” he asked abruptly.
I told him that such was the case; that over ladies fair
I had been obliged to fight a duel or two in different part
of Europe.
This answer seemed to enrage him, for at once ex-
claimed in a passionate voice—
“ Toujours les dames. Is it true you are so fortu-
nate ? ”
“ Report credits me with more than my due. Like
other men roving about Europe, I have had my adven-
tures.”
His next question startled me, and I began to suspect
that there was something wrong.
“What do you think of my wife?” was what ha
asked.
“ That you are a man to be envied.”
“ But that it not the answer. Do you think her
pretty ? ”
“ There can be no doubt of that.”
I endeavoured to change the subject by drawing his
attention to a bank of clouds we were about to pierce in
our upward career, but it was in vain.
“You admire her very much F ”
“ Ho one can help admiring her,” I answered.
“ I never could understand why you did not marry
her.”
“ The truth, is that it never occured to me to ask her.
Our friendship was that of brother and sister. Although
69
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


no more beautiful object could be found, old fellow, it
seems a little out of place to discuss your wife.”
“ Wbat did I bring you here for ? ”
“ Then your purpose in getting me to ascend with you
was to talk about Mrs. Green ? It strikes me that a
more convenient and comfortable place could have been
found somewhere on the earth. You are a funny fellow,”
I said.
“ What I have to say is better without witnesses.
Here I can be judge and executioner.”
This extraordinary answer put me on my guard, and I
watched his movements as well as I could in the un-
certain light which was beginning to appear in the
heavens. Contrary winds had carried us rapidly in
different directions, and until we had a little more light
it was impossible to tell where we were. It was not a
very pleasant position to be cooped up in such close quar-
ters with a jealous husband, whose mind was evidently
unhinged, and I thought that the sooner our voyage was
finished the better. So far as strength went I was the
stronger of the two, but a struggle in a baloon floating a
few miles above the earth was to be avoided. I tried
what silence would do.
“ She would have married you. She thinks nobody
like you,” he began again.
“ I tell you I never thought of her as my wife.
What possesses you, Green, to speak to me in this absurd
fashion ? ”
“ Jealousy—revenge,” he hissed, and I could just
perceive him playing with something which looked dis-
agreeably like a knife.
This was serious, and unseen by him—he seemed
absorbed in thought—l took measures to descend as
rapidly as possible. There was no disguising the fact
that I was in a baloon alone with a madman !
“We will make for the sea,” he muttered to himself.
“ One thrust, and over he goes.”
“ Not if I know it,” 1 thought, “ There will be a little
discussion before that undesirable end is attained.”
“Was woman ever loved so much before F ” he began,
speaking to himself. “ For her I was ready to sacrifice
my present, my future, my hereafter, my life; nothing
that a mail coaid do would have been left undone
70
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


for one approving smile, one kiss from lier pouting
lips.
“ Ah.! to think that other lips have pressed hers, that
other arms have encircled that matchless form, drives me
mad—mad! Yet she looks an angel of purity. How
often have I stayed awake to watch the childlike sleep.
No impure thought was haunting the quiet mind. If
she had but whispered the name of a rival she would
never have risen from the couch again. But that letter—
ah ! that letter. I have it here; it speaks of secret meet-
ings, and calls me —the fiend—the duped, or complaisant
husband. And the letter was not wrong. I watched
them meet secretly myself. Oh ! Lizzie, was such a love
as mine to be thrown away like a used glove? Would to
God we had never met. No, I won’t say that. I cannot
forget the days of rapture I spent with you, my darling.
It is not you I blame; it is he, the husband’s friend, I must
destroy. Time for action. This good knife will revenge
my lost honour. No man shall boast that he has kissed
those lips and live. Now we will make for the sea, and
then one thrust and over he goes ! ”
He was right in saying it was the moment for action.
He had worked himself into such a mad fury I expected
every moment to be attacked. All the time he was
raving the balloon was —unknown to him—rapidly
descending, and we were close to the earth, so close that
by throwing out the grappling irons I made certain of
stopping our further progress, and it was not a bit too
soon.
To throw out the irons and knock that dangerous
knife out of his hand as he rose to attack me was the
work of a second. The next minute I pinned him down
in the bottom of the car, and prevented any further un-
pleasantness.
With the dawn of morning workpeople came over the
Brighton Downs and assisted me to secure the Sunbeam
and her poor demented owner.
His ascents into the air had finished, and the next
occasion that I go up in a balloon with a friend I shall
previously put him through a series of searching
questions about love and jealousy, if he should happen
to possess that much desirable acquisition—a young and
pretty wife!
71
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


CHAPTER XIII.
MY TWO MATCHES, OR WATERLOO AVENGED.
A man with a history —Was it murder? —Glotilde avenges
Waterloo —The winner of the Two Thousand mattes a
good haelt ,
It was difficult to say to what nationality Monsieur H
belonged, as he spoke as many different languages as a
Pole or a Russian, but probably Switzerland had the
honour of producing the keen-eyed, wiry little man. He
was not, even in his most friendly moments, very com-
municative about his antecedents, and, if that jade
rumour did not belie him, he had good reasons for his
reticence.
The gossips of the place, envious of his prosperity,
alleged amongst other things against him, that he had
been a waiter at a notorious night-house in Panton Street,
Haymarket, and that on the occurrence of a drunken
brawl he and a disreputable man about town called B
threw a gentleman of good position either out of the
window or down the stairs and killed him.
Murder was never meant, and death was, no doubt, the
result of an accident. The police could not get to the
bottom of the affair—as the people who were present kept
out of the way —and the friends of the deceased did all
they could to hush the matter up.
It was more than likely that Monsieur H was mixed
up in this disturbance, as he disappeared from England
about that time, and although he annually makes a holiday
visit to Paris or Berlin, Geneva or Vienna, he never
favours London with his presence.
The land he could see on a clear day without the aid of
glasses appeared to be forbidden ground to him. That
he had mingled in the fast life of the metropolis in his
younger days you would be thoroughly convinced by a
few minutes’ conversation with him.
One tangible fact connected with the little man is to be
obtained from the journals of the period; his wife was
successful in getting a divorce from him. The lady who
found him too wayward in his affection and a little too
72
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


ready with his hands, was not frightened at her unfortu-
nate matrimonial experiences, for when that troublesome
individual, the Queen’s Proctor, could no longer interfere,
she was led a second time to the altar, on this occasion by
Mr. E , who recently had a favourite for one of the
largest races of the year.
This Monsieur H , with a history in the background,
kept a small hotel at a French watering place.
The autumn of life seemed to give him. a great amount
of pleasure in a temperate manner. His early youth,
however mild it might have been, had evidently not
clogged his sense of enjoyment.
In addition to his hotel —which was well managed—he
had two other possessions on which he prided himself, and
I put them in the order in which he judged them; first,
was a long-tailed half-bred hack, and the second a big,
strapping black-eyed wife, for he had also sought con-
nubial bliss once again.
If it had not been for this horse this narrative would
not have been written.
It was a rough-coated, badly-groomed mare of a chest-
nut colour, with a blaze face and two white heels, a little
doubtful about the forelegs, standing as near as possible
sixteen hands high. Good fun was often to be got out of
the series of tremendous efforts the diminutive landlord
had to make before he could mount his tall steed. Once
in the pigskin, however, he seemed comfortable enough,
and did not appear as if even buck-jumping would dis-
lodge him.
In his private bar and round the billiard table at night
the prowess of Clotilde —that was the hack’s name—was
often the subject of much animated talk. Her early life
was shrouded in mystery like her owner’s, but taking into
account her formation, the white marks and chestnut
colour, the astute Monsieur H was inclined to admit
Blair Athol to the dignity of having been her male pro-
genitor.
Dreams of breeding winners of the Derby flitted across
the little man’s mind, but he could never fix upon a
suitable sire, and for aught I know he may be still cogi-
tating on that important subject, v
When I made Monsieur H ’s acquaintance, I had
with me a pony I picked up a bargain at Newmarket, and
73
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


when I met the jovial little man out riding we nsed to
have a canter together.
It was one night at a supper the match between onr
nags was first mooted.
Somebody had caught a splendid basket of trout, and
wished his friends to share the finny delicacy. When the
speckled beauties had been done justice to, and grog and
cigars was the order of the evening, the proposition about
the match, previously mentioned as a joke, was brought
forward in real earnest.
The landlord was willing to run his Clotilde against my
pony Jack over a mile for any reasonable sum —owners to
ride. After the usual amount of desultory talk the match
was at last arranged, the stakes to be £25 a side, and an
early day was fixed for its decision.
The advantages were to all appearances not with me.
I was nearly a stone heavier than my opponent, and the
long stride of his mare would tell against Jack. My only
chance of success lay in the fact that the mare was entirely
out of condition, and could not be got ready in the time,
whereas my pony had not an ounce of superfluous flesh
about him. I knew also that Jack could go a rattling
pace, and that he would be quicker on his legs than the
mare.
The wily landlord was not ignorant of his mare’s weak
point, and no time was lost in putting her into hard work
and practising her to jump off quickly at the word “ Go ”
given by his billiard marker.
The latter part of the business was the source of much
amusement to the onlookers, and puts one in mind of
Jennings’ teaching Grladiateur similar lessons before a
certain Cambridgeshire.
On the important day Jack was very troublesome at
the post, he was too eager to begin, while Clotilde stood
watchful, but quiet as a sheep. Her schooling had ap-
parently not been wasted. When the flag fell —we had
an example—the mare was as ready to commence as
the pony, and ere half the distance had been covered her
long stride began to tell, and I could see that only an
accident would save the race. I nursed my impetuous
little brute as much as I could for a final rush, but my
opponent was up to every movement and was not going
to be caught napping.
74
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


Nothing I could do disturbed him, and he kept on the
even tenor of his way, winning without difficulty by a
couple of lengths. The mare showed more speed than I
had given her credit for, and her owner rode like a
Trojan.
The victory rested with the foreigner, and there was
nothing for it but to pay and look pleasant. I omitted
to say that the loser was bound to give a supper for the
benefit of the hotel, and altogether I found, on including
some sundry bets I had made, I was to the bad over the
transaction nearly £lOO.
If the matter had ended with the transfer of the money
and the supper I would not have cared, but it did not.
It was excessively galling to be condoled with on every
side, and to read a sensational but thoroughly incorrect
account of the match in the columns of the local news-
paper, the Journal du Nord.
On perusing a lengthy description of the race and
accompanying remarks, a stranger would have come to the
conclusion that we had been engaged in nothing less than
a great international struggle, and that the disgrace of
Waterloo had at last been wiped out.
They managed to ruffle my temper to a considerable
extent, and I impatiently waited an opportunity to be
revenged.
“ Why don’t you have a proper hack and not a weed,
they cost the same to keep,” was the remark continually
dinned into my ears by the triumphant Monsieur H -.
I meekly submitted that he was in the right, and that I
was on the look out for a better animal.
He was anxious to assist me with his judgment, but
the horses he recommended did not suit, and I wrote to a
friend in England explaining my dilemma, and asked him
to send me something decent. He was not long in com-
plying with my wishes.
One morning about ten days after the dispatch of my
letter a telegram from Clarence intimated that he had
been successful.
“ Have sent what you want by to-day’s tidal train,
particulars by post,” he said.
When my new hack stepped on shore and his clothes
were taken off,Monsieur H and his allies —who had heard
of the expected arrival and were in waiting—pronounced
75
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


him not good enough to draw a voiture, and said if I had
given more than £lO for the ugly brute I had been
swindled.
The new comer was, it must be confessed, not a beauty
to look at, and before he had been many minutes on
French soil he displayed unmistakable signs of a disagree-
able temper, but the old adage says “ handsome is that
handsome does.” He was certainly not an easy horse
to ride, and you required to know his little peculiarities.
A dead set was made against him in the town, and I was
about the only person who thought him anything but the
unmanageable animal he appeared to be. Of course I had
good grounds for a contrary belief.
Trotting on the sands one day soon after the arrival of
my new purchase I encountered Monsieur H on
Clotilde. Since his victory the little man had taken to
patronizing me ; before, he rather valued my opinion, but
now my most sagacious remarks passed unheeded, and
were not worth the breath spent upon them.
“ So sorry you have been imposed upon with that brute,”
he remarked. “ I wanted to give you your revenge.”
“Nevermind my horse’s appearance,” I replied. “If
you really wish another contest, we are ready.”
“ You mean that ? At double the stakes if you like.”
The cunning landlord was sanguine of the result because
his mare had undergone a regular course of training, and
looked at least lOlbs. better than she did on the last
occasion.
This was well known to me, but I was not in the least
afraid. So anxious was he of settling the match there and
then that to equalize the chances, as he said, he offered to
give me a two lengths start, but this kind proposal I,
much to his astonishment, declined. I consented, how-
ever, to the other terms, and later in the day a regular
agreement was signed at the hotel.
Although by my desire this second match was fixed for
an early hour of the morning to keep away loafers, the
affair had got wind, and to my intense annoyance there
were hundreds of spectators. The English colony was
present to a man, that officious ass the reporter of the
Journal du Nord was there, busy with his pencil, an
expatriated bookmaker was fully occupied in taking the
odds —they laid 2 to 1 on Clotilde —and Monsieur H ’s
76
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


friends mustered in great force. An even start was
effected at the first time of asking; for three parts of the
journey I contented myself with racing side by side with
my opponent, but when the last quarter of a mile was
reached, I gave my horse his head. He instantly took
advantage of his freedom, and carried me past the judge
about ten lengths in front of Clotilde. The only trouble
I had in the race was to hold back my horse, who almost
pulled my arms out of their sockets. Perfidious Albion
had regained her prestige, and my winnings were not to
be despised.
“ What the deuce have you got there ?” asked an English
officer, after the race.
“ Only a winner of the Two Thousand,” was my some-
what astonishing but truthful answer.
My friend Clarence offered me for choice two horses,
the second in the Cesarewitch and a winner of the Two
Thousand Guineas, and I selected the latter.
CHAPTER XIV.
UNFORTUNATE POSTAGE STAMP,
A street acquaintance —The fascinating widoiv—Fatal
marriage—Marrying another man's wife —A question
of damages—Lucky hit at Ascot.
“ Do you. know that yon have married my wife P”
This somewhat extraordinary piece of intelligence was
communicated to my friend Alfred Drummond in his own
home about three months after he was married. The
person who claimed a prior right to the lady had scamp
plainly written on his bloated features, and he looked all
over a man who lived by his wits. I thought it an ill-
advised union from, the first, but when I ventured on a
word of warning, I was immediately put down as an old
croaker, so I determined to let the wilful man have his
own way. The lady was certainly beautiful in that
voluptuous sense so much admired by painters of the
Dutch school, but I was not taken with her. There was
a shiftiness about her glance not pleasant to see either ir.
horse or human being. Although I drank to their hap--
piness in Irroy on that fatal wedding day, I was never
sanguine of the result, but by the utmost stretch of my
77
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


imagination I could not have foreseen the deplorable
consequences. The marriage totally wrecked my friend’s
life, and all but ruined me.
If men will pick up their wives in such an irregulai
manner, they must not be astonished at the surprises the
future has in store for them. It will be learned from this
narrative that acquaintances made in the street are never
any good. My friend met the girl he married in a post-
office ; she was sending a telegram, and his business was
confined to the purchase of a penny stamp. As it turned
out, the buying of that stamp was the most unfortunate
thing Drummond ever done. I have often thought that
if he had by any chance only seen the contents of the
lady’s message, his eyes would have been opened and he
would have been saved much money. They spoke —I
never 'knew exactly how that came about, but it is easy
to guess. A look would be sufficient, for Alfred Drum-
mond, who was one of the most susceptible of men, but I
rather think that the ill-fated intimacy began with the
restoration of a dropped handkerchief. At all events, the
meeting in the post-office ended by the lady’s address
being obtained, and permission to visit her being granted.
A quiet, well-appointed brougham was waiting the fair
siren outside the post-office, and ray friend came rushing
to me full of the adventure, and, so to speak, treading on
air.
When you find a man is in love don’t trouble to reason
with him. Labour lost. And for your own sake don’t
attempt to say one word against his mistress if yon want
to avoid a duel to the death. Any aspersions cast upon
the whiteness of the charmer’s teeth, the colour of her
hair, the smallness of her foot, or the levity of her conduct,
will never be forgiven. Mr. Alfred Drummond had had
to my knowledge many previous attacks of this love fever,
but none of them so sudden, severe, and lasting a nature
as the present one. He was perfectly infatuated, and his
ravings about the lady’s perfections disgusted his more
sober-minded companions. There is no doubt Mrs. Selby
—he told us that was the name —gave him great encourage-
ment from the commencement. It seems that on present-
ing himself at the lady’s villa, which was situated at West
Brompton, the door was opened by a man servant, and he
was shswn into an exquisitely decorated drawing room.
78
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


He was received most graciously, and his visits became
of almost daily occurrence, and letters were continually
passing between them. On the occasion of a carpet dance,
I was introduced to my friend’s enslaver, but her shifty
look created doubts about her integrity in my mind, and
I did not like the people I met at her house. If they did
not belong to Bohemia proper, they lived within hailing
distance of that mystic land. Ho one enjoys a “lark”
more than the writer of this “ ower true tale,” but when
it becomes a question of marriage, too much caution
cannot be used. There would be fewer cases in the Divorce
Court if men would be ruled by their judgments instead
of their passions. All my efforts to control my friend in
this matter were fruitless. I could see things were ap-
proaching a climax, so I was not surprised at the announce-
ment Drummond made to me one morning, about two
months after their first interview.
“ Congratulate me, old fellow,” he said, bouncing into
my office, with an open note in his hand; “ I have won
the prize.”
“I am very glad; how much is it.” I knew well
enough what he meant, and was sorry to hear the news.
“ It is not a prize in the French lottery ; something
immeasurably superior to money.”
“ A castle on the Rhine, with the title of Baron attached
to it ?”
“ Ho, stupid; you are extra dull this morning; the in-
comparable prize is Mrs. Selby.”
“ Oh, the widow,” I remarked; “ so all mysteries have
been explained.”
“ I don’t know what you mean; the mysteries, as you
call them originated in your own suspicious mind.”
“ Then tell me who is she after all. As you are going
to marry her, of coui'se you know everything?”
“ Who should she be but herself, Mrs. Selby, the
widow of a City merchant who was killed by the natives
three years ago when on a business visit to the Cape ?’
“ Then you have been introduced to her relations ?”
“ What are you driving at ? I know her friends.”
“ I said relations .”
“ She has not got any; so much the better for me.”
“ Perhaps; but if I stood in your shoes I should like to
be posted up a little more about my wife’s ftutecedents.”
79
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ I am satisfied, and that is everything.”
“ Certainly; no offence, you know. You will bea rich
man now, I suppose.”
“ What do you mean ?”
“ I presume the expensive establishment at Brompton
is not kept up on nothing—your widow must have lots of
money.”
“ I don’t know and I don’t care. I love the darling for
herself. You have always had an unpleasant word to say
about Caroline; I shall be sorry if my marriage is going
to break up our friendship.”
“ What I said was intended for your good, Alfred, but
if the die is cast I have finished. Shake hands, wed Mrs.
Selby as soon as you like, and I wish you much happi-
ness.”
When you have a serious regard for a man, as I had
for Drummond, it grieves you to the heart to see him
commit an irreparable act of folly. I was quite confident
that the widow was not all she represented herself to be,
and that her present mode of life was to some extent
enveloped in mystery. When there is so much secrecy,
there is always something objectionable to hide. But
you might as w T ell try to turn the tide as endeavour to
convince a lover that there are any imperfections in his
sweetheart. The day for the marriage was at hand, and
I was anything but reconciled to it. What business was
it of mine ? You see w r e were like brothers. Our friend-
ship began at college, and became cemented when we
both secured Government appointments in the same office.
Although our natures were entirely different, Drummond’s
wayward, mine consistent, no two individuals could
repose greater confidence in each other. It was not
because his marriage would to some extent separate us
that I objected to it. I may have many faults, but selfish-
ness is not one of them. 1 made certain that my friend
would be one of those rash individuals who “ marry in
haste to repent at leisure,” and my surmises turned out to
be only too correct.
He had reason to have dark forbodings himself. A
letter she hid on his appearance and refused to show him
caused him considerable uneasiness, and once he came
suddenly upon her close to her house in deep conversation
with a man, to whom she did not proffer to introduce him.
80
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


He was so much under her influence at the time, she no
doubt managed to explain these trifling matters to his
entire satisfaction. The letter was probably a bill from
her dressmaker, and the stranger her solicitor’s clerk.
When she was reported to be ill and confined to her room,
I saw her in a box at the Haymarket Theatre, but this
fact I kept to myself. They were married, and went to
the Continent for the honeymoon, and on their return they
took up their residence at the villa. His stay in this fool’s
paradise was but of short duration. They had only been
settled down about three months, when he made the un-
pleasant discovery that he had married a living man’s wife.
In his terrible trouble he came to me for advice. The
man who represented himself as the real husband had
threatened all manner of actions at law, but agreed to do
nothing until twelve o’clock the following day. His story,
plausible enough, was that, on going into the interior of
the country at the Cape to trade, he had been captured by
the natives, and been kept a prisoner for over two years.
A friend who was with him—who succeeded in escaping—
left him on the field for dead, and reported the decease ol
her husband to Mrs. Selby. On one condition I agreed to
assist Drummond out of his difficulty, and that was, tbat
he must separate at once from the lady. As he loved the
woman to distraction, this was a hard blow; but he at
once saw the propriety of complying with the stipulation,
and the next day I kept the appointment with Mr. Selby
instead of my friend.
The meeting was to take place at the villa. On
arriving there a few minutes before the time arranged, I
was met by Mrs. Selby, with her attire in disorder and
dishevelled hair.
“ Where is he P He has not been here since yesterday,”
she exclaimed, clutching hold of me and bursting into a
flood of tears.
I tried to calm her, but it was of no use; she became
quite hysterical and threw herself face downwards on the
sofa. If that is not real, I thought, what a magnificent
actress she would have made. On ringing the bell for
her maid her real husband made his appearance. On
seeing the condition of his wife he went up to the sofa
and spoke kindly to her.
“ Don’t take it so much to heart, Caroline,” he said,
81
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


feelingly, “ you had reasons to think me dead. Ido not
blame you.” Turning to me lie remarked, “ I hope I
have not kept you waiting. You are from Mr. Drum-
mond, I presume; if you will step into another room we
will talk over matters.”
Before sitting down I had a good look at Mr. Selby,
and I neither liked his manner nor appearance. I saw
that I had an unscrupulous, perhaps clever rogue to deal
with, and I became doubly cautions.
I began by saying what a strange affair it was, and
asking him where he and Mrs. Selby were married. He
was prepared for the question ; he not only produced the
marriage certificate, but also furnished me with the
names and present abodes of the witnesses. When I
made enquiry about the business in the City he at once
gave me a card of the address; he was an exporter of
fancy goods, whatever that may mean. Alluding inci-
dentally to his altered appearance, he asked whether two
years in the bush was not enough to pull any one down.
Then we got to closer quarters.
“ Well, Mr. Selby, it is a great misfortune to all parties.
What do you propose to do ? ” I asked.
“ I doated on my wife, and should like to take her
back,” he replied ; “ to prevent exposure, which I suppose
would not suit your friend, I am willing to come to
terms.”
“ As you are the lawful husband, I will undertake that
Mr. Drummond relinquishes all his claims.”
“ But that will not be sufficient; he has done me a
great injury and must compensate me for it.”
“Your captivity has not bettered your fortunes, Mr.
Selby.”
“ On the contrary, ruined me,”
I saw that the whole affair resolved itself into a
question of money, and it was imperative for my friend’s
sake that the matter should be hushed up. I wondered
how it was that his wife was enabled to live in such good
style in his absence, but said nothing. It was no good
studying delicacy with a man like that. I said —
“ How much do you want P You must remember that
my friend is a comparatively poor man.”
“ A thousand pounds,” was the startling answer.
“ Quite preposterous, I replied ; “ my friend is not in a
82
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


position to pay anything like this sum, and if he took my
advice he would keep his money in his pocket. He , at
all events, acted in good faith.”
“ I have not said a word against Mr. Drummond, but
he has mortally injured me. He can think over my
proposition, hut to-morrow at the same hour I must have
a decided answer,” Mr. Selby remarked. “ There is the
address of my hotel. You can tell him that to clear
myself I may have to prosecute my wife for bigamy, and
that I can take the case into the Divorce Court.”
When I got back I told Drummond what had taken
place. I thought he would have gone mad when ha
heard that there was no doubt about Mr. Selby’s identity
My poor infatuated friend had good prospects, and foi
certain reasons, very serviceable now, his marriage was
only known to a few people. The difficulty we had to
encounter was how to get rid of the demands of the
injured husband. There was not much time to delibe*
rate, Selby took care of that, and when once the peculiar
case got wind it would fly to all parts of the town. A
certain amount of money must be paid I could see, and at
length we agreed to offer five hundred pounds. But how
to get the sum; Drummond had not five hundred pence.
His journey to Paris, the expenses at Brompton, to say
nothing of the innumerable rich presents he had given
Mrs. Selby, had swallowed up all his ready money, I
had relations to look after, and was at no time flush of
cash. But by the aid of an all-potent bill stamp we
solved the problem, and I wended my way next morning
to the appointment with five one hundred pound notes in
my pocket.
“ Look here, Mr. Selby,” I said when I got to his hotel,
“ let us understand each other. I have come on behalf
of my friend to make you a first and last offer ; if you
accept, the money is ready; if you refuse, you may in-
stitute what proceedings you please.”
“ What is the proposal P ”
“ That on your signing that paper, agreeing to take
back your wife and cease all action against Mr. Drum-
mond, I will pay you five hundred pounds.”
A slight noise in the bedroom adjoining the room we
were sitting in attracted my attention at this moment.
There was some one listening to our conversation, and
83
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


now that the full particulars of the conspiracy are known,
I have no doubt it was Mrs. Selby. The movement of
the fire-irons was most likely a pre-concertcd signal. He
strongly objected to the smallness of the sum, and dwelt
on the great wrong than had been done him, which was
bound to embitter his whole life.
“Well, Mr. Selby,” I said, rising and taking up my
hat, “ I can make no addition to my offer.”
“It is so little ; think of my awkward position. Mr.
Drummond, a perfect stranger, parts me from my friends,
banishes me from places where I am known, and compels
me to change my name. And, worst of all, after what
has passed, my wife can never be the same to me that
she once was. Put yourself in my place and you would
think yourself utterly ruined.”
“ It is certainly a dreadfully unfortunate occurrence,
but my friend can do nothing more; the fact is that he
had the greatest difficulty to procure this sum.”
“No compensation will ever heal the wound, but for
my wife’s sake I will take the money.”
M. 4L M. Jfc Jt.
TV TV TV Tv tv
To satisfy my curiosity, and oblige Drummond, I made
a few enquiries at West Brompton later in the week, and
learned that on the same day I paid the money the furni-
ture of the villa was sold privately, and it was reported
in the neighbourhood that, on account of ill-health, Mrs.
Selby had gone abroad.
Poor Drummond kept his word—what acute suffer-
ing it cost him was known only to himself —and did not
attempt to see his wife of three months again, but his
separation from her was killing him.
To the great grief of all his friends he became careless
in his habits, and took to drink. He was expostulated
with time after time, but in vain. Nothing I could say
would rouse him, and to all intents and purposes he
seemed a lost man —a ship at sea without a rudder.
The bill on which I figured as the drawer had nearly
run its course, and how it was to be met I had not the
vaguest notion. There was no chance of a renewal. A
proposition to that effect which I made the holder was
rejected at once. Rumours as to my unfortunate friend’s
dissipated habits had got about, and people had no longer
any confidence in him. It was well known that I had no
84
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


private sources of income. With ruin staring me
in the face you may rest assured I was not inclined to
bless Mrs. Selby.
Brought up in a district where innumerable racehorses
are reared and trained, it was natural that I should take
an interest in the turf, but when I wanted them most to
be fortunate my speculations all at once ceased to be re-
munerative. The Derby had upset all my calculations—
a second-class animal found the course to his liking, and
beat all the favourites —and I looked forward to Ascot to
get back my money with interest. Still as my invest-
ments were necessarily of a trifling amount I had no idea
of winning sufficient to take up the obnoxious bill which
was due immediately after Ascot. It so happened that
my annual holidays fell at Ascot time, and I made up my
mind to a week’s racing if the funds held out. If at
all lucky I might get a hundred, and I thought that this
sum would tempt the Jew to renew the bill. In another
three months there was no telling what would happen. I
saw that it was no good relying on Drummond to find the
five hundred, or any portion of it, and he had made un-
successful applications to all his relations. I was very
sorry for him, but his friendship was likely to prove
rather costly. The poor fellow was a pitiful sight to see.
Every hope of his life and his pride had been blasted by
that woman, and inattention to his duties at last com-
pelled him to resign his post.
I see him regularly once a year, but there is no im-
provement in his condition. On the contrary, the wreck
is beginning to break up, and I fear that soon his place
on earth will be vacant. An uncle allows him two pounds
a week so long as he remains at Boulogne.
To “ Royal Ascot,” as it was called by the sporting
prophets, I went, determined to do my best to defeat the
layers of odds. A careful study of the programme made
me fancy I could name a few winners.
Entering the course on Hunt Cup day, I was addressed
by a miserable looking object, who informed me that he
was the brother of a famous jockey. He knew, he said, a
certainty for the principal race. Hot believing for a moment
that he had any reliable information, I threw the half-
starved wretch a shilling, and was walking away when he
after me and gave me a scrap of paper.
85
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


In a popular play, derived of course from French
sourses, it is seen of what great importance a few words
of writing may become. The strip of paper handed to
me by the Newmarket lout, and which I carelessly put
into my waistcoat pocket without reading it, was destined
to save me from a grave difficulty; and dirty as it is, it will
always have a prominent place in my album.
Over the previous events I had varying luck, and when
the numbers went up for the prettiest race of the year,
I had won altogether twenty-five pounds, so I resolved to
give myself a chance.
There was a large field, and long prices were offered
against many of the competitors. A man had only to
know the winner to realize a fortune for a ridiculously
small outlay.
The favourites I discarded, as I had seen too many
“ certainties ” settled coming up the stiff ascent. I had
taken stock of most of the horses before they cantered,
and was trying to get a hint from the betting, when I
recollected the neglected “tip ” in my pocket.
On the soiled paper was scrawled with a pencil, “ The
winner of the Hunt Cup is Jasper ! Back him, and send
a trifle out of your winnings to R. F., Black Bull Inn,
Newmarket.”
I had seen and liked the form and condition of Baron
Rothschild’s horse. He looked admirably adapted to
ascend the hill, as his hind legs were well placed under
him ; and considering his performances, he was not over-
burdened with weight. There were many more unlikely
candidates, and finding that all the sporting Solons,
excepting one who wrote under the odd name of“Disgue,”
had not a favourable word to say about Jasper, and in
the absence of other authentic intelligence, I pinned
my faith to the selection of the Newmarket tout.
“ How much Jasper F ” I asked a prominent member
of the ring.
“Hundred to three,” was the answer.
“ Put it down seven times,” I said, and I handed the
bookmaker twenty-one pounds.
If the horse lost I would still be the winner of four
pounds on the day, and there were other races to specu-
late on. I was not kept long in suspense. A bell
announced that the starter had got rid of his eager and
86
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


troublesome customers. Anxious eyes watched the
struggle.
“ The favourite’s beat,” was soon proclaimed, and
several gentlemen shouted. “ Steel, Nicholls, what against
Jasper ? ”
As they neared the Grand Stand a terrific shout told
me —for I was so hemmed in I could not see the race —
that Jasper was winning in a canter.
Lucky shilling!
My seven hundred pounds was paid immediately after
the jockey weighed in, and I increased my winnings to a
thousand before the last race was run on Friday. With
this piece of good luck my difficulties were happily at an
end. When the bill was presented it was duly honoured,
but to his credit it must be stated that Drummond never
rested until he got a relation to refund me the money.
It need scarcely be put on record here that the brother
of the famous jockey had occasion to rejoice at the success
of Jasper.
*****
A trial at the Old Bailey in the following November
showed the public that Mr. and Mrs. Selby were nothing
but a couple of swindlers who went about preying on
unsuspecting men like my unfortunate friend, Drum-
mond,
The Silber Gauntlet
A STORY OF THE TURF.
In Four Chapters.
CHAPTER I.
An Introduction to Billy Platt.
It was the eve of the Wincastle races which were first
started in that period so fruitful of duchesses— the reign
of old Rowley. Historians differ as to whether the Merry
Monarch did or did not, on a certain occasion, actually
patronise this meeting in person, accompanied by a
notorious play actress ; but that does not matter.
® Historians, as well as doctors, agree to differ. The
quaint country town of Wincastle was full to the over-
87
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


flowing, and tlie oldest inhabitant pledged his word at the
bar of the Black Bull that he had never set eyes on such
a big crowd.
It was a motley assemblage, at any rate, peculiar about
the shape of its coat, and the cut of its trousers ; not too
particular as to the delicacy of its language, but much
exercised in its mind where it was going to sleep.
The old-fashioned inns and lodging-houses had, early in
the day, let their last bed, and were now asking and
getting exorbitant prices for the sofas, tables, and chairs.
Later on there will be eager bidders for the right to spend
the night on the bare floor. Thoroughbred horses, worth
small fortunes, accustomed to all the refinement and
luxury of a Newmarket stable, had to be contented with
the miserable shelter of a cow-byre or a cart-shed.
It was no doubt Mr. Strathill, the energetic clerk of the
course, who had been instrumental in drawing the addi-
tional bipeds and quadrupeds to Win castle this autumn.
According to his specious advertisements his annual
gathering was the very paradise of all race-goers, and he
dwelt impressively on a new contest, of singular inte-
rest, to be decided on the first day, called the Silver
Gauntlet.
This extra attraction was first mooted by the Duchess
of Wincastle —a fascinating widow of twenty-five —and the
trophy was subscribed to by her Grace and all the un-
married belles of the neighbourhood.
The Gauntlet was an imitation of a lady’s glove in
silver, and was a masterpiece of Hunt and Roskell. The
fingers were so arranged that this beautiful and expensive
work of art (it cost £200) when filled with flowers could
appropriately be used to decorate a table.
The new race was to be run over three miles of a fair
hunting country, gentlemen riders.
At this palpable challenge of beauty every eligible man
in the country, who had a decent horse, was eager to
try his fortune.
The large field of fifteen or sixteen competitors was
expected, and already there had been some heavy
wagering at the clubs.
Nothing worthy of note occurred in connection with
any of the other races at Wincastle; but the unfortunate
and peculiar circumstances surrounding the battle for the
88
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


Silver Gauntlet soon became the all-absorbing topic of
conversation.
The race was a success in a monetary sense, but tbe
clerk of tbe course would sooner cut off bis right band than
include it in bis programme a second time.
It was the first and last Silver Gauntlet ever contested
for on tbe Wincastle Downs.
Amongst tbe surging crowd at the entrance to tbe Black
Bull might have been seen two men in deep conversation ;
they were a strange contrast to each other. One was a
tall, handsome, devil-may-care-looking fellow about
thirty, who owned an estate in the neighbourhood, and
who, from a disappointment in love or something else,
was said to be going headlong to ruin. Yet his comrades
would tell you that a more open-handed and steadfast
friend than Ivan Moordown did not exist.
The other man, who was making Moordown wince at
his coarse and cutting remarks,, was a noted member of
the betting ring—Billy Platt. Billy’s appearance was not
in his favour ; it was of the costermonger order of beauty,
and his vocabulary would have furnished an important
addition to a new slang dictionary.
His disgraceful language and revengeful disposition
made the ex-vendor of cauliflowers generally feared and
detested. Emanating from the lowest rung of the ladder,
and encountering unpleasant difficulties in his way, such as
being half-murdered at Ascot, and nearly drowned at
Hampton, it was believed that he now laid himself open
to get the “ swells ” into bis toils.
It was well known that the Marquis of H-f—‘ —, Lord
Wr —and Mr, B/V were all obliged to discontinue
attending race meetings because Billy declined to give
them a few weeks’ grace to square their accounts.
When spoken to on the subject, he would abruptly
answer, “ Dong it,'mon, moind yer own bissness ; think ye
the swells wud hav’ waited for my brass P ”
The conversation between Mr, Moordown and Billy had
continued but a short time, when the latter said (we omit
the oaths, and put his hybrid language into English)—
“ I cannot hear myself speak with this infernal clatter.
Come upstairs to my sitting-room.”
“ Later on would suit me better. I have an appoint-
ment,” replied Moordown, edging away.
89
DANGBBOTJS DILEMMAS.


“ The wench, or Avhoever it is, must Avait. It is high
time we had an understanding. I have come to Wincastle
on purpose to see you.”
“It is uoav seven; I will come back at nine if it is im-
portant.”
“ This present moment, or not at all,” was the polite
answer of Platt. “If it Avas even the Duchess herself
Avho was going to meet you, business must be attended to
first.”
“ Lead the way then,” said MoordoAvn, evidently any-
thing but pleased at his capture.
CHAPTER II.
Billy Platt shows his hand, and receives an unexpected but
well-deserved blow.
“ Have you any idea how much you owe me ? ” asked
Piatt, as soon as the sitting-room door Avas shut.
“ I have not my book Avith me — it has become rather a
large sum, as I have not had a single winning Aveek since
Goodwood,” replied Mr. Moordown,
“ Some people would think it a large amount, but it is
a mere flea-bite to you rich landoAvners.”
“ What is the total? ”
“ £1725, and I want the money.”
“It is more than I thought, but never mind, Billy, you
shall ha\ T e it, every penny.”
“When?”
“ I have no money to spare at present, but my turn of
luck will come if you are only patient with me.”
“But I have no patience left; you have had lots of
time, and I must insist on a settlement—here—to-night.
1 am short of ready money myself.”
“ That is unreasonable. You don’t suppose I walk about
with such a sum of money in my possession ? ”
“ Have it I must. Why not get some of your friends to
advance it ? I have heard that great people always
oblige one another.”
“Out of the question. You can \A r ait at all events till
after Wincastle races. I may be able to knock off a good
portion of the debt this week. I have a horse entered for
the Silver Gauntlet, and he is not unlikely to win.”
“ What’s its name ? ”
90
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ Highdrift,”
“ Highdrift! the devil. Why that’s favourite, and the
horse lam so bad against. Laid eights, and now they
take 2 to 1, and the worst of it is they only back another
horse Avith any freedom —Springtrap. I have a ruinous
book ; it is all Highdrift.”
“ I am sorry you are bad against my horse, because he
is very well, and knowing, as I do, every one of his
opponents, I think he stands an excellent chance. You
must not lose by Highdrift, Billy.”
“Highdrift be poleaxed ! (That word will do.) Get
back my money at 2to 1 ! You must think me a hedge-
hog.” (He did not say hedgehog.) “ I know a move worth
a dozen of that. Me back Highdrift P Why, lam only
too happy to lay against him. Do you know anyone who
wants the odds to a hundred ? ”
“ I don’t understand you, Platt, Highdrift is all right,
and it is not more than 2to 1 against him. He will very
nearly, if not quite, win.”
But that’s where we agree to differ. You do not see
my drift—lowdrift, you can cab it if you like. I have
been taking liberties with your all along, and I’ll bo
cremated if he is going to Avin.”
“What the devil do you mean, man?” asked Moor-
doAvn, getting rapidly into a passion, and rising hastily
from his chair.
“ Just what I say. It is a mutual benefit affair. You
owe me £1,725, and cannot pay it; I agi’ee to give you
time. I have overlaid your horse ; you oblige me by
scratching him on account of an accident, or give mo
your Avord that if he runs he Avill not win.'
“Scoundrel! take that,” was MoordoAvns ans Aver to
these equitable proposals, as he drove his right betAveen
Billy’s eyes.
When Billy recovered from his well-deserved punish-
ment, and Avas able to regain his feet, he found Sir
Hew Mainfly, the owner of Springtrap, the second
fa\ 7 ourite for the Silver Gauntlet, in his room.
“ Well, Billy, anything wrong ? You look dreadfully
uncomfortable. Been taking a nap ? You might have
chosen a softer place than the floor. Hilloa ! that’s a
nasty lump on your forehead. *Who has been giving you
a lesson in the noble art of self-defence ? ”
91
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ Somebody who will very soon rue it. Who should it
be but the owner of Highdrift, the great Mr. Moor-
down P ”
“ You don’t mean to say he has been foolish enough to
quarrel with you ? ”
“It is just what he has done. He might have paid his
debt first, don’t you think P ”
“ Certainly. I never was so surprised. Did you
explain things properly? Would he not listen to
reason ? ”
“ I at last told him plainly enough, and the moment he
understood it he knocked me down.”
“We did not reckon on this difficulty. Moordown’s
obstinacy will upset all our plans. It is provoking, for
with Highdrift out of the way the race would have been
a good thing for my horse. I did think, as he owed
you such a lot of money, you would be sure to bring him
to terms.”
“ I did my best, Sir Hew; but nothing is lost as
yet.”
“ Everything is very uncertain. What will you do
now ? ’ ’
*■ I will send him a letter demanding payment of my
money before twelve o’clock to-morrow, and in the mean-
time I will lay all I can against Highdrift.”
“ And to-morrow. How will you proceed ?”
“ Never mind, I have arranged it. Highdrift won’t
trouble you.”
“ Suppose he finds the money. Is it much ? ”
“ £1,725.”
“ Impossible for him to get that sum.”
“ I thought so. With Moordown out of the hunt you
will, I suppose, about pull through. I have made a book
for your horse.”
“ I only fear Highdrift. Keep him harmless and you
will win your money.”
“ Don’t bother about the blackguard or his horse; I
have a blow to pay, and am in a hurry to get rid of the
obligation. I hear you are both after the duchess. Make
hay while the sun shines. Win the Silver Gauntlet,
and carry off the duchess into the bargain.”
“ Keep to your compact, Billy, and I will have a good
try for the double event.”
92
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


CHAPTER III.
A Woman comes to the Rescue.
W hile Sir Hew Mainfly and Billy Platt were plotting the
ruin of Ivan Moordown, the fair Duchess of Wincastle
was busy arranging her house for a grand ball to be given
that evening. All the county magnates had accepted,
and amongst the “ contents ” were her Grace’s two
reputed suitors, Sir Hew Mainfly and Mr. Moordown, so it
will be perceived that there were other interests linked
with the winning of the new prize instituted by the
duchess, which did not at first meet the eye.
Humour alleged that of her two lovers the duchess
preferred Moordown, but that the reckless life he led
prevented her giving him any encouragement. As has
been already seen, the two men are very dissimilar in
character —the one resembling a lion, and Sir Hew more
of a tiger.
The duchess herself had been a Blanche Wintour, the
daughter of a wealthy commoner. She had been and was
still a great beauty, and fihe earl married her not because
he cared for her, but to spite his brother and please his
other relations, and secure an heir to the title and estates.
A baby came, but, unfortunately, it was a girl, and the
earl, thinking himself shamefully ill-used, went off in a
hot temper to the North Pole, where he caught a severe
cold, which, settling on his lungs, ultimately led to his
death. Her first marriage had been entirely one of con-
venience, but in selecting a second husband the duchess
was at liberty to be guided by her heart
All the guests at the ball were more or less interested
in the Silver Gauntlet, and the chances of the various
candidates were freely discussed. Other ladies besides
the duchess had lovers going to take part in the race.
From the commencement of the betting till that night
Mr, Moordown’s horse had been the favourite, followed a
point or two off by Sir Hew Mainfly’s Springtrap, and
and Lord Piershore’s Eye of Night, but no sooner had the
dancing begun, when it was whispered about that there
was something wrong with Highdrift.
93
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


One man had seen Billy Platt lay six ponies, and offer
to go on ; a second was told that the horse was actually
scratched on account of an accident to his fetlock joint,
ancl a third had heard that the retrograde movement in
the betting was only got up for the easier working of a
large commission.
On approaching a knot of these gossips, the question
was put point blank to Moordown whether there was any-
thing the matter with his horse, and his answer was re-
assuring enough.
“When I left him a few minutes ago,” he said, “he
was as well as any horse in England.”
Still there were men who shook their heads, believing
that where the smoke is the fire is not far distant, and
they noticed that Moordown looked terribly dejected and
ill at ease.
Later in the night it became generally known that Platt
had finished Highdrift’s business for him by offering 10
to 1 as often as anyone would take it, and everyone con-
cluded the horse would not run.
Disquieting rumours about the favourite had reached
the duchess from time to time, but she could not ask
Moordown for an explanation, as he kept out of her circle.
When, however, she overheard this remark, “ They say
Moordown is hard up, and has given a laying commission
to Billy Platt, she went in search of him. She found him
leaning against a pillar at the entrance to the conservatory.
“ Truant,’’ she exclaimed, with an enchanting smile, and
striking him a smart blow on the shoulder with her fan.
“ Why have you deserted me ?”
“ I was not vain enough to think I would be missed.”
“ Yon were in error. I have come in quest of you.”
“ I wish I could believe that, flatterer.”
“ You may ; it is the truth. I was really anxious about
vou. Now tell me everything. What is the matter with
ilighdrift P”
“ Nothing whatever; the horse was never better.”
“ Then what means these scandalous reports ?”
“ All I can say is that I don’t originate them.”
“ But why is it, Moordown, certain low bookmakers are
offering such long prices against High drift, and openly
boasting that he is as good as dead for the race to-mor-
row P”
94
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


There was no reply.
“ You must answer me,” putting 1 her hand on his arm.
“ This concerns your honour.”
“ I cannot tell you.”
“ But you must,” stamping her little foot. “Is it
money ?”
“If you must know, it is. I have had a run of had
luck, and am in difficulties, and the scoundrels plot to
drag my name in the gutter. I cannot icmain to he dis-
graced. If I never see you again, Blanche, think as kindly
of me as you can.”
“Nonsense; that is not like you. You will stop and
face the difficulties when I tell you. I cannot remain any
longer from my guests, hut promise to see me in the
morning at ten punctually; and, remember, if Highdrift
does not win to-morrow you are to expect no more flowers
from me,” and she gave him a rose out of her magnificent
bouquet.
Moordown did not feel so depressed after this interview.
Next morning the word went round that Highdrift had
passed a bad night. Anyone seeing the clear eye and
glossy coat of that horse as he stood in his loose box
would, perhaps, have formed a different opinion.
Outside the Black Bull Billy Platt and his chums were
early at work to earn a few more sovereigns out of the
“ dead ’un.” Nobody could understand the determined
hostility displayed against the quondam favourite, as he
was known to be all right, and people began to look sus-
piciously at and talk in a way the reverse of complimentary
about Moordown. As the town clock struck ten the
betting on the Silver Gauntlet stood thus :
6 to 4 agst Sir Hew Mainfly’s Springtrap (taken).
5 2 Lord Piershore’s Eye of Night (taken).
5 1 Col. Heapland’s Idol (taken and offered.)
8 I Capt. Moretown’s Conqueror (t. freely).
12 1 Mr. ’s Highdrift (offered).
As some of the largest bookmakers from London and
the provinces were present the betting was extensive, and
any particular horse could easily be backed to win a few
thousands.
a Platt had been fortunate enough to find another
creditor of Moordown’s, and the two “ pals” were work-
ing together. Up to eleven o’clock there was no
95
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


change of any moment in the betting, but at that hour
Billy and his chum were startled out of their false
security by a Captain Wardlock readily accepting all the
long prices proffered against Highdrift. The captain
booked all the money he could get at 12, 10, and 8 to 1,
and, to Billy Platt’s utter amazement, he closed with his
offer of six hundreds. He was also prepared was the
captain to take slight odds that Highdrift beat Springtrap
wherever they finished.
This unlooked-for movement was a crushing blow to
Platt, and quite knocked him out of time ; and he retired
with his friend to the hotel, to see how he stood and
discuss the altered position of affairs. They had scarcely
sat down before Sir Hew Mainfly joined them, consterna-
tion visibly written on his face.
“ Has he paid you ?” he asked Platt before he had well
got into the room.
“Not a sixpence, and here is another creditor who is
acting with me. The documents are ready for the
stewards.”
“ Then what the devil means this reaction in the
betting ?”
“ I have not the least idea, Sir Hew. Who is Captain
Wardlock ? ”
“ An intimate friends of Moordown’s, and a dangerous
man. He is not working in the dark.”
At this instant there was a loud knock at the door, and,
to the no small surprise of the three conspirators, Moor-
down entered the room.
“ In good company, Sir Hew,” said Moordown sarcasti-
cally.
“Like you, I have some business with Platt.”
“ Mine won’t take a minute.” (Turning to Platt and
throwing down a bundle of notes on the table.) “ You
and your confederates are baffled this time. There is
your money.”
“ If I had not been so short, Mr. Moordown, I would
not have troubled you. No inconvenience I hope.”
“ If you ever presume to speak to me again, you know
from last night what to expect.”
“As you are settling with everybody, Mr. Moordown,
you may as well pay me my small claim,” said Platt’s
friend.
96
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ Certainly. How much is it ? ”
“ Only £145.”
“ There. How, Sir Hew, you will be able to resume the
business which I am sorry to have interrupted,” said
Moordown, as he left the room.
“ Good morning, Mr. Moordown, we will meet on the
course,” replied Sir Hew, who little knew that ere the sun
set he would be lying where he was now sitting—a dead
man.
CHAPTER IV.
Broken bones and successful love.
They had now lost all hold over Moordown; and the
three men were so stunned it was a short time before
either spoke. Sir Hew was the first to open his mouth.
“ Where on earth did he get the money P ”
“ Who could have found such a large amount in a
night? It must have been the duchess. They do say
she is sweet on him,” muttered Platt.
“ Nonsense! I don’t believe a word of it; but
where the cash came from is a mystery,” said Sir Hew.
“Will this talk help me to get back the money I have
overlaid against Highdrift ?” asked Platt’s friend. “ A
pretty book I have got to square.”
“ The race is not yet decided,” replied Sir Hew, looking
much perplexed, “ and if I cannot win somebody else
will have a difficulty. One moment, Platt—your friend
won’t mind”—taking Platt to the window, and whisper-
ing : “You know Airton; he is a certain starter, but has
not the ghost of a chance. He is not particular what he
does, and there is an old feud about a girl between him
and Moordown. You must manage to give him a hundred
to get in the way of Highdrift. That is the best I can
suggest. Two of us ought to be able to stop the brute.”
Most great races are run at three o’clock, and the Silver
Gauntlet at Wincastle was no exceptiou. At that hour
the excellent field of thirteen placed themselves in the
hands of the starter, who despatched them on their
eventful journey at the second attempt.
As they streamed past the Grand Stand, crowded with
all the beauty and aristocracy of the county, it was seen
that Sir Hew Mainfly was leading, but that he could
97
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


scarcely control the fractions Springtrap, 'and that High-
drift, with Moordown for his pilot, held a good position
in the centre of the second lot close to Mr. Airton on his
weedy thoroughbred Jasmine.
We who are behind the scenes know that Airton’s
proximity to Moordown bodes no good to the latter.
The only important alteration in the betting at the fall
of the flag was the return of Highdrift to his old position
of first favourite.
As he swung himself into the saddle, Moordown told
Wardlock that he would make a waiting race of it, and
let Highdrift do his best in the last two fields. He
seemed to be quietly confident of the result, and he took
all the chaff his friends gave him about the withered rose
pinned to his jacket in good part.
There had been a heavy fall of rain during the night,
and before half the three miles was covered the holding
ground began to find out the weak points of many of the
half-trained horses.
Springtrap was going in more sober fashion, but he
was not by any means done with ; on the contrary, he
looked as formidable as anything, and now that he sub-
mitted to Sir Hew’s guidance he possessed an undeniable
chance. Sir Hew had wisely pulled him back to the
second division, among which Highdrift and Jasmine were
still running side by side.
So far, and it is nearly two miles, there have been no
casualties, but they are fast approaching the big jump.
A natural brook has been artificially guarded, and, judging
from the number of people at the spot, some scrambling
is expected. These waiters on accidents were not dis-
appointed. Two or three of the first flight were too
exhausted to clear the obstacle, and landed in the water,
where they kicked and splashed, to the intense delight of
the spectators.
As he neared the brook, Sir Hew Mainfly put on a spurt
and left the company, and pulling his horse together landed
him safely on the other side.
Watchers on the top of the Grand Stand offered to bet
even money that they named the winner. They meant
Springtrap, and it did look like odds on that horse, when
Highdrift met with a check at the brook.
On nearing the water, Jasmine swerved right in front
98
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


of Highdrift, and the result was a serious scrimmage, in
which horses and men were on the ground together.
Airton may have been earning his hundred or not, but he
had hitter occasion to remember the accident; a kick he
received when on the ground injured his spine, and he
was doomed to be a cripple for life.
Moordown, who had stuck to his reins, was on his feet
and into the saddle in a minute, and it required no persua-
sion to get Highdrift across to the right side. Yaluable
moments had, however, been lost, and there was now a
considerable gap between him and Springtrap. He set
his horse going in earnest, and soon passed the stragglers,
and when he got into the second field from home he had
everything beaten except Springtrap, on whom he did not
appear to gain a yard.
The success of Sir Hew seemed almost certain. There
was only a trifling post and rails obstruction between him
and the straight run in, and he was a,comfortable distance
ahead of his most dangerous enemy. The owner of
Highdrift began to lose hope, and bewail his confounded
luck. If Airton had not got in his way, he thought,
things might have been different.
After all that had occurred in connection with the
race, it galled him to the quick to think he was likely to
be beaten, and, of all men, by Sir Hew, and in sight of
the duchess.
But there are many slips between the cup and the lip,
and ships have been known to founder in summer seas.
Whether it was carelessness, or the horse got frightened
at the yelling of the mob, or was tired, cannot be said
now, but, in taking the most insignificant obstacle of the
whole course, Springtrap for the first time made a mis-
take, and came down heavily, pitching Sir Hew on his
head.
The baronet never spoke more. When picked up it
was discovered that his neck was broken.
Moordown had now the race in hand, and he passed the
Grand Stand six lengths in front of Conqueror, next to
whom came Idol and Bye of Night.
Moordown was a general favourite, and the many con-
gratulations he received were hearty and sincere, but he
would have bartered them all, and Highdrift also, for the
little smile of recognition bestowed on him by the duchess.
99
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


The accidents —there was a third, which was not, however,
of a serious nature —damped the gaiety of the meeting,
and Billy Platt invented a special curse for the new race,
which he repeats to this day.
*****
On the following forenoon an interview took place at
the Castle between the duchess and Mr. Moordown.
“ I have brought you the Gauntlet, duchess,” he said,
kneeling ; “it is really more yours than mine. Inside you
will find your money, which brought such good luck. How
tell me how I can repay your great and unmerited kind-
ness ? ”
“You want to be put to the test, do you ? ”
“ Hothing could please me better. I only hope it will
be something difficult.”
“ Tremendous ! ” she answered, laughing and blushing;
and raising him from his kneeling position; “nothing
short of a life-test.”
CHAPTER XV.
MY REVENGE AT BILLIARDS.
Enticed to Liverpool ivith a Burlesque Troupe —The eomie
Murderers —a nice Amateur —the unknown Friend — the
Champion of England.
“ Look here, Jack, you know Pattie Hastings ? ” said
Horace Brown, as he entered my apartments hurriedly
one morning,
“ I have certainly set eyes on that young lady,” I re-
plied. “ She is not here ? ”
“ Who said she was ? Why, you old hypocrite, you were
mad about her last winter, and even now the recollection
of these beautiful sonnets you used to send her, to say
nothing of the bouquets and bracelets, makes her sigh —
after a third glass of champagne ! ”
“ Champagne has more than that to answer for. Sup-
pose I did at one time admire the little woman’s antics on
and off the stage, what then ? Has she sent you to me
for a certificate of character ? Eyesight all right ? Ho
Colorado gold nor Arizona diamonds for her; and shells
sound in wind. I will back her to talk scandal against
100
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


any three damsels yon know. The Duke of C is
not going to be divorced to marry her ? No dissension, I
hope, in a certain household ?”
“You talk coolly enough now, old fellow ! ” said Brown.
“ Other times, other opinions. She was the queen of bur-
lesque a short year ago, and her dancing some one not a
mile off thought more graceful than Kate Vaughan’s ! ”
“This is evidently the dull season, and you are hard up
for subjects to speak about,” said I. “ Does Hughes run
his horse at Sandown ? ”
“ I don’t know. But I say, Jack, you are not bad
friends with Pattie P ”
“ Bother Pattie ! Has the world taken a fit to revolve
round her ? Or is it a case of Miss Hastings on the brain P
Pulse too rapid, head hot, skin too dry, feverish very;
hold out your tongue, and let me prescribe for you.”
“ I see,” said Brown, “ you are in one of your ‘ waiting-
to-be-fed’ moods ; it is no good asking a favour.”
“You have confined your observations to Miss Hastings
since you entered the room, permit me to observe. When
I hear what the request is I may be able to answer. The
money market, however, is tight.”
“It is not money,” said Brown. “ I want you to come
to Liverpool with me.”
“To Liverpool!” said I. “Why not San Francisco?
In queer street, eh ? Pressing business abroad, I suppose ?”
“ Bosh !” said Brown. “ Pattie Hastings is taking her
troupe to America, and I am going to Liverpool to see her
off. I wish you would come —she will be delighted.”
“ I see !” said I. “ After the steamer goes dull hotel!
No one to speak to or play billiards with ! Long railway
journey without a partner at ecarte. Well, all right; I
will take pity on you. When does this burlesque eclipse
take place ? ”
“ We start by the nine o’clock train to-morrow morning,”
said Brown.
Having agreed to go, we arrived at the station at the
appointed time, and went to Liverpool. There were the
gushing Pattie and her invaluable troupe, and a more for-
ward set of young women I never saw. We put them
safely on board a Cunard steamer, and returned to the
Washington Hotel. The question then arose how we
were to dispose of our time, as we did not mean to leave
101
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


for town till next day. The theatres were no good —all
old pieces, which we had seen many times in London.
Brown suggested a visit to a waxworks in the neighbour-
hood, where all the notorious murderers —Rush, Palmer,
and Co.—wore evening costume, and only wanted a flower
in their coats to look like stewards of a county hall, I
declined to interview the horrors. We eventually made
up our minds to try our luck at that ever-fascinating
game—billiards.
Notwithstanding that I play a more than an average
game, I happened to meet my match that night.
As regards playing cards with strangers, an amusing
anecdote is related of the elder Matthews and his partner
Mr. Yates. They were on a professional tour and found
themselves at a country hotel on a stormy day without any
means of killing the time during the bad weather. They
would have liked a game of whist immensely, but where
were they to find partners, double dummy being dull
work ? The landlord was consulted, and asked if he knew
of any gentleman who would have a game of whist ? He
replied in the affirmative, a gentleman being then in the
hotel whom he thought understood the game pretty well.
A polite message was immediately conveyed to the stranger,
inviting him to join them in a game. The unknown gentle-
man soon made his appearance, and they all sat down to play,
the new arrival taking dummy.
Luck was dead against the comedians. They could not
win a single game. After they had played some time, and
no inconsiderable amount of money had passed to the
holder of “ dummy,” the stranger looked at his watch and
said he was sorry to have to leave, having to meet an
important engagement. The comedians were apparently
.surprised at this sudden termination of the game, and
Matthews asked whether he would be disengaged soon
again P The stranger replied that he would be most
happy to meet them at any hour next day, when perhaps
they would be in better luck, at the same time regretting
it was most urgent business that called him away. “ Pray,”
said Matthews, who was rather excited, and when so stam-
mered, “ what may your —your business be if—if —it isn’t
—im—pertinent—to inquire ? ” “ Why,” replied the
stranger, with a knowing nod, “ I am, like yourselves, a
professional—a magician—and give a performance to-night
102
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


at the Town Hall. Yon will, therefore, excuse my depar-
ture. Good evening, gentlemen! ” and the stranger bowed
and retired. The two comedians considered it prudent
next morning not to renew the game with so lucky an
opponent, and thought they had had enough of it, al-
though very much dissatisfied with the stranger and his
“luck.”
Well, I considered I was “done” at billiards at Liver-
pool, but determined, unlike the comedians, to have
satisfaction and revenge before I left. Dinner over
at the Washington, we strolled a little through the
city, and came across some excellent billiard-rooms in the
neighbourhood of the Exchange. Having nothing else on
hand at the time I suggested a game to Brown, and just
as we had finished our third hundred a well-dressed, young-
looking man came into the room. As he appeared
rather anxious to play, I obliged him, and it was not
long before I found, to my surprise, that he was a
much better player than I had anticipated. Thinking I
could win easily, I began very carelessly, but my young-
looking opponent soon made me stare with astonishment
at his good play; and as he kept edging up to the “ spot-
stroke” without leaving the balls about, I began to anticipate
defeat. I, however, pulled myself together, and, after a
well-contested and exciting game, I came off the winner.
The second game was also exciting, as I was ninety-eight
when he ran out the victor. The third game commenced
very steadily, but eventually I came off triumphant. The
betting, at first in half-sovereigns, increased as w T e con-
tinued to play, and I found myself at the end of the game
richer by £4. Brown was also a gainer by the result.
“You are very evenly matched, you two gentlemen,”
said a man, who, judging from his flash appearance, pro-
bably dabbled in horse-racing. “If you will play again,
I don’t mind backing the loser of the last game for £5 or
£10! ”
Brown jumped at the offer, and the money was accord-
ingly deposited with the marker. “How,” said Brown,
“you have not come across a £ dufferdo your best! ” Play
commenced, and notwithstanding my having endeavoured
by every possible means to win, I was defeated by three !
This annoyed me very much, and Brown was exasperated
that I should be beaten in this manner at my favourite
103
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


game by a provincial. We now saw that my opponent
stood in with the bookmaker in his bets ; but this was to
us quite immaterial so long as the marking was correct,
which Brown took good care it should be.
The rumour spread by this time through the neighbour-
hood that billiards was being played for large sums of
money, and the room became in consequence incon-
veniently crowded. Another game was proposed, and as
I was anxious to win back Brown’s money as well as my
own, I consented, on condition that my opponent would
give me points. This 1 scarcely expected would be
granted.
“ I think we are fairly matched,” said my modest
friend. “ How many would you have the conscience to
ask ? ”
£i Can you give me ten in a hundred ? ”
“ Impossible,” replied my opponent. “ I might as well
give you the game.”
The bookmaker here interposed, and persuaded him to
let me have the ten points, offering at the same time to
back his friend for £25, or any part of it !
Brown and I consulted, and as it seemed a certainty for
me, the match was made. It is needless to describe the
play here, but it was the most exciting of the series,
and the betting equal. Suffice to say that, to my utter
amazement, the game, with nine spot strokes, resulted in a
victory for my opponent, my score being only ninety-five !
There was no help for it —luck was dead against us, and,
like the comedians, Brown and I considered we had had
enough of it —at least, for the present —and thought it
prudent to retire. Before leaving, however, we learned
the victor’s name. His profession was that of a clerk
in an insurance office. On striking a profit and loss
account at the hotel we ascertained, to our dismay, that
our evening’s amusement had cost us £42 ! So much for
Pattie Hastings and our trip to Liverpool.
The next morning we strolled down to see the extensive
docks, and to witness the landing of the passengers from
America, a Cunarder having just then arrived. I was
pleased to find among the passengers an old friend of mine,
who had been on a professional tour in the United States.
Having informed him of the hotel we were etopping at, he
agreed to accompany us, and on arriving and partaking of
104
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


some refreshment he retired to hare a few hours’ rest.
Brown and I again consulted as to our mode of procedure,
and having struck on a good idea and discussed it, we re-
solved on remaining another night, and endeavouring if
possible to turn the tables on our conquerors.
On my friend coming down to dinner, I had an oppor-
tunity to narrate to him our unlucky proceedings the
previous evening, and the amount of money we lost. As
lie was acquainted with my play, he felt surprised, and was
anxious to see this provincial wonder. Having succeeded
in arousing his curiosity, he agreed to look in at the
billiard-rooms, but his name was on no account to be men-
tioned. We accordingly appointed an hour, and when we
entered the rooms it was easily to be seen that we were
expected. The bookmaker, with his cable chain, was
there, and there were a numerous gathering of his friends.
There, too, was my opponent, playing a game with the
marker. Before I was very long in the room I was asked
if I should like to stand up, and I replied, with some
hesitation, I would play one game for £5 on getting ten.
This was assented to, and the play commenced in the
midst of some enthusiasm, and resulted in my carrying off
the honours, my opponent, for his own reasons, not
wishing to show off his best form so early in the
evening. When I declined to play any more, Brown was
asked to have a game, and he declined. They then pressed
our friend to try his luck, and he rather unwillingly con-
sented, not being in so good a condition as he should wish,
owing to his voyage across the Atlantic. Wishing to do us
a favour if possible, he stood up and prepared for the play.
When asked, however, how many points he would take, he
caused some surprise in the room when he replie'd that,
although he was somewhat cramped by a sea voyage, he
would try to play level !
The game commenced, and the bookmaker’s friends were
jubilant; they looked upon this match as the best thing
ever known for their champion ! They hoped we would
only stop some time in Liverpool, and they would make
their fortunes. What an immense advantage it was to
have such a splendid player to set against strangers like
us !
But this time they were mistaken. They had caught
the wrong bird. Our friend won the game, and, to their
105
CANGE aOUS DILEMMAS.


utter consternation, kept on winning game after game,
until, after two hours’ play, he whispered, “ Got your
money back ?” and I answered, ‘‘ Yes, with interest —
don’t play any more.”
We immediately left the place and returned to the hotel,
where we had an excellent supper and a few bottles of
“ phiz,” leaving the bookmaker and his friends to wonder
who the “ unknown ” was.
A couple of years afterwards I met the insurance clerk
at St. James’s Hall, and he showed us that he was one of
the best players m the country. But the man who beat
him at Liverpool was the Champion of England
SECRETS OF A MATRIMONIAL AGENCY.
“ You have saved ray life.”
“ Nonsense,” I answered ; “ the scoundrels were cowards
and bolted the moment I came in sight.”
“ 1 tell you, sir, they would have murdered me, and flung
my body into the river, where I should have become
another ‘ Thames Mystery,.’ There were three of them —
the wretches !”
“ Valuables safe ?” I asked.
The man felt his pockets.
“ Lost my watch and chain,” 'he said. “ Easily re-
placed ; but, if they had taken my life, who would have
carried Put my mission ?”
‘ Your mission ? May I inquire the nature of it ?”
“ You may; it is to make men and women happy.”
“ I understand ; you preach.”
“ Quite wrong : I practise.”
“ You mystify me,”
“ Very likely,” the strange-looking individual replied.
“My conduct is at variance with the world’s. I never
seek to harm any one, and all my time is devoted to for-
warding the interests of others.”
Men with a grievance are plentiful enough, but a person
whose sole object in life is to diffuse happiness is rather
106
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


uncommon. In this age of iron such good-natured per-
sons are looked upon with a suspicion of lunacy,
“ Very commendable,” I said ; “ but I am still in the
dark as to how you attain such desirable ends.”
“ Of course you are, my worthy friend ; but I hope to
enlighten you. Answer me one question ; are you single
a bachelor ?”
“ I am, and in no hurry to call any woman ray wife.”
“ A misogamist,” he muttered to himself; and then
aloud, “ I am glad you are single, because you will have
occasion to rejoice that you met me—that you came to
my assistance. You have rendered me one great favour;
will you do me another ?”
“ If it’s in my power,” I replied.
“ There is my card ; dine with me to-morrow at 7.”
I consented, but it was with some hesitation. I let him
go, and I asked myself whether it was not the correct
thing to place a philanthropist of this kind under some
restraint; There is a society in work to suppress promis-
cuous charity, and for aught I know there may be an insti-
tution founded for the express purpose of shutting up uni-
versal benefactors.
His card bore the address, “ Mr. Albert Dove, 1090,
Finsbury Square, E.C.”
The foregoing conversation took place on the Thames
Embankment, near Waterloo Bridge, one stormy night in
March of the present year.
Descending Savoy Street on my way to Scotland Yard,
I heard a scuffle and a cry for help, and, knowing the bad
reputation of the Embankment at that particular spot, I
hastened to the rescue—with the result already told.
This chance encounter made me acquainted with a new
phase of life abounding in striking scenes touching most
notes of the gamut of existence.
My newly-acquired friend was not only peculiar in his
speech, his appearance was out of the common. The first
thing I noticed was his height, which was over six feet,
and he looked taller on account of his high “ chimney-
pot ” hat. His dark top-coat was closely-buttoned up to
his chin, and reached down to his heels. It was impos-
sible to judge of the man by his face, as it was covered by
a tangled mass of black hair. His moustache and beard
showed that not much time was spent in trimming them,
107
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


and, taking advantage of their freedom, they rivalled each
other in roughness and length. In his right hand Mr.
Dove carried a heavy stick of black oak, typical of the ro-
bust build of the owner, and his recent assailants had cause
to congratulate themselves that the suddenness of their at-
tack prevented its being used.
For a man of his dim nsions his eyes were exceedingly
small, but what they lost in size they made up in brilliancy.
If his eyes were diminutive, his arms were long—longer
even than his great height justified; and when he walked
he threw them about in the most irregular manner, just as
if they were ready to go to war with each other, but neither
one nor the other cared to take the initiative.
His mode of locomotion would draw attention to him
anywhere, be it at church or fair. He was a most inele-
gant walker; each step seemed to be a combination of the
jerk and shuffle, and, coupling this peculiarity with the
slightly stooping body and lengthy arms, I thought that
the man must be a little deformed, perhaps hump-backed.
From a rough-cast individual like this you would naturally
expect a harsh voice, but it was quite the reverse ; his
voice tfas musical to a degree, and he spoke as softly as
any young woman addressing her lover.
It is not often we come across men of his disposition of
mind or formation of body. But if the shell was gnarled,
the kernel within was sound enough, and, strange as was
Mr. Dove’s business in life, you had only to become ac-
quainted with him to be convinced that his chief aim was
not the amassing of riches, but the well being of the men
and women who entrusted their future to him.
But I must not anticipate—the extraordinary circum-
stances will be narrated as they befell me. Curious to know
who Mr. Dove was, and what occupation he followed, I
consulted Kelly’s Directory, but withont being made any
the wiser. His name and address were correctly given,
but nothing more. The man was unknown at Scotland
Yard, except to one officer, who said he recollected the
name of Dove cropping up some years ago in connection
with a divorce case.
Punctual to the hour appointed, my cab drew up at
1090, Finsbury Square. In answer to my knock the door
was opened by a negro servant, in a handsome light blue
livery, who took my hat and and ushered me, much
108
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


to my surprise, into a drawing-room full of elegantly-dressed
ladies and gentlemen, all engaged in agreeable conversa-
tion, intermingled with much laughter. I expected to dine
quietly with Mr. Dove, and here were at least twenty
guests, all entire strangers tome. The moment the servant
pronounced my name, my host —who was quite a giant in
comparison with his guests —came forward from a knot of
ladies, with whom he was exchanging some pleasantry, and
warmly welcomed me. Taking me round the company,
he said—
“ You will have great pleasure in becoming acquainted
with the gentleman who saved my life.”
“ I was talking about you when you entered,” address-
ing himself to me, “ and explaining to my dear friends how
much they are indebted to you. Without your valuable
assistance last night, there would have been no joyous din-
ner—no spirit-stirring dance here this evening; and, alas !
who would have administered to the wants of my flock ?”
His language led me to suppose that my first idea was
correct, that he was really a clergyman—perhaps of some
new denomination. His appearance was very singular,
and his manner eccentric, but not unpleasing. He ap-
peared to be about forty-five, but the wrinkles on his fore-
head may have made him seem older than he really was.
I had hardly time to say that he made a great deal too
much of the sli ht service, when dinner was announced by
a pompous-looking butler dressed in black.
“ You will take charge of Miss Bertram,” my host said,
with a wave of his hand in the direction of a pretty but
pert-looking young lady eighteen or nineteen years of age,
who at that instant entered the room, and who advanced
without the slightest shyness, and placed the tips o! her
fingers on my arm.
The dining-room was on the other side of the entrance-
hall, and during the short promenade, and while the guests
were seating themselves, and during the progress of the
dinner, the conversation never flagged for a moment —it
was like the incessant roll of musketry.
The guests, with the exception of myself, were evidently
well known to each other, and appeared very much at
home. The host, by his genial manner, contributed not a
little to the general cheerfulness, and he was exceedingly
attentive to me.
109
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


The plate on the table, and the numerous paintings on
the walls, to say nothing of the well-drilled servants in at-
tendance, all betokened wealth. Mr. Dove must have
money, and a good deal of it too ; but what was his po-
sition in life, and who were the ladies and gentlemen as-
sembled round his dinner-table ?
The highly self-possessed young lady I took in to dinner,
thinking, no doubt, I was a stranger, kindly entered into
conversation with me as soon as we were seated at
table.
“ An odd collection,” was her first remark.
Presuming that she referred to the numerous pictures
hanging round the room, I replied
“ They do look curious. Good and bad, I suppose.
Are they all English?'*
This commonplace answer made her laugh.
“ There are a few doubtful specimens among the French,
but the most reputable are the English, *’ she said.
“ Perhaps Mr. Dove is not so easily deceived by the
English ; even experts are liable to be taken in by the
artful French and Italian counterfeits.*'
Unknown to myself, I must have said something very
funny, for Miss Bertram could not control her laughter.
“ Does not our host get imposed on sometimes by
worthless rubbish?” I asked.
When she could stop giggling she said—
“ He makes mistakes of course, but he has been won-
derfully successful. His knowledge of human nature is
immense, and his foresight amounts to genius. These
attributes account for his having so few failures.”
Not perceiving what human nature and foresight had
to do with buying pictures, I endeavoured to bring back
the conversation to a lower and more comprehensible
level.
“ Does he make it the business of his life to pick up
these splendid specimens?” I asked.
“ I believe so ; but speak lower in case the colonel op-
posite hears you ; he might object, and he is a regular
fire-eater. Coffee and pistols, you know.”
‘‘ I would not hurt his feelings for the world. Is he in-
terested in the speculation?”
“ He is after the Queen of Sheba ; the one with the bird
of Paradise feather.”
110
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“After the Queen of Shebi, is he? Then there is a
sale occasionally?”
“ There is, but we call it by a different name, though it
comes to much the same thing in the end.”
“ The specimens are, perhaps, disposed of privately to
avoid the publicity of the auction-room.”
The girl burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter,
which drew attention to us.
“ Glad you are enjoying yourself,” called out Mr. Dove
to me ; “ a glass of wine with you.”
The middle-aged lady in red velvet on my left hand ut-
tered some unpleasant observations about the forwardness
of young ladies in general, and of Miss Bertram in par-
ticular, and the colonel on the other side of the table looked
daggers at me ; as if I could help it.
“ Tell me the joke, and I will laugh, too,” I whispered
to my fair friend.
“ Is this your first visit ?” she asked, as if an idea had
just occurred to her.
“ The first.”
“ What are the symptoms? Are you an admirer of the
classic, and is it blonde or brunette?”
This was beyond me, and I looked at the young girl in
astonishment, which only redoubled her laughter. The
horrible thought just then entered my head that I was in
a private lunatic asylum; everything tended to confirm me
in that opinion, and the marvel was that the truth had not
dawned on my obtuse mind b fore. I had often been told
that all mad doctors are, more or less, eccentric—that
their attendance on insane people has, through course of
time, an injurious effect on their own minds ; and here was
an example in the case of Mr. Dove !
The guests were no doubt his patients, and the stalwart
men in waiting the keepers, ready to control any obstre-
perous individual, with their straight jackets, and bands
of leather and iron in some convenient cupboard close
at hand.
It is I know the belief of some doctors that it would be
all the better for the afflicted ones if they were treated
more like sane individuals, and were indulged in dinner
parties and balls as if they still belonged to the outer world.
I cautiously examined my fellow guests one bv one, but I
could discern nothing approaching the extravagant in their
111
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


conduct, but everybody has heard of the wonderful cun-
ning of lunatics ; this evening they were evidently on their
best behaviour.
As I glanced round the circle ray eyes at length met the
mirthful eyes of Miss Bertram, who was evidently watch-
ing me, and enjoying my perplexity. Was she mad, too ?
At first I was inclined to think she was rather an intelligent
young woman —anything but stupid—but now the inco-
herent portion of her remarks rose up to condemn her. I
was in the act of pitying her when she whispered behind
her fan—
“ Is it a very bad attack ?”
It is necessary to humour mad people, so I replied—
“ Not very ; I feel quite myself at times.”
She burst out laughing, and before she could recover
herself the ladies rose from the table, and being next the
door I did my duty. As Miss Bertram passed me with a
sweeping bow, she said —
“ Don’t despair; have confidence in the doctor.”
Before placing me in an assembly of lunatics, Mr. or
Dr. Dove ought to have made me aware of the insanity of
his guests. There was no telling what awkward things
might have happened. When the ladies returned I sought
an opportunity of speaking to him on the subject, but the
gentlemen crowded up to his end of the table, and I had
no chance. For a set of madmen, I must say their talk
was rational enough ; and, whm the colonel, on whom the
claret had a friendly effect, challenged me to a game of
billiards, I could not but consent, and get well beaten on
attempting to give points.
“ Yes, go with the colonel,” Mr. Dove said; “ you have
time for a game before the dancing commences.”
I should have liked to mention the Queen of Sheba to
the colonel, but he did not seem a man you could take a
liberty with, and I thought better of it. Another lunatic
was polite enough to mark the game, and called out the
score with such accuracy that I at once set him down as
an old billiard-marker.
When we had got through two games the sound of music
reached us, and we returned to the drawing-room. The
ball was in full progress, and it was a strange sight to
see the huge and ungainly figure of our host moving
amongst the dancers playing the fiddle. He was evidently
112
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


an excellent performer, and it was to his music his patients
danced. Occasionally he would waltz round the room
playing his instrument all the time. His resemblance to
the mythical satyr would at once strike an ordinary on-
looker.
“ A good dance makes people cheerful, and assists my
cause,” he remarked, as he waltzed past me.
“ Many a happy wife has occasion to bless the Blue
Danube,” he whispered on another occasion.
“ Come and see a recent success,” he said in one of the
short intervals ; and I was led up and introduced to a shy-
looking little man of fifty, and anything but a reserved
young woman of twenty-five, his wife, who both looked
happy enough, and seemed perfectly cured. Show patients,
I presumed.
“ For the encouragement of others,” he whispered in
my ear. “ Won’t you dance ? There is Miss Bertram dis-
engaged. Most accomplished girl. Daughter of an old
friend. A sad history ; but I will tell you all about her in
my study, for you must smoke a cigar with me before you
g°”
Until the circumstances were cleared up a bit I con-
sidered it advisable not to dance with Miss Bertram or any
other lady.
It was a new experience, and I could not be too cau-
tious.
When we were closeted in the study by our two selves,
with a good cigar and a brandy and soda, I soon ap-
proached the subject which was troubling my mind. I
thought Mr. Dove would have died of laughing at my ex-
traordinary mistake in taking his house to be a private lu-
natic asylum. He stamped and danced about the room
in his uproarious glee, and I could not get a word
out of him for some time—until he was thoroughly ex-
hausted.
I must admit that when I heard the name of the estab-
lishment I was greatly surprised, but it must be remem-
bered that there is not a similar house to 1090, Finsbury
Square, in her Majesty's dominions.
“ If love is lunacy,” my host said, waving his hand to»
113
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


ward the ball-room, “you are right, but my patients reside
in an abode of joy, not of sorrow, and they are free to
depart at any time—in couples.
In other words, the place was a Matrimonial
Agency.
CRUEL WORK OF AN INTIMATE FRIEND.
Public sympathy was entirely with the accused, yet the
verdict pronounced—that of Guilty—was generally ex-
pected. The evidence put forward by the prosecutor was
so conclusive. There was not much chance for the prisoner
when two witnesses swore that he (Edward Fraser) had
said in their hearing that he would do the deceased (Syd-
ney Marshall) some deadly harm, and when three more
individuals were placed in the box to prove that they be-
held the struggle between the two men, and saw the person
in custody push his opponent over the cliffs into the water.
Much disappointment was, however, felt throughout the
country when the grand jury scheduled the crime as mur-
der instead of manslaughter. But this decision was quite
of a piece with Fraser’s other misfortunes. Marshall’s
body had not been recovered, notwithstanding a very dili-
gent search, and the local fishermen thought that it had
been carried out to sea by the under-current. Still no one
doubted that the man had perished. Although he richly
deserved his fate, that was no justification of the deed in
the eye of the law. Provocation beyond human endurance
does not, as poor Fraser found out, permit a man to be a
law unto himself. The husband may have his home broken
up, his future career destroyed, his wife dishonoured —as
in the case of this man—but he is prohibited from laying
violent hands on the seducer.
The judge in sentencing the prisoner to be hanged, said
that the recommendation of the jury (to mercy) would
be forwarded to the proper quarter, but that he could not
hold out much hope of a reprieve. It so happened that
a number of capital sentences had been commuted about
114
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS,


this time, and the Government deemed it necessary, as
murders were on the increase, to make an example. Which-
ever way it turned, fortune was decidedly adverse to Fraser.
He was not only unlucky in having a treacherous friend
and an unchaste wife, but he must needs seek his revenge
at an inopportune moment.
The jury’s messa e of raevcy was duly sent to the Home
Office, and there soon followed it a great many petitions
to the same effect, signed by thousands of all grades of
society, from the bishop to the bricklayer. The prisoner
was no hardened criminal, and the fatal blow, or push, or
whatever it was, was given in defence of his household
gods. Before deciding on the question of life or death,
the Home Secretary consulted the judge, and communi-
cated, as usual, with Scotland Yard. He required full
particulars of the antecedents of the two men, and wished
to know it it was within the range of possibility for Sydney
Marshall to have escaped with his life.
“ The press has not left us much to discover,” remarked
the chief, as he handed me the letter from the Home Office.
“ This is Tuesday ; the answer must go on Friday. See
if you can throw any new light on the subject.”
It may be as well to state here that every care is taken
that these revelations will not injure living individuals.
When it is considered desirable, names of persons and
places are more or less changed, but otherwise the eventful
episodes are real, and the author only writes about matters
in which he was personally concerned in his official ca-
pacity:
In search of information for the Home Secretary, I had
an interview with the prisoner at Lewes Gaol (the murder
was committed near Brighton), and saw all the relatives
and acquaintances of the two men in London, and the fol-
lowing is what I learned :
Edward Fraser and Sydney Marshall had been intimate
friends. They first got to know each other through Miss
Evans, who became the wife of Fraser, and afterwards lan
away with Marshall. This frail but pretty young woman
was the daughter of a draper at Kensington. “ More
beauty than wit,” was how an old lady described her. She
was, however, wisa enough to give her hand to the mere
eligible of her two suitors. Marshall was a clerk in a city
bank, and had only his salary to depend on, whereas Fraser
115
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


was a junior partner with his father, a solicitor in Gray’s
Inn. Considering that there had been a serious quarrel,
ending in blows, in the presence of the young lady, it was
surprising that Marshall cared to remain intimate with the
newly-married couple, but he may have had his revenge in
view.
Except in their affection for the same young lady, no
two individuals could have been more dissimilar in their
tastes and habits than Fraser and Marshall. It was an
instance of extremes meeting. Marshall read much, and
was a thinker, persuasive and subtle. He effectually hid
his wicked designs underneath a placid exterior. Not easily
got out of temper, and when there was a purpose in view
he was never impatient. In appearance he was rather hand-
some, of the medium height, slightly built, and very dark ;
eyes closely set together (a bad sign), small and bright.
On the other hand, Fraser was a tall, fair-haired, blue-
eyed Saxon—an athlete not unknown at certain running-
grounds, and at the Oval—a young man not over fond of
book learning, but full of life, and a capital companion.
His father had given him a year on the Continent before
taking him into partnership, and in his travels he had
managed to perfect his knowledge of the French and Ger-
man languages. It was his ability to speak French which
suggested the idea of his going to the Mauritius, and it was
while on this voyage that his friend betrayed him.
His marriage with Miss Evans was not popular with his
parents ; they saw what a silly, frivolous girl she was, but
they could not make him listen to reason. He was in love,
I suppose, and consequently a little insane. At the wed-
ding Marshall acted as best man, and a sister of his was
one of the bridesmaids. The short honeymoon was spent
in Paris, and on their return the happy pair found the villa
they had taken ready for occupation. Enjoying excellent
health, and with a good position, no two young people
could have commenced their married life with finer pros-
pects: but vessels sometimes founder in summer seas.
Their happiness was fated to be but short-lived ; their in-
timate friend was biding his opportunity to destroy it.
Marshall had not long to wait for the desired change.
One of the oldest clients of Mr. Fraser, sen., was a Mr.
Hampton, who had a sugar plantation in the island of
Mauritius, managed by Frederick Lefevre, a Frenchman.
116
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


The Governor, Sir George Bowen, had through a friend
apprised Mr. Hampton that rumours to the discredit of
Lefevre were current at Port Louis, and that the affairs of
the estate wanted looking into. Mr. Hampton was old,
and half an invalid, and, therefore, not inclined to under-
take the long journey, and he asked his legal adv.'ser
whether he knew a suitable person. The remuneration
was to be something handsome.
The lawyer thought that this would be a splendid op-
portunity for his son, but the young man would not hear
of it unless he could take his wife with him, which was out
of the question. He had only been married six months,
and was, it was presumed, still surrounded by the glamour
of love. Great pressure was brought to bear upon him to
accept the mission. Even his wife’s relatives agreed that
it was too tempting a proposal to be rejected.
When Sydney Marshall wjs consulted he said there
should be no hesitation whatever about it—that offers of
that kind did not drop from the clouds every day. Such
opportunities never came in his way. There was no oc-
casion to trouble about Mrs. Fraser ; he and his sister would
look after her. They would do what they could to prevent
the young wife being too miserable in her husband’s ab-
sence. She was miserable enough at the idea of her hus-
band leaving her, but somehow or other became reconciled
to it. Finding everyone, not excepting his wife, in favour
of his going, Fraser sailed for the Mauritius.
Mrs. Fraser, jun., did not appear to take the temporary
loss of her husband very much to heart. She did not go
to the theatre or visit her friends seldomer than before,
and her constant companions were Marshall and his sister.
Her mother-in-law hinted that she saw a little too muc h
of the Marshalls, but the young wife replied that the close
intimacy was the wish of her husband. At parting had not
Edward put her hand in Marshall’s and said, “ Sydney,
here is your other sister; remember, you are her guar-
dian ?”
Husbands who object to disagreeable surprises should
always inform their wives of the hour of their return, so that
their fair partners may be in waiting to receive them with
open arms. At least that is the opinion of your humble
servant, an unmarried man. Edward Fraser was foolish
enough to neglect this precaution, and the result was quite
117
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


the reverse of what he anticipated. In his mind’s eye he
no doubt often pictured the disconsolate wife gazing on
his photograph and kissing it, and seeking consolation
from his love-letters. And as the ship neared Southampton
on the return journey he frequently heard, in imagination,
her joyful cry of welcome as he stepped across the thres-
hold of his home.
Leaving his luggage to be forwarded, he hurried up from
Southampton, and reached the vicinity of his villa one
night about eleven o’clock. He sent no telegram an-
nouncing his arrival in England, and the “ Ajax,” having
had a good passage, reached port twenty-four hours before
she was due. Everything favoured the pleasant surprise
in store for his wife. He, like a lover who had a clandes-
tine appointment, stopped the cab a few doors from the
house, and jumped out with only a small bag in his hand,
containing presents for the treasure of his heart (that is the
correct phrase, I think). Stealthily opening the garden
gate, the fond husband, dying to embrace his wife, hastened
through the shrubbery and trees which bordered the ap-
proach to the front door and make the place pitch dark.
All his precautions had been useless. Before he had gone
many steps a lady rushed into his arms and kissed him.
“ My darling, ’ she whispered, “ you have come at
last !”
It was his wife j she had been on the watch for him.
So overjoyed was he at this mark of affection, all he could
say was—
“ Beloved one!”
“ There is no letter or telegram, dearest Sydney,” she
whispered in his ear, putting her arms round his neck ; “a
few more hours of bliss.”
“ Woman !” he exclaimed, horrified, “what do 1 hear?
I am your husband.”
She uttered a startled cry, jumped apart from.him, and
fled.
At this moment the gate clicked, and a footstep ap-
proached.
“ He has [returned ! run for your life!” called out the
wife from the shrubbery.
Sydney Marshall, for it was that trustworthy gentleman,
did not require a second warning. He was out of the
gate and round the corner in a second,
118
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


The dazed and maddened husband quickly followed,
but Marshall wss not to be seen, and he did not return to
his apartments that night.
Fraser would not trust himself to go near his wife again,
and he went to his father’s. When father and son reached
the villa next morning the servants told them that Mrs.
Fraser had packed up a couple of boxes and left at six
o’clock, as she said, to meet her husband.
The guilty pair had, no doubt, left London. It was as-
certained that, on the plea of urgent private affairs, Mar-
shall had received a fortnight’s leave of absence from busi-
ness.
“ Let me know where they are, and your task is finished,’
he said to the detectives employed to trace them ; and at
the end of two days—an eternity to him —he got the ad-
dress, a farmhouse, in the neighbourhood of Brighton.
“ That is enough,” remarked Fraser; “ I will now make
sure that the scoundrel will not corrupt another man’s
wife.” It was this remark that told so much against him
at his trial.
In the darkening light of an October afternoon the
quondam friends met face to face on the cliffs, and the
deadly struggle began. It did not last long. Fraser, being
the stronger of the two, soon had the advantage, and he
hurled the destroyer of his happiness into the sea. The
deed accomplished, the betrayed husband did not attempt
to fly. He gave himself up to the first policeman he met;
and all that he said to the inspector was, that, as the law
did not meet his case, he had been obliged to be his own
judge and executioner.
Not the slightest trace of Sydney Marshall, dead or alive,
had been discovered.
The official report to the Home Secretary was based on
these details, which I have curtailed as much as possible.
Whether they came at a wrong time or not, the petitions
in favour of a commutation of the sentence were unsuc-
cessful.
The execution took place within the precincts of Lewes
Gaol, and, as the case interested me, and I had business
at Brighton, I was present. It was quite true, Fraser owned
that he had sought the man’s life, and as he had broken
the law he must pay the pmalty. He proposed to meet
his ignominious end with quiet firmness. An incident oc-
119
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


curred at the last moment to destroy his fortitude, and
which rivetted my attention. It was immediately before
Marwood pulled the cap over the condemned man’s face.
Fraser was taking his last look on earth when his eyes met
those of one of the reporters. Suddenly, as a flash of
lightning, his face underwent the most extraordinary
change; before it wore a resigned expression—now it had
all the malignity of a fiend.
The governor and everyone could see that the man was
terribly agitated ; his body swayed violently, and he at-
tempted to speak, but, as fortune would have it, the clock
was sounding the last beat of eight, and the hangman made
haste to finish his horrible work.
When all was over the reporter who had so greatly dis-
turbed Fraser’s dying moments sneaked quickly out of the
prison, but I did not mean to lose sight of him. An ex-
planation was necessary. Detectives see so many phases
of crime that they are not usually astonished at anything,
but I must own to being dumbfounded when I discovered,
under all his disguise, that reporter to be Sydney Marshal!.
A good swimmer, and terrified for his life, he had, when
pitched into the water, struck out to sea in the hope that
he might fall in with a passing vessel, and he was evidently
picked up by a French fishing-boat and landed at Portail.
“ Why were you there?” I demanded, pointing to the
gaol.
“ As I was never safe until he was dead, I wished to
see the last of him.”
“ But how did you obtain an entrance ?” I asked.
“ Easily enough. I induced a Brighton reporter to let
me take his place.”
“ Do you think Fraser recognised you?”
“ I am sure he did.”
“ Hanging would be too good for you !” I said.
The villain was tired of my examination. What could
have been done with him if I had detained him?
Several years have passed since then, but, directly or
indirectly, I have heard nothing more of Sydney Marshall.
It was some consolation for Fraser’s heart-broken pa
rents to kno./ that the prisoner was guiltless of murder.
The notoriety was too much for the Evans’ family,
and with their frail daughter they emigrated to Buenos
Ayres.
120
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


THE MISSING “RAJAH” DIAMOND.
About ten days or a fortnight after Fraser met his sad
fate, I was summoned to the private room of the chief.
“ Have you anything particular in hand?” he asked.
“ Nothing, chief,” I replied.
“ Then you are really disengaged ? The matter lam
going to entrust you wi;h must be inquired into with the
utmost circumspection.”
“ I will be extra careful.”
“ Lady B has been here this morning in a great
state of agitation. A diamond, known as the ‘ Rajah,’
and worth something like twenty-five thousand pounds,
has disappeared from her jewel-box, which is really safe
built in the wall, with two keys—one held by Lady B ,
and the other by her husband.”
“ Yes, chief, it would be difficult to dispose of a stone
of that value,”
“ Impossible ; and no one at Amsterdam would risk
cutting it without the highest references. The stone is
well known, and is said to have been the eye of an idol in
India. Occasionally it has been set to wear at Court, but
when it disappeared it was quite loose.”
“ And when was it m’ssed ? Yesterday ?”
“ No; a week ago.”
“ As long as that?”
“ Yes. You see Lady B was of opinion that the
stone would be replaced in the safe.”
“ How could that possibly happen ?”
“ As you may have heard, Lord B is rather eccen-
tric. He is a great connoisseur of precious stones, and
he may have taken out the ‘ Rajah ’ diamond to admire
it, and forgotten to return it.”
“ But why not ask him?”
“ That is what we want to avoid. Her ladyship’s object
in coming here is to get us to trace the stone without his
knowing anything about it. He is in such delicate health,
the disappearance of his much-prized diamond might be
very hurtful.”
“ Her ladyship could give you no clue ?”
121
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ None whatever ; but you will see her yourself. She
is at the town mansion to-day, but leaves for their place
in Norfolk to-morrow. The jewel-box is at the Norfolk
house. You must arrange with Lady B to be quar-
tered in the house as sanitary inspector, or something of
that kind. As a sanitary inspector you can roam all over
the house without suspicion.”
“ I will do my best, chief.”
There was a slight difference in the ages of Lady B
and her husband ; she was twenty-three, and he would
never see sixty-five again. Lord B was not always the
wealthy man he is now; an elder brother conveniently
died without family, and an unusually rich seam of coal
was discovered on his property. All at once his income
rose from a few hundreds to twenty thousand per annum
—that was on the death of his brother —and it is now said
to exceed thirty thousand. A man who had such a splendid
income was bound to have a pretty wife, and in Miss M-
he met the belle of two seasons, admired by everyone, from
the prince to the peasant. Envious tongues did not hesi-
tate to say that this union of May and December would
not be lasting, and that because a near female relative had
gone wrong, Lady B would soon give occasion for
scandal. These wiseacres were disappointed for once.
Lady 15 proved herself an exemplary wife, and there
were two children, a boy and a girl, born of the marriage.
Arrayed in frock coat and a tall hat, I presented myself
at the town house at four o’clock.
“ Her ladyship in ?” I asked.
“ I will see,” replied the man-servant. “ What name ?”
I produced my card—
“ Mr, Robert Charrington,
Sanitary Inspector,”
and on it in writing, “ By appointment.”
“ Her ladyship does not recollect your name, but will
you walk upstairs ?”
On being ushered into Lady B ’s presence and when
the footman had retired, she came forward and said—
“ 1 expected someone—from Scotland Yard.”
“ Quite right, my lady; here is a note from my chief.”
“ Of course you understand that this is quite a private
matter at present. I think the stone has been mislaid—
not stolen.”
122
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


“ Does your ladyship suspect no one ?”
“ Only my husband. He has the jewellery out frequently
to dust, and he is a little forgetful.”
“ Does no one assist his lordship on these occasions?”
“ He is either alone or I am with him.”
<f There are two keys, I believe ; can the safe be opened
without the production of both ?”
“ One is sufficient, but you must have the ‘ word.’ ”
“ The ‘ word,’ madam ?”
“ Yes, it is a French idea, I think, and Milner had to
pay money to use it. There are three small tliscs, each
surrounded with the letters of the alphabet, on the door of
the safe, and the diminutive hands on the discs have to be
set to a certain word before the keys are of any use. When
the diamond disappeared the word was ‘ war ;’ one hand
had to be pointing to ‘ w,’ the second to ‘ a,’ and the
third to ‘r/ When the safe is locked the hands on the
discs are, of course, turned to any of the letteis of the al-
phabet but the right ones. Although you held the key, it
would be perfectly useless to you without knowing the exact
word, and you might go through the whole dictionary with-
out discovering it.”
“ Have you any system in changing the ‘ word ?’ ”
“ I generally alter it every month ; this is effected through
the clock-work on the back of the lid —but although I al-
ways acquaint my husband with the secret it soon escapes
his memory, and he has invariably to come to me for the
information.”
“ Can the diamond have fallen into wrong hands?”
“ That will be for you to discover ; there is one thing
certain, it is not in the safe nor in Lord B ’s possession.
My maid and I have made a thorough search.”
“ Then the loss of this stone is well known in your
ladyship’s household ?”
“ On the contrary, it is quite a secret.”
“ Your maid knows ?”
“ Ann Gregory does not count; she can be trusted. She
has been in the family all her life, first with my father, and
on my marriage she came with me.”
“ I understand that the knowledge of the loss has been
withheld from his lordship ; have vou any reason to sup-
pose that he is aware of the fact ?”
“ Any sudden shock might seriously affect Lord B ,
123
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


and until all my efforts to find the ‘ Rajah ' had failed, I
did not propose to mention the matter to him ; still I am
not quite sure that he docs not know the diamond has
disappeared. Since I first missed the stone, a week ago
yesterday, Lord B has been to the safe twice, and,
although he said nothing, after these visits he appeared
much depressed.”
“ When did your ladyship last see the diamond ?”
“ Exactly ten days ago. I wore it at Court, and on my
return to Norfolk I put it in the safe myself. Lord B
happened to be present, and with a pair of pincers he took
the stone out of its setting, after which I placed it in the
case marked * Rajah,’ ”
“ Such a valuable diamond must be found. If your
ladyship will kindly give me a line to your butler I will go
down to Norfolk as a sanitary inspector, and when I have
any good news to communicate, 1 will ask to see you.”
“ Certainly. I return to-morrow, and will remain in
Norfolk three weeks. I need not say to you that the re-
covery of a stone worth will meet with a suitable
acknowledgment.”
“ Thanks from you, my lady, would be a sufficient
reward.”
I am no Communist, and am quite satisfied with my
position in life ; but only imagine a stone which I could
easily slip into my waistcoat pocket being worth such a
large sum of money. Will one of your chartered account-
ants please compute how many individuals could be made
independent if not happy for life with the amount men-
tioned ? One hundred cottages could, I suppose, be built
for something like
On reaching the Norfolk house my letter to the butler
received every attention, and I was soon installed in a good
room of the bachelors’ quarter, and I arranged to have my
meals served in an adjoining sitting-room. I had some
ground plans with me, borrowed for the occasion, which I
took care to leave open on the table for the inspection of
inquisitive servants.
There was a large staff of servants, male and female, and
I took steps to satisfy myself that the “ Rajah ” had not
been accidentally hidden amongst their belongings. This
was a work of care and time. How did I manage it ? That
is my secret. No dresses were left rumpled nor coats
124
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


unfolded, and not one of the servants was a whit the
wiser.
From the time the diamond was replaced in the safe to
the day of its disappearance there had been no visitors in
the house, and Lord B had not been from home.
As the opportunity occurred, I made a minute search
in the room occupied by his lordship, but without any
success.
“ Rather dull here,” I said to Lord B ’s confiden-
tial servant one day. “ You could do with a little amuse-
ment.”
“ That we could, sir,” he said. “ Times are changed
since his lordship became an invalid.”
“ You were not accustomed in former times to let the
grass grow under your feet ?”
“ That we did not. We went the pace and no mis-
take. ’
You have been a long time with Lord B ?”
“ Going on now for twenty years; and although his
lordship has been a good master to me, I don’t think if his
life were published it would be suitable for family reading.’
“ Gay, eh ?”
“ Downright fact, sir. The pranks we played in London
and Paris would shock a quiet gentleman like yourself.
The farmers down here used to send their daughters out
of the way when they heard of our coming.”
“ Lord B must now find time hang heavily on his
hands. How does he amuse himself ?”
“ When he is able, he walks a great deal. If the day
is at all fine, he generally goes as far as Oakshot Farm.’’
“ An old flame ?”
“ People said so,” he replied, with a lau h.
Next morning found me at Oakshot Farm, and I was
made welcome by a bold-faced, handsome woman, about
thirty. I was tired after my long walk, at least I said so,
and asked the favour of a glass of milk. The woman
hastened to get the milk, and we were soon in the full swing
of a big conversation.
“ What makes you think Lord B is failing rapidly ?’
I asked.
“ Why he says and does such uncommon things; for
instance, being our landlord, my husband and I thought we
could not do wrong in calling our last baby a ter him. We
125
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


asked his permission, which he generously gave us, and
said he would give the youngster a handsome present.”
“ Well ?”
“ A year elapsed, and we saw .nothing of the promised
gift. One day recently —he comes often here—he asked
me which of the children was named Gerald, and when I
pointed out baby to him on the floor, he pulled out a
piece of glass —fancy a bit of glass—and put it into his
fingers', saying something about its being a talisman against
all the ills of life. What could he mean ?” .
“ A little wrong,” and I touched my forehead,
“Just what I thought.”
“ Is that the bit of glass?” I asked, taking up the glit-
tering morsel, which was being thrown from one child to
the other.
“ It is ; a shilling would have been of more use.”
“ The children shall not be disappointed. I will give
them a shilling *
You are roucrmg yourself, sir," 1 sue said, “and I am
sure you are welcome to the milk.”
In this extraordinary manner did I manage to recover
the great “Rajah” diamond, which now rests more se-
curely at Lord B ’s banker’s than it did at the house
m Norfolk.
126
DANGEROUS DILEMMAS.


