





r T- ' GEROUS Voyage by Captain Bligh in an open Boat from Tofoa to Timor, 1789
[wanting title-page and all after p. 178], with several curious old woodcuts , 12mo. rough covers ,
__ , ' [or-4-^Oj..
Not mentioned in Allibone, Lowndes, or Brunet. jj-




DANGEROUS VOYAGE,
BY CAPTAIN BLIGH,
IN AN OPEN BOAT FROM, TOFOA TO TIMOR,
1789.
Former navigators having discovered a prolific
and salutary vegetable in the South-Sea Islands,
which was used by the natives instead of bread,
it occurred to the merchants and others interested
in our West India possessions, that the introduc-
tion of it on their property would be extremely
beneficial. The nature of the climate and the
strength of the plant seemed to promise luxuri-
ant fruit; and, from various observations made
in different voyages, there appeared to be little
doubt, that its cultivation in the West Indies
would be attended with success.
A representation to this effect being presented
by the merchants and planters to his Majesty,
he was pleased to order a vessel to be fitted out
and equipped for that specific service. The
Bounty armed transport of 215 tons, commanded
by Lieutenant Bi.igh, was put in commission,
and sailed from Spithead on the 23d?©f Decem-
ber, 1787. She carried four 4-psunders and
ten swivels, and was manned by a ship’s comna.ny
a 3


•* *| 11 in the whole, including officers; and two
gardeners were sent out, in addition, to take
care of the plants. She was stored and victual-
ed for eighteen months, and a quantity of iron-
work and trinkets put on board to facilitate an
intercourse with the natives.
According to Lieutenant Bligh’s instructions,
he was to proceed, with all expedition, round
Cape Horn, to the Society Islands in the South
Sea, and there, Laving taken in a sufficient quan-
tity of Bread-fruit plants, to proceed through
Endeavour Straits to Prince’s Island in the
Straits of Sunda, or to the Island of Java, as
should prove most convenient. Thence he was
directed to proceed round the Cape of Good Hope
to the West Indies, and deposit one half of the
plants in his Majesty’s garden at St. Vincent, for
the benefit of the Windward Islands, and then,
sailing to Jamaica, to leave the remainder there.
Lieutenant Bligh, however, conceiving that
it might be too late in the season for doubling
Cape Llorn, received a discretionary power to
proceed to Otaheite, round the Cape of Good
Hope. We shall proceed to narrate the singular
events of the voyage in this officer’s own words:—
“ On the 27th of December it blew a severe
storm of wind from the eastward, in the course
©f which we suffered greatly. One sea broke


away the spare yards and spars out of the star-
board main-chains; another broke into the ship
and stove all the boats. Several casks of beer
that had been lashed on deck broke loose, and
were washed overboard; and it was not without
great risk and difficulty that we were able to se-
cure the boats from being washed away entirely.
A great quantity of our bread was also damaged,
and rendered useless, for the sea had- stove in
our stern, and filled the cabin with water.
On the sth of January, 1788, we saw the
Island of Teneriffe about 12 leagues .distant, and
next day being Sunday, came to an anchor in
the road of Santa Cruz. There we took in the
necessary supplies, and, having finished our bu-
siness, sailed on the 10th.
I now divided the people into three watches,
and gave the charge of the third watch to Mr.
Fletcher Christian, one of the mates 1
have always considered this a desirable regulation
when circumstances will admit of it, and I am
persuaded, that unbroken rest not only contri-
butes much to the health of a ship’s company,
but enables them more readily to exert them-
selves in cases of sudden emergency.
As I wished to proceed to Otaheite without
stopping, I reduced the allowance of bread to
two-thirds, and caused the water for drinking to
4 i‘


5)6 filtered through drip-stones bought at Tene-
nfFe for that purpose. I now acquainted the
ship s company of the object of the voyage, and
gave assurances of certain promotion to every
one whose endeavours should merit it.
On Tuesday, the 26th of February, being in
south. latitude 29 deg. 38 min. and 40 deg.
44 min. west longitude, we bent new sails, and
made other necessary preparations for encoun-
tering the weather that was to be expected in a
high latitude. Our distance from the coast of
Brazil was about 100 leagues.
On the forenoon of Sunday the 2d of March,
after seeing that every person was clean, Divine
Service was performed, according to my usual
custom on this day. I gave to Mr. Christian,
whom I had before directed to take charge of the
third watch, a written order to act as Lieutenant.
The change of temperature soon began to be
sensibly felt; and, that the people might not
suffer from their own negligence., I supplied
them with thicker clothing, as better suited to
the climate. A great number of whales of an
immense size, with two spout-holes on the back
of the head, were seen on the 11th,
On a complaint made to me by the master, i
found it necessary to punish Matthew Quintal,
one of the seamen, with two dozen lashes, for


insolence and mutinous behaviour, which was the
first time that there was any occasion for punish-
ment on board.
We were off Cape St. Diego, the eastern
part of Terra del Fuego, and the wind being
unfavourable, I thought it more advisable to go
round the eastward of Staten-land, than to at-
tempt passing through Straits le Maire. We
passed New Year’s Harbour and Cape St. John,
and on Monday 31st, were in latitude 60 deg.
1 min. south. But the wind became variable,
and we had bad weather.
Storms, attended with a great sea, prevailed
until the 12th of April. The ship began to leak,
and required pumping every hour, which was no
more than we had reason to expect from such a
continuance of gales of wind and high seas
The decks also became so leaky, that it was ne-
cessary to allot the great cabin, of which I made
little use except in fine Weather, to those people who
had not births to hangtheir hammocks in, and by this
means, the space between decks was less crowded.
With all this bad weather, we had the addi-
tional mortification to find, at the end of every
day that we were losing ground; for, notwith-
standing our utmost exertions, and keeping on
the most advantageous tacks, we did little better


than drift before the wind. On Tuesday, the
22d of April, we had eight down on the sick
list, and the rest of the people, though in good
health, were greatly fatigued; but I saw, with
much concern, that it was impossible to make a
passage this way to the Society Islands, for we
had now been thirty days in a tempestuous ocean.
I bus the season was too far advanced for us to
expect better weather to enable us to double
Cape Horn; and, from these and other consider-
ations, I ordered the helm to be put a-weather,
and bore away for the Cape of Good Hope, to
the great joy of every one on board.
We came to an anchor on Friday, the 23d of
Ma y, in Simon’s Bay at the Cape, after a tol-
lable run. The ship required complete caulking,
for she had become so leaky, that we were
obliged to pump hourly in our passage from Cape
Horn. Ihe sails and rigging also required re-
pair, and, on examining the provisions, a consi-
derable quantity was found damaged.
Having remained thirty-eight days at this
place, and my people having received all the ad-
vantage that could be derived from the refresh-
ments of every kind that could be met with, we
sailed on the first of July.
A gale of wind blew on the 20th, wit h a high


sea; it increased after noon with such violence
that the ship was driven almost forecastle under,
before we could get the sails clewed up. The
lower yards were lowered, and the top-gallant-
mast got down upon deck, which relieved her
much. We lay-to all night, and in the morning
bore away under a reefed foresail. The sea still
running high in the afternoon, it became very
unsafe to stand-on; we therefore laj'-to all night,
without any accident, except that a man at the
steerage was thrown over the wheel and much
bruised, i Wards noon, the violence of the storm
abating, we again bore away under reefed foresail.
In a few days, we passed the island of St. Paul,
where there is good fresh water, as I was in-
formed by a Dutch Captain, and also a hot
spring, which boils fish as completely as if done
by a fire, Approaching to Van Diemens’ Land,
we had much bad weather, with snow and hail,
bat nothing was seen to indicate our vicinity to
the coast on the 13th of August, except a seal,
which appeared at the distance of twenty leagues
hem it. \\c anchored in Adventure Bay on
Wednesday the 20th. In our passage thither
Lem too Cape of Good Hope, the winds were
chiefly from the west-ward, with very boisterous
Weather, The approach' of strong south
*


tmds is announced -by many birds of the alba-
tross or peterei tribe, and the abatement of the
gale, or a shift of wind to the northward, by
their keeping away. The thermometer also vn-
nes five or six degrees in its height, when a
change of these winds may be expected.
In the land surrounding Adventure Bay are
many forest trees, one hundred and fifty f eet
high ; we saw one which measured above thirty-
three feet in girth. We observed several eagles
some beautiful blue plumaged herons, and pamv
quets in great variety.
The natives not appearing, we went in search
"[ t!lem tc,v “ r<l!i Ca P 0 Frederic Henry. Soon
iwler, coming to a grapnel close to the shore
w e aeard their voices, like the cackling „f „ eesc
and twenty persons came out of the woods UV
threw trinkets ashore, tied up in parcels, which
•ney would not open until I made an appearance
of leaving them; they then did so, and taW
the articles out, pot them on their heads. On
fct coming in sight> they made a prodigious
Chauermgm their speech, and held their arms
over their heads. They spoke so quid.-, that it
impossible to cateh one single word they ot-
' I^ eir colour is of a dull black, their skin
Wed about the breast and shoulders. One


was distinguished by his body being coloured
with red ochre, but all the others were painted
black, with a kind of soot, so thick laid over
their faces and shoulders, that it was difficult to
ascertain what they were like.
On Ihursday, the fourth of September, we
sailed out of Adventure Bay, steering first to-
wards the east-south-east, and then to the north-
ward oi east, when, on the 19th, we came in
sight of a cluster of small rocky islands, which I
named Bounty Isles. Soon afterwards, we fre-
quently observed the Sea, in the night-time, to
be covered by luminous-spots, caused by amazing
quantities of small blubbers, or medusa?, which
emit a light, like the blaze of a candle, from the
strings or filaments extending from them, while
the rest of the body continues perfectly dark.
We discovered the island of Otaheite on the
2.5 th of October, and before casting anchor next
morning in Matavai Bay, such numbers of canoes
came off, and, after the natives ascertained we
were friends, so many of them had come on
board, and crowded the deck, that in ten mi-
nutes, I could scarcely find my own people. The
whole distance which the ship had run, in direct
and contrary courses, from the time of leaving
England, until reaching Otaheite, was twenty-


seven thousand and eighty-six miles, which, on
an average, was 108 miles, each 24 hours.
Here we lost our Surgeon on the 9th of De-
cember. Of late he had scarcely ever stirred
out of the cabin, though not apprehended to be
in a dangerous state. Nevertheless, appearing
worse than usual in the evening, he was removed
where he could obtain more air, but without any
benefit, for he died in an hour afterwards. This
unfortunate man drank hard, and was so averse to
exercise, that he could never be prevailed on to take
half a dozen turns on deck at a time, during all the
course of the voyage. He was buried on shore.
On Monday, the sth of January,, the small
cutter was missed, of which I was immediately
apprized. The ship’s company being mustered,
we found three men absent, who had carried it
off. They had taken with them eight stand of
arms and ammunition, but with regard to their
plan, every one on board seemed to be quite ig-
norant. I therefore went on shore, and engaged
all the Chiefs to assist in recovering both the
boat and the deserters. Accordingly, the former
was brought back in the course of the day, by
five or the natives; but the men were not taken
until nearly three weeks afterwards. Learning
the place where they were, in a different quarter


of the island of Otaheite, I went thither in the
cutter, thinking there would be no great difficulty
in securing them with the assistance of the natives.
However, they heard of my arrival, and when I
was near a house in which they were, they came out,
and delivered themselves up. Some of the Chiefs
Lad formerly seized and bound these deserters; but
had been prevailed on, by fair promises of returning
peaceably to the ship, to release them. But finding
an opportunity again to get possession of their
arms, they had set the natives at defiance.
The object of the voyage being now com-
pleted, all the Bread-fruit plants, to the number
of one thousand and fifteen, were got on board,
on Tuesday, the thirty-first of March. Besides
these, we had collected many other plants, some
of them bearing the finest fruit in the world;
and valuable from affording brilliant dyes, and
far various other properties. At sunset of the
fourth of April, we made sail from Otaheite, bid-
ding farewel to an island, where for twenty-three
weeks we had been treated with the utmost af-
fection and regard, and which seemed to increase
in proportion to our stay., That we were not in-
sensible of their kindness, the succeeding cir-
cumstances sufficiently proved; for to the friendly
and endearing behaviour of those people., may he


ascribed the motives inciting to an event that ef.
fected the rum of our expedition, which there wa*
previously every reason to Believe would have
been attended with the most favourable issue.
Next morning we got sight of the island
Huaheine; and a double canoe soon coming
alongside, containing ten natives, I saw among
them a young man who recollected me, and
called me by my name. I had been here in the
year 1 ,80 with Captain Cook, in the Resolu-
tion. A few days after sailing from this island,
the weather became squally, and a thick body
of black clouds collected in the east. A wa-
ter-spout was in a short time seen at no great
distance from us, which appeared to great ad-
vantage from the darkness of the clouds behind
u. As nearly as I could judge, the upper part
Mas about two feet in diameter, and the lower
about eight inches. Scarcely had I made these
remarks, when I observed that it was rapidly
advancing towards the ship, We immediately
altered our course, and took in all the sails ex-
cept the foresail, soon after which it passed
within ten yards of the stern, with a rustling
noise, but without our feeling the least erect
Rom its being so near. It seemed to be travel-
ling at the rate of about ten miles an hour, in


the direction of the wind; and it dispersed in
a quarter of an hour after passing us. It is
impossible to say what injury we should have
received, had it passed directly over us.
Masts, I imagine, might have been carried
away, but I do not apprehend that it would
have caused the loss of the ship.
Passing several islands on the way, we an-
chored at Annamooka, on the twenty-third of
April; and an old lame man called Tepa,
whome I had known in 1777, and immediately
recollected, came on board, along with others
from different islands in the vicinity. They
were desirous to see the ship, and on being
taken below, where the bread-fruit plants were
arranged, they testified great surprize. A few
of these being decayed, we went on shore to
procure some in their place.
The natives exhibited numerous marks of the
peculiar mourning which they express on loosing
their relatives; such as bloody temples, their
heads being deprived of most of the hair, and
what was worse, almost the whole of them had
lost some of their fingers. Several fine boys,
not above six years old, had lost both their
little fingers ; and several of the men, besides
these, had parted with the middle-finger of ths
right hand.


The Chiefs went off with me to dinner, and
we carried on a brisk trade for yams; we also
got plantains and bread-fruit. But the yams
were in great abundance and very fine and
large. One of them weighed above forty-five
pounds. Sailing canoes came, some of which
contained not. less than ninety passengers.
Such a number of them gradually arrived from
different islands, that it was impossible to get
any thing done, the multitude became so great,
and there w T as no Chief of sufficient authority
to command the whole. I therefore ordered
a watering party, then employed, to come on
board, and sailed on Sunday 26th of April. .
We kept near the island of Kotoo all the
afternoon of Monday, in hopes that canoes
would come off to the ship, but in this we
were disappointed. The wind being northerly, we
steered to the westward in the evening, to pass
south of loroa; and I gave directions for this
course to be continued during the night. The
master nad the first watch, the gunner' the mid-
dle-watch, and Mr. Christian the morning-
watch. "This was the turn of duty for the night.
Hitherto the voyage had advanced in a
comse of uninterrupted prosperity; and had
been attended with circumstances equally plea-
and satisfactory. But a very different


scene was now to be disclosed; a conspiracy
had been formed, which was to render all our
past labour productive only of misery and distress;
and it had been concerted with soMnuch secrecy
and circumspection, that no one circumstance
escaped to betray the impending calamity.
On the night of Monday, the watch was set
as I have described. Just before sun-rise on
Tuesday morning, while I was yet asleep, Mr.
Christian, with the master-at-arms, gunner's
mate, and Thomas Burkitt, seaman, came into
my cabin, and seizing me, tied my hands with
a cord behind my back; threatening me with
instant death if I spoke or made the least noise.
I nevertheless called out as loud as I could, in
hopes of assistance; but the officers not of
their party, were already secured by sentinels
at their doors. At my own cabin door there
were three men, besides the four within; all
except Christian had muskets and bayonets;
he had only a cutlass. I was dragged out of
bed, and forced on deck in my shirt, suffering
great pain in the mean time from the tightness
with which my hands were tied. On demand-
ing the reason of such violence, the only answer
was abuse for not holding my tongue. The
master, the gunner, surgeon, master’s mate,
and Nelson, the gardener, were kept con-


I feed below, and the fore hatchway was
guarded by sentinels. The boatswain and car-
penter, and also the clerk, were allowed to
come on deck, where they saw me standing
abaft the mizen-mast, with my hands tied be-
laud my back, under a guard, with Christian
at their head. The boatswain was then order-
ed to hoist out the launch; accompanied by a
threat, if he did not do it instantly toiah/care
himself,
Tlie boat being hoisted out, Mr. Haywaub
md Mr. Hallet, two of the midshipmen, and
dr. Samuel, the clerk, were ordered into it.
demanded the intention of giving this order,
nd endeavoured to persuade the people near me
ot to persist in such acts of violence, but it «.
> no effect; for the constant answer was, « Hold
onr tongue, Sir, or you are dead this moment ”
The master had by this time sent, requesting
iat he might come on dock which was pcr-
rtted; but he was soon ordered back anno
Ins cabin. My exertions to turn the'tide
affairs were continued; when ChhiStiax
eogtng the cutlass he held for a bayonet, and
Iding me by the cord about my hands with a
°ng gripe, threatened me with immediate
mh, if I would not be quiet; and the villains


around me Lad tlieir pieces cocked, and bayonets
fixed.
Certain individuals were called on to get into
the boat, and were hurried over the ship’s side;
whence I concluded, that along with them I was
to be set adrift. Another effort to bring about
a change produced nothing but menaces of having
my brains blown out,
The boatswain and those seamen who were to
be put in the boat, were allowed to collect twine,
canvas, line, sails, cordage, a 28-gallon cask of
water; and Mr. Samuel got 150 pounds of
bread, with a small quantity of rum and wine;
also a quadrant and compass; but he was prohi-
bited, on pain of death, to touch any map or
astronomical book, and any instrument, or any
of my surveys and drawings.
The mutineers having thus forced those of the
seamen, whom they wished to get rid of, into
the boat, Christian directed a dram to be
served to each of his own crew. I then unhap-
pily saw that nothing could be done to recover
the ship. The officers were next called on deck,
and farced over the ship's side into the boat,
while I was kept apart from every one abaft the
mizen-mast. Christian, armed with a bay-
onet, held the cord fastening my hands, and the
guard around me stood with their pieces cocked


I but on my daring the ungrateful wretches
fire they uncocked them. Isaac Martin, on
hem, I saw had an inclination to assist rm
and as he fed me with shaddock, my lips hein
quite parched, we plainly interpreted eac
others sentiments by looks. But this was oh
served, and he was removed. He then got into
the boat, attempting to leave the ship ; how
ever, he was compelled to return. Some others
were also kept contrary to their inclination
It appeared to me, that Christian was some
!me 1,1 doubt ' aether he should keep the
•arpenter or his mates. At length he deter
nmed on the latter, and the carpenter was
udered into the boat. He was permitted,
lough not without opposition, to take his tool-
hest.
Mr. Samuel secured my journals and ccm-
ussion, with some important ship papers-
us he did with great resolution, though strictly
atched. He attempted to save the time-
?eper, and'a box with my surveys, drawings
id remarks for fifteen years past, which were
ry numerous, when he was hurried away
d roughly told that he was well ofi' to get
•at he had.
Much altercation took place among -the
itinous crew during the whole of this affgir.


Some swore, “ that he would certainly find
his way home if he got any thing with him,”
meaning me ; and when the carpenter’s chest
was carrying away, they cried out that he
would haver a vessel built in a month ; whilst
others ridiculed the helpless situation of the
boat, which was very deep in the water, and
had so little room for those who were in her.
As for Christian, he seemed as if meditating
destruction on himself and every one else.
1 asked for arms, but the mutineers laughed
at me, and said I was well acquainted with
the people among whom I w'as going ; four
cutlasses, however, were thrown into the boat
after we were veered astern.
The officers and men being in the boat, they
only waited for me, of which the master-at-
arms informed Christian, who then said,
“ tffime Captain Bligii, your officers and men
are now in the boat, and you must go with them;
if you attempt to make the least resistance, you
will instantly be put to deathand without
further ceremony, I was forced over the side
by a tribe of armed ruffians, where they untied
my hands. Being in the boat we w T ere veered
astern by a rope. A few pieces of pork was
thrown to us, also the four cutlasses. The ar-
mourer and carpenter then called out to me to
remember that they had no hand in the trails-


action. After having been kept some time ts
make sport for these unfeeling wretches, and
having undergone much ridicule, we were at
length cast adrift in N the open ocean.
Eighteen persons were with me in the boat,
the master, acting surgeon, gunner, boatswain,
carpenter, botanist, master and quarter-mas-
ter’s mate, two quarter-masters, the sail-maker,
two cooks, my clerk, the butcher and a boy.
i here remained on board, Fletcher Chris-
tian, the master’s mate, Peter Haywood,
Edward Young, George Stuart, midship-
men, the master-at-arms, gunner’s mate, boat-
swain’s mate, gardener, armourer, carpenter’s
mate, carpenter’s crew and fourteen seamen,
being altogether the most able men of the
ship’s company. Having little or no wind,
we rowed pretty fast to the island of Tofoa*
which bore north-east about ten leagues distant.
file ship while in sight steered west-north-
west, but this I consider only as a feint, for
when we were sent away, “Huzza for Otaheite,”
was frequently heard among the mutineers.
Christian, the chief of them, was of a res-
pectable family in the north of England.
Ibis was the third voyage he had made with
me. Notwithstanding the roughness with
which I was treated, the remembrance of
past kindness produced some remorse in him.


While they were forcing me out of the ship,
I asked him, whether this was a proper return
for the many instances he had experienced of rny
friendship ? He appeared disturbed at the ques-
tion, and answered with much emotion, “ That
—Captain Bligh— that is the thing—l am in
hell—l am in hell.” His abilities to take charge
of the third watch, as I had so divided the ship’s
company, were fully equal to the task.
Haywood was of a respectable family in the
north of England, and a young man ofabilities
as well as Christian. These two had been
objects 01 my particular regard and attention,
and I had taken great pains to instruct them
having entertained hopes, that, as professional
men, they would become a credit to their coun-
try. Y oung was well recommended ; and St u-
ART was of creditable parents in the Orkneys;
at which place, on the return of the Resolution
from the South Sea in 1780, we received so
many civilities, that in consideration of these
alone I should gladly have taken him with me,
and moreover, he had always borne a good
character.
When I had time to reflect, an inward satis-
action prevented the depression of my spirits.
Y T et a few hours before, my situation had been
particularly flattering, I had a ship in the most
penect order, stored with every necessary both
.B


for health and service; the object of the Voy-
age was attained,, and. two-thirds of it now
completed. The remaining part had every
prospect of success.
It may naturally be asked what could be the
cause of a revolt so unexpected, and attended
by circumstances of such cruelty and unneces-
sary harshness. I can only conjecture that the
mutineers had absurdly flattered thfcmselves
with the hopes of a happier life among the
Otaheitans than they expected in England.—
These hopes were founded upon various cir-
cumstances. Some of the sailors had received
offers of kindness and of friendship from the
Chiefs; who were rather inclined that their
visitors should remain among them, and had
made them promises of large possessions.—
Others had formed attachments with some of
the native females, which had considerable in-
fluence upon their conduct. These females
were by their simplicity of manners naturally
interesting ; and many of them were well made
and rather handsome.—While all saw before
them on their return, a tedious voyage, with
its attendant difficulties and dangers. Thus
these unprincipled and unfortunate men mis-
led by ambition, sensual appetites, and the de-
sire of present ease, became guilty of an of-
fence of the most heinous nature ; and, as will


fee seen hereafter, suffered hardships and mis*
fortunes far greater than any which they had
dreaded, and infinitely more than an equivalent
for the pleasures they had expected.
But the secrecy of this mutiny surpasses be-
lief. Thirteen of the party who were now with
me had always lived forward among the sea-
men, yet neither they, nor the messmates of
Christian, Stuart, Haywood, and Young.
had ever observed any circumstance to excite
suspicion of what was plotting; and it is not
wonderful that I should have fallen a sacrifice
to it, my mind being entirely free from suspi-
cion. Perhaps, had marines been on board,
a sentinel at my cabin-door might have pre-
vented it, for I constantly slept w ith the door
open, that the officer of the watch migh t have
access to me on all occasions. If the mutiny
had been occasioned by any grievances, either
real or imaginary, I must have discovered
symptoms of discontent, which would put me
on my guard, but it was far otherwise. With
Christian, in particular, 1 was on the most
friendly terms ; that very day he was engaged
to dine with me, and the preceding night he
excused himself from supping with me on pre-
tence of indisposition, for which I felt concerned,
having no suspicions of his honour or integrity,
B 3


My first determination was to seek a supply
of bread-fruit and water at the island of Tofoa,
and afterwards to sail for Tongataboo, and
there to risk a solicitation to Poulaho, the
King, to equip our boat, and grant us such a
supply of water and provisions as should enable
us to reach the East Indies.
The quantity of provisions which I found in
the boat, was 150 pound of bread, 32 of
pork, six. quarts of rum, six bottles of wine,
and 28 gallons of w r ater.
An easterly wind sprung up, which enabled
us to make sail, and we reached Tofoa in the
evening, though not before dark. There being
no anchorage, and the shore so steep that we
could not land, we were obliged to keep the
boat under the lee of the island with two oars.
I then served half a pint of grog to every
person, and we went to rest as well as our un-
happy situation would_admit.
At dawn, having rowed along shore in search
of a landing-place, we discovered a cove, about
ten o’clock, with a stony beach, when I dropped,
the grapnel within twenty yards of the shore.
A great surf ran here, but unwilling to
diminish our stock of Mr.SAMUEL
and some others landed in search of supplies
and, towards noon, returned with a few quarts
of water, which he had found in holes. Un-


certain of what our future necessities-might be,
l issued only a morsel of bread and a glass of
wine to each person for dinner.
Rowing farther along shore, we discovered
cocoa-nut trees on the top of high precipices.
Several of the people notwithstanding tjie
surf made it dangerous landing, climbed the
cliffs, and got about twenty cocoa-nuts, and
others slung them to ropes, by which we hauled
them through the surf into the boat. I return-
ed to the cove, and, having served a cocoa-nut
to each man, we again went to rest in the boat.
At day-light, we attempted to put to sea, but
the wind and weather proved so unfavourable,
that we were glad to resume our former station.
There, after issuing a morsel of bread and a
spoonful of rum ot each person, we landed,
and I, with Mi-.Neeson, the botanist, Mt. S-
amuel, and some others, having hauled ourselves
up the precipice by long vines fixed there by
the natives for that purpose, advanced into tire
country. We found a few deserted huts, and
collected three small bunches of plantains.—
We aiso, with much trouble, collected about
nine gallons of water in the holes of a deep
gulley near a volcanic mountain.
At the head of a cove about 150 yards from
tl;e water side was a cave; the distance across
B 3


the stony beach about 100 yards ; and from
the country into the cove there was no other
way than up the precipice I have described.
The situation guarded us from the danger of
surprize; therefore I resolved to remain on
shore for the night with part of my people,
that the others might have more room to rest in
the boat with the master. I directed him to
lie at a grapnel, and be watchful in case we
should be attacked. One plantain was ordered
to be boiled for each person, and, having supped
©n this scanty allowance, with a quarter of a
pint of grog, and fixed the watches forthe night,
those whose turn it was, lay down to sleep
in the cave, before the mouth of which we kept
up a good fire.
On Friday the first of May, a party which
bad been dispatched the day preceding, set out
again on a different route. The natives soon
after came about us, and though no particular
chief was among them, were tractable, and
behaved honestly, exchanging provisions for a
few buttons and beads. The party returned,
and informed us that they had seen several neat
plantations, from which circumstance, as there
was no doubt of inhabitants being settled on the
island, I determined to sail the first opportunity.
Towards evening, I had the satisfaction of
finding our stock of provisions somewhat in-


creased, but the natives did net appear to have
much to spare. At sunset they left us in quiet
possession of the cave, which I thought a good
sign, supposing that they would return next
day with a better supply of food and water, and
that I should thence be enabled to sail without
further delay. A quarter of a bread-fruit and
a cocoa-nut, were served to each person for
supper, and a good fire being made, ail but
the watch went to sleep.
At day-break next morning, I was much
pleased to find every person’s spirits a little re-
vived, and that I was no longer regarded with
those anxious looks which had constantly been
directed towards me, since we lost sight of the
ship,
There being no certainty of obtaining a
supply of water from the natives, I sent a
party among the gullies of the mountains with
empty shells. In their absence, the natives
came about us in greater numbers, and also two
canoes round from the north side of the island.
In one was an elderly chief, called Maccaacka-
vow ; and along with our foraging party came
another, called Eefow. I made a present to
each, and I found that they had either heard cf
me or seen me at Annamooka. They were
very inquisitive to know how I had lost my
ship. During this conversation, a young man


»a,med Negfeete appeared, whom I remembered
to have seen at Annamook ; he expressed
much pleasure at our meeting. Eefow agreed
t® accompany me to Tongataboo, if I would
wait till the weather moderated. His readi-
ness and affability gave me much satisfaction.
This, however, was but a short duration, for
the natives began to increase in rlumber, and I
observed some indications of a design against
us. Soon after, they attempted to haul the boat
on shore, when I brandished my cutlass in a
threatening manner, and spoke to Eefow to
desire them to desist, which they did, and
every thing became quiet again. My party now
returned with about three gallons of water. I
continued buying up the little bread-fruit
brought to us, and likewise some spears to arm
my men with, haying only four cutlasses, two
of which were in the boat. Wanting the
means of improving our situation, I told our
people that I should until sunset, by
which time something might perhaps happen in
our favour, for, if we endeavoured to go at
present, we must fight our way through, which,
were it necessary, could be more advantage-
ously done at night.
The beach was lined w’ith natives, and we
heard nothing but the knocking of stones to-


gether, which they held in each hand, and this,
f well knew, was the signal of attack.
At noon a cocoa-nut and bread-fruit were
served to each person for dinner, and some also
given to the chiefs, with whom I continued to
appear intimate and friendly. They frequent-
ly importuned me to sit down, which I as
constantly refused, apprehending that they
intended to seize me. After dinner, the num-
bers of the natives continued increasing, and I
discovered that instead of their intending to
leave us, fires were made, and places fixed on
for their stay during the night. Consultations
were also held among them, and every thing
assured me that we should be attacked. I sent
orders to the master to keep the boat close to
the shore when he saw us coming down, that
we might the more easily embark.
I had my jotirnal on shore with me writing
the occurrences in the care; and as I sent it
down to the boat, it would have been snatched
av, T ay, but for the timely assistance of the gun-
ner.
The sun was near setting when I gave the
word, on which every person on shore with
me boldly took up his proportion of things and
carried them to the boat. The chiefs asked ms
if I would not stay with them ail night. I
gaid, “ No ; I never slept out of my boat, but


in the morning we will again trade with you,
and I shall remain till the weather is moderate,
that we may go, as we have agreed, to see Pau-
laho at Tongataboo.” Maccaackavow then
got up and said, “ You will not sleep on shore
then mattee which directly signifies we will
kill you : and he left me. The onset was now
preparing ; every one kept knocking stones to-
gether, and Eefow quitted me. All but two
©r three things were in the boat, when I took
Ncgeete by the hand and we walked down the
beach, every one in a kind of silent horror.
While I vras seeing the people embark,
Nageete wished me to stay to speak to Eefow,
but I found that he was encouraging the na->
fives to the attack, and it was my determina-*
xion, had it then begun, to have killed him for
his treacherous behaviour. I ordered the car-
penter not to quit me until the people were in
the boat. Nageete, finding I would not stay,
loosed himself from my hold and went off, and
we all got into the boat except one man, who
quitted it during the time I was getting on
board, and ran up the beach to cast the stern-
fast off, notwithstanding the master and others
called to him to return, while they were drag-
ging me out of the water.
No sooner was I in the boat, than the attack
fesgan from about 200 natives. The poor mv>


fortunate man who had run up the beach, was
knocked down, and the stones flew like a
fchower ef shot. Many Indians got hold of the
stern-rope, and were near hauling the boat on
shore, which they certainly would have effected,
if I had not had a knife in my pocket with
which I cut the rope. We then pulled off to
the grapnel, every one being more or less hurt.
I now saw five of the natives about the poor
man they had killed, two of them beating him
on the head with stones indheir hands.
We had no time to reflect, for, to my sur-
prize, they filled their canoes with stones,
and twelve men came off" after us to renew the
attack, which they did so effectually, as nearly
to disable us all. Our grapnel was foul, bu
Providence here assisted us, the fluke broke,
we got to our oars, and pulled out to sea. The
natives, however, could paddle round us, so
that we were obliged to sustain the attack,
without being able to return it, except with
such stones as lodged in the boat, and in this I
found we were very inferior to them. We could
not close, for our boat was lumbered and heavy,
of which they well knew how to take advantage.
I therefore adopted the expedient of throwing
overboard some clothes, which, as I expected,
they stopped to pick up ; and as it was by this
time almost dark, they gave over the attack


anti returned towards the shore, leaving us to
reflect on our unhappy situation,
The unfortunate man killed was John Nor-
ton, who had now made two voyages with me
as quarter-master. His worthy character made
me regret him very much.
I once before sustained a similar attack with
a smaller number of Europeans, on the Morai
of Owhyliee, where Lieutenant King left me
after the death of Captain Cook. Yet notwith-
standing this experience, I had not an idea that
the power of a man’s arm could throw stones
from two to eight pounds weight, with such
force and exactness as these people did. Here
we were unhappily without fire-arms, which
the Indians knew; and had they attacked us
in the cave our destruction was inevitable.
Taking this as a specimen of the disposition
of the natives, there was but little reason to ex-
pect much benefit from visiting Paulaho. Their
good behaviour formerly, I considered as pro-
ceeding from their dread of our fire-arms; and
as likely to cease on their knowing us to be
destitute of them.
We set our sails and steered along shore, by
the west side of the island of Tofoa. My mind
was occupied in considering what was best to
be done, when I was solicited by all hands to
take them towards home, I told them except


what hopes of relief w e might find at New Hol-
land, we could expect none before reaching
Timor, a distance of full twelve hundred
leagues, where there was a Dutch settlement,
but in what part of the island I was ignorant.
Then they all agreed to live on an ounce of
bread and a quarter of a pint of water a day*
Therefore after examining our stock of provi-
sions, and recommending to them in the most
solemn manner not to depart from their pro-
mise, we bore away across a sea where the
navigation is but little known, in a small boat
twenty-three feet long, from stem to stern,
deeply laden with eighteen men. I was happy
to observe, however, that every one seemed
better satisfied with his situation than myself.
Our stock of provisions consisted of about
one hundred and fifty pounds of bread, twenty-
eight gallons of water, twenty pounds of pork,
three bottles of wine, and five quarts of rum.
The difference from what we had on leaving the
ship, was principally owing to our loss in the
confusion of the attack. A few cocoa-nuts
were in the boat, and some bread-fruit; but
the latter was trampled to pieces.
It wa« about eight o’clock at night, when
we bore away under a reefed lug-foresail.
Having divided the people into watches, and
C


got the boat in a little order, we returned God
thanks for our miraculous preservation, and fully
confident of his gracious support, I found my mind
more at ease than it had been for some time past.
At day-break, the breeze increased ; the sun
rose red and fiery, a sure indication of a se-
vere gale of wind. At eight, it blew a violent
storm, and the sea ran so high, that between
the waves the sail was becalmed, and when on
the top of the wave it was too much to have
set; but we could not venture to take it in,
for we were in very imminent danger and dis-
tress, the sea curling over the stern of the boat,
which obliged us to bale with all our might:
A situation more distressing, has, perhaps, sel-
dom been experienced.
Our bread was in bags, and in danger of be-
ing spoiled by the wet; if this could not be
prevented, our being starved to death Was ine-
vitable. I therefore began to examine what
clothes were in the boat, and what other things
could be spared; and having determined that
only two suits should be kept for each person,
the rest was thrown overboard, along with some
rope and spare sails. This lightened the boat
considerably, and we bad more room to bale
out the water. Fortunately, the carpenter had
a good chest in the boat, ig which we secured


the bread the first favourable moment. His
tool-chest was also cleared, and the tools stowed
in the bottom of the boat.
I served a tea-spoonful of rum to each person,
for we were very wet and cold, with a quarter
of a bread-fruit, scarcely eatable, for dinner.—
Our engagement was now strictly to be earned
into execution.
The sea ran higher in the afternoon; and the
fatigue of baling, to keep the boat from filling,
was very great; we could do nothing more than
run before the sea, in the course of which the
boat performed so well, that I no longer dreaded
any danger in that respect. But among the
hardships we were to undergo, that of being
constantly wet was not the least; the night was
very cold, and at day-light our limbs were so
benumbed that we could scarcely make use of
them. At this time, I served a tea-spoonful of
rum to each person, from which we all derived
great benefit.
On the fourth day of May, we discovered
some small islands, and I kept my course be-
tween them, the gale having considerably abated.
Served a few broken pieces of bread-fruit for
supper, and performed prayers.
The night turned out fair, and in the morning
every one contentedly breakfasted on a, few
' c 2


pieces of yams that had been found in the boat
Though a great deal of our bread proved to i*e
damaged and rotten, we preserved it for use.
Hitherto, I had hardly been able to keep any
account of our run : but we now equipped our-
selves a little better, by getting a log-line
marked, and having practised counting seconds
several could do it with some degree of uccu
racy. At noon of the fifth, we were in latitude
18 deg. 10 min. south and longitude from Tofoa.
by account 4 deg. 29 min. Since yesterday at
noon, we had made 94 miles.
We passed a number of islands, but durst not
venture to land as we had no arms, and were
less capable of defending ourselves than when
at Tofoa. To our great joy, we hooked a fish,
but were miserably disappointed by its being
lost in trying to get it into the boat, Our allow-
ance for the day was a quarter of a pint of
cocoa-nut milk, and the meat which did not
exceed two ounces, to each person; and for
supper, an ounce of the damaged bread, and a
quarter of a pint of water. This supply was
contentedly received, but we suffered great thirst
As our lodging was very wretched and confined
lor want of room, I endeavoured to remedy
this defect by putting ourselves at watch and
watch ; so that one half always sit up, while
the other hah lav down in the bottom of


boat on a chest., with nothing to cover us but
the heavens. Our limbs were dreadfully
••ramped; and the nights were so cold, and we
so constantly wet, that after a few hours sleep
we could scarcely move.
At dawn of the seventh, we again discovered
land distinguished by some extraordinary high
rocks, which, as we approached them, assumed
a variety of forms. The country appeared
agreeablv interspersed with high and low land,
and in some plaees covered with wood. Off
the north-east part, lay some rocky isles, near
which a lee current very unexpectedly set us,
and we could only get clear by rowing close to
a reef that surmounted them. At this time we
observed two large canoes coming swiftly after
us, along shore, and being apprehensive of their
intention, we rowed with some anxiety, fully
sensible of our weak and defenceless state.—
All the afternoon, we had light winds at north-
north-east; the weather very rainy, attended
with thunder and lightning, One of the canoes
gained upon us, and by three o’clock was not
more than two miles distant, when she gave
over the chace. Whether these canoes had any
hostile design against us, must ever remain a
doubt; perhaps we might have benefited hy an
intercourse with them ; but in our defenceless
c 3


situation, making the experiment would have
been risking too much.
Heavy rain came on, when every person did
his utmost to catch some water ; and we in-
creased our stock to 34 gallons, besides quench-
ing our thirst for the first time since we had
been at sea. Being extremely wet, and having
no dry things to shift or cover us, we passed an
uncomfortable night, experiencing cold and
shherings hanjly to be conceived. Most for-
tunately next forenoon turned out fair and we
stripped and dried our clothes. I issued an
ounce and a half of pork, a tea-spoonful of
rum; and an ounce of bread; the rum, though
so small in quantity, was of the greatest ser-
' ‘ cc- fishing line was generally towing a-
stern of the boat, but though we saw great
numbers of fish we could never catch one.
In the afternoon, we cleaned out the boat.
Hitherto, the allowance had been issued by
guess, but I now made a pair of scales, and
accidentally having some pistol bails in the
boat, twenty-five of which weighed a pound,
or sixteen ounces, I adopted one, weighing 272
grains, as the proportion of weight that each
person should receive of bread, at the times I
served it.
I also amused all hands with describing the
situation of New Guinea, and New Holland,


and gave them every information in my power,
that in case any accident happened to me, the
survivors might be able to have some idea of the
way to Timor, which at present they knew
nothing of more than the name, and some not
even that.
Next afternoon, Saturday the ninth, I fitted
a pair of shrouds for each mast, and contrived
a canvas weather-cloth round the boat, and
raised the quarter about nine inches, by nail-
ing on the seats of the stern sheets, which
proved of great service to us. After a fine day,
the clouds began to gather aboxit nine in the
evening, and we had a prodigious fall of rain,
with severe thunder and lightning. By mid-
night, we had caught about twenty gallons of
water, but spent a miserable night, and the
morning brought us no relief. The sea broke
over us so much, that two men were constantly
baling; and we had no choice how to steer,
being obliged to keep the boat before the waves
to prevent her filling.
Our situation, on Monday morning, was ex-
tremely dangerous, the sea frequently running
over our stern, which kept us baling with all
our strength. Thq sun appeared at noon,
which gave us as much pleasure as a winter’s
day in England. We observed the latitude
c 4


]4 deg. 15 min. south, and had made since yes*
terday 102 miles,
r i he wet weather still continued, and the
wind blew in fresh squalls. As there was no
prospect of getting our clothes dried, I recom-
mended to every one to strip and wring them
through the salt water, by which means they
received a warmth, that while wet with rain
they could not have.
During the succeeding days we discovered
several islands. The largest 1 judged to be
twenty leagues in circuit, the others five or six.
The sight of them only served to increase the
misery of our situation. We were very little
better than starving, with plenty in view. Yet
to attempt procuring relief was attended with
so much danger, that prolonging life, even
amidst such distress, was thought preferable,
while there was any chance of being able to
surmount our hardships. For my own part, I
consider the general run of cloudy w r et wea-
ther to be a blessing of providence. Hot wea-
ther would have destroyed us with thirst; and
probably our being so constantly covered with
rain or sea protected us from that dreadful ca-
lamity. These islands I judged to be part of
the NeW Hebrides ; they are fertile and inha-
bited, as we saw r smoke from several places.


The night of the 15th was very dark, not a
star could be seen to steer by, and the sea
continually broke over us. I found it neces-
sary to counteract the effect of the southerly
viads, to prevent, being driven too near New
Guinea, and therefore, at intervals of mode-
rate weather, steered a more southerly course.
Next day, in addition to our allowance of one
twenty-tilth of a pound of bread, and a quar
ter of a pint of water, I issued for dinner about
an ounce of salt pork to each person, For this
pork I had been often solicited, but it. was
better to use it only in small quantities. We
had strong breezes and dark gloomy weather,
with storms of thunder, lightning and rain.
The night was truly horrible.
-At dawn of day, I found every person com-
plaining, and some of them requesting extra-
allowance, which I positively refused. Our
situation was miserable, always wet, and suffer-
ing extreme cold in the night, without the least
shelter from the weather. Being constantly
obliged to bale the boat to keep her from filling,
perhaps this should not have been reckoned an
evil, as it gave us exercise.
The little rum we had was of great service;
when our nights were particularly distressing,
1 generally served a tea-spoonful or two ta
C 0.


each person, and it was always glad tidings to
hear of my intentions.
At noon, a water-spout was very near on
board of us: since yesterday we had made lOd
miles. The night was dark and dismal, and
nothing but wind and waves to direct our
steerage. I designed, if possible, to gain New
Holland to the southward of Endeavour Straits,
and it was thence necessary to preserve such a
situation to make a southerly wind a fair
one.
At dawn of Wednesday the 20th, several of
my people seemed half dead. Our appearance
was shocking, and I could look no way with-
out catching the eye of some one in distress.
Extreme hunger was now too evident, but no
one suffered from thirst, nor had we much incli-
nation to drink, that desire, perhaps, being satis-
fied through the skin. The little sleep we got
was in the midst of water, and we always awoke
with severe cramps and pains in our bones.
All the afternoon, we were covered with rain
and salt water, so that we could scarcely see.
The rain fell so heavy through the night, as to
alarm us, lest it should fill the boat, and we
were obliged to bale with all our might.
On Friday, our condition was extremely ca-
lamitous. We were forced to take course of the
sea, running right before it, and watching with.


the utmost care, as the least error in the helm
would, in a moment, have been our utter destruc-
tion. At noon it blew very hard, and the
foam of the sea kept running over our stern
and quarters, We had made 130 miles in the
course of the preceding day. But the misery
of this night increased ; the sea flew over us
with great force, and kept us baling with hor-
ror and anxiety. I found every one in a most
distressed state at dawn, and began to fear that
another such night would put an end to the
lives of several who seemed no longer able to
support their sufferings.
A fine morning on Sunday, l had the plea-
sure to see, produced some cheerful counte-
nances, and the first time, for fifteen days past,
we experienced comfort from the warmth of the
sun. In the afternoon, we had many birds
about us, such as boobies and noddies, which
are never seen far from land.
As the sea began to run fair, and we shipped
but little water, I took the opportunity of ex-
amining into the state of our bread, and found,
that, according to our present allowance, there
was a sufficient quantity for twenty-nine days.
But, as it was very uncertain whether we might
in that time, be able to reach Timor, and,
after alj, possibly be obliged to go to Java, 1<
determined to regulate the allowance so as to


make our stock hold out six weeks. I was ap-
prehensive that a proposal on this head would
be ill received, and that it would require my
utmost resolution to enforce it. However, on
representing to the people the necessity of
guarding against casual delays, from adverse
winds and other causes, they all cheerfully
assented. Accordingly, by giving each indi-
vidual one twenty-fifth of a pound for breakfast,
the same for dinner, and omitting the usual
proportion for supper, we had forty-three days’
allowance.
On Monday at noon, some noddies came so
near to us, that one was caught by the hand.
It w r as about the size of a small"’pigeon. I di-
vided it, with its entrails, into fifteen portions,
and it was distributed by a method well known
at sea, where one person turns his back on the
subject that is to be divided; another then
pointing separately to the portions, asks
Uoud, “ Who shall have this ?” to which the
first answers by naming somebody.—Thus
every one has an equal chancer The bird was
distributed in this way, with the allowance of
bread and water for dinner, and eat up, bones
and all, with salt water for -sauce.
In the evening, we fortunately caught a boo-
by, which is as large as a duck. Like the
noddy, it has received its name from seamen,


for suffering itself to be caught on the masts
and yards of ships. Its presence always indi-
cates the vicinity of land. I directed this bird
to be killed for supper, and the blood to be
given to three of the people, who were the most
distressed for want of food. The body, with
the entrails, beak and feet, I divided into
eighteen shares, and with an allowance of
bread, which I made a merit of granting, we
made a good supper, compared Avith our usual
fare.
Next day, Ave were so fortunate as to catch
three more boobies; the stomachs of two of
them contained several flying-fish and small
cuttle-fish, Avhlch were all saved for dinner
on Wednesday. To make the bread delivered
a little savoury, most of the people dipped it in
salt water, but I generally broke mine into
small pieces and ate it in my allowance of wa-
ter, out of a cocoa-nut shell, with a spoon,
economically avoiding to take too large a piece
at a time ; so that I AVas as long at dinner as if
it had been a much more plentiful meal.
At one in the morning, the person at the
helm heard the sound of breakers, and I no
sooner lifted up my head than I saw them close
under our lee, not more than a quarter of a
mile distant. I immediately hauled on a ward
to the north-north-east, 'and in ten minutes,


time we could neither hear nor see them. The
idea of getting into smooth water through the
reefs on the coast of New Holland, and of find-
ing refreshments, kept up the spirits of my peo-
ple. Next morning, at day light, we could see
nothing ot the land nor of the reefs; we bore
away, and at nine o’clock came in sight of them.
The sea broke furiously over every part, but
we saw smooth water within, so that all antici-
pated infinite satisfaction in hopes to get there.
I now found that we were embayed, for we
could not lie clear with the sails, the wind hav-
ing backed against us, and the sea set in so
heavy towards the reef, that our situation was
become unsafe, we could effect but little with
the oars, having scarcely strength to pull them,
and I began to apprehend, that we should be
obliged to attempt pushing over the reef. Even
this I did not despair of effecting with success,
when a break was discovered in it, about a mile
from us, and at the same time, an island of mo-
derate height within, which I called Island
Direction. I entered the passage with a strong-
stream running to westward, and found it about
a quarter of a mile broad, with every appearance
of deep water.
As we advanced within the reefs, the coast
oi New Holland began to shew itself very dis-
tinctly in a variety of high and low land, some


parts of which were covered w ith wood. Two
islands lay about four miles off, and appeared
eligible for a resting-place, if for nothing more ;
but, on our approach to the nearest, it proved
only a heap of stones, and its size too inconsi-
derable tc shelter the boat. We therefore pro-
ceeded to the other, which was within a quarter
of a mile of a projecting part of the main land.
Here we saw some old fire-places but nothing
indicating that it would be an unsafe situation
for the bight. Every one was anxious to find
something to eat, and, as the tide was out, oysters
were soon discovered on the rocks, but being
nearly dark, few could be collected. One half
of the company slept on shore, and the other
in the boat. We could gladly have made a
fire, hut, being unable to accomplish it, took
our rest for the night, which happily was calm
and undisturbed. As there were no appearances
of the natives, I sent out parties in search of
supplies, while others of the people were put-
ling the boat in order. One of the gudgeons
of the rudder had come out during the night,
and was lost; but,' by great good luck, we found
a large staple in the boat, which replaced it.
This would have been a serious accident before,
lor the management of the boat could not have
been so nicely preserved as these very heavy
seas required.


The party returned with plenty of oysters
jmd fresh water. I had also made a fire by the
help of a small magnifying glass, and more
fortunately still, we found a piece of brimstone,
and a tinder-box, in the boat, so that I secured
a fire for the future. One of the people had
been so provident as to bring from the ship a
copper-pot; and now, witfi our supplies, we
made a stew with a mixture of pork and a little
bread, that might have been relished by far
more delicate palates; of this, each received a
full pint.
The general complaints of disease among us
were giddiness of the head, great weakness of
the joints, and violent constipation, which in
some had continued from the time of leaving
the ship. I had constantly a severe pain in
my stomach. None of our complaints, how-
ever, were alarming. On the contrary, all re-
tained marks of strength and fortitude sufficient
to resist what might be expected in our voyage
to Timor.
The oysters were of considerable size, and
well tasted; they adhered so fast to the rocks,
that our most expeditious way was opening
them where fixed. We also found good water
here on thrusting a stick into the ground, and
likewise a small river on the south side of the
id and.


Besides places where fires had been made,
there were other signs of the natives sometimes
resorting to this island; we observed two ill-
constructed huts, with only one side loosely
covered ; and a pointed stick, having a slit in
one end, was found, which is used to sling
stones by the natives of Van Diemen’s land.- -
The tracks of some animal were visible. Nel-
son, the botanist, agreed with me that it was
the kanguroo ; but whether this animal swims
over from the main land, or is brought here to
breed by the natives, it is impossible to deter-
mine.
I had counselled my people not to touch any
kind of berry or fruit that they might find.—
\ et no sooner were they out of my sight than
they began to make free with three different
species that grew all over the island, eating
without any kind of reserve. Symptoms of
having eaten too much at jast began to frighten
some of them : but on questioning others who
had taken a more moderate allowance, their
minds were a little quieted. These, however,
became equally alarmed in their turn, dreading
that such symptoms would come on, and that
they were all poisoned; so that their mutual
looks bore the strongest marks of apprehension;
uncertain what would be the issue of their im-
prudence. Fortunately the first proved whole-


some and good. One sort grew on a small de-
licate kind of vine; it was the size of a large
gooseberry, and of a sweet taste. Another
grew on bushes in clusters, like elder-berries;
and the third was a black berry resembling a
large sloe, both in size and taste. When I saw
these fruits eaten by birds, I had no longer any
doubt of their being wholesome.
Wild pigeons, parrots, and other birds, were
about the summit of the island, but not having
fire-arms, we could not obtain any of them.
Lizards were seen, and the blackberry bushes
were full of ants’ nests, webbed like a spider’s,
but so close and compact, as not to admit the rain.
This day being the anniversary of the restora-
tion of King Charles the Second, and the name
not being inapplicable to our present situation,
for we were restored to fresh health and strength,
I called this Restoration Island.
On Saturday _the 30th of May, I discovered
a visible alteration for the better in our compa-
ny, and I sent them away again to gather oys-
ters. We had now only two pounds of pork
remaining. This article, which I could not
keep under lock and key as I did the bread,
had been pillaged by some inconsiderate per-
son, but every one denied knowledge of the
fact. I therefore resolved to put it out of their


power ia future, by sharing the residue for our
dinner. % While the party was out picking oys-
ters, I got the boat in readiness for sea, and
filled all our water vessels, which amounted to
nearly sixty gallons. Early in the afternoon
they returned with what they had collected for
sea-store, and every thing was put into the boat.
We had still thirty-eight days allowance of
bread, according to the last mode of issuing a
twenty-fifth of a pound for breakfast, and as
much for dinner.
Being ready for sea, all hands were directed
to attend prayers. We were preparing to em-
bark at four o’clock, when about twenty of the
natives appeared, running and hallooing to us
on tlie opposite shore, and making signs for us
to come to them. They were each armed with
a spear or lance, and a short weapon carried
in the left hand. On the top of the hills we
saw the heads of many more. Whether these
were their wives and children, or others who
waited for our landing, meaning not to shew
themselves lest we might be intimidated, I can-
not say; but as I found we <ere discovered on
tlie coast, I thought it prudent to make the
l)cst of our way for fear of being pursued by
canoes. I passed these people as near as I
could with safety; they were naked, and ap-


parently black ; their hair, or wool, bushy and
short.
At day-break, the face of the country had
entirely changed, for we had now a low sandy
coast in view, with very little verdure, or any
thing to indicate that it was habitable by a hu-
man being, except a few patches of small trees
or brush-wood. Many inconsiderable islands
were in sight; and I passed a channel between
the nearest and the main land. Some of them
were very pretty spots, and well situated for
fishing. Large shoals of fish were about us,
but we could not catch any. Passing this
strait, another party of seven natives appeared
running towards us, shouting and making signs
for us to land. Some waved green branches of
the bushes near them, as a token of friend-
ship ; but others of their motions were less
amicable.
A little farther off was a larger party, who
likewise came towards us ; I therefore deter-
mined not to land, though wishing much to
have some intercourse with them. Never-
theless I laid the boat close to the rocks, and
beckoned them to approach, but none would
come within two hundred yards. They were
armed in the same manner as the people we
had seen from Restoration Island; stark-


naked, black, with short bushy hair, or wool,
and like them in every respect.
We landed at another island four miles dis-
tant, whence I was enabled to take a view of
the coast; two parties were sent out to search
for supplies; and others I ordered to stay in the
boat. On this occasion, fatigue and weakness
got so far the better of their sense of duty, that
some of the people expressed their discontent
at having w r orked harder than their companions,
and declared that they would rather be without
their dinner than go in search of it. One per-
son in particular went so far as to tell me, with
a mutinous look, that he was as good a man as
myself. It was impossible for me to judge
where' this might end; therefore to prevent
such disputes in future, I determined either to
preserve my command, or die in the attempt.
Seizing a cutlass, I ordered him to take hold of
another, and defend himself; on which he
cried out, that I was going to kill him, and
immediately made concessions. I did not al-
low this to interfere further with the harmony
of the boat’s crew r , and every thing soon became
quiet.
On the north side of this, which I named
Sunday Island, w r e saw an old canoe about
thirty-three feet long, and its extreme breadth


about three feet, lying bottom upwards, and
half buried in the beach; it might be capable
of carrying twenty men.' The discovery of one
so large induced me to seek a more retired
place for lodging through the night. We dined
each of us on a full pint and a half of stewed
oysters and clams, thickened with small beans.
On Monday the first of June, we landed at
dawn on another island, four leagues distant
from the main. It formed the whole into a
lagoon into which the tide flowed, being com-
posed of four small keys, surrounded by a reef
of rocks connected by sand-banks. As usual,
parties was dispatched in quest of supplies,
Nelson returned towards noon, but in so weak
a condition, that two men had to support him.
He of a violent heat in his bowels,
loss of sight, and a great thirst. Tliis I found
was occasioned by his inabilty to support the
ardour of the sun, and from over exertion.—
Luckily lie had no fever; and it was now that
the little wine, which I had so carefully prj
served, became of real use. I gave it to him in
very small quantities, with pieces of bread
soaked in it; and he soon began to recover.
Hie boatswain and carpenter were also ill, com-
plaining of head-ach, and sickness of the sto-
inacnj indeed few were without indisposition.


The recent tracks of* turtle were seen on this
island, and we found the shells of two; there
was no appearance of any quadruped; fish
w r ere in the lagoon, though we could not catch
any, therefore it was unlikely that our wants
would be supplied here. The remains of a hut,
and the turtle shells, were a proof that the
natives occasionally visited this place; but I
conceived a quiet night’s rest would be of es-
sential service to those unwell, and I did not
apprehend any danger. Towards evening, I
cautioned every one against making too large a
fire, or suffering it to blaze up after dark;
and committing the charge of this to Mr. Samuel
and the gunner, I strolled about the beach,
to observe whether the island could be seen
from the main. I had just satisfied myself
that it could not, when, on a sudden, the
island appeared all in a blaze, which might
have been discerned from a much greater dis-
tance. I ran to learn the cause, and found it
was occasioned by the imprudence and obsti-
nacy of one of the party, insisting in my ab-
sence to have a fire for himself; and in making
it, tne flames caught the neighbouring grass,
and spread rapidly* This might have produced
serious consequences in betraying our situation
to the natives; and the relief which I expected
from a little sleep bemg totally lost, I anxiously


waited for the flowing of the tide that we might
proceed to sea.
Mr. Samuel and the gunner went out to
watch for turtle, and three men repaired to
another quarter to endeavour to catch birds,
all the others being sick except two, went to
rest. The bird party returned about midnight,
with only twelve noddies, and they might have
caught many more, but for the folly of one of
the party, who separated from his companions,
and disturbed the birds. I was so much pro-
voked at my plans being thus defeated, that I
gave the offender Robert Lamb, a good beat-
ing. He afterwards acknowledged that he had
eaten nine birds raw. The turtling party had
no success, which is not surprizing, considering
the noise we made in extinguishing the fire.
The birds were half-dressed, that they might
keep the better; and the clams which we got
were cut into slices to dry. Then having tied
a few gilt buttons, and pieces of iron, to a tree
for any of the natives that might come here,
we embarked, and departed at dawn. Ten
birds were divided for dinner, and the usual
quantity of bread ; I gave half a glass of w ine
to Nelson, who was now so far recovered as to
require no oilier indulgence.


The gunner had brought his watch from the
ship, and by it we regulated our time ; unfor-
tunately it now stopped, so that noon, sun-
rise and sun-set, are the only parts of the day,
of which from henceforward I can speak with
any certainty.
We arrived at sunset at another island,
covered with wood, and took shelter for the
night, under a sandy point, which was the only
part at which landing could be effected. This
being rather a wild situation, I thought it best
to sleep in the boat. Nevertheless a party was
sent to see whether any thing could be got.—
They observed a great number of turtle bones
and shells, w here the natives had been feasting,
and their last visit seemed to be of recent date,
but they returned without success. We lay at
grapnel till day-light.
Next day, before dark, a small island was
seen bearing west, which, on our arrival, we
found only a rock where boobies resort, and
thence called Booby Island. No more land
was seen on the coast of New Holland ; and at
eight o’clock in the evening, we were once
more launched into the open ocean. Miserable
as our situation was in every respect, I wa»
secretly surprized to see that it did not appear
to affest any one so strongly as myself; on the
D


contrary, it seemed as if we had embarked on a
voyage to Timor, in a vessel sufficiently calcu-
lated for safety and convenience. So much con-
fidence gave me great pleasure, and I may ven-
ture to assert, that to this cause, under Providence,
our preservation is chiefly to be attributed.
Encouraging all with hopes, that eight or ten
days would bring us to a land of safety, and
after praying to God for a continuance of his
most gracious protection, I served an allowance
of water for supper, and stood awayW.S.W.
on the voyage.
We had just been six days on the coast of
New Holland > the course of which we ob-
tained some provisions; but perhaps nearly
equal benefit was derived from being relieved
h-om the fatigue of constantly remaining in
the boat, and enjoying good rest at night.—
lliesc advantages certainly preserved our lives,
though in our present situation we were deplora-
ble objects; but the hopes of speedy relief kept
up our spirits. Incredible as it may appear, I
for my own part felt neither hunger nor thirst,
my allowance contented me, knowing I could
have no more.
Next day, Thursday the fourth of June, we
saw a number ol water-snakes: they were
ringed \ ellow and black# Though the weather ,


was fair, we were constantly shipping water,
which kept two men always employed to bale
the boat, The following evening a few boobies
eame about us, one of which I caught with my
hand. The blood was divided among three of
the men who were weakest, and the bird kept
for a future meal. Some clams hung up to dry
for sea-store •w ere stolen ; but every one solemnly
denied it.
In the afternoon of the sixth, I took an op-
portunity of examining into the state of our
bread; and found nineteen days allowance re-
maining, at the rate of one twenty-fifth of a
pound, three times a day. Therefore as I saw
every prospect of a quick passage, I again
ventured to grant an allowance for supper.
The sea ran very high all that night, and was
next day breaking over us; I heard many com-
plaints; Mr. Ledward, the surgeon, and Law-
rence Lebogue, an old hardy seaman, appeared
to be giving way very fast; I could only assist
them by a tea-spoonful or two of wine, which
I had carefully saved, expecting such a melan-
choly necessity.
On Monday afternoon, we caught a small
dolphin, which was the first relief of the kind
that we obtained. I issued about two ounces,
including the offals, to each person, and saved


the remainder for next day. The wind blew
strong all night, so that we shipped much wa-
ter, and suffered greatly from wet and cold.
At day-light, as usual, I heard much com-
plaining, which my own feelings convinced me
was too well founded. I gave the Surgeon and
Lebogue a little wine, but I could afford them
no farther relief, except encouraging them with
hopes that a very few days longer, at our pre-
sent rate of sailing, would bring us to Timor.
Gannets, boobies, men-of-.war, and tropical
birds, were constantly about us. At noon we
served the accustomed proportion of water, and
dined on the remains of the dolphin, which
amounted to about an ounce per man. I after-
wards suffered much sickness, from the nature
of part of the stomach of the fish, which had
fallen to my share.
Next morning there was a visible alteration
for the worse in many of the people, which ex-
cited great apprehensions in me. . Extreme
weakness, swelled legs, hollow and ghastly
countenances, with an apparent debility of
understanding, seemed to be the melancholy
presages of approaching dissolution. The
surgeon and Lebogue, in particular, were most
miserable-looking objects. I occasionally gave
them a few tea-spoonfuls of wine out of the ’


little that remained, which was of infinite use;
the hopes of being able to accomplish the voy-
age, were our principal support. The boat-
swain very innocently told me, that he really
thought I looked worse than any one in the
boat; I was amused by the simplicity with
which he uttered such an opinion, and returned
him a better compliment. Our course since
yesterday was 111 miles.
The following afternoon, we saw gannets and
many other birds, and at sun-set kept a very
anxious look-out. Early next morning, with an
excess of joy, we discovered Timor, and by
clay-light were within two leagues of the shore.
It is not possible for one to describe the pleasure
which the blessing of the sight of this land dif-
fused among us. It appeared scarcely credible to
ourselves, that in an open boat, and so poorly
provided, we should have been able to reach the
coast of Timor, in forty-one days after leaving
Tofoa; having, in that time, run by our log
the distance of 3618 miles; and that, notwith-
standing our extreme distress, no one should
have perished on the voyage,
I have already mentioned, that I did not
know where the Dutch settlement was situated,
but I had a faint idea that it was at the south-
west part of the island. I therefore, after day-
d 3


light, bore away along the shore towards that
quarter. We had a most agreeable prospect
of the land, which was interspersed with woods
and lawns, the interior mountainous, but the
shore low. We could only see a few huts,
whence we concluded that no European resided
in this part of the island.
During the afternoon, w r e continued our
course along a low shore covered with in-
numerable palm trees, called the fan palm,
from the leaf spreading like a fan. Here
however, were no signs of cultivation. That
we might not run past any settlement in the
night, we brought to, under a close reefed fore-
sail. At two in the morning, we wore and
stood in shore till day-light, when I found we
had drifted about three leagues to the west-
ward. On examining the coast, and not see-
ing any sign of a settlement, we bore away in
that direction, having a strong gale against a
weather current, which occasioned much sea.
Coming to a grapnal in a sandy bay, that I
might the more easily calculate our situation,
v e had a view of a beautiful looking country,
as if formed by art into lawns and parks,—
The little time we were here, the master and
carpenter importuned me much to let them go
ia search of supplies, but after I had at length


assented, they found no other person willing
to be of the party, therefore they did not quit
the boat.
At two o’clock, we ran through a dangerous
breaking sea, and discovered a spacious bay or
sound, with a fair entrance, about two or
three miles wide. This being'a likely place for
a European settlement, I came to a grapnel
near the east side of the entrance, where w r e
saw a hut, a dog, and some cattle. I imme-
diately sent the gunner and boatswain towards
the hut, and having made some remarks on the
place, I saw them returning with several of the'
natives ; I therefore no longer doubted our
success. They brought five Indians, and in-
formed me that they had found two families,
where the women treated them with European
politeness. From these people we learned that
the at a place called Coupang,
at some distance tq the north-west. I made
signs for one of them to go in the boat, and
shew us the way thither, intimating that 1 would
pay him for his trouble. The man readily com-
plied, and embarked.
The Indians were of a dark tawny colour,
had long black hair, and chewed a great deal
of betel ; they brought us a few pieces of dried
turt!e ; and some of Indian corn. This


nst was the most welcome, for the turtle could
not be eaten, unless previously soaked in hot
water. They offered to bring us other refresh-
ments, if I would wait, but as the pilot was
willing, I determined to push on.
By his direction we kept close to the east
shore under all sail; but as night came on, the
wind died away, and we were obliged to tug
at the oars, which I was surprised to see we
could use with some effect. At ten o’clock,
finding v?c advanced slowly, I came to a grap-
nel ; and now, for the first time, issued double
allowance of bread, and a little wine to each
person.
At one o’clock in the morning of Sunday the
fourteenth, after the sweetest and happiest
sleep that ever men enjoyed, we weighed and
continued to keep the east shore on board. The
report of two cannon gave new life to every
one, and soon after we discovered two square-
rigged vessels and a sutter at anchor. We en-
deavoured to work to windward, but loosing
ground on each tack, we took to our oars
again, and kept rowing close to the shore till
four o’clock, when I brought to with a grapnel,
and gave another allowance of bread and wine
to all hands. As soon as we had rested a little,
we weighed again, and rowed till uear day


light, when we came to a grapnel off a small
fort and town, which the pilot told me was
Coupang.
Among the things which the boatswain had
thrown into the boat before leaving the Ship,
was a bundle of signal flags ; with these we
had, in the course of the passage, made a small
jack which I now hoisted in the main-shrouds
as a signal of distress, for I did not think pror
per to land without leave.
Soon after day-break, a soldier hailed us to
land, which I immediately did among a croud
of Indians ; and was agreeably surprised to
meet an English sailor, who belonged to one of
the vessels in the road. His captain, he told
me, was the second person in the town, on
which I desired to be conducted to him, being-
told that the governor was ill and could not be
seen. This gentleman, Captain Spikerman,
received me with great humanity. I informed
him of our distressed situation, and requested,
that care might, without delay, be taken of
those who were with me. He gave directions
for their immediate reception at his own house,
and he himself went to the governor to learn
when I could see him.
I now desired my people to come on shore
which was as much as some of them could do


being hardly able to walk; however, they were
helped to the house, and found a breakfast of tea
and bread and butter provided.
A painter might have delineated the two
groupes of figures, which, at the time, present-
ed themselves to each other; an indifferent
spectator would have been at a loss which most •
to admire, tire eyes of famine sparkling at im-
mediate relief, or the horror of our preservers
at the sight of so many spectres, whose ghastly
countenances, if the cause had been unknown,
would not so much have excited pity as terror.
Om bodies v ere nothing but bone and skin, our
limbs full of sores, and we were clothed in rags.
Xa this condition, with tears of joy and gratitude
rowing down our cheeks, the people of Timor
beheld us with a mixture of horror, surprise and
commiseration.
The governor, Mr. William Adrian Van Este,
notwithstanding extreme sickness, became so
anxious about us that I saw him before the appoint*
ed time. He received me with great affection,
and gave me the fullest proof that he was possess-
ed of every feeling belonging to a humane and
good man. He said that he considered it the
greatest blessing of his life that we had fallen un-
nei his protection, and though his infirmity was
such, that he could not himself do the office of


a friend, lie would order us to be supplyed
with every thing. There was a house, which
he regretted was the only uninhabited one at
Coupang, that should be assigned to me, and my
people should be kept either in the hospital, cr
in Captain Spikerman’s ship.
On returning to Captain Spikerman’s house,
I found that every kind relief had been given to
the crew; the surgeon had dressed their sores, and
the cleaning of their persons had not been less
attended to, several friendly gifts of apparel having
been presented to them.
On examining the house meant for me, I
found it ready prepared, with servants in waiting.
But unwilling to be separated from my people, I
allotted one room for myself another for the
master, surgeon, botanist, and gunner; a loft
to the other officers, and an outer apartment
to the men ; a hall was common to the offi-
cers ; and the men had a back piazza. The
governor being informed of this arrangement,
sent chairs, tables, bedding, and other
cessaries, for the use of every one. When
I took leave of him, he desired me to ac-
quaint him with every thing of which I stood in
need. But it was only at intervals that he
had a few moments of ease, being then in a
dying state, of an incurable disease, On this


account, I transacted business with his son-in
law, Mr. Waujou, who was second in this
place, and not Captain Spikerman.
At noon, a plentiful dinner was brought to
my.people, and having seen every one make aft
abundant meal, I dined myself with Mr. Wau-
jou. Rest and quiet, however, I considered
as more necessary to the re-establishment of
iny health, and therefore soon retired to my
room, but instead of rest, I began to reflect
on our late sufferings, and the failure of the
expedition ; and above all, on the thanks due
to God, who had endowed us with power to
endure such heavy calamities, and
me at last to be the means of saving eighteen
lives.
In times of difficulty, circumstances bearing
hard on a commander will generally arise.
In our late situation, it was not the least of
my distresses to be constantly assailed with
the melancholy demands ’of my people for an
increase of allowance, which it grieved me to
refuse. The quantity of provisions with which
we left the ship, we might have consumed in
five days. TheVe was a necessity of observing
the most rigid economy ; and by invariably
practising it, we had still, on our arrival, pro-
visions for eleven days more, so that had we


been unfortunate enough to have missed the'
Dutch settlement at Timor, we could on the
same scanty allowance have proceeded to Java,
where I was certain of supplies.
Another disagreeable circumstance to which
my situation exposed me, was the caprice of
ignorant people. Had I been incapable of
acting, they would have carried the boat on
shore as soon as we made Timor, without con-
sidering, that to land among the natives, at' a
distance from the European settlement, might
have been dangerous, as among other Indians*
When I reflected how providentially our lives
were saved at Tofoa, by the natives de-
laying their attack, and that with scarce any
tiling to support life, we had crossed a sea of
more than 1200 leagues in an open boat with-
out shelter; when I reflected that in such
stormy weather we escaped foundering, and
that none of us were taken off by disease ; that
we passed the hostile natives of other coun-
tries without accident, and at last happily met
the most friendly people to relieve our distress,
I was enabled to bear with' cheerfulness and
resignation the failure of an expedition, the
success of which I had had so much at heart*
E


tVith respect to the preservation of health,
during sixteen dajs of heavy and almost con-
tinual rain, I would recommend to every one
in a similar situation the method we practised;
which was, to dip our clothes in salt water as
often as they became drenched with rain, and
then wring them out. It was our only resource,
and I believe that it was of the greatest service
to us, for they then felt more like a change of
dry clothes than can be well imagined. We
had occasion to do this so often, that at lengtlv
all our clothes w y ere wrung to pieces; for ex-
cept the few days we passed on the coast of
New Holland,*jve were continually wet w r ith
either rain or sea.
Shortly after our arrival, I presented to the
governor a formal account of the loss of the
Bounty, and a requisition in his Majesty’s
name, that instructions might be sent to all the
Batch settlements to stop the ship, if she made
her appearance. Along with this, a complete
descriptive list of the mutineers was given.
To secure our arrival at Batavia, in'the island
©f Java, before the October fleet sailed for
Europe, I gave public notice of my intention
to hire a vessel to carry us thither. Several
offers were made in consequence, hut none
that I judged reasonable, which determined
me to purchase a small schooner in the road,


34 feet long. I gave 1000 rix-dollars for her,
and fitted her out for sea, under the name of
his Majesty’s schooner Resource. Mr, Wau-
jou obligingly supplied me with four brass
swivels, and fourteen stand of small arms, as
a loan, to be returned at Batavia. These were
necessary, as the coast of Java is frequently
infested with piratical vessels.
On the 20th of July, I had the misfortune to
lose Mr. David Nelson, who died of an inflam-
matory fever. Since the time of our leaving
New Holland, he had been in a weak condi-
tion, and had lately taken cold from impru-
dently throwing off warm clothing. The loss
of this honest man I very much lamented; he
had with great care and diligence attended to
the object for which he was sent out, and had
always been ready to promote the good of the
mission in which w r e were engaged, Next
day after reading our funeral service, he was
interred in the burying-ground behind the cha-
pel appropriated to the Europeans of the town,
I regretted that I could not get a tomb-stone
to place over his remains.
This was the second voyage he had under-
taken to the South Seas, having been sent out
by Sir Joseph Banks in Captain Cook’s last
E 2


voyage to collect seeds and plants; and
after surmounting so many difficulties, and in
the midst of thankfulness for his deliverance,
he was called upon to pay the debt of nature at
a time when least expected.
Our schooner being victualled and ready for
sea, I took an affectionate leave of the inhabi-
tants of Coupang, and sailed on the afternoon of
the 20th of August, having the launch in tow
which had so much contributed to our preser-
vation.
The town of Coupang is situated in a great
hay, which is an excelient road far shipping;
it is the only settlement which tire Dutch have
in 1 imor: on the north side of the island is a
Portuguese settlement. The natives in the
neighbourhood of Coupang are extremely in-
dolent, but those at a distance from the Euro-
peans are strong and aetive.
Ihe cjnef or king of the island, resides
about four miles from Coupang, I had an
opportunity of making a visit to him, and was
received with much civility. His dress was a
checkered wrapper, girded round his waist with a
silk arid gold belt, a loose linen jacket, and a
coarse handkerchief about bis head. A few
of his chiefs were with him, who partook of a
vepast he had provided for us; after wffiich, he


retired for a short time with three o'" them, and
on returning, presented me with a round plate
of metal about four inches in diameter, on
which was stamped the figure of a star.
On Sunday the sixth of September, we saw
the high land of Cape Sandana, in the north-east
part of Java, and on the tenth anchored off Pas-
sourwang, a Dutch settlement on the coast. Pro-
ceedingabout amile up the river on which it stands,
I landed at a small well-constructed fort, and met
a friendly and polite reception from Mr. Adrian
Van Rye, .the commandant.
We sailed next day, and anchored in Souva-
baya road, where I was informed that I must
not land or send a boat on shore; there being
such a restriction on all strange vessels at their
first arrival. I was received the following
morning also with much friendship and civility
by the governor and commandant, and hospi*
tably entertained by them. Sourabaya is one
of the pleasantest places I ever saw ; situated
on the banks of a river, and a mile and a half
from the shore. The interior parts of the
country, near the mountains, are infested with
a breed of fierce tigers, which makes travelling
inland very dangerous.
We sailed on the 'l7th. and made Samarang,
e 3


1,,,, ' f ''f “™'"’ surrounded by a wall and
. *“* *° Batavi °. i‘ is the most consi-
derable settlement which the Dutch have in
“•. From some of ‘he inhabitants, the like
civilities, as before, were renewed; and Mr
Abeggr, the surgeon of the hospital, to whom
W * Were f ind ; bted for service and ~J.
ernes, refused any remuneration for Hi err), thus
ruinating Mr. Mar, the surgeon at Cm,pang.
We sailed on the 26th front Sa,mra„g> with
8 galley tnountingssix swivels, which the
'• i nor had ordered to accompany us to Bata- *
™, where we anchored ort the first of October.
cere we founfl ruling at anchor a Dutch man-
of-war, ana twenty sail of Dutch East India
snips, besides smaller vessels.
I accompanied the sabandar, an officer with
whom Strangers transact business, to pay ,„v
respects to the governor-general. Acquainting
bis Excellency with my situation, I requested
that my people might be taken care of an J
that we Should he allowed lo engage a pa'ssage
to Europe in the first ship that sailed ; and
-ikewiss desired permission to sell the schooner
and launch. All this he told mo should be
gi anted. The sabandar wrote these requests
“"° a .f orl *“ l pal'lion, to be presented to the
«opncu next day;


The hotel for the accommodation of stranp
gets, is situated near the great river here, in
the most healthy part of the city.
less I found the air hot and suffocating, and
was taken ill in the night with a severe pain in
my head. Next day it increased, and a vior-
lent fever came on. I sent to acquaint the
sabandarwith my situation, and was soon visited
by the head surgeon of the town hospital, by
whose care the fever considerably abated in
twenty-four hours, though the head-ach conti-
nued. Next day having desired leave of the-
governor to hire a s house in the country, he
gave orders for my being accommodated in that
of the physician-general, Mr. Sparling.
On the 6th of October, I was carried about
four miles from the city to Mr. Sparling's
house, which is near the convalescent hospital,
where there were more than 900 patients. —
However, I received no relief, and my indispo-
sition increasing, Mr. Sparling advised me to
leave Batavia as speedily as possible, and re-
presented the necessity of it to the governor-
general, I was informed by his Excellency,
that the homeward bound ships were so much
crowded that it would be impossible for all
my people to go in one ship only. Therefore,
as a separation was unavoidable, I sent to rer
e 4


quest of the governor that I might be allowed
to tak a passage for myself in a packet about
to sail to Europe, and also for as many of my
people as she could receive. In answer to this
I was informed that I and two more could be
accommodated in the packet, as she was too
small to admit of a greater number, and that I
might rest assured of a passage being provided
for those that remained, by the earliest oppor-
tunities.
On Friday, the ninth, the General Elliott
anchored in the road, having saved a quantity
of treasure that was on ward the Vansittart,
one of our East-Indiamen, which had been
lost in *the Straits of Banca.
Next day the Resource was sold by public
auction to the highest bidder. The custom at
Bata via. rs to begin high; and to lower the price
until some person bids, and the first bidder is
the buyer. She was accordingly put up at
2000 rix-dcllars, but, to my great disappoint-
ment, no one offered to purchase before she
was lowered to 295, at which she was sold to
an Englishman commanding a ship at Bengal,
The launch was likewise sold. The services
she had rendered me, made me feel great reluc-
tance at parting with her, nor should I have
done so, if I could have found a convenient


opportunity of conveying her to Europe, An
order of council imposed a duty on all vessels
sold, with which 1 could by no means comply,
thinking I had already sustained a sufficient loss in
705 rix-doliars, as the vessel had cost me 1000.
I agreed with the captain of the packet for
a passage to Europe for myself, my clerk, and
a servant, and embarked on the 16th of Octo-
ber. The packet was commanded by Captain
Peter Couvret, and bound for Middleburgh—
The governor promised that those of our com-
pany remaining behind should follow in the first
ships, and be as little divided as possible. I
had previously authorised the master, Mr.
Fryer, to supply the men and officers left un-
der his command with one month's pay, to ena-
ble them to purchase cloathing for their passage
to England,
I had taken great pains to bring plants from
Timor to Batavia, in six tubs; these, I thought
might be serviceable at the Cape of Good Hope,
if brought no farther, but I had the mortiiiea-
tion of being obliged to leave them all here
behind me.
On the 18th we spoke with the Rambler, an
American brig, bound from Boston to Batavia*
After passing the Straits of Sunda, we steered
£ 5


to the northward of Cocos Isles, which Cap-
tarn Couvret told me, are full of cocoa-nut
trees; there is no anchorage near them, but
good landing for boats
Nothing worthy of remark occurred in the
passage to the Cape of Good Hope, where we
arrived on the 16th of December. There was
a standing order by the Dutch East India Com-
pany, that no person who took a passage in any
, th ® ,r Shl > s from Batavia for Europe, should
allowed t 0 leave the ship before she
reached the intended port; according to which
regulation I must have gone to Holland in the
packet. However, on my making use of iha
governor of Batavia’s name, by his desire, to
Ir ‘ ander Graaf the governor of the Cape,
be not only dispensed with the rule, but re-
ceived me in the most polite and friendly man-
lier.
We sailed from the Cape in company with
the Astrea, French frigate, and on the 21st saw.
Ascension Island. On the 13th of March 1790,
the Bill of Portland was in sight, and on
the evening of Sunday, the next day, l left
the packet and was landed at the Isle of
Wight.
Those of my people whom I had left at
Batavia, were provided with passages'by the


earliest ships, and were apparently in good
health at the time we parted.
Nevertheless they did not all live to quit
Batavia, One of the seamen, Thomas Hall,
had died before my departure, and another,
as also the master’s-mate, within a fortnight
after it. The hardships they had experienced
rendered them unable to support so unhealthy
a climate as that of Batavia. Of nineteen,
who were forced by the mutineers into the
launch, it pleased God that twelve should sur-
mount the difijculties and dangers of the voy -
age, and live to revisit their native country.
Adventures of the Mutineers .
We have thus follo wed the gallant Captain
Bligli through his interesting narrative ; ami
have learnt from himself the manner in which,
he and his faithful crew were guided and sup-
ported by the hand of Providence through the
perils of a raging sea, exposed to the fury of
the flfements in an open boat, v but little
clothing and scanty provisions, It is now de*
sirable to learn something of the fate, of the
ungrateful Christian and ins mutinous compa-
nions, who forgetting their duty to their emm


try, and obedience due to their command-
os Officer, had desperately entered upon an
act, the punishment of which by the laws of
pvery country is death.
e give this narrative the more readily, on
account of the awful example it holds forth of
the certain punishment which awaits the guilty,
find which no time, nor distance, nor conceal-
ment in unfrequented corners of the world,
can avert. Ihe mutineers, twenty-five in
number, were supposed from the expressions
which escaped them, when the launch was
turned adrift, to have made sail towards Qta-
hcite. As soon as this affair w r as made known
to the Admiralty in England, Captain Edwards
v. ordered to proceed in the Pandora to that
island, and endeavour to discover and bring
to England the Bounty, with such of the crew
as he might be able to secure. On his arrival
in March, 1791, at Matavai bay, in Otaheite,
four of the mutineers came voluntarily on
board the Pandora to surrender themselves;
and from information given by them, ten others
(the whole number alive upon the island) were,
in the course of a few days, taken, and with
the exception of four, who perished in the
wreck of the Pandora, near Endeavour Straits,
conveyed, to England for trial, before a court


martial which adjudged six of them to suffer
death, and acquitted the other four, it having
been proved to the satisfaction of the court, that
these latter had been compelled by force to act
as they had done.
From the accounts given by these men, as
well as from some documents that were pre-
served, it appeared that *as soon as Captain
Bligh had been driven from tjre ship, the twen-
ty-five mutineers proceeded with her to Too-
bouai, where they proposed to settle; but
the place being found to hold out little en-
couragement, they returned to Otaheite, and
having there laid m a large supply of stock,
they once more took their departure for Too-
bouai, carrying with them eight men, nine
women, and seven boys, natives of Otaheite.—
They commenced on their second arrival, the
building of a fort, but by divisions among
themselves, and quarrels with the natives, the
design was abandoned. Christian, the leader,
also very soon discovered that his authority
over his accomplices was at an end ; he there-
fore proposed that they should return to Ota-
heite ; that as many as chose it should be put
on shore at that island, and that the rest
should proceed in the ship to any other place
they might think proper. Accordingly they


mice more put to sea, and reached Matavai on
the 20th of September, 1789. Here sixteen of
the twenty-five desired to be landed, fourteen
of whom, as already mentioned, were taken
on boat d the Pandora ; of the other two, as re-
ported by Col man (the first who surrendered
himself to Captain Edwards) one had been
made a chief, killed his companion, and was
shortly afterwards murdered himself by the
natives
Christian, with the remaining eight of the
mutineers, haying taken on board several of
the natives of Otaheite, the greater part 'wo-
men, put to sea on the night between the 21st
and 22nd September, 1/89 j in the morning the
ship was discovered from Point Venus, steer-
ing in a north-westward direction; and here
teiminate the accounts given by the mutineers
who were either taken or surrendered them-
selves at Matavai Bay. They stated, however,
that Christian, on the night of his departure,
was heard to declare, that he v/ould seek for
some uninhabited island, and, haying establish-
ed his party there, break up the ship ; but all
Ihe endeavours of Captain Edwards to gain
intelligence either of the ship or her crew at
any of the numerous islands visited by the,
Pandora, failed,


Froni tliis period, no information rcEpccting
Christian or his- companions reached England
for twenty years ; when, about the beginning
of the year 1809, Sir Sidney Smith, then com-
mander in chief on the Brazil station, trans-
mitted to the Admiralty a paper which lie had
received from Lieutenant Fitzmaurjce, pur-
porting to be an f« Extract from the log book
of Captain Folger, of the American ship To-
paz,” and dated Valparaiso, 10th October,
1808. This extract contains a short account
of the conduct and fate of the mutineers who
left Otaheite under the command of Christian.
It states that they had proceeded to a small
desolate island in the Pacific Ocean, called
Pitcairn’s Island, where they settled, and
seemed to have some prospect of ease and se-
curity. Their hopes of happiness were, how-
ever, but short-lived ; for all of them but one
named Alexander Smith, were murdered by
tiie Otaheitans. The extract contains many
other most interesting facts : but these are so
much more fully described in a letter, written
by the same Captain Folger to the Lords of the
Admiralty, that it appears better to give the
following complete copy of this letter to the
reader. It was received, about the com-
mencement of the year 1810, by Rear Admi


ral Hotliam, when cruising off new London,
together with the Azimuth compass to which
it refers :
* Nantucket, Ist March, 1815.
( My Lords,
‘ The remarkable circumstance which took
place on my last voyage to the Pacific Ocean,
■will, I trust, plead my apology for addressing
your Lordships at this time. In February,
1808, I touched at Pitcairn’s island, in lati-
tude 25 deg. 20 min. S. and longitude 130 deg.
W. from Greenwich. My principal object was to
procure seal skins for the China market; and
from the account given of the island, in cap-
tain Carteret’s voyage I supposed it was un-
inhabited j but on approaching the shore in
my boat, I was me# by three young men in a
double canoe, with a present consisting of
some fruit and a hog. They spoke to me in
the English language, and informed me that
they were born on the island, and their father
was an Englishman, who had sailed with Cap-,
tain Bligh.
After discoursing with them a short time, I
landed with them, and found an Englishman of
name oi Alexander Smith, who infovmoct


me that he was one of the Bounty’s crew, and
that after putting Captain Bligh in the boat,
with half the ship’s company, they returned to
Otaheite, where part of their crew chose to
tarry, but Mr. Christian, with eight others, in-
chiding himself, preferred going to a more re-
mote place; and after making a short stay at
Otaheite, where they took wives, and six men
servants, they proceeded to Pitcairn’s Island
where they destroyed the ship, after taking
every thing out of her which they thought
would be useful to them. About six years
after they landed at this place, their servants
attacked and killed all the English excepting
the informant, and he was severely wounded.—■
The same night, the Otaheitan .widows arftsc and
murdered all their countrymen, leaving Smith
with the widows and children, where he has re-
sided ever since without being resisted.
* I remained but a short %hie on the island,
and on leaving it, Smith presented me a
time-piece, and an azimuth compass, which he
told me belonged to the Bounty. 'I he time-
piece was taken from me by the governor of the
island of Juan Fernandez, after I had had it
in my possession about six months. The com-
pass I put in repair on board my ship, and
made use of it in my homeward passage, since


winch a new card has been put to it by an in-
strument maker in Boston. I now forward it
to your Lordships, thinking there will be a
kind of satisfaction in receiving it, merely from
the extraordinary circumstances? attending it.
(Signed)
' mayjfiew fglg'er/
Nearly about the same time a further ac-
count of these interesting people was received
from Vice-Admiral Dixon, in a letter addressed
to him by Sir Thomas Staines, of his Majesty's
ship Briton, of which the following is a copy :
‘Briton, Valparaiso, Oct. 18, 1814.
‘ Sir,
I have the honour to inform you that, or,
my passage from the Marquesas Islands to this
port, on the morning of the 17th September, I
fell in with an Island where'none is kid down
in the Admiralty, or other charts, according
to the several chronometers of the Briton and
lugus. I therefore hove-to, until day-light,
and then closed to ascertain whether it was
inhabited, which I soon discovered it to be,
and, to my great astonishment, found that every
individual on the island, (forty in number)


#poke very good English. They prove to be
the descendants of the deluded crew of the
Bounty, which, from Otaheite, proceeded to
the above-mentioned island, where the ship
was burnt.
Christian appeared to have been the leader
and sole cause of the mutiny in that ship. A
venerable old man, named John Adams, is the
only surviving Englishman of those who last
quitted Otaheite in her, and whjnse'UJxfemplary
conduct, and fatherly care of the whole
colony could not but command admiration.
The pious manner in which all those born on
the island have been reared, and the correct
sense of religion which has been instilled into
their young minds by this old man, have given
him the pre-eminence oyer the whole of them,
and they look up to him as the father of the
whole, and themselves as one family.
* A son of Christian’s was the first-born on
the island, now about twenty-five years of age
(named Thursday October Christian ;) the *el-
der Christian fell a sacrifice to the jealousy of an
Otaheitan man, within three or four years after
their arrival on the island. They were ac-
companied thither by six Ot&hejtan men and
twelve women. The former were all swept away
by desperate contentions between them and the


Englishmen, and five of the latter have died at
different periods, leaving at present only one man
apd seven women of the original settlers.
‘ The island must undoubtedly be that called
I itcaiin s, although erroneously laid down in the
charts. Vi e had the meridian sun close to it,
which gave us 2 5 deg. 4 min. S. latitude, and
I .w) deg. 25 min. W. longitude, by chronome-
ters of the Briton and Tagus.
‘lt is abundant in yams, plantains, hogs,
goats and fouls, but affords no shelter for a
ship of any description; neither could a ship
water there without much difficulty.
‘ * cannot however, refrain from offering my
opinion, that it is well worth the attention of
our laudable religious societies, particularly that
for propagating the Christian religion, the whole
of the inhabitants speaking the Otaheitan tongue
as well as the English.
‘ During the whole of the time they have been
on the island, only one ship has ever com-
municated with them, which took place about
six years since. She was an American vessel
called the Topaz, of Boston, Mayhew FoEer
Master. °
‘ The island is completely iron-bound, with
rocky shores, and landing in boats at ail times


difficult, although safe to approach within a short
distance in a ship.
(Signed)
‘ T. STAINES.’
As the real position of the island was ascer-
tained to be so far distant from that in which it
is usually laid down in the charts, and as the
captains of the Briton and Tagus seem to have
still considered it as uninhabited, they were
not a little surprized, on approaching its shores,
to behold plantations regularly laid out, and
huts or houses more neatly constructed than
those on the Marquesas islands. When about
two miles from the shore, some natives were
observed bringing down their canoes on their
shoulders, dashing through a heavy surf, and
paddling off to the ships; but their astonish-
ment was unbounded on hearing one of them,
on approaching the ship, call out in the Eng-
lish language, ‘ Won’t you heave us a rope,
now?’
The first man who got on board the Briton
soon proved who they were. His name, he
said, was Thursday October Christian, .the
first born on the Island. He was then about
five-and-twenty years of age, and is described
as a fine young man about six feet high; hi*


liajr deep black ; -bts countenance cpeu. ati*l
interesting; of a brownish cast, but free fi®#,
that mixture of a reddish tint which prevails m
that Pacific Island; his only dress was a
piece of cloth round his loins, and a straw
hat ornamented with a black feather of tii*
domestic fowl. 'With a grout share of goad
humour, says Captain Pip on, 'we were gk-4
to trace in his benevolent countenance aifW
features of an honest English face/ < I mas t
confess/ he continues, f I could not survey this
interesting person without feelings of tender-
ness and compassion/ His companion was
named George Young; a fine youth of seven,
teen or eighteen years of age.
If the astonishment of the Captains was
great on hearing their first salutation in Eng-
lish, their surprize and interest were not a lit-
tie increased, on Sir Thomas Staines taking
the youths below, and setting before them
something to eat, when one of them rose up,
and placing his hands together, in a posture of
devotion, distinctly repeated, and in a pleasing
tone ana manner, c For what we are going to
receive, the Lord make us truly thankful.’
The y expressed great surprize on seeing a
sow on board the Briton, never having seen
one before and were in doubt whether she
was a great goat or a horned sow.


The two captains of his Majesty’s ac-
companied these young men on shore. With
some difficulty and a good wetting, and with
the assistance of their conductors, they ac-
complished a landing through the surf, and
were soon after met by John Adams, a man
between fifty and sixty years of age, who con-
ducted them to his house. His wife accompa-
nied him, a very old lady, blind with age. He
was at first alarmed lest the visit was to appre-
hend him; but on being told that they were per-
fectly ignorant of his existence he Avas relieved
from his anxiety. Being once assured that this
visit Was of a peaceable nature, it is impossible
to describe the joy the poor people manifested
on seeing those whom they were pleased to
consider as their countrymen. Yams, cocoa-
nuts and other fruits, with' fine fresh eggs
Were laid before them ; and the old man would
have killed and dressed a hog for his visiters,
but time would not allow them to partake of
his intended feast.
This interesting new colony, it seemed
now consisted of about forty-six persons, most-
ly grown up young people, besides a number
of infants. The young men all bom on the
island, were very athletic, and of the finest
forms, their countenances open and pleasing,
indicating much benevolence and goodness of


heait: but the young ivomen were objects of
particular admiration, tall, robust, and beauti-
fully formed, their faces beaming with smiles
and unruffled good humour, but wearing a
degree of modesty and bashfulness that would
do honour to the most virtuous nation on earth;
their teeth, like iVoiy, were regular and beau-
ful, without a single exception ; and all of
them, both male and female, had the most
marked English features. The clothing of the
young females consisted of a piece of linen
reaching from the waist to the knees, and
generally a sort of mantle thrown loosely over
the shoulders, and hanging as low as the an-
cles ; but this covering appeared to be intended
clnefly as a protection against the sun and the
weather, as it was frequently laid aside. They
sometimes wreath caps or bonnets for the head,
in the most tasty manner, to protect the face
from the rays of the sun; and though, as Cap-
tain Pipon observes, they have had only the
instruction of their Otaheitan mothers, “ our
dress-makers in London would be delighted with
the simplicity, and yet elegant taste, of these
untaught females.’'
Iheir native modesty, assisted by a proper
sense of religion and morality instilled into
Sheir youthful minds by John Adams, has hi


tlierto preserved these interesting people perfectly
chaste and free from all kinds of debauchery,
Adams assured the visiters, that since Christian’s
death there has not been a single instance of any
young woman proving unchaste, nor any attempt
at seduction on the part of the men. They all
laboured while young in the cultivation of the
ground ; and when possessed of a sufficient quan-
tity of cleared ground and of stock to maintain
a family, they are allowed to marry, but always
with the consent of Adams, who unites them by
a sort of marriage ceremony of his own.
The greatest harmony prevails in this little
society; their only quarrels, and these rarely
happened, being according to their expression,
“ quarrels of the mouth they are honest
in their dealings, which consist of bartering
different articles for mutual accommodation.
Their habitations are extremely neat. The
little village of Pitcairn forms a pretty square;
the houses at the upper end of which are occupied
by the patriarch, John Adams, and his family
consisting of his blind wife, and three daugh-
ters, from fifteen to eighteen years of age, and
a boy of eleven; a daughter of his wife by a
former husband, and a son-in-law. On the
apposite side is the dwelling of Thursday Oc-
F


iober Christian; and in the center is a small
verdant lawn, on which the poultry are let
loose, fenced in so as to prevent the intru-
sions of the domestic quadrupeds. AH that
was done, was obviously undertaken on a
settled plan, unlike any thing to be met with
on the other islands. In their houses too
they had a good deal of decent furniture, con-
sisting of beds laid upon bedsteads, with neat
covering; they had also tables, and large
chests to contain their valuables and clothing,
which is made from the bark of a certain tree,'
prepared chiefly by the elder Otaheitafi females'
Adam’s house consisted of two rooms, and the
windows had shutters to pull-to at. night. The
} ounger part of the sex are, as before stated, em-
ployed with their brothers, under the direction
of their common father Adams, in the culture of
Hie ground, which produces cocoa-nuts, bananas,
the bread-fruit-tree, yams, sweet potatoes, and
turnips, they have also plenty of hogs and goats:
the woods abound with a species of wild ho g,
and the coasts of the island with several kinds
of good fish.
Their agricultural implements are made by
themselves, from the iron supplied by the
Bounty, which, with great labour,. they beat
out mto spades, hatchets, crows, Sts. This


was not all. The good old man kept a regular
journal in which was entered \he nature and
quantity of the work performed by each family,
what each had received, and what was due on
account. There was, it seems, besides private
property, a sort of general stock, out of which
articles were issued on account to the several
members of the community; and, for mutual
accommodation, exchanges of one kind of pro-
vision for another were very frequent, as salt
for fresh provisions, vegetables and fruit, for
poultry, fish, &c.; also, when the stores of
one family were low or wholly expended, a fresh
supply wae raised from another, or out of the
general stock, to be repaid when circumstan-
ces were more favourable ; all of which was
carefully noted down in John Adams’s journal.
But what, was most gratifying of all to the
visiters, was the simple and unaffected manner
in which they returned thanks to the Almighty,
for the many blessings they enjoyed. They
never failed to say grace before and after meals,
to pray every morning at sun-vise, and they
frequently repeated the Lord’s Prayer and
the Creed. “It was truly pleasing,” says
Captain Pipoo, “ to see these poor people so
well disposed to listen attentively to moral


instruction, to believe in the attributes of God,
and to place their reliance on Divine Goodness.’
The day on which the Avo Captains landed,
was Saturday the 17th of September; but by
John Adams’s account it was Sunday the 18th,
and they were keeping the Sabbath, by making
it a day of rest and prayer.
Ihe visit of the Topaz is, of course, as a
notable circumstance, marked down in John
Adams s journal. The first ship that appeared,
of! the island was on the 27th of December,
1795; but as she did not approach the land,
they could not make out to what nation she be-
longed. A second appeared some time after,
but did not attempt to communicate with them*
A third came sufficiently near to see the natives
and their habitations, but did not attempt
to send a boat on shore; which is the less
surprising, considering the uniform ruggedness
of the coast, the total want of shelter, and the
almost constant and violent breaking of the
sea against the cliffs. The good old man was
anxious to know what was going on in the old
world, and they had the means of gratifying his
curiosity by supplying him with some magazines
and modern publications. His library consisted
of the books that belonged to Admiral Bligh
but the visiters had not time to inspect them,


They enquired particularly after Fletcher
Chnet;an. This ill-fated young mart, it seems*
was never happy after the rash and inconside-
rate step which he had taken; he became sullen
and morose* and practised the most harsh and
severe conduct towards his companions in
juft-
Disappointed in his expectations of Otaheite
and the Friendly Islands, and most probably
dreading a discovery, this deluded youth com-
mitted himself and his remaining confederates
to the mere chance of being cast upon some
distant island, and chance threw them on that
of Pitcairn. Finding no anchorage near it, he
ran the ship upon the rocks, cleared her of the
live stock and other articles which they had
been supplied with at Otaheite, when he set
her on fire, that no trace of inhabitants might
be visible, and all hope of escape cut off froip
himself and his wretched followers. He soon
however disgusted his own countrymen and
the Otaheitans, by his oppresive and tyranni-
cal conduct, they divided into two parties, and
disputes, and affrays and murders were the can-
sequence. His Otaheitan wife died within a
twelvemonth from their landing, after which
he carried off one that belonged to an Otahei-
tan man, who watched for an opportunity c|
I'd


taking his revenge, and shot him dead while
digging in his own field. Thus terminated, in
a distant land, the miserable existence of this
deluded young man, who was neither deficient
in talent nor energy, and who, if he had con:
ducted himself with propriety, might have risen
in the service of his king and country, and
June become an ornament to his profession
and a source of comfort and happiness to his
family.
John Adams declared, as it was natural
enough he should do, his, abhorrence of the
crime in which he was implicated, and said that
he was sick at the time in his hammock; this
we understand, is not true, though he was not
particularly active in the mutiny: he expressed
the utmost willingness to surrender himself and
be taken to England; indeed he rather seemed
to have an inclination to revisit his native coun-
try, but the young men and women flocked
round him, and with tears and entreaties beg-
ged that their father and protector might not
be taken from them, for without him they must
ah perish. It would have been an act of the
greatest inhumanity to remove him from the
Eiand; and it is hardly necessary to add that
-ai Ibomas Staines lent a willing ear to their
entreaties, thinking that if he were even


amongst the most guilty, his care and success iii
instilling religious and moral principles into the
minds of this young and interesting society,
have, in a great degree, redeemed his former
crimes.
This island is about six miles long by three
broad, covered with wood, and the soil of
course very rich; situated under the parellel of
25 deg. south latitude, and in the midst of a
wide expanse of ocean: the climate must be fine,
and admirably adapted for the reception of all
the vegetable productions of every part of the
habitable globe. Small, therefore, as Pitcairn’s
island may appear, there can be little doubt
that it is capable of supporting many inhabit-
ants ; and the present stock being of so good a
description, we trust they will not be neglected.
In the course of time, the patriarch must go
hence; and we think it would be exceedingly
desirable that the British nation pro-
vide for such an event by sending out some
zealous and intelligent instructor, together with
a few persons capable of teaching the useful
trades qr professions. The guides recom-
mended by Captain Pipon to be supplied
them, appeal- to be highly proper:—cooking
Utensils, implements of agriculture, maize 91'
lbe Indian tern, the orange tree from Valpa


faiso, a most grateful fruit in a warm climate,
and not known in the pacific Islands, and that
root of plenty the potato; bibles, prayer-books,
and a proper selection of other books, with
paper and other implements of writing. The
\isiters supplied them with some tools, kettles,
and other articles, such as the high surf would"
permit them to land, but to no great extent;
many things are still wanting for their ease and*
comfort. The descendants of these people, by
up the Otaheitan language, which the
present race speak fluently, might be the means
of civilizing the multitudes of fine people scat-
tered over the innumerable islands of the Great
Pacific. We have only to add, that Pitcairn’s
island seems to be so fortified by nature as to
oppose an invincible barrier to an invading ene-
my ; there is no spot apparently where a boat
ean land with safety, and, perhaps, not more
than one where it can land at all; an everlast-
ing swell of the ocean rolls in on every side,
and breaks into foam against its rocky and
iron-bound shores.
W e cannot read and compare these two ac-
counts viz. that respecting the escape, of Cap-
tain Bligh, and of such of his crew js remained
with him, on the one hand ; and on the other,
the account of the subsequent proceedings and


fate of the mutineers, without' learning from
thence an awful lesson, and being forcibly struck
at the manifest appearance of a superintending
Providence. Whilst that portion of the crew of
that hapless vessel who continued steadily to walk
in the path of duty were conducted through un-
heard of dangers, and the greater part of them
restored in safety to their native home, and to
their anxious and expecting families ; those who
become forgetful of their duty, and actively en-
gaged in the mutiny, either finished their career
of life in foreign lands, far from their country
and their kindred, and nearly all by violent
deaths; or were brought to their native land as
culprits, and died upon the scaffold. John
Adams would seem to be the only exception,
and with respect to him it appears from himself
that his own inward feelings of remorse for the
crime to the commission of which he suffered
himself to be persuaded, have acted as a source,
perhaps, if we knew but all, of the most severe
ol punishments to him. His fears and anxieties
lest even at the distance of five and twenty years
from the commission of the crime, he should still ■
be offered up as a sacrifice to the offended laws of
his country, are evinced by his apprehensions
upon the occasion of the late visit to the island
by Captains Pipon and Staines; and by his


lesoiling' to the expedient of endeavouring t©
conceal himself by changing his name; for it
seems that when visited by these latter officers
he called himself John Adams, though he had
previously styled himself “ Alexander Smith”
when visited by the American Captain FoJgtr;
and .which, by a reference to the books of the
Bounty, has been ascertained to have been his
proper name. But that which seems to mark
more strongly than any other circumstance, the
feelings of remorse and contrition by which this
unfortunate man has been visited, is the care
and diligence he has shewn in bringing up the
young people committed to his sole charge by
toe sad catastrophe of the massacre of their
fathers, in habits of strict morality, and in the
principles of religion. He hasthus made the
best atonement in his power for the breach of
those principles of which he has been formerly
guilty ; and we hope and trust that this atone-
ment may be accepted on bis behalf.


THE APPENDIX,
CONTAINING A
DESCRIPTION
OF THE
Island of Otaheite.
WUH some account of its inhabitants, their manners,
CUSTOMS AND MODE CF LIVING J TOGETHER WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF SOME OF THE MORE REMARKABLE ANI-
MALS AND VEGETABLES, WHICH ARE FOUND IN THOSE
CLIMATES, PARTICULARLY SUCH AS ARE MENTIONED IN
r SHE FOREGOING NARRATIVES.
—OUCCO I —
narratives, which have been just given,
naturally excite a curiosity to be informed con-
cerning any circumstance connected with the
Inhabitants of the Islands which were visited
by Captain Bligh and his crew. Animals also
of various kinds, and several useful vegetables,
are mentioned in the course of the story, which
seemed to deserve a particular description.
As to the Islands, Ocaheite is in every respect
the principal, and on that account we have


chosen it, as all could not be described; while
the manners, dress, and customs of its inhabi-
tants are so like those which have been observed
in the other South Sea Islands, that in describ-
ing them we may be said to have described all.
Though many books have been written giving
an account oi animals and vegetables, we
thought this little publication would be defi-
cient if it did not describe those which are
more worthy of notice, and of which mention
is actually made.* >
OTAHEITE.
l his is one of a numerous groupe of Islands
which are situated in the Pacific Ocean: they
are called the Society Islands. Otaheite, is
placed in south latitude 17 cleg. 46 min. and west
longitude 149 deg.l 3 min. is in length about 29
miles, and in circumference 120. The appearance
of this Island from a distance is very striking;
loity mountains of a great variety of forms pre-
sent themselves; some rising gradually to a
point, others very strange and irregular
Iheir height may be conjectured, from the
distance at which they become visible, which
h not less than 130 miles; this circumstance,


shewing that they are raised to a very consider-
able perpendicular elevation above the level of
the sea. As you approach nearer to the Island,
its aspect becomes still more beautiful; the
land rises slowly and smoothly from the edge of
the sea to a distance of several miles; the moun-
tains then commence, and are entirely visible,
from the base to the summit. What contributes
to give full effect to this prospect is, that these
mountains are covered with trees to the very
top ; and these trees (fitted to their situation)
are of the largest dimensions, and of every
variety of form and colour. Nor is this rich
clothing confined to the mountains ; for, as
might be expected, the plain which lies be-
tween them and the sea is ornamented with the
most beautiful and sweet-scented flowering shrubs
and trees. This plain, of which we have spoken,
is so encompassed as to represent to the eye the
appearance of a vast amphitheatre.
Such is the impression which the approach
to this Island makes upon the spectator; and
when he lands upon it, lie finds still farther
reason to be delighted with this favoured spot.
Abundance of wholesome and very nutritive
fruits, and animals of various kinds, which are
excellent for food, are found upon it; while
G


its climate, not incommoded by excessive beat
as is generally the case so near to the line, but
healthy and pleasant, 4s kept moderately cool
by a gentle breeze which generally blows from
between east and south-east.
The inhabitants are stout and well made.
Their stature is above the usual height of Eu-
ropeans, and their gait is stately. The men
are from five feet seven to five feet ten inches
high, though some of them have been observed
considerably above six feet. The females of
the better classes are also taller than those of
Europe; but the women of a lower descrip-
tion are diminutive in their size. This peculi-
arity is to be attributed to various causes, but
the principal one is to be found in their licen-
tious habits; for they frequently indulge, with-
out restraint from moral feelings or from de-
cency, in the most riotous and shameless ex-
cesses. Their hair is sometimes flaxen, but
male frequently brown or red, while that of the
children is generally flaxen, and afterwards
becomes gradually darker as they grow up, In
this respect, they differ from the native inhabi-
tants of all other similar climates, and even of
all Asia, the hair of the latter being univer-
sally black.
Botli men and women are even gracefully
elad, in a kind of white cloth which is made


of the bark of tome shrub, This cloth is
pot woven but is made like paper, to which,
in its texture, it bears a great resemblance.
If treated carefully, it will last for a considera-
ble time ; but still it is not strong, and like
paper it will not bear to be wet. Their dress
consists of two pieces of this cloth : one of
them has a hole in the middle of it, and this
being put over the head, it hangs down before
and behind to the middle of the legs; the other
pieee is generally four yards long and one
broad, and is wrapped about the body so as to
have a handsome and easy appearance. When
jt rains, they are obliged to throw off this dress,
as it will not stand the wet, and to wear in
in its stead a kind of course strong mattingg
Both sexes are fond of finery ; their ornaments
consist of feathers, flowers and shells, but th<?
females delight principally in pearls,
Their habitations are mere sheds ; they are
<ippen in all directions, and exposed to every
blast of wind. They consist of a roof sup-
ported at the sides by two rows of pillars,
Which are between three and four feet high,
and in the middle by a third row df pillars
about eight or nine feet in height. Thar roof
is formed of the leaves of the palm-tree. The
floor is covered with hay, upon which they put
g 2


Imats upon these mats they sit and sleep, as
there are never any chairs or stools except per-
haps one for the master of the family. I n their
houses there are not any divisions, as into eating
rooms and bed-chambers ; they are open
throughout, and in tins, there 1s no distinction
from persons of the highest to those of the
lowest rank. The only mark by which the
residence of a chief may be distinguished is a
kind of paling by which it is surrounded at
some and perhaps by its being of a larger
size. In fact the houses of the poorer peonle
serve for scarcely any other purpose than shelter
when the weather is wet, for they even sleep in
the open air when the nights are fine.
I lien food is very simple; that of the poorer
classes consists almost entirely of vegetables,
biead-fiuit, bananas, plantains, yams and
apples; while that of the rich comprehends
hogs, poultry, dogs, and fish. Such dogs as
are intended to be used for food are not taken
at random from those that go wild in the woods,
nor even from their domestic stock; they are
taken when very young, and are prevented
from eating any tiling but the finest vegetables ;
no animal food whatever is given to them. The
eil'ect of this mode of preparation upon their
liesh is said to be very considerable; some
Europeans, who have been prevailed upon to


taste it, say that it is very palatable. Their
inode ol killing animals for use is by eulFoca-
tion; they stop up the nostrils and hold the
mouth closed until life departs. They eat
much of their food raw, especially their fish as
we do oysters; what they do not use in this
state, they dress in a very peculiar manner. As
they have not any vessels which will stand the
lire, they do not boil any meat, but proceed
thus: .hey dig a pit about six or seven inches
deep, which, they very carefully pave with
pretty large stones at the bottom, and some-
times on the sides when the animal they intend
to dress is large. This they till with fuel in
great abundance, and having lighted a fire, they
make it very hot. They then clear it out;
cover the bottom and sides with the leaves of
the cocoa-nut-tree ; lap the meat in plantain
leaves, and in this state, lay it upon the heated
stones; they then heap the embers over all.
When it has been in the pit for a sufficient time,
it is found to be fit for use.
Their usual drink is water and the milk of
the cocoa-nut ; yet upon important occasions,
as uays of peculiar festivity, &c. they prepare
a liquor of which they are very fond. Their
mode of preparing this is so very uncommon as
to deserve description, though we doubt whe-
G 3


ther it will appear very enticing to our readers:
it is made from the root of a plant called by
the natives ava-ava. When they wish to make
some liquor for immediate use, a number of
them sits down about a vessel, each of whom
chews a quantity of the above-mentioned root
until it becomes quite soft and pulpy, and then
spits it in this condition into the vessel. When
they have obtained enough of this juice, they
ruix some water with it ; they then slightly
strain it through something like a sieve, after
which it is fit for drinking. This liquor, so
strangely composed, has a slight degree of in-
toxicating power; but, though they are very
fond of it, they have been very rarely seen to
indulge in the use of it so as to be sensibly af-
fected. Indeed they feel a disgust for ail in-
toxicating liquors, which is rather unusual in a
people in their low state of civilization. We
generally find the vice of drunkenness very
common among savage nations, insomuch that
Some persons have very judiciously remarked,
that almost by it alone- we might- distinguish
between them and a more polished and im-
proved people. But It must be said for the
inhabitants of Otaheite, that to whatsoever
other vices they are subject, they cannot be
charged with the habit of drunkenness. If at
any time one of them has been induced by the


European seamen to intoxicate himself, such
unqualified contempt and disapprobation are
manifested towards aim by the others, and he
seems to feel so strongly the impropriety of his
own conduct, as never to be guilty a second time,
though earnestly entreated.
To this abhorrence of drunkenness, and to
the simplicity of their food, but principally to
the former, may be attributed their good health.
Though they generally sleep in the open air,
and though their houses, if they oan be so
called, are exposed on every side, they usually
live to an advanced age. Some of them have
been remarked of even extreme old age without
any of its usual signs except gray haiis; active
upon their limbs and lively in their spirits, they
seemed to have arrived at those years without
any natural decay. What a lesson ought this
to be to persons placed in circumstances more
favourable to the improvement of their mind !
The poor ignorant savage is temperate in hi - *
drink and simple in his diet, though having it
fully in his power to commit excess in both,
and is consequently vigorous and athletic in
youth, and at lust reaches a healthy and cheer-
ful old age.
The general disposition of this people seems
to be gentle and friendly. They seem inclined
a 4


to peace, and almost always give a kind recep-
tion to strangers. This latter circumstance,
however, may in some cases arise from fear.
We have seen how ill Captain Bligh, with the
iionest men of his crew who remained wdth him
was treated by the natives when they found
him without arms, but more particularly with-
out fire arms. It has been observed also that
they are very unsocial in their domestic habits :
even at home, the women are not permitted to
be present at their meals, and when the men
eat together, they turn their backs upon each
rther.
They have not any trade with the natives of
other islands; such trade as they have is with
one another, and is rather a kind of barter.
They are very expert in it, so as to shew that
they are not by any means devoid of natural
talents; but they are very much "inclined to
thieving. This propensity is so strong that
they cannot, o?, will not refrain from attempt-
ing to indulge it before your eyes ; and such
is their ingenuity that they succeed in many
cases where success might appear hopeless to
a European. This habit, and others which
have been observed among them, leads us to
this conclusion, that they are a people of very
little moral principle, ■ though possessing some
dispositions of a more amiable nature.


Before we leave die consideration of the na-
tives, ,we shall give a description of the canoes
or boats used by them in their war expeditions,
m hshmg, and in passing rivers and straits
of the sea. Canoes are the vessels used by all
savage nations for the purposes to which civil-
ized people apply ships and boats; and they
are found to be of various forms and of very
different sizes. Some are so small as to hold
but one man in width, while in length they
contain seven or eight men; others again are
found to be fifty-three feet long, and eight feet
wide in the middle, narrowing gradually to
either end. Some are made for fishing; these
are small and so light that one man may < arry
them over laud on his head; some are made
for burthen, and will carry even thirty or forty
hogsheads of sugar; others again are constructed
foi tne service of war, which are much stronger
and highly ornamented with rude painting, shells,
the teeth of seals, &c.
Vvlien formed for carrying burthens, they
are made rather wide than long, but when
in fenced for Avar, they are long and very
to eng at each end. For whatever purpose they
used, they are almost universally con-
structed of one tree, hollowed out, a d the
o.Vitss wood cut off from the outside to as to
G 5


make them more manageable, and to give a
proper form to the bottom. If it be designed
to put up a sail in a canoe which is to carry
merchandize, jt is steeped thoroughly in water
when made, until the sides will yield to a force
applied within. The sides are then stretched
out by strong beams fastened to them inside ;
upon these beams boards are laid so as to make
a very good deck ; which, while it protects the
cargo from damage, serves to give strength to
the sides.
The Indians in some parts of North America
construct canoes in a very curious manner,
which ought not to be passed over in a discrip*
tion of this vessel. Their canoes are formed
of stripes of whalebone, tied, or rather stitched
closely together from end to end. Being in-
tended to hold but one man, they are decked,
as it were, by seal skins sewed together, and
then fastened strongly to a hoop in the middle.
In this hoop, the Indian sits, and by his seal-
skin jacket, extending all round beyond the
hoop, h;e keeps all water from entering Ifye in-
side of the canoe : so that the deck being water
tight, and no water getting in by the hoop, he
is enabled to preserve any thing dry in the bot-
tom of his little boat.
It is obvious from this description, that if
the canoe should upset, the man must go round


•with it (as he still continues sitting in the hoop
to keep out the water) and thus be plunged into
the waves. Such accidents do not often occur,
so expert are the Indians in the management
of the cance ; but when they do happen, it
is quite incredible (except for the evidence we
have of the fact) how soon matters are put
to rights. From thhir earliest infancy, the In-
dians are taught the exercise of recovering
themselves when upset in the water; and con-
sequently they never fail to bring the canoe
round to its proper position. Thus a single
man will put out to sea in the most boisterous
weather; the most tremendous waves are to
him as nothing; and, when fish cannot be other-
wise obtained, he will go many leagues from
land in pursuit of them, and always return in
safety. Perhaps few things are more striking
to the mind than the consideration of this poor
Indian, alone, at a great distance from land,
looking after his scanty fare in the solitary and
stormy ocean.
Canoes are not rowed by oars, as our boats
are, but are put in motion by paddles, which
are made some-what in the shape of a com
shovel. These are not put into the water and
taken out again as oars are in rowing, but are
moved backwards and forwards under the sur-
face. They are dipped down perpendicularly j


when moved forward it is edgeways, but they afe
fiat when pulled backwards; thus driving on
the canoe in a manner something like “ Sculling”
as it is called by sailors.
THE WHALE.
Notwithstanding what has been written by
many authors concerning the kraken and other
animals, as being of vast size, there is not at
present any doubt entertained by intelligent
persons but that the whale is the largest in ex-
istence. It is found in all the extensive seas
of all parts of the world, but it is of the great-
est dimensions within the warmer regions. In
these, it is not unfrequently found of a length not
less than 120 feet; while in the northern seas
it is seldom longer than 90 feet. It is become
in late years much less numerous than it was
formerly, being driven by the fishers from the
places which it naturally haunted as supplying'it
abundantly with food.
This animal is of a very • disproportioned
form, for the head is in size at least one third
of the whole: the tongue is so large that five
or six tuns of train oil are extracted from it;
while :’-e gullet is not more than two or three
inches'wide, so that only small fishes "can pass


through it, such as herrings. The eyes are very
small, when compared with the enormous size
of the head; they are not larger than those of
an ox, and, what is very uncommon in fishes,
they have eye-lids and eye-lashes like those of
land animals. They are placed very far behind,
like those of a hare, enabling it to see in every
direction; and this resemblance between two
creatures, so amazingly different in other respects,
is accompanied by a similarity of disposition; for
the whale, though apparently destined to be the
monarch of the ocean, is timorous, inoffensive,
and the object of attack and persecution to many
of a diminutive size.
It is very sharp-sighted and hears very well
(except when spouting water,) although it has not
any external appearance of an organ for that pur-
pose ; this organ however shews itself upon re-
moving the very outside skin, for then all the
internal parts of a perfect ear are found. It has
two orifices in the upper part of the head, through
which it spouts water to a great height when it
comes up to the surface for breath. To explain
this expression it may be. necessary to remark,
that, almost all kinds of fishes supply them-
selves with such quantifies of air as may be
required for life, in a manner very different
from that of land animals. In water is con-


tained a small portion of common air; and this
the fishes obtain by sucking in the water, and
by working it out again through their gills.
Very little air is sufficient for their support,
and this they obtain at any depth, separating
it from the water in the manner described.
But the whale breathes as land animals do;
and though it may be able to take in more at a
breath than they, yet it must come up to the
surface in order to take in a new supply. Thus
it never continues more than two or three mi-
nutes under water, as it cannot lay in a stock
which will last longer, but mast return to take
in fresh breath.
The whalebone, as it is improperly called,
is not any part of the bones of the animal;
they are hard, stiff and porous, like other
bones, and very abundant in marrow. There
are in the upper jaw 350 thin plates of a
black elastic substance on each side; these
are w hat we call whalebone, and in the living
animal are covered with long bristles, through
which it strains the water from its food. Of
these 700 plates about 500 are fit for use.
The whale feeds upon very small fish, sea
snails and sea blubber; it is very easily sus-
tained, and in pursuit of its sustenance gentle
and inoffensive. When a male and female
form an attachment, they continue constant to


each other during life, and the degree of affec-
tion which they mutually entertain is truly
interesting and surprising. When one of them
has been taken by the fishers, the other, though
raturally timorous, remains by its unfortunate
companion to the last, makes the greatest ex-
ertions to set it free, and even has been known
to give itself up to destruction rather than de-
part without its beloved companion. In these
exertions they sometimes commit dreadful ha-
voc upon the fishing-boats; they lash the sea
into a foam, and with a single blow of the tail
drive a boat w ilh its crew to the bottom.
It is strange that an animal so affectionate
towards those of its own kind, and so inof-
fensive to all others, should not be permitted
to live in peace. One might suppose that its
vast size would strike terror into its enemies,
and that it should thus be left to the enjoyment
of its simple pleasures. But the case is very
different indeed ;if the whale were the most
voracious, cruel and tyrannical monster, it
could not be more tormented than we find it to
be. First, a small animal called the whale-
louse fixes itself under the fins and scales, and
in perfect security feeds upon the fat to which
it has the means of penetrating. This animal
multiplies exceedingly, and puts the whale to
extreme pain ; in vain dees the mighty mows-


ter endeavour to free itself from its little tor-
mentor ; every effort ma'kes it more careful to
secure its hold. Next, the sword-fish, assisted
by its ally the thresher-fish, as the sailors call it,
assails him. This fish, rising out of the wafer,
comes down with its tremendous instrument,
and pierces the skin and flesh of the whale
until the sea is actually coloured with the
blood; while the thresher from below attacks
him as he attempts to escape from the superior
assailant; and thus each seconding the efforts
of the other, they often succeed in exhaust-
ing the gigantic innocent. The seal ali#
frakes his share in the conflict, but his object
is only plunder, and lie has frequently been
known to tear off whole lumps from the sides of
the whale.
Rut all these are but trifling, when compared
with the injuries inflicted upon him by man.—
His fat and other parts of his frame are so be-
neficial and useful to this his chief enemy, that
lie is pursued for them by men belonging to
every commercial country. The whale-fishery
is now principally carried on in the high nor-
thern seas, about Greenland. It commences
in May, continues through June and July,
and terminates before the end of August; for
if the ships were not out of these seas by the
beginning of September they would be r.ur-


founded by ice, and obliged to remain during
the whole winter in that most inhospitable cli-
mate. The mode in which it commonly con-
ducted is this, each ship employed in the ser-
vice has six boats : each of these has six rowers
and one harpooner, whose business it is to strike
the whale when he appears. When the ship
comes to her station two boats are put upon the
Watch; if a whale is observed spouting by
either of these, they both advance, and the first
which approaches him before he goes down
commences the attack. If the harpooner suc-
ceeds in striking him, a signal is instantly given
to all the other boats, which letting themselves
down from the ship come up in all haste. In
the mean time, the whale descends sometimes
perpendicularly downwards, sometimes scuds
off obliquely, but in either case moves at first
with great rapidity.
The harpoon still sticks in his side and carries
with it a line, which has been most carefully
coiled up in the boat, and if there is not enough
in that boat the rest supply their lines until
the whale, relaxing his efforts, moves more
slowly, and is at last obliged to return for air.
Though each line be 1200 feet long, it some-
times happens that all the six are drawn out;
but this seldom happens. The motion of the
whale is so swift at first, that if the side of


the boat were not kept constantly wet it would
be set on fire by the rubbing of the rope, and
if the slightest accident occurred in the uncoil-
ing of the rope, the boat Would be assuredly
carried down. When he returns to the surface
they attack him with lances : he sinks a second
time; on his ascent he is again attacked ; until
at last, wearied by fatigue, and exhausted by
the loss of blood, he turns upon his side, is
killed and dragged along to the ship’s side.—
He seldom rises more than twice before he is
killed ; hut while he is above on the surface it
is exceedingly dangerous to go near him.
When brought to the ship they fasten him
with ropes, and men having irons upon their
shoes, to prevent their slipping, get upon him,
and cut ofl’ large pieces of fat or blubber, until
they have obtained all that is valuable'.'they
then let the remainder of the body loose, when
it is instantly devoured by seals and sharks
and other fishes of prey. The larger pieces of
blubber are afterwards cut small, stowed closely
in tubs and brought home, where it is melted
down into train oil. j Such are the leading cir-
cumstances in the life of this stupendous crea-
ture, and by all combined, as we have said, its
numbers have been already observed to be verv
much diminished.


THE SEAL.
This animal, though much smaller than the
"Whale, is yet very often of an exceedingly large
size. It belongs to an order of creatures which
by living partly on land and partly in the water,
are called amphibious : they are of various
kinds, and of very different dimensions; some
are called sea-lions, sea-bears, and others sea-
calves, from the resemblance*which they bear
to those animals on land : some are not more
than eight feet long and five feet round in the
middle, while others ard not less than twenty-
five feet long and twenty round. Such are their
varieties; but they are all amphibious, very
fat, fond of going together in great numbers,
and very voracious. They are to be found in
all countries from the north to the south pole;
though the southern seas seem to be their fa-
vourite residence, as they are found there in
much larger number and of a much greater size.
They have this property in common, they are
four-footed, and belong to the class of animals
called quadrupeds; some have their fore-feet
made like those we see on land animals, while
others have them very short, the hind feet
turned backwards for the purpose of swimming,
and webbed.


Ihe teeth of most kinds are very long and
sharp, and in their mutual conflicts inflict very
long deep wounds like those 'given by a sword.
Of -the Sea-Lion in particular, the teeth are of
a very dazzling whiteness, and as hard as flint;
in so much that pieces of them having been
found upon the shore they could not be distin-
guished from white-flint, except by the smell
produced by rubbing them together. The sea**
lions have manes, jet some have not this orna-
ment; and it does not seem to be accompanied
by peculiar ferocity. It is remarkable that
while almost all will fly from a man some will
stand upon the defensive, and frequently give
very desperate wounds ; as was found to be
the case by Captain Rogers who attacked one
of them; it broke the spear which lie held,
and would have killed him but for a desperate
effort and immediate assistance. They are
generally very tender about the nose, so that
struck there even by a club they will instantly
die. In a desolate island of the South Sea seve-
ral English gentlemen and sailors killed, with
bludgeons alone, more than eight hundred of
them in a very few hours.
I his was a very useless massacre, as their
bodies were left on the beach to rot : but they
are very capable of being applied to the most
serviceable purposes. To the wretched inha-


bitants of Greenland, for example, they are
more useful than the sheep to us, or the cocoa-
nut tree to the savages of the pacific ocean.
From the sheep we obtain food, and light and
raiment; from the cocoa tree they acquire food,
drink, houses, and indeed almost every thing
they stand in need of. Still the seal is more
beneficial to the Greenlanders, for without it,
life would be scarcely supportable. Its flesh,
serves them for food; its fat furnishes them
with light by which they pass the long winter
evenings; its bones give them fuel; its skin
covers their boats and tents ; from it they obtain
the best strings or thongs; and from its in-
testines blown up, or stretched out and dried,
they make buoys for their nets, windows for
their houses, or even curtains for their beds.-r-
Being of such service, it is not surprising that
the means of catching them should be an affair
of great importance ; and so much so do we
find it to be, that the highest praise which one
Greenlander can pass upon another is, “ that
he can take a seal alone.”
For this purpose, they have various modes of
proceeding: sometimes a man gets upon a kind
of sledge, moves himself forward on the ice
with a motion similar to its own, towards a
seal which he sees resting upon a rock, and if
he can approach near enough kills it with a


spear. But a more dangerous -way must be
resorted to in summer, when the ice has been
melted away, and the animal can swim. Then
the Greenlander alone in his little boat, ad-
vances towards a seal which he sees basking
upon the surface of the water, strikes it w ith a
harpoon as we have described in whale-fishing,
and almost always, though with great difficulty
and danger, succeeds in bringing it to shore.
Upon the coast of Caithness in ScptJand,they
have another method of catching seals. Along
tins coast there are great numbers of caverns
which run from the edge of the sea a great way
under land. In these the seals breed, and in
teem they retire for rest at peculiar seasons in
the night. When it. is completely dark, the seal-
hunters enter these caverns from their boats,
and go into them to a considerable distance
with lighted torches. When they have reached
their station, they make a great noise, whiclt
rouses the seals from their sleep. The seal-
then rush in all haste to the sea. The hunters
allow the first crowds to pass, for they are so
numerous as to hear down all opposition ; but
the young and all the other stragglers they
knock on the head in great numbers. The
cubs, as they are called, are very fat, producing
eight or nine gallons of oil while yet very
young : indeed so rapid is their growth, that


in less than nine days young cubs, are as active
as their mothers. This employment of seal-
hunting is very dangerous; if the torches should
accidentally be extinguished, or if a wind should
suddenly set into the cavern from the seaward,
destruction would be inevitable.
THE TURTLE.
This animal, the shell of which Captain
Bligh found upon several of the shores he vi-
sited in his Wonderful voyage, though he wag
so unfortunate as not to find any of its flesh, ja
very plentiful in all the seas of the warmer cli-
mates. It is covered above with a very strong
shell which is sometimes able to bear almost
the weight, of a cart. This creature grows to
a very large size, being often 480 pounds in
weight. It has four short feet, upon which it
moves very slowly while on land, but it can
swim very well at sea. It is so strong, though
so unwieldy in its motions, as to carry GOO
pounds, or as many men loaded as can stand
upon its back. It propagates its kind by
eggs, of which it lays not less than 1000 ; this
amazing number it deposits in the sand, with
which it carefully covers them; then leaves
them to the genial heat of the sun during


day, while at night it sits upon them and
hatches them itself. When the young are suf-
ficiently strong, they break the shells and run
towards the sea. These eggs are good food,
but the flesh of the animal surpasses them : this
is of a delicious flavour, wholesome, and ex-
ceedingly nutritive. Tlie seamen find nothing
which contributes more to relieve them from the
effects of the salt diet to which they must resort
in long voyages : while the epicures of all wealthy
cities find them the most luxurious dainty.
It is not therefore surprising that they should
be sought after wherever they are to be
found, with great avidity, and that various modes
of catching them should have been discovered.
Sometimes they are seen basking in the heat
upon the surface of the sea ; when they are
thus observed, a man approaches quietly, so
as not to disturb their slumbers, dives un-
derneath them, and thus takes them by sur-
prize, Put the slightest noise rouses them,
when they instantly plunge to the bottom. An-
other mode is adopted when the animal is seen
floating ; a man coming as near as he can in a
boat, strikes it with a harpoon or barbed dart,
to which a line is attached ; it then sinks, but
is shortly forced to return, and is thus taken
in a manner something similar to that pursued
in whale fishing, as we have already described it.


But the most successful mode of all is that of
American seamen. They go to those shores of
which the turtle is known to be fond, and lie in
wait on the beach near the edge of the water,
until the turtle thinks of returning to the sea
very early in the morning before sunrise : as
many as they can lay hold of, they turn upon
the back and so leave them until all have been
so treated. The creature is so helpless that it
must continue in this position even to death,,for
its legs are so short as not to enable it to re-
sume its natural attitude. It may be kept alive
a long time, until it be required far use, and
some have become tame, and even domestic.
There have been instances of their living in
this condition for many years: one in particular
has been recorded as living upwards of
thirty ;-during a great part of which time it was
asleep. Every day it had retired to rest by
four o’clock in the afternoon, and did not
make its appearance until late in the forenoon.
In the winter it burrowed a hole in the garden,
where it concealed itself from the beginning of
November to the latter eiul of April. At its
coming out of this hole in spring, it ate very
little, its appetite became stronger towards the
Middle of summer, it then became again indif-
ferent of food, and retired as we have just said
*1


at the near approach of cold weather. Though
apparently very stupid, nay almost insensible
of what passed around it, still it could distin-
guish tne persons of the family, and was even
attached with the marks of affection to the lady
who had fed it for so many years.
THE CUTTLE FISH.
This curious animal is of a great many kinds,
and is found in almost all climates ; but in the
Indian seas it seems to find the most favourable
residence, for there it to an enormous
size. Indeed the stories which are told of its
dimensions, and which are implicitly believed
by the Indian seamen and fishermen, are almost
incredible. But first we ought to give an idea
of its form : it has a body in the centre, from
which there branch out no less than six or eight
arms, with two long feelers. Its mouth
the middle of the body at the center of its arms
and feelers, with a beak hooked like a parrot’s,
'lo this mouth, it conveys its food by means of
the claws, and these claws also fasten it to any
fixed substance when it wishes to be at rest.
Its food consists of sprats, lobsters, and other
shell fish, upon which it can lay hold. Its mo-
tions are- very slow, and it would find great


difficulty in escaping from its numerous enemies,
if it were not for a very extraordinary liquor
with which it has been furnished by nature,
partly for this purpose. The liquor we speak
of is black in its colour like ink, and if we
may judge from its effects upon other sea ani-
mals, of a disagreeable taste to them. When
the cuttle fish is pursued by the sea w r olf, and
finds itself in danger of being caught, it squirts
out a quantity of this liquor, which instantly
stains or dies all the water about it, and thus
enables it to get off, as it were, in darkness.
So strangely lias Providence furnished every
class of beings, even those apparently most de-
fenceless, with the means of escape, if not of
defence.
This liquid has been known from the remotest
ages, and has been applied to various uses:
when mixed w ith other matters it has proved a
good dye, and it has been used as ink for
writing and printing. When the animal is taken,
it emits a great deal of this juice, and makes.a
noise like a hog. In this creature, we find a
remarkable instance of conjugal affection ; the
union of the male and female, when once formed,
is during life, and in defence of the female
and the young, the male will expose itself with
great boldness to considerable danger; if be
should be taken, they immediately fly with
H 2


great terror. But to return to the enormous
size at which it is said they arrive in the, Indian
seas; its body, it is asserted, is sometimes two
fathoms, that is, twelve feet across the centre,
. and the arms stretch out to the amazing length
of nine fathoms or fifty-four feet. So impressed
are the Indian fishermen with the truth of this
account, that they never row out in their little
bouts without a sharp axe, by which they may
cut on any or these arms which may be cast
over the boat, and which would overset it.
THE FLYING FISH.
This animal might at first view be supposed
to be the peculiar favorite of Providence, by
being enabled to live in one element, and
when necessity or inclination prompts, to raise
itself into another; thus seeming to have a
double existence. But this, like many first
opinions, is very unfounded; for perhaps there
does not ex:st a creature which lives a more
wretched life than this. Its wings are but the
breast fins as they are called, which almost all
fishes have ; these, being of a most unusual
length, toughness and strength, enable it to
fly for some time in the upper air. But
their flight is very short; whether the wines
v- c '


cfiase to be pliable when dry, or that the crea-
ture is soon wearied; it, is difficult to say, but
they must soon return to.the water, and in their
way thither they often fall upon the decks of
ships.
They seem to be an object of great desire to
the other fishes, for they are pursued with ea-
gerness by the dolphin, the seal and others. It
has no means of defence against these voracious
enemies ; it therefore makes every effort possi-
ble to escape, but they swimming faster would
easily overtake it, were it not for the fms. Ris-
ing out of the water it soars into the air, and
thus gets rid of the immediate danger. But when
above, it is still pursued ; for the albatross and
other sea birds, perpetually on the wing, per-
ceive it, and in their turn make an attack upon
it. Forced by these, it again takes refuge in
the waters, but such is the sagacity of its for-
mer pursuers, that they, by continuing their
original track below, receive it as it fails.—
These fishes seem to watch it in its flight, and
to have their whole attention fixed upon it; for
it is said, that in their eagerness of pursuit,
they often become the prey of their own pecu-
liar enemies, nay even dash themselves upon
the rocks.
113


THE BREAD FRUIT TRET.


THE BREAD-FRUIT.
This invaluable vegetable grows upon a tree
about the size of a middling oak. The leaves
of this tree are from one and a half to two feet
long, about one foot broad in the middle, and
smooth like those of the fig-tree, and the fruit,
which is about the size of a child’s head, lianas
about the boughs like apples. It does not
grow spontaneously, but must have been plant-
ed ; the growth is however so rapid, as to re-
quire but a few months to bring it to perfec-
tion, and a man might easily plant ten of them
in an hour. Such is the abundance of the pro-
duce, that a man who plants a dozen may be al-
most said to have done his duty to his family
and posterity. The bread-fruit is round, or
nearly so, and between seven and eight inches
in diameter; it is covered witjj a thin skin, and
has a core within, the size of which is about
two inches and a half long, and half an inch
thick. Between the skin and the core lies the
part or the fruit which is fit for use; this is as
while as snow when first opened, and is nearly
as firm as freshly baked bread, having a sweets
ish taste like that of a Jerusalem artichoke.
It is in season for about seven months in the year,
and during the wdiole of that time supplies a kind
of food both wholesome and pleasant to the in*


habitants of the South Sea Islands, who also
make cloth of the bark of the tree, and use the
wood in building their huts and canoes.
It is dressed in a great variety of modes ; the
simplest is that of cutting it into three or four
pans after the core and skin have been removed,
and roasting them till they are thoroughly diy.
In this state it is rather insipid in taste, but is
still very eatable. Sometimes it is baked in an
oven ; but then it is soft and bears a great re-
semblance to a boiled potato. If dressed in
this manner, the natives are obliged to prepare
it fiom day to day, as it soon becomes harsh
and dry; tin's defect, however, is easily reme-
died, by cutting the fruit into slices, ar,d diymg
tnem in the sun. When thus prepared, it will
last for a considerable time, and tastes very much
like brown bread.
jiut the most usual mode of dressing it for
keeping, is to make it into what is called ma-
fuc, Maine is thus made; the fruit being ga-
thered before it is quite ripe, is laid in heaps
and covered with leaves. It is left in these heaps
until it ferments, when it becomes disagreeably
Si eet ; the core is then taken out entire,
the skin is stripped off, and the fruit is
thrown into a pit, the bottom and sides of
this pit are carefully covered with fine grass.
7he fruit being covered over with leaves, is


loaded with stones to press it close ; it then un-
dergoes a second fermentation, and becomes
rather sour and very pleasing tq the palate. It
is then bruised and afterwards rolled up in
balls, which being wrapped closely in leaves
will continue fit for use a long time.
THE YAM.
This is a large bulbous root like the potato,
but of a much greater size, the common -weight
being two or three pounds, and some have been
found not less than forty-five pounds. It grows
upon a long trailing stalk, which spreads or ex-
tends along the ground a great way, is jointed
in some measure like a cane, and, at the joints,
strikes roots into the earth. These roots are at
first fibrous a,id very thin and small, but as
they fasten themselves into the soil we soon
perceive them to enlarge and to produce the
yam. They are propagated very much like a
potato, by cutting the root into pieces; but care
must be taken as in the potato to preserve an
eye in each. The skin is thick and rough, of
a violet colour, hut so dark as to appear almost
black ; but the inside is perfectly white, firm
and mealy as that ol the potato, but much
firmer and closer in the texture. This meg-


lincss does not shew itself at first, but appeals
upon boiling or being roasted, when it becomes
dry and exceedingly nourishing, and much to be
[nefened to any similar substance in common
use. It is therefore never eaten raw, but it may
be prepared even by being cut into slices and
exposed to the sun.
MAIZE, OR THE INDIAN CORN.
Ihis grain grows upon strong upright stalks
much taller than those of any European corn.
Ti;c head or ear is also much larger than that
of our wheat or barley, beiug seven or eight
inches long, and nearly an inch and a half
thick. There are generally upon it eight rows
of grains very regularly disposed, in each of
the-e rows about thirty grains, every one of
which is larger than two of the finest wheat.
The stalk of the maize is jointed like the sugar-
cane, and contains a juice from which a sirop
hke that of sugar is made. It is planted
in iqw s, distant from each other every way
two or three feet; the seed is put into holes
where the rows cross egch other, two or three
or more grains into each, lest some should
fail or be carried off by birds. If one of the
grains succeed it is sufficient. As it grows up,


the earth is heaped about it to furnish it with
nourishment: and when this lias been twice
done, the plant is left to itself. When reaped
it ought to be threshed, well dryed, then cover-
ed up in pits with hay, dry grass, &c. This
grain is of very general use and is prepared in
many ways, but boing of itself very dry it is
paostly, when ground into flour, mixed with
other substances, as rice.
THE PLANTAIN.
This valuable vegetable is to be found in
piost parts of the hot climates, but is culti-
vated with pecular attention in the West In-
dies. In Jamaica particularly it is the princi-
pal food of the negroes; they prefer it to all
other vegetables for common use, and if if;
should by any convulsion of nature be destroy-
ed, theie could not be found for it perhaps a.
substitute; flour made of wheat is less palata-
ble to them, and they esteem it also less nour-
ishing. Its leaves are found to be very ser-
viceable as an application to blisters; they
serve for napkins and table clothes, and re
even used to fatten hogs. The stalk is of a
soft texture ; it rises to the height of IS or 2Q
feet,, and tapers very gradually from (he bottom,


THE COCOA-NUT TREE.


(where it is about tire thickness of a man’*
thigh,) to the very top.
Throughout the whole length, it is smooth,
buUt the upper end, very long leaves strike out.
These leaves are generally eight feet long, and
from two to three feet broad, smooth, thin and
easily torn, unless they be laid flat. The growth
of the leaves is perhaps more rapid than that of
any other vegetable ; they may almost be said
to be seen to grow ; if a mark be made at the
end of one of them, it will be found to have
giown more than an inch beyond it in the
course of an hour. The fruit, u hen full grown,
is a foot long and two inches thick,at first green,
then a pale yellow. It is covered with a tough
skin, but the pulp within is soft and lusciously
sweet. When intended for use, it is pulle'd before
it is <juite ripe, otherwise it Would not bear hand-
ling : the skin is stripped-off and the rind is then
roasted. In this state it is served up as bread,
to which indeed it is said to be superior.
THE COCOA-NUT TREE.
The cocoa-nut grows upon a tree whoa#
trunk rises to the height of f>o feet. This trunk
** ueaj, y °f the same thickness from top to


bottom, though it. has been observed of the
form of an apothecary's pestle, smaller at the
middle than at either end. No leaves or
branches grow from it throughout all this
length ; but at the top there are fastened to
tlie trunk, by strong fibrous substances, about
28 leaves, if they may be so called, 14 or 15
feet long From these the larger leaves or ra-
ther branches, smaller leaves strike out, which
are 3 or 4 feet in length. The trunk gene-
rally inclines to one side, which is supposed
to he occasioned by the weight of the fruit
when the tree is young. The fruit grows
at the very top, i.i clusters of about a dozen
nuts in each. Of the bark o! the tree, the In-
dians make ropes : the leaves are used lor mak-
ing mats, baskets and brooms, and by the Last
Indians for writing on, like paper, while the
young and tender ones at the top are an excel-*
lent substitute for cabbage.
The nut appears much larger than it really
is, being surrounded by a thick husky coat;
when this is stripped off, the shell appears,
which is-hard, b ack or dark brown, and
verv strong. The kernel of this nut is of a
very uncommon form j not round and distinct
as is usual, but attached to the inside of tire
shell all round about it, to the thickness, of
nearly half an inch, forming as it were an in*


side coal ; within this kernel is a hollow space
filled with a liquid called the milk: large nuts
contain of this fluid nearly three half pints;
almost all hold more than a pint. The milk
is a little acid, very agreeable, cooling, and
exceedingly wholesome ; but if it be pleasing
to us when brought to those cold climates by
a tedious voyage, what must it be to the natives
of those hot and parqhed countries where it
grows naturally. Exhausted by the heat of
the sun, and worn out by fatigue, the poor
Negro has but to gather one or two cocoa nuts.
The kernel serves for good food, and the milk
for a most delicious and refreshing drink. In
short there are few of the necessaries and even
conVeniencies of life but are derived from the
different parts of this tree. It supplies the in-
habitants with bread, milk, and oil, it af-
fords them a strong spirit, vinegar and barm—-
timber to build their huts, aud thatch to cover
them, the shell is a useful article among their
household vessels, and the coarse fibrous husk
surrounding it, as well as the bark, is made
into matd, cloth, and cordage. We are told of
people who every year cross over to the Cocoa-
Nut Islands, and having cut down a tree, with
the bark spin a yarn with which they sew the
planks together, and so build a ship. Of the
I 2


same wood, they cut and round away a mast;
of the bark and fibrous covering of the shell,
they weave the sails and cordage, and having
thus completed their vessel, they load her with
cocoa nuts which they carry back to sell.—
During their voyage, and the whole time em-
ployer! in building the ship, the cocoa nut tree
furnishes them with fruit, milk, vegetables and
clothing—and thus the bountiful care of Pro-
vidence is seen every where to supply the
means of support and happiness.
But the difficulty is to gather the nuts : they
grow at the top of a tree 60 feet high, whose
trunk is smooth and without a branch by which
one might climb, The ingenuity of man has
not however failed him here ; for the Indian
contrives a mode of gaining his prize at any
height, although alone. He makes a hoop tf
some very pliable rods, about the tree, wide
enough to contain both the trunk and his own
body, and strong enough to sustain his weight.
When the hoop is finished he puts himself into
it so far as that it may come below his shoulders,
he then presses against the tree with his hands,
his knees and feet, and consequently presses
back against the hoop ; by this means the hoop
is kept firm in its place, and by moving his
hands and feet a little he forces himself upwards
(like a sweep-chimney) until he gradually
reaches the top.


THE BANANA .
This is of the same kind with the fruit we
have described, but it is smaller in size and
more pleasant in flavour. This fruit is shorter
and rounder, about four or five inches long,
like a cucumber. The stalk rises to 12 or 15
feet * n height, and the leaves are about two
yards long and a foot broad ; if it be cut down,
there shoot up from the root a great many suek-
ers, which in eight months will themselves
produce fruit; and by reason of this verv use-
ful property, a succession of it may be had ripe
through all the months in the year. This is
the more necessary, as the fruit cannot be used
green. When ripe, it is taken either raw or
roasted in slices, and is relished by all classes
of people. When the natives in any of the West
India Islands intend to go on a long journey
or voyage, they generally lay in a stock of
loaves made from the banana in a peculiar man-
ner. They squeeze the fruit when quite ripe,
through a fine sieve, expose it to the sun until
it is sufficiently dry, and then wrap it in leaves.
In this state it has an agreeable acid taste, and
will continue fit fdr use a long time.
i 3


THE PALM TREK
This tree, called also the date tree, frorrt
the fruit which it bears, grows in most of the
countries of the East: it has been also trans-
planted into the West Indies, but rather unsuc-
cessfully, as it does not grow to its usual size,
and its numbers have of late years very much
diminished. In the islands of the South Sea,
its trunk grows to a height of 50 or 60 feet;
and in Arabia, where particular attention is
paid to its cultivation, it sometimes reaches to
100 feet. The trunk is round, upright and
regular; except for many lumps which grow
upon it, where old leaves have fallen off dur-
ing the growth of the tree, When arrived at
its full size, there are not any leaves upon it
except at top, where they grow in a cluster,
hanging down like an umbrella.
These leaves ought rather to be called
branches, for they are very strong, and are
from eight to nine feet in length. Besides the
leaves, there shoot up from the bottom of the
trunk, suckers which are 4 to 5 feet long.


The fruit, called dates, grows like an acorn ;
it is solid, tough and firm, and has a kernel,
which is hard and agreeable to the taste.
The palm tree has a very remarkable pro-
perty, that every part of it is useful. To begin
with the trunk ; its wood is tough, strong, and
fit to he made into every instrument of hus-
bandry : it lasts a long time, even when ex-
posed to every change of the weather, so that
it is often called “ incorruptible.” It serves
also for fuel; it burns at first slowly, hut, its
coals last a long time and are very hob The
inside of the young trees is good food, and is
Called the marrow ; the young leaves also, and
flow r ers, are used for the satne purpose, and are
very palatable when eaten with lemon/Tuice.
The old leaves or branches, are dried, hi the
sun, and their fibres, being taken out are wo-
ven into mats and other articles of domestic
nse. The Otaheitans make their mats of these
fibi •es, and it is surprising how serviceable
such mats are ; though coarse, they make a
warm durable clothing for the natives, Some
smaller leaves, or fibres, which grow at the
root, are dried and twisted into mats.
From the trunk, also, is obtained a very
pleasant and wholesome liquor, like milk. To
obtain this, the branches at the top are all
I 4


cut off, deep cuts are then made in the tree,
out of which the juice drops 6r distils. This
juice is carefully preserved as it comes out,
and having had a little time to rest and ferment,
is fit for use.
The fruit is eaten when young and fresh, in
which case it is very good food: or, if allowed
to ripen, when it becomes hard it is dried, and
then ground into meal, which lasts for a long
time without turning, and is much relished.—
Thus this vegetable, and the camel, seem
granted by a bountiful Providence to the
Arabs, in place of the many advantages which
other nations enjoy from their situation. Of
the camel it is said that every part of its frame
(its hair, its bones, its skin, its flesh) is useful,
and that even its excrements serve various
purposes, particularly in medicine; while we
have just seen that the date tree supplies meat
and drink and clothing, that its very flowers
serve as food, and its leaves answer many
ends.
THE LION.
This animal is found in most parts of the
old world,, throughout all the southern and


middle regions of Asia; but is observed to
grow to the largest size in Africa. There he
is frequently seen of the height of from four to
six feet; and from eight to nine feet long from
the nose to the beginning of the tail. Its head
is large, and appears even larger than it really
is, by reason of an enormous mass of long
shaggy hair which grows upon it. This, which
is called his mane, leaves his face bare, but
covers the rest of his head, all his neck and
his shoulders, and hangs down to his knees.—
The rest of his hair being short, he seems of a
very disproportionate form; the body appear-
ing to belong to an animal much smaller than
that which carries the head. When he is en-
raged, all the hair of his mane stands erect: he
lashes himself with his tail, and altogether as-
sumes a most tremendous appearance. His
legs are thick and very strong ; and his bones
are so hard that they have been said to strike
fire like a flint.
The claws are long anu sharp, and their
sharpness is preserved by their being kept
within cover, unless when he intends to make an
attack : then he drives them out with such ter-
rible force that he can dash them at once into
the very bowels of a horse through the ribs.—
The Lion may be very justly called the King
i 5


of the beasts, for he can master all other qua-
drupeds except perhaps the elephant, and even
he, fears to meet him. The habit of uninter-
rupted success makes him' fearless, and he
looks upon man with a surly indifference, but
will attack him if assailed by hunger. This is
however true only in the inhospitable deserts,
where he seldom meets with mankind ; for
when he happens to live near the haunts of
men, he becomes timorous, and never attacks,
except lie can conic on by surprise.
In this, we may see the wonderful power
which reason gives to the human species : even
the poor ignorant Hottentot is by its means
more than a match for this terrible beast.—
The appetite of the lion for flesh is very great,
for lie requires at least fifteen pounds a day;
but when lie has obtained enough to satisfy
his hunger, he will not, like the tiger, conti-
nue to destroy animals through wanton ra"-e.
But it is when pressed by want of water that
he shews forth all his terrors ; if in the hot
sandv deserts of Africa he should not get
enough to quench his thirst, he seems to become
actually mad with ferocity; his eyeballs be-
come red and fiery his mane is raised, he
lashes his tad, and roars with all his fury.


last gives it up, exhausted of blood and strength,
a prey to the dogs. This is indeed a very
dangerous amusement; if in the pursuit the
hunter should fall, or if through terror and agi-
tation the horse should become even for a mo-
ment unmanageable, certain destruction awaits
him ; but such is the skill acquired by practice,
and so intelligent is the horse'rendered by long
training, that very few accidents happen.
THE KANGUROO.
This curiously formed creature is found in
Very few places; indeed it is highly probable
that it breeds naturally only in New Holland.
It is said to belong to a class of very extraor-
dinary animals, the opossum ; every species ot
which has some strange property. For instance,
one of them has a kind of second womb or
belly, into which it can put any thing by an
external opening; and into this, it conveys its
young, and so carries them off when pursued.
The kanguroo has a small head tapering to
the nose; the neck also and shoulders are
small in proportion to the whole size ®f the


THE KANGUROO.


animal : but it gradually increases in bulk or
thickness from the top of the nose to the root
of the tail. Its rump and belly are very large,
os also its hind legs. But its most curious pe-
culiarity is the shortness of its foi;e legs ; for
though the others are long, thick and strong,
these are exceedingly weak and short, in so
much that they are not of any .service in walk-
ing ; and seem to be used only for putting
the food into the mouth. It usually sits up-
right upon its hams, and with its long erect
ears has a queer appearance; it moves by
bounding, and it sometimes springs to the
height of eight feet. It is very timid, and
generally goes in herds of 30 or 40 each. Tt
has no instrument of defence but its tail,
which is as long as the rest of its body, and
which it uses to beat off dogs wlien pursued.
THE CAMELOPARD.
The existance of this animal was for a long
time doubted in Europe; the account of its
great height and extraordinary form were so
incredible in themselves, and often so contra-
dictory, that few persons placed any confi-


THE CAMELOPARD.


dence in them. The most credulous could
scarcely believe that any animal was so tall that
a man on horseback could ride under it with-
out stooping ; yet, strange as it may have ap-
peared, the fact is strictly true, or very nearly
so. The camelopard inhabits the deserts oi
Africa, especially towards the south, above
the Cape of Good Hope; and though it be not
very rare in them, still they are so extensive
that we cannot come up with it often. Its
form is light, slender and airy, like that of the
deer, but without the proportions, and also
without the easy motion of the latter. Its
head is like that of the deer, with two horns
about a foot long, which are a part of the skull
or rather a continuation of the hone of it. Ils
neck is like that of a horse, its legs and feet
like those of a deer, hut the lore-legs are
twice as long as the hinder.
As it stands erect, it is 18 feet high from
the ground to the top of the head, and tea
feet to the tip of the shoulder, leaving eight
feet from the shoulder to the head. If its
body were then three feet deep, there would
be still seven feet under the belly. The hinder
part of the body is so low', that when the ani-
mal is standing it has the appearance ol a dog
sitting; and this form renders all its motions
laborious, awkward and tiresome, Hence it


retires into remote places, where it is not
likely to be pursued, and is therefore but rarely
met with. A young one being brought to the
Cape, was accurately measured, and, though it
had not reached full maturity, was more than
seventeen feet high; from the head to the
shoulder seven feet, from the shoulder to the
tail seven feet, and the hind-legs shorter by
two feet than the fore.
It is utterly incapable of defence, except in
flight ; its horns are blunt, its teeth fitted only
f>r eating vegetables, and its legs it cannot use
in kicking, so that it is very timorous, and
flies from every enemy. It is not of any ser-
vice to man. The shortness of its bade, and
the steep descent from the shoulders to the
rump (being three feet in seven) combined
with its awkward motion, tender it unfit for
riding, and st ill more so for carrying burthens ;
yet it is sought after through curiosity, and
has been sent from Africa to Murope, and the
remotest parts of Asia ; the strangeness of its
form, anti the beauty of its spotted skin, are
too alluring to he resistt d. The skin of one
has been presented to Trinity College, Dublin,
in the museum of which it may be seen very
well stuffed and preserved


THE ELEPHANT.
This animal is deserving of the most careful
attention, not merely on account of its vast
size, but because it is the most sagacious and
docile of the brute creation. All writers
agree in saying, that its natural sagacity is
greater than that of all other brutes, yet were
people to judge from its external appearance,
they would be very much disappointed. At
first view, it presents an enormous mass of
flesh, almost without animation ; a huge body
covered with a thick bide, on which a very
few straggling hairs grow, legs thick, clumsy,
and ill shaped, so as to seem unfit for moving ;
little eyes, large hanging ears, and a long
winding trunk or nose. Such a form gives one
the idea of stupidity in the extreme; but this
first impression is soon removed.
Of all four-footed beasts, the elephant is the
largest, as well as the strongest; its height
is sometimes fifteen feet, but it is very short
for its height. In its natural state, it is gentle
and peaceable, yet so brave as not to yield
without resistance to an injury. It seems a
social animal, going generally in companies,


B.n<l the oldest always leads. The young', the
females, and the weakly, are put in the centre,
and are surrounded by the stronger in a com-
pact body. Thus they march in perfect secu-
rity through the deserts; and when they come
to an enclosed place, every thing seems to fall
before them. The husbandman finds it a vain
matter to attempt resistance, and is forced to
give up the fruits of bis labour, which are de-
stroyed in a short time. Hunters may take
revenge upon the stragglers, and such as are
left behind ; but if would be certain destruc-
tion to attack the main body. If even a num-
ber of men were to do si, the elephants would
advance right forward, and though some of
them might be injured, the others would beat
their enemies with their trunks, toss them up
info the air with their teeth, and then trample
them under their feet to death.
1 he trunk of the elephant is one of the most
curious things in nature, and belongs to him
alone.. Properly speaking, it is but a lengthen-
ed snout, hollow, and ending in two nostrils
like those of a pig. If is generally about 8 or
9 feet long, and at the base, five feet snd a half
lound ; though hollow, it has a division which
runs through its whole length, so that it is in
reality double. Through it the animal drinks,


breathes, and smells, and at the end is an «xten-
sion of the skin five inches in length, which
serves all the purposes of a finger. The trunk
may be turned in every direction, lengthened,
shortened, and bent into every form at will ;
so pliant that it will embrace any thing, arul
so strong that nothing can be torn from its
grasp. The finger at the end will take up the
smallest substance, even a pin ; and an ele-
phant has been made to hold a pen bv it, and
write legible letters. The tusks or teeth are
two in number; they grow from the upper
jaw to the length of six feet, and are useful
only for defence. When the animal grows old
they become very heavy, so that it is obliged to
make holes in its stall for their support.
In a certain city of the East, an elephant,
which often passed through the market-place,
always received from a certain herb woman a
handful of greens. Being, one day, seized with
a fit of anger, he broke his fetters, and run-
ning through the market, put the crowd to
flight and among others the woman, who in
her hurry forgot a little child at her stall.
The elephant remembering the spot where
his lricnd used io sit, took up tire infant
gently in his trunk, and carried it to a place of
safety.


At the Cape of Good Hope, the elephant is
hunted for his teeth, which will produce more
than two hundred pounds of ivory. Three
horsemen, well mounted and armed with spears
attack him, one after another, giving relief as
they see their companion hard pressed, until
the beast is subdued. Three Dutchmen, bro-
thers, having made large fortunes by their busi-
ness, resolved to return home and enjoy the
fruits of their labours; but before they went,
they wished to have a last chase by way of
amusement. Unhappily, one of their horses
fell, and flung his rider ; the elephant instantly
came up, seized the huntsman with his trunk,
flung him up to a great height in the air, and
received him upon his tusks as he fell. Then
he turned to the other two brothers with a look
of contempt and revenge, holding out to them
the wretched man writhing upon his tusks, in
the agonies of death.
THE ALBATROSS.
This bird is found in almost all parts of
the world, from Kamschatka, where it is called
by the natives “ the great gull,” to the warm-
est climates, and about the Cape of Good Hope.
It lives upon fish, and is exceedingly voracious,


THE ALBATROSS.
K


so as to appear almost insatiable.— Nature has
qualified it for the indulgence of this appetite ;
for its digestion is amazingly quick, and its
throat is so wide, that it will swallow a salmon
five pound in weight. And such is the eager-
ness with which it gorges down its prey, that a
fish, by being too long, and too Jarge, will
sometimes stop in the passage, and when the
head has reached the bird’s stomach, the tail
and fins will remain hanging out of the
mouth, until the rest is digested.—ln this won-
derful voracity, it bears a great resemblance to
a certain large serpent, which, after breaking
the bones of an animal, will attempt to swallow
it, though in vain ; for part will still stop in the
gudet and mouth, rendering those dangerous
reptiles quite helpless for the time, in so much
that they may he knocked on the head with a
club. But to return.—-The Albatross is a sure
sign to the sailors that a shoal of fishes is
at hand, for it is always in pursuit of them,
and follow's them as they go from one .re-
gion to another.
Th is bird breeds in nests which it makes
upon the ground; these nests are round and
übcut. a foot high. In this it lay 3 its eggs,
four or five in number, and larger than a
goose’s. While the female is hatching, the


male is perpetually upon the wing for food,
with which he plentifully .supplies her. This
is ihe more necessary, as there are many other
birds, as hawks, gulls, &c. constantly upon
the watch to seize the eggs if the female leave
them uncovered for an instant. While she is
sitting, she is so stupid, or so courageous, (it is
hard to say which, as she makes no defence)
as to allow herself to be knocked off the nest
rather than leave it on the approach of a man.
The eggs arc very good food, and have this
remarkable property, that the white does not
harden, like other eggs.
I t is for these eggs principally, that this bird
is looked after ; as they are much used at the
( ape of Good Hope, while the body is totally
useless for any purpose, even savages will not
willingly eat its flesh. But its bones are
converted into various uses; of them needle-
casts, tobacco-pipes, and such things are made;
and its intestines are also serviceable, being-
blown up and stretched by the inhabitants of
the South Sea Islands, for buoys to their
nets in place of bladders. The albatross is
often attacked by another bird of the same
kind with itself (which is rather uncommon in
the brute creation) celled a skua ; this, when
the albatross is upon the wing, attacks him
K 2


from below and kills him by w'ounds in the belly;
and the only mode the other has of avoiding
this fate is by settling upon the water ; where,
however, he is not safe, for the remains of ma-
ny of them have been cast on shore, as if torn
by that voracious fish, the shark,
THE GANNET.
Tins bird belongs to the class called pelicans;
it is of a very large size, being in its weight
from six to eight pounds, in length from the
bill to the tail more than a yard, and from the
tip of one wing to that of the other, if stretched,
upwards of two yards. This remarkable length
of its wings has induced some persons to think
that it never rests, nay, that if it did set lie upon
the surface of the sea, it would find it impossi-
ble to rise again. This however is not true, for
it has been seen floating upon the water, though
this indeed happens very rarely. What we have
said above concerning the rapacity of the alba,
tross, is literally trifling, when compared with
the appetite of the gannet. This latter seems to
live for no other purposes than those of eating
and sleeping ; when upon the wing, it may be
observed floating along with one eye turned


THE GANNET.


downwards and looking intently upon the
water; when it sees any fish it instantly
plunges down with astonishing quickness
and force, and very rarely fails of success. It
then rises again and pursues the same course,
until it is indeed unable to swallow more; in
this state it returns to land, and (though a web-
footed bird) perches only upon trees, nearly
asleep and insensible of danger, until hunger
drives it again to sea.
The Gannet is also called the Solan Goose,
from a word which in various languages, and
among them the Irish, signifies a quickness of
sight. The name is well-deserved, for this
bird will see a fish under water, from a height
of one hundred and fifty feet, and when it
does, an arrow could not descend with greater
rapidity. Sailors amuse themselves w ith catch-
ing the gannet by a curious device; they fasten
a fish to a board, which is allowed to sink a
few inches below the surface. When the bird
perceives the fish it immediately darts down,
and unconscious of any danger drives its bill
forward with such force as to penetrate the wood
to the depth of an inch and an half, by which
means it is caught, as it cannot disengage its
hill.


The eggs of this bird are very nourishing,
the young also are excellent eating, before
they begin to fish for themselves ; at this time,
these are often so fat as to have three inches
under the skin before you reach the flesh. It
would lay but one egg if undisturbed , it that
be taken away, a second, and so on to a con-
siderable number. This circumstance is taken
advantage of by those who wish for the eggs ;
they steal the first from the nest without terri-
fying the bird ; when a second is laid, they
take that too ; and at last, they leave the bird
to hatch a young one, which however they ge-
nerally find means to take also. 11 it were not
for the incredible numbers of this bird, the
dangers to which it is exposed, and from which
its stupidity prevents all escape, would soon
occasion its extermination. But iu some islands,
the gannets breed in such abundance that
the rocks and the sea are really covered with
them ; they fly in such numbers as to darken
the sky ; and the noise they make is sufficient
to prevent your hearing a pegson with whom
you may be conversing. At the breeding sea-
son their nests are so thick upon the ground that
it is scarcely possible to walk among them with-
out trampling upon the eggs and the young; and
the females, as they sit, will pull at your clothes
without attempting to go away from the nests.


In certain islands to the north of Scotland,
the wretched inhabitants have little other food
during the winter than the eggs and young of
the gannets; they therefore hunt after them
during the breeding season for a winter store.
In these islands, they are not so plenty as in
other places, and they build their nests upon
rocks which are almost inaccessible, and upon
the face of the most dangerous precipices; so
that the pursuit after them is, in the highest
degree, hazardous. Two men will sometimes
set out w ith a basket and a rope \ one of 'them
takes the basket, and, fastening the rope about
his body, lets himself down from the top of a
precipice, where the other remains to hold the
rope, and draw him up again. In this manner
he descends from the highest rocks hanging
over the sea, without any other reliance than
upon the strength and carefulness of his com-
panion, who, by the slightest negligence,
would occasion his inevitable destruction.—
When he has searched all the nests within his
reach, he is drawn up, and then the other takes
lii£ turn. '
In those islands we may see instances of the
clangers and amazing difficulties to which men
are sometimes reduced, for the purpose of ob-
taining food. If a man cannot obtain a com-
panion, he often sets out alone with his rope


%nd basket. The rope he fastens above to the
root of a shrub, -to a rock, or to a stake driven
into the ground ; he then lets himself down
with his basket to a proper station. When
there, by a swinging motion, he gets into the
hollow of the rocks under those which over-
hang hpji : when he has finished his search, he
allows himself to swing out again, and pulls
himself up. While he is thus under these
overhanging rocks he must take the greatest
care lest the rope should escape from him :
for if it should do so, nothing but an accidental
blast of wind could bring it again within his
reach, and the unfortunate creature would thus
certainly perish with the means of escape be-
fore his eyes, and perhaps but a tew teet be-
yond his grasp.
MAN OF WAR BIRD.
This bird, mentioned by Captain Bhgh in
bis. narrative, is of the same species with the
♦jannet or Solan goose. It has not any 'ery
remarkable properties deserving of description.
Under the bill however is a pouch, as in all
* -


the pelican ftlfctg' extending along the neck,
and large enough to hold a man’s head; iifto*
this pouch it puts its prey until it can feed at
leisure; for it not others do,
when they catch fish, t&icat it, but deposits it
here, and goes to look after more till it
has got-enough. Its wings are very long in
proportion to the size of its body, and th bones
of them are very light; so that it appears con-
stantly upon the wing, and like the gannet is
said never to rest upon the water. Though this
should not be strictly true, its flighty are un-
doubtedly very long, for it has been seen upon
the wing at a distance of six hundred miles uom
land.
This bird is the inveterate enemy*of thg.
Booby and Noddy, two other birds of the sajne/
trine, which are so called by reason of their
astonishing stupidity, as they will allow.them-
selves to be taken by the hand. It will attack'
them when they have caught a fish, and bullet
them with its wings until they give it up ; nay,
il they have already swallowed it, the man-of-
war bird will continue to persecute thorn until
they disgorge it. It is also the enemy ofTlic
flying-fish; this miserable animal, as we have „
already described, being hunted by the dolphin








