

DANIEL O’CONNELL.
AN ORATION
Aeliuered in Sydney.
BY
ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN,
ON OCCASION OF
THE CENTENARY,
1875.
Sydney:
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER,
19 JAMIESON STREET.
1875.






DANIEL O’CONNELL.


DANIEL O’CONNELL.
AN ORATION
Aeliuered in Sydney.
BY
ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN,
ON OCCASION OF
THE CENTENARY,
1875.
Nutmeg;
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER,
19 Jamieson Street.
1875.




THE ORATION.
The doors of the Exhibition Building, says the Sydney
Morning Herald of the 7th of August, were opened at
half-past 6 o’clock, and a vast concourse of people began
at once to pour in, so that in a comparatively short space
of time the lower part of the building was well filled ; the
galleries, which were not opened until some time after-
wards, soon became crowded. On the platform were
Archbishop Folding, Archbishop Vaughan, the Bishops of
Maitland and Goulburn, Monsignor Lynch, Very Rev.
W. Gillett (Vice-Rector of St. John’s), and a large num-
ber of clergy; His Honor Mr. Justice Faucett; Messrs.
Hay, Montague, Abbott, M.L.As.; Messrs. Anthony Trol-
lope, P. A. Jennings, K.S.G., Dr. Badham, John Hughes,
J. G. O’Connor, W. C. Curtis, C. A. W. Lett, J. P. Garvan,
T. M. Slattery, Mrs. Goodenough, Miss Goodenough,
Madame Ristori, Mdlle. Ristori, and many other ladies
and gentlemen.
The programme was opened with a “ Grand Overture
on the most beautiful Melodies of Ireland,” by the orches-
tra and organ, which was succeeded by a series of songs
and choruses selected from the gems of Irish melody.
There was also performed a Cantata, written for the occa-
sion by Professor Charles Badham, and set to music by
Signor Giorza. These musical selections were rendered
by Miss O’Hara, Mrs. Miles, Miss Bessie Harrison, Miss
K. Slattery, Mr. Lynch, Mr. Bushelle, and a large chorus


Of ladies and gentlemen, and a powerful band Tt
various pieces were received with much entlm '
performers being frequently hearZ Lered
Giorza acted as conductor, and Mi/j p n ’
presided at the organ. ' Gar Van a %
After a few of the musical items on the programme had
been given, the Chairman, Mr. P. A. JennW KS C
came Ward and briefly introduced to the audi’eifce ffis
to ac ®. Arebblsbo P Vaughan, who had kindly undertaken
to deliver the Oration of the evening. 7 k
that be «»W not cast
him, and reflect upon the greatnf^oftlm^ l7 *^ ol6
which he had to sneak i- , sub J e ct upon
his audience, without heino- "r 6 Jf * mancipations of
by a feeling’of hi own °r d , ly moved -“oved
them or to the great !' ' d ,° JUStice either to
minds, or even to thnl • ♦ thoughts possessed their
which he had not tl artTco" 6 '" 0 *"" 8 °< bis own spirit
means of human langua£re° , < j!,' nvi ‘ y ’ ln g m their fulness by
sustained him onoccasion anYfl s°* °“ e tba *
sympathy of his audience, which liW fV“r ghty
and sensibility, bore him ;* ’ i sea of kmdness
Idm to endeavor to give “n f\ coura g ed
lie was able, to those thoughts fl. i ‘ be , st lan gnage
which were silently yet intenselv “ d P? lsati °M
midst. If he were onlv r '^/n erglZln S in their
-sentiments, and to .ireirnt 1 r ‘i. fully - t 0 reflect tb oir
that which made T “ w °rds
look bright, he , r t { l ulc^®r an( i every eye
sympathy the . r . esulb ™e>
return, might possibly now n i ii ll 118 . s P and he, in
I"" I "'* .« “■ ■■ Tibration, .if SS &5* *“"*■
”»■ - - ffiTfssrrsijff


suffering upon the sister Island, how was it that he, of all
others, should stand there on that evening as their chosen
spokesman —as the mouthpiece of the admirers and friends
of the great Daniel O’Connell ? And he would ask in re-
ply ; —Dow was it that a committee of gentlemen, the
most Irish he might say of the Irish, should have done
him the honor of sending a deputation to wait upon him
to assure him that it was the unanimous and strong desire
of the gentlemen who composed that committee, and of
that large body which they represented, that he should
be prevailed upon to make the oration of this evening,
and that they spontaneously committed the fame and
name and honor of the Great Liberator into his hands ?
It was for this simple reason: —Because the great body of
the people knew that he was a Catholic, and therefore was
loyal; that he was an Englishman, and therefore prized
freedom ; that he was a Catholic, and reverenced, authority;
an Englishman, and was therefore identified with liberty;
because they all knew, the people knew, that the great
specialty of O’Connell, his note, or mark, or character-
istic, was not in his intense love of liberty alone, not in
his singular loyalty of spirit only, but in the fusion or
combination of these two. Stamped on his soul, on one
side, was a fair figure of “ Freedom,” and above it written,
“ Authority;” on the other side, “ Liberty,” and over it,
inscribed in clear letters, “ Loyalty.” With him what-
ever was not thus stamped was counterfeit. No man’s
loyalty ever was more tried than his—no man’s reverence
for authority; never did man struggle as he for freedom,
for liberty; no man —no, not one —ever so expanded his
being in the presence of the fair and of the free, and yet
possessed such heroical self-mastery, maintaining his obe-
dience to law under the most galling circumstances, and
manifesting his reverence for the Crown under so many
bitter provocations. It was because the people knew, be-
cause they could not help knowing, that there were four
points of contact between himself and the great O’Connell,
that they did not hesitate a moment in asking him to
speak on this occasion; and it was because he thought he


imght possibly do some little good on tb’
dwelling on the Liberator’s / , thls ° c casion by
picturing him as he really was "thatTli ''^meteri,sties, by
the flattering invitation and to riaWk U< V' 1I ' 1 " to accept
man undertaking which he felt 6 0 lanee of failing
could have performed so Uch better Z'\ *
■And, indeed, there wi< uettei “an himself.
him to embrace this great ennor/” 0 ’! V 6 prompted
before so vast an audience exWhn^b 7 f ubliol y> and
of civil and religious liberty Tf I the champion
that was freed by him but L A r not Ireland done
were, through 4 England
darkness and the shadows of deatl™’ Th ed y, from th . eir
broke for ever the chains mid h Q n* blow which
Erin shivered also if i c handcuffs of the sons of
the Catholics of England— the manacles of
hundred years thevstood uprthtVnd *“* f ° r three
they were men. And mmht h b be £ an to learn that
them all, take this occasion of offe°- h< f 6 f resent b cfore
elt tribute to that great deliverer o'fhfv f* M Unib J e heart-
England once more inhabitable fr»r S w ho made
as dearly as l ife and the oh l T ho loved liberty
Yes - Was it not through him th fh™ than I*3
more return to the sunny banks of tL w 6lB C ° uld once
molested amidst the orchards nnrl to live un-
shire? Did he not rememtr tll aPP e ‘r e u? of Hereford-
th.e priests’ hiding-place and the ° f hIS Whood at
mit carved by a Driest’ i t } le I woode n statue of a her-
Allen’s DrovJ? Did °t be ° n hidden away in
acres which had been pointed oTtoh'" the b ™ ad
lost for conscience sake till t as having been
shut up and the f °“
position m which life wa ! 7 a handoned a
e J d ® to slavery and the loss of fr; 0 * )' , m “£> Preferring
of all they valued most ? ends to d| c degradation
“ T d ratier roam
And subject to the tyrant’s c,™d


If this was all past now, and we were rejoicing in a
brighter and better day, is that any reason why our bene-
factors should be forgot ? Shall we not thank them for
our present sunshine ? and was it wrong of him, should
he be judged egotistical if he took the opportunity of
seizing this great occasion for paying his tribute of thank-
fulness to the Emancipator of English Catholics, and
especially those of his own name ? He did then seize
this opportunity of acknowledging this debt, and of de-
claring to the world that he did not know of any man of
modern times, to leave ancient alone, who combined in
his own person such statesmanship, such masterful oratory,
and such a profound Christian spirit as Daniel O’Connell
of Derrynane!
And if he had had no personal motive for standing as
it were by the Liberator’s side, were there not over-
whelming motives of a public nature which would pro-
duce the same effect ? Was he apologizing for the position
he occupied that evening? Far from it; he had rather
to apologize for being so poor an exponent of so great a
cause. Not only as a Catholic who had received benefit
from O’Connell, but as an Englishman, he could stand
boldly forward, and identify himself with the cause which
the Liberator espoused, fight his battles over again, and
cheer him to the echo in every new victory which he
achieved.
He must explain himself. In every country, even that
which boasts of freedom, and which on the whole has been
guided by the most enlightened statesmanship, there have
ever been two classes of men —despots and tyrants on one
side, and the lovers of freedom and fair play on the other.
England has, during the course of her political existence,
nourished and been stung by a line of despots and tyrants,
whilst, at the same time, she has produced another race of
men, possessed of the genuine spirit of liberty, and ever
ready to give to others what they claimed for themselves.
Now, is it according to the English spirit of liberty to
range ourselves with tyrants ? Is it a want of patriotism
to denounce their conduct as an insult upon one’s country,


shrank frraTthepresei^ 1 ' Whilst ,le
Ills country’s greatest enemies he f™ T 1 ™ naSWere
parted with them thrown as it L, f! hlmself as he
really great and good—with men ')! “ ldst of the
for England the high name she Im'? T® ! elped to g ain
lier institutions, and for the spirit lfV™ ‘‘ 6 freedom of
extends to her opponents pfoy which she
r* *•
himself in a goodly company of li’ir He felt
quent advocates, whether whl/the ton'* fnends and elo ‘
could see Pitt ready to throw out Jiff e- pen - He
sentences in favor of freedom F ° m . G , °{ . hls eX( pnsite
combination of passion with reason^ ’ 3!- US u " e q ua >ied
highest eloquence, on the point of ’ hlch (he
oratory which would make hi ? Ut a Stream of
the rest of the evening; whilst Win, e ,. s P ea ter ) dumb for
and inimitable manner would S S Sllvel 7 to “es
in the heart, as he would plead will “ the ear > and settle
his own, in favor of the ns hts of ! 3 po T er ’ especially
of the subject. And did lie i, n t man ’ and dle freedom
this ? Besides perceiving this plaff" ‘° more ‘han
with the great men of old who i e m’ n , n ’ , as 14 wer e, alive
such magic power, he thinfa L " d ‘3 toi W
couth form of Dr. Johnson ai+f SGG tle rou ghj un-
self and exclaiming against thehr YY*!’ stretc^^n g him-
on the Irish peoplef aSd tW 1 S treatmen t visited
away at his Peter PmW S Smith writing
Pen with a special poinfto d + - Dean l . Swift sending his
and a whole UxyTorators Drapiers
class, ranged on the same side’ aT,d ’ f P ° ets ’ of a “inor
talents in honor of the cause ’ d read y to exert all their
hands that night. And if rtf hlch Was ent ™ted to his
Burke is readf to come forS 3* enou g h > Edmund
beat down with his a ® omen f’s notice, to
the littleness'"if q" d f^^of ’relsoting'
With the lightning of his eloquence, w4ThTswHt,S5


arrow of his sarcasm, and with the withering of his scorn,
will rise from where he sleeps in the dust of Westminster
to plead over again a cause which in days of old he advo-
cated with such surpassing enthusiasm and tire.
But let this vision pass; and what rises in its place ?
What did he see ? Who were those men of bright eye
and keen wit, and masterful power who now are filling up
the spaces? Were they his friends—friends of Ireland,
of liberty and freedom ? Yes, they were the great Irish
bar; there is Flood, with his stubborn love of country;
and Curran, the great advocate of the oppressed; and
Bushe, and Burrows, and Ball, and Saurin, and Parnell,
and Plunkett, with his Demosthenic fire, and a crowd of
others whom it would take too long to mention—all men
of mark, many men of genius, some unique in the un-
matched gifts and grace of heart, intellect, and expression.
These all were on his side, more or less supporting him,
ready to die for their country, and exhibiting such an
amount of genius, eloquence, and energy as has seldom
been expended in working out the freedom of an oppressed
nationality.
But was it necessary to summon the past on this occa-
sion—to call up the shadows of great men to give life and
a meaning to the centenary of O’Connell? Are not
millions of the living this very evening glorying in the
greatness of the Liberator ? Did he not see in spirit a
great meeting 16,000 miles away, in Ireland’s greatest
city, with one clothed in the crimson die of a Prince of
the Catholic Church as the centre of it, thousands of
Erin’s sons rejoicing in their deliverance, and in the
centenary of their deliverer ? Turn to America —is not
what is being done in Dublin being repeated in New
York, and under another Cardinal, a lineal descendant of
Con of the hundred battles? Indeed, is not the whole
Catholic, and he might almost say, civilized world re-
joicing on this occasion, and paying its tribute to him to
whom tribute is so justly due ? Do not we, Mr. Chairman,
you yourself decorated by the Sovereign Pontiff, the great
patriarch of Australia, who graces us with his presence,
B


& WS&tei £ together With a “
vast masses of the peonledo “? l with the
form a part as it wr? n7rt> ' Ve “ this vast meeting
Liberator, and feel to *?
associations of our brothrpn «+ i ne with the thousand
colonies, and throng Cut the “ AmeiiCa > “ the
represent bttt rSonrfl^onTliMtS 1 * 5011 = y f We
wor/d. £
from history or the dead • he A\ le d l m’ed no support
million voices which this’day shouteTto ° n V f the
on account of the achievement u to heaven for joy
victories, by the greatest and h f I f T . e^ test °b bloodless
was “ KenVs p£e and M n! IHe who
the circle of his fame till it ei 7 S 01 b y ’ bad expanded
freedom, till he became he?? ° to , Uched eyei ? **<>re of
liberty, the glory of rti e^ l ch^P lon of
man’s bloodf eait that with a free-
to allow himself *t<f that -as going
from the clear and scruntdo “7?- ** Warmth of oratory
Little men m4“m,Kf 0 " 8 ,' delmeatlon of his subject
the practices °of hyperbole of rhetolic ’ aa d
declamation to lend to them L, t l ':' l exaggerations of
it might be n ece^SXnLT^“* of , < rf neSß:
hoial; but not so with the tn,it / b , unreal and a>'ti-
whether in word'T tet h \ g man of genius,
innate powers which he’ has bemf 61 ’’ , thro . u g h ffi e
keeps his high place before tT b endowed with, and
the supreme qualities which h ° G^eS ie through
His life, his speech his j! 1 P osse sses or has possessed,
and flattery, are the sm-mo '!tn • cbaracter , n °t mere words
ii ever there was a man vidios* - 1S P olm anent fame. And
to the intellect of the cultured gre ? of Its elf appealed
people, that man pre-em tml ° *5? P. assions of the
The greatest complfment that ' .\ v;l . s Haniel O’Connell.
way to secure his lastino f '1 be pald to hi m-the
lasting fame, and to display the really


colossal character of his intellect and will, was to strive
religiously to grasp him as he really was, to hold up the
mirror to his nature, and, in as far as possible, to repro-
duce the living man. He was too great either to require
one single flourish of rhetoric to set him off, or one single
stroke of the brush to remove a wrinkle from his brow.
No: it was not his (the speaker’s) ambition to be guilty
that evening of any “ wasteful and ridiculous excesshe
was not going, he could assure them, to occupy himself in
trying
“ To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
To throw a perfume on the violet;”
that is, to attribute to the great Liberator qualities beyond
those which he possessed, or to deck him out, and set him
before them, in any colors except his own. He was too
great to bear flattery, too genuine to require hypocrisy or
paint. His highest praise is to picture him as he was,
neither greater nor less, neither magnifying anything nor
diminishing defects. “ Paint me as I am,” exclaimed
Oliver Cromwell to young Lely, to whom he was sitting
for his portrait, “ paint me as I am, and do not leave out
a wrinkle or a scar, or I will not pay you a shilling !” It
was his (the speaker’s) aim to paint O’Connell as he really
was, and to have imprinted on the minds and imaginations
of his audience a picture, clear in outline, true in life, and,
so far as he was capable, by patient thought and study,
of doing justice to his subject, representing a vivid likeness
of the great Tribune of the people.
He did not forget the great efforts made by the greatest
of Italian and French orators to delineate the character of
O’Connell. It would be presumption indeed to aim at
rivalling, or to pretend to imitate, the manner of Ventura
or Lacordaire; he was not going to enter into lists with a
Chateaubriand or a Montalembert; but, with all their
genius, there was one advantage which he had over all of
them: they stood too near the great subject which they so
brilliantly depicted to be able to seize it in all its colossal
proportions. It is said that it takes a hundred years to
prove a book to be a classic. So, surely it takes that length


mortal or to*/!;? 6 ThosfTwho ? emory is to be ™-
cannot judge of their form and outline' 6 Iw
them from a distance that ’ Uk . v " ,ust view
and take in their entire figure •V ma '’ ! ? l ' a ' s P their outline
It is only now that he I ttk o. W ‘? P™ 1 °’Connell.
world’s heroes. The fog and fo,J J ea ? ace am °ngst the
have passed away, the afare and h°t o° n temporary history
down; the atmosphere is clear and °(, P r ion bape cooled
out in distinct and share relief - n i & tie outlines come
mountain peak rises “ when al’l th' ’ BB S ,° me bu g e Jutting
against the sky the form „f the are laid ’” <*>£
bold, distinct, and in its full nm b f* liberator comes out
the present generation tIiTC ZI ° f
sohdated his fame. Years simnlv? mi* P f ned and con -
He stands out in the vast j,- P t yadd aui .' e^stob l s crown,
more heroic form aTrend j I If” 06 ’ a mi §' ht ier «g«w. a
than even those thought “P* f eatness
loved him tenderest. What indeed ne " blm best . and
course, the thousands of meetfouf and tn' 8 P?* con '
mg that was goino- on thmnllP’* th e great triumph-
ed this
Seen from a distant Hhi ° * i w^at h® said ?
out of sight, Whilst the truly P”/ * a - Se gTeat men ’ fade
clear light of centuries SZ f T Wed trough the
the Divine and the immortal with ’th™ 6 somethln g of
which have been lavished on them SU !T assin g gifts
day have passed since O’Oomipli n f hundred years this
it is only after a hundred ye a “fhat Ba ' V and
ness, and declare his voJtinn * J Can test his great-
fame amongst the greatest bene?? the perpetuity of his
Would that the elCenftonol P° f th , ebuma u race,
silent for ever 1 Would that?! ° were not
sleeping in the dnst! For i eat Ventura were not
exert their genius in d.-„ • , py now , at this day, to
they would felipse thole Jreft effort 6 ?/ 30 *?’ ° f °’ Conne H.
to us, and draw even a n,?hW *l* h ° y have be queathed
than that which they produced f-f f U !? ol the Liberator
to him to grasp his LLhw /it ‘ B * ,* hey S ‘°° d too
t liugnty gilts. too close to depict in all


their greatness those attributes which lend to his whole
character a sublime and kingly majesty.
But we cannot raise the dead; tongues that have fallen
into dust, tongues the most eloquent, voices the most
sweet, when once they are silent, are silent, alas! for ever.
You must be patient with an humbler effort, and with the
advantages of distance and of circumstances to make up
for the lack of genius, and for the want of that rarest and
sublimest gift—a tongue which is divinely eloquent.
Now, there are two ways in which the figure of a great
world-benefactor can be brought before the mind: one we
might call the historical or biographical method, and the
other the artistic. In the former the hero’s life is given
chronologically, beginning in the case of O’Connell, for
instance, with his birth at Carhen and following his career
through all its varied incidents to his death at Genoa;
living his life over again with him, and in his company,
from boyhood to manhood, and from that to old age. The
artistic method resembles the painting of a picture. Had
Reynolds, or Rembrandt, or Correggio to reproduce on
canvas the figure of some great potentate, he would fill
his palate with divers colors; it would be brilliant with
purple and white and crimson, with blue and brown and
green; and then he would take his brush and gradually
transform a cloudy outline into a glowing picture—the
figure itself telling its story—the light in the eye, the curl
on the lip, the masses of shade and the glowing lights, all
forming one living speaking whole. This appeared to him
the most effective and telling way of recalling a hero
before the imaginations of the people. He had selected
this method in preference to the other. He had carefully,
and with some little trouble, gathered his colors together
from biographies, and lectures, and recollections, and his-
tories, and parliamentary reports; and also from those,
and they were many, who had been themselves under the
fascination of O’Connell’s eloquence, and had tasted the
charm of his society.
Yes, look at the broad canvas and see the blurred out-
line, the outline of a man. Watch awhile —see, the form is


iToAtveZi tZ k No m 2 he i’ bl : oad shoulders,
if a fi , lle t !n H ' S “™ s are fo W e d on U his n vvkte'S^there
in hL°: P pe~ 0 To d htkfa*r; tU Y^
couple of dogs are sketched v-.t ?°. me shrubs ’ a
amidst the tbey a i e h ! s deer-hounds
SJS Safe S^S^iSS
livino- presence of n mon n . cietail, represents a
the liohMn 11 of I heroic in body and mind •
humor;
of face and head, and the iSeXt ?
man, speaking of indomiteWe ent to J m of the whole
perseverance raise in tb • . ua B e and unconquerable
of one boro to“ an *
achieve some stupendous work fi eStl ] ned to
an heroic form Ine mind 18 fixed upon
“ A combination and a form indeed,
be
accordfngto And thei-e mustbe worked Ut
men. Some are men of dlfferent klnds of public
both; of sol 10n ’ SOn f. of speech, some of
and purity of their private life . S “ S f tai J l l ed \ tho v^tues
ss
no°;
elements of human mightness. °'Kf tt'one


could draw out from history who seems to have been far
above the average in what he did, in what he said, and in
what he was. O’Connell was not a great military chief, he
did not spill the blood of the brave like water; still he
commanded an army of millions, and gained a victory
before which the achievements of Wellington must pale.
He was not, like Pitt, brought up from his father’s knee in
all the elegance of the highest forms of oratory; still he
swayed the multitude, and held them by the magic of his
word more powerfully than could have been done by any
speaker before or since his time: and besides this, unlike
so many others—and this is not the place to lift the cur-
tain of the private lives of the world’s heroes—he was a
man of profound piety, of sterling faith, of unblemished
virtue, and of heroism in his attachment to the old re*
ligion.
Whether he was greater as an orator or as a statesman
it is difficult to say: whether the genuine Catholicity of
his spirit, especially in his latter years, was grander than
the other two qualities, this is not the place to determine;
but one thing is certain: that as a statesman, in what he
did, he was supreme; that as an orator, in what he said,
he was unapproachable; and as a Christian, in his way of
life, as a Catholic, he can bear favorable comparison with
the greatest religionists of modern times. And let us first
examine what O’Connell did: let us consider him as a
statesman, or, in other words, as a Liberator.
Now, in studying the achievements of great men, whether
they be great soldiers, statesmen, or divines, it is absolutely
necessary to gain an adequate knowledge, not only of the
victories they gained, and of the instruments and methods
by which they gained them, but of the blocks and obstacles
which stood in their way, of the strength of the enemy, of
the difficulty of the problem, or of the subtilty of the ques-
tion under consideration. Their greatness, their genius
comes out in proportion to the efforts they made, and the
strength and complexity of the difficulties over which they
were victorious. He who defeats an enemy superior in
weapons and in numbers to himself, and occupying an


almost impregnable position, is looked unon -
soldier in proportion to his success in' ™ - g t f V
greater odds, and in making !! J ° ve > ,c .ommg the
and become transcendent il/ 1 ar e known
the scales with the vast mass of m-f J ar ® weighed in
had to contend. ° f opposition with which he
juggle with, and the whl^tlie^t^
O’Connell faw thejighf’CbSnged to 31 ' 8 Da ” iel
courageous Irish familv o bon f ed to an a ncient and
men of a sturdy ndenendent ‘° have been
hold their ®P e "“ en ? « h aracter and well fitted to
stormy timTs A 6 boldest in ™gh and
shrewd in their knowled Jnf'ff - y Str ? g and Prolific,
their love of enterprise^ th™ if & r 8 ’ adv enturous in
their own as best thpv p u eit^ei lved at home and held
tune or glory i„ S heTeiwte ’ofV 6 " 4 to Seek *»*
one of them • T g " klngs ' More than
but in military science f 6 ™' y in battle
with a robust phvsimiP « family inherited, together
and a certain miterf nln,f ° U u■ T ( mde Pendont spirit,
struggles of the brave and th "‘"i* 00,1108 of perpetual
relenting enemy Born a cruel aild m>-
Kerry, with the blood of brave men a‘nd nohl °° aSt ° f
running m his veins inQHrw Zt Z? . and noble women
6 anf ftTe “‘f™ f
em, and the earnest protest of a man on a


white horse whom afterwards O’Connell described as the
Lawyer of the party, was indelibly fixed upon his memory.
His early boyhood was spent amidst scenes of excitement.
The privateers and smugglers, who infested the coast,
were not all of them unknown at Derrynane; nor would it
be necessary to inquire too closely how far the O’Connells
were provided with many necessaries and luxuries of the
table, free of duty, by seafaring men. Then, on the land,
there were, besides other marauders, the Crelaghs, who
made raids upon the cattle, and drove them off, and sold
them in another county, the only protection which the
family could depend upon being their own strong arms and
high courage. Thus the child, from his earliest infancy,
was brought up in an atmosphere of adventure and excite-
ment, and his precocious mind and extraordinary memory
were filled at a very tender age with pictures of the deeds
of ancient heroes, and the achievements of the warrior
chieftains of his race. He lived not merely a sleepless
observer in the present, but a student, or rather a drinker-
in of the past. He possessed a singular sympathy with
verse: the rhythm and the music of the stirring ballads of
his country had a peculiar charm for him. Like some
sweet harmony they would linger in his memory, and he
learnt much of the past sorrows and wild deeds of the
Milesians, in those endless songs and snatches which have
preserved in all their original aroma the soul-stirring
actions of great and potent men.
Besides this, all his surroundings spoke the same lan-
guage. Ireland’s glories, and Ireland’s sufferings, and the
tyranny of the oppressor, were set to every tune, and were
the theme of every conversation. In such an atmosphere
he was born and bred. Besides this, nature herself seemed
as if it were made to nurse the spirit of freedom in him.
Often would the boy betake himself into solitude to con-
verse with his own spirit. At Derrynane, where he prin-
cipally lived, there were extensive shrubberies, celebrated
for the growth of their luxurious hollies, and high up,
overlooking the sea, was a kind of hermitage in which he
loved to seclude himself, and commune with the past, the
c


present, and the future ; • ..
guine temperament would easily ? ma f natl « n and san-
thoughts which swarmed into hLtd To" S' 16
he saw around him was but symbolical of theS v ha ,
his country or of tw im + 011^ al „ ot the condition of
stranger had denied her. When he Jit h^“ Which
ocean which spread out illimUni i ° e^es on the
great rollers tCnderW i n St S r S’ With the
Labrador, and bursting on thTJ ' S from t* 16 coast of
beneath his feet he mused nv ltlc perpendicular rocks
land’s history! or thoS of Z u times of L’e-
so unlike the consSt Ld 1 d f i' e « dom ? f «>« ocean,
when the winds were hushed ancUhf sf natl , ye land : 01 '.
and all was still and silent as a lot! had passed-
broke out in heaven he and , moon and stars
victory, and of the § °" dayS ° f rest after
rich and populous and inhabited b Pe t° e and j ° y of a land
race. If he tZS his J , a happy and contented
high mountain! wThS S S" 8 the Same: the
torrents and leapino- watcrf-db’ ° nS f" d tarn ‘ s ’ the rushing
to him, and raised ht Spoke the sam ® languagl
one an imag!Tf Zfee l me r C ° ntrasts within his soul-
another repfesenfeg the ZSt oTS S S
down under an iron heel and I IS native land— ground
in the “wild courage of’theh- dZaiT " P v‘ ng aWay ’ or ’
perate but inetfectual remV- n pa * making some des-
no courage could shake off 1 against an °PP r essor whom
to Is Z c zt7i:x the Tb rst Ca r, ics wh ° went
education had just been so fq penal iaws against
lie to learn his' letters r M t 0 allow a Cath °-
at home without beino- mer^lf 1 f rudl ?\ ents of knowledge
of felony. He picked nn 'punished for the crime
dering teachers of the time - \ lnformatlon from the wan-
himself to be a boy of to Sch ° ol P roved
with a retentive memory. °He TLid tn f peci f B ifte d
- ——*JOiS»SKB)BS


ambition, and his early self-respect. Anything like dis-
grace was a terror to him. Not knowing his lesson one
day, his master threatened him with a beating. “ Give me
half an hour to learn it,” implored the boy, “ and if I don’t
know it, beat me then.” It was not the pain of punishment
that he shrank from, but from the feeling of disgrace in
being flogged.
As far as spiritual influences are concerned they were
brought to bear upon him from his tenderest years through
the influence of his mother, to whom, he declared, he owed
everything that he possessed in after life of great or good.
He regarded her as a saint, and reverenced her for her
intellectual gifts. Never to his dying day did her image
depart from his memory; and her presence, like the shield
of a guardian angel, seemed ever to be held over him to
ward off every harm. Then, the influence of Father
O’Grady was not without its effect. A man of much keen
mother-wit, simple, shrewd, and tilled with genuine faith,
his very eccentricities would all the more fix his memory
and his teaching in the boy’s mind and imagination. Any-
how, from his earliest days, he was steeped in the faith of
the Catholic Church, and drilled in the doctrines which she
inculcates; imbibing, together with large draughts of free-
dom, those ruling principles which direct the actions of
heroes in a lawful cause, and rein up liberty from falling
into licence. The very groundwork or basis of O’Connell’s
nature was profoundly Catholic —and the Catholic spirit,
there is little doubt, indeed it is clearly evident, as a rule,
permeated all his thoughts and deeds.
From the humble school of his native county the boy
was sent, as all had to be who wished for anything that
could be dignified by the name of education, abroad; first
to St. Omer, and then to Douai. Here he became noted
for his steady habits of application, and tor the inexplica-
ble something in his character which created the impression
that he was destined to do great things. His uncle wrote
to the President of St. Omer’s, Dr. Stapylton, and requested
him to put compliments on one side, and to give his candid
opinion on young Daniel. The doctor replied that he never


should be more mistaken in bis life if the lad were not
destined to make a remarkable figure in society. Dr.
Stapylton proved himself to be a man of judgment and
discernment; and it was from this time forth that O’Connell
continued to_ earn for himself the highest admiration of all
who knew him.
But his academical career was cut short by the French
The students and professors of Douai were
terrified night and day by the accounts they received of
the rivers of blood that flowed in the streets of Paris, and
of the frantic madness of the savages who were bent upon
the annihilation, not only of the monuments of the past,
but of the very elements of common morality and religion.
Douai itself became in jeopardy; the students were in-
sulted, and screamed at in their walks through the streets;
and finally they left the college, where life was not worth
a weeks purchase, and sailed once more for home. Now,
it was between this period and his entrance into public
life, that O’Connell’s character became fully formed and
thoroughly consolidated.
He letumed to Ireland from Douai in 1793; he became
a law student at Lincoln’s Inn in 1794; and he may be
said to have entered public life when called to the bar in
1798.
From his earliest years young O’Connell felt within him-
self, as so many had done before him, a presentiment of
greatness. It was not pride, or vanity, or self-conceit in
mm, but a calm and steady persuasion that he was des-
tined to do a work, and that work the liberation of his
countrymen. As a child he startled his relations by his
precocious anticipations. Whilst they were conversing on
one occasion regarding the relative merits of Flood & and
Drattan, young Daniel sat thoughtfully and silently ob-
servant, and on being asked what possessed his mind, he
started up and said that he too one day would leave his
mark upon the world. The name and fame of heroes
seemed ever to fire his ambition; and even when of
maturer age this impulse to make a name for himself did
not tor a moment leave him. He brings it out strongly in


a letter to bis uncle when studying for the bar; and even
when seemingly at the point of death his dream of creating
for himself a reputation appears to have held its customary
mastery over his mind. When persuaded that his case
was past recovery he threw his feeling into that music
which was so natural to him, and recited these plaintive
verses of the poet: —
“ Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me ;
Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecture what I might have proved;
And think life only wanting to my fame.”
Without a touch in him of fanaticism, he possessed that
kind of inspired love of his country and grief at her wrongs
which at times accompanies the more effeminate minds of
heroines and poets. But his enthusiasm and fanaticism
were controlled by a sturdy masculine will and a vast
store of common sense. Though his temperament was in
keeping with the highest poetry and passion, it was ever
under the rigid control of his manly character, and what-
ever of sentiment and feeling he possessed was turned into
an instrument for achieving some great and practical end.
Naturally led from boyhood to study the ballads of his
country, her various wrongs and miseries, when he grew to
man’s estate his vision took a wider range, and he mastered
the whole tragedy of the past. Nor did he study without
an object. His ambitious spirit fixed itself upon one intent
which he determined to achieve. He declared it to be, at
this, the outstart of his manly life, his one design on earth
and fixed ambition, to leave his country at his death more
free and happy than she was when he was born. His
solitary hours at Derrynane were spent in working out this
problem, and seeking out a key to solve the mysterious
passion of his country, and for the fulcrum and the lever
by which to lift her from slavery and degradation. It
would be the greatest mistake to imagine that O’Connells
course of action in the liberation of his country was the
result of chance, and the lucky issue of an uncertain vulgar
struggle. Before he set about his mighty work of libera-
tion he studied the problem which was before him fium


when he had LZ h’ * ‘T coramenced his labors
rmnlications W his way through all their labyrinthine
complications He had to consider the blocks which stood
in his way the instruments by which he could remove
“ it,e ,let H d l, tO , l dol,t ” b ™' gi " g his I
successtu issue. He had to gam from England civil and
re igious liberty, which had over and over, in the face of
many a bloody Strife, been denied to the millions of h°s
dom AnT'F L i ng f nd Was the great bar t 0 free-
dom. And England was not only confined in her obstinacy
by motives of home policy, and through religious influenced
but she was also strongly acted on \ events which " ere
developing themselves abroad. The condition of America
?ut - th f significance as regarded
Sand. G n m her dealin - with her aster
What did O’Connell see in France? His boyish imam-
nation had been stained with pictures of the French
touched him °l b almost
toucnecl him, as it were, when a boy at college. It was an
throne'sn'p* the throb * an earthquake, every
LoZ XV?Tf e ’ an< ? Spre ? d conste rnation in every heart
lived tII pooriy understood the times in which he
~ i' i be mas ? es 0 the people would no longer submit to
the burdens which were placed upon them of
tiintnytkel n ? tbw « bu ‘ to aggravate the populace,
rivefif time of e v U l den risin S of some ™gbty
river in time ot flood, they broke down every bamVr nf
decency and order, and brought
upon everything higher and nobler than themselves Kino-
byX anvenC d H * trial - and was -ndemned
oy tne Convention. He would spare them the nain nf o
picture of the sad parting of Louis with his wife and child
rem He was led to the scaffold, and died whhthTcourare
of a martyr, whilst the Abb.s Edgeworth, who attended
to Heaven™ Th “ Son ° f Saint Louis > asce " d
to neaven! Ihe murder of the King; was follows li™
oTF~ d Tt I,nage /, h r UghoUt the langth a,ld
rranee. The scaffold was not equal to the work of


butchery, and the people were mowed down with musketry
in the public places and shot indiscriminately in the streets.
The Loire was choked with corpses, streets flowed with
blood. The object of these assassins was not only to des-
troy the living, but to blot out every memory of the past;
they razed the public buildings, and did their utmost to
blot from the memory of man the very name of Christi-
anity itself, and to substitute in its place the most debasing
atheism, and such practices of public debauchery as would
bring a blush on the face of the most hardened amongst
the heathens. Europe, horror-stricken by the enormities
perpetrated by the revolution, flew to arms. Three hun-
dred and fifty thousand men were marched towards
France. A Corsican, a child of the revolution, was soon
to avenge the action of the European powers. Bonaparte
in the fields of Italy showed signs of his future greatness.
The enemy was vanquished; Napoleon became Consul,
and then Emperor; and by his marvellous genius for war,
he changed the map of Europe, and fixed members of his
own family or military staff on almost every throne in
Europe. He kept the world in constant terror till in
1815, when Wellington, an Irishman, met him in the field
and overset him for ever, overset the indomitable Emperor
of that fair country over whose destinies at this moment
presides a Marshal of France, but of Irish name and of
Celtic blood.
O’Connell, meditating on the horrors of the French
revolution, clearly perceived how it shook every, even the
most stable, throne to its very base. The masses of the
people, in every country, were awakened out of sleep.
He saw that England especially had reason to be on her
guard. She had not only to deal with the immoral in-
fluence of France, but with the rebellious children in her
vast colonies beyond the Atlantic. There was an unmis-
takable current of revolutionary electricity flowing be-
tween France and America; many an adventurous French-
man had joined the American revolt, and had returned
home and told his tale. In vain did the British Govern-
ment send army after army across the ocean. Starvation


of U Lexlngton, e (^^Bunker’s^HiU^of^or^own^ 6 dft 0
surrender of Lord Cornwallis, showed the Zt’ obstinate
Of kings and the most incapable of ministers the follv of
protracting a struggle which was practically decided. 7
T . 11( 3 great Chatham, who had always been favorable to
• u in(^e P en(^ence °f the colonies, though he thought thaf
independence would be the signal for England’s fall
presented* to theT WaS to be
presented to the king to declare the independence of
be”’^tn
arm Of his son, William Pitt, he staggeredToTistface 6
Hjs hmbs were swathed in cotton, and his imperious face
could hardly be seen, hidden as ’it was by Horn and
t f Cing r Y the h -^ g „o n se
Sreat for l n L. A r T *° the elfort was too
great tor him, overcome with disease, old age and emo
>U ’ h « sw ° oned into the arms of his son • and not
toke tf nS | remainS W6re borne t 0 Westminster Abbey
history. h **** am ° ngS ‘ * lle ° ther worthies of English
The English nation, having lost her prestige in war
dee h d V1 h g had t 0 surrender those possessions which were
deemed by many statesmen necessary to her gJatness Zl
S” a d ccoTnt:f e h 8116 . cast upol that island
to hern r‘ f i her mis g OT emment, had ever been
to her a source of weakness instead of strength She was
not even secure at home Tbe pfF™f t \• . e w . as
France bed nnf n -b 1 . enect of Jacobinism in
ranee had not been without its effect on the Eno-liJi
populace. Pitt suspended the Habeas Corpus Act and
any one who dared to utter dangerous language or show
the slightest symptoms of a Gallican spirit wafdealt w, ? th
£ Warn %ssth trr


Ireland, and felt little disposed to relax her bonds, or deal
leniently with any symptoms which appeared indicative
of that fever which had cost the British government so
dear. Ireland was within easy reach of France, and Ban-
try Bay was a fine harbor for a French fleet. Irish patriots
had ever been hovering about the heels of French Generals,
Governors, and Diplomatists; and there were not a few
sympathisers with the bloodiest forms of the Reign of Ter-
ror. The Shearses themselves, according to their own
account, gloated over the death of Louis XVI. John, on
being asked by O’Connell how he could endure so horrible
a sight as the murder of the King, exclaimed that he was
present and assisted at the murder out of love of the cause !
Thus it was that the British government of the day
considered it a matter of imperative necessity to hold the
Irish nation in an iron grasp. To allow her an inch of
greater freedom would have been to stir up the country
to revolt, or to encourage her to imitate the bloody exam-
ple of France. It was the effect of political terror that
dictated the British policy; and O’Connell clearly per-
ceived that it would require almost a miracle to dispel the
phantom which had been created by events that had taken
place beyond the ocean and on the continent of Europe.
But there was something else besides political terror
that would have generated despair in any mind except
O’Connell’s: it was blind obstinacy, created by the effect
of religious fanaticism. Fear of the influence of Catholics,
and the Catholic Church, pervaded every rank of society,
from the King on his throne to the penniless vagabond in
the stocks. O’Connell could not help being struck with
amazement at the hold it possessed over the popular mind.
When he was a child, wuthin his own memory, a hundred
thousand men rose at the beck of a half-cracked nobleman,
and, without a shadow of a grievance, surrounded the
House of Parliament in London. The Speaker trembled
with terror as he heard the deafening shouts and roars of
the furious multitude which was trying to force its way
into the House. Peers were dragged out of their coaches,
bishops were seen creeping over the tiles in their lawn
D


Bee J e / f’ ‘ ho J‘ ous ? oi . Lord Chief Justice Mansfield was
sacked, the chapels of the foreign ambassadors were ruth-
lessly rifled and the children of the Prime Minister were
earned in their night-clothes and placed on a table in the
Horseguards as the only place where they would be secure,
liolborn Hill ran with rivers of gin and rolled wilt
drunken ruffians: the gaols were forced open, and mur-
derers, thieves, and the lowest rabble swelled the mad
dened hrong whilst thirty-six fires blazed at different
the metropolis. And why was all this wild
and diabolical excitement ? Because some miserable some
contemptible shred of relief had been cast to the Ir”h
Cathohcs. According to the brutalized notion of the popu-
aoe, Ireland was simply known as a land of bogs infested
by a swarm of poisonous Papists. Any quarter given to
them was confused with the idea of inflicting figs and
that'the land* Tf British pub ! -d witlfthe Motion
tliat the land of freedom would speedily fall a nrev to a
homfrs ofldokt’ f ® forth l th covered with all the
orrors of idolatry and superstition—so grossly ignorant
had the minds of the people become of the liistorv of
their own country, and of the times of Alfred the flLf
More ! d 16 Gonfessor > the Black Prince, and Sir Thomas
class! th Vr r ° r f P , oper -T Was not ™nfined to the lower
of I ti . 16 rlatural antipathy against it of the Church
of the Reformation, with its vast revenues and broad
glebes, and venerable fanes, is intelligible enouo-h Tt is
but natural that the great peers, enriched by church pro
r o le“ !d k b! “If eye T" those!) 0 whom
when/t me to power; which
peovle pZ ?, “I"! 1 j I tice to the millions of the Irish
P j-i ~ * and was forced from office- Lord
Hrey did the same, with a like ■ T Tn ’
fell from
w r tt ™
the highest ornament. Take the Minlstry"f which


passed emancipation. In the beginning of 1828, when
they came into power, they were the strongest Ministry
England had ever seen ; at the end of 1829, they were the
weakest. Why ? Because they emancipated the Catholics.
Never did abuse and obloquy fall so thick and strong upon
men who had once been favorite ministers: history and
fiction were ransacked to find terms of infamy fit to des-
cribe their wickedness: Scripture could furnish but one
name sufficiently odious —that of Judas Iscariot; whilst
clergymen, Macaulay tells, hurried from Cornwall and
Northumberland to vote against that minister whose very
presence a few months before would have set their parish-
bells jingling. Such opposition was too strong for any
government; it sought support from one party and then
another—it received a blow on one side, and then on the
other; then it staggered, and reeled, and fell —and why ?
Because it gave to Ireland that which was its natural
right; because it was made, through utter fear, to grant,
against its own prejudices, and through the mighty influ-
ence of Daniel O’Connell, civil and religious liberty to all
subjects of the British Crown. Thus O’Connell found a
threefold cord, which is not easily broken, binding up the
limbs and freedom of his country —the action of political
terror, of religious fanaticism, and of the most brutal
ignorance. Even the grave Lord Eldon exclaimed, in all
the sincerity of his heart, u The day that a Catholic enters
the British Legislature the sun of England’s greatness is
set!”
Such was the tough and impervious breastwork which,
like some perpendicular rock, stood in the way of the
dreams of Daniel O’Connell. He counted the costs, he
measured the strength of the enemy, and he was not
dismayed.
And what did he see when he cast his eyes on his own
country ? The hand of nature had been bountiful indeed,
but what nature had made, man had marred. In no coun-
try in the world, within the same area, was to be found
such rich pasturage, such a luxury of waving corn-fields,
and so many elements of agricultural greatness. I rom


the Giant s Causeway to Cape Clear, from Connemara to
me Hill ol Month, nature had spread herself out in all her
variety of picturesque loveliness, and in a contrast of
beauty seldom found in the most favored countries of the
world. _ Ihe Glens of Wicklow and the Vale of Avoca,
the plains of Meath and the spreading Curragh of Kildare
the glens and tarns and mountains, and jutting peaks, and
thundering waterfalls of Kerry; and then the mystic
beauties of Killarney, together with the shining water-
courses of the Shannon and the Lee, make up a tale of
natural beauty not easily found in any other country on
the earth. No doubt there are scenes to be found, which,
m tde . ir aw ful grandeur and sublime loveliness, surpass
anything to be found in the Emerald Isle; but, taking it
as a whole, in the length and breadth, no country can
surpass it, at least on the continent of Europe, in its varie-
gated gilts of picturesque lovliness and pastoral beauty.
And when he turned his gaze upon the people who in-
habited this favored spot, what did he perceive ?He saw
that every man who lived in Ireland was not an Irishman.
e perceived one broad and telling contrast. He per-
ceived that the great Irish people—that race which from
time immemorial had inhabited the island-had preserved
their own identity of thought, feeling, and character, had
clung to their own ancient traditions, and had not lost
the essential spirit of their especial nationality in spite of
the outrages and persecutions of many hundred years.
About seven or eight millions, the great mass of the popu-
lation, was ot one distinct race: as different from those
who forced themselves amongst them as the native of the
East is from the Norwegian; as the inhabitants of Cir-
cassia from the hardy Highlanders of Scotland. The
genuine Celt, the race of pure Milesian blood—of blood
i enttcal with his own—these were the people with whom
f-n tl !u s^P a the dee P, uncontrollable
ympathy of identity of race, interests, and feelings. The
nghsh settlers who had come over with the Conqueror,
and had formed the English Pale, cannot be called Irish,
he Anglo-Saxons, the Danes, the Anglo-Normans, the


troopers who came over with Cromwell, and the Dutch
boors who landed with King William —these could not, by
any stretch of courtesy, or by any confusion of history, be
mistaken for that poetical, sensitive, melancholy, humor-
ous, brave, and impetuous Eastern race, which still dreams
of building up the walls of Tara, which still melts to the
strains of the Irish Harp, which still throws its patriotic
feelings into a poetry especially its own, and still dreams,
as it has dreamt for seven hundred years, of making the
home of their fathers the land of their birth,
“ Gx-eat, glorious, and free,
First flower of tlie earth and first gem of the sea.”
Yes: O’Connell could not but discover in his country-
men elements of noble deeds and germs of genuine great-
ness. A brave, chivalrous, high-spirited people, that is, as
created by the hand of nature, and fit for any enterprise,
and with sufficient daring in their constitution to prepare
them for any venture. But the hand of man, of the op-
pressor, had been strong upon them; they were, and had
been, a down-trodden race, and had bled under the iron
heel of conquest for over 700 years. But the Liberator
had to look farther back —to look into the earliest history
of his country, and to trace its various fortunes down to
the very day in which he lived, if he really wished to learn
a lesson from her chequered and turbulent career. Look-
ing back into prehistoric times his eye seemed to catch,
amidst the vapors and mists of antiquity, visions of great
warriors and chieftains battling together with their hosts,
and sights of blood and carnage,
“ And chance and craft and strength in single fights,
And ever and anon host with host
Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail hewn,
Shield breakings, and the crash of brands, the crash
Of battleaxes on shattered helms, and shrieks
After the Christ,”
From the days of Ugony the Great, and of Con of the
hundred battles, to those of Brian, who seems with a sort
of celestial energy to have won the great battle of Clon-
tarf, and to have hurled the hosts of the enemy into that


chivalrous, seem to have been carrvirTon ? f .
pahty havnig its own laws, traditions, and custom s its own
I editary jealousies and perpetuated discords, fomented
o PP <sa a m^^sc d o r r^" oeM ! u,t
ments and chances of internecine war ’ WhTn thVchW
were not lighting with each other, they were engaged with
ca eXrtlT my; and - 6Ven then was not LTd om the
case that the very enemies of their country were ma T „!!
ing the S principX7S g a S Zgh P boring “St
a " ay in m “
Sand oi rt7T m Which had become chronic fn the
Channel, and selecting Ireknd’s chkf eft ° Ver . . th f Irisll
SMte s^U he to E W h th Pale
b Tf ht deaftt
wrmraLed an tbi “ d **** and commerce
and the Sft “^S^holdt^^


ment. The millions of the people were treated as outlaws ;
they were used as unclean animals, as creatures unworthy
of pity and regard, and, as far as the British power ex-
tended, they were trampled upon as veritable slaves. This
continued for generation after generation, sometimes the
Pale expanding, sometimes contracting; sometimes fierce
rebellions, and then bloody repressions; now periods of
intermittent calm, short spaces of breathing time, rest, that
strength might be renewed to begin hostilities again. Ire-
land became, in course of time, a kind of hunting-ground
for England.
At length the first English settlers became attached to
the soil, and identified themselves, not with Milesian, but
with their own interests in the land. They became inde-
pendent; England became jealous. Wave after of
English crossed the channel, and fight after fight took
place between the new arrivals and the old settlers, each
striving for the mastery, each bent upon getting hold of as
large a portion of booty, as great a quantity of the game,
as their strength and cunning could secure to them. Mean-
while, the Milesian multitude were not forgetful of them-
selves, and, ever and anon, with the throes of an earthquake,
they rose and shook themselves in their chains, and looking
to Spain, now to France —turning to any side for help—
they made spasmodic and wild efforts to free themselves
from the vampire which was eating up the fairness and the
plenty of their land.
Then came the great rebellion of 1641, with the four-
teen armies in the field at one time, and the fearful and
bloody period which is mixed up with the name of Dutch
William —times of extermination, famine, and blood —the
very clouds crimson, as it were, with the reflection of the
oceans of human life, which were poured out in the mas-
sacres and battling of army against army, host against
host. Then ensued a darker and a sadder period still;
the iron heel of conquest became shod with the spikes of
sectarian hate. England had thrown off the religion of
King Alfred; and "had followed the footsteps of King
Henry VIII. The English Pale followed in the wake of


the mother-country. Added to the diflerence of race was
now the difference of antagonistic creeds. Civil and re-
igious discord and animosity came into direct collision,
the sword of the conqueror was whetted and pointed by
that detestation which springs from an unregenerate spirit
when it handles the weapon of theology. *
In a state paper of the time of Henry VIII., the “noble
folke of Ireland is divided into three classses: “ the King’s
subjects, “the English rebels,” and “the Irish enemies”-
“the Fm>fkl SU ufiH being, as a rule, the last invaders;
and the Irish enemies” the great mass, the millions of
he original population of the country—the Catholic Mile-
hund^ed e ‘vea SeVe f h^ red years of con( l uest and three
1 f, yea! s of religious tyranny and persecution was
enough to crush any nationality, and to break the strongest
heait of any people. When penal laws had been added to
in tbVhmd'of f he n Celt T ld hardly be Said to be alive
f 1 + a f h i fathers; hewas bound hand and foot,
and treated as a slave, and scouted as an outcast; he was
under the protection of no law, and his property and life
i*™ with impunity; less
seem e than the aboriginal savage, than the lowest and most
degraded species of the human race. Before the law he had
no rights; and his most prosperous condition was to be al-
-1 CTConnHl obscurity, and wretchedness,
y Connell had deeply studied the question of how to '
g-et freedom and liberty for his countrymen. They had
bvTuS ently i and re P by force, by strategy,
by sudden nsmgs, by secret societies, by calling in the aid
ff ore *? n muskets , but every effort had
W r!lo tt d fetters closer, and wasted valuable lives
tated on tL°pff n T Ce fin b °Q°n' He had medi-
tated on the efforts of the Shearses, of Wolfe Tone and of
nmny other men made desperate by oppression; ’he had
studied the workings of endless secret societies and had
SSUe f f orts ~ ]but aII resulted in the
one inevitable conclusion: that, whether lawful or unlaw-
n , every effort had failed and had brought greater misery


on Ireland. Yes: What did he see under his own eyes?
The Rebellion of 1798. His ears never were able to rid
themselves of the shrieks and groans of the dying, or his
eyes to efface the pictures of bloodshed which stained his
imagination and shook his soul. Then the awful end of
Lord Edward Fitzgerald, of Russell, and of Robert Emmet;
the blood shed in vain in their fruitless attempts to bring
about a change in the destinies of their country, spoke to
the strong sense and tender heart of O’Connell with the
language of deeds —more eloquent than any mere words of
man. He felt that some other method must be tried—
some other instrument invented for freeing his country;
for blood and conspiracy had been tried long enough.
Besides, the country had been split up from the first in
endless parties and innumerable secret societies. Every
attempt that had been made by one party or society to
gain justice for the country had been paralyzed by some
other. Nothing could be achieved without union. He had
known or seen enough of White Boys, and Right Boys, and
Heart of Flint Boys, and Twelve o’Clock Boys, and Peep
o’Day Boys, and Shanavests, and Caravats, and Thrashers,
and Carders, and Heart of Oak Boys, and of the Bloody
Boyhood of the Bog of Allen. They had had their day ;
they had exerted their energies, such as they were, and
Ireland was still loaded with chains, and sunk in the sla-
very of a twofold oppression. He did not desire, he shrank
with all his courageous soul from adding another episode
of blood, followed by greater slavery, to those which had
gone before. History, if it had proved anything, had
proved this, that the old traditionary methods of violence
and force had failed; that some other system must be
adopted; and that, if civil and religious liberty was to be
obtained, it had to be through the energy of other instru-
ments and the application of other methods.
But before touching upon the weapons in which O’Con-
nell trusted for achieving the object of his dreams, what
was the real condition of the millions of his Catholic coun-
trymen, as viewed —not according to their own minds,
fired by the oppression under which they writhed —but
E


according to philosophers, statesmen, and members of
quite another class? He could easily weary them by the
quotations he could give them from eminent English
authors as to the oppression exercised by the foreign mas-
ter. But he would save them that weariness, and as speci-
mens of a hundred others, he would quote the words of
two eminent Englishmen, and of the most profound Pro-
testant statesman that Ireland, amidst a galaxy of brilliant
men, had ever produced. Dr. Johnson declares that the
yranny under which the Irish suffered surpassed in its
horrors and cruelty the ten persecutions of the Christians
under the Pagan emperors. Edmund Burke calls the net-
work of hideous penal laws, under which the Catholics of
England and Ireland were languishing, “A machine of
wise and elaborate contrivance, and as well fitted for the
oppression, impoverishment, and degradation of a people
and for the debasement in them of human nature itself as
was ever devised by the perverse ingenuity of man.”
Macaulay says, that under Cromwell, the policy was
strong, straightforward, and cruel. It was comprised in
one word, and that word was extermination. After that
the Irish Homan Catholics were permitted to live, to be
ruitful to replenish the earth; but they were doomed to
IT 10 n^ e wer f 111 Sparta ’ what the Greeks were
undei the Ottoman, what the slaves now are [this wa*
before their emancipation] at New York.” Nor were the
people alone subject to this debasing and iniquitous treat-
ment, men of refined education and heroic life, of whom
the world was not worthy, were in as evil a condition.
lose priests, says Macaulay, “who were revered by
millions as their natural advisers and guardians, as the
only authorised expositors of Christian truth, as the only
authorised dispensers of the Christian sacraments, were
treated b}' the squires and squireens of the ruling faction
as no good-natured man would treat the vilest belgar.”
In fact, Ireland may almost be said to have ceased to be
a nation; the masses of the people, abiding in poverty and
the m a n nd ° f V lent J~ ] livin ß’> as it were, without
hope m the world—were well mgh broken in their spirit


and cowed down by centuries of oppression. Every at-
tempt at relief by violence had failed, and had but increased
the hardness of their lot; every petition was either treated
with silent contempt or regarded with scorn ; it was only
now and then, when the political atmosphere abroad looked
exceptionally threatening, that some paltry measure, which
it was almost an insult to offer, was thrown in amidst the
people to prevent them increasing the complications in
which Great Britain might be entangled. O’Connell might
well look with sad misgivings on his sorrowing Ireland, on
that land which appeared white with the helplessness of
death. Well might he think, surely any one but he would
have been compelled to think, that she had come to her
last hour, that her last struggle was nearly over, that the
rattle in her throat had nearly stopped; but no: he knew
her as a father knows his child; he looked upon her,
stretched in her beauty before him, with agony written on
her brow, and seamed with the scars of many a wound;
he looked, and started, and exclaimed: —
“ She is not conquered: beauty’s ensign yet
Is crimson on her lips and in her cheek,
And death’s pale flag is not advanced there.”
The enemy might aim at her death; might, as his last act
of oppression, as the filling of the cup, even order her to
die; but he would turn round, and exclaim to those who
through the influences of the past had forgot theii man-
hood —he would turn round and ask —
“ Is there no heart in the trampled land
To spurn the tyrant’s proud command ?
Can the wronged realm no arm supply
But the abject tear and the slavish sigh ? ”
And, indeed, on looking about him, he found few who had
the masculine boldness left to initiate a new and difficult
policy. The people ground down to the earth; in England
they might be independent enough, but in Ireland —
“ There landless laborers hopeless toil and strive,
And taste no portion of the sweets they hive.”
The masses, the millions of the people, were broken in
spirit and had well nigh lost all sense of freedom, ceitain }


all hope of union, and in their wildest dreams could see no
ot ei way out of their sad condition than some miraculous
interposition of the Almighty, who, from His high Heaven,
might at last have mercy on them. As for the middle
classes, they could hardly be said to exist; anyhow, trade
had been systematically crippled, and harbors and estua-
nes, which easily would have floated all the navies in the
world, and broad and majestic rivers, which would have
been the high-roads of a vast and flourishing commerce,
were turned into a bitter mockery through the jealousy
and selfish policy which animated the political action of
the master islands. As to the nobility, they were in an
anomalous position. Whilst they yearned to get rid of
their badges of slavery, they trembled lest in doing so they
should jeopardise the little freedom they had left—
“ Willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike,
Just hint a fault and hesitate dislike
they “let I could not wait upon I would;” and thus, cal-
cu atmg between two interests, the fear of losing what they
had, and their desire of getting more, they were about the
last men—though of course there were noble exceptions—
to head a forlorn hope such as that which O’Connell, with
a superhuman courage, patience, and temper undertook
and carried through. What then were the instruments
with which he had to work? What sort of tools were
those which he was obliged of necessity to handle, in order
to achieve an object in which every hero of every other
generation had signally failed, and failed, too, when the
people were less dispirited than in O’Connell’s time, and
possessed more of the independence and vigor of a soldier’s
heart . He found a people demoralized and disorganized,
and with all tlm hope beaten out of them; their natural
leaders more timid than themselves—many of them time
servers; those that were not, unused to the rough conten-
10ns of public the sturdy give and take, and violent
usages of bitter political and party warfare. Such was the
material, the only material he could avail himself of, to
meet the threefold opposition of Great Britain, by which
he could not only indeed meet it, but confront and over-


throw it, and, in spite of political terror, religious fanati-
cism, and their violent auxiliary, impenetrable ignorance,
set up amongst the millions of his people the fair and
gracious form of civil and religious liberty.
He had to convert, in one word, this raw material into
a formidable and novel weapon for attaining his end. He
had indeed to organize a people, to create a nation, to
breathe into their souls (beaten to the earth by tyranny)
the spirit of freedom, loyalty, union, self-respect, and in-
domitable self-control. He had to reverse all the cherished
traditions of the past —a vast and giant undertaking. The
old traditionary methods of the sword and the spear had
to be forgotten; the traditionary spirit of faction and con-
tention had to be annihilated, the much-loved and imme-
morial secret compacts, and hidden undertakings, and dark
conspiracies, and deep-laid plots —all these methods, which
had been ingrained into the people’s natures by the pro-
cesses of centuries, and the action of adversity, had to be
swept to the wind; theological bitterness, and sour exclu-
siveness, and religious dislike had to be melted before the
new sun which was rising in the heavens; and men were
to learn that the brave, the good, and the true weie men
of the light, were men of order and loyalty, friends and
guardians of authority, and strong in the clearness of then
rights and in their evident capacity for using them. O Con-
nell’s dream was to create out of the millions of his coun-
trymen one immense and overmastering instrument, com-
posed of the united voice of a noble and justice-seeking
people, which should be capable of forcing the public
opinion of England and of the world to listen to, to study,
and then to admit and concede indisputable claims. Since
the days of Henry VIII., the force of opinion, as a moral
weapon, had been growing in its influence; and just at
this time, when O’Connell was meditating his new method
of warfare, it was beginning to become more formidable
than ever before. The influence also of the press was
making itself felt as a fourth power in tlm realm; and the
possibility of setting, as it were, on fire in the hearts of
millions one great and ever-guiding idea—an idea which


was converted into a force surpassing that of armies, was
not unnoticed by the keen and subtle mind of the great
Liberator of the people.
It was not necessary for him to go into a detailed history
of the vaiious unsuccessful efforts which had been made
pievious to the time of 0 Connell to establish some kind
of organization for the protection of Catholic interests.
It is enough to say that everyone of them had failed; and
that their very failure, through the discontent and dis-
couragement which they produced, did more to set diffi-
culties in the path of the Liberator than if they never had
existed at all. How could he be supposed to possess gifts
which others were not endowed with? Why should he
succeed when others every bit as energetic and able had
signally failed ? What was the use of repeating an experi-
ment which had been made already, and had shown what
it was worth, by its results ? Such were the cries of the
disheartened, and of those who had good reason indeed to
give up every effort in despair—such was the feeling of
every man save one—save Daniel O’Connell. Such oGn-
tlemen as Dr. Curry, Mr. O’Connor, and the accomplished
Mi. Wyse had done their best and were genuine patriots.
-But learning, sense, and culture, were not enough to work
such a revolution as Ireland required. They founded the
first Catholic Association ; but it bore within it the seeds
of its own dissolution. Not to speak of minor causes, the
very presence of such men as Lord Trimleston, and Lord
I aaffe was enough to cause a rupture in any species of
society. The one was stiff, with all the arrogance of a
nobility estranged from public strife, and unused to mixing
with the people; the other was a nobleman, who had
learnt the amenities of life in the courts of kings, and
was unable to brook the supercilious manner and overbear-
ing tone of him who became his natural rival and oppo-
nent. Two parties were formed at once, and in their
formation the Catholic Association ceased to exist, as the
body is a corpse when the soul has fled from it.
From this time forward the action of the Catholic body
was simply a repetition of that antagonism and disunion


which had led to so many bloody fields in the heroic times
of Ireland, a spirit which almost appeared inseparable from
the people, so übiquitous and constant was its presence
whenever men associated themselves together to secure
some common advantage for the country. Lord Kenmare,
an amiable nobleman, hardly equal to fighting the world
in stubborn times, resuscitated the committee simply to see
it melt into thin air. A second association was formed in
1790, under the leadership of Mr. Keogh. Keogh was
much more like the man that the Catholic body needed.
Bred in the merchant service, of a coarse, rough, and
determined manner, he blended prudence with boldness,
and might, had he known the secret of creating a strong
public opinion, have done much towards advancing the
liberties of his country. But, like the others, his com-
mittee was unable to exist in a country where the first idea
of adhesion seems to have been lost. It was dissolved.
Then came other attempts which need not be referred to,
but which were as little successful as those which had pre-
ceded them. It is enough to mention the names of those
who were the moving spirits in them, men of respectable
mediocrity, but not one of whom towered above the rest
with acknowledged superiority, to show how natural it
was that their various attempts should have fallen short
of anything like success. Composed of members of the
clergy, the aristocracy, and the bar, they represented
simply a helpless confusion of good intentions, which never
resulted in any permanent advantage to the cause. Lords
Fino-al and Gormanston, French and Trimleston, with Dr.
Dromgoole and Dr. Troy, with Scully, Hussey, and Clinch,
met, discussed, and disagreed; and were altogether in-
capable of forming what alone could achieve any valuable
triumphs, a compact and united force, diiected, as it were,
by one master genius, who was capable of turning each
one’s talent, fortune, and position to account. After at
least four or five distinct attempts had been made, and had
fallen through, the Catholic body seems to have given up,
as hopeless, the idea of advancing the _ liberties ot the
people by means of committees, associations, and boards.


The country was paralyzed, and began to sleep the sleep
ot helplessness and despair. Their one hope had been to
create the idem velle, the idem nolle, and the idem sen-
tire de (Republica, and this hope or effort had signally and
disastrously failed. But there was one man whom no
disaster could defeat, no opposition could tame, no adver-
sity could dismay—and that man was Daniel O’Connell.
Whilst the country and its natural leaders had thrown
up eveiy further attempt in despondency, O’Connell and
fehiel met by chance in 1823 at a friend’s house, amidst
the mountains of Wicklow. - From his earliest boyhood
U Connell had lived on the thought of serving his country,
ihat deep-set conviction that he was to leave her freer
and happier at his death than she was when he was born,
still haunted him like a phantom and held him in its
grasp. When all others had despaired of their country
he felt that his hour had arrived for savin o- her.
His first effort at forming a Catholic organization was
met with scorn, contempt, and ridicule. Past efforts and
past failures were thrown in his face. He was denounced
as a lunatic, or a fanatic, who did not know what he was
01 gradually, in spite of opposition, O’Connell
made his influence felt. His first meeting was held in a
of aa obs cure tavern, in Sackville-street.
” 1 . difficulty could the members be got together. At
one time, to complete the necessary number for a quorum,
U Connell himself rushed into the street and captured two
Maynooth students, and almost by force compelled them to
jom the meeting, to prevent it prematurely coming to an
end. otill he persevered. Gradually, as men were struck
y ms earnestness, his courage, and his untiring power of
work, they began to believe in him. The clergy fell in
with the movement; then Lord Kenmare and the aristoc-
racy; next men of the bar and wealthy merchants, and
persons of influence throughout the country. It matters
little who was m the chair; there was but one ruling and
controlling mind in this first real association of Catholic
vigor, fhe weight of O’Connell’s authority, the masculine
vigor of his character, his prudence, boldness, and extra


ordinary resources; and then his magic mastery over the
minds of all, lent a cohesion and a unity to the whole body,
of which he was the supreme and guiding spirit, such as
had never, in the memory of man, been known in Ireland
before. To cpiote the words of an intelligent Frenchman,
“ He runs thither (to the meeting of this Association) on
quitting the Four Courts, and if by chance he be delayed,
no one presumes to take his place. He it is who brings
forward all motions, and directs the discussion, and who
carries every question which he thinks proper to propose.
When he rises there is an immediate silence upon all
sides; when he sits down and ceases speaking the room
resounds with peals of applause; and when he retires the
association retires also.” Such is the spell of genius.
Such is the power of one man supremely endowed tor
achieving some great and mighty purpose.
He had now created that which Ireland wanted—one-
ness of spirit and unity of action, and a determination of
having a leader, and of following him. This Association
grew at length into a vast political machine. Its influence
was felt throughout the island, from the inland loughs and
mountains to the fishing smacks which sailed around and
about the coast. It was a kind of electric network, which,
subtle and invisible as it was, held together as one man,
and educated, enlightened, and encouraged the great masses
of the people. All felt the sway, the übiquitous presence
of one ruling spirit, all -were animated with a sanguine
hope, and all relied with implicit confidence in the states-
manship and guidance of the Supreme Director. Ihe
people ceased to be simply a flock of helpless sheep at the
mercy of any shearer. They began to feel like men. Uni y
became a bond of confidence and a link of stiength.
And, gradually, the British Government began to awaken
to the fact that the down-trodden Irish people had become
a nation —a nation formidable in the majesty ot their
numbers, in the unity and intelligence of their action, and
in the justice of their stern demands; a nation governed,
too, practically, by a dictator chosen by themselves; a chief
whose unbending will, stubborn energy, and magic in u-
F


ence over his countrymen had transferred to him, as a
matter of fact, the reins of government from the British
Crown. His will was law, and his law was so clear, dis-
tinct, and intelligible that the veriest fool could understand
it, and add strength to his designs. A man of intense
practical genius, and of an eloquence which enthralled the
hearts of his countrymen, a man who had studied the his-
tory of his native land, and had decreed that she should
be free, O’Connell now became the ruler of a nation created
by his own statesmanship, the director of that grand cam-
paign which was to win for her a liberty unknown for seven
hundred years.
But more fully to effect his purpose he established two
other methods of reaching the people’s intellects and hearts,
and bringing about those changes in their traditions, with-
out which his entire scheme never could have been fully
realized. He set on foot an order or society of Liberators,
the object of which was to put down secret societies, to
conciliate all classes of Irishmen in one band of brother-
and affection, to protect all persons possessing the
elective franchise, and to extinguish for ever religious
animosities between man and man. His one great effort
was to replace discord by universal brotherhood, and to
carry honestly in the light of day, under the sanction of
the Constitution, those measures which were for the advan-
tage of the people. His second, or rather third, method
was the “ Rent.” By means of “ the Catholic Rent,” which
insisted in a subscription of one penny a month for every
Catholic, he would be able to net a large income of over
£50,000 a year for promoting Catholic interests. There
were many tyrannies which could be met only by money,
many obstacles which money alone could remove. Nor
was this all; by demanding from every Irishman a contri-
bution towards carrying out schemes for their general good,
each man, woman, and child would experience a personal
interest in the work, would feel identified with it, and
would represent a real and intelligent moral power in the
country. Thus, by means of the Association, the Libera-
tors, and the Rent, O’Connell educated the ignorant, and


welded with one compact force, from the highest peer to
the poorest peasant, the millions of his countrymen.
Whilst thus united they were being politically schooled,
and were learning the great lessons of order, obedience to
law, and self-respect; and the possibility of achieving
great ends by means of peaceful methods joined to virtu-
ous and sober lives. So firmly were these three interests
set together, that they could, at a moments notice, as it
were, "be concentrated on one point, and when thus concen-
trated, they were generally capable of securing a certain
At length an occasion offered itself, in which the organ-
izations of the Liberator could be fairly tested. Mr. Vesey
Fitzgerald,who had satin Parliament for Clare, was about
to take office under Government. A new election was the
natural consequence. Never before this had a Catho ic
dreamt of contesting an election. But it showed what a
mighty change in a short time the Liberator had wrought.
If he could defeat Fitzgerald, and were returned himself
bv the votes of the electors, he would be almost able to
force emancipation from the English government, four-
teen thousand pounds were placed at once at his disposal.
Reissued his address; he hurried down to Clare. His
task was a difficult one, for Mr. Fitzgerald was well beloved
bv the neonle But the great champion of Irelands rights
Is tooTowm-ful for him. The voters felt that they were
under the protection of the Association They had been
trained by the enlightened principles of Daniel O Connell,
and for the first time in their lives, they voted like tiee-
men-like patriots who had been educated into a genuine
love of country. For well nigh thirty years they had-bee
drilled and schooled into habits of discipline and o .
Knowing the deep interests which were at stake they ob-
served the strictest propriety and decorum Whilst, in old
days, neither a marriage nor a funeral could be concluded
without blows being given and blood being drawn, now thu ty
thousand Irishmen could meet together and engag .
most intensely exciting duties without a single act being
committed which might be exaggerated into a breach ot


the peace. Neither would they, however poor, touch bribes
with their fingers; nor, however faint or dry, touch drink
with their lips. The energy and flagless labors of one
supreme mind had trained them into this. There was not
a shoeless urchin in that vast concourse who was not keenly
alive to the necessity of doing his part in the great work
of liberation by self-control. There was not one man or
woman, old or young, who had not seen and loved, and
listened in rapture to, the Liberator, and who was not
ready to die rather than offend against the laws of order,
sobriety, and self-respect which he laid down for them.
What happened at Clare was but a mere picture of what
took place throughout the country. The Irish nation, as
of one accord, through the magic of one man’s word and
influence, had determined to adopt that enlightened policy,
which has done more to create out of common clay heroic
forms than any other method devised by human ingenuity.
How could such force of unity, and determination of pur-
pose, be thwarted in its just efforts after honest rights?
Is it possible to imagine a people possessing in an intense
degree all the requisites for liberty, exhibiting in a man-
ner which appealed to every man of sense the highest
attributes of freedom, remaining slaves ? The test was
applied at the Clare elections. Menaces of ejection and
threats of assassination were made, but made in vain.
Calmly, and with the determination of resolute men, the
electors poured in their votes for O’Connell. Those driven
up like mobs of cattle, by the opposite party, no sooner
caught the flash of O’Connell’s eye than, straightway, they
threw aside all fear of consequences and voted for him.
They may rob me of my farm, my pig, and my cow;
they may seize my body, but they cannot touch my soul!”
was the exclamation of one man, who represented thou-
sands of his countrymen, as he boldly gave his vote for the
Liberator. All the popularity, prestige, and local influence
of I itzgerald powerless against such organized and
unbending determination as was marshalled on that day.
0 Connell stood at the head of the poll by nearly one thou-
sand votes. The sheriff, amidst deafening shouts which


rent the air—the shouts of a nation from whom the chains
had dropped —declared Daniel 0 Connell duly elected. He
was immediately lifted, amidst deafening applause, into a
chair of triumph. Accompanied by sixty thousand men
waving green boughs, like a moving forest they followed
and surged round him as he was borne through the streets
of Ennis by his friends. His progress from Ennis to Dub-
lin was such as few kings have in their proudest days
experienced. At the entrance to one town 4000 horsemen
came out to escort him to his residence with those lusty
and manly cheers such as are known well to the Irish
soldier. At another, an army of 14,000 men on horseback
surrounded him, and offered him a welcome such as is
remembered or spoken of to this day. In one week t e
Rent” amounted to £3OOO. On his arrival at the capital
he could look back with pardonable pride to one series ot
magnificent ovations which followed upon his successful
opposition to Fitzgerald. He could feel that it he had
created a nation out of the millions of the people, that
nation did not forget its benefactor, or undervalue the
years of “ toil and turmoil, the cark and care, he had go
through to mould it into shape, and to awaken within it
the high attributes of liberty. He had breathed his own
bold, prudent, and energetic spirit into his countrymen
and they recognised in him the founder of their manhood
and origin of their freedom.
When the result of the election for Clare became known
in England its people, and their rulers, were struck dumb
with amazement. It was looked upon as the most e
traordinary event that had ever occurred « nd » a system
of representative Government, and many thou r ,htfu
persons declared that O’Connell had done more in one
clay for the liberation of Ireland than had been done in
forty years by all other men.” Now, for the first time for
seven hundred years, the power of the Irish pe°P e
making itself felt with resistless force upon the British
Government. Up to this, every concession that had been
made was not the effect of Irish influence as much as that
of foreign complications. In a country where m


broken up into factions, and bound in the chains of secret
societies, and divided against each other—in a country
where the only one monotonous method of gaining liberty
was by physical violence, there was little to be feared by
such a power as Great Britain. It is reduced to a simple
question of mechanics. The heavier weight prevails.
Without entering into the reasons of it, it was a patent
fact, to all except the stone-blind, that as a military power,
in the force of swords and muskets, England has ever been
the master. A European complication was the only possi-
ble event in which Ireland could do much by rising. And
such complications, for whatever cause, never for seven
hundred years, and that is a long period, brought any-
thing but a deeper slavery upon the country. But O’Con-
nell made the grand discovery which developed Ireland’s
real strength.
If England were more powerful by brute force, Ireland
was more powerful with moral force. Her very suffer-
ings, appealing for centuries to the world, were on her
side; whilst the tyranny of England drew upon her, even
from her best and most enlightened statesmen, words of
reproach and sometimes deeds of anger. Why choose the
weapon in which you are evidently the weaker, and reject
that which at once throws the advantage on your side ?
Why fight England with the sword when the sword is her
acknowledged forte, and not attack her with the mighty
influences of justice and right, of liberty and freedom by
which you may prevail ? This is what had been done by
the Liberator. This is what turned the councils of Great
Britain into confusion. England was attacked at last in
her weakest, her vulnerable point, by the strongest arms
that Ireland could wield—arms which now she was brand-
ishing for the first time with astonishing effect. Welling-
ton and Peel were men of keen insight and staunch courage.
They would gladly have left Ireland in her bonds. But
looking across the Irish sea, they saw there a united
people, sternly, and with a sublime unanimity, claiming
those rights which no longer could be denied. Every
nation of Europe, the great people of America, all the


world, was ranged nay, clamorously, on
the side of Ireland: the whole civilized globe condemned
the policy of England. And then “ the Roman Catholic
Association,” says Macaulay, “ began to exercise authority
such as the Irish Parliament, in the days of its independ-
ence, had never possessed. An agitator became more
powerful than the Lord Lieutenant. Any explosion ot
feeling on one side of St. George’s Channel was answered
by a louder explosion on the other. The Clare election,
the Penenden Heath meeting, showed that the time ot
evasion and delay was past.”
Wellington, who “could not comprehend the possibility
of placing Catholics in a Protestant Legislature with any
kind of safety,” now found it safer to admit them. He
who was the king of physical force, the conqueror of the
great genius of war, Napoleon, was met by a still mor ®
formidable antagonist, by one who wielded a different
weapon, a weapon of more tempered metal, of keener
edo-e of more Divine workmanship than had been dreamt
o f & by his philosophy, and he was vanquished. Ireland
had at last confronted England fairly—England led on by
her most mighty general, and England was conquered ,
conquered in an equal fight; and the surliness with which
she laid down her arms showed the intensity of her mor i
fication at her discomfiture. The King, who shrank wit
terror from putting his name to the Act of Emancipation,
was only induced to do so by a greater terror in store for
him should he have refused. _ His memorable words t
Sir Harcourt Lees contain, as in a nutshell, a summary of
the position occupied by Hamel and n ®f p
acknowledged victory achieved by the people .
“There are three kings in this country, exclaimed
irritable monarch, “King Arthur [Wellington], King
George, and King Dan; but King Dan is the most power-
ful and will oust the other two.” . , ~
Meanwhile, a petition had been presented against the
return of O’Connell for Clare. The petition was over-
ruled On the 15th of May he proceeded to the House to
take the oath. The interest and excitement in London


was intense. The streets leading to St. Stephen’s were
choked with dense masses of people—traffic was stopped.
It became impossible to move from Charing Cross to the
House of Commons. The Chamber itself presented an
unusual spectacle. Every available space was occupied.
Peers and peeresses took advantage of their privileges to
look upon a sight which, to them, was little less than
miraculous; to witness a man who had created one nation,
and with it had defeated another, taking his seat in the
Legislature of the Empire—a seat which he, by his own
indomitable perseverance, had won, in spite of all the
mighty forces of England arrayed against him; a seat
which he was about to claim as his just right in the very
presence of those great powers which had coalesced in
order to defeat him in his object. He (the speaker) would
not weary them with an account of the petty bit of need-
less persecution which, for the moment, prevented O’Con-
nell taking his seat. Nor would he venture to detain
them with a picture of the Liberator pleading for his
cause before the Bar of the House of Commons. It is
enough to say that he pleaded in vain. “ Are you wil-
ling,” said the Speaker to him, “to take the Oath of
Supremacy?” “Allow me to see it,” said O’Connell.
After looking at it a moment, he fixed his eye upon
the chair and said, in a firm clear voice, “ In this oath
I see one assertion as to a matter of fact, which I know to
be false; I see a second assertion as to a matter of opinion,
which Ido not believe to be true.” He then retired. A
fresh writ was issued; the Liberator was returned a second
time by the Clare electors, obnoxious clauses having
been expunged from the oath, and took his seat in the
British House of Commons. All this small tyranny
shows two things: the innate repulsion which still existed
in England against admitting the masses of the Irish
people to civil and religious liberty, and the genuine
power which O’Connell had evoked to meet it. The
new opposition he encountered at every turn simply
served to make his victory more triumphant and more
conspicuous.


And the people fully realized the benefits he had con-
conferred upon them. For twenty-nine long years ot
toil, contention, and incessant labors, such as would
have killed an ordinary man, he had striven for their
sakes. He had sacrified his profession and his own pur-
suits out of love of them and of his country; and they,
in turn, idolized him as no man ever before was idol-
ized, and maintained him, out of their poverty, with tie
munificence of a prince. They felt, indeed, th
reward could adequately represent his services. He had
created a nation out of the dust-the findings of
tyranny and slavery. He had united
never in its long history, had ever before been united, he
educated the masses of his countrymen as lf by personal
presence he had come in contact with them one by one
is no other man ever did, he infused his own spin into
millions, and made them as one man-charged with his
own principles, breathing his own aspirations, and tel
lowing out, though against the natural gram the rules and
order? which he,°as if he were some divine
down for them. Secret societies, the bane of all political
life withered in the land; the voice of freedom sang wi .
all the liberty of a new creation; mutual hatred and
religious discords, if not obliterated, were brought under
som? command; whilst the moral tone and character of
the people was so much altered, so far
it had been, that strangers who revisited Ireland a ter
O’Connell had done his work, were struck with astonis
men Tat the change. Never before ha. one man worked
so mighty a revolution as to create a nation, and to sow,
within every unit of which it was composed, the elemen
of liberty and the germs of freedom. ~w n , ome
If in this picture he (the speaker) had thrown so
momentary shadow across the fair fame of his country, it
was notbecause he did not entertain a. intense.a love of
fatherland as any other. But he did not identi y
with the errors of those who had, from fame
sessed the reins of government. Men pas* away, tyrante
die, and have to go to their account, but one s tatliei
G


still lives on; her everlasting hills and teeming valleys,
her busy marts and her clanking towns, her bright sea-
ports, and the broad outlines of her liberty still survive,
still live on as generation after generation is gathered to
the past. Love of country does not mean blindness to the
errors and crimes of her children; does not mean conceal-
ing the iniquities of those who are her’s in name, but who
are unworthy of her in the action of their lives; but he
took patriotism to mean a stern antagonism against all
that lessens one’s country’s reputation—a voice ready at
all times to condemn conduct unworthy of her fair name,
and stigmatizing boldly, and publicly branding with eter-
nal infamy if necessary, as a warning to others, base and
heartless persecutors to their fellow-men. This is true
patriotism—to lift one’s country up in the scale of nations,
and to let the world know that the tyrant and the op-
pressor, if they are to live at all, shall live as warnings in
the minds of future generations.
And, indeed, every year is bringing in greater light of
charity and larger views of the rights of humanity. Each
generation as it passes away carries with it some error,
some intellectual disease which gives place to a brighter
light of truth and a healthier idea of liberty—at least so it
should be, and so in many ways it is. O’Connell set the
great example. He taught, not Ireland or England only
but the civilized world, a lesson —a set of political princi-
ples which are capable of indefinite expansion, daily im-
provement, and endless application. No man of modern
times has cast on this chequered world so bright, so broad,
so softening a light. And all future generations will drink
of his clear fountain, will eat of his sweet bread of liberty,
and will look up to heaven and bless O’Connell’s name!
He hoped that now he had partially, at least, fulfilled his
promise of showing what O’Connell did. Time did not
permit him to draw out in its fulness the entire breadth
of the Liberator’s mind. Wherever the form of freedom
showed itself, he was in the van making way for her
advance. His keen eye for liberty penetrated beyond
those of the most distinguished statesmen of his time.


Nearly every great measure he supported or fought for
has eventually been carried in the interests of liberty and
for the benefit of the world. He seems to have fulfilled
Schiller’s definition of genius when he said it consists,
u not in following the past, but in creating the future.
Who was more vehement than he in his advocacy of
the rights of man throughout the world? Amidst those
able statesmen who fought for reform in 1832, he was
amongst the most active. He saw with a clear eye that
free trade would bring the granaries of the world to teed
the poor of England, and he battled for it with a heavy
hand He was only second to Wilberforce himself in his
exertions for the emancipation of the slave; and he com-
bated for the rights of Poland as if they were his own
He boldly opposed the poor laws defended the rights ot
soldiers against the lash, advocated freedom for the Church
and wherever he could strike a blow which would be ot
service to the interests, the enlightened interests,. °J
manity, he struck it with all his might, and all his heart
went with it. . «
But time does not permit even the bare enumeration ot
the principles and measures which he advocated and
exerted for the good of man. Suffice it to say, that the
obstacles have been described which stood in the way ot
that main object which has given his name eternal renown.
The political terror, the religious fanaticism, and the crass
ignorance of Great Britain—that colossa power of resistance
was without the spilling of a drop of blood, and without a
single act of disloyalty to the Crown, overcome He found
a nation in the dust, paralyzed, cowed down trembling;
throbbing himself in all his veins with a spirit of fiery free-
dom, he'lifted it up and converted it into a power which
Great Britain was unable to resist; and he himself, havmg
raised up his' people, did what no daring man at that day
would have imagined possible, he offered himself in oppo-
sition to a favorite candidate at the Clare election, was
returned, and, in the face of all Ins opponents, took his
seat in the Imperial Parliament, there to assert the liber-
ties of his country, and by the thundenngs ol his denun


ciation of wrong, and by his masculine, his unanswerable
logic, to break into dust the arguments of oppression, and
those pretexts for tyranny, by which his country had been
degraded from her place amongst the nations for well nigh
seven hundred years. Yes: it is true he is gone; but he
lives amidst us with a larger life; time has but mellowed
his growing fame. Distance is bringing out his full pro-
portions ; and the world can now look upon the figure of
a man who has no like for his originality of genius, his
practical statesmanship, his vast influence over his people;
and who, like no other ever read of, created a nation, and
freed it by means of principles which, at the same time
that they wrought freedom amongst men, brought order,
loyalty, self-respect, and mutual charity to bear upon the
millions of the people.
“ Whilst the tree
Of Freedom’s withered trunk puts forth a leaf,
Even for thy tomb a garland let it be—
The Forum’s champion and the People’s chief.”
The address of his Grace was listened to with great
attention, and was frequently interrupted by spontaneous
bursts of applause. Three cheers for Archbishop Vaughan
w T ere given at the close of his address, three cheers for the
Queen, and three for Daniel O’Connell.
It may be stated that the money taken at the gates
during the morning’s performances amounted to nearly £4OO.
It was not possible to ascertain the result of the evening’s
entertainment, on account of a number of tickets having
been sold, but from the great crowd in the building—esti-
mated at about 6000—there can be little doubt that an
equally large amount was realized. It is not a little grati-
fying to find that the monetary results of the demonstra-
tion are so favorable, considering the object to which it
is proposed to devote the proceeds—the foundation of a
scholarship, to be called “ The O’Connell Scholarship,” in


connection with St. John’s College, affiliated to the Sydney
University. There is very little doubt, from what has
already been achieved, that the O’Connell Scholarship will
soon be an accomplished fact.
Before closing this notice it should be recorded that the
arrangements made by the committee were so far perfect
that, notwithstanding the magnitude of the demonstration,
there was no hitch in the proceedings, but everything passed
off according to the programme, in the most satisfactory
manner. Great praise is especially due to Mr. M. Molony,
who acted with untiring zeal from the initiation of the
movement as chairman of the committee, and to the hon.
secretaries —Messrs. J. P. Garvan and T. M. Slattery—
who were almost übiquitous and indefatigable in their
endeavors to make the O’Connell Centenary Celebration
what it proved to be—a great success.
CANTATA.
The following Cantata, written by Dr. Charles Badham, of the Sydney
University, was sung at the Exhibition Building on the occasion of the
O’Connell Centenary Celebration :
EXILE,
WITH CHORUS.
The stars that watch our slumbers never knew thee,
Erin nor cheered the cradle of our birth ;
And to long-fasting eyes, that fain would view thee,
Stands as a wall the solid globe of earth.
Still dream we out the dull relentless story ;
Zone after zone of the unchanging sea;
Across the sun’s diurnal path of glory——
On ! on ! until we wake, but not on thee!


What we could save of thee, that bore we hither,
The Exile’s only wealth, the one dear thought,
The one dear name, that shall be last to wither, —
To wither when all memories are nought.
But now ’tis as the sea’s returning waters
Filling the shores and inlets of the soul;
For through the world shall Erin’s sons and daughters
This day their great Deliverer extol.
But come, lerne, minstrel of our choice!
We know thy father was our Champion’s friend;
Now let thy harp and voice
Each strive for mastery, each with the other blend!
lERNE.
RECITATIVE.
It was an aged seer who sought to gain
A silent deathbed upon Tara’s sod;
And, ere he yielded up his soul to God,
Thus did he utter his prophetic strain :
AIR.
If, Erin, thy birthright were other than queenly,
If dull were thy mind, as ignoble thy woes,
No power had Fortune to rack thee so keenly
By mocking and marring what Nature bestows.
Thy brow was for mirth, but the rents of thy mourning
Reveal all the furrows thy shame would disguise,
And tears ever hang on the fringes adorning
Those orbs that should mirror the depths of the skies.
0 dowered with gifts as the darling of Heaven,
Made rich but to spoil, and made fair to betray!
But the hour is appointed, the Champion is given ;
The dark spell that binds thee shall vanish away!
The sound of one voice all thy thousands shall rally;
No threat shall they utter, no sword shall they draw:
March, march to your triumph! while Peace in her valley
Reposes serene in the shelter of Law,
CHORUS.
Hail, mighty Orator! hail, wise Defender!
Wiping the dishonor from our ancient creed !
Fierce in debate, and yet as woman tender,
Through the world dispensing balm to those who need!


Free as the bolt of Jove scathing the offender,
Slaving all thy life that others might be freed!
For thy immortal work what can we render,
Rearing its own monument, reaping its own meed?
AN EXILE.
RECITATIVE.
Hear how, with temperate and dauntless word,
He scouted faction and denounced the sword: —
AIR.
His soul hath not fair Freedom’s hue
Who wears the stealthy dagger at his side.
Half-hearted patriots! by you
The despot and his crew
Are made more strong and well-nigh justified.
Oh ! help not those who batten on your harms
By idle muttering and clandestine arms!
Seek not with curses to affray,
For Power affrighted is a beast of prey ;
And shame will pierce where menaces rebound,
Hardening the breast they cannot wound.
The calm keen eye fixed on the offender’s face
(Rather as offering than asking grace),
Surer than any dart
Can shoot remorse for unrequited wrong
So deep into the heart,
That startled Conscience weeps for having slept so long.
Out on the sword ! out on the sword !
It goads the injustice which it cannot smite.
Be Reason’s sovereign word
The only weapon of your countless throngs !
Swell loud the diapason of our right!
For justice pealing from ten thousand tongues
Is as a trumpet of the Lord of Hosts ;
The strongholds of the proud, without a thrust,
Fall flat before it, while the dust
Mounts from the crumbled towers like their departing ghosts.
CHORUS.
Hail, mighty Orator! hail, wise Defender ! &c., &c.
A PRIEST.
RECITATIVE.
He spake and conquered, and he speaketh still: —
AIR.
Out on the sword ! out on the sword !
0 Erin! hear thy Liberator’s word,


And let his warning through thy bosom thrill!
Yet keep the sword ! yet keep the sword !
It is a treasure to be stored
Against the day that comes upon the world.
When from the barbarous North is hurled
The thunderbolt of brutal conquerors ;
When that fell demon whom thy soul abhors,
Who stamps the heel of military rule
On Church and Senate, Guild and School,
And clanks defiance in the House of Prayer,
(Art thou not there, O Lord? art thou not there?)
Would level into one Imperial waste
Whatever Time has built or Virtue graced,—
Then, then, ye brethren all!
The guardians of Freedom’s chosen land!
For your united islands stand,
Locked in the fierce resolve to conquer or to fall!
CHORUS.
Ye brethren all! ye brethren all!
The guardians of Freedom’s chosen land !
For your united islands stand,
Locked in the fierce resolve to conquer or to fall!
J. G-. O’CONNOR, PRINTER, ETC., JAMIESON STREET.




