

DARA SHUKOH
Dr. K. R. QANUNGO
SECOND EDITION








DARA SHUKOH
VOL. I.
BIOGRAPHY
KALIKA-RANJAN QANUNGO, M.A., PhJD.,
(Oal.)
Professor and Head of the Department of History, University of
Lucknow, formerly of the University of Dacca, Author rf
"Sher Shah " and the ."History of the Jats. u
WITH A FOREWORD BY
Dk. R. C. MAJUMDAR, M.A., P.R.S., Ph.D.,
Formerly Vice-Chancellor, University of Dacca.
SECOND EDITION
S. C. SARKAR & SONS, Ltd.
CALCUTTA


Published by
P. C. Sarkae, B.A., LL.B.
of S. C. Sarkar & Sons, Lm,
i|c, College Sq., Calcutta.
SECOND EDITION 1952
All Rights reserved by the Author.
Price Rs. 8.
Printer: U. P. Bhattacharjec,
Exchange Gazette Fbess,
5, Mission Row, Calcutta.


To
Sir A. F. RAHMAN, B.A. (Oxon.)',
LATE VICE-CHANCELLOR, DACCA UNIVERSITY,
AS A TRIBUTE TO HIS LOVE OF LEARNING
AND PATRONAGE OF SCHOLARSHIP.


DARA WITH AN OFFICER
By courtesy of Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay


DĀRĀ SHUKOH WITH SAINTS
By courtesy of Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay


DARA SHUKOH
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
I owe an apology to the public for offering this reprint
of my Dara Shukoh eighteen years after its first publication,
without any addition or change in the text. During these
years my only new acquisitions have been a few letters of
Dara addressed to scholars and faqirs, which have no
intrinsic value for history, and will therefore be incorporated
in volume II of this work, which contains the Persian text
of Dara’s letters and prefaces, with English translations.
The independence of India has been as much favourable
to the memory of Akbar and his worthy great-grandson
Dara, as to our own happiness, for only a free and secular
State like India to-day can truly appreciate the worth of these
two liberal thinkers. In their own times both of them were
looked down upon by the orthodox ulema as infidels, or at
best as Hinduised Muslimsj The lives of these two
statesmen prove that our future is hopelessly dark if tlie
spirit of India is not unchained from bondage to bigotry and
dogmatic theology, whether Hindu or Muslim. Our
patriots should remember that the path of Akbar or Dara
is not for cowards, but only for men who are prepared to
sacrifice their personal gain and popularity in the pursuit of
their honest convictions.
Lucknow University,
ist January, 1953.
K. R. QANUNCO.




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
I owe an apology as well as an explanation to my
readers who have been expecting the second volume of my
History of the Jots, and not a biography of Prince Dara
Shukoh. After the publication of the first volume of the
History of the Jots, Sir Jadunath Sarkar suggested to me
the idea of a monograph on Dara, for which he had
discovered some new materials in the Jaipur Darbar
archives. This biography of Dara was originally intended
to form a modest volume of 200 pages to be written in
twelve months. Accordingly I took up the study of the
tragic career of the Philosopher-Prince as a diversion from
the tale of war and woe of eighteenth century India. But
as I proceeded studying things in and around the subject,
what was honestly meant to be a diversion became almost a
passion, and the result has run to about 800 pages in two
volumes of which the first is now offered to the public.
In my study of Dara Shukoh I took my clue from the
great historian William Irvine, who wrote to Sir Jadunath
in August, 1905: “I suppose man has still enough of the
brute in him to have remained a fighting animal, and the
drum and trumpet school of history seems as popular
as ever The losing side (c.p., Dara
Shukoh’s) always gets scanty justice in histories." The
publication of a very learned article, Les Entretiens de
Lahore by Huart and Massignon in the Journal Asiatique
(Oct.-Dec., 1926) came as a great stimulus, and gave a new


turn to my study. I found therein an echo of my sentiment
that some writers have wrongly inferred “the social barren-
ness of Dara’s work from his political defeat.”
It also suggested to me a fresh line of research in the
history of the evolution of Indian religious thought, of
which the life and writings of Dara Shukoh form an
important chapter. With these French savants I feel that
at this moment when the unity of India depends on a new
attempt at the mutual comprehension of the two spiritual
dements (Hinduism and Islam), attention can legitimately
be paid to the figure of Dara Shukoh, who attempted in the
seventeenth century what Kabir and Akbar had done before
him in the fifteenth and the sixteenth respectively, or what
Rajah Ram Mohan Roy did in the nineteenth.
Dara and Aurangzib represent the two sides of Shah
Jahan’s character, as well as the two phases of his glorious
reign. Dara is the central figure of a great religious and
literary movement for the adaptation of Islam to the spiritual
traditions of India. His spiritual search took him to the
fidd of theosophical research. He attempted to bridge the
gulf between Hinduism and Islam not for the com-
monalty of the two creeds but only for the “elect” of the
two communities. He started with the proposition that there
must be a common source of all revealed Scriptures, as the
Quran refers to a Umm-ul-kitab. Dara set himself to the
task of discovering this lost Book with the zeal and
confidence of Sir Galahad in search of the Holy Grail, and
having crossed the bourne of Islam, he lighted upon the
Upanishads as that very Book hidden from profane eyes.
As regards the study of the political career of Dara
Shukoh, I worked on the same materials and traversed the


same ground as Sir Jadunath had done in his History of
Aurangzib, vols. i and ii, with the idea of arriving at
reasoned conclusions independently. The result has been
very disappointing and sadly disproportionate to the time
spent on it. Sometimes the strenuous labour of several
months on the voluminous records on the War of Succession
has been altogether fruitless of any new discovery, as the
learned historian of Aurangzib has not left for his successors
a single important fact or dramatic touch unappropriated
by himself, except some dry strings of insignificant proper
names or irritating details, which I too have passed over
without notice. I had an advantage over Sir Jadunath on
one point, namely, the Jaipur letters, particularly those on
Sulaiman’s campaign against Shuja. Though some of these
letters were noticed by him in the second edition of the first
two volumes of his History of Aurangzib, he left them to
me for a fuller use in writing that particular chapter of the
War of Succession in a new light. I have been able to treat
in detail Dara Shukoh’s siege of Qandahar by utilising an
anonymous contemporary account of that siege (Lataif-ul~
akhbar) by an eye-witness. The Qandahar campaign was
a crucial test of Dara’s character and ability, and marked a
crisis in his career; hence, the justification of my treatment
of it in a separate chapter, perhaps the longest in the book.
Where original records threw no light on the War of
Succession, I had. to content myself with brief summaries
from Sarkar’s History of Aurangzib. As truth and reason
must overrule sentiment, however strong and dear, I had
to accept in general the views of Sir Jadunath on the career
and character of Dara as a soldier and a politician. In
doing so, I am not without misgivings that my readers will


perhaps hold that the pupil of the historian of Aurangzib
has murdered poor Dara Shukoh a second time.
In this volume of Dara Shukoh, the reader will come
across references to a vol. 11, which is not yet before him.
That volume, containing the literary and political correspon-
dence of Dara Shukoh and some extracts from his Sirr-ul-
Asrar, is also in the press. The present volume has been
made complete in itself for the use of students and the
general public by the inclusion of some chapters which were
originally planned to form part of vol. 11.
My indebtedness to Sir Jadunath is only too obvious.
Without the support and encouragement of Dr. R. C
Mazumdar, the Head of the Department of History at the
Dacca University where 1 serve, it would hardly have been
possible for me to bring this work to a conclusion. My
sincere thanks are due to Mr,. Fida Ali Khan, M.A., Head
of the Department of Persian and Dean of the Faculty of
Arts, Dacca University, and to Hakim Habib-ur-Rahman
Sahib of Dacca for placing their private collections of Mss.
at my disposal for use, and also permitting me to publish
some important letters of Dara in their possession. My
friend Dr. Jogindranath Chaudhuri, M.A., Ph.D., has
kindly helped me in reading the proofs of this volume, for
which I offer him my warmest thanks.
K R. Q.
January, 1935.


FOREWORD
Prince Dara Shukoh, the eldest son and heir-Apparent
of the Emperor Shah Jahan, is a unique figure in the Mughal
imperial family. He is chiefly remembered for his tragic
end, but few people realise that the tragedy lay not so much
in his death as in his life. The Mughal princes who followed
Akbar belonged to a set type. Valiant, debauched and
luxurious, they excelled in fighting and drinking, and very
often in both. The imperial throne was their only objective
and pomp and power their sole aim in life. They divided
their time between camp and harem, and wine and women
formed their chief diversions from the exertions of warfare.
They cared very little for knowledge and still less for any
higher intellectual pursuits. They moved in a narrow groove
and lacked all liberal ideas or noble statesmanship. The
pleasures of the flesh alone made any appeal to their animal
instincts and they never bothered about any higher spiritual
life of which man is capable.
Into this world was bom a mystic philosopher, a devotee
of knowledge and seeker after spiritual troths. Save his
accident of birth he had no other qualifications for the exalted
Peacock-throne with which a cruel mocking fate ever
tantalised him. Had Dara Shukoh been bom in an ordinary
household, he might have lived and died a pious saint, gay,
might have even made his mark as one of those spiritual
guides of Medieval India who preached the universal religion
of love and human fellowship. An exalted soul, a noble
heart, a liberal mind, a freshness of outlook, a lofty idealism,
and an inexhaustible thirst for knowledge—these were the
uncommon gifts with which nature endowed him. They
would have elevated him to almost any height, save the one


to which a cruel tempting fate ever allured him as his natural
destiny. Herein lies the greatest tragedy of Dara’s life. He
had aptitude for a higher spiritual life, but he had to spend
his days amid the sordid materialism of the Mughal palace.
His special qualities of head and heart were meant for the
ennobling of mankind, but he was called upon to use them
for gaining a royal throne. It is the old familiar tale of a
square peg in a round hole. He had the ladder for heaven,
but used it for the Peacock throne. .
Few historical figures present such a grim tragedy. The
very noble qualities of Dara proved his ruin. Had his
pursuits been less intellectual and aims less spiritual, he might
have been more successful in his enterprise. Had he
studied less of philosophy and more of military science, had
he devoted to administration and warfare the time he spent in
translating the Upanishads and writing Majuma-td-Baharatn,
had nature instilled in him more of worldly cunning and less
of mystic spiritualism, he might have perhaps proved victori-
ous in the struggle for succession. But so long as man docs
not radically alter his estimate of moral values few will regret
the choice that nature made in the equipment of Dara Shukah.
The life of such a man is an eminently fit subject for
study both by the philosopher and by the historian. While
the tragic end of Dara has always made a profound appeal
to many, few people have shown any real appreciation of 1 is
greatness and sterling merit. To Dr. Qanungo belongs the
credit of making a serious effort not only to unravel the real
man before our eyes, but also to explain the significance of
his life and mission. His great mission in life, as the follow-
ing pages will prove, was the promotion of peace and concord
between the followers of Hinduism and Islam. “It is


hardly an exaggeration to say”, remarks Dr. Qanungo,
"that any one who intends to take up the solution of
religious peace in India must begin the work where Dara
Shukoh had left it and proceed on the path chalked out by
that prince.” Unfortunately that path was not followed by
any other Mughal prince. The truth is that Dara typified a
spirit which vanished with him. As the author of the
following pages has very truly observed, the defeat of Dara
"saw the definite close of the most brilliant epoch of the
medieval history of India which is aptly called the Age of
Akbar —the age of nationalism in politics and culture, the
era of Revival of Letters and Fine Art.”
Dara dreamt of a new enlightened age for India of
which the foundation was laid by Akbar, and his failure was
a national loss. His dreams, it is true, came to nothing.
But even such dreams have their value, and-if we properly
adjust the moral values, the dreamer may not suffer in
comparison with his more realistic and successful rival whose
long and apparently triumphant career shattered the
great fabric of the Mughal empire. Judged by ordinary
standards Aurangzib was a great success, and Dara a
hopeless failure; but to those whose visions transcend the
ordinary limitations imposed by worldly conventions, and
catch a glimpse of ultimate reality, the position may be
exactly the reverse. To them the following pages would
make an absorbing appeal, and the very lucid and
sympathetic delineation of Dara’s character by the gifted
author would be a study of abiding interest to all.
R. C. MAJUMDAR.
Ramna Dacca,
2?th December, 1934.


CONTENTS.
Chapter I
Boyhood and education . .. I
Chapter II
Marriage and family life :. .; 9
Chapter 111
Rank and offices held by Dara Shukoh.
His early commands .. i$
Chapter IV
The third siege of Qandahar .. • * 33
Chapter V
Spiritual life of Dara Shukoh .. .. 72
Chapter VI
Literary achievements of Dara Shukoh .. 99
Chapter VII
The Interlude (1654-1657 A.D.) .. 119
Chapter VIII
The Causes of the War of Succession .. 145
Chapter IX
The struggle for the throne .. .. 165
Chapter X
The vicissitudes of fortune .. .. 190


Chapter XI
The dosing act of the tragedy .. .. 214
Chapter XII
Aurangzib and the family of Dara Shukoh .. 234
Chapter XIII
Dara and a Hindu ascetic .. .. 241
Chapter XIV
Dara Shukoh and the contemporary Muslim
saints .. .. .. 252
Chapter XV
Character of Dara Shukoh ~ .. 269
Bibliography ~ ~ .. 291
Index .. .. .. 303


DARA SHUKOH
CHAPTER I
BOYHOOD AND EDUCATION
Section I.—Birth and Boyhood
The city of Ajmir assumed an unusually
brilliant and gay appearance during the spring
of the year 1615. The spiritual quiet of the
place was broken by the din and bustle of a
jubilant Court. The occasion was the successful
close of the Me war campaign and the return of
the victorious Prince Khurram with the grand-
son of Eana Pratap in his train. About a month
after, Mumtaz Mahal gave birth to her third
child and first son, at Ajmir in the night of
Monday, 20th March 1615 (29th Safar, 1024
A.H.). The Emperor Jahangir gave to this heir
to his favourite son the name of Muhammad
Bara Shukoh, in whom not a few recognized the
Heir-Presumptive to the Throne. 1 The fortunate
new-comer was hailed as “the Prime Hose of
the Empire” ( Gul-i-awwalin-i-gulistan-i-Shahi
i Padshah-mma, i. 391; Amal-i-Salih adds “after 12 gharis
and 42 pals of the night had passed”. For festivities etc., see Amal-i-
Salih (a secondary source), pp.'92-94. A list of Shah Jahan’s children,
vide Appendix.


—which gives the year of his birth). Roses
enough and in rapid succession indeed blessed
the wedlock of Shah Jahan and Mumtaz, Of
their fourteen children, two daughters and four
sons were destined to play their parts in one
of the saddest tragedies of History.
When Dara was about two years old, his
father was appointed Viceroy of the Deccan,
There too Khurram’s arms and diplomacy
achieved conspicuous success. But the jealousy
and plots of the fair Empress Nur Jahan drove
him into rebellion in 1623. For two years in
the dreary South and through the wilds of
Telingana, in Bengal and Bihar, Shah Jahan
suffered terrible privations which were cheer-
fully shared by Mumtaz and her children. At
last, worn out by the relentless chase of Nur
Jahan’s fury, he sought peace with his father,
consenting to send Dara and Aurangzib as his
hostages to the Court. The two princes left the
Deccan for Labor towards the close of the winter
of 1625.
Dara and Aurangzib met the Emperor at
some stage between Attock and Rohtas (near
Rawalpindi), on his return journey from the
Afghan country. Having now in her custody
the three sons of Shah Jahan—for Shuja the
most beloved of his grandchildren was already
with Jahangir—Nur Jahan began to conspire
more confidently to set aside the succession of
that Prince. But before her plots could mature


Jahangir breathed his last in the Rajaur terri-
tory, on Sunday, 29th October, 1627 (28th Safar,
1037 A.H.).
Shah Jahan formally crowned himself at
Agra on February 4, 1628 (Bth Jamadi-us-sani
1037 A.H.), 1 and about three weeks later the
princes were brought to the Court by their
maternal grandfather Asaf Khan. They reached
Akbar’s mausoleum at Sikandra on February
26, and were ordered to halt there for the night.
In the afternoon Mumtaz Mahal snatched a visit
to her sons in a tent set up for her reception,
midway between Agra and Sikandra. Next day,
Dara made his salutation to the Throne in a
public darhar, offering the customary nazar and
nisar (money to be scattered over the Emperor’s
head to take off evil influences). He was granted
a daily allowance of one thousand Rupees,
besides two lakhs of Rupees in cash, as his share
of the royal bounty at the coronation.
Section 2.— Education
To the Court-historian of Shah Jahan
“going to school” (ha maktah raftari) meant no
more than a bare mention of the name of the
tutor. The Padshalmama tells us that Dara’s
tutor was Mulla Abdul Latif Sultanpuri. 2 The
1 Coronation of Shah Jahan, Pad. I. A. 87-98; arrival of the
princes, ibid, 177; Amal-i-Salih, 225-231. An interesting notice of
the arrival of princes, W. Foster's English Factories {1623-1629),
p. 247.
2 Pad. I. B. 344-345-
3
SHAH JAHAN CROWNED


primary and secondary courses of Dara’s study
seem to have been of the same stereotyped
character as those of an average Mughal prince,
—who was usually taught the Quran, the
standard works of Persian poetry, and the
history of Timur. Great attention was paid to
calligraphy and the cultivation of a graceful
epistolary style for which Abul Fazl, at once the
model and despair of the age, was recommended.
An apt pupil, Dara learnt all that Abdul Latif
could teach, developed scholarly habits, and
above all imbibed his master’s predilection for
the maaqulat, i.e., speculative sciences. The
famous calligraphist Abdur Rashid Dailemi 1 is
said to have been one of the instructors of Dara.
He wrote a clear and elegant hand, which was a
close copy of his father’s, as the autographs
of Shah Jahan and Dara preserved in some MSS.
of the Oriental Public Library of Patna and
elsewhere show. He read much Persian poetry;
but Firdausi and Sadi had far less interest for
him than Rumi and Jami. Unlike his father,
history had neither lesson nor inspiration for
him. If Shah Jahan admired Alexander the
Great, Dara preferred Aristotle and Plato. The
i Among the exhibits at the Exhibition in connection with the
Nagpur Session of the Indian Historical Records Commission, 1928,
a specimen of the calligraphy of Abdur Rashid Dailemi was shown
(Collection of A. Ghosh, 42, Shambazar Street, Calcutta). I have
seen another specimen in a private album of Hakim Habib-ur-
Rahaman, Chok, Dacca. Opinions differ whether Abdur Rashid was
a tutor of Dara.


miracles of saints entertained him far more than
the exploits of warlike heroes.
Dara Shukoh remained a lifelong student
with an unbalanced passion for study and
speculation. His mind had a mystic bent and
he sought allegory where others had found stern
facts. He studied the Quran and the Hadis with
the assiduity and the pre-possession of a theorist
eager to prove a thesis. In his Quranic studies
he rejected the commentaries of the early
[Fathers of the orthodox school, and hated
Arabicism as productive of intolerance and
intellectual sterility. He shunned the jurists
and never cared to study Islamic Jurisprudence.
Shah Jahan wished to train up the Crown Prince
in the duties of government under his own eyes
and always kept him at Court. But Dara lacked
the capacity to study men and things at first-
hand, and though brought up at Court, could
never judge a courtier aright.
The youthful Prince found himself at the
cross-ways in the very beginning of his
career. Since the death of Akbar the forces of
reaction in the empire had been gathering
strength beneath the calm surface of the ebbing
Liberalism. Dara was deceived by appearances,
and Shah Jahan had not possibly warned him of
the dangers ahead. If any one should truly
inherit the empire of Akbar it must be done with
Akbar’s policy and idealism; so did the Prince
think. The mantle of Akbar thus fell on him;
5
dara/s liberal views


but it proved Ajax’s burden upon less sturdy
shoulders. Dara realized the futility of evolv-
ing a new religion, unintelligible and unaccept-
able to Hindus and Mnsahnans alike. He could
never think of straying outside the fold of Islam
to embrace humanity in love and amity; in the
very heart of Islam he would seek a common
platform for the warring creeds. He resolved
to retain in full his allegiance to Muhammad,
and yet be a catholic-hearted promoter of unity
and peace reconciling Islam to the spirit of pro-
gress, culture and civilization of the world at
large. The esoteric path of Islam was taken up
by him, and he devoted his ample leisure to
theosophical studies. He read in translation the
Jewish, Christian, and Brahmanical scriptures
in the course of his investigation about the doc-
trine of Tauhid or Divine Pantheism.
He patronized Sanskrit scholars, translated
the Bhagavad Gita, and 50 TJpanishads with
their help, mastered Hindi, and wrote hymns in
this popular vernacular. In short, he focussed
in himself all the liberal influences of the age,
and was looked upon by the Hindus as a re-
incarnation of the spirit of Akbar. To posterity
the name of Dara Shukoh became a byword for
a man learned in philosophic lore.
Section 3. —Betrothal and Bereavement
About two years after Shah Jahan’s
accession to the throne, the renowned general


Khan Jahan Lodi, a commander of 7,000 horse,
rose in rebellion and fled to the South. As he
threatened to league himself with the ruler of
Bijapur, §hah Jahan marched to the Deccan in
the month of December 1629. Dara also travell-
ed with the imperial camp, but did not take part
in any action. While the Emperor was
touring through Khandesh, Mumtaz Mahal pro-
posed a match between the Crown Prince and
the daughter of the deceased Prince Sultan
Parvez. Shah Jahan heartily entered into the
project and issued orders to make preparations
for the marriage on a most magnificent scale,
but the queen suddenly died at Burhanpur in the
night of 7th June, 1631 (17th Zilqada, 1040 A.H.)
after giving birth to a daughter, Gauharara
Begam. After an absence of about 2% years
the Emperor 1 returned to the capital (June 9,
1632).
APPENDIX
Children of Shah Jahan and Mumtaz Mahal
{Padshah-nama, Vol. I. A., 391-393).
1. Hur-un-nisa —Saturday, 8th Safar, 1022 A. H. born
at Agra: died after 3 years and one month at Ajmir
on Wednesday, 24th Rabi-us-sani, 1025 A. H. (b. 20th
March,. 1613; d. 1st May, 1616).
I Shah Jahan’s state exit from Burhanpur 24th Ramzan, 1041
A. H. (April 4, 1632), Pad. LA. 422; state entry into the capital
on Ist Zilhijja, 1041 A. H. (9th June, 1632). Dara Shukoh, sitting
behind the Emperor, scatters money ( nisar ) over his father’s head—
Pad. I. A. 428.


2. Jahanara Begam—2 Ist Safar, 1023 H. (Wednesday
23rd March 1614) born at the village of Heeni during
the Mewar campaign.
3. Dara Shukoh—Monday night, 29th Safar, 1024 H.
bom at Ajmir (20th March 1615).
4. Shah Shuja—Sunday night, 18th Jamadi-ul-akhir,
1025 A.H. at Ajmir (23rd June 1616).
5. Raushan Rai [Raushanara] Begam—2nd Ramzan,
1026 H. at Burhanpur. (Sunday, 24th August, 1617).
6. Aurangzib—Sunday night, 15th Zilqada, 1027 H. at
Dohad in the Panch Mahal District, Bombay Presi-
dency. (24th October 1618).
7. Ummed Bakhsh—Wednesday, nth Muharram, 1029
H. near Sarhind; died at Burhanpur in the month of
Rabi-us-sani, 1031 H. (Sth December 1619 —February
1622).
8. Suriya Baku Begam—2oth Rajab, 1030: died at the
age of seven on 23rd Shaban, 1037. (31st May, 1621
—lBth April 1628).
9. A Son—Born in 1032 A.H., died before being named.
10. Murad Bakhsh—2sth Zilhijja, 1033, (28th September
1624) at the fort of Rohtas in Bihar.
11. Lutfullah—Wednesday 14th Safar, 1036 H. (25 Oct.,
1626), died after 19 months on 9th Ramzan 1037.
12. Daulat Afza—4th Ramzan 1037 H., died 20th
Ramzan, 1038 H. (28th April 1628—3rd May 1629).
13. A Daughter—loth Ramzan, 1039 H; died immediately
after. (13th April 1630).
14. Gauharara Begam—Wednesday night, 17th Zilqada,
1040 A. H. at Burhanpur. (7th June, 1631).


CHAPTER II
MARRIAGE AND FAMILY LIFE
Section I.—Marriage of Dara Shukoh
After the return of the Emperor to Agra
preparations for Dara’s marriage were resumed
under the supervision of Jahanara Begam,
assisted by the capable governess Siti-im-nisa
Khanam. 1 The princess took the utmost pains
to make the celebration of the Crown Prince’s
nuptials as grand as the deceased Mumtaz might
have wished. Out of the total expenses of thirty-
two lakhs of Rupees, Jahanara alone contributed
16 lakhs. The sachaq (first gifts with the
auspicious red dye for the bride), worth two
lakhs, was sent on 11th November, 1632 in a
magnificent procession, accompanied by the
mother, elder sister and paternal aunts of the
late Empress {Pad. I. A. 453). The actual
marriage festivity came off three months later.
In the night of Friday, February 1, 1633 (Ist
Shaban, 1042), on the occasion of the henna-
handi ceremony, a grand majlis was held in the
court-yard of the Diwan-i-khas; the Emperor
for the first time after death of Mumtaz Mahal
appeared there in festive apparel to preside at
i A biographical sketch of Siti-un-nisa Khanam; Padshahnama,
ii. 628-631; Sarkar’s Studies in Mughal India.


the banquet, and allowed music to play again in
the palace. Hundreds of heart-ravishing songs-
tresses entertained the assembly, and from every
corner of the hall arose the echo of joy. The
hands of Dara were, according to the custom,
dyed red with the henna (Hindi “Mehdi”;
Lawsonia inermis), by ladies concealed behind
the curtains, while handsome maids came to stain
the fingers of distinguished guests with the red
dye, and tied their fingers with gold-embroidered
handkerchiefs. When this pleasant function
came to a close, the guests were dismissed with
the customary distribution of sashes (also called
Tcamarhand) , among them.
Next evening Hara, mounted on a stately
charger, was brought to the Public Audience
Hall from his own mansion in a magnificent
procession under the escort of the three younger
princes. When the Prince stood near the throne
after making his obeisance, the Emperor put
a string of pearls around his neck and tied on
Dara’s head the same sehra (bridegroom’s
crown) which had been placed on his own by
Jahangir in the night of his marriage with
Mumtaz. When two prahars and six gharis of
the night had passed ( i.e after midnight) Qazi
Muhammad Islam, 1 the most fanatical Mulla of
his time, was sent for to officiate at the marriage
I He was so strict a Sunni that when he fell ill he threw into
the fire a recipe because it happened to be taken from the work of a
Shia doctor! He died in 1061 A. H. (1651 A. D.). For a biographi-
cal notice, see Maasir-ill-umara, iii. 89-91.


ceremoney which was performed in the presence
of the Emperor. He fixed as the kabin of the
bride the same amount (viz., five lakhs of
Rupees) which had been promised to Mumtaz
(Pad. I. A. 458-459). The festivities came to a
happy close on Bth February (Bth Shaban) ; this
day the Emperor, accompanied by his sons, high
nobles and household servants, paid a visit to
Dara’s house and was entertained most magni-
ficently by that Prince.
Section 2. —Conjugal Life
Though the harem of Dara had the usual
supplement of slave-girls, he contracted no other
marriage. Stray darts of Cupid, which did not
spare even the Puritan Aurangzib,—might have
sometimes made the passionate Prince restless ;
but certainly love was ever present between
Para and his wedded wife Karimun-nisa, popu-
larly known as Nadira Begam. If we are to
believe Manned, the Prince once fell violently
in love with a Hindu dancing-girl named Rana
Dil, who refused to yield except on terms of
lawful wedlock. His passion was so consuming
that when Shah Jahan opposed this unworthy
proposal, he began to pine to death. At length
the Emperor sanctioned this marriage, and Rana
Dil proved as noble and faithful a wife as any
high-born dame. 1 Though based on doubtful
i Storia, i. 222, 261.
11
YOUTHFUL LOVE-STORY


testimony, this story is not half as romantic as
the account of the love-sickness of Aurangzib
in mid-life for the frolicsome Hira Bai
(Zainabadi Mahal), to please whom the ideal
Musalman of the age once raised the forbidden
cup to his lips.
Bara’s love for Nadira was not less stead-
fast and romantic than that of Shah Jahan for
Mumtaz. Nor did Nadira in beauty, physical
and moral, and in fortitude and devotion, suffer
by comparison with her mother-in-law. When
once she fell seriously ill at Jahangirabad while
travelling with the Court from Labor to Kabul,
Bara most tenderly nursed her for several
months. 1 They too never separated in life, and
misfortune made their love shine the brighter.
All his sons and daughters were born of Nadira
Begam; a notice of them is given below.
The Children of Dara Shukoh and Nadira Begam.
i. A daughter, born at Agra on Sunday, 29th Rajab, 1043
A. H. (19th January 1634). The Emperor accom-
panied by great nobles went to see the child, and took
his meal in Dara’s house. She died a few months
afterwards, on the day of Id-ul-fitr (21st March
1634). Dara who was then travelling with the Court
to Labor got high fever and heart-trouble owing to
grief and mental depression. The Emperor was so
alarmed that he sent for Hakim Wazir Khan from
Labor, and in grave concern ordered Dara’s tent to
be pitched close to his own, so that Jahanara Begam
1 Dad. it. 501, 571, 634.


might tend him. Shah Jahan went to see him several
times, and distributed large sums to the faqirs and
the destitute. {Pad. I. B. 3,9, 10).
2. Sulaiman Shukoh, bom on Friday morning, 27th Ram-
zan, 1044 (March 6, 1635), at the village of Sultanpur,
during a journey with the Court from Delhi to Agra.
The celebration of the birth-ceremony took place at
the latter city. The Emperor with all the nobles down
to the grade of Hazari was magnificently entertained
at Dara’s mansion. {Pad. I. B. 73-74, 84-85).
3. Mihir Shukoh, born on Wednesday, 2nd Rabi-ul-awwal,
1048 (July 4, 1638); died on the 9th of the next
month. {Pad. ii. 101, 104).
4. Pak-nihad Banu Begam, born on 29th Jamadiul-awwal
1051, August 26, 1641. {Pad. ii. 245).
5. Mumtaz Shukoh, 1 bom on the last day of Jamadi-ul-
awwal 1053 6th August, 1643 {Pad. ii. 337), died
possibly in the month of Zilqada, 1058.
6. Sipihr Shukoh, bom on Thursday, nth Shaban,
1054 •= October 3, 1644. {Pad. ii. 388). Shah
Jahan visited Dara’s house after the birth of every
grand-child of his and gave, on each occasion, two
lakhs of Rupees in cash for the birthday celebration.
7. Jahanzeb Banu.
8. Amal-un-nisa.
It is rather strange that the Court-histories of Shah
Jahan do not mention the birth of any child to Dara from
1645 to his death (1658). Two daughters of Dara seem
to have survived their father. In the Kalhnai-i-Aurangzib,
a daughter of Dara, Amal-un-nisa Begam, is twice mentioned
1 Waris mentions the death of a child of Dara at the age of
four years and 9 months in the month of Zilqada, 1058. This child,
whose name is not mentioned, cannot be Paknihad Banu, who was at
this date, 6 years and 9 months old. So evidently Mumtaz is meant.


as an object of Aurangzib’s special care. She received
certain ornaments as presents from that Emperor (Sarkar
MS., 92, 101). Manucci mentions a little daughter of Dara,
called by her pet name Jani Begam, [official name Jahanzeb
Banu], who was brought up by Jahanara and married to
Muhammad Azam, son of Aurangzib [in 1668.] This
daughter of Dara cannot be the same as Pak-nihad Banu who
was 12 years older than Muhammad Azam. Amal-un-nisa
and Jani Begam were not apparently the same person. These
were certainly born after Sipihr Shukoh.


CHAPTER III
RANK AND OFFICES HELD BY DARA
SHUKOH. HIS EARLY COMMANDS
Section I.—Rank in the Mughal Peerage
According to the convention of the Mughal
Court none could have any locus standi in the
State except as a member of the official nobility.
The Mughal Peerage included the “noblesse of
the sword” as well as “the noblesse of the robe” ;
the soldier and the physician, the poet and the
painter, the theologian and the eunuch were
equally entitled to this honour in the guise of
Army Officers (mansabdars).
Prince Dara received his first mansab,
12000 sat and 6000 saivar, on the occasion of the
Emperor’s lunar birthday, Saturday sth Octo-
ber, 1633 (11th Rabi-us-sani, 1043 H.; Pad. I.
A. 541). On this day the sarkar of Hissar (in
the Panjab), which was the Dauphiny of the
House of Babar, —was assigned as the fief of
the Prince. The choice was not accidental, but
made deliberately to proclaim the eldest Prince
as the Heir Designate to the Throne. ,
The promotion of Dara was rapid and high,
beating, all previous records of the family.
Several lifts raised his rank in five vears to


20.000 sat and 10,000 sawar. After this his sat
stood fixed for about ten years; nevertheless,
promotion continued in the form of increments
to his sawar contingent, and conversion to do-
aspah, seh-aspah. Dara got a lift of 10,000 sat
in April 1648, and eight years after another
10.000 sat in January 1656. By this time Bara’s
command was bigger than those of Shuja and
Aurangzib combined. Though younger, the
energetic and brave Aurangzib had overtaken
the indolent Shuja; but the policy and affection
of Shah Jahan raised Dara beyond the sphere
of competition. Just before his fateful illness
the Emperor raised Bara’s rank to 50,000 sat,
and after his partial recovery, when the War of
Succession loomed larger in the horizon, he
bestowed on Bara “in recognition of his filial
piety and tender nursing during the illness”,
an extraordinary rank of 60,000 sat and 40,000
sawar, of which 30,000 was do-aspah, seh-aspah.
Section 2. —Viceroyalties of Dara
1. Allahabad:
Dara was appointed subahdar of the pro-
vince of Allahabad, vice Shaista Khan, with the
additional charge of two imperial forts, Chunar
and Rohtas, on the 15th June, 1645. As the
Prince was at this time travelling with the Court
in Kashmir, Baqi Beg, the chief eunuch of the
harem of Dara, was nominated his deputy to
these territories {Pad. ii. 444). Baqi Beg and


other deputies successfully administered this
province on behalf of the absentee Viceroy for
twelve years. Dara visited it only once (1656-
1657), and completed at Benares his monu-
mental work Sirr-ul-asrar (also known as Sirr-
i-akhar), a translation of 50 Upanishads, on Ist
July, 1657. Allahabad had no political and
economic interest for the Prince, who prized it
only as the abode of Hindu learning, and of a
Sufi mystic, Shaikh Muhibb-ullah Allahabadi.
2. The Pan jab:
About two years after (March 1647) the
subah of the Pan jab was added to the viceroyal-
ty of Dara. As it became at this time the base
of supplies to the imperial army fighting in
Balkh under Aurangzib, Dara had to reside at
the head-quarters of his new province for about
a year. This province continued in the uninter-
rupted possession of Dara till he was chased out
of it by the army of Aurangzib. Though
generally left to the management of his deputies,
Labor received the greatest attention of the
Prince and nowhere was his rule better appre-
ciated. He gained great popularity through
the interest he took in the welfare of the city,
which he improved by the construction of
numerous cJiauks or market-places. His name
is still held in affectionate remembrance at
Labor; and the costly Badshahi mosque erected
at Labor by Aurangzib has ever been held in
2


disrepute because it was built from the “spoils
of b100d...” 1
Labor had a peculiar sanctity for Dara as
the famous saint, Mian Meer had lived and died
here. He became acquainted with the saint in
1634 A.D. During his viceroyalty Dara built a
beautiful mausoleum over the tomb of the saint,
which afterwards sheltered the last remains of
his beloved consort Nadira Banu Begam.
3. Gujrat:
This subah was granted to Dara in 1649,
who transferred Baqi Beg 2 (now created
Bahadur Khan) from Allahabad to Gujrat in
order to settle the affairs of the new province.
Dara never visited Gujrat and was relieved of
its charge in July 1652.
4&5. Multan and Kabul:
In July 1652 A.D. a redistribution of pro-
vinces became necessary when Dara assumed the
command of the Qandahar expedition after
Aurangzib had twice failed to recapture that fort
from the Persians. Dara was relieved of the
charge of Gujrat (17th Shaban, 1062== 14th
1 This mosque was turned into a magazine by the Sikhs and only
restored by the English to the Musalmans, who however shunned it
as an Akeldama. (Labor Gas. 1883, p. 24 and 176.) The mausoleum
of Mian Meer lies near the Labor East (Cantonment) Station; it is
a building of white marble and Agra sandstone with a mosque in the
courtyard (ibid., p. 166.) Manucci mentions the building of this
mausoleum by Dara.
2 Bahadur Khan (Baqi Beg), biographical sketch in Maasir-ul-
umara, i. 444-447.


July 1652), being given in exchange Multan and
Kabul; Aurangzib, who had to resign Multan to
Dara, got the four subahs of the Deccan. 1 The
subah of Bihar, which was coveted by Prince
Shuja, viceroy of Bengal and Orissa for a long
time, was granted to Dara on 20th December
1657, when the civil war had well-nigh broken
out. Dara played the absentee Viceroy both in
Multan and Kabul. After his retreat from
Qandahar in 1653 A.D., Sulaiman Shukoh
accompanied him to Delhi, leaving Kabul in
charge of Bahadur Khan (Baqi Beg). In
Multan Muhammad Ali Khan was replaced a
year afterwards by Sayyid Izzat Khan. In
January 1657 Rustam Khan Bahadur Firuz
Jang was appointed to Kabul, vice Bahadur
Khan (Baqi Beg) 2 , who was transferred to
Labor. When the civil war broke out, Baqi Beg
was sent as the guardian of young Sulaiman
Shukoh during his campaign against Shuja; his
place in Labor was filled by Sayyid Izzat Khan
(Abdur Razzaq Gilani)3.
Section 3. — Services and emoluments of
Dara Shukoh
The career of Dara as a soldier and
administrator was extremely uneventful. During
1 Redistribution of the provinces on 17th Shaban, 1062 ■=• July 14,
1652. (Waris, 66a). Gujrat was given to Shaista Khan, who was
replaced by Murad Bakhsh in that subah in March, 1654 (Waris, 85a.)
2 Waris MS. 66 b; Khafi Khan, ii. 713.
3 A biographical notice of Sayyid Izzat Khan ( Maasir-td-mutra ,
ii. 475-)


his official career he commanded three military-
expeditions against the Persians, and of these
two were almost holiday parades without any
enemy to encounter, but in the third Fortune
deserted him sadly. He was only an absentee
Viceroy of several provinces, which were ruled
in his name by subordinates nominated by the
Emperor. The Crown Prince was reared up
like a greenhouse plant carefully shielded from
dangers and disappointments, and watered by
the perennial spring of Shah .1 ahan’s affection.
Though his services were meagre, his emolu-
ments were rich. His military rank alone enti-
tled him to a salary of two crores and seventy-five
thousand Rupees a year. Besides his own exten-
sive fiefs in Kashmir, Kangra and the Pan jab,
he was granted all the jagirs of the great minister
Sadullah Khan (April 1656). He also held two
rich sinecures, viz., the Faujdarship of Kaul
(Aligarh) and the Rahdari (guardianship) of
the region between Delhi and Agra with a total
income of 22 1 /o lakhs of Rupees. Shah Jahan
placed at the disposal of Dara splendid resources,
military and financial, without giving him any
opportunities for developing the practical ability
to utilize them.
Sec. 4. —First expedition against the Persians
Since 1522 A.D. the province of Qandahar
had been a debatable ground between the Timu-
rides and the Safavis for 125 years, during which


it changed hands several times. It came twice
as a windfall to the Mughal Emperors, but
slipped as often through their voluptuous grasp.
Shah Tahmasp conquered it during the minority
of Akbar, but Muzaffar Husain Mirza betrayed
it into the hands of that Emperor in 1596 and
entered Mughal service. Shah Abbas I wrested
it from Jahangir in 1623, but fifteen years later
Ali Mardan Khan, the Persian governor of
Qandahar, made it over to the Mughals and fled
to the Court of Shah Jahan from the wrath of
his tyrannical master (February, 1638).
Shah Jahan made vigorous efforts to con-
solidate this gain of chance, and conquered Bust
and Zamin Dawar, the two dependencies of
Qandahar. He spent eight lakhs of Rupees in
strengthening the fortifications of these forts,
and constituted a new province, the subah of
Qandahar, which also included the tribal ter-
ritories to the west of Dera Gbazi Khan and
Hera Ismail Khan—yielding a revenue of fifteen
lakhs of Rupees (six crores of Dams).
Mortified at the loss of Qandahar, Shah
Safi, as Abdul Hamid tauntingly remarks,
“could neither enjoy rest by day nor have any
sleep at night (roz he-tap u shab he-khwab)
But in truth his own sovereign, distressed by
the constant fear of losing the insecure gain of
chance, fared hardly better. The characteristic
feature of the Indian foreign policy during the
16th and 17th centuries had been the diplomatic


isolation of heretical Persia by a coalition of
the Sunni rulers of Hindustan, Turkey, and
Transoxiana. Shah Jahan maintained a close
alliance with Sultan Murad the Fourth of
Turkey, who had also designs upon the Persian
Iraq. He humoured Nazar Muhammad Khan
of Balkh and the Uzbeg chiefs with occasional
exchange of friendly messages and gifts; tlie
latter were, however, distrustful at heart be-
cause the Timurides never altogether gave up
their pretensions to Balkh, Badakhshan and
Samarqand. In spite of these warlike and
diplomatic measures, the Persian nightmare did
not cease to haunt the dreams of Shah Jahan.
In the beginning of the year 1639, the
Persians were reported meditating an attack
on Qandahar. The Crown Prince, who had not
hitherto seen any active service, was eager to
win his spurs in a campaign against the Per-
sians. Accordingly he was given leave at Labor
with great solemnity on February Bth, 1639
(14th Shawwal, 1048 H). 1
The apprehension of Persian hostility
seemed to have died down about this time, as
the slow and leisurely march of the Indian army
to Kabul—which was reached only on 18th May
i First expedition:—Dara starts for Qandahar, Pad. ii. 140; the
Mughal army reaches Kabul, 25th Muharram, 1049 H., ibid., p. 147;
Dara goes to Ghazni, 17th Safar, 1049 H., ibid,, 150; returns to Kabul,
18th Rabi-ul-awwal, 1049, ibid, 151; homeward march, 15th August
1639 (25th Rabi-us-sani; ibid. 156); meets the Emperor at Labor,
October 9, 1639 (21st Jamadi-ul-sani, 1049, ibid. 163.)


—indicates. After a fortnight’s rest at that
city, Dara was ordered to Ghazni with his con-
tingent and Qilich Khan to Qandahar for
watching the movements of the Persians. In
truth, Shah Safi was at this time in the grip of
a serious struggle with Sultan Murad IV of
Constantinpple, who had invaded the Persian
Iraq and captured Baghdad. The Mughal
Prince was recalled to Kabul in the first week
of July, 1639.
Section 5. —Second expedition of Bar a
towards Qandahar
The Persian menace became a reality when
Sultan Murad IV died and the Turks were
rapidly expelled from their recent conquests in
Iraq and Armenia (1640-1641). Relieved of
the fear of the Turks and flushed with his recent
victories in the west, the Persian King diverted
the whole warlike resources of his kingdom
towards Qandahar. He sent in advance his
Commander-in-Chief Rustam Khan Gurji with
a powerful army, having instructed him to halt
at Nishapur, the capital of Khurasan, till his
own arrival. This news caused a great stir in
the Mughal Court at Labor. Distinguished
officers were hastily recalled from provincial
governments, and the Rajput chiefs hurried to
the Pan jab at the head of their contingents.
The supreme command of the army was given
23
QANDAHAR MENACED


to Prince Dara (10th April, 1642), and Said
Khan Jahan, Rustam Khan Bahadur, Rajah Jai
Singh, Rajah Jaswant Singh and other veterans
were placed on his staff.
Said Khan Bahadur, subahdar of Multan,
and several officers of the Kabul army were
ordered to reinforce Bara. The Crown Prince
again led a magnificent army across the Indus,
but the Persian King never reached Nishapur,
having ended his life’s journey at Kashan in
May 1642.
This was rather a cruel disappointment to
Dara, who was reluctant to turn back without
encountering the enemy. He proposed to force
a war on the Persians by attacking Sistan,
Farah and Herat and thus relieve Qandahar of
the constant Persian menace. Shah Jahan with
greater prudence disapproved of this rash enter-
prise, and did not allow the Prince to proceed
beyond Ghazni. In order to reassure the garri-
son and the inhabitants of Qandahar, two distin-
guished officers, Rustam Khan Bahadur Firuz
Jung and Said Khan Bahadur Zafar Jang were
sent there with 30,000 horse. About a month
afterwards Dara was recalled to Court,, and on
his arrival at Labor (2nd September, 1642) 1 was
received with all the honours due to a victorious
general.
i Second expedition of Dara towards Qandahar: Pad. ii. 291-308.
24
DARA SHUKOH
[CH. 111.


Section 6.—Aurangzib’s failures at Qandahar
For five years after the second expedition
of Dara against the Persians, Shah Jahan
enjoyed some repose, thanks to the helplessness
and minority of the young Shah Abbas 11. But
the Persian King belied the calculations of his
enemy, and suddenly in the depth of winter
(January, 1649) appeared before Qandahar
with a well-appointed army. Shah Jahan sacri-
ficed this much-coveted possession for the com-
fort of a genial winter. Instead of personally
taking the field, he sent forward reinforcements
under Aurangzib and Sadullah Khan, but the
cowardly Mughal garrison surrendered the fort
before the arrival of the Prince. Aurangzib
laid siege to Qandahar in May, 1649, but was
forced to withdraw after three months’ vain
effort.
Then, after most elaborate preparations for
three years, Aurangzib and Sadullah were sent
a second time at the head of a grand army 60,000
strong to reconquer Qandahar. The second
siege lasted from 2nd May, 1652 to July 1652; but
in spite of strenuous digging and bombardment,
success seemed as distant as ever. Aurangzib
was eager to deliver a general assault with the
courage of despair; but the Emperor refused
to sanction such a mad enterprise, and ordered
him to abandon the siege.


Section 7. —Dara appointed to besiege
Qandahar: His preparations
When the army returned crest-fallen from
Qandahar to Kabul on 9th July, 1652, Dara
offered to lead another expedition to retrieve
the prestige of the empire. Accordingly it was
decided that next spring the imperial army
with the Crown Prince as Commander-in-Chief
should start from Labor against the Persians.
The Prince now held the rank of 30,000 sat,
with a contingent of 20,000 horse, do-aspah, seh-
aspah, which had been the mansab of Shah
Jahan before his accession to the throne. Be-
sides, the entire military resources of the empire
were placed at his disposal for equipping the
expeditionary force. The provinces of Kabul
and Multan were added to his viceroyalty and
these were to be governed by his deputies,
Shukoh and Muhammad Ali Khan respectively.
Dara had hitherto been more renowned as
a scholar than as a soldier; and the whole empire
expected a surprise. No one had a higher
opinion of the ability of the Prince than the
Prince himself, and in his estimation an
Aurangzib or a Sadullah was only a sorry
mediocrity. Naturally impulsive, emotional and
unreasonably optimistic, his own fancy often
imposed upon him; like Peter the Hermit of
Gibbon, Dara “ believed whatever he wished,
and whatever he believed he saw in dreams and
26
DARA SIIUKOH
[CH. 111.


visions”. His constant exercise of emotion and
association with Sufi and Hindu mystics had
developed in him a frame of mind, credulous,
sensitive and impractical. Optimism now played
upon the imagination of the Prince, who was
already having dreams about the speedy fall of
Qandahar.
It is said that one day during his stay at
Kabul two Sufi faqirs came to the Prince’s
parlour and sat silently hiding their heads in
the folds of their patched frocks. After a while
one of them raised his head and cried out, “I
am now witnessing the affairs of Iran; Shah of
Persia is dead ’’. The second exclaimed, “So too
am I; but I will not come back till the coffin of
the Shah is deposited in the earth”. Having
heard these words, the Prince said “I also have
seen in a vision (makashfaJi), that I shall not
be required to stay at Qandahar for more than
seven days, and during these seven days the fort
will be conquered The death of Shah
Abbas may be true”. However, he returned to
Labor at the approach of winter and vigorously
pushed on his preparations; “whatever could
not be done in a year,” says Waris, “was com-
pleted by the Prince during his stay of 3 months
and 9 days at Labor”. (Lataif, 7a; Waris
70a). “One may form some idea of the vast
stores and siege-materials collected by the
Prince”, says the author of Lataif-ul-alchbar,
“from the fact that 6000 bamboos, each of which


was not less than ten yards (1 yd. = 42 finger-
breadths), in length were got ready for the
construction of scaling ladders”. ( Lataif, 8b).
Special attention was paid to the equipment
of the Artillery and to the organization of the
Army Supplies. The Banjaras, who formed a
caste of Army contractors and grain merchants
in those days, were bound down to supply grain
to the Qandahar army. The gun foundry of
Labor cast three big guns 1 and seven light
pieces (top-i-hawai).
The full strength of Artillery went up to 7
big guns,. 17 top-i-hawai, and 30 smaller pieces;
thirty thousand shells, 14,000 rockets and 1,500
maunds of lead, and a proportionate quantity
of powder were collected in the munition depot
at Labor.
The personnel of the Artillery consisted
partly of well-paid European gunners, and a
I The largest of these was named ‘Fath Mubarak’ which could
discharge a shell weighing 45 seers; upon this was inscribed a pious
wish :
Top-i-Dara Shukoh Shah-i-Jahan;
Me-kunad Qandahar-ra wairan.
i.e., May this gun of Dara Shukoh, the lord of the world, devastate
Qandahar.
Another gun capable of firing thirty-two-seer shells was given
the name of “Kishwar Kusha”, and the third bore a Sanskrit name
‘Garh-bhanjan’. The biggest piece, capable of firing a shell weighing
fifty-six seers (112 lbs.), named ‘Qila-kusha’ was inscribed with the
following couplet:
“Top-i-Dara Shukoh, QUa-kusha;
Sar-i-Garjasp me-burd ba-hawa.
i.e., May this gun of Dara Shukoh, named Qila-kusha, fling the head
of Garjasp into the air (Lataif-ul-akhbar 7a, 8 a; Waris, 7 b.)
28
DARA SHUKOH
[CH. 111.


few military engineers. During his stay at
Labor the Prince is said to have ordered the
construction of a mock-fort on the model of
Qandahar with a view to have a rehearsal of its
capture. He then summoned the Feringees,
who were expert in sieges, and who had with
them books written by them on the science of
capturing forts ( kitahha dar an fan sakhtand
u Jiam-rah dashtand). In these books there
were drawings of all imaginable kinds of forts
with their description, and methods of making
approaches in such and such a manner if the
fort were of this or that category. On the
appointed day the Prince himself went to
witness this mimic siege of Qandahar at Labor.
He visited the two siege batteries erected
against the toy-Qandahar, and ordered, a bom-
bardment of its walls; and a party was told off
to storm and capture it. The Prince received
the congratulations of those present, and this
event was commemorated in a chronogram
“Fath-i-awival-i Bara Shukoh” i.e., the first
victory of Dara Shukoh. He returned to the
palace, praising the battery of the Feringees as
superior to that of the Hindustanis. 1
The expeditionary force mobilized at Labor
numbered, according to the official muster-roll,
70,000 horse, made up of the contingents of
about 110 Muslim and 58 Rajput officers of rank
(ranging from 5-hazari to 5 -sadi) and of troops
i Lataif, MS. ga, gb.


of the Prince’s own establishment. Besides,
five thousand mounted match-lockmen and three
thousand mounted archers of the Ahadi Corps,
ten thousand infantry armed with match-locks,
and 60 war-elephants of the imperial stable
(exclusive of 170 elephants of the Prince and
the mansabdars), added to its effective strength.
The non-combatant establishment of the Army
consisted of 6,000 diggers and hatchetmen, 500
stone-cutters and sappers, and 500 1 water-car-
riers, exclusive of the usual complement of
camp-followers. Preparations having been com-
pleted, Dara wrote to the Emperor that the
astrologers had fixed 23rd Rabi-ul-awwal (11th
February 1653), for starting, and 7th Jamadi-
us-sani (25th April), for laying siege to Qanda-
har. The Emperor directed that the army
should march by way of the Thal-Chotiali route
via Multan, as provisions were abundant be-
tween Multan and Qandahar. On this occasion,
the Prince received as present jewels, arms,
elephants, and horses worth five lakhs of Rupees
and one lakh of gold coins and one crore of
Rupees for his military chest; in presents and
i The number 500 in this passage of Khafi Khan seems to be
a misprint, if not an error; because 500 is too small a number for
sappers and water-carriers, considering the size of the army. Five
thousand in both cases is perhaps the correct number. Waris says
in a subsequent passage that Sayyid Mahmud Barha with 1070
sappers was appointed to assist Mulla Fazil in the work of
draining off the ditch (Waris 74b.)


reward to officers and troops another twenty,
lakhs were spent. 1
Great enthusiasm prevailed in the army,
particularly among the men and officers of the
Prince’s own contingent, who were all “untried
braves” like their master. Their incorrigible
optimism irritated those who had grown old in
war and twice returned unsuccessful from
Qandahar. Every officer of Dara considered
himself a Rustam or an Afrasiyab of the age,
and seemed reluctant to share the glory of con-
quering Qandahar with their imperial auxili-
aries. However, Dara relied for his success not
so much upon temporal powers as on spiritual
forces. He took into his pay a number of
“praying Mullas” (arbab-i-duaat) , who began
praying for his victory at Labor and were taken
with the army to Qandahar. In an age of
superstition and black magic, nobody however
pious and enlightened could ignore the Devil
altogether; so the Prince employed also several
magicians ( sahiran ), for generating worms
( kiram ) in the food-stuff of the besieged, and
creating dissensions in the ranks of the enemy
etc., by their incantations. Thus, armed at all
points and having impartially pressed man, God
and Satan into his service, the Crown Prince
took the field against the Persians for the third
time.
i Khafi Khan, i. 716-17; Waris MS. yob.


On 11th February 1653, after three gharis
of the day had passed, Prince Dara Shukoh
came out of the city of Labor, and took up his
quarters in the camp outside. After a two days’
halt he began bis march by way of Multan, Doki
and Pishin, On 23rd April (sth Jamadi-us-
sani), the Indian army debouched through the
Panjmundrah pass and encamped on the 25th
at Mard-i-qila, five kos from Qandahar. Thus
the auspicious date (7th Jamadi-us-sani), which
the astrologers had fixed for starting the siege,
was lost through dilatory march. Though the
advanced division of the army under Rustam
Khan Bahadur Firuz Jang had already reached
the fort of Qandahar and the first shots were
exchanged, Bara’s officers, Abdullah Beg and
Jafar, insisted upon having another auspicious
day to begin digging trenches, and evidently
owing to this the commanders did not occupy
their allotted sections in the blockading line
immediately after their arrival, but on Thurs-
day, 10th Jamadi-us-sani, 1063 A.H. However
the Prince did not occupy his head-quarters in
the Garden of Kamran (the ill-fated brother of
Humayun) till seven days later, on another
auspicious day, 16th Jamadi-us-sani 1 (4th May
1653).
i Dara’s inarch to Qandahar, Waris 740-746; Lataif, gb-i3a;
according to the latter authority Dara occupied the camp in the
Garden of Kamran on Wednesday 16th Jamadi-us-s4hi, i.e., 4th May,
1653. But Waris says “on the 15th” i.e., 3rd May.


CHAPTER IV
THE THIRD SIEGE OF QANDAHAR
Section 1. —Old Qandahar and its outposts
The old city of Qandahar which was des-
troyed by Nadir Shah in 1738, was situated
about two miles outside the modern city on the
Herat Road. The city consisted of three distinct
parts, each on a separate eminence, and capable
of mutual defence. On the serrated crest of
the hill stood many towers united by curtains.
The highest of these called Lakah, commanded
the citadel (named Daulatabad), which stood
lower down on the second eminence, while the
town and the market-place ( mandi ), both walled
round, were situated further below on the first
table-land above the eastern plain. The ram-
parts of the old town which were built of dried
clay, strengthened by the mixture of chopped
straw and stones, were at places ten yards
broad. On the side of the plain was a wide and
deep ditch, and on the north face of the ridge
against which the fort nestled, there are forty
steps cut in the rock and leading up to a cave
half way up the hill (called Chehel-zina ) which
commanded both the citadel and the city. The
redoubt of Lakah crowned a peak in the middle
of the ridge and defended Qandahar on its
3


western flank, where the hill descends to the
plain in a steep scarp. “Proceeding along the
hill from the north-eastern corner of the ridge
where the wall first leaves the hill, we come in
succession to the gates of Baba Wali, Waisqa-
rah, Khwajah Khizir and Mashuri, till at last
the wall strikes the ridge again at the south-
western corner of the fort, where stood an earth-
work bastion and a redoubt”. ( Aurangzib,
Yol. 1 & 2, pp. 124-7).
Section 2.—Dispositions of the besieging
Army
On Thursday, 28th April, 1653, the divi-
sional commanders of the army completed the
line of investment by taking up their positions
in the following order: —
Beginning from the north-
east
against Baba Wali Gate. Mahabat Khan, 5-hazari.
against Waisqaran Gate. Qilich Khan, 5-hazari.
between Waisqaran and Jafar, Mir-i-rAtish of the
Khawajah Khizir. Prince, with his artillery,
against Khwajah Khizir Abdullah, Mir Bakhshi of
Gate. the Prince, with the
infantry.
between Khizir Gate and Qasim Khan, Mir-i-Atish
Mashuri Gate. of the Imperial Artillery,
4-
against Mashuri Gate. Mirza Rajah Jai Singh,
5-


against Chehel-zina Tower. Ikhlas Khan, 3-hazari.
against Lakah Redoubt. Baqi Khan, Chaxnpat Rai
Bundela, Sayyid Mirza,
and others.
Mulla Fazil, Mir-i-Saman of the Prince, was
entrusted with the work of draining off the ditch,
and Sayyid Mahmud Barha with 1,070 sappers
and a contingent of troops was appointed to
assist him. On 4th May, the Prince occupied
his camp in front of Mirza Kararan’s garden to
the west of the Lakah hill. Rustam Khan
Bahadur Firuz Jang with a strong force was
stationed a little ahead to watch the road from
Bust, and other thanas were put in charge of
officers of approved ability.
Section 3.—Sorties and night-attacks
On the very first day, a body of Persians
came out of the Khizir Gate and challenged the
Hindustanis. Khwajah Khan Uzbeg rode out to
meet them with a few followers, and pursued the
enemy to the edge of the ditch where he lost his
horse, and received several bullet-wounds from
volleys fired from the rampart. While he was
returning, the fugitives turned upon him, and
were about to despatch him when a voice' of
command cried out, “Shame upon you. Let him
go away”. When the news reached the ears of
the Prince, he sent for Khwajah Khan and gave
him a special khilat and a horse, besides an in-
crease of 200 sawar in his mansab.


A’ party of three hundred Persians fell
uppn the men of Izzat Khan’s trench, when they
had assembled for prayer early at dawn, on the
2nd Ramzan (17th July, 1653), killing and
wounding many men. Had it not been for the
brave succour of Qutb Khan and Shams Khan,
sons of Kazar Bahadur Kheshgi, a great
disaster would have befallen them. These two
brothers had 31 of their men wounded, and the
troops of Mahabat Khan, who encountered the
Persians near their trench during their retreat,
lost 14 in killed, and 31 wounded.
Izzat Khan, a favourite servant of Bara
concealed the extent of his loss (about 90 in
wounded and killed), carried some corpses of
the Persians killed elsewhere to his own trench,
and showed them to the officer deputed to
enquire, as the trophies of the heroism of his
own men! 1
Sorties became more frequent towards the
close of the siege, specially upon the trenches of
Bara’s favourite Jafar. The Persians were as
vigilant in night-watch as the Hindustanis were
i Lataif-ul-akhhar, 760-770. The official account in Padshah-
naim, apparently based upon the despatches of Dara—says “Sorties
were few and none successful; but once owing to the negligence of
the men in Mahabat Khan’s trench some of the Khan’s men were
killed and some wounded; when the Persians were retunring, men of
Izzat Khan’s trench who were near punished them, killing several of
the Persians” (Waris 77b). That Dara had subscribed to a false
report about this affair became the general talk in the camp. The
author of Lataif-ul-akhbar says, “As from the very start it became
clear that the Crown Prince wished that all the credit of efforts in
capturing this fortress should go to his own servants, particularly


negligent. They often crept silently into the
trenches, and returned after leaving headless
trunks of sappers as the ghastly memorial of
their nocturnal visits. In the night of 24th
May, Path Muhammad Kalal the darogha of the
beldars (diggers) in the trench of Qasim Khan,
went out with four beldars to the trench-head;
next morning their corpses were found lying
without their heads. The same night another
party slipped across, the ground between the
posts of Mahabat Khan and Qilich Khan into
the field lying behind their lines, killed 3 men,
and hamstrung four horses ( L'ataif, 31 b).
Even the cautious Bundela chiefs were not
immune from such unpleasant surprises; at
midday on 30th June, noticing the men in the
trenches of Pahar Singh Bundela off their
guard, a party of the besieged came upon them
and slew about 60 people; some troops of Pahar
Singh pursued them and lost 20 more from the
fire of the fort (ibid 58a), , On the 3rd of
Ramzan (18th July) about 30* Persian muske-
teers came down to the Lakah Hill, cut the
throats of four camels and five cows which were
grazing on the ground between the battery of
Champat Rai Bundela and that of Baqi Khan,
to Jafar and Izzat Khan, whatever the soldiers of Mahabat
Khan did to punish the enemy, drive them away, and prevent them
from carrying off their dead went to the credit of Izzat Khan in
reports to the Emperor; the plea put forward was the presence of
two slain enemies which the men of Izzat Khan picked up in front
of Mahabat Khan’s battery no mention of Qutb Khan and
Shams Khan ” (78b-7pb).


and were carrying away the lawful flesh when
they were set upon by several hundred imperia-
lists; more Persians came to the rescue of their
comrades and volleys were exchanged; but the
Persians got away with their fat game (79 b).
These are but a few typical incidents of frequent
occurrence during the siege.
Section 4. —Magic and Miracles
Though Dara Shukoh was a sincere lover
of God, it was no part of his creed to make
God’s quarrel his own. He brought from Labor
some workers of black magic along with a
number of learned and pious ulemas as a supple-
ment to his warlike equipment. One of these
was a Hindu sannyasi, evidently a Tantric
Sadhu, named Indra Gir, who had long enjoyed
the Prince’s wine and victuals on the promise
of working a miracle at Qandahar. He was
looked upon as “the master of forty genii
( deo )”, whom he could employ to fill the ditch
by pulling down its walls. On 3rd May Indra
Gir was called upon to summon his deos, and
try them against the fort, which seemed invinci-
ble to human efforts. Quite confidently he
walked to the ditch to demand an entrance into
the fort, and said in reply to the challenge of
the Persian sentry, “I am one of the intimate
associate of the Prince; I wish to see this fort,
and smoke a chilam of tobacco on that high
tower.” The Persians took him inside the fort;


and it was afterwards learnt from the deserters
that he was taken to their chief who ordered
that he should be taken round the fort, and
entertained with a chilam of tobacco. The
Persian commander sanctioned for him the
usual jug of wine, food and other necessaries
which Dara used to supply every day to Indra
Gir.
When Indra Gir became very importunate
about going back, the suspicion of the Persians
was aroused and he was put to the rack
(shikanja) . He revealed his secret under tor-
ture, and was employed to carry water for the
Persians on duty in the Lakah redoubt. The
Persian commander asked Indra Gir to practise
some magic ( saliiri ) which would compel the
Mughal army to retreat. But when he was dis-
appointed with the sannyasi, he ordered that
Indra Gir should be taken to the top of the
Jamrud-shahi hill, and flung down below to join
his comrades of the nether world ( Lataif, 18a).
On 23rd July, a Haji appeared in the camp
of Dara. Under the cloak of piety he was a
magician and a hypnotist (Sakir u chasham-
kand), and told the Prince that he had come from
the country of Kanaur (Ganaur?) to secure the
reduction of Qandahar by prayers and magic.
He declared that he could by his incantations
silence the fort-guns and muskets for one pas
(3 hours) and two gharis; which was time enough
for a few bold men to capture it. The Prince


sanctioned for him free rations and Rs. 20 per
diem as remuneration, and with some difficulty
met a further demand for two dancing-girls,
two gamblers, two thieves, one buffalo, a lamb
and five cocks, requisitioned by the magician.
Next came a Jogi with 40 disciples and desired
to offer a special prayer, which would secure the
submission of the garrison within twenty days.
He retired to a secluded place with his party,
being granted free provisions and Rs. 100 daily
for other expenses. Several Deccani Sadhus,
called Gurus 1 who professed to be seventeenth
century Count Zeppelins, undertook to build for
the Prince a “wonderful thing which could carry
two or three persons with hand-grenades
( huqqah ), and fly in the air without wings and
feathers. They were allowed to make the
experiment, free provisions and Rs. 40 per diem
being sanctioned for them. ( Lataif, 85 a, 8 5b).
Next day, the 24th July, the Naqibs moved
from tent to tent, crying out to the soldiers to
get ready for scaling the ramparts. At noon
the Haji came, and after a while he disappeared
from view, but having reappeared at the close
of the day said, “I have been inside the fort
Tuesday noon I shall take the soldiers with me”.
This was again deferred to Monday next. In the
night of 26th July, the magician performed some
diabolical rites for Jafar. The Haji lighted a
i The author of Dabistan mentions a class of Kashmiri Brahmans,
called Guruva gurina (Shea, ii. 103).


lamp and threw some grains of pulse {mash),
upon it: then he fell into a weird dance, now
jumping a yard high into the air, and now falling
upon the ground. At the close of the dance, a
dog was sacrified before the lamp, and also the
lamb and cocks; then turning to the dancing-
girls, gamblers, and thieves he said, “It is
obligatory to sacrifice you all; however, I shall
give my own blood instead of yours; you are
free”. He inflicted a wound on his own thigh
and taking out some blood of his own sprinkled
it upon the blood of the slain beasts; again he
fell to dancing which continued for some time.
.... Jafar was then called in, and ordered to
wash his sword with the sacrificial blood which
would make it cut through steel; he was further
assured that these rites had made him an Achilles
without Achilles’ heel.
Next day when only four gharis of night
remained, Jafar armed his followers and keep-
ing them in absolute readiness went to wake up
the Haji for silencing the fort-guns. The
magician opened his eyes reluctantly and said,
“Mirza Jafar, three deos {genii) are guarding
this fortress, with them I had a tough fight last
night, in the course of which several times I had
to go up into the sky and come down to earth.
I have as yet succeeded in subduing two deos,
who are safe in my custody; but the third, which
is the most turbulent of the three, is still at large
guarding the fort-walls. Let the attack be


postponed till Monday next, because I hope to
capture the refractory one by that time”.
The activity of the magician on behalf of
Jafar had been noised abroad, and evidently
reached the Persians, who performed some
counter-magic on Friday and threw down the
carcase of a dog with its belly cut open and filled
with boiled rice. They are said to have done the
same thing and thrown the carcase of a dog into
the trench of another officer, Rajah Rajrup of
the Jammu hills, who was contemplating an
assault on the Chehel-zina Tower. However,
Jafar again went to the Haji on the appointed
day with unabated enthusiasm; 1 the Haji told
him that he had despaired of rounding up the
third deo, and that unless the two captive deos
were released, he himself might lose his life at
their hands; the enterprise should therefore be
given up definitely!
Section 5. — The capture of Bust and Girishk
On May 13, 1653, Rustam Khan Bahadur
Firuz Jang left the camp at the head of a well-
appointed army of 15,000 troops for the subjuga-
tion of Bust and other. dependencies of
Qandahar. He reached Bust on 21st May, made
a demonstration, and sent a messenger to Mahdi
i Lataif MS. 86a; 86 b; 87a; 896; 90a. Recently an almost similar
story of a “Master of Ghosts” appeared in the Statesman, Saturday,
9th Feb. 1929.


Quli Khan advising him to surrender. As the
Persians prepared to hold out, Rustam Khan
requisitioned a big gun and some sappers from
Qandahar, and blockaded the fort. When the
big gun arrived, Mahdi Quli sued for terms and
surrendered the fort on the tenth day of the
siege (Waris, 76a). But another version of the
fall of Bust is found in the non-official history,
Lataif-ul-akhhar; it is said there that on the
seventh day of the siege Rustam Khan sphead a
false story of the fall of Qandahar, and ordered
a great rejoicing in his camp; Mahdi Quli was
deceived by the ruse, and the fort was secured
before a single shot had been fired from the
newly-arrived big gun, which was nevertheless
named “the Amantaldb”l ( Lataif, 35b).
Rustam Khan induced Mahdi Quli to write
a letter to his son (who was in charge of the fort
of Girishk, 30 miles higher up on the bank of
the Helmand), to come over and accompany him
to Hindustan; Mahdi Quli’s son evacuated
Girishk, but fled to Farah. On 29th Shaban
(15th July, 1653), Rustam Khan sent a
detachment to punish Mirza Muhammad
Raushan Gurji in the neighbourhood of Zarain
Dawar. In the last week of July he himself
made a raid across the Helmand to disperse an
assemblage of Persians near the village of
Nauzad (?) Rustam Khan was next ordered to
invade the Zamin Dawar district, further north


west, through which the road from Farah to
Qandahar passes.
The Hazaras co-operated with the Mughal s
and wrested some outposts from the Persians.
Daulat Beg Hazara captured Kiriwaz (?) and
Mihir Quli Sultan Hazara drove away a band
of Qizilbashes and Gurjis (people of Gurjistan,
north of the Piruz-Koh range), who were holding
the fort of Charshina. But these successes were
nullified when it was found necessary to recall
the division of Rustam Khan to take part in an
assault upon Qandahar. But no troops from the
main camp were willing to go to Bust on garri-
son duty. When the Mughal Ahadis were
ordered to start for Bust they flatly refused, and
even threatended to resign service. The rebelli-
ous soldiery argued that Sadat Khan, under
whom they were asked to serve in Bust, was a
Persian who had no interest or relations in
Hindustan; his only son being w T ith him in the
camp; “In the event of any reverse of fortune”
they said, “Sadat Khan will go over to the
Persians light-heartedly, but our families in
Hindustan will be ruined and God knows
"whether we shall ever be able to escape from that
place.” {Lataif, 146 b).
In obedience to the instructions of the
Prince, Rustam Khan Bahadur, having dismant-
led the fort of Bust, rejoined the main camp at
Qandahar on 27th September.


Section 6. —Attack upon the Chehel-zina
Hill
The key to the defences of Qandabar was a
hillock of granite rock on the northern side of
the ridge, at a distance of about three quarters of
a mile from the citadel. Above a flight of 40
rock-cut steps it had two projecting towers,
overlooking the Citadel and the Mandi (fortified
market) of Qandahar. Once this hill is cap-
tured, Qandahar becomes untenable: Shah
Abbas II discovered this in 1649, and Aurangzib
also planned to turn the defences of Qandahar
by seizing this point. But this could be captured
not by slow mining and bombardment but
at a heavy cost and with superhuman courage.
A novice in the trade of arms, Dara thought of
scaring away the guards of the towers by an in-
cessant discharge of rockets, without any storm-
ing party to seize the moment of the enemy’s con-
fusion. For two consecutive nights, 7th and Bth’
May, several thousand rockets were discharged
to the great delight of the Persians who had
never seen a more brilliant display of fireworks.
Highly pleased with the rocket-men and the
officers in command, Dara gave a reward of
Rs. 20 to each man, and a promotion of 100 sat
to Muhammad Sadiq and Mir Shihab-ul-din.
On 10th May, Jafar was temporarily shifted
to a new position to erect a heavy battery against
the eastern tower on the Chehel-zina. The


bombardment was ineffectual, and the Persians
silenced some of his guns. The charge of the
battery was given at last to the right man, Rajah
Rajrup of the Kangra Hills, who had distin-
guished himself by his attack on this hill in the
second siege. Dara gave Rajrup a promotion of
500 zat, 500 sawar, and was all praise for him
(6th June). But shortly afterwards, Rajrup’s
neighbour and hereditary enemy, Rajah Man
Gwaliori, who had been a rival of Rajrup’s
father in the first siege, got possession of the
Prince’s ears and coveted Rajrup’s command.
Rajrup, who had lost 46 men killed and 160
wounded in carrying forward the work, deter-
mined to hazard an attack at all cost. On 20th
June he communicated the time of assault to the
commanders of the batteries to his right and left,
and also formally to the Prince for approval.
Bara’s astrologers foimd the time “after 5
gharis” inauspicious, because of the presence of
the sun in the sign of “the Cancer” which was
not favourable, considering the position of the
tower. Rajrup received positive orders to alter
the time to “after the 18th ghari”. But before
the astrologically correct time arrived, a younger
brother of Jafar, who had been ailing for a long
time, expired. This was considered as a bad
omen and the order for attack was altogether
cancelled; poor Rajrup suffered a further loss
of 5 men killed, and about 20 wounded in recall-
ing his advance-party.


Three days after this, Dara in a fit of anger
called Rajrup (in his absence) a liver-less fox
and said, “Send him to the trench of Jafar, who
will teach him well how to serve, and hand over
his battery to Rajah Man Gwaliori”. Qazi
Afzal firmly defended Rajrup, and saved him
from this humiliation. On 15th July Yallabh
Chauhan was asked to take over the charge of
Chehel-zina from Rajrup; but he excused him-
self saying “I am a man of the plain and not a
mountaineer; I am ignorant of hill-fighting”.
This threw the Prince into a rage, and he ordered
that the Chauhan should be forthwith conduc-
ted to the trench of Jafar; but he relented soon
and recalled him on his way to Jafar’s. Yallabh
was allowed to relieve Devi Singh Bundela, who
was appointed to the charge of Chehel-zina
( Lataif, 72b). But this post was henceforth
neglected, all resources being now concentrated
in filling the ditch and pushing forward the
trenches in the main line of blockade.
On 14th September (2nd Zilqada), the
works in the Chehel-zina 1 battery were dis-
mantled ; Devi Singh handed over the materials
to Rajrup, who was now required to co-operate
with Jafar in pushing the approach to Sher Haji,
i Chehel-zina; Raj nip’s bravery is praised by Waris:—
“Rajrup drove the trench to the foot of the Chehel-zina and
although a gun was sent to him the bombardment was ineffectual....
An assault was made on one of the towers, but the garrison used
naphtha; many men were wounded; the Prince ordered Rajrup to
desist Next he was given charge of a battery midway between


a bastion of the fort near the Khwajah Wais-
qaran gate. As a collague of Jafar, everything
went on well with Rajrup; Dara gave him
Rs. 5000 in reward to relieve his immediate dis-
tress, and Rs. 5000 more was promised to him
when his trench would reach the foot of Sher
Haji.
Such is the treatment which most of his
officers received at the hands of Dara. It was
only human that in the civil war Rajrup shrank
from siding with him against Aurangzib and
even turned hostile to Dara.
Section 7.—Sapping
The formidable chain of posts which had
been established against the main gates on the
eastern side of Qandahar slowly approached
the ditch by running sheltered trenches. The
battery of Jafar became the pivot of the whole
siege operations, which caused jealousy and
heart-burning among the officers in charge of
the other batteries. They complained of the
partiality of the Prince for Jafar, and resented
those of Jafar and Qilich Khan” (76a). The big gun referred to
is evidently the Aman-talab, which was returned to Raj nip’s battery
on 14th June, after Bust had surrendered ( Lataif , 43a). The attack,
mentioned above, was not upon Chehel-zina, but on a redoubt on the
Lakah hill, delivered in the night of 14th July by Rajrup in concert
with three other officers, Champat Rai Bundela, Devi Singh and
Sayyid Mahmud. The imperialists meditated a surprise; but they
themselves were cruelly surprised and Rajah Rajiup, whose men were
foremost, suffered heavily, the pick of his contingent being destroyed.
(Ibid, yob).


Jafar’s airs and brag. Two big guns, Top-i-
Mariam and Qila-kusha, reached the camp on
6th August, and six days later came Fath-i-
Muharak (Fath-i-lashkar ?). But these guns
were found worse than useless, as no iron-shells
of the proportionte size and strength had been
brought from Labor. The Prince had listened
to the suggestion of one of his favourites that
it would be more economical and convenient to
take stone-cutters with the army and have stone-
balls of hard granite'prepared there from the
inexhaustible quarries of Qahdahar. But the
wicked darogha of stone-cutters made balls of
soft stone with the result that when these were
fired from the Qilakusha, they burst in the air-
injuring the gunners themselves. Stone-balls;
were now wrapped with san (hemp-twine) to
prevent their bursting to a certain extent. Some
of the Feringhee gunners deserted to the Per-
sians, and others proved hardly more efficient
than the Hindustanis. Though 27,000 rounds
of ammunition are said to have been fired,'no
practicable breach was made, nor could'they
silence the Persian artillery.
The besiegers worked hard to drain off the
ditch by blowing away the dams. One spring
was emptied on 13th July, but three days later
it was reported byQasim Khan and Abdullah
that the water in front of their position which
had fallen to knee-deep was now neck-high.
Even when they at length succeeded in emptying
4 .


the ditch, it was very difficult to keep it dry, as
water began to flow in through mysterious
channels near the edge of the Sher Haji. How-
ever, the ditch was filled up in front of Jafar’s
battery by throwing into it logs of wood and
bags of earth. At any rate, it ceased to be an
obstacle to the storming party. But the Persian
fire, particularly their musketry, was so galling
and accurate that the Hindustanis dared not
come out of their raised batteries (damdamah) ,
and sand-bag ramparts.
Jafar constructed a magnificent structure,
75 yards in # length, 55 yards in breadth and 27
yards in height, and mounted ten small guns
upon it. He made a huge damdamah (covered
platform) in which 20 men could stand erect at
ease to carry on the work of mining. According
to the official report, about 300 yards of the
rampart, and the wall of the Sher Haji were
battered down by the artillery of the Prince.
Jafar .and Izzat Khan (the latter commanded a
battery against the Sher Haji), claimed to have
made practicable breaches in their front. The
Prince, who would believe his own favourites
against the rest of the world, accepted their
version without any personal inquiry or a visit
to these reported breaches. It was rather risky
on the part of any officer to contradict the Prince
on this point, because,it would be set down to
the cowardice or disloyalty of the speaker.


Section 8. —Preparations for assault
On August 21, Dara made a distribution, of
armour and cuirasses and designated officers to
different batteries in contemplation of a general
assault two days afterwards. It was notified by
beat of drum, says the author of Latiaf-ul-
akhhar, that on the day of assault, those who
were not sepoys and did not possess the neces-
sary courage to go to the attack, should he ready
to offer prayers (hasaadat-i-handagi) ; a price
of Rs. 5 was put on every head of a Qizilbash;
and one ashrafi for every Persian prisoner
brought in alive. 1 The Prince having thus
decided his own line of action without even
consulting the senior nobles, called together his
chiefs next day to sound their opinion; but it
only served to irritate and insult them further.
All came except Qilich Khan, who sent word
that he would come in the afternoon as he had
taken a purgative ( julah ). Dara turning to-
wards Mahabat Khan, 2 said, “Breaches have
1 Lataif I2ib^i22a.
2 Mahabat Khan, Mirza Lohrasp, son of the notorious Mahabat
Khan who made a captive of Jahangir (M. U. iii. 590-595). Manucci
says, “It happened that Mahabat Khan's soldiers killed one of Dara’s
men. Falling into a rage, and without inquiry into matter, he ordered
his troops to be collected with orders to drag Mahabat Khan before
him Shah Jahan ordered a severe reproof to be administered to
Dara After this incident Mahabat Khan bore a grudge
against him.” ( Storia , i. 225). Whether the above incident, for
which Manucci is the only authority—took place before the Qandahar
campaign' or after it, is not known. Dara who listened to backbiters,
had differences with Mahabat Khan from the very start of the siege;
the trouble being due to the knavery and impudence of Dara’s own
servants. When the author of Lataif-ul-akhbar went to explain the


been opened opposite the batteries of Tzzat
Khan and Jafar. What do you advise about an
assault?” Mahabat replied “We are servants;
we have nothing else to do except carrying out
your orders. Kings only can advise a king.”
Dara attempted flattery, but ended with harsh
words of threat; “Why do you not speak
plainly” said the Prince, “that attack is advis-
able, and that fighting shoulder to shoulder with
others you will carry it by storm? Your father
conquered the famous fort of Daulatabad
You seem to think of returning home without
capturing Qandahar. Better banish such a vain
and mischievous idea from your mind.” Next,
he asked Nejabat Khan, 1 a 5-hazari to give his
opinion on the feasibility of an assault. Nejabat
submitted that it would be better if for three or
four days more the guns were kept employed in
levelling down the rampart. Dara silenced him
difficulties of pushing the trench to Data’s secretary Faqir Khan, the
latter uttered some disrespectful words to the Khan (May u, 1653;
Lataif 24a). This Mahabat Khan was the man who had the hardihood
to tell Aurangzib to his very face in an assembly that no soldier
was required to fight with Shiva “The Qazi (Abdul Wahab) will
put Shiva down”. ( M. U. iii, 594)-
1 Nejabat Khan, Mirza Shuja (M. U. iii, 821-828). Previous
to the Qandahar campaign, Nejabat, while faujdar of Saharanpur, was
tempted by the report of gold mines to make a raid into the country
of the Nak-kati Rani who ruled in Srinagar in the Kumaon Hills.
He managed to escape with his nose, leaving honour and gold behind
(ibid 822). The attitude of Nejabat was very, objectionable from the
beginning. He refused to take up his position before the Ab-dozd-gate,
and on being asked to go to Bust with Rustam Khan, he at first
declined and was afterwards persuaded by his colleagues to do so.
( Lataif, 19a, 24a, 25a). He, however, regained the Prince’s favour
for a while, and was recalled to Qandahar.


by saying, “You seem to insinuate that no
breaches have been effected No matter
whether there is a breach or not, an assault
must be delivered.” Then he turned to Mirza
Rajah Jai Singh Kachchwah and said abruptly,
“Rajah Jiu, your exertions in the Emperor’s
business have fallen short of expectation from
the very start (of the siege). l No plea will be
heard now If your objection is that no
breach has been made in front of your battery,
I give you Jafar’s.” The Rajah, declining the
offer, said, “By the time Jafar and Izzat Khan
will get into the fort through the breaches
* i Alluding to the Rajah’s plea of inability to push forward his
trench more quickly. The Rajah turned away the Prince’s man
saying, “We Rajputs are not very clever -in digging trenches and in
siege-work. Better let the Prince hand over this battery to whomsoever
he pleases.” (May 28, 1653; Lataif 35a). On 15th Ramzan (30th
July) Jai Singh was sent for by Dara, who made a very earnest
request to him to make an assault, holding out many bright promises.
But the Rajah kept a very sullen attitude without speaking a word in
reply for a considerable time. At last he came away giving the
Prince a cold and evasive reply ( Lataif, 94b, 95a). Vide my paper at
the Ninth Meeting, Indian Historical Records Commission, Lucknow.
For a biographical sketch of Jai Singh—meagre and unsatisfactory
—see M. U. iii. 568-576. Letters have of late come to light in the
Jaipur Archives, showing that Dara was on very intimate terms with
the Rajah. The coolness between the two during the Qandahar
campaign cannot be explained in any other way except by the fact
that the Rajah resented Dara’s partiality for Jafar and others, and
became disgusted with the childish follies and unrestrained speeches
of Dara. Manucci says that Dara once insulted Jai Singh by humor-
ously remarking that the Rajah looked like a musician ( Storia , i,
225). At Qandahar too Dara flung a similar taunt at the Rajah:
“This is the third time that you have come to Qandahar. If you
fail this time also how will you show your face to the women of
Hindustan? In truth women are better than the men who have
returned again and again from this place." ( Lataif, 20a, see also
84b).


(made by them), I shall be able to do the same
by fixing scaling-ladders to the wall.” Dara
enquired, “If so, on what date do you agree to
deliver the attack'?” The other replied, “I have
nothing to do with agreements and assurances;
I have simply to obey your command.” The
Prince cried out in a passion, “What words are
these ? You must say plainly whether an assault
is advisable or not. If you mean to keep your-
self aloof from the affair, give it to me in
writing, so that I may either order a retreat to
Hindustan or recall Rustam Khan Bahadur and
make an attack with his advice.” The Rajah
replied, “I am prepared to give it in writing
that I am always in favour of an attack, and
also ever ready to deliver it.” Dara retorted,
“Your heart and tongue do not seem to agree.
What is in your heart, your tongue does not
give out, and whatever your tongue utters finds
no echo in your heart. If they are in unison,
why do you not say straightway that you con-
sider an assault to be advisable and that by a
concerted effort you will capture the fort?” He
continued, “Perhaps it has occurred to you that
I shall return without conquering Qandahar.
If I do so, how can I 'show my face to the
Padshah?” The Rajah rejoined, “Your High-
ness is the very light of the Emperor’s eyes.
Whenever His Majesty’s glance will light upon
your Highness’s world-illuminating counten-
ance, it will be quite welcome. But how shall


we humble servants show our faces'?” The
Prince ironically remarked, “You have twice
shown this very face to His Majesty; the difficul-
ty is rather with me, for whom this will be the
first occasion for doing it.” More unpleasant
words followed, the Prince, being highly dis-
gusted with these fearless rejoinders on equal
terms, cut short the unhappy altercation with
the words, “Whether you agree to the proposal
of assault or not, I do command you to make an
assault, no matter whether you die or conquer
the fort ” He then solemnly recited
the Fatiha and gave the above-mentioned nobles
leave to depart.
Dara not only embittered the feelings of
the three most powerful nobles of the Empire,
but also unknowingly sowed the seed of mutual
jealousy between his two confidants by his
tactless praise of Jafar in the presence of Izzat
Khan. “Had there been two more men like
thee,” said the Prince in appreciation of Jafar ? s
optimism and flattering vaunt, “by this time the
affair of this fort would have been decided.”
Jafar, Izzat Khan and Rajah Rajrup were the
three persons,who gave their opinion in favour
of an assault. Qilich Khan came in the after-
noon; but even before being asked to take his
seat, he was told by the Prince that an assault
had been decided upon, and that the Khan
might go after the Fatiha had been read.


On August 23, (Tuesday, 9th Shawwal) the
troops, kept under arms all night, were inspected
by the Prince in their respective posts. When
about 3 gharis of the night remained, the strom-
ing parties rushed for their objectives at the
signal of the Prince. Like Xerxes witnessing
the battle of Salamis from his golden throne,
Bara watched the fate of his troops from the
shelter of a house on the top of the well-known
hill, Chehel-dokhtaran (Eminence of the Forty
daughters) J What followed next has been very
graphically described by the author of Lataif-
ul-akhhar, who at the command of Mahabat
Khan took his stand on a height near his battery
and reported the progress of the attack to the
Khan seated securely within the damdamah
(raised battery). 1
Section 9. —Assault delivered
We begin with the battery of Izzat Khan.
Jahangir Beg with two war-elephants and 1000
mail-clad horsemen rushed for the breach which
seemed almost deserted. The Persians with great
coolness reserved their fire till the Mughals were
well within the range of arrow and bullet. A
tremendous volley of artillery and musket fired
i On loth Ramzan, 25th July the Prince ordered Chandra Bhan
his Bayyutat (superintendent of household stores and workshops) to
select a site, from which he might witness the deeds of valour of his
troops on the day of assault. Chandra Bhan having chosen a house
in the declivity of a hill, known as Chehel-dokhtaran, the Prince
visited the place. ( Lataif, 89a).


at point blank range put the Mughal elephants
and horsemen to flight. Izzat Khan, so the
envious camp gossip went, was busy sprinkling
his body with rose-water ( jama-ra wa kardah
gulah bar khud me-bashid), when the signal for
the assault was given. He followed the advance-
party of Jahangir Beg with a body of troops,
but returned to his own trench without making
any effort to rally his men and renew the attack. 1
Mahabat Khan was all the while sitting inside
his trench listening to the reports of the author
of Lataif-ul-akhbar. One shell accidentally
burst near him and killed a soldier who was
sitting just opposite; but the Khan escaped un-
harmed, He returned to his own position in
the rear when Izzat Khan turned his back upon
the enemy.
Qilich from the right, and Mirza Abdullah
and Qasim Khan from the left of Jafar’s
battery, made for the breach with great courage
and coolness; but Jafar, as the ungenerous
rumour in the camp went —was calmly eating
his bread with onions and enjoying a dessert of
water-melon {nan o piyaz o hindumm me-
khaurd). 2 However, the fight was very obstinate
at this point. In the face of a terrible fires and
1 The allegation may be true. Waris simply states, “Men who
had advanced from the direction of the battery of Izzat Khan
became exposed to fire from three sides.” {Waris, 78b).
2 Lataif, 134 a. “Jafar from his battery urged his men forward
to the attack.” (Waris, 78b). .
3 The Persians used flaming “sheets (chador), steeped in naphtha."
(Waris, 78b).


determined resistance, the Mughals struggled
hard but had to withdraw after suffering a
casualty of 557 dead, besides numerous wounded.
Nejabat Khan and Rajah Mukund Singh Hada,
who had been ordered to the battery of Jafar,
are said to have remained inactive during the
attack. Nejabat Khan had some grievances
against Dara, hut we do not know why the
famous Hada chief who afterwards laid down
his life for Dara at Samugarh, acted so feebly
on this occasion. It is said that Nejabat Khan
asked the Hada chief why he was not sending
his men to the attack; the latter replied, “These
men who are with me and not ordinary mercen-
aries but my own brethren and kinsmen; I can-
not send them where I myself will not go. ” The
Khan retorted, “There ought not to he any con-
sideration for brother or son in the Emperor’s
business.” Stung to the quick, the fiery Hada
rose up, and taking Muhammad Quli, the eldest
son of Nejabat Khan by the hand, proceeded
towards the rampart. When the Khan found
out that the Rajah was in no mood for jest, he
in fear of his son’s life ran barefooted to turn
them back! Rajah Jai Singh, highly incensed
against Dara, made no effort worthy of mention.
Only two men from his trench came out with
scaling-ladders; but they were immediately
brought down by the Persian bullets, and the
business ended there in this section of the assault.


On the western face four detachments
under the command of Sayyid Mahmud Barha,
Lashkar Khan, Muhammad Aqil, and Mirak
Ataullah (Bakhshi of the Ahadis), attempted
to carry the Qaitnl ridge and the Lakah redoubt
by surprise. Sayyid Mahmud with a good
number of Sayyids died in a rash advance
against the tremendous cross-fire of the enemy.
Lashkar Khan with one thousand Baksariya
(men of Buxar) mateh-lockmen, and accom-
panied by some notable chiefs, such as Badan
Singh Bhadauriya and Champat Rai Bundela,
silently climbed to the foot of the rampart of the
Lakah redoubt, and was about to get to the top
by means of scaling-ladders. But unfortunately
the Persians detected the movement and over-
whelmed the assailants with stones, killing 30
men outright. Muhammad Aqil worsted a party
of Persians in a hand to hand fight; but a chance
bullet killed his ally Atatillah, whereupon the
Ahadis retreated hurriedly; Aqil and Devi Singh
Bundela, being thus left without succour, could
not maintain their position, and had to retire
with heavy loss.
The tumult continued for four hours till one
prahar of the next day. About one thousand
men were killed, and about the same number
wounded. As soon as Dara returned to his tent,
the music of victory began to play within the
fort. The Persians brought dancing-girls to
spots within sight of the Mughal batteries, made


them dance to amuse their enemies, and enjoyed
the day to their heart’s content, makmg merry
faces at the Hindustanis. Next day the Persian
commander allowed the Musahnans in the
Mughal army to carry away and bury the dead
bodies of the Musahnans only, while he gathered
together 500 heads of the Hindus, leaving their
headless trunks to the birds of prey. 1
Section 10. — Last phase of the siege
Mutual recriminations followed the failure
of this attack; the other imperialists taunting
Jafar and Izzat Khan with cowardice, and the
latter accusing Mahabat Khan and Rajah Jai
Singh of neglect of duty. But whatever the peo-
ple might say in private, no one could have the
hardihood to tell Dara that Jafar had done noth-
ing during the attack (Hichra qudrat-i-an nist
he he-goyaid he Jafar har-e no.-hard; Lataif,
128 b).
Dara, who had been much cast down, was
thus consoled by Jafar: “Why should your-
i For references:— Lataif, n 2a —133 b; Waris 77b. Both autho-
rities agree about the date (9th Shawwal, 1063), objectives and
details of attack. Waris says that each of the big guns fired too
rounds during the night of assault about which Lataif-ul-akhbar is
silent; again, Waris puts the number of casualties at 1000, but the
latter says that on the western front alone, the figure amounted to
that number in wounded and' slain (the exact number of the dead
not being ascertained), exclusive of 557 dead in the eastern batteries.
Waris is very discreet and gives substantially correct details of the
assault, without any reflection on the scandalous conduct of the great
nobles. He says that the Ahadis, even after the death of their
captain, fought valiantly but others fled down the ridge at the sight
of the carnage in the ranks of the Ahadis.


Highness grieve at the loss of soldiers who are
entertained in service with the very purpose of
being sacrificed in action? As regards the
assault, your Highness may bo pleased to
enquire that Shah Abbas (the Second) captured
the fort after more than one assault.” He sent
away Mahabat Khan to Bust under the osten-
sible plea of reinforcing the troops of Rustam
Khan (25th August), and Rajah Jai Singh l to
the Shutar-gardan pass to keep watch for the
rumoured approach of a Persian army (30th
August). Qilich Khan was the only 5-hazari
who, in spite of his ill-feeling towards the
favourites of Dara, had behaved most loyally on
the day of assault. Dara now made an earnest
appeal to the Khan tos?,ve him from the igno-
miny of failure. He offered him absolute com-
mand over all the batteries and promised him
the rank of a haft-liazari (7000 zat, 7000 horse,
i Feelings between Jai Singh and Dara continued to be bitter
till the end of the campaign. “On 25th Shawwal (Sept. 8, 1653)
Dara sent Shaham Quli to the Rajah with the following message.
“I hear you are oppressing the people and cutting trees from their
gardens. Had yau displayed such destructive energy beneath the
•walls of Qandahar, you could have by this time probably captured
this fort by pulling down all its walls.” The Rajah replied
“Fortunately within two or three kos of my encampment there are
no gardens from which my men are likely to gather fuel by cutting
down trees.” The messenger of Dara also reported that in the
neighbourhood of the Rajah’s camp no garden could be seen, and
that the person who gave such an information must have told a lie.
( Lataif, 146 a). Again, on Ist Zilqada (September 13, 1653) the
Rajah in reply to Dara’s letter asking him to be present at Qandahar
on the 4th of that month for making another attack, sent word to
the Princd, “The assault cannot be made by me. Your Royal High-
ness may inflict any punishment for this fault of mine. I have no
more business with Qandahar." (Ibid, 151 b).


do-aspah, seh-aspah ) with the title of Khan-i-
Khanan. Qilich Khan, a wary old soldier,
nibbling at the bait, said, “The siege is drawing
to a close; to ask me to take charge of the work
at this stage is to give the tail of the fish into
my hand ( dum-i-mahi ha-dast-i-man dadan-
ast).,, He, however, pledged his word to do
his utmost and accepted the task of directing
the siege. Dara was so much overjoyed that he
embraced the Khan and gave him a kiss on the
neck at the time of his departure ( Lataif, 135 b).
A few days afterwards Qilich Khan 1 advised
Dara to recall the troops of Rustam Khan
Bahadur for delivering another assault. The
siege dragged on for a month more, which was
characterized by feverish activity and a des-
perate effort to mine and bombard the ramparts
and the fortifications of the Sher Haji.
Section 11.—Causes of Dara’s failure
The superiority of the means of defence
over those of attack in siege-warfare in the
seventeenth century, united with the fervent
patriotism and invincible pride of Persia, rolled
back the onset of the aggressive Mughal Im-
perialism. The army of the Great Mughals had
always been an unwieldy mass of irregulars,
i Qilich Khan Turani ( M. U. iii, 92). He was an honest blunt
soldier who had spent a considerable portion, of his life in fighting
with the Persians in Qandahar. Alternate coaxing and neglect marked
the behaviour of Dara to this veteran soldier.


stiffened by native and foreign mercenaries
representing a xlozen nationalities. Within
India the Mughal army owed its splendid success
not so much to its military efficiency as to other
factors, such as the solidarity and common
patriotism of Islam against the non-Muslims,
the caste dissensions and hereditary clan-feuds
of the Hindus, and the proverbial indifference
of the Indian people to political issues and the
fate of their rulers. But against Persia the
Emperor of Delhi could make no such appeal
in the name of religion or of country to the
Muslim section of his army, which was mostly
reinforced by the brain and arm of Persian
emigrants to Hindustan ; while the Kachchwah
and the Rathor had not half as much zest in a
fight with the Safavis as against the Sisodias.
Mutual jealousy among contingents of mansab-
dars and tribal imits, and absence of discipline
and drill prevented the growth of any esprit de
corps in the army and made co-operation impos-
sible except undqr the vigilant eyes of a master-
ful personality. Envy and a passion for
individual distinction, as opposed to comrade-
ship and devotion to a common cause, were
undoubtedly the driving forces in a Mughal
army—a fact borne out by the whole military
history of the Mughal Empire. Even an Aurang-
zib was helpless against these inherent defects
of the Mughal army. •


However, no one can overlook some grave
defects of Data’s character which were respon-
sible not only for his ill-success at Qandahar
but also for the tragic failure of his whole politi-
cal career. He identified himself with a party,
With men of his own contingent, and gave his
confidence blindly to a few upstarts without
experience hut with a good deal of knavery and
presumption. This widened the breach between
him and the high nobles who suspected that the
Crown Prince was not disposed to grant equal
opportunities to all to distinguish themselves.
The result was that they desired not so much
the capture of Qandahar as the humiliation of
the favourites of Dara. He lacked the force of
character and tact necessary for holding to-
gether the mutually repellent elements of his
army. Disobedience and defiance 1 characterized
the conduct not only of the 5-hazaris but also of
persons of lesser note. Not only was there a
feeling of bitterness and jealousy between the
imperial auxiliaries and the Prince’s contingent,
but his favourites also played a selfish game with
the inevitable issue. Three trusted officers of
I To quote only a few instances: —
(1) Muhammad Aqil comes away from Jafar’s battery,
demands an independent charge, and secures it (25th
May; Latiaf, 31 b).
(2) Nusrat Khan refuses to serve in Jafar’s trench and
threatens to resign (15th August; 1 hid, 114 b).
(3) Shams Khan and Qutb Khan reject the Prince’s offer of
pardon and refuse to return to their posts saying that
they had lost their izsat by being associated with Izzat
Khan (26th August, ibid, 136 a).


Dara, viz., Abdullah, Jafar and Izzat Khan,
quarrelled among themselves and intrigued to
discredit each other in a most silly manner.
Jafar, chief of the Prince’s artillery, was the
hero of the siege. He enjoyed the unbounded
confidence of the Prince, to whom he was as it
were, “a blind man’s stick”. It is said that
Zulfiqar Khan once signified his intention to
surrender on the promise and assurance of
Rajah Jai Singh, Mahabat and Qilich Khan,
whereupon Dara in disgust said, “If he is willing
to come, he may do so on the pledge of Jafar
and Izzat Khan; for their word is equivalent to
mine” (qaul-i-an-Jia qaul-i-ma ast) 1 . But these
two would often fall out in the very presence of
the Prince and sometimes backbite each other.
Izzat Khan, irritated by Jafar’s brag, called him
a Paji (rascal), and told the Prince bluntly,
“Favour and confidence shown by you to such
rascals ( pajiha ), will not be of any avail.” 2 On
15th June Abdullah sent a request to Jafar
(whose battery was contiguous to his own)
asking the latter to postpone advancing his
trench-head till he should have come into line
with Jafar’s, Four days afterwards Abdullah
went to salute the Prince, and told him in reply
to a question that his trench was a few steps
( qadam ) ahead of Jafar’s. This having reach-
ed the ears of Jafar, he flared up and fell foul
1 Lataif, 98 b.
2 Lataif, 62a.
5


of the whole race of Iranis and their vile Shia
heresies. Even Bara’s kind words to soothe
his resentment were of no avail. After three
days Qazi Afzal succeeeded in bringing about a
reconciliation between the two. But Mirza
Abdullah’s men 1 were suspected of carrying on
a treasonable correspondence with the enemy.
* Section 12. —Abandonment of the siege
K There is a tiresome monotony about the
Mughal expeditions to Qandahar, because the
same plan, the same procedure, and the same
inevitable result characterize all the three. The
Persians compared the Hindustanis to summer-
birds who would depart for the warmer plains
at the advent of the Afghan winter. But Bara
resolved upon continuing the siege during the
cold season, and even issued orders to the army
to procure supplies. There was, however, little
chance of his being able to starve the garrison
into surrender; because the blockade was ineffec-
tual and food was smuggled into the fort by the
Afghans and sometimes by the very grocers
( haqqals ) of Bara’s camp. The situation was
made critical by the rebellious attitude of the
frontier Afghan tribes who threatened to cut off
the communications of the expeditionary force
with Labor and Multan. They plundered a
Gurzhardar (mace-bearer) of the Court at Boki
i Abdullah’s trick, Lataif, 46 b; Qazi’s reconciliation, ibid., 50 a;
Abdullah’s men warned, 640.


as early as the last week of July, and made
booty of the imperial rescript ( farman ), horses,
robe of honour, and the scent-bottle (huqqah-
i-itri), meant for the Prince ( Lataif, 88b;
25th July, 1653). The Indian troops became
thoroughly demoralized, and began to dream
dreams of divine intervention against them. A
man saw in a dream 1000 strange cavaliers
marching calmly through the Mughal ranks into
the fort; these were interpreted to be the war-
riors of Imam Eaza coming to the aid of the
Shia Persians against the Sunnis of Hindustan.
Even the prophet appeared in a dream to a
Sayyid of pure lineage in the Prince’s camp,
and predicted that victory was not to be gained
this year and that it was useless to multiply
the slaughter of Musalmans ( Lataif; 61a, 626,
1446).
Rustam Khan Bahadur Eiruz Jang return-
ed to Qandahar on 27th September, after having
dismantled the fort of Bust, but the Prince, in
obedience to an order from the Emperor, had
to drop the plans of making another assault
upon Qandahar and of continuing the siege
during the coming winter. Next day the Prince
started on his homeward journey at an auspi-
cious moment. Izzat Khan with the top-khana
and the Kabul contingent took the road to
Ghazni, while the main army under the Prince
travelled by way of Pishin and Doki to Multan.
Bara reached Pishin on sth October and ordered


the destruction, of the fort there. The army-
had to fight its way through the tribal territory,
as the Afghans blocked the roads and demanded
their customary subsidy. Rajah Jai Singh
worsted a large body of Afghans near Doki.
The Prince encamped at Doki on 13th October,
and thence in nine days reached Multan. After
a halt of 11 days here he entered Labor on 22nd
November (11th Muharram, 1064). 1
A grand public reception was accorded to
the Crown Prince and his suite at the newly-
built city of Shahjahanabad-Delhi on 26th
December, 1653. Dara and Shah Jahan had
reached Delhi —from Labor and Agra respecti-
vely,—on the previous evening (14th Safar,
1064 A.H.; Waris 82a). The Emperor ordered
him to encamp for the night outside the city,
and next morning sent the nobles in attendance
at Court to go out and Conduct the Prince in all
i The author of Lataif-ul-akhbar says that on 13th Zilqada
(25th September) Dara wrote a letter to Rustam Khan Bahadur
to rejoin the main camp positively on the 14th; but the Khan reached
the camp on 15th Zilqada (27th September). The Prince started
on his homeward journey when 7 gharis of the night of Thursday
16th Zilqada yet remained (28th September). But according to
Waris, Rustam Khan Bahadur came to Qandahar on 14th Zilqada
(26th September), and the march began next day (see Lataif, 168a-
-170b; Waris MS. 79a). Other incidents during the retreat:
destruction of the fort of Pishin, Lataif, 172 b; a war-elephant runs
mad; Rajah Satarsal Hada refuses to kill it at the Prince’s com-
mand; Satarsal’s encounter with the hostile Afghan tribesmen (ibid,
173 b, 174 a) ; Afghans plunder the men of Pahar Singh Bundela and
are taught a severe lesson by Rajah Jai Singh (ibid, 175 a) ; a brief
narrative of the journey from Qandahar to Labor (Waris MS. 79b).


honour worthy of his rank, to the Diwan-i-Am. 1
Dara with his son Sulaiman Shukph entered
the darbar and offered a nazar of 1000 ashrafis.
His Majesty in his boundless favour and
exuberance of affection embraced him and gave
him a kiss [ibid, 82&], The Prince forgot his
worries and disapointraents in the undiminished
favour and affection of his doting father, and
calmly settled down to his studies. Dara was
left to himself and his Muses till the trumpet of
the civil war summoned him to arms. ’
Section 13. — The sequel of the Qandahar
Campaign
It is interesting to note that none of the
5-hazaris came in the train of the Crown Prince
to share the honour of the public reception on
26th December (1653). Things turned out
exactly as Mirza Rajah Jai Singh had predicted;
the Emperor’s eyes dilated with joy at the sight
of the Prince, and in spite of the ignominy of
their failure, the favourites of Dara gained
applause and substantial favours. On the next
solar birthday of the Emperor (6th January,
1654), at the recommendation of Dara, Jafar
who had been “most active in advancing the
trenches”, was honoured with the title of
Barqandaz Khan. Another favourite of Dara,
I On this occasion Dara was given a rich khilat with a nim-
astin, and two Iraqi horses from the royal stable.


Faqir Khan 1 (son of Baqar Khan Kajum sani),
who had been dismissed and forbidden the
Court, was, at the solicitation of Dara, reinstated
in his rank of 2000 zat, 1000 sawar. Mahabat
Khan, who had his first audience of the Emperor
after his return from Qandahar on this day,
did not even get a khilat. Kejabat Khan’s lot
seems to have been no better; he having been
given leave without any khilat to depart for his
jagir on 14th January, 1654, (Waris, 836).
Qilich Khan, who had been promised the rank
of a 7-hazari and the title of Khan-i-Khanan,
lost the favour of the Prince for saying that the
breach made by Jafar was impracticable (25th
September, Lataif 166 a). He died at Bhera
(in the Panjab) on 24th January, 1654 (Waris,
836). On the lunar birthday (9th February),
Kunwar Ram Singh, son of Rajah Jai Singh,
was given an addition of 500 zat to his mansab,
and the Rajah was given a choice khilat and leave
for home. But this was no recognition of the
services and ability of that old veteran in com-
parison with that of his younger and much less
capable Rathor rival, Jaswant Singh, who had
been created a 6-hazari with the title of Maha-
rajah, a month before (6th January) in the solar
i Faqir Khan perhaps acted as secretary to Dara and was one
of his confidants. He writes a letter by order to Mahabat Khan to
advance his trench. The author of Lataif-ul-akhbar goes to Faqir
Khan to explain the situation on behalf of Mahabat Khan; Faqir
Khan, deaf to reason, makes some offensive remarks in reply (nth
May, Lataif, 24a). This is enough to illustrate the character of
Faqir Khan; no wonder that he wormed his way into Dara’s favour.


birthday gazette of the Emperor. Rajah
Mukund Singh Hada was conciliated with a pro-
motion of 500 sat. No reward or mention of
Rajrup and Champat Rai Bundela is found in
the birthday gazettes of 1654. Rustam Khan
Bahadur Eiruz Jang received on the lunar
birthday (9th February), a princely reward of
4 elephants, 1 female elephant and 10 Iraqi
horses (84&).
The two birthday lists of honours corro-
borate the authenticity of the account of Lataif-
ul-akhhar as regards the conduct of the 5-hazaris,
and Bara’s relations with them during the third
siege of Qandahar.


CHAPTER V
SPIRITUAL LIFE OF DARA SHUKOH
Section I.—Dara Shiikoh and the Qadiriya
Order
Within a year of Dara’s marriage, Nadira
Begam bore him a daughter who died on the day
of the Id-ul-fifr (21st March 1634), during his
journey in the Emperor’s train to the city of
Labor. He reeled imder the shock of this first
sorrow, and it was very probably that at this
psychological moment the bereaved young couple
sought spiritual consolation at the feet of the
renowned mystic Mian Mir of Labor, a Sufi of
the Qadiriya Order, founded by the blessed saint
Abdul Qadir Grilani (1077-1166 A.D.).
The great Emperor Shah Jahan honoured
only two Muslim saints with his personal visit ;
one was Shaikh Muhammad Eazlullah of
Burhanpur (whom he visited while Viceroy of
the Deccan during the lifetime of the Emperor
Jahangir), and the other was Mian Mir, to whom
he paid three visits in the course of the year 1634
A.D. His first visit to the saint’s cell was on
April 7,1634 and the next, two days after. On
his return from Kashmir Shah Jahan again saw
the Shaikh (December 18,1634), and held with
him “some discussions on theology and intricate


points of spiritual sciences which were the
source of joy and cheerfulness to that recluse/’ 1
It was most likely during the winter of 1635,
when the Court was at Labor, that Dara Shukoh
received from Mian Mir a healthy stimulus to
his spiritual life, and what was more valuable,
picked up an acquaintance with his future Pir,
Mulla Shah Badakhshi, a disciple of the Shaikh.
That very year the venerable saint Mian Mir
passed away without having had time to make
him a disciple. For six years after the death of
Mian Mir, the princely aspirant to divine know-
ledge eagerly searched for a spiritual guide in
every quarter and devoted himself to the study
of the lives and miracles of saints.
In his Risala-i-Haqnuma (written in 1646
A.D.) Dara tells us that “in the prime of his
youth” one night an angel ( hatif ) cried out to
him four times in dream, “God has bestowed
upon thee what no king on earth did ever get.”
This dream was interpreted by the arifs (i.e.,
gnostics) to mean that divine knowledge had
been promised to him. “In time,” says the
Prince,“the foreshadowing of it began to mani-
fest, and day by day the veil was lifted little by
little.” It will not be far from the truth if we
i Padshahnama, LB. 65. Biographical notices of Mian Mir and
Mulla Shah Badakhshi, Pad. 1.8. 329-330; 335. Khafi Khan on the
conduct of Mian Mir, and the Emperor’s appreciation of his indiffer-
ence to the royal guest, Muntakhab, ii. 548-49. Reference in Dabistan to
Mian Mir and to Maulana Shah, who was the Pir of the author of
Dabistan; Shea, part 111, pp, 284, 287; Pers. text, Bombay Litho, pp.
318, 319- '


hold that this divine inspiration came to Dara
not before his marriage, and not certainly imme-
diately after it when youths have other dreams.
Dara was possibly awakened to a spiritual life
by the mystic touch of Mian Mir after the death
of his first child. As wish is father to thought,
the aforesaid dream of Dara was perhaps a
visualization of his own thought when" his
imagination became fired by the companionship
of the mystics at Labor during the winter of
1635 A.D. From that day, the Prince began to
frequent the cells of saints and a mysterious
pain made him feel ill at ease.
The Court-historian Abdul Hamid, who is
so silent on the literary and spiritual life of Dara
Shukoh, gives us an interesting anecdote which
throws some light on the superstitious reverence
of the Prince for saints and his implicit faith
in miracles. On one occasion when singers and
jugglers were entertaining the royal assembly,
Shaikh Nazir, who had been invited to Comt on
account of his fame in working miracles, sud-
denly fell into an ecstaey and called for a glass
of water. The Shaikh drank a little and passed
the glass on to others; every one who tasted of
it declared that it was pure honey! .Prince
Dara Shukoh and Qazi Muhammad Islam (d.
1651 A.D.) submitted to His Majesty that in
Agra the Shaikh had in their presence once
transformed a water-jug ( kuza ), and on another
occasion a handkerchief into a pigeon; further


they added that once the Shaikh had put into
their closed palms a blade of glass, which came
out in the shape of a worm (kirm). Rajah
Yikramjit, whose veracity is testified to by old
Abdul Hamid, once told the Emperor that he
was on one occasion watching Shaikh Nazir at
prayer; he saw that in the course of the prayer
the black whiskers ( mahasin ) of the Shaikh
turned white and that his head became separate
from his body, and after a while they were
joined together again. l
The piety of Dara took an intellectual turn
at this early stage. He devoted his ample
leisure to compiling a comprehensive work on
the lives and miracles of the saints of Islam.
He did it as an act of devotion, a substitute for
the company of saints; such studies further
inflamed his imagination, and gave a decisively
spiritual turn to his mind.
After the death of Mian Mir, Dara did not
again visit Labor till November 12, 1638. He
was shortly after appointed to command an ex-
peditionary force against the Persians, and
returned from it to Labor on October 9, 1639.
His first work, the Safinat-ul-awliya, was com-
pleted there on January 11, 1640, during the
short interval of repose, as he had to leave for
i Padshahnama of Abdul Hamid, LB. 337.


Kashmir in the Emperor’s l train in the first
week of February, 1640. Dara remained with
the Emperor in Kashmir for about seven months
(March 22, 1640—September 14, 1640), 2 and
during this time, renewed his devotions to
Maulana Shah Badakhshi, a disciple of Mian
Mir. Though Dara Shukoh received instruc-
tion and inspiration from several saints, and
addressed them in his letters as his Pir and
Murshid, yet it was Maulana Shah who retained
the allegiance of the Prince to the last. After
his initiation Dara Shukoh designated himself
as Qadiri and Hanafi.
Dara Shukoh was born a client of the great
Khwajah Muin-ud-din Chishti, the patron saint
of the house of Akbar, —which Emperor had
lavished almost royal devotion to his shrine
at Ajmir. His sister, Jahanara was a murid a
or disciple of this order and as an act
of piety wrote a biography of the Khwajah,
entitled Munis-ul-arwa (the Comforter of
Souls). He himself seemed to have wavered
long before leaving the fold of Muin-ud-din
Chishti for that of Abdul Qadir Gilani, But
the magnetic personality and piety of Mian Mir
and the reputation of Maulana Shah drew the
1 Shah Jahan arrives at Labor on November 12, 1638, (15th
Rajah, 1048 A.H., — Pad. ii. 123) ; leaves for Kashmir, 25th Shawwal,
1049 A.D. (February 8, 1640) ibid., p. 179; enters Srinagar, 9th
Zilhljja (March 22, 1640) ibid., p. 191,
2 Shah Jahan starts for Labor, 7th Jamadi-us-sani, 1050 A.H.
(14th September, 1640); Pad. ii. 208.


Prince to the Qadiriya fraternity. Besides, the
lofty spirit of charity and philanthropy of
Abdul Qadir Gilani, I—who 1 —who was for closing the
very gates of hell and opening those of paradise
to the Kafirs no less than to the Faithful, —could
not but appeal to the imagination of the great-
grandson of Akbar. When he became thorough-
ly acquainted with the practices of the Qadiriya
order, he wrote his second book the SaMnat-ul-
awliya (completed in 1642 A.D.), which is
mainly a biography of Mian Mir, with incidental
notices of the various stages of the mystic
journey of the Sufi towards his goal.
Heaven seemed to have approved of Bara’s
choice of the Qadiriya discipline. In the night
of Friday, 17th Rajab, 1055 A.H. a voice from
Heaven (nada) conveyed to him a message that
the Qadiriya discipline was the best path for
reaching God. That night he also received a
divine injunction to write a tract for the use of
the Sufi neophytes. He promptly obeyed the
call and in a year wrote a pamphlet, Risala-i-
Haqnuma, containing the gist of the Sufi-istic
practices and the different stages of spiritual
illumination. He claims to speak, like Abdul
Qadir Gilani, the founder of the sect, only
under divine command; and protests that this
pamphlet is to be taken verily as a revelation
from the Qadir (the Almighty), and not as the
i See Ency. of Islam, i. 42.


sectarian work of a Qadiri (Hast as Qadir
madan as Qadiri). 1
The above-mentioned books of Dara Shukoh
written between 1639 and 1646 A.D. cover an
important stage in the growth of his spiritual
life. We propose to review his religious out-
look, the methods and fruits of his spiritual
contemplation, and his conception of God and
the Universe in turn.
Section 2.—Doctrines proclaimed by Dara
If Dara was an unbeliever in Islam there
was as yet hardly any odour of infidelity in his
writings. There are perhaps some doctrines,
e.g., Pantheism and the theory of the Descent
of the Absolute, which were not acceptable to
the contemporary orthodox theologians, but the
garb in which they were put was quite orthodox.
Dara was out and out a Musalraan during this
period, being full of reverence for the Prophet
and his teachings. He even gives a pseudo-
scientific explanation of the tradition, that the
body of the Prophet, just like a Hindu god, did
not cast a shadow nor could any fly sit upon
him. “ Since soul (ruh) is subtler than air
even, and nothing can obstruct its movement or
i In the English translation of the Risala-i-Haqnuma by Rai
Bahadur Sris Chandra Vasu (Allahabad, 1912), the exact date is
not mentioned. The litho edition of the Newal Kishore Press gives
the date Friday, Bth Rajab, 1055 A.H. But Bth Rajab of this year
was not a Friday, but Wednesday, 20th August, 1645; Bth Rajab is
therefore either an error or misprint; it should be either 10th or
17th Rajab. I consider the latter date more likely.


veil its activity, where is the wonder that the
famous journey to heaven by that world-leader
was made in his (etherealized) physical body'?”
To the Prince (as he tells us in his Bisala) |
“Allah” was the highest and best of all the
names, and common to both those who believe
in Islam and those who do not ( shamil-i-kuffar
o Islam). 1 He claims no originality for his
doctrines and tells us that he had simply made
an abstract from standard works on Sufi-ism
which he mentions in his preface to the Bisala-
i-Haqnuma. Though he makes a fling at the
theologians devoted to the externals of counter-
feit Islam and brands their writings as counter-
feit coins, he emphatically says, “It must be
known that whatever is written in this Bisala
is exactly without a hair’s difference, the record
of the practices, meditations, methods of sitting,
moving, and acting adopted by the prophet. 2
If we take the Prince at his word we must hold
that the Prophet practised the control of breath
(Sanskrit Pranayam ) in the cave of Hara, fixed
his attention at the time of meditation on vari-
ous centres (or chakras like the Hindu Yogis),
saw the Illumination (Sanskrit jyoti), and
heard the psychic sound (Sanskrit anahat
1 See Risala, pp. I, 9-10; S. C. Vasu’s translation. Text, pp.
1, 13. Compare “All the hundred and twenty-four thousand prophets
were sent to preach one word. They bade the people say “Allah”
and devote themselves to Him”. Abul Fadl to Abu Said (Nicholson’s
Studies in Islamic Mysticism, p. 7).
2 Sar-i-mui tafawat 0 tajaivas na-yafta bud — Risala, Pers. text,
p. 6, translation p. 4.


dhwani ) or the Great Voice of Silence. Absurd
as these statements appear to us, we cannot
justly accuse Dara Shukoh of importing these
Indian or Tibetan mysteries into Islam. Scat-
tered and obscure allusions to these practices l
are found in the Sufi literature for several
centuries prior to the birth of Dara Shukoh.
He has simply handed down traditions from his
Pir without a critical test.
Dara’s doctrines, such as the theory of the
coming down of the Spirit into Matter, were
certainly unacceptable to the orthodox school of
Sufi-ism. He says, “Know, 0 friend, that the
reason why the essence of man has entered this
frame-work of the body is that the seed which lies
concealed in it may reach perfection, and again
return to the Self” (sahah-i-tasalsal-i-Haqiqat-
i-insani dar in hayhal-i-jismani an ast he u
wadiaa } t he dar in pinhan ast bahamal rasidah
has ha-asal-i-hhivesh paywandad) . 2
However, it should be noticed that though
every doctrine, every practice, and even every
stage of spiritual progress explained in his Eisala
has a parallel in Sanskrit works on the Vedanta
and Yoga systems of a much older , date, Dara
expressly says that this treatise is an abstract
1 The control of breath and the method of fixing attention on
the dil-i-sanowari or the cedar-heart were, as the author of Dabislan-
ul-Masahib, a fellow-disciple of Dara, tells us, the common property
of the Hindu, the Magian, and the Musalman ascetics in the first
half of the seventeenth century.
2 Introduction to Risala-i-Haqnuma.'


of standard works on Sufi-ism, such as Fususu’l-
hikam of Ibn-ul-Arabi, al-Futuliatu *l-Makkiyya
of the same author, Kitab-al-Luma, by Abu
Hasr al-Sarraj and several other works.
Section 3. —Dara on ascetic practices
A word about Dara’s notion of asceticism.
It is the general rule for a regular Sufi novice
to wear the muraqqa or khirqa (patched frock).
We do not know whether the Crown Prince of
Hindustan ever wore it publicly, or underneath
his princely garment, like Cardinal Wolsey’s
sack-cloth inside the dazzling gold and silk robe
of a Chancellor. So far as we can judge from
his writings, he preferred moral renunciation
to asceticism. In his opinion “worldliness is
the non-remembering of God, It does not
consist either in dress, or in having sons and
wife.” He maintains this view throughout and
says distinctly that his was the Path of Grace,
not of Exertion, and that he was naturally
attracted to God without the performance of
any austerities. It is also to be noted that
though the Prince professes himself to be a
Qadiriya, he ignores the earlier stage of hard
self-discipline and physical renunciation which
Shaikh Abdul Qadir prescribes as essential for
a novice. “In the discipline of the school to
which the author belongs” says Dara, “there is,
i Introduction to Safinat, rendered into English by S. C. Vasu;
see Appendix, Risala, ii.
6


contrary to the practices laid down in other
schools, no pain and difficulty .there is no
asceticism in it, everything is easy, gracious and
a free gift. Everything here is love and affec-
tion, pleasure and ease”; God is not the tor-
mentor, but the comforter of his creatures and
He certainly brings His “elect” through the
Path, in order to welcome them as guests, and
not to punish them as criminals. 1
The spirit of Islam is not one of renuncia-
tion, but of unattachment, to be engaged in out-
ward worldly pursuits without being affected by
them; to be in retirement in the very midst of
worldly bustle is its criterion of spiritual
progress. 2
Dara ignores altogether gymnastic postures
and devices for keeping off distraction by crying
the name of God aloud such as a Qadiriya
generally adopts. He is in favour of reciting
very slowly and mentally the name “Allah”,
without any movement of the tongue—a method
which was recommended by Mian Mir to a few
select disciples. He highly recommends the
1 Risala, Eng. trans. p. 5; Pers. text, p. 5-
2 Data’s spiritualism finds a faithful echo in the immortal lines
of our poet Rabindranath: —
•fcHWJ « C=T 'siftt* ;
•m r—


Sultan-ul-azkar,3 which is exactly the same
process of controlling the mind by the regulation
of breath as the Pranayam of the Hindus, with
this difference that the Hindu Yogi sits erect
while the Sufi bends forward placing his two
elbows on his two knees at the time of regulating
his breath. Dara says in his Bisala that Mian
Mir had communicated the secret of this prac-
tice in parables and allusions to Maulana Shah,
who in a similar manner transmitted it to him;
but while Maulana Shah could grasp Jts real
meaning in a year, his apt pupil realized the
effect of it in six months, and those who learnt
it from Dara, began to see the light of the soul
and hear the cosmic sound within three or four
days! This is not surprising in a country and
an age when the wise maxim prevailed, ‘‘lf the
King says it is midnight at mid-day, one would
do well to add, ‘Yes, I see myriads of stars’!”
In his boundless enthusiasm, unbalanced self-
confidence and deplorable ignorance of men, the
spiritual director only foreshadowed the futile
statesman and soldier of the future.
3 Usual course for a beginner in the Qadiriya order is to read
Sura Ikhlas, Sura Falaq, Sura Nas seven times each before he sits
down to meditation. The aspirant then sits, cross-legged (technically
called four-kneed posture), utters the word 'La’ aloud and with a
forcible jerk of the head upon the left knee; ‘ilia’ on the right knee,
'ha’ on the right shoulder and “ilaha" more loudly and with greater
emphasis on the heart, so as to strike it internally like the hammer
of the blacksmith. Sufis of other schools laugh at this vociferous
practice of invoking Allah who is neither deaf, nor stays afar; the
distance between Allah and his creatures being even shorter than that
between the rider and the neck of his camel!


Section 4.—The Unitarianism op Dara
Shukoh
The Sufis are the Unitarians of Islam, and
their goal is tawhid 1 or unification, which con-
sists in affirming the unity of God after having
gained a perfect knowledge of His Unity. They
seek Him each in his own way, and hence there
are as many ways to God as there are seekers
of Him. The famous saint Abu Said Fazlullah
of Khurasan says, “Innumerable are the ways
to God, yet the way is but a single step: take
one step out of thyself, that thou mayst arrive
at God.” To pass away from self (Jana) is to
realize that self does not exist, and that nothing
exists except God (tawhid). The Tradition,
‘He who knows himself knows his Lord’, signi-
fies that he who knows himself as not-being
(’adam) knows God as the Real Being (wajud).
This knowledge cannot he obtained through the
intellect, it cannot be learned, but is given
by divine illumination. The organ which recei-
ves it is the heart ” 2
1 For a learned discussion on tawhid, see Nicholson’s translation
of the Kashf-ul-Mahjub, pp. 278-285.
2 See Nicholson’s Studies in Islamic Mysticism, p. So; Cf. Kabir’s
sayings;—
FtF FI SOFT Ffa $1, fFF, fFF stfF I
3pi RJfT FIF FtF >R FtF II
FT FRF FF gf?FT Ft Ft F2 ft Flff I
«RfT ffFT FT Fit 1$ Flff II


The doctrine of tawhid was the subject of
Dara’s lifelong study, and the perfect realiza-
tion of it through knowledge and contemplation
was the goal of his spiritualism. We shall first
deal with its devotional aspect.
It was God who had promised divine know-
ledge to the Prince in his early youth, and Dara
had since then waited for the day when God
would in His boundless mercy draw him unto
Himself. “I have no hope,” says the Prince,
“of reaching the goal through my own deeds
and acts. My sole reliance is on thy mercy,
O Lord.” 1 Dara followed the Path of Grace,
which took him to many Masters for spiritual
illumination. He first realized ‘ ‘ unity ’ ’ through
meditation under the spiritual guidance of
Maulana Shah, and thereafter, “his eagerness
to visit the gnostics of every religion, and to
listen to discourses on the doctrine of Divine
Unity ( tawhid ) became great; he read many
books on Sufi-ism, and wrote tracts on it; his
thirst for the knowledge of the Divine Unity
(tishnagi dor falab-i-tawhid), which is verily a
boundless ocean, went on increasing every day
i.e., You do not know the name of the village (the destination), with-
out knowing this where will you go? A cycle of ages has passed in
travelling, but the village lies only at a distance of half a mile:....
What you have searched through the whole universe lies within you.
He has given a veil of illusion which keeps Him concealed from our
eyes.
i Introduction to the Safinat-awliya (1639 A.D.) trr. by S. C.
Vasu.


” 2 He came into intimate contact with
many saints and, in the language of the Sufi, he
drank deep in many “drinking ghats” (mash-
rab) to allay his spiritual thirst. The highest
realization came to him not through the intellect
or by calm contemplation, but in a mystic “rage
of love” which passed over him during the years
circa 1645-1650. Some letters of Dara Shukoh
to an eminent contemporary saint, Shah Dil-
ruba, bring out an interesting feature of the
mysticism of the Prince and the evolution of his
conception of “Unity”. We shall here only
hint at the stages of this evolution, as these
letters will be translated elsewhere in full.
There are, according to the Sufis, three
stages in the realization of One-ness ( ittihad ).
The first stage is the annihilation of Self, and
union (jama) without real separation although
the appearance of separation is maintained. At
this stage the aspirant realizes “Everything is
He—l am nothing.” This state of spirituality
is reflected in letter Ho. 3 of Dara to Dil-ruba.
In commonplace poetic effusion he says—
“ Lord, my dear, I am! not, I am not;
Thou art the Lover, Love, and the Beloved.”
The second stage, technically called “the
intoxication of union” (sakrul jam), marks the
highest point of ‘uruz’ or spiritual ascent. Here
the consciousness of separation between “I”
2 Introduction to the Sirr-i-akbar.


and “Thou” completely vanishes, the mystic
being entirely absorbed in the undifferentiated
qne-ness of God. The devotee is seized with a
giddiness as it were, and ‘self’ and ‘God’ become
indistinguishable to him. He realizes “I am
I”, and in worshipping God he only worships
himself. The letter No. 4 written by .Dara
Shukoh to Shah Dil-ruba reflects the transition
from the first to the second stage of this realiza-
tion on the part of the Prince. In the introduc-
tory verses, Dara in ecstatic rapture visualizes
God as Shaklis-i-kid or the Universal Person
(Sans. Virat ), and praises Him almost in the
language of the Bhagavad-gita l : Hamah wajah,
hamah sama’ hamah ’ayn, i.e., “Thou who
art all faces, all ears, and all eyes.” A pan-
theist, Dara says in amazement: “Truly, indeed
very truly, to the eye that can see, the whole
(kill) stands clearly manifest in its part; the
world-illuminating sun can be recognized in
every shining particle of sand, the ocean in
every drop of the brine.”
Dara, forgetful of the yawning abyss of
fanaticism and ignorance below, from the pin-
nacle of his spiritual ascent pens to Shah Dil-
ruba in the same letter: “The externals of
Islam have fallen off from the heart of this
I Cf. xiii. 13; —
gshn 33. 1
wkr- fersfcT n


faqir, and. the real infidelity has been revealed
to me
“I have become the wearer of the sacred thread,! an
idol-worshipper ;
“Nay, I have become the worshipper of the self
(Khud-parast) , and a priest of the temple of
Fire-worshippers (dair-nashin)
He finishes with a more brilliant touch—
(Verses) “Agar Kafir (a)z Islam-i-majazi gasht be-zar;
Ke ra kuffr-i-haqiqi shud padidar.
Damn har-but-e jan-ist pinhan;
Ba-zer-i-kuffar iman-ist pinhan.i
i.e., If the infidel is alienated from the
external Islam, who has come to know the real
nature of infidelity?
Life lies concealed in every idol and Faith
lies hidden beneath Infidelity.”
The Bisala-i-Haqnuma seems to have been
written in the stage of “the intoxication of
Union”; witness his own words:—
(i) No one is a stranger to Thee in this
Universe; on whatever Thou layest Thy hands
that confronts Thee as Thy own self.
(/«) 0 thou who seekest God every-where,
thou verily art that God and that separate from
Him. This search of thine is exactly like the
I Cf. Diwan-i-Amtr Khusru: —
Kafir-i-ishqam Musahnani mart dar kar nist,
Har rag-i-man tar gashta hajai-i-sumar nist,
Khalq me-guaid ke Khusru hut-parasti me-kunad.
Are, Are, me-kumm ba-khalq-i-alam kar-e nist.


search of the drop for the ocean, when it is
already in the midst of the waters of the ocean.
He assures “the aspirant” “when
thou shalt carry this stage to perfection, then
there will remain no doubt that thou art the
truth”. This is the realization of “I am God;
I am the Truth” {ana’ al-Haqq ) or as the
Yedantin says—
“l am the Brahman ( brahmosmi )”. This
was the truth of truths which the Yedic rishis
proclaimed from the forests of Aryavarta; and
this was the truth which startled the Muslim
world in the palmy days of Harun-al-Rashid,
when every drop of the martyred blood of
Hallaj,—(as they say)—cried out from the dust
of Baghdad, “Ana’ al-Haqq”.
In fact, the externals of Islam, save Allah,
Muhammad, and the Quran, perished in the
mysticism of Bara. The Prince awoke to a new
life, vigorous and fresh, and pursued further
his investigation of the doctrine of tawhid in
the scriptures of other religions. He was fami-
liarly addressed as al-Kamil or the Perfect One,
and acknowledged as an authority on Sufi-ism
by the liberal section of his contemporaries.
Or, Love has made me an infidel; I have no business with the
faith of a Musalman; Every artery of mine has become a string;
I do not require the sacred thread (which the idol-worshipping
Brahman wears as the badge of his infidelity).
People say ‘Khusru worships an idol
Yes: I do: leave me alone; I have nothing to do with the
creatures of this world.


He recovered “the sobriety of union” which
marks the third stage of the realization of One-
ness, with a fervent belief in the principle of
unity-in-plurality as enunciated in the opening
lines of letter No. sto Shah Bil-ruba. “In the
name of Him who is Incomparable in the one-
ness of Being, whose wahidat (One-ness") no
plurality ( kasrai ) can conceal, and in spite of
all this plurality (many-ness), whose wahidat
(Unity-in-plurality) exists like number 1 among
numbers.”
Section s. —The Theosophy of Dara Shtjkoh.
The key-note of Bara’s theosophy was the
uncompromising monotheism of the Quran,
realized in the principle of “Unity-in-plurali-
ty’’.There is no place for more than one in the
heart of the Musalman; —either “I” or “He”
must perish in the physical as well as in the
spiritual plane for the peace of his soul. It is
the religion of the Musalman to carry on a
“jihad” both inside against his “lower self”
'( nafs ), as well as outside against “others” who
do not acknowledge the one-ness of God. The
proud Musalman warrior goes out to conquer
others with his inborn ego-ism “I am and no
other”; and to realize himself and the unity of
God by a grim process of elimination by the
logic of the sword. The saint of Islam is al-
ways on the alert to fight “others” which peep
into his heart as “dangers” ( hhatrat ), and to
wrestle with them desperately till he recognizes


them to be wanton pranks of his own self; out-
side he meets humanity with no other weapon
than the boundless love of his faithful heart—a
heart which is more spacious than heaven and
earth. He conquers God and man by receiving
them into his bosom and expands himself into
the Universal Person ( shakhs-i-hul ) to feel
oneness with the whole creation and the Creator.
The Sufi is a lover, —even a prototype of
the lover who often carries his love for an
earthly being to the point of scandal. He
impatiently knocks at the door of his Beloved,
crying aloud “It is I”, but there is no response,
no admittance till the lover, lost to himself,
humbly repeats, “It is thou”. But when the
Sufi eagerly goes to embrace his Beloved, he
finds in his own embrace no other being than his
own “Self”, which had been for ages playing
wanton pranks with him. Nevertheless, the joy
of the Sufi is a thousand times deeper than that
of one who longs for an animated doll of flesh
and blood; his love knows no separation either
in life or in death, no ebb and flow through
eternity, and the beauty of his beloved knows
no wrinkle of age. The problem of problems
to the Sufi is the discord between “I” and
“He”; the One and the Many. There is no
salvation for humanity, no peace in the world
till an agreement is reached on this point. So
the Sufi makes up the quarrel by a self-consum-
ing love, till he awakes to the truth “I am He”.


But how are the polytheist and the
monotheist to meet in friendship, when the for-
mer is blind to the One, and the latter, with equal
blindness, would refuse to accept a fact, and in
self-deception ignores the Many? The Sufi by
his spiritual penetration sees what the common
folk do not and he proclaims to the world
“There are many religions, but only one God;
diverse ways, but only one goal.” 1 The
Sufi knows well “a true polytheist” and
discovers “pure faith” hidden beneath the
rubbish of infidelity. He sees only a difference
of the angle of vision between the Musalman
and the Hindu in looking at the same Being.
They quarrel childishly because none of them
can see the complete Absolute Truth, and both
persist with vulgar obstinacy in their own folly
and ignorance. Moreover, the common followers
of both religions look with suspicion upon the
mystic who advises peace and offers to guide
them aright in realizing the complete truth. He
despairs of weaning them from “self-interest”
and turns away in disgust saying, as Dara
Shukoh said, in pity and disgust—
“mara ba-umuam-i-in liar do qaum kare
nist.”
i.e., I have no business with the common folk of
these two communities 2 . He turned to “the
1 See Nicholson’s Studies in Islamic Mysticism, p. 23.
2 Introduction to the Majmu-ai-Baharain.


elect” of these communities and hoped to bring
about a general concord in the long run through
the efforts of ‘‘the Elect”.
The true infidel sees the Many submerged
in the One, while the Musalman sees nothing but
the One manifested as the Many. In the
technical terminology of the Muslim philo-
sophers, the discord between Huwiyya i.e., He-
ness, and Aniyya i.e., I-ness is overcome in
Wahidiyya, i.e., the Many identical in essence
with each other and with the One. 1 This
principle of Wahidiyya, i.e., Unity-in-plurality
was the key-stone of Dara’s theosophy. The
world had agreed on the principle many
centuries before the birth of Dara Shukoh; but
it was none the happier, nor was there any sign
of concord among men. People quarrel over
shadows though there could be no mistake about
the substance, and they shed blood in the name
of God! So mankind cannot agree on the wor-
ship of God with a name, as each sect will call
him by a different one. So the philosopher-
Prince proclaimed the new Gospel of India three
hundred years back and invoked blessing upon
his divine mission of mingling the two oceans,
Islam and Hinduism —saying, “In the name of
Him who has no name; but who reveqls
Himself by means of any name He desires;
boundless praise be to the Beloved who wears
i See Nicholson’s Studies in Islamic Mysticism, pp. 96-97.


on His incomparably beautiful countenance
Hinduism and Islam, contraries as they are like
two opposite points.. .without allowing either of
them to be a veil on His benign face. Hinduism
and Islam are both in search of Him, proclaim-
ing, ‘He is one without a partner, in every-
thing He is manifest, He is the beginning, He is
the end, and nothing exists but He. He is the
neighbour, friend and fellow-traveller. He is
within the shreds and patches of the faqir’s robe
as well as in the purple of the monarch’....
There are in the august assembly as well as in the
neglected corner men who know Him.” 1
By study and occult practices Dara acquired
a philosophic imagination which to a Sufi is the
true vision and faculty divine. This alone
enables the seeker to comprehend the Divine
Essence and its relation to Attributes, and above
all “to know himself”. The Prince says to his
imaginary pupil in the Bisala : “When it
reaches perfection, wherever thou shalt look thou
shalt see thyself, and everywhere thou shalt
recognize thy own identity. Beware and do not
think of Him as without colours and without
attributes; in that case thou shalt not have the
fortune of taslibih, i.e., visualizing Him in the
imiverse which is His image. Similarly, beware
mat thou mayst not limit His conception to
similitude from the manifestations, and to qua-
i Introduction to the Majmu-al-Baharain. The above is a free
rendering.


lities only,lest thou shalt be deprived of a share
in His wealth of tanjih, i.e., impersonality; but
thou shouldst know that purity and impurity
{i.e., the state of being without attribute, and that
of being limited by attribute), personality and
impersonality {tashhih o tanjih) are all aspects
of His manifestation and self-limitation. If thou
thinkest even the smallest atom to be separate
from Him, verily thou shalt be forbidden the
blessing of Unity and of Knowledge (tawhid
o irfan) The knowledge of God, according to
the Sufi, is self-knowledge, which, however, like
wine only a few can stand. Under its intoxica-
tion the devotee becomes lost to himself, and
utters what sounds blasphemy and heresy to the
ears of the uninitiated. The famous saint Abu
Said once cried out pointing to himself: “There
is naught within this vest except Allah.”
Section 6. —The Spiritual Progress actually
ACHIEVED BY DARA ShUKOH
The above marks the highest point of spiri-
tual ascent, and no progress beyond this is
possible except by retrogression. The third or
last stage of the realization of One-ness is
reached when the Sufi retraces his path, and
recovers “the sobriety of union” (saJuval-jam) .
“This is the stage in which the mystic returns
from the pure one-ness of the second stage to
plurality in one-ness and to separation in union
i See The Compass of Truth, p. 23; Pers. text, p. 23.


and to the Law in the truth, so that while conti-
nuing to be united with God he serves Him as a
slave serves his lord and manifests the Divine
life in its perfection, mankind”. 1 The path of
the spiritual journey is like that of the circum-
ference of a circle which ends at the self-same
point of its start. The Sufi commences his
ascent ( uruz ) from the Alam-i-nasut, i.e., the
physical plane or the world of perception, climbs
successively to the Alam-i-maldkut, i.e., the
astro-mental plane or the world of spirits; and
to the Alam-i-jabrut, which is the plane of bliss,
unity and satisfaction; finally he reaches the
Alam-i-lahut, also called the Alam-i-Hawwiyat
or the plane of Thatness, i.e., of the absolute
Truth. Dara Shukoh in his Risala-i-Haqnnma
gives a fascinating description of the four planes,
“ communicating to the world at large some
perfume of the experience through which he
had passed.” The Alam-i-lahut being the plane
of Divinity, cannot be the permanent station of
the mystic. His journey becomes complete only
when he descends ( nazul ) again to the Alcm-i-
------nasut, which is the proper station of humanity.
If we are to accept the orthodox definition
of the stage of “the sobriety of union” quoted
above, Dara never completely reached it, because
he was to the last indifferent to the Law
(shariyat), and as such, in the opinion of the
i For a notice of the three stages of “Oneness,” see Nicholson’s
Studies in Islamic Mysticism, p. 230, footnote 326-327.


orthodox, failed to “manifest the Divine life in
its perfection, mankind”.
The Prince seemed to have recovered parti-
ally this sobriety of union when he wrote his next
letter (no. 5) to Shah Dil-ruba. In the opening
lines of this letter he praises God not in verses
hut in severe prose, dwelling on the principle
of unity-in-plurality. He begins, “In the name
of Him who is incomparable and unrivalled in
the unity of His existence, whose absolute One-
ness no plurality ( kasrat ) can conceal, and whose
unity, in spite of all this plurality, exists like the
unit 1 among numbers.” The orthodox school
of Sufism, though in itself an enigma, would
refuse to acknowledge anybody as the perfect
Unitarian if he does not return to the path of the
Shariyat after “the intoxication of union”.
But Dara Shukoh was one of those pious rebels
who did not consider it essential to conform to
the letter of the Law after the realization of the
Truth. When the truth ( Jiaqiqat ) dawns, the
Sufi becomes, in the opinion of these bold trans-
gressors of the Law, a Perfect Man {Kamil),
whose existence expands from the partial into
the universal, 1 and whom no creed or community
can exclusively claim as its own. Their very
excess of religion becomes irreligion, and early
fervour and enthusiasm cool down to indiffer-
i Cf. “....It will make thee universal from patrial, an ocean
from a drop, a sun from a shining particle of sand, and existence
from non-existence.” (os just tu-ra kul suzad, as qatra dariya,
as sarrah aftab, as nisi hast). See Risala, text, p. 27.
7


ence. It is no wonder that Dara Shukoh, whom
the contemporary saints called al-Kamil (the
perfect man), though perhaps in mutual admi-
ration, was suspected to be a polytheist by the
Muslim theologians, and could be credited With
no religion even by his enthusiastic foreign
partisan Manucci. He made a religion of the
doctrine of taivhid or Unitarianism, and pursued
his investigations to the bourn of Infidelity,


CHAPTER VI
LITERARY ACHIEVEMENTS OF DARA
SHUKOH
Dara Shukoh was admittedly the greatest
scholar of his age and country and the most
learned prince of the House of Timur. He was
no amateur dn the field of scholarship, but an
earnest student of theosophy with a passion for
discovering the principle of unity-in-plurality
in revealed religions. The history of his literary
activity is also the history of the evolution of
his spiritualism. Philosophic inquiry was
with him a part of religious wnrship, and his
writings were his best prayers to his God, —to
“the Divinity objectified in humanity.” He
became convinced that the doctrine of tavjhid
or divine unity has assumed, like pure water
different colours in different vessels (i.e., in
various religions, which differ only in appear-
ance but completely agree in essence). He
wielded his brilliant and facile pen with the
sincerity and courage of a martyr to popularize
this great truth, which he believed to be the
healing-balm of the sore of religious discord
that was eating into the vitals of mankind. This
he did, not by repudiating the religion of
Muhammad, but by reading an original meaning
into it, by removing the stigma of narrowness


from the noble brow of Islam. He showed that
the bosom of Islam is not less capacious than the
heart of the Musalman, which alone—in God’s
own words —can accommodate Him whom
heaven and earth cannot contain.
There are two distinct periods in the history
of the literary activity of Dara Shukoh. Down
to 1647 A.D i.e., up to the completion of his
Risala-i-Haqnuma, Dara was mainly occupied
with the Sufi theosophy of the Pantheistic
School. From 1647 to 1657 he devoted himself
to the study of the Jewish, Christian and Hindu
religions, with the object of discovering the
underlying principles of these religions and
harmonizing them with the tenets of Islam. It
was probably during this period that he approa-
ched the great saint Sarmad the Jew as a pupil
to study the Jewish religion. Sarmad with his
beloved disciple Abhai Chand was at this time
living in the newly-built Delhi of Shah Jahan.
Abhai Chand had translated a part of the Book
of Moses into Persian, which was revised 1 by
his master Sarmad. This work was apparently
the common source of information about the
Pentateuch to Dara Shukoh as well as to the
author of Dahistan, who was his friend and
admirer. There was less difficulty as regards
the Gospels and the Psalms which had already
been familiarized in India, particularly at that
important centre of Jesuit activity, Agra.
i See Shea’s Dabistan, ii. 299, 300.


Maimed says that Bara was delighted to hear the
Christian fathers overcome the champions of
other religions with their arguments. Four
Jesuit fathers, father Estanilas Malpica (a
Neapolitan), Pedro Juzarte (a Portuguese),
Father Henri Buzeo (a Flamand), and Heinrich
Roth (a German), enjoyed the intimacy of the
Prince who, as Manucci says, loved to drink
occasionally with them.
As regards Hindu philosophy, it had
been filtrating imperceptibly into the esoteric
Islam even before its advent into India.
Alberuni in the 11th century, and Abul Fazl in
the sixteenth, made the elements of the six syst-
ems of Hindu philosphy accessible to the
Musalmans. Since- the literary Renaissance of
the age of Akbar, the Musalmans began to take
greater interest in Sanskrit literature and the
Hindu religion. Akbar presented popular
Hinduism to the Musalmans by having the
Mahabharat, the Ramayan, and the Atharva
Veda translated into Persian. But these transla-
tions benefited rather the succeeding generations
of the Persian-knowing, Islamicized Hindu
Court-nobility than their Muslim compatriots
who could not form any high opinion of Hindu-
ism from these books. The Muslim missed the
high philosophic truths and morals hidden under
romance and allegory in these Sanskrit works.
Badayuni, who was the type of Mulla revered


as an oracle and model of piety by the mass of
the Muslim population, considered it a sin to be
engaged in translating the religious books of the
infidels. He learnt three things about the
Hindus, namely, that they used to eat beef and
bury their dead in ancient times, and that they
had a formula in the Atharva Veda which was
similar in meaning and sound to the Muslim
'Kalima, having many ‘LV in it.
Dara Shukoh tapped the very springhead
of Hindu philosophy, and presented the highest
and best tenets of Hinduism to the Musalmans
in an attractive garb by the translation of its
standard philosophical works into Persian. He
translated (evidently with the help of Pandits)
—The Bhagavad Gita 1 under the misleading title
of “Battle between Arjun and Durjodhan”,
divided into 18 chapters, as we learn from a mar-
ginal note in the India Office Library MS. of this
work. The famous philosophical drama “Pra-
bodh-chandrodaya” was rendered into Persian
under the title of Gulzar-i-haP for the use of
Dara Shukoh by his munshi Banwalidas, who,
with the assistance of the Prince’s favorite
astrologer Bhawanidas, translated it from the
1 Ethe’s Catalogue of the India Office Library, (p. mi) MS.
No. 1949. “In the British Museum copy of it, it is wrongly ascribed
to Abul Fazl; the real translator was, as a note on fol. 13 in the
present copy proves—Dara Shikoh”.
2 Catalogue of the India Office Library, p. ill I, MS. No. 199 -
Bhagwandas is mentioned by Manucci as the most favourite astrologer
of Dara ( Storia, i. 223).


Hindi version of this work by Swami Hand Das.
There is in the Bodleian Library a Persian work
“Tarjama-i-Joga-Vashishta” l (translation of
the Joga-Yashishta), made for Dara.
Leaving out the above-mentioned books
written under his patronage, Dara was himself
the author of the following works in Persian:—
1. Safinat-ul-atvliya —or Lives of Muslim
Saints, was written when he was Hull of the
pain of search’ in the path of Sufism. It was
completed in 1639 A.D., i.e., when the Prince
was about 24 years old. The work throughout
breathes noble sentiments, bearing testimony to
his wide reading, particularly in Sufi literature.
It is interesting to study the first stage in the
growth of Dara’s spiritual life in his first liter-
ary production.
2. His second book, ‘ ‘ Sakinat-u l-aw liya ’’,
completed in 1642 A.D., marks a more mature
stage of his religious life. He says, “When I
became more intimate with the rules of discip-
line and the various stages of the Path..... .1
composed a book on the various signs, conduct,
stages and miracles of my own Shaikhs (mean-
ing apparently the saints of the Qadiriya order),
i Ethe and Sachau’s Bodleian Library Catalogue Vol. iii., p. 818.
The author of Dabistan, mentions one Mulla Muhammad, a Sufi, as
having translated some parts of the Joga-Vashishta. We learn from
the Misra-bandhu-binode (History of Hindi Literature in Hindi)
that Kavindracharya Saraswati wrote a compendium of this work
in Hindi with the title Joga-Vashishta-sara (M.B. ii. 453). This
■was perhaps meant for his patron, Dara Shukoh.


and called it Sakinat-ul-awliya.” It deals
mainly with the life of the renowned saint Mian
Mir of Labor.
3. His third literary production, Risala-i-
Haqnuma or the Compass of Truth, was written
for the instruction of novices in the path of
Sufi-ism. Here Dara speaks as a Pir to a
Murid, though he deprecates the use of these
terms; the murid is addressed as “friend”, and
he describes himself in the third person, not in
Julian pride but with the genuine humility of
a faqir. This tract is said to have been written
under divine inspiration between August 1645
and January 1647. As Dara had been with
the Emperor in Kashmir from April to Septem-
ber 15, 1645, the revelation must have come to
him in Kashmir on Friday, 17th Eajab, l
(August 19, 1645). The year 1646 during
which this Risala was written, was a year of
great anxiety and misfortune for Dara, because
his loving wife Nadira Banu had been suffering
from a prolonged illness for eleven months, and
recovered only in February 1647. 2 In the
Introduction, Dara says, “Know that this
pamphlet consists of four chapters (Ghahar
fast), and each chapter gives the description of
1 Nawal Kishore press Litho text has "Bth Rajab,” which is
not a Friday, but Wednesday. "Bth” is evidently a slip, possibly for
17th Rajab. See text p. 4.
2 Dara accompanies the Emperor to Kashmir, Pad, ii. 413;
returns to Labor, ibid., pp. 467-9; Shah Jahan visits Nadira Banu
after recovery, ibid., p. 634.


an Alam, i.e., plane of existence.” (Pers. text,
p. 8.) But the Bisala-i-Haqnuma which is extant
in MS. as well as in print has six chapters. It
is reasonable to infer that the Risala originally
had four chapters and ended with the descrip-
tion of the fourth and highest plane, vis., the
Alam-i-lahut. The last two chapters, on the
nature of Truth, are undoubtedly from the pen
of Bara, but they appear to have been added to
it as a supplement at a later date.
Dara, like every learned Muslim theosop-
hist, was deeply influenced by Neo-Platonism. 1
He professes to communicate only that which
he heard from his spiritual teachers or read in
standard works on Sufi-ism. It is unfair to
expect a critical and scientific spirit in an author
who is also a devotee and is dealing with occul-
tism. With all its faults and merits Bisala-i-
Haqnumo, is a faithful mirror of Dara’s persona-
lity and character. In all fairness to him it
must be admitted that only those who have
spiritual insight can, indeed, do justice to the
author. The elements of Sufi-ism were never
put in a more attractive and intelligible form
by any other writer within such a small compass.
4. Majmua-ul-Baharain (Mingling of two
Oceans). This tract was the first fruit of the
comparative study of Islam and Hinduism by
i “....When Plato heard this, he believed in Moses, and
acknowledged that he was a messenger of God”. ( Risala, text p. 18;
The Compass of Truth, p. 18).


Dara Shukoh. The date of its composition is
uncertain; but there is very little doubt that it
was written cir. 1650-1656. The Prince intro-
duces his treatise in right orthodox style with a
praise of God in whom Islam and Hinduism
meet, followed by an invocation of peace and
blessings upon Mustapha (the Prophet), his
family and his chief Companions. This is
enough to prove that Dara had not renounced
allegiance to God and his Prophet. The Prince
says that by constant association and frequent
discourse with the Hindus he discovered that as
regards the ways and means of knowing God,
the difference between the Hindus and the
Musalmans was only verbal, the conflict being
one of language and expression (ikhtalaf-i-
---------lafzi). In this work he has culled together the
elementary principles of the theory of Creation,
common to Brahmanism and Islam. In his
pride of authorship the Prince says that he
writes for “the elect” of the two communities,
who only can be benefited by his industry and
researches. He has nothing but contempt for
the commonalty of the two creeds, “the block-
heads without insight” (kund-fahaman-i-ghair-
kin).
Undoubtedly the Prince struck an original
line of investigation which, if honestly pursued
for the benefit of this neglected commonalty,
may achieve great things in the present century,
when the fate of India depends on a fresh
106
DARA SHUKOH
[CH. YL


attempt at the mutual comprehension of her two
spiritual elements and an appreciative study of
her two apparently discordant cultures.
This work of Dara Shukoh is the first
serious and scholarly attempt in this direction,
and has as such a unique interest for every
student of Indian History. Dara was not a
great Sanskritist like Al-Beruni; nor did he
possess the calm judgment and critical acumen
of that renowned scholar. He had to rely
mostly upon the Pandits who hardly agree
among themselves in the interpretation of their
literature and philosophy. Owing to these
limitations the conclusions of the princely
author may not be quite acceptable to specialists
of the present age. The main thesis of the
Prince in this work was to prove that the ideas
of Hindu cosmogony were similar to those
embodied in the Quran. The task of the Prince
was one of exceptional difficulty, and therefore
it is no wonder if his analogies and parallelisms
are sometimes far-fetched and superficial. 1
i As the publication of the complete text of the Majmua-al-
Baharain with translation has of late been announced by the Secre-
tary, A. S. 8., it is unnecessary to translate any part of this work
here for elucidation.


Section 4. —Sirr-i-Akbar or Sirr-ul-asrar
The last and greatest of Dara’s literary
achievements was the translation of 52 Upanis-
hads from their Sanskrit original into graceful
and masterly Persian prose, under the title of
Sirr-i-Akbar (the Great Secret), or as it is
found named in some MSS., Sirr-ul-asrar (the
Secret of Secrets). A more suitable title for
the Upanishads in their Persian garb can hardly
be imagined than “the Great Secret or Secret
of secrets”, both being very suggestive of the
nature of their contents, which the Aryan sages
always held JJinfOIKW: (The greatest of all
secrets). Dara opens his Introduction with an
equally appropriate praise of God whose Essence
is compared to a point or dot, having an existence
without length, breadth, or depth, indivisible
and all-pervading. This was indeed the
smnmum bonum of the spiritual experience of
Dara, as well as of every seeker after God who,
they say, exists, but whose existence though
always self-evident can only be described in
terms of negation (neti, neti). It was the
insatiable thirst for the fullest exposition of the
doctrine of Tauhid or Oneness of God that
brought him at last to its very fountain-head, the
Upanishads. The Prince took a hint from the
Quran which says: “Indeed it is an honoured
Quran in a book that is hidden. None shall
touch it, but the purified ones. It is a revelation
by the Lord of the worlds” (Sura LVI). And
108
[Ch. YL
DARA SHUKOH


commenting on this passage Dara says that this
(hidden Book) can be neither. Jabur (the
Psalms), nor Taurit (the Books of Moses), nor
Injil (the Gospels); nor does it refer to the
Lauh-i-Mahfus, the Protected Tablet under the
throne of God, because the word “tanzil” means
something revealed which the Protected Tablet
is not. According to him the UpanisJiad could
he none other than the “hidden Book” of the
Quran; because the etymological significance of
the Upanishad suggests “that which is taught
in secret”. Dara is undoubtedly correct from
the historical point of view, the date of the
Upanishads being earlier than that of all the
three Scriptures mentioned above. But few
would agree either with Dara’s interpretation of
the Quranic verse or with his assumption that the
Prophet through whom the Quran was revealed
ever knew of the existence of the Upanishads.
At any rate, it suited the purpose of this great
missionary of peace and reconciliation, whose
ultimate object in his literary and spiritual
pursuits was to establish harmony between the
two apparently conflicting cultures and creeds
of India. 1
i Mr. Nevill, on the authority of a local tradition perhaps writes
that Dara Shukoh spent several years of his life in Benares, where
his name is preserved in the muhalla Daranagar. It was here, he
says, that Dara wrote the Persian translation of Upanishads with
the help of 150 pandits (Benares District Gaz. P. 196). Accordingly,
I wrote on p. 17 of this book, “Dara visited it (Allahabad) once only
(1656-1657), and completed at Benares his monumental work
translation of 50 Upanishads on. Ist July, 1657.” The whole sentence


Dara says in the Introduction that he got
together a number of Sannyasis and Pandits
residing in Benares, the abode of Hindu learn-
ing, and well-versed in the Yedas and
Upanishads, and with their help completed the
translation of the Upanishads in six months, on
Monday, the 26th Ramzan, 1067 A.H. (28th
June, 1657) at his palace, Manzil-i-Nigamhodh
in the city of Delhi. Only once in life did Dara’s
passion for literary work get the better of his
filial affection; because though heat and pestil-
ence were depopulating the imperial capital in
the summer of 1657, and the ailing Shah Jahan
had to leave the city for a change to Mukhlispur,
Dara chose to stay back for completing this
work.
should be rejected in view of the discoverey of a MS. (by Mr. Mahesh
Prasad of Allahabad) in which there is a very definite mention
of the date and place of the completion of the work. I have in
order to test the accuracy of the passage in the MS. of Mr. Mahesh
Das, —traced the movements of Dara as given in the Fadshahnama.
It is proved beyond doubt that Dara could not have been in Allahabad
or Benares in the year 1657 A.D. Dara, who always accompanied
Shah Jahan in his tours, did not accompany his ailing father who
left Delhi in February, 1657 for Mukhlispur. This absence of Dara
can only be accounted for by some very urgent work, and this was
perhaps his pre-occupation with the Upanishads. 26th Ramzan, 1067
according to the Calendar was a Sunday; but this is immaterial, as
we invariably find one day’s difference. I have extensively utilised
Mr. Mahesh Das’s article “Unpublished Translation of the Upanishads
by Prince Dara Shukoh” (published in Dr. Modi Memorial Volume,
Bombay, 1930, p. 622-638). By a closer study of the text of the
Translation I have been able to rectify some inaccuracies on the part
of Mr. Mahesh Das. This will be discussed in the second volume of
this work where I have printed the full text of the Introduction,
and the qfjFTTl ) and also extracts from translations of
the Chandogya, Brihadaranyaka, Kena, and Chhurika Upanishads
(Pers. text, p. 141-176), with their English versions as specimens.


As regards the nature of the Persian
rendering, Dara says that he“ himself rendered
into Persian (the Updnikhats which is the store-
house of the doctrine of Unity, ganj-i-tauhid)
without any increase or decrease, without any
selfish motive, sentence for sentence and word
for word.” 1
A comparison of any Persian passage at
random with the published Sanskrit text will at
once convince the reader of the truth of what
Dara says about the nature of his work. Dara
may be accused of this much transgression that
in a very few cases, instead of translating direct-
ly the cryptic sentences of the original text of
the Upanishads, he has rendered into Persian
the commentary of Sankara 2 on those passages
for the sake of accuracy free from ambiguity.
It is also interesting to notice his slight adapta-
tion of some passages to make things intelligible
to Muhammadans, for whom particularly this
translation was meant. He took much pains to
make his work easily intelligible to men of aver-
1 Pers. text, p. 144.
2 As for example in the Brihadaranyak Upanishat four species
of horses are mentioned: Haya ( fJf Vaji ( Arba
( an d Ashwa ( ) assigned for mount respectively to
Devos, Ghandharvas, Asuras, and men. Dara translates the passage
thus: “And the Arabi horse ( asp-i-Arahi ) which on account of its
swift speed, is called Haya, takes the angels ( Ferishtahah ) to their
destination; Baji, which is a horse of the Iraqi breed, is mounted by
the Gandharvas; Arba, which is of the Kachchi breed is ridden by
Asuras; and Ashwa, or Turki horse carries men to their destination.”
Without affecting the sense Dara has aptly introduced the Arabi,
Iraqi, Kachchi, and Turki breeds of horses, though unwarranted
either by the original text or its commentary by Sankara.


age intellect who had no grounding in Hindu
mythology and philosophy. We must say he has
eminently succeeded in tips attempt. The
Sirr-i-Akhar of Dara Shukoh has not only all
the merits of a good translation, but also the
compactness and charm of an original work.
Dara was the first serious student not only
of Comparative Religion, but also of Compara-
tive Mythology in Mediaeval India. The most
enduring portion of his work is his Islamic
nomenclature for clothing in Muslim garb Hindu
ideas, Hindu gods, and the bewildering variety
of beings that figure in Hindu mythology. Hot
to speak of Persians, Muslims of every nation-
ality except perhaps the Chinese Muslim, will
more readily welcome the Sirr-i-Akbar of Dara
either in its Persian original, or in the transla-
tion of this Persian version into their particular
languages, than any translation from the most
authoritative English version of the Upanis-
hads. No amount of explanation will give a
clearer idea of Mahadev 1 to the Musahnan than
Dara’s identification of this deity with the angel
Israfil, who, according to Muslim belief, stands
below the throne ( Arsh ) of God, with a horn in
his hand; Israfil will blow his horn as a signal
for Qiyamat-i-Kiibra (mahapralaya ) when the
seven higher and seven nether worlds would fold
up and be resolved into the Primeeval Mist.
I Pers. text, p. 147.


Section 5. —Minor Works of Dara Shtjkoh.
Dara Shukoh was an indefatigable propa-
gandist, and impelled by a sort of missionary
enthusiasm, he turned out a number of books and
tracts on various aspects of Sufism during his
literary career of a little more than 15 years.
But nowhere do we come across a complete list of
Dara Shukoh’s works, though Dara himself in
scattered passages mentions “several tracts”'
written by him; but he has not given us even the
titles of these books. It is quite possible that
some more books of Dara may come to light in
future.
Among the minor works of Dara Shukoh,
Hasanat-ul-Arifm (completed in A.H. 1062-1652
A.D.), marks a very important stage in the
evolution of Dara’s religious views and spiritual
progress. Though the Prince had not yet ac-
tually stepped outside the bourn of Islam in
search of the origin of the doctrine of TanTiid
(oneness of God), his views and his attitude
towards Shariyat were about this time veering
towards those of Mansur bin Hallaj. Hasanat-
nl-Arifin was written by Dara to meet the public
criticism of his pantheistic views which, in the
opinion of the orthodox school, were altogether
un-Islaraic.
In the Introduction to this book Dara says:
“Sometimes, in a state of ecstasy and
enthusiasm, I pronounce words which only
8


highest truths and knowledge permit: certain
sordid and vile individuals, as well as insipid
devotees because of their narrowness blame me
and accuse me of heresy and inkar (denial of
God). It is because of it that there came to me
the idea of reconciling [lit. reuniting] the words
of great believers in the unity, of saints and of
those who have acquired the knowledge of the
Reality ; .so that this may serve as a
convincing argument for [silencing] those who
are Dajjals under the aspect of Christ, Pharaoh
with apparent qualities of Moses, Abu Jahal
calling himself a disciple of Muhammad.” 1
At the very start of his spiritual life Dara
imbibed through association with the great saint
Mian Mir and his fraternity—belief in the
essential superiority of the esoteric to the exo-
teric interpretation of Islam, and of the doctrine
of Hama-u-st (everything is He) to that of
Hama-as-u-st (everything is from Him). Unlike
other Sufis he began broadcasting his views in
several books and tracts on Sufism written by
himself. At first he wrote and spoke with a
certain amount of caution and reserve; e.g,, in
his first book, Safinat-ul-awliya, Dara says, l ‘On
the night of 27th Ramzan, 1049 A.H., at the age
of twenty-five of the author, this book was
completed I have not dwelt on great and
subtle truths uttered by the sages of old, which
i Hasanat-ul-Arifin (Mujtabai Press, Delhi); quoted in Dr.
Yusuf Husain’s book, t’lnde Mystique au Moyen Age (p. 179-180).


common people do not comprehend. When
Shaikh Abu Said Kharraj reached Egypt, some
people said to him: ‘Why do you not speak
from the pulpit 1 ?’ The Shaikh replied, ‘... .A
discourse on truth to the uninitiated amounts to
slander. 1 ’ ” But during 13 years (1639 —1652
A.D.) that elapsed since the publication of this
first work of his, Bara met several renowned
Sufis of a more advanced school; e.g., Mulla
Shah, Mir Sulaiman Misri, and Shah Bil-ruba, 2
and imbibed their extreme views. The convic-
tion that now filled his heart was so great that
it forced its way out breaking through every
barrier of caution and fear of consequence. This
has perhaps led a Muslim critic of the orthodox
school to remark that Bara Shukoh by writing
this book only betrayed himself, and in attempt-
ing to defend himself with his pen the Prince
acted in a manner less heroic and honourable
than that of Mansur bin Hallaj, Shahabuddin
Suhrawardy or Sarmad, who died for their
conviction without opening their lips in self-
defence ! Elsewhere the same critic sums up his
criticism of Bara’s Hasanat-ul-Arifin by saying
that he would very strongly recommend this book
to those who want to study the perversion flit.,
ruin] of Sufism \3
1 See Khatima of Safinat-ul-awliya, p. 216; (Newalkishore Press).
2 Hasanat-id-Arifin, p. 26-36 (Mujtabai Press, Delhi).
3 Sayyid Najib Ashraf Nadvi’s Urdu Introduction to Ruqqat-i-
Alamgir, p. 361-363; footnote, p. 362 (Published by Dar-ul~
Musannafin, Azamgarh, U.P).


The pantheism of Dara finds a more
eloquent expression in his Tariqat-ul-Eaqiqat. 1
This had been the favourite theme of Persian
Sufi poets for several centuries before the birth
of Dara. In a similar vein Dara writes:
“Thou art in the Kaaba as well as
in the Somnath temple;
In the convent as well as in the
tavern.
Thou art at the same time the
light and the moth;
The wine and the cup, the sage
and the fool, the friend and the
stranger.”
“Thou art thyself the rose and the
amorous nightingale.
Thou art thyself the moth around the
light of thine own beauty.”
Besides the above-mentioned works, Dara
wrote an interesting Introduction to the Persian
Translation of a compendium of the Joga-
Vashishta Ramayana made under his superin-
tendence with the title Tarjuma-i-Joga -
Vashishta in 1656 A.D. It runs thus: “When
I had gone through the Persian'translation of
i See L’ Inde Mystique au Moyen Age, p. 178.


this book (the Joga-Vashishta), which is attri-
buted to Shaikh Sufi, I saw in a dream two
dignified figures of calm appearance, one of them
standing on a higher level than the other. I
was drawn involuntarily to their presence....
and Yashishta with great affection and gracious-
ness placed his hand on my back, and said:
‘Rama, here is an earnest seeker of knowledge,
and a comrade (lit., brother) of yours in true
search of the Reality; embrace him/ Ram-
chandra held me in his embrace with great
warmth and love. Then Yashishta gave to
Ramchandra some sweets which I ate out of his
hand. After having seen this in dream my
desire to have this book translated became
greater than ever; and one man from among my
servants was appointed to translate this work.
This translation was completed under the
supervision of the Pandits of Hindustan.’ ’ An
Urdu adaptation of Tarjuma-i-Joga-Vashishta
made by Maulvi Abul Hasan under the title of
Minhaj-us-Salikin enjoys great popularity in
Upper India.
That the philosphical views of Dara were
rapidly veering towards the Advaita Yedantisms
becomes quite apparent from his selection of
Sanskrit works for translation; e.g., Bhagavad
Gita, Joga-Vashishta, and Prohodha-Chandro-
daya. The last one is a drama of unique interest
written by a Sannyasi named Krishna Misra
about the year 1065 A.D. This is considered


as the first attempt in Sanskrit literature to
demonstrate the inner harmony of diverse
systems of Hindu philosophy, “The play
(The Moonrise of Wisdom) is an allegory of
deliverance of the human spirit from the tempta-
tions and delusions of the world. Vishu-bhakti
stirs up Discrimination and using the Upanis-
hads, Faith, Good Sense, and their numerous
allies, inflicts a signal defeat on Delusion, Love,
and Greed, and their many attendants, the rise
( tidaya ) of Wisdom naturally follows (probo-
dha), and the human spirit realises its own
absolute identity with God, renounces Action and
adopts dispassionate asceticism as the only right
rule.of life.” 1 The Khud-parasti (worship of
Self) of Dara was the result of this realization
of the absolute of the human spirit with God; and
the final stage of the evolution of his religion and
religous life was something like that dispassion-
ate asceticism which rejects dogmas and rituals
of religion as superfluous.
I Farquhar’s Outline of the Religious Literature of India, p. 22f.


CHAPTER VII
THE INTERLUDE (1654-1657 A.D.)
Between two signal failures, namely, his
unsuccessful siege of Qandahar and the disastr-
ous War of Succession, three eventful years
constitute nevertheless a happy interlude in the
life of Dara Shukoh. This period was marked
by his greatest successes, literary, political, and
diplomatic, and it was during this period that
the imperial crown all but touched his brow, and
his golden throne shone by the side of the
Peacock throne of Shah Jahan, with whom he
appeared before the world as the joint ruler of
Hindustan. These years, which also synchronis-
ed with the period of Aurangzib’s Second
Yiceroyalty of the Deccan, were, however, years
of sullen and treacherous calm —only a prelude
to the War of Succession. Clouds of the impen-
ding conflict gathered in the distant political
horizon which set everybody athinking about the
future of the empire of Shah Jahan. Though
alive to the danger, Dara never lost his
optimism, and having put off thought of the evil
day, he would in his philosophic reverie some-
times ramble into the presence of Rishi
Vashishta and hold converse with him. and some


times traverse the wilderness of the Upanishads
in a confident search of the Hidden Book alluded
to in the holy Quran. His friends and well-
wishers would now and then rouse him from his
political torpor by gentle hints about the hostile
designs of his brothers, who were unceasingly
weaving diplomatic meshes around him. We
propose to survey briefly those activities of Dara
during this period which have a bearing on the
War of Succession.
Section I.—Marriages of Sulaiman Shukoh
As early as 1646 A.D., when Sulaiman
Shukoh was only a boy of nine, Dara was in
correspondence with Mirza Rajah Jai Singh for
a match between his son and a daughter of Rao
Amar Singh Rathor by a sister of Mirza Rajah.
The primary motive for such a matrimonial
alliance was purely political, as we learn from the
following letter of Dara to Mirza Rajah. “As
this daughter l (of Rao Amar Singh Rathor) is
born of a sister of yours, it is better if she is not
betrothed there; had this girl been any other
(than your sister’s daugher), you might have
given her in marriage wherever you liked. I
wish that you and your relatives were united by
alliance with my son Sulaiman Shukoh. I have
disclosed this affair to you because I look upon
i She was perhaps Indar Kuraari, referred to as a widow of
Sulaiman Shukoh in Akhbarat 20-4.


you as the most sincere well-wisher and a parti-
cular friend of mine, and regard you as worthy
of my highest favours.” 1
Dara spoke out his mind sincerely by saying
that the greatest recommendation of the girl in
his eyes was her relationship with Mirza Rajah,
whom he would not like to see united by a matri-
monial alliance with anybody else, —apparently
with any of Shah Jahan’s other grandsons.
It appears that this negotiation soon resulted
in a betrothal of the Rajah’s niece with Sulai-
man Shukoh. The actual marriage, which had
been postponed for eight years, took place in
1654 A.D. Urgent political considerations seem
to have precipitated the celebration of this
match. It was a reapproachment with the
powerful Mirza Rajah with whom the Prince
had had a serious misunderstanding almost
amounting to a breach during the third siege of
Qandahar. Besides, the news leaked out of a
secret family pact between Shuja and Aurangzib
made at Agra in December, 1652, when Shuja’s
daughter Gulrukh Banu was betrothed to Sultan
Muhammad, the eldest son of Aurangzib. As
a move against this hostile design of his brothers,
Dara prepared for the celebration of the mar-
riage of Sulaiman immediately after his return
from the siege of Qandahar.
i Dara’s letter to Jai Singh, reaching the latter at Aurangabad
(?) on Safar 24, 1056 A.H.; vide Pers. text, p. 122. Aurangabad is
clearly a mistake for some other place; because in that year, 1056
A.H. (1646 A.D.) Mirza Rajah was serving under Murad in Ralkh.
(Dr. Banarasi Prasad’s History of Shahjahan, p. 195) •


On April 4, (1654 A.D.) the nuptial cere-
mony was performed according to the strict
injunctions of the Shariyat (Canon-law). 1 A
fortnight later (18th April, 1654) the Emperor
with his retinue paid a congratulatory visit to
Tiara’s mansion and the ceremony closed with
the usual pomp and festivity.
Two years after the marriage with Rao
Amar Singh’s daughter, Sulaiman Shukoh
contracted a second marriage with a daughter
of Jafar Khan’s younger brother. In this affair
Shah Jahan himself seems to have taken the
initiative. This alliance was partly a compli-
ment to the family of Jafar Khan (who had
married a younger sister of Mumtaz Mahal),
and partly a concession to the feelings of the
Muslim nobility in general. The girl 2 was
brought from Patna, and the marriage took
place on the night of October 26, 1656.
Section 2. —Dara Shukoh and Maharana
Raj Singh Sisodia
Maharana Jagat Singh of Mewar, father
of Raj Singh, had begun extensive repairs to
the fortress of Chitor in violation of an express
condition of the existing treaty between the
emperor Jahangir and Maharana Amar Singh.
This work of restoration was pushed on with
1 Marriage of Sulaiman, Waris, 86 a; the Emp’s congratulatory
visit, ibid 87 a.
2 Munawwar Bai is referred to in the Akhharat as another wife
of Sulaiman Shukoh.


greater vigour by his son Raj Singh, who
ascended the gadi of Mewar on October 10,1652.
The new Maharana made an unseemly demons-
tration by marching with his army to the
imperial frontier, and sent a belated contingent
of his troops under Bhupat l (son of Sahasa,
son of Maharana Pratap Singh), to the third
siege of Qandahar (1653 A.D.) only under
pressure. The Emperor, however, tolerated
these disloyal acts of the rulers of Mewar till
the affair of Qandahar came to a close.
On 21st May, 1654, the Emperor sent a
mace-bearer, Abdal Beg with two gift-horses for
the Maharana and a far man directing him to
send immediately to the Deccan his contingent
of service-troops to serve there under Aurang-
zib. The real mission of Abdal Beg was
perhaps to spy out the Rana’s armed strength,
and the extent of his repairs to Chitor. It was
reported that most of the old gates of Chitor
had been restored, and several new ones con-
structed; and that walls were being built even
in places difficult of access. The wazir Sadullah
Khan was appointed to the command of an
expeditionary force numbering 30,000 troops
and given leave on September 4, 1654 to invade
Mewar and demolish the fortifications of Chitor.
Twenty days after the Emperor accompanied
by Dara started for Ajmir via Amber, with the
i Bhupat returns from duty, gets a khilat with leave to return
home on 21st May, 1654; Waris, 87 a.


ostensible object of visiting the tomb of Shaikh
Muninuddin Chishti. 1 ' A letter of Dara to
Mirza Rajah Jai Singh, written on the day of
the Emperor’s departure, reveals the 'great
anxiety of the Prince for the fate of the Maha-
rana: “To-day the Emperor starts for Ajmir
and I shall pass by near your home and be a
guest of yours. As a separate army has been
sent against the territory of the Rana and I
have, out of kindness and favour, always been
attentive to the interests of the Rana, I wish to
represent to His Majesty the truth about his
loyalty and devotion, so that he and his territory
may be immune from the shock [as*7>.] of the
victorious army” 2 Maharana Raj Singh had
assembled an army in Chitor; but his better
sense prevailed just in time, and seeing no other
alternative than to sue for pardon, he sent a
deputation to Dara.
On October 4, 1654 this deputation consist-
ing of Rao Ramchand Ghauhan, Raghodas
Jhala, Sanwaldas Rathor, and the priest Gharib-
das interviewed the Prince at the stage of
Khalilpur. Dara worked hard to prevail upon
the Emperor to relent, and Shah Jahan at last
permitted Dara’s trusty servant Chandrabhan
Brahman to proceed to Udaipur for settling the
affair. Before the arrival of Chandrabhan,
the Maharana had sent Madhusudhan Bhatta
x Chitor expedition, Waris, 90 b; the Emp’s march, 91 b.
2 Jaipur Records, vide Pers, text p. 129.


and Rai Singh Jhala with proposals of peace to
Sadullah Khan, who was bent on forcing a war
on the Rana and annexing his territory to the
imperial domain, naturally resented this inter-
vention of Dara. The Rana had no option but
to submit to the hard terms of the imperial
court, namely, the cession of parganas 1 Pur,
Mandal, etc., and agreed to send his son to the
imperial camp with Bara’s diwan, Shaik Abdul
Karim, who accordingly rode for Udaipur on
2nd November to escort the Sisodia prince. On
4th November, the Emperor granted away
Mandalgarh to Rup Singh Rathor, and on 29th
of the same month, he ordered Arjun, son of
Bithaldas Gaur, to take effective possession of
Bednur which had lately belonged to the Rana. 2
On the 21st November, 1654 the eldest son of
Rana, aged seven or eight, arrived at the
imperial camp and made his salute to the
Emperor, As the prince had not yet been given
any name by the Rana, the Emperor gave him
an auspicious and classical name, Sobhag Singh,
which however did not please his father who
changed it to Sultan Singh! The wazir had
been ordered to evacuate Chitor as “the guilt
of the Rana was forgiven through the interces-
sion of the Crown Prince ”.3 Sadullah Khan
after having demolished the walls and fortifica-
tions of Chitor during 15 days, and done what-
1 For details see Ojha’s Rajputana ka Itihas, p. 845.
2 Waris, 88 b.
3 Ibid.


ever injury he could to the possessions of the
Rana, rejoined the imperial camp on 22nd
November. Having dismissed the Sisodia
prince with presents for himself and his father
(26th November) the Emperor returned to Agra
on the 17th December, 1654.
Thus ended the affair of Maharana Raj
Singh, who indeed escaped a great calamity
through the strenuous efforts of Dara Shukoh.
The Prince in a letter to Mirza Rajah Jai Singh
writes: “The particular kindness and love
which I bear towards the Rajput race has be-
come manifest; the territory and honour of the
Rana remain intact. Let it be known to the
whole Rajput race to what extent I wish well of
them.” 1 But the political speculation of Dara
was upset by the very act of the Emperor, who
had forcibly seized some of the paraganas of
the Maharana as a penalty for his rebellion.
The ruler of Mewar like the common run of man
thought less of what had been saved than of the
little lost to him, inspite of the utmost efforts
of a friend and patron. The Maharana, who
had merely exploited a noble sentiment of Dara
to extricate himself from a tight corner, now
threw himself unscrupulously into the arms of
his enemy Aurangzib. Shortly after the return
of the imperial army from Mewar he sent
Udaikaran Chauhan and Sankar Bhatta on a
i Vide Pers. text, pp. 121-122; the date 1055 ' n the printed text
13 a misprint; the correct date being A.H. 1064.


secret diplomatic mission to Aurangzib in the
south. Aurangzib in return despatched to
Udaipur two trusty agents of his own, Indar
Bhat and Fidai Khwajah with a khilat, a dia-
mond ring, and an elephant for the Maharana. 1
The attitude of the Sisodia chief towards Dara
revealed to the world the futility of building
upon sentiments which 'in politics count less
than self-interest even with the most sentimental
race.
Section 3.—Dara Shukoh gets the title of
Shah-i-Buland-iqbal (3rd February, 1655)
After his return from Rajputana to Delhi
the Emperor publicly invested the Crown Prince
with almost regal honours on his 66th Lunar
birthday, (Saturday, 3rd February, 1655). Be-
fore the darbar time the Emperor sent from
the royal wardrobe a robe of honour sparkling
with gems and pearls worth Rs. 2,50,000 to the
mansion of Dara Shukoh. The Prince dressed
in this robe, came to attend the weighing cere-
mony, which being over the Emperor took oft
from his head a sarband (a fillet for fastening
on the turban) worth 4)/o lakhs of rupees set
with a rose-coloured ruby and two big strings
of seed-pearls, and with his own hand tied it on
to the head of the Prince. Besides this robe
of honour and sarband a cash gift of thirty
I Tzvo nishans of Aurangzib to Raj Singh give details of this
exchange of envoys and presents between them. See Ojha’s
Rajputana ka itihas, p. 844, footnote 3.


lakhs of rupees was made to him. The Emperor
addressed the Prince by a new title Shali-i-
Buland-Iqbal, and asked him to take his seat
on a gold throne which had been placed by the
side of the imperial throne. Dara at "first
hesitated, but being pressed by his father he
took his seat. In a letter to his spiritual guide
( Pir ) Mulla Shah Badakhshi, Dara writes,
‘ ‘ [After the distribution of khilats and promo-
tions] His Majesty said, ‘My child, I
have made up my mind not to do any important
business or decide on any great undertaking
henceforth without your knowledge and with-
out consulting you first; I cannot suffi-
ciently thank God for the favour that Allah has
blessed me with a son like you “ The
Emperor”, says Waris, “ordered that the nobles
and other courtiers should go to the palace of
the Crown Prince to congratulate him. On
23rd February, 1655, the Emperor paid a visit
in state to Dara’s house to congratulate the
Prince on his getting the title of Shah. It is
fully borne out by the history of the last two
years of Shah Jahan’s reign that the Crown
Prince had an increasing share in the adminis-
tration of affairs, and except in matters of
foreign policy his voice was all but final in his
father’s cabinet.
i Dara’s letter to Mulla Shah, vide Pers. text p. 21-23. This
letter supplements the brief notice of this event in the Padshah-nama
(Waris, 96 a). As regards date and other details the letter fully
agrees with the narrative in the court history.


Section 4. —Dara Shukoh and Court politics
Shah Jahan, like every absolute monarch,
was the personification of the State, and his
darbar, whether stationary in capitals or on the
move in camps, was the motive-spring of the
administrative machinery of the empire. Per-
sonal influence with the Emperor was a market-
able commodity, which was eagerly sought after
by a host of clients from every corner of the
empire. Nobody, whether a mighty ambassador
like Sir Thomas Roe or a humble scholar ex-
pectant of a few acres of rent-free land, could
have his business done at Court without securing
a “patron” there and propitiating him with
presents. Great nobles and vassal princes, who
kept their agents at Court, nevertheless invari-
ably sought a “patron” to have their wishes
satisfied. The prestige and influence of a
“patron” with the Emperor were determined
by the number and status of their clients. No-
bles inimical to one another, feudatories in
dispute with their neighbours, and contiguous
vassal states quarrelling over their boundaries,
and even foreign trading companies bent on
elbowing one another out, ranged themselves in
hostile groups under “patrons” struggling for
influence at Court, and hence the formation of
factions was inevitable.
There were two main parties at court headed
respectively by the incapable though ambitious
Crown Prince, and the honest and able wazir
9


Sadullah Khan; and between these two the
Emperor swung like a pendulum being drawn by
sentiment or self-interest in opposite directions
with varying force. This rivalry between his
most beloved son, and his most esteemed minis-
ter and friend, made Shah Jahan almost as
unhappy as the enmity between Prince Salim
and Shaikh Abul Fazl embittered the last days
of Akbar. The Prince hated the ability of
Sadullali no less than his Sunni bigotry. In
his jealousy and arrogance, Dara used to speak
contemptuously of Sadullah and his admiring
pupil Aurangzib. Long after the wazir and the
Crown Prince had been united in common dust,
anecdotes continued to be told about their mutual
jealousy and the snubbing repartees of the
ready-witted Sadullah, and even a most malicious
and false allegation was made that Dara had
poisoned the wazir. It was perhaps in allusion
to the enmity of Dara towards Sadullah
and his solicitations on behalf of condemned
criminals and nobles under the Emperor’s
displeasure—(as we shall notice later on) —that
Shah Jahan is once said to have remarked:
“Ko doubt the Crown Prince possesses the
resources, majesty, and pomp of a King; but he
appears to be inimical to honest people, being
good to the bad, and bad to good men.” 1 Aura-
ngzib relates another anecdote, “Dara Shukoh
was not on good terms with Sadullah Khan whom
I Letters of Aurangzib, B. 54; A. 37.


he used to trouble and vex: once he said, ‘Great
is His Majesty’s graciousness to you: from
what depth to what a height His Majesty has
elevated you.’ The Khan, ready-witted as he
was, retorted, ‘ln truth it is even so; but at first
I should have been, on the Day of Resurrection,
ranked with the learned, and now among His
Majesty’s ministers: let him know who can
understand it’.” 1 '
Khafi Khan also speaks of Dara’s enmity
to Sadullah against whom the Prince is said to
have made an allegation to the Emperor to the
effect that the wazir had assigned to him desola-
ted parganas yielding a poor revenue while he
took prosperous ones for himself; having learnt
this Sadullah sent for the agent of the Crown
Prince and having taken over the parganas
ruined by the oppressive amils of Dara to his
own jagir, gave him in exchange flourishing ones
according to the estimate of Dara’s servant.
Within a year or two it was found that these
very mahals had become worse cultivated and
poorer in the yied of revenue. 2 The behavaiour
of the Crown Prince to Sadullah, so goes another
anecdote —once drew a sharp reprimand from
Shah Jahan. One day Sahara Mai, the diwan
of Dara Shukoh, presented to the Emperor an
account-sheet ( fard ) showing a balance of ten
lakhs of rupees due by the Treasury to the
1 Anecdotes of Aurangzib, F. 212; K. 334.
2 Khafi Khan, p. 738.


Prince. The Emperor passed it on to Sadullah
Khan to report on it after scrutiny in the office
of the High Diwan. Sadullah at once remarked
that firstly such a big sum could not be paid from
the Treasury, and secondly the bill was not in
order, because a balance had not been struck
between previous receipts and expenditure, and
the current account. After the Emperor had
left the darbar, Dara spoke some harsh words
to Sadullah Khan, and this the Emperor came
to learn in the inner apartments from the news-
sheet of daily occurrences forwarded by the ins-
pector ( mushrif ) of the Hall of Private Audi-
ence. Shah Jahan immediately penned a letter
censuring the Prince for his conduct, “....
Sahara Mai looks to the benefit of your house-
hold, and Sadullah is there to guard my interests
( lit., wealth ). Certainly this sheet ought to have
been correctly prepared by your office, and it
was proper for you to see whether this would
possibily pass through Sadullah’s hand... .It is
certainly very bad to ill-treat servants of the
State; to win their hearts is praiseworthy”. In
the afternoon, the Emperor sent to Sadullah
Khan a present of several pieces {than) of gold
embroidered Mahmudi cloth. 1
Sadullah was a good man only with regard
to those that would not cross his path. Dara’s
enmity to Sadullah was perhaps a fact (though
1 Anecdotes of Aurangzib, B. 53 adds:
“With a cash gift of 3,000 dinars"; A. 46;
F. 190, substantially identical.


borne out mainly by. the testimony of his
enemies) ; but this was not due to any depravity
of the Prince’s heart; it was the result of the
inevitable clash between two ambitious persons
disputing for mastery over the Emperor’s mind,
and supreme power at Court. The Crown
Prince considered Sadullah as much a servant
of his own as of his father; while Sadullah,
incomparably superior to Dara in ability, fear-
less in his honesty, and proud beyond his station,
would not brook the superior airs of the Prince.
Dara, however, never used his boundless
influence with his father to injure any person,
though he often misused it to benefit many
unworthy people. Nothing pleased him more
than the liberal exercise of the royal clemency
to heal a wounded heart or to save a life, how-
ever justly forfeited. He could not resist tears
—even crocodile tears, and disbelieve any
pathetic tale of misery concocted with skill. So
among the clients of Crown Prince we find des-
perate rebels like Champat Rai Bundela, dis-
missed nobles 1 like Faqir Khan, and Shaikh
i Some notable instances:
1. Faqir Khan, son of Baqar Khan Najumsani, who had for
some misconduct, been forbidden the darhar, and dismissed from his
mansab was reinstated to his former rank of 2-hazari zat, 1,000 sawar
(6th January, 1654; Waris, 83 b).
2. Shaikh Farid, son of Qutbuddin Khan, who had for some
grave offence lost his mansab —was, through the intercession of Dara
received back into favour, and given a rank of 3-hazari zat, 2,000
sawar (4th June, 1654; Waris, 87b).


Farid (who had been forbidden the Court for
grave offences), and scoundrels like Malik
Jiwan stretched out for execution on the plat-
form of the police prefect of Delhi.
Section 5. —Dara Shukoh and Rajah
Prithvichand of Srinagar
The Garhwal principalities sheltered with-
in the inaccessible fringe of the Himalayas had
generally been immune from Muslim invasion
since the disastrous expedition in the reign of the
mad Sultan Muhammad Tughlaq. The Emperor
Shah Jahan renewed the enterprise in 1636,
s being lured by the reported existence of gold
mines in Srinagar, which was then ruled by the
notorious Rakkati Rani (Rose-cutting queen).
Rajabat Khan (Mirza Shuja, son of Shahrukh
Mirza), faujdar of Saharanpur, who was nomi-
nated to the command of the expeditionary
forces, was drawn by the tactics of the Rani far
into the interior, where most of his troops
3. One very old Muslim grandee of high rank, and enjoying
great favour at Court had lost his mattsab, and been denied admittance
to the darbar for the past eight years and two months. On the nth
March, 1655, this old man through the intercession of Dara was given
back his rank of 5-hazari (?) zat, 4,000 sawar, appointed to Sarkar
Jaunpur vice Mukarram Khan, and presented with an Iraqi horse with
gold-saddle and an elephant. The name of this old man is missing
in Sir J. N. Sarkar’s MS. of Waris used by me. From the list
of mansabdars given at the end of this Ms., it appears that this
man must be Mutaqqid Khan, 4-hazari zat, 4,000 sawar who died
at Jaunpur on the 12th Zilqada of the 29th Regnal Year (Waris, 97b;
124 a), i.e.. about a year after his restoration to office.
4. Malik Jiwan, who afterwards most treacherously betrayed the
fugitive Dara—had been condemned to death by Shah Jahan for
rebellion. Dara, intervened and procured a pardon for him.


perished of fever. Najabat Khan with a
miserable remnant of his army escaped from the
territory of the queen with their noses if not with
their honour intact. In 1654 Shah Jahan, elated
with his recent triumph over Maharana Raj
Singh, diverted a portion ®f the army to fresh
attack on Srinagar. On 14th November, 1654,
Khalilullah Khan was given leave from the
neighbourhood of the city of Ajmir to march
against Rajah Prithvichand of Srinagar with an
army 8000 strong (Waris, 92 b). Aided by
Riajahs Saubhagyaprakash of the Sirmur Hills
and Bahadurchand of Kumaon, the Muslim
force penetrated into the interior of Srinagar
territory, and next year took effective possession
of Dun, above Hardawar. This was turned
into a fortified base-camp of the imperialists,
and has since then been known as Deradun in
popular parlance. Khalilullah Khan, whose
incapacity was well-known, was retained only
as the norriinal commander-in-chief of the army,
which was now practically put under the com-
mand of Chaturbhuj Chauhan. However, the
war lingered on for two years, and on 20th
January, 1656, Qasim Khan Mir-atish left Delhi
with 4000 horse to reinforce the Mughal army
at Dun. Rajah Prithvichand having despaired
of ultimate success opened a long correspond-
ence with Jahanara Begam, protesting his
loyalty and innocence, and signified his willing-
ness to submit if Prince Dara Shukoh would


intercede for him. He sent his son Medini
Singh to the Crown Prince who, on the 30th
July introduced him to the darbar. Medini
Singh presented on behalf of his father a nazar
of one thousand ashrafis to the Emperor, who
graciously pardoned all faults of his father, and
bestowed on him a rich khilat, jewelled armlet
( dast-band ), and a Kipchaq horse with a gilt
saddle.
Section 6.—Deccan politics
During the years 1654 to 1657,, Aurangzib’s
intrigues and aggressive designs against the
kingdoms of Golconda and Bijapur wholly
engrossed the attention of the imperial Court.
The Deccan question sharply divided the mili-
tarist party of Sadullah and Aurangzib from
the peace-party of Dara and Jahanara. This
faction fight at Court which culminated in the
War of Succession, was certainly one of the pre-
disposing causes of that war. Aurangzib had
gone to the South in 1652 sorely aggrieved at
the treatment meted out to him by Shah Jahan,
who had unjustly refused him another chance
of retrieving his prestige at Qandahar. His
activities in the Deccan had, like every other
activity of his life, one underlying motive and
steadfast object; namely to equip himself for
the inevitable day of contest with his eldest
brother and to gather resources for that strug-
gle. He plainly wanted to force a war on the


weak and rich states of Golconda and Bijapur
because a war would place him' at the head of
large armies, train his officers, keep his arms
bright, and provide him with the sinews of the
coming war of succession.
Aurangzib’s greedy eyes first fell upon
the rich territories and utter helplessness of
Abdullah Qutb Shah of Golconda. At first he
demanded the immediate payment of twenty
lakhs of rupees as the difference due to the rise
in the exchange ratio between the hun and the
rupee (on the account of the Golconda tribute),
during the last sixteen years (1637-1653!),
forbade the ruler of Golconda to carry on war
against the Hindu Rajah of Karnatak (unless,
as the Prince shamelessly suggested, this inter-
ference was bought off for a price), and plotted
with Mir Jumla, the wazir of Golconda to betray
his master’s interests and come over to the
Mughal service. His ally Sadullah Khan
brought the Emperor round to sanction this
iniquitous policy by appealing to his greed. At.
last Aurangzib employed finesse and most
reprehensible cunning to ruin Golconda by
suppressing a very important letter of Shah
Jahan to Abdullah Qutb Shah, and suddenly
invaded the territories of Golconda. Shah
Jahan, as the historian of Aurangzib says, “in
order to gratify Aurangzib” sanctioned only a
demonstration of force to secure the release of
the family of Mir Jumla, who was claimed by


strange logic to be an imperial servant! But
Aurangzib aimed at the very life of Abdullah
Qutb Shah and the annexation of the whole
kingdom of Golconda, and accordingly instruct-
ed his son Sultan Muhammad to entrap and
murder the King of Golconda at a friendly
interview, by displaying “cleverness, prompti-
tude, and lightness of hand”. The Mughal
army captured Haidarabad and besieged the
King in the fortress of Golconda. At this
juncture Dara and Jahanara intervened effec-
tually to save their client, the unfortunate Qutb
Shah.
Ever since the time when the rulers of
Golconda and Bijapur had carried their quarrel
over the spoils of Kamatak to the imperial
Court, Dara and Aurangzib had been backing
opposite parties. Naturally, Abdullah Qutb
Shah sought the intercession of the Crown
Prince to save his life and fortune from the
machinations of Aurangzib. Shah Jahan had
played so long into the hands of Aurangzib and
Sadullah, who had steeled his heart against
clemency and justice by a sinister appeal to his
greed, land-hunger, and Sunni prejudice. Dara
had only to appeal to the better sense of the
Emperor, and place before him the case of the
ruler of Golconda in its true light. The pendu-
lum now swung towards the peace party owing
partly to recovery of the Emperor’s innate sense
of justice and partly perhaps to- the exposure


of the secret designs of his ambitious and uns-
crupulous son. The following letter of Dara to
Abdullah Qutb Shah throws considerable light
on this affair, “On the 29th Jamadi-ul-awwal
(March 15,1656) Mulla Abdus Samad came and
brought with him three letters ( arzdasht )
written by Your Highness to His Majesty, the
Emperor, to my illustrious sister Jahanara
Begam, and to me. I placed all the three
letters before His Majesty, who out of
graciousness wrote a farman of favour to Your
Highness and despatched the same to Shaista
Khan (for delivery) so that it may be made
clear to you that the Emperor did not in
fact sanction a siege of Golconda, and the occu-
pation of Your Highness’s territory. On the
contrary, it was desired that they should return
taking with them, the sons, And other members
of the family of Mir Muhammad Said. 1
This was not a mean intrigue, no stabbing
in the back on the part of malicious Dara, as
Aurangzib and his blind apologists hold without
assigning any reason. Early in February, an
imperial letter of pardon (dated Bth February),
with a robe of honour for Abdullah Qutb Shah
had been despatched through Aurangzib, who
took the liberty to withhold it on the plausible
ground that it would create difficulties in the
i Letter dated 2nd Jamadius-sani, 1066 A.H. (18th-March, 1656) ;
vide Pers text p. 133; Jamadius-sani in the body of the letter is
evidently a copyist’s error for Jamadi-ul-awwal. Abdullah Qutb
Shah’s letters to Dara pers, text ibid p. 34-52.


settlement of terms. But in fact it was he who
purposely prolonged negotiations so that he,
like an expert angler, might play his game to
the finish. Aurangzib, who was playing false
with the Emperor, stands condemned in his own
words, “ Qutb-ul-mulk is now craving pardon
(early in March), “proposing that his mother
would wait on me and that his daughter would
be married to my son. But I wish to send him
to the wilderness of destruction”. 1 In short,
Aurangzib stands convicted, out of his own
mouth, of having practised low cunning and
cruel injustice for ruinning Golconda. If Bara
intervened, even through for a bribe (as his
enemies allege without any ground), to coun-
teract this pernicious influence in politics, he
cannot be accused of having betrayed the best
interests of the empire, which were far from
being identical with those of Aurangzib.
Another proof of Aurangzib’s treasonable con-
duct is furnished by the fact that he compelled
Abdullah Qutb Shah to execute a secret Ahfid-
nama (Agreement) to the effect that after his
death the issue of his daughter married to the
eldest son of Aurangzib, should inherit the
whole kingdom of Golconda to the total exclu-
sion of all his other heirs; and this was done
i Adah, 81 a. Quoted in Sarkar’s History of Aurangzib, Vols.
I & 11, p. 213, f.n.


without the knowledge of the Emperor l who
refused to sanction it when it was afterwards
presented to him for confirmation. Further,
Aurangzib defrauded the state of greater part
of the spoils of Golconda over which an unseem-
ly wrangle ensued between father and son.
Even the great historian of Aurangzib seems to
have been once and once only imposed upon by
the neatly-written despatches of Aurangzib and
Aurangzib’s indignant parade of honesty and
contempt of lucre pretending to return to his
father everything he and his son had received
as presents from Golconda!
Baulked of his prey in Golconda, Aurang-
zib turned his eyes on Bijapur, whose virtuous
and able king Muhammad Adil Shah died at
this time after a prosperous reign of thirty
years (1626-1656). Aurangzib’s joy at the death
of this good king overflows through his letters
to his friends like Mirza Rajah Jai Singh.
Though Bijapur was an independent kingdom
and had most faithfully observed the terms of
peace with the Mughal Empire, Aurangzib
plotted for its destruction. Imperialism, bold
and avowed, is not so outrageous to our moral
sentiments as the cloak of cant and hypocrisy
with which politicians sometimes invest it in
order to deceive mankind. Aurangzib, too,
i There is not the remotest allusion to this ahadnama m the court
history, a fact which throws positive suspicion on Aurangzib’s conduct;
for the marriage of Aurangzib’s son, see Waris, no a.


assumed it in order to induce his father to
sanction a war of annexation against Bijapur.
He started a convenient theory of the illegiti-
macy of Ali Adil Shah II and appealed to the
Emperor not to leave such a kingdom in the
possession of a bastard, but to annex it to the
empire for the good of the people. In anticipa-
tion of the Emperor’s sanction of an invasion of
Bijapur, Aurangzib mobilised his army on its
frontier, intrigued to win over the wazir of
Bijapur, and threw his treasury open to buy
the desertion of Bijapur captains. The vacil-
lating Emperor wavered for sometime; but he
ultimately swung towards the militarist party
now under the lead of the new prime minister
Mir Jumla, whose unchallenged authority in
Deccan politics, and present of matchless dia-
monds, rubies, and topazes to the Emperor,
brought about the downfall of the peace-party,
under Dara. 1
Shah Jahan sanctioned a “wholly unrighte-
ous” war against Bijapur on 26th November,
1656, giving Aurangzib a free hand “to settle
the affair of Bijapur as he thought fit’’, Auran-
gzib captured the strong fort of Bidar after a
siege of 23 days only (29th March, 1657), and
next laid siege to Kaliani which also surren-
dered on August 1,1657. 2 The Mughal viceroy
1 History of Aurangzib ii 233.
2 Ibid p. 236, 237,250.


was reinforced by heavy contingents of imperial
troops, and the fall of Bijapur itself seemed only
a question of a few months. Six months after
the outbreak of hostilities, when Aurangzib was
in the full tide of success, the emperor suddenly
cried halt, made a peace with Bijapur without
consulting Aurangzib, and sent peremptory
farmans to Mahabat Khan and Rao Satarsal
Hada to return to the presence with all the
Mughal and Rajput troops on active duty in
the south without waiting for the formal leave
of Aurangzib. The whole affair looked omino-
usly mysterious, and was attributed as usual to
the intrigue of Bara. Unfortunately at this
point the official history of Waris comes to a
close, and no original correspondence between
the Crown Prince and Bijapur has yet come to
light. Muhammad Salih Kambuh who wrote
his Amal-i-Salih in Aurangzib’s reign, asserts
that Adil Shah, unable to make a stand against
Aurangzib, sent an envoy Ibrahim Bichittar
Khan to Prince Dara Shukoh, and through him
sued for peace. Aqil Khan Razi, a protege of
Aurangzib, says that two imperial rescripts
(farmans) to Mahabat Khan and Rao Satarsal
Hada were written “at the request” of Dara
Shukoh. 1 But this change of policy on the part
of Shah Jahan is so decisive and stern, and of
such grave import that Dara’S influence, how-
ever great, cannot wholly account for it. In
i Kambuh, 5 b; Aqil, 16.


this affair the old Emperor seemed to have been
swayed more by his dread of Aurangzib than
by his love for Dara. Shah Jahan was ill at
ease with Aurangzib in whom he saw the image
of his own guilty self, the youthful Khurram,
hold, astute, and unscrupulous, a rebel against
his own father and the murderer of his eldest
brother. He had an instinctive distrust of
Aurangzib, and hence his vacillating, and some-
times unreasonably vexatious attitude towards
the latter. There was a misgiving in his heart
that Aurangzib might use the viceroyalty of the
Deccan as a stepping-stone to the throne of
Delhi, as he himself had done during the reign
of Jahangir. A letter of Shah Jahan to Prince
Shuja shows that the Emperor was at this time
seriously contemplating the removal of
Aurangzib from the Deccan, Before Shah
Jahan could mature his plan against Aurangzib,
he fell seriously ill on 6th September, 1657. The
news of his illness, magnified into death by
rumour, gave the signal for the commencement
of the War of Succession.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE CAUSES OF THE WAR OF
SUCCESSION
Section 1. —Bara's heresy and the Civil War
Islam never contemplated the rise of a
hereditary monarchy within its polity, and
therefore provided no definite law of succession
to a kingdom of the faithful. On the other
hand by refusing any religious sanction to the
universal law of primogeniture it weakened
the only safeguard, however frail, against the
arbitration of the sword. Besides, rebellion had
lost its odium and disgrace in the house of Timur,
every member of which considered himself a
Mirza, —a prince with the title to rule and to
seize the heritage of every other. There was no
check on the personal ambition of princes and
usurpers in the Mughal empire as in every other
Muslim State.
Some people are inclined to think that the
civil war might have been avoided if Shah
Jahan had not followed the policy of drift as
regards the education of his sons, each of whom
developed a character and tendencies diametri-
cally opposite to those of the others. Thus,
10


Dara strayed into the bourne of infidelity, Shuja
showed a leaning toward Shiasm, Aurangzib
hardened into a bigoted Sunni, while Murad
scoffed at every form of religion and delighted
only in wine and slaughter. But the private
character and religious views of the princes
were not at all responsible for the civil war
among them. It is absurd to hold that if all
the four sons of Shah Jahan had grown up
equally devout Musalmans, the general body of
the faithful would have stood by the claim of
the eldest prince against the pretensions of his
brothers. Even if Dara had been as noble and
pious as Ali himself, his brothers were sure to
get from amongst Indian Musalmans more
numerous followers than those led by Muaw-
wiya against the son-in-law of the Prophet.
The struggle between Dara and Aurangzib was
not really a trial of strength between Hinduism
and Islam, though more Hindus fought on the
side of the former, and more Musalmans on the
side of the latter. If the triumph of Hinduism
or of Islam had been the issue of the contest,
the Sayyids of Barha would not have been the
most faithful supporters of Dara, nor would
Maharana Raj Singh have favoured the cause
of Aurangzib. We shall elsewhere discuss
whether Dara was an apostate, a heretic as
alleged by his enemies. It is enough to say here
that however he, like many more illustrious sons
of Islam, might differ from the Mullas in the
interpretation of the true spirit of the prophet's


creed, he lived and died a Musahnan. 1 It was
not Dara’s heresy but his lack of worldly wis-
dom and tact that drove most of the self-seeking
courtiers, both Muslim and Hindu, into the
ranks of his rival’s supporters.
Section 2.—Shah Jahan’s partiality for
Dara Shukoh
Shah Jahan’s partiality for Dara, a com-
mon theme with writers, native and foreign,
friendly and hostile to him—is often alleged as
one of the contributory causes of the rebellion
of the younger princes against their father.
The Crown Prince was looked upon by his
younger brothers as the drone of the family,
spoonfed, swaddled in robes of honour and led
about in state in the Emperor’s suite. During
the thirty years’ reign of Shah Jahan, Dara
had not been allowed to stay away from Court
even for fifteen months. Though he had scarce-
ly any achievement in arms to his credit, his
military command finally rose to 60,000 zat,
being greater than even the combined commands
of all the younger princes—and the same partia-
lity was shown towards the sons of Dara;
Sulaiman Shukoh was the absentee viceroy of
i Bernier, a hostile critic of Dara as he was, says “Bom a
Mahometan he continued to join in the exercise of that religion; but
although thus publicly professing his adherence to its faith, Dara
was in private a Gentile with Gentiles, and a Christian with Chris-
tians”. (Constable’s Bernier and his Travels, p. 6).


Kabul with a rank of 12 -hasari; even Sipihr
Shukoh’s rank (absentee governor of Thatta
with the rank 1 of 8-hazari), was higher than
that of the eldest sons of Shuja and Aurangzib.
Shah Jahan gave away state jewels, horses, and
elephants to Dara. He created more peers out
of Dara’s servants, and bestowed liberal patron-
age on Dara’s spiritual guides, literary satellites,
and musicians. 2
Much, in this way, has been said of Shah
Jahan’s partiality to Dara. But could the
1 Shuja and Aurangzib were both 20-hazaris; their eldest sons
Sultans Zainuddin and Muhammad being both 7-hazaris. For
mansab of Princes see Waris, 123 B.
2 Kavindracharya Saraswati gets Rs. 1,500 at Labor (7th Oct
1651; Waris) ; Mulla Shah Badakhshi, Pir of Dara and Jahanara,
given Rs. 5,000 on the completion of the fast of Ramzan (12th July,
1656; Waris 114 a); Chandrabhan Brahman honoured with the title
of Rai (gth April, 1656, 108 b) ; Dara’s poet, brother of his diwan
Mulla Salih, gets Rs. 1,000, “for having strung together with dili-
gence a collection of the names of God in Hindawi " (2nd May,
1655; Waris 98 b) ; musicians of Dara get Rs. 2,000 (31st March,
1655, Waris 98 a). As regards the ennobling of Dara’s servants,
Waris says “Among the servants of Shah Buland Iqbal Muhammad
Dara Shukoh, five persons had already been created Khans; these
were Bahadur Khan, deputy-nazim of the subah of Kabul (this
person was Izzat Khan who on the nth March, 1655, was given the
higher title (?) Bahadur Khan), Sayyid Salabat Khan (son of
Sayyid Hashim Barha), the deputy-nazim of the subah of Allahabad,
Mutatfiaid Khan, Diwan of the Prince, Muhammad Ali Khan, the
deputy-nazim of Thatta (Sindh), and Barqandaz Khan (the notori-
ous Jafar), the Chief of the Prince’s Artillery. Besides the above
mentioned persons, five more were on this day (14th July, 1656)
ennobled; Abdullah Beg Najumsani was given the title of Askar
Khan, Khwajah Muin, the city Magistrate of Labor, given the title
of Muin Khan, Sayyid Abdur Razzaq, the deputy-nazim of Multan,
made Izzat Khan, Shaikh Daud, faujdar (on behalf of Dara Shukoh)
of the country between Agra and Delhi —made Daud Khan, and
another official Nahar Tamburi made Nahar Khan” (Waris, 166 a).


impartiality of Shah Jahan avert bloodshed?
Was it likely that equal share in the paternal
affection as well as the patrimony would have
kept back the princes from a contest for the
throne? Shah Jahan followed the path which
providence seemed to have chalked out for him,
namely, to give the eldest-born his due, and by
a happy accident the Heir-Apparent happened
to be the most lovable of his children also.
Hence, the Emperor acted throughout as the
most loving and zealous friend and tutor of
Dara, for whom he seemed to hold the empire
of Hindustan as a sacred and inviolable trust.
Once this position of Shah Jahan is frankly
realized, the charge of his having shown parti-
ality to Dara at once falls to the ground. He
did everything in an honest attempt to do justice
to his destined heir, and impressing his younger
sons and the rest of the world with the idea that
it was as futile to envy and emulate Dara as to
contend against fate. But the trouble arose
because the younger princes, unable to reconcile
themselves to their lot, plotted to feed fat the
grudge they bore to their father and eldest
brother. Also, Dara’s incompetence encouraged
every attempt to wrest the sceptre from his
weak grasp.
Section 3. —Relations between Dara and
Aurangzib.
( The enmity between Dara and Aurangzib
since the very beginning of their careers was no


doubt one of the causes of the War of Succes-
sion. Aurangzib is represented by his bigoted
advocates as an apostle of forbearance, a miser-
able victim of the malicious intrigues of Dara,
whose jealousy and hatred of his younger
brothers were, it is alleged, only proportionate
to their ability. But it appears clear from
recorded history that it was Aurangzib who first
revealed the blackness of his heart by the open
display of spite and venom against Dara. We
shall briefly review the main incidents throwing
light on the relations between two brothers
before the out-break of the War of Succession.
1. On 28th May, 1633, two elephants
Sudhakar and Surat-sundar were set to fight on
the sandy plain of the Jamuna below the Agra
fort. Mounted on horses Dara, Shuja, and
Aurangzib pushed closer to the elephant
Sudhakar; the enraged animal after having put
his opponent to flight, turned upon the horse of
Aurangzib and flung it down. Young Aurang-
zib, a lad of fifteen, showed wonderful bravery
and resourcefulness, and succoured by Shuja
and Mirza Rajah Jai Singh, came out safe and
victorious from the encounter. On this occa-
sion, Aurangzib not only gave a “foretaste of
his lofty spirit and royal contempt for death”,
but also of his unbrotherly feelings by a mali-
cious fling at Dara; “If the fight had ended
fatally for me”, he said to his father, “it would
not have been a matter of shame The


shame lay in what my brothers did”. These
are the very words which a devoted partisan of
Aurangzib Hamiduddin Khan puts appropria-
tely in his master’s mouth. One cannot but
admire the courtesy and cleverness in this
insinuation, using a plural number while he
clearly meant a single person, namely, Dara.
Dara was at some distance on the other side of
the elephant, and “could not even if he had
wished it, have come to Aurangzib’s aid, as the
affair was over in a few minutes”. 1
2. As he was the first to strike the note
of suspicion and envy against Dara, so he was
the first to offend his father and merit public
censure, because “misled by the wicked coun-
sels of his foolish companions, he wanted to
take to the retired life of an ascetic, and had
also done some acts which the Emperor disap-
proved of” 2 (1644 A.D.). Hamiduddin clears
up this obscure statement by an anecdote,
suggesting that the prince’s disgrace was the
outcome of his open jealousy of Dara Shukoh.
“It is narrated that Dara invited his father and
three younger brothers to see his newly-built
mansion at Agra. It was summer, and the
party was taken to a cool underground room
bordering on the river, with only one door
leading into it. The others entered, but Aurang-
zib sat down in the door way. To all inquiries
1 History of Aurangzib, i and ii, p. to.
2 Pad., ii. 373.


of Shah Jahan about the reason of his strange
conduct he gave no reply. For this act of
disobedience he was forbidden the Court. After
spending seven months in disgrace, he told
Jahanara that as the room had only one entrance
he had feared lest Dara should close it and
murder his father and brothers to clear his own
way to the throne. To prevent any such attempt
Aurangzib had (he said) occupied the door as
a sentinel”. 1 Whatever might be the element
of truth in this anecdote, none can doubt that it
reveals Aurangzib as the future murderer of
his brothers and gaoler of his father, and had
Aurangzib got his father and brothers in such
a trap he would perhaps have done what did not
strike Dara’s mind at all.
3. During Aurangzib’s governorship of
Multan and Sindh (1648-1652) some unpleasant
things took place over the affair of Ismail Hut,
a predatory Baloch chieftain whose territories
were situated on the border land between Multan
and Upper Punjab. Ismail Hut was a protege
of Dara and claimed to be a subject of the
governor of Labor. He refused to wait upon
Aurangzib, the newly appointed governor of
Multan, producing a letter of Dara as a plea
( navishtah-i-Dada-bhai-ra dastawiz sahhta).
It was only a dispute of jurisdiction between
two viceroys of contiguous provinces—a dispute
which the Emperor justly decided in favour of
i History of Aurangzibe, i. and ii. p. 69.


Aurangzib. In 1652 the province of Multan
was added to the viceroyalty of Dara, who after
taking charge of that province wrote to the
Emperor that the servants of Aurangzib had
destroyed many buildings in the city of Multan
and burnt and sold away the timber and doors.
However, Aurangzib effectively replied to this
charge, referring in support of his defence to
a report of the news-writer of Multan, from
which it was apparent that after the departure
of Aurangzib’s servants, the people of the city,
took courage to commit such depradations.
Whatever might have been the faults of Aurang-
zib, he was certainly above such petty acts of
vandalism, and too severe a master to tolerate
such things in his officials. A more regrettable
incident happened when Aurangzib, on his way
to the Deccan, alighted in the neighbourhood of
Labor, Dara’s official in charge of Labor came
out of the city as if to welcome Aurangzib ; but
strangely enough he rode past the encampment
of the prince and re-entered the city without
visiting him. This was a gratuitous insult
tending ,to lower the prince in the public eye.
But Aurangzib certainly did injustice to Dara
in suspecting that Dara’s servant had insulted
him at his master’s bidding; because Dara was
at this time staying with the Emperor at Kabul.
This awkward behaviour of Dara’s servant was
apparently due to indecision whether he could
go to welcome the prince as required by official
etiquette without rousing the suspicion of his


own master. Nevertheless, the mischief was
done; and the bad manners of the servant
certainly brought odium upon the master.
4. No two men perhaps differed more
widely in personal character, tastes, and religi-
ous outlook than did Dara Shukoh and Aurang-
zib. They somewhat resembled in their charac-
ter and in the vehemence of their hatred towards
one another their English contemporaries, the
cavaliers and the roundheads. Dara’s religious
motto was that of Akbar, namely, “Peace with
all” ( Sulh-i-kul ) and as such, we may say, his
religion was “the parent of arts and letters, of
wholesome knowledge, of innocent pleasures”,
—in short, a religion of the cultured salon;
whereas the creed of Aurangzib partook of the
austere gloom of the guardroom of God’s
soldiers, tolerating nothing useless from a rough
soldier’s point of view, discarding every
pleasure soft and alluring, sparing neither
themselves nor others in a fight for God’s sake.
Dara, though much given to study and spiritual
contemplation, seemed to the outer equally
devoted to pleasure, a prince profuse, gay and
brilliant, and above all with a soft heart ready
to do any gracious service for a little flattery.
Aurangzib was essentially “a man without
music”, always cold, sedate, grave, and demure,
with religious gloom upon a pale and sickly
countenance and like Macaulay’s Italian type
of the tyrant, he was “of sober diet, as constant


at prayers as a priest, and as heedless of oaths
as an atheist”.
Dara called in derision his younger brother,
a prayer-loving Mulla (namasi); and taunted
him as a hypocrite, while the latter returned
the compliment by calling him a Kafir, a Mulhid,
(polytheist). Some orthodox apologists of
Aurangzib assert that by using these epithets for
Dara, Aurangzib only echoed the sentiment of
the age, the sentiment of the majority of the 17th
century Musalmans of Hindustan. In their
public lives Dara was looked upon as the patron
of the Hindus, and Aurangzib as the champion
of Islam. Dara’s first great public act seems to
have been the use of his influence in securing the
remission of the pilgrim-tax in Allahabad and
Benares. We are told that a Hindu deputation
headed by the famous Maratha scholar
Kavindracharya 1 Saraswati, waited on the
Emperor and pleaded their case so eloquently as
to draw tears from the eyes of Dara and Shah
Jahan. With the progress of his studies in
Hindu philosophy and his association with
Hindu sannyasis and yogis his intellectual
sympathy for Hindus developed into active
interest for their welfare.
Aurangzib showed himself a militant
missionary of Islam with genuine contempt for
i On this occasion the Emperor conferred upon the eloquent
and versatile scholar the title of Sarvavidya-nidhan )
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series no. XVII, p. iv—v.


other faiths, which grew in intensity with his
growing years. During his governorship of
Gujrat, he destroyed the ancient temple of
Chintaman and vented his fanatical fury by
killing cows there. He also forbade the export
of saltpetre from Gujrat to Europe, because the
young and imaginative Pan-Islamist was afraid
lest the Christians should use it as ammunition
of war for killing devout Sunnis like the
Ottoman Turks. However, these actions of
Aurangzib were not approved by Shah Jahan;
the temple, it is reported, was afterwards
restored to the Hindus. During his second
viceroyalty of the Deccan he destroyed the
temple of Khande Rai on the Satara Hill
(near Aurangabad).
In his anxiety to back his friends,
Aurangzib did not hesitate to use his influence
at court to shut the road of justice to Hindus
seeking redress of their grievances. The fol-
lowing is a typical example of his early anti-
Hindu bias, as revealed in a letter written to
his ally Sadullah Khan: ! ‘A Brahmin named
Chhabila, the qanungo of property-tax of the
city of Bihar had uttered improper words with
reference to the holy Prophet. After investi-
gation and verification of the charge by order
of the Emperor, Zulfiqar Khan and other
officers of the place had sent him to hell by
beheading him, as was required by justice, and
purified the place defiled for a long time by his


impure existence. I hope you are aware of
these facts.
Now Mulla Mohan, 1 whose relations with
me are not unknown to you—has written to me
that the brothers of that accursed misbeliever
out of obstinacy and bigotry ( taasuh ) have
complained at the imperial court against
Shaikh Muhammad Maula ( Maalit ), Mir Adil,
a brother’s son of the above mentioned, i.e.,
Mulla Mohan, and Abdul Maani, the Mufti of
the province of Bihar. So I write this to
remind you of this affair. As it is proper for
and obligatory upon all Muslims to do their
utmost to assert the religion of the Prophet,
and it is the duty of Kings and nobles to protect
the theologians {Ulema) of Islam in enforcing
the injunctions of the holy Law, you should
exert yourself more than your peers to close
the door of complaint of this wretched tribe to
the Emperor’s feet and to take care of the
letters {i.e., explanations) of the guardians of
the Faith” {Adab. 101 a). The whole affair
looks suspicious; because had there been no
irregularities, no genuine grievance, the Hindus
would not have courted danger by carrying
their appeal to an orthodox Muslim Emperor
i “His real name is Muhiuddin; bom in Bihar, he committed
the Quran to memory at the age of nine entered the service of
the Emperor Shah Jahan and was appointed tutor to Prince
Aurangzib.... became a disciple of Shah Haidar, grandson of
Shaikh Wajuddin Gujrati... .resigned his service and returned to
Bihar. He died in 1068 A.H. (1658 A.D.) at the age of 84 years
(Ghulam Ali Azad’s Maasirul-Kiram, p. 43).


against the powerful local Muslim function-
aries who were not known for their qualities
of mercy and forbearance. Aurangzib inter-
fered not for seeing justice done unto Muslims
but to close the very door of justice to the
Hindus. Why did the Ulemas shrink from
standing a scrutiny of their judgment even by
Shah Jahan who had the destruction of several
big temples and the forcible conversion of
some Hindus to his credit? Nevertheless,
Aurangzib made less enemies among the
Hindus than I)ara did among the bigoted Mus-
lims, because Aurangzib’s heart unlike Dara’s,
was never on his lips nor very often on the
point of his pen.
Section 4.—Coalition of Shuja, Aurangzib,
and Murad.
The three younger princes, drawn together
by common enmity to Dara, had formed an
informal defensive alliance that grew stronger
with the growing partiality of Shah Jahan for
his eldest son. Aurangzib was the soul of this
confederacy and the connecting link between
Shuja and Murad. In December, 1652 Shuja
and Aurangzib, contrary to their father’s wish,
had met at Agra and each of them had enter-
tained the other for three days, and the alliance
was further cemented by the betrothal of
Gulrukh Banu, a daughter of Shuja to Auran-
gzib’s eldest son Sultan Muhammad. Murad


Bakhsh saw Aurangzib at Do-rahah during the
latter’s progress through the province of Malwa
(23rd December, 1652). Since then a brisk
correspondence passed among the confederates
through Aurangzib’s province and with Aurang-
zib as a sort of secretary to the coalition,
Shah Jahan never took his youngest son Murad
Bakhsh 1 very seriously; but he greatly suspect-
ed the matrimonial alliance between Shuja and
Aurangzib. The bitter correspondence between
Shah Jahan and Aurangzib over Sultan
Muhammad’s betrothal, leaves no doubt in our
mind that Shah Jahan gave to Aurangzib as
clear and emphatic a hint as decency would
permit that he would be glad to see the betro-
thal set aside. Shah Jahan also tried to win
over Shuja by taking him into his favour and
confidence against Aurangzib. He complained
to Shuja of Aurangzib’s administration as a
failure in the South, and offered him the
viceroyalty of the five Deccan subahs if the
prince would like to have them in exchange of
Bengal and Orissa.
Towards the middle of December, 1657
Murad wrote to Aurangzib a letter which was
i Shah Jahan is once said to have remarked that Murad Bakhsh
cared only for “the nourishment of his body” (tanparwari). This
was however not the whole truth about Murad Bakhsh. He was in
character a typical central Asian Turk somewhat deficient in judg-
ment and address, but endowed with great animal courage and
bodily strength, always bragging, as man kase Bahadur nist; i.e.,
there is none braver than I. Murad Bakhsh is regarded as “the
black sheep” of the royal family. He proved a failure in every
work entrusted to him.


supplemented by an oral message of a more
secret nature delivered by his trusty agent. By
a strange coincidence Aurangzib also about the
same time had written to Murad a letter of
similar purport supplemented by a similar oral
message sent through a confidential messenger.
About a month before (19th October, 1657),
Murad had despatched another letter to Shuja
through Aurangzib’s province. The object of
this secret correspondence was to concert
measures for meeting the critical situation
created by the illness of their father and the
alleged usurpation of Dara. Thus, through the
initiative of the impatient Murad their defen-
sive alliance was turned into an offensive one
ostensibly against their usurping eldest brother.
The first act of the confederates was to establish
a chain of postal relays linking Ahmadabad,
Aurangabad, and Rajmahal for the rapid
transmission of news. As soon as the news of
Shah Jahan’s illness reached Aurangzib, he
took most vigorous measures to cut off com-
munications between Dara and his allies and
partisans south of the river Narmada. While
Aurangzib successfully kept the imperial court
quite in the dark about his designs and move-
ments, he received reports of the state secrets
at the capital and the measures of Dara from
his sister Raushanara Begam. Even Gauhara-
ra, the youngest child of Shah Jahan, had her
ambitions, and she kept Murad regularly
informed of the activities at Court. Besides,


Aurangzib had posted in every part of Northern
India numerous secret agents who smuggled
urgent news across the Narmada to him.
Apart from a general agreement among
the three younger princes, there was a closer
pact between Aurangzib and Murad who looked
upon Shuja as their prospective enemy. As
early as 23rd October, 1657, Aurangzib supplied
to Murad the key to a cypher to be used in
their future correspondence. While Aurangzib
openly condemned Dara as a heretic and an
idol-worshipper, he secretly denounced Shuja
as a rafizy or heretical Shia to his foolish collea-
gue Murad, whom he flattered as most worthy
of rule and for whose sake he professed to be
exerting himself. But in order to deserve the
throne Murad, notorious for his irreligion, was
advised to pose in public as an orthodox Sunni
and a champion of Islam. “Indeed so wholly
did Murad enter into Aurangzib’s policy of
throwing a religious cloak on their war of
personal ambition, that his letters assume a
sanctimonious tone calculated to raise a smile
Taking a hint from Aurangzib, the
gay reveller of Ahmadabad poses as the cham-
pion of Islam; he threatens Dara with extirpa-
tion as the enemy of the holy faith; he refers
to his eldest brother as the Mulhid —the very
term used by Aurangzib and his court-histo-
rians” (History of Aurangzib, i., p. 302).
However, Murad had some suspicion
whether his Pir (guide) in politics was not
11


acting towards him on the very same formula
of “dissimulation” against God and man. He
pressed Aurangzib to send him a solemn deed
of agreement stating explicitly the terms of
the partnership between them. Just before
their march to Northern India Aurangzib, in
order to lull the rising suspicion of Murad,
sent him an ahad-nama to the effect that after
the overthrow of the infidel Dara, Murad should
get the provinces of the Punjab, Sindh,
Kashmir, and Afghanistan. This documeilt
concluded with the pious words “ I
shall without the least delay give you leave to
go to this territory. As to the truth of this
desire, I take God, and the Prophet as my
witnesses:”
Section 5. —The Illness of Shah Jahan
(September, 1657).
Shah Jahan, whose health had shown signs
of a decline during the summer of 1657, fell
seriously ill on 6th September, and for seven
days nobody except Dara and a few high
officials in his confidence had access to the ailing
Emperor. He was given up for dead by all
but a few well-wishers of Dara; many persons
refused to believe that he was still alive even
when on 14th September he showed his face
through the window of Ms bed-chamber to the
expectant crowd below. "To reassure the people,
a darbar was held, and Dara who “had nursed


his father to the utmost limit of possibility
(which was the best form of the worship of
God),” was rewarded with an increase of
mansah by 10,000 zat, 10,000 horse do aspah
sehaspaK , in all 50,000 zat, and an inam of two
and a half lakhs of rupees. Calling to his pre-
sence some confidential courtiers and the chief
officers of the State, he made his last will before
them, and ordered them to obey Dara henceforth
“as their sovereign in every thing, at all times,
and in every place” (Kambuh 8 b). On 18th
October the Emperor left for Agra to recoup his
health. Meanwhile, mischief had done its
work. The yoimger princes, who were at heart
disappointed at the news of their father’s re-
covery, refused in public to believe the incon-
venient truth that Shah Jahan was really alive.
They suspected every despatch from Court to
be either a forgery or one written under the
pressure of Dara. They pretended to give
credence to the malicious rumour that the lean
figure that now appeared daily at the palace
window to receive the salute of the people was
only an old eimuch dressed in the imperial
robes whom the usurper Dara was passing for
the deceased Shah Jahan. They began a false
and most pernicious propaganda against Dara, 1
i The worst and most absurd allegations against Dara may be
read in the pages of Bernier (Constable’s Bernier and his travels,
p. 25-26). His source of information being his Agha, Danishmand
Khan, a notorious partisan of Aurangzib, the account given by him
is only a bundle of falsehoods and malicious libels which does not
deserve even a refutation.


who, they alleged, had usurped supreme power
and made their father a helpless prisoner.
They would not even be dissuaded by the letters
of Jahanara, who tried to bring about a peace
among her brothers. As they were prepared
for war and Dara was not, they were unwilling
to let slip this opportunity of crushing their
hated rival once for all. The unhappy Emperor
saw with consternation the dreaded deluge
coming not after him but even before his eyes
were closed.


CHAPTER IX.
THE STRUGGLE FOR THE THRONE
Section I.' Sulaiman S hunch's campaign
against Shah Shuja (December, 1657
May, 1658)
Prince Muhammad Shuja, only thirteen
months younger than Dara Shukoh, was a faith-
ful copy of his loving grandfather Jahangir
with whom he had lived till the age of twelve.
Sharp in intellect, indolent by nature, and
voluptuous in habits, Shuja was every inch a
prince in outward and inward graces, and with
all his faults an eminently lovable character like
his grandfather. Among the sons of Shall
Jahan he perhaps represents, in mental and
moral equilibrium as well as in tastes and
predilections, a happy mean between Dara and
Aurangzib,—being a skilful soldier and level-
headed politician with that fine touch of human
sympathy which Aurangzib lacked so sadly.
But his talents and abilities shone only in
flashes, while his weaknesses clung about him
more steadfastly. Shuja’s love of ease and
enjoyment of the refined pleasures of life had
no doubt marred his fine capabilities to some
extent. But no one can take seriously on the
authority of Aurangzib the alleged remark of


Shah Jahan that Shuja possessed no other
quality than enjoying life (juz sayarchashmi
sifate na-darad). 1 Bengal, the nursery of
Shuja’s ambition, became also the tomb of his
energy. During his seventeen years of uniter-
rupted viceroyalty there, Shah Shuja and his
associates had almost been recast both in body
and mind in the softer mould of Bengal, and
their swords had grown rusty in their scabbards
for want of enterprise and action in that land
of peace, plenty, and pestilence. There the
Prince had drunk the cup of pleasure almost to
its lees and as a result thereof “small things like
the Chameli flower escaped his eyes” even at
fortyone. 2
Shuja was staying in his provincial capital,
Rajmahal, when the news of Shah Jahan’s
illness, magnified by rumour into actual death,
reached him. He at once crowned himself, and
as his preparations had been almost completed
beforehand, the Bengal troops soon entered the
i Letter of Aurangzib, F 38 a.
2. Bernier’s estimate of Shuja’s character is substantially
accurate: —“Sultan Shujah... .resembled in many characteristic traits
of character his brother Dara; but he was more discreet, firmer
of purpose, and excelled him in conduct and address. He was
sufficiently dexterous in the management of an intrigue, and by means
of repeated largesses bestowed secretly, he knew how to acquire the
friendship of great Omrahs....such as Jessomseingue (Sic. not
Jaswant Singh but Mirza Rajah Jai Singh). He was, nevertheless,
too much a slave to his pleasures; and once surrounded by his
women, who were exceedingly numerous, he would pass whole days
and nights in dancing, singing, and drinking wine”. (Bernier’s
Travels, Constable, p. 8).


province of Bihar, co-ordinating their march
with their war-boats sailing up the river Ganges.
Pressed hard by Dara, the old Emperor very
reluctantly consented to send an army against
Shuja, as he laboured under the delusion that
his farmans (mandates) would be enough to
overawe the rebellious princes. However, in the
last week of December, 1657, Prince Sulaiman
Shukoh was appointed to the command of an
army 22,000 strong, with Mirza Rajah Jai Singh
as his guardian and chief adviser. The
Emperor looked upon this expedition as little
more than a holiday parade for Sulaiman; but
the heart of Dara had its own misgivings; he
deputed all his most faithful and able household
officers to serve under his son on this distant
campaign—an ill-advised act of impulse with-
out foresight.
In high spirits Sulaiman Shukoh pushed
towards Benares by continued marches, urging
his old guardian to join him without delay. l
But the enthusiasm of the officers of the
imperial contingent was not so keen, because
the Emperor had at the time of their departure
appealed to them to avert bloodshed if Shuja
could be persuaded to retire peacefully from
Bihar. Dara was eager for swift and decisive
action, but that was far from the wish of the
Emperor who trembled for the life of his rebel-
i Jaipur Records, Vide Pers. text, p. 53.


lions son. Thus the soldiers who went to fight
did not know whom to please, and therefore
they could have no singleness of purpose. A
cautious politician, Mirza Rajah suspected that
Dara might possibly in the Emperor’s name
but without his approval and behind his back,
dictate to the officers serving against Shuja a
line of action which was likely to compromise
their position seriously with their master. So,
he left at court his son Ram Singh as his vakil,
who should directly report to him the Emperor’s
instructions. Soon after the march of the
imperial army Shuja wrote to his father and
eldest brother offering hollow excuses for his
action, and asking for the grant of Mungir,
which formed a part of Dara’s province of
Bihar. Dara was “prepared to give away to
brother Shuja the fort of Mungir, provided
that he agreed to dismantle the fortress and
that he and his sons did not reside there.” 1
Inspite of this reasonable offer of the Crown
Prince, and the Emperor’s affectionate pardon
of. his faults, Shuja continued his hostile
advance and invaded the province of Allahabad.
Shah Jahan was now* sadly disillusioned about
the real motives of his younger sons who, he
now found, were in league to crush Dara, and
bent on fighting for the throne before his very
eyes. The wrath of the old Emperor flared up,
and his embittered feelings were communicated
i Jaipur Records, vide Pers. text, p. 54.


to Mirza Rajah in a letter in which Dara writes,
“His Majesty desires very much that the
severed head of that unmannerly ( be-adab )
wretch should be brought to him v We
might totally disbelieve it as an unscrupulous
lie invented by Dara had it not been said in
public to Ram Singh, as we learn from a subse-
quent letter, —“With his own holy tongue the
Emperor said to Kunwar Ram Singh;—‘Write
to your father that I want the head of that
unmannerly and worthless wretch I
hope the Kunwar has certainly written these
words to you.” l
Dara exhausted his store of complimentary
phrases and powers of persuasion supplemented
by the happy auguries of dreams, revelations,
and astrological forecasts in humouring Mirza
Rajah Jai Singh. “With the tongue of divine
inspiration”, writes the Prince, “His Majesty
said that as Rajah Man Singh had conquered
and crushed Mirza Hakim, God willing, Mirza
Rajah will crush this unmannerly and luckless
wretch.” 2 The very next day Dara communi-
cates to him more favourable predictions of the
Rajah’s success. “Through vision (sufistic),
and from books of astrology ( Kuth-i-najum ) I
learn what by divine guidance I firmly believe
to be true, that this great victory will be achiev-
' i Jaipur Records, vide Pers. text, pp. 66, 71.
2 Vide Pers. text, p. 64.


ed by that worthiest of the worthy.” 1 Never-
theless, Mirza Rajah remained as stiff and
coldly formal as before, and his conduct even
gave rise to suspicions which were reported to
Court by Sulaiman Shukoh. But the Emperor
and the Crown Prince took Sulaiman to task,
and as a proof of their own confidence in the
Rajah, Bara wrote to him, “His Majesty
suspects that this must have been written out
of enmity. Therefore my son has been directed
to have in future the despatchs of news from
that quarter written by the great Rajah himself,
so that His Majesty could accept them as
accurate and authentic.” 2
Prince Sulaiman Shukoh, a brilliant and
energetic youth of 22, though studiously courte-
ous to his guardian, could not be expected to
cling to the apronstrings of Jai Singh. He
asserted his position as commander-in-chief of
the expeditionary forces and by his dash and
optimism made up for the lack of enthusiasm
and sincerity on the part of his colleagues. By
a forced march of two weeks he reached
Benares with his division and halted in that
city for three days. A bridge of boats was
constructed over the Ganges in twenty-four
hours, and immediately afterwards the prince
crossed over to the other side. There had been
a race for Benares between the uncle and the
1 Vide Pers. text, p. 137.
2 Vide Pers. text, p. 61.


nephew, because the progress of the imperial
army would have been brought to an indefinite
halt at Benares if Shuja could hold in strength
the other bank of the Ganges along which ran
the great military road via Chunar to Patna
and Rajmahal. Sulaiman encamped for a week
at Bahadurpur, a village two miles east of the
right-bank head of the Railway Bridge at
Benares, Here the brave and faithful Ruhela
chief Dilir Khan, the faujdar of Qanauj, joined
the imperial army and infused a new vigour
and confidence among the rank and file.
Meanwhile, Shuja with his army and fleet
had reached the neighbourhood (25th January,
1658), and encamped on a well-chosen site
inaccessible on account of numerous nullas and
thick jungles in front and the river Gauges in
the rear, which was commanded by his war-
boats. The problems that now confronted the
imperialists was to force a pitched battle on
the rebel army which could not be starved out
of their strong position as they procured their
supplies by river. Sulaiman became impatient
as urgent despatches came from Court to finish
the war on that front. Mirza Rajah had not
matured any definite plan of action and could
see no other alternative than standing on the
defensive. A local Rajput chief named Goklat
(Gokul?) Ujjaniya [i.e., of the Dumraon
Zamindar family] was tempted with the offer
of a mansab to employ his men in cutting the


jungle and stopping the supplies of the enemy
—a tedious and futile effort which amounted
to a surrender to Shuja’s waiting game. It is,
however, interesting to read that even after the
disastrous Qandahar campaign the Crown
Prince had not become more modest in the
estimate of his own ability as a soldier, and
offered at this juncture to teach his own trade
to Mirza Rajah to whom he wrote, 1 “If you
have not decided upon anything, make it clear
to me so that from this place I may suggest
some plan and send instructions as to what
should be done. At present, you should urge
Gokul Ujjaniya, the zamindar of that place, to
send his foot-men and soldiers in all directions,
and close the roads of supplies and grain to the
enemy, and a similar force should be sent over
to the Benares side for carrying on an irregular
fight, and closing the enemy’s roads for the
supply of foodstuff ” The next letter of
Dara conveyed positive orders of immediate
action and an attack on the enemy’s jungle-clad
encampment by placing the artillery in front.
Well-provisioned by their boats and im-
mune from attack, the troops of Shuja had
been lulled into a careless repose in their camp
after a few days of alarm and vigilance. Inac-
cessible to man and mosquito alike, Shah Shuja
was in the habit of sleeping till noon (do-
i Vide Pers. text, p. 6g.


pahar). His officers also, who had not perhaps
forgotten to bring their own mosquito-curtains
(pashsha-khana), slept as comfortably if not as
late as their master. There were the usual
military pickets and night watches, but no
officers to go the rounds to keep the sentries
alert. Shuja’s patrols, strangers to alarms,
and unaccustomed to the cold of the chilly mid-
winter nights of Upper India, could hardly be
expected to be dutiful and vigilant. This could
not long be concealed from the spies of Sulai-
man.
During the night preceding 14th February,
1658 the imperial army was ordered to be ready
for striking their tents and marching to a new
site chosen for encampment. Early in the
morning, Sulaiman rode out at the head of a
choice body of mail-clad horsemen, and sudden-
ly fell upon the sleeping troops of Shuja. The
half-awakened Bengal soldiers ran for life in
all directions. Shuja hastily mounted an
elephant and began to shout for his captains
and men, most of whom had already fled.
Shuja was no coward in the face of danger, but
the odds were heavy against him. Prince
Sulaiman and Dilir Khan Ruhela were the first
to engage Shuja, and soon afterwards Mirza
Rajah Jai Singh, and Rajah Anirudh Gaur
closed upon the elephant of Shuja which had
been slashed in the leg by an intrepid imperia-
list. The plucky mahut drove the animal furi


ously in the direction of the fleet and thus
saved Shuja imminent capture. The
victory of the imperialists was complete; the
rest being butchery and loot. The fleet, with-
out heeding the cries of their own fugitives,
glided away downstream leaving their helpless
brethren between the devil and the deep water.
A booty worth two krores of rupees fell into
the hands of the imperialists.
Two nobles, Fazil Khan and Fakhir Khan
brought this happy news to the Emperor on
Saturday, 20th March, 1658, and very next
day a gazette of promotions and rewards to the
victors of Bahadurpur was issued. Though the
victory was due to the bold initiative of
Sulaiman Shukoh, the Emperor and the
Crown Prince judiciously ascribed the whole
credit of it to Mirza Rajah who was now created
a 7-hazari. In a letter beginning with
the Yedantic formula “Satchidanand” Bara
in his habitual vein of hyperbole writes, “You
have achieved what even Rajah Man Singh
could not have accomplished "Within
the last 100 years such a victory was vouchsafed
to none else”. 1 But dark suspicions still linger-
ed in the heart of the Rajah, who complained
in a letter that the Emperor had given his ears
to a malicious accusation of some person to the
effect that the Rajah had wilfully let Shah
Shuja escape from the field of battle. The
i Letter No. 17, Pers. text, p. 77.


Emperor writes, “ None intimated any
such thing to me. My confidence in the loyalty
of the Rajah is so great that nobody can have
the hardihood to say any such thing to me.... ” r
The circumstances of the hair-breadth
escape of Shuja lent support to the suspicion
of collusion on the part of Mirza Rajah Jai
Singh, who was afterwards known to have acted
on the proverbial dictum of hunting with the
hounds and running with the hare. At any
rate the fruits of the victory achieved by the
bold initiative and exertion of Sulaiman Shukoh
were lost through the strange dilatoriness of
Jai Singh. Shuja reached Patna in five days,
while Mirza Rajah took twenty days to arrive
there. Sulaiman could not move alone as the
country was unknown and long in the occupa-
tion of the enemy. Shah Jahan justly made a
reflection on the conduct of the Rajah in a
farman, saying that the imperial army ought
to have arrived at Patna in ten days, and had
the Rajah done so, Shuja could not have carried
i Farman, dated 4, Farawardin, vide Pers. text, p. 85-86. That
there was a widely circulated story of Jai Singh’s treachery is borne
out by the following words of Bernier: “But all the efforts of Jai
Singh to prevent a battle (at Bahadurpur) proved abortive It is
certain that if Jai Singh and his bosom friend Delil Khan (Dilir
Khan), a Pathan and an excellent soldier, had not purposely held
back, the rout of the enemy would have been complete, and their
commander probably made prisoner. But the Rajah was too prudent
to lay his hands on a Prince of the 8100d....he acted conformably
to the Mogul’s intentions when he afforded Sultan Shuja means of
escape”. (Constable’s Bernier, p. 35-36) Bernier was not likely to
know that Shah Jahan had changed his mind, and this connivance
on the part of the Rajah was a piece of treachery.


off Ms wealth from that city and made himself
secure in Mungir. l Shuja made a stand at
Surajgarh, 15 miles south-west of Mungir, till
the end of March, 1658. The imperial army
turned his flank by a tardy march through the
wooded broken ground via Jitpur, occupied city
of Surajgarh evacuated by the enemy. Further,
east their progress was arrested by a newly
built wall across the narrow plain between the
Kharagpur hills and the river Ganges. Had
Jai Singh shown half as much zeal and general-
sMp in the pursuit of Shuja, as he afterwards
displayed in chasing the fugitive Dara through
the Rann of Cutch, the issue of the War of
Succession would have been totally reversed.
While Mirza Rajah, in spite of most urgent
appeals to finish the war with Shuja, was sitting
down idly before the fortifications of Mungir,
'Aurangzib and Murad had united their troops
and inflicted a disastrous defeat on Maharajah
Jaswant Singh at Dharraat (15th April, 1658).
When the news of this defeat reached the
imperial army at Surajgarh, Mirza Rajah was
jubilant at the overthrow of his hated rival
jaswant, and perhaps congratulated himself
on being fully revenged on him and his friend
and patron, Dara Shukoh. The Emperor wrote
to him to conclude peace with Shuja at once,
and come back to Agra with all the Rajputs,
leaving in Bihar Sulaiman Shukoh with the
household troops of Dara. The Rajah wasted
I Ibid., p, 86.


several days in holding leisurely peace-talk
and entertaining Mirza Jan Beg, the plenipo-
tentiary of Shuja with princely hospitality. A
peace of status quo was concluded and the
treaty was formally signed on May 7, 1658.
At last, the army of Sulaiman Shukoh
began their westward march, and if Mirza Rajah
and Sulaiman had ridden hard with light kit
only—as they were repeatedly asked to do—
they could have yet reached Agra in time to take
part in the battle of Samugarh, fought on May
29, 1658. But Jai Singh, who was a traitor at
heart, would not exert himself to save Bara, and
Sulaiman, hampered by confusion and disloyal-
ty in his camp, could not leave Mirza Rajah
behind without risking the dissolution of his
whole army. Sulaiman, who was still marching
several stages ahead, arrived only as far as
Korah, 105 miles west of Allahabad, when the
fatal news of Samugarh greeted the ears of the
ill-disguised traitors. Mirza Rajah now threw
off his mask and prepared to march away to
Agra leaving poor Sulaiman to his fate. This
desertion of the Kachchwah Chief might have
been excused as an act prompted by the instinct
of self-preservation, had he not exerted himself
shamefully to seduce others also from loyalty to
the unfortunate Bara. Bilir Khan Ruhela was
prepared to accompany Sulaiman Shukoh if the
prince would go to Shahjahanpur and trust
himself to the loyalty of the Ruhelas. Sulaiman
12


accordingly ordered retreat to Allahabad on
June 4,1658. But meanwhile Mirza Rajah, now
an active partisan of Aurangzib, succeeded in
convincing the Ruhela chief of the folly of
staking his all for a sentiment, and exhorted
him to quit the sinking wreck. With this act
of Rajah Jai Singh opens that tale of treachery
which culminated in the betrayal of Dara by
Malik Jiwan. The fate of Sulaiman we shall
record elsewhere.
Section 2. The Battles of Dharmat and
Samugarh
Dara had built high hopes on Maharajah
Jaswant Singh, who, along with Qasim Khan
had been sent to Malwa in the last week of
December, 1657 with instructions to hold the
line of the Narmada against Aurangzib, and
prevent him from forming a junction with the
army of Murad. But the Rathor chief was only
a novice in the art of war in comparison with
Aurangzib, who to the utter dismay of the im-
perialists, formed a junction with Murad’s army
on the 14th April in the neighbourhood of
Dharmat, only 14 miles southwest of Ujjain.
Next morning a four hours’ fight took place at
Dharmat (15th April, 1658) in which Jaswant’s
inexperience, lukewarmness of the Sisodia and
Bundela contingents, and the treachery of the
Muslim division of the imperial army under
Qasim Khan gave a decisive victory to


Aurangzib and Murad. Only with a remnant
of his Rathor clansmen Jaswant fled to Jodhpur,
where the crestfallen knight is said to have been
refused reception by his proud and sensitive
Sisodia queen. Dharmat meant a double
catastrophe for Dara, who apart from losing a
battle in Malwa, lost along with it all the fruits
of Sulaiman Shukoh’s victory over Shuja at
Bahadurpur. His enemies raised their heads
on all sides, traitors threw off their masks, and
even friends began to waver in his cause.
Battle of Samugarh, 29 May, 1658.
The disastrous news of the battle of
Dharmat reached Dara on 25th April at
Balochpur on his journey to Delhi with the
Emperor. The court immediately turned back
to Agra, and preparations were made in haste
to meet the crisis. The Emperor threw open the
imperial treasury and arsenal to Dara for equip-
ping another army to retrieve his fortune. Dara
now sorely felt the absence of his ablest and
most trustworthy household officers whom he
had deputed to serve under his son Sulaiman.
But Shah Jahan was in a distracted state of
mind, now advising Dara on military affairs and
writing to Jai Singh to come with all haste, now
listening to sinister counsels of peace suggested
by the treacherous nobles in Aurangzib’s inter-
ests. The Emperor still hoped to turn back
Aurangzib and Murad by diplomatic messages;


so he urged Dara to avoid war. Dara was per-
fectly right in holding that under the present
circumstances' there was no alternative to a
vigorous prosecution of war. But his passions
often got the better of his discretion, and he is
said to have taunted those who advised peace as
faithless cowards, and added sting to the insult
by telling them that Rao Satarsal Hada and
Barqandaz Khan (the notorious Jafar) would
drive the rebels back like hares to the south of
the Narmada.
The plan of campaign outlined by Dara was
to hold in strength the line of the Chambal, pre-
vent Aurangzib from crossing at any of the fords
of that river, and put off any decisive action till
the arrival of Sulaiman Shukoh’s army from
Bihar. Accordingly, he sent the advanced
division of his army to Dholpur with instruc-
tions to guard the ferries of the Chambal and
erect batteries and earthworks at strategic
points. If he had organised a single flying
column under some dashing and active officer
like Rustam Khan Bahadur or Rao Satarsal
Hada to watch the movements of the enemy
along the whole line of the Chambal, no plan of
campaign would have been more effective in
checking the progress of Aurangzib.
The Crown Prince took leave of the
Emperor on 18th May to start for Dholpur with
the main army. It was a most pathetic scene
as the old Emperor for the last time bestowed


gift and blessings on his beloved son with tremb-
ling hands, and held him long and tightly to his
bosom in a parting embrace. At last Shah
Jahan lifted his arms and turning towards
Mecca prayed for Dara’s victory and recited the
fatiha (the prescribed Quranic verses of
victory). Nor was the orthodox Hindu tradi-
tion omitted. Dara was ordered to mount at the
very steps of the Diwan-i-Am, a chariot presen-
ted to him for this occasion. With banners
unfurled and drums beating, and surrounded by
a most magnificent retinue, the Crown Prince
marched out of the Palace quadrangle in regal
pomp and pride of war. The lonely Emperor
stood leaning upon his mace ( asa ) and gazed
on the procession straining his dim eyes to catch
the last glimpse of his most beloved son.
Dara reached Dholpur on 22nd May and
busied himself in strengthening the defences at
the femes of the Chambal. But Aurangzib turn-
ed the rear of Dara by fording the river 40 miles
east of Dholpur on the 23rd May. Consequently
Dara next fell back towards Agra and encamped
at Samugarh, 8 miles east of that city. On 28th
May when the weary and straggling advanced
detachments of Aurangzib’s army were sighted
off Samugarh, Dara in nervous haste led out his
troops in full array of battle, but strangely
enough, without delivering an immediate attack
on the worn-out troops of the enemy, he chose
to halt and wait for Aurangzib to ‘take the


offensive. In the evening he in a defeatist
mood returned to the camp after several hours*
meaningless manoeuvre under a terrible sun
which completely wore out his fresh and hearty
troops.
The effective strength of the army of Dara
was about 60,000 men of all arms, and that of
the two rebel princes was no less than 50,000.
But Dara could hardly count upon the loyalty
and devoted service of even half of his army,
because the nobles of the Foreign party, i.e.
Iranis and Turanis, in the imperial army were
extremely jealous of the nobles of the Hindus-
tani party, Rajputs, Sayyids of Barha and other
Hindustan-born Musalmans patronised by Dara.
The state of affairs in the camp of Dara at Samu-
garh was not unlike the condition of things in
his siege-camp beneath the walls of Qandahar.
Above all, the character and past record of Dara
as a soldier were not calculated to inspire am r
confidence among his followers. In contrast
with Aurangzib he appeared in a very unfavour-
able light. Aurangzib had “aged in war”, and
breathed in life nothing but war and intrigue;
while Dara had seen very little of actual fighting
and never handled large bodies of men in the
face of an enemy. Brought up in the soft
environments of the court, nurtured in
mysticism and philosophy, given to contempla-
tion and literary pursuits, Dara was a complete
contrast to Aurangzib as a soldier and man of
action. '


Early in the morning of Saturday, 29th
May, Bara Shukoh arrayed his army on the
loose sandy plain of Samugarh in the conven-
tional Mughal style. His artillery under the
command of Barqandaz Khan (.Tatar) and
Manucei and other European officers, was placed
in a row in front of the whole line, and behind
the artillery was posted a strong body of infan-
try armed with matchlocks. Next came 500
camels carrying swivelguns, and these were
followed by several hundred furious war-
elephants, almost as invulnerable as mail-clad
knights. Under the shelter of this impenetrable
wall of defence the rest of the army formed in
5 divisions was arrayed for action. The van
was composed of about 10,000 well-appointed
horsemen, Rajputs and Pathans under Rao
Satarsal Hada, and Baud Khan. Between the
centre and the van stood 10,000 troops as
advanced reserve under Kunwar Ram Singh
Kachchwah, and Sayyid Bahir Khan. In the
centre the Crown Prince, mounted on a tall ele-
phant, took post surrounded by 3,000 faithful
house-hold troops of his own and at least twice
that number of troops of the imperial
mansabdars. The right wing of his army
15,000 strong was composed entirely of unreli-
able Central Asian mercenaries, under the com-
mand of the supple and treacherous Khalilullah
( Khan; and the left wing was commanded by
'prince Sipihr Shukoh and the brave and loyal
chief Rustam Khan Bahadur Firuz Jang. At


about noon the two armies came into contact
with each other, and for an hour the artillery on
both sides fired from too wide a range, produc-
ing only much noise and a thick veil of smoke
and dust. Aurangzib’s guns replied very feebly
and gradually ceased altogether to fire. Bara’s
formation of battle in spite of its defects, was
well suited for fighting a defensive action, and
so was also Aurangzib’s, the advantage lying
evidently on that side which could play the
defensive game, and tempt the other side to an
attack. Either owing to his own inexperience
or misled by the sycophants and traitors around
him, Dara wrongly concluded that the guns of
Barqandaz Khan must have put Aurangzib’s
artillery out of action and that the enemy was
perhaps afraid of attacking his lines; so he
decided to scatter them by a general attack.
Rustam Khan with the left wing and Khalilullah
Khan with the right charged respectively a
division of Aurangzib’s artillery under
Safshikan Khan, and the troops of Murad on
the two wings of the enemy. Having met with
an unexpected and murderous volley at close
range from Safshikan’s artillery, Rustam Khan
followed by ten thousand men with drawn sabres
swerved to the right to attack Aurangzib’s van.
His path was barred- by Bahadur Khan and
other divisions of Aurangzib’s troops which
were pushed forward to check the onset. For
a time Rustam Khan carried everything before
him and scattered Bahadur Khan’s troops.


Suddenly the kettledrums of Dara sounded
victory and the Prinbe himself with the centre
dashed forward to support his victorious left
wing, and riding in the track of Rustam Khan
fell upon Aurangzib’s Advanced Reserve under
Shaikh Mir, who was pressing Rustam Khan’s
exhausted troops hard. He put to flight Shaikh
Mir’s division displaying in action “ undenia-
ble proof of invincible courage” as even his
detractors admitted. But he failed to save
his own left wing, a remnant of which had, after
the heroic death of Rustam Khan, fled under
his son Sipihr Shukoh. No success, no advan-
tage could, however, compensate for this unwise
step, namely, the evacuation of his position in
the centre, which “more than all other causes
put together ruined Dara.” 1 His army as a
whole was now in the predicament of a ship
with its rudder broken. His mighty formation
vanished; his guns stood deserted, his match-
lockmen were scattered, his elephants and camel
corps remained idle too far in his rear to be of
any assistance. In short, everything fell into
confusion and Dara utterly lost control of the
situation.
He now determined to try his luck by
attacking the thinned centre of Aurangzib; but
when about to lead a charge against his mortal
enemy, the news of the death of Rao Satarsal
Hada and confusion on his right wing turned
i Sarkar, i 395.


him back from the project. So, from the ex-
treme left of his line the Prince undertook to
traverse the whole length of his front, all the
while exposing his own flank to the galling
musketry and artillery fire of the enemy.
Simultaneously with Rustam Khan’s
charge, Khalilullah Khan had with the right
wing of Para’s army attacked Murad’s division
which formed the left wing of the hostile army.
A traitor at heart, he made only a show of
attack and having discharged several volleys of
arrows at the enemy, retired behind the line as
soon as he saw Murad Bakhsh hotly engaged
with the van of Para under Rao Satarsal Hada
and Paud Khan. This division which was
looked upon as the “steel edge” of the army of
Para did its work most splendidly. Puring
the tumult of Khalilullah’s attack on Murad’s
troops it drove itself like a wedge between the
troops of Aurangzib and those of Murad. The
Rajputs singled out Murad for attack and a
fierce fight raged round his elephant. It is no
exaggeration to say that Rao Satarsal and his
companions fought at Samugarh with the
loyalty of Napoleon’s Guards at Waterloo. No
historian can pretend to do justice to the
heroism of Rao Satarsal at Samugarh which a
gifted bard 1 of Bundi deemed the sublimest
i Surajtnal Mishran, a nineteenth century poet of Bundi and
author of Vamsa-Bhaskar, (which may be called the Mahabharat
of Rajputana) reserved the treatment of this episode for a separate
treatise which however he did not live to attempt.


theme for his Muse. Not only Rao Satarsal
but every Rajput cavalier that followed him
fought trusting “his body to the edge of the
sword, his mind fixed on God, his heart set on
the work of his master, and his head as it were,
added to the beads in the rosary (of human
skulls) of Hara.” 1 The first of the heroic band
of chiefs who fell was Rajah Ram Singh Rathor.
Rao Satarsal died with his son, his brother,
three nephews, and the very flower of the Hada
clan in their fight with Murad, who was ultima-
tely compelled to give ground. The remnant
of Rajputs under their last surviving leader
Rajah Rup Singh Rathor, fell with unabated
fury upon Aurangzib, who was now moving
forward with his centre to succour Murad
Bakhsh. It was at this crisis that Dara hurried
from his extreme left to reinforce his men. An
obstinate struggle ensued. As the traitor
Khalilullah had hidden his face, Dara’s van
now formed his right wing while his left wing
had ceased to exist. Aurangzib engaged the
van of Dara, and ordered Sultan Muhammad
with his own van, consisting of 10,000 fresh
troops, to attack the exhausted and disordered
centre of Dara. The fight was now too unequal
to be retrieved by the personal valour of Dara
i fnr <runfK it % i
am it, Bisfr if n
(see Bhushan’s Satrasal-dashak, annotated by Lala Bhagwandin
Benares Hindu University).


and the steadiness of his followers. The Raj-
puts of the van were not only outnumbered but
also out-classed in weapons,, having only lance,
sword, and dagger to oppose to their enemy’s
rockets and volleys of bullets. Rajah Rup
Singh Rjathor died in an attempt to kill Aurang-
zib, and all his Rajputs perished fighting
against great odds. The traitor Khalilullah
with 15,000 troopers who did not receive even
a scratch, put himself out of sight altogether.
Only a remnant of Daud Khan’s Pathans
survived, who could at best cover his retreat.
Dara, mounted on his tall elephant, now became
a target for Aurangzib’s artillery served by
expert European marksmen. At the urgent
importunities of his friends the Prince dis-
mounted and took a horse. But half an hour
after the unfortunate Dara realised his mistake.
Still he held on bravely, but those who hitherto
survived the enemy’s sword were struck down
by a desolating hot wind which suddenly began
to blow in their faces. Dara was distracted
and his resolution gave way when he saw his
faithful followers dying helplessly with cries of
“water” on their lips, and heard his young son
Sipihr Shukoh weeping bitterly. Those who
valued their master’s life more than their own,
desperately caught hold of the bridle of his
horse and forced it to take the road to Agra.
None can dispute in the face of these facts
that Aurangzib as much deserved the victory


as Dara merited his failure. However, Khalil-
ullah’s treachery was not perhaps an after-cry
raised by the imperialists to cover the shame
of their defeat, as the illustrious historian of
Aurangzib holds. Who can say what would
have been the issue of the fight if Khalilullah
with 15,000 Mughal mercenaries had not
absolutely held aloof on that day? If victory
was impossible, the rout of Dara’s army at least
would not have been so complete but for trea-
chery in his ranks.
The battle of Samugarh is one of the most
decisive battles in Indian history from the
political, moral, and military point of view. It
meant much more than the transfer of the
crown of Hindustan from one son of Shah
Jahan to another. Samugarh saw the definite
close of the most brilliant epoch of the mediae-
val history of India which is aptly called the
Age of Akbar—the age of nationalism in politics
and culture, the era of Revival of Letters and
Fine Art. Dara lost at Samugarh not only a
magnificent army but also that optimism and
self-confidence which sometimes enable great
minds to triumph over almost irretrievable
disasters. Dara’s ship was now off its anchor-
age, and the Prince being no pilot in stormy
seas allowed it to drift whithersoever Fate
would take it.


CHAPTER X
THE VICISSITUDES OF FORTUNE
Section 1. —Flight of Dara Shukoh from
Samugarh
The Crown Prince, now a miserable fugi-
tive, after covering two or three kos from the
battle-field, reached a shady tree where he
alighted to unlace his helmet and sat down
under the tree in utter prostration of body and
mind. He refused to move from the place
even when the terrific roll of the victor’s
kettledrum was heard nearer and clearer every
moment. “What is destined to happen”, he
cried out, “better let it happen now”. At last
at the importunity of his alarmed followers he
mounted again, and having reached the capital
at about 9 p.m v shut himself up in his mansion.
The whole city of Agra appeared like a bewail-
ing house of dead, and loud lamentations in
the inner apartments of Shah Jahan were
echoed more loudly from the mudwall of hum-
blest citizen. Shah Jahan sent a request to Dara
to come and see him for the last time, a pathetic
appeal which was as pathetically refused by
Dara. The crestfallen prince wrote in reply,
“Give up your wish to see my abashed face
again. Only I beg your Majesty’s benediction
of farewell on this distracted and half-dead


man in the long journey that he has before
him”. At about 3 a.m v accompanied by his
wife Nadira Banu, his children and grand-
children, and with an escort of a dozen jaded
horsemen, Dara started for Delhi.
About five thousand troops, leaving Agra
in small groups before the investment of the
city on 3rd June by the victorious Aurangzib,
rejoined the standard of Dara Shukoh who
reached the neighbourhood of Delhi on the sth
June, However, Dara still commanded great
resources, as Shah Jahan had supplied him
with ample treasures from Agra, placed at his
disposal the warlike stores of the Delhi fort,
and urged those who retained any love for him
to join the Crown Prince. Dara busied him-
self in raising another army at Delhi, and sent
instructions to his son Sulaiman Shukoh to
join him there without delay. But events
moved too fast for him, and the unexpected
fall of the Agra fort (Bth June, 1658) within
five days of its blockade by Aurangzib discon-
certed his plans altogether.
Again, flight was the only course open to
Dara Shukoh. But wither should he fly? To
Allahabad or to Labor? Dara chose to retreat
to the Punjab which was then ruled by his
deputy Izzat Khan, one of his few faithful
servants. He acted on first impulses rather
than on mature reflection in this matter. He
failed to take advantage of the new situation


brought about by Aurangzib’s success which
made him an enemy of his less successful con-
federate Shuja. No doubt he recognised the
importance of an alliance with Shuja to whose
officers Sulaiman was directed to hand over
the province of Allahabad. Dara lacked bold-
ness of diplomacy and political foresight, and
as such he could not muster sufficient courage
to trust and unite with Shuja to attack Aurang-
zib from the east and hold him at bay till he
should raise an army in the Punjab and .come
to the aid of Shuja.
Dara and Shuja in league in the eastern
provinces, discontented Murad by his own side,
rebellious Jaswant in Rajputana, unsubdued
Punjab and Kabul on the north-west, and
hostile Golconda and Bijapur in the south,
would have rendered Aurangzib’s position very
critical, though the ultimate success of any
coalition against that able soldier and resource-
ful diplomat was extremely doubtful. But
Dara decided on retreat to Labor which afford-
ed Aurangzib an opportunity for crushing his
enemies piecemeal. Perhaps the saddest mis-
take which Dara ever committed was to ask
poor Sulaiman Shukoh to do the impossible,
namely, to join him at Labor by marching
along the foot of the Himalayas instead of
instructing him to fly eastward to the protection
of his uncle Shuja.


Section 2.—Dara's Prospects in Lahore
Dara had left Delhi with large quantities of
treasure and an army 10,000 strong on 12th
June, and travelling by way of Sarhind reached
Labor on 3rd July, 1658. On the way he posted
his best general Daud Khan at the ferry of
Taiwan with instructions to hold the line of the
Satlej against the enemy. From Labor he
despatched a second detachment of troops num-
bering about 5,000 under Sayyid Izzat Khan to
reinforce Daud Khan and guard the ferry of
Rupar on the Satlej. His prospects seemed to
brighten for a while. Within a short time
20,000 troops assembled under his banners.
Some imperial officers from various motives
joined him, one of these being Rajah Rajrup of
the Jammu Hills, who offered to raise an army
from among the Hill Rajputs if the Prince
would provide him with sufficient funds.
Dara, who had been the shelter and support of
Hindus all through his life still pinned his faith
to the fidelity and valour of Rajputs. The
unhappy prince readily caught at Raj nip's offer
and made much of him. In order to attach this
Hindu chief to her husband’s cause with a most
inviolable tie, Nadira Banu sent him her milk to
taste which, according to the notions of the age,
placed Rajrup in the relation of a son to her.
Rajrup received several lakhs of rupees 1 from
i Storia de Mogor, ii. p.
Rajrup joined Aurangzib’s army encamped near the bank of
the Bias on 25 Aug., t.e., 7 days after Dara’s flight from Labor.
13


Dara, went home, and it is notorious how he
requited the debt of Nadira’s milk a year after
on the field of Deorai where he, as a partisan of
Aurangzib, wrought the complete ruin of Dara
by turning the flank of Dara’s position. The
devotion and loyalty of the European artillery
officers of Dara stood in noble contrast to the
perfidious conduct of Rajrup. Manucci, an
Italian youth barely past twenty, had joined the
service of Dara as an Artillery officer a few
months before the battle of' Samugarh. After
having passed through a series of thrilling
adventures in the course of his journey in dis-
guise from that lost field to Labor, he presented
himself before Dara again.
About a month after Dara’s arrival at
Labor, Bahadur Khan who commanded the van
of the pursuing army reached the bank of the
Satiej. Foreseeing the contingency of the
seizure of boats on the river by the troops of
Dara, Aurangzib had supplied his general with
portable boats carried on waggons 1 Against
such an enemy Dara had indeed very little
chance.
Finding the greater part of Dara’s troops
concentrated at Taiwan, Bahadur Khan secretly
crossed the river in the night of sth August at the
Rupar ferry, which was negligently held by
Dara’s men. Two days afterwards the second
division of the pursuing army under Khalilullah
Khan also crossed the Satlej at Rupar. Com


pelled to evacuate Taiwan and every other ferry
on the Satiej before the combined forces of these
two generals, the troops of Dara fell back on
Sultanpur on the eastern bank of the river Bias.
The news of this reverse upset Bara’s calcula-
tions, namely, to hold out at Labor till the
advance of Shuja from Bihar or a rebellion in
Raj put ana under the leadership of his ally
Jaswant would compel Aurangzib to turn back
from the Punjab.
Masum, author of Tarikh-i-Shujai, gives a
faithful picture of the state of affairs at Labor
at this stage “The prince began to waver in
mind to be or not to be at Labor; now he would
think that he should strengthen the city and the
citadel of Labor, summon the nobles of the neigh-
bouring districts to his aid, and make a last and
determined effort ; now he would think thus :
‘As no ray of hope appears in any direction (lit.,
no scent of good from any quarter reaches my
nostrils) it is better that this half-dead self—
which has come out safe from the battle—should
be take itself to such a place where with my own
eyes I may hot witness the slaughter of wives
and children.’ Baud Khan, the ablest and most
faithful among the servants of Bara represented
to him that the Prince ought not give himself up
to despair, which, according to the verse (of the
Quran), has been branded as infidelity.” He
proposed that Bara should himself stay at
Labor and look after the equipment of his


forces ; and send prince Sipihr Shukoh to
Sultanpur on the bank of the Bias, evidently as
the nominal commander-in-chief. It was re-
solved accordingly that Sipihr Shukoh should go
along with Baud Khan to oppose the van of the
army of Aurangzib. But Nadira Banu, other-
wise a courageous and sensible lady and the main
prop of the sinking spirit of Dara, would not at
.all part with her sole remaining son. Her grief
■over the fate of Sulaiman Shukoh burst forth,
and the mother completely overcame the politi-
cian in her, Dara with much difficulty persuaded
his wife to agree to the departure of Sipihr
Shukoh. But this delay in the march of that
prince ruined the only chance of holding up the
van of the pursuing enemy. Baud Khan who
had taken up his position at Sultanpur found it
untenable against the united forces of Bahadur
Khan and Khalilullah Khan. So, he fell back
upon Govindwal on the other side of the Bias,
where Sipihr Shukoh joined him with reinforce-
ments. But it was now too late to attack the
enemy’s van securely posted on the Sultanpur
side of the river. Meanwhile Aurangzib himself
reached Rupar on 14th August and on the receipt
of the news of the movement of Bara’s troops
towards Govindwal, sent Mirza Rajah Jai Singh
with some other officers to reinforce the van
under Khalilullah Khan. On the 18th Mirza
Rajah and others formed a junction with
Khalilullah’s troops at Garb Shankar, 32
miles west of Rupar where they soon heard of


Dara’s flight from Labor towards Multan.
Dara deemed himself scarcely safe with only the
Bias between himself and Aurangzib. It was
perhaps the fear of having his line of retreat cut
off that made Dara leave Labor hurriedly. He
had recalled Sipihr Shukoh to his side and com-
manded Daud Khan to hold out till the enemy
would actually appear before Govindwal.
There seems to be little truth in
Manned’s story of the false letter of Aurangzib
to Daud Khan, which made Dara suspicious of
the loyalty of Daud Khan and was in con-
sequence mainly instrumental in driving Dara
out of Labor. Though Masum corroborates
Manned’s version of affairs, it smacks too much
of a stock-story. Daud Khan very faithfully
clung to the company of the Prince as far as
Bhakkar, though we doubt very much whether
he slew his wives (as Manucci and Masum
narrate) to remove Dara’s unfounded suspicions
and free himsdlf from all anxiety of the world.
Had he made such a holocaust of his near and
dear ones, what on earth could induce him after-
wards to desert a master for whom he was
determined to die ? It is not unlikely that
Dara, who found nothing but ingratitude and
treason about him did great injustice to this loyal
servant of his by suspecting him of being in col-
lusion with Aurangzib. The very fact that
Daud Khan after having taken leave of Dara at
Bhakkar returned through Jaisalmir to his home


in Hissar warrants us to surmise that it was per-
haps Baud’s anxiety for his family in
Aurangzib’s power that made him desert the lost
cause of Bara. The author of Alamgir-nama l
says that Baud Khan received a klnlab from
Aurangzib in November, 1658, but he d6es not
make any mention of slaughter of his wives by
Baud Khan. Masum narrates whatever he
heard about it in the remote provincial town of
Malda in Bengal. Manucci had been no doubt
for sometime Baud Khan’s comrade-in-arms ;
but he sat to write down his reminiscences when
fact and fiction had become jumbled up in his
failing memory, when almost every event con-
nected with the career of Bara had already
received a colour of romance.
Section 3.—Bara flies through Multan
and Sind
Bara took from Labor vast treasures and
numerous artillery, and 14,000 troops attracted
by his liberality accompanied him as far
as Multan, which he reached on sth
September. But many of his men and
officers refused to follow him in his flight
further. His army began to melt away
repidly, and when- he arrived at Bhakkar,
it was reduced to half in number, and that half
i Alatngirnama, i. 221.


•even was half dead through the fatigue of
incessant marching. At Bhakkaf Bara halted
for five days and deposited a part of his treasure,
many of the ladies of his harem and his heavy
pieces of artillery in the fort of Bhakkar, which
was plentifully supplied with ammunition and
supplies and put under the command of his
faithful eimuch Basant and Sayyid Abdur
Razzaq. Manucci and other European artillery
officers were also left there in charge of the guns
of the fort. Four thousand troops and most of
his officers including Baud Khan left him and
returned from Bhakkar to their jagirs. Dara
himself did not know whither to go ; to Persia
as an exile, or to the gates of Agra with the
chivalry of Rajputana at his back % He
marched further down the Indus and reached a
place 50 miles south of Bhakkar where begins the
road to Persia via Qandahar. It was perhaps
from this place that Dara opened negotiations
with Shah Abbas II for a safe refuge and help.
In a letter of Shah Abbas II to Dara the Persian
king signifies his unwillingness to invade
Bhakkar till he should meet the prince, and
informs him that Zulfiqar Khan governor of
Qandahar, has been instructed to take the
necessary steps for conveying the property of
Bara to Persia. The fate of Humayun seemed
to dog the footsteps of unhappy Bara. But
Humayun was fortunate enough in not having
Hindustan-bom wives and retainers reluctant
to trust themselves to the power of the Persians.


Aurangzib reached Multan on 25th Septem-
ber in pursuit of Dara ; but alarming news of
the hostile advance of Shuja in the direction of
Allahabad turned him back from this point.
Five days after this he turned back from Mul-
tan, leaving there his generals Saf-shikan Khan
and Shaikh Mir with instructions to expel the
fugitive from the province. At Uch these two
generals divided their forces, and marched
parallel on the opposite banks. The most criti-
cal stage of the pursuit was the passage of
Dara’s boats under the gun-fire of the fort of
Sehwan, and the escape of Dara’s troops through
the narrow defile near that fort (2nd November,
1658). Saf-shikan and Shaikh Mir kept up a
hot pursuit of Dara along the right bank of the
Indus as far as Thata. There again Dara gave
the slip of Saf-shikan by crossing the river
Indus on 16th November. Six days later his
pursuers also crossed the river, but they lost
scent of their game. Just then orders arrived
from Aurangzib recalling them to his presence
for equipping an expeditionary force against
Shuja. Dara now plunged with his army into
the inhospitable region of the Rann of Cutch and
after going through unspeakable hardships
arrived at the capital of the Rao of Cutch. The
Rao relieved the misery of the fugitives in every
way and bound himself closely to the cause of
Dara by betrothing his daughter to Sipihr
Shukoh. Hope and optimism revived in the
fugitive prince.


Section 4. —A rift in the cloud
Dara Shukoh, now a desperate gambler in
fortune, drew a good omen from bis unexpected
welcome at Cutch. After having equipped his.
small retinue for fresh adventure, he crossed
over to Kathiawad where the Jam of Nawnagar
honourably received him like a loyal vassal. He
now cast his looks on the rich province of
Gujrat, which at this time practically owned no
master. Gujrat, the seat of Murad’s power, was
still in the actual possession of Murad’s officials
who nursed wrath and resentment against
Aurangzib for having so treacherously and
inhumanly overthrown their master. To govern
such a province Aurangzib sent an equally dis-
contented man, Shah Nawaz Khan. Dara now
marched upon Ahmadabad with only 3000 troops
to try his luck there. When he reached the
environs of the city Shah Nawaz quite unex-
pectedly came out to welcome him and conducted
him into the fort. Dara now established his
court at Ahmababad ; but out of love and respect
for his living father, he neither assumed the
kingly title nor sat on the throne. The only
royal prerogative which he assumed, and that too
at the importunity of Shah Nawaz Khan, was to
show himself every morning from the state-
window, ( Jharoka-i-darshan ). Lured by the
prospect of liberal pay, an army of 22,000
troopers soon assembled under Dara. He sent a
small force under Amina Gujrati to wrest the


port of Surat from Aurangzib’s officials. Amina
secured the peaceful surrender of the city from
Aurangzib’s governor Sadiq Muhammad Khan,
and brought away from it a large sum of money,
considerable quantities of ammunition, and 40
pieces of artillery for his master.
Dara had rendered friendly diplomatic
services to Bijapur and Golconda which but for
the support of the Crown Prince would have
been annihilated by Aurangzib in 1656 and 1657.
To the rulers of these two States, sworn enemies
of Aurangzib as they were, Dara looked up
for help in another attempt at retrieving
his fortune. Indeed, Dara was reported to be
contemplating a dash for the South, and
Aurangzib had accordingly warned his son
Prince Muazzam to be in readiness to frustrate
such a move on the part of his uncle. But the
whole of Hindustan was suddenly thrown into
a strange commotion by a false news about the
defeat of Aurangzib at the hands of Shuja and
the return of Maharajah Jaswant Singh to
Jodhpur laden with the spoils of Aurangzib s
camp. Dara, like most other men, did not doubt
its authenticity, and he accordingly gave up the
idea of going to the Deccan. Having appointed
Sayyid Ahmad Bukhari to the charge of
Ahmadabad, he started for Ajmir by way of
Sirohi on 14th February, but when he had
travelled only three stages he was upset by the
news of Aurangzib’s decisive victory over Shuja


ill the battle of Khajwa (sth January, 1659).
Had he at this stage turned his steps towards the
Deccan he could have, with the forces at his dis-
posal (about 20,000 troops, besides artillery),
safely cut his way to the courts of Bijapur and
Oolconda. But Rajputana still lured him on.
Maharajah Jaswant Singh, who could hardly
hope for pardon a second time at the hands of
Aurangzib, was now in open revolt against him,
and in order to give a colour of justice and
legitimacy to his action he invited the Crown
Prince to his territory, giving him the most
solemn promises of help. Accordingly Dara
preferred linking his fortune with that of
Jaswant to a retreat to the Deccan without
striking a blow. So he marched rapidly with
his army to Mairta, 37 miles north-west of Ajmir.
But there he found no signs of warlike prepara-
tions, nor of Jaswant’s coming out to welcome
him. The prince had sent to Jodhpur a trust-
worthy Hindu agent named Dunichand, who
returned with a message from Jaswant that it
was more advisable for the Prince to establish
himself in Ajmir, which is the heart of the
Rajput country, and that he would after
equipping his forces join him in person there.
Dara with his army now movedjowards Ajmir,
37 miles south-east of Mairta.
Hone indeed had a better claim upon the
sympathy and gratitude of the Hindus than the
liberal-minded and generous prince Dara


Shukoh. And among the Hindus, Maharana
Raj Singh of Mewar, “the Sun of the Hindu
race” perhaps was most heavily indebted to
Dara Shukoh, who had shielded him from the
wrath of Shah Jahan, and saved his principality
from impending ruin only three years before
when Shah Jahan had sent Sadullah Khan
against the Maharana.
Hurled by cruel fate from the pinnacle of
fortune to the abyss of misery, Dara Shukoh
made a touching appeal to the Maharana for aid
and protection in the name of the sacred rites of
hospitality which a Rajput holds so dear. He
writes: (After informing the Maharana that he
had reached Sirohi), “We have entrusted our
honour to the keeping of the Rajputs and we have
indeed come as a guest ( mehman ) of the whole
Rajput race. Maharajah Jaswant Singh has
also got himself ready to join us. You are the
head of the Rajput race. We have recently
come to know that your son has come away from
his (Aurangzib’s) side. Such being the case we
hope that the worthiest of the worthy Rajahs
(t.e., the Maharana) would come to our help in
liberating Ala Hazrat (the Emperor Shah
Jahan).... If you are unable to come in person,
some relation of yours should he sent to us with
2000 horse.... 1 ( nishan, dated Ist Jamadi-tCl-
awwal 1069 = 15 January, 1659 A.D.).
i Udaipur archives quoted in Virbinode, ii. p. 432. As the
style shows there can be no doubt that the letter is genuine. But the
date, Ist Jamadi-ul-awwal seems to be a slip or a copyist’s error; such


But the entreaties of the distressed prince
found no response from the Maharana. Raj
Singh, in spite of all the fame and glory that
crowned the close of his career, was like every
other Hindu chief essentially a man of narrow
views and of still narrower sympathies.
Maharana Raj Singh’s resentment against
the Emperor Shah Jahan for confiscating a few
parganas in 1654 made him forget that he owed
his own salvation and the possession of the rest
of his territory to the powerful intervention of
Dara Shukoh, who could not secure the complete
restoration of his possessions owing to the
opposition of Aurangzib’s ally Sadullah Khan.
The recovery of these parganas became the one
absorbing though of the Maharana, who now
turned to Aurangzib to secure this object.
Several nishans 1 of Aurangzib preserved in the
archives of Udaipur give us a clue to Aurangzib’s
diplomacy in winning over the Maharana to his
side. In one of these, written on the eve of his
departure from the Deccan, he consents to the
restoration of four of the confiscated parganas,
as prayed for by the Maharana; in a second letter
written after the victory of Dharmat he urges the
slips being not unfrequently met with in other letter of Dara preser-
ved in Jaipur. Dara entered Ahmadabad on pth January, 1659 and he
stayed for about a montir%eforc he_ decided to go to Rajputana; so
the correct date should be'lst Jamadi-us-sani i.e., 14th February. Sir
Jadunath Sarkar on the authority of Persian writers gives 14th Feb.
as the date of Dara’s departure from Ahmadabad. But this letter
clearly proves that Dara had reached Sirohi not later than the middle
of February, 1659.
1 Nishans quoted in Virbinode, ii 414.
Alamgimama, p. 311-312.


Maliarana to wrest the above-mentioned
parganas from their present holders, and gives
him hopes that, God willing, he would make the
Maharana a greater potentate than even Rana
Sanga. After the victory of Samugarh,
Aurangzib flung contemptuously a few more
bones at him in the shape of the grant of
Dungarpur, Banswara, Basawar, etc., in order
to silence the custodian of the interests of Hindu
race, whose humiliation he was to attempt later.
At Ajmir Dara was passing through days
of agonising anxiety at the delay of Jaswant. A
second time Dubin Chand (Dunichand?) went to
Jaswant and came back with the same evasive
replies from him, as the Jodhpur Chief had now
abandoned the thought of joining Dara. At last,
poor Dara sent his young son Sipihr Shukoh to
move the heart of Jaswant, but it was to no
purpose. Maharajah Jaswant Singh broke his
plighted word and turned false to Dara; but
why? Was the perfidy of Jaswant pre-
meditated?
The whole affair admits of being
interpreted as a piece of pre-meditated
treachery on the part of Jaswant, who
evidently used poor Dara a pawn in his
diplomatic game to secure from Aurangzib
a pardon on liberal terms for what he had done
at Khajwa. To credit Jaswant with so much
cool deliberation, cunning and political sagacity
is to misinterpret his acts and character. The


embarrassing act of treachery of Jaswant at
Khajwa and Ms fresh enmity to Aurangzib for
no apparent advantage after the latter had
forgiven that act, is explained only by Jaswant’s
love for Dara which, throughout the remaining
career of Jaswant, kept him an ill-concealed
enemy of Aurangzib, and prompted him
invariably to acts of treachery against that
erhperor. Jaswant undoubtedly was sincere in
Ms profession of devotion to Dara and meant to
stand by him through thick and thin when he
invited Dara to Rajputana. He actually made
some preparations for opposing Aurangzib; but
at the psychological moment when Jaswant’s
optimism was giving way to despair at the
approach of the avenging armies of Aurangzib,
when sentiment was struggling with self-
interest for ascendancy over his heart, there came
a letter from Mirza Rajah Jai Singh, the wary
old decoybird of Aurangzib: “What can be
your inducement, (he wrote to him) to endeavour
to sustain the falling fortunes of this Prince?
Perseverance in such an undertaking must
inevitably bring ruin upon you and your family,
without advancing the interests of the wretched
Dara. Prom Aurangzib, you will never obtain
forgiveness. I, who am also a Raja, conjure you
to spare the blood of Bagipous (Rajputs). Do
not buoy yourself up with the hope of drawing
other Rajas to your party; for I have means to
counteract any such attempt. This is a business
which concerns all the Indous, and you cannot be


permitted to kindle a flame that will soon rage
throughout the kingdom, and which no effort
might be able to extinguish. If, on the other
hand, you leave Dara to his own resources,
Aurangzib will bury all the past in oblivion; will
not reclaim from you the money you obtained at
Kadjoue (Khajwah) ; but will at once nominate
you to the government of Guzarate. You can
easily appreciate the advantage of ruling" a
province so contiguous to your own territories;
there you will remain in perfect quiet and
security, and I hereby offer you my guarantee
for the exact fulfilment of all I have
mentioned.” 1 Only an obstinate fool or a
heroic martyr could hold out against such tempt-
ing offers and cogent arguments effectively
driven home with the bayonet at one’s throat
But Jaswant was neither; his moral courage and
constancy were not equal to his valour and noble
impulse. Jai Singh’s letter stifled the cry of
conscience in the breast of Jaswant, whom the
instinct of self-preservation induced to dis-
honour his plighted word to his princely ally.
Section s.—The Battle of Deobai
Deserted by Jaswant and indeed shunned
by every Rajput, Dara found it impossible even
to make a safe retreat without giving a fight to
Aurangzib. Leaving his own family and those
of his officers at Ajmir, Dara led his small army
i Bernier’s Travels, Constable, p. 86.


out to the pass of Deorai, situated 4% miles
south of Ajmir, a little to the east of the
Rajputana-Malwa Railway line. There he took
a strong position with the city of Ajmir in his
rear and his two flanks guarded by two long
inaccessible ranges of hills, the Bithli and Gokla.
He fortified this line in front by running “a low
wall south of his position, from hill to hill across
the valley, with trenches in front and redoubts
at different points. The entire line was divided
into four sections, each under a different com-
mander with artillery and musketeers. On the
right at the south-western corner of his position,
close to the hill Bithli lay trenches of Sayyid
Ibrahim (sumamed Mustafa Khan), and Jani
Beg (Dara’s Chief of Artillery) with a thousand
barquandazes besides other troops. Next came
the trenches of Firuz Mewati, and beyond them,
on a hillock over-looking the pass were mounted
some big guns. Here, at the centre of lines stood
Bara with-his staff. On his left the line was
continued by the third section of the trenches
commanded by Shah Nawaz Khan, and
Muhammad Sharif Qalich Khan, and fourth
section under Sipihr Shukoh at the south-eastern
comer adjoining the hill of Gokla.” 1
On 11th March Aurangzib halted one mile
from Deorai, his progress being arrested by the
fortified trenches of Dara. That very night, a
dashing officer of Aurangzib silently occupied a
1 ( History of Aurangzib, Vols. I & 11, p. 506) .
14


mound midway between the two armies. Next
morning an obstinate fight took place for four
hours over the possession of this mound; but
under cover of the fight the artillery of Aurangzib
was dragged up the mound which compelled
Dara’s troops to retire behind their lines. In
the afternoon of 13th March, 2000 steel-clad
cavaliy of Dara came down upon the pickets of
Aurangzib and gave a good account of themselves
in a skirmish with the enemy. The traditional
Mughal tactics of attack along all the fronts
proved a failure against the entrenched lines of
Dara. The perfidious Rajrup, who had tasted
Nadira Banu’s milk as a most solemn pledge of
Ms devotion to Dara, now offered to accomplish
what none else could do. His followers had
’discovered an unguarded path for ascending the
back of the Gokla Mil in the rear of the left flank
of Dara. Towards the evening of 14th March,
Rajrup sent a body of his hardy mountaineers
behind the Gokla hill to climb up the narrow
track wMle he himself attacked Shah Nawaz
Khan’s lines on the left flank of Dara. One
thousand cavalry sallied out from Shah Nawaz
Khan’s trenches to engage Rajrup. But in
accordance with a preconcerted plan Aurangzib’s
officers had concentrated the greater part of their
troops opposite the enemy’s left flank which they
were determined to carry at any cost. An
obstinate cavalry’action was fought in front of
Shah Nawaz Khan’s trenches. The troops of
Dara never fought so well, nor did Dara and Ms


officers ever show so much coolness and judg-
ment as on this day. But Bara was out-
generalled; Aurangzib had massed his troops
against the left flank of Bara and now made a
concentrated attack on it. Jai Singh, Bilir
Khan and Shaikh Mir bore down upon the troops
of Bara who had come out to attack and, after
one hour’s persistent charges by cavalry,
dislodged them from their position and pushed
forward in reckless fury to the edge of Shah
Nawaz Khan’s trenches. About the same time
Rajrup’s infantry toiling up the Gokla hill
appeared on the crest of the hill in the rear of
Shah Nawaz Khan. Then the troops of
Aurangzib, flushed with the certainty of coming
victory, attacked the trenches of Shah Nawaz
with fresh vigour. To complete the disaster, a
cannon-ball from Aurangzib’s battery killed
Shah Nawaz outright. Still the battery killed
fiercely and the troops of Bara fought with the
most obstinate valour. Of the attacking party
Shaikh Mir was killed by a bullet and Bilir
Khan received an arrow-wound. Bilir Khan’s
Pathans, now reinforced by the Rajputs of
Mirza Rajah Jai Singh practically annihilated
the left flank of Bara.
Bara had done his best throughout the day
to maintain the unequal contest. From his posi-
tion in the centre he watched carefully every
phase of the battle and sent timely reinforce-
ments to the trenches of Shah Nawaz Khan. His


troops could have yet repulsed the attack but for
the panic created by the sudden appearance of
Eajrup’s infantry in their rear. They now
gave up all hopes and considered it suicidal to
prolong the struggle. Dara realised the situation
too clearly to tarry longer in that untenable
position. Accompanied by his only surviving
general Firuz Mewati and his son Sipihr
Shukoh, he, at about 8 p.m. (14th March), took
the road to Gujrat via Mairta. What had
appeared to be a rift in the cloud proved only
the treacherous golden tint of evening clouds.
APPENDIX I.
Bernier depicts Shah Nawaz Khan as a double-faced
traitor, who kept Aurangzib regularly informed of all the
designs of Dara and asserts that Dara owed his misfortune
to his putting too much trust in Shah Nawaz Khan.) But
this is perhaps a baseless calumny against the old man. In
fact had not Shah Nawaz Khan thrown himself whole-
heartedly into the interests of Dara and stood by him to the
last, Dara would either have been made a prisoner at
Ahmadabad or compelled to retire disappointed from Gujrat.
We find no reason to suspect the fidelity of Shall
Nawaz to Dara till his death. The story of the
treachery of Shah Nawaz Khan like that of Aurangzib’s
corrupting the artillerymen of Dara who fired blank shots
is only the usual cry of the defeated party. According to
Iswardas Nagar, who had no reason to exaggerate the number
of slain in the army of Aurangzib, 5,000 men were killed on
the side of Aurangzib. Dara lost perhaps fewer men because
he fought on the defensive behind trenches. There was
some slaughter after the capture of the left wing lines of
Dara by Dilir Khan and Jai Singh; but the dark night soon
put a stop to it. How are we to account for such heavy


casualties in the army of Aurangzib if Dara’s artillery which
was most busy, had fired only blank shots? Had Data’s
artillerymen been corrupted, Aurangzib’s army would not
have been held back for two days.
As regards the death of Shah Nawaz Khan, Bernier says
that the head of Shah Nawaz was either cut off by Dara
himself “or, as it is thought more probable, by the swords
of persons in Aurangzib’s army, who, being secret partisans
of Dara, felt apprehensive that Shah Nawaz Khan would
denounce them, and make mention of the letters they had been
In the habit of writing to that prince.”(Bernier’s Travels, p.
87). There is hardly a grain of truth in these bazar-gossips.
According to one account, which Sir Jadunath Sarkar has
accepted, the body of Shah Nawaz was blown away by a
cannonball (Hist, of Aurangzib) Iqhd-nama-i-Alamgiri says
that he was killed by the sword of a soldier of Aurangzib.
Bernier tells another absurd story: “I shall simply state
that the first shot was scarcely fired when Jesseingue (Jai
Singh) placing himself within the sight of Dara, sent an
officer to inform him that he must instantly quit the field.
The poor prince, seized with sudden fear and surprise, acted
upon his advice ” Bernier evidently knew very little
of the battle of Deorai. After the overthrow of his left wing
Dara required no friendly advice of Jai Singh to leave the
field. In anticipation of a sudden reverse of fortune, he had
kept the inmates of his harem mounted on elephants
throughout the last day of tfie battle (14th March, 1659) on
the bank of the Anna-Sagar lake in charge of the trusty
eunuch, Maqbul.
We can only accept as true what Bernier actually saw
and not what he heard from his Agha, Danishmand Khan, or
from boastful and imaginative partisans on either side.


CHAPTER XI.
THE CLOSING ACT OE THE TRAGEDY
Section I.—Dara’s flight from Ajmir
Having travelled without a halt all the night
of 14th March, 1659 and the whole of the next
day, Dara and his party arrived at Mairta in
Jodhpur territory in the evening of the 15th
March. With only 2000 troops and one faithful
general, Firuz Mewati, Dara left Mairta that
very night, and covering 30 miles a day, fled
southward for Gujrat by way of Par and
Bargoan. Six days behind him came his
pursuers, Mirza Rajah Jai Singh and Bahadur
Khan with an army of 20,000 troops. Three
days after Dara had left the territory of
Jodhpur, Jaswant received orders from
'Aurangzib to capture the fugitive. Accordingly
he joined Mirza Rajah Jai Singh in the march
towards Ahmadabad. The orders of Aurangzib
to Mirza Rajah were explicit that he must not
return without Dara, dead or alive. The
military genius, energy and forethought
displayed by Jai Singh during the pursuit of
Dara through Gujrat and the Rann of Cutch
stand in glaring contrast with the same Rajah’s
slackness and ill-concealed indifference in the
chase of Shuja from Bahadurpur to Mungir.
The story of the relentless pursuit of Dara by
Mirza Rajah Jai Singh as described by
contemporary European and Muslim writers and


fully borne out by his own despatches to
Aurangzib ( Haftanjuman ) gives a direct lie to
Bernier’s statement that Jai Singh purposely
held back from making a prisoner of Dara
during his flight to Siwistan. In fact, Jai Singh
entered into this inglorious work with some
ardour and zeal, and not without betraying a
deep personal, hatred. Bar from conniving at
Bara’s escape, he spread a net-work of diplo-
macy to entrap the unhappy prince. “Jai Singh
sent off letters to the princes and zamindars in
every direction to bar Bara’s path—to Sirohi
and Palanpur in the south, Bairwara (Bailwara,
9 miles north of Udaipur) in the south east, to
princes of northern Kathiawar and Cutch and
the zamindars of Lower Sindh, and to the officers
of Gujrat. Thus it was that everywhere
Bara found enemies warned of his coming and
ready to seize him.” 1
With his little band of faithful followers
worn out by fatigue and thirst and hemmed in
on all sides with bands of ferocious Koli robbers,
Bara reached with difficulty a place 48 miles
north of Ahmadabad on 29th March. But the
letters of Jai Singh had done their work. Bara’s
officer who had been sent to Ahmadabad returned
with the news that Bara’s governor' Sayyid
Ahmad Bukhari 2 had been imprisoned by the
local civil and military officers and that the entry
1 History of Aurangzib, Vols. I & 11, p. 525.
2 Bernier’s statement that Dara’s governor at Ahmadabad was
won over by Aurangzib is contradicted by the Persian authorities.


of the Prince to Ahmadabad would meet with
determined resistance. Bernier, who accident-
ally fell in with the party of Dara and was made
to accompany the prince in the capacity of a
physician, thus describes the miserable plight of
Dara:
“I had now been three days with Dara,
whom I met on the road by the strangest chance
imaginable; and being destitute of any medical
attendant, he compelled me to accompany him in
the capacity of a physician. The day preceding
on which he received the governor’s communica-
tion, he expressed his fear lest I should be
murdered by the Koullys (Kolis), and insisted
upon my passing night in the Karavan-serrak
(Sarai), where he then was. The cords of the
Kanats or screens, which concealed his wife and
women (for he was even without a tent) were
fastened to the wheels of the carriage wherein I
reposed I mention the circumstances as
a proof of the low condition to which the fortunes
of the Prince were reduced. It was at break of
day that Governor’s message was delivered, and
shrieks of the females drew tears from every eye.
We were all overwhelmed with confusion and
dismay, gazing in speechless horror at each
other at a loss what plan to recommend, and
ignorant of the fate which awaited us from hour
to hour. We observed Dara stepping out more
dead than alive, speaking now to one, then to
another; stopping and consulting even the
commonest soldier. He saw consternation in


every countenance, and felt assured lie should be
left without a single follower ...... Dara felt
anxious to retain me in his service, especially
as one of his wives had a bad wound in her leg;
yet neither his threats nor entreaties could
procure for me a single horse or camel; so totally
destitute of power and influence had he become I
I remained behind, therefore, because of the
absolute impossibility of continuing the journey,
and could not but weep when I beheld the prince
depart with a force diminished to four or five
hundred horsemen.” 1
On 30th March Dara resumed his flight in
a westerly direction and entered the Kari
district, trusting himself to the honour and good
faith of a Koli Robin Hood named Kanji
(Kanhoji). The afflicted heart of the prince
was soothed by the conduct of this Hindu outlaw
in whom he found knightly sentiments purer
and loftier than what the flower of Rajput
chivalry had displayed during the last month.
Moved to pity by the distress of the outlawed
Heir-Apparent of Shah Jahan, the robber
chieftain safely escorted him to the boundary
of Cutch. Meanwhile, Gul Muhammad Khan
with 50 horse and 200 musketeers, whom Dara
had left in charge of Surat, joined his party.
Dressed in a tunic of thin linen and wearing
slippers worth 8 annas and accompanied by an
equally miserable retinue, the prince started
i Bernier; 89-91,


from Yiramgaon, and after crossing the
waterless waste of the Lesser Raim, again
entered Bhuj, the capital of his former friend,
the Rao of Cutch. But Dara now found
the chief a changed man, whose mind had been
worked up by the letters of Jai Singh “full of
hopes and threats.” The Rao not unreasonably
declined to harbour the fugitive in his dominion,
which was certainly beyond his power. He
however entertained the prince and his party
for two days and then escorted him to the
northern boundary of his island, where begins
the terrible salt marsh of the Greater Rann. In
the beginning of May, 1659, Dara re-entered
Sindh but found his path ahead at Badin
blocked by an officer of Aurangzib.
Dara, stricken down by “the slings and
arrows of outrageous fortune”, now instinctively
felt that he had come to the end of his life’s
journey. Indeed, the net of Aurangzib was fast
closing round him. In front of him lay. the
traitor Khalilullah Khan, who had marched
down from Multan to Bhakkar in order to baffle
any attempt of Dara to join his trusty slave
Basant, who was most gallantly defending the
fortress of Bhakkar against great odds. Behind
him Jai Singh was crossing the Great Rann with
the strung up energy of a hunter in sight of the
game. The Raj ah had marched 80 miles without
halting over a roadless and waterless salt marsh,
travelling at night by moonlight and with


lighted torches when the moon set. The only
course now open to Dara was to cross the Indus
and flee to Persia via Qandahar.
Section 2. —Dara's adventures among the
Trans-Indus tribes
On the eastern bank of the Indus even Firim
Mewati, who had so long followed the fortune
of Dara with rare constancy and fidelity; took
leave of the prince. Dara, with his last faithful
officer Grill Muhammad crossed over to the other
bank of the Indus and entered the Baloeh tribal
territory. The fugitives were plundered and
ill-treated by the Chandi tribe; but the Maghasis,
who were enemies of the Chandi tribe, gave a
hospitable welcome to Dara and offered to escort
him with his family to Qandahar. But fate
decreed it otherwise. Dara’s wife Nadira Banu
and the other women of his harem shuddered at
the idea of entrusting their honour to ferocious
Baloches, and worse still to be dragged into the
harem of the licentious Shah of Persia. Dara
had to give way particularly because of the deli-
cate condition of the health of Nadira Banu who
had been long suffering from dysentery .
Dara’s mind also changed; hope again
conjured up before him the vision of the Peacock
Throne which might perchance be yet recovered.
He formed the plan of raising an army with the


help of some powerful tribal chief in the trans-
Indus region for relieving the fort of Bhakkar
which was still holding out, and then marching
into Afghanistan, held by a friendly governor
Mahabat Khan, the younger. The prince
eagerly seeking an ally among the border tribes
recalled to his mind an incident of his happier
days when he had saved the life of an Afghan
predatory chief, Malik Jiwan, 1 who was now
castellan of the fort of Dadar, 9 miles east of the
Indian end of the Bolan Pass. He appealed to
Malik Jiwan for help and refuge in the name of
humanity and former friendship. Malik Jiwan
was a typical frontier Pathan, a compound of
the Turk and the Jew, a mixture of ferocity,
pride, and cupidity. Disregarding the offer of
the friendly Mirza of the Maghasi to escort him
to Qandahar, Dara left their protection and
started with his party for Dadar.
I Masum describes the incident as follows:
"The governor of Multan arrested him (Malik Jiwan) for
•committing a dangerous crime and sent him to court. The Emperor
(Shah Jahan) wanted him to be thrown under the feet of an elephant
■and put to death by being inflicted the worst tortures. One of the
friends of that zamindar was in the service of Dara Shukoh and
enjoyed the confidence and intimacy of the prince. One day in an
opportune (lit. delightful) moment he submitted to the prince the facts
of Malik Jiwan’s affair and begged and wept much for his pardon.
The prince melting at the tears of his servant, gave him his word to
secure his release. Next day, the prince put the whole affair before
the Emperor, saved the doomed one from that perilous situation and
made him, upon whose head ought to have descended the sword of justice,
the recipient of royal favour. Through the kindness of Dara Shukoh
that rejected one (coming out as it were) from beneath the elephant’s
feet, mounted the back of the elephant, and started homeward in safety
•and honour.” (Tarikh-i-Shujai, 1396; 140 a.).


Section 3. —Death of Dara's wife,
Nadira Banu Begam
Though the unfortunate Dara had lost the
crown of Delhi at Samugarh, he felt as if the
royal fortune of Hindustan was yet accom-
panying him through every adventure as long as
his beloved wife Nadira Banu was by his side.
Like a phantom of Hope she sustained the
sinking spirit of her husband in the darkest
hours of adversity and suffering, and urged him
forward to manly exertion for retrieving his
fortune. She had long been ailing of dysentery;
but Dara could never dream that she would,
unlike his mother Mumtaz Mahal, die without
seeing better days. But the end of Nadira drew
near and before the party of the prince reached
Dadar she breathed her last (6th June, 1659).
The grief and misery of the bereaved prince
exceeded all bounds; “The bright world grew
dark in the eyes of Dara Shukoh. He was
utterly bewildered. The pillars of (his)
judgment and prudence all at once shook and
fell down.” 1 It is hardly an exaggeration to
say that she was to her husband his consort,
counsellor, and disciple in one, and by taking
her away God took away his all. But could the
disconsolate prince have foreseen what was to
befall him soon afterwards, he would have
bowed in gratitude and thanked God that death
had saved her from the greater agony of
surviving her husband and sons.
I Tarikh-i-Shujai, Ms. 140.


Section 4. —The Prince made captive
When Dara had arrived within one kos of
the stronghold of Malik Jiwan, the Afghan chief
came out to welcome him with due honours. It
was at this stage that Nadira Banu died (6th
June) expressing her last wish (wasiyat
kardah ) to have her corpse home back to
Hindustan. Hitherto hers was the main
objection which held back Bara from the project
of going to Persia. So, after her expiry the
few faithful and stout hearts who were anxious
for the safety of their prince proposed that
instead of thrusting their heads into the den of
the treacherous Pathans possibly seduced by the
letters of enemies—they should from that very
place turn towards Persia.
But Dara refused to believe that Malik
Jiwan, who owed his life to him could ever turn
false to his salt. He put on a mourning dress
and decided to observe at least the three
customary days of mourning before deciding
what course to follow. The corpse of Nadira
was borne to the house of Jiwan where Dara and
his followers were very hospitably entertained
for the next two days. True to his departed
love, Dara’s first thought was to arrange for the
escort of Nadira’s last remains, which he wished
to be buried at Labor in the holy precincts of
the grave of Mian Mir. Dara sent away every
available soldier, about 70 in number, under his
brave and devoted captain Gul Muhammad to


escort the coffin of Nadira to Labor. Khawjah
Maqbul, who had served Nadira all through life,
was ordered to accompany the coffin and attend
to her burial rites. The prince with the magna-
nimity of a nobles soul about to close his account
with the world, assembled all his other followers
and gave them a free choice either to return to
Hindustan with the party of Gul Muhammad
or stay back to suffer voluntarily the privations
of exile in Persia. None remained with Dara
except his son Sipihr Shukoh and a few eunuchs
and menial servants.
Next morning (9th June, 1659) Dara, with
his son Sipihr and a handful of miserable
followers, left the house of Malik Jiwan and
proceeded towards the Bolan Pass, their des-
tination being the fort of Qandahar. But no
sooner had they reached the head of the road,
than they were surrounded by Malik Jiwan and
his ferocious band. Dara, whose body and
spirit seemed to have been paralysed by the death
of Nadira, did not raise a finger in self-defence
only Sipihr Shukoh offered fight but was soon
overpowered. They were now brought back
prisoners to the house of their treacherous host,
who at once despatched fast riders to the camp
of Jai Singh and Bahadur Khan with the news
of their capture. The piteous sight of his young
son, Sipihr Shukoh with his hands tied behind
his back was more than what Dara could bear.
“Finish, finish,” said he, “ungrateful and


infamous wretch that thou art, finish that which
thou hast commenced; we are the victims of evil
fortune and' the unjust passion of Aurangzib,
but remember that I do not merit death except
for having saved thy life, and remember that a
prince of the royal blood never had his hands
tied behind his back.” 1 The sinful heart of
Malik Jiwan quailed for a moment at the vehe-
mence of Dara’s words, and he ordered the
hands of Sipihr Shukoh to be untied.
Mirza Rajah Jai Singh and Bahadur Khan
crossed the Indus on 20th June and proceeded
towards Dadar to take charge of the captives.
On the 23rd Malik Jiwan handed over Dara, his
son and two daughters to Bahadur Khan. ‘ ‘ The
fallen prince was speechless with dispair and
utterly dazed by calamity; he consented to
everything that his captors suggested. They
made him write a letter to the eunuch Basant,
ordering him to give up to the imperialists the
fort of Bhakkar with Dara’s property and
family lodged there, and sent the eunuch
Maqubul to carry it as a proof of Dara’s ruin.” 2
Malik was made a hazari in the Mughal peerage
and received the title of Bakhtyar Khan for
betraying the luckless heir of Shah Jahan.
Besides, he was asked to accompany the pri-
soners to Delhi where further honours awaited
him.
1 Travels of Tavernier, Vol. I, pp. 351, 352.
2 History of Aurangzib, Vol. I & 11, p. 540.


After two months Bahadur Khan and the,
newly made Bakhtyar Khan (Malik Jiwan)
arrived at Delhi with the captive prince and his
family (23rd August, 1659). Dara and his son
Sipihr Shukoh were handed over to the charge of.
Nazar Beg, a trusty chelah (slave) of Aurangzib.
They were lodged in one of the buildings of
Khawaspura, now a village three miles south of
Delhi-Shahjahanabad. Two days after (25th
August), Nazar Beg was summoned to the
presence of Aurangzib in order to submit details
about the condition of the prisoners. On Tues-
day, 29th August, Aurangzib issued orders for a
disgraceful parade of the captive prince and his
son in a magnificent military procession which
should pass through the main thoroughfares ot
the city of Shahjahanabad in order to disillusion
the citizens of Delhi who were till now sceptical
about the capture of the real Dara. The pri-
soners were dressed in coarse and dirty clothes
with sorry turbans wrapped with an apology of
a Kashmir shawl “resembling that worn by the
meanest people.” A miserable and worn out
female elephant, made more repulsive with dirt
and filth, was selected for the honour of carrying
the captive princes, who with their feet
enchained were seated in an open howda on its
back ; and the slave Nazar Beg with a naked
sword sat behind them. Close to the elephant of
Dara, rode Malik Jiwan and his Afghans. A
strong force of mail-clad cavalry in their shin-
ing steel and withdrawn swords, and mounted
15


archers with arrows fixed to their bows lent an
awe-inspiring magnificence to the disgraceful
show. Bahadur Khan mounted on an elephant
headed the procession to Delhi through the
Lahori gate of the city. “Exposed to the full
blaze of an August sun, he was taken through the
scenes of his former glory and splendour. In the
bitterness of disgrace he did not raise his head,,
nor cast his glance on any side, but sat ‘like a.
crushed twig.’ Only once did he look up, when
a poor beggar from the road-side cried out, “Oh
Dara I when you were master, you always gave
me alms ; today I know well thou hast naught to-
give.”l ‘A king in shreds and patches,’ poor
Dara had now nothing to bestow on misery
except perhaps a drop of tear and a sigh of
sympathy. Nevertheless he raised his hand and
drawing off his wrapper threw it to the beggar.
The French doctor Bernier an eye-witness of
this ignominious show, says : “The crowd
assembled upon this disgraceful occasion was
immense ; and everywhere I observed the people
weeping and lamenting the fate of Dara in the
most touching language.... From every quarter
I heard piercing and distressing shrieks, for the
Indian people have a very tender heart ; men,
women, and children wailing as if some mighty
calamity had happened to themselves.... but not
a single movement was made, none offered to
draw a sword, with a view of delivering the
i Hist, of Aurangzib, I & 11, p. 543,


beloved and compassionated prince.” 1 The pro-
cession, after passing through Chandi Chok and
Sadullah Khan’s Bazar and under the walls of
the citadel of Delhi, returned to the Khizirabad
garden, where Bahadur Khan handed back the
prisoners to the custody of Nazar Beg. Dara
and his son were lodged in their former cell in the
Khawaspura mansion and Shafi Khan was
appointed to guard them with a strong force.
Section 5. —Murder of Dara Shukoh
Alarmed at the report of popular sorrow and
indignation during the procession, Aurangzib
summoned that very evening a meeting of his
most confidential partisans in the Diwan-i-Khas
of the Delhi fort. It was debated whether Dara
should be executed or kept a state-prisoner in the
fort of Gwalior. “By some it was maintained
that there was no reason for proceeding to
extremities, and that the prince might be taken
to Gawalior provided he were attended with a
strong escort. Danishmand Khan, although he
and Dara had long been on bad terms, is said to
have enforced this opinion with all his powers of
argument : but it was ultimately decided that
Dara should die, and that Sipihr Shukoh should
be confined in Gwalior. At this meeting
Raushanara Begam betrayed all her enmity
against her hapless brother, combating argu-
ments of Danishmand, and exciting Aurangzib
i Bernier’s Travels, I, pp. 99-100.


to this foul and unnatural murder. Her efforts
were but too successfully seconded by Khalil-
ullab Khan and Shaista Kban, both of them old
enemies of Dara ; and by Taqarrub Kban, a
wretched parasite recently raised to the rank of
Omrah, and formerly a physician (Hakim
Baud).” 1 The ulemas who bad had a bad time
during the period of Dara’s ascendancy, issued
the fatwa of death sentence against the unortho-
dox Dara. “The pillars of Canonical Law and
Faith apprehended many kinds of disturbance
from his life. So, the Emperor, both out of
necessity to protect the Faith and Holy Law, and
also for reasons of State, considered it unlawful
to allow Dara to remain alive any longer as a
destroyer of public peace.” Thus does the offi-
cial history 2 published under Aurangzib’s
authority justify this act of political murder.
Next morning (30th August) Aurangzib
held a darbar to show his appreciation of Malik
Jiwan’s services. When the party of this newly
created peer was being conducted through the
city, the pent-up wrath of the populace of Delhi
against the traitor broke forth. “The idlers,
the partisans of Dara, the workmen and people
of all sorts (lit. trade), inciting each other,
gathered into a mob, and assailing Jiwan and his
companions with abuse and imprecations, they
pelted them with dirt and filth, and clods and
stones, so that several persons were knocked and
1 Ibid., p. 101.
2 Alamgir-mma; see History of Aurangzib, I & 11, pp. 544-545.


killed, and many were wounded. Jiwan was
protected by shields held over his head, and he at
length made his way through the crowd to the
palace. They say that the disturbance on this
day was so great that it bordered on rebellion.
If the kotwal had not come forward with his
policemen, (to suppress the rising) not one of
Malik Jiwan’s followers would have escaped with
life. From the roofs of houses women threw so
much ashes, and pots ( haujah ) filled with urine
and human stools upon the heads of Afghans that
even many bystanders received injuries. ’ ?I This
incident, however, only hastened the doom of
Dara.
In the evening Aurangzib summoned Nazar
Quli (Beg) to his presence and ordered him to
separate Sipihr Shukoh from his father, and
bring him the head of Dara. The supervision of
the bloody task was entrusted to Shafi Khan. At
nightfall when Dara for fear of being poisoned,
was engaged with his son Sipihr Shukoh in boil-
ing some lentils, Nazar and his comrades of hell
entered the room. Seeing these bloody men in
the posture the prince all at once gave a start and
sat shrinking back. He said to them, “Have
you been sent to slay us V’ They replied “At
present we do not know anything about killing
anybody. It has been ordered that your son
i Khafi Khan, iii., p. 86; translated in Elliot and Dawson, Vol.
VII, p. 246. As regards the end of Malik Jiwan, Bernier says: "He
did not escape fate, however, which he merited, being waylaid and
assassinated within a few leagues of his own territory.” Bernier’s
Travels, p. 104.


should be separated from you and kept in custody
somewhere else. We have come to take him
away.” Sipihr Sukoh was seated knee to knee
with his father. 1 The hump-backed Nazar,
casting his venom-spouting glance at Sipihr
Shukoh, said, ‘ ‘ Get up. ’ ’ At this Sipihr Shukoh
losing his senses, clung to his father’s legs.
Father and son hugged at each other tightly and
began to weep, crying “Alas I alas 1” In a
harsh and threatening tone the slaves said to
Sipihr Shukoh ; “Get up : otherwise we shall
drag you away,” and they, started to lay hands
■on him to snatch him off. Dara Shukoh wiped
off his tears, turned towards the slaves, and said,
“Go and tell my brother to leave his innocent
nephew here.” The slaves in reply said, “We
are not anybody’s message-bearer ; we must
carry out our orders.” And saying these words
they rushed forward, and forcibly tore him
away from his father’s embrace. When Dara
realised that this was his last moment, he tore
open a pillow and took out a small pen-knife
which he had kept concealed there. He turned
to the slave who was advancing to seize him and
drove this small knife with such force into the
wretch’s side that it stuck fast in the bone.
I The Khuda Baksh Library Ms. of Tarikh-i-Shujai has the word
" hadwaz“ meaning flying. The India Office Ms, reads bar-jtishlak
bar do-zanuvi nishat; "bar do-zanuvi” does not exactly mean kneeling
down (in humility). This is a mode of sitting as opposed to sitting
cross-legged. Sitting on knees with legs back is still the usual mode
of sitting particularly in the presence of a superior. The Khuda Baksh
Ms. seems to be more accurate; because flying or shrinking back suits
the context better.


Though the prince tried to take it out, he did not
•succeed. Then Dara Shukoh dealt some blows
with his fist right and left. At length they made
a rush at him in a body and overpowered him.
The agonising shriek of Sipihr Shukoh, who was
in a neighbouring room, continued to reach the
ears of Dara Shukoh when they were engaged in
finishing their bloody work.” 1 The author of
Tarikh-i-Shujai, prone to pious credulity like his
countrymen, adds ; “this sinner has heard that
after the work was finished, the head of prince
Dara Shukoh repeated aloud the “kalima-i-
Shahadat” (Muslim confession of faith) which
was heard by people.” 2
The severed head of Dara was at once taken
do Aurangzib, who ordered it to be placed in a
dish and washed clean of blood. When he was
fully satisfied that it was the head of Dara, he
exclaimed, “Ah Bad-hahht / I did not look at
the face of this apostate from religion when
alive ; nor shall I do so now.” Next morning
(31st August, 1659) the dead body of Dara was
placed on the back of an elephant and taken
along the road of every bazar and lane of the city
of Delhi. The bystanders wept at the ghastly
spectacle. On that day the kotwal held an
investigation into the previous day’s riot and
attack on Malik Jiwan. Haibat, an ahadi
(gentleman trooper) of the Guards, who had
1 Masum, India Office Ms., 144 b, 145 a; translated in the Hist,
of Aurangzib, I & 11, p. 548-549.
2 Ibid.


instigated his fellow citizens to be avenged on the
traitor, was sentenced by Aurangzib to a most
cruel death. He was sawn alive into two halves
with unexampled barbarity.
Manucci, a violent partisan of Dara, relates
an anecdote of doubtful authenticity about
Aurangzib’s treatment of the head of the mur-
dered prince. He says that at the suggestion of
Raushanara Begam the severed head was
enbahned, enclosed in a box, and sent under the
guise of a present to Shah Jahan from his son
Aurangzib. The captive Emperor ignorant of
its contents received the packet with the remark
that it was at least some consolation to him that
his usurping son had not forgotten him al-
together. But when the packet was opened the old
Emperor fell into a swoon, and Jahanara rent
the prison-chamber of her father with shrieks of
agony ( Storia, ii.)
Though such an act was not perhaps too
atrocious to be credited to the character of
Aurangzib, x it cannot be accepted as historically
authentic ; because no other writer, European or
Indian, corroborates Manucci’s tale. All the
contemporary chroniclers as well as later his-
torians affirm that the severed head of Dara was
joined to its trunk, and, that his last remains
were borne to the tomb of Humayun and con-
signed to a grave under its vault, unwashed and
un-prayed for.


A martyr to Love, human and divine, a
heroic soul that stood for peace and concord
among mankind, and the emancipation of the
human intellect from the shackles of blind
authority and dogma, Muhammad Dara Shukoh,
merely justified in life and death the inscrutable,
“ways of God to man.”


CHAPTER XII.
AURANGZIB AND THE FAMILY OF
DARA SHUKOH
Section I.—The fate of Sulaiman Shhkoh
On being deserted by Mirza Rajah Jai
Singh, Dilir Khan and other imperial officers,
Sulaiman Shukoh began a retreat from Kora
(4th June, 1658) to Allahabad. His large and
victorious army had melted away, and only about
6000 men remained with him under Dara’s trusty
officer Baqi Beg. Sulaiman left his heavy
baggage, golden palanquin and other parapher-
nalia of royalty, and the surplus women of his
harem in the fort of Allahabad in charge of a
brave officer named Sayyid Hashim Barah. His
project was to make a wide loop round Delhi and
join his father at Labor by easily making his way
through the unguarded sub-montane districts of
Saharanpur and Ambala. He crossed the
Ganges on 14th June, and marching via Lucknow
and Moradabad reached Nagina, where he
intended to recross the river to its right bank
But the people were hostile and the boats at
every ferry rowed away to the other side of the
river at the approach of his army. He proceed-
ed further up the river and made a halt at
Chandi, opposite Hardwar, waiting for his officer
Bhawanidas, who had been sent to Rajah Prithvi
Singh of Srinagar to negotiate for help. But


this halt proved fatal. Aurangzib had sent an
army under Shaista Khan to cut off Sulaiman’s
projected retreat to the Pan jab and hold him
back at Hardwar. A dashing officer named
Pidai Khan who was moving far ahead
of the main army of Shaista Khan, received a
letter from the Rajah of Kumaun, apprising bun
of the presence of Sulaiman Sukoh opposite
Hardwar. Prom Puth, south east of Hapur,
Pidai Khan rode 160 miles in one day, and with
only 50 men reached Hardwar.
The clamour of Sulaiman’s soldiers, parti-
cularly the Sayyids of Barha who now trembled
for the safety of their homes and families, dis-
tracted the poor prince. With only 2,000 men he
entered the territory of the Rajah of Srinagar,
who promised him a safe refuge on condition of
his dismissing his troops. Baqi Beg, who had so
long been the Mentor of the young prince, had
breathed his last on the way to Srinagar. Young
Sulaiman left without an adviser, committed
errors of judgment and played into the hands of
traitors in his own retinue. He was deceived by
a forged letter purporting to have been written
by his commandant of the Allahabad fort, and
intimating the news of the arrival of Shuja near
Allahabad. Leaving the protection of the Rajah,
Sulaiman came down with his faithless followers
to Nagina, where in one day all but 700 of his
men deserted him. Next day, when he decided
to return to the hills, only 200 men were willing


to follow him there ; and his pursuers were also
close upon him. At last with his wife and a few
other ladies, his foster-brother Muhammad Shah
and seventeen followers, the miserable prince
threw himself upon the protection and honour of
the Rajah of Srinagar.
Aurangzib sat ill at ease on the usurped
throne of Delhi so long as he could not secure the
person or procure the death of Sulaiman
Shukoh, a prince more capable of ruling than his
father, and the most beloved of Shah Jahan’s
grand-children. He had sent the arch-traitor
Rajah Rajrup against Prithvi Singh in July
1659, and for more than a year, the God-fearing
and brave Rajput chief of Srinagar, who remem-
bered with gratitude Dara’s services to him in
1656, successfully defended both his territory and
his guest. The Rajah was all kindness and
generosity to the fugitive prince whom he is said
to have given a daughter in marriage.
Aurangzib, impatient of slow progress of arms,
now took to diplomacy, and asked Mirza Rajah
Jai Singh’s help in this matter. The Raj ah, who
was then staying at court, wrote friendly letters
to Prithvichand advising him to save himself
from inevitable ruin by surrendering Sulaiman
Shukoh. Having failed to seduce the old chief
of Srinagar, Jai Singh turned to intrigue with
his all powerful Brahmin minister. The minis-
ter, finding it impossible to induce his master to
part with the fugitive prince, gave a deadly


poison to Sulaiman in the form of medicine,
•which the cautious prince first experimented on
a cat. On being informed of this heinous
attempt of his minister, the Rajah immediately
beheaded the scoundrel. Jai Singh next plotted
with the Rajah’s son Medini Singh, instigating
him to play the Aurangzib towards his father.
It was the fate of Dara to be betrayed especially
by those who owed most to him. Medini Singh
all but imprisoned his father and arranged for
the surrender of the fugitives to Jai Singh’s men
( Masum’s TarikTi-i-Shujai ).
But according to the official account, as given
by the authors of Alamgir-nama and Maasir-i-
Alamgiri, it was Prithvi Singh, who of his own
accord wrote a letter to Jai Singh, intimating his
willingness to surrender Sulaiman, if Mirza
Rajah would intercede with the Emperor for
forgiving his remissness. The Emperor par-
doned the offences of the chief of Srinagar at the
request of Jai Singh, whom the Emperor asked
to send his son Ram Singh to Srinagar for
bringing away Sulaiman Shukoh. On the 27th.
December, 1660, Prithvi Singh sent down the hill
the captive prince accompanied by his son
Medini Singh. This news reached the Emperor
on 29th. December and on this day Jai Singh
was presented with a jewelled turah. On 2nd
January, 1661, Kunwar Ram Singh, Tarbiyat
Khan, Radandaz Khan and other imperial
mansabdars brought with them the captive


prince. He was lodged with Muhammad Sultan,,
eldest son of Aurangzib, who had been impri-
soned in Salimgarh for having joined his uncle
Shu j ah.
Three days after (sth January 1661), from
the prison-fortress of Salimgarh, Sulaiman
Shukoh, a captive in chains, was conducted to the
presence of Aurangzib in the Private Audience
Hall of Delhi. Looking every inch a prince even
in his misery, he behaved with much self-pos-
session. He boldly said to his uncle that he
would prefer instant death to being made to
drink the decoction of poppy seeds in the
Gawalior prison. Aurangzib, who was out-
wardly compassionate and tender to Sulaiman,
loudly and with solemnity promised that post
water should never be given to him. Sulaiman
was removed to the state-prison of Gwalior (15th
Jan. 1661 ),* Aurangzib meant anything but
I Alamgir-nama (pp. 600-602), and Maasir-i-Alamgiri (p. 33)
are silent on the intrigue of Aurangzib through Jai Singh against the
Rajah of Srinagar for securing the person of Sulaiman Shukoh. All
non-official accounts such as those of Masum (1576-1596), Tavernier
(vol. i. 290-92), Bernier (378-380), and Manucci i. 105) establish
beyond doubt the fact that Aurangzib employed Jai Singh in this
affair. Masum’s account of Sulaiman’s life in Srinagar and his
surrender the fugitive prince. Bernier also holds that “the intrigues
says that Brahmins brought pressure on the Rajah of Srinagar to
surrender the fugitive prince. Bernier also holds that “the intrigues
of Jai Singh, the promises and threats of Aurangzib... .shook the
resolution of this pusillanimous protector.” We read nowhere except
in Masum’s Tarikh-i-Shujai the attempt of the minister of Prithvi
Singh to poison Sulaiman, and Medini Singh’s usurpation of authority-
in Srinagar. Nevertheless his version appears to be quite accurate.
We believe the old Rajah of Srinagar was no party to the affair of
the betrayal of Sulaiman into the hands of Aurangzib.


what his tongue had uttered in the Diwani-i-
Khas. Sulaiman was given the much-dreaded
drink of opium-seed water for a year but his
youthful vitality proving too strong for this
slow poison, he was strangled to death under
Aurangzib’s orders and buried by the side of
Murad Bakhsh, similarly done away with in that
dismal prison. Thus at the age of thirty the
promising career of Sulaiman Shukoh came to a
violent close.
Of the unfortunate children of Sulaiman
Shukoh, a daughter named Salima Banu was
brought up and adopted as her own child by
Gauhar-ara Begum. In the month of Muharram,.
1082 A.H. (June, 1662) Salima Banu was-
married to Prince Muhammad Akbar. Another
daughter of Sulaiman Shukoh was married to
Khawajah Bahauddin in 1678 A.D. ( Maasir-i -
Alamgiri, pp. 118,166).
Section 2.— Fate of other children op
Dara
Snatched from the last embrace of Bara,.
Sipihr Shukoh had been sent away a prisoner to
Gwalior soon after the murder of his father.
After twelve years’ prison life in Gwalior his lot
became a little better. Under instructions from
the Emperor, Multafat Khan brought him to
Delhi and lodged bun in prison-tower of
Salimgarh on the Bth December 1672. Sipihr


Shukoh was introduced to tlie Emperor on the
16th December, and was given in marriage,
Zubdat-un-nisa, a daughter of Aurangzib (30th
January, 1673). The only male issue of this
wedlock was Ali Tabar (born on 13th July,
1676), who did not live for more than six
months. We hear nothing more of Sipihr
Shukoh in the i official histories of Aurangzib’s
reign. 2
Two daughters of Dara born of Nadira
Banu, who had been taken prisoner along with
their father and second brother, were brought to
Delhi and at first sent to the harem of
Aurangzib for being looked after. But at the
entreaty of Shah Jahan and Jahanara, they were
sent to Agra to reside with them. The elder of
the two, Jani Begam, l grew up an exceptionally
beautiful and accomplished woman and was
married to Muhammad Azam, the second son of
Aurangzib.
i See Maasir-i-Alamgiri, pp. 121, 124, 125, 154.
1 An exploit of her sheds the last gleam of romantic interest on
the tragic tale of Dara. See Sir J. N. Sarkar’s Hist.of Aurangzib
iv> pp. 301-2. An independent and more detailed account of Anurudh
Singh Hada’s rescue of Jani Begum from hands of the Marathas is
found in the Vamsobhaskar. The two accounts differ in minor details.
<Vamsabhaskar, p. 2869-71).


CHAPTER XIII.
DARA AND A HINDU ASCETIC
Baba Lai was a Ghatri (Kshatriya) by
caste, born in Malwa during the reign of
Jahangir (1605 —1627). He was a follower of
Chetan Swami, who was a great saint with many
miracles to his credit. It is said that one day
Chetan Swami begged of Baba Lai some rice and
fuel in alms, lighted a fire between his legs, and
held with his feet a pot in which rice was being
boiled. Seeing this miracle Baba Lai prostrated
himself before the saint and accepted him as his
guru (spiritual guide). He received from his
guru a grain of cooked rice, which, when eaten
revealed to him at once the mysteries of the
whole universe. He followed Chetan Swami to
Lahore, where one day the saint, in order to test
the progress of his disciple in yoga, ordered him
to bring some gopi-chandan (whitish earth,
sacred to Vaishnavas) ■ from Dwaraka in the
Kathiawad Peninsula, several hundred miles
distant from Lahore. Baba Lai, it is said having
completed the long journey returned with gopi
chandan from Dwaraka in less than an hour ;
whereupon his guru gave him leave to part from
him and settle independently as a master. He
took up his abode at Dyanpur near Sarhind.
Here he built a hermitage for himself and began
to initiate people in his own creed, which con-
sisted in the worship of one God without form
16


or any exterior cult. His system drew much
from the Vedanta philosophy and sufism. His
followers called themselves Baba Lalis : and
among those who followed his doctrine was
Prince Bara Shukoh. 1
Baba Lai was staying at Kotal Mehran, 2 a
suburb of the city of Lahore, when Bara Shukoh
halted there on his .journey hack to Court from
the unsuccessful siege of Qandahar (22nd
November, 1(553) . Buring three weeks of Bara’s
halt at Lahore (till about the middle of Becem-
ber, 1653), a very interesting religious discourse
took place between the Prince and the Hindu
ascetic in the house of Rai Chandrabhan
Brahman, situated in Niyula.3 This discourse
continued for nine days with two majlis or sit-
tings a day. The conversations were held in
Urdu, and these were, it seems noted down by
Rai Jadhavdas4 in a copy book. Afterwards the
whole thing was rendered into Persian by Rai
Chandrabhan ( munshi ), and published under
1 Garcin de Tassy, i. 94-96; Asiatic Researches, xvii., p. 296 ff.
2 Kotal Mehran is undoubtedly “Kui Miran”, a suburb of the-
city of Labor ( Lahore District Gas. 1884 p. 192).
3 Niyula seems to be that quarter of the city of Lahore ■which
is now known as Naulakha. Its situation is thus noticed in the Lahore
District Gazetteer: “Some distance north of the Mall and separated
from it by an open and still desolate tract, lies the Railway station
forming centre of a colony of bungalows This part of the station
is known as Naulak (Naulakha). This part of the station once
formed a part of the ancient city.” (Ibid., p. 164).
4 Prof. Wilson calls him Jadu Das. According to Prof. Wilson’s
authority this interview took place in 1649 ( vide Garcin de Tassy, i.
96), which is clearly a mistake. This dialogue, Nadir-ul-Nukat was
translated into Urdu under the title Risalah-i-usulah u ajubah-i-Dara
Shukoh. (Garcin de Tassy, vol. i., p. 96).


the title Nadir-ul-Nukat. As regards the nature
of this religious discourse the great French
critics, Huart and Massignon justly remark;
“These dialogues, which appear to have really
taken place towards the end of the year 1063
A.H. (1653 A.D.) have not the polemical and
formal character of official conferences, orga-
nised among the representatives of rival reli-
gions at the court of the Sassanides. These are
questions put by the prince in full sympathy and
confidence to the ascetic whom he respects, and
who replies to him as to a friend. Though the
subjects approached belong to the most varied
domains of the traditional civilisation of India
the most original passages are those in
which Dara Shukoh tries to make Baba Lai
analyse in Hindu terms his own religious
experience as a Muhammadan ” r Else-
where the same critics observe: “As regards
the ascetic Baba Laldas.. .we have been able to
notice in the curious remark that Dara made
about him (in his Sliatahat, Urdu translation
Labor, p, 144), that he was a mundiya (a
shaven-headed monk) and that he was attached
to the sect of Kabirpanthis. Thus then, it is still
the great shadow of Kabir that has protected
this germ of reconciliation between Hinduism
and Islam generously sown by him in the 15th
century. At this moment when the unity of
India depends on a new attempt at the mutual
comprehension of the two spiritual elements,
I Journal Asiatique, 1926 (Cct.-Decr).


attention can legitimately be paid to the figures
of Baba Lai and Dara.” 1
Kabir has undoubtedly been the great
fountain-head of inspiration to succeeding
generations of religious reformers and great
thinkers from Akbar to Mahatma Gandhi and
Rabindranath, men who have preached the
gospel of concord and love to humanity, who
attempt at bridging the gulf between race and
race, creed and creed. But it is difficult to
accept even on the authority of Dara himself that
Baba Lai was a Kabirpanthi out and out. There
is no doubt that Baba Lai, who originally started
his ascetic life as a Eot-yogin (a sect given to
the practice of stiff physical postures or asanas
for working miracles —became afterwards a
mystic, upholding like Kabir, the worship of one
absolute God without form, and singing God’s
praises and his own spiritual experiences in
popular Hindi verses. But Baba Lai did not,
as the following extracts from the Dialogue will
show, share Kabir’s contempt for book-lore and
yoga practices, nor did he, like Kabir, condemn
fiercely idol worship and the externals of
religions.
It is a great misfortune that the Persian
text of this interesting Dialogue, Nadir-ul-
Nukat, has come down to us only in mutilated
and corrupt transcriptions. As the Dialogue
i ibid.


reveals the inner man, a few extracts in transla-
tion from the published text will not be out of
place here.
1. Q. What is the difference between Nad and the
Vedaf
A. It is the same difference that holds between the
sovereign who orders and the order decreed by him.
The one is Nad, the other the Veda.
2. Q. What is the light of the moon, what is the black
spot in it, and what is the cause of its whiteness ?
A. The moon by itself has no brightness; it is an
absolutely colourless object on which the rays of the
sun fall; its whiteness is the reflection of the seas and
its black spot is the land of this earth.
3. Q. If it be a matter of reflection, why is it not
equally seen on the sun?
A. The sun is like a globe of fire, while the moon
is like a globe of water; reflection is formed in water
but not in fire.
6. Q. What is the cult of idols among the Hindus?
Who has prescribed it?
A. This observance has been established in order to
strengthen the heart. He who has known the reality
of things is excused for that reason with respect to
the external form; but when one has not the know-
ledge of the inmost reality, one remains attached to
the external form. It is the same with the unmarried
girls who play with dolls; once married, they abstain
from it thenceforth; this being a sort of idol-
worship. So long as one has not gone to the bottom
of it ( batin ), one is attached to the external form;
since when one knows the inner meaning, one does
away with it.


11. Q. What distinction is there between the Creator
and the creature? I had put this question to some,
who replied to me by a comparison of their differ-
ence to that which exists between a tree and its seed.
Is it so or otherwise?
A. The Creator is like the ocean and the creature
like a jug full of water. Although the water is the
same in the jug and the ocean, there is a very great
difference between the two recipients. It is thus
that the Creator is creator and the creature is
creature.
12. Q. What is Paramatma, and what is Jivatmaf
How again does the Jivatma become (one with)
Paramatma?
A. Wine comes from water: but if it be poured
on earth, the impurities, the intoxication and the
pollution which it contains are left on the surface;
whereas the water will penetrate into the ground,
and will remain pure water. It is the same with the
man who is still the Jivatma; if he abandons along
with his existence the sediments of the five senses,
then will he rejoin God.
13. Q. What is the difference between the Jivatma and
the Paramatma?
A. There is no difference at all in essence.
14. Q. Then, how is it that punishment and reward do
apparently exist?
A. It is the mark which is imprinted by the mould
of the body; thus it is with the Ganges and the water
of the Ganges.
15. Q. What is the difference marked out by this
example.
A. This difference is many-sided and unlimited. In
fact, if the water of the Ganges passes into a jug and
if a drop of wine falls into it, all the water of the jug


is considered polluted as wine; whereas on the con-
trary if a hundred thousand jugs of wine were
poured into the Ganges, the Ganges would always be
the Ganges. It is thus that the Paramatma is perfect
purity; while an atma (Jivatma ) is coloured by the
existence of here below; if it renounces this abode
then the atma becomes the Paramatma. But so long
as it dwells in this existence, it will always remain
an atma (Jivatma).
39. Q. It is indicated in the books of the Hindus that
those who happen to die in Benares (Kashi) are sure
to attain salvation. If it be so, one may wonder
that there is equality between the fate of those who
persist in asceticism and of sinners.
A. Truly speaking, Kashi is the confirmation of
one’s life. He who becomes confirmed in life
(eternal) is sure to find mukti (salvation).
20. Q. Because every man has received life, will there-
fore every man obtain salvation ?
A. With the exception of a Mahapurukha, no one
becomes confirmed in life (existence), but only gets
rooted in desires. And desire is (something)
different from real life ( khwaish as wueud alahidah
ast). Desire leads man to desire and thus deprives
him of salvation.
26. Q. If it becomes known that I always at heart
prefer the (the garb) of a faqir, men for their
advancement in dignity may put on the dress of a
darwish ; but ultimately their real nature will come
out, and this will affect their hearts severely. A king
should abstain from it.
A. No one will ever be successful in closing a path
(i.e. the wearing of the ascetic robe), by which the
men of God pass ; just as a man who goes on collect-
ing pebbles with the hope of discovering perchance
the philosopher’s stone [cannot be dissuaded from


doing so indiscriminately]. Moreover, the darwish,
who comes to the assembly in the dress of a darwish
acquires great merit ; when he takes leave to depart,
men render him services and adore him greatly, and
this is itself a recompense.
32. Q. According to the Hindu idea, it is in the valiey
of Birj (Brindaban) that the genuine figure (surai-
i-khas) of Shri Krishna reveals itself to the
shepherdesses ( gopis ). Does this mysterious ap-
pearance suit men or not ?
A. This apparition will not suit those who are
attached to worldly life ; because if they cast their
glance on that genuine figure, they will die and get
punishment instead of reward. Amongst the faqirs,
those who have all their desires suppressed in their
body so well that their hearts on no account move tn
any direction, are only fit to stand it.
39. Q. It is sometimes said that in Divine union one
attains the Essence (Zat)i. How can it be said that
this union obtains Divine essence ?
A. When one reddens a piece of iron in the fire and
it takes the colour of fire, it behaves like fire.
41. Q. It is a custom that when Muhammadans die,
they are buried and Hindus are burnt ; but when a
darwish 1 in the cloak of a Hindu breathes his last
(dar burqa-i-Hindu) , what will be done to him!?
A. First of all, to be buried or burnt is an alterna-
tive regarding material existence. Now the darwish
does not care for his body, which he has abandoned
in order to plunge himself in the ocean of joy found
X This question relates to the highest Sufistic realisation. “I am
God.” Baba Lai’s reply to it also conforms to the usual Sufistia
commentary on it.
2 It should be noted in this Dialogue that the words, derwish and
faqir, have nowhere been used to mean exclusively Muslim fagtrs.
They have been used as in this passage to signify the “men of God"
of every creed.


in the realisation of God. He leaves the sphere of
material existence ( hasti ) only to be exalted to a
lasting abode in that which has no material existence
(nisti ). Like a serpent which enters its. hole without
any thought of its worn out skin left behind, the
darwish cares no more for his body ; let people da
whatsoever they like with it.
42. Q. A man said to me: “Do less of evil.” I asked
him : “What does it signify, less of evil (kam
azar) ?” He replied : “Little of evil (andak
azar).” I said : “To do evil is to do evil, no matter
of what degree it is.” How can it be measured ?
A. We cannot injure him who is greater or stronger
than we are. He who is of equal strength can
retaliate. But we should not do any injury to him
who is weaker; this is what is indicated by the advice,
“Do less of evil.”
43. Q. Free Will is God {md bud-i-haqiqi) ;it is also
said in the books that every one is endowed with Free
Will. How can we accept it ?
A. Free Will is God, whose sovereignty is sublime.
It is also in all that exist.
44. Q. How can we be assured of it in both cases ?
A. When the child was still within the womb of his
mother, Free Will in him was Divine Providence that
protected him, and nourished him in all his develop-
ment ; there being no other person at that' time.
Once the child is ushered into the world half of Free
Will is that which out of grace and kindness for
creatures begets milk in the mother’s breast (i.e.
remains with God) ; the other half passes on to the
child ; because, when the child weeps, his mother
becoming aware of it, suckles him. When the child
is grown up and becomes familiar with the cravings
of the flesh, and occupies himself in doing things,
good and bad, he himself becomes this free ztriil ,*
because God is above good and bad.


53- Q. What does the heart signify ?
A. The heart is meant to say “I” and “You” ; that
is to say, the duality arising out of (the affirmation
of) two : because the heart takes the mind (arm, lit.
souls) to every direction, towards father, mother,
brother, wife and children —to whom it becomes
attached. We must know that attachment between
two comes from the heart.
54. Q. What is the appearance of the heart which can-
not be seen ? (Surat-i-dil che-ist ke dar nazor
na-me-ayaid) .
A. The appearance of the heart is like that of a
breath of wind.
55. Q. How can it be known ?
A. Just as the wind uproots trees although it remains
invisiable to our eyes, in the same manner does the
heart throw into commotion the five senses (hawas-i-
-khatns) ; it is in us and yet not visible to our ey;s.
It is thus that the appearance of the heart is like that
of a breath of wind.
56. Q. What is the function of the heart?
A. The heart is the broker (dedal) of our mind.
57. Q. How can it be known ?
A. From the shop of five senses —which are called
"Indriyan" in Hindi—it secures the pleasures of the
world, and takes them to the mind, and the mind itself
becomes enamoured of the seductions of these
pleasures. It is thus that the heart procures goods
from the shop for the buyer, and having received a
commission steps aside ; gain or loss falls on the
buyer or the seller. In this way it acts as a
broker and herein lies its [function.]
61. Q. What is called the sleep of the faqirs ?
A. It is the sleep which a man goes into, leaving
behind him every desire of the world, and shaking


himself free from the “You” and “I” ; and during
sleep no worldly object appears to him in dream.
The sleep of faqirs is perhaps called Jog-nidra in
Hindi, because it is free from the coming and going
from this world which is liberation ( mukti ).
63. Q. What is the “awakening” ( bedari ) m which the
animals, vegetables, minerals, etc. accomplish the
four stages (of their evolution) ?
A. It is called the “complete revolution of the
universe” ( gardishi-i-falak ) : The universe (is a
body) of which the head is the north ; the feet, the
south ; the eyes, the sun and the moon ; the bones,
the mountains and stones ; the skin, the earth ; tne
pulse, the oceans ; the blood, the waters of seas and
fountains, the bushes and forests are its hair, and its
ear is the sky.
64. Q. The sky is single, whereas ears are two Why ?
A. The two ears hear only one single word.


CHAPTER XIV
DARA SHUKOH AND THE CONTEM-
PORARY MUSLIM SAINTS
Section I.—Prince Dara and Mulla
Shah Badakhshi
Mulla Shah Muhammad, known also by the
epithet of Lisan-Ullah, was the son of Mulla
Abd Muhammad, the Qazi of Arksa, a place
near Rustak in Badakhshan. Attracted by the
fame of the great Sufi Mian Mir of Labor, he
came to India in 1614 and became his disciple.
After the death of Mian Mir, which took place
on the 7th Rabi I. A.H. 1045 (August 21,1636)
Mulla Shah went with his disciples to live
permanently in Kashmir. Drunk to madness
with divine love, he is said to have broken loose
from the shariyat, and let himself adrift in the
dangerous waters of ma’arifat (gnosticism)
which, they say, landed him on the benighted
shores of Infidelity ( kufr ). However, among
the disciples of Mian Mir, none equalled him in
piety, no scholar of his age enjoyed greater
reputation for learning, and none among the
contemporary authors —perhaps with the excep-
tion of Dara Shukoh—employed his pen more
usefully for the propagation of spiritual know-
ledge than did Mulla Shah Badakhshi. 1
i For biographical notices, Rieu, ii. 690-91; Bodl Catalogue, col.
209; Oriental Public Library Catalogue, iii. 1112. Rieu reads Mulla
Idi in place of Mulla Abd. Muhammad, and Ark in place of Arksa
{vide Oriental Public Library Catalogue, iii. 112). The most con


To him the enlightened and accomplished
prince Dara Shukoh turned for spiritual illu-
mination and also for formal initiation into the
Qadiriya order of Sufism. Tawakkul Beg, who
was also a disciple of Mulla Shah, tells us that
it was not without considerable difficulty that the
Prince could induce the saint to accept him as a
disciple in 1050 A.H. (1640 A.D.) during his
visit to Kashmir. Mulla Shah had gained
spiritual illumination by hard devotional and
ascetic exercises; but on his pupils he imposed
no such stern discipline or long course of prayer
and meditation. “For his own pupils”, says
Tawakkul Beg, “he had discovered a simpler
and shorter course in which he used his will and
personality to open, as the phrase is, the knot of
their hearts”. This process of opening the knot
of heart appears to have been a sort of hypnotic
“suggestion” to stimulate at first an emotional
religiosity in a neophyte, and next instruct him
in the doctrine of union with God, Dara had,
says Tawakkul Beg, “the greatest difficulty
in prevailing on Mulla Shah to operate on
bim Fatima, 1 a sister of Dara Shukoh, who
temporary accounts are those in Dara’s Sakinat-ul-auliya, and
Tawakkul Beg’s Biography of Mulla Shah. Next comes the
Dabistan and Mirat-ul-khiyal (p. 198). Some of the works of Mulla
Shah: fafsir-i-Shah a commentary on the Quran; Risalah-i-Bismillah;
Risalah-i-Shahiya, Gaels and Rubais collected in a Kulliyat; Tazkira-
i-Sha'ra-i-maa'rifan, a prose work. (See Oriental Public Library
Catalogue, Hi. 113).
1 It is very apparent Mr. Macdonald has mistaken a common
complimentary epithet, Fatima-uz-samani, (the Fatima of her age)
for the name of princess Jahanara, eldest daughter of Shah Jahan.
if he religious attitude and life in Islam, p. 205).


had a long correspondence with the master,
was initiated by her brother acting for him;
passed through all the normal visions, attained
to pure union with God and intuitive perception.
Mulla Shah said of her; “She has attained
to so extraordinary a development of mystical
knowledge that she is worthy of being my
representative”. She thus describes some of
her experiences; ‘I seated myself, then, in a
corner with my face turned toward Mecca, and
concentrated all my mind on the image of the
master, calling up at the same time, in my ima-
gination, the personal description of the most
holy Prophet. Occupied with this contempla-
tion, I arrived in a state of my soul in which I
neither slept nor waked, and then I saw
the holy company of the Prophet and his four
friends I also perceived Molla Shah; he
was seated near the Prophet, upon whose feet his
head lay, while the Prophet said to him, ‘O
Mulla Shah, for what reason did you illumine
that Timuri?’
God be praised, who, through the
particular attention of the holy master, has
accorded to me, a poor woman, the gift of con-
ceiving in the most complete manner, of the
absolute Being, as I have always ardently
desired. Whoever does not posses the knowledge
of the absolute Being is not a man—he belongs
to those of whom it is said, ‘They are the brutes,
and more ignorant still.’ Every man who has


attained this supreme felicity becomes, through
this fact itself, the most accomplished and the
most noble of beings and his individual existence
is lost in the absolute existence; he becomes like
a drop in the ocean, a mote in the sunshine, an
atom over against totality. Arrived in this
state, he is above death, future punishment, the
Garden and the Fire. Whether he is man
or woman, he is always the most perfect
being
The experiences of Jahanara must have also
been the experience of Dara Shukoh, kindred
souls and disciples of the same master as they
were. But Dara went further than Jahanara,
and carried to its logical extreme the doctrine
of absolute unity which emboldened him ta
proclaim openly that he was a Khud-parast or
worshipper of Self. The influence of Mulla
Shah on the moral and spiritual life of Dara was
very great, and the master and the disciple lived
on terms of most affectionate intimacy. The
Prince in his book Easant-ul-Arifin tells us
much about his Pir’s learned interpretations of
Quranic verse; ‘O you who believe, don’t you
approach the prayer when you are drunk,’
{Quran, iv. 43). ‘lf the drunkenness is earthly,
the prayer is forbidden in order that it may not
be vitiated out of respect for the prayer. If the
intoxication is that of the Reality, it is forbidden
to approach the prayer, out of respect for the
I Ibid., p. 205.


intoxication.’ Similarly, the explanation which
Mulla Shah has given of the terms “believer”
and “infidel” is at once subtle and most liberal.
He says that the true believer is the infidel who
has attained to God, who has seen Him and
and known Him; the infidel is a believer
(imandar) who has not attained to God, whom
he has not seen nor known.” 1 This is also a
humourous home-thrust at those who either by
birth or by reciting the confession of the creed
arrogate to themselves the appelation of
■“Believers”.
Mulla Shah was not only a man of wide
intellectual outlook but also a pantheist of sub-
lime imagination and humanitarian tendencies.
He retained to the last the allegiance of his
restless princely disciple, who had a fascination
for the new, and who made almost equally
intimate acquaintances with several other saints.
In the preface to his last literary production,
Sirr-i-Asrar or the Persian translation of the
Upanishads, Dara makes a grateful acknowl-
edgement of his debt to his master who inspired
him in his. search for the doctrine of TauMd
(Unity of God) in non-Islamic Scriptures.
Out of what was undoubtedly a considerable
mass of correspondence between Dara and Mulla
Shah only two letters 2 have come down to us;
1 Hasanat-ul-Arifin, Persian text, p. 21-24; p. 31-32.
2 Though two letters of Mulla Shah have been printed on pp.
23-24, and _pp. 31-32, they seem to be one and the same letter; but the
difference in reading being very great, we have given the texts of
both letters, coming through different Mss.


one written by Bara to his Pir on the occasion of
his getting the title Shdh-i-Buland-iqhal and the
’other written by Mulla Shah giving the prince
some instructions in spiritual matters. Mulla
Shah writes: ‘ * May he attain the bliss of vision
(Beatific). May the lamp of the heart of the
enlightened ones be safe from the breath of
enemies. You may have heard that secrets
should be concealed from outsiders; do keep
them secret. It may be known to you that one
should be less inspired in the company of those
who have less of the grace of God; do not warm
up too much. It is no secret to you that in carry-
ing a work to completion, one must take pains;
do exert yourself. He who is sincere-hearted
in this work is surely a lover, and he who is a
lover is worthy of the blessing of the vision
(Beatific). The perfect man (Insan-i-Kamil)
is he, who is not reprehended by any body
whether common people, or intimates of the
■ inner and innermost circle; that is to say, (He
is the perfect man) who does not omit the
performance of any work enjoined either by the
skariyat (the dogma of Islam), or by the tarigat
(the path of esoteric Islam), or by the Jiaqiqal
(the Truth), First comes Gnosis ( marifat )
which is the effect ( asar ) of good company. The
second (thing) is the concentration of the mind
which is the result of self-control, and third
comes shariyat, which means conformity with
(the ways of) mankind in general. Inwardly
every act (of ours) must conform to haqiqat;
17


and. outwardly all acts should be like those of
people at large. Love those who hold similar
views and shun the hypocrites.”
The above letter is a severe comment on
some of Dara’s faults of character. Without
taking into consideration the capacity and
character of people, Dara would communicate
indiscreetly great spiritual mysteries and
practices to his readers and neophytes in gene-
ral. He even boasts of his speaking without
ambiguity, of things which the former saints
communicated only by subtle hints. Such in-
capacity to keep secrets, such injudicious can-
dour was indeed a grave defect of Dara’s
character. Mulla Shah, however intoxicated
with divine love he might be, was not altogether
indifferent to the hard realities of the world to>
which he draws the attention of his less practi-
cal-minded pupil. He interpretes the Shariyat
as conformity with the (usages) mankind in
general and not of Islam only. This is another
way of restating Akbar’s cardinal doctrine of
religious policy i.e. sulh-i-kul (peace with all).
It was the influence and admonition of Mulla
Shah that restrained the prince from defying
the Islamic shariyat more openly. Nevertheless,
for having been a partisan of Dara, the saint was
summoned from Kashmir to Aurangzib’s
presence to answer certain charges made against
him by illiberal theologians of his age. “He
went very reluctantly to Lahore and lived there


in great distress and fear till his death; but all
the while thanked God that his life ended as it
had begun in poverty. Here he died in 1661,
and was buried close to his master, Mian Mir.” 1
Section 2. —Dara Shukoh and Shaikh
Mhhebbullah Allahabadi
Perhaps the boldest and most original
thinker and writer among the contemporaries of
Dara Shukoh was the famous Sufi, Shaikh
Muhibb-ullah of Allahabad. The-earliest notices
of the Shaikh is to be found in Mirat-ul-Khiyal
written by Sher Khan Lodi, son of Ali Ahmed
Khan Lodi, 2 in the reign of Aurangzib. The
Shaikh wrote a most difficult book on Sufism in
Arabic, entitled “Taswwid,” in which he argues
that the Gabriel of the Prophet Muhammad was
within Muhammad himself. Similarly, every
prophet had his Gabriel within his ownself.
Gabriel is not a winged angel but a hidden
spiritual power (quwwat-i-batini) . When this
power overwhelmed the prophets, wahi or re-
velation descended on them.
Soon after his appointment as the absentee
vieeory of Allahabad (1645 A.D.), Dara wrote
a letter to the Shaikh in which he says that the
subah of Allahabad seemed particularly accept-
1 Tarikh-i-Kaskmiri by Azam, I2ia-122; History of Aurangzib,
iii., p. 94-95.
2 Bodleian Library Catalogue of Persian Mss. vol. i, 207. Bui
Miarat-ul-Khiyal published in 1848, Umdaf-ul-Akhabar Press, gives
Ali Amzad Khan as Sher Khan’s father’s name.


able to him because of the presence of His Holi-
ness within its jurisdiction. In the same letter
Dara 1 requested the Shaikh to answer in detail
16 questions on Sufism. The Shaikh writes in
reply a very long letter answering all the ques-
tions to the entire satisfaction of the prince.
Dara wrote a second letter thanking the Shaikh
for his pains and intimating his desire to
exchange ideas with the Shaikh, if he received
any encouragement from that quarter (i'e. from
the Shaikh).
The author of Mirat-u-Khiyal says that
when Muhibb-ullah’s book happened to come to
the notice .of Aurangzib, he condemned it
severely because, besides the above mentioned
view of Gabriel, there were many subtle and
ambiguous things difficult to comprehend and
often running counter to the shariyat. Death
had by this time placed the Shaikh beyond the
reach of Aurangzib’s vengeance. At last two
disciples of the Shaikh living in retirement were
discovered, and then Aurangzib called upon
either to explain their master’s book and recon-
cile its views, with the dogmas of Islam, or if
unable to do so, burn it to ashes. The disciples
of Shaikh replied to Aurangzib that if His
Ma jesty wished to burn the book, Taswwid, there
was enough fire in the royal kitchen to consume
it. 2
1 Dara to Shaikh Mahibb-ullah, Dara Shukoh, vol. ii., Pers. text,
1-2; reply of the Shaikh, ibid., p. 3-8; second letter, 8-10-.
2 Mirat-ul-Khiyal, Pers. text, p. 228-29,


Section 3. —Dara Shukoh and Shah Dil-ruba
Six letters 1 written by Dara Sukoh to Shah
Dil-ruba are extant in a collection of letters,
entitled Fayyaz-ul-Qawanin. They are the only
reliable source of information regarding the
saint and his relations with Dara. These letters
were written by Dara in reply to letters received
by him from the saint, which are unfortunately
lost, perhaps for ever. These letters being with-
out dates, it is very difficult to say exactly when
the prince came into touch with Shah Dil-ruba
through correspondence. In the first letter
Dara writes: “Whenever I happen to be,
whether at Agra or in Lahore, my heart remains
enchained to thine.” Dara invites the Shaikh
to the Court in a letter; but the Shaikh probably
did not visit the prince. The prince writes in
another letter that he was very eager to meet
him, and if he could, he would have travelled to
the Shaikh’s abode by making his head perform
the functions of legs ( sar-ra-qadam sakhtdh). 2
1 Dara to Dil-ruba, Pers. text, p. 10-20.
2 Dara to Dil-ruba, letter No. 2, Pers. text. It seems Dara
approached Shah Dil-ruba with the sincere humility of a disciple after
he had become a murid or disciple of Mulla Shah Badakshahi. This
is borne out by some passages in the last letter (No. 6) ; wherein the
prince says that he has referred certain points for elucidation to his
pir-i-dastgir, meaning certainly Mulla Shah, and requests the saint
to send back the table of his spiritual descent ( shijra ) wrapped up
in a letter. As Dara refers to Shah Dil-ruba in his book, Hasanat-
td-Art fin, written about 1656, they must have known eacli other
considerably long before that date.


Section 4.—Dara Shukoh and Shaikh
Muhsin Fani
Shaikh Muhsin Fani, “a traveller in the
subtle path of Sufism” was, according to the
author of Mirat-ul-KMyal, an inhabitant of
Kashmir, a man of culture, affluence and of
pleasant manners. He acted for a time as the
Sadr or Civil Judge of Allahabad in the reign of
Shah Jahan, It is said that when Murad
Bakhsh captured Balkh in July, 1646 (the capi-
tal of Nazar Muhammad Khan) there was found
in the library of Nazar Muhammad Khan among
other things a copy of Diwan-i-Muhsin Fani in
praise of Nazar Muhammad. At this the
Emperor Shah Jahan got angry with Muhsin
Fani and deprived him of the office of Sadr,
though he was given a yearly allowance sufficient
for his maintenance. Since that time he used to
live in Kashmir and soon became a spiritual
teacher of high reputation. He built in the
middle of a garden a square mansion with a
pucca well ( Hauz ) adjacent to it—from which
this house became known as the Hauz-Khana.
At noon the Shaikh used to sit there, and his
disciples went to him one at a time for receiving
instruction. The reputation of the Shaikh
attracted to his fold a penitent courtezan named
Nazi, matchless for her beauty even in Kashmir.
The inevitable happened; and the Shaikh became
fast entangled in the noose of Nazi’s love. It is
said that Jafar Khan, subahdar of Kashmir, had


also become enamoured of Nazi, who, however,
scorned his overtures and spumed at his rich
presents. Jafar Khan wrote in retaliation some
verses giving publicity to the scandal in the
filthiest language, which with an apology, the
author of Mirat-ul-Khiyal has quoted in his book.
Dara and Muhsin Fani picked up a friend-
ship perhaps during one of the visits of the
prince to Kashmir. The only evidence, hitherto
available, of Muhsin Fani having been a con-
temporary and a friend of Dara is a letter 1 of
the prince to Fani and Fani’s reply to it.
According to the author of Mirat-ul-Khiyal, 2
Muhsin Fani died in Kashmir in 1671 A.D.
(1081 A.H.) nearly ten years after the murder
of Dara. It should be noted here that the
famous work Dabistan-ul-muzahibJ which is
commonly ascribed to Muhsin Fani, is nowhere
1 For the correspondence between Dara and Muhsin Fani, Pers.
text, p. 30-31; 32-33.
2 Mirat-ul-Khayal (Lithoed. 1848; Uradat-ul Akhbar, Munshi
Lachman Prasad), p. 179-180.
3 Dr. Rieu says, ‘Muhsin Fani, to whom it ( Dabistan-ul-Musahib )
has generally been ascribed, is only named in some copies, as the
author of a Rubai quoted at the beginning of work. (Translation,
vol. i. p. 3). Our knowledge of the author is confined to facts gleaned
from some passages in his work, in which he incidentally refers to
himself. From these he appears to have been brought up in the faith
of the Sipasis, also called Abadis, a branch of the Parsis.
The work was probably completed shortly after 1063 A.H., and
certainly before A.H. 1068 for Dara Shukoh is spoken of in the last
chapter xx vol. iii., p. 285, as being still at the height of his power.
Although the author is nowhere explicitly named, it is not improbable
that the name of Mubad, which appears in connection with some
verses... .was his iakhallus or poetical designation. Indeed Mubad
Shah is named as the author in one of our copies...." (Catalogue
of Persian Mss. in the British Museum, i. 141-142).


mentioned in the Mirat-ul-Khiyal as one of the
works of Fani. This proves perhaps beyond a
doubt that both Muhsin Fani, and the author of
Babistan-ul-Muzahib, though contemporaries
and friends of Dara Shukoh, were not one and
the same person. The author of Bahistan, who
several times quotes Dara as an authority on
Sufism, probably completed his work before the
year 1658 A.D., because any event of a later date
(such as the overthrow of Dara’s power and
execution of Sarmad) is not noticed in that book.
Such being the case, the author of Mirat-ul-
Khiyal could have hardly omitted to include
Babistan among the works of Fani, if he had
written any such book.
Section 5. — Dara Shukoh and Sarmad the
Mystic
Sarmad is perhaps the pen-name of a Jew
whose original name is not known, but who after
his conversion to Islam received the name of
Muhammad Said. Authorities differ on the
nationality and parentage of Sarmad. The
author ‘ of Babistan-ul-Muzahib written about
1657 A.D. says that Sarmad was a Jew. The
author of Mirat-ul-Khiyal, (written during the
•reign of Aurangzib) asserts, we do not know on
We may only remark that Dr. Rieu is not perhaps quite justified
in holding that the author of DabiStan was a Parsi; because in a
certain passage the author says that he made a pilgrimage to Mecca,
where he met a follower of the false prophet Musailama, and was
asked by that man to make a pilgrimage to the tomb of Musailama.
Why should a Parsi make a pilgrimage to Mecca?


what authority,—that Sarmad was originally
from Farangistan- and was an Armenian; and
Yalih Daghistani, author of Riaz-ush-Shaura,.
written in the time of Emperor Muhammad
Shah, gives Kashan as his native place. Even
if Sarmad was an Armenian, he was not perhaps
an Armenian Christian; because the author of
Dabistan says that he derived his information of
Jewish religion from Muhammad Said Sarmad,
whom he met in Hyderabad Sind in 1057 (1647
A.D.), “who originally came of the learned of
the Jews, from a sect who are known as Ribbani,
and who (Sarmad), after learning the principles
of Jewish faith and studying Taurit became a
Musalman.” 1
Muhammad Said started his career as a
merchant and came to Tatta (Sind) for trade.
But there he fell in love with a Baniya boy
named Abhaichand so violently that he lost the
equilibrium of his mind altogether. Sarmad
wooed the boy with much assiduity and made a
god of him; be says in one of his verses, “I do-
not know if ip this world my God is Abhaichand
or some one else” ( khuda-i-man 'Abhaichandast
ya digar). Abhaichand also became so much
attached to him that he could not bear to live
apart from him, Sarmad and Abhaichand after
sometime left Tatta, and came during their
wandering to the court of Abdullah Qutb Shah
of Golconda. Being disappointed there they
i Dabistan, text, fob 2476.


-came to Delhi toward the close of Shah Jahan’s
reign and began to live there enjoying the devo-
tion and patronage of Prince Dara Shukoh.
The author of Mirat-ul-Khiyal says, “As Prince
Dara Shukoh was inclined to the society of
maniacs ( majanin ) he kept his (Sarmad’s)
company, and enjoyed his discourses for a con-
siderable period.” l
But there is a plane of existence wherefrom
saints like Sarmad whom the world-wise people
call mad, think no better of the common run of
men and hate to be called wise {danishmandan) .
Dara Shukoh was still in the noose of scholas-
ticism when he met the great saint who, having
already enough of scholarship, had bidden
adieu to it as useless in the path of God.
Dara writes to Sarmad: “Master (pir u
murshid-i-man) , every day this humble self
desires to go to you, but has not been successful.
If ‘I am I’ ( agar man man-m), why this annul-
ment of my ‘will’? And if lam not I, where
is my remissnes? If the murder of Imam
Husain was the Will of God, then who is
Yazid coming in between ? And if it was not
the will of God, what is the explanation of it ?
The Prophet goes to a fight with the kafirs, and
defeat befalls the army of Islam; the ulemas of
official Islam ( ulema-i-zaMri ) say that'this is ‘a
lesson in patience’ ( taalim-i-sabr ) ; but where is
the necessity of a lesson ( taalim ) to him who has
reached the end (of spiritual progression).”
I Mirat-td-Khayal, p. 104.


The saint replied in a sentence that he had
silenced the sciences he had once read. It is
said that Sarmad used to pronounce only the
negative part of the formula of Islam i.e.
“There is no deity.’’ If he was asked the
reason of it he would say, “I am absorbed in the
negative and have not yet come to the positive.
Why shall I tell a lie ?” Sarmad was really
not an atheist, but a panthiest; but both being
equally damnable in the eyes of orthodoxy, the
mullas were only waiting for an opportunity to
be avenged on the saint.
After Dara’s murder, Sarmad with his
boundless influence over the citizens of Delhi
was looked upon by Aurangzib as politically
dangerous. Besides, a charge of heresy and
violation of Islamic ordinances was made out
against him by the court theologians. Sarmad
was given the alternative of either covering his
nudity or parting with his head. The saint
chose the latter and died a true martyr’s death
welcoming the executioner and his naked sword
with a smile and laying his head unmoved on the
block. He is said to have uttered the following
verse when the executioner’s sword was about to
descend on his saintly head:
“ There was an uproar, and we opened
our eyes from the eternal sleep;
We saw the night of wickedness still
endured; and so we slept again.


Sarmad, who lost his head on a charge of
heresy was canonised a saint by the people at
large. His severed head, it is said, recited like
that of Dara Shukoh the whole of the Kalima,
a miracle which Valih Daghistani mentions on
the authority of Khalifa Ibrahim Badakhshi,
who perhaps heard it with his own ears I
Sarmad’s tomb, which lies east of the Jama
Masj id of Delhi on the other side of the road is
even today a place of popular worship. 1
i The major portion of this section is based on Moulvi Abdul
AH's-article on Sarmad in J. A. S. B. 1924, p. in and following.
For other references to Sarmad’s life see History of Aurangzib, hi.,
p. 95 footnote.
Mr. B. A. Hashimi has recently contributed a learned article (to
be continued) in the “Islamic Culture”, October, 1933, pp. 663-672.
He holds that the emigrant ancestors of Sarmad were European Jews
who had migrated to Armenia, and that prior to his coming to India
Sarmad lived in Kashan.


CHAPTER XV.
CHARACTER OF DARA SHUKOH
Section I.—Dara and Atjbangzib Contrasted
“Dara... .was a man of dignified manners,
of a comely countenance, joyous and polite in
conversation, ready and gracious of speech, of
extraordinary liberality, kindly and compas-
sionate, but over-confident in his own opinion of
himself, considering him competent in all things,
and having no need of advisers. Thus it was
that his dearest friends never ventured to inform
him of the most essential things. Still it was
easy to discover his intentions.” 1 The above re-
marks on the character of Dara from the friendly
pen of Manucci are substantially borne out by
the following words of the less sympathetic
Bernier: “Dara was not deficient in good
qualities; he was courteous in conversation,
quick at repartee, polite and extremely liberal:
but he entertained too exalted an opinion of him-
self ; believed he could accomplish everything by
the powers of his own mind.... He was also very
irascible; apt to menace, abusive and insulting
even to great omrahs; but his anger was seldom
more than momentary.... ” 2 Indeed it was
notorious that Dara’s thunder was not half as
dreadful as the faint smile of Aurangzib.
The foregoing chapters, particularly those
dealing with his political career, are an ample
1 Storia, i; 221.
2 Constable, Bernier’s Travels, p. 6.


commentary on the defects of Dara’s character.
But his virtues were his own, while his weak-
ness, which leaned only to virtue’s side, were the
unhappy accidents of a combination of circum-
stances. These defects are the more deplorable
because of their conjunction with sterling merits
and noble intentions; and they loom unrea-
sonably large because of his failure in the field
of politics and war. However, there was some-
thing in Dara’s character which in spite of his
weaknesses and indiscretion endeared him to all
but his inveterate enemies. Long after the
murder of Dara, Munucci during his tour
through Bihar happened to meet at Patna a man
named Abul Qasim, and their conversation
having turned on the fate of the unfortunate
prince, Abul Qasim sincerely regretted that he
had no opportunity of testifying his love and
devotion to the prince, though he had done him
some wrong and injustice.
Prince Dara Shukoh is often pronounced
as a failure in history. This is perhaps an
injustice to Dara as well as an insult to the
modem conception of history. History cannot
but judge a man by the criterion of the sum-total
of the good done by him to his own species.
Judged by this standard, Aurangzib’s half a
century of barren rule was the most conspicuous
failure in Indian history. Dara expiated for his
failure in his own person; while the success of
Aurangzib affected adversely the political


destiny of a whole continent. Dara proved a
failure in war and state-craft because he made
them the secondary objects of his pursuit. He
devoted the greater part of his time and energy
to carry on a literary propaganda for the promo-
tion of peace and concord between the better
minds in Islam and Hinduism. It is hardly an
exaggeration to say that anyone who intends to
take up the solution of the problem of religious,
peace in India must begin the work where Dara
had left it, and proceed on the path chalked out
by that prince. The world has not become
richer in any way by the long reign of
Aurangzib; but it would have been certainly
poorer without a Dara Shukoh.
Dara and Aurangzib present a most perfect
contrast, having been cast by nature in different
moulds altogether. Both stood head and
shoulders above their contemporaries, one in the
domain of thought and the other in the field of
action. Aurangzib was not without an element
of mysticism in him; but he never forgot the
maxim, “ Religious mysticism is one thing,
practical business is another.’ ’ Dara and
Aurangzib were equally faithful to Islam; the
former being true to the spirit only and the
latter to the very letter of his religion. Each
had his own idealism. Dara thought of rescuing
the spirit of the Prophet’s creed which was being
crushed under the dead weight of the dogmatism
of the mullas. His ambition was to supplant


■exoteric Islam by esoteric mysticism as a living
moral force among the Muslim intellectuals. He
appears in the role of a peace-maker between the
Hindus and the Muslims; his task being to
interpret to each community the highest truths
of the religion of the other in a most intelligent
and acceptable manner. Aurangzib was a
militant pan-Islamist to whom the only solution
of the quarrel of creeds appeared to be the con-
version of the whole world to Islam. Dara and
Aurangzib personify respectively the spirit of
progress and of reaction. The forces of con-
servatism and reaction having been stronger in
the Middle Ages, it is no wonder that Aurangzib
triumphed over Dara. The fight between the
spirit of Aurangzib has been continually going
on in Islam, and indeed in every community and
everywhere in the world with varying fortune.
As regards Dara Shukoh some modern
Muslim writers even share almost Aurangzib’s
sentiments towards his eldest brother, who was
in his opinion a schemer in politics, a vain
pretender in the domain of spirituality, a
polytheist himself and a friend of polytheists,
good for nothing except talking and laughing.
However even granting that Dara was ban-
krupt in good deeds, and guilty of every
calumny charged against him, none can possibly
doubt that the Prince, like Abou Ben Adam
might with a conscience much cleaner than that
of Aurangzib—say to the good angel; “Write
me as one that loves his fellow men.”


However, inspite of the unfavourable
verdict of history Aurangzib shall ever remain
the hero of popular inagination which is hardly
affected by historical criticism. The homage of
love and admiration which Muslims pay to him
is not due to the peculiar mentality of that
community. Had he been born among the
Hindus or the Christians and did as much for
them, he would have been hailed with no less
popular applause than what he receives today
from his own community. His is a character
just suited to fire popular imagination which
always paints the ideal hero as one who does not
deviate even by a hair from the traditional path
of Dharma (Law), restores religion to its purity,
represses the enemies of his faith, subdues the
wicked, protects the pious, spurns the seduc-
tions of softer vices, labours not for his own
enjoyment but to discharge his duty to his
people, lives and dies a poor man in the midst
of the wealth of Hind with a character without
weaknesses and without any moral stain.
Nowhere in the world and in no age, the hero of
popular imagination has ever been the real
historical character, Charlemagne, Harun-al-
Rashid, Peter the Great, and Shivaji in the light
of historical research are not as they figure in the
imagination of the unlettered mass of their own
countrymen. If the ideal king Ramchandra
cannot be blamed for cutting off the head of a
Sudra ascetic, as the poet Bhavabhuti paints his
hero, —Aurangzib can hardly be blamed for
18


putting Sarmad and Dara to death, or what he
did towards those whom he deemed the enemies
of true religion. The misfortune of Aurangzib
was that he lived in a historical age, and had the
full light of history focussed on him.
Section 2. —The Character of Dara Shukoh
COMPARED AND CONTRASTED WITH THAT OF
Shah Jahan
The character of the Emperor Shah Jahan
partook of a double nature —an actual combina-
tion of Muslim orthodoxy and the profane tradi-
tion of the age of Akbar. He was Dara and
Aurangzib in one; the latter representing the
“other side of the medal.” The reign of Shah
Jahan was a period of transition from the
enlightened nationalism of Akbar to the gloomy
orthodox reaction of the days of Aurangzib.
Outwardly his regime was a continuation of the
Age of Akbar; though beneath the surface, the
strong undercurrent of reaction was sapping the
foundation of the empire. However his court
still remained a happy meeting ground of Hindu
and Muslim cultures, and genius and skill in the
field of literature and fine art were liberally
rewarded without any discrimination of creed.
Of all the Mughal Emperors of Hindustan, Shah
Jahan was peculiarly fortunate in receiving the
approbation and applause of both his Muslim
and Hindu subjects; and he plerhaps deserved it.
The mulla hailed him as the real Mahdi (Guide),
coming after Akbar, the Dajjal and Antichrist


of Islam. The pandit was also equally warm in
his praise of Shah Jahan, and the most gifted
among them, Panditraj Jagannath eulogized him
in a verse which has since then become
proverbial.
I
SRTJ'TTW: qfetftRR: 3T
3T rtTRT II
i.e., either the Lord of Delhi or the
Lord of the Universe is alone capable of fulfiling
desires. What is given by other kings may
suffice only for buying pot-herbs or salt.
But this cultured and benevolent despot was
essentially a bigot not a whit less obdurate than
Aurangzib. Shah Jahan was a lover of poetry,
but as anecdotes tell us, his fanaticism would
invariably get the better of his literary judgment.
It is said that the poet Shaida (the Mad), was
banished the country for composing the couplet;
Chi-st dani hada-i-gulagun musaffa-
i-jatihri;
Husn-ra parawar-digar u ishq-ra
Paigamhari.
i.e. “Dost thou know what Wine is, which is
crimson like the rose, and pure and sparkling
like a gem? It is the nourisher of Beauty, the
message-bearer of Love.”
Shah Jahan’s orthodoxy fired up and dis-
playing a sad lack of humour, he became
violently angry with the poet, who had
blasphemously associated the names of God and


the Prophet with the forbidden liquor. The
poet could win back'his favour only by writing
an apology and quoting in self-defence the
authority of Maulana Rumi. 1
Dara and Aurangzib inherited respectively
the non-essential and the essential elements of
Shah Jahan’s character. Strong family affec-
tions, love of pomp and magnificence, a generous
appreciation of learning and scholarship, a
refined taste in music and painting, and a weak-
ness for astrology 2 and astronomy were Dara’s
share; but of Shah Jahan’s shrewdness, keen
insight into human character, severely practical
turn of mind, indefatigable business capacity and
love for routine work, Dara had none. The
Crown Prince was nevertheless a man of fine
capabilities, endowed with courage and energy,
physical and mental. His manhood could not
grow to its full stature because unlike other great
characters in history, he began his life, so to say,
at the wrong end, i.e. with a silver spoon in his
mouth. The practical side of Dara’s character
remained undeveloped because at the beginning
1 Mirat-ul-Khayal by Sher Khan Lodi, p. 109-11. This Shaida
was not the famous poet Shaida Gilani. The author of Mirat-ul-
Khayal says that he belonged to the family of the Shaikh-zadas of
Fathpur Sikri. From another instance of Shah Jahan’s lack of
humour, see the anecdote of Shah Jehan and poet Chandrabhan
Brahmin, ibid., p. 154-155.
2 Greek and Hindu astrology and astronomy were much studied
in the reign of Shah Jahan. Jagannath who received the title of
Mahakavi-rai translated the Arabic “Almagist”, Optolemy’s work on
Astronomy) into Sanskrit under the title “Siddhantasara-Kaustubha”.
He compied another another, work on Astronomy and named it
Samrat-Siddhanta [Gaekavad’s Oriental Series].


of his career, he found before him nothing
tangible, nothing material to strive after such as
Akbar, Shah Jahan and Aurangzib had had
before them in their early life.
Dara’s share in the glory of Shah Jahan’s
reign was not inconsiderable. He and Jahanara
formed a wholesome counter-poise to the forces
of reaction headed by Aurangzib and Sadullah
Khan. There is a strong reason for holding that
the abolition of the pilgrim tax on Hindus 1 and
restoration of the desecrated Chintaman temple
were two great successes scored by Dara over
the reactionaries. As regards the abolition of
the pilgrim tax, we learn from the biographical
notice of Kavindracharya Saraswati, that Shah
Jahan and Dam Shukoh shed tears at the
eloquent and touching appeal of Kavindra in the
Darhar-i-Am. It hardly admits of any doubt
that it was only the close personal friendship of
Kavindra with Dara (who was initiated by him
intp the mysteries of the Yoga and Vedanta
philosophy)—that secured such a great con-
cession for the Hindus from the bigoted emperor
i It is also surprising that Padshahnama, which was regularly read
out to the Emperor Shah Jahan and corrected by the great wazir
Sadullah Khan, does not contain even the remotest reference to one
of the most benevolent acts of Shah Jahan, namely the remission of
the pilgrim tax on the Hindus, which, after its abolition by Akbar
had been revived in the reign of Jahangir. This he did at the prayers
of a Hindu deputation, headed by Kavindracharya Sarswati, who, we
are told, received more than one hundred congratulatory addresses
from the leaders of the Hindu community throughout the Mughal
Empire; and among these addresses ope was from Mahamopadhyaya
Viswanath Nyayapanchanan, the famous Naiyayika of Bengal, then
residing at Benares and finally at Brindavan. [Gaekwad’s Oriental
Series No. XVII Kavindracharya’s list, Foreward, V.] /


Shah Jahan; Apart from Dara’s spirit of
toleration and his pro-Hindu proclivities, the
very fact that Aurangzib had desecrated the
temple of Chintaman, perhaps induced Dara to
exert himself in its restoration. This restora-
tion to idol-worship of a place where once the cry
of muazzin had been heard and the Musalmans
knelt in prayers—was, perhaps without a prece-
dent in the history of Muslim rule in India.
The injunction of the Islamic Law might be in
favour of the immunity of old places of worship
of the infidel subjects; but no injunction could
prevail against a despot’s whim if it was not
backed by sufficient moral force.
The court-history of Shah Jahan does not
refer to any temple destruction later than
January, 1633. A farman of Shah Jahan
granted to Goswami Yithal Rai Tikayat of
Govardhannath, resident at Gokulin the 6th (?)
Regnal year tells us that the lands of mauza
(village) Jatipura had been granted by
the Goswami “for his use and for the expenses
of the Thakordwara, tax-free.” 1 There is no
denying of the fact, that generally speaking,
from the 10th year onwards the policy of Shah
i “Imperial Farmans” by K. M. Jhavari, New Printing Press,
Bombay.
Farman No. VI; date has been read as 6th Illahi year. Farman
No. VII which is refers to exemption from some dues, was, according
to the reading of the translator, issued only after an interval of one
month. Farman No. VIII is only a nishan of Dara Shukoh in the
handwriting of Dara’s Diwan Abdul Karim. It runs thus: ‘as Vithal
Rai....has his residence in Qasba Gokul, (and) as this place is the
native place of the above-mentioned person, he has got his property
and cattle there, it is ordered that no one should molest or disturb...."


Jahan toward the Hindus shows a change for the
better, which certainly was due to the growing
influence of Dara and Jahanara at court. The
three lists of mansabdars (two in Abdul Hamid’s
text and one in Waris), given at the end of each
ten yearly cycle of Shah Jahan’s reign furnish
a useful study of the increased percentage of
Hindu mansabdars in the Mughal army. During
the last ten years of the reign the increase in the
higher grades was double, and in lower grades
almost threefold. When the War of Succession
broke out there were two Hindu chiefs above the
rank of 5-hazari, a unique recognition of Hindu
merit which was never again seen since the death
of Akbar. Dara’s pronounced Hindu sym-
pathies and his active and generous patronage
of Hindus concealed from Hindu eyes the darker
side of Shah Jahan’s rule. He was also the
maker of the cultural history of the reign of
Shah Jahan, and minus this cultural history, the
reign of Shah Jahan has little to boast of except
his buildings.
Section 3. —Dara Shukoh and Akbar the Great
Dara Shukoh appears at first sight to have
been a re-incarnation of the spirit of his great-
grand father. But as a matter of fact there has
yet been no second Akbar among the rulers and
thinkers of the Muslim world. Throughout the
entire course of Indian history none, except
Asoka perhaps, excels him. His reign was
characterised by an intellectual and religious


revolt, and the birth of Indian nationalism in
politics as well as in the Fine arts and literature.
Strictly speaking there cannot be a just com-
parison between Akbar and Dara; because the
genius of the former was all-comprehensive and
of epic grandeur; while that of the latter was
essentially lyric in character. They stand .'n
striking contrast as regards their mental traits;
Dara being essentially a mystic and intuitiona-
list; while Akbar was pre-eminently a rationa-
list, “a disciple of his own reason”; 1 compared
with Akbar even Caliph Mamun, would appear
a timid conservative.
In Akbar the qualities of the head and the
heart were nicely balanced, which was not the
case with Dara, whose intellectual faculties were
weaker than the qualities of his heart. As
seekers after God, they also stand in different
categories; Akbar being highly intellectual, and
Dara highly emotional. Akbar’s God was an
objective God, while the God of Dara was an ex-
perience. Having realised God as the Truth,
as they claimed, Akbar took up as his motto to
do the will of God, strive after more knowledge
about Him, practise heroic stoicism and self-
introspection; while Dara, like Sarmad and
Mulla Shah, threw away knowledge and reason
to the four winds, and plunged deep into
the joy of union with Him. Or, in Hindu
phraseology Akbar was a Yogin, and Dara, a
BJiakta; the former in his attitude to God being
compared to the young one of a monkey clinging


fast to the mother’s bosom by its own determina-
tion and unaided strength; the latter resembling
a kitten, mewing helplessly till its mother comes,
and lifts it up bodily. It is said, however, that
in the path of God, Knowledge is blind and Faith
lame; and each is helpless without the other’s
aid in attaining to Truth. It is no wonder that
Akbar’s rationalism ended in mysticism; for,
God is beyond the reach of reason. Dara was a
god-intoxicated man to whom his stoic great-
grand father, weary of search and keeping vigil,
might as well have said:
i.e. “We are undone by the inquiry of
truth;
' Thou, bee, art indeed blessed.”
Superficial observers and blind fanatics
bracket Dara and Akbar together as atheists,
hypocrites and opportunists, men destitute of all
religions. Dara and Akbar regarded the so-
called orthodox enthusiasts of every creed as
religious fools, who, however, thought no better
of them than as ungodly knaves. In truth,
Dara Akbar never denied the existence of
God; but their god was incomprehensible to the
average Musalman, Christian or Jew; because
such a god was neither the exclusive patron of
the children of Ismail nor of the progeny of
Israel. A god without 11 his chosen seed” without
a particular love for monotheists and hatred for
polytheists, was hardly an intelligible being to


Semetic races. Dara and Akbar have been called
hypocrites, because they were not prepared to
hold only one religion to be true and all others
false, and because they would not testify their
love for one religion by hating and persecuting
all others. They were large-hearted seers of
truth, and as such quite content to leave “heresy
to the heretic, and religion to the orthodox/’
Theirs was the policy of Sulh-i-kul or “Peace
with all.” Akbar is said to have deviated from
this policy only with regard to Islam, because,
in his opinion, the official Islam was a stumbling
block to progress and disloyal to the state. Like
many modern thinkers both in the East and the
West, Akbar was under a strong impression that
the Islam of Shaikh Abdun ISTabi and Mulla
Abdullah Sultanpuri was incompatible with
progress and civilization.
Akbar had built up a national empire and
started it on a new career of progress by found-
ing national schools of painting, architecture,
music and literature, which contained the best
elements of Indian as well as Islamic arts and
culture. He attempted the same thing in religion
too, and established a new sect by adulterating
the pure monotheism of Islam with cruder beliefs
and pagan element-worship of Aryan and
Iranian cults. But Akbar’s contemporaries in
the East were mere pigmies in comparison with
his mighty genius and were hopelessly mistaken
in comprehending the high idealism of Akbar as


the blind men of the fable were in forming the
idea of an elephant. They condemned Akbar
as a polytheist and sun-worshipper. A few like
Abul Fazl and Faizi 1 could only understand
aright his philosophy; the latter has immortal-
ised in a qasidah, the mystery of Akbar’s sun-
worship.
Qismat nigar ki dar klmr-i-har jauhar-i-
---------’atast.
Ayina ba Sikandar u ha-Akbar aftab.
TJ-me-kwnad mu’aina-i-khud dar ’aina.
V in me-kunad mushahdah-i-haq dar
aftab.
i.e., look to the divine dispensation that every-
thing is given to him that suits his nature; a
mirror to Alexander, and the sun to Akbar. The
former sees his own self in the mirror; but tho
latter sees the Truth in the sun.
It is noteworthy that similar thought-waves
were stirring men’s minds in the West and the
East during the sixteenth century, which in
Europe was characterised by an intellectual
ferment, the rise of religious reformers, the
growth of national monarchies, the ambition and
policy of national despots to be supreme
governors of the State and the national Church,
and the elimination of extra-territorial influences
from the political and religious life of the people.
Akbar made a supreme effort to free Indian
Islam from Arabicism and adapt it to the needs
i Faizi’s Nal-Daman, Introduction.


of India, as the Persians had evolved Shiaism
to make Islam suited to their national genius.
Even the Musalmans who deny that Akbar
was a Muslim, never doubt that Dara Shukoh
was a Muslim inspite of all his pantheistic ideas.
Dara and Akbar, though alike in their attitude
of peace with all religions, yet differed as poles
asunder in their attitude towards Islam. Akbar
was one of those who, as one of his sayings goes,
“do not believe in divine books, nor credit that
the Supreme essence that is tongue-less will
express itself in human speech,” l And to him
Traditions ( Hadith ) were no proofs: “Many
simpletons, worshippers of imitative custom,
mistake the traditions of the ancients for the
dictates of reason, and garner for themselves
eternal perdition.” 2 But any piece of writing
of Dara Shukoh will reveal the fact that quota-
tions from the Quran and the Traditions are
used by him as the most conclusive of proofs.
Dara believed not only in the Quran but also in
the Vedas as “the Word of God” ( kalam-i-
IlaJii). The acceptance or the story of physical
ascent ( mihraj-i-jismani ) is regarded almost as
an article of faith among the orthodox Muslims,
who believe that the Prophet made this journey
to Heaven in his physical body. Akbar rejected
the story as absurd, because it was physically
impossible. The rationalists of Islam (mutazi-
lites) make a sort of compromise by holding
1 Jarrett’s Ain-i-Akbari, iii. 380.
2 Ibid., 382.


that the Ascension was made not in the physical
body but in the subtle body, Bara’s opinion
veers to the side of the orthodox party. He says
in Risalah-i-Haqnuma that the Prophet used to
practise pranayam {award hurd ) or controlling
of breath in the cave of Hara, and as a result of
it his body became lighter than air, and more
transparent than diamond; where, then, was the
impossibility that the Prophet in his rarified
physical body ascended the seventh heaven?
This belief of Dara is no doubt as crude as that
of our pious Musalman villagers of Bengal who
will tell you many a story that such and such a
Pir travels overnight to Mecca and after offering
namaz at Kaba returns to his praying carpet
before day-break!
If there is any truth in Badayuni’s malicious
allegations, Akbar, like the philosopher A 1 Kindi
subjected the moral character of the Prophet to
a scandalous analysis, interdicted his name, and
pushed him aside as a back number among the
prophets, and himself usurped his position. But
Dara never entertained or tolerated any such
idea towards the prophet of Arabia. He always
regarded him with the deepest veneration as the
fountainhead of all knowledge, esoteric and
exoteric; his quarrel being always with the
narrow-minded mullas and their interpretation
of the Quran and the Traditions. Akbar dis-
obeyed the holy injunction that Muhammad was
the last of the prophets, and he aspired to form


an ummat (politico-religious brotherhood) of hi a
own; Dara, on the other hand, never put forward
any such pretensions, but only claimed to be an
Insan-i-kavnil or perfect man, —a claim not
incompatible with orthodox Islam.
About the religion of Dara Shukoh, Bernier
says, “Born a Mahometan, he continued to join
in the exercise of that religion; but although
thus publicly professing his adherence to its
faith, Dara was in private a Gentile with
Gentiles, and a Christian with a Christian.” 1
There seems to be no doubt that Dara never
refused at least outward conformity to Islam,,
and this is enough to meet the charge of apostacy
against him; because- Islam like the Roman
Catholicism of the Middle Ages never enjoins
Inquisition into men’s thoughts and private
actions.
The charges of heresy against him, such as-
his wearing a ring with the word prabhu
inscribed in Hindi characters on it, his associa-
tion with Hindu ascetics, and his gift of a stone
railing to the temple of Keshab Rai which
Aurangzib brought against Dara to justify a.
political murder—have been dismissed by the
historian of Aurangzib as insufficient to con-
demn him of heresy. As we have already
noticed Dara’s views on the main articles of the
Muslim faith did not differ substantially from
those of the orthodox school except on the point
i Travels of Bernier, Constable, p. 6.


whether an Arif (gnostic) who has known and
caught a glimpse of the unveiled face of Truth
can claim exemption from compliance with the
injunctions of the shariyat. Dara, unlike the
Sufis of the moderate school, held that after the
dawn of Truth ( Haqiqat ), a gnostic becomes
free from the rigor of religious discipline
{Shariyat). But it was a matter of opinion
only. His views seem to have afterwards been
sobred down under the sharp reprimand
of his Fir Mulla Shah Badakshi. And, as
Bernier bears it out, Dara never neglected out-
ward conformity with Islam, though he might
not have been as rigorous in fasting and praying
as Aurangzib. The fatwa of the divines who
signed the decree of Dara’s death need not be
taken very seriously. Like the Stuart judges
they were lions under the king’s throne and
could be made to do anything for a considera-
tion ; the most notorious instance being the fatwa
of deposition against Aurangzib himself issued
by the Maulanas in the pay of his rebellious son
Akbar, on the ground that this Emperor (a saint
canonised during his lifetime) —on account of
his un-Islamic conduct was unworthy to rule over
Musalmans !
It is true that Dara wore a ring inscribed
with the word prabhu, and that he made the gift
of a stone railing to the temple of Keshav Rai
at Mathura. But these were not proofs of his
heresy. Dara would not have been found fault


with if the word prabhu were replaced on his
ring by its Arabic equivalent al’Babh. To the
ear of a Mulla prabhu sounded like an anathema,
and the sight of the Hindi script offended his
eyes as a profanation; because the illiberal
Mullas as well as the illiterate Muslim mass in
those days—as in ours too —look upon the Arabic
language and the Arabic script with supersti-
tious veneration, as if Arabic were the only
language and the only script acceptable to God,
just as the Christian god of the Western Church
understood only Latin in the Middle Ages and
Hindu god till now understands nothing but
Sanskrit! Dara’s ring was an open, protest
against this popular superstition. It was but a
materialization of the great truth contained in
the following couplet of his:
Ba-nam-i-ankeh u nam-e na-darad; ba-har
nam-e he hlnvani sar bar arad.
i.e. In the name of Him who has got no name;
but who responds to whatever name you choose
to call Him by.”
As regards the fate of the temple honoured
by Dara Shukoh, the historian of Aurangzib
writes: “On 14th October, 1666, learning that
there was a stone railing in the temple of Keshav
Rai, which Dara Shukoh had presented to it,
Aurangzib ordered it to be removed, as a
scandalous example of a Muslim’s coquetry with
idolatry. And finally in January 1670, his zeal


stimulated by the pious meditations of Ramzan,
led him to send forth commands to destroy this
temple altogether, and to change the name of the
city of Mathura to Islamabad.’’ 1 But this gift
was perhaps not a case of a Muslim coquetting
with idolatry, but the most courageous and con-
vincing proof of Bara’s loyalty to his idealism
and philosophy. Bara more than once declared:
“ba-zer-i-but imanist pinhan;” i.e. Faith
( iman ) lies hidden beneath the idol”; and this
gift was only a genuine sentiment translated into
action. In fact, had there been no such concrete
example of Bara’s sincerity, critics would have
been justified in treating his lofty and catholic
sentiments as little better than commonplace
Sufistic effusions.
Bara and Akbar stand imique among the
Muslim thinkers of India as regards their moral
courage and sincerity of conviction. Akbar
built a temple in Kashmir, and inscribed on it a
note of warning as it were to bigots of every
creed born and unborn: “He who from
insincere motives destroys this temple, should
first destroy his own place of worship; for, if
we follow the dictates of the heart, we must bear
up with all men; but if we look to the external,
we find every thing proper to be destroyed.”
This was perhaps also the sentiment that pro-
mpted Bara to respect the external worship of
every community. If we compare the position
i Sir Jadunath Sarkar’s Hist, of Aurangzib, iii., p. 267.
19


■of Dara with that of Akbar, and the dangers
which each had to encounter in publishing their
faith, the stone-railing of Dara outweighs the
temple of Akbar in the scale of moral courage.
Peace be to the soul of Prince Dara Shukoh,
who deserves well of his country. His great
message to his countrymen shall ever find an
eloquent echo in the following lines of a derwish;
Hindu kahe son ham hade,
Musalman kahe ham
Ek mung-ka do fand hai,
kun ziyada kun kam;
Kun ziyada kun kam,
karna nahi kajiya;
Ek Ram-ka bhagat hai,
duje Rahman-se raziya;
Kahe ‘Deen Darvish * Doy saritan,
mil ek sindhu;
Sahib sab-da ek hai,
ek Musalman Hindu. 1
I Deen Darvish, a nineteenth century saint; quoted in Hindi
ke Musalman Kavi.
i.e. The Hindu says, T am superior’;
the Musalman says I.
Two halves of a grain of mung they are;
which, then, is greater than the other?
Don’t quarrel over who is superior;
and who is not;
The one is the devotee of Ram, the other of Rahman.
Deen Darvish says, the two unite in one ocean;
There is only one Lord of all.
The Hindu and the Musalman are one.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. Persian (general histories and literary
works).
i. The Padshah-nama, or the court history of the reign
of Shah Jahan in three parts, each covering the history of a
daur or decade. The first two parts were compiled by Abdul
Hamid Lahori and the last by Abdul Hamid’s pupil Muham-
mad Waris. Abdul Hamid’s work is available in print
{Bibliotheca Indica series). I have used a neatly written
Ms of Waris belonging to Sir Jadunath Sarkar.
Emperor Shah Jahan was ambitious of having a grand
history of his reign compiled on the lines and written in the
style of Abul Fazl’s Akbamama. Sadullah Khan recom-
mended Abdul Hamid as the only man in that age capable
of performing such a task, because he enjoyed among his
contemporaries great reputation as a successful imitator of
Abul Fazl’s inimitable Persian prose style. Old Abdul
Hamid, then living in obscure retirement in the city of Patna 1
was invited to Court in the second decade of Shah Jahan’s
reign and entrusted with the work. He lived only to finish
the history of the first twenty years of the reign.
Muhammad Waris, who continued the work begun by
his master according to the author of Maasir-i-Alamgiri, died
on the 10th Rabi-ul-awwal, 1091 A.H. 2 He was stabbed to
death by a mad student whom he kept with him.
The Padshah-nama is the most detailed and in many
respects the most authoritative history of Shah Jahan’s reign.
It was compiled from State papers, news sheets, reports of
daily occurrences' at Court and other official documents. It
has an additional stamp of authority because of the fact that
it was read out to the Emperor by his wazir Sadullah Khan,
and amended by him at the Emperor’s suggestion. The
concluding portion of the work was similarly revised, after
Sadullah’s death, by Ala-ul-mulk Tuni (Fazil Khan), the
x Abdul Hamid on himself and his work, Pad. ia., 10-13.
2 Elliot, VII, 121.


Lord Steward of the Household. The Padshah-nama, there-
fore, has also the merits and defects of an outo-biography,
so far as the character and doings of the Emperor are con-
cerned. Shah Jahan’s character is reflected in this Court
history, as he liked to portray himself.
The prevailing tone of the history is the Emperor’s
orthodoxy as the ideal Muslim ruler of his age. Temple
destruction, war against non-Muslims, gifts to Mecca,
illumination on Id festivals, Milad assemblies attended by the
Emperor are noticed without fail by the two royal historio-
graphers ; whereas everything which might be interpreted as
a weakness or lapse from orthodoxy is passed over in silence;
c.g., his remission of the pilgrim tax on Hindus and restora-
tion of the temple of Chintaman. Even Waris or his royal
patron did not think it desirable that the Padshah-nama
should record the Emperor’s exemption in his sixtieth year
from the fast of Ramzan by a fatwa of learned doctors and
muftis in accordance with the ordinances of the Quaran. 1
Next comes Shah Jahan’s strong family affections, parti-
cularly his love for Dara and Jahanara. The Padshah-nama
contains long notices of his buildings in Agra and Delhi; but
curiously enough no mention of Painting which also reached
the highest perfection during his reign.
The Padshah-nama records very minutely the political
career of Dara Shukoh which was however, uneventful. It
has been found unnecessary and even impossible to notice in
detail in my book the promotions, presents, gifts of jewels
and horses and royal visits with which Dara was honoured by
his father. Nothing against Dara, such as his quarrel with
Sadullah could certainly be expected to find a place in the
Court history. The prince’s literary activities and religious
views are not at all noticed in it. It gives appendices con-
taining lists of the saints, scholars and poets, who flourished
during this reign; but among these there is not a single
Hindu name included in the list itself, though there are in
the body of the text, Jagannath Pandit, and the Hindi poets,
i Inayat Khan’s Shah-Jahan-nama, quoted in Elliot, VII, 97.


Haranath and Sundar Kavi Rai etc. are incidentally men-
tioned. Had the authors of the Padshah-nama included like
Abul Fazl names of Hindu scholars, poets, saints also in his
lists, more light would have been thrown on the character of
Dara, who had intimate relations with them.
2. Amal-i-Salih of Muhammad Salih Kambu. (In
process of publication in the Bibliotheca Indica series).
It is a history of the reign of Shah Jahan from his birth
to his death in 1665 A.D. It has not much independent value
for the first 30 years of Shah Jahan’s reign, which are treated
with greater fulness and originality in the Padshah-nama.
The book having been written during the reign of Aurangzib,
the author could mention with impunity Shah Jahan’s com-
plicity in the murder of Khusru, and could not but give the
version of the War of Succession from the view point of the
party hostile to Dara. It is a supplement to the Padshah-
nama in respect of the 31st year of Shah Jahan’s reign,
followed by a brief account of Jiis end.
4. Alamgir-nama (Bibliotheca Indica) by Muhammad
Kazim, written in 1688 contains the history of first ten years
of Aurangzib’s reign. The Emperor prohibited the con-
tinuation of this official history when the author presented it
to him in the thirty-second year of his reign. All subsequent
historians, such as Saqi Mustaidd Khan, Shaikh Muhammad
Baqa and Khafi Khan have extensively drawn upon it. The
author of Alamgir-nama thus justifies the overthrow and
murder of Dara:
“Dara Shukoh in his later years did npt confine himself
to the freethinking and heretical notions, which he had
adopted under the name of tasawwuf (Sufism), but showed
an inclination for the religion and institutions of the Hindus.
He was constantly in the society of Brahmans, Jogis and
Sanyasis... .he had given up the prayers, fasting, and other
obligations imposed by the law. It became manifest that if
Dara Shukoh obtained the throne and established his power,
the foundations of the Faith would he in danger and the
precepts of Islam would be changed for the rant of infidelity


and Judaism... .Consequently, for the defence of the Faith,
and maintenance of the Shariyat, added to the urgent consi-
deration of state policy... .he was put to death. 1
5. Latif-ul-Akhbar: an anonymous account of the third
siege of Qandahar, attributed. to Badi uz-Zaman Rashid
Khan. The author, as the internal evidence shows, was in
the service of Mahabat Khan, the Younger, and accompanied
that general to Qandahar with the army of Dara Shukoh.
The author was indeed at that time not at all known to higher
circle and no mention of his name (if he be Badiuz Zaman)
in the official account of the third siege of Qandhahar is given
by Waris. The author, like Badayuni of the days of Akbar,
seems to have been till then a man disappointed in life, and
the very opening lines of his work strikes a note of cynical
contempt for successful courtiers and state officials. He
writes;
“I am not one of the special favourites aware of secrets
nor a grandee of the inner circle. Neither am I a clerk in
[Government] service, nor am employed on the diplomatic
missions or in the news-writing department that I might tell
a lie and live on falsehoods; that I should conceal an
occurrence from the public eye and get up proof for what did
not happen only for the amusement of friends in Hindustan
with their ears alert for news from Qandahar. I believe a
lie should not be told and truth concealed from friends.
When there is no motive, nor the favour of anyone in view,
why should one go astray from truth and be not a fair-speak-
ing man? By God, of the occurrences of this journey
whatever I, who am so little known, have seen, none else have
seen; if anyone has seen, he has kept them secret for his own
worldly gains, and if he has told, he told them in other way.
The account of the age is (better) known to persons living
aloof in a comer.”
Latif-ul-Akhbar is a diary of events entered day by day
(19a —227 b) from the beginning to the last day of the third
I Pers. text, p. 34, 35; Elliot, VII, 197. For a bogus Dara
appearing in Gujrat in 1663, see Alamgir-natna, p. 837.


siege of Qandahar. It contains authentic military details as
well as camp gossips, the latter none the less valuable for
the study of popular beliefs and superstitions of Persians
and Indians in the 17th century. I have reconstructed the
story of Dara’s siege of Qandahar mainly from this work,
which, though most damaging to Dara’s character both as a
man and a soldier, appears to me more trustworthy in this
respect than the court history of Shah Jahan. Rieu
remarks: “It is no doubt the Tarikh-i-Qandahar which
Khafi Khan quotes (Vol. I, p. 722), and ascribes to Rashid
Khan, as Muhammad Badi. This Rashid Khan who was
also called Badiuz-Zaman Mahabatkhani was appointed
Divan-i-Khalisah in the 24th year of Aurangzib’s reign and
died in the 41st year of the same reign” (Rieu i. 265).
6. Tarikh-i-Shufai (or Shah Shujai, Ethe, i. 340).
It is a history of Prince Shah Shuja, written by
Muhammad Masum (bin Hasan -bin Salih) a protege and
servant of Shuja for twenty-five years. Ethe remarks:
“This work may be a part of the same author’s Fatuhat-i-
Alamgiri, which was also completed in 1070 A.H.” (Ethe,
i 340). So far as internal evidence goes the author wrote
his work at Malda in Bengal, and mentions events of later
date than 1070 A.H. (1660); e.g., Sulaiman’s surrender by
the Srinagar Rajah (1661). Therefore it cannot be a part
of any work completed in 1660. We very strongly suspect
1070 A.H. to be copyist’s error for 1080 A.H., which is
very likely.
The author, though a servant of Shuja, was yet an
admirer of Aurangzib, and full of sympathy for Dara. But
he seemed to have had no first hand knowledge of affairs,
other than those of his master Shuja. Masum’s work is a
work of art full of dramatic and human touches which we
miss in dry chronicles compiled from state papers.
7. Muntakhabu-l-Labab: a well-known history, “com-
mencing with the invasion of Babar, A.D. 1519 and conclud-
ing with the 14th year of the reign of Muhammad Shah”
written by Muhammad Hashim, better known by. his title


Khafi Khan. (See Elliot VII, p. 207-210). Khafi Khan
has certainly borrowed much from court chronicles like
Padshah-nama, as nobody can help it. But it is perhaps not
quite correct to say that “so far as the reign of Shah Jahan
is concerned he does not materially add to our knowledge”
(Dr. Banarasi Prasad’s History of Shah Jahan). Khafi
Khan was the first writer who utilised non-official sources
like Tarikhi-i-Kandahan, and herein lies the value of his
history.
8. Masir-ul-umara: well-known biographical dictionary
of the nobles of the Mughal Empire by Shahnawaz Khan
(Bibliotheca Indica).
9. Works of Dara Shukoh:
(i) Safinat-ul-awliya; Newal Kishor Press.
(ii) Sakinat-ul-awliya (Oriental Public Library
Ms.).
(Hi) Risalah-i-Haqnuma (Newal Kishore Press).
(iv) Hasanat-ul-arifin (Mujtabai Press, Delhi).
( v ) Majma’al Bahrain (Sarkar Ms.).
(vi) Sirr-i-Akbar (Rieu, i. add 18404; also a Ms.
belonging to Mr. Fida Ali Khan, Dacca
University).
10. Dabisian-ul-Muzahib: English translation by
O’Shea and Troyer; Litho. edition, Bombay.
11. Mirat-ul-khyal : by Sher Khan Lodi (Umdat-ul-
akhbar Press). This Tazkira or anthology of literary men,
written in the early years of Aurangzib’s reign, is indispensa-
ble to students of history of this period.
(b) Letters.
1. Adab-i-Alamgiri, by Qabil Khan. It consists of
three parts; namely (i) letters written during the years 1649
to 1659; (ii) history of the War of Succession, a supplement
by Qabil Khan himself; (Hi) letters written in 1678—-8 oby
Shaikh Muhammad Sadiq of Ambala who “at the request of
his son Muhammad Zaman, edited the whole work with the
above three distinct parts in 1703 A.D. and gave it the title


of Adab-i-Alamgiri.” 1 The first part of the work is of great
value in studying causes of estrangement between Aurangzib
and Shah Jahan and Aurangzib’s bitterness against Dara.
The second part, namely, the history of the War of Succes-
sion has got no independent value.
2. Letters of Aurangzib collected and edited by
Inayetullah Khan in his Kalimat-i-Tayyihdt and Akham -t-
Alamgiri, and Sayyid Ashrof Khan’s Raqaim-i-Karim. 2
They contain stray references to Dara, and his children,
Aurangzib’s gifts to Dara’s daughter Amal-un-nissa, wives
of Sulaiman Shukoh, Aurangzib’s care for Dara’s tomb etc.
3. Letters in the Jaipur Darbar Archives. The Jaipur
Darbar Archives is a veritable mine of raw and first hand
materials for the history of the Mughal Empire from the
time of Shah Jahan to Muhammad Shah. It is pre-eminently
a discovery of Sir Jadunath Sarkar who for the first time
was allowed to inspect the Archives and make copies of
some letters preserved therein. I have used transcripts of
about 1000 letters in Sir Jadunath’s collection. There are
some mistakes, in dates of receipt due perhaps to copyist’s
hurry or ignorance. I have edited in Vol. II of Dara Shukoh
some of the most important letters written by Mirza Rajah
to Shah Jahan and Dara, and farmans and nishans received
by him from the Emperor and the Crown Prince. I have
reconstructed the story of the campaign of Sulaiman Shukoh
against Shuja during the War of Succession from these first
hand materials. These letters bring out incidentally some
phases of Dara’s character, his belief in astrology and in his
own ilham or divine inspiration.
4. Haft-anjuman (Sarkar Ms.), a collection of letters
by Rajah Jai Singh’s secretary Udairaj, who after the death
of his master turned a Muslim. It is a valuable supple-
ment to the collection of letters in the Jaipur state record
(Studies in the reign of Aurangzib, p. 298).
1 Sarkar’s Studies in Aurangib’s reign, p. 292.
2 For biographies of editors and a critical estimate of the value
of these letters, see Ibid., p. 288, 289, 292-296.


5. Faiyyaz-ul-qcewanin (Sarkar Ms.) —This collection
contains letters of Dara to Shah Dilruba, correspondence
between Dara and Mulla Shah and Shaikh Muhibbullah,
besides several letters bearing on the causes of the War of
Succession. I have incorporated correspondence of Dara'.in
vol. ii of this work. That these letters are not fictitious is
proved by the fact that even in minute details some of them,
e.g., letters of Dara to Mulla Shah wonderfully agree with
references found in the Padshah-nama of Waris. Letters of
Dara .to Muhibbullah are also preserved in a collection of
letters in the private possession of Mr. Fida Ali Khan of
Dacca University.
6. Golconda letters (Salar Jang Ms.) —by Abdul Ali
Tabrizi. I have printed correspondence between Dara and
Abdulla Qutb Shah in vol. ii of Dara Shukoh.
7. Durrul-Manshur or Sahaif-ush-Sharaif —compiled
by Muhammad Askari Husain Bilgrami in 1171 A.H.
( 1 757)- I have used a Ms. belonging to Hakim Habibur
Rahaman Sahib of Dacca. This copy was transcribed in
1827 A.D.
B. English.
Sir Jadunath Sarkar—
(t) History of Aurangzib.
(m) Studies in the Reign of Aurangzib.
Constable —Bernier’s Voyage to the East Indies.
W. Irvine —Storia do Mogor.
Ball—Tavernier’s Travels in India.
Hakluyt Society—Peter Mundy’s Travels.
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series—No. XVII, Kavindrachaya List.
Dr. Banarasi Prasad—History of Shah Jahan of Dilhi
(Indian Press, Allahabad, 1932).
Dr. Modi Memorial Volume—“ The unpublished translation
of the Upanishads by Prince Dara Shukoh” (pp. 622
638). Before the publication of this article I printed
about 50 pages of extracts of original Persian from
Mr. Fida Ali Khan’s Ms.


Srish Ch. Basu—The Compass of Truth or English transla-
tion of Dara’s Risalah-i-Haqnuma (Panini Office,
Allahabad). ,
Mahfuzul Haq—Majma’al Bahrain (A. S. B.).
Dr. S. K. De—History of Sanskrit poetics.
Farquhar, John Nicol—Outlines of Religious Literature of
India.
Percy Brown—lndian Painting under the Mughals.
V. A. Smith—History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon.
C. French.
Garcin de Tassy— Histoire de la Litterature Hindoui et
Hindustani (Oriental Translation Fund).
Huart (Cl.) et Massignon— Less Entreliens de Lahore,
J. A. 1926, i. Very recently the Dacca University has
secured a copy Nadir-un-Nukat or Dialogue of Dara and
Baba Lai.
Ysuf Husain— -L’ Inde Mystique au Moyen Age, 1929.
D. Vernaculars.
Lai Kavi— Chhatra-prakash, edited by Shyam Sundar Das.
Lai Kavi was a court poet of Maharajah Chhtrasal
Bundela,. son of Champat Rai • whose career the poet
describes in chapters 5 to 7. The poet’s account of
Champat Rai’s valiant services under Dara at Qandahar
is inaccurate as it does not agree with that of an eye-
witness namely, the author of Lataif. We do not know
from any Persian sources why Champat Rai turned
hostile to Data on die outbreak of the War of Succession.
Khafi Khan, an , earlier authority, lends support to the
poet's contention that it was Champat Rai who showed
the secret ford on the Chambal to Aurangzib’s army.
Lai Kavi says that Champat Rai defiantly left Agra
without leave, and raised the standard of rebellion before
the outbreak of the War of Succession, because Dara
deprived Champat Rai of his jagir of Kunch at instiga-
tion of Champat’s kinsman and enemy, Pahar Singh
Bundela. This may be true, as Dara had the weakness


of lending a willing ear to insinuations and back-bitings.
Lai Kavi’s sketch of the character of Aurangzib and
Dara is graphic and fairly historical.
Surajmal—the Vamsa-bhaskar, a stupendous Hindi epic,
written under the patronage of Maharajah Ram Singh
of Bundi (1821 —1888) by Surajmal Mishan, the royal
bard of Bundi. Though a nineteenth centuiy work, no
student of Rajput history or of contemporary Delhi
Affairs can afford to ignore it. The War of Succession
is described by the poet in animated verse without
sacrifice of truth (pp. 2661—2782).
Kaviraj Shymaldasi— Virbinod, an unpublished work,
having for its main theme the history of Mewar. This
is a vast store-house qi first-hand historical materials,
secured from Udaipur Darbar Archives, to which none
before or after Shymaldasji had full access. It
contains translations of several nishans of Dara and
Aurangzib to Maharana Raj Singh, and some nishans
of Dara to Rao Akhairaj II of Sirohi.
M. M. Gaurishankar Ojha—- Rajputana ka Itihas; this work
has superseded Tod’s History of Rajasthan. It is a
thoroughly reliable and comprehensive work, on the
Ruling House of Udaipur. Dara’s services to Maharana
Raj Singh, and Maharana’s intrigue with Aurangzib are
set forth in Ojha’s chapter on Raj Singh (p. 843 —50).
Shyam Behari Misra— Misra-bandhu-binod, a comprehensive
and fairly accurate history of Hindi Literature in three
volumes (chapters 20-21). Report on Hindi Mss.
in Hindi pt. I. Dara in his Sar-samgraha says that he
had employed a large number of men for making an
anthology of Hindi poetry, and translating the same into
Persian (p. 65).
Sayyid Najib Ashraf Nadvi— Muqaddamah-i-Raquaat-i-
Alamgiri ( Dar-ul-musannafin , Azamgarh). The author
seems to be an apologist of Aurangzib. His views on
Aurangzib, Dara and Shah Jahan are those of an
average orthodox Muslim.


E.Sanskeit.
Works of Jagannath Pandit—i. Pranabharanam and
Jagadabharanam (Kavya-mala series, i. 79). Jagannath,
son of Perama, hailing from Tailanga country lived
in Delhi under the patronage of Dara Shah (Catalogus
Catalogorum i; Notices of Sanskrit Mss. X). Slokas in
Pranabharanam and Jagadabharanam are almost
identical, though the hero of the former is said to be
Pran-narayan, king of Kamrup or Assam; and of the
latter. Prince Dara Shukoh. Why should Jagannath
publish a poem substituting the name Dara for Pran-
narayan ? There was no king of Kamrup or Assam of
the name Prannarayan. Jagannath’s contemporary was
Pran-narayan, Rajah of Kuch Bihar, who made war
against the Mughals. There is a notice of another
work, Rajvaman, which is different from the above-
mentioned poems. I spent much time uselessly in a
fruitless attempt to extract history from a patent
panegyric, which is made to suit alike the Crown Prince
of Hindustan and a rebellious chief of Kuch Bihar.
1 Pran-narayan ruled in Kuch Bihar from 1633 to 1666 A.D.
During the War of Succession he made a bid for independence,
defeated the Mughal faujdar of Kamrup and made an offensive and
defensive alliance with Jayadhvaj Singh, King of Assam, against the
Mughals. He proved a great source of trouble to Mir Jumla and
Shaista Khan till his death in 1666. See History of Aurangzib, iii,
pp. 156, 166, 191, 192.




INDEX
“A”
Abadis —263 (n)
Abbas, Shah I —2l
Abbas, Shah 11 —25, 27, 45, 61,
199
Abdal Beg— l 23
Abd Muhammad Mulla —2s2
Abdul Ali, Maulvi —26B (n)
Abdul AH, Tabrizi —298 (n)
Abdul Hamid (see also
padshanama)—2l, 74, 75,
75 (n), 279, 291
Abdul Karim, Shaikh —l2s,
279 (n)
Abdulla, Mirza—sf), 57, 65
Abdulla Beg Najumsani (Askar
Khan)— 32, 148 (n)
Abdidla Mir Bakshi —34
Abdulla Qutb Shah —137, 138,
139, 139 ( n ). I 4°. 266, 298
Abdidla Sultanpuri, Mtdla —2B2
Abdul Latif Sultanpuri, Mulla
—3. 4
Abdul Maant —ls7
Abdul Quadir Gilani (Shaikh
Abdid Qadir) —72, 77, 81
Abdul Wahab —52 (n)
Abdun Nabi, Shaikh— 2B2
Abdur Razsaq, Sayyid (Iseat
Khan) —See Izzat Khan.
Abdur Raszaq, Gilani ( Sayyid
Izzat Khan) —19, 19 (n)
Abdur Rashid Dailemi —4
Abdus Samad, Mulla —139
Abhaichand —too, 266
Absolute, Descent bf the —7B
Abul Fazl —4, 101, 102 (n), 130,
.283, 291, 293
Abut Hasan, Maulvi —117
Abul Qasim —conversation with
Manucci —270
Abu Nasr al-Sarraj —Bl
Abu Said Faslullah, (quoted)
—B4, 95
Abu Said Kharraj, Shaikh —115
A dab-i-A lamgiri —297
Adil Shah, 11, AH—See AH
Adil Shah
Adil Shah, Muhammad —141
Advaita Vedantims, of Dara—
ii?
Afghanistan —promised to
Murad—l62
—Dara’s plan about— 219-220
Afghans, the —Dara in the
country of—2, 66, 67-68
—attitude of, to Dara—66
—worsted by Jai Singh—6B
—in the army of Dara— 225
—hostile reception to —229
Afza, Daulat —See Daulat Afza
Afzal, Qazi —47
Agra —3, 7,9, 13, 20, 68, 74, too,
I2i, 126, 148, (n), 150, 151,
158, 163, 176, 177, 179, 181,
188, 190, 191, 199, 240, 299
—Shah Jahan crowned at—3
—Hur-un-Nisa born at —I
—reported miracles at —74
—centre of Jessuit activity—
too
—Shuja and Aurangzib at
—l2l, 158
—elephant fight at —150
—Dara’s mansion at —207
—after Samugarh—l9o
—fall of— 191
—daughter of Dara at—24o
Ahadis, the —30, 44, 59, 60 (n),
231
—archers— 3o
—rebellions —44
—valour of—6o (n)
Ahmadabad—l6o, 161, 201, 202,
20S (n), 214, 216
—postal connection at —160
—Dara’s march on and occu-
pation of— 201, 202, 205 (n)
Ahinad Bukhari, Sayyid —2o2,
215


Ajmir —l, 7,8, 76, 123, 124, 135,
202, 203, 206, 208, 214
—Dara born at —l, 8
—shrine of Chishti at —76,
124
—Dara’s flight from —214
Akbar —3, 5. 21, 76, 77. ioi,
130, 189. 244, 258, 274, 276,
277, (n), 279-285, 287. 289,
290, 294
—mausoleum of —3
—devotion of, to Chishti—76
—Hindu Scriptures translat-
ed for—lol
—last days of— 130
—Age of—lB9, 274
—Kabir’s influence on —244
—cardinal doctrine of —258
—abolition of tax on the
Hindus by—277 (n)
Akbar, Muhammad, Prince —
See Muhammad
Akhairaj 11, Rao —300
Akhbarat— l2o (n), 122(n)
Alam— 105
Alamgirnama —l9B (n),205 (n)
228 (n), 237, 238 (n), 293,
294 (n)
A lam -i-Haimmyat —96
Alam-i-jahrut —96
Alam-i-lahut —96, 105
Alam-i-malaktU—gt
A lam-i-nasut —96
Alberuni —101, 107
Al-Futuhatu 'l-Makkiya —no
Ali Adil Shah 11— 142, 143
AH Ahmed Khan Lodi —259
Ali Acad, Ghulam— ls7 (n),
See also Maasir—ul-kiram
Aligarh —2o
Ali Khan, Muhammad—Ste
See Muhammad
Ali Mardan Khan —2l
Ali Tabar —240
Al-kamil —B9, 98
Al Kindi —2B7
Allahabad —l 6, 17, 18, 109 (n),
148 (n), ISS, 168, 177, 191.
200, 234 235, 259, 262
—centre of Hindu learning—
-17
—remission of pilgrim tax in
— : ISS.
Allahabadi, Shaikh Muhibbullah
—See Muhibb-Ullah
Almagist —276 (n)
al 'Rabb —2BB
al Sarraj —See Abu Nasr
Amal-i-Salih —2 (n), 3 (n),
143. 293
Amal-un-msa —13, 14 297
Amantalab, the —43, 48 (n)
Amar Singh Rathor —120, 122
Amar Singh, Maharam —l22
Ambala —234, 298
Amber —123
Amina Gujrati —201
Anahatdhwani —79-80
Anecdotes of Aurangzib — 131
(n), 132 (n) See also.
Akham-i-Alamgiri —297
Anirudh Gaur, Rajah —l7s
Aniyya —93
Anna-Sagar —2l3
Anurudh Singh Hada —240 (n)
Aqil Khan Razi —143
Aqil, Muhammad —59, 64 (n)
Arabicism in Islam —2B3
Arabi Horse —in (n)
Arba —in (n)
Archives, Jaipur —s 3 (n), 297
Archives, Udaipur —3oo
Arifs— 73, 287
Arjun —l2s
Arksa-^252
Armenia —23
Army A Mughal —63
Army supplies —2B
Artillery —2B
Asaf Khan —3
Asanas —244
Ascension —2Bs
Ascetic practices, Dara on—Bl-
-
Ashraf Khan, Sayyid —297
Ashwa —in (n)


Askari Husain, Bilgrami,
Bilgrami, Muhammal —298
Askar Khan —See Abbdulla Beg
Asp-i-Arabi —ls2 (n)
Assam —301
Astrology, Hindu, Greek— 276
(n)
Athaullah, Mirak —59
Atharva Veda —ioi, 102
Attack —2
Audience Hall —10, 132, 238
Aurangabad —121 (n), 156, 160
Aurangzib —3, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16,
17, 18, 19. 25-26, 45, 48, 52
(n), 63, 119, 121, 123, 126,
130. 136-144, 146, 148. 149-
158, 158-162, 165, 176, 178-
189, 191, 192, 194-198, 200,
201-215, 215, (n), 218, 224-
225, 227, 228 229, 231, 232,
234-240, 258-260, 265-267,
269-274. 275-277,278, 286,
287, 293, 295, 296, 297, 299,
300
—as hostage— 3
—love adventures of— 11, 12
—his failures at Qandahar —
—25, 26
—pact with Shuja by—l2l
—Dara’s contempt at—l3o
—story about Dara by—l3o
—in the Deccan—l 36-144
—Relation with Dara —149-
158 . .
—Coalition against Dara—
-158-162
—victory at Dharmat—l76,
177-189
—war of succession— 201-215
—treatment of captive Dara—
-224-225
—plan of Dara’s murder, by—
-277, 228, 229
—Dara’s head treated by—
-231, 232
—treatment of Dara’s family,
by—234-240
20
—intrique against Prithvi
Singh—236
—Contrast with Dara—269-
?74
—inherited characteristics and
early life—276, 277
—desecration of temple—27B
—charge against Dara, by—
-286, 287
Azam,- Muhammad —l 4, 240,
259 (n)
“B”
Baba Lai —241, 242, 244-251
—miracles of— 242
—Dialogue of —244-251
Babar —15, 295
Badakhshan —22, 252
Badakhshi, Mull Shah —See
Mullah Shah
Badan Singh Bhadauriya —s9
Badayuni —lol, 285, 294
Badi, Muhammad— 295
Badin —2lB
Badiuzzaman Mahabai Khani
—See Rashid Khan
Badiuzzaman Rashid Khan —
See Rashid Khan
Baghdad —23
Bahadurchand —135
Bahadur Khan (Baqi Beg ) —
18, 19 See also Baqi Beg)
Bahadur Khan (Izzat Khan)
148 (n), (See also Izzat
Khan)
Bahadur Khan (Aurangzib’s
General) —184, 196, 198,
214, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227
Bahadurpur —l7l-174, 179
—battle of—l7l-174
Bahadur, Rustam Khan —See
Rustam Khan
Bahara Mai —131, 132
Bahauddin, Khawajah —239
Bahir Khan, Sayyid —lB3 ■
Bahrain, Majmaal —296, 299
Bai, Hira —See Hira
Bai, Munawtvar —See Munaw-
war


Baji—ui (n)
Bakhsh, Murad —See Murad
Baksh, Umined —See Ummed
Bakhtyan Khan —See Malik
Jiwan
Baksoriya —s9
Balkh—l7, 22, 121 (n), 262
Baloch— 152, 219
Balochpur —l79
Banjaras —2B
Banswara —2o6
Banwalidas —lo2
Baqar Khan Nazum Sant—
-70, 133 (n)
Baqa, Shaikh Muhammad —293
Baqi Beg— l 6, 18, 19, 234, 235
—created Bahadur Khan
—lB
Baqi Khan—2s, 37
Bargaon —2l4
Barha Sayyids of —146, 182,
235
Barha, Sayyid Has him —See
Hashim
Barha, Sayyid Mahmud —See
Mahmud
Barqandaz Khan (Jafar) —69,
148 (n), 180, 183, 184
Basant— 199, 218, 224
Basawar —2o6
Bcdnur —125
Beg, Abdal —See Abdal
Beg, Abdulla —See Abdulla
Beg, Baqi —See Baqi
Beg, Daulat —See Daulat
Beg, Jahangir —See Jahangir
Beg, Jan—See Jan
Beg, Jani —See Jani
Beg, Nazar —See Nazar
Beg, Nazar Qtdi —See Nazar
Quli
Benares— 17, 109 (n), no,
no (n), 155, 167, 170, 171.
172, 187 (n), 277 (n)
—Dara at—l 7, 109 (n), no,
no (n)
—remission of pilgrim tax
in— ISS
—Sulaiman’s march t 0—167,
170, 171, 172
Bengal —l 9, 166, 198
Bernier —147 (n), 163 (n),
166 (n), 175 (n), 208 (n),
212, 213. 215, 215 (n), 216,
217 (n), 226, 227 (n),
229 (n), 238 (n), 269,
269 (n), 286, 287, 287 (n),
298
—On Dara—l 47 (n), 163
(n), 269
—on Dara’s religion—2B6, 287
—in the camp of Dara—2l6
—on prisoner Dara —226
—on Shuja—l66 (n)
—on Jai Singh—l7s (n), 215
—on Shah Nawaz— 212, 213
—on Malik Jiwan’s death—
-229 (n)
Bhadauriya Badan Singh —See
Badan Singh
Bhagavad Gita translated —6,
102, 117
Bhagawandin, Laha —lB7 (n)
Bhakkar—l97, 198, 199, 218,
220, 224
Bhakta —281
Bhat, Indar —See Indar
B hat la, Madhusudhan —See
Madhusudhan
Bhatta, Sankar —See Sankar
Bhavabhuti —273
Bhawanidas, the astrologer —lo 2
Bhawanidas, the officer —234
Bhera— 70
Bhuj —2lB
Bhupat —l23, 123 (n)
Bhuslum —lB7 (n)
Bias— l 93 (n), 195, 196, 197
Bichittar Khan—lbrahim —See
Ibrahim
Bidar —142
Bihar— B, 19, 156, 157, 167, 168,
176, 180, 19s, 270
Bijapur—7, 136, 137, 141, 142,
143, 192, 202
—designs on—l4l, 142


—war stopped—l 43
—Dara’s services to —143, 202
Bilgrami, Askari Husain —See
Askari Hussain
Birj (Brindaban ) —248
Bithaldas Gaur —125
Bithli —209
Brij (Bridaban) —248
Bithaldas Gaur —125
Bithli —209
Bodhleian Library —lo 3, 259(0)
Bolan —220, 223
Brahman, Chandrabhan —See
Chandrabhan
Brahmans, Kashmiri —40 (n)
Brahmanical Scriptures —6
Brihadaranyaka —no (n), in
(n)
Brindaban —24B, 277 (n)
Brown, Percy—2gg
Bundela, Contingents —l7B
Bundela, Champat Rai —See
Champat Rai
Bundela, Chhatrasal —See
Chhalrasal
Bundela, Devi Singh —See Devi
Singh
Bundela, Pahar Singh —See
Pahar Singh
Bundi —lB6, 300
Burhanpur —7, 8, 72
Bust— 3s, 42-44, 48 (n), 52 (n),
61, 67
—Capture of Bust —42-44
—fort dismantled —67
Buxar —59
‘C’
Caliph Mamun —See Mamun
Calligraphy —4, 4 (n)
Catalogus Catalogorum —3ol
Chakras —79
Chambal— lBo, 181, 229
Champat Rai Bundela —3s, 37,
„ 48. (n), 59. 71, 133, 299
Chandi —219, 234
Chandrabhan Brahman —s 6 (n),
124, 148 (n), 242, 276 (n)
Charshina —44
Chaturbhuj Chauhan —135
Chauhan, Chaturbhuj See
Chaturbhuj
Chauhan, Rao Ramchend —See
Ramchand
Chauhan, Udaikaran —See Udai-
Chauhan, Vallabh —See Vallabh
Chehel —dokhtaran —56, 56 (n)
Chehel-Zina —33, 35, 42, 45-48
—attack on —4s-48
Chetan Swami, miracle of —241
Chhabila —ls6
Chhandogya —no (n)
Chhatra prakash —299
Chhalrasal Bundela, Maharajah
—299
Chhurika —no (n)
Chintaman —ls6, 277, 278, 292
— desecration of —156, 278
— restoration of —277, 278 ■-
Chishti —Khwajah Muinuddin —
See Muinuddin
Chitor —122, 123, 124, 125
Christ —114
Christian Scriptures —6
Chunar— l6, 171
Compass of Truth —95 (n), 104,
299 —(See also Risala-i-
Haqnuma)
Constable —2oB (n), 269 (n),
268 (n) —(See also Ber-
nier)
Constantinople —23
Crown Prince [See also under
Dara]—s, 7,9, 20, 22, 24,
26. 30, 31, 32, 35, 38, 46,
47, 48, 49, SO, 54, SS. 56.
64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 74, 77,
79, 81, Bg, 103, 106, 107,
124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129,
130—133, 136, 138, 143, 147,
168, 170, 172, 174, 180, 181,
183, 190, 191, 202, 203, 276,
297, 301
Cutch— l76, 200, 201, 214, 215,
217
— Rao of—2oo, 218


‘D’
Dabistan (Dabisian-ul-Muza-
lub) —40 (n), 73 (n), 80
(n), 100 (n), 103 (n),
253 (n), 263, 264 264 (n),
265, 265 (n), 296
Dacca— 4 (n), 296, 298, 299
Dadar —220, 221, 224
Daghistani, Valih —265, 268
Dailemi, Abdur Rashid —See
Abdur Rashid
Dailwara (Dairwara) —215 ■
Dairwara (Dailwara) —215
Dajjals —114
Damdamah—so, 56
Dancing girls—in Persian Camp
—59
Danishmand Khan —224, 293,
313
Dara
—royal bounty of —3
—tutor of —3, 4
—studies of —4, 6
—as a pupil —4
—autographs of— 4
—lack of experience ■ —5
—betrothal of —6-7
—marriage of —9-11
—conjugal life of — 11-12
—children of —12-14, 72
—illness of —12
—rank and offices of— ls-32
—promotion of— ls-16
—viceroyalties of —16-19
—Qandahar expeditions of —
18-17
—services and emoluments of
—l9-20
—fauzdarship of Kavl —20
—march to Kabul —22
—first victory of— 29
—magic and miracles with
Dara —3 B-42
—capture of Burt and Girishk
—42-44
—attack upon Chehelzina —
45-48. „ .
— indignation at Rajrup —47
— reward of Rajrup — 47
—Council of War — 52-56
—and Nejabat — sB
—Consolation of Jafar — 60
—appeal to Qilich Khan—
-61, 62
—failure of — 62-66
—favourites and dissension
amongst officers— 64, 65,
69, 70
—at Pishin — 93
—reception of — 68
—spiritual life of — 70-98, 108,
112, 113, 117, 118
—Quadiriya order and Dara
—72-82
—dreams of — 74 117
—superstition of — 74
—compilations by —7s
—command of Persian ex-
pedition—7s
—with the Court and Em-
peror—l 3, 16, 75, 104,
ios, 109, no, in, 122,
123, 128, 129, 153
—doctrines of — 78-81
—Prophet and Dara — 7B, 106
—on ascetic practices—Bl-83
—on Unitarianism —B4-90
—promise of Divine Knowl-
edge—Bs
—search for illumination —Bs
—Dara and Dilruba —B6-87,
261, 298
—theosophy of —90-95
—attitude towards common
people— 93-106
—spiritual progress of —95-
98
—literary achievements of —
90-107
—Dara and Islam —100, 146
—Dara and Hindu Philo-
sophy—lo 2, 103
—works of —103-118, 296,
298
—humility of —104
— neo-platonism of —105


—lslam and Hinduism —105,
106, 107, 109
—translation of Upanishads
by —lo B-118, 298
—a student of comp. Mytho-
logy—ll 2
—minor works -oi —113-118
— letters to Mirza Raja —l2o,
' 124, 126
—Raj Singh and Bara —l22-
127
—royal honour —l27-128
—letter to Mulla Shah —l2B,
128 (n)
—Bara and Court politics—
-129-134
—Bara and Prithvichand—
-134-136
—betrayed by —l 34 (n)
— intercessions by —l3B-140
—partiality by Shah Jahan—
-147-149
—Bara and Aurangsib —l49-
ISB,
—coalition of brothers against
—l5B-162
—propaganda against—l 63
—at Samugarh —l79-189
—flight from Samugarh—
-190-192
—Prospect of, in Lahore —
193-198
—flight of— l9B-208, 214-219
—battle of Beorai —2oB-213
—death of Nadira —221
—made captive —222-227
—murder 0f— 227-233, 293
—fate of children —239-240
—Bara and Baba Lai —241-
251
—Mulla Shah and Bara—
-252-259
—Muhibbullak and Bara—
-259-260
—Muhsin Fani and Bara—
-262-264
—Sarmad and Bara —264-268
—contrasted with Aurangsib
—269-274
—contrasted with Shujah—
-274-279
—contrasted with Akbar—
-279-290
—political career of —292
— bogus Dora —294 (n)
—Masum 0n —295
—in letters of Aurangsib—
-297
—Dialogue of —298
—cause of hostility of Cham-
pat— 299
— Jagannath on —301
Darbar, Jaipur —See Jaipur
Darbar, Udaipur —See Udaipur
Baud, Hakim —22B
Baud Khan (Shaikh Baud) —
148 (n), 183, 186, 188, 193,
195-199
Baud Shatkh —See Baud Khan
Baulatabad —33, 52
Baulat Afza—S
Baulat Beg Hazara —44
Bauphiny (of Babur's house) —
IS
Bawar, Zamin (See Zamin)
Bows 0n —229 (n)
Bead bodies, treatment by the
Persians —60
Beccan, the— 2, 7, 19, 119, 123,
136-144, 156, 159. 202. 203,
205
Beccani Sadhus —40
Been Barvish —290 (n)
Behradun (Bun) —135
Belhi— l3, 19, 100, no, 127, 134,
I3S, 144, 148 (n), 179. 191.
193, 224, 225-228, 231, 234,
236, 238, 239, 266, 267, 292,
301
Belhi —Shahjahanabad —68, 225
Belil Khan —See Dilir Khan
Beorai— 194, 208-213
Deos— 3B, 41, 42
Bera Gazi Khan —2l
Bera Ismail Khan —21


Descent of the Absolute —See
Absolute
Devi Singh Bundela —47, 48
(n), 59
Dharmat —l76, 178, 179, 203
Dholpur —lBo, 181
Dialogue —244-251, 299
Dilir Khan Ruhela —l7l, 173,
175 (n), 177, 211. 212, 234
Dilruba, Shah—B6, 87, 97, US.
161, 298
Diwan-i-Muhsin Fani —262
Dohad —8
Doki —32, 66, 67
Do-rahah —ls9
Dreams —26, 67, 74
Dubinchand —206
Dumraon —171
Dungarpur —2o6
Dunchand —See Dubinchand
Durrul-Manshur (Sohaif-ush-
Sharaif) —298
Dwaraka —241
D van pur —241
t E*
Egypt— ns
Elliot— 229 (n), 291 (n), 292
(n),294 (n), 296
European artillery —2B, 194, 199
(See also Feringees)
European gunners —2B
European marksmen —lBB
Expedition, Persian —20-23 (See
also Qandahar expedition)
Expedition, Qandahar —18, 20-
7i
T*
Faith —294
Faiyyaz-ul-qawanin —l6l, 298
Faizi —283
Fakhir Khan —s 2 (n), 70, 133,
133 (n)
Fant, S aikh Muhsin —S e e
Muhsin
Farah— 24, 43, 44
Farangisian —26s
Farid, Shaikh —133— 134, r 33
(n)
path Muhammad Kalal —37
Fathpur Sikri —276 (n)
Fatuhat-i-Alamgiri —29s
Fatwa, of the divines —2B7
Fazl, Abul —See Abul Fazl
Fazlullah, Shaikh Muhammad
—72
Fazil Khan —l 74, 191
Fazil, Mulla —30 (n) 35
Feringees —29, 49 (See also
European Artillery)
Fidai Khan— 235
Fidai Khwajah—l27
Firdausi —4
Firuz Jang, Rustam —See Rus-
tam Khan
Firuz—Koh —44
Firuz Mewati —209, 212, 214,
• 219
Free Will —249
Fususu’l — hikam —Bl
■G*
Gabriel —259, 260
Gandhi, Mahatma —244
Ganges —l 67, 171, 176, 234
Ganj-i-tauhid 111
Gdtein de Tossy —242 (n), 299
Garh Sankar —l96
Garhwal —134
Gates of Qandahar —33-35, 48
Gauharara —7, 8
Gaur, Aniruddh —See Anirudh
Gaur, Bithaldas —See Bithaldas
Gharibdas —124
Ghaazni —22 (n), 23, 24, 67
Ghulam Ali Azad —See AH
Azad
Gilani, Abdul Qadir —See Abdul
Qadir
Gilani, Abdur Razzak —See
Abdur Razzak
Gilani, Shaida —276 (n)
Gir, Indra —3B 39
Girishk —42-44
Gita, Bhagavad —See
Bhagavadgita
Gokla [hill] —209, 210, 211
Goklat Ujjaniya —l7l, 172


Golconda— l 36-141, 192, 202,
203, 266
Golconda letters —29B
Gopis —24B
Gopichandan —l4l
Gospels —loo, 109
Goswami, Vit Hal Rai—Set
Vithal Rai
Govardhan Nath —l7B
Govindwal —l96, 197
Gredter Rann —See Rann
Greek Astrology, Astronomy —
See Astrology, Astronomy
Gujrat— lB, 19 (n), 156, 201,
208, 212, 214, 294 (n)
Gujrati, Amina —See Amina
Gujrati, .Shaik Wajjuddin —
See Wajjuddin Shahi—l
Gul Muhammad Khan —217,
219, 222, 223
Gulrukh Banu —121, 158
Gulzar-i-hal —lo2
Gurus —40
Guruva gurina —40 (n)
Gurzhardar —66
Gurzi, Rustam Khan —See
Rustam Khan
Gwalior —227, 238, 239
Gwaliori, Rajah Man —See
Man
‘H’
Habibur Rahman Sahib, Hakim
—4 (n), 298
Hada, Anurudh Singh —See
Anurudh Singh
Hada, Mukund Singh —See
Mukund Singh
Hada, Satarsal —See Satarsal
Haft-anjuman —297
Haibat —231
Haidarabad —l3B
Haidar, Shah— ls 7 (n)
Haji, a magician —39-42
Haji, Sher —See Sher Haji
Hakim Mirza —l69
Hakim Wazir Khan —Sec
Wazir
Hakluyt Society —29B
Hallaj —B9
Hallaj, Mansur bin —113
Hama-az-u-st 114
Hama-u-st 114
Hamid, Abdul —See Abdul
Hamiduddin Khan —lsl
Hanafi —76
Ha pur —235
Haqiqat —97, 257, 287
Hara, cave of —79
Haranath —293
Hardawar —135, 234, 235
Hasan —29s
Hasan, Abul —See Abu Hasan
Hasanat-ul-Arifin —1 13, I 1 4
(n), 115, 115 (n), 255, 256
(n), 261, (n), 298
Hashim Barho, Sayytd —l4B
(n), 234
Hashim, Multammad —See
Khali Khan
Hauzkhana —262
Haya—iu (n)
Hazara, Daulat Beg— See
Daulat
Hazara, Mihir Quli —See Mihir
Quii
Heent —B
Heinrich Roth —lol
Helmand —43
Hennabandi —9
Henri Buzeo, Father —See
Buzeo
Herat— 24, 33 , , „
Hidden-book of the Quran —
108, 120
Himalayas —l 34 192
Hindi hymns by Dara —B
Hindi-ke-Musalman Kavi
290 (n)
Hindi mss., Report on—3oo
Hindu —6, 27, 63, 101, 102, 106,
107, 109, 112, 187 (n), 193,
203, 204, 206, 241,-251,
276 (n), 277, 279, 293
—Dara and the Hindus—6,
27, 107, 109, 112, 193, 203,
241-251, 277, 279


—Philosophy and Islam—ioi
—Badayuni on— ioi
—Chief of the— 193, 204, 206
—astronomy and astrology
—276 (n)
—abolition of fax 0n —277,
277 (n)
Hindustan^- 22, 63, 199, 222, 232
—coalition against Persia
—22
—Persian emigrants to —63
Hindustanis— 29, 35, 36, 49, 50
60, 66, 182
Hira Bai —l2
Hissar —15, 198
Histoire de la Litteraiure
Hindoui et Hindustani—
’ 299
Historical Records Commis-
sion— 4 (n), S 3 (n)
History of Aurangsib ( Sarkar )
—l4O (n), 142 (n), 151 (n),
152 (n), 161, 209 (n), 213,
215 (n), 224 (n), 226 (n),
228 (n), 231 (n), 240 (n),
259 (n), 268 (n), 289 (n),
298, 301 (n)
History of Fine At —299
History of Hindi Literature —
103 (n)
History of Rajasthan —3oo
History of Sanskrit Poetries—
-299
History of Shahjahan —121
(n), 296, 298
Horses, species of —in (n)
Hot-Yogin —244
Huart—2 43, 299
Hmnayun —32, 199, 232
Huqqah —4B
Husain Imam —See Imam
Husain, Muzaffar —See
Muzaffar
Husain, Yusug—See Yusuf
Htewiyya —93
Hyderabad Sind—26s
•P
Ibn-ul-Arabi —Bl
Ibrahim Badakhshi, Khalifa —
268
Ibrahim Bichittar Khan —143
Ibrahim, Sayyid —2o9
Idols, cult of— 24s'
Ikhlas Khan —35
Imam Husain —266
Imam Rasa— 67
Inayet Khan —292 (n)
Inayetullah Khan —297
Indar Bhat —127
Indar Kumari —l2o (n)
Indian Painting under the
Moghuls —299
Indian Office Library —lo 2, 102
(n)
Indous —207
Indra Gir —38, 39
Indriyan —2so
Indus— 24, 199, 200, 219, 224
Infidel —256
Injil —lo9
Inkar —114
Insan-i-Kamil —257
Iran, Iranio —27, 66, 182
Iraq —22, 23
Iraqi horse —in (n)
Irvine, W —29B
Islam, Akbar 0n —282, 283
Islamabad —289
Islam, Qasi Muhammad —10, 74
Islam Hut —ls 2
Israfil —112
Iswardas Nagar —2l2
Iltihad —B6
Issat Khan ( Sayyid Abdur
Rassaq) —36, 36 (n), 37
(n), So, 52, S 3. SS, 56, 60,
64 (n), 65, 67. 148 (n),
191, 193, 199 , , ,
Issat Khan, Sayyid (Abdur
Rassaq Gilani ) —19
T
Jabur —109
Jadhavdas, Rai (Jadu Das)—
242


Jadu Das ( Jadhavdas ) —242
00
Jadu Nath Sarkar, Sir —See
Sarkar
Jafar (Barqandaz Khan) 32,
34. 36, 40. 4i, 42. 46-49. 50,
52, S 3, 55. 57, 60, 64 (n),
65, 69,, 70, 122, 148 (n),
180, 183, 184
Jafar Khan —262, 263
Jagadabharanam —3ol
Jagannath —27s, 276 (n), 292
Jagatsingh, Maharana —l22
Jahahara Begam —B, 9, 12, 14,
76, 135, 136, 138, 139. 148.
(n), 152, 164, 232, 240, 253
(n), 255, 277, 279, 292
Jahangtr —l, 2,3, 11, 21, 51
(n), 72. 122, 144, 165, 241,
277 (n)
Jahangirabad —l2
Jahangir Beg— s 6, 57
Jahan Lodi Khan— 6-7
Jahan, Said Khan —24
Jahanseb Banu —13, 14
Jaipur Records —124 (n), 167
(n), 169 (n), 204 (n), 297
Jaisalmir —l97
Jai Singh, Mirga Raja —24, 34
53, 54, 58, 60, 61, 65, 68,
68 (n), 69, 70, 120, 121,
124, 126, 141, 150, 166 (n),
167-170, 171-178, 179, 198,
207, 208, 211, 213, 214, 218,
223, 224, 234, 236,- 237, 238
00, 297
Jam —2ol
Jama —B6
Jama Masjid —26B
Jami —4
Jammu —42, 193
Jamrud — Shahi —39
Jamuna —150
Jan Beg, Mirza —177
Jam Begam —l4, 240
Jani Beg —2o9
Jarrett —2B4 (n)
Janvant Singh, Rajah —24, jo,
166 (n), 176, 178, 179. 192.
202, 203, 204, 206-208
Jatipura —27B
Jaunpur —234 (n)
Jayadhvaj Singh— 3ol (n)
Jesseinque —2l3 (See Jai
Singh)
Jesuit —loo
Jewish, Scriptures —6
Jhala, Raghodas— l24
Jhala, Rai Singh —l2s
Jhavari, K. M —179 (n)
Jihad —90
Jitpur —l76
Jiwan, Malik —See Malik
Jiwan
Jivatma —246, 247
Jodhpur —l79
Jbga-Vashishta —103, n 6, 117
Jog-nidra —2sl
John Nicol, Farquhar —See
. Farquhar
Juzarte, Pedro —See Pedro
Jyoti —79
‘K’
Kabo—2B3
Kabir— B4 (n), 243, 244
Kabirpanthis —244
Kabul— l 2, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24,
26, 27
Kachchi horse —ll 2 (n)
Kachchwah —63, 177
Kachchwah Raw, Singh —See
Ram Singh
Kadjoue —2oB
Kalal, Path Muhammad —See
Path Muhammad
Kalam-i-Ilahi —2B4
Kaliani —142
Kalinta —lo2
Kalimat-i-A urangsib — 13
Kalimat-i-Tayyibat —297
Kawbu, Muhammad Salih —
See Salih
Kamil —97 '
Kawran—32, 32 (n), 3S
Kamrup—3ol


Kamrup —3ol
Kanaur —39
Kangra —2o, 46
Kanhoji —2l7
Kari —217
Karim, Abdul —See Abdul
Karim-un-nisa —ll
Karnatak —137, 138
Kashan —24, 265, 268, (n)
Kashaf-ul-Mahjub —B4 (n)
Kashi —247
Kashmir —16, 20, 72, 76, 104,
104 (n), 162, 225, 252, 253,
258, 262, 263, 289
Kathiawad —201, 214, 241
Kavindracharya Saraswoti—
-103 (n), 148, (n), ISS, 277
(n), 298
Kaviraj Shyamdasji —See
Shyamdasji
Kazim, Muhammad —293
Kena ( Upanishad) —no (n)
Keshab Rai —2B6, 287, 288 v
Khafi Khan —19 (n), 30 (n),
31 (n), 73 (n), 131, 131
(n), 229 (n), 293, 295, 296,
299
Khajwa —2o3, 206, 207, 208
Khalilpur —l24
Khalilullah Khan —135, 183,
184, 186, 187, 188, 189, 194,
196, 218, 228
Khande Rai —ls6
Khandesh —7
Khan-i-Khanan —62, 70
Khan Jahan Lodi— 6, 7
Kharagpur —l76
Kharraj, Shaikh Abu Said —
See Abu said
Khawaspura —22s, 227
Khesgi, Nazar Bahadur — See
Nazar Bahadur
Khizirabad —277
Khud-parasti —llB, 255
Khurasan —23, 84
Khurram —1,2, 144
Kkusru, Diwan-i-Amir —BB
(n), 293
Khwajah Khizir —23, 35
Khwajah Muin —l4B (n)
Khwajah IVaisqaran—4B
Kipchaq —l36
Kiram —31
Kiriwaz —44
Kishwar Kusha—2B (n)
Kitab-al-Lumd —Bl
Koli —215, 216, 217
Kora (Korah ) —177, 234
Kotal Mehran —242 (n)
Krishna Misra —ll7
Kuch Bihar —301
Kui Miron —242 (n)
Kuiliyat —2s3 (n)
Kutnaon —52 (n), 135, 233
Kunch —299
Kunwar Ram Singh —See Ram
Singh
‘L*
Lachmanprasad, Munshi —263
(n)
Lohor —2, 12, 17, 18, 19, 22, 24,
26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 38,
49. 66, 72, 73, 74. 75, 104,
104 (n), 148 (n), 152, 153,
191-195, 197, 198, 223, 226,
234, 241, 242, 252, 258, 261
Lahori, Abdul Hamid—2gi
(See also Abdul Hamid)
Lakah— 33, 35, 37, 39, 48 (n),
, 59
Lala Bhakwandin —See
Bhagwandin
Lai Kavi —299
Lashkar Khan —s 9
Lataif ( Lataif-ul-Akhbar ) —
27, 28 (n), 29 (n), 32 (n),
36 (n), 39, 40, 42 (n), 44,
47, 48 (n), Si. 5i (n), 52
(n), S 3 (n), 56, 57. 57
(n), 60, 60 (n), 61 (n),
62. 64 (n). 65 (n). 66 (n),
67, 68 (n). 70, 71, 294, 295
Lyuh-i-Mahfuz —109
Les Entretiens de Lahore —299
Lesser Rann —See Rann


Letters of Aurangzib —lo3 (n),
297
L Inde Mystique au Mayen
Age—ll 4 (n), 116 (n),
299
Lisan—Ullah —252
Lives of Saints —103
Lodi, AH Ahmad Khan —See
All Ahmad
Lodi, Khan Jahan —See Jahan
Lodi, Sher Khan —See Sher
Khan
Lohrasp, Mirza (Mahabat
Khan The younger)— sl
(n)
Lord Steward of the House-
hold— 292
Lutfullah —8
‘M’
Majma-al-Baharain —92 (n),
94 (n), 105-107, 296. 299
Maani Abdul —See Abdul
Maaqulat—4
Ma’arifat —252, 257
Maasir-i-Alamgiri —237, 238
(n), 239, 240 (n), 291
Maasir-ul-kiram —157 (n)
Maasir-ul-Umara —lo (n), 18
(n), 19 (n), 296
Macaulay —ls 4
Macdonald —253 (n)
Mace-bearer —123
Madhusudhan Bhatta —124
Maghasis —2l9, 220
Magic, Magicians —3l, 38-42
Mahabat Khan (the Younger )
—34, 36, 36 (n), 37. 37
(n), 51. 52. 56, 57, 60, 70.
143, 220, 294
Mahabat Khani, Badiuzzaman —
See Rashid Khan
Mahabharat —101, 186 (n)
Mahadeva —112
Mahakavirai —See Jagannath
Mahapralaya — 112
Mahapurukha —247
Mahatma Gandhi —See Gandhi
Mahdi —276
Mahdi Quit Khan —42-43
Maheshprasad —no (n)
Mahfuzul Huq —299
Mahmud Bar ha Sayyid —3o
(n), 35. 48 (n), 59
Mahmudi cloth —132
Mairta —2o3, 212, 214
Malda —l9B, 295
Malik Jiwan —134, 134 (n), 178,
220, 222-225, 228, 229, 229
(n), 231
Malpica Estanilas —ioi
Malwa— 159. 178, 179, 241
Mmun, Caliph —2Bo
Mandalgarh— l2s
Mandi —45
Man Gwaliori, Raja —46, 47
Mansabdars —15, 63
Mansingh, Raja —l69, 176
MaAsur—ll3, 115
Manned —11, 14, 51 (n), S 3
(n), 98, 101, 102 (n), 183,
194, 197. 198. 199. 232, 238
(n), 269, 170
Manzil-i-N igambodh —110
Maqbul— 2l3, 223, 224
Mardan, AH Khan —See AU
Mardan
Mashuri —34
Massignon —243, 299
Master of Genii —3B
Master of Ghosts —42 (n)
Masutn, Muhammad —195, 197,
198, 220 (n), 231 (n), 237,
238 (n), 295
Match-locks —30, 59
Mathura —2B7, 289
Maulana Shah —73 (n), 76, 83,
85 (See also Mulla Shah)
Mecca —2s4, 264 (n), 285
Medini Singh —l36, 137, 238
(n)
Mewar —1,8, 123, 204, 206, 300
Mewati, Feruz —See Firuz
Main Mir —18, 72-77, 82, 83.
104, 114, 222, 252, 259
Mihir Quli Sultan Hazara —44
Mihir Shukoh —13


Minhaj-us-Salikin —See Abdul
Hasan
Miracles —3 B-42
Mir Adil —157
Mirak A iaullah —See Ataullah
Mirat-ul-Khiyal —2s3 (n), 259,
260, 260 (n), 262, 263, 263
(n), 264, 266, 276 (n), 296
Mir Bakhshi —34
Mir-i-Atish— 34, 135
Mir-i-Saman —35
Mir Jumla —137, 140, 142, 301
(n)
Mir Muhammad Said —139
Mir, Shaikh —185, 200, 211
Mirza Hakim —See Hakim
Mirsa Raja Jai Singh — See
Jai Singh
Mirza Sayyid —See Sayyid
Mirza Shuja —See Nejabat
Khan
Misra-bandhu-hinode —103 (n,)
300
Misra, Shyam Behari —See
Shyam Behari
Misra Mir Sulaiman —See
Sulaiman
Mist, Primaeval —ll2
Modi, Dr. —no (n), 298
Moonrise of Wisdom —118
Moradabad —234
Moses —too, 105 (n), 109, 114
Mucrwwiya —l46
Muazzam —277
Mubad —263 (n)
Mughal Army —See Army
Muhammad Adil Shah —See
Adil Shah
Muhammad Akbar —239, 287
Muhammad Ali Khan —19, 26,
148 (n)
Mulhammad Agil —See Aqil
Muhammad Azam —14 (See
Azam)
Muhammad Badi —See Badi
Muhammad Baqa, Shaikh — See
Baqa
Muhammad Dara Shukho — See
Dara
Muhammad Fashdlah —72
Muhammad Hashim —See
Hashim
Muhammad Islam, Qasi —See
Qazi
Muhammad Kasim —See
Kazim
Muhammad Masum —See
Masum
Muhammad Maula, Shaikh—
, 157
Muhammad, Mulla —103 (n)
Muhammad, Nazar —See
Nazar
Muhamtnad Quli —58
Muhammad Roushan Gurji —
See Raushan
Muhammad Sadiq —See Sadiq
Muhammad Said Sarmad —See
Sarmad
Muhammad Salih Kambuh —
See Salih
Muhamtnad Shah —236
Muhammad Shah, Emperor—
-265, 295, 297
Muhammad Sharif Qalich —See
Qalich Khan
Muhammad Sultan —See Sultan
Muhamtnad Tughlak —l34
Muhammad Zaman —See Zaman
Muhibb-Ullah Allahabad,
Shaikh —l7, 259-260
Muhiuddin —157 (n)
Mushin Fani, Shaikh —262-264
Muinuddin Chishti • Khwajah—
-76, 124
Mukharram Khan —134 (n)
Mukhlispur —no, no (n)
Mukund Singh Hada —sB, 71
Mulhid —155, 161
Mulla Abd Muhammad — See
Abd Muhammad
Mulla Fazil —See Fazil
Mulla Mohan —ls7
Mulla Salih —See Salih


Mulla Shah Badakshi —(See
Maulana Shah) —73, 76,
115, 128, 148 (n), 252-259,
262 (n), 280, 278, 298
Multafat Khan —239
Multan —lB, 19, 24, 26, 30, 32,
66, 67, 68, 148 (n), 152,
153. 197, 198. 200, 218,
220 (n)
Mumtdz Maluil —1,2, 3,7, 9,
10, 11, 12, 122, 221
Mumtaz Shukoh —13
Munawwar Bai —l22 (n)
Mundy Peter —See Peter
Mungir —l6B, 176, 214
Munis-ul-arwa —76
Munshi Lachman Prasad —See
Lachman
Muntakhabu-l-Labab —295
Muqaddama-i-Raquaat-i-Alam-
giri—300
Murad Bakhsh —B, 19 (n),
121 (n), 146, 158-162, 176,
178,' 179, 184, 186, 192,
301, 239, 262
Murad Sultan of Turkey —22,
23
Muraqqa —Bl
Murida—76, 104, 262 (n)
Musailama —264 (n)
Mustafa Khan —See Ibrahim
Sayyid
Mustaidd Khan, Saqi —See
Saqi
Mustapha —lo6
Mustamaid Khan —l4B (n)
Mustaqqid Khan— l 34 (n)
Muzaffar Husain, Mirza —2l
Mysteries, introduction into
Islam —Bo
Mysticism, stages of —80-96
‘N’
Nabi Shaikh Abdun —See
Abdun
Nad— 24s
Nadira Begam—u, 12, 18, 72,
104, 104 (n), 191, 193, 194.
iq6, 210, 219, 222, 223, 240
—children of —12-13
Nadir Shah —33
Nadir-ul-Nukat ( Dialogue ) —
243-251, 299
Nadvi, Sayyid Najib Ashraf —
115 (n), 300
Nagar, Iswardas —See Iswardas
Nagina —234, 235
Nagpur —4 (n)
Nahar Tamburi (Nahar Khan)
148 (n)
Najumsani, Abdullah Beg —See
Abdullah Beg '
Najumsani, Baqar Khan — See
Baqar Khan
Nak-Kati-Rani —52 (n), 134
Nal-Daman —2B3 (n)
Nand Das, Swami —103
Naqib —4o
Narmada— l6o, 161, 178, 180
Naulakha —242 (n)
Nauzad —43
Nazval Kishore Press —7B (n),
140 (n)
Nazsmagar —2ol
Nawaz Khan Shah —See Shah
Nawaz
Nazar Bahadur Kheshgi —36
Nazar Beg (Nazar Quli) —225,
227, 229, 230
Nazar Muhammad Khan —22,
262
Nazar Quli (See Nazar Beg)
Nazi —262, 263
Nazir Shaikh— 74, 75.
Nejabat Khan —s 2, 58, 70, 134,
135 .
Neo-Platontsm of Dara —105
Nevill —109 (n)
Nicholson —See Studies of
Islam
Nisar —3
Nishapur —23, 24’
Niyula —242 >
Nomenclature (Islamic ) of
Hindu gods —ll 2


Nur Jahan —2
Nusrat Khan —64 (n)
‘O’
Ojha, Gaurishankar —See Gau-
rishankan (also Rajputana
ka Itahis)
Oriental Public Library, Patna
—4, 252' (n), 253 (n), 296
Oriental Series, Gaekward’s—
-155 (n), 276 (n), 277 (n),
298
Orissa —19
O'Shea ( Shea ) —296 (See also
Shea)
Outlines of Religious Literature
of India —llB (n), 299
(see also Farquhar)
. P .
Padshah-nama —2 (n), 3, 3 (n),
7, 9 (n), 11, 12 (n), 13,
16, 22 (n), 25 (n), 73 (n),
75 (n, 76 (n), no (n),
128 (n, 151 (n), 277 (n),
291-293, 296, 298
Pahar Singh Bundela —37, 68
(n), 299
Pak-nihar Banu Begam —l3,
14
Palanpur—2ls
Panch Mahal —8
Pandit Jagannath —See Jagan-
nath
Panjmundrah —32
Paramatma —246
Parvez—l
Pathan— lB3, 188, 212, 222
Patna— 4, 122, 171, 175, 270,
291
Patron in Court —129
Peacock Throne —119
Pedro Juzarte —101
Pentateuch —loo
Pcrama —301
Percy Brown —See Brown
Persia— 22, 199, 219, 222, 223
Persians —lB, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
26, 38, 39, 50, 56, 199 (See
also 'expedition')
Peter Mundy —29B
Peter, the Great —273
Peter, the Hermit —26
Pharaoh —114
Philosophy, Hindu —101, 102,
118
Pir of Dura —l4B (n)
Pishin —32, 67, 68 (n)
Plato —4, 105 (n)
Prabhu —2BB
Prabodh-Chandrodaya —102,
117
Pranabharanam —301
Pranayam —79, 83, 285
Pran-narayan —3ol
Pratap Maharana —i, 123
Praying Mullas —31
Prithvichand, Rajah —l 34-136,
. 236, 237, 238 (n)
Pnthvi Singh, Raja —234, 236,
237
Prophet —7B, 79, 146, 254, 259,
266, 284, 285
—reverence of Dara for —78,
285
—Hindu Practice of —79, 285
—Gabriel of —259
—Physical ascent of —284,
285
Psalms —100, 109 ‘
Panjab —ls, 17, 20, 23, 191,
192, 195, 235
Pur —l2s
Puih— 235
‘Q.’
Qabil Khan —296
Qadiri —76, 78
Qadiriya —72-83, 253
Qaitul —59
Qalich Khan —209
Qanauj —l7l
Qandahar— lB, 19, 20-23, 44,
45. 49, 66-71, 119, 121, 123,
136, 172, 182, 219, 223,,
242, 294, 295, 299
Qasba Gokul —279 (n)
Qasim, Abul —See Abul Qasim


Qasim Khan— 34, 49, 57, 135(
170
Qazi Afzal —See Afzal
Quazi Muhammad Islam —10,
74
Qila-Kusha —28 (n), 49
Qilich Khan— 23, 34, 38, 48
("). Si. 55, 61, 62, 65, 70
Qiyamat-i-Kubra —112
Qizilbashes —44, 51
Quran —4,5, 89, 90, 107, 108,
109, 120, 157 (n), 284, 285,
292
Qutb, Abdullah —See Abdullah
Qutb Khan —36, 37 (n), 64 (n)
Qutbuddin Khan —133 (n)
Quwwat-i-batini —259
«R»
Rabindranath —B2 (n), 244
Radandaz Khan —237
Raghodas Jhala —124
Rai Singh Jhala —125
Rajaur —3
Rajmahal —l6o, 166, 171
Rajputana —l27, 186 (n), 192,
195, 199, 203, 205 (n), 307
Rajputana-ka-Itihas —l2s (n)
127 (n), 300
Rajputana-Malwa Railway—
-209
Rajputs— lB2, 183, 187, 188, 193,
210, 211, 212, 236
Raj Singh, Maharana —122-127,
135, 146, 204-206, 300
Ramayana —lol, 116
Ramchand, Chauhan Rao —l24
Ram Chandra {Rama) —117,
273,
Ram Singh, Kunwar —70, 168,
169, 183, 237
Ram Singh, Maharajah —3oo
Ram Singh Rathor, Rajah— lB7
Rana DU —ll
Rana Pratap —Sec Pratap
Rana Sanga —2o6
Rann {greater) —2lB
Rann {lesser) —218
Rao Akhairaj II —300
Rao of Cutch —2oo,2lB (See
also cutch)
Ragaim-i-K arim —297
Rashid Khan, Badi-uz-zaman
{Badiuzzaman Muhabat-
khani)—294, 295
Rathor—63, 70, 178, 187
Raushanara —See Raushan Raj
Raushan Gurji, Mirza Muham-
mad— 43
Raushan Rat, Begam —B, 160,
227, 232
Rawalpindi —2
Rasa, Imam —See Imam
Razi, Aqil Khan —l 43
Razzad, Sayyid Abdur —l4B
(n), 199, also see Izzat
Khan
Riaz-ush-S haw a —265
Ribbani —26s
Rieu —252 (n), 263 (n), 295,
296
Risalah-i-Bismillah —253 (n)
Risalah-i-Haqnumah —73, 77,
78 (n), 79. 80, 80 (n),
82 (n), 83, 88, 94, 96, 97
(n), 100, 104, 105, 285,
296, 299
Risalah-i-Shahiya —2s3 (n)
Roe, Sir Thomas —129
Rohtas—2, 8, 16
Roth, Heinrich —See Heinrich
Rubai —263 (n)
Ruhela, Chief— l7l, 173, 177,
178
Rumi —4, 276
Rupar —l93, 194
Rup Singh Rathor, Rajah—
-125, 188
Ruggal-i-Alamgir—uS (n)
Rustak —252
Rustam —31
Rustam Khan Bahadur —19, 24,
32, 35, 42, 43. 44. 52 (n),
54, 61, 62, 67. 68 (n), 71,
180, 183, 184, 185, 186
Rtistan Khan Gurji —23


‘S’
Sachaq —9
Sachau —103 (n)
Sadhu —3B, 40
Sadat Khan —44
Sadi —4
Sadiq, Muhammad, —4s, 296
Sadiq Muhammad Khan —2o2
Sadulla Khan — 20, 25, 26, 123,
I2S, 130, 136, 137. 138, 156,
204, 205, 227, 277, 277 (n),
291, 292
Safinat-ul-awliya —77, 81 (n),
85 (n), 103, 114, 296
Sashikan Khan —lB4, 200
Sahaif-ush-Sharaif —298
Saharanpur —s2 (n), 134, 234
Sahasa —123
Sahwa-l-jam—9s
Said Khan Bahadur —24
Said Khan Jahan —24
Said Mir Muhammad —139
Sakinat-ul-awliya —77, 103,
253 (n), 298
Sakkar —199
Salabat Khan, Sayyid —l4B (n)
Salih —259
Salih Kambu, Muhammad —
143, 293 (See also Amal-i-
Salih)
Salih, Mulla —l4B (n)
Salim —130
Salima Banu —239
Satimgarh —23B, 239
Samad, Mulla Abdus —See
Abdus Samad
Samarqand —22
Samrat-Sidhanta —276 (n)
Sanga, Rana —206
Samugarh —sB, 176, 177, 178-
189, 190, 194, 206, 221
Sankara Bhatta —l26
Sannyasi (Hindu) —38, 39
Sanwaldas Ralhor —124
Saraswati, Kavindrachaya —See
Kavindracharya
Sarh'md —193, 241
Sarkar, J. N— 9 (n), 134 (n),
140 (n), 142 (n), 151 (n),
152 (n), 161, 185 (n), 20S
(n), 213, 240 (n), 289 (n),
296, 297, 298 (See also
History of Aurangzib)
Sarmad— 100, 115, 264-268, 274,
280
Sarvavidya-nidhan —lss (n)'
274, 280
Sarvadiya-nidhan —lss (n)
Sar-Samgraha —3oo
Satara —ls6
Satarsal Hada Rao —68 (n),
143, 180, 183, 185, 186, 187
Satlej— l93, 194
Satrasal-dashak —lB7 (n)
Saubhagyaprakash —135
Sayyid' Mirza —3s
Sehwan —2oo
Shaft Khan —277, 229
Shah (of Persia) —27, 219
Shah Abbas I —See Abbas
Shah Abbas ll —See Abbas
Shahabuddin Suhrawardy —lls
Shaham Quli— -61 (n)
Shah Dilruba —B6, 87, 97, 115,
261, 298
Shah Haidar —See Haider
Shah-i-Buland Iqbal —l2B, 257
Shah Jahan —2,3, 4,5, 7,8, 11,
12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22, 24,
25, 26, 51 (n), 68, 72.
76 (n), too, no (n), 119,
121, 122, 123, 124, 12s, 127,
128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 134.
135, 136, 137, 138, 140, 141.
142, 143, 144 145, M 7-149.
151. 152, IS3, 169, 170, 174,
I7S, 179. 180, 181, 189, 190,
191, 204, 20s, 217, 220 (n),
224, 232, 236, 240, 253 (n),
262, 266, 274-279, 291-293,
295, 296, 297, 300
—conspiracy of Nur Jahan
against—2
— crowned —3
—children of— 7, 8
