

DARK DEEDS
iVi J
IN A
SUNNY LAND,
BLACKS AND WHITES
j i\ . .
North-West Australia.
BY THE
REV. J. B. GRIBBLE,
Missionary to the Natives.
STIRLING EROS., STEAM PRINTERS, PERTH.


V 3
*
| sama
] clZAVI-. Y T A7V : '
f VJf&i. XlJUL 7 * . 1. f vJ
V ■ .<
>
■ ! ■■ ■ -> f
4-
*•- *•* ■* y
prf ■-. i ’ • y * :. c ‘ ; " f
V
' I’", v ,. ■ I
I
„
>' ‘ \ - .. .
r. r < . ' 1 T . i.|
' , *,> C.i C x. -j- ..-,1 ■■ I « • I k. ■»
, *’ t ,: »‘x -I.. - ' ’ f-»
-■


F \OOtf\Uf
ißajestp t\)t (©mm** iflaufcaU r?
aborigine.
In instructions to His Excellency the then Governor, from Her
Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, dated from Osborne House, Is e
of Wight, sth March, 1861, the following paragraph occurs.—
« And it is our further will and pleasure that you do to the utmost
of your power, promote religion and education among the nat ye
inhabitants of our said Colony, and that you do especiallycareto
protect them in their person, and in the free enjoyment of their
possessions, and that you do by all lawful means prevent and re-
strain all violence and injustice which may in any manner be prac-
tised or attempted against them, and that you take such ipeasu e
as may appear to be necessary to further their -conversion to the
Christian faith and their advancement in civilisation.
LORD BROUGHAM’S OPINION OF DARK DEEDS.
“ Tell me not of rights, talk not of the property of the planter
in his rights, I acknowledge not the property. The principles, the
feelings, of our common nature, rise in rebellion against it. Le
the appeal made to the understanding, or to the heart, the sen-
tence is the same that rejects it. In vain you teU me of laws that
sanction such a claim. There is a law above all the enactments of
human codes, the same in all times, such as it was before the
daring -genius of Columbus, pierced the night of ages, •
opened to one world the source of power, wealth and knowledge,
to the other all unutterable woes, suck as it is at this day. it is
the law written by the finger of God, on the heart of man, and t
law is unchangeable and eternal. While men despise fraud, a
loathe rapine, and hate blood, they shall reject, with indignation
the wild and guilty fantacy, that man can hold property in man.
PREFATORY NOTE.
That dark deeds, dark, not only because they were done m the
dark, for some men only perform their deeds of oppression and cruelty
under the shadow ,of darkness. As the Great Teacher has sai ;
“ Men love darkness rather than light because their deeds ar
evil,” but that which chiefly constitutes the darkness of certain
deeds, is that their nature is directly opposed to the principles o
right, justice and humanity ; which may be justly compared to rays
of purest light, coming straight down from the Great Sun of Rig -
eousness, and before such light alone, can real works of darkness b
made manifest. Because " that which maketh manifest is light.
Amongst the darkest deeds ever performed by mortals, must he
classed those acts of “inhumanity to man” which as a certain poet
has truly said “ makes countless thousands mourn. • , ,
As evidence of this, we have only to look at Africa s long an sa
catalogue of woes, woes inflicted on poor defenceless blacks, miiu-


manity, of the vilest description, practised by the white-skinned
Christian on his dark-skinned brother. _
Capture, chains, long inarches, whipping, exhaustion, death on
the road-side, or if surviving all these, a far more tumble fate in
the shape of a living death. Packed like herrings in the slave-dhow;
sold like brutes of the field, to the highest bidder, on some foreign
shore, and then dark, dark, finale, a life, longer or shorter, according
to the powers of endurance—of what P Heaven only Knows •
Let Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe, with her graphic pen, sketch
the revolting picture to our minds. ~ .
That deeds of darkness have been committed, not only in Africa
and America, in connection with the slave trade a trade which
thank God, (through the holy exertions of such men as Wilber-
force, Fowell-Buxton, Lord Brougham, Abraham Licolm, John
Woolman, and others, whose names might be mentioned) has been
brought within very limited bounds, and can never again
show itself openly. Butin India also in connection with the
horrible proceedings of the great Mutiny, deeds of the grossest
darkness were done. , , ~ ’ ..
Who can think of the Black Hole of Calcutta, with its agonising
mass of human victims, men, women, and children, of our own
nationality, writhing in all the tortures of a living death, without
a thrill at the heart-strings, and the deepest abhorrence of soul,
not only at the condition of the sufferers, but also at the infernal
ferocity of the perpetrators. _ . , ’, .
Again, in the days of fierce persecution in Madagascar, what a
dark blood-stain of cruelty marked its pages, and more recently still,
and far nearer home, what horrible deeds were performed in con-
nection with the system of “ black-birding,’ so called, carried on
by such human monsters, as Mount and Morris, of South Sea
n °B°S e that Australia itself, professedly the new home of liberty and
light, should also have become the theatre of the dark deeds of
oppression and cruelty. That a land not only blessed by the Great
God, with cloudless skies, and wide-spread prosperity and happi-
ness to those who have been privileged to make it their home, and
moreover a land which professes to reflect the noble institu-
tions of Great Britain, those godly and philanthropic fabrics, which
are not only England’s glory and boast, but the envy of all the
world beside. That a land so circumstanced and blessed by Divine
Providence, should have become the nursing mother of oppression
and injustice, and that deeds of infamy should find toleration
therein, is not only a cause for the greatest astonisnment, but in
itself constitutes the foulest blot that could possibly rest upon the
escutcheon of Australia’s fame.
But the question may be asked by some, “Is it really so ; are
deeds of darkness, in the sense of injustice and inhumanity, piac-


tised in this land of light and blessing” ? That _such is the case
will be clearly shown in the following pages.
The events which have occurred in this Colony, during the past
ten months, in relation to the native question, leave no room for
an apology for the publication of this pamphlet. The circum-
stances of the times demand it.
As regards the re-appearance of my now notorious journal and
article on the native labour system, I have allowed them to go
forth in the precise form in which they first appeared in the In-
quirer and Daily News, for the simple reason that the world at large
may be able to form an opinion of the state of things obtaining on
the Gascoyne, when I settled there as a Missionary. I would, how-
ever, have it to be distinctly understood that my journal and
articles werepublished after andnot before, all the barbarous tactics
of the settlers to get rid of me. It is a fact that none can contra-
dict, that for five months I endured every kind of cruelty at the
hands of the Gascoyners, without publishing a thing against them,
either in this Colony or in any other, and it was only when they
hounded me down at the second public meeting in Carnarvon, that
I resolved to adopt the only course open to me, viz., —the columns of
a free Press; and there is another important fact in connection with
the matter, which is not generally known —the Bishop of the Dio-
cese gave his emphatic sanction to the publication, having stated
to the Editor of the Inquirer, and Daily News, personally, only the
day previous to the publication, that he saw no reason why they
should not appear in print. And yet, strange to say, after they
did appear, my[conductpn making public the state of things on the
Gascoyne was denounced by the Mission Committee, of which the
Bishop himself was the presiding Head. Further comment is
needless.
As to the case of the poor victim of civilized barbarism, Thacka-
biddy, I have given it in full, as reported by the Inquirer, so
that people beyond Western Australia may see for themselves
how r justice is administered in these parts, and then draw their
own conclusions, respecting “ dark deeds in this sunny land.”
In conclusion, I may just state that the profits, if any, accruing
from the sale of this pamphlet will be devoted to the Native Mis-
sion, in the North-west of Australia ; in connection with which I
hope (D.Y.) to labour long in bestowing the benefits of the Glorious
Gospel of the Blessed God upon those to whom we owe so much,
but for whom we have done so little.
JOHN B. GRIBBLE.
Perth, Western Australia, May 29th, 1886.


MY FIEST THESE MONTHS ON THE GASCOYNE.
From tlie ever-flowing Murrumbidgee, in the interior of New
South Wales, where for nearly seven years I had laboured to ame-
liorate the condition of the native tribes, I was called by the
Church in the west, to organise similar work, amongst the numer-
ously represented tribes on the Gascoyne (which, by the way, very
S6 Acrdin'gly, sailing from Sydney, after a protracted voyage, I
reached Fremantle, and went on by rail to Perth, where, after ar-
ranging necessary matters with the Bishop of the diocese, and
havino- been most courteously received, by His Excellency me
Governor, and several members of the Government, who assured
me of their spmpathy and readiness to assist in the work in which
I was about to engage, I took my passage for Carnarvon, six hun-
dred miles north of Fremantle, in the Otway. _
On the way up, I learned from the representatives of pearling
and settlement, who were amongst my fellow passengers, what kind
of material I should have to deal with, on the white side ot the
a shallow creek, or minor mouth of the river. After a delay of
several hours, in consequence of boats of the lightest draught
beinu- unable to leave the shore until the tide was sufficiently high,
the police boat came alongside, in which I was safely taken to the
landing-place.
Nothing, I suppose, in the shape of a township, could be more un-
prepossessing to a stranger than Carnarvon, —low shores, treeless,
houseless; giving one, at first sight, the impression that he was in
a squatting country; background, made up of ridges of raw sand
bearino- stunted shrubs, the same being alive with natives, in a
state of nature ; number of houses, including two hotels and three
stores, twelve. The white population may of course be judged by
the number of houses. Such was Carnarvon, as I first saw it.
With natives as guides and porters, I made my way to the pro-
fessedly most aristocratic of the two hotels—the Carnarvon —
where a room 'bad been engaged for me by the Eesideut Magis-
trate, which I must say was all that could be desired, clean and
comfortable.
I subsequently reported myself to the Eesident Magistrate,
whom I soon judged to be a gentleman, in the true sense of the
wor d —an opinion, I may say, 1 have had no reason to change from
that day to this.
My first duty was one connected with my functions as a clergy-
man, when I was called away to visit a dying lad. After which, with
a native police guide, I rode about 2\ miles up the river and in-


sDected a site, which bad been recommended by Mr. Foss, as one
most suitable for a native home and school, and so ended my firs
da The next 1 day G bSn^Satmday, assisted by Mr. Eushton, I arrang-
ed for the conduct of Divine Service on Sunday, and found the
people as a rule, favorable to any effort for their moral welfare.
The'sunday Service was well attended, and apparently a ppr -
ciated With Monday began real missionary enterprise.
Ha vino- obtained the use of a police horse and cart, I got my
luggage and materials to a pool, some little distance from the town,
where” with the help of a native, who, though willing and intelli-
gent, had the drawback of the loss of ai foot, from a spear wound
I pitched one of the military tents sootligmgly lent me bj Colonel
Angelo, of Perth, and there erected a smalf corrugated iron hut,
in which "to keep iby hoxes safely* -. 1 v .
After such preparatory work, and having secured three horses,
two by purchase and one by loan—and also the services of a so-
called -civilised native, named Bullocky, I s ®t outpn y
journey into the interior, my object being to inspect the Mission
reserves at the Kennedy Eange, and Mount Dalgetty
At night we halted at station, on the south bank of the
Gascoyne. The approach of our little procession caused no little
stir in the neighbourhood of the rear premises; quite a number of
rough-looking men ran off, as I pulled up and enquired for the
inanaeer The strange manner of these men, so unlike what I had
been Lustomed to on the far-away Mupumbidgee, caused me to
wonder; but I was not long m as<jertammg the use - vm
been so strangely deserted, I made my way to the front of the
house, which, as an exception to the rule, is a very good one.
There I discovered, in the principal room, a congregation of men,
some of whom I had recently seen at the back, and all being, more
or less, under the influence of spirits, hurriedly clearing away
bottles and pannikins from the table and depositing the same
under the roughly constructed bunks. My presence upon the
scene rather disconcerted the actors, but paying Weß, men
I see what you have been doing ; now, don t be dishonest, make a
clean breast of it, and don’t hide any more grog, _ they seemed to
regain their wits, and then, without saying anything further, upon
the subiect I explained who I was, and that I wanted to see the
manager. • One said he was away on the run, and another said he
was round the corner. On going outside, and * ound the
the house, I met the said manager, who received me kindly, at the
same time apologising for the disorderly state of domestic affairs
on the ground, that he had no cook. On signifying my wishJto
remain over night, he said, he thought I had better go on and shake
down at the woolshed hut, three miles distant But on my com-
plaining of fatigue, he said I could stay, but he expected every
visitor to provide his own blankets. Having assured him I could


do that, the horses were all turned out, and I turned in, to this, the
first squatting homestead I had seen on the celebrated Gascoyne.
To my surprise, in the course of the evening, three of the young
men (indeed two of them were in appearance mere lads) came to
me, and said, they had recently been making asses of themselves,
and would I give them the total abstainer’s pledge. I should only
be too happy so to do, I replied, and the result was, that six took
the pledge, some for a year, and some for six months; but all, with
the understanding, that it was not to commence till 12 o’clock at
night, so that they might finish up the supply they had on hand.
During the evening I read an account from the Leisure Hour of my
own adventures with the notorious Kelly gang, and gave them a
short address, which I hoped might not be in vain. At the con-
clusion of the proceedings, the manager said, that although, some
of them had been led to think the parson a stuck-up kind of fellow,
he was glad to find, that he was not so, and that he was glad that
he had stayed for the night. I made myself as comfortable as
circumstances would allow, my greatest discomfort being the
sounds of revelry, coming from the adjoining room, for as soon as
my address was finished they hurried away, with the avowed in-
tention, of draining the bottles before midnight—which I think
they managed to do. As a grand finale some rolled on the floor,
with significant heaviness. Next day, after receiving unmistake-
able kindness from the manager, I proceeded on my way a consider-
able distance, and late in the evening came to a small hut, which con-
stituted the homestead of station. Here I found the
manager, a fine-looking specimen of humanity, in the midst of
his shearers, who were seated round the camp fire, enjoying a
quiet smoke, after the rough bush meal. Though the house
was small and inconveniently packed with supplies, the good man
did all in his power, to make the way-faring missionary com-
fortable, giving up to my use his own bed, while he slept on
the sandy floor, and on leaving, next morning, he compelled
me to replenish my stock of provisions from his own supply, and
would not hear of payment. Such hospitality, coming especially
from one of another persuasion, struck me very forcibly with the
generosity of the man’s heart. The next plkce of call, only for a
very short time, was the camp, which really professes to be the
homestead of C Station. It consisted af a small grass hut
without walls, six or seven nude natives, male and female, and a
young lad, far too young to be in snch a position, in charge. At the
camp fire I noticed a very young native girl, lying apparently ill;
but, on asking the lad in charge, what was wrong with her, with
cold indifference he said, ff Oh I she’s right enough.” The next
day, being Sunday, I rested till Monday at station, where I
found a young man, the owner, I believe, superintending shearing
matters. For two years this young squatter, had been content to
pass his existence, in a very contracted hut, quite incompatible


both with his position in society and his calling as a squatten It
surprised it - at ikst, to find men with professed Christian instincts
living in sv. ■ a disorder, and dirt, as I found some of them living in.
But, before I had completed my 400 miles of travel, I found my
surprise changed into pity, for that enlightened human nature,
which could so soon enter upon the high-road to barbarism, when
left to itself. But to return, the young stockowner, now under
review had recently, it would seem, bethought himself of civilized
environments and had arisen and built, what should have been a
good bush house. But, alas! like many other things in this un-
certain world, “it was spoilt in the making,” and I could not
wonder at that, when I was told by one who ought to know, that
the only tool the enterprising squatter, could furnish the workmen
for the construction, of the roof, and verandah, was a tomahawk! I
formed a favourable opinion, of the capabilities of this run, and I
doubt not that, when the young owner, has acquired more know-
ledge of his business, and the best method, to prevent his natives
from running away, he will have his sails set to a fair breeze
towards success. Quite a number of natives, females predominat-
ing, were owned by Mr. . On Sunday I conducted a short
service, several natives, a Chinaman, and the owner being present.
The nature of the hospitality of which I partook, during my stay
here, was so strangely exceptional, that I must ere I pass on refer
to it. The meals were served up on two grocery cases, which
served for a table, by a Chinese cook, whose shirt, if boiled down,
would certainly have yielded a good supply of cart-grease. On
asking him why he did not wash his greasy shirt, he replied “ No
soap.” Only one fork could be mustered, and John was sent out
to cut a forked stick, which, when he returned, he was told to
hand me. I may add that when night came my host pointed to the
dusty earthen floor, and a sheet of corrugated iron, and remarked I
might shake down there, and shake down I did, on my bed of
ridges and grooves, wondering whether I was really in a civilized
country dr where. For a little tea, sugar, and flour which I asked
to be obliged with on the Monday morning, previous to my resurn-
ing the journey, I was charged the modest sum of seven shillings a
fact which I should never think of mentioning, had it not been
for another fact—that all the other settlers, without exception, were
really hospitable, and would not hear of payment, though in each
case it was tendered by me.
The country hitherto from the Port had been monotonously flat
and covered with scrub, which in places was very thickly inter-
grown ; good grass abounded; the sheep I saw, though as
breed they would count for little in New South Wales, or Victoria,
were decidedly fat, at once showing the fattening properties of both
grass and scrub.
My next stage of thirty miles, to the Kennedy, lay through un-
traversed bush, the character being sand-ridges and clay-pans.


covered and surrounded respectively, by bewildering scrub. Eight
glad was I, therefore, when at night the native guide, pointing to
the foot of a large gum-tree, said, “ Ba-ba !”—meaning water.
Early next morning I was awake, and while my native was hunt-
ing up the horses I took my field-glasses and ascended one of the
high peaks at the foot of which I had camped, and from my
exalted position I surveyed as far as my glasses would allow me
the vast extent of ironstone upland with its thousand peaks and
cones, and deep impenetrable gorges, the favorite haunts
of a tribe of natives said to be ferocious and blood-thirsty
cannibals. The view I obtained was certainly a grand one, but
the prospect of forming a Mission in such a place of apparent un-
productiveness, was most forbidding. Eor twenty-five miles over
ironstone surface nearly all the way, the poor horses toiled ; some-
times I was hemmed in by barriers of mighty rocks, and my only
way out was the narrow foot-tracks of the wild natives, which gave
me the impression that the natives in the Kennedy Eange must be
numerous. In one place I came upon an immense battle-ground,
where, my native told me, many a great fight had taken place.
Having reached the great rent in the mountain-side called “ Shipka
Pass” I was obliged to follow it down to the Gascoyne, and camp-
ing at night on the river-bank, was up betimes in the morning, and
journeyed on to a station, near the junction of the Lyons with the
Gascoyne. This station, as regards the homestead, is, I must
honestly say, for order and cleanliness, the best apointed I saw during
my travels. The house, though small, was well built, and was inter-
nally the picture of neatness, and I was more than surprised to
learn, that it was not only kept in such a state of home-like at-
tractiveness within, by the bachelor manager, but that he had with
his own hands, assisted of course by his natives, built the very
substantial and compact little house, in which I spent the most
comfortable night on the Gascoyne.
Mr. , manager for a company, ! was given to understand, is
certainly, in my opinion, a true gentleman. His address and
manner bespoke good anteeedents, and I should, from conversation,
take him to be a person well adapted for the post he fills. So far
as I could see and judge natives on this station are treated with
true humanity—quite a relief to one after being brought into con-
tact, with an opposite state of thing elsewhere. The next halt was
at what shall I call it ? I really don’t know a something-
representing the head-quarters of a station. All that was to be
noted, were three features—a flock of sheep on the sandy bed of the
river, two white men, and two young native women. The Dal-
getty Mount, was now my object to reach, and in order to do so, I
must call at certain homesteads along the route. The first
of these, though of long standing, is far from what it
should be in every respect, considering the facilities for man-
agement which it possesses. Here I saw sheep shamefully tortur-


Ed by white shearers; but there was no help for it, the owner told
me —he was quite in the hands of these uncouth fellows. The
sheep on this run were in splendid condition, but the fleeces as
they were Shorn showed plainly the fatality of open country feed-
ing, on the soil such as that, fringing the Gascoyne. My opinion
is that pastoral pursuits in this district will never pay until the
runs are fenced, and back-block water supply secured. I thought
had Eiverina enterprise taken this country in hand, by this time, a
great area of frontage land would have been securely paddocked.
Though much about this station could only be defined as rough,
I received much kindness from the owner. This gentleman,
though courteous in his manner, seemed to think that the “ nig-
gers” were best as they were, without any interference on the
part of Exeter Hall representatives. But as I saw the said
“ niggers ” on this station, I should say that a deal more was
needed for their bodies, leaving their souls out of the question.
Still up the Gascoyne I pursued my way, and by-and-bye came
to a station founded and owned by a Mr. , whom I found
possessing the manners of a gentleman, and had it not been for
the misfortune of bush isolation, which I dare say has rubbed off
much of his native polish, he would shine as a true diamond.
Homestead antiquated in appearance, consisting of a well-built
house, yards, and certain sheds required for the working of the
run. Here I found natives shearing, and they only, and doing
their work well, but slowly. I could not help but admire the
patient toil of these blackmen as hour after hour they stuck to
their task, notwithstanding their suffering from the effects of a
severe cold, which at the time was prevailing throughout the dis-
trict ; and I thought what a pity it was that those who reap such
benefit from their toil should not treat them in a manner commen-
surate with such benefit. But there, alas ! comes in the difficulty.
I forgot to say that at one station where I called, and where I
found a large number of natives in the ownership of the manager,
I drew attention to the neglected appearance of certain of the
natives, and that if the blacks were unkindly treated they would
certainly run away. I was told in reply that the treatment was
quite good enough for " niggers,” and that it was absurd to think
they should have tea, sugar, &c. And mark—these same
natives I found were saving this very station hundreds of pounds
per annum. Truly justice —where ?
In this upper region of the Gascoyne the only two white women
on the river are to be found, one of whom I had the pleasure of
"meeting, and found her to be a lady in education and manners, but
notwithstanding such she was not above putting her hand to
rough work in the busy time of shearing, and. as I contemplated,
the sacred influence of woman’s presence and example as here
seen, I could not help regretting that every man (white man, I
mean), in the district was not married. May it soon be so.


Having reached the distant Dalgetty Reserve I spent two
days and nights thereon, and formed a most favorable
opinion of its resources. Its position commands a vast
area of country in which the natives are numerous, although
during my stay I did not see one bushman; the reason assigned
by neighbouring settlers being a police party scouring the country
in search of " niggers” who had stolen sheep on a station higher
up the river. Completing my inspection of the country I return-
ed by much the same route as that by which I journeyed up. At
the Junction Police Station, where I stayed a day and a night, I
found several unfortunate natives chained like so many dogs to
each other round the neck, and then the main chain connecting
with a tree, and as though that was not sufficient to prevent their
escape some of them were coupled at the ankles, and in such con-
dition these poor beings sat hour after hour, and day after day,
and week after week, awaiting the coming of the Police Magistrate
from Carnarvon before they could be tried. They were quite nude,
yet I noticed that when driven into the cell at night there was
nothing in the shape of a blanket, and they were chained and
fettered just in the same way as when in the open air. If ever I
pitied poor creatures in my life I did these unfortunates, and on
asking the constable in charge why they were chained by the ank-
les in the cell he told me it was necessary. But I could not see the
necessity at all. It was unnecessary punishment inflicted on
human beings who had not as yet been found guilty of crime.
Indeed one of the group, a poor old man, was afterwards set free.
Here I also found two young native women, the reputed wives of
two black trackers attached to. the station. I was told by the
young constable in charge, who, by the way, showed me every
kindness in his power, that one of these young native women had
just buried her half-caste child, and that she was in great grief at
its loss. On going to the camp the officer asked the one who had
lost the child who the father of it was, and she gave the name of a
young man who was now in a Government Office in Perth.
This information was made intelligible to me by the young police
officer. I asked the young man whether what I had heard at the
Port respecting half-caste children being killed and eaten was true.
He said he believed it was, and cited a case in point as an illustra-
tion- „ , , , . , ..
From the Junction Police Station I proceeded towards the
coast, with nothing to engage my attention with the exception of
an occasional wool team with its inevitable native girl or woman
attached. Conversing with several of the drivers, I asked them
why they had females always with them ? Some replied they pre-
ferred them to boys, and others did not blush to admit that they
had them for immoral purposes. The last night of my downward
journey I spent at an out-camp of a station where I found a young
white man in charge, and seated at the fire I saw two young native


women, one with a half-caste babe on her breast. On drawing
the attention of the young man to the fact I asked him did he
know who the father was, and to my astonishment he said he be-
lieved that he was. I talked seriously and kindly to him, showing
him the sinfulness of such intercourse, and begged of him to turn
over a new leaf. He replied, "You see Sir, she has got the child
now, and I can’t now turn her adrift.” A young native woman,
only a few miles from this very spot, told me, on my asking her
whether she was married, that she had only one white-fellow’s
yamba (child), and she gave me the name of the father—the
manager of a certain station.
With feelings far from bright and satisfactory as regards my
social environment, I arrived safely at my Carnarvon camp, and
at once set about making arrangements for the execution of real
Mission work.
Having received authority from head quarters, I removed my
effects to the Galilie Baba, which is about two miles and a half
from the Port, on the north side of the sandy bed of the Gascoyne
—a position which had been strongly recommended to me by the
Resident Magistrate—where I began the erection of a house, con-
sisting of three rooms and verandah, my assistants being two
natives, one of whom, as before stated, had lost a foot, and the
other had lost the sight of an eye. I completed this task, and then being
short of building material I sank a well, and at a depth of
twelve feet struck a good supply of fresh water ; being a great
convenience both as regards domestic purposes and the proposed
Mission garden. After sinking and securing the well I conceived
the idea of building a comfortable hut for my worthy natives,
although some people said the natives would never sleep inside a
house. In due course the hut was finished, and I had the satis-
faction of seeing the native females, attached to the Mission home,
in possession cf their own dwelling. This hut I might say is con-
structed entirely of material from the river. Having no dray
everything had to be carried on the shoulders or heads
of the natives and myself. The next effort was in the
direction of a school-house, but the posts were so heavy and
the distance so great that, after conveying and placing a few in
position, I was compelled to postpone the task until material
should arrive from Perth. But being wretched, if not fully em-
ployed, I set to work enclosing a garden area, which work is still
progressing. As soon as I began the work of erecting the Mission pre-
mises natives began to gather round and they were anxious to learn
all and sundry as to my object, and several desired to make their
home with me. At the present time I have eight, consisting of
the wife and child of a native who is engaged on the police boat at
Sharks Bay, and who especially desired me to take charge of them
during his absence; four native men, one a kindly loan from a
settler up the river, and another was assigned to Mr. Eushton, the


schoolmaster at Carnarvon, but now, strange to say, he is claimed
by a Mr. C , although Mr. Eushton’s was a prior engage-
ment. Another being a runaway from the same Mr. C , on
the ground of ill-usage, and who, although Mr. C— has been
here and ordered him away, stoutly declares that he will not
return, though the police may lock him up. My only native
man, therefore, is the one without a foot. The other two
are a young woman, near her confinement, and a girl about
ten years old. With the females came a young woman in a state
of real wretchedness, as regards appearanee, at any rate, who
complained of having been flogged by a Mr. . because she
would not walk when he told her to do so ; she desired in company
with another to remain for protection at the Misson, I allowed her
to do so providing she went before aJ.P. at Carnarvon to state
that she was not assigned to any one. Not long after coming to
the Mission she was set upon by two so-called civilized natives,
from a white man’s camp, as, in company with another woman,
she was crossing the sandy bed of the river.
Hearing a native woman’s cries and shrieks, two of my native
men and I ran in the direction from which they came, and found
the two terrified creatures just emerging from the river bank, and
on enquiring what was the matter the poor injured creature
signified what had taken place and showed the wounds, which
plainly indicated that great violence had been used; the other woman
showing me at the same time how she had been thrown down and
then held by both arms and legs. I must say that at the sight of
the signs of the outrage my very blood boiled, and though dark as
it was I hurried away alone, after dressing the poor creature’s
wounds, to the said white man’s camp and informed him of what
had taken place. He said he was very sorry, and in my presence
severely reprimanded the cruel monsters, who had by this time
returned to the camp; he earnestly requested me not to give the
case into the hands of the police, as I said I should do. The man
being a most respectable person, I agreed to stay proceedings.
Shortly after this occurrence Champion informecLme that he and
the same woman wanted to live together, and that he would protect
her from any further injury. He subsequently told me he was
going that night to her camp, I told him that as members of a Christ-
ian Mission home I could not allow my natives anything of the kind, and
that they must come before me for explanation and sanction, which
they did; everything was made plain to the man as regards family
relationship, &c. He well understood my meaning and what I said
to the woman, and they still signifying their intention to live toge-
ther in the simplest manner compatible with the re-
quirements of the case, I gave them my sanction as their
friend and guardian, and they regarded themselves doubt-
less as man and wife, and in thus acting I did as I had
done to many native couples in New South Wales, and certainly


thought that in so doing I was protecting an injured and urpro-
tected human being. But what was the sequel P After several
weeks had elapsed, during my absence at a Sunday afternoon
service in Carnarvon, the white man whom she said had flogged
her rode up and ordered her to walk to his station. Next day I
hastened away and had an interview with this man telling him of
the circumstances connected with the woman’s going to the
Mission, and that so far as her going back to fulfil the term of en-
gagement (if such engagement really existed) I had not the least
objection. But there was the man who had regarded the woman
as his wife—he should be consulted. Producing an agreement
signed by another settler, both master and witness being single
men, I learned, he observed, that whether natives were assigned
or not, they belonged to the owners of the runs on which they were
found and that the Mission had no right whatever to any but the
old and crippled; at the same time asking me what I intended to
do with the natives. I said in reply, “ the future will show.” T
said “ the woman belongs to a man of the Mission, and certainly
his claim should be considered, and whether he is willing for her to
fulfil the term of engagement.” The result was, that my
native Champion signified his willingness, and a paper explaining
all this, was sent to Mr. the settler, in charge of the native man
concerned, who, on his return informed me, that the white man
had greatly frightened him and made him say that he did not want
the woman any more, and that he should never have her again.
The day after the woman’s going away, I was informed by two
different parties, that they had heard, that the reason why Mr.
was so particularly interested over this case was that the very
woman was his own “ kept woman.”
Having received instructions from the Bishop to furnish an esti-
mate for the maintenance of those native children likely to be
gathered to the Mission school, in company with a police officer
and guided by a list of the names of all Carnarvon natives assign-
ed, I recently set out in search of native children of school age.
Several were soon found in the camps, whose names were taken,
and their friends were instructed to take them to the Resident
Magistrate, to get the matter of attending school explained to
them.
On passing a white man’s house, some two miles from Carnarvon,
we saw a native girl and asked her name, having previously dis-
covered that she was not assigned.
• this was taking place a white man approached, and, spea'k-
ing a few words to her in “ Ingarra,” she suddenly ran round the
house and entered by the back door. The said the whiteman entered
the premises, and shortly afterwards came out to us saying with a
laugh, “They have put her under the bed from you.” From all
these events and circumstances, together with the fact that a so-


called public meeting, notified only at 3 o’clock p.m. as to take
place at 8 p.m. of the same date, and of which no chance whatever
was given to the Missionary to attend, although both he and his
work were to be severely dealt with, has just been held at Carnar-
von, and at which a resolution condemning Missionary effort in
the Gascoyne district was carried and is to be sent to the Govern-
ment, will give people generally an idea of the moral tone of
society in this part of Western Australia.
The following, then, is the three months’ summary of my work:
Travelled 400 miles in the interior, built Mission house and native
hut, commenced school house, fenced part of garden block, sunk
well, small community of natives gathered by their own free
will. Church services for whites organized and regularly main-
tained ; and last, but not least, got the whole district (I will not
say town of Carnarvon) against me, —why ?
SUBSEQUENT EXPERIENCES.
To the Editor of the Inquirer.
Dear Sir, —As so much is being said and written in opposition
to the Gascoyne Native Mission you will, I feel confident, allow
me the privilege of throwing a little light upon the subject from
the position occupied by the Missionary himself.
Five months ago I came to the district for the purpose of found-
ing a Christian Mission to the natives, and everywhere, during my
first three weeks’ travels in the interior, I gave the settlers plainly
to understand that I came as a friend of all and the enemy of
none, that I had no intention nor desire to interfere with their
interests, seeing that my first object was to impart Christian in-
struction to the natives in the way which I might find to be most
suitable to the circumstances of the blacks ; and that if it w'as found
to be impracticable to deal directly with those natives in the em-
ployment of the settlers I should find quite sufficient scope outside
in which to operate. But judge of my surprise on hearing one
settler say that he thought the natives would be far better with-
out such efforts, and to find another quite prepared with statistics,
newspaper articles and extracts, and a set cut-and-dried speech to
show the failure of missionary enterprise in general and the New
Norcia Mission and Warangesda in particular! And my utter
astonishment may be better imagined than described when, after
three months’ hard work in company with two natives, I discover-
ed that concerted action had been taken by the Gascoyne settlers
to crush the Mission at the very inception.


A so-called public meeting was convened of which I had not the
slightest knowledge till the following day, and at which my person
and work were thoroughly denounced, and a petition praying for
my immediate withdrawal was prepared and signed. But why
were such measures adopted ? Because they found that I was not a
suitable man for them. I had, while up country, seen wrongs and
abuses to which I had conscientiously drawn their attention. I
feared not to “ call a spade a spade.” I simply said that certain
things ought not so to be; and because of my honesty of speech, I
found three months subsequently that the whole district was con-
federate against me. The only course open to me, seeing that my
mouth was stopped in Carnarvon and a petition for my removal
was being forwarded to my Bishop, was to proceed to Perth and
there plead my own and the Mission’s cause. And because I did
that —what any other man worthy the name of a man would have
done, no matter whether in secular or spiritual trust —what has
followed ? On my return I found that my enemies were enraged
against me. A proposal was made to charter the lighters so as to
prevent the landing of my building material, while the recognised
agent of the opposition at Carnarvon went boldly to the store-
keeper from whom I get my supplies and told him that- I was
“ boycotted,” and that all who sympathised with me or helped
me would be “boycotted” too. And this was not a mere threat.
“ Boycotting ” has been really resorted to. Those who had sup-
plied me with mutton wrote to say that I should have no more,
and then, when it was known that I was obtaining a limited supply
a kindly-disposed'person ordered a larger supply so that I might
obtain a little through him, but that person’s supply was at once cut
down; therefore, being driven to telegraph to the Bishop that I
could obtain no meat, his lordship had an interview with Alex.
Forrest, Esq., and that gentleman kindly and promptly telegraph-
ed to say that I could get a supply of killing sheep from his station
—which I did. But Mr. Forrest’s Manager (Mr. A. Hancock) in-
formed me on Sunday last that the other settlers had threatened
to “ boycott” him for letting me have the sheep.
Another meeting has been held, at which my Perth lecture was
utterly denounced, and at which I tried to defend my position
against their cruel attacks. But from the beginning to the end of
my attempted address I was assailed with abuse and threats—one
gentleman going so far as tp challenge me to fight, while another
declared that he was prepared to do anything, to kick me out of
the district.
The natives who were in the habit of frequenting the Mission
have now disappeared, for it seems that one of the objects sought
by my opponents is to prevent the natives from settling down at
the Mission. That this is the case I have learned from a young
native man who recently came down the river and who expressed


to me a strong desire to settle at the Mission; but on two subse-
quent occasions he called and stated that a Mr. ,of Carnarvon,
would not let him come to the Mission. And this interference, it
must be borne in mind, ivas with a free and unassigned native.
The last great effort of the enemies of a Christian Mission in
these parts has been to prepare a second petition to ray Bishop, and
this petition has been hawked about from house to house, and from
individual to individual, for signatures ; some of which have been
obtained through misrepresentations, as the following, which is a
verbatim copy of a letter received by me recently, will go far to
show:—*■
" To the Rev. Mr. Gribble.
“ Dear Mr. Gribble. —The petition that went forward to his lord-
" Bhip the Bishop of Perth for your removal we signed, and we
« signed the same on certain conditions —that the whole of the
"residents at Carnarvon were in favour of your removal. We
" have since found that this is a falsehood, and we at once offer our
" sineere apology for signing the same. It was done more on the
" impulse of the moment, and since signing same we have found
" that we erred on the side of the majority. We, trust that you will
" take this in a true, manly light, and overlook whatever false step
« we may have made as business men.—We remain, your obedient
" servants.
" GEORGE BASTON, June.,
"THOMAS BIRD.
«P.S.—You may make whatever use you think fit of the
above.”
The gentlemen whose signatures are attached to this letter, tele-
graphed to the Bishop to erase their names from the petition, as also did
a Mr. Carroll, who told me that he felt as though he could cut off his
hand for having signed such a document; but, poor man, his con-
scientiousness has resulted in his being "boycotted,” along with
other friends and supporters of the Mission. A large placard was
posted in the township the other day bearing the following words :
—Down with Gribble and all his supporters, and confusion to all
sneaks.” And only last Sunday, when, as usual, I went to the
sehoolhouse to oonduct Divine worship, I found posted on both
doors the following announcement: —
" Old Parry sent a parson here,
" His name is J. B. Gribble ;
" Poor silly wretch, he damned himself
"To save the Lord the trouble.”
I simply give these facts so that the people of Australia may
have both sides of the question presented; and I think from what
I hare, stated in this letter all honest persons will readily admit
that missionary enterprise is a thing most repugnant to the feelings
of the majority of the settlers on the Gascoyne. There are worthy


exceptions, not only in Carnarvon but in the interior ;.but, as a
rule, they, according to their own showing, have one desire—and
that is to deal with the natives in their own way. They want to
be “ a law unto themselves,” and, consequently, they cannot toler-
ate the advent of one who comes with the j Gospel of " Peace and
goodwill ” to the poor blackman.
By making room for the above in the columns of your valuable
paper you will greatly oblige and help yours truly,
JOHN B. GRIBBLE,
Galilie Native Mission, Gascoyne River, January 25, 1886.
A second petition had been drawn up praying the Bishop
to remove me on the ground of my interference with the native
labour system. I was again obliged to take steamer for Perth,
and while on the voyage down the coast, the outrage described
in the following sworn statement, was perpetrated upon me.
THE ALLEGED AFFRAY ON BOARD THE S.S.
NATAL.
To the Editor of the Inquirer.
Dear Sir, —The statement which follows was submitted by me
to His Lordship the Bishop of the Diocese for the consideration of
the Missions Committee, who, after due consideration thereof,
passed a resolution of sympathy, and “ recommended me to take
legal steps to bring the offenders to justice.” Those steps I
endeavored to take by leaving my statement with a solicitor
recommended by my committee on Saturday last, stating to
the clerk that I would call on Monday for advice; but noticing in
the evening newspaper that the s.s. Natal was advertised to sail on
Monday, and knowing that my principal witnesses were connected
with that ship I deemed it necessary, in the interests of justice, to
secure their detention; thereupon I went to the private residence
of the said solicitor and sent in my card with a statement that I
desired an interview on the most urgent legal business, but such
interview was twice refused. On Monday morning, at the appointed
time, I called again at the office, and was met at the door by the
clerk, who stated that the solicitor was in the next room, but that
he had not opened ray statement and would not undertake my
business. I subsequently called at the office of another solicitor,
but found that he was out of town. The chance, therefore, of
securing that evidence which I depended upon having been lost, the-


only thing I can do is to publish my statement, after having sworn
the same xn the presence of a duly qualified person.—l am, 'yours,
etc.,
JOHN B. GRIBBLE.
Perth, Western Australia,
• February 9, 188 G.
_ Dear Lord Bishop,— lt is my painful duty to acquaint
you with the circumstances of an outrage committed on myself on
board the s.s. Natal, when lying at anchor in Champion Bay, on
Saturday night last. Before the ship anchored, when lying under
m y mg near the wheel on the quarter-deck, I observed three men
take up a position near me, and one of them, who was the nearest
to me. I heard say to the others, «It would be a good job if we
could get rid of him.” After what I had seen of the manifestation
of strong feeling against me previously from Port Gascoyne, this
remark caused me to think that perhaps they intended personal
violence, and I felt rather alarmed, but said nothing, A little
demonstration took place, and the man at the wheel told them to
go away. One of the party said to him to "Goto h ,” and they
then walked forward. When the steamer anchored a large num-
ber of passengers went ashore, and thinking I was safe fell asleep.
About a quarter past one o’clock I was aroused by voices near me,
und I saw a number of men standing at my side and conversing in
an undertone. A man who I afterwards recognised as Mr.
from the Gascoyne, seized the man who was standing nearest to me’
and threw him violently forward upon me. This man, whom I
afterwards discovered to be from the Nor-west, closed with me, and
I struggled with him, and during the struggle I asked him what
he was doing. He said, “ The ship is rolling ” I said, “ You know
that is false, as the ship is at anchor. Why can’t you let me
alone ? By this time I had regained my feet, and, wrenching
myself from him, I walked across to the side-rail, where I saw the
man who had begun the assault standing. Recognising him I
called him by name and said, “ What, is it you Mr.
replied he —“ Yes” I said —“ Thank you for the compli-
ment.” I was then seized again by Mr. and struggled
him to the port side, at the same time calling
aloud to the captain and officer of the watch. I tried to make
my escape along to the port side to the companion-stairs, but a
Mr. , who was aroused by the screams, said, “ Don’t come
this way, sir, my wife and children are lying across the deck,” or
words to that effect. I said to him, “These men are ill-
treating me ; where is the officer of the watch ?” He said,
T * don’t know, I have only just awoke.” I was then obliged
to beat a retreat through my assailants, Mr. seizing me as


I re-passed the wheel, and with him I struggled the whole length
of the quarter-deck to the companion-stairs on the starboard side
I repeatedly asked my tormentor what did he want to do with me*
and what had I done to him, seeing he was a perfect stranger to
me; and all the time of the struggle I continued calling for heln
But the only person I could see, there being no light on the deck
was a Malay, and to him I made signs to bring assistance • but he
did not s-vm to understand me. At the companion-stairs
7T ned , llard to Prevent my descent, but by keeping a firm
hoid on the hand-rad, I resisted his force, and finallywrenched
myself from his grasp and descended into the saloon, on entering
which I met the stewardess, to whom I related what had occurred^
Ju Sai l?/o I l or the officer of the watch ; where are
t e y • ®tie said, “They are all ashore, sir.” Seeing a passenger
along the passage I ran to him, saying, “ What shall Ido they
have been trying to drag me limb from limb on the deck • wW
ate the officers f" He said he did not know. I then hS'a,„!cl
from an inner cabin call out and say, “What is the mat
ter Mr GribWe?” Recognising the voice as that of Mr"
Hastie, the ship’s purser I said, “Come, Mr. Hastie, I have
been assaulted.’ He came to me and I told him all that had oc-
curred. He said, I will show you to a cabin, and if you remain
Ha S r t e i/? U ff W1 q^ af t e *; Iwent intothe cabin and M?.
Hastie left. I did not think it necessary to close the door of the
cabin. About ten minutes after entering the cabin two men one
of whom I recognised as the man who said it would be well to
nd of me, came into the passage, and one of them w JtTnS the
opposite cabin. The man to whom I have just refer
remained in the passage with his back to my cabin
door. I heard my name mentioned, and immediately after
the man standing near my cabin door turned round and
was just crossing the threshold when I sprung out of my bimk
and said What right have you in my cabin He said « r
not m your cabin.” I said, “ You were.” f then cJled’for The
purser, who came upon the scene, and I related the circumstance
saying that my life was in danger, and that the man who was enter’
mg my cabin had said in my hearing that it would be a goJdlob if
they could get rid of me. He then said, “ You are not in 1
go into the cabin and close the door, and nobody will molest vou”
He also remarked that there was a great noise onboard
my voice had been heard all over the ship. I irr
cabin and shut the door, but in about five minutes it was thrown
violently open .ad spring out of my bunkt ‘oS it I °s!w
ivxr. - outside. I then felt that serious mischipf was
and that I must defend myself against any further attack A<>cnrd*
mgly 1 barricaded the door of the cabin witheverymm
I could find, and ! ihen sat upon the biS^


the door and my feet to the washstand. No sooner was this pre-
caution taken than I heard the sound as of a crowd outside, and
the cabin was besieged for about an hour and a half. The besie-
gers tried hard to force the door. At one time the barricade near-
ly gave way, and a man got his hand and head partly through, but
on my saying, “ I shall be obliged to take the law into my own
hands at the entrance of the first man into this cabin,” he withdrew,
saying, “he may have a shooter.” Thereupon they only tried to
force the door, and the cabin window was tried, as I could see
their hands at work from the light without. About a quarter
past three o’clock I heard a woman’s voice (I think that of the
stewardess) begging my assialants for the sake of the ladies, whose
cabin was immediately opposite to that of which I was in posses-
sion, and as a lady-passenger had but recently been confined, to
desist and go away. Taking advantage of this circumstance I said
to the rioters, “ If you are men, or if you have a particle of man-
hood remaining, go away for the sake of the women.” They then
desisted from their acts of violence, and after a little conference
they departed.
During the period of the siege I received the most violent
threats ,* they said if they could only get me for ten minutes they
would “ do for me,” that they would throw me overboard to the
sharks,” that they would “ hang meand one man said he would
shoot Dribble, the ** devil,” and they taunted me by saying that I
had come from New South Wales to interfere with their natives,
but they would not let me live to reach Fremantle. They also
said that I had thought they were ashore, but they had me at
their mercy. Language was also used which was too disgusting
to repeat, as to their intentions.
Being your Missioner, My Lord, I submit this statement to the
consideration of 'Your Lordship and the Mission Committee, that
you may secure to me that protection and justice which are my due.
—I remain. Your Lordship’s humble servant.
JOHN B. GEIBBLE.
The Lord Bishop of Perth.
[Sworn before me as true and correct.]
A. HELMICH, J.P.
February 16.
[We have purposely left blank the’names of the persons given
in the above statement.— Ed.]


The publication of my journal, &c., caused great excitement
amongst the friends and supporters of my opponents in the north,
some of whom were members of the Missions Committee. An
influential deputation waited upon the Bishop for the purpose of
denouncing both the editor of the Church Paper, the Standard, and
the obnoxious missionary. Forthwith a meeting of the Committee
was held and the following resolutions were carried, and the reso-
lutions, together with my reply, will be sufficient proof that from
that particular juncture my governing body began to yield to the
popular outcry against missionary effort, and was henceforth
virtually persecuted “ in the house of my friends.’ 1
Copt op Resolutions , carried at the last meeting of
the C. Committee Board op Missions. Perth,
Jan. 25, 1886.
(1) Moved by Archdeacon Brown : ,
That the following minutes be entered in the minute book, and
that a copy be forwarded to the Rev. J. f ;B. Gribble, Mission Chap-
lain at the Gascoyne. , . _ r „
During the short period .that has elapsed since Mr. Gnbble s
settlement in the Gascoyne District, the Committee have viewed
with much interest and solicitude the important events that have
transpired in the formation of the Mission. With thankfulness
they regarded his favourable reception, and the gratifying report
made by him of the welcome which the Resident and other leading
settlers gave him, and of the readiness with which they promised
pecuniary support to the Clergyman’s stipend. With deep regret
they learned the hostile measures taken by many influential set-
tlers immediately after Mr. Gribble’s return from his journey to
the Kennedy and Dalgetty Reserves, and especially as this hostility
was manifested by their endeavour to procure his dismissal
through the Bishop, without any distinct charges being brought
against him, or any evidence volunteered; through a similar en-
deavour to extinguish the Mission by an appeal to the Governor ;
through the circulation by the Press of a resolution condemning
the Mission; and last of all by their threat to prevent his landing
upon his return from Perth. All these proceedings seem to the
Committee to have been so discourteous, so unjust in mode of pro-
cedure, and so unconstitutional, regarded in a civil point of view,
that they can only attribute them to the influence of temporarily
excited feeling. They wish to assure Mr. Gribble of the deep sor-
row such treatment produced in the minds of the Comtnittee and
their sympathy with him.
On the other hand, the Committee deeply regret the course
which Mr. Gribble has since adopted, ostensibly in self defence.


They lament greatly the language which he was reported to have
used at a public meeting held since his return : and which (if cor-
rectly reported) they conceive should be withdrawn with deep
regret: but they especially deplore the publication in the various
newspapers of a journal of his three months’ residence, which has
already done much to alienate the public outside the Gascoyne
District from the Mission, and which must prove extremely detri-
mental, if not fatal to the success of his ministry among the white
population, who are equally with the aborigines committed to his
ministerial care.
The action of the Rev. J. JB. Gribble in publising the articles
referred to in the Daily News and Inquirer meets with (and we
deeply regret so to express it) the unqualified condemnation of
this committee.
The Resolution was carried. The Bishop, with the Rev. J. Allen,
objecting to the term ‘ unqualified condemnation.’
(2) The Committee think it is necessary in the interests of the
Gascoyne Mission, and in recognition of the statement made on be-
half of the settlers by Mr. Maitland Brown, that the Resolutions
passed at their first meeting were passed under the influence of
strong excitement, and did not represent the true feeling of the
settlers, that Mr. Gribble should writeja letter to the Bishop for
publication in the same newspaper in which his journal appears,
expressing his regret that he should have taken the course which
he did in publishing to the world, after so short an acquaintance
with the district, the details of the domestic life and faults of the
settlers therein eommitted to his pastoral care.
(3) That Mr. Gribble be instructed to send all reports of his
work for the future to the Bishop, or in his absence to the Chair-
man of the Missions Committee, and not to the newspapers of the
Colony, leaving it to the Bishop or the Committee to publish such
particulars as they deem advisable : the work which he has under-
taken being so undertaken the Diocese, and not as his
own independent work.
H. H. PERTH,
Chairman of Missions Committee.
REPLY TO RESOLUTIONS,
Perth, Feb., 1886.
Mt dear Lord Bishop,—
In reply to yours bearing date Eeb. 11th, 1886, I have to say
that I cannot, after all the unwarrantable opposition and persecu-


cution which I have received at the hands of the Gascoyne settlers,
consent to take the action which the Missions Committe request
me to take in the resolutions passed by them at their meeting of
the 25th January.
My reasons being the following l. All I stated was true, and
I must stick to truth, let the consequences be what they may.
The work of the Mission must be prosecuted on the lines of truth,
in opposition to falsehoed and wrong, or it will be a failure.
The words I used at the Carnarvon meeting and complained of
by the deputation were as follows :—“ My future work will be in
the Gascoyne district ; do you hear that ?” A voice said “ Yes. 5 ’
“Then,” I continued, “ Go home and dream over it.”
I say, my lord, there is nothing in the words themselves that
might reasonably be complained of, and shows plainly the weak
cause of my opponents when they can press such a statement, and
which after all was made after the greatest provocation and
threats to " kick ”me out of the district. Under such circum-
stance how could I withdraw such a statement with deep regret ?
I would respectfully point out to your Lordship that the set-
tlers themselves, according to their own showing, were in the first
instance the aggressors, and that they, after the shortest acquaint-
ance with me, passed resolutions at a public meeting held at Car-
narvon, condemning me and my work, both to your lordship and
the Governor of the Colony, and moreover petitioned for my im-
mediate removal. Therefore a public apelogy is due to me from the
Gascoyne settlers, and until such is forthcoming I cannot in com-
mon justice .'to myself apologise for anything I have done, or
retract anything I have written, seeing that my so doing, uncondi-
tionally , would seriously compromise my position as a missionary
to_the heathen of this land and materially damage the Gascoyne
As to the “ unqualified condemnation ” of the publication of
my journal by the Missions Committee, I am not deserving of such
deuunciati ,»n at the hands of my governing body, inasmuch as your
lordship saw the manuscript and I crossed out those things which
you thought objectionable, and you furthermore desired me to
leave ihe manuscript in your lordship’s care for future use before
I returned to the Gascoyne. And when after the greatest provoca-
tion at the second Carnarvon meeting I decided to send the manu-
script (which you had seen and corrected) for publication, I
wrote by the same mail informing you that I had done so, and
your lordship withdrew the manuscript sent to the West Australian
Sn i j °- the Editor of the Inquirer and Daily News,
and desired to see the manuscript sent to him, and he informed me
that you plainly told him that you could see nothing objectionable
to the publication thereof, and you left the said manuscript ih his
hands knowing that it was to appear in print the next day.


After all this, why should the Committee give their “ unquali-
fied condemnation ” to my conduct, and request me to write a
letter expressive of my regret to be published in the same papers
in which my journal appeared ?
3. I am, in the 3rd Resolution, requested to send all reports of my
work for the future to the Bishop, or in his absence to the Chair-
man of the Missions Committee, and not to the newspapers of the
Colony.
Although I was never before asked to tie myself hand and foot
as regards reporting my work to the newspapers, I am quite wil-
ling to send reports to my Bishop or Chairman in his absence.
But to say I will submit to send all reports and communications
first to the said parties, I positively refuse. For by my so doing I
should cast away my own Christian self-respect, and commit my-
self to a system which would be damaging in the extreme to the
work which I have at heart.
If the Committee cannot trust me as their Missionary to report
publicly facts which come under my notice, simply because they
may interfere with the feelings or pockets of interested parties,
how, I ask, can wrongs be redressed and a real Christian Mission
be carried on ?
And then to promise that I would not write directly to newspapers
in self-defence would mean the wrapping up of the instincts of
true Christian manhood and committing them to the perpetual
safe-keeping of ecclesiastical superiors. Shall Ido that ? My own
conscience says distinctly. No.
I know full well that your lordship will be shocked at these
expressions of my principles, and be inclined to refer me to the
teachings and example of Christ, my Master, “ Who, when He was
reviled, reviled not again,” and who said, “ Lore your enemies,
and pray for them who despitefully use you, and persecute you,”
&c.” But then lam distinctly taught both by the words and acts
of the same Master, that I am not to condone sin, nor be afraid to
expose evil-doers, be they who they may. Christ said to the evil
doers in His day, " Woe unto you Pharisees, hypocrites, how shall
ye escape the damnation of hell ?” " A wicked and adulterous gen-
eration,” “ Woe unto you scribes and pharisees, hypocrites, for ye
shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men, for ye neither go in
yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.”
« The Pharisees said unto Him get Thee out, and depart hence, for
Herod will kill Thee. And He said unto them. Go ye, and tell
that fox. Behold I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to-
morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.”
My lord Bishop, there is no more difficult service for Christian
men than to be stern rebukers of sin. Stephen and Paul, as well
as our Lord, knew that denunciation was as holy at times as silence


wag at others. Great wisdom is, I know, necessary, but also great
fidelity.
I shall be exceedingly sorry to have to sever my connection with
the Missions Committee of your lordship’s Diocese ; but, if I am to
continue working as their Missionary, it must be on lines of jus-
tice and right to the aborigines of this land, in opposition to the
injustice and wrong-doing of interested and unprincipled white
men. This is my decision, and by it I stand or fall. In conclu-
sion, I must say that I regard the recent proceedings of the Mis-
sions Committee as very unfair, to say the very least. For they
passed condemnatory resolutions without waiting for a single word
of explanation from me, their Missionary. And your lordship, as
Chairman, telegraphed to my opponents at Carnarvon, informing
them that the Committee had strongly condemned my conduct in
publishing my journal, while I was left in perfect ignorance as to
anything of their procedure. <•
I remain.
Your lordship’s
Humble servant,
JOHN B. GEIBBLE.
The Lord Bishop of Perth.
The following, which is a copy of the letter sent by me to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, will clearly show how I have
been treated in relation to the Natal outrage, and will also serve
as a connecting link between my very earliest experiences, and the
present position of affairs, in relation to the North-west Mission.
I may here state, that the firm attitude which I have been com-
pelled to assume in relation to H. E. the Governor, with whom
alone the blame rests so far as the miscarriage of justice is con-
cerned, has brought down upon me not only civil but even ecclesi-
astical vengeance. H. E., to whom I made my complaint both
verbally and in writing, instead of promptly adjusting the crook-
ed matter, kept me without a reply for five days, during which
period he referred a matter of simple injustice (which my Com-
mittee had no right to adjudicate upon) to that body, which being
composed of the poor creatures *,of circumstances, and the mere
satellites of vice-regal patronage, as might be expected, yielded to
such pressure, and requested me to beg H. E.’s pardon and with-
draw my complaint, which thing, while I have a heart to feel, and
a tongue to speak out against iniquities in high places I can never
think of doing. The result is that lam now interdicted by the
Dean of Perth, and practically deserted by the Mission Committee.


Truly this Colony " is filled with violence, the priests prophecy
smooth things, and the people desire to have it so.
Perth, W. A.,
May, 1886.
The Right Honourable
The Secretary of State
For the Colonies.
Your Lordship,—
I am painfully compelled, through force of cir-
cumstances, to lodge a complaint against His Excellency the
Governor of this Colony on the ground of what is, in my opinion,
unpardonable miscarriage of justice.
The facts of the case are as follows.—On the 16th of August,
1885, I arrived in this Colony as an accredited Missionary of the
Church of England, from the Colony of New South Wales, where
for several years I had laboured amongst its native tribes.
My mission in this Colony is to teach, and preach amongst the
tribes of the North West Coast.
Soon after my first landing at Port Gascoyne, I made an
extensive tour in the interior, during which I saw and heard things
in relation to the treatment of the natives by the white settlers
which caused me much pain and disgust. And I plainly spoke out
against such abuses.
One case in particular, in which I saw a young native girl being
debauched by a white man, on the ground, as he informed me, of
the girl haying been assigned to him by the police, I reported
directly to his Excellency the Governor.
On my return to the coast, I began the establishment of a mission
station, and proceeded with the work of building for three months,
without making any public disclosure of the abuses which I knew’
to exist. Hut at that juncture, without being apprised of their
intentions, the settlers convened a meeting, at which my work was
emphatically denounced, and a petition was drawn up, and sent
to the Bishop of the Diocese praying for my immediate removal
from the district. And a complaint was sent to the Governor, on
the ground that I had interfered with the native labour
system.
Owing to such action, I went to Perth, and defended myself
against their unfounded charges, the result being that both Gov-
ernor and Bishop assured me of their confidence and support, and
I returned to the scene of my labours. But on reaching Port
Gascoyne, an effort was made to prevent the landing of ray building
materials and supplies, but being foiled in this respect, they (the
settlers) forthwith “ boycotted” me, and went even so far as to
* r boycott” those who showed me any sympathy or rendered me
any help.


After two months of such tactics, a second meeting was held for
the purpose of again petitioning for my removal. I attended and
after patiently listening to all that my opponents had to say
agamst me and my work, I requested a hearing, but for an hour and
a half I was subjected to annoyance and interruption, until at last
I was hounded down by abuse and threats. I then informed
them that if they would not hear me directly, they should hear me
indirectly.
I accordingly wrote out an account of my experiences, and sent
it to the Perth Press, and I was again compelled to sail to Perth
by the steamship «Natal.” But while on the voyage I
was one night, while lying asleep near the wheel on ° the
quarter-deck, cruelly assaulted by a number of North West pearlers
and settlers. And not only was I illtreated on the deck, but
after getting to my cabin, it was entered by a man whom I had
heard say, while on deck, that it would be well if they could get rid
° f ***** ordered him out of my cabin, there being no lock
on the door, I barracaded it with everything moveable, and then
seated myself on such barracade with my back to the door and my
feet to the washstand. While I was thus defending my position
the cabin was beseiged by a number of men, and from about half
past one o’clock in the morning till after three o’clock the
endeavoured to force an entrance.
Dunng the seige they made the most terrible threats, to the
effect that if they could only get me for ten minutes they would
murder me, either by hanging, drowning, or shooting. The reason
they assigned being, that I had come from N. 9. Wales to interfere
with their natives, but they would not let me live to reach
Fremantle.
The next day’ I reported the matter to the captain, who I was
told was on shore during the occurrence; the ship being at anchor
in Champion Bay. He expressed his sorrow and protected me
against further violence.
On reaching Perth I at once reported the case to my Bishop
who convened a meeting of the Mission Committee, by which a
resolution was passed, recommending me to take legal steps tobrino-
the offenders to justice. Such steps I took. But at the very in-
ception of the proceedings I was hindered.
A legal gentleman, Mr. S. Burt, who is the present Acting
Attorney-General, and as I heard subsequently, one of the largest
Pastoral Lease holders, would not entertain my case. And then
when I attended at the Police Court to obtain summonses served
on the officials of the “ Natal” whom I required to detain as
witnesses, I could not find any person to issue such summonses,
a * a PP* le d f° r them within prescribed office hours
The next morning early the " Natal” sailed for Singapore, and I
then secured the services of another gentleman, Mr. E. S. Haynes,


and, in his company, applied to the Police Magistrate at Freman-
tle for warrants or summonses against the accused. But that
official strange to say, refused them, saying that before he could do
so, he would have to consult the Crown Law Officers on the subject.
A day or two afterwards, I swore the information in the presence of
a local Justice of the Peace, thinking that the matter would at
once be proceeded with. But it was not so.
The case passed by the Police Magistrate to the Crown Law
Officers, and the Attorney General, the Hon. A. P. Henaman,
promptly referred it back to the Magistrate for him to deal with
it in the ordinary manner. (If this had been done I should aot have
had my present cause of complaint.)
During this strange course of procedure, by special invitation, I
waited ou the Governor and talked the matter over with His Ex-
cellency, and left his presence with a distinct assurance that the
law should at once take its own course, in relation to the
matter.
Arrangements were forthwith made by my solicitor for the
returnbf the summonses on or about the 17th inst., about the time
of the second return of the s.s. Otway from the North, and with
the fullest confidence in such arrangement, I returned to my
station.
I then made a hurried journey of 400 miles into the interior, so
as to get back to the coast in time to catch the ship.
On the 11th of May instant I reached Perth and was astonished
beyond measure to find, that nothing had been done to further the
ends of justice. The summonses had net been issued. And more
than that, I learned from my solicitor, that he did not know that
they had not been issued till the sth inst., when it was too late to
prevent my sailing from the North West.J And he further in-
formed me, that the Clerk ©f the Court had instructed him to com-
municate with the Colonial Secretary with reference to the issne of
the summonses.
I may here observe that I found that during my absence from
Perth the Attorney General, the Hon. A. P, Hensman, had been
forbidden his duties, and that Mr. S. Burt, the gentleman who had
previously refused to have anything to do with my case, had been
appointed as Acting Attorney General.
In the face of this, to ray mind unpardonable tampering with
the administration of justice, I decided to wait upon the Governor,
which I did, and laid the whole matter before him. And I asked
H. E. plainly, why justice had been denied me, and why my case
had not been dealt with, as it doubtless would have been, if poor
and uninfluential men had been the offenders.
His Excellency pleaded that neither he nor the Colonial
Secretary had anything to do with the case, as it rested entirely
with the Magistrates.


i.tLSS“tiSr5 ,ii ““ first inst * nce ’
ga * e H - ®- Ixs understand, that practically the case had
T f 1 C # uld rl ret . urn a £ ain for the hearing. Neither
couid I remain for such hearing. And I should be compelled to
adopt another and more effective course, viz.—that of referring the
case to Your Lordship, as Secretary of State for the Colonies. g
, . f kxeellency requested me to make my complaint in writing
H E th.t ft 011 f, 12t 5 ! nst -’ and in su ch complaint I assured
and 1^ Ustlce t0 which 1 had been subjected
in this Coiony would compel me to make known to the world the
Australia “ g Under the Flag in Western
Governor t^e^^West^AusTmlian”^(which
Not only, my Lord, have I been subjected to illtreatment at the
hands of unscrupulous and designing settlersand Sera wii
whose interests I have in the cause of suffering humanity come into
f clnnet P* * the hands of the Pernor o*f thTcobT to
I cannot close my eyes to the distinct promise he made mJ’l am
but loithS *1 It 88 ~ ad iudi^ity.
nation?" W«n ttat "'rigWa^w^SSSßil
I have the honour to be.
Tour Lords-hip’s Obedient Servant,
May 25, 1886. JOHN B, GEIBBLE.
The Eight Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
S prosecute


THE NATIVE LABOUR SYSTEM ON THE
GASCOYNE.
After the running narrative of my first three months’ doings and
experiences on the Gascoyne I am now free to give my impressions,
based upon personal observation, of a subject which is directly
connected with the development of this district, so far as settle-
ment is concerned. I refer to the native labor system , or what I
prefer to define as a system of bondservice bordering on slavery.
I shall be allowed great latitude in dealing with this subject, inas-
much as I was not permitted to take part in the proceedings of the
recent meeting held at Carnarvon, where I should have been able,
had I been present, to ventilate the subject from the standpoint
of the natives. As it was, all that was said was on the side of the
owners of the natives depending upon the said owners;
and it was not at all likely that they would say or do any-
thing contrary to their own interests, be they what they may.
Some things adduced as illustrations of points being discussed may
appear passing strange; but then it must be remembered that
“ facts are sometimes stranger than fiction.”
As regards the treatment of the natives at Carnarvon, I can say
honestly that they are, as a rule, well treated; the only reason I
have had to complain of has been in the case of young native girls
hanging about the hotels, where they are, to say the least, in dan-
ger of contamination. It would be well for the sake of the white
children attending the Government school if those natives who are
not employed by the whites, and who are, as a rule, very lightly
attired, were compelled to camp at a respectable distance from the
town ; and for decency sake some provision should be made for
their being sufficiently covered. That is all I have to say respect-
ing the natives at the Port—with the exception that they are far
better treated than the general run of aboriginal natives in the in-
terior. Indeed all the way up the river I heard the Carnarvon
natives spoken of as being “ far too civilised,” f - knowing too
much,” spoilt,” &c., &c. .
To prove my statement that the native labor system in this dis-
trict is one bordering on slavery, I must first deal with the way in
which they are secured. Ido not say that no natives do come
voluntarily and offer their services to the owners of stations; but
this Ido say—that in some cases the native laborers are recruited
in a way which does not give the native the least freedom of will.
They are compelled to touch the pen to an assignment-paper which
it is impossible for them to understand, and, as regards the
witnessing of such assignment, the parties so acting are doubtless


interested, so tliat in such case the poor native becomes a bondserv-
ant by force. But there is an advanced phase of this side of the
question which must be disclosed. At times the wild natives are
really run down and captured and taken to the stations, and then
the assignment as above described takes place ; and then, if they
run away (which they are almost certain to do) a warrant is issued
for their arrest, and then the police are set in motion, and if run
down or ferreted out they are taken to the J unction Police Station,
and there chained up for a few weeks. Some may think this is only
the dream of a disordered brain ; but here is a case in point, un-
asked by me. A certain person directly connected with one of the
principal stations on the Upper Gascoyne informed me that at
times they were obliged to go out in search of the bush natives to
bring them in to work, and that one day a party so engaged under
the personal direction of a Mr. , the managing partner, came
upon a little group of bushmen in the river-bed, who on seeing the
white horsemen at once ran away. Chase was given and several
escaped, but one man in particular who was pursued by the leader of
the white party suddenly vanished, and after a diligent search the
poor fellow was found concealed in a native well seven feet deep,
from which he was dragged and compelled to go into bond-service.
My informant, pointing towards a certain native, said, “ That’s
the native —there.” What, I ask in the name of humanity and
British freedom, is such a system is that ? Is it voluntary serving,
or is it slavery ? A young man from a distant station on the
Manilliatold me that there also they had to run in the wild natives
to get them to work. What, I ask, is “ running in,” —is it volun-
tary service to the white man, or is it the opposite ?
On my remarking to a settler that it was strange that I did not see
a single wild native in all my travels on the Kennedy and Dalgetty,
although I plainly saw their numerous tracks, he explained it by
saying that the “ niggers” saw me, but that they were afraid,
thinking I was after them. Now, I ask again, what does all this
go to prove ? Most certainly that in some cases at any rate the
natives are not consulted in the matter of engagement, but are by
compulsion made the bondservants of the whites. Then, again,
their continuous servitude without a chance of leaving is another
reason for my saying that they are bondservants, and not free
lajgfcrers. The law in this respect is openly violated. The
“masters’ and Servants’ Act” distinctly says that a certificate of
discharge must be given at the close of the term of the engage-
ment, if required. Is not this part of the Act—that very Act
under which the natives are said to be engaged—totally ignored by
many of the settlers ? If a native desires to go away when he has
faithfully fulfilled the conditions of his engagement is he then dis-
charged to enter the service of another, if he feels disposed ? The
truth is—No; he is not! The poor fellow is given to understand


in a way he does not like, that once assigned he is forever a slave
in effect. Is it not a fact that some who have been for years in the
same bondservice run away repeatedly ? And why do they run
away? Simply because they know they cannot release themselves
in any other way. When I spoke of six months as being, as I was
given to understand, the period of a native’s agreement
the wife of a certain settler told me that her husband
said “he could keep his natives as long as he liked.” That
is just the fact of the matter —they are kept as long as their
owners like. I know there are worthy exceptions to this state of
things, but these exceptional persons are laughed at for their
honesty in the treatment of their natives, as one of them told me
himself. I ask again, what does this go to prove P —verily that a
species of slavery does exist in this part of the Queen’s domin-
ions.
As to treatment in other respects, I have only to say that every-
where I saw the natives sufficiently fed with but one exception;
but as regards clothing, what I saw in some instances did not give
me the impression that the clothing condition of the legal agree-
ment had been fulfilled on the part of the owners. On the Upper
Gascoyne, especially at the time of my visit, many of the natives
were laid up from work in consequence of a severe cold which was
prevailing; but though they were ill, and the nights chilly, they,
in some cases, had not even a shirt or a sign of a blanket, so far as
I could see. On drawing the attention of one of the settlers to the
naked condition of his sick natives he said, “ I’ll give them some-
thing after shearing.” On another station I saw a native woman
watering the garden, and trying in vain to hide her nakedness
from white beholders with the half-shirt she possessed, while her
master, standing by observed, " Your shirt is rather too short, old
woman !” lam not so unreasonable as to argue that a native on
the Gascoyne should be fully attired in European costume; but I
do maintain that common decency says they should be sufficiently
covered, and the terms of the agreement say plainly that they must;
and if they are not, then all I have to say on this point is that
they are not treated as free laborers, but as slaves—subjects only
to the will and caprice of others.
But yet another reason for my defining the native labor system
as a species of slavery is the sad fact of the assignment of
native women and girls to white men, the great majority of
whom are single. This, to ray mind, is the most sad association
of the whole native labor question. On every station women aurl
girls are engaged, principally as shepherds, and these creatures are
entirely in the hands of their owners; I say owners, because cer-
tain settlers have told me that they owned all the natives on their
respective runs, and these native women and girls are, when away
iu the bush with their flocks, placed under the care of young white


men, who camp out with them, their duty being to go from flock
to flock to see that the natives are watching the sheep. I was in-
formed that some of the females had their native husbands with
them. One of the settlers told me he had hard work to get hus-
bands for all his women. Many of these native shepherds are mere
oirls. Doubtless some of these females are voluntary servants ;
but I got to know of one case in which the poor creature was not,
and because she had run away she was in the “ black book ”of
her owner, and I afterwards found her at the camp of a young
man to whom she had been lent because his girls had run away :
and these same girls I discovered at another station, and they had
run away, they said, because they could not get enough,
damper. I also found that women and girls were fully assigned
to teamsters. It is quite a common thing to see them even in
Carnarvon with such. Upon asking some of these men why they
had girls and not boys attached to their teams, some said they
“ preferred them others said they were “ better than boys,” and
that “ boys always run away but others frankly admitted that
they had them for immoral purposes. And although this is bad
enough I have in my .possession facts which are so exceedingly
repulsive in their character as to be unfit for the columns of a
family newspaper. I ask every right-thinking person whether
such a feature of bondservice is not shocking to contemplate, es-
pecially when professed Christian men are connected therewith ?
Assignment of native females against their will for purposes of im-
morality is a sign of slavery.
The last proof that the native labour system is a species of slav-
ery to which I shall refer is the persecution of those whose object
is to ameliorate the condition of a subject race. That such proof is
not wanting on the Gascoyne has, I think, already been shown. But
I will just give an illustration or two of this very point. Not long
since a native man, clothed only in the rags of a shirt and waist-
coat, came to the Mission. On asking him in ingarra who he was
and where he came from, he said he had come from the homestead
of a certain settler not far from Carnarvon and that his time was
up, that his master had torn up “ paper talk” (agreement) that he
would give him no clothes, no money, and that his son had punish-
ed him. I rode to the settler’s homestead and told him of the
occurrence and that I had told the native to return, and that he
said he would not. On hearing this the settler said, “ I’ll see if
he’ll not come back ; I’ll get him locked up ; he has only been with
me for about two months.” And then he said that I had influenc-
ed the man to run away—a charge which I stoutly denied. Late
on the same day this man, in company with two other settlers,
rode up to my door and said he had come for his native. I said he
could have him, pointing at the same time to where the native was.
But to my surprise he not only told the man whom he claimed to


walk, but also ordered away a young man who had entered the
Mission camp a day or two after my arrival at Carnarvon, and to
whom he had no claim whatever. I protested against such a pro-
ceeding, saying the blacks were free subjects of the Queen and that
they were not slaves. He was then joined by one of his friends,
and they both.charged me with inciting the natives to run away
from their owners, and threatened me with prosecution on this
ground, and because I had said when up the river that the native
women should not be dealt with immorally. The latter charge I
candidly admitted, stating my reason. They then rode off and said
they would see what authority I'had to interfere with the natives.
I had, of course, none, neither had I exercised any. At the time
of writing the man ordered away is still at the Mission, although I
have told him repeatedly that the police would be after him. • But
he seems to prefer going to gaol than return to . The other
illustration of this point is the recent meeting held at Carnarvon
and previously referred to, at which the following reso-
lution was put and carried—not unanimously, I am odad
to learn, for the sake of our ‘Australian Christianity.
The Secretary who took the minutes informed me that there was
one in the room who protested, while several left previous to its
being put to the vote. Eesolution That this meeting protest
u against the _ Government assisting or continuing the establish-
“ ment of Mission stations to deal with aboriginals in this dis-
" trict.” This resolution was moved by a Mr. , whose sta-
tion is far inland and who has a large number of natives in his
ownership, but whose country adjoins our Mission Keserre.
If persecution is a sign of slavery truly it is not wanting on the
Gascoyne. But, then, one cannot be astonished at such proceed-
ings when he remembers he has settled amongst a people whose
sentiments in relation to the natives have already been made
known to the world (See Government Gazette, December the sth,
1882, re Mr. E. Fairbairn’s report. A Mr. G is reported to
have said, “ I think the presence of police will do good; but at the
same time I think if the Government would shut their eyes for six
months and let the settlers deal with the natives in their own way
it would stop the depredations effectually.”) “ I remarked” (says
Mr. Fairbairn) “that the Government would look upif>n him as a
blood-thirsty man. On comparing Mr. W ’ s letter with his
statement as taken down by me I find it generally correct enough
but as regards his complaint that f my report conveys the idea
that he is in favour of shooting natives, when he distinctly and
plainly told me that he was not/ I must beg to put before him his
own words : “I think if the Government would allow the settlers
to give the natives a good dressing, as was done at the DeGrey a
few years ago, and as was done at Champion Bay some years since,
it would effectually put a stop to it. In the early days of Cham-


pion Bay the natives were shot down right and left for sheep and
cattle stealing. Unless the police sent up are good men they will
do no good.”
Furtner comment is quite needless. The conclusion of the
whole matter is, that the settlers in this district are afraid of the
improvement of the natives by Missionary agency, and therefore
they are striving by all the means in their power to crush the work
at the very inception.
A CHAPTER OF HORRORS.
THACKABIDDY.
SUPEEME COURT—WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 9, 1884.
(Before His Honor Mr. Justice Stone).
The Court re-opened at five minutes past ten o’clock, when the
first case taken was that of alleged
Manslaughter.
Charles Clifford was charged with having, on the 29th May last,
unlawfully killed an aboriginal native at the Gascoyne known as
ihackabiddy. The prisoner, who pleaded “not guilty” was
defended by Mr. S. H. Parker, and a Jury was sworn in after the
learned counsel for the defence had challenged three of the nro-
posed jurors. *
TRe Attorney General, in opening the case to the Jury, explain-
ea that this case had been sent down to the Supreme Court for
trial by the Chairman of the Geraldton Quarter Sessions. He the
learned counsel, confessed that he could not understand why such
had been done, inasmuch as in his opinion the case ought to have
been tried upon the nearest available spot to the scene of commis-
the alleged offence. Still he felt bound to observe that the
Qfiairman of the Quarter Sessions had acted within his strict legal
rights in thus remitting the case to Perth. However, a great deal of


extraneous feeling had been imported into the case by the local
organ of the Press having endeavoured to show that the Govern-
ment had brought pressure to bear upon the Chairman of the
local Quarter Sessions to induce him to send the prisoner to Perth
for trial, and he seized the opportunity of publicly giving a flat,
unqualified, and most emphatic denial to what had been published
in the newspaper in question. He could distinctly assure both
the Jury and the public that there was not a single word of truth
in the assertions which had been made about the case. Having
reviewed the whole of the circumstances of the case at considerable
length, the learned counsel proceeded to call the following witnes-
ses in support of the case as put forward by the Crown.
George Joseph Gooch deposed : I am a sheep farmer, residing
on the Manilia Eiver, about 130 miles from Carnarvon. In May
last the prisoner was in the service of my partner and myself.
On the evening of the 24th I was at home on our station, when in
consequence of what Keen told me I rode out to a sheep-camp
where the sheep were in the prisoner’s charge. 1 saw a native
there named Thackabiddy, standing about 200 or 300 yards from
the sheep. The native had a spear, two kylies and a throwing-
board. The native was not doing anything, but I gave him into
Keen’s charge and at once gallopped off. I rode out of sight of
Keen and his prisoner, but was away only a few minutes. While
I was away I heard Keen shout, and then I heard the report of a
revolver being fired three times. When I returned I found Keen
on his horse holding the native’s spear, while the native was
standing about five yards in front of the horse’s head. I told the
native to throw down his weapons. I saw that he was wounded
in the throat. The native then threw a kylie at me, but it flew
over my head ; he attempted to throw another, but I dismounted
and seized him, he striking me with his throwing-board on the
shoulder when I laid hold of him. I then put a line round his
neck and led him off to the camp ; the native went quietly enough.
The next morning I started to deliver the prisoner over to the
police at Carnarvon. The party consisted of the native, the pris-
oner, and myself ; we had, I think, four horses. The prisoner was
chained to a horse, a chain was fastened round the native’s neck,
and then put around the horse’s neck. The native complained to
me that one of the revolver bullets was still in his neck, but I did
not examine the wound. He walked along pretty well, and eat
and drank; he gave us 4 no trouule beyond that of watching him.
While I was with him I never dragged him any part of the way;
he picked up a stick once, but I took it and threw it away. On
the 28th May, at about eleven o’clock, Mr. Gale and a boy named
Eoach joined us, and on the same afternoon Mr. Gale and I rode
off to Carnarvon, leaving the prisoner and the boy Eoach with the
native. When I last saw the native he was chained to a tree ; the


chain was comfortable round his neck, I mean that it was quite
good enough for him. On the 3rd June I saw the spot where the
native had died. I did not see the body there, as it had been re-
moved. I saw certain marks on the ground; they were such as to
lead me to believe that they had been made by dragging the native
along the ground, I stepped the track for about a quarter of a
mile, but then gave it up, but I saw the track at intervals after-
wards until came to the place where the dragging apparently
first began. There were trees along the track, to which the native
might have been secured with perfect safety. When I left the
native with the prisoner we'had travelled more than 100 miles to
Carnarvon.
Cross-examined: 1 rode up to the natives to see if they were
stealing the sheep. The natives made a practice of doing so
there. I told Keen to look after Thackabiddy while I went off to
see if I could see any [more natives. Thackabiddy was a ring-
leader in sheep-stealing. When I told Keen to look after the na-
tive I was under an impression that there was a warrant out
against him. Thackabiddy was a powerfully built native, about
six feet in height.
To the Jury: When the native was arrested he bled a little from
the wound in the neck, but not at all afterwards while on the
journey up to the time I left him.
Richard Gale said : lama Justice of the Peace for the Colony.
On the 28th May last I was travelling from the Manilia River to
Carnarvon with a boy named Roach. At about 11 a.m. I overtook
Mr. Gooch, the prisoner, and the deceased native. The native
walked well and easily. I did not look at his wounds; I travel-
led alongside the native for four or five miles, and he did not stop
once. After dinner Mr. Gooch and I went on in advance, leaving
the native with Roach and the prisoner. The native was then
resting.
Cross-examined: The prisoner was not arrested immediately
after the inquest which was held on the deceased at Carnarvon.
I have never seen the bush natives wear clothing. There was no
rain during our journey down; the days were hot, but the nights
were rather cool.
Re-examined : It was just then the beginning, of the cold sea-
son. In the cold weather the natives light fires at night.
Edward Roach deposed : I am in the service of Messrs. G ooch
and Wheelock, but in May last I was in the service of Mr. Gale.
On 28th May last I was travelling with ray master towards Car-
narvon, when we met Mr. Gooch, the prisoner, and Thackabiddy.
My mate and Mr. Gooch went on and left me with the native and
the prisoner. We stayed there for about three hours, and moved
on. The native seemed to travel alright ; he was chained to the
horse the prisoner was riding. We camped that night, and start-


Ed the next day before daylight. I went after the horses, which
had strayed back a lot towards water during the night; when I
was away I heard Clifford shout ; I got the horses and then re-
turned, when the prisoner said something to me. We then sad-
dled up and went on our journey. Clifford was then riding, hav-
ing the native still chained to his horse. When we started I was
riding; we .'had five horses with us, and we drove the other
horses before us. When we had gone about a mile one of the
horses turned back, and I had to go after it; I went back out of
sight of Clifford and the native; when I was away I heard the
prisoner shout out my name. When I got back I saw the native
holding Clifford on the ground; they were struggling together
under the horse’s neck. The native was still chained to the horse,
which was standing still. The native had a stirrup-iron in his
hand. Clifford told me that the native had pulled him off his
horse. I shouted to the native to let the prisoner go, and as he
would not do so I fired over his head to frighten him, and as that
had no effect I shot the native in the leg. The native w r as a good
tall native, a little bigger than Clifford. When I fired at the
native I aimed at him below the knee. The native then got up,
walked off a few yards, and then chucked himself down. I found
that my ball had hit him on the ankle. Clifford showed me a
mark on his forehead, where he said Thackabiddy had struck him
with the stirrup-iron. Clifford then got on his horse and said he
would drag the native to the first tree he might come to. He then
dragged him along on the ground. I pointed out a tree, but Clif-
ford said he would go on to a better one. Altogether he was
dragged for about a mile (sensation). Once the native sat up while
he was being dragged, but he never stood up or walked. The
native was dragged sometimes on his shoulder, sometimes on hia
back, and sometimes on his belly. We passed a good many trees
while the native was being dragged along, and he could have been
secured to any one of them alright. Ido not think that the native
was able to walk.. He held on to the chain with both hands above
his head, otherwise he would have been dragged along by his
neck. After having dragged the native for about a mile Clifford
chained him up to a tree and then called me to help him to fasten
his hands behind him with a handkerchief and a strap; while I
was doing so I noticed that the skin was chaffed off his shoulder.
When he was chained up he was allowed about two feet slack of
chain. I then wanted Clifford to stop with the native and let me
go for the police, but he said he was frightened to stay with the
native alone, so he went on with me. Clifford had a loaded revolv-
er, the native no weapon at all ; Clifford was free, but the native
was chained up to the tree with his hands tied behind his back,
Clifford rode off without leaving the native either food or water,
but he left a small fire burning about two yards from the native.


I rode off with Clifford. It was cold weather that night. The
fire was such a small one that it would only last about an hour.
Clifford left the native chained np early in the morning. When I
last saw the native alive he was trying to stand upright-, but he
could only get half upright, because he was chained so short down
to the bottom of the tree. If any food had been left for him he
would not be able to lay hold of it. When Clifford went on to
Carnarvon I went after the horses that had run away. I returned
to the native about-dinner time to pick up the tracks; he was then
in a stooping position. I chucked him a couple of bits of damper;
he scraped one piece towards him with a stick, managed to pick it
up and take one bite, he could not get another bite, as his hands
were tied too far back. I then left him and rode away.
To the Jury; When Clifford was struggling with the native the
native was still chained to the horse’s neck. When the native was
struggling with the prisoner he had either a stick or a stirrup-iron
in his hand; I cannot swear which of the two it was.
Cross-examined : The story I have told to-day is the same as the
one I told the Magistrate at Carnarvon in all but one particular;
that was about Clifford getting on his horse at once. At Carnar-
von I swore that the prisoner led his horse while the dragging
went on, because the prisoner had asked me to say so. I don’t
feel in any fear about this case for firing at the native. At Ger-
aldton p.c. Turner and another constable went through my depo-
sition with me. (At this stage Mr. Parker put in the witness’s
deposition which he made before Mr. Foss at Carnarvon, and read
it aloud; after doing so the learned counsel subjected the witness
to a long and searchiug cross-examination of nearly an hour’s
duration, but failed to shake the witness’s evidence upon any
material point).
William Turner deposed : I am a police constable, and during
last May I was stationed at Carnarvon. I accompanied “the
prisoner and another person, to the spot where the native had died
on the Manillia Eoad : the spot is, so far as I can calculate, about
28 miles from Caruarvon. The tracks of the dragging which I saw
proved tojme that the native must at times have been dragged on
his back, hands and feet, shoulders, and stomach. There were no
marks of any person walking there, though horse tracks were
plainly visible. From actual measurement I found that the
distance the natiye was dragged was 74 chains 61 feet, or nearly
a mile. I followed the tracks on till I came to the deceased native.
I found the body lying on its left side, with its back to the tree.
The elbows were tied as tightly as possible behind the back with a
police-strap. There was a chain fastened round the neck, tvhich
was then passed round the tree, and the end of the chain was
brought round and padlocked to the chain round his neck. It was
utterly impossible that the man couldlhave stood upright, or that


he could have used his hands. I examined the body, upon which
I found the following wounds One through the chin and into
the neck, one across the arm, a bruise on the face, a bullet hole
riwht through one of the ankles, and a raw patch on each shoulder,
which appeared to have been produced by dragging. I found two
bits of damper near him, but he could not have used his hands to
eat them ; there was no water near him ; there were the remains
of a small bramble fire about 7 or 8 yards away from the body, but
it could not have afforded the native any comfort or warmth. The
prisoner showed me a small scratch on his forehead. There were
plenty of trees equally as good all along the road, one of which
stood only a chain or a chain and a half from where the body was
first draped. I found a stick near the spot where the dragging
commenced ; on a stick I saw two or three hairs, and also some
Clotted sand of a reddish colour, but I could not say whether it
was blood or not. There wasjno warrant in existence at this time
for the arrest of Thacabiddy.
Cross-examined : The stick I produce is the one I hound, there is
still one hair sticking to it; I am!certain it is not possum hair, for
there are no ’possums about there ; neither do I think it is a
wallaby’s hair. I thought that the native must have died from
the wound in the neck, in fact I told Clifford so. I took the body
into Carnarvon, where it was buried with the chain round the
neck Clifford was nokar rested for more than six weeks after the
inquest had been held,'that would be about the beginning of July
last, and he has been in prison ever since. When we were carry-
ing the dead body into Carnarvon a large quantityjof blood flowed
from the mouth. . „ ~ . , ~
Ee-examined : On the road into Carnarvon the prisoner told me
that the wounds on the shoulders of the deceased were caused by
his having been trampled upon by the horse when they were
struggling together. The chain used was an ordinary full-length
trace-chain.
That was the case for the Crown,
Mr. Parker for the defence then called
Edward Scott, who deposed : I am a member of the Eoyal
College of Surgeons, England. I have heard the greater part of
Mr. Gooch’s evidence, as well as that of Mr. Gale, young Eoach,
andp.c. Turner, and from what I have heard I can only surmise
the cause of death, which I suppose was caused by secondary hem-
orrhage, which generally occurs four, five, or six days after the
wound has been inflicted. I should not think that the dragging
had any material effect upon the cause of death.
To the Jury : A person suffering from a gun-shot wound certainly
ought to be kept as quiet as possible. If he had struggled to free
himself from the chain, that, in my opinion, would have done him
far more harm than his being dragged along for a mile or so.


Cross-examined : For one of my own patients suffering from a
nshot wound, I certainly would not think that his being dragged
mg a road for a mile with a chain round his neck would he con-
nive to his recovery. I certainly would not prescribe such a
arse of treatment myself. I think it is perhaps possible that the
igh handling the deceased received may have done him harm,
tie a man up to a tree, with his arms pinioned closely behind
n, might do him harm ; and I would not adopt such a method of
iatment myself.
Mr. Parker then addressed the Jury on behalf of his client, con-
iding that, according to Dr. Scott’s evidence, the brutal treat-
;nt the deceased native had received at the hands of his client
Id not have either caused or accelerated his death.
The Attorney General replied on behalf of the Crown in an
oquent address, during the course of which he insisted upon the
alienable and incontrovertible right of the black-man to obtain
ie same amount of legal protection and justice as that accorded
i one possessed of a skin of lighter hue, since both were subjects
Her Royal and Imperial Majesty, and therefore stood on
vel ground before the majesty of the Law. He concluded a most
ipassioned speech, by calling upon the Jury to decide the case
pon its merits, just as if the wretched victim had been one of
leir own color, kindred, and race.
His Honor, in charging the Jury, expressed his firm conviction
tat the prisoner at the bar should have been indicted for murder,
stead of manslaughter, and expressed his opinion that it was
rtunate ‘for the prisoner that the Crown had elected to indict
im upon the minor charge. After carefully reviewing the
ddence in the most impartial manner.
The Jury, after twenty minutes’ consideration, returned a
irdict of “ not guilty.” •
Che verdict was received with simply stupefaction by all present;
id after a pause
His K jnor, addressing the man in the dock, said : You have
;en acquitted by the Jury, but I have a caution to give you. I
ipe that you will amend your ways, and that you will behave
ith more discretion in the future. Otherwise you will most
jsuredly find yourself placed in a far more awkward position than
lat which you have so lately occupied.
The prisoner was then discharged.
BLOOD-CURDLING CRUELTY.
Sensational articles appear from time to time in our Wednesday
bearing upon the illtreatment ol our aboriginal


natives. In another leading article, in Wednesday’s issue, rel
ence is made to the case of William Thomas, an ex-policeman, i
a parallel drawn between the treatment by the Bench, and thal
a settler residing some miles from Eoebourne. It is said that t
man had two boys in his employ, the eldest being about
years old, both speaking English. They ran away after be;
flogged, were pursued, and were driven back with a stockwhi]
distance of 30 miles. Arrived at the station, the elder boy i
stripped, lashed to a fence in “ crucified” position, and then flog;
until he had fainted. The second boy was treated in the sa
manner, and after having worn ont one lash, he began to put
another, when the boy, in his agony, screamed out, “ Oh, masti
If you want to kill me, cut my throat, but don’t cut me to piece
The brute, unmoved, continued flogging, until the second lash 1
worn out. "News of the horrible deed reached Eoebourne, s
when the boys were brought in, the inhuman monster admit
that he had not flogged the first boy so much as he had the secc
because he could bear it, adding that he had ‘ lost his temp<
The Magistrate inflicted a fine of <£l for flogging the weaker b
and £5 for the assault upon the boy who could bear it. If th
facts are true, and we are bound to give credence to them,
scarce know which is most deserving of condemnation, the condi
of the inhuman monster who flogged the children or the ma§
trate who permitted such blood-curdling brutality to be jndulj
in at the cost of a paltry fine. We have in mind a similar ca
where too missionaries were sentenced to penal servitude for fl(
ging natives in Africa : yet in W. Australia, where so. much is si
of the humane treatment of our aboriginals, the conduct of t
settler and the magistrate are not inquired into. We consider tl
a public question, involving the character, of the colony. It 1
either been grossly libelled, or a state of affairs is permitted
exist in regard to the treatment of our aboriginals that demar
strict inquiry. If our magistrates can treat so lightly such sevi
treatment, it is time they were at once removed from their po
tion, and their names struck off the roll of Justices of the Pea l
We trust the Government will at once clear up the matter. T
colony should be purged of such a foul disgrace, if true, by t
public condemnation of the culprits, or if untrue by i the prosec
tion of the Journal which has promulgated the hideous story,
story equal in atrocity and horror to any told of the worst ;da
of American slavery. —Herald (Fremantle W.A.)
HOW NATIVE WITNESSES AEE TEEATED.
When the alleged native murderers of the late Isaac Doi
were arrested, an aboriginal was brought in as a witness. T


n had to travel chained just as the accused were. Upon
arrival at Eoebourne he was thrust in a cell like the prisoners,
I kept there for over ten months. The only exercise he had
■iug that time was being marched to and fro between the gaol
I the Court House whenjhis evidence was wanted. From the
finement he nearly lost the use of his limbs, and could walk
y with great difficulty. He soon became very ill; and, upon
release of the alleged murderers, he was turned out of gaol. By
t time, however, he had become so bad that he could not move,
.so he was put back into the cell again, where he died in great
ny within the course of a week, No medical attendance was
rded him, and he was allowed only the food with which native
oners are supplied.
►n the authority of Mr. D. Carly, of Perth, I present the follow*
[catalogue of horrors :
le says—“On my first arrival at Barrow Island in April, 1872,
pat put off from shore and H. McK came on board the
Qipton, and made a statement to the effect that he and J. S
been in charge of 40 natives, and that S. had shot himself. In
Ipany with several white men I viewed the body, and afterwards
jed to the Government Eesident at Eoebourne, that it was im-
sible for the man to have shot himself, judging from the
it ions of the several wounds. The man in my opinion had been
rdered. That was the first time I saw kidnapped natives,
fc is very well known by all old hands about Nickol Bay, and
“Flying Foam Passage” that in one day there were quite sixty
Ives, men, women, and children, shot dead. The natives them-
es have shown me the skulls of fifteen who were shot. Three
fie skulls were those of children, and two of these small skulls
bullet holes through them. I have seen many natives shot in
back for no other cause than that of running away from their
>1 slave masters.
or many years past, the Government have employed in the
ce force of this Colony, men who have been convicted in the
reme Court for killing men, both black and white, and others
! been tried but not convicted for want of evidence, and some
lese men are still in the employment of the Government. I
; reported two cases of bribery on the part of the police at
bourne. In the one case, two constables were bribed with pearls
mdone the murder of a native boy.
saw at “ Plying Foam Passage” no less than 24 natives hand-
id together, and then conveyed to Delambre Island and there de-
ed until they were required for pearl diving, their only food
g a little flour.


During my early experience at Eoebourne a man whose name 1
might give, criminally assaulted a native woman who was within a
few days of her confinement, she died the same night of the outrage.
This case was tried in the Supreme Court, Perth, and the man was
discharged.
On one occasion I was standing near the police court at Eoe-
bourne when I saw two natives brought from the cells. * They
were chained to each other round the neck. I noticed that one of
the natives had been shot in the arm, the limb being shattered to
pieces. And there was not the least covering on if. The
shattered arm he tried as best as he could, to hold up with his
sound hand. Thousands of flies were tormenting him, but he could
not drive them away. In this state he wastaken into the Police Court
to be tried. A few days afterwards I saw him brought into Cossack
chained round the neck, and to a horse. He was put on board shin
and died.
I have seen in Eoebourne a policeman knock a native down with
a piece of wood as though he had been shot. I have seen the same
policeman strike a native on the back with a shovel, and leave a
wound four inches long.
: V;I have also seen constables lock up in the cells numbers of kid-
napped natives. And a man named was in the habit
standing guard over kidnapped natives, who were chained together
in a workshop, and that within sight of the Government Eesidence
at Eoebourne. «
In September, 1878, I was inside my house at Cossack, when I
heard a native woman call out to me to save her boy from a man
who was kidnapping him. I went out and saw the woman strug-
gling with a white man for her boy. I did not interfere, as it was
useless, knowing that the man’s brother was a J.P. who I had
seen sign away numbers of kidnapped natives. The man tore the
boy from his mother and took him t@ a store close by and got him
assigned. The next day the boy was put on board of a cutter in
spite of the screams and struggles of his poor mother. I drew the
attention of a constable to the case, and he said he could not inter-
fere. I have seen hundreds of children brought into Cossack who
have been torn away from their mothers, and yet it is said that
where the British flag flies slavery cannot exist.
In October, 1880, two white men came to Cossack, having on
board their cutter ten kidnapped natives; they were sold to
for twenty pounds cash, and a debt of .£35. I saw the money paid.
In Sept., 1880, I saw at Eoebourne a police constable pass on his
way to Cossack. He had in charge a native man who had a chain
locked around his waist, and then attached to the saddle of his
horse; soon after I started for Cossack myself, and when about five
iniles along the road I saw the constable cantering his horse, and
the native was running to keep up. I saw him fall down from sheer


SbSt^l he r dragged along the ground for a consi-
derabie distance. I galloped up and said to the constable. I have
vou W a i y ° U haVe d T; aad 1 know that is no use reporting
S tht y °Vl to 30 ** a h' ain - Soon after 1 reached Cos-
sack the trooper and the native arrived; the unfortunate beino-
wfdsf S^ arCe J ? ra ?T lj and he had a terrible blood-stain right round his
sv„rofMr s tu£ noftiie oiai “' and bi °° d was a ° w “s
" Wtet «■«
tW w 1? 74, wben at Cossack, I saw two dead native women
a sTafS t S"°* h P° isoned fl °nr which they got S
h^^-^ 6 f orge 5 1Ver> and Iwas told b y natives that
same station Sf °™, the Same oause ‘ The owner of that self-
reported forwards poisoned himself, as commonly
thenSse o?k!Jn ree mßn wel l arm ®. d and mounted left Cossack for
circumsCL P ? m l°^ the FltzTOy Eiver - 1 reported the
bSess t thG Authontie s, and was told to mind my own
twJnfS°nS er ° f the sa “ e y ear these men returned to Cossack with
~S.S ,th " Mdefcir “ I »' “
west it wasm^L State! tha,t du F in g my sojourn in the North-
ern ovrAhe^r^] 0 v^° nP f CtlCe to sell cutters for.a considerable
S™ ? v ® r their real value, because of the numbers of native*
numbed?nTw year I S u W . for several da y s in succession large
numbers of natives who had recently returned from the nearlim.-
assigned as general servants by a drunken J.P. in a nub 5
wan^to 6 G K SS ffL - S ° me ° f the natives told me that they did not
want to sign, but they were forced to do so y
1 have see nunmbers of natives brought in from
and f? me °t them had never before seen the face of a whiteman
were impelled to put their hand to a pen and make a cross
were then^lave^^fOT U ltfe o^^3B^(^ d, af^ l^^V^re^g<Md^for, pea^
ta
1 have known numbers of natives to be killed by alligator* and
sharks whde engaged in their dangerous employment d
r Jl™ v Sam !J ea / J two constables at Eoebourne were compelled to
3tl r n°? the / orceß . b be e <***e they had attemptedTSnS
assault on two native girls in the lock-up. P nunai
in 1878 a young man was tried in Eoebourne on the charge of


killing a native by striking him on the head with a paddle. He was
discharged.
In 1883 a white man reported to the authorities at
Koebournethat he had killed two natives by striking them on the
head with the butt-end of his gun. No inquiry was made into the
matter.
In 1883 I met the Bishop of Perth at Cossack, and told him of
the slavery and cruelty existing. I pointed out to his lordship
several native children not more than eight years old whom I was
then protecting, and who I had good reason to believe had been
criminally abused by whitemen. And I said, pointing to the police
station, “ that house is no better than p b and that the author-
ities would not give the natives justice.” His lordship said in
reply, “I am sure that Mr. will give everybody justice.” I
said, “My lord, I am sure he will not, bring me to the proof, and
I will Drove it.” .
Previous to this circumstance I had reported to Captain Smith,
the head of the Police Department, that a certain constable had,
whilst drunk, dragged a native girl named Fanny to the lock-up,
the girl crying out while being so dragged that she was being
locked up for carnal purposes. I received no reply to this report.
I was present at the trial of a settler who was charged with
having branded a native ;he was discharged. I have several times
seen branded natives.
I may also state that the accused settler is in a high position
in Western Australia to-day. Signed, David Caret.
In addition to this hideous list of dark deeds I must briefly state
a few facts which have occurred since I arrived in the Colony,
some of which have come under my own observation.
On a certain station several native men declared aloud in the
presence of their owner that a young native girl about 15 years of
age was their master’s wife. On hearing this unexpected bit of
information the settler adroitly smuggled the girl out of sight and
hearing, and I saw her no more. At the same station I was in-
formed by a white overseer that in certain places the choicest bit
of hospitality that could be tendered to a visitor was the finest-
looking black girl.
At another station when retiring one night I stumbled over a
whiteman in the act of debauching a native girl, and that, too, on
the very verandah of the master’s house ; the vile offender was not
ashamed to acknowledge his conduct, and in excuse he said “ the
masters do it and why can’t we ?” I told the master of the shock-
ing circumstance, and with a laugh he said “ I don’t see much
harm in that kind of thing.” On reaching a police station I report-
ed the case, and a constable told me that the man to whom I re-
ferred was well known to the police, that stealing native girls for
carnal purposes was his favorite game, and that he had stolen the


girl he then possessed when she was in charge of a flock of sheep,
the property of a neighbouring settler. This case I reported
directly to the Governor.
The Eesident Magistrate at Carnarvon told me previous to my
first journey in the interior that half-caste children were freely
killed and eaten by the natives, and this statement was subsequent-
ly confirmed by the police up country.
The Clerk of the Court at Carnarvon told me he knew that little
native girls, only seven or eight years old, were the victims of
white men.
Early this year it was reported that five natives had been shot
dead by white men near Mount Clere, and about the same time,
two more were shot, by a party somewhere in the direction of
Mount Labouchere.
In January of this year I saw between thirty and forty natives
chained together and enclosed within the narrow bounds of a cor-
rugated iron enclosure not more than thirty feet square, and there
they lay day after day, and week after week, under the rays of an
almost vertical sun, while the perspiration poured from their
naked bodies, as though they had just been sluiced with buckets-
full of water. These natives, the most of them, had been brought
down from the Peedong country, more than three hundred miles,
and were accused of having speared cattle. I was present when,
on the evidence of a very young white man, they were sentenced
to two years banishment on Eottnest Island. But the strange part
of the tale is yet to be told. One of the troopers in charge told
me that some of these unfortunate beings had never seen a white
man until the day they were captured, and chained. Now the
question arises here, were they individually guilty, and who could
say they were ? There was not one to speak on their side of the
question.
When my sou and I were up the Gascoyne in April last, when
about 130 miles from the coast, we halted over the Sunday. Late
in the afternoon a party of whitemen camped on the opposite side
of the river, and while we were lying on some roeks reading, we
heard the sharp snap of a rifle, and instantly a ball passed close to
our heads ; we sprang to our feet, but had no sooner done so, than
a second report was heard and a ball passed very close to us the
other side. I then stated to my son that evil was without doubt
intended, and that we had better run for our lives. We accordingly
ran [.towards some Cajaput trees for shelter, and while we were
running two more shots were fired. After recovering ourselves
somewhat, I desired my son to accompany me to the opposite camp,
but as he appeared to be rather timid, I ventured forth with my
native, and showing myself openly, I made my way to the • camp.
As I drew near I saw several rough-looking men sneaking away
and concealing themselves. To a man who maintained bis position


and whom I fully recognised, I reported our narrow escape ; without
making the least excuse he replied to the effect that such conduct
was too bad. These without any exaggeration are the simple facts
connected with the episode.
During our return journey to the coast when about 22 miles from
the Mission Station we halted, at a sheep camp, and the white
man in charge gare me the following particulars. A white man
from a station up the river, had sent a native lad to his camp during
his absence, to get a young native girl whose friends were on this
particular station. But as the girl would not go, he gave her a
great beating and then rode away. But about a week after, just
on the Sunday previous to my call, he came again bringing with
him a rope, and the girl still refusing to comply with his request,
he deliberately tied the rope round her neck and fastened the other
end to his horse. He then mounted, and rode away dragging the
poor creature along the ground. When nearly choked he stopped,
and having untied the rope, he gave her a sound thrashing and
rode away. His pretence was that the girl had been promised to
him, but the girl declared that he had no claim on her, and that
what he had done to her was at the instance of the white man who
required her for carnal purposes. The girl was brought into my
presence and she related her sad story, and a Malay who witnessed
the outrage confirmed the girl’s statement. The white man, my
informant stated that when he returned in the evening after the
occurrence, he plainly saw the track along the ground caused by
the dragging.
On reaching the Mission Station, I reported the case to the
police at Carnarvon, but I have heard nothing more of it.
In May, 1886, two young men were fully committed for trial on
the charge of having killed a native at York.
In the same month a man named P was arrested at Roe-
bourne at the instance of the authorities in Perth for having
murdered a native in the North-west. P ■ ■ had been previ-
ously discharged by the Local bench, on the same charge.
In the preceding pages quite sufficient has been adduced to
show unmistakably that even in Australia, under its sunny skies,
deeds, the most dark and horrible in their nature, have been com-
mitted, and are still being practised, and that too, not onlyunderthe
British flag, but even in the face, so to speak, of the Representative
of the greatest Sovereign the world has ever seen, and who em-
phatically declared that the justice and righteousness of the Word
of the Living Oodconstituted "iThesecret of England’s greatness."


THE NATIVE QUESTION.
(From the Perth (W.A.) Inquirer.)
From A Lady’s Stand-point.
Hear Sir, —It has been reported that the Eev. J. B. Gribble
has attacked the character of the ladies of Perth; 'at least, this
is the unmanly thrust some of the settlers have lately given him,
having nought to accuse him of. It is enough for us his simple
denial. In our conscious innocence we know, to quote Marcus
Auerelius, " A well-bred man will never insult us, and no other
can.”
We are all well assured Mr. Gribble will say nothing unworthy
of a Christian and a gentleman.
It is the truth that cuts, not falsehood; and the Gascoyne
settlers are living examples of this.
If Mr. Gribble has made false statements about them, why not
treat him with cool contempt and show by their actions that he
is wrong P
A beautiful lady would laugh with unutterable scorn if she were
told she was as ugly as an old negress; and, just so, morality will
bear with unshrinking front any charge of impurity.
Mr. Gribble has right on his side; and, though even his own
party (the Church) are pusillanimous and chicken-hearted to an
extreme, God will not desert him. Truth and right must conquer.
The activity of good is ever shown by its conflict with evil. With
a true soldier of Christ there must be war to the knife—no quarter 5
and the way ihe mud has been stirred up in this matter, and all
the filth come to the surface, shows in an unequivocal manner that
Mr. Gribble is no milk-sop, no namby-pamby Christian (and there
are many about), but a man willing to lay down his life in the
cause. He has been persecuted in the cruellest manner by men
professing Christianity, and yet there are men in Perth
who dare not plant themselves on his side because interests are
so mingled. The settlers have growled at him like a dog, because
he wants to interfere with their bone— i.e., the native; and the
good folk in Perth, even the dignitaries of the Church, tremble at
the rage of the dog.
No indignation meetings have been held where the rev. gentle-
man could express himself, but he is sedulously instructed to keep
in the back-ground and do anything for peace and quietness. Mr.
Gribble is an accredited missionary, not a green-horn, and has gone
about his work in a manly way, single-handed, and in the teeth of
the most determined opposition. But the vices of some settlers


have not been condoned, and their interests are endangered. If
missionary work goes on they may have no black paramours, and
the aboriginal will probably demand regular wages for his labor !
The whole thing lies in a nut shell. There is so much of the
world in the Church and little of the Church in the world, that
ecclesiastics derive half of their funds from men whose
lives they must wink at. There is no doubt the Roman
Catholics will smile at the efforts of so-called Christian
settlers to expel the first missionary of their own faith
who has set foot in the land. We deserve their taunts, and I for
one blush for the effigy of Religion that has been set up in our
midst. Truly the feet are of clay.—l am, Sir, yours truly,
AN ENGLISH LADY.
Perth, February 27, 1886.
THE REV. J. B. GRIBBLE AND HIS OPPONENTS.
To the Editor op the Inquirer,
Dear Sir, —As an illustration of what may happen to a Christian
missionary in Western Australia I ask you to be so kind as to
publish the so-called report of a meeting held at Carnarvon during
my previous visit to Perth, as well as the handed to
me personally by the gentlemen who are reported to have made
statements the most injurious to my reputation and character.
Seeing that the statements themselves have been emphatically dis-
claimed, the intended injury falls, not upon the obnoxious mission-
ary, but upon respectable residents of Carnarvon ; therefore, after
due reflection I have decided to allow them to vindicate their own
honour against a journal which professes to be the advocate of all
things true and honourable, —contenting myself with the hope of
having my own grievances redressed at a tribunal before which
mere party influence and questionable interests will have but little
show of success, and where, at any rate, the wronged native and his
persecuted benefactor will most certainly have true British
justice meted out.—l remain, yours, &c..
JOHN B. GRIBBLE.
Perth, May 17, 1886.


[Prom the Western Mail, May Ist, 188G.]
CHURCH OF ENGLAND AT CAKNARYON.—PUBLIC
MEETING.
A meeting of the Church Committee took place at the resi-
dence of Messrs. Cleveland Bros, at 8 o’clock p.m. on the 15th
ult.,
Mr. G. Lefroy occupying the Chair.
Mr. Foss first rose to resign his office as member of the Church
Committee. He made a very short but eloquent speech, in the
course of which he said that he had long since lost all confidence
ill Mr. Gribble as a minister of the Gospel, and in consequence of
the misitatements which that gentleman had been guilty of
making, he wished to have nothing further to do with the Church
as long as Mr. Gribble remained. Mr. Foss said that be hoped
his resignation would not make any difference in the mind of the
others, as he did not wish to influence them in any way whatever,
but he could not help remarking that in his opinion Mr. Gribble
was not a suitable man for a pastor for that district, and that he
could not support the Church in any way while it was under his
charge. He would be most happy to contribute .£lO per annnm
towards any suitable clergyman.
Mr, Cleveland rose and in a very few words strongly condemned
Mr. Gribble’s conduct since his arrival in the district, and stated
that he begged also to resign his place on the committee and to
withdraw his support.
Mr. George Easton was the next to resign, and in the course of
a strong speech he stated that he never did consider Mr. Gribble a
proper person to be their clergyman. He also declared that he
never would have supported him but that a certain settler bad in
an overbearing manner tried to force him into opposing Mr,
Gribble. For that reason he had hitherto supported that reverend
gentleman.
Some further discussion ensued, and the meeting terminated
with the usual vote of thanks to the Chairman.
THE DISCLAIMERS.
Carnarvon, May 6th, 1886.
My dear Mr. Gribble,—
The report of the Church Committee as published in the
Western Mail of the Ist instant is incorrect as far as it refers to


what I said at that meeting. The said meeting was not a public
meeting; it consisted of four members of the late Church com-
mittee, and no one else was present. I sent no report of the meeting
in question, but do not know whetner any other member sent
one.—Yours faithfully,
C. D. V. FOSS,
Police Magistrate.
Carnarvon, May 6th, 1886.
To the Rev. J. B. Gribble, —
In reference to the report in the Western Mail as to the resigning
of the Carnarvon Church committee,
The said report is incorrect. I said the chief cause of resigning
was in reference to the misstatements in regard to the marriage
between the two natives at the Ga-lilie Mission.
It was moved and passed at the meeting that I, as the late
Secretary, should explain by letter to the Bishop that this meet-
ing had nothing whatever to do with the quarrel between Mr,
Gribble and the settlers.
REGINALD CLEVELAND,
Late Secretary Carnarvon Church Committee.
Carnarvon, May 6th, 1886.
Dear Mr. Gribble, —
What lam reported to have said at a Church Committee at
Carnarvon in the Western Mail of May Ist, 1886, is incorrect.
They were not the words I used at all. I said that I had no reason
to resign as a committee-man, but that as all the Committee were
resigning I could only follow their example, and that I had noth-
ing whatever personally against the Rev. J. B. Gribble. —Yours
faithfully,
GEORGE BASTON, Junb.
UUiJOftl
!il ,iIJU ,novi*


THE WANDERING BLACK.
Where is the Australian black to-night.
The child of God’s tender care.
Why turn from him and shun his sight ?
Nay, kneel for thy brother in prayer.
Chorus—
Oh! where is the native to-night ?
» ** 99 99 99 99
My heart o’erflows for God loves him and knows.
Oh! where is the native to-night ?
Once he was free as a bird of air.
He roamed the bush so wide.
Now whites possess his country fair,
And few are on his side.
Chorus—Oh ! where, &c.
Oh ! could I see him now the black,
And speak of Jesu’s love
Teach him the Bible’s precious lore.
And raise his hopes above.
Chorus—Oh! where, &c.
Go search for the wandering black to-night.
Go look for him where you will
But bring him to Christ with all his blight,
And tell him He loves him still.
Chorus—Oh! where, &c.


I
• , ■ h»«wm
. .moajg DumaonAW hht
i r■ v 1 . i '*
t «mvj . T*. «> 3o IJn f * ?
. Ilf, 5.Ml «l»H ■ I»«fi li•-.••(} nujj •>/
.I ,y .J.j iU 'JJliJf'l'i *li» "I'd I'C'U'l
' —itiamtJ
< uj Ctvi<hill Olid ;,f ylfwlw ’ HO
;."M t*/l I >J!ft mid ■; >vcl 100 7«M ■ wol 1> O V;'
1) I ■
t iijs 3o fctiJ i- i.n 'ir'i iff o*l :
n or ft .Jnl udi I) fiwoi H
•Mi vijuiK'j ; ’•! ft '■
.ufr lil liit ' K Wji J'i'/
rO! I*o—i .UO'!" 1
, ; ->d) w on raid 3'je I Wiiw ’ 'lO
OToJ "ji . >( 1> **! > J>-'> ' -
t 7'X"I i.u<-i - )*<{ nil inn! dMi*/i
jj til- -J-.UA (.--uA
, ; jj t -.j : • • * j> >
.
Ktvf O’j jiiw mid icd dool o».)
,1)1 id lil, ditv( J.iHilO oj mid rur id lull
dliihi mid ar/ol oil midli-diu^
.oi t 9iodvf • JO—-diraoM


00333158 9
3 1508


■
■
... I *
f ■ ' , ' 3
*• '
I ■■ y : ft*
■
; >- J ■ t
n
T ■'
f
f-J
-
/ i ,: * ■ j*
■ *
' " ■ •■ :••■ • I
• *w
’ . - * H ..; •■';»•, ...
.
! • ‘
" 3
’ 'H i
k
