

DARWIN’S THEORY
GENESIS OF THE MOON
PARTICULARS AND RESULTS OF A SHORT
INVESTIGATION THEREOF
JAMES NOLAN
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY




DARWIN’S THEORY
OF THE
GENESIS OF THE MOON
PARTICULARS AND RESULTS OF A SHORT
INVESTIGATION THEREOF
JAMES NOLAN
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
fL Is4*3




m 3355/ Pf 3 *33
IX-<R SL
DAEWIN’S THEOEY OF THE GENESIS
OF THE MOON.
That the frictional tides raised in the earth by the moon are
constantly resisting terrestrial rotation, and the necessary reaction
on our satellite increasing that body’s orbital momentum, is a
fact which has been recognized in recent years. Hence, unless
there be some unknown agency counteracting these effects, the
earth’s rotation must be actually slackening, and the moon’s
distance from its primary constantly increasing ; so that in time
to come the moon’s distance should be greater and the earth’s
rotation slower than now; while, on the other hand, in past ages
the moon’s distance shoiild have been less, and the earth’s
rotation more rapid than at present. On this reasoning it has
been thought interesting to follow back the course of the moon
and find the rotation period of the earth for different distances of
the moon in the retrospect. This has been done by Professor
G. H. Darwin, who finds that the earth’s rotation period would
agree with the moon’s orbital period when the satellite was very
close to the present surface of the earth, and he has fixed the
period of revolution at that epoch at from two to four hours.
He further remarks that then the two bodies would move as if
they were but parts of a rigid body, or that the whole system
would revolve in a period of from two to four hours.
This seeming agreement between the moon’s orbital and the
earth’s axial revolutions, when followed back to a time when the
two bodies might have been almost in contact with each other,
has been insisted on by Professor Darwin, when he says,
“ Hence, there seems a considerable probability that the two
bodies once formed part of a single one, which broke up in
consequence of some kind of instability.” This view has been
supported in several papers by the same writer, and which were
read before the Royal Society of England six or seven years
ago.
Two or three years after the publication of the above papers,
Professor Robert S. Ball came forward as a supporter of the
same theory, when he gave a lecture entitled “ A Glimpse
through the Corridors of Time,” which found its way into many
publications. Also, I notice that in September of last year


Professor C. A. Young, in his address as retiring President of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
referred favourably to that theory ; and that the author himself,
writing only a few months ago (see Nature, April 2, 1885, p.
506), had not changed his mind on the subject.
It would, however, appear that the above-named astronomers
who have expressed themselves with reference to the theory
have not subjected it to a very searching inquiry, for we find
Professor Ball (writing in Nature, vol. xxvii., p. 202) says:—
“ Indeed, seeing that the earth-moon history is one which he has
made peculiarly his own, and illuminated by discoveries which I
believe to be the most important contributions made to physical
astronomy in modem times, it would seem presumption in me to
venture to differ from him.” Again, Professor Young ( Nature,
vol. xxx., p. 503) says ; —“ Without necessarily admitting all
the numerical results as to her age and her past and future history,
one may certainly say that he has given a most plausible and
satisfactory explanation of the manner in which the present state
of things might have come about through the operation of causes
known and recognized—has opened a new field of research, and
shown the way to new dominions.”
Now, I think it can be clearly shown that the author of the
above theory has completely overlooked some great difficulties in
the way, which, when taken into consideration, put quite a
different aspect on the case. The agencies by which the changes
in the system were supposed to have been mainly worked were
the rapid rotation of the first body of the system —the earth—
and the tides raised in it by the second body of the system —the
moon—when it had separated. All may seem to go well so long
as we view only the effects on the earth itself, but when we come
to reverse the case, or consider the effects of similar agencies or
forces on the second body or moon, the difficulty is obvious.
The case of rotation will be first dealt with. In one of the
papers referred to (Proc. Roy. Soc., No. 200, 1879) it is said :
“ The coincidence is noted in the paper that the shortest period
of revolution of a fluid mass of the same mean density as the
earth, which is consistent with an ellipsoidal form of equilibrium,
is 2 hours and 24 minutes; and that if the moon were to revolve
about the earth with this periodic time, the surfaces of the two
bodies would be almost in contact with one another.” At this
epoch the whole system was supposed to revolve in the same
time, or the earth and moon always kept the same faces towards
each other, and therefore the moon revolved on its own axis in
the same time as the earth did—namely, 2 hours and 24 minutes.
Here the earth was supposed to rotate at its shortest period, and
the moon—a body of smaller density—to rotate in a period as
short, which is an impossibility. There are only two conditions
(so long as the size is not small enough to allow cohesion to
become a sensible factor) which can alter the minimum period of


rotation of a fluid body—first, the mean density of the body • and,
secondly, the distribution of the density, or the rate of increase
towards the centre. Either to increase the mean density or to
increase the proportion of density towards the centre gives the
body a shorter minimum period of rotation. As regards both of
these conditions the moon must have had the disadvantage. If
newly separated from the earth, her density must have been
nearly homogeneous ; while the earth, which was supposed to
have acquired the rapid rotation which caused the moon to separate,
from the process of contraction, could only acquire that condition
by the contraction of a denser nucleus, in the way that Laplace
supposed his mass to acquire, from a slow motion, such an increase
at the surface as to quite counteract the centripetal force there
Therefore the moon must have had a smaller proportionate
increase of density towards her centre, as well as a smaller mean
density, than the earth ; and yet she has been supposed to rotate
in a period as short as the minimum period of rotation of the
latter !
But the greatest difficulty—the effects of the tides raised in the
moon by the earth—has yet to be considered. To commence with the
more simple and decisive case (which gives the combined effects of
rotation and the tidal force), let the moon be supposed to revolve
in a circular orbit and at a distance of 7,120 miles from the earth’s
centre ; and, first, let the moon be supposed so solid as not to
yield to the tidal force, but to retain the spherical form. Now,
taking the earth’s gravity at her surface, and at radius 3,960
miles, as the unit of force, the earth’s attraction at the centre of
the moon would be 0-3093 (according to the well-known rule that
the earth’s gravity outside her surface varies inversely as the
square of the distance from her centre), and as the centrifugal
force would just balance gravity there, it must also be 0-3093 at
the same place. Taking the lunar radius at 1,080 miles, the
nearest point of the moon (which body is supposed always to keep
the same face turned towards the earth) will be distant only 6,040
miles from the earth’s centre ; consequently the earth’s attraction
there will be 0-4298. Again, the centrifugal force, which
balanced attraction at the centre of the moon, will decrease
towards the earth, and only amount to 0 - 2618 at the nearest point
of the moon, for it will be zero at the point round which the earth
and moon are revolving, and will increase directly as the distance
from this point. If, now, the centrifugal force— i.e., 0-2618 —be
subtracted from the earth’s force of attraction, there will be a
balance, or difference, of 0-1680, which will be a resultant force
tending to carry a body away in the direction of the earth. But
there will be another force—-the moon’s own attraction—tending
in the opposite direction from this point; and which direction an
object would take if left at rest, relatively to this part of the
moon’s surface, would depend on the relative magnitude of the
forces. If the moon’s mass be 80 times less than the earth’s, and


her diameter 3'6 66 times less than the earth’s, then the moon’s
own attraction at her surface would be OT6BO, or just equal to the
resultant force impelling towards the earth. If, therefore, the
moon be revolving about the earth at the distance named, and
always keeping the same face to the earth, a loose object at one
point of the moon would apparently have no weight. If the moon
came airy nearer the earth —other things being equal—the loose
object would fall towards the earth, and revolve about her in an
independent orbit of smaller mean distance. If the moon be
shifted the other way, or away from the earth, the moon’s attrac-
tion would predominate, and an object would have sensible weight
on all parts of that body.
But while it might be convenient, for the sake of illustration, to
suppose the material of which the moon is composed to be of
such strength as to withstand the tidal forces of the earth, it is
quite evident that in reality such cannot be the case. Under the
supposed condition all, or nearly all, the weight or pressure along
one diameter would be taken off the moon, while another
diameter would press down with the weight of a thousand miles
of matter. Even under the small attraction of the moon at her
surface, and the diminishing force towards the centre, any
ordinary solid known on the earth would yield somewhat like
a fluid, and rise where the pressure is least.
If, next, the moon be removed to a distance of 8,000 miles from
the earth’s centre, it even then could have no figure of equilibrium.
First, let us take an approximate method which should be under-
stood by those having only a moderate knowledge of the subject.
According to Newton (see “ Newcomb’s Astronomy,” p. 308)
the moon’s longest semi-axis, at her present distance, would be
thirty-one yards longer than her intermediate semi-axis, which
lies in the lunar equator, but points at right angles to the earth,
supposing the moon to be as dense as the earth. But since the
density of the moon is now known to be about five-eighths that
of the earth, the height of the lunar tide must be increased eight-
fifths times, which would give 49’6 yards instead of 31. This
would be equal to a proportionate difference of one in 38,560, or
the longer axis would be equal to the shorter one with one added
to it in every 38,560 units of its length. According to the well-
known rule—that the tidal force increases inversely as the cube
of the distance of the tide-producing body—when brought to a
distance of 8,000 miles, or thii’ty times nearer the centre of the
earth than the moon’s present distance, the tidal force would
have increased to 27,000 times its original value. Now, the
proportionate difference, instead of being one in 38,560, must
be 27,000 in the same number, and 38,560 is to 38.560 plus
27,000 as unity to 1-700. Consequently, if the shorter equa-
torial axis of the moon be 1, the longest one must be 1-700.
Now, at the centre of the moon the earth’s attractive force
would be 0-2450, and the centrifugal force would of course be


the same ; but if from this point the earth be approached,
terrestrial gravity would increase, while the centrifugal force
would diminish, until at 6,530 miles from the earth’s
centre gravity would be 0'3677, and centrifugal force 0-1994,
leaving a difference of 0ff683, which is just greater than the
moon’s gravity at her own surface. Hence the moon cannot be
elongated towards the earth to beyond this distance. Strictly
speaking, she could not extend so far earthward—first, because
gravity at her own surface would decrease as she changed form
from the spherical figure ; and, secondly, because nearly all the
weight or pressure along one axis would be lost if the moon
extended to the limits of her attraction, or to where it is over-
balanced by the other forces. But as it will make the case
simpler to suppose the moon to extend thus far, and as it can be
afforded to give the advantage to the opposite side, or argument
against the reasoning here given, if there be any such, then the
distance 6,530 miles will be admitted. Then the moon’s longer
semi-axis would be 8,000 minus 6,630, or 1,470 miles. To pre-
serve the proportion before mentioned the shorter equatorial
semi-axis must be 865 miles. Now, it can be shown that a body
of such dimensions would be decidedly less in volume than our
satellite actually is. The volume of the ellipsoid or elongated
moon is (at least approximately) in proportion to the continued
product of the three semi-axes—the longest and the shortest
equatorial ones and the polar axis. To get the right volume for
the moon the continued product of the three semi-axes must
equal the cube of the moon’s semi-diameter. If this semi-
diameter—viz., 1,080 miles—be made the unit of measure, then the
other two semi-axes which have been determined will become
1-361 and 0 - 801 respectively. The product of these is 1-090.
The third semi-axis, to give the right volume, must be such a
number that when multiplied by the above product the result
will be unity, for the cube of the moon’s radius, with the radius
as the unit of measure, will be 1. The required number is 0.917,
and this must represent the polar semi-axis. That shows that
to get the right volume for the moon, the polar semi-axis must
be greater than the shortest equatorial one. But it is easy to
see that the polar semi-axis cannot be greater, but must be less
than either of the equatorial ones. Taking Newton’s figures, and
allowing for the increase as in the other case, the third semi-axis
should be about 0-650. This multiplied into the first product
gives 0-708 instead of 1. This means that the moon’s volume
should not exceed 0-708—its present value—while her attractive
force should not be lessened, which is equal to saying that the
moon must be denser than she really is before she can have any
figure of equilibrium at the distance of 8,000 miles from the
earth’s centre. Perhaps it will seem that her present density
should increase as the proportion ; but, remembering the


advantages allowed the moon before, the density must be still
further increased. I do not know that the above estimates of
Newton are quite correct; but they cannot be so far wrong as to
alter the general result arrived at by this method, which is
admittedly only an approximate one, and for a moon of homo-
geneous density.
But if there is an increase of density towards the centre of the
moon, the tides would have less effect on her ; still it can be shown
that with any distribution of the density, so long as the mean density
remains the same, the moon could not hold together by virtue of
its own attractive force when as near the earth as last supposed.
To take an extreme case, let all the mass be practically supposed
collected in the centre of the moon, or, to understand the position
better, let 999 parts of the moon’s mass be supposed collected
within a solid globe of about two miles diameter at the centre of
the moon, and let the remaining one-thousandth part of the
moon’s mass be contained in a fluid, which, when enveloping the
solid, brings the volume up to that of the moon. This exceed-
ingly light fluid should be supposed to be involatile and incom-
pressible. For the present the fluid itself will be regarded as of
homogeneous density. When, now, a tide is raised on the moon,
her own attraction or centripetal force at her raised surface will
decrease as the square of the distance of that surface from the
centre, where the mass is located. If, therefore, the lunar radius
be increased to 1,214 miles in the direction of the earth, lunar
gravity would fall from OT6BO to 0-1330 ; and at the same place
terrestrial gravity would be 0-3405, with centrifugal force 0-2073,
thus leaving a difference of 0-1332, which just exceeds lunar
attraction there, so that this is the limit of the moon’s extension
in this direction. Now, for the moon to have its greatest possible
volume, the longest semi-axis should reach to that distance.
Next, let it be sought to find the length of the polar or shortest
semi-axis. It is evident that the weight or pressure at the base
of a vertical cylindrical column taken at any part of the moon
must be equal, provided the diameters of the columns be the
same when weight is meant. First, suppose the two columns,
the one pointing towards the earth and the centre of the moon,
and the one pointing towards the centre of the moon and in the
line of her axis of rotation, to be of the same height— i.e., 1,214
miles from the moon’s centre; then the pressure at the base
would be exactly the same for each, provided no other force but
the moon’s own attraction acted on them. But there would be
two other forces acting on them. The differential force arising
from the earth’s unequal attraction on different parts would take
something off the weight of the one pointing earthwards, and
the converging attraction of the earth on the polar column would
press it down and therefore increase its weight. To shorten the
case, the depressing effects will be neglected, and again the
advantage allowed to the moon. The question now is to determine


the value of the differential force on the column affected by it.
Here the differential force might be understood to mean the
combined effects of rotation and tidal force. Now, the force
named acts in opposition to the moon’s gravity all along the
column in question : therefore, the first might be called a negative
and the second a positive force. The magnitude of each is the
same at the apex of the column, so that if all the matter of the
column be collected there, it will be attracted with equal intensity
by each opposite force. When restored to its proper length, the
matter as a whole would be attracted less by the negative force
than when as above supposed. For instance, if the negative
force diminish directly as the distance of the centre of the moon
—that is, if at half the distance from the centre the force be
half, and at a quarter the distance, a quarter, &c., of what it is at
the apex, then the average attraction would be just half what it
would be if all the matter were collected at the apex. In the
case in question the mean attraction would be a little less than
half; or, in short, it would be 0'4706 what it would be if the
whole mass were at the end of greatest negative attraction. The
exact rule for determining this is more complex than any of the
rules here explained ; and as there is another method by which
an approximation can be got with perhaps less calculation, and
which a little consideration will show to be quite near enough to
the truth for the present purpose, this more easily understood
way only will be explained. The differential or negative force
along this column is simply the difference between the earth’s
attraction and the centrifugal force arising from the moon’s
orbital motion. As now the question is to get the average
negative force, the average of the difference between terrestrial
gravity and the counteracting centrifugal force will be the answer.
For a first approximation, let the differences at the two extreme
ends, and in the middle, be added together and the sum divided
by 3 (the number of terms), then we have 1 + + = '0646,
which is for the mean negative attraction on the column. But
to express this mean in terms of the attraction at the apex, as
before, it must be divided by T 332, when the quotient will be
*4853, which is not very far different to the value detei-mined by
the first method. If, again, the negative force at the two points
midway between these first selected be taken into the calculation,
the result will be *477, which is a closer approximation to the
truth. The greater the number of points concerned, the better
the average, so long as the points are equally distant one from
the other, and the three first points not shifted from their places.
Hence, if the process be only cut fine enough, any degree of
accuracy may be attained.
Negative attraction might be called negative weight, and
positive attraction positive weight. Now, the standard of
measure for each force is the weight of the whole mass of the


column, weighed at the apex or greatest distance from the
moon’s centre. When, therefore, we find a negative weight of
0-4706 added to one column, we must add a negative weight
of the same magnitude to the second column, to preserve the
equality of weight which must have existed before. But if a
positive weight of the same magnitude be subtracted, the same
end will be served. If the positive force did not increase
rapidly towards the base, but was the same all the way, then the
outer 0-4706 of the column, would gravitate towards the moon
with the right force j but as the weight of the matter increases
downwards, a shorter length would give the right weight. The
pressure or weight of the overlying section increases downwards
like the square of the speed of a falling body, so that at one-
third the distance it would be and at half 1. For the
falling body the unit of speed should be parabolic velocity at the
summit of the column. Any pressure or weight being given, its
distance from the centre of the moon can be found by adding-
unity to it and dividing the longer semi-axis by the sum.
Hence, 1 +O-4706 = 1-4706, and 1,214 miles divided by that
gives a quotient of 826 miles. If, therefore, the whole section
which lies above or outside this distance be removed from the
column, the right weight will have been taken off, and the
pressure at the base must be the same as where the negative
force acted on the column of greater length. From this reason-
ing it will become evident that when the longer semi-axis
extends to 1,214 miles, the polar one cannot be more than 826-
miles, otherwise the pressure at the base would be too great on
one side. If these columns, while occupying their respective
places, be supposed enclosed within pipes which are connected at
the base, so that the liquid can flow from the one to the other, it
will become clear that things cannot be in equilibrium if there be
any difference of pressure at the base.
It might be here added that in the case of a body with all its
mass supposed collected at the centre, and the tide raised to its
highest limit on one axis, and the length of the longest semi-
axis insensibly small in relation to the distance of the tide-
producing body, the polar or shortest axis will be two-thirds of
the longest one. Or if this kind of body be merely rotating on
its own axis in its shortest possible period, there will be the
same relation between the longest and the shortest axis. Then
the negative force will be, on the average, half what it is at the
surface or place of maximum.
But having determined two semi-axes of the moon, and
expressing them in terms of the moon’s real radius, the longest
will be F 1241, and the shortest 0-7648. The product of these is
0-8597. If the intermediate semi-axis multiplied into this gives
unity, the solid nucleus will have just the volume of surrounding
medium that it can control. But in this case it can be seen that
any intermediate semi-axis cannot give 1, for the product of


the other two, to give this number, must be multiplied by 1 *1632 y
which is greater than either of the other factors; and it is impos-
sible for the equatorial axis, which points at right angles to the
earth, to be longer than the one pointing towards her. This
proves that the greatest volume that the moon’s attractive force
could control would be less than her actual volume is ; or, in
other words, that the mean density must be greater before she
could have any figure of equilibrium at the distance of 8,000
miles from the earth’s centre. So far the density of the envelop-
ing fluid has been supposed homogeneous, but the same result
would follow with any distribution of the density or decrease
towards the surface. For instance, if some of the supposed
existing fluid be removed, the longer serai-axis of the moon
would become shorter by a certain amount, when there must be
some of the weight taken off that axis, and to restore the balance
an equal weight must be subtracted from the polar axis. Flow,
if the vacated space be refilled at each place with a new fluid
whose density is some fraction of the density of the first, the
balance will be restored, for when the light fluid takes the place
of the heavier one, the weight is reduced to the same fraction at
each end. Of course the new fluid is to be the same, at least in
density, at either axis. Again, when the overlying stratum of
the first fluid was supposed removed, the surface of the moon was.
a fluid in statical equilibrium ; and whenever there is a fluid in
this condition, and a lighter one liberated on the surface thereof,
the tendency of the light fluid is to flow out in every direction
with equal force, until, not necessarily the depth, but the pres-
sure at the base, for the surface fluid becomes everywhere the
same. Hence, as the weight was the same at both axes for the
layer removed, the pressure at the base must have been equal ;
and as the weight of the new medium at each axis was equal, the
pressure at the base must also be equal. If there be any
difference the fluid will flow to the side of least pressure, thus
equalizing things.
According to Darwin’s theory, the moon was, in past time,
revolving about the earth very close to her present surface, and
the periodic time of our satellite, when she commenced to recede
from the earth by tidal friction, is fixed at from 2to 4 hours; for
then, it is said, if the earth rotated in a similar period, and the
lunar tides slackened terrestrial rotation to its present value,
the inaction on the moon would have driven that body to her
present distance, w T hen allowance is made for the probable amount
of the sun’s interference. But even the longest of these periods
would bring the moon just within the distance at which it has
been shown she could not withstand the earth’s tidal force, for
the distance—B,ooo miles—would correspond with a period of
4 hours and 1 minute very nearly.
However, it can only be proved that the moon did not exist so
near the earth, either as a single body, or a divided one with any


of the fragments hearing an appreciable proportion to the moon’s
present size. Consequently, if the moon had separated from its
primary, it must have been in pieces small enough for cohesion to
become an important factor in overbalancing the differential force
encountered. This amounts to saying that the moon must have
been a ring of fragments revolving in the plane of the earth’s
equator. But it has been supposed that the moon receded from
its initial distance by the frictional tides raised by itself in the
earth. This might be so if the moon existed bodily, but as an
equatorial ring she could raise no frictional tides —at least no
sensible ones—in the earth, but only a slight equatorial protuber-
ance of similar elevation at all points of the equator; so that
there would be no rise and fall, or change of form, in the earth.
But if there would be no tidal friction in the earth itself, there
would be a kind of friction in the ring ; for there must be endless
oollisions among the parts. Those of smallest orbit will go round
quickest; therefore they will sometimes come in contact with the
surface of another, when the quickly-moving one will impart
some of its energy of motion to the other, and this will increase
the period of the outer and reduce the period of the inner one, or
further separate them. Such action would cause the ring to
expand both ways in its own plane ; but if the bombardment be
kept up at the surface of the earth, the inward expansion would
be repelled. If the expansion outwards were to continue until
the ring receded to a distance where the moon’s own gravity
oould counteract the effects of the differential force, and then the
fragments to aggregate and form a single body, and this to recede
to the moon’s distance by tidal friction, there would be the same
relation between the momentum of the moon and that of the
remainder of the system as if the moon receded the whole way by
tidal friction. It appears that all the ring matter could not form
into a single body ; but if, by any interaction of the system, the
residue again came to form part of the earth, the latter should
have the same rotation as if the moon had receded the whole way
by tidal friction, oi’, in fact, by any other mechanical process
involving similar frictional interaction. I do not say that the
process indicated is possible, but rather that it seems the nearest
approach to a way by which advantage can be taken of the fact
that the proportion of the masses of the earth and moon is just
about what it should be if the moon had been revolving near the
present surface of the earth and had receded therefrom at the
expense of the earth’s rotation, which in the beginning kept pace
with the moon’s orbital motion.
But any theory which essays to trace the moon back to a time
when she was close to the earth’s surface seems beset with many
difficulties. A very natural objection, and one of considerable
force, is the fact that apparently nowhere else in the solar system,
and certainly not in the majority of cases, can a secondary body
be traced to near the present surface of its primary, as the moon


might be. Darwin has himself sought, but sought in vain, for
another such case. Is it not very illogical to suppose that the
moon originated in a way which cannot have been the way of
origin for the other planets and satellites 1 I think it would need
much stronger evidence than any that has come forward to justify
such a belief. Hence the condition of the system which has
suggested the special process is probably no more than an acci-
dental agreement. Such coincidences must sometimes be met;
as, for instance, the very nearly equal rotation periods of Venus,
the Earth, and Mars. Even admitting that there is some law
according to which the rotations should be direct, there hardly
can be any by which their periods should be so nearly equal. But
all this notwithstanding, it must be admitted that tidal friction
has produced an appreciable effect in the direction of retarding
the earth’s rotation and increasing the moon’s distance. I think,
however, that the only peculiarity of the earth-moon system worth
anything in the way of indicating that such condition was brought
about by tidal friction is the fact, that the orbital and axial
revolutions of the moon are identical in period.
But to return to the general consequences of the differential
force at close quarters. There is a law, according to which two
heavenly bodies cannot revolve about their centre of gravity
with their surfaces nearly in contact, unless one be smaller than
the other by a certain amount, and, further, that the small one be
denser than its companion by a certain value. This rule holds
while the major body does not depart greatly from the spherical
form. If a body were to separate into two, it is clear that the
small planet given off must be less dense than the parent body
from whose surface matter it has been composed. Hence it would
be impossible for a globe, or even a spheroid of moderate
ellipticity, to separate into two bodies of such dimensions as to
allow the differential force affecting either to overbalance the
combined effects of the centripetal force and cohesion of the
same body.
Further, it would seem that these general objections could be
extended to Laplace’s nebular hypothesis, in the way that it has
generally been received. For instance, the rings of vapour which
surrounded his planets, to escape destruction by reason of the
differential force, could hardly be of less density than the planet
itself. If the planet be flattened out to a disc-like body, a ring
of smaller density than the central body might revolve near the
equatorial surface. But to further pursue this point would be
going beyond the scope of the present investigation.
Coming again to Darwin’s papers, it seems that he sees no
difficulty in bringing the moon to any distance from the earth
which is not less than the sum of the radii of the earth and
moon, for, he says, “ Since the moon’s diameter is about 2,200
miles, and the earth’s about 8,000, therefore the moon’s distance
cannot be less than 5,100 miles ; and in fig. 2, which is intended


to apply to the earth and moon, and is drawn to scale, the base
of the strip is only shaded, so as not to render the figure confused.”
This statement is made in explaining some diagrams intended to
show the different configurations of the earth-moon system in
the past, or when the moon was supposed to have been nearer
and nearer the earth, until at a time she might have been in
contact with the earth’s surface. Fuller particulars will be found
in the “Proceedings of the Royal Society,” No. 197, 1879.
Now, theoretically, it might be interesting to follow the moon
back that far, as it might be done by supposing that body to
be solid enough to bear the enormous stress to which it would
be subjected ; but, in the instance above referred to, the question
was regarded as a kind of practical one, and instead of any
mention being made of supposing the moon tide-proof, it has
been remarked that if the earth and moon were ever molten
masses, it was highly probable that they once formed parts of
the same body. From what has just been said, it appears that
no allowance at all has been made for lunar tides. But it can
be seen, perhaps without even a calculation, that enormous tides
would be raised in the moon at more than double the distance of
5,100 miles.
Next, as regards separation, rapid rotation would never cause
a quantity of the matter of a body to become piled up at one
particular place, and form into a separate single body there of any
appreciable size. Even if the moon were set revolving about the
earth so that the whole system revolves in the same time, and the
two bodies have their surfaces in contact, things would not be in
equilibrium. The rapid orbital motion of the moon would not
save it from destruction, for the part next the earth would move
as much too slowly as the outer portion would too quickly for the
central or mean motion ; the whole mass—the combined masses
of the two bodies—would not be in equilibrium until it levelled
itself, that is, until it formed an ellipsoid, without any elevations
here or there. Possibly the outside of the ellipsoid might not be
continuous, but perhaps composed of a number of fragments
moving round the central portion ; but still the distribution of
matter would be arranged systematically about the centre of
gravity of the whole mass. To go more particularly into this
question it would only resolve itself into some of those before
treated of.
According to the diagrams and papers to which I have referred,
if the moon were revolving about the earth at some distance and
in such way that the two bodies always kept exactly the same
faces towards each other, the system would be in instable equi-
librium ; and if the moon happen to get ahead of the earth, her
ox’bital motion will be resisted, when she will constantly approach
the earth until she touches the surface of and falls into that body.
But, in reality, the falling of the moon would be a more eventful
process than a simple approach until the surfaces of the two


bodies come in contact. If the moon commence her approach
outside the critical or breaking distance, she would become more
and more elongated in the direction of the earth, until some of
her elevated surface next the earth could no longer hold on, but
must become detached and partially approach the earth, and
revolve in a new orbit of smaller mean distance. As the moon
continued to approach it would lose more of its surface matter,
in the shape of small fragments, which would from time to time
come into collision with one another, as well as with the main
body; this would have the effect of expanding the ring in the
plane of the moon’s orbit, in the way before explained. At length
the ring would reach into the surface of the earth, so that the
pieces would begin to fall into that body. If the moon be very
dense towards the centre, then, as it lost surface matter, it would
become a body of greater mean density, and, if the density be
great enough, it could reach the surface of the earth before being
reduced to such a small fraction of its original size. Then, or, in
fact, in any case until the moon finally breaks up, the approaching
residue will drive all the fragments before it in its march towards
the central body, so that there can be none left outside the main
body of the ring. If the density of the central part of the moon
be much less than three times the earth’s mean density, then the
moon would be all reduced to fragments before coming very near
the earth’s surface. Even if the density of the moon be homo-
geneous, she would divide into fragments gradually, for the reason
that the larger body would be slightly more affected by the tidal
force than the smaller one, when the radius of the affected body
bears a sensible proportion to the distance of the disturbing body.
In such a case the moon would define the outward boundary of
the ring so long as she was considerably larger than the other
pieces; but the time would come when she would be all reduced
to small pieces, after which the expansion of the ring might be
outward as well as inward. The breaking up of the satellite
would be a very slow process indeed, for, as it approached the
central body, it would be ever losing in mass, therefore the
frictional tides raised by it in the primary would be growing
smaller and smaller, until finally they would become insensible,
so that, practically speaking, the last of the ring would be
unaffected by tidal friction.
Altogether, I think that the importance of the differential
force arising when one heavenly body comes near another has not
been so widely recognized as it might have been. There is one
system of comets whose separation from the parent body I think
there is good grounds for believing is due to the tidal force of
the sun. I allude to the great comet of 1882, and its orbital
predecessors. I explained fully my reasons for this belief in
articles which appeared in the Victorian Review for December,
1882, and February, 1884, respectively.
That the objections to Darwin’s theory should have been so


long overlooked will not seem so strange as it otherwise might,
when we bear in mind how slow the objections were in coming
which caused the rejection of several theories in modern times.
Of the many will be mentioned the old notions of the constitution
of Saturn’s rings ; of comets ; and the hypothesis that possibly the
moon had great cavities throughout her interior, into which the
water and air of ancient time had long since receded.
In conclusion, I think the following summing up with respect
to Darwin’s theory will not be found unsupportable :
(1) That the moon could not have existed bodily so near the
earth as the greatest initial distance fixed.
(2) That, in any form possible there, she could not have
receded by the agency assigned—tidal friction.
(3) That, if a modification be made by allowing her to have
separated at a greater radius than that corresponding to a period
between two and four hours, the moon would be no longer traceable
to the earth’s present surface, on which condition the theory has
been founded.
George Eobertson and Co., Printers, Melbourne.




