





Date Book and Record
CHIEF EVENTS
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY
From the earliest times to the present.
Compiled by JOHN S. ANDERSON,
(Teacher under the Department of Public Instruction,
New South Wales.)
GEORGE ROBERTSON & GO.
Sydney - 351 & 363 George Street.
Melbourne 384 & 390 Little Collins Street.
Adelaide - Freeman Street.
Brisbane - 37 Queen Street.
London - 17 Warwick Sq., Paternoster Row, E.C.


PREFACE.
In placing this little work before the public, the compiler
feels satisfied that no apology is needed for its appear-
ance, as, by its publication, a long-felt want is being
removed. As the dates and events have, in every in-
stance, been carefully verified and revised, their accuracy
may be unhesitatingly relied upon ; so that, although
this little work was originally intended for the use of
teachers and students, it may also be looked upon as a
standard work of reference by all readers and seekers
after knowledge. In conclusion, the compiler desires to
confess his indebtedness to the undermentioned authors
and others, whose works he has carefully consulted and
compared : —Rev. Dr. Lang, Messrs Blair, Allen, Barton,
Sutherland, Rusden, Coghlan, Fenton, Smith, Gordon
and Gotch, &c.
Printed for Geo. Robertson & Co. by F. Cunninghame & Co., Sydney.


DATE BOOK AND RECORD
CHIEF EYE NTS
-A.TJSTIR-A.XiX.A-lISr HISTORY.
Early Part of the Sixteenth Century.—Two old
Portuguese manuscript maps, dated 1531 and 1542, the
latter bearing the name of Guillaume le Testu, have been
brought to light, showing the outline of an extensive tract
of land marked south of the East Indies. As Australia
occupies approximately the position of this land, it is now
generally believed that the Portuguese were its original
discoverers.
1598. A book is published this year, in which mention is
made of the existence of a Southern Continent as fol-
lows : —“The Australis Terra, beginning at two or
three degrees from the equator, is the most southern
of all lands, and is separated from New Guinea by a
narrow strait.”
1598. Houtman discovers the Abrolhos, a group of rocky
islets off the western coast of Australia.
1605-6. An expedition, in the Dutch ship 11 Duyfhen ” (or
“ Dove ”), sails from the Dutch colony at Java to ex-
plore the coast of New Guinea. In returning, the
vessel coasts along the eastern side of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, but turns back at Cape Keer-Weer (or
Turnagain) on account of running short of provisions ;
and also, owing to several of the crew having been
attacked and killed by the natives on landing for the
purpose of obtaining water. (These Dutch seamen,
as far as can now be ascertained, were the first Euro-
peans who set foot in Australia.)


1605. An expedition, under the command of Pedro Fer-
nandez de Quiros, a Spaniard, with Luis Vaez de
Torres as second in command, sails from the port of
Callao, South America, in search of the Southern
Continent.
1606. De Quiros discovers land, and names it “Terra
Australis del Espiritu Santo” (Southern Land of the
Holy Spirit), being under the impression that he had
found the Southern Continent; but Torres, sailing
along its coasts, finds it to be an island (now known
to be one of the New Hebrides group).
1606. Torres, having separated from De Quiros, sails
through the “Straits” to whieh his name has now
been given, without being aware that he is so close to
the Southern Continent.
1616. Dirk Hatichs (incorrectly named Hartog), a Dutch
captain, in command of the “ Eendracht,” comes in
sight of the western coast of Australia, and lands on
the island in Shark Bay, which now bears his name.
1618. Captain Zaachen discovers and examines a con-
siderable portion of the northern coast, which he
names “Arnhem Land.”
1619. Captain John Van Edels examines the western
coast of Australia.
1622. A Dutch vessel, the “Leeuwin” (or “Lioness”),
sails along the southern coast, from which circum-
stance its name has been given to the south-west cape
of Australia.
1623. Jan Carstens, in command of the yachts “ Pera”
and “ Arnhem,” sails along the northern shores of
Australia, and coasts down the eastern side of the
Gulf of Carpentaria.
1627. Peter Nuyts, a Dutchman, in command of the
“ Guide Zeepaard ” (or “ Good Shepherd ”), examines
the coast of the Great Australian Bight.
1628. General Peter Carpenter enters and explores the
Gulf of Carpentaria, which has been named after him.
1628. The north-west coast of Australia is surveyed by
one of the Dutch East India Company’s vessels, and
named “ De Witt’s Land.”
1628. The Dutch organise an expedition for the purpose
of colonising the newly-discovered Southern Con-
tinent, which they had named New Holland. Cap-


tain Francis Pelsart, of the “ Batavia,” is placed in
command, and 10 vessels are equipped for the expedi-
tion, which sails from Texel on October 28.
1629. On the voyage —after rounding the (’ape of Good
Hope —Pelsart is separated from the fleet in a storm ;
and, when near the Australian coast, his ship, the
“ Batavia,” is wrecked on the Houtman’s Abrolhos.
(This was the first and last attempt on the part of the
Hutch to colonise Australia.)
1636. Pieter Pietersen sails along a portion of the nor-
thern coast.
1642. Van Diemen’s Land (now known as Tasmania) and
New Zealand are discovered by Abel Jansz Tasman,
who had been sent on a voyage of discovery by
General Antony Van Diemen, Governor of the Dutch
possessions in the East Indies.
1644. Tasman explores the northern and western coasts
of Australia.
1688. William Dampier, a young Englishman, while
leading a very adventurous life among the buccaneers,
or sea rovers, with whom he had sailed on a voyage
round the world in quest of plunder, gains the com-
mand of a vessel named the “ Cygnet,’’ in which he
makes a cruise to the north-western coast of Austra-
lia, and lands at a group of islands, which has been
named from this circumstance, “ Buccaneers’ Archi-
pelago. ”
1697. William de Vlaming, a Dutch captain, in command
of the “ Gielvink,” while cruising off the western
coast of Australia in search of the remains of a man-
of-war, the “ Ridderschap,” supposed to have been
wrecked on those shores, discovers the mouth of the
Swan River.
1699. Dampier, having been placed in command of the
“Roebuck,” a small ship provided by the English
Government, sails into Shark Bay, and explores the
north-west coast of Australia to Roebuck Bay. (In
Dampier’s description of his voyage, he states that
the natives he met with were the most miserable
beings in the world, having no houses nor skin gar-
ments; and that “ setting aside their human shape,
they differ but little from brutes.” In another part,
he describes the kangaroo—which he then saw for


the first time —as “ a sort of racoon, differing from
that of the West Indies chiefly as to the legs, these
having very short forelegs, but jumping upon their
(hind) legs as the others do; and like them, being
very good meat.”
1705. Three Dutch vessels sail from Batavia, and explore
the north-west coast of Australia.
1727. Wreck of the “Zeewyk” on Gun Island, one of
the Houtman’s Abrolhos.
1768-9. Captain James Cook*—having been placed in
command of the “ Endeavour,” to conduct an expedi-
tion in the interests of the Royal Society of London,
to Tahiti, there to land astronomers for the purpose
of observing the transit of the planet Venus across
the face of the sun, successfully accomplishes his
mission. Sailing away thence on a voyage of dis-
covery, he reaches the coast of New Zealand, and
thoroughly examines the shores of the two large is-
lands, which he circumnavigates. (Among those who
accompanied Cook in this expedition were Sir Joseph
Banks, at that time president of the Royal Society;
Dr. Solander, a botanist; and Mr. Charles Green,
astronomer).
[*James Cook, born October 27, 1728, at Marton, in Yorkshire,
England ; died, February 14,1779, at Hawaii (Owhyhee), Sand-
wich Islands ; killed by the natives.]
1770. Cook sights the eastern coast of Australia at Point
Hicks, near Cape Howe, and sailing northwards,
anchors in Botany Bay, so named on account of the
splendid botanical specimens obtained there by Sir
Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander. Having examined
the country in the immediate vicinity of the bayj
Cook takes possession of it on behalf of the British
Crown, at the same time naming it “New South
Wales.” Setting sail from Botany Bay the vessel is
headed northwards; and, passing Port Jackson,
anchors in Moreton Bay. Still proceeding north-
wards along the coast, Cook narrowly escapes ship-
wreck, and is obliged to run his vessel aground at the
Endeavour River, and repair her. Thence he explores
the coast to Cape York, and sails through Torres
Straits on his way to Batavia.
1772. Marion du Fresne, a Frenchman, sails along the
west coast of Van Diemen’s Land,
4


1772. The south-western coast of Australia, in the
vicinity of Cape Leeuwin, is visited by a French
vessel under the command of Captain De St. Alouarn.
1773. Captain Furneaux, an Englishman, in command of
the “Adventure,” sails along the eastern coast of
Van Diemen’s Land.
1774. Norfolk Island is discovered by Captain Cook.
1776. Botany Bay is selected as a suitable place for a
penal settlement by the British Government, who are
obliged to find a new place of transportation for their
convicts on the United States of America declaring
their independence.
1777. Captain Cook visits Adventure Bay, on the eastern
coast of Van Diemen’s Land.
1787. The first convict fleet sails from England in May
of this year. (It consisted of 11 ships altogether.
The frigate “Sirius,” the armed tender “Supply,”
three storeships, the “ Fish burn,” “ Borrowdale,”
and “Golden Grove,” and six transports, the “ Char-
lotte,” “Alexander,” “Scarborough,” “Prince of
Wales,” “ Lady Penrhyn,” and “Friendship.” There
were on board these vessels over 700 convicts, men
and women, and a guard of 200 soldiers.) Captain
Arthur Phillip is appointed commander of the fleet,
and Governor of the new colony; Captain John
Hunter, second in command ; and Mr. David Collins,
J udge-Ad vocate.
1788. Arrival of the “ first fleet ” in Botany Bay (Janu-
ary 18, 19, and 20.)
1788. Botany Bay proving unsuitable for settlement the
fleet is removed to Port Jackson, which Governor
Phillip, immediately after his arrival, had roughly
explored and found to be far more suitable.
1788. A French expedition, consisting of the two cor-
vettes (frigates) “ Astrolabe ” and “ Boussole,” under
the command of Jean Frangois Galaup, Comte de La
Ptirouse, sails into Botany Bay as the convict fleet is
preparing to remove to Port Jackson. After an inter-
change of civilities the French are left to refresh and
refit. During their stay, a Roman Catholic priest, M.
Le Receveur, naturalist of the expedition, dies, and
is buried on shore.


1788. The new site chosen for the convict settlement is
at Sydney Cove, Port Jackson. On January 26, the
vessels having all arrived in the harbour, a landing is
effected. The land is cleared for cultivation ; but,
owing to the colonists possessing but a very meagre
knowledge of agriculture, very little is raised from
the soil.
1788. Lieutenant King, with a few convicts and soldiers,
is sent by Governor Phillip from New South Wales,
to take possession of Norfolk Island.
1788. Disease having made its appearance amongst the
convicts at Sydney, and having spread to an alarming
extent, all the works are stopped, and the colonists
being reduced to direst straits, numbers die from
want of nourishing food.
1788. Captain William Bligh, of H.M.S. “Bounty,”
touches at Adventure Bay, in Van Diemen’s Land, to
obtain wood and water.
1788. Governor Phillip, while on a boat excursion, ex-
plores Broken Bay.
1788-9. Governor Phillip makes several exploring excur-
sions in and around Port Jackson, in one of which he
discovers the Hawkesbuiy River.
1789. Captain John Henry Cox, in command of the brig
“ Mercury,” examines the southern and eastern shores
of Van Diemen’s Land, discovering and naming
Oyster Bay.
1289. The “Guardian,” a storeship, on her way to the
colony with provisions on board, is wrecked on an
iceberg.
1789. Fresh supplies for the colonists are obtained by
the “ Sirius ” from Cape Colony, but these are soon
consumed.
1789. The “ Rosehill Packet,” better known as the
“ Lump,” the first vessel built in the colony, com-
mences to ply between Sydney and Parramatta.
1789. The first harvest is gathered in New South Wales.
1789. Wreck of the “ Sirius ”at Norfolk Island.
1790. The “ Supply ”is dispatched to Batavia for provi-
sions.
1790. Arrival of the second fleet at Sydney with 1500
sick and dying convicts on board.
6


1790. Three convicts —two men and a woman—succeed
in escaping from the colony, about this time, to
Timor, in an open boat, but they are imprisoned
there and sent back to Sydney.
1790. Arrival of three storeships in Port Jackson.
1790. The first shop is opened in Sydney.
1790. The first detachment of the “New South Wales
Corps ” arrives in Sydney. (This was a special corps
organised in the British Army for service in the
colony.)
1791. Captain Hunter sails for England with dispatches
to the Home Government.
1791. Lieutenant John Macluer, of the Bombay Marine,
whilst engaged in surveying the western coast of New
Guinea, sails along the northern coast of Australia.
1791. Wreck of the “ Pandora,” commanded by Captain
Edwards, in Torres Straits, Loss of 39 lives. The
survivors, in open boats, ultimately reach Timor
safely.
1791. Captain George Vancouver visits the southern
coast of Australia, and discovers and names King
George’s Sound.
1791. Arrival of H.M.S. “Gorgon” in Port Jackson,
having on board the public seal to be affixed to all
documents.
1791. Escape of a number of convicts into the bush, who
perish miserably in a fruitless attempt to reach China
and the East Indies.
1792. The first grant of land in the colony—3o acres,
near Parramatta —is given to James Ruse.
1792. Arrival in Port Jackson of the first foreign trading
vessel, the “ Philadelphia,” from the United States.
1792. Bligh revisits Adventure Bay, in Van Diemen’s
Land, with the ships “ Providence ” and “ Assistant.”
1792. Departure of Governor Phillip, who resigns on
account of ill-health. (He afterwards received a pen-
sion from the British Government.)
1792. Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux, in command of
an expedition consisting of the vessels “ Recherche ”
and “Esphrance,” organised by the French Govern-
ment to go in search of traces of La lost
expedition, visits the coasts of Van Diemen’s Land,
and examines the country in the immediate vicinity
7


of Storm Bay. Leaving the shores of Van Diemen’s
Land he cruises along the south-west coast of Aus-
tralia.
1793. D’Entrecasteaux revisits the shores of Van Die-
men’s Land.
1792-5. Major Grose and Captain Patterson direct the
affairs of the colony in the absence of a Governor.
1793. The first church in Australia is built at Sydney by
the Rev. Richard Johnson, the colonial chaplain.
1793. Arrival of the “ Bellona ” in Sydney with immi-
grants.
1793. The American ship “ Hope,” employed in collect-
ing skins for the China market, visits Port Jackson.
1794. Arrival in the colony of Messrs. Palmer, Muir,
Skirving, Margaret, and Gerald as prisoners, five
gentlemen generally known as the “Scotch Martyrs.”
1794. Captain John Hayes, of the Bombay Marine, in
command of the ships “Duke” and “Duchess,”
visits the southern coast of Van Diemen’s Land, and
gives the name “Derwent” to a river previously
discovered by D’Entrecasteaux.
1794. Arrival of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, a Church of
England clergyman, in the colony.
1794. A mutiny breaks out at Norfolk Island.
1795. Arrival of Governor Hunter to take charge of the
colony.
1795. Arrival of free settlers in the colony to whom
grants of land are given.
1795. A small printing office is established in Sydney by
Governor Hunter, and a Creole named Howe, a late
arrival in the colony, is appointed printer.
1795. George Bass, a surgeon, and Matthew Flinders, a
midshipman, who had both arrived in the colony on
board the “ Reliance,” explore the shores of Botany
Bay, and sail up the George’s River in their little
boat the “Tom Thumb.”
1796. In another trip in the same boat, in which they
narrowly escape shipwreck, Bass and Flinders
examine Port Hacking.
1796. The first Government immigrants arrive in Sydney.
1796. The first discovery of coal in the colony is made
at the mouth of the Hunter River by a party of
fishermen.
8


1796. A fine herd of cattle—descendants of a few which
had strayed away from the settlement at Sydney a
few years before—is discovered wandering on the
Cowpastures, near Camden.
1796. George Bass, in a fruitless attempt to cross the
Blue Mountains, discovers the Grose River.
1796. The first play-house in Australia is erected at
Sydney by convicts, and opened. Its existence, how-
ever, proves very short-lived, as shortly afterwards
it is demolished by order of the Governor.
1797. The Hunter River is discovered by Lieutenant
Shortlands, while in pursuit of some runaway con-
victs who had stolen a boat.
1797. Bass, having secured a whaleboat fully equipped,
sails southward from Port Jackson; and, coasting
along the shore, discovers the Shoalhaven River,
Jervis Bay, Twofold Bay, Wilson’s Promontory,
Corner Inlet, and Western Port ; and proves that
Australia and Tasmania (Van Diemen’s Land) are not
joined, but are separated from each other by the
broad channel now known as Bass Straits.
1797. Wreck of the “Sydney Cove” on Furneaux Island.
1797. Discovery of coal near Mount Keira, in the Illa-
warra district, by Mr. Clark.
1797. Arrival at Sydney of Mr. Clark, the supercargo of
the “ Sydney Cove,” with one or two other survivors,
after an overland journey from Cape Howe, where
their boats had been cast ashore in a gale in trying to
reach Sydney.
1797. Flinders visits the wreck of “ Sydney Cove,” and,
in a small boat, examines the islands and channels to
the north of Tasmania.
1797. Captain Hamilton of the “ Sydney Cove,” and the
remainder of his crew, are rescued from Furneaux
Island by the schooner “Francis,” despatched
expressly from Sydney by Governor Hunter.
1797. The first school-building in Australia is erected in
Sydney.
1798. The first church built (Rev. R. Johnson’s) is burnt
down.
1798. A small band of missionaries arrives from Tahiti;
having been compelled to seek refuge elsewhere on
account of the ferocity of the natives.
9


1798. In the “ Norfolk,” Bass and Flinders sail com-
pletely round Tasmania; discovering the Tamar
River and Port Dalrymple.
1799. Heavy floods occur in the Hawkesbury district,
causing great destruction to property.
1799. Wilson, a convict, —accompanied by five others—
succeeds in crossing the Blue Mountains.
1799. The first public meeting in Australia is held at
Sydney ; its object being to raise funds for building a
substantial gaol.
1799. Flinders—now promoted to the rank of Lieutenant
examines the coast northwards from Sydney to
Hervey Bay,
1800. Flinders proceeds to London and publishes his
charts.
1800. Lieutenant James Grant, in command of the
“Lady Nelson”—being sent out by the British
Government to explore Bass Straits —accomplishes
his work successfully.
1800. Governor Hunter leaves for England ; and is suc-
ceeded by Captain Gidley King, who at once assumes
the Governorship of the colony.
1800 —1806. (During his administration. Governor King,
through not being properly backed up by his subordi-
nates, found himself unable to improve the disorgan-
ised state of the colony. Most of the officers of the
New South Wales Corps commenced to import rum
and other spirits into the colony, for which as much
as £2 per gallon was charged at first; and some even
went so far as to manufacture spirits by introducing
stills into the colony, in defiance of a “ Prohibition
Order ” issued by the Governor. —Drunkenness and
immorality were fearfully prevalent at this time
among all classes of the colonists.)
1801. The south-western coasts of Australia are visited
by the French vessels “Geographe” and “Natural-
iste,” under the command of Admiral Baudin.
1801. The brig “Anna Josepha”—built in the colony—
sails for the Cape of Good Hope, freighted with an
export of colonial timber and coals ; which finds a
ready market there.
1801 —2. Flinders placed in command of an expedition
sent out in the “ Investigator ” by the English
10


Government to survey the Australian coasts, names
the capes and inlets he passes ; and discovers
Kangaroo Island and Spencer’s Gulf. At Encounter
Bay he falls in with a French expedition under
Admiral Baudin.
1802. Lieutenant Murray in command of the “ Lady
Nelson,” discovers and examines Port Phillip.
1802. Baudin’s expedition visits Port Jackson, where the
Frenchmen are hospitably entertained by the
colonists.
1802. Mr. Charles Grimes, Surveyor-General of New
South Wales, and Lieutenant Charles Robbins,
examine the harbour and shores of Port Phillip ;
having been sent out on purpose, in the schooner
“ Cumberland,” by the Sydney Governor.
1802. Lieutenant Barreiller makes an unsuccessful
attempt at crossing the Blue Mountains.
1802 —3. Flinders makes a thorough examination of
Torres Straits, the Gulf of Carpentaria, and the
north-western coast of Australia.
1803. Mr. Caley, after trying in vain to force a passage
across the Blue Mountains, is compelled to give up
the attempt.
1803. Flinders, anxious to prosecute his explorations on
the northern coasts, embarks for England in the
“Porpoise,” in order to obtain another vessel from
the Admiralty, the “Investigator” having become
quite worn out and unsafe.
1803. Wreck of the “Porpoise” on a reef in Torres
Straits. —Flinders, having saved his charts and
paper's, returns to Port Jackson, where shortly after-
wards he sails for England in the schooner “ Cum-
berland.” On the voyage, owing to the leaky state
of the vessel, he finds himself compelled to put
in at Mauritius, at this time a French possession,
where he is cast into prison by the Governor DeCaen,
and detained six years before being allowed to pro-
ceed to England. (At this period England and France
were at w r ar.)
1803. The first Australian newspaper, the “ Sydney
Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser,” is
established by George Howe, a West Indian Creole.
1803. John Macarthur, an ex-officer of the New South


Wales Corps, returns from a visit to England, and
introduces merino sheep (a present of King George
III.) into the colony.—He receives a grant of 10,000
acres at Camden for his experiment, which turns out
to be very successful.
1803. The first settlement in Tasmania (Van Diemen's
Land) is founded at Risdon (Restdown) by Lieutenant
Bowen, who arrives at Storm Bay with a party of
convicts and soldiers, onboard the vessels “Lady
Nelson ” and “ Albion.”
1803. David Collins, sent out from England with a large
party, in the ships “Calcutta” and “Ocean,” attempts
to form a settlement at Port Phillip.
1803. The first sermon is preached at Port Phillip. (Nov.
13th) by the Rev. Robert Knopwood.
1803. The first marriage is celebrated at Port Phillip
(November 28).
1804. Collins abandons Port Phillip, and removes his
party to the Derwent, in Tasmania ; where he founds
Hobart Town.
1804. A mutiny of convicts, under the leadership of
Cunningham, at the “Ponds,” Castlehill, near Parra-
matta, is quelled by Major Johnstone.
1804. Coal mines are opened at the mouth of the Hunter,
where a settlement is formed.—(This, ere long, devel-
oped into the town of Newcastle).
1804. The system of assigning convicts as servants to
settlers, is established by Governor King.
1804. Lieutenant-Colonel Paterson is sent from Port
Jackson to form a settlement at Port Dalrymple, in
Tasmania. York Town is founded on the Tamar;
but the site proving unsuitable, the settlement is
removed to George Town, and subsequently to
Launceston.
1805. The natives attack the settlement on the Derwent,
in Tasmania ; but are driven back with loss.
1806. Captain William Bligh succeeds King as Governor
of New South Wales.
1806 —1808. (Ordered by the English authorities to put
a stop to the liquor traffic, Bligh attempted a reform
by adopting severe measures ; but only succeeded in
incurring the displeasure and hatred of his subordi-
nates).


1806. A great flood occurs at the Hawkesbury. Heavy
losses are sustained by the neighbouring farmers.
1807* The settlement at Norfolk Island is abandoned:
the settlers are transferred to Tasmania, where they
receive grants of land ; and found New Norfolk on
the Derwent.
1807. Failure of the wheat crop in Tasmania. Flour is
sold at about £4 per bushel.
1808. Great distress in Tasmania: the settlers find them-
selves on the verge of starvation.
1808. Owing to a quarrel with Macarthur, and unwise
conduct on his own part, Governor Bligh is arrested
and deposed by Major Johnstone, who then assumes
the Governorship of New South Wales, until super-
seded by Colonel Foveaux.
1809. Colonel Paterson, from Tasmania, supersedes
Colonel Foveaux.
1809. Bligh, having been offered the command of the
“ Porpoise,” in which to proceed to England, sails to
Tasmania, where he is foiled in his endeavours to
enlist the sympathy of the colonists in his cause.
1809. The new' Governor of New South Wales—Major-
General Lachlan Macquarie—arrives in the colony.
1809 —1821. (During his administration, Macquarie
exerted himself to improve the state of the colony.
He encouraged the farmers and settlers in industrious
habits and improved methods; built schools, churches,
hospitals, public offices, and other buildings; and
interested himself in the cause of religion and educa-
tion).
1809. A large detachment of the Seventy-third Regiment
—accompanying Major-General Macquarie—arrives
in Sydney.
1809. The first Presbyterian Church in Australia is
erected at Portland Head, on the Hawkesbury, in
New South Wales.
1809. A great flood occurs at the Hawkesbury, causing
great destruction to life and property ; and much
distress.
1810. Governor Collins ( r J L"asmania) establishes a small
newspaper, the “ Derwent Star.” (Its existence was
very brief : after a few issues had been published, it
ceased to appear).
13


1810. Sudden death of Governor Collins (Tasmania).
1810. Bligh—now a Commodore —returns to Port Jack-
son ; and, after a short stay, sails for England.
1810. Flinders is released from his incarceration in
Mauritius, and proceeds to England.
1810. The first horse races take place in Australia.
1810. Public markets are established in Sydney.
1810—12. Lieutenant Lord and Captain Murray direct
affairs in Tasmania pending the arrival of a new
Governor.
1811. Major Johnstone is court-martialled in England.
—An enquiry held by the English authorities into the
circumstances which led to Governor Bligh’s expul-
sion, results in Major Johnstone being cashiered, and
the New South Wales Corps recalled.
1811. Governor Macquarie, accompanied by Mrs.
Macquarie, visits Hobart Town, Tasmania, in the
schooner “ Nelson.”
1812. The settlement at Port Dalrymple is placed under
the charge of the Governor at Hobart Town.
1812. Major Gordon is appointed Commandant at Port
Dalrymple, Tasmania.
1812 —13. Colonel Geils administers the government of
Tasmania.
1813. Governor Davey—Collins’ successor—arrives in
Tasmania,
1813. The ports of Tasmania are opened to merchant
vessels for general commerce.
1813. The Blue Mountains, in New South Wales, after
having presented insurmountable obstacles, are at
last successfully crossed by three gentlemen —Messrs.
Gregory Blaxland, William Charles Wentworth, and
William Lawson.—On their return, Surveyor Evans
is sent to examine the pass; after which, making
further exploration, he discovers the Bathurst Plains,
and the Macquarie and Lachlan Rivers.
1813. The foundation-stone of Sydney light-house is laid.
1814. Death of Flinders (July 14); on the very day that
his great work—describing his voyages and dis-
coveries—is published in England.
1814. Jeffrey Hart Bent, Esq., the first Judge of the
Supreme Court, arrives in New South Wales. (He
was shortly afterwards recalled in consequence of his
14


arbitrary conduct, and was succeeded by Mr. Barron
Field).
1814. Major Abbott, formerly attached to the New
South Wales Corps, arrives in Tasmania as Judge-
Advocate.
1814. A second attempt to establish a newspaper at
Hobart Town fails.
1814. A road is constructed across the Blue Mountains ;
and opened up for traffic.
1814. The Brothers Hume penetrate the mountains to
the south-west of Sydney ; and discover the country
around Berrima.
1815. The town of Bathurst is founded by Governor
Macquarie.
1815. Squatters, with their flocks, cross over the Blue
Mountains along the new road, and occupy the fine
pasture lands around Bathurst.
1815. Mr. Samuel Leigh, the first Wesleyan minister,
arrives in New' South Wales.
1815. The first steam engine is used in Sydney.
1815. Bushranging, by escaped convicts, commences in
Tasmania. Settlers in the country are obliged to arm
themselves. Michael Howe, a bushranger, after com-
mitting atrocious depredations, is killed in a des-
perate encounter.
1816. Settlers on the banks of the Nepean, in New South
Wales, are murdered by the blacks; and several
farms are attacked and plundered.
1816. A lighthouse is erected at South Head, Port
Jackson.
1816. Corn is first exported from Tasmania to New South
Wales.
1816. Whales are captured in the Derwent (Tasmania).
1816. The “ Hobart Town Gazette,” —published by Mr.
Andrew Bent—makes its first appearance.
1816. The first free immigrants arrive at Hobart Town.
1817. The first Bank in Australia—“ The Bank of New
South Wales”—is established.
1817. Governor Davey (Tasmania) resigns. Colonel
Sorrell is appointed his successor.
1817. Death of Major Johnstone, on his estate, at An-
nandale, New South Wales.
1817. Mr. Hamilton Hume, accompanied by Mr. Meehan,


a Government surveyor, explores the country lying
south-west of Sydney, and discovers the Goulburn
Plains and Lake Bathurst.
1817. The foundation-stone of St. David’s Church—the
first permanent church in Hobart—is laid.
1817. Lieutenant Philip Parker King (son of Governor
King), in command of the “ Mermaid,” examines
the north-eastern shores of Australia.
1817. Geary, the Tasmanian bushranger, is killed.
1817-18. Lieutenant Oxley, the Surveyor-General of New
South Wales, is sent on two expeditions to trace the
courses of the Lachlan and Macquarie Rivers ; and
finds their waters flowing into what seem to be inter-
minable marshes or swamps. (This discovery, coupled
with the curious fact that these rivers flowed towards
the centre of the continent, led to the erroneous
belief of the existence of a great inland sea.)
1817-18. Captain Philip P. King, in command of an ex-
pedition fitted out by the Imperial Government,
examines and surveys the north-western coast of
Australia.
1818. In his second expedition Oxley discovers the War-
rumbungle and Hardwick Ranges; and the Castle-
reagh, Peel, and Hastings Rivers.
1818. Free passages to Australia are abolished.
1818. Mosquito and Black Tom, tw r o bushrangers, are
executed at Hobart Town, in Tasmania.
1818- Attempts are made by Governor Sorrell to sup-
press bushranging in Tasmania.
1818. Hector Macdonald, a bushranger, after commit-
ting several robberies in the neighbourhood of Laun-
ceston, Tasmania, is shot.
1819. The Sydney Savings Bank is established.
1819- Captain Philip P. King conducts three expedi-
tions, during this period, to the north-west coasts of
Australia, which he thoroughly examines and surveys,
in his ship the “ Mermaid.” On his third expedition,
before returning to Sydney, he visits King George’s
Sound, and surveys the Swan River. (In these expe-
ditions he was accompanied by Allan Cunningham,
the botanist).
1820. Merino sheep are first imported into Tasmania,
16


having been obtained from Mr. Macartbur’s flocks in
New South Wales.
1820. Large quantities of wheat are exported from Tas-
mania to Sydney.
1820. Governor Macquarie makes a tour through the
newly-settled districts to the south and west of
Sydney.
1820. Lieutenant Johnson is sent in the cutter “ Snap-
per ” to examine the southern portion of the eastern
coast of New South Wales ; and discovers the Clyde
River.
1820. The first meeting of Methodists is held in Tas-
mania.
1821. Governor Macquarie pays a second visit to Tas-
mania.
1821. Departure of Governor Macquarie for England.
Sir Thomas Brisbane succeeds him as Governor of
New South Wales.
1821. The Van Diemen’s Land Bank is established.
1821. The first Sunday-school is established in Tasmania.
1821. The first export of Tasmanian wool, consisting of
a shipment of twelve bales, is forwarded to London.
(This wool realised sevenpence a pound).
1822. The first emigrants direct from England arrive in
Tasmania.
1823. Mr. John Lewis Redder is appointed Chief-Justice
in Tasmania.
1823. The Royal Veteran Company—a remnant of the
New South Wales Corps—is disbanded. (This com-
pany consisted of the officers and soldiers of the New
South Wales Corps who had chosen to remain in the
colony when that corps was recalled.)
1823. Arrival of the Rev. A. Macarthur —the first Pres-
byterian clergyman—in Tasmania.
1823. Oxley is sent by Governor Brisbane to survey
Moreton Bay, Fort Curtis, and other portions of the
eastern coast. At Moreton Bay he rescues two ship-
wrecked men —Pamphlet and Finnegan —who point
out to him a river they had discovered ; which he
examines and names “ Brisbane River.”
1824. Arrival of Chief-Justice Redder in Tasmania. The
first Supreme Court is established.
17


1824. Messrs. Hume and Hovell, on an exploring expedi-
tion, cross the Murrumbidgee and Murray, and pene-
trate to the shores of tort Phillip ; discovering on
their way the rivers Ovens, Goulburn, and other tri-
butaries of the Murray.
1824. A convict settlement is formed at Moreton Bay
by Oxley ; and Captain Miller is appointed the first
commandant.
1824. Sir Francis Forbes is appointed first Chief-Justice
in New South Wales.
1824. Courts of justice are established in New South
Wales. Trial by jury is introduced.
1824. The Rev. Dr. John Dunmore Lang arrives in
Sydney.
1824. The first Executive Council in New South Wales
is formed. (It consisted of six members, viz. :
William Stewart, Lieutenant-Governor ; Francis
Forbes, Chief-Justice ; Frederick Goulburn, Colonial
Secretary; John Oxley, Surveyor-General; James
Bowman, Chief Colonial Surgeon; and John Mac-
arthur, Esq.)
1824. Censorship of the press, strictly enforced up to this
time, is abolished by Governor Brisbane.
1824. Captain Bishop succeeds Miller as Commandant of
the Moreton Bay Settlement.
1824. Governor Brisbane visits the settlement at Moreton
Bay.
1824. Governor Arthur succeeds Sorrell in the adminis-
tration of Tasmania. The colonists of Tasmania pre-
sent Governor Sorrell, on his departure, with an
address and a testimonial of £750.
1824-1836. During Governor Arthur’s administration
bushranging revived in Tasmania, under the leader-
ship of Crawford and Brady. Crawford and two or
three others were captured by a settler named Taylor,
whose house they had attacked, and were executed at
Hobart Town. As several gangs infested the island,
Governor Arthur, to diminish their number, offered a
pardon and a free passage home to those who would
surrender themselves. Brady was at last captured
by John Batman, and executed.—Owing to the scar-
city of gold and silver money in the colony, coins to
the value of £lOO,OOO were sent out from England for


the use of the colonists, at the request of Governor
Arthur.
1825. Two newspapers are established in Sydney—the
“ Australian,” edited by Dr. Wardell and Mr. W. C.
Wentworth : and the “ Monitor,” edited and owned
by Mr. E. S. Hall.
1825. A monument is erected near the north head of
Botany Bay, by Messrs. De Bougainville and Ducam-
pier, in command of the French war vessels “ Thetis”
and “ Esp6rance,” then lying in Port Jackson, in
memory of La who had been shipwrecked,
and whose crew bad been murdered at the Santa
Cruz Islands.
1825. Tasmania, hitherto a dependency of New South
Wales, is made into a separate colony. (Its popula-
tion at this time exceeded 12,000.)
1825. Major Lockyer examines the Brisbane River.
1825. Captain Logan is appointed Commandant of the
Moreton Bay Settlement, as Captain Bishop’s suc-
cessor.
1825. The Tasmanian Gazette —the first newspaper pub-
lished in Launceston—is first issued.
1825. Governor Brisbane (New South Wales) is recalled,
and is succeeded by Sir Ralph Darling.
1825. Allan Cunningham, a botanist, discovers the Pan-
dora Pass over the Liverpool Range, and also the
Liverpool Plains beyond.
1825. The first settlement—Fort Dundas—is made on
Melville Island, north of Australia, a stockade being
established there by Captain Bremer, of H.M.S.
“ Tamar,” with a party of soldiers and convicts.
1825. The first General Quarter Sessions are opened in
New South Wales.
1825. A famine prevails in Tasmania.
1825. An association—the Australian Agricultural Com-
pany—with a capital of £1,000,000 sterling, is formed
in England for the purpose of developing the agricul-
tural, pastoral, and mineral resources of Australia,
and receives a grant of 1,000,000 acres in New South
Wales ; and also obtains the exclusive right of min-
ing for coal in the colony for a term of 31 years.
1825. The Sydney Chamber of Commerce is established.


1825-8. A severe drought prevails in New South Wales
during this period.
1826. The employees of the Australian Agricultural
Company form a settlement on the Liverpool Plains
and at once commence operations. Sir Edward
Parry, the famous Arctic explorer, is sent out as
manager.
1826. At this time nearly 30 Sydney vessels are engaged
in the whale-fishery.
1826. Norfolk Island is chosen as a place of transporta-
tion for criminals convicted in New South Wales.
1826. Rumours—of a design on the part of the French to
occupy some portion of the southern coast of Austra-
lia —having reached Sydney, the Governor dispatches
detachments of soldiers, under the command of Cap-
tain Wright and Major Lockyer, to take possession of
Western Port and King George’s Sound, and to form
a settlement at each place. (Mr. Hovell accompanied
Captain Wright to Western Port.)
1827. After being occupied about a year, Western Port
is abandoned by order of Governor Darling.
1827. Messrs. John Batman and Joseph Tice Gellibrand,
Tasmanian settlers, apply for permission from the
Sydney Governor to occupy the land round Western
Port, but are refused.
1827. James Stirling, an English captain, sails along the
western coast of Australia and examines the Swan
River.
1827. A settlement —Fort Wellington—is made at
Raffles Bay, in the north of Australia, by Captain
Stirling, in H.M.S. “Success.”
1827- A great financial crisis occurs in New South
Wales, consequent on foolish and extravagant specu-
lation in sheep and cattle. Much distress results,
and many colonists are ruined.
1827. A public meeting is held at Sydney to petition for
trial by jury, and representative institutions.
1827. While being conveyed to Norfolk Island, a party
of convicts, under the leadership of Walton, one of
their number, overpower the crew of the vessel, arm
themselves, and compel the captain to sail for New
Zealand. On arrival there, however, they are re-
20


captured by Sydney whalers, taken to Sydney, and
the ringleaders hanged.
1827. Sydney is first supplied with water from the
Botany Swamps.
1827. An insurrection breaks out among the convicts at
Norfolk Island. A number of them escape in three
boats, but are pursued, and subsequently recaptured.
1827. Regular postal communication is established be-
tween the principal towns of New South Wales,
mails being dispatched twice a week.
1827. Sudds and Thompson, two soldiers in New South
Wales, are sentenced to be transported to Tasmania
for theft; but Governor Darling, discovering that
they are successfully carrying out a scheme of their
own, interferes, and alters the course of the law by
ordering them to be chained together with heavy
spiked collars of iron round their necks, and then to
be set to labour on the roads. (In consequence of the
severity of their punishment, Sudds, whose constitu-
tion was very delicate, died within a few days, while
Thompson became insane.)
1827-30. During this period, the “Newspaper War”
rages. The Sydney Gazette, the Government organ,
upholds the acts of Governor Darling, whilst the Aus-
tralian and the Monitor, two opposition papers, de-
nounce the Governor as brutal, cowardly, &c.
1828. Barracks for the soldiers and prisoners are built
at Moreton Bay.
1828. The Rev. John Vincent is appointed chaplain of
the Moreton Bay Settlement.
1828. Sealers form a settlement at Portland Bay, on the
southern shores of Australia.
1828. Captain Sturt sets out on his first exploring expe-
dition. He discovers the Darling River, and dis-
proves the existence of an inland sea.
1828. Crown lands are first rented in Tasmania.
1829. Mr. Hayes, publisher of the Australian, and Mr.
Hall, publisher of the Monitor, are both prosecuted
by Governor Darling for libel, and are fined and im-
prisoned.
1829. The first Circuit Court in New South Wales is
held at Campbelltown.


1829. Allan Cunningham discovers the Darling Downs,
and explores the Brisbane River to its sources.
1820. The Brisbane Observatory (or Windmill, as it is
called) is erected.
1829. The “Launceston Advertiser”—a newspaper,
established by Mr. John Rascoe Fawkner, —makes
its first appearance.
1829. A British Colony is founded on the Swan River, in
West Australia. Captain Fremantle arrives as the
pioneer of the settlement. Captain Stirling is
appointed the first Governor.
1829. Arrival of the “Calista ” —the first emigrant ship
in W T est Australia.
1829. Bountiful grants of land are given to settlers in
West Australia. (As an instance, a gentleman named
Peel received 500,000 acres).
1829. The first Legislative Council of New South Wales
is instituted. (It consisted of 15 members, invested
with power to make laws for the colony). One of its
first acts was to introduce the English Jury system
instead of arbitrary trial by Government officers.
1829. The settlements at Melville Island and Rallies Bay
are abandoned.
1829. Tasmania receives its first legislative body ; 15
gentlemen being appointed to consult with the
Governor, and make laws for the colony.
1829. Edward Gibbon Wakefield’s book is published in
London. (In this little work he proposed that a new
colony be founded in Australia, to be colonised by
wealthy immigrants only ; and that, in order to keep
it in the hands of the wealthy, and to prevent the
influx of poorer immigrants, a high price be charged
for the land).
1829 —30. Sturt conducts a boat expedition on the
Murray River. In this trip more than 1000 miles of
unknown country are traversed, and Lake Alexan-
dria, into which the Murray flows, is discovered.
1829—30. During this period, 55 vessels arrive at the
Swan River settlement, with about 1200 emigrants.
1830. The settlement at King George’s Sound is trans-
ferred to the Government of Swan River.
1830. The first attack is made by the natives on the
settlers at the Swan River.
22


1830. A powerful league is formed by the colonists of
New South Wales, to bring about the cessation of
transportation.
183 ). Commencement of the “Black War ”in Tasmania.
The first attempt made by Governor Arthur and the
colonists to capture the aboriginals, for the purpose
of confining them to one part of the island, signally
fails; only two being caught. (This unsuccessful
undertaking cost the colony over £50,000.)
1830. The Sydney College is founded.
1830. Bushranging rife in New South Wales. Desperate
encounters take place between bushrangers and the
police in Bathurst district, in which several of the
former are captured, and subseqrrently tried and
executed. Depredations of Donohue’s gang near
Sydney ; Macnamarra, one of the ringleaders, is shot.
The chief himself—John Donohue—is shortly after
(September 1) shot by a trooper at Raby, near Liver-
pool.
1830. Captain Logan, Commandant of the Moreton Bay
Settlement, —while on an exploring expedition—is
murdered by the blacks at the instigation of some
convicts whom he had treated very harshly. Captain
Clunie succeeds him as Commandant.
1831. Capture of Walmsley and Webber, the last of
Donohue’s gang.
1831. A company, with a capital of £50,000, is formed in
England for the purpose of founding a colony on the
southern shores of Australia. It enters into negotia-
tions with the British Government, with a view to
obtaining a charter that would confer upon it immense
concessions ; but fails to obtain it.
1831. The first Colonial Steam Navigation Company is
established.
1831. The first steamer built in Australia—the “ Sur-
prise”—is launched in New South Wales.
1831. Captain Bannister and party cross overland from
Perth to King George’s Sound.
1831. Assisted immigration to New South Wales is initi-
ated. The first batch of immigrants to arrive consists
of 50 young women from an orphan school in Cork,
Ireland.


1831. Dr. J. D. Lang, a colonist, after a visit to Great
Britain, returns to Sydney in the “ Stirling Castle,”
accompanied by five Presbyterian clergymen. By the
same boat 50 mechanics from Scotland are brought
out to help him in building the Australian College.
1831. Governor Darling is recalled by the English
Government, and is succeeded by Sir Richard Bourke.
1831 —37- (During Governor Bourke’s administration,
the discussions of the Legislative Council became
public; religious equality was established; the
monopoly of Government aid enjoyed by one commu-
nion was broken up ; a universal system of education
was established ; and the squatting system was
legalised, and placed upon a better footing).
1831. A complete change takes place in the mode of
disposing the public lands in New South Wales ; free
grants being abolished, and the new system of selling
by auction established.
1831. Arrival of the “Sophia Jane,” commanded by
Captain Biddulph, the first steam-ship to enter Port
Jackson.
1831. Murder of Captain Barker by the blacks, while
exploring in the neighbourhood of Lake Alexandria
(South Australia).
1831. The “Sydney Herald” —a newspaper—is published
for the first time.
1831. Major Thomas Mitchell conducts an expedition to
the north-west of Sydney, and reaches the Upper
Darling.
1831. The Sydney Government Domain is opened to the
public.
1832. Arrival of the first printing-press in West
Australia, from England.
1833. The Brothers Henty settle at Portland Bay, on the
southern shores of Australia, and establish a whaling
station there.
1833. The South Australian Association is formed in
England for the purpose of colonising the southern
shores of Australia. On receiving the consent of the
British Government, an Act is passed by the Imperial
Parliament, investing the Association with full
power to found a colony. Eleven commissioners are
appointed ; of whom Colonel Torrens is Chairman;
24


Rowland Hill, Esq., Secretary; Mr. Hurtle Fisher,
Resident Commissioner; Captain John Hindmarsh,
Governor ; and Colonel Light, Surveyor-General.
1833. The Sydney Mechanics’ School of Arts is founded,
1834. Dr. Lang’s work on “ New South Wales as a penal
settlement, and as a British colony,” is published.
1834. Mr. Henty’s application for a grant of land at
Portland Bay is refused by the Home Government.
1834. John Batman forms an association in Tasmania for
the purpose of occupying the fine pastures around
Port Phillip.
1835. John Batman, on behalf of the association, sails in
the “ Rebecca ” to Port Phillip to examine the
locality. On his arrival there he enters into an agree-
ment with the natives, by which he imagines himself
to be in legal possession of 600,000 acres, which he pur-
chases from them by giving in exchange a quantity of
sugar, blankets, looking-glasses, &c. (This purchase
•was afterwards declared invalid ; but Batman and
Company received a grant of 28,000 acres in compen-
sation for the expenses they had incurred )
1835. A rival association for colonising Port Phillip is
organised by John Pascoe Fawkner at Launceston
(Tasmania). In the schooner “Enterprise” the
members and servants of the association cross over to
Port Phillip, and settle on the banks of the Yarra,
where Melbourne now stands.
1835. Re-appearance of William Buckley, one of the
three convicts who had escaped from Collins’ party
32 years previous. He joins Batman’s party, whom
he warns against an intended murderous attack by an
aboriginal tribe with whom he had been living.
1835. The Imperial authorities hold an inquiry into the
Sudds-Thompson case, and exonerate Sir Ralph Dar-
ling from all blame.
1835. Major Mitchell leads an expedition to the Bogan
(New South Wales'.
1835. Richard Cunningham, botanist of Mitchell’s expe-
dition, is killed by the blacks.
1835- The first importation of sheep and cattle into Port
Phillip is made. These are brought over from Tas-
mania on board the “ Norval.”
25


1835. The first overlander, Mr. John Gardiner, arrives
at the Port Phillip Settlement with a herd of cattle
from the Murrnmbidgee, New South Wales, Other
overlanders follow soon afterwards.
1835. Captain Fyans is appointed Commandant of the
Moreton Bay Settlement.
1836 The harbour of Port Phillip is surveyed by Lieu-
tenant Hobson in H.M.S. “ Rattlesnake.”
1836. Mr. Stewart, a Sydney magistrate, is sent by
Governor Bourke to the Port Phillip Settlement to
assert the rights of the Crown, and to announce, in
accordance with a proclamation issued the previous
year, that all purchases of land from the aborigines
are invalid.
1836. Governor Arthur’s period of office expires. A
testimonial, for which £l5OO had been subscribed, is
presented to him by the colonists of Tasmania.
1836. Major Mitchell leads an expedition to the south,
crosses the Murray, and enters Port Phillip district
(or, Australia Felix, as he named it) ; discovers the
Glenelg River, and on his return makes known the
capabilities of the rich and fertile district. (In this
trip he placed beyond question the junction of the
Murray and the Darling.) For his services Mitchell
was rewarded with a vote of £lOOO from the Sydney
Council, and afterwards received the honour of
knighthood.
1836. Foundation of the colony of South Australia. The
first immigrants land at Kangaroo Island ; but the
place proving unsuitable, they remove to St. Vincent’s
Gulf, and lay the foundations of the city of Ade-
laide a short distance inland.—Arrival of Governor
Hindmarsh, who determines to remove the settlement
to Encounter Bay ; but, being opposed by Light and
Fisher, no change is made, and a violent quarrel
takes place.
1837. Departure of Governor Bourke from New South
W ales.
1837. Governor Bourke visits the Port Phillip Settla-
ment, and plans out the town of Melbourne. TV /V
1837. Major Cotton is appointed Commandant of the
Moreton Bay Settlement.
26


1837. The first steamer, the “ James Watt,” anchors in
Moreton Bay.
1837. The first newspaper in South Australia, the “South
Australian Register,” is published.
1837. The first sale of Crown lands in South Australia is
held at Adelaide.
1837. Sir John Franklin (who afterwards lost his life
while exploring the Polar regions) becomes Governor
of Tasmania.
1837. The discussions of the Tasmanian Council are
made public.
1837. Port Essington, on the northern shores of Austra-
lia, is established by Sir Gordon Bremer as a military
post, with H.M.S. “ Britomart ” as tender.
1837. The first exports of the Port Phillip Settlement,
consisting of hides, wool, and tallow, are shipped.
1837. Messrs. Hawdon, from Howlong, on the Murray,
drive cattle overland to Melbourne.
1837. A fortnightly mail is established between Sydney
and Melbourne, carried by John Bourke, Mr. Flaw-
don’s stockman.
1837-45. Surveying voyage of H.M.S. “Beagle,” com-
manded by Captain Stokes.
1838. Sir George Gipps succeeds Sir Richard Bourke as
Governor of New South Wales.
1838. The first newspaper in Victoria, the “ Melbourne
Advertiser,” appears for the first time (the first issues
being in manuscript form). A rival paper, the “ Port
Phillip Gazette,” is established soon afterwards.
1838. The system of assigning convicts as servants to
settlers ceases.
1838. Shepherds, in the employ of Mr. William Faithful,
are speared by the blacks near the Goulburn River.
1838. The colonists of Tasmania petition to the Crown
for the concession of British institutions.
1838. Branches of the Bank of Australasia and Union
Bank are established in Melbourne.
1838. The English Government interferes in the affairs
of South Australia. Mr. Fisher is dismissed ; Gover-
nor Hindmarsh is recalled ; and the offices of both are
conferred on Colonel George Gawler. —Early failures
occur in South Australia, owing to the settlers clus-
tering together at Adelaide, instead of spreading out
27


over the Land and cultivating it. Many land-holders
become bankrupt. Provisions increase in price, flour
being raised from £2O to £BO per ton.
1838. Captain George Grey’s expedition arrives from
England, on board of H.M.S. “ Beagle,” and lands at
Hanover Bay, to explore the north-west coast. The
Glenelg River is discovered ; but the expedition fails,
and is retaken on board,
1838. The first Congregational minister—the Rev. W.
Waterfield arrives in Melbourne. About the same
time the Rev. J. C. Grills, a Church of England clergy-
man, arrives also at Port Phillip.
1838. Mr. John Snodgrass is appointed first Commis-
r sioner for Crown Lands in Melbourne.
V 1838. The Sydney Botanical Gardens are opened to the
public.
1838. Departure of the “Goshawk” from South Aus-
tralia, with a cargo of oil and whalebone ; being the
first vessel to leave the colony bound for Great
Britain.
1838. The first Wesleyan Chapel in South Australia is
opened.
1838-41. Arrival of poor emigrants in South Australia, in
quest of employment. Government works are com-
menced by Governor Gawler, to give employment
to destitute settlers:—a good road being made
between the city and Port Adelaide ; Govern-
ment House ; a Custom House; Police Station ;
wharves ; and other necessary but costly buildings
being erected. The Treasury being empty, the Gover-
nor pays the workmen out of his own pocket; and
persuades English merchants to send out food and
clothing for the starving colonists, drafts on the Im-
perial Treasury being given in payment. The first of
these are met readily ; but, eventually, drafts to the
amount of £69,000 are dishonoured. The colony, being
unable to meet debts to the amount of £405,400, is
declared insolvent. Many settlers sell their land,
and return to England ; the price of land goes down
to a trifle ; poorer immigrants buy land, and com-
mence cultivating it. —Change for the better; wheat
is grown successfully. Overlanders with sheep, cattle
and horses arrive from New South Wales.
28


1839. Mr. John Hutt becomes Governor of West Aus-
tralia.
1839. Mr. Charles Joseph Latrobe is appointed Superin-
tendent of the Port Phillip district.
1839. Death of Mr. John Batman.
1839. The convict settlement atMoreton Bay is broken up.
1839. Lieutenant Gorman is appointed Commandant of
the Moreton Bay Settlement.
1839. The Rev. P. B. Geoghan, D.D., the first Roman
Catholic clergyman, arrives in Melbourne.
1839. Angus McMillan explores Gippsland, in the Port
Phillip district: and names it Caledonia Australis.
1839. Captain Grey’s second expedition lands at Shark
Bay, to explore the north-west coast. The stores
being washed away by the sea, Grey is forced to
retreat to Perth, on the Swan River, which is reached
with difficulty.
1839. Arrival in Moreton Bay of the “ Sophia Jane,” the
first steamer direct from England.
1839-40. Count Strzelecki, a Polish nobleman, while
exploring and making a scientific examination of the
Great Dividing Range and Gippsland, finds the nature
of the ground in several places to be auriferous.
1840. Alteration in the Land Laws of New South Wales.
The colony is divided into three districts. In the
Port Phillip district land is to be sold for not less than
£1 per acre ; in the Sydney and Moreton Bay districts
for not less than twelve shillings per acre. (These
alterations were made by the Secretary of State in
England, to avert the ruin with which the colony of
South Australia was threatened).
1840. The effects of the changes in the Land Laws of
New South Wales prove disastrous, as land specu-
lations result, which cause much insolvency.
1840. Squatters settle in the vicinity of Moreton Bay.
1840. Transportation of convicts to New South Wales is
abolished by an Order in Council. Tasmania, however,
is to continue receiving convicts.
1840. Moreton Bay, on the cessation of transportation
to New South Wales, becomes a free settlement.
1840. A meeting is held in Melbourne to petition for the
separation of the Port Phillip district from New South
Wales.
29


1840. Extensive land sales are held in Tasmania. Great
demand for labour. Emigration to Tasmania
increases.
1840. The first newspaper in West Australia, —the
“ Perth Inquirer,”—is published for the first time.
1840. Regular coastal communication is established
between Sydney and Brisbane ; the schooner “John”
being the first coaster.
1840. Adelaide is incorporated.
1840 —41. The land revenue, in New South Wales, is
employed in assisting immigration. Bounty orders
are issued. Arrival of great numbers of immigrants
in New South Wales. Great glut of labour.
1840—41. Edward John Eyre’s expedition sets out from
Adelaide. Lakes Torrens and Eyre are discovered ;
but, owing to scarcity of water, the expedition,—
after penetrating as far as Mount Hopeless, is forced
to return. Eyre attempts to reach West Australia
by journeying along the shores of the Great Austra-
lian Bight. Great sufferings are experienced by him
and his party (which consisted of Mr. Baxter, a
European; an aboriginal named Wylie ; and two
other natives.) Treachery of the natives, who murder
Baxter, plunder the provisions, and decamp. Wylie
remains faithful. After a terrible journey, Eyre
arrives at King George’s Sound.
1841. Governor Gipps visits the Moreton Bay settlement,
and lays out the plan of the present city of Brisbane.
1841. Captain Wickham is appointed Superintendent of
the Moreton Bay district.
1841. The colony of South Australia receives a loan from
the British Government. The Commissioners are
abolished, and the Home Government undertakes
the management of the colony. Governor Gawler is
recalled, and Captain George Grey is appointed in his
stead.
1841. Wreck of the steamer “Clonmel” at Corner
Inlet, while on her way from Sydney to Melbourne.
1841. Mr. John Walpole Wallis, —one of the Puisne
Judges of the Supreme Court of New South Wales,
—is appointed as resident Judge for the Port Phillip
district.
30


1841. A meeting is held in Sydney to protest against the
separation of the Port Phillip district from New
South Wales.
1841. The “ Squatters’ Protective Association ”is formed
in New South Wales by Mr. Benjamin Boyd, to resist
Governor Gipps’ aggressive measures against the
pastoral interest.
1841. Rich ores of lead are discovered on the Mount
Lofty Range, in South Australia.
1841. A “Home” for penniless and friendless girls, is
founded in New South Wales, by Mrs. Chisholm, —
a benevolent lady who had arrived in Sydney in
1839.
1841. The first Supreme Court is opened in Melbourne ;
the first Criminal Session is held.
1841. Sydney is first lit with gas.
1841. The “Bank of Australasia,” and the “Western
Australian Bank,” are established in Perth.
1841. The Rev. W. B. Clarke discovers auriferous stone
on the Great Dividing Range in New South Wales
1841, Messrs. Leslie, Hodgson, and Elliott, three
squatters, —advance farther into the country, with
their flocks and herds ; and are the first to occupy
the Darling Downs.
1841—44. Period of great distress in Tasmania. Great
commercial crisis ; many colonists become insolvent.
1842. A meeting is held in Sydney to petition for repre-
sentative government.
1842. Captain Stokes, in H.M.S. “ Beagle,” examines
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria ; and discovers
the Flinders and Albert Rivers.
1842. A bronze figure of Sir Richard Bourke, —designed
by Mr. Westmacott—who had been commissioned for
the purpose, — together with a granite pedestal,
arrives in Sydney. After its erection, the statue is
unveiled by Governor Gipps, a general holiday being
proclaimed for the occasion.
1842. (By the end of this year,—thanks to the exertions
of Mrs. Chisholm, —situations had been found for
about 2000 distressed immigrants of both sexes.)
1842. Melbourne is incorporated.
31


1842. The “ Probation System ”of dealing with the con-
victs (proposed by Lord Stanley, Secretary of State
for the Colonies) is introduced in Tasmania.
1842. Mr. Montagu, Chief Secretary of Tasmania, is
dismissed from office for insulting Governor Franklin
—(He was afterwards reinstated by Lord Stanley, the
Secretary of State.)
1842. Discovery of copper on Captain Bagot’s sheep run,
at Kapunda, in South Australia, by Mr. Dutton, the
overseer. (Mines were opened, which, during the
first two years, yielded about £15,000 )
1842. By an Act of the Imperial Parliament, a new con-
stitution is granted to New South Wales, by which
representative institutions—legislative and municipal
—are conferred upon the colony. The Legislative
Council, composed of 36 members, is established ; 12
members being nominated by the Crown, the remain-
ing 24 being elective ; IS to represent New South
Wales, and 6 the Port Phillip district.
1843. The first general election under representative
government takes place (June). The new Council
meets for the first time on August 1. Mr. Alexander
Mackay is elected the first Speaker.
1843. The Bank of Australia becomes bankrupt; great
financial and commercial crisis.—Much distress is
caused by the unwise interference of the British
Government with the laud laws, the price of land
being raised £1 per acre throughout New South
Wales. Land sales cease.—Glut in the live stock
market; squatters are saved from absolute ruin by
boiling down their sheep and selling the tallow thus
obtained. On account of the great distress through-
out the colony, Governor Gipps is obliged to issue
provisions at less than cost price to prevent starva-
tion.
1843. Governor Gipps visits Melbourne.
1843. The first coal mine in Queensland is opened at
Red bank.
1843. The first land sale is held in Brisbane.
1843. Governor Franklin (Tasmania) is superseded by
Sir Eardley Wilmot.
1843. Departure of Sir John Franklin for England. (In
1845, in command of the ships “Erebus” and
32


‘‘Terror,” he conducted an expedition into the
Arctic regions to search for the North-West Passage ;
but the whole party perished miserably in the
attempt.)
1844. Numbers of free labourers are forced to leave Tas-
mania in order to earn sufficient to support themselves
and families, owing to the low rate charged for con-
vict labour.
1844. During the second session of the Sydney Legisla-
tive Council, Dr. Lang, one of the Port Phillip repre-
sentatives, moves, “ That an address be presented to
the Queen, praying that the requisite steps be taken
for the separation of the Port Phillip district from
New South Wales ; and that it be erected into an
independent colony.” The motion, however, is de-
feated, there being 19 votes against it. Dr. Lang,
nevertheless, forwards to England a private petition,
signed by all the Port Phillip representatives ; the
outcome of which is that a reply is received from
Lord Stanley, the Secretary of State, stating that the
necessary steps will be taken without delay. (But,
owing to a change of Government in England, six
years elapsed before Port Phillip district was made a
separate colony.)
1844. Specimens of gold, claimed to have been found in
the Pyrenees, are exposed to view in the window of a
jeweller’s shop in Melbourne.
1844. A great flood occurs on the Yarra ; the lower parts
of Melbourne are inundated.
1844. The first German immigrants arrive in South Aus-
tralia.
1844. Signs of gold are discovered near Adelaide, in
South Australia.
1844-5. Captain Sturt organises an expedition to pene-
trate into Central Australia. The party, including
Mr. Poole, surveyor; Mr. J. H. Browne, surgeon ;
and Mr. McDouall Stuart, draughtsman; starts from
Menindee, on the Darling River. The Stanley (or
Barrier) Range and the Grey Range are discovered.
Progress is retarded on account of scarcity of water ;
an intolerable summer is experienced. Death of Mr.
Poole. The explorers push on through very uninvit-
ing country covered with red sand hills and salt lakes,
33


and penetrate as far as the Stony Desert. Discovery
of Strzelecki and Cooper’s Creeks. Return of the
expedition.
1844-5. A German botanist, named Ludwig Leichhardt,
conducts an expedition from Sydney to the Gulf of
Carpentaria, via Moreton Bay, and thence to Port
Essington, discovering on his way the Fitzroy, Bur-
dckin, Mitchell, Gilbert, Roper, and other rivers.
(For his services he was rewarded with over £2OOO
from the Government and residents of Sydney.)
1845. Further discoveries of copper are made in South
Australia. The Burra Burra and Princess Royal
mines commence operations. (From the Burra Burra
mines alone, copper to the value of about £600,000
was unearthed during the three years after their dis-
covery.)
1845. Departure of Governor Grey from South Australia.
He is succeeded by Colonel Robe, an English Tory.
1845. On a proposal of increased taxation on all classes
of tradespeople and others, in order to increase the
revenue, a great public demonstration takes place in
Tasmania, protesting strongly against the obnoxious
measure on the principle of “No taxation without
representation.” In consequence the measure is
withdrawn.
1845. The first steamship arrives in West Australia.
1845-6. Sir Thomas Mitchell leads an expedition to the
north-west of Sydney. He discovers the Fitzroy
Downs, the Gulgoa and Warrego, tributaries of the
Darling, and also the Barcoo or upper course of
Cooper’s Creek, which he mistakes for the Victoria
River.
1846. Dr. Lang is banquetted by the people of the Port
Phillip district.
1846. Governor Hutt (West Australia) is succeeded by
Lieutenant-ColonelClarke.
1846. Governor Gipps (New South Wales) retires from
office.
1846. Wreck of an emigrant ship in Bass Straits. Over
400 lives are lost.
1846. The first issue of the “ Argus,” a newspaper, is
published in Melbourne.
34


1846. The foundation stone of the Melbourne Hospital is
laid.
1846. The “ Moreton Bay Courier,” a newspaper, is pub-
lished for the first time.
1846-7. Leichhardt leads a second expedition to the
north, which proves unsuccessful.
1846-50. During this interval of four years, more than
2,500 convicts are landed in Tasmania. The colonists
agitate against transportation ; —foremost among the
agitators being Mr. Pitcairn, who draws up petitions,
and forwards them to England.
1847. Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin becomes Governor of
West Australia.
1847. Governor Wilmot (Tasmania) is recalled by the
Home Government, but dies in the colony shortly
afterwards. Sir William Denison succeeds him as
Governor.
1847. Edmund Kennedy leads an expedition to the Bar-
coo River (New South Wales).
1847. Sir Charles Fitzroy becomes Governor of New
South Wales.
1847. Death of Lady Fitzroy —killed in an accident at
Parramatta (New South Wales).
1847. A settlement, designed for a penal colony, to be
called “ North Australia,” is founded at Port Curtis,
on the east coast of Australia ; but within six months
after its foundation it is abandoned.
1848. J. S. Roe, Surveyor-General of West Australia,
starts from York, on an exploring expedition, and
penetrates as far as the Russell Ranges.
1848. The people of Port Phillip District, in order to
draw the attention of the British Government to
their grievances, elect Earl Grey, a member of the
Imperial Parliament, as their sole representative.
1848. Governor Kobe (South Australia) is recalled, and
is succeeded by Sir Henry Young.
1848-54. During his administration, Governor Young
made an unsuccessful attempt to remove the sand-bar
at the mouth of the Murray, and to construct a har-
bour (Port Elliott) at the entrance. —Owing to the
scarcity of coined money, and to save the colony from
serious commercial disaster, he instituted a new cur-


rency, consisting of gold cast into small bars and
ingots stamped by authority.
1848. Leichhardt starts on his last expedition. He pro-
poses to cross the continent from east to west —More-
ton Bay to the Swan River Settlement. (The fate of
this expedition has always been shrouded in mystery,
and is not certainly known to this day. All the
members of the party are supposed to have lost their
lives).
1848. Governor Irwin (West Australia) is succeeded by
Captain Charles Fitzgerald.
1848. Kennedy sets out on his disastrous expedition to
explore Cape York Peninsula. After overcoming
many difficulties, Kennedy is murdered by the blacks.
1848. The first emigrant ship Jhe “ Artemesia ”) anchors
in Moreton Bay.
1848. The Rev. Charles Perry, D.D., being appointed
Bishop of Melbourne, arrives in Port Phillip.
1849. Governor Fitzroy visits Melbourne, and is accorded
an enthusiastic welcome.
1849. Discovery of gold on the Pyrenees (Victoria) by
Thomas Chapman, a shepherd.
1849. Smelting of copper ore is commenced in South
Australia.
1819. The convict ship “ Hashemy ” arrives in Port
Jackson, with ticket-of-leave men on board. A great
anti-convict demonstration takes place in Sydney.
1819. The settlement at Port Essington is abandoned.
1849. Final abolition of transportation.
1849. Gold is discovered in New South Wales by an iron-
worker, named Smith, who shows the Colonial Secre-
tary a lump of gold imbedded in quartz ; but as he
demands a large pecuniary reward for pointing out
the locality, his offer is refused.
1849. An attempt is made to revive transportation,
owing to the depreciation in value of station proper-
ties threatening ruin to the holders.
1849. Arrival of the ship “ Randolph ” at Melbourne
and Sydney with convicts on board. The convicts
are not allowed to land.
1849. The Fortitude Valley Pioneers arrive at Moreton
Bay.


1853. An Act is passed for the better government of the
Australian colonies.
1850. Convicts are introduced into West Australia. The
first batch arrives on board the “ Scindian.”
1850. Mr Lamb lays before the Legislative Council of
New South Wales a motion against the renewal of
transportation to the colony, which is carried by a
large majority.
1850. Meetings are held in Sydney and Melbourne pro-
testing against a renewal of transportation.
1850. The Sydney Anti-Ti’ansportation Society is
founded.
1850. The first railway in New South Wales, between
Sydney and Goulburn, is established.
1850. The settlers of the Moreton Bay district petition
for separation from New South Wales.
1850. Governor Young (South Australia) examines the
Murray River.
1850. The first Bank is opened at Moreton Bay.
1850. Prince’s Bridge, over the Yarra, Melbourne, is
opened to the public.
1851. Port Phillip District is separated from New South
Wales ; and is erected into an independent colony,
and named “ Victoria.”
1851. A great “ Anti-Transportation League” is formed
by the various colonies, their purpose being to compel
the British Government to put an end to transporta-
tion to Tasmania.
1851. Representative government is extended to all the
coloxxies by the British Parliament. The first Legis-
lative Couxxcil of Victoria, consisting of 10 nominee
and 20 elective members, is estxiblished. —South Aus-
tralia receives its first constitution. Its Legislative
Council, consisting of 8 nominee and 16 elective mem-
bers, is formed.—Constitutional change in Tasmania.
The first representative Legislative Council is estab-
lished.
1851. A severe drought px’evails ixx Victoria.
1851. Black Thursday (February 6). A fierce hot xxorth
wind and extensive bush fires are experienced ixx Vic-
toria, causing great loss of life and property.
1851. Discovery of gold at the Summer Hill Creek, near
Bathurst, in New South Wales, by Edward Har-
37


greaves, who is rewarded by the Government with
£5OO for making known his discovery and pointing
out the locality. (He afterwards received a vote of
£lO,OOO from New South Wales, and over £2OOO from
Victoria.)
1851. A proclamation is issued declaring gold to be the
property of the Crown. A commissioner is appointed
for the goldfield, who is to act as magistrate. Dig-
gers’ licenses are issued at the i - ate of 30s each per
month. A regular gold escort is established by the
Government between the goldfield and Sydney.
1851. Discovery of a solid lump of gold weighing nearly
a hundredweight, and worth about £4OOO, at Meroo
Creek, near Bathurst, in New South Wales, by an
aboriginal shepherd in the employ of Dr. Kerr.
1851. Discovery of platinum in New South Wales by
Mr. Stutchbury, the Government geologist. Fresh
discoveries of gold are made in New South Wales, at
Ophir, Turon River, Braid wood, and other places.
1851. Discovery of gold at Clunes, in Victoria, by Wil-
liam Campbell, Esq., a member of the first Legislative
Council of that colony. Further discoveries of gold
are made in Victoria, at Buninyong, and the Yarro-
wee (the Ballarat diggings as they were called, which
proved to be the richest goldfield in the world), and
also at Mount Alexander and Bendigo. Thousands
of persons of all classes flock to the diggings.
1851. The Brisbane School of Arts is established.
1851-2. Great numbers of convicts escape from Tasmania
and flock to the Victorian diggings.
1851-61. During this decade about £100,000,000 worth of
gold is exported from Victoria.
1852. A great meeting is held in the Mechanics’ Insti-
tute, at Melbourne, to protest against the influx of
ex-convicts and escaped prisoners into Victoria from
Tasmania.
1852. Nearly 100,000 immigrants arrive in the colony of
Victoria from all parts of the w'orld.
1852. More than 150 tons of gold, valued at over
£10,000,000, are raised in Victoria during this year.
1852. A gold escort is established between the Bendigo
goldfield and Adelaide.
38


1852. Bands of bushrangers, composed chiefly of ex-con-
victs, begin to infest the colony of Victoria.
1852. The ship “Nelson” anchored in Hobson’s Bay, is
boarded by bushrangers, and is robbed of £24,000
worth of gold dust.
1852. Thei “Convicts’ Prevention Act”—prohibiting
convicts from landing in the colony—is passed by the
V ictorian Legislature.
1852. The Sydney University is inaugurated.
1852. Gundagai—a town on the Murrumbidgee, in New
South Wales,-—is totally destroyed by a flood. (In
this calamity, 75 persons lost their lives.)
1852. Arrival of the Peninsular and Oriental Company’s
S.S. “ Chusan,” in Sydney; being the fmt mail
steamer to arrive in the colony via the Cape of Good
Hope.
1852. Mr. Hovenden Hely, in command of an expedi-
tion, sets out in search of Leichhardt’s lost expedi-
1852 —53. Gold is discovered on the hills near Echunga,
in South Australia.
1853. Transportation to Tasmania ceases.
1853. Steam communication (postal and passenger) is
established between England and the Colonies by the
“ P. & 0. Co.”
1853. Mr. Francis Cadell navigates the Murray for a
distance of 1300 miles, in his steamer —the “Lady
Augusta,”—and receives a bonus of £4OOO for accom-
plishing the feat.
1853. Captain Wickham is appointed Government Resi-
dent at Moreton Bay.
1853. Discovery of the nugget “Sarah Sands,” in
Victoria, worth more than £6OOO.
1853. The Mclvor gold escort, on its way to Melbourne,
is attacked and robbed by a gang of bushrangers
(who were subsequently captured and brought to
justice; three of them —Melville, Wilson, and
Atkins—being convicted and executed.)
1853. Capture of Dalton, the bushranger, in Melbourne.
1853. Bradley and O’Connor, two bushrangers from
Tasmania, after committing several depredations in
Victoria, are captured and executed.
39


1853. Discontent arises among the Victorian gold-diggers
on account of the high sum charged for license-fees.
Many evade payment. The miners agitate for the
repeal of the license-fee. The Gold-Diggers’ Union
is formed, its object being to protect the social and
political interests of the diggers.
1853. The Victorian gold-diggers’ license-fee is reduced
to 20/- per month.
1853. Arrival of troops in Victoria, from Hobart,
Tasmania.
1853. The first railway is established in Victoria by
private enterprise.
1853 —54. Great financial crisis in Victoria ; many per-
sons are ruined.
1853—55. During this period nearly 250,000 immigrants
arrive in Victoria.
1854. Governor Latrobe (Victoria) retires ; and is suc-
ceeded by Sir Charles Hotham.
1854. Riot on the Ballarat goldfield. A digger named
Scobie having been murdered, it is supposed, by
Bentley, an hotel keeper, the diggers assemble ;
wreck the hotel and set fire to it. Bentley, however,
effects his escape.
1854. Three of the Ballarat rioters Fletcher,
Weatherly, and Mclntyre—are convicted. A depu-
tation waits upon the Governor, and demands their
release. Being refused, the diggers burn their
licenses, and resolve to pay no more fees.
1854. The Ballarat diggers arm themselves and revolt
..under the leadership of Vern and Lalor. Their
stronghold, the “ Eureka Stockade,” is attacked at
night by the troops of the camp under Captain
Thomas. The insurgents are completely defeated,
125 of them being taken prisoners.
1854. Large meetings, addressed by Messrs. Blair,
Fawkner, Enabling, Frencham, and other speakers,
are held in Melbourne and other towns, at which
resolutions are carried in favour of the diggers.
1854. Owing to the Convicts’ Prevention Act of 1852 being
disallowed by the Home Government, a great demon-
stration takes place in Melbourne, protesting against
the influx of British felons into the colony. The
40


result is that an Act more stringent in its provisions
is passed by the Legislature.
1854. An electric telegraph line is opened between Mel-
bourne and Williamstown.
1854. The first shipment of cotton is exported from
Brisbane.
1854. A committee of three is appointed by Governor
Hotham to enquire into the financial condition of the
colony of Victoria. In its report startling dis-
closures are made, and the abolition of the imprest
system is recommended.
1854. The Sydney Grammar School is founded. #
1854. The name “Van Diemen’s Land” is altered to/
“ Tasmania.” /
1854. The first exhibition is held in Victoria.
1854. The market-place is opened in Hobart, Tasmania,
by Sir William Denison.
1854. Great floods occur in Hobart.
1854. The Melbourne University is founded, the founda-
tion stone being laid by Sir Charles Hotham.
1854. Mr. (now Sir) Henry Parkes is elected member
for Sydney in the place of Mr. W. C. Wentworth,
who had proceeded to England to advocate certain
matters pertaining to the “ Constitution Act,”
1855. The trial of thirteen of the Ballarat rioters is held
in Melbourne ; all are acquitted.
1855. As the outcome of the report of a commission ap-
pointed to enquire into the state of the goldfields of
Victoria, the monthly license fee is abolished ;
miners’ rights are issued at the rate of £1 each per
annum, which give to the holders permission to dig
for gold anywhere within the colony ; and miners
are allowed to elect special representatives to the
Parliament to watch over their interests.
1855. Death of Major-General Sir Robert Nickle, Com-
mander-in-Chiet in the Australian Colonies.
1855. Governor Fitzroy (New South Wales) retires from
office, and is succeeded by Sir William Denison
(formerly Governor of Tasmania).
1855. Steam communication with England is stopped
owing to the Crimean War.
1855. The first railway in New South Wales—Sydney
to Parramatta —is opened.
41


1855, Mr. (afterwards Sir) Arthur Edward Kennedy be-
comes Governor of West Australia.
1855. The Sydney Mint is opened.
1855. Port Jackson is fortified.
1855. The “New Constitution Act” for Victoria is pro-
claimed (November 23).
1855. An Act is passed in Victoria to check Chinese
immigration.
1855. The first electric telegraph line is opened in South
Australia.
1855. Power is granted to the Government, by an Act
passed by the Imperial Parliament, to form the
Moreton Bay District into a separate colony from
New South Wciles.
1855. Sir Henry Young becomes Governor of Tasmania.
1855. Mr Richard Graves Macdonnell is appointed
Governor of South Australia.
1855-6. Establishment of Responsible Government in the
colonies.
1855. Inauguration of Responsible Government in Vic-
toria. The English system of two Houses of Legis-
lature is adopted ; the Upper House being com-
posed of thirty members, and the Lower House sixty
members—which number has since been increased to
eighty-six—both bodies to be elective ; members of
the Upper House to be owners of at least £5OOO
worth of real property.
1855. Mr. Haines forms the first Victorian Ministry
under the new Constitution. Voting by ballot is
moved by Mr. Nicholson ; and the motion is carried
in spite of the opposition of the Ministry. The
Haines Government resigns. Mr. Nicholson fails to
form a Ministry.
1855. Death of Sir Charles Hotham, Governor of
Victoria.
1856. The Governorship of Victoria is assumed by Major-
General Macarthur. Mr. Haines’ Ministry again
comes into power. Arrival of Sir Henry Barkly, the
New Governor.
1856. Death of William Buckley, at Hobart Town,
Tasmania (aged 76 years).
1856. Changes in the Constitution of New South Wales.
Responsible Government is introduced. Two Houses
H Y% - k ■
42


of Legislature are established, viz., Upper House
(composed of twenty-one or more members nominated
by the Governor); and Lower House (composed
fifty-four elective members). Mr. Stuart
Donaldson forms the first Ministry.
1856. Responsible Government is introduced into Tas-
mania. Two legislative bodies are adopted ; members
to both being elective.
1856. Mr. T. S. Mort constructs a dry dock at Sydney.
1856. A. C. Gregory organises an expedition, and goes
in search of Leichhardt. Starting from Cambridge
Gulf (West Australia), he strikes across to the Gulf
of Carpentaria, and thence to Moreton Bay, without,
however, meeting with any signs of Leichhardt’s
party.
1856. The first railway line in Victoria, between Mel-
bourne and Sandridge, is opened.
1856. The “ Patriotic Fund” is opened, to assist the
widows and orphans of soldiers killed during the
Crimean war.
1856. The Melbourne University is inaugurated.
1856. An intercolonial mail service is established.
1856. The colony of West Australia is constituted a
Bishop’s See —the first Bishop being Dr. Matthew
Blagden Hale.
1856-63. Constant and rapid changes occur in the Vic-
torian Government.
1857. A. C. Gregory, in command of an expedition, starts
from Sydney, to discover, if possible, traces of
Leichhardt’s lost expedition.—He returns, having met
with but little success.
1857. Death of Lady Barkly at Adelaide ; killed in an
accident while out driving.
1857. Discovery of the nugget “ Blanche Barkly” in
Victoria ; worth about £7OOO.
1857. The Australian Museum, at Sydney, is opened.
1857. Wreck of the “Dunbar” at the Gap, near the
entrance to Port Jackson (August 20). Of more than
one hundred lives on board, all perish save one—a
man named Johnston. (This dreadful disaster hap-
pened on one very stormy night, and was due to the
captain mistaking the Gap for the entrance to the
Harbour.)
43


1857. The right of voting in Victoria is conferred on
every man having resided in the colony a certain
time.
1857. The Sydney Exchange is opened.
1857. The first South Australian Parliament under Re-
sponsible Government assembles.
1857. The first electric telegraph line is opened in Tas-
mania ; telegraphic communication being established
between Hobart and Launceston.
1857. The Pitcairn Islanders remove to Norfolk Island.
1857- The Melbourne and Geelong railway is opened.
1857. The first railway in Tasmania is established.
1857. The Frazer family is murdered by the blacks at
the Dawson River, in Queensland.
1857. Hobart, Tasmania, is incorporated.
1857. Hobart is first lit with gas.
1858. The New South Wales Ministry, under Mr.
Cowper, passes a reform measure conferring a greater
electoral equality, universal suffrage, and the ballot.
1858. Manhood suffrage is introduced in New South
Wales (the privilege of voting being extended to
every male person over twenty-one years of age.)
1858. The number of members for the Lower House is
increased to sixty-eight.
1858. The “ Welcome Nugget ”is unearthed in Victoria.
It is sold for £10,500.
1858. Gold is discovered at Canoona, Port Curtis district,
in Queensland ; and also at the Fitzroy River. Arri-
val of thousands of diggers ; but the gold-fields prove
very poor, which causes much distress among the
miners.
1858. The Real Property Act is passed by the South
Australian Government. It provides that all trans-
ferences of land are to be registered at a public office
called the Lands Titles Office ; the purchaser’s name
is to be recorded, and a certificate of title given
to him ; and after this his right to the property
is indisputable. Mr. Torrens, with whom the Act
originated, is appointed Registrar of the Lands Titles
Office.
1858. Telegraphic communication is established between
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide.
44


1858. Discovery of gold near Rockhampton ; and in the
Coast Range, Queensland.
1858. Mr. Charles Ledger introduces a large number of
Llamas into the colonies from South America, as an
experiment. (These were afterwards bought by the
State, but the experiment proved a failure.)
1858. Major Warburton leads an expedition to Lake
Torrens, South Australia.
1858. Launceston, Tasmania, is incorporated.
1859. The northern province of New South Wales (or
Moreton Bay District) is separated from New South
Wales; and is constituted an independent colony,
under the napie of Queensland.
1859. Sir George Ferguson Bowen is appointed the first
Governor of Queensland.
1859. John McDouall Stuart in command of an expedi-
tion, is sent out by South Australian squatters, to
seek new pastoral, lands beyond Lakes Eyre and
Torrens.
1859. Brisbane, Queensland, is incorporated.
1859. Melbourne University graduates are placed on an
equal footing with graduates of other Universities, in
accordance with royal letters-patent to that effect.
1859. The first submarine telegraph cable to Tasmania
proves a failure.
1859. Circuit Courts are established at Drayton, Ipswich,
and Maryborough, in Queensland.
1859. Military Volunteers are first enrolled in Tasmania.
1859-60. The Kennedy district, in Queensland, is ex-
plored by Dalrymple.
1860. Queensland receives its constitution, which resem-
bles that of New South Wales. The first Queensland
Parliament assembles. Mr. (afterwards Sir) R. G.
Wyndham Herbert is the first Colonial Secretary ;
and Mr. Radcliffe Pring is the first Attorney-General.
1860. Discovery of copper at Wallaroo, in South Aus-
tralia. Mines are opened.
1860. A reward of £2,000 is offered by the South Aus-
tralian Government to the first individual who should
be successful in crossing Australia from south to
north. J. McDouall Stuart makes the attempt, but
fails.
45


». A grant of nearly £lO,OOO is given by the Victorian
Government towards organising an expedition for the
purpose of making new discoveries in Australia. Of
this sum £3,000 is to be devoted to importing camels
from Arabia. An additional sum of over £4,000 is
raised by subscriptions.
)-l. An expedition, under the command of Robert
O’Hara Burke and William John Wills, sets out from
Melbourne; reaches Menindie, on the Darling ; and
proceeds thence to Cooper’s Creek, where a depot
is formed. Leaving the other members of the party
there, Burke and Wills, with two men, King and
Gray, push on to the Gulf of Carpentaria, which they
approach in a state of exhaustion. On the return
journey, Gray dies ; the others arrive at Cooper’s
Creek to find the depot deserted. After making in-
effectual attempts to reach the settled districts to the
south, and experiencing great sufferings from star-
vation and exposure, Wills dies ; and shortly after-
wards Burke dies ; but King survives, and is be-
friended by a native tribe, with whom he lives until
rescued by Howitt’s relief party,
i, Sir John Young becomes Governor of New South
Wales.
[. Mr. (the late Sir) John Robertson introduces his
two Land Bills in the New South Wales Parliament.
(These measures, although opposed by the Council,
are subsequently passed into law.)
L Relief parties are organised by the various colonies
to go in search of Burke and V ills : —viz., Howitt’s,
from Victoria ; Walker’s, from New South Wales;
Landsborough’s, from Queensland ; and McKinlay’s,
from South Australia.
[. The Victorian party, under the command of A. W.
Howitt, succeeds in rescuing King, and in recovering
the remains of Burke and Wills. Walkers expedi-
tion crosses to the Gulf of Carpentaria from Rock-
hampton. Landsborough traverses the continent
from the Albert River, in Queensland, to Melbourne,
in Victoria, by way of the Barcoo River. McKinlay’s
expedition, starting from Adelaide, proceeds to
Cooper’s Creek, and thence to the Gulf of Carpen-
taria ; thus traversing Australia from south to north.
46


1861. J. McDouall Stuart makes a second unsuccessful
attempt to cross the continent. In this trip he dis-
covers Central Mt. Stuart.
1861. Frank Gregory’s expedition starts from the north-
west coast to penetrate to the interior. It proves
unsuccessful; but the Fortescue, Ashburton, DeGrey,
and other rivers are discovered.
1861. The first daily newspaper is published in Brisbane.
1861. The first exhibition is held in Queensland.
1861. A settlement is formed at Port Denison, in
Queensland.
1861. Colonel T. Gore Browne succeeds Sir Henry
Young as Governor of Tasmania.
1861. Copper is discovered on the Peak Downs, in
Queensland.
1861. Copper is discovered at Moonta, in South
Australia.
1862. Governor Macdonnell (South Australia) retires
from office ; and is succeeded by Sir Dominick Daly.
1862. (Sir) John Robertson’s Land Act—(free selection
before survey)—comes into operation in New South
W ales.
1862. Mr. John Stephen Hampton becomes Governor of
West Australia.
1862. McDouall Stuart succeeds in crossing Australia
from Adelaide to Van Diemen’s Gulf.
1862. An alteration is made in the land laws of Victoria.
(No more than 640 acres are to be selected by any
person in the same year.)
1862. The first issue of the “ Hobart Town Mercury,”—
a Tasmanian newspaper—appears.
1862. The “ Common Schools Act ” is passed by the
Victorian Parliament. (By this Act the denomina-
tional and national systems of education are combined
into one.)
1862. The first English cricketing team (H. H. Stephen-
son’s) visits Victoria and New South Wales.
1862. The “ Chinese Immigration Restriction Act ” is
passed in New South Wales.
1862. The Eugowra gold escort in New South Wales is
robbed by bushrangers.
1862. The Geelong and Ballarat railway is opened.
47


1862. The Pitt-street tramway in Sydney is opened for
traffic.
1863. High prices are paid in England for Queensland
cotton, owing to the scarcity of that material in con-
sequence of the American civil war.
1863. The Tasmanian Land Act is passed.
1863. Active search is made in Tasmania for gold and
other metals.
1863. The M'Culloch Ministry comes into power (Vic-
toria;.
1863. Departure of Governor Barkly (Victoria) —Sir
Charles Henry Darling succeeds him.
1863. An intercolonial conference is held in Sydney.
1863. State aid to religion is abolished in New South
Wales.
1863. Heavy floods occur in Queensland.
1863. O’Meally, the bushranger, is shot in New South
Wales.
1863. Adelaide is first lit with gas.
1864. The remains of Burke and Wills are conveyed to
Melbourne, where they are honoured with a public
funeral.
1864. The first sod of the first railway in Queensland is
turned at Ipswich.
1864. The cultivation of the sugar cane is introduced
into Queensland.
1864. Francis Gardiner, the bushranger, is captured in
Queensland.
1864. The foundation stone of the Brisbane Town Hall
is laid.
1864. Death of Sir R. R. Torrens.
1864. The Brothers Jardine explore the country from
Rockingham Bay to Cape York (Queensland).
1864. The Northern Territory is annexed to South Aus-
tralia. Sales of the lands of the Northern Territory
are held in Adelaide. The land is readily taken up
and preparations are made for forming a settlement.
1864 A settlement is formed at Adam Bay in the Nor-
thern Territory, by the South Australian Govern-
ment. Lieutenant-Colonel Boyle Travers Finniss is
appointed first (Jovernment Resident; and Mr. J. F.
Menton, engineer and surveyor. (Dissensions arise


from the first, resulting in the recall of Mr. Finniss,
and subsequently the settlement is abandoned.)
1864. The foundation stone of the Adelaide Town Hall
is laid.
1864. James M‘Culloch, the Victorian Premier, prepares
the “ Protective Tariff Bill,” It is rejected in the
Upper House.
1864. The National Museum, at Melbourne, is opened.
1865. Deadlock in Victoria. The Victorian Ministry,
being determined to pass the “ Protective Tariff Bill,”
embody it with the Appropriation Bill. This bill is,
however, rejected by the Upper House. In order to
pay the salaries of its Civil Servants, the Government
obtains a bank loan of £40,000.
1865. Daniel Morgan, Ben Hall, and John Gilbert, three
bushrangers, are shot in New South Wales.
1865. South Sea Islanders—or Kanakas as they are
called—are imported into Queensland to work on the
sugar and cotton plantations. Great numbers of them
are kidnapped by captains of vessels and landed in
Queensland.
1865. The first Queensland railway—between Ipswich
and Grandchester—is opened.
1866. A conference is held between the two Legislative
bodies of Victoria. Concessions are made on both
sides. The modified “ Protective Tariff Bill ” and
the “ Appropriation Bill ” are passed.
1866. Governor Darling (Victoria) is recalled for having
acted unconstitutionally, in concert with the Ministry,
in an attempt to coerce the Legislative Council, in
connection with the “Protective Tariff Bill.” He is
succeeded by Sir John Henry Thomas Manners Sut-
ton (afterwards Viscount Canterbury).
1866. Great depression and commercial crisis in Queens-
land. Failure of the bank; —many settlers become
bankrupt.
1866. Mr. mow Sir) Henry Parkes introduces before the
Legislative Assembly of New South Wales his famous
“Education Act.”
1866. An Intercolonial Exhibition is held in Melbourne.
1866. Sydney sovereigns are made legal tender.
1866. Riots break out at Brisbane, in Queensland.
49


1866. Gold is discovered at the Star River, in the north
of Queensland.
1867. The Queensland Government offers rewards for
the discovery of payable goldfields within the colony.
1867. Rich gold is discovered at Gympie, in Queensland,
by a wood-cutter named Nash.
1867. The “ Appropriation Bill” (Victoria) is rejected in
the Upper House, owing to provision having been
made in it by the Legislative Assembly for a grant of
£20,000 to Lady Darling, for her husband. But as
Lady Darling declines to receive the money, the bill
is passed the following year (1868).
1867. The Pitt-street tramway in Sydney is removed.
1867. The “ Vernon” is first used as a training-ship for
boys (New South Wales).
1867. John and Thomas Clarke —two bushrangers—are
captured and executed.
1867. The Western railway line, in New South Wales,
as far as Weatherboard, is opened.
1867. The foundation-stone of the Melbourne Town Hall
is laid.
1867-8. Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, the Queen’s
second son, arrives in the colonies on board H.M.S.
“ Galatea,” on a visit.
1868. The Duke of Edinburgh narrowly escapes assassi-
nation at the hands of O’Farrell, a young Irishman,
at Clontarf, Port Jackson, in New South Wales.
1868. Lord Belmore succeeds Sir John Young as Gover-
nor of New South Wales.
1868. Death of Governor Daly (South Australia). Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Hamley administers the Government
until the arrival of the new Governor.
1868. Transportation to West Australia ceases.
1868. Governor Bowen (Queensland) is succeeded by
Colonel Samuel Wensley Blackall.
1868. The “ Polynesian Labourers’ Act” is passed by the
Queensland Legislature. Government agents are
appointed to every labour vessel to watch over the
interests of the Kanakas.
1868. The Ravenswood goldfield, in Queensland, is
opened.
1868. The “Curtis Nugget,” worth £3OOO, is unearthed
in Queensland.


1868. The foundation-stone of the Sydney Town Hall is
laid.
1869. Governor Browne (Tasmania) is succeeded by Mr.
(afterwards Sir) Charles Du Cane.
1869. Sir James Fergusson becomes Governor of South
Australia.
1869. An expedition, under the command of John For-
rest, a Government surveyor, sets out from Perth,
West Australia, to search for traces of Leichhardt’s
lost expedition ; but it returns unsuccessful.
1869. The “Welcome Stranger,” worth nearly £ll,OOO,
the largest nugget on record, is unearthed in Victoria.
1869. Mr. G. W. Goyder, the Surveyor-General of
South Australia, proceeds to the Northern Territory,
and chooses a new site for settlement at Port Darwin,
where he lays the foundation of the town of Palmer-
ston. Under his direction, the settlement proves a
success.
1869. Death of William Laune, the last of the Tas-
manians.
1869. Death of John Pascoe Fawkner, the founder of
Melbourne.
1869. Gold is discovered at Waterhouse, in Tasmania.
1869. West Australia is divided into electoral districts.
1869. The first telegraph line in West Australia, be-
tween Perth and Fremantle, is opened.
1869. The Free Public Library, at Sydney, is first
opened.
1869, The British Australian Telegraph Company is
formed for the purpose of laying a submarine cable
between Singapore and Port Darwin.
1869. Governor Hampton (West Australia) is succeeded
by Mr. (afterwards Sir) Frederick Weld.
1869. The Gilbert River goldfield, in Queensland, is
opened.
1869. The first message is sent through the Bass Straits
submarine cable.
1869. Gold is discovered in the Barossa Ranges, near
Gawler, in South Australia.
1870. John and Alexander Forrest, in command of an
expedition, explore the shores of the Great Aus-
tralian Bight; and succeed in crossing from West
Australia to Adelaide.
51


1870. A riot of the unemployed takes place in Adelaide.
1870. F. Ward (or Thunderbolt), the bushranger, is
shot.
1870. A new land law comes into force in Victoria ; ac-
cording to which no more than 320 acres can be
selected by one person during the same year.
1870. An Intercolonial Conference is held at Melbourne.
1870. H. Power, the bushranger, is captured and brought
to justice.
1870. The construction of an overland telegraph line,
between Adelaide and Port Darwin, is commenced,
under the superintendence of Mr. Charles Todd.
1870. An Intercolonial Exhibition is held in the Prince
Alfred Park, at Sydney.
1870. The British military forces are withdrawn from
Australia.
1870. Great floods occur in Victoria.
1871. Death of Governor Blackall (Queensland). The
Marquis of Normanby succeeds him.
1871. A conference of delegates is held in Australia.
(Besides other points upon which the assembled re-
presentatives decided to take united action were
Telegraphic communication, intercolonial tariffs,
naval protection, and ocean mail and passenger ser-
vice).
1871. A submarine cable is laid between Port Darwin
and Banjoewangie, Singapore.
1871. Gold diggings are opened in the Northern Terri-
tory.
1871. The Queensland National Bank is established.
1871. The Mount Bischoff tin mine, in Tasmania, is dis-
covered by James Smith.
1871. Perth, in West Australia, is incorporated, and is
created a city.
1871. The Etheridge goldfield, in Queensland, is opened.
1872. An Intercolonial Exhibition is held at Melbourne.
1872. A Land Act for the Northern Territory is passed
by the South Australian Parliament.
1872. The Victorian Mint is opened.
1872. The payment of members of Parliament is intro-
duced in Victoria—each member to receive a salaty
of £3OO per annum. (The necessary measure, how-
ever, only passed into law after great opposition by
x 5. . /
52


the Council, and sharp contention between the two
Houses.)
1872. Sir Hercules George Robert Robinson succeeds
Lord Belmore as Governor of New South Wales.
1872. Tin is discovered in Maryland, New South Wales.
1872. The “ Maria,” having on board an expedition to
New Guinea, is wrecked on the coast of Queensland,
1872. The first telegraphic message from England is re-
ceived in Adelaide on June 20 (the overland line
being then not completed).
1872. The Mount Bischoff tin mine, in Tasmania, is
opened.
1872. Telegraphic communication between England and
Adelaide is established.
1872. The first through telegram from London to
Hobart is transmitted.
1873. The public funeral of W. C. Wentworth takes
place.
1873. Discovery of the Palmer River goldfields, in
Queensland. Great influx of Chinese to the mines;
thousands of Celestials settle in the district. (Their
presence being obnoxious to the European miners, a
poll tax of £5 is subsequently imposed by the Govern-
ment on every new arrival.)
1873. The San Francisco Mail Service is established.
1873. Mr. Elder places camels at the disposal of the
West Australian Government for exploring purposes.
1873. Colonel Peter Egerton Warburton’s expedition
crosses from Alice Springs—a station on the overland
telegraph line between Adelaide and Port Darwin—
to the Oakover River, on the North-v est Coast.
1873. Ernest Giles’ expedition is unsuccessful in its
attempt to cross from the telegraph line to the West
Coast.
1873. Sir George F. Bowen (formerly Governor of Queens-
land] succeeds Viscount Canterbury as Governor of
Victoria.
1873. Captain Douglas, Government Resident of the
Northern Territory, resigns ; and is succeeded by Mr.
G. B. Scott.
1873. Departure of Governor Fergusson (South
Australia); Sir Anthony Musgrave succeeds him.
53


1873. An Intercolonial Conference—presided over by
Mr. (now Sir) Henry Parkes —is held in New South
Wales.
1873. Sir James Martin is appointed Chief-Justice in New
South Wales.
1873. W. C. Gosse’s exploring expedition proves unsuc-
cessful ; after travelling westward from the telegraph
line, and penetrating but a short distance, it is forced
to return.
1874. John Forrest, in command of an expedition, crosses
successfully from Geraldton, in West Australia, to
the overland telegraph line.
1875. Sir William Wellington Cairns succeeds the
Marquis of Normanby as Governor of Queensland.
1875. Ernest Giles’ second expedition succeeds in cross-
ing from the telegraph line to the West Coast.
1875. Mr. (afterwards Sir) Frederick Aloysius Weld
becomes Governor of Tasmania.
1875. Sir W. F. Stawell acts as Deputy-Governor of
Victoria during Governor Bowen’s absence in Great
Britain.
1875. Sir William Cleaver Francis Robinson becomes
Governor of West Australia.
1875. The first Circuit Court is held at Palmerston,
Northern Territory. Mr. Justice Wearing, one of
the Judges of the Supreme Court of South Australia,
arrives at Port Darwin to preside over the Court.
1875. Wreck of the steamer “Gothenburg” on the
Great Barrier Reef, off the coast of Queensland,
while on its way from Port Darwin to Adelaide.
More than 100 persons, including Judge Wearing and
Dr. Milner, Government Resident, are drowned.
1875. The National Gallery of Victoria is opened.
1875—76. Mr. W. 0. Hodgkinson’s expedition starts
from George Town, in Queensland, and explores the
country in the vicinity of the Cloncurry and Diamen-
tina Rivers.
1876. The submarine cable between Port Darwin and
Banjoewangie is interrupted during a great portion of
this year.
1876. The Western Railway Line, New South Wales, is
opened to Bathurst.
54


1876. Death of Truganinni, the last Tasmanian
aboriginal.
1876. The English mail is first brought overland to
Sydney from Melbourne.
1876. Mr. E. W. Price succeeds Mr. Scott as Govern-
ment Resident of the Northern Territory.
1876. The Hodgkinson goldfield, in the north of Queens-
land, is opened.
1876. The Hobart Town waterworks are opened.
1877. An electric telegraph line is constructed between
Perth and Adelaide, and communication is estab-
lished.
1877. Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy becomes Governor of
Queensland.
1877. Mr. A. W. Sergison, in command of an expedi-
tion, explores the country between Port Darwin and
the Victoria River ; and declares it to be well
adapted for pastoral purposes.
1877. A conference is held in Sydney to consider the
duplication of the cable between Australia and
Europe.
1877. Messrs. John Robertson and Henry Parkes (New
South Wales) receive the distinction of knighthood
(K.C.M.G.).
1877. The Adelaide University is inaugurated.
1877. Major-General Sir Henry St. George Ord becomes
Governor of West Australia.
1877. A gold robbery takes place from the steamship
“ Avoca.”
1877. Sir William Francis Drummond Jervois becomes
Governor of South Australia.
1877-8. Severe drought in Queensland. Great depres-
sion in trade.
1878. Death of the Rev. W. B. Clarke (June 16).
1878. Death of the Rev. Dr. John Dunmore Lang
(August 8).
1878. A conference is held at Melbourne to consider the
duplication of the submarine cable between Port
Darwin and Banjoewangie.
1878. Wreck of the “ Loch Aird.”
1878. The Kelly gang of bushrangers is outlawed.
1878. “ Black Wednesday,” Victoria (December 8.)—120
Civil Servants are dismissed.
55


1878-9. —Mr. Favenc, in command of the Trans-Conti-
nental Expedition, crosses from Blackall to Port
Darwin.
1879. An expedition, under the leadership of Alexander
Forrest, crosses from Perth to Port Darwin, and ex-
plores the north-western portion of the continent.
1879. The bushrangers of the Kelly gang are captured.
1879. Lord Augustus VV. F. S. Loftus succeeds Sir Her-
cules Robinson to the Governorship of New South
Wales.
1879. John Forrest’s exploring expedition surveys the
country between the DeGrey and Ashburton Rivers,
in West Australia.
1879. The Marquis of Normanby becomes Governor of
Victoria.
1879. An International Exhibition is held at Sydney, in
the Garden Palace, which had been built for the pur-
pose, in the Botanical Gardens.
1879. The Sydney Steam Tramway is established.
1889. Sir Henry Parkes introduces his “Educational
Bill,” providing for a compulsory system of education,
and abolishing State aid to denominational education.
1880. An International Exhibition is held at Melbourne.
1880. Sir William C. F. Robinson becomes Governor of
West Australia a second time.
1880. Captain Rennefather, in command of the “Pearl,”
examines a portion of the eastern shore of the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
1880-1. An Intercolonial Conference is held at Mel-
bourne.
1881. An individual named Skuthorpe reports having
found Leichhardt’s journal, and having discovered
other traces of the lost expedition. His statements,
however, are discredited.
1881. Two expeditions, under the command respectively
of Mr. Frank Hann, and Major-General Fielding, ex-
amine and survey the route of the proposed Trans-
continental Railway from Roma (Queensland) to Point
Parker.
1881. The first railway is established in West Australia.
1881. Major Sir George C. Strahan succeeds Mr. Frede-
ick Weld as Governor of Tasmania.
56


1882. Mr. Ernest Giles examines the country between
Farina and Feake.
1882. Mr. McMinn explores the country in the vicinity
of the Mary and Adelaide Rivets, Northern Territory.
1882. The Adelaide University is opened.
1882. The Garden Palace in Sydney is accidentally
burnt.
1882. Shocks of earthquake are felt at various places in
the colonies.
1882. The Sydney Gallery is first opened on Sunday.
1882. A Postal Conference is held at Sydney.
1882. Several interruptions occur in the overland tele-
graph line during this year.
1882. The steamship “Austral” sinks in Sydney Har-
bour.
1882. The Federation Congress is held at Sydney.
1883. Sir William C. F. Robinson becomes Governor of
South Australia.
1883. Messrs. Favenc and Crawford cross the Queensland
border, and explore the country surrounding the
McArthur River.
1883. New Guinea is taken possession of by the Queens-
land Government.
1883. Mr. David Lindsay starts from Palmerston, and
explores Arnhem Land.
1883. The “Criminal Law Consolidation Act” is passed
by the New South Wales Parliament.
1883. Australia is traversed from the Gulf of Carpentaria
to Melbourne by Mr. George Morrison, unarmed and
alone.
1883. Governor Robinson (West Australia) is succeeded
by Sir Frederick Napier Broome.
1883. The railway line between Sydney and Melbourne
is completed.
1883. Sir Anthony Musgrave becomes Governor of
Queensland.
1883. The Broken Hill Silver Mines, in New South
Wales, are opened.
1883. Mr. W. J. O'Donnell explores the country sur-
rounding the Ord River, in West Australia, and tra-
verses the country to Katherine station, on the over-
land telegraph line.
57


1883. Mr. Winnecke, with a number of camels, starts
from the VVarbnrton River, and explores the interior
as far as Goyder’s Pillars, in the Tarlton Range.
1884. Sir Henry Brougham Loch becomes Governor of
Victoria.
1884. Mr. Stockdale explores the Kimberley district, in
the north of West Australia, and discovers six rivers
between Cambridge Gulf and the Prince Leopold
Range.
1884. Mr. J. S. Parsons is appointed Government Resi-
dent of the Northern Territory.
1885. Gold is discovered at Kimberley, in West Australia.
1885. Lord Charles Robert Carrington succeeds Lord A.
Loftus to the Governorship of New South Wales.
1885. Captain Carrington examines the Goyder, Blyth,
and other rivers in the north of Australia.
1885. The Soudan Contingent leaves Sydney. (The idea
of this expedition originated with W. B. Dailey, Esq.)
1885. Archbishop Moran is made the first Australian
Cardinal.
1885-6. Mr. D. Lindsay, in command of an expedition,
starts from Adelaide, traces the course of the Finke
River, examines the country on the border of South
Australia and Queensland, and ultimate!} 7 reaches
Palmerston,
1886. The first Federal Council is held at Hobart, in
Tasmania.
1886. Wreck of the steamship “Ly-ee-Moon” near
Green Cape, on the coast of New South Wales.
1886. The Rev. E. Tenison-Woods explores a portion of
the Northern Territory, and traces the Mary River to
its source.
1886-7. A great depression prevails throughout all the
colonies.
1887. An exhibition is held at Adelaide, in South Aus-
tralia, in commemoration of the jubilee of the colony.
1887. Mr. Hugh Milman examines the Batavia and
Ducie Rivers, in the north-west of Queensland.
1887- A terrible explosion takes place at the Bulli Col-
liery, in New South Wales. Over 80 miners lose
their lives.
58


1887. Mr. David Lindsay, accompanied only by a black-
fellow, traverses the continent from Palmerston to
Adelaide.
1887. Sir Robert C. Hamilton is appointed Governor of
Tasmania.
1887. Mr. J. R. Browne, in command of ah expedition,
traverses the country from Northam, in West Austra-
lia, to Eucla, on the shores of the Great Australian
Bight.
1887. The Queen’s Jubilee is celebrated throughout the
colonies with great enthusiasm.
1888. The second session of the Federal Council takes
place at Hobart.
1888. The railway line between Sydney and Brisbane is
opened.
1888. The centenary of Australia is celebrated.
1888. The statue of the Queen is unveiled at Sydney,
1888. Heavy floods occur in Queensland.
1888. Mr. Ernest Favenc, accompanied by Mr. W. R.
Cuthbertson, leaves Melbourne for Adelaide to
organise an expedition for the purpose of exploring
the central portions of Australia.
1888. H.M.S. “ Orlando,” the flagship of the Australian
Squadron, arrives in Port Jackson.
1888. The Centennial International Exhibition is held at
Melbourne.
1889. The railway line between Perth and Albany, in
West Australia, is opened.
1889. General Sir Henry Wylie Norman succeeds Sir
Anthony Musgr - ave as Governor of Queensland.
1889. The third session of the Federal Council is held at
Hobart.
1889. Mr. W. H. Tietkins conducts an expedition into
the interior, discovering and naming Lake Macdonald
and Kintore Range.
1889. The Earl of Hopetoun succeeds Sir H. Loch as
Governor of Victoria.
1889. Payment of members of Parliament is introduced
in New South Wales ; each member to receive £3OO
per annum.
1889. Governor Robinson (South Australia) is succeeded
by the Earl of Kintore.
1889. Arbor Day is inaugurated in South Australia.
59


1889. The Centennial Hall, at Sydney, is completed, and
opened.
1890. A Federation Conference is held at Melbourne.
1890. \ penny postage is instituted throughout Victoria.
1890. Wreck of the s.s. “ Quetta” in Torres Straits.
1890. Mr. J. G. Knight becomes Government Resident
of the Northern Territory.
1890. Great flood on the Darling River. Destruction of
the railway embankment at Bourke, New South
Wales.
1890. A duplicate cable is laid to New Zealand.
1890. The great organ at the Sydney Town Hall is
opened.
1890. Great strike of Trades-Unionists in New South
Wales. Riots occur at the Circular Quay, in Sydney ;
the Riot Act is read. Mounted troopers patrol the
- streets of Sydney.
1890. Sir William C. F. Robinson, for the third time,
becomes Governor of West Australia.
1890. Responsible Government is introduced into West
Australia. The new Constitution is proclaimed
(October 22).
1891. The first West Australian Parliament under Re-
sponsible Government assembles (January 20).
1891. The fourth session of the Federal Council is held
at Hobart.
1891. The National Australasian Convention is held.
1891. Death of Sir John Robertson (May 8).
1891. Australia is admitted to the Postal Union.
1891. The Australian Auxiliary Sqrmdron arrives in Port
Jackson.
1891. The Earl of Jersey becomes Governor of New
South Wales.
1891-2. An exhibition is held in Tasmania.
1891-2. Mr. David Lindsay, in command of a well-
organized expedition, under the auspices of the
Royal Geographical Society (including several scien-
tific men), sets out from Adelaide, and explores the
interior to the west of the telegraph line.
1892. Major-General Richardson retires from the com-
mand of the New South Wales military forces, and
is succeeded by Major-General Hutton.
60


1892. Great strike of miners at Broken Hill, in New
South Wales.
1892-3. Rich developments occur in the Mount Lyell
silver mines in Tasmania.
1893. The fifth session of the Federal Council of Aus-
tralasia is opened at Hobart in Tasmania.
1893. Heavy floods occur in Queensland —Brisbane is
completely insulated.
1893. Severe shocks of earthquake are experienced in
West Australia.
1893. Mr. David Lindsay, in command of an expedition,
examines the country between Adelaide and Fowler’s
Bay.
1893. The Maritime Strike is declared in New South
Wales ; unionist seamen are called out.
1893. A grand military tournament and display is held
in Sydney, under the direct supervision of Major-
General Hutton.
1893. Floods occur in New South Wales.
1893. The Earl of Jersey resigns the Governorship of
New South Wales, and is succeeded by Sir Robert
William Duff.
1893. Viscount Gormanston becomes Governor of Tas-
mania.
1893-4. Strike of shearers throughout New South Wales
and Queensland.
1893-4 Gold is discovered at Coolgardie and Kurnalpi in
West Australia.
1894. Gold is discovered at Wyalong and other places
in New South Wales.
1894. A general election takes place in New South
Wales, resulting in a decided majority for the free-
traders. The Dibbs Protectionist Ministry resigns.
Mr. George H. Reid becomes Premier.
1894. An exhibition is held at Hobart.
(iT^K~e)
F. Cunninghame & Co,, Printers, 146 Pitt Street, Sydney.
61


