

DAVENPORT, BROTHERS,
AND
PROF. W. M. FAY.
A PAMPHLET
CONTAINING
A SHORT SKETCH.
OF THE
Lives, Travels, & Performances
OF THE
BROTHERS
DA V ENPORT,
AND
PROF. W. M. FAY.
Authenticated and Publislied by Permission.
COMPILED and WRITTEN by J. H. JENKINS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
TAMWORTH:
Printed by Gosling & Smart, "News” Office.
1877


DAVENPORT, BROTHERS,
AND
PROF. W. M. FAY
Aifc. P JL M: P H 1 £ GD
CONTAINING
A SHORT SKETCH
OF THE
Liyes, Travels, & Performances
OF THE
BROTHERS
DAVENPORT,
AND
PROF. W. M. FAY.
Authenticated and Published by Permission.
0
COWILED and WRITTEN by J. H. JENKINS.
♦
PRICE : ONE SHILLING.
jyag-. ... v ■ =
TAMWOETH ;
Printed by Gosling & Smart, “News” Office.
was®-


BIOGRAPHY AND ADVENTURES
OF THE
DAVENPORT BROTHERS.
Probably no era of the world’s history has been so replete with
evidences of man’s immortality, or so fall of testimonies to the
fact that this, even with all its amazing achievements, is hut the
beginning of his career of greatness, whether viewed with refer-
ence to a post mortem, existence, an active life beyond the grave,
or the possibilities and probabilities of the race on earth.
Of all that has had a tendency to startle men, revolutionize
previous methods of thinking, and to effect radical changes in
mind, politics, morals, and religion, unquestionably the greatest,
most potent and subtle, wide-reaching and radical, has been that
grand movement, whereby, to the minds of millions, man’s con-
tinued existence after death has been physically and sensibly
demonstrated ; and among the multitudinous agencies whereby
this radical movement and change has been, and still is being,
effected, the Brothers Davenport confessedly stand pre-eminent
among the many thousands whose mission appears to lie in that
direction.
The life, experience, and mission of these two most extraordin-
ary young men constitute the historic task allotted to the writer
by the seemingly accidental circumstance of his having attended
one of their seances.
The parents of these two strangely-organized men are still
living. Ira Davenport, sen., is in body and spirits apparently but
little older than his boys; while their mother, lam told, is as
fresh and youthful as are most women of but half her years ; and
she, no doubt, owes thisto the fact that through her veins courses
a rich stream of healthy, strong, genuine English blood ; for she
was born in merry England, and, like all other English girls, was
brought up, as girls should be, on good, common, solid, healthy
food ; had plenty of sunshine and fresh air ; and Was not pam-
pered to death upon sweets and poisonous cakes, candies, and
other abominations, as are nine in every ten of American girls.
It has been said that there is a streak of meanness in every New
ffeglader. It may sot bd so; but, if it it,- bad table-mabige-
ment while they are young must be the producing cause.
Mrs. Davenport, sen., is descended from an ancient English
family of considerable importance, and can point to an ancestry
high on the genealogical scroll.


Emigrating to this country at an early age, she eventually was
married, in the year 1839, to Ira Davenport; and from this
union sprang the remarkable personages, a portion of the ex-
perience of whose lives and deeds it is the writer’s task to record
in the following pages.
Ira Davenport, sen., was born in the town of Skaneateles,
Onondaga County, State of New York, in the year 1816 ; his an-
cestry being American, immediately, hut remotely purely English.
His marriage took place in Chautauqua County, New York, at
the date already specified.
Mr. Davenport was for many years connected with the civil
department of the State Government; and, latterly, with the
police of his native State. At the present time, he is in the en-
joyment of a sound constitution, and the health consequent upon
a life devoted to usefulness, and totally dissociated from all habits
detrimental to either mind or body ; indeed, but few married
people present a finer picture of good health, well-preserved youth,
and personal calm and happiness, than do these two persons; and
doubtless to this pregnant fact, and the legitimate consequences
resultant therefrom, the world, and the age in which we live, is
indebted for these wonderful children, and the still more wonder-
ful mission to which they have been called, and concerning which
the reader’s close attention is about to he challenged.
Ira Erastus Davenport, the eldest son of Virtue and Ira
Davenport, was horn in Buffalo, Erie county, State of New York,
on the seventeenth day of September, 1839.
This child was quite remarkable from his earliest infancy. He
appeared to think at an age when the majority of children are
purely vegetative; and there was an expression of quiet power in
his eyes and features, which, while it was a source of pride to his
parents, and of attraction and admiration on the part of their
friends and acquaintances, yet caused them no little uneasiness,
for they feared to lose him. Such, however, was not to he the
case ; for the child grew rapidly in health, strength, and intelli-
gence.
About fifteen months after the birth of Ira, he had a brother
born to him, namely, William Henry, who first saw the light of
this world on the first day of February, 1841; and on the 23rd
day of December, 1845, Elizabeth Louisa, their only sister, was
born in Buffalo, N.Y., at which place also was William born.
The most extraordinary likeness ever seen in persons not twins
existed between It a and William personally for many years, but
not now to so great an extent; and, to a great degree, mentally
also But socially there is a marked difference; for whertaa Ira
is full of life and vivacity, William is remarkable for the sober
gentleness of his demeanor; the one is the incarnation of good
6


feeling, life, and gladness, and the other of delicate sensitiveness,
rapidity of perception, intuition, and calm dignity.
The elder 'brother was, during his childhood, quite remarkable
for his retiring disposition ; for so shy was he, that, when visitors
and strangers came to his parent’s house, he would quietly steal
ofi, as if their presence was irksome to him, and alone, in some
retired spot, would muse away the hours, returning to the house
only when well assured that they were safely off.
Mr. Davenport, sen., related to the writer many incidents of
the juvenile career of his eons, and, among others, stated, that,
long before Ira could walk alone, he took to drawing, as if by a
natural instinct, and even at that early period of his life, gave
unmistakeahlc evidences of the possession of high natural talent
in that peculiar line ; for he would creep all over the floor until
he found a stick suitable to his purpose, and then, full of glee, and
crowing with joy, away he would scramble, till he found a sandy
spot, or, failing in that, some place where dust had collected and
settled, whereupon he would amuse himself for hours together,
in drawing landscapes of a pattern peculiar to artists of that age,
and figures of things, which, while distantly human, could truly
he said to resemble all things generally, and nothing in particular.
Mrs. Davenport, whenevej she wished for a quiet time, had
nothing to do but hand Ira a bit of stick, or some chalk, and that
young gentleman gave her no more trouble till eating time came
round again ; and the pictures, if such they could be called, were
quite surprising, and by no means haphazard performances: on
the contrary, they displayed considerable purpose and design, and
gave bright promise of a futuic artist of eminence, which career
would doubtless have been his, but that a Power above us all had
decreed and ordained a different one, —and one, too, compared to
which the brightest career ever run by any painter or artist of any
kind pales and sinks into utter insignificance ; for it was that of
uplifting the veil which blinded the eyes of untold thousands, to
the tremendous fact of human immortality ; that is to say, pro-
vided that the manifestations about to he recorded, and whieh
took place in the presence of himself and brother, be really what
many claim them to be, absolute and undeniable demonstrations of
the continued life and activity of man when the fever called
“ living ” is over at last, as many of us believe.
As in riper years, so, also, in their infantile days, there Was a
strange and mutual sympathy between the brothers; for without
speaking a single word, and, indeed, long before one of them could
Speak at all, they held mental intercourse together ; and Ira, the
eldest, quite frequently interpreted to others what William him-
self was wholly unable to express. By a singular internal
telegraphy, they read, sent, and received thoughts from each
ether.
7


It is a remarkable coincidence that Prof. W. M. Fay, whose
fame is so world wide, and who has accompanied the brothers in
their travels throughout the world, and contributed to such a great
extent in the wonderful manifestations that have from time to
time taken place, was born in the year 1839, on the 16th day of
September, only one day previous to the birth of the elder Daven-
port Brother.
Their first seance was given in the evening of the 13th day of
February, 1855, Prof. Fay being with them and in conjunction
up to the present, since which time they, like all other prominent
and public men, have had to submit to very trying and severe
tests, and to their credit, have been eminently successful, and
come out scathless. Many conjurors have tried, and to a certain
extent have been successful in imitating them, but all have
failed to produce the same effects. Dr. Silvester, the Illusionists,
Herr Tolmaque and many others have managed to satisfy the
public with false representations of the Original Davenport per-
formances and tried their utmost to expose their phenomena. The
public, however, are the best judges in the matter, and from the
fact of the immense amount of patronage these gentlemen have
received during their travels, while others have signally failed,
should be sufficient proof.
In the “ dark ages,” the marvels done in presence of the
brothers Davenport would hate been referred by a large majority
of the people to necromancy or witchcraft. In these enlightened
days, all those who do not care to examine ascribe them at once to
legerdemain, and the mechanical deceptions of professional jugglers,
or so-called conjurers. Of course, at this day, and in this country,
no one out of the nursery believes in magic, as it was anciently
believed in everywhere, and still is over the Eastern world.
Most people have been amused, and perhaps astonished, at the
tricks of our modern magicians, who fry pancakes in hats, make
cards or money dance, pour all kinds of liquors out of a single
bottle, shoot gold watches into the centre of uncut oranges, and so
on. These tricks are amusing, and, until we know the modus
operandi, they are surprising. It is not strange, that those who
cannot account for the Davenport manifestations, and who also
know but little about them, should class them with such perfor-
mances.
It is not strange, either, that as soon as the various “professors”
of these magical arts found the phenomena attending the brothers
Davenport noticed in the leading papers of England, as their
amusing, but not especially wonderful performances were not likely
to be, they should endeavour to take advantage of this
kind of publicity, and of the excitement these wonders had
produced. And if the “ professors ” believed that the Davenports
8


were mere jugglers, like themselves, they had also a right to be
indignant, as would every one, that they were gaining notoriety,
and perhaps money, under false pretences. I cheerfully admit,
that it would be right, and perhaps the duty of every magician in
England, to expose such a base and infamous deception ; and they
could not do it too speedily.
The Brothers Davenport had scarcely appeared in London, be-
fore Prof. Anderson, then performing at St. James’s Hall, declared
that they were “ very clever young artistes, who have been per-
forming the rope-tying trick, bell-ringing, trumpet-flying, and
changing-coat experiments, all of which my son is exhibiting at
the present time in America by natural agency only.” Then
came “M. Tolmaque, prestidigitateur,” declaring that “he could
do the same things as the Davenports, in the same manner,” and
offering to show a committee hew they were done, if the Daven-
ports would do the same. An “ Officer of the Army ” offered to
take off his jacket!)-without removing his coat; but when he was
required to have his hands tied together, like the Davenports, he
respectfully declined.
The Brothers Davenport met the statement of Prof. Anderson
fairly and squarely, as follows :
308 Regent Street, Oct. 8,1864.
Sir.— Having read your letter in “ The Morning Post” of Saturday last
wc beg to accept the challenge made or implied in that communication.
We are ready to appear before a party of twelve or more gentlemen,
specially chosen as capable of fairly investigating the phenomena we
present. You shall be present, and shall have every facility given you to
examine the empty room and the instruments we use. You shall then
explain, to the satisfaction of the gentlemen present, the legerdemain you
have staled we employ, or produce, if you can, in your own person, the
same results. Should you succeed by legerdemain in performing or imitat-
ing those results, or be able to detect and expose imposture, we shall then
be ready to acknowledge that your accusations are justly founded. But if
you fail, as we are well assured you will do, we shall require you to retract
publicly the accusations you have publicly made against us.
We are, &c., Brothers Davenport.
To Prof. Anderson, St. James’s Hall.
The professor denied that he had given any challenge. It would
be impossible for even a professor of legerdemain to back more
coolly out of a difficulty.
A similar letter was sent to “M. Tolmaque, prestidigitateur ” ;
and he also declined the encounter in the same manner.
These two magicians did not so with their enchantments.
Finally, to cover the whole ground, the following letter was
written, and, like the others, published in “ The Morning Post”
(Oct. 8, 1804)
London, Oct. 4,1864.
Sir, —The ssnvir which took place in your house, and in the presence of
yourself and friends, lu-t Wednesday evening, has given rise to much
discussion, in which we have been pronounced by some not- only jugglers.
9


but impostors (say jugglers, and therefore impostors). Two professed
conjurers have publicly announced that they can produce, by legerdemain,
all the phenomena we hare exhibited. We accept the challenge, and shall
feel obliged if a committee of gentlemen of character and position can be
found, selected from such as arc quite free from any prejudice in the
matter. A serrnce shall then take place in a room which may be examined
beforehand, and with instruments to be furnished by the committee. We
are prepared to produce there certain phenomena in the presence of these
gentlemen, and in the presence of the two conjurers ; and, when we have
done, the conjurers shall be required to attempt to produce the same, under
the same conditions, or shall expose, to the satisfaction of the committee,
the fraudulent means we are stated to have employed : but this they shall
do by the exercise and exhibition of legerdemain, (or, if they please, by
machinery), and not by any occult power of the nature of that we possess
and which they might use in secret, and then repudiate ; for we do not
pretend that we have the exclusive possession of the power we employ.
We trust, sir, in fairness to us, and to those who believe in our honesty,
that the test will be fairly and strictly applied, and the result, whatever it
may be, made public.
We make this offer in all sincerity and good faith ; and we hope it will
be met and dealt with in the same spirit.
We are jmurs truly,
Ir\ Erastus Davenport.
WILLIAM H. DAVENPORT.
To Dion Boucicault, Esq.
This fair and open challenge, which has simple good faith
written in every sentence, and which in the latter portion shows
the extent of it in a very curious manner, met with no response
from the magicians.
A correspondent of The Morning Post asks" of M. Tolmaque,
who gave an exhibition of tying and untying himself, very clever,
no doubt, but not at all to the purpose : Can he, d. e-wed in black,
and holding powdered chalk or flour in his hands, effect both the
phenomena of tying and untying the ropes, as exhibited by the
brothers Davenport, and in the same space of time, without drop-
ping any of the flour from his hands ? Can he produce visible and
palpable hands, distinctly and unequivocally human to outward
sight and touch, ending at the wrist, without wires or rods or
human arms connected with them 1 The writer offers to pay any
sum he may name to any prestidigitateur who can do these things,
on condition, that, failing, he will give a quarter of the sum to
some charity.
Professor Anderson, instead of accepting any of these offers,
challenged the brothers to do their “ tricks ” in his theatre, in full
light, instead of darkness ; knowing perfectly well that total dark-
ness in some cases, and partial obscurity in others, was usually
an indispensable condition, and, so far as can be known, one of the
laws of the phenomena,—as much so, perhaps, as in the camera
obscura. If the things done in the absence of light could be done
in its presence, the cabinet and ropes, sealing-wax, flour, straps of
10


diachylon, and all other tests, might be dispensed With, though it
may be doubted if people would more readily believe.
M. Tolmaqne declined the challenge, on the ground that he
would have nothing to do with works of darkness.
Mr. Palmer was not quite satisfied with the backing-out of the
prestidigitateurs. He was nettled, perhaps, that a portion of the
press persisted in declaring that the magicians had solved the
problem and exposed the cheat, when they had refused the fairest
opportunities to do so, with all the glory that would have attended
such an achievement. Mr. Palmer, therefore, on the 22nd of Oc-
tober, published the following :
If M. Tolmaqne or any other person will, by legerdemain, produce pre
cisely the same phenomena as those to which the Brothers Davenport give
rise, under precisely the same conditions, to the satisfaction of a majority
of the noblemen and gentlemen who were present at the sin nee held last
Friday evening at the Hanover-square Rooms, I will pay £IOO to any of
the dramatic funds that may be selected : the party, of coarse, attempting,
should he fail, to pay a like sum to the same institution.
The dramatic funds vainly watch and wait for that hundred
pounds ; but the response of M. Tolmaqne is a curiosity. He
writes ( Morning Star, Oct. i 4j :
I, M. Tolmaqne, prestidigita'.ciir, hereby inform Mr. Palmer, that, as'long
as he sails under false colours, 1 will not answer Mm, or any of his friends,
on the subject of the Brothers Davenport.
M. Tolmaquk.
And this, I believe, ended the pretences of the magicians, who,
not being able to do so with their enchantments, gave curious ex-
periments of their own, and untied knots at the music-halls.
This feat of untying knots is old and familiar enough, and is
just what the brothers Davenport do not do. To prove this, they
allow the ropes to be sealed; to prove it, they hold both their
hands filled with flour or other white powder; to prove it, they
have been sewn up in bags, enclosed in wooden tubes, and subjec-
ted to all the tests mentioned in these pages, and a hundred
beside.
If the Davenports are impostors, they are the most magnificently
successful ones that ever deluded the astute Yankee nation since
tbe Declaration of Independence or before it. Not only that, but
they have palmed off a gigantic swindle on the sharpest man in
Europe (Napoleon III.), and “ bagged ” the whole French nation
besides, to say nothing of England, and her lords, dukes, earls,
viscountq barons, M.D.’s. surgeons, authors, poets, lawyers,
barristers, artists, clergymen, philosophers, and— canaille, which
has more brains, and of a better quality generally, than the
world usually gives it credit for. Along with England go Ireland,
Scotland, Prussia, Austria, Monaco, Italy, and Russia, with their
respective dignitaries, potentates, kings, emperors, the third
11


estate, the press, aud all their commonalities. Wherefore, if I
repeat, they are impostors, and do the whole thing “by the twist
o’ th’ wrist,” all I can say is, Well done, Davenports ! You’re a
couple of first-class “bricks,” and no mistake!
Of human insects small, amidst all truth’s beraters
The smallest of them all are “ prestidigitateurs.”
There’s not a hole so small, but through it they will wheedle
And ne’er touch sides at all, e’en through a tiny needle.
Fourscore such souls would mount the upper air,
And smuggle into Heaven, astride a single hair.
We come now to a period in the experiences of the brothers,
which, for the credit of English character, we wish might never
have had cause to be recorded. But the truth of history de-
mands that the essential character of that brutal spirit which
inspired the ruffianly mobs to their outrageous attacks should be
revealed to the public. It must be remembered, that the brothers
had landed in England while a sanguinary war was raging in their
native land, that involved the very life of the nation. The
English people, as a whole, were in undoubted and undisguised
sympathy with the slave-holders’ rebellion; and northern men
were constantly subject to insult and abuse, wherever and when-
ever their patriotic proclivities were known. Quiet attention to
one’s own business, or studied avoidance of the vexed question in
dispute between the North and the South, did not shield any
person from incivilities when it became known that he was from
the hated North.
It was soon known, of course, that the young Americans were
Northerners; and although they never sought occasion to pro-
claim their patriotism among an unfriendly people, neither did they
ever swerve from or deny their loyalty to the government which
they loved, and the glorious old flag under which they were born.
This was enough for the rabble, who, under other circumstances,
might have tolerated the Devil himself if he had proposed to as-
tonish them by his powers, but who could not and would not
tolerate the hated “ Yankees,” if they could find the shadow of a
pretext against them.
Thus, it was not merely natural incredulity as to uncommon
phenomena, or even religious bigotry, which they were obliged to
encounter, but the intense hatred of an ignorant or prejudiced
people, whose traditions had prepared them to believe, that, if
America could be broken to pieces, the prosperity and power of
England would be augmented. This is not the place to inquire
into the philosophy of such a sentiment; but that it existed every-
where, and became among the lower classes of English people, es-
pecially in the cities and in the north of England, an intense hatred
to loyal Americans, none can truthfully deny.
The brothers , had made a provincial tour in Yorkshire and
12


Lancashire, attended with marked success and fair treatment, es-
pecially by the press of the towns they visited, until they arrived
at Live r pool, where, after giving a private seance, and obtaining
the usual manifestations (which were stated by The Liverpool Post
to have been most strange and entirely unaccountable ”), they had
public exhibitions. After the first of these, it appears that the
persons who despaired of exposing them by argument, organized a
violent physical attack upon them, which ended in a riot, and the
destruction of the cabinet. The history of this occurrence, and the
subsequent riots at Huddersfield and Leeds, are carefully stated iu
the following address of the brothers Davenport to the British
public, which was prepared for and published in the leading English
papers;—
THE BEOTHEES DAVENPORT TO THE BRITISH PUBLIC.
We appeal to the free press and the enlightened and fair-dealing people
of the British Empire for a candid consideration of the following statement,
and for the even-handed justice usually given in this country to all
persons, rich or poor, citizens or strangers. We ask also, as a matter of
justice, that journals which have published accounts of the recent riots at
Liverpool, Huddersfield, and Leeds, of which we were the victims, should
also give the facts contained iu this statement.
We beg, furthermore, most respectfully to commend to the consideration
of the Eight Honorable Sir George Grey, and the magistracy and police
authorities of the United Kingdom, the fact, that within two weeks, in three
of the most important provincial towns in England, without any fault of
our own, transgressing no law of the realm, and offering no violence or
injury to any person, wo have been made to suffer in property, and have
been menaced with extreme personal injury, with apparent danger to our
lives, as will appear by the following statement of facts :
After having given over two hundred public and private seances, or ex-
hibitions of physical phenomena, such as have been described in all the
leading journals of Europe and America, and in our published biography
at the Queen’s Concert Room*, London, and the mansions of the nobility
and gentry of England, we visited Liverpool on the 13th February, and,
as is our custom, gave a private seance, to which the members of the press
and others were invited, who reported the satisfactory character of the
exhibition. February 14. we gave two public seances at St. George’s Hall
with like results : a private seance at a gentleman’s mansion, and a public
morning performance on Tuesday, wore alike satisfactory.
On Tuesday evening, we were proceeding with another exhibition, when
two persons, a Hr. Hulley and a Mr. Cummins, acting as a committee from
the audience, re. attempting to tie our wrists, caused so much pain that we
were compelled to protest against the torture they were inflicting. We
iwere willing to be tied with entire security, as we have been many hundred
•tunes by riggers, sailors, engineers, and other skilled persons, or to give
e.tiv reasonable test in proof that we have no active part in the phenomena
witnessed in our presence ; we had no fear of a “ tom-fool-knot,” or of any
erode of fastening that did not inflict unbearable torture. We declined to
be bound by a committee whose unfairness and even brutality, were soon
taanifesr. Hatley and Cummins refused to retire and give place to another
committee : the audience was made to believe that it was the form of a
funicular knot, and not the cruelty of its application, to which we ob-
lecled ; and we were compelled, by an nnappeaseable tumult, to return the
money taken for tickets, and postpone further proceedings.
13


On the fallowing evening, printed regulations were given to every person
entering the hall, and read from the platform; in which we distinctly
claimed the right of rejecting any person on a committee whom we should
find acting with unfairness. This would be our right were we criminals on
trial for felony. Before commencing, we invited all persons who were not
satisfied with these regulations to retire from the hall, and receive the money
they had paid for entrance.
Messrs. Hulley and Cummins, backed by a crowd of their friends, came
again upon the platform, and, from their previous unfairness, were promptly
rejected by us as a committee. They insisted upon tying us, and appealed
to the audience to support them in their demand. They refused to leave the
platform when requested, took possession of our cabinet, and in various
ways excited violent manifestations in the audience.
We were then assured by a gentleman of Liverpool, that, unless we sub-
mitted to the demands of these men, there would be a furious riot. He
promised that they should not be permitted to Injure us, and we finally
yielded to his assurances. But they had no sooner placed the cords upon
©ur wrists, than they inflicted a degree of pain which could not be endured.
We protested against this violence, but in vain ; and, refusing to submit to
it, longer, had the cords cut from our wrists, and left the platform, which
was instantly invaded by the mob. Our cabinet was broken in pieces ; and
Hulley and Cummins, the heroes of this assault of s ;me hundreds of brave
Englishmen upon four unarmed, unoffending, and unprotected foreigners,
were borne from the hall upon the shoulders of their friends, apparently
proud of their triumph.
Our cabinet destroyed, and our business interrupted, with heavy pecuniary
damage, in Liverpool, we returned to London, had a new cabinet construc-
ted, and on the following Monday repaired to Halifax, where we gave our
usual public and private exhibitions, without interruption.
Our next engagement was at Huddersfield, on February 21. On our
arrival, we were informed that Hulley and Cummins, the heroes of the
Liverpool mob, had been telegraphed to, and were coming, with a strong
deputation from that town, to break up our exhibition. The infuriated
mob was the common talk of the t wn. We appealed to the police; and
we are happy to say, that, in this instance, a sufficient force was promptly
sent to the hall for our protection. The crowd that assembled gave many
indications of being prepared for violence. When our representative had
stated the regulations adopted, and that we proposed simply the presenta-
tion of certain facts, without any theory, and asked for the appointment
of a committee, two gentlemen, instructed, it was said, by Hulley and
Cummins, came upon the platform, and commenced to tic our wrists
together behind us, which they did with needless severity. We bore the
pain, however, until, carrying the ropes through the hole in the scat, they
drew the backs of our hands down upon it with such violence as to threaten
dislocation, placing their knees upon the seat, and in one instance upon the
hands of one of us, to give them greater purchase. This torture, delibera-
tely, and to all appearance maliciously inflicted, we, of course, could not
bear ; and, at our demand, the cords were instantly severed. We exposed
our livid wrists, in which every strand of the cord was visibly imprinted,
to the audience, who, to the credit of their humanity, cried out, “ Shame !'’
But the mob, organized to break up our exhibition, had no such feeling,
and made a simultaneous rush for the platform, where, however, an efficient
police force saved our property from destruction, and us from violence,
which under the stimulating addresses of the heroes of the Liverpool
outrage, expended itself in hootings and bowlings.
We had engagements for two nights at Hull; but on our arrival, we were
informed by the gentleman who had engaged us, the chairman of the hall


committee, and the police superintendent, that there were such indications
of a violent mob, that wo could net be permitted to give our exhibition ;
and we received from the gentleman chiefly interested the following note :
“ Music Hall, Jaeeet Stbeet, Hull, 22nd February, 1865.
-“Sis, —As I believe there is reason to apprehend a disturbance at the hall
this evening, if the seance of the Davenport, brothers takes place, I have
come to the conclusion that it would be advisable to postpone the seance. I
am sorry to do this, particularly as yourself and the Messrs. Davenport have
arrived in Hull, and are ready to fulfil your engagement ; but I am driven
to do so by the organized attach, which I am given to understand is in pre-
paration. lam also urged to do so by the proprietors of the hall, who are
alarmed lest their property should be damaged by any disturbance.
“ I remain yours faithfully,
“ROBERT BOWSER.”
“ Ebv. Dk. Fbkguson, Eoyal Station Hotel, Hull.”
Failing to find at Hull that protection in our legal rights which we had
supposed was extended to every man on English ground, we went to meet
our next engagement at Leeds, w here the scenes of Liverpool and Hudders-
field were re-enacted with increased violence,. We were met by an or-
ganised nioli. and were refused the protection of the police when it was
demanded. When the ringleaders or agents of the mob, taking possession
of the stage, had subjected ns to the same violence that had been planned
and practised upon us at Liverpool and Huddersfield, —the mob again
destroying our property, smashing tire cabinet, and breaking up or pur-
loining our musical instruments, and we were protected from personal
violence, amid tile smashing of door-panels and the howling of an enraged
populace, by the tardy- arrival of a detachment of police and the brave and
firm conduct of one of its members, —our agent, contrary to all justice, was
compelled to order the return of the admis-ion-moncy paid by those who
bad come for flic very purpose of making the riot from which we suffered.
On the same day, we laid given a public seance, attended by the members
of the press .and some of the most respectable citizens of Leeds, in which
the famous “ tom-fool-knot ” was used, and in which, so far as we were
able to judge, the phenomena exhibited gave entire satisfaction.
It remains but to state two or three facts which may throw further light
on these proceedings.
In Liverpool, as reported in The Mercury, Mr. Ilulley, when accused of
acting unfairly to, and being an enemy of, the Davenports, said, “ I avow it;
I am a bitter foe to the Davenporis.” After such an avowal, what right had
he to act on a committee whose duty was strict impartiality.
We wish to be just to the police. At Huddersfield, though they could not
give us order, wo were protected from actual violence. At Leeds, snob pro-
tection was withhold until too late to save our property.
At Liverpool, The Mercury says :
“The appearance of inspectors Valentine and Southwell, with a force of
thirty men, did not stop the process of demolition. The police, indeed, did
not attempt to interfere so long as only Ihr property of the Davenports was
threatened
The Leads Mercury, reporting the violent proceedings against us at
Huddersfield, says:—
“Mr. Walker, not considering that his hands could pull the rope tight
enough, used \his knee to assist him ; and the brother he was operating on
again protested. .... Several persons had at that time gone to the
cabinet, and Davenport showed his wrist to some of them. It had a livid
math, fringed with red, about the breadth of a finger ; and in the hollow of
this mark there were the marks of the individual strands of the rope."


Yet some hare been found to insist on inflicting this brutal torture upon
ns, with howling mobs to back them, as if we were malefactors or wild
beasts. It may be doubted if such an amount of violence, wrong, and
outrage has been inflicted on any unoffending man in England since
Clarkson was mobbed by the slave-traders of Liverpool, and Priestly by
the mad bigots of Birmingham.
And for what reason ? What evil have we done ? Of what wrong can
any man accuse us ? How have wo offended the public or any individual ?
If there were anything immoral or unlawful in our exhibition, we could
understand the feeling which has prompted so much lawless violence,
which has been so largely excused by the press, and tolerated by the police
authorities. We are called humbugs ; but, if every humbug in England is
to be mobbed, it may be well for both the Government and the people to
consider the possible consequences. But we solemnly and earnestly deny
that we have ever deceived any man in this matter, or made any false
representation; and we can appeal to many thousands of intelligent
persons, on both sides of the Atlantic, who will testify to the reality of
these manifestations. It was said to us at Liverpool, “ Admit that yaa
practice deception, and we have nothing to say against you.” How could
we admit what is not true ? For eleven years we have constantly asserted
that the physical facts exhibited in our presence are not-piqduced actively
or consciously by ourselves, nor by confederates, nor by any trick or decep-
tion whatever; and we have submitted t S hundreds of tests, and are ready
to submit to hundreds more, to satisfy any reasonable mind of the truth of
this declaration.
It is utterly false that we have refused to be tied with a particular knot.
We have simply and only refused to be tortured. We have been covered all
over with the most complicated fastenings that could be devised ; we have
been held hand and foot by persons above all suspicion of fraud, and tested
in every conceivable way, without affecting the manifestations which occur
in our presence. In eleven years, we have never been fastened so that the
“ force ” attending us, whatever it may be called or considered, has not re-
leased us. We do not believe we can be, unless placed in such pain as to
destroy the conditions under which this “ force ”is able to act. With or
without fastenings, this power attends us; single or together, awake or
asleep, bound or held ; and in whatever way our passivity is procured, the
manifestations alike in kind, if not in degree, attend us. This is no fraud—
no trick.
Were we mere jugglers, we should meet with no violence, or we should
find protection. Could we declare that these things done in our presence
were deceptions of the senses, we should, no doubt, reap a plentiful harvest
of money and applause. As tricks, they would transcend, according to the
testimony of experienced observers, any ever exhibited in Occident or Orient.
The wonders of the cabinet, or, still more, of the dark seance, surpass all
pretensions of conjurers. We could safely defy the world to equal them,
and be honored for our dexterity. But we are not jugglers, and truthfully
declare that we are not; and we are mobbed from town to town, our pro-
perty destroyed, and our lives imperilled.
What is the possible motive for these outrages, which some of the enlight-
ened organs of public opinion have incited and excused 1 Breaking no law,
we claim the protection of the law which, we repeat, even were we criminals,
would save us from illegal outrage. If we, asserting physical facts interesting
to every man of science, and doing our best to demonstrate their verity, and
satisfy a laudable curiosity respecting them, are to be treated as we have
been this past fortnight in four large English towns, who can be safe from
similar outrages ? We have ventured to appeal to her Majesty’s Secretary
for the Home Department; and we appeal also to every member of the


British Parliament, as we do to the whole British people, to give our case a
proper investigation.
If, in spite of our solemn declarations of entire good faith, and all our
efforts to demonstrate the reality of the phenomena which attend us, we are
disbelieved, every man in England has a right to absent himself from our
exhibitions. We do not ask the attendance of any person who is not ready
to give a fair and candid examination to (he tests to which we submit and
the facts presented. There is no reason for excitement, and no excuse for
violence. There is as much call for riot against electricity, or a mob to put
down oxygen. We have not even an opinion to support or a creed to pro-
mulgate ; only certain curious, or. it may be, important fads to exhibit.
Shall we be allowed to do this 1 This is the question now to be decided.
The riots at Liverpool. Huddersfield, and Leeds, have excited and alarmed
all England. In scores of places where we have engagements, involving
many thousands of pounds, our agents, or those interested, have become
frightened, and their and our interests are placed in jeopardy, ahull t-hey
be ‘Sacrificed 1 It is for the people, the press, and the Government'Of Eng-
land to determine.
It is our intention to go on jp the wort in which we are, in perfect sin-
cerity, engaged. tWe are ready to give, in every town in the United
Kingdom, the proofs that we. have given in London of the reality of the
phenomena we exhibit, and with which the tying of ropes, on which so
much stress is laid,'.has so little to do that they might be entirely dispensed
with, substituting many other tests of an equally or more satisfying charac-
ter. We arc ready, in good faith, to fulfil every engagement ; but we de-
mand, as we think wo have a right to demand, the protection of the laws
under which we have voluntarily placed ourselves, and a little more of
boasted “ English fair play,” of which we have heard so much, and, in a few
cases, experienced so little.
Ira Eeastus Davenport.
WM. HENRY DAVENPORT.
(Known as the brothers Davenport.)
London, Feb. 27, 1863.
To the Editor of the Diihj yens.
THE DAVBSPOBT BEOTJIEES.
Sir, —A seance by the Brothers Davenport took place in my house
yesterday, in the presence of Lord Bury, Sir Charles Nicholson, Mr John
Gardiner, Sir C. Lennox Wyke, Ecv. E. H. Newenham, Iter. W. Ellis,
Captain E. A. Inglefield, Sir. Charles lleade, Mr. James Matthews, Mr.
Algernon Borthwick, Mr. I. Malles, Mr. 11. E. Ormerod, Sir. J. W. Kaye,
Mr. J. A. Bostock, Sir. H. J. Eidcout, Sir. Eobert Bell, Mr. J. N. Mangles,
Sir. H. M. Dumphy, W. Tyler .Smith. 11. D., Sir. E. Tyler Smith, Sir. T. L.
Coward, John Brown, M.D., Mr. Eobert Chambers, and Sir. Dion Bouci-
cault.
The room in which the meeting was held is a large drawing-room, from
which all the furniture had been previously removed, excepting the carpet,
a chandelier, a small table, a sofa, a pedestal, and twenty-six cane-
bottomed chairs.
At two o’clock, six of the above party arrived, and the room was subjected
to careful scrutiny. It was suggested that a cabinet to be used by the
Brothers Davenport, but then erected in an adjacent room, should be re-
moved into the front room, and placed in a spot selected by ourselves.
This was done by our party ; but, in the process, we displaced a portion
of this piece of furniture, thus enabling us to examine its material and
structure before we mended it. At three o’clock, our party was fully


assembled, and continued the scrutiny. We sent to a neighbourjpg music-
seller for six guitars and two tambourines, so that the implements to be
used should not be those with which the operators were familiar. At half-
past three, the Brothers Davenport arrived, and found that we had altered
their arrangements by changing the room which they had previously
selected for their manifestations. The seance then began by an examina-
tion of the dress and persons of the Brothers Davenport; and it was certi-
fied that no apparatus or other contrivance was concealed on or about their
person. They entered the cabinet, and sat facing each other. Captain
Ingleficld, then, with a new rope provided by ourselves, tied Mr. W.
Davenport hand and foot, with his hands behind his back, and then bound
him firmly to the seat where he sat. Lord Bury, in like manner, secured
Mr. I. Davenport. The knots on these ligatures Were then fastened with
sealing-wax, and a seal was affixed. A guitar, violin, tambourine, two bells,
and a brass trumpet, were placed on the floor of the cabinet. ‘The doors
were tjjen closed, and a sufficient light yas permitted ip the room to
enable us to see what followed. I shall omil any dctailed'account of the
Babel of sounds which arose in the cabinet, and the violence with which
the doors’were repeatedly burst open and the instruments expelled ; the
hands appearing, as usual, at a lozenge-shaped orifice in the centre door
of the cabinet. The following incidents seem to us particularly worthy of
note : While Lord Bury was stooping inside the cabinet, the door being
open, and the two operators seen to be sealed and’ bound, a detached
hand was clearly observed to descend upon him ; and tgf- started back re-
marking that a hand had struck him. ’ Again, in the’ full light of the
gas chandelier, and during an interval in the seance , the doors of the
cabinet being open, and while the ligatures of the Brothers Davenport were
being examined, a very white, thin, female hand and wrist quivered for
several seconds Jin the air above. The appearance drew a general ex-
clamation from all the party. Sir Charles Wyke now entered the cabinet,
and sat between the two young men, his hands being right and left on each,
and secured to them, The doors were then closed, and the Babel of sounds
recommenced. Several bands appeared at the orifice : among them the
hand of a child. After a space, Sir Charles returned amongst us, and
stated, that, while he held the two Brothers, several hands touched his face
and pulled his hair ; the instruments at his feet crept up, played round his
body and over his head, one of them lodging eventually on his shoulders.
During the foregoing incidents, the hands which appeared were touched and
grasped by Captain Inglefleld ; and he stated, that, to the touch, they were
apparently human hands, though they passed away from his grasp.
I omit mentioning other phenomena, an account of which has already
been rendered elsewhere.
The next part of the seance was performed in the dark. Two ropes were
thrown at their feet, and in two minutes and a half they were tied hand and
foot, their hands behind their backs, bound tightly to their chairs, and their
chairs bound to an adjacent table. While this process was going on the
guitar rose from the table, and swung or floated round the room afld over
the heads of the party, and slightly touching some. Now a phosphoric light
shot from side to side over our heads ; the laps and hands and shoulders of
some were simultaneously touched, struck, or pawed by hands ; the guitar
meanwhile sailing round the room, now near the coiling, and tfien scuffling
on the head and shoulders of some luckless Wight. The bells whisked here
and there, and a light thrumming was maintained on the violin. The two
tambourines seemed to roll hither and thither on the floor, now shaking it
violently, and now visiting the knees and hands of our circle ; ail these
foregoing actions, audible or tangible, being simultaneous. Mr. Rideout,
holding a tambourine, requested it might be plucked from his hand : it was


.almost instantaneously taken from him. At the same time, Lord Bury made
a similar sgquest; and a forcible attempt to pluck a tambourine from his
grasp was made, which he resisted. We then requested that the coabof one
of the brothers should be removed. We heard instantly a violent twitch ;
and here occurred the most remarkable fact. A light was struck before the
coat had quite left the brother’s person ; and it was seen quitting him,
plucked ofll,jhim upwards. It flew to the chandelier, where it hung for a
moment, and then fell to the ground. The brother was seen meanwhile
bound hand and foot, as before. One of our party now divested himself of
his coat, and it was placed on the table. The light was extinguished, and
this coat was rushed on to Davenport’s back with equal rapidity. During
the above occurrences in the dark, we placed a sheet of paper under the feet
of these two operators, and drew with a pencil an outline around them, to
the end, that, if they moved, it might be detected. They of their own ac-
cord oifered to have their hands filled with flour, or any other similar sub-
stance; to prpye they made no use of them ; but this precaution was deemed
unnecessary : we required them, however, to count from one to twelve re-
peatedly, that their voices, constantly heard, might certify to us that they
were in the places where they were tied. Each of our own party held his
neighbour firmly, so that no one could move without two adj acent neigh-
bours being aware of it.
At the termination of this seance, a general conversation took place on the
subject of what we had heard and witnessed. Lord Bury suggested that the
general opinion seemed to be, that we should assure the Brothers Daven-
port that, after a very stringent trial and strict scrutiny of their proceedings,
the gentlemen present could arrive at no other conclusion than that there
was no trace of trickery in any form ; and certainly there was neither con-
federates nor machinery ; and that all those who had witnessed the results
wo'uld freely state in the society in which they moved, that, so far as their
investigations enabled them to form an opinion, the phenomena which had
taken place in their presence were not the product of legerdemain. This
suggestion was promptly acceded to by all present.
Before leaving this question, in which my name has accidentally become
mixed up, I may be permitted to observe, that I have no belief in what is
called spiritualism, and nothing I have seen inclines me to believe in it;
indeed, the puerility of some of the demonstrations would sufficiently alienate
such a theory. But Ido believe that we have not quite explored the realms
of natural philosophy ; that this enterprise of thought has of late years been
confined to useful invention ; and we are content, at least, to think that
the laws of nature are finite, ascertained, and limited to the scope of our
knowledge. A very great number of worthy persons, seeing such phenomena
as I have detailed, ascribe them to supernatural agency ; others wander
around the subject in doubt; but, as it engages seriously the feeling and
earnest thought of so large a number in Europe and America, is it a subject
which scientific men are justified in treating with the neglect of contempt ?
Some persons think that the requirement of darkness seems to infer
trickery. Is not a dark chamber essential in the process of photography 1
And -what would we reply to him who should say, “ I believe photography
to be a humbug ; do it all in the light, and I will believe otherwise, and not
till then”? It is true that we know why darkness is necessary to the
production of the sun-picture ; and, if scientific men will subject these
phenomena to analysis, we shall find out why darkness is essential to such
manifestations. I am, &c.,
DION BOUCICAULT.
326 Regent Steebt. Oct. 12,1861.


SEANCE WITH NAPOLEON.
On Saturday afternoon, Oct. 28, a notice from his Majesty,
Emperor Napoleon, was very unexpectedly received by the
Davenports, requesting them to appear at the palace of St.
Cloud that evening, at eight o’clock. As it was then after five,
and as such an interview had been entirely unsought by them, the
Brothers were not wholly prepared to meet them on so short a
notice. They immediately despatched a message to St. Cloud, to
the effect that it would bo impossible for them to appear at that
time, as the necessary arrangements (packing, transporting, and
erecting the cabinet) would take a much longer time. His
Majesty would listen to no excuse, but insisted pn seeing them
that evening, stating that a little unavoidable delay on their part
was excusable under the circumstances.
They were afterwards informed that it was not until Saturday
noon that the Emperor wag'-aware of their presence in Paris, as he
had been deceived by the ftilsehoods of the press, which affirmed
that they had gone to Germany. As. he saw them advertised to
appear at La Salle Herz, to continue all the week, he thought
Saturday evening would be the only opportunity of seeing them
without interfering with their public arrangements.
They arrived at St. Cloud about nine o’clock, and found some
thirty distinguished persons of the court assembled, and among
them the Emperor and Empress, also the young Prince Imperial,
a fine, active little fellow, who was anxious to have them teach
him the trick, as he called it.
During the process of erecting the cabinet, which occupied
about three-qa iru-i s of an bom', his Majesty was present, and
looked r.n with the greatest interest, closely scrutinizing every
part us it was properly adjusted. Everything being in readiness,
the company being seated, two persons came forward, and, in a
very scientific and skilful manner, commenced binding the
Brothers, his Majesty standing near, and examining every cord and
knot placed upon them. The Empress, upon one occasion,
thinking the ropes upon their wrists were too tightly drawn,
ordered them to be slackened, and would only allow the tying to
proceed after the most positive assurance on their part that the
cords caused them no inconvenience. After the tying process was
completed, an I while the instruments were being placed in the
cabinet by one of the gentlemen, the trumpet, which had just been
put in upon the floor, and while the doors of the cabinet were
open, suddenly sprang into the air, and fell near the Emperor.
This was repeated several times, with valuations, in the strong
glare of gas-light; and other manifestations, commonly occurring
with them, were given with more than ordinary force.
During the evening, one of the gentlemen entered the cabinet,


and received several striking manifestations ; and, in making Ins
report of what he had experienced, he assured their majesties, and
all present, that what had occurred while he was seated in the
cabinet was produced by some foreign power; that the brothers
did not move a single muscle, and that he sat as still as possible.
Many tests, not commonly given, were obtained during the
evening. By request of the emperor, a watch was taken from his
Land, and carried to different persons in the room. The removal
of the coat, by Professor Fay, while the knots were sealed, and the
Lands securely fastened, and the light being introduced while the
coat was in the air, and plainly visible, drew an exclamation of
wonder and surprise from tho company. We think we are justi-
fied in asserting that there was not one individual present, who,
after witnessing the wonders of that seance, had the least doubt of
the reality of the phenomena..
At tho conclusion of the seance, the brothers and Professor Fay
were detained for half an hour by the emperor and empress,
answering questions in regard to tho phenomena and their causes,
the emperor saying he was not surprised at tho excitement which
such an extraordinary exhibition created in a large assembly. It
was, lie thought, imprudent to attempt to show such phenomena
to many persons at one time, who could not test for themselves
their reality. After many expressions of their entire satisfaction,
the imperial party withdrew at half-past one in tho morning, and
the Davenports sat down to a sumptuous supper which had been
provided for them at the palace.
On the following day, the emperor marked his further apprecia-
tion of the exhibition by sending to the Davenport party an
unusually munificent gift for their services.
PROFESSOR LOOMIS’S STATEMENT.
At one end of Willard’s Hall is a largo platform about fifteen
feet square, and throe feet from the floor, carpeted. At the back
side of this platform, resting on three horses, about eighteen
inches high, with four legs each (one inch in diameter), was a
box, or cabinet, in which the phenomena occurred. It is necessary
to describe the box critically, in order to bo able to understand the
occurrences which took place.
After a very careful examination took place, I find the box
.seems to be made for two purposes only; first, to exclude the
light; and second, to be easily taken apart, and packed in a
small space for transportation. It is made of black-wnlnut
boards, from one-fourth to one-half of an inch in thickness. The
boards are mostly united by books and hinges, so as to be taken
apart and folded up. The box is about seven feet high, six fee t
wide, and two feet Jeep ; and the back was one inch in front of
21


the brick wall of the building. It has three doors, each two feet
wide, and as high as the box; so that, when the doors are open,
the entire interior of the box is exposed to the audience. Across
each end, and along the back, are boards about ten inches wide,
arranged for seats, firmly attached to the box. These are one-
half inch walnut boards. At the middle and near the back edge
of each of these seats are two half-inch holes, through which
ropes may be passed for the purpose of tying the boys firmly to
their seats.
The entire structure is so light and frail as to utterly preclude
the idea that anything whatever could be concealed within or
about its several patts by which any aid could be given in produc-
ing the phenomena witnessed. The top and bottom of the box
were of the same thin material, and not tongued and grooved, so
that the joints were all open. The floor was carpeted with a loose
piece of carpet, which was taken out. The entire inside of the box
was literally covered with bruises and dents, from mere scratches
to those of an inch deep.
I examined the box thoroughly in all its parts, and am satisfied
that there was nothing concealed in it; nor was there any way by,
which any thing could be introduced into it to aid in producing
phenomena.
The phenomena exhibited may be divided into several classes.
a. Before the performance commenced, the audience chose a
committee of three, of which I was one. The other two were
strangers to each other and to myself. I never saw them before
that evening, have never seen them since, and do not know their
names. One of the committee, a stout, muscular man, over six
feet in height, professionally a sea-captain, and who remarked to
me as he was performing the operation, that he had pinioned many
prisoners, tied one of the boys in the following manner; viz., a
strong hemp rope was passed three times around the wrist, and
tied ; it was then passed three times round the other wrist, and
tied again, the hands being behind the back. The rope was then
passed twice around the body, and tied in front as tightly as
possible. Before this was completed, the wrists had commenced
swelling, so that the flesh between the cords was even with their
outer surface, the hands puffed with blood and quite cool. The
circulation was almost completely stopped in the wrists. The boy
complained of pain, and said, “ Tie the rope as you wish, but I
cannot stand it. lam in your power, but you must loosen the
rope.” I remarked to the captain that it was cruel to let the rope
remain so tight as it was ; that security could be gained without
being necessarily cruel. We examined his wrists again ; and the
captain decided not to loosen the rope. The whole work of tying
the boy was closely watched by me during the entire progress, and


thoroughly examined when done ; and I must say that very little
feeling was exhibited for the boy. No human being could be
bound so tightly without suffering excruciating pain. His hands
were released in about fifteen minutes. I then examined his wrists
carefully. Every fibre of the rope had made its imprint on the
wrists. I examined them a second time, one hour and thirty
minutes after, and the marks of the rope were plainly visible. He
was pinioned as tightly around the body. After being thus tied
by his hands, he was seated at one end of the box, and a second
rbpe, being passed around his wrists, was drawn, both ends,
through the holes in the seat, and firmly lied, underneath.
His legs were tied in a similar manner, so that movement of his
body was almost impossible.
All the knots were a peculiar kind of sailor knots, and entirely
beyond the reach of the boy’s hands or mouth.
The other Davenport boy was tied in a similar way, by another
member of the committee. After being tied, I carefully examined
every knot, and particularly noticed the method in which he was
bound. The knots were all beyond the reach of his hands or
mouth. He was as securely bound as the other, the only differ-
ence being that the ropes were not as tight around the wrists.
This one, as the other, was tied to his seat, the ropes being passed
through the holes, and tied underneath to the ropes attached to
his legs. Thus fastened, one at one end of the box, and one at
the other, they were beyond each other’s reach.
Thus far I was perfectly satisfied of three things :
1. There was in the box no person except the boys, bound as
above described.
2. It was physically impossible for the boys to liberate them-
selves.
3. There was introduced into the box nothing whatever beside*
the boys and the ropes with which they were bound.
These being the conditions, the right-hand door was closed;
then the left-hand door; and finally the middle door. At the
same time the gas-lights were lowered, so that it was twilight in
the room. Within ten seconds, two hands were seen by the
committee and by the audience, at an opening near the top of the
middle door ; and one minute after, the doors opened of their own
accord, and the boy bound so tightly walked out unbound, the
ropes lying on the floor, every knot being untied. The other boy
had not been released ; and a careful examination showed every
knot and every rope to be in the precise place in which the com-
mittee left it.
The doors were closed as before, with nothing in the box be-
sides one of the boys, bound as described, hand and foot, with all
the knots beyond the reach of his hands or mouth, and in less


than one minute they opened without visible cause, and the boy
walked ont unbound, every knot being untied.
h. The box being again carefully examined, and found to
contain nothing but the seats, the boys were placed in them un-
bound, one seated at one end and one at the other. Between
them, on the floor, was thrown a large bundle of ropes, and the
doors were then closed. In less than two minutes, they opened
as before, and the boys were bound hand and foot in their seats.
The committee examined the knots and the arrangements of the
ropes, and declared them more securely bound than when they
had tied themselves. I then made a careful examination of the
manner in which they were tied, and found as follows ; viz., a
rope was tightly passed around each wrist, and tied, the hands
being behind the back; the ends were then drawn through the
holes in the seat, and tied underneath, drawing the hands firmly
down on the seat. A second rope was passed several times around
both legs, and firmly tied, binding the legs together. A third
rope was tied to the legs, and then fastened to the middle of the
back side of the box. A fourth rope was also attached to the legs
and drawn backward, and tied to the ropes underneath the seat,
which hound the hands. This last rope was so tightened as to
take the slack out of the others. Every rope was tight, and no
movement of the body could make any rope slacken. They were
tied precisely alike- I also examined the precise points where the
ropes passed over the wrists, measuring from the processes of the
radical, ulnar, and metacarpal hones. I also carefully arranged
the ends of the ropes in a peculiar manner. This arrangement
Was out of reach and out of sight of the boys, and unknown to
any one but myself. The examination being ended, the following
facts were apparent: —
1. There was no one in the box with the boys.
2. There was nothing in the box with the boys, except the
lopes.
S. It was physically impossible for the boys to have tied,them-
selves, every one of the knots being beyond the reach pf their hands
or mouths, and the boys being/onr feet apart.
4. The time elapsing from the closing of the doors to their
opening (less than two minutes by the watch) was altogether too
short for any known physical power to have tied the ropes as they
were tied.
c. The boys being tied in this manner,, one of the committee
yjas requested to shut the doors ; he stepped forward, closed the
right-hand door, also the left-hand door, and was about closing the
middle door, when two hands came out of the box, one of which
hit him a severe blow on the right The committee-map,
Ttas partly in the box, and. felt the blow, but did not know whgt


struck him. He immediately threw open the doors, but nothing
could be found but the boys, tied as before. I carefully re-examined
the positions of the ropes, and found them as I had left them.
The hands were seen by the audience distinctly. The lights had
not been turned down, and the hands were in the plain gas-light,
and remained in sight several seconds. Having satisfied myself of
the reality of the hands, having seen the blow given by one of
them, which was sufficient to turn the committee-man partly round,
I examined them with reference to their position in relation to the
boys, anatomically considered. The middle door had not been
closed, and the committee-man had not left the box; both boys
were firmly tied to their seats, and the gas was fully lighted. The
hand that appeared to the left of the committee-man might,have
been, so far as place and anatomical £ relation was concerned,
the right hand of the hoy at the left side of the box ; but the hand
that struck the man could not have belonged to either boy. It
was more than four feet from either one, and at least two feet too
high ; and, had either body been sufficiently near, it must have been
a right hand on a left arm !
d. The box was then carefully examined again, and nothing
could be found, except toe boys, bound as described before.
There was then placed on the floor, between the boys, a bell, a
violin, a guitar, a tambourine, and a trumpet. This being done,
the left door was closed, then the right door, and as the committee
man was closing the middle door, the brass trumpet, weighing
about two pounds, jumped up from the floor, struck the top of
the box with great force, and fell out on the floor. This took
place while the committee-man stood facing the box. The door
was wide open, and the committee-man stood partly in the box.
The boys were again carefully examined, and found to be tied as
at first. I examined the ropes that I had carefully and privately
arranged, as before described, and found them as I had left them.
e. The trumpet was placed back, and all the doors closed.
Within ten seconds, the violin was tuned and began to play ; at
the same time the guitar, tambourine, and boll began to play ; all
joining in the same tune. Part of the time, the bell was thrust
out of the window in the upper part of the middle door by an arm,
and played in sight of the audience. While the music was being
made, there was a multitude of raps, both light and heavy, on all
parts of the box. The first tune was played and repeated, and a
few seconds of comparative quiet followed, broken only by the
instruments jumping about the box, and a few raps. Soon a
second tune was begun, in which all the instruments joined as
before. In the midst of this tune the doors suddenly opened them-
selves, and the instruments tumbled about, some one way, some
another, and part fell on the floor. The time between the stopping


of the music and the opening of the door was not a single second ;
and I went at once to the box, and found both boys bound, hand
and foot, as I had left them. I examined the ropes, particularly
around the wrists, and found them in the precise position in which
I had left them, measuring from the processes of the radial,
ulnar, and metacarpal bones. I also found the ends of the ropes
under the seats, which I had, as previously described, privately
arranged in a peculiar manner, in precisely the same position as I
had left them.
Inferences: 1. There was no one in the box with the boys.
2. Nothing was in the box except the boys, bound, and the
instruments.
3. The boys could not untie themselves.
4 The boys could not have been untied, as the position of the
ropes could not have been retained; having been privately arranged
by myself, out of their sight and reach.
5. The time between the playing of the instruments and the
opening of the doors was totally insufficient for the boys, had they
been untied, to have tied themselves, it being but a second.
6. The boys could not have tied themselves, all the knots being
beyond their reach.
/. The boys being tied as before, I got into the box, and seated
myself on the back seat between them. I then placed my right
hand on the legs, just above the knees, of the boy at my right, and
my left hand, in a similar way, on the legs of the boy at my left
side. My hands were then bound to them with ropes. They were
placed in such a manner that I could detect distinctly any move-
ment of the superficial muscles of the thighs of both boys. I did
this for the purpose of ascertaining whether the body of either boy
moved.
After being thus tied, the committee carefully examined the
box, and found nothing in it except the two boys and myself
bound. The instruments before named were then placed in the
box beside my feet; the violin being in my lap. In this position
the doors were closed. Instantly loud raps were heard; and
within two seconds after the closing of the door, and while we
were all still, and not a muscle of either limb, as I could perceive,
moved, I felt fingers passing all over my hands and face. It
could not have been imagination, as the fingers took hold of my
cravat, unfastened it, and took it off my neck as carefully ad I
could have done. One of the boys spoke to me, and said, “ Will
you request the instruments to play ?” I asked, “Do you mean
tne?” He replied, “ Yes.” I then said, “Will the violin play
Instantly the violin raised up from my lap, before my face and
began to play. It Was out of reach of the boys. The boy at the
left then said, “ Will you notice the order in which the instru


ments move ?” I replied, " I will.” He then said, “Go gently.
Will the violin go to the top of the box ?” Instantly the violin,
still playing, went to the top of the box, at least two feet beyond
our reach, all the while playing. The guitar was at the same
time playing at my side. While the violin was moving about,
playing over our heads, the boy at the left side said, “ Strike
gently ; don’t strike hard.” Instantly the tambourine came up
in front of me, tapped one cheek, then the other, then the top of
my head, and, as quick as thought, struck the right hand boy a
tremendous blow on the top of the head. He cried out, as any
one would, hurt by a sudden, unexpected blow, “Oh !” The
trumpet then moved on the floor to the front of the box, and up
the side, out of our reach, to the top of the box, then sailed round
with the violin, at least two feet above our reach. The tam-
bourine came upon my left, and balanced itself on the top of my
head : at the same time hands were passing over my face, head,
and sides. At this point the doors suddenly opened. The violin
and trumpet dropped from the tap of the box, and the tambourine
fell from my head. During all this time, I did not move ;
neither did the boys, as far as I could perceive.
I know that it was impossible for them to have moved their
hands from behind their backs without my noticing it.
I know they did not rise from their seats.
I know that there were not hands or lingers enough to have
played the guitar, violin, and tambourine, and passed over my
face and body, as they did, at the same time, had both the boys
been untied.
Had it been the hands of the boys on my face, they could not
have had time to have replaced them and tied the ropes before the
doors were opened. Such quick and violent motions of the boys
must have caused perceptible motion of the legs; but I know they
were perfectly still during the whole time I was bound to them.
When I was untied, I again examined the ends of the ropes,
which I had previously adjusted as before described, and found
them as I had left them at first.
The instruments were then taken out, and nothing, was left in
the box but the boys, bound as described. The doors were closed;
and, in less than one minute, they opened, and the boys walked
out, every knot being untied. This closed the performance.
But in order that the paper may be correctly understood, it is
proper to make the following statements :
1. I am a disbeliever in spiritualism.
2. I could see nothing in the phenomena above described that
was indicative of spiritual or intellectual power, or force beyond
that of the boys.


3. I never spoke to the Davenport Brothers before, nor have I
spoken to them since,
4. I have written this as an account of phenomena which I have
witnessed, as correctly as I am capable of doing, precisely as I
would describe any other phenomena.
5. I endeavored to be critical in my observations, that they
might be valuable, and, for the same reason, accurate in the
expression of them in this paper.
C. I felt, during the exhibition, that the phenomena were pro-
duced by the means of a power with which I was unacquainted.
7. I was not at all impressed with the idea that this new force
was under the control or direotLn of a spiritual presence, but fully
under control of the minds of the boys.
8. I did not make the examination for the purpose of sustaining
any theology, or for curiosity, but for the express purpose of accu-
rately noting the phenomena that occurred.
1). I am acquainted with the general methods of sleight-of-hand
performers, and am perfectly satisfied that these phenomena must
be accounted for in some other way.
10. I cannot believe that deception was used. As far as I could
perceive, the phenomena were real, and must be accounted for
through the agency of a new force.
11. If the human mind is competent to give evidence of observed
phenomena, then the above statements may be relied on as correct.
(Signed.) S. L. Loomis.
This speaks for itself; and all comment on the writer’s part is
wholly unnecessary.
We will now give a few extracts from European papers :
The Freeman’s Journal , after describing the phenomena wit-
nessed, sums up thus ;
It would be, perhaps, wearisome to go further into detail. Suffice it to
say. that we witnessed laxt night the xfrangrft anil most n/incciwntnbleper-
formance iliat cuiil/l he thouykt if inert to the sacral miracles.
The Irish Times has the following sensible remarks :
That they are possessed with mysterious power, bordering almost on the
supernatural would appear to he undouhtal. The phenomena which they
present astound the audience, and defy nil efforts at discovery. It is better
to abstain from all expression of any decided opinion as to the agency
employed in the manifestations, and simply relate what one has witnessed.
Many opinions respecting 'them have been formed, and some of an adverse
diameter, urged with a degree of acerbity by the English press. Statements,
too, have been made, that their agency has been discove:ed, and that the
manifestations produced were merely the efforts of successful conjurers. In
that opinion few impartial persons can concur, and certainly none who were
present at the seance last evening.


Saunder’s News Letter and Dally Advertiser says of the first
seance, —
For three hours wc were in an atmosphere so pervaded with mystery and
wonder, that. long ere (he performance was over ire had given vp all hope
to finding the key to anything ire sail'.
The Daily Express, equally bewildered, goes on to say,—
Much has been said and published ad the surprising feats performed by
these young men ; and however prepared those present might have been to
witness all that the most extravagant fancy could imagine, and notwith-
standing the skepticism of many was openly expressed, the proceedings
last evening eclipsed the anticipations of the most sanguine, staggered the
prejudices of those the last to admit of supernatural agency , and evoked
from all the most unequivocal and decided marks of approbation. To
account for them by ordinary laws of nature seems impossible ; that a
supernatural agency should be invoked, common sense forbade believing ;
and the audience while acknowledging the unaccountable nature of the
means employed, were content to express (heir astonishment, and give the
brothers every credit for candor and extraordinary ability.
The Dublin Advertiser Gazette says :
Popular delusions have been at all times considered remarkable ; and one
of the most singular of that class is the perfect faith with which the gross
misrepresentations of the Brothers Davenport have been received. The
English press stated that these gentlemen were nothing but “ indifferent
conjurors,” and that their seances were totally devoid of the smallest ele-
ment of wonder. Such statements we have no hesitation in brandiim as
being without the smallest foundation of truth.
The Glasgow North British Mail says :
Tire fact that the brothers tacitly affirm the presence of unseen powers,
and have really not yet been satisfactorily “ exposed,” adds a vague senti-
ment of dinUer-ie to the feelings with which the onlooker regards the said
phenomena, that considerably heightens the charm of tho"stance. The
Me c srs. Davenport, any unprejudiced person who has once seen them will
say, have been unjustly treated, and, to some extent, maligned. Let the
wonders with which they amuse an audience be produced how they may,
the entertainment is, so far as we have seen or heard, neither to be ap-
proached or imitated. Every part of the •■■y nice, we may add, is conducted
with quiet taste and decorum, on which no rowdyism, it is to be hoped, will,
during their stay in this city, at all obtrude.
After their return to America, where they arrived on the 29tli
of August, 18fi8, they made an extensive tour throughout the
States, visiting every State in the Union, from Maine to California,
from Minnesota to the Gulf of Mexico — extending over 5 years—
making one of the most successful tours ever known, and creating
the most intense excitement wherever they appeared. In many
places, religious fanatics endeavoured to prevent their exhibiting
their wondeiful powers ; but—thanks to the liberal and progressive
spirit which pervades the American nation—they wore permitted
to continue in giving their seances with the greatest possible
success. In March, 1878, the Brothers sailed for Havana and
Cuba, and after spending 8 months in the West Indies, sailed for


South America, after which the tour of Italy, Egypt, and India
East was made with their usual success. Having travelled all
over the civilized world, and performed before all the crowned
heads of Europe, these gentlemen arrived in Melbourne from
India (where they completed a most successful tour) per R.M.S.
Assam, in August, 1876, and made a great sensation at the
private seances given to the Press and influential citizens, after
which they opened at the Town Hall, where their marvellous per-
formances were witnessed by thousands, who, together with the
Press of that city, were unanimous in expressions of wonderment.
After leaving Victoria* South Australia was visited with like
results ; then Tasmania and New Zealand. It may be well here
to relate what took place in the latter colony, respecting a
challenge, and give the report, as taken from the Dunedin paper,
March 17th, 1877 ;
“ Wo do not remember to have witnessed an audience more in-
tensely excited and interested in the result of any performance
than was that assembled in the Princess Theatre, last night. The
occasion was the acceptance by the Davenport, Brothers, of the
challenge made by Captain Barry, viz , that he would lay a sum of
£5O that he would so tie the Brothers that they could not release
themselves. The terms of the challenge, as advertised, was as
follows ;
I, Captain William Jackson Barry, of Cromwell, having tied one of the
Davenport Bros, at the Princess Theatre, Dunedin, on Monday eve, March
12. ami having found out the way in which they get themselves loose, I am
anxious to tic them again, but must be allowed to bring my own ropes. If
the above gentlemen will allow me this chance I will put down £5O that I
tic them in such a manner that ;hey cannot get loose. If they doubt this I
am ready and willing to put down the above amount, and then to name time
and place for the above challenge to take place. The reply was as follows :
To Captain W. J. Barry,—ln reply to your challenge published in the Guar-
dian of the 14th instant, I beg to state that the Davenports and Professor
Fay me willing to meet you on the following conditions, viz., that you shall
find your own rope, provided it be the same kind or similar rope to that used
by the Davenports and Professor Fay, also that there be no brutal tying, the
same to lake place on the stage of the Princess Theatre, on Friday night
next, March IC, 1877, in presence of the audience and two medical gentle-
men—one appointed by the Davenports and Professor I l 'arc the other by
Captain Barry—so if you mean business you must come up to time, as this
will be the last night but one of our performances here.
DAVENPORT BROS. & PROF FAY.
In accordance with these terms the Brothers were introduced to the audi-
ence, which crowded every part of the house, by Prof. Fay, Captain Barry
proceeded by saying. “ Ladies and Gentlemen, —Last Monday eve I came on
the stage with Mr. Couzens, and assisted him to tie the Brothers, but I was
not satisfied, and wished to tie them alone, therefore 1 gave the challenge,
that challenge has been accepted, and I come hero to meet it on fair ground,
but I will object to any other party tying either of the Brothers ; I must tie
the two or I walk off the stage.” Prof. Fay : “ The reason we have two gen-
tlemen separately to tie the Brothers is that the audience may not wait so


long.” Captain Barry : “ That don’t suit me Professor.” The point was
conceded, Prof. Fay remarking that the Captain could have his own way in
everything. Captain Barry then commenced the work of tying, a proceeding
we cannot of course deecribe beyond saying that he used every description
of knot known to a sailor, making a perfect web-work of rope around each,
and afterwards mooring them to the seats of the Cabinet, which he first had
sealed so that he might be satisfied that they were not false or movable ones.
Having occupied 54 minutes in making all taut the Captain stepped forward
and concluded some rambling remarks by saying, “ I have now tied these
gentlemen, and I have moored them, and I can assure .you, Ladies and Gen-
tlemen, that if they get out of that, without undoing it with their teeth be-
tween now and five weeks, they will do well, and they must have some out-
side agency of which I know nothing. I have been tying knots in this
country for 42 years, and I assure you if those gentlemen get out there is no
one on this side of the line can tie them securely.” The Cabinet doors were
then closed, and scarcely had they been so when the musical instruments
began to piay and the bells to ring, a fact which effectually disposes of the
hypothesis that the Brothers slip their hands from their faitenings, in order
to set the instruments in motion. The Cabinet being opened and reclosed,
the excitement as the time flew began to heighten. In 7 mins. 20 secs, the
first hand appeared at the hole ir the Cabinet amidst loud applause, a satis-
factory proof that at least one hand was free. In 8. mins. 40 secs, two hands
appeared, and in 12 mins. 35 secs, the four hands appeared, at which sign the
applause was deafening. Prom this forward it was only a matter of time
when the remaining knots would be untied. Captain Barry nervously walked
about, and the audience began to show signs of impatience. In 19 mins. 40
secs, however, the doors flew open and the Brothers stepped forward free
from their bonds, not freed by merely shaking them off, but with every knot
untied, and the rope perfectly free from tangle. The applause
was deafening, such as is seldom heard in a theatre, and the
feat was pronounced by all to bo a most extraordinary
one. In reply to Professor Fay's request to make a
statement, Captain Barry said, “ Well gentlemen, I have had every fair
play. (Applause.) The way I tied those men is a way no other man this
side of the line could tie them. You can take that for granted. I started
with a Tom fool’s knot over the shoulders and round the neck ; I followed
this with a slip hitch on their waists, and I put clover knots and timber
bitches and fastened them down with a mooring, and there must have been
an agency or something outside assisting them to get out of that lot.”
After the applause had been repeated and subsided, the usual performance
was proceeded with.
THE DAVENPORTS IN SINGLETON.
After alluding to the Cabinet manifestations by Mr. Ira Daven-
port and Prof. Fay in most eulogistic terms, the Singleton Argus
goes on to say that “ perhaps the chef (V amvre of the evening was
that of Mr. Fay’s coat flying off and on again in an instant, he
being at the same time firmly lashed to a chair with his hands
tied behind him, and the rope knots sealed with sealing-wax.
This portion of their performance affords an awful scope for
speculation.”
During the time these exhibitions were being given in New
Zealand, Mr. Wm. Davenport, the younger of the two, was in


such a delicate state of health that the medical men prohibited his
appearing on the stage. He, however, kept up as long as possible,
when on leaving that colony ho ruptured a blood vessel, and was
the source of considerable anxiety to all who were connected with
him. After arriving in New South Wales, it was deemed ..advi-
sable for him to take rest in Sydney, when it was hoped the
beautiful climate of this colony would have the desired elfoot of
restoring him to health; that dire disease, consumption, however,
was too surely doing its work, and on Thursday he again had a
flow of blood from the lungs, was carried to his bed, and never
rallied. On the following Saturday night week, or rather Sunday
morning early, lie peacefully breathed his last, leaving a young
widow, to whom ho was only married 5 months.
GOSUKG & SMART, PRINTERS, “NEWS” OFFICE, TAM WORTH.
