

■r \ i ff l 1 a 1 • It / j I
N<j /m3.i


HE Sea Fairies Greet David and Dawn
Calling David and Dawn to him, Mr. Edwards informed them that their adventures under the
Southern Cross were ended, and that he proposed sending them to the land under the sea; w here they
would see many strange and wonderful sights; meet new and fascinating fairies, and in fact, have
many splendid adventures.
The children were delighted, and thanked Mr. Edwards, but their delight knew no bounds when
he said that Tuckonie could accompany them on their new adventures.
Then, telling them to wait in their hut, Mr. Edwards said good-bye and closed the door, leaving the three children to
await events.
Nothing happened for a long time, and just when they were feeling sleepy, the wind began to nse.
It howled around their frail hut, rocking it to the foundations, and David who had run to the window announced that they
were no longer on the ground, but were being borne through the air at a terrific speed.
They were not a bit afraid, because they knew that their new adventures had commenced.
Dawn and Tuckonie joined David at the window, and they peered out. They were still over the earth and could see
trees and mountains a long way below.
Suddenly Dawn gave a cry. “We’re over the sea,” she said, and pointed out the great waves rolling along far below
them.
Just then the hut gave a violent tilt, and they slithered along the floor.
“W’e must be coming down, I think,” said David, and it seemed that he was right, because the hut made no effort to right
itself, but continued to career downwards. Then, without warning, it suddenly straightened, and with the gentlest of bumps,
landed not on the water but on a small island.
The children scrambled through the door and on to the little sandy beach.
“What a tiny island,” Dawn exclaimed. “It can't be more than 20 yards across.”
Chattering with excitement they raced up and down the few yards of land standing all alone in the vast blue ocean.
Suddenly David gave a gasp of surprise. Their hut which was resting neap the water's edge, glided into the air and
after circling around the island once, disappeared into the distance.
Gazing upwards the three children watched until it was just a speck against the blue sky and then Tuckonie said. here
hut go to?” _ .... „
“Back to the land of the Southern Cross, I expect,” replied Dawn, “but don’t worry something exciting will happen soon.
No sooner had she spoken than a huge sea-gull appeared seemingly from nowhere and landed at their feet.
“Good afternoon children,” the bird said in a gruff voice. “I’m very pleased to see that you’ve arrived safely. Ive been
expecting you.” _ - *
The children very politely said good afternoon and waited for the large sea-gull to explain his presence on the island.
They hadn't long to wait. “I’ve been sent here by Father Neptune,” the sea-gull continued, “and he instructed me to say
that although you’ll be very welcome at his kingdom, you must first be made water-proof.”
“And how will that be done?” asked Dawn curiously.
The sea-gull looked at her in surprise. “Why, that’s the easiest thing in the world. I’ve a bottle of water-proof lotion with
me, and I just sprinkle a few drops on you and you'll be proof against water. It won't be able to wet you at all.
Lifting his wing the sea-gull took a tiny botde in his beak and placed it on the sand. "There you are, he said. Take the
cork out, and give the bottle back to me.”
David did as directed, and the sea-gull swooped down on the uncorked bottle, and clutching it firmly in his beak, hovered
over the children, sprinkling a few drops of the precious liquid on each of them.
This done, he landed again and said. “Now- pay attention to me. You’ve been thoroughly water-proofed, but in order
that you may breathe under water, I must cast a magic spell ova: you.”
Hopping round and round them, the sea-gull chanted in a loud voice. “One, two, three —one, two, three, now breathe eep
beneath the sea.”
The sea-gull said this six times, then throwing back his head gave a weird cry.
“That’s all children,” he concluded abruptly, “you’ll now be able to breathe under water, so I’ll say good-bye and hope that
you have a thoroughly good time.”
Before the children could ask any questions he flapped his wings and flew out to sea.
Silently the children watched him go, then David said. “Well, that’s that, I wonder how and when we 11 get to t e
bottom of the sea.” . . ,
They were not left to wonder for long, because suddenly the island began to shake, and to their amazement commence to an
beneath the sea. The water reached their ankles, then their knees, then their heads, but the water didn t wet t em an tev
found they could still breathe although the water was by now well over their heads.
Down, and down and down they went. The water changing from a light green to a darker hue, and then turning a most
inky black, but still they continued on their downward journey, and at long last with a slight bump they reached t e ' er V ottom.
What an amazing sight met their eyes, when they became accustomed to the gloom, for they beheld a smiling ol man, "t
a long, white beard. He had a crown on his head and in one hand held a sceptre. He looked at them fof a an sai
in a gentle voice. “Welcome to my kingdom, children. I give you greeting in the name of all the sea-fairies.
Very shyly first Dawn, then David and finally Tuckonie shook the old man s hand, who said. lam Father Neptune.
I rule this land under the sea. During your stay in my kingdom you will have many adventures, see many strange 01-63
and have a thoroughly good time. A comfortable cave has been put at your disposal, and as soon as you ave sett e in it y
must come and visit me at my palace. Now I’ve no doubt that you are tired after your journey, so Percy t e iot is
guide you to your new home.” , . ~,
Thus after many strange happenings the children found themselves in the land under the sea and for the time eing
leave them sleeping in their cave . . . because on awakening all sorts of adventures await them.


_ I' / -
L r -Mr / • — —i
1 mv i w9 Jr
.<*p^B \ VTnWjl.- P
Jf* ~ , .40; W . *»F • J
jj* ' ’ J'
f.sR >W
-fv> wJ
y
11 jB m
■ \ r -* * ’ ; Um
l~ : u . *y
•%Bk. V"* Mfc. *'3% :
WtHA‘Wfc«,,. \ .‘^Sp
■ 'SMHPBT' , _ - ..» K ' >
-f®


HE Search for The Priceless Pearl
Cheerful old Father Neptune, the father of all the Sea Fairies, was telling David, Dawn and
Tuckonie of the wonderful treasure to be found at the bottom of the ocean, and Dawn, who was
listening very intently, said. “Please. Father Neptune, could you show us some of these treasures?”
“Of course, I will, Dawn. We’ll leave this very minute for the Oyster beds. Come on, children.”
Father Neptune clapped his hands, and behold, a carriage, drawn by Sea-Horses, appeared. In a few
seconds they were on their way towards the Oyster beds. At last they came to a stretch of white, clear
sand; the carriage pulled up, and the children tumbled out.
“Here we are, children,” said Father Neptune. “Come along.”
They walked through rows and rows of huge Oysters, who were all sound asleep.
“Ssh . . . don’t make a noise.” whispered Father Neptune, “nothing annoys an Oyster more than to be awakened from a
heavy sleep.”
“Why?” asked David.
Father Neptune chuckled. “Don’t ask me. but it’s a fact.”
Just then, Tuckonie tripped over a very large Oyster, and with a cry of rage, the Oyster sat up. He failed to see Father
Neptune, so he turned to David and said. “How would you like someone to walk on your bed?”
“I wouldn’t,” replied David.
“Well, why walk on mine?” the Oyster very naturally asked.
“We’re very sorry, but it was an accident.”
“I don’t believe you —you did it on purpose, and I think you’re very unkind.”
By this time Father Neptune had joined the children. “What’s the matter?” he asked David.
“Tuckonie tripped over this Oyster and it seems very annoyed,” he explained.
Father Neptune roared with laughter. “Never mind, David.” He turned to the Oyster and explained that David, Dawn and
Tuckonie were visitors.
* That’s all very well,” the Oyster grumbled, “but I want nothing to do with them and I’m going to sleep again.”
“Indeed you're not, " said Father Neptune in an angry voice. “Although I’m not the father of David and Dawn. I am the
father of all the Sea Fairies, and so I command you to be polite. Otherwise I’ll turn you into a Jelly Fish.”
At these words the Oyster quaked with fear and said.
‘ \ ery well. Father Neptune. Illdo as you say. but please, please don’t turn me into a Jelly Fish.”
“No. please don’t turn him into a Jelly Fish,” begged Dawn.
\ ery well. 111 give him one more chance. Now, Osbert, tell the children your story,” commanded Father Neptune.
Once upon a time,’ Osbert began. “I lived with my brothers and sisters in a very big nursery. When I w'as old enough I
went to school to learn how to make pearls. I w r as very clever, and it was no time before I made my first pearl. It was
a little one, but the teacher said it was valuable, and he’d send it to Father Neptune. Well, as time w r ent by, I decided to enter the
competition to produce the priceless pearl. I went into strict training, and slept 23 hours a day.” Here Osbert sighed. “I can
never get enough sleep,” he complained and looked wistfully at Dawn.
“What happened then?” asked David.
The Oyster smiled.
“You’d be surprised, but if I were to have another hour’s
At these w'ords, Father Neptune appeared very interested,
alone. We’ll be back in an hour’s time, but be careful, don’t
the children walked on.
sleep, I might win the prize.”
and said: “Well, if that’s the case, the children and I will leave you
disappoint us ” and with this word of warning, Father Neptune and
Thev passed dozens and dozens of Oysters. Some were asleep, and others were just waking up.
Oh look, said Dawn as they passed a particularly large Oyster, who blinked at them sleepilv. “I think he wants to speak
to us.
They went over to the Oyster, and in a very polite voice, Dawn said: “Good afternoon.”
“Is it?” answered the Oyster. “I can’t help it.”
Father Neptune frowned at the rude sheM fish. “Have vou entered for the priceless pearl competition?” he asked.
The Oyster nodded. “Yes, and I think I’ll win it.”
"But Osbert says that he’ll win,” said David.
The Oyster laughed. “Just come closer and see my pearl,” he invited.
“Oh, it’s marvellous,” gasped Dawn, “isn’t it, Father Neptune?”
“Yes it’s very good,” he said, “but I’ve seen better.”
Then you don t think I’ll win the prize?” asked the disappointed Oyster.
Father Neptune shook his head. “I’m afraid not. Come on. children,” and he led the way along the Oyster bed
They were on the way back to the carriage, when David said,
hour’s time.”
I d forgotten all about it,” confessed Father Neptune.
They found Osbert wide awake and looking very pleased with
“Have you a surprise for us?” asked Dawn.
Osbert nodded. “I’ve made the finest pearl in the world,” he
“We’ve forgotten about Osbert. He told us to go back in an
himself.
said proudly. “Just look.”
- --—_ UK »uilie Miu prouuiy. just iook.
r ( • elsure ' e °P ene d his shells, and the children gave a gasp of amazement, and even Father Neptune seemed pleased.
e eir ' e . r> e y es " as a P ear l the size of a tennis ball. It was perfectly round, and faintly pink in colour,
there, what do you think of that?” asked Osbert.
Marvellous, boomed Father Neptune. "I’m very pleased with you, Osbert, and you’ll certainly win the prize.”
Uathenng up the pearl. Father Neptune wrapped it in sea-weed. and gave it to Dawn to hold.
Lome on, children,” he said. “We must get back now, it’s late.”
P 5 the y P acked on to th e waiting carriage. David asked. “What was the prize that Osbert won. Father Neptune?”
at er , eptune smiled, then he said. “The privilege of sleeping for a week without being disturbed.”


'V't
IS -9.0V


HE Strong Men of The Sea.
David hadn’t been feeling well, so Dawn tool him to see old Doctor Sturgeon, who at once re-
commended that David attend the Physical Culture Classes, conducted by the strong men of the sea.
“A tonic won’t do you any good, David,” Doctor Sturgeon, an old and wise fish informed him.
“what you need is plenty of exercise, and I guarantee that the strong men of the sea will see that you
get it,” and the old doctor chuckled at his own joke.
“Oh,” said David rather doubtfully, “and wtere do I find these strong men?”
“I’m afraid I can’t tell you,” was the reply. “Under rule 473 of the Sea Fairies lam forbidden
to divulge their whereabouts.”
“But,” protested Dawn, “why tell us to visit the strong men if you won’t give us any idea of how we may find them?”
The doctor shook his head. “I’m sorry,” he said, “but that is the rule. However, as you’re friends of mine I’ll give you a clue.
Listen carefully. “Search where the waters are deep and green, try to approach without being seen. Can you remember that?” he asked.
The children nodded, and. after thanking him returned to their cave.
They told the little aboriginal boy w-hat had transpired, and Tuckonie was just as puzzled as they were, but he said. “No need
for you to worry David. Tuckonie plenty good black tracker, he find strong men quick and lively.”
David and Dawn smiled at his enthusiasm, and sat in puzzled silence trying to fathom the meaning of Doctor Sturgeon’s strange
words.
At last David had an idea. “I think we’d better go for a walk, and perhaps we’ll find someone who may tell us
where we can find the strong men. What do you think, Dawn?”
Dawn agreed, and so the three children left their cave and commenced the search for the Strong Men of the Sea.
They hadn’t gone very far when they saw Percy the Pilot Fish, he was in a hurry, and wasn’t pleased when they stopped him.
“No, I don’t know where the Strong Men live, and even if I did I wouldn’t be allowed to tell you,” he said in reply to their
questions. “Anyway,” he continued, “why do you w'ant to
Dawn explained that David wasn’t feeling very well, and
them?”
Doctor Sturgeon had said that the only people who could do
anything for him were the Strong Men of the Sea.
“Oh, well that’s different,” Percy said, “why didn’t you
so in the first place? As I said before I don’t know where to
find the Strong Men, but I can give you a clue. Listen carefully. Search where the waters are deep and green, and try to ap-
proach without being seen.”
To Percy’s amazement, the children burst into laughter.
“What’s funny about that?” Percy demanded indignandy, “I give you a valuable clue and all you do is laugh.”
David explained that Doctor Sturgeon had given them the very same clue, and that they were no wiser than before.
“I can’t help that,” Percy replied, “It only remains now for you to use your common sense. It’s simple enough. What do
you usually find in waters that are deep and green?”
“Fish,” answered Dawn mischievously.
Percy wriggled his tail with rage, and with a swish of his fins he darted away.
So on they went, meeting very few sea fairies who had
At last when they were thinking of giving up the quest and
school books under one fin, and looked very wise and clever.
ev«n heard of the strong men.
returning to their cave, they met Basil the Bream. He had a pile of
The children bade him good afternoon, and Basil, who
long chat.
was very pleased to see them prepared to settle down for a nice
“Yes, I think I can help you,” said Basil after the children had explained the necessity of finding the strong men, “now let me
consider a moment.”
The children watched anxiously, as Basil, with eyes closed, swayed back and forth on the tip of his tail.
“I’ve got it,” he said triumphantly, “it was as simple as A.8.C.”
“Then you know how we may find the strong men?” Dawn asked.
“Of course, I do, and anyone with an ounce of common sense would know you’ll always find rocks where the water is deep and
green. And what do you find on rocks as a rule?” Basil demanded.
“Mussels,” said David triumphantly, “wasn’t I silly not to think of that before.”
“Of course you were,” said Basil.
“But please,” said Dawn, “why are we to approach without being seen?”
“Because,” Basil answered, “the Mussels or strong men of the sea are very, very nervous of strangers, and if they hear anyone
approaching they immediately close their shells.”
“I see,” said David, “then how are we to make ourselves kaown to them?”
“Leave that to me,” answered Basil. “I’ll fix everything. Come along.”
They followed Basil for miles and miles. Then suddenly the water became very deep and very green
“Ssh,” cautioned Basil. “Don’t make a noise.
They watched Basil swim noiselessly to a huge rock which was covered with large Mussels. Their shells were open and they
were talking amongst themselves.
Basil approached within a foot of them, then said in a gentle voice.
“Oh Strong Men of the Sea, please listen to me.”
The children watched anxiously, expecting every second to see the Mussels close their shells, but they did nothing of the
sort, and were evidently listening to Basil, who continued. “Strong men, please will you see David, he wants to be made strong and
well?”
In a very gruff voice one of the Mussels replied. “Where is this boy, let me see him.”
The Mussel regarded David seriously. “You appear to be very big and strong. Let me feel you muscles.”
Hm! the Mussel exclaimed, his examination concluded. “They feel exceedingly hard. Why, there’s nothing the mattei
with you. Who sent you here?”
David explained that Doctor Sturgeon had sent him.
Well all I can say,” replied the Mussel, “is that there’s absolutely nothing the matter with you, and I shall have no hesita-
tion in informing Doctor Sturgeon of the fact. He probably mistook you for one of his other patients. Now I come to thinl
of it, you are not unlike Sammy Salmon.”
This was too much for Dawn, who laughed so loudly that the Mussels took alarm and immediately closed their shells. Bui
the children didn’t mind in the least, because David was well and strong.


HE Story of The Weeping Whale.
One morning very early, David, Dawn and Tuckonie were awakened by the sound of sobbing. It seemed
so very near that the children decided to investigate.
Tuckonie was the first to leave the cave and he guided David and Dawn to a large black shape,
which on closer inspection, they found to be a whale.
Standing at a safe distance the children regarded the huge creature with interest, and were moved to
pity as large tears rolled down its cheeks.
“I wnnder why the whale is crying?” asked Dawn
“Perhaps it’s lost and can’t find the way home,” suggested David.
“Mine tinkit whale hungry,” Tuckonie countered.
“Well, you’re all wrong,” the whale spoke so suddenly
to their distress he commenced to sob again.
the children jumped. “I’m not lost and I’m not hungry,” and
This was too much for kind hearted Dawn. She approached the tremendous mammal and gently stroked one of its huge
fins. “Tell me w’hy you’re crying?” she asked.
The whale choked back a terrific sob and in a very soft voice said. “Father Neptune says I’m clumsy and all because I broke
his favourite chair. You know the one I mean, it has pearls and gold on the arms. And now it’s broken beyond repair. Oh
dear. I don’t know what to do. Father Neptune says that unless I can mend his chair I’m never to go near his Palace again.”
Seeing the whale about to weep again, David hurriedly spoke. “Crying won’t mend the chair. Keep calm for a little while
and we’ll see if we can help you.”
The whale gave a sigh of relief. “Do you really mean that?”
“Of course we do.” said Dawn, “Tuckonie is very good at mending things, aren’t you. Tuckonie?”
The little aboriginal boy nodded his head, “Tuckonie be plenty good mender, him fix chair.”
The weeping whale smiled through his tears. “You’re all very good to me,” he said. “I don’t know how to thank you.”
“Oh that’s all right,” said Dawn, “we hate to see anyone in trouble. Now would you please tell us your name?”
“Certainly,” was the reply. “William’s my name. William the Whale, and I live near the South Pole, but I very often
visit Father Neptune, and it was on my last visit that I happened to break his chair. You see I was just leaning over his chair,
when absentmindedly I swished my tail.”
The memory was too much for William and tears welled into his eyes. “Please William, don’t cry any more, everything will
be all right,” said Dawn in some alarm.
"\ ery well. I'll try not to. but it will be very hard, because Father Neptune said I was big. fat and clumsy, and I’m not
really, it’s only because my tail is so very, very large. Just look at it,” William said.
‘Y es it is rather large,” David was forced to admit, “but still that’s not your fault, all whales are big aren't they?”
“Of course. ’ replied William rather haughtily, “whales are the largest mammals in the world.”
“Then you’re not a fish.” asked Dawn.
William snorted disdainfully. “Of course not, I’m a mammal, which means that I have to breathe air to live. Naturally
I can stay under water for a very long time without going to the surface for air, but nevertheless the fact remains that lam not
a fish. Is that quite clear?” he demanded.
“Yes,” answered David amazed that William should be so
everyone has to learn you know.”
annoyed at being taken for a fish. “It’s quite clear now, but
They were all silent for a moment w'hen Tuckonie said.
“How about we fixem chair.”
At this reminder William looked as if he might w r eep again, but David stopped him by saying. “Oh yes, I’d forgotten the
chair, I suppose wed better go to Father Neptune’s Palace right away. You wait here William, we won’t be long.”
So leaving William to await their return. David, Dawn and Tuckonie made their way to Father Neptune’s Palace.
They found Father Neptune in his garden planting some seeds, which he told the children he hoped would grow into rare
and beautiful sea flowers.
“Now w'hat can I do for you?” he asked them, his gardening completed.
David acted as spokesman, and told Father Neptune poor William’s troubles.
The kindly old man laughed. “I’m afraid I w r as rather annoyed at first, and may have acted hastily towards William, but t
really didn t mean him to take me seriously.”
Dawn stared at him. “But what about your broken chair?” she asked.
Father Neptune smiled. “It has already been mended. One of my sw'ord fish is a skilled carpenter, and now it’s as good as
new. So go back and tell William that provided he looks where he’s going he can visit me in my Palace again.”
David and Daw r n w'ere delighted at this news, and thanking Father Neptune, rushed off to tell William, and the only one who
was a little bit disappointed was Tuckonie, who was given no chance to prove how clever he was at mending chairs.


HE Story of The School of Fish
“You know, Dawn,” said David, “I can’t understand how the fish down here know so much without
going to school. I can’t understand it. Can you, Tuckonie?”
Tuckonie shook his head. “Tuckonie no care. Tuckonie not like lessons.”
“Oh, but you should,” reproved Dawn, “everyone should like lessons. I think they’re very interest-
ing.”
Just then, three small fish scurried by, and, to the three children, peering through the dim, green light,
they seemed to carry tiny school bags under their fins.
“Well I never,” said Dawn, staring in surprise. “I’m sure they’re going to school. Come on. Let’s
follow them.”
And chattering with excitement, the children followed the hurrying fish. Through a long dark tunnel they went until they
were hopelessly lost. But they didn’t care —on they went until it grew gradually lighter, and the sound of a bell reached their ears.
“Here we are.” gasped David, “we’ll hide here and watch.”
They gazed in wonder at the strange scene before their eyes. Sitting—standing—swimming or just floating lazily about were
dozens of fish of every size and description. But the funniest fish of all, was undoubtedly the school master, who wore glasses, and had
on a mortar board hat and a long black gown. He was standing before a blackboard, on which was some writing, and in front of him,
balancing on its tail was a large black bream.
“Silence,” roared the school master. “I demand instant silence. Did you speak, Willie Whiting?”
“Please sir, I didn’t make a sound,” answered a tiny, little fish.
“Well, someone spoke,” and Mr. Schnapper glared fiercely around the strange classroom.
“Perhaps he heard us talking.” whispered David.
“Ssh,” Dawn whispered, “Mr. Schnapper seems very angry.”
Just then, the school master turned to the black bream and said: “Now, Bertie, answer this question. What does black bream
plus cooking make?”
“Please teacher, I know,” a little fish in the back row cried out. waving one tiny fin.
Mr. Schnapper turned round, glared, then said with a roar. “I was not asking vou Cyril, kindly keep silent.”
Poor Cyril the Salmon blushed a deep pink, and the children felt so sorry that David wanted to comfort him, but Dawn said:
“Don’t be silly, David, Mr. Schnapper would see you at once.”
The attention of the children was once more held by Mr, Schnapper waving tus cane at Bertie the Black Bream.
“I’ll give you one more chance. Now tell me. what does black bream plus cooking equal?”
Bertie looked shamed faced and stuttered.
“Oh, now silly he is.” said Dawn laughing, “why I can see the answer on the blackboard.”
“So can I,” added David. “The answer is boiled fish.”
“Can you tell me the answer?” the now thoroughly cross school master asked.
“No sir,” whispered Bertie.
“Well you deserve to be caught. Sit down at once,” snapped
He turned to his class. “Can any fish tell me the difference
There was silence. Not a single fish spoke.
Mr. Schnapper
between a fish hook and a bent pin?”
“I can. A bent pin hasn’t got a barb.”
This was too much for Dawn, and she stood up and said.
“Who spoke?” asked the school master.
“I did,” answered Dawn. “I’m Dawn, this is my brother. David, and this is our friend, Tuckonie.”
“What do you want here?” Mr. Schnapper asked. “Do you want to be enrolled in my school? Come on. Speak up.”
The children stood nervously in front of the angry school master, until at last David plucked up courage to answer.
“Please, Mr. Schnapper, we don’t want to join your school, we’re only here to find out if fish reallv do go to school.”
At these words. Mr. Schnapper grew angrier than ever. “Of course fish go to school, they always have and they always will do.
Why,” he continued. “I’m positive that any of my pupils know more than you, and I’ll prove it right away. Stand up, Gregory the
Garfish and answer this question.”
The unhappy Gregory stood up on his tail and wriggled uncomfortably. “Now, Gregory,” Mr. Schnapper went on, “tell me in
as few words as possible, the rules for preventing young fish from being caught.”
Gregory coughed, cleared his throat, then said in a thin piping voice. “Ignore bait—never wait until too late. Swim away—go
and play—live for many and many a day.”
“Excellent, Gregory,” commented Mr. Schnapper. He turned to the smiling children
“That’s the way I teach my pupils, and believe me. ever since I’ve been headmaster I’ve lost only one pupil, and that was
Clarence the Crab, who unfortunately got caught in a lobster pot. Poor, poor Clarence.”
Seeing Mr. Schnapper about to burst into tears, Dawn spoke quickly. “Oh, lam sorry, but I’m sure it wasn’t your fault, and I
think you are very clever.”
“Of course, I am.” he answered, “and to prove it I’ll ask you each a question. I’ll start with Dawn. What is it,” said Mr.
Schnapper, “that has four fins and two tails?”
Dawn thought for a moment. “Four fins and two tails?” she repeated. “I’m sure I don’t know.”
Mr. Schnapper laughed. “Why it’s easy. Two fish, of course.”
The whole class roared with laughter, and Dawn felt most uncomfortable.
“That’s a silly question, and it’s not fair,” she said.
Taking no notice of her, the school master turned to David. “Tell me,” he said, “what is it that goes in and comes out twice
a day, and yet if it’s not in it’s out?”
Poor David shook his head. “I’m smc I don’t know.”
“I knew you wouldn’t know,” laughed Mr. Schnapper delightedly, “but it’s an easy one. The tide, of course.”
Again the class rocked with laughter, and DavH blushed.
Mr. Schnapper then turned to Tuckonie. “Now it’s your turn,” he began, but before he could speak, the bell sounded, and
before you could say “knife,” fish were swimming in all directions,
unconcerned, and taking off his glasses he prepared to depart.
“What has happened?” asked Dawn.
The children stared in surprise, but Mr. Schnapper was most
“Happened . . . why . . . nothing,” said Mr. Schnapper, “it’s simply play time. They’ll be back in ten minutes, and if you
care to wait, you’ll hear me give them a music lesson. I’m teaching them their scales.”
The children explained that they couldn’t wait as much as they’d have liked to, and so, thanking Mr. Schnapper for his kindness,
they departed, fully convinced that fish really and truly go to school.




HE Story of The Flighty Flounder.
Leslie the Leather Jacket, was talking to the children at the entrance of their cave. He was very
excited, and kept swimming round in circles. ,
“I do wish you’d keep still, Leslie, you’re making me feel giddy,” said David.
“I can’t help it,” explained Leslie. “I feel so excited and happy.”
“What has happened to make you feel like that?” asked Dawn.
Leslie blushed. “Freda Flounder said that she’d go to the picnic with me.”
Dawn smiled at David, who said. “When is the picnic, Leslie?”
“To-day, I’m leasing now to get my sandwiches, and then I’m to call for Freda.” Leslie explained, and
with a swish of his tail he disappeared.
“I wish we could go to the picnic, I’d like to see Freda Flounder,” said David.
“So would I,” answered Dawn.
“Tuckonie plenty like see Flounder,” the little aboriginal boy chimed in. “Tuckonie going to picnic.”
“Oh. but we haven’t been invited,” said Dawn.
David and Dawn were silent for a moment, and then David said. “Do you think we could go along, I’d like to see Freda
. what do you say, Dawn?”
“Oh, I think we can go, we’U take our own lunch and we won’t be in the way. I’ll cut some sandwiches now.”
It didn’t take Dawn long to prepare the lunch, and they left lor the picnic grounds, which they thought would be the Grotto.
After travelling for a little while they reached their destination.
“We seem to be the first here,” said David looking around.
“Perhaps we’ve come to the wrong place,” Dawn suggested.
But just then a big Porpoise dived towards them.
“Why, hullo!” he said, “what are you doing here?”
The children explained and the Porpoise laughed.
“So you want to see Freda the Flighty Flounder? Well she should be here very soon. I suppose you know 7 that Leslie the
Leather Jacket is bringing her?”
Dawn nodded her head. “Yes, and he seemed very excited about it too.”
Again Porgy the Porpoise laughed.
“Poor Leslie. Oh, well, he’ll live and learn.”
“Why, what do you mean?” asked Dawn.
“Well, Freda has the name of being very Flighty. Only last week she promised to go for a moonlight excursion with Bertie
the Bream, but she failed to keep her appointment, and Bertie w r as heartbroken. He discovered later that she’d gone with Freddy
the Frost Fish.
“Oh, how sad,” said Dawn, “and now you think she’ll disappoint Leslie?”
Porgy shrugged his fins. “It’s hard to say. The trouble with Freda.” he went on, “is that she’s very vain. W 7 hy, at home I
believe she has twenty polished oyster shells so that she can see her face wherever she swims. If that’s not vanity, what is?” he
demanded.
“Isn’t there anything we can do to teach her a lesson?” Divid asked.
“I can’t think of anything,” Porgy confessed, “how about you, Dawn?”
“I’ve a wonderful idea,” she said. “Come close and I’ll tell you about it.”
They crowded around her while she explained. “The first thing to do is to borrow her Oyster shell mirror.”
“But, how can we do that?” asked Porgy.
“That will be easy, ’ Dawn went on. “I’ll put a smudge on my face, and say that I can’t get it off. She can’t very well refuse
to loan me her oyster shell mirror, and then . . . ”
“Yes . . . and then?” David broke in.
“Well," continued Dawn, “as soon as I have the mirror, Tuckonie will do his share.” She smiled at their puzzled expressions.
Before they could ask any questions, she continued.
“You know that Tuckonie draws faces very cleverly, well, when we have the oyster shell, Tuckonie will immediately draw a
very ugly face on it, then when we give the mirror back to Freda, and she looks into it. she’ll think it’s her own face. It will be
very, very ugly, of course, and it will cure her for ever of being vain.”
“It’s a splendid idea,” said Porgy.
“It’s marvellous,” said David.
“It be one great plan,” said Tuckonie.
"Ssh,” whispered Dawn, “here they are,” and she quickly put a tiny smudge on her nose.
Sure enough Leslie the Leather Jacket and Freda the Flounder were approaching the picnic grounds. Freda was dressed in her
very best, and was holding a small posie of sea flowers, while poor old Leslie was carrying the luncheon hamper. On seeing Porgy
and the children they stopped.
But Porgy called them over. “Oh, Leslie,” he said, “I want Freda to meet David, Dawn and Tuckonie.”
They were introduced, and Freda drew 7 out her big oyster shell mirror to see if her hair was tidy.
On seeing the mirror, Dawn exclaimed. “Oh dear, I know I’ve a smudge on my face. I wish I had a mirror.”
\ ou may have mine if you wish,’’ said Freda, and handed her mirror to Dawn, who. quick as lightning, gave it to Tuckonie.
The little aboriginal boy picked up a piece of charcoal, and seeing that Freda was talking to Leslie, and had her back turned,
commenced to draw as fast as he could.
It took him only a few seconds, and he handed the shell back to Dawn, who in turn gave it to Freda.
Oh, thank you. she said. T removed the smudge. It’s r;ally a beautiful mirror.”
■A es. isn’t it," replied Freda, and from force of habit she gazed into it.
She gave a sudden squeal.
Something s happened to me, she cried, “I am really ugly, but no one has ever told me.” and with one last squeal she ran
home as fast as she could swim.
Poor Leslie looked on in amazement, and Porgy and the children roared with laughter. “That should teach her not to be
v ain, said David, and it did too, because from that day onwards, Freda was a different fish, and now she and Leslie are very happy
together.


HE Story of the Flying Fish.
“Look what I’ve got,” cried David excitedly, waving a letter that had just arrived.
Dawn and Tuckonie jumped to their feet. “What’s in it?” asked Dawn.
“An invitation,” replied David.
“Who from?” asked Dawn.
“Father Neptune, he wants us to go to his Palace on Friday afternoon. The Flying Fish arc
giving a grand exhibition in aid of the Sea-Horse Christmas Fund,” and David handed her the letter.
“It should be wonderful.” said Dawn, “because the invitation says that the Flying Fish will loop
the loop, perform power dives, and conclude with a breath-taking and thrilling race. Oh, Ido wish
Friday would come.”
Well, Friday duly arrived, and at half-past three the children arrived at the Palace grounds.
It was crowded with fairy creatures from near and far. and Father Neptune moved among his guests, greeting each in turn.
At last he saw the children and beckoned them to follow him.
“I’ve special seats reserved for you,” he said, “and you should have a splendid view from here.”
He led them to the very front row of a tiny little grandstand, and left them to await proceedings, remarking that if they’d
excuse him he would go behind the scenes and finalise arrangements.
Left to themselves, David, Dawn and Tuckonie gazed about with interest. They were very puzzled at a peculiar looking tower,
which stood in the centre of the grounds. It was very tall, and supported three tiny platforms.
“I wonder what that’s for?” said Dawn.
“I’ve no idea.” said David, “but we’ll soon know.”
Just then, they heard the sound of music, and everyone craned their necks to see where it came from.
“Why it’s Father Neptune’s Fairy Band.” exclaimed Dawn delightedly, as the musicians swung into view, led by a big Drum-
Major, who was none other than a magnificent Swordfish, who was very proud of himself.
Suddenly Dawn giggled. “Look, David,” she said, “there’s Basil the Bream, with the big drum, and it’s nearly as big as he is.”
This was true enough, as poor, little Basil appeared to have great difficulty in beating his drum and at the same time preserving
his balance.
“It’s not fair,” exclaimed David laughing loudly. “I think we should help him.”
“Don’t be silly,” replied Dawn, “he’d be most offended if we interfered.”
The band by now was almost abreast of them, and at a signal from the big Drum-Major, they swept into formation; a very
striking demonstration, whose effect was slightly spoilt by Basil the Bream falling headlong through his drum.
The vast audience gave a great roar of laughter, to become a shriek of delight when the Swordfish removed him by the tail,
and replaced him on the ground.
During this interlude the other members of the band had continued playing their various instruments, so that the dm was
deafening. • i r
Weak and helpless with laughter, the children awaited events, and the re-appearance of Father Neptune was a signal tor
instant silence.
The Grand Old Man of the Sea mounted his stand and in a deep, thundering voice, said.
“My subjects, this afternoon’s exhibition by my Flying Fish is in aid of the Christmas Fund for ailing Sea-Horses. During the
interval a collection will be taken, to which I would ask you to respond to the best of your ability.”
This announcement was greeted with cheers, and as Father Neptune descended from the platform, someone struck a deep-
sounding note on a ship’s bell.
This was evidently a pre-arranged signal, for as the last notes died away, a swarm of Flying Fish appeared from behind a rock.
They were swimming in perfect formation, twelve abreast, and presented a marvellous sight, as with one accord they dipped
in a salute before Father Neptune’s throne.
Loud and prolonged cheering greeted this display. Then, six Flying Fish detached themselves from the main body and darted
to the high tower, which had first attracted the children’s attention.
“I wonder what they’re going to do?” whispered Dawn.
“Ssh, wait and see,” replied David.
The Flying Fish had by now reached the tower. Two swam to the top platform. Two on to the second one, and two more
on to the platform below.
Poising delicately on their tails they awaited the signal. Father Neptune clapped his hands, and as one fish, they dived,
swiftly and surely towards the sea floor.
The audience held their breath in suspense. Nearer and nearer the Flying Fish swooped towards them. Then, when it ap-
peared that a collision was possible, they zoomed upw'ards, leaving a trail of tiny pearl-like bubbles in their wake.
“Oh, that was wonderful,” cried Dawn, clapping her hands. “I wish they would do it again.
But the Flying Fish had to adhere to the programme, and their next act was a thrilling and magnificent display, in which they
looped the loop, not once, but a dozen times.
An interval of ten minutes was then declared, during which time a collection was taken.
Little Penguins with collection boxes went from person to person, and it says much for the Sea-Fairies that not one refused a
contribution.
A signal from the ship’s bell denoted that the interval had concluded, and Father Neptune, mounting once more to his dais,
announced that the final item would be an exciting race in which fifty Flying Fish would take part.
Amid great excitement the competitors lined up, and each had a number tied on to its fin.
“I hope number four wins,” said David.
“So do I,” replied Dawn.
“Tuckonie like number twenty to win. Him nice black colour,” said the little aboriginal boy.
The start of the race stopped further comment, and the water was churned to a white foam as the Flying Fish strove for
victory. With just a little way to the winning post, number four, who seemed to be the popular favourite, apeared to have the
race won
Then spurred on by Tuckonie’s wild shout, little number twenty made a desperate effort, and reached the winning post first
by a bare half inch.
The noise was terrific, and reached climax when the prizes were presented.
Returning to their cave afterwards the children agreed that they’d spent a thoroughly enjoyable time.


HE Wedding of Marion the Mermaid.
‘ Will you come to my wedding, Dawn?” Marion the mermaid asked in her gentle voice. She and
children were talking in Shell Fish parade, one of the favourite haunts of the sea fairies.
“We’d love to go,” Dawn answered, and David and Tuckonie expressed their pleasure at the invita-
Marion was one of the prettiest mermaids the children had seen, and as she had such a sweet
nature she was a great favourite with everyone.
She was very clever too, and made the most wonderful toys from shells and seaweed, which she
sold from her little shop near the children’s cave.
And now she had just finished telling the children that she was giving up her shop to be married, and that her husband
to be, Mervyn the Merman, wanted to take her to his Sea Snail Farm.
The children were very interested, and asked Marion all sorts of questions regarding Mervyn.
Marion was very happy, and smiled at their eager questions, doing her best to satisfy their curiosity.
Thus the children learned that Mervyn worked hard all the year round, raising sea snails in order that they might eat and
destroy a certain variety of seaweed that was regarded as a nuisance by the sea fairies. Mervyn was very well paid for his trouble,
so that the future looked bright.
“When is the wedding?” asked David.
“Next Wednesday,” said Marion, “which gives me just a week to prepare my trousseau. I’m having my wedding dress made by
my sister, Myrtle, who is a very clever little dressmaker.”
The girls then discussed various materials, while David and Tuckonie pretended they understood all about it.
About five minutes later, Marion informed the children that she must go, and that she would expect to see them at her
wedding, and afterwards at the wadding breakfast, to be held in the cave of the Funny Echoes.
The children thanked Marion and watched her swim gracefully away. “Now,” said Dawn, when she was out of sight,
“what can we give Marion as a wedding present?”
They sat in thought for a while, then Tuckonie suggested. “Flow about we give Marion necklace of coral?”
“But she already has one,” Dawn objected, “we’ll have to thin': of something else.”
Then David, who had been silent for some time, said. “I know, we’ll give Marion a cloth of gold to wear for very best.”
Dawn and Tuckonie clapped their hands with delight, but Dawn, ever practical, asked from where they were to get the cloth
of gold.
“From the Gold Fish, of course,” answered David, “we’ll go to their workshop right away and ask them to make the cloth.
It shouldn’t take them long.”
So away the children went to seek out the gold fish, and found them all as busy as possible on a big order they had received
from Father Neptune to re-paper his palace wall with gold.
David approached the Chief Goldfish and told him what he wanted done.
“I don’t think we can possible make you a cloth of gold by next Wednesday,” the Chief Goldfish said, “you see we’re so
very busy at present, and Father Neptune may be annoyed if We left off making his wallpaper.”
Dawn joined David and added her pleas to his. “Well, I won’t make any promises, but as it’s for Marion we’ll see what
we can do. Come back on Tuesday, that's the day before the wedding, and if it’s possible to have the cloth of gold ready, you
shall have it.”
With that the children had to be content and they returned to their cave.
The days passed very rapidly, and before they realised it Tuesday was upon them.
They arrived bright and early at the Goldfish Work Shop, and David knocked at the door, which was opened by the Chief
Goldfish.
“Oh there you are David, I was expecting you, and I’ve a wonderful surprise. The cloth of gold is ready, and you may
take it with you. Would you like to see it before I wrap it up?”
The children were very excited and said that they would.
The cloth of gold was hanging over a rock, and very beautiful it was —shining and shimmering in the pale green light.
Thanking the Goldfish, they took their precious garment back to their cave, and examined it thoroughly.
“I’ve never seen anything so wonderful,” said Dawn, “Marion should look even more beautiful than ever when she wears
this.”
The children hardly slept that night owing to excitement, and when it was quite early on Wednesday morning they were up
and about making final preparations for Marion’s wedding. They put on their very best clothes, had a hurried breakfast and off
they went.
When they arrived at the cave where the ceremony was to take place—they discovered that early as they were, there were
several other guests ahead of them, and that by the time Marion and Mervyn arrived, the cave was full to overflowing.
Marion looked charming, and was radiantly happy, while big Mervyn was very handsome and had a smile for everyone.
At the conclusion of the ceremony they crowded around the bride and bridegroom, and then, they all hurried along to the
wedding breakfast, held in an adjoining cave.
There was lots and lots to eat. Cubes of artic ice; drinks of fairy sea water, topped with delicious fairy sea foam; crystallised
seaweed and watercress sandwiches. So naturally the children enjoyed themselves thoroughly.
Then Marion moved among her guests thanking each one for the presents they had brought. She was especially nice to
the children and thanked them again and again for the magnificent cloth of gold, which she said she would always treasure.
Then all the guests arose and at the top of their voices toasted the happy couple, sang “For they are Jolly Good Fellows,
and threw little white pebbles at the happy couple as they boarded the sea sled, which was to take them for their honeymoon at
Mervyn’s Farm.
And so very happy and excited, the children returned to their cave, there to await the next adventure under the sea.




HE Sandman and Sand Fairies.
One day, David, Dawn and Tuckonie were visiting Father Neptune at his beautiful Palace. They had
been there many time before, but were never tired of exploring the many quaint rooms, which held all
sorts of fascinating things.
“What’s in this room. Father Neptune?” asked David, as they paused outside a large, black door,
which was securely bolted.
“Well, that’s a secret,” was the reply. “No one besides my own special fairies has ever been in that
room.”
The children waited anxiously while Father Neptune considered.
“Very well,” he said at last. “You may go in if you give me your solemn promise not to tell a single soul of what you see.”
The children were naturally delighted, and gave Father Neptune their promise, whereupon he took a large key from his pocket
and unlocked the heavy door.
“Go in. children,” he invited, holding open the door.
Tuckonie was the first to enter, closely followed by the others,
and it was so dark inside that for a little while they couldn’t
see anything.
Gradually they became used to the darkness, and could make
each, someone was lying down, fast asleep.
out several objects, which they thought were beds, and upon
“Ssh . . . don’t make a noise,” Father Neptune whispered, “I don’t want to wake them yet.”
The children were frankly puzzled as to whom he was referring, and in the tiniest of whispers, Dawn said. “Who are they,
Father Neptune?”
The old man smiled. “They’re very good friends of all boys and girls, whom they visit every night without fail. Now can
you guess who they are?”
“No. I’m afraid I can’t,” said David.
“Flow' about you, Dawn?” Father Neptune asked. She shook her head, and he turned to Tuckonie.
The little aboriginal boy wriggled uncomfortably and remained silent.
“Well, well, I am surprised at you . . . fancy your not knowing w'ho visits all the boys and girls at night time,” and Father
Neptune chuckled to himself.
Just then, someone stirred on one of the beds, gave a great big yawn and sat up, sleepily rubbing his eyes. Then, there was
sharp click and the room was flooded with light.
The children blinked and when their eyes were accustomed to the light, they saw that the figure on the bed was an old, old
man. with a long grey beard and the kindest of faces.
The old man smiled at the children and then turned to Father Neptune, who had been watching the scene with interest.
“Who are these children, Father Neptune?” the old man
“Visitors from the land above the sea. and their names are
“Well. I’m very pleased to see them,” said the old man.
The Sandman arose from his bed and shook hands with
from the wall, he walked over to the other beds, and shaking
fairies.”
Immediately the queerest little figures jumped from their
surprise at the sight of the children.
asked.
David, Daw'n and Tuckonie,” was the reply,
w'ho was none other than the Sandman.
the children, then, consulting a large alarm clock that was hanging
the occupants very gently, said in his soft voice: “Time to get up,
beds, and gathered around the Sandman, their eyes wide open with
To say that David. Dawn and Tuckonie were startled, would be to put it mildly. They were absolutely astonished. Of course
they had heard of the Sandman, but never in their wildest dreams had they thought to see him.
Dawn was the first to recover from her surprise and she said. “Are you the Sandman who calls every night to send boys and
girls to sleep?”
The Sandman nodded. “Yes. every night, assisted by my fairies, I visit every home in the world, and see that every little boy
and girl goes sound to sleep.”
“Do you sprinkle sand in their eyes?” asked David.
The Sandman chuckled. “Not ordinary sand, but special fairy sand, which is so soft and fine that it is invisible.”
“And do you make the sand?” asked Dawn
“Yes, we make it in this very room. Do you see that big box in the comer?” the Sandman asked.
The children said that they did, and, at the Sandman’s invitation w'alked over to inspect the contents.
It was filled to the brim with ordinary coarse sea sand, and the children, who w'ere very disappointed, pointed this fact out to
the Sandman, who was very amused.
Summoning one of his sea-fairies, whom he called Waterwave, he said. “Waterwave, show the children how we make fairy
sand.”
Little Waterwave, w'ho was very, very tiny, flew on the rim of the box, and with a beautifully jewelled wand tapped the box
three times, saying as she did so the magic words. “Sand. sand, turn to rain . . . then back once more to sand again.”
The children, watching in fascinated silence, distinctly heard the swish of water in the box, and saw one or two drops fall to
the ground. Then little Waterw'ave summoned them to approach, and, looking in the box, they saw it was empty.
“Why it’s empty,” said Dawn.
The Sandman, w'ho had been standing behind them, chuckled. “Oh no, it’s not empty, but as I said before magic sand is
invisible”
He gave a quick glance at the alarm clock. “It’s time we were moving, fairies,” he said, and immediately there w'as great
activity and bustle.
Each little fairy reached for a small knapsack, folded neartly on the end of every bed, and taking these to the box, they quickly
filled them with magic sand.
This task completed, they stood in a row, waiting for the Sandman’s further orders.
These were not long in coming. “Now', fairies,” he said, “when the alarm rings at four o’clock, go about your tasks. You all
know where to go.”
The Sand Fairies said that they all knew their tasks, and smiled shyly at the children, who gazed at them in wonder.
Suddenly the alarm rang . . . and in a flash the Sand Faries had disappeared, leaving only Father Neptune, the Sandman and
the children in the room
Why didn t you go as well?” Dawn asked the Sandman.
The old man smiled. “Once a week I have the night free. You see I’m a very old man, and must have plenty of rest,
besides, to-morrow morning I have to train forty little sand fairies in their task of bringing sleep to the children of the world. So
if you’ll excuse me, I’ll go back to bed. Good-night, children.”
And so on tip-toe Father Neptune and the children stole softly from the room, leaving the old Sandman to enjoy his rest.


messenger, and with the money I earned. I bought a new suit,
might inspect it from all angles.
“Well, the coat seems rather short,” remarked David.
“And the trousers are rather long,” Dawn commented.
“Do you really think so?” Peter asked in a worried voice,
said it fitted me perfectly.”
“By the way, who made it?” asked David
“Marcus the Mullet,” Percy replied. “He has a little tailor
“Because I think he made your suit very badly, and it’s up
Dawn nodded her head in agreement. “I think we ought
to wear such a suit. Let’s go to Marcus the Mullet’s place right away.”
HE Story of the Tailor Fairies.
“Oh. good afternoon, David,” said Peter the Perch very politely, as David opened the door in
response to his knock “I wondered if you’d be at home because I wanted to show you my new suit.”
David invited him inside the cave, where Dawn and Tuckonie sat on the floor making necklaces
from sea shells.
“Here’s Peter the Perch, to show us his new suit,” announced David.
Dawn and Tuckonie looked up from their engrossing task. “Oh, hullo Peter,” the former said.
“It’s a long time since we had a visit from you. Where have you been all this time?”
“Oh, here and there,” replied Peter, “I had a job for several weeks as Father Neptune’s special
What do you think of it?” he asked turning around slowly so they
“I’m sure you must be wrong, because the tailor who made it
shop near the avenue of the Seven Star Fish. Why do you ask?”
to us to tell him so. What do you say, Dawn?”
to do something about it. It’s a shame that poor Peter should have
The others agreed with her And it was not long before they found themselves outside Marcus’ shop, where a large sign on the
window announced.
“SUITS TO SUIT ALL TASTES—SHIRTS TO FIT ALL WAISTS.”
“What a funny sign,” said Dawn, reading the announcement aloud, and she had just finished reading it when from the
shop walked the queerest looking fish.
“That’s Marcus,” whispered Peter in David’s ear. “He’s come to try and sell you a suit.”
Seeing Peter with the children, Marcus had no hesitation in speaking to them.
“I suppose you like Peter’s suit so much that you’ve come here to have one made for yourself,” he said to David. “I’ve the
most beautiful materials inside my shop. You can have the choice of sea-shell grey; big-rock brown; seaweed green; shipwreck black
or mermaid mauve. Every colour is guaranteed not to fade, run or shrink: while the workmanship of each suit is such that you’ll be
proud to show your friends. Come in right away, and I’ll take your measurements.”
Poor David, who had been fascinated by the flow of words, found himself being shepherded towards the door.
Dawn came to the rescue. “Excuse me. Mr. Marcus,” she said, “but David hasn’t come for anything. As a matter of fact,
we came here to see if you could do something about Peter’s suit. It doesn’t fit him at all.”
These words had the effect of stopping Marcus immediately. He forgot about David and faced Dawn
“How dare you say such a thing,” he said indignantly. “Why, I’ve been making suits for years and years and this is the first
complaint I’ve had.”
He rushed into his shop, leaving the children staring in amazement. But he was out again in a moment, carrying an Oyster
shell under one fin.
“Look,” he said. “These are Peter’s measurements. They’re written on this shell. Read them yourself if you like,” and the
angry little tailor fish thrust the Oyster shell under David’s nose.
David read: “Length from nose to tip of tail—22 inches. Width from fin to fin —8 inches. Depth 4 inches.”
“There, what’s wrong with that?” asked Marcus snatching the shell away and hurrying to Dawn with it. “You read it now,” he
instructed.
Dawn did so. and gave a cry of triumph. “I knew you’d made a mistake. “These measurements are not for Peter after
all. The name on the shell is Cuthbert the Cod, and that means you’ve made Peter’s suit to the wrong measurements”
Marcus began to cry. “I can’t understand it,” he sobbed. “This is the first time in forty years that I’ve made a mistake.
I don’t know how it could have happened. Come inside and I’ll make enquiries.”
The children and Peter the Perch followed the sobbing Marcus into the shop, which was much larger than they had imagined
from its outside appearance.
A busy scene greeted them. Half a dozen fish were sitting on the counter stitching away for dear life, while trying on a suit
was a most dignified looking old gentleman, whom they recognised as Simon the Schnapper.
Marcus wasted no time making enquiries. He summoned one of his assistants, and gave him a good dressing down. “You
ought to be ashamed of yourself, Hubert.” he said, scolding the small Herring, who had been responsible for the mistake. “Peter
the Perch is a good customer of ours. Make him a new suit immediately,”
The small Herring darted about in all directions, and to the
had cut a length of mermaid mauve material and was busily stitching
“Hubert will only be a few minutes, and while we’re waiting
He led the way to another room, which, he explained, was the
room where Father Neptune’s clothes were made.
The children were very interested, and would liked to have
calling Marcus, and so they trooped back to the main room.
A differently dressed Peter stood before them. His suit
Buttons on each sleeve and on his waistcoat.
“There, what do you think of that?” asked Marcus.
“It s really beautiful,” said Dawn, “and when David wants a
Bidding Marcus good afternoon, the children thanked him,
watching children it seemed only a matter of seconds before he
to the correct measurements.
I’ll show you around the shop,” Marcus volunteered,
dressing room, and from there, led the children to a beautiful
stayed for a long while, but just then, they heard Hubert’s voice
fitted to perfection, and he looked very smart, with tiny Pearl
new suit, he’ll certainly come to you.”
and followed the fashionably attired Peter from the shop.






HE Story of the Skating Rink
The Sea Fairies were always surprising the children with something new and novel for their enter-
tainment so, when one day Willie the Whiting suggested they visit the new skating rink, they
were not as startled as one might suppose.
“Where is the skating rink?” asked David.
“At the back of Father Neptune’s Palace,” was the reply. “The opening is scheduled for this
evening so we may as well go along.”
The children thought this a grand idea, and questioned Willie as to how they could obtain skates,
and whether they’d need ice or roller skates.
“Ice skates, of course,” said Willie, “and I can get you each a pair, without any trouble at all. Come with me now.”
So away they went, and Willie led them to Simon Schnapper’s Blacksmith shop.
Simon was very busy when they arrived. He w r as making a new
it most improbable that he’d find time to make their skates.
However, Willie Whiting was very persistent. He pleaded with
agreed.
He called his assistant, a big, strong looking Porpoise, and told him to make the furnace roar.
The Porpoise needed no encouragement. He set to with a will, blowing and puffing until
But Peter the Porpoise knew his job, and in next to no time,
“Hold out your foot,” shouted Simon above the noise,
you,” he told Dawn, and finally it was Tuckonie’s turn.
steel safe for Father Neptune to put his jewels in, and thought
Simon to such an extent, that in desperation the Blacksmith
a will, blowing and puffing until the children thought he’d burst.
the furnace was a roaring mass of flame.
David obeyed and the Blacksmith took his measurements. “Now
After taking the measurements necessary to see that their skates would be the correct size. Simon reached for some hoop-iron
that was hanging on the wall. This he placed in the furnace until it was red hot, then with strong and powerful blows he com-
menced hammering.
Sparks flew in all directions, but they were fairy sparks and soon faded out.
The hoop-iron took shape under the guidance of Simon, and very soon the children were delighted to see a perfectly made
skate placed in a shell of water to cool.
Simon took a great pride in his work and would not let the children leave his smithy until their skates were just so.
“There you are, children.” he said at last, “I’ve never made finer skates and I hope you have a jolly time on them. Good-bye,
and come and see me again some time.”
So thanking the Blacksmith, they departed, Willie taking all the credit for the Blacksmith’s work. “What did I tell you?” he
said, “Simon makes the finest skates down here, and they’re guaranteed for a lifetime.”
As it was drawing near lunch time, the children invited Willie to their cave, and they all sat down to a picnic lunch.
During the meal the talk was all of skating, and Willie confided that he was the best skater in Father Neptune’s Kingdom.
“Just wait until you see me tearing around the rink,” he said rather boastfully, “there’ll be no stopping me.”
Knowing that it was rude to contradict or argue with a guest, the children politely agreed with him, and as soon as they’d
finished their meal and washed up. Dawn suggested they have a little nap so they’d be bright and fresh for the night’s activities.
The others agreed with her, and soon the children w 7 ere sleeping peacefully.
David was the first to awake, and consulting his watch, saw that it was seven o’clock. He awakened the others, and they set out
for the skating rink.
They were not the only ones looking forward to a night’s skating, for they were soon joined by dozens of others, all bound
in the same direction.
On arrival at the rink, they found that the admission was two periwinkles, and this presented rather a problem. But David,
searching through his pockets, discovered that he had five, while Dawn could muster two. Tuckonie supplied the odd periwinkle,
which was very lucky, because Willie confessed that he hadn’t a single penny to bless himself with.
They passed through the turnstile and discovered the rink already crowded, so they thought they would wait and watch for a
few minutes.
Willie, however, was impatient. “There’s room for one more,” he said, “so I’ll get in a little practice. You can watch me and
perhaps learn a little.” With that he adjusted his skates and hopped on to the rink.
Smding at the children, he commenced to glide along at a great speed, elbowing his fellow skaters aside with small regard for
their comfort.
How'ever, he reckoned without old Dame Perch, who w r as only a beginner, and w'ho had to cling to the ropes for support.
Willie was almost opposite her. when her legs gave way and she collided into the Whiting with terrific force, and clutched him
wildly around the neck. Poor Willie was flabbergasted, but the old lady refused to let go. and so, amid cheers and laughter from the
others, they encircled the rink, to all appearances performing some kind of strange dance.
Just then the master of ceremonies struck a bell, and in a loud, clear voice, announced that Mr. Willie Whiting and Dame Polly
Perch had been awarded first prize for the most eccentric dance of the evening.
This was too much for the children, and they laughed until their sides ached, but Willie, who had been relieved of his unwanted
partner, rejoined them, and said in a superior manner: “I told yo u I’d be worth watching. Just wait until you see what I’ve won,”
and he unwrapped a small parcel, which he’d been given.
Although the children had laughed at Willie’s impromptu dance it was nothing to the delighted shriek of laughter they gave on
beholding Willie’s prize. It wa s a small booklet, entitled: “How to Skate In Ten Lessons —AND HELPFUL HINTS TO
YOUNG BEGINNERS.”




HE Story of The Sea Sheik
Dawn was very fond of sea shells and she had enlisted the aid of David and Tuckonie to find
new kinds.
Thus we find them busily engaged in searching a little rock pool not far from their cave.
Suddenly Dawn gave a cry of delight. “Oh look what I've found. she said, holding up a frail
and beautiful little shell. “Isn’t it lovely?”
It certainly was beautiful and had a little pointed top, around which, ran minute ridges, faintly
pink in colour.
“That’s a very rare specimen,” said David after a careful inspection, “what do you say, Tuckonie?”
“Yes, him one rare shell, p’raps belong fairy shell queen,” the little aboriginal boy said.
“Oh. do you think so?” asked Dawn excitedly.
“Yes, Tuckonie no make mistake. That shell belong fairy queen. You wait and see.”
Before Dawn could reply, a Seahorse, drawing a tiny carriage, pranced into view.
The children stared in amazement. It was the smallest carriage they’d ever seen, and was made entirely of shells, even to the
wheels.
The dearest, tiniest, little figure alighted from the carriage, and taking no notice whatever of the children, commenced to search
for something, running hither and thither in vain.
“I wonder what’s she’s looking for?” whispered Dawn
“I don’t know,” replied David. “Listen.”
Drawing herself up to her full height, which must have been about a quarter of an inch, the tiny figure darted back to the
waiting Seahorse, and said in a silvery little voice. “I can’t understand it. My house was here when we left this morning. What-
ever can have happened to it?”
“I’ve an idea those children may know something about it,” the Seahorse replied, looking at the children out of the corner of
his eyes.
For the first time the tiny figure seemed to notice the children, and boldly walking right up to them said. “Do you know where
my house is?”
“What sort of house was it?” asked Dawn feeling a little guilty.
“A shell, a sea shell,” was the reply.
“Oh, I am sorry. I didn’t know it was anyone’s house, and I just picked it up to add to my collection,” Dawn said.
The little figure bristled with annoyance. “How dare you. How dare you touch the house of Queen Topsy. I’ve a good
mind to tell Father Neptune,” and Queen Topsy literally danced with rage.
“I’m really dreadfully sorry,” said Dawn, and she meant every word, for she’d not intentionally have hurt anyone’s feeling.
A delightful smile greeted Dawn’s apology. “I believe you are sorry, and I’ll forgive you this time. Give me my house now, if
you please,” said the Sea Shell Fairy Queen.
Dawn handed her the exquisite shell, and with a cry of delight. Queen Topsy took it in both tiny hands.
“You don’t know how pleased lam to find my house safe and sound,” she confided. “You see, Father Neptune had it made
especially for me, and there’s not another like it in all the Kingdom.”
“Is it comfortable inside?” asked David.
“Most comfortable,” The Queen replied. “It has hot and cold water laid on. A folding bed, an easy-chair, a portable stove
and pictures and curtains.”
The children’s faces were a study. They found it impossible to believe that so tiny a shell could hold all that Queen Topsy
had said.
The tiny Fairy Queen saw the doubting looks on their faces, and she smiled. “So you don’t believe me?” she asked.
The children said nothing.
“Just watch,” Queen Topsy commanded, and waved one hand over the shell,
She must have cast a magic spell, because the wonderstruck children could see inside the shell, and they discovered that the Fairy
Sea Shell Queen had indeed spoken the truth.
It was just as Queen Topsy had said. There was the smallest bed imaginable, covered with a bed-spread no bigger than the
fraction of a postage stamp. The chair, no larger than the head of a pin. The curtains, so small that they had to strain their eyes
to see them; while the pictures were just specks.
“Why, it’s wonderful,” gasped the delighted Dawn. “I’ve never seen anything so marvellous.”
David and Tuckonie were equally enthusiastic, and Queen Topsy laughed delightedly. “Every shell which you see is really a
house,” she explained. “But because it may seem empty at the time you pick it up, it’s only that the owner is absent for a while.
I hope you remember that in future.”
The children promised to remember in future, and after bidding Queen Topsy farewell, returned to their cave, to discuss again
and again the wonders they had seen that afternoon.


Kindhearted Dawn immediately felt sorry for the captive buoy, a nd she said. “Yes it must
be very lonely for you out here —
hardly seeing a soul from one year’s end to the other.”
Cedric looked at them wistfully. “Do you know that this is the first kind word I’ve had
. oh ... I feel so happy . . . ”
HE Story of The Captive Buo
David. Dawn and Tuckonie were examining an old anchor they had discovered buried beneath the
sand. It was rusty, and covered with Barnacles and Seaweed.
“I wonder how long this has been here?” Dawn asked.
“Probably a very long time,” David answered, “because it’s very old fashioned, and I should think
it once belonged to a sailing ship.
Dawn agreed, and for a little while they discussed what kind of ship it had saved from
drifting on the rocks. They soon grew tired of this and were thinking of returning to their cave when
David stumbled over a thick steel cable, that went up and up and up.
“I wonder what’s on the other end?” asked Dawn, helping David to his feet
“I’ve no idea, but I think we should find out,” he answered.
And so the three children commenced to swim to the surface. It seemed an awfully long way. but at last they came to the top.
“There’s a funny, round steel thing fastened to this end of the cable,” announced Dawn, “and it’s bobbing up and down in the
waves.”
The children looked at the round, red cylinder. It was very
“What can it be?” asked David, swimming over and touching
“Don’t do that,” the queer shaped object said in a cross voice.
big and had a large ring fastened at the top.
it with one finger.
“I can’t bear to be touched. It upsets me.”
“Did you hear that, Dawn?” said David. “The funny thing can talk.”
“I wish you wouldn’t refer to me in those terms,” the round object retorted. “If you must discuss me, kindly use my correct
name. I’m a buoy, a captive buoy.”
“Oh, are you,” said Dawn, “and please, what’s a captive buoy?”
The buoy gave a sorrowful sigh. “It seems a waste of time sending children to school. Do you mean to tell me you’ve never
heard of a captive buoy?”
“Now I come to think of it, I have,” David replied. “They’re things they tie ships up to when they don’t want to let go their
anchors.”
For the first time the captive buoy smiled. “I’m glad to learn they teach you something,” he said, “and let me tell you that
captive buoys are absolute necessities. Now what would they do without me?”
“I’m sure I don’t know,” said Dawn. ,
“Why they’d have to rely on anchors in all kinds of weather, and, at the best of times an anchor is unreliable,” and the
captive buoy looked as if he would brook no argument.
“I believe you’re right,” said David, thinking of the anchor they had found at the bottom of the ocean.
“Of course, I’m right. Cedric the Captive Buoy is always right.”
“I don’t think you’re very modest,” Dawn said.
“You’ve no right to say that,” Cedric answered angrily, “and I wish you’d go away,”
“Please don’t be bad tempered,” David begged.
Cedric considered for a moment. “Oh, very well. It’s not often that I have visitors, and to tell you the truth I'm very lonely
at times.”
and to the children’s alarm, he burst into tears.
“Don’t cry, please Cedric,” said David. “Dry your eyes and tell us a story.”
“Very well,” Cedric consented, “if you listen carefully and promise not to interrupt.”
The children promised, and Cedric commenced his story.
Many years ago, he said, I was built in a big steelworks in Glasgow, and I was made from the finest steel procurable.
One day when I was finished two men came along to inspect me, and I can remember their saying that they’d never seen a finer captive
buoy, and that Id do for the job they had in mind. Very soon I found myself in the water and many ships used me in preference to
dropping their anchors. However one day, a big tug, with a crane aboard, drew up along side me and I was hoisted aboard.
didn t worry much, for by nature Im very calm. I remained on board the tug for some weeks, then one fine day we steamed
out of harbour bound, I heard someone say, for the distant port of Bilbao.
“One winter’s day, when I had been about a year in the water, it commenced to blow a hurricane. The wind howled and
whistled and whipped up tremendous seas. Now it so happened that the night before, a big steamer had arrived from England with
hundreds of passengers aboard. The ship was to have left at seven o’clock the next morning, but during the night this terrific
hurricane arose. The ship was at anchor and seemed safe enough, but I knew better. I just bobbed up and down among the
waves and waited My patience was rewarded. Shortly before midnight a terrific gust of wind tore down on the ship. I was
teelmg sleepy at the time and was dozing—but the sound of men shouting caused me to awake and pay attention. Slowly but surely
the huge ship was drifting ashore. The anchors were dragging and it seemed that nothing could be done Then great clouds of
smoke issued from the ship’s funnel and I knew her engines were turning. They were making desperate attempts to head lor sea.
u We T fi^ lng , a loSlng battle> The wind was to ° stron g and the ship was just abreast of me, when a man leant over the rail and
shouted. ‘ There s a captive buoy just a cable’s length away, if we can hook up to that we’ll be saved.”
"The winches were set to work and the useless anchors raised from the bottom. Then, showing great bravery, a man clambered
over the side by clinging on to the anchor chain, and as one anchor came into sight, he knocked out the pin and let it go. With
tremendous strength he raised two or three links of the chain, then waited his opportunity. It was not long in coming. As a wave
lilted me up to his level, he grabbed my iron ring and forced one of the links through. Then quick as thought he fastened it securely
and scrambled up the ship's side. A great cheer broke out from the anxious crowd as he reached the deck.
“Well their worries were over. Although through the night it blew harder than ever. I held that ship safely and saved it from
going on the rocks.
“That’s all,” Cedric concluded abrupdy.
Oh. I think it was wonderful, and thank you so much for telling us,” said David.
But there was no reply.
Cedric the Captive Buoy was sound asleep, dreaming, perhaps, of the days gone by.


HE Story of the Haven of Tired Ships.
One afternoon, David. Dawn and Tuckonie were talking to Percy the Pilot Fish. He was a great
friend of theirs, and was telling them all about the strange things to be found at the bottom of the
ocean.
'ls there anything in particular you'd like to do this afternoon?” Percy said to David. David shook
his head.
"No—why?” he asked.
“Well,” said Percy, ‘"how would you like to visit the Haven of Tired Ships?”
Dawn clapped her hands with joy. "Oh, that would be wonderful. "Where is it?”
Percy wriggled his tail. "Over near the Valley of the Whistling Whirlpool. It’s not far. About three miles due west. Would
you like to- go?” -
“Of course,” said David, “and on our way would you tell us something about the Haven of Tired Ships?”
Percy looked wise. “I don’t know that I should. Jack Tar might be very angry. He likes to tell visitors all about the tired
ships himself.”
"Who’s Jack Tar?” asked Dawn as they followed Percy towards the Valley of the Whistling Whirlpool.
Percy chuckled. “Oh. he’s an old sailor. He’s the caretaker of the tired ships, and he's been down here for hundreds of
years. He’ll seem a little fierce at first, but he’s really very, very
‘ Him got funny name,” said Tuckonie.
“I don’t think it’s funny, and I’ve a good mind not to take
"Please do.” said David. “Tuckonie didn't mean to be rude.
nice, and tells the most wonderful stories.
you after all,” and Percy flicked his fins with annoyance.
Did you Tuckonie?”
The little aboriginal boy spoke in his gruff voice. “Tuckonie sorry, you take him see tired ships?”
Percy nodded. “Oh, very well no one could say that Percy the Pilot Fish is ungracious. Come on.”
And so off they went —past huge jagged rocks that were covered with thick brown seaweed, and they saw strange queer look-
ing fish that looked at them curiously. At last Percy, who had been swimming a little ahead of the children, stopped suddenly.
“We’ll go down here.” he said, and led the way through an opening caused by two big rocks leaning together and leaving just
enough room for them to pass. They squeezed through the narrow opening, and then went down, and down through water that
was inky black. With startling suddenness it grew lighter, and th’ir feet came to rest on very white sand.
“Here we are,” said Percy, “come with me and I’ll introduce you to Jack Tar. he lives on board that ship over there.”
The children followed his gaze and saw a huge wooden ship resting at a sharp angle on the bed of the ocean. Tattered sails
were hanging from tall masts, and beautifully coloured fish were swimming in and out of the portholes. As the children gazed in
wonder at the queer old ship, a man appeared on deck and. walking towards the stern, climbed down from a rope ladder that hung
there.
"That’s Jack Tar,” Percy informed them, “he’s coming over here.”
The old sailor came towards Percy and the children. Looking very fierce he said. “What are you doing here, Percy?”
Peres- wasn't afraid. “It’s all right shipmate, these children are visitors from the shore, and they’re friends of Father Neptune.
He wants you to show them over the Haven of Tired Ships.”
“That’s all right then, friends of Father Neptune are friends of mine. Tell me your names, and I’ll show you my ships.”
David stepped forward. “I’m David, this is my sister, Dawn, and this is our friend Tuckonie.”
“Well I’m very pleased to see you down here,” answered Jack Tar.
“Come over here and see the “Mary Ann,” she was wrecked over three hundred years ago.”
They went towards the ship and ran their hands over the salt encrusted timbers.
‘ Tm very proud of ‘The Mary Ann.’ said Jack Tar, “she’s almost as good now as when she was launched. Look at her.
Isn’t she a picture?”
The children craned their necks gazing upwards. Towering
cannons pointed through the portholes.
above them, the old old ship seemed very solid, and queer brass
“Yes.” said Jack Tar, “ ‘The Mary Ann’ was a man-o-wa:
terrific gale, and crashed into that rock.”
and was returning from the West Indies, when she ran into
The children gazed in fascinated awe at the tremendous rock
with its great jagged edges.
“It does seem a shame that such a beautiful ship should sink,” said Dawn sadly. “Can't you do anything about it?”
Fraid not. shipmate. There's nothing we can do to warn them. All we can do is to look after them when they come
down here. Ships are funny things,” he continued, “and although you won’t believe it they’re as much alive as you and I. Isn’t
that so. Maty Ann? ’
"Of course it is. answered the ship in such a cross voice that the children jumped with surprise. “Of course I’m alive and if
you don’t believe it, watch my masts.”
The children obeyed, and could hardly believe their eyes as the two tall masts commenced to sway and bend.
Jack Tar chuckled. "There, what did I tell you. Mary Ann is saying how do you do.”
He turned to the ship. “Don t get excited, Mary, you know you’re not as young as you used to be.”
A gentle snore was the only answer.
“Mary’s gone to sleep.” he explained. "Leave her alone—she’s a dear old lady.”
David, Dawn and Tuckonie were much too surprised to say aanything, and they followed Jack Tar and Percy the Pilot Fish to
a big oak chest, which was half buried in the sand.
“What’s this?” asked Dawn.
That* a treasure chest, explained Jack Tar. “It’s from the old ‘Reliant,’ lying just around the corner.”
Ihe ‘Reliant was wrecked many years ago, when returning from a pirate expedition. I’m ashamed of the ‘Reliant.’ She’s a
very bad old ship, and Ive brought the treasure chest here just to punish her. I’ll probably take it back next week.”
Vi ell. it s getting late now and I must light the ships' lanterns, but before I do, come over here.” They followed him to the
stem of the Mary Ann. “Look over there,” said the old sailor pointing in the distance.
I hey gasped in surprise. Hundreds and hundreds of masts from hundreds and hundreds of ships rose in the sea like a great
underwater forest.
Those are my ships every one of them.” said Jack Tar proudly, “and now that you’ve seen the Haven of Tired Ships, think
kindly of all the ships that sail the seven seas, and remember that every ship, whether it’s just a rowing boat or a big liner, is a
living thing that responds to care and attention. I must go now, but come and see me again one of these days. Percy will see
you safely back.”
And, silent with wonder and amazement, the children watched the old sailor go about his task of caring for the tired old ships.




the Coral Fairies.
HE Story o
Father Neptune was showing the children through his private museum; a large and wonderful
room in the south wing of his palace.
One of the most fascinating of rooms, it was shown to very few visitors, but David, Dawn and
Tuckonie were privileged, being specially invited by Father Neptune himself.
“Look at this, children,” said the
several beautiful and delicately coloured
old man, leading the way to a long table, on which rested
objects which they could not name.
“Oh, how lovely,” said Dawn admiringly. “What are they, Father Neptune?”
“Thev are pieces of Coral,” he explained, “and the specimens which you now see are very, very rare. Look,” he said,
handing her a perfect fan-shaped piece, which was tinged a glorious pink.
Dawn handled the exquisite coral carefully, and then passed it to David and Tuckonie for inspect.on.
There is no use denying that the children were fascinated by Father Neptune’s marvellous collection of coral, and they
begged him to tell them how it was made; who made it, and why it assumed such remarkable shapes.
“Well, children,” he replied in answer to their eager questions, “sit down and I’ll tell you all about the Coral Fames, and
their patience and cleverness in making this wonderful stuff.
David. Dawn and Tuckonie seated themselves at Father Neptune’s feet, and waited for the dear old man to commence his
lone ago” he began, “there was a little race of fairy creatures called Coralites. They were so tiny as to be almost
invisiblHnd naturally they had difficulty in finding suitable dwelling places. It was no use then clmgtng to the racks,
as the first wave that came along washed them off.
“Now one day a very wise old Coralite. named Midgee, decided that this was not good enough. He and his people were
tired of being washed off the rocks, so they decided to hold a monster meeting of all the Coralites to try and make suitable ar-
rangements for comfortable dwellings.
“Every Coralite in the Kingdom attended, and Midgee, the Chief Coralite, listened patiently to what they had to say.
‘Towards conclusion U. taSTt-d“
Ws n eqTaUy dny STandtfid in >he faintest of voices. 'Please Midgee, I’ve an idea,” Now this caused all the Cocaines .o
look around in amazement because the tiny Coralite whose name was Weenyteen. was not particularly noted for h.s intelligence.
However, Midgee was by this time eager to hear anything that would be of value, so he said. ‘Very well, W eenyteen, what
have you to say?’ . TI ,
“Finding himself the centre of attention. Weenyteen blushed, and had difficulty in saving anything. However, M.dgee
waited patiently, and at last Weenyteen said. T think it would be a good idea if we were to build our own houses.
This statement caused something of a sensation, for of all the suggestions put forward that afternoon, none had included any
hint that they would have to help themselves to the extent of working.
“Panic reigned for a while, but at last Midgee called the meeting to order and said in an angry voice. Would you please
explain, Weenyteen, exactly how we are to go about making our own homes?’
“ ‘Certainly ’ replied Weenyteen, who now spoke with confidence. T have thought everything out. and the whole scheme
is simple. First of all we divide ourselves into colonies, say twenty thousand to each colony; then, working night and day we
collect broken sea-shells.
“‘We take these to our friends the whales, who will grind them into powder and afterwards we collect the powder, mix
it with fairy gelatine, and mould it into shape to suit our respective requirements. You II find he concluded with a note of
triumph in his voice, ‘that when this has been done, we’ll all have homes that will last us for the rest of our lives.
“Cheers and clapping greeted this statement, and when the noise had subsided. Midgee said that the idea seemed excellent
and that he would investigate the whole scheme without delay.
“He selected a special committee including Weenyteen to go into the whole matter, and from that day onwards the Coralites
were a different people.
“Thousands and thousands of them spent their days in collecting sea-shells, and dumping them on to a huge pile. When
sufficient had been gathered the whales were called in to help, which they were only too pleased to do.
“Whale after whale rolled over the shells, reducing them to a very fine powder, which the Coralites mixed with fairy gelatine.
“Soon the first little house was made, then another, and another, until there was hardly any room left for the other sea-
fairies. Then someone suggested that they build one house on top of the other, and for decorative purposes, build them in
variety of shapes and forms.
“This was agreed to, but still the number of little houses
‘The time has come when we must go to other seas and found
suggest that a number of us depart immediately.’
“Thus it was that Midgee led one million of his subjects
and commenced their gigantic task of building The Great
visitors from every land to view its beauties.”
increased, and one day Midgee the Chief Coralite said to his people
colonies for our children and great grandchildren. Therefore, I
to found a new colony, and they settled in North Australian Waters
Barrier Reef, one of the wonders of the world, and which attracts
Father Neptune stopped and cleared his throat, “well kiddies I’ve been talking for a long while, and now I hope you under-
stand all about the little Coral Fairies. You may take those pieces of Coral with you, and when you study them, think for a
while on the infinite patience and skill of the little creatures whose homes they are.’
The children, silent with wonder at the story they had heard, thanked Father Neptune and returned to their cave, to dream
perhaps pf the clever and wonderful Coral Fairies.


HE Story of David and Adventure
ith the Swordfish.
David, Dawn and Tuckonie were among the first to arrive at the Palace Grounds to witness the
Great Annual Tournament.
This was an event to which all the Sea Fairies eagerly awaited, because it decided possession of
the famous Clamshell Cup, at present held by th e representatives of the Atlantic Ocean, whose
doughty fighters, the great grey swordfish, were confident of retaining it.
The children found good seats, and settled down to await proceedings. They were vastly
amused at the good natured barracking from all parts of the ground, and David, who was sitting next to a young Porpoise, asked
who were the favourites.
“The Atlanticites, of course. They’re much bigger and stronger, but as I live in the Pacific I naturally hope that our fellows
will win.”
“Well, we live in Australia and that’s in the Pacific, so I’m going to barrack for the Pacific Swordfish,” said Dawn and the
others said likewise.
David asked the Porpoise how Swordfish fought.
“With the long swords which they have on the ends of their noses. They are very powerful weapons, and I’ve known an
angry swordfish to charge a rowing boat and make a great big hole in it," he replied.
“But, if they’re as strong as all that won’t they hurt each other during the Tournament?” Dawn asked
“Father Neptune wouldn’t allow it. He makes them wear thick sponges on the end of their swords,” the Porpoise said.
Dawn gave a sigh of relief. “That’s all right then. I was a little worried.”
A rolling of drums and a crash of bugles stopped further conversation, and the entire audience rose as one man.
“The Tournament has started,” whispered the Porpoise, as a band swung into view at the head of a long and glittering pro-
cession.
Directlv behind the band was row unon row of smartly attired Penguins, swinging along with militarv precision. Following
them came the Schnaoper contingent: then the Bream, the Mullet, the Kingfish, the Perch and the Codfish battalions; while close
on their heels a squadron of seahorse pranced gailv along, to be followed bv dozens of Whales, moving slowly to allow the
audience to view their great bulk and majesty, and the audience gasped with amazement when a flight of flying fish swooped, zoomed
and stunted a few feet above their heads.
This was a signal that the procession had ended, and all eyes turned towards King Neptune, who rose from his throne and in
a stentorian voice announced. “My subjects, in accordance with our time honoured custom we will now witness the first heat of the
Great Tournament. The combatants will be an Atlantic and a Pacific Ocean Swordfish.”
In the great hush that followed the competitors swam forth to do battle.
They took up their positions on the arena, and the children were quick to notice that each had a great, soft sponge fastened
to the end of Its sword.
The referee an active little Herring, gave the signal for hostilities to commence, and the huge Swordfish charged each other.
Despite their bulk they were most agile and evaded each rush with lightning-like movements that were hard to follow.
At last a deep throated roar burst from the crowd. The Atlantic Swordfish had hit his opponent fairly and squarely on the
side, and without further ado, he was declared winner of the first heat.
Throughout the afternoon the heats were decided, and the losers eliminated
Then came the grand finale. The last and deciding battle for possession of The Clamshell Cup
The winner of the first heat was to face a Pacific Ocean Swordfish.
Hopes ran high, and a buzz of excited conversation was only stilled as the combatants faced each other.
“Oh dear, our Swordfish looks so small.” said David.
“Don’t you worry.” the Porpoise replied, “what he lacks in size he’ll make up in skill.”
A burst of cheering signalled the contest had started. The Atlantic Swordfish charged straight for his lighter opponent,
but with a dextrous swish of his tail the other darted aside, and before you could blink an eyelid had jabbed his muffled sword
against the Altanticite’s tail.
A roar of encouragement greeted this fine piece of work, and the children jumped with delight and excitement.
But the Atlanticite w’as far from finished. He cleverly charged again, but this time before reaching his opponent, he veered
swiftly to the left.
The Pacificite fell into the trap, and his supporters gave a cry of dismay to see him spun round and round by the force of the
blow' he received from the other.
The Porpoise groaned. “That’s one fall each. The next fall decides the winner,” he said.
The children were speechless with excitement as the swordfish faced each other for the last time.
The Pacificite opened proceedings by a swift dart to his opponent’s flank. The other turned in a flash, but the Pacificite was
ready. He charged downwards as the Atlanticite swept by, and then, quicker than thought, zoomed through the water at a terrific
speed. The other had no hope, and the contest was over as his sword crashed into his rival’s great grey side.
The audience went absolutely crazy. They cheered, stamped and clapped for nearly five minutes, and the children danced
with joy as the winning Pacific Ocean Swordfish swam slowly towards King Neptune’s Throne; there to receive the Clamshell Cup
from the fair hands of Queen Mop, who congratulated the winner on his marvellous display of skill.
Thoroughly happy and tired out with excitement, David. Dawn and Tuckonie returned to their cave, proud to be inhabitants
of the Great Pacific Ocean.


The Sea-Serpent.
HE Story o j
One day, right at the bottom of the sea, David and Tuckonie, the Earthly Twins, were talking about
Sea-Serpents,
David turned to Dawn, who was picking beautiful sea flowers and said: “Do you believe in Sea-
Serpents, Dawn?—l don’t, but Tuckonie says that they live in the very deepest parts of the sea.”
Dawn answered absentmindedly: “I’m sure I don’t know, David, there may be, but I don’t think
that anyone has ever seen a Sea-Serpent.”
“That’s where you’re entirely wrong,” a cross voice broke in, “of course, there arc Sea-Serpents, and
very friendly creatures they are, too.”
The children jumped with surprise at the sound of this voice, which seemed to come from nowhere.
“Did anyone speak?” asked David, peering into the clear, green water.
“Yes, I did,” retorted the voice, “and if you look above your heads you’ll see me.”
The children gazed above them, and there, just a few feet above their heads and swimming lazily about was one of the queerest
looking fish they had even seen. It was shaped like a shield, and had an electric bulb, which kept flickering, right on top of it’s
head.
“Who are you?” asked David.
“What, don’t you know who I am?” the fish replied in a surprised manner, “why I thought everyone knew Ernie the Electric
Light Fish. Anyway,” he continued, “what are you doing here?”
The children explained, and this seemed to annoy Ernie considerably.
“I don’t know what the world’s coming to,” he said peevishly, “there is hardly any room left to swim about in.”
“That’s silly,” replied Dawn, “there’s lots of room for everyone. I think you’re very greedy.”
“No one can call Ernie greedy or selfish,” was the reply, “why, I’ve practically run my battery down looking for the Sea-
Serpent’s silver spoon.”
“What are you talking about?” asked David, “do you know any
Ernie the Electric Light Fish chuckled. “Of course. I know
The children gazed at him in wonder, and at last Dawn begged.
Sea-Serpents?”
Sea-Serpent, Tm one of Simon’s ‘NO’ men.”
“Please tell us what you mean.”
“Very well,” Ernie consented. “You see, Simon the Sea-Serpent is very frightened of rain, and the first thing he does every
morning is to ask if it’s raining. Of course, it never is, but he likes to be told. All Ido is say ‘NO,’ and he’s perfectly satisfied.”
“I think it’s very silly,” said Dawn.
Just as Ernie was growing angry, David said. “Please, Ernie, can we see Simon the Sea-Serpent?”
“But I thought you didn’t believe in Sea-Serpents?” answered Ernie.
“I don’t know whether I do or not,” explained David, “but I would like to make sure.”
“Oh, very well,” replied Ernie, “follow me,” and with a swish of his tail he darted ahead, the children following as best they
could.
At the side of a huge underwater mountain that towered upwards for hundreds of feet, Ernie stopped and waited for the
children. When they’d caught up with him, he led the way to an immense opening in the side of the mountain. The water rushed
into this gap at a terrific rate, and the three children were swept along a tunnel, which suddenly came to an end.
Then Ernie, who was very calm, said. “Now you’ll have to swim, down and down and down.”
They obeyed. Down, down, they went, the water growing darker all the time, and all they could see was the faint glow
from Ernie’s electric light bulb. At last it grew lighter, and very much out of breath, the children glided into a huge cavern.
“There he is,” said Ernie, whisking his tail in the direction of
extend for miles.
huge creature, with a horse shaped head, whose tail seemed to
“Is that Simon the Sea-Serpent?” asked Dawn.
“It is,” replied Ernie, “and from the look of him he’s lost his
and say ‘hullo’ to Simon.”
silver spoon again. Come on. children,” he continued, “come
As they approached, Simon the Sea-Serpent looked up and said. “Is it raining, Ernie?”
“No,” replied Ernie.
“That’s good,” the Sea-Serpent said, and continued burrowing in the sand.
Just a moment, please, Simon.” Ernie said, “I’ve brought some visitors to see you, who don’t believe in Sea-Serpents.”
And then, to the children’s dismay, Simon burst into tears.
It s always the same,” he complained, “nobody believes I exist.” He turned despairingly to the children. “I do exist, don’t
I?” he pleaded.
“You seem to.” answered Dawn, who wasn’t the least little bit frightened.
Of course, I do, answered Simon, “and I’ve lived in this cave for nearly five hundred years. Is that right, Ernie?”
NO,” said Ernie, who was thinking of something else.
“What’s that?” thundered Simon.
“Yes—l mean, yes, of course,” replied the startled Ernie.
l^en ’ retorted Simon, very much pleased, and turning to Tuckonie, asked; “Who are you?”
Me Tuckonie, plenty good black tracker,” was the reply.
Simon’s face lit up. “Then perhaps you can find my silver spoon.”
Tuckonie find silver spoon right now. Look, you’ve got your foot on it.”
iave ’ Simon gave a great sigh of relief. “Now I’ll be able to eat, which is something I haven’t done since
“But it’s only lunch time now,” said David.
(<^° U )) t^°n * un< k f s tan d, replied Simon, gazing at him mournfully, “I meant breakfast time about three hundred years ago.”
‘Oh.” said Dawn in a faint voice, “you poor thing, you must be hungry.”
1 am. and if you will excuse me, I’ll have lunch now.”
nor>nlp * r 'Serpent looked at them with doleful eyes. “Good-bye, children, and when you go back to the earth again, tell
people. *ho live up there, that because they’ve never seen a Sea-Serpent, it’s not to say that they do not exist.”


M *I W irjf-
/ \ V: r '* l\w tm I
sown, Down they went. the water
rowing darker dll the time


HE Story of Xmas Under The Sea
The sea fairies were agog with excitement. Christmas was drawing near and preparations were in
hand for an enormous party to which everyone was to be invited.
David. Dawn and Tuckonie were very busy, because Father Neptune had left the arrangement in
their hands, and as they wanted the party to be a great success, the children were leaving no stone un-
turned in their endeavour to make it the greatest Christmas party ever held under the sea.
There was such a lot to be done. First of all they had to select a suitable ground on which to
have the party, and after much discussion they finally decided that a fine stretch of sandy ground near the Valley of the Sunken
Rocks would be most suitable.
Then they had to make the catering arrangements, and to make a success of this they enlisted the help of old Freddie
Flounder, who was really an excellent cook.
He suggested that they have piles and piles of mixed sandwiches; heaped plates of sea froth ice-cream; hundreds of crystalised
foam bubbles; lots of cake and plum pudding and as many bottles of lemonade as they could order.
Now besides having to arrange the party, the children were very anxious to give as many presents as possible, and with this
in view we find them sitring in their cave a faw days before Christmas, making out a list of the sea-fairies to whom they were
giving presents.
“I think Father Neptune would like a new pearl to place in his crown,” said Dawn.
“And I’m sure that Percy the Pilot Fish would like a new compass,” said David.
“And Tuckonie give Jack Tar one brand new pipe,” the little aboriginal boy chimed in
So the list of presents grew, and for the next few days they were very busy buying all their gifts, which they did in the sea
fairy shops.
At last it was Christmas eve, and the children went to bed very early. They were up very early on Christmas day and went
to Father Neptune’s Palace.
“A merry Christmas, children,” he said, and handed them their gifts. A lovely Coral necklace for Dawn; a new pen-knife
for David and a shell encrusted boomerang for Tuckonie.
They spent happy hours at the palace, until it was time to leave for the party, and saying they expected to see him later, said
good-bye to Father Neptune.
On their way to the party, they met hundreds of sea-fairies bound in the same direction, and it was an excited, happy crowd
who arrived at the huge sandy stretch where the party was to be held.
The tables were in position, and Freddie Flounder and dozens of assistants were busy unloading the great quantities of food-
stuffs.
The children leant a hand, and soon everything was ready.
Suddenly a bugle call echoed sweet and clear above the noise.
Instantly all was silent and then, amid cheers and cries of a “Merry Christmas,” Father Neptune and his court arrived on the
scene.
They were led by the children to the seats of honour, and at a signal from David, the assembly arose, and with one voice
chanted. “Greetings, Father Neptune, on this, the happiest day of the year.”
Then Father Neptune holding up his hand for silence, spoke. “My dear subjects,” he said. “This is the first Christmas under
the sea at which we have been honoured with guests from the great land above the water. In David, Dawn and Tuckonie, we
have found three children whom it is a pleasure to know.”
A great storm of cheering drowned his words for a while, and when this subsided, he continued. “During their stay in my
kingdom, the children have learnt much of the ways of sea-fairies. They have seen and experienced all manner of things hitherto
denied mere mortals. But their visit will not have been in vain, for when they return to their own people, they will be able to tell
of a wonderful civilisation, existing at the bottom of the sea, and that there are really sea-fairies. Now, my subjects,” he
continued, “I want you to fill your glasses with lemonade and drink a toast to our guests, and when this is done, we’ll proceed
with our party in the true manner of well behaved fairies of the sea. Fill your glasses.”
A great rush for lemonade and glasses took place, and when every single creature had filled their glass, Father Nepune said;
“The toast, my subjects, is ‘Our Visitors —may good luck and good fortune be always theirs.’ ”
Ten thousand voices repeated “Our Visitors—may good luck and good fortune be always theirs.”
The children were so delighted and happy that at the conclusion of the toast they found it was some minutes before they
could speak. Then prompted by Dawn, David stood up and said: —
"Father Neptune and sea-fairies, thank you so much for your good wishes, and the wonderful time you’ve given us in your
kingdom. We’ll never, never forget how good you’ve been. Thank you very much,” and with just the faintest suspicion of
tears in his voice David sat down. The sea-fairies cheered and clapped, and then settled down to enjoy their party.
How they could eat. In a very few minutes there was absolutely nothing left. But everyone had plenty, and with gaily
coloured caps on their heads they commenced to play games, in which all took part.
And so some hours later the party drew to a conclusion, and tired out but very happy, everyone went home.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


HE Story of The Sea Circus.
“Hurry up David, or we’ll be late,” said Dawn.
The children were tidying their cave. Tuckonie was polishing the floor; David was gathering fresh
sand, while Dawn was placing nice green seaweed on the beds. There was every reason for the children
to hurry, because Percy the Pilot Fish had promised to take them to the opening night of the tre-
mendous. magnificent and sensational Sea Circus. The children were most excited and hurried through
their tasks. They had just finished when Percy the Pilot Fish arrived.
“Are you ready?” he asked.
The children said that they were, and away they went, Percy leading the way.
It seemed that every fish and queer fairy creature that lived beneath the sea were bound for the Circus. They came from
all directions, and soon, the sea was thick with excited, chatterirtg creatures all anxious to see the fun.
“How far to go now?” asked David.
“Not far,” replied Percy, “the Circus is being held on a big, sandy patch near the Valley of a Thousand Rocks.”
They hadn’t gone very much further when they came to the end of the queue.
“Join the queue please, and don't push,” they were told by a big Police Fish, whom the children recognised as Williaml
the Walrus. “Join the queue please and don't push.” he kept repeating,
"We’ve joined the queue and we’re not pushing,” said Percy the Pilot Fish.
“Ssh,” whispered Dawn, “don’t annoy him, he mightn’t let us in.”
William the Walrus was just about to speak, when there was a commotion at the back. “Hey! who’s pushing,” and William
the Walrus scampered to the rear of the queue.
“It’s Walter the Whale,” complained Myra the Murray Cod, “he trod on my foot. He’s too big and clumsy to be allowed
near anyone.”
“I think it’s a shame,” said Dawn, “the policeman ought to do something about it. Poor Myra’s foot is badly hurt.”
“It’s not,” grumbled Walter the Whale, who was very hot and bothered. “I hardly put any weight on it at all. She’s a
big baby—that’s what she is.”
Before Myra could reply they arrived at the ticket box, and
Salmon, acting as usher showed them their seats, which were nice
The children and Percy settled down to await proceedings,
big top hat, climbed over ropes of long strands of sea-weed.
having each paid two winkles for a ticket were allowed in. A
flat rocks very near the ringside.
They had not long to wait. First of all the ring-master, in
“Ladies and gentlemen,” shouted the ring-master, who was none other than Keith the King Fish. “Ladies and gentlemen,”
he boomed. “To-night’s proceedings will commence with a most novel and sensational balancing act by Sally the Seal. Ladies
and gentlemen, Sally the Seal.”
A storm of applause greeted Sally’s entrance from behind a rock. She bowed to the audience, and took up a position in the
very middle of the ring. Standing on the very tip of her tail with her flippers stretched upwards she waited while Keith the King
Fish threw a round shell in the air. Up it went, then came down with a rush. But Sally was there, and darting a little to the
left she caught the shell right on the tip of her nose, and commenced to dance, swaying from side to side. Rounds of applause
from the excited throng acknowledged Sally’s cleverness, who deftly tossed the shell once more into the air, caught it again,
bowed, and left the ring.
An excited murmuring broke out as Keith the King Fish entered the ring. “The next art, ladies and gentlemen, will be
sea-horse race. The winner will receive half a pound of rare and fragrant sea-weed.”
Cheers greeted this announcement and the sea-horses entered the arena.
“Oh. I hope that one wins,” said Dawn pointing to a small and rather shy sea-horse with large green eyes. “It has such a
pretty face.”
“Look, they’re about to start,” replied David. m
The sea-horses, six in all. were lined up waiting for the signal. Suddenly it came. Keith the King Fish banged two oyster
shells together, and off they went. They came to the first hurdle, a large and jagged rock which they all cleared with feet to spare.
Round they went, with the sea-horse whom Dawn liked leading by at least three yards.
“Oh come on, come on,” she cried standing up and clapping her hands.
“Sit down in front,” someone called out, but she was too excited to notice. With only one more lap to go, Dawn’s sea->
horse still had the lead, but another and bigger sea-horse was slowly gaining. Inch by inch it crept up. until it seemed certain to
win, but with a sudden burst of speed Dawn’s sea-horse got it’s little nose in front to win by a whisker.
so glad.” Dawn was jumping up and down with excitement, but
“Our sea-horse won, David. Our sea-horse won. Oh, lam
as everyone else was doing the same it didn’t matter at all.
Keith the King Fish entered the Ring and held up his hand
Sidney Sea-horse.”
for silence. “The Race,” he announced, “was won by Master
Cheers and shouts drowned the remainder of his words, but
they saw Sidney Sea-horse step forward to receive a beautiful
bunch of sea-weed, which he straightaway popped into his mouth.
The audience was now silent waiting for the next event, which Keith the King Fish announced would be a rough and tumble
act by two clowns, who were saucy looking penguins with their noses painted a bright red. They came lurching into the ring,
falling over their feet, bumping into each other and turning somersaults. The audience roared with laughter, and tears came into
their eyes as one penguin rolled himself into a ball and scuttled around the ring, while the other penguin made vain attempts to
stop him. The children were weak with laughter and they gave one final yell of mirth when Keith the King Fish attempting to
keep out of the way fell over backwards, spoiling his nice new hat. This seemed to annoy Keith, and to everyone’s delight, he
tried to chase the penguins from the ring, but they refused to be chased, and run round his legs, getting in his way. The audience
bellowed, roared and shouted with glee.
At last Dawn said. “I think it’s a shame to tease the ringmaster. Let’s help him chase the penguins from the ring.” So
the three children and Percy the Pilot Fish joined the ringmaster in his attempts to catch the penguins. But they were far too
clever, and easily dodged out of the way. But at last David had an idea. He ran to the side of the ring and broke one of the
strands of sea-weed that was used as rope. Quickly he tied a loop in one end. and using this as a lasso caught one of the penguins in
a twinkling of an eye. The audience seeing this clapped louder than they had done all night, thinking, no doubt, that this was 3
special art performed for their benefit. The other penguin realising that his friend had been caught scampered away.
The ringmaster who was now quite calm stepped up to David. “I don’t know how to thank you.” he said, “but for you
the penguins would have spoilt my circus. I’ll never engage them again, they’re far too naughty. Would you like to take their
place on the programme?”
Dawn laughed and David blushed. “I’m not really clever,” he said, “I only caught the penguin because I was sorry for you.”
“Well think it over,” replied Keith the King Fish, “and if you ever want a job in a circus, there’s one waiting for you.'
David thanked him, they returned to their seats, and the circus went merrily on until it was quite late.


