

<E-'2So cLo
ii; 11111
il:
i ;
; i
■ 't: - -


w
I jTff
:aB|dK*» ~s-. ~ -afet. ’a'^.
■ t&Hf- t.‘ ■ : ;r. " : - ■ ■
■ " ■>- ■
g * /k *
$hi* ■% --'^" sasa T !^S5([^^^^^
-^0
P r
‘David and Dawn with Tuckonie
on the Magic Boomerang.


5 Tu
M II OHO
Copyright.


HE Story of the Prickly Pair
“OH, David,” said Dawn, “I’m so tired,”
“So am I,” replied David.
The two children had been walking all day through the Australian Bush looking at the beau-
tiful wild flowers.
“Let’s sit down here and rest,” David said.
“No, I’m not going to sit near that ugly bush,” cried Dawn, pointing to a queer prickly looking bush that was
growing on the side of a path.
“I wonder what it is,” said David. And than Dawn suddenly remembered seeing pictures of it in her book, exclaimed
“That is a Prickly Pear, come on David, we’ll sit over here on the other side of the path, it’s so uninteresting.
“Um-m-m. —uninteresting are we ? ” exclaimed two tiny squeaky voices.
David and Dawn both stood up quickly and then the bush broke into parts and a pair of the strangest creatures the>
had ever seen moved towards them. One was a very tall thin man, and the other. a funny little fat man both were covered
from head to foot with hundreds of prickles.
David said, “Hullo, are you really Prickly Pears,”
“We are,” replied the two queer men. Then the litde fat one spoke in a deep sad voice, “My name is Spike, and this
is my twin, Prickles.”
Dawn laughed. “You don’t look like twins,” she said.
This appeared to hurt the Prickly Pair, and they stood together and started to talk to each other in low voices.
“I don’t like them as well as the Fairies, they are too ugly,” said Dawn, whispering to David.
The Prickly Pair heard her and replied in a sad chorus.
“We used to be fairies a long time ago.” Then they burst into tears.
“Oh, you poor little things, do tell us what happened,” cried David and Dawn.
After drying their tears with their hands, the Prickly Pair and David and Dawn sat down, and this was the story
Spike and Prickles told
Once upon a time lived two little mischievous fairies whose names were “Pickles ’ and “Silver. They were al-
ways doing things that they were told not to in Fairyland. Sometimes they would imprison Honey Bees in Flower Bells
and then tell the other Bees that their friends had been killed by a wild creature, or they would put pebbles in the
other Fairies’ food and do lots of other naughty things.
One day the Fairy Queen heard of these doings and summoned Pickles and Silver before her Court.
They were both very frightened bv this and for a time were quiet and good. Shortly afterwards however, they started
to get into mischief again.
This time the Fairy Queen decided they must be punished and said : “Pickles and Silver, from now on you will be
called Prickles and Spike and be covered in nasty little prickles and spikes all over, so that everyone will avoid you. \ou
will be known as the Prickly Pair—you ate banished from Fairyland until you change your ways and do a service worthy of
all good fairies.”
When they finished their story the Prickly Pair again burst into tears.
“You poor dears,” said David and Dawn, “Never mind, we will be your friends.”
The Prickly Pair were happy then, and again drying their tears said “What would you like to see in the Australian
Bush.”
Dawn said she wanted to see some of the quaint people who lived in the bush
At these words Prickles tore a gum leaf off a big tree and whistled on it. In a few seconds, a fat little Biack Boy
came running down the path. He was as black as coal with teeth as white as snow. He smiled at everyone and was
not a bit shy.
“Hullo,” he said, and David and Dawn said “Hullo” too, and asked him his name.
“I am called Tuckonie,” said this happy little boy, “I will be your friend and show you through the bush.
“Of course,” said the Prickly Pair, before the children had time to answer, and taking hands the five new friends
set out in search of adventures in the magic bushland.


1 i 5 a / Jfi jPf |
' I * 1 " * L ‘| "*" - gfc lSs[ ' fa'
l m i ■
3 * I im I # \Sr T'MjI / jF’ /I
f 'Kk M : J i ■ 1 ' :^~ ' ■'* t - '^RB
‘ " f - x' y i
l : '"''■ JS \l i ) * r AspK£ f j
tf|H y 1 I J
, i t I i J r|Tm ■-,11 trl I r j 1 1 IB » J /i
X • • 1 §, Jy | Jf Jg B V 1 v 4 I ■ 1.1 ■ / i i Jg A
And a pair of the strangest creatures they had ever seen moved
towards them. One was a very tall thin man, and the other
a funny little fat man both were covered from head to foot
with hundreds of prickles.


LICE SPRINGS
One hot summer’s day the children and the Prickly Pair were sitting in the shade of some
wattles, feeling far too hot to play any games, and having a lazy conversation with Innamincka,
the Mischief Maker, when they heard two people coming, arguing very loudly together—one with
a deep growling voice and the other with a little twittering shrill voice.
“Who is it I wonder ? ” asked Dawn
“The Grasshopper and the Kangaroo,” said Prickles. “They’re always arguing; they can never agree as to which of
them can spring the furthest.”
“Here they come” laughed Spike pointing towards the Bush, and the next minute a large Kangaroo came springing
into view followed by a large green Grasshopper. Obviously they were both angry and the Grasshopper was saying,
“We’ll have a contest to prove it. I can spring further than you ?
The Kangaroo simply laughed and said,
“Oh no you can’t. I won’t worry my head arguing about the matter—now run away little Grasshopper.”
The Grasshopper looked furious. “I can, I tell you !” he shouted with his shrill voice getting higher and higher.
“No one can spring as far as I can.”
Innamincka. the Mischief Maker, was delighted to see this dispute and he suggested they should have a jumping com-
oetition and that David and Dawn should be the judges... Everyone, excepting the two children, then began to argue as
to who should jump first and Dawn suggested that it should be the Grasshopper because the .dea of having a competition
was his to begin with.
So the Grasshopper took a flying leap up into the air. over a wattle bush and half way down a slope on the other-
side Spike ran up and put a waratah which he had picked specially at the exact spot where the Grasshopper landed. Then
the Kangaroo made his lump. Up into the air he went, over the wattle bush and he landed bang on top of the
waratah flower just where the Grasshopper had landed. Everyone rushed forward, but there was no disputing it, the Kan-
garoo had not jumped an inch more or less than his rival.
The two began to argue again and Innamincka roared with laughter and said “Never mind my friends, you must agree
that you can both jump the same distance.”
“But I know that really I can jump further,” protested the Grasshopper.
“Nonsense, little Grasshopper, as a matter of fact that was not nearly such a fine jump as I usually make,” said
the Kangaroo.
Suddenly the bushes parted and a little girl stepped up to where the group was standing. She had the longest
legs the children had ever seen, and the most lovely flowing golden curls. She was beautifully dressed too. in. a frock that
was all the colours of opals. Dawn thought she would have been the loveliest little girl aiv e i on v erg
been quite so long and if only she didn’t look so bad tempered.
“Who is she ? ” whispered David to Spike.
'■Hush,” replied Spike lowering his voice, “it’s Alice Springs, she’s got a very bad temper.”
“You are stupid.” she said to the Kangaroo and the Grasshopper. “How often have I told you that neither you
can jump ! I never have seen such a poor exhibition of jumping. You only just hopped over a fifteen foot bush.
Dawn was rather surprised at the scorn with which this little girl spoke. She herself tried a jump quietly without any-
one noticing and of course she only went a few feet along, and not right up into the air at a
“I think they are very good jumpers,” said Dawn timidly.
“Oh, my dear do be reasonable,” replied Alice Springs. “Why neither of them can jump over even one mountain.’’
The Kangaroo and the Grasshopper said nothing during this conversation and they stood quietly by while Innamin-
cka showed Alice Springs the spot from which the other two made their jumps.
Prickles counted “One. two. three—Go.” and Alice Springs leapt into the air. Up, up, up, she went, over the
tree tops with her curls flying out behind her. The children shaded their eyes from the sun as they watched her, a small
speck, disappearing over the distant mountains.
“What will happen to her ? Where will she land ? ” asked the amazed children.
“That’s what nobody quite knows,” said Prickles. “She just goes leaping off back to her home, far, far y
here, in a part of Fairyland where none of the animals live.”
The Kangaroo and the Grasshopper went off in different directions, they realized the stupidity of their argumen
how vain they had been, while Innamincka the Mischief Maker gave another long, hoarse, throaty chuc e.


iff Jjl fjf JTX\. sUi/ ' |) '■ v *|r
hWr /m •" »y vIl/W I ' V
M 'i%r ml ■ / i I • ]\F
The Kangaroo simply laughed and said: “Oh no you
can’t. I won’t worry my head arguing about the
matter now run away little Grasshopper. ”


HE Story of the Insect People
“I say David,” said Prickles, the little fat Prickly Pair, “would you like to visit the In-
sea World ? ”
David looked rather thoughtful for a moment,
“Well I don’t know,” he said, “what do you think Dawn ? ”
Dawn seemed to think it would be rather nice and Tuckonie nodded his head and smiled
in his usual pleasant way. So finally it was decided that the Prickly Pair should take David and Dawn and Tuckonie
to visit the Insea People.
This time they didn’t travel on the Magic Boomerang, they walked through the bush until they came to a huge hole
in the ground. As soon as they got there they heard a deafening noise.
“Why, what’s that ? ” cried Dawn.
“Don’t be alarmed.” said Spike, the tall thin Prickly Pair, “It’s only the guards of the Insea World giving warning
that we’re coming.”
David looked about him and saw hundreds of Cicadas, you know those strange little inseas that make a loud, whist-
ling noise all the time in the bush. Some people call them Locusts. Dawn looked closely at the Cicadas and she found that
they were all dressed in uniform. Then Prickles went over and whispered to one of them and the whistling stopped.
Spike beckoned to the children and led the way down the big hole. Down, down, down they went until they were right
under the ground. Dawn was surprised to notice that it wasn’t at all dark, in faa the further down they went the lighter
it seemed to get. At last they reached what looked like a h ige hall and inside it was every sort of insea you can imagine.
Right in the middle of the hall there was a sort of throne and on this sat a large Beetle.
“Who’s that ? ” whispered Dawn to Prickles.
“Oh. that’s the Elephant Beetle,” replied Prickles, “he’s the King of the Insea World, and if anyone ever annoys him
he beats them with his trunk. Come up and make your bow to him.”
The children went forward with the Prickly Pair and they were presented to the Elephant Beetle. He spoke very kindly
to them and told them several stories about the Insea People. He told them that the Cicadas kept guard outside and
always gave warning if any of their enemies were coming near. David thought this was a splendid idea and he aske
the Elephant Beetle a lot of questions. Suddenly the shrill whistle of the Cicadas was heard again and the Inseas scram-
bled away.
“Why, what’s the matter ? ” cried Dawn.
“I think there’s a Kookaburra approaching,” answered Tuckonie, “and the Inseas don’t like Kookaburras.”
“Oh. why not ? ” asked Dawn, “Kookaburras are such jolly folk.”
“I know,” said Tuckonie, “But the Kookaburras eat the inseas if they get a chance. ’
Then Tuckonie went on to explain how the Insects lived in constant fear of all the birds and lizards —that was really
the chief reason for the uniformed guards being at the entrance to Insea Land.
The Elephant Beetle seemed quite frightened when he heard the alarm. He jumped down off his throne and ran
and hid in the darkest corner of the great hall. Soon, however, the whistling stopped, then all the Inseas came out
again.
Then the Elephant said proudly.
“Of course, I wasn’t really frightened, but I wanted to see that all my subjeas were safely hidden in case some of our
enemies came down here. Now come along, there’s nothing to fear, I’ll show you over the whole of Insea Land and you 11
see many interesting things.”’
The children went with the Elephant Beetle and they met quite a number of Inseas, some of them were beautiful,
some of them were ugly and some of them were very strange. David and Dawn stayed in Insea Land for a few days and
they enjoyed every minute of their visit to that place.


HE Story of the Opossum
ONCE, when wardering through the bush with Tuckonie, and the Prickly Pair, David and Dawn
very nearly tripped over three or four Opossums, who were eating their dinner beside a path.
“Oh,” said Dawn, “let’s make friends with the Opossums.”
But the Opossums were frightened out of their wits, and whisked around on their tails, to
scamper up the trunk of the nearest tree, and there to stay, clinging to the bark with all their might.
Tuckonie called up to them, “It’s alright, you can come down. These children are David and Dawn, and they’re
friends, they won’t hurt you.”
“Thank goodness for that,” said the Opossums, and they came backwards down the trunk of the tree. “All day
we have been running away from two hunters, who, if they catch us, will take our beautiful fur coats, to sell to the
shops. We thought for the minute that you WERE the hunters.”
David and Dawn felt very angry that anyone could be so cruel, and they promised to help the Opossums escape.
Tuckonie went away down the path for a minute, then he came running back, and putting his finger to his mouth, said
“Ssh ! ” Everyone stopped talking, and they could hear, quite close by, the sound of men talking.
“It’s the hunters,” said Spike, and as soon as he said it, the Opossums began to cry, big wet tears, which rolled down
the side of their noses onto the ground.
“Oh please help us,” they said, “or we shall be caught, and then our lovely soft coats will be lost.”
“Don’t cry,” said Dawn, “we’ll help you,” but she didn't know how.
Suddenly Prickles, who was really clever when he wanted to be, had a plan, and he called out
“Quick ! get into a hollow log, and we’ll teach those hunters a lesson.” He chuckled as if it were a great joke,
but the Opossums didn t think it was at all funny, and were shaking all over from fright.
They looked about—but there wasn’t a hollow log anywhere, and the hunters were getting nearer and nearer.
Run, called out Spike, and picking up the smallest Opossum, he made off through the bush as fast as his legs
could carry him, with David and Dawn, Tuckonie and the others strung out in a row behind him.
And the hunters began to run too. They had nearly caught up to them, when Spike found a great hollow log.
He pushed the Opossums in quickly and covered them up with a handful of leaves; then David and Dawn hid behind a
tree; he and Prickles jumped onto the top of the log, and lay down in a little hollow part, so that really it was hard
to tell which was the log, and which the Prickly Pair, so carefully did they hide themselves. After a minute, two big
men, with sacks on their backs, came up, and began to look for the Opossums. They w’ere very dirty and ugly. One of
them had a black beard, and he looked very cruel. they saw the Opossums were not anywhere in sight, they
stamped their feet, and growled in anger. They looked up into the trees, but No ! there was not a sign of an Opossum.
I m tired, said the man with the beard, “and I'm sick of looking for Opossums.”
“So am I,” said the other, “let’s sit down on this log.”
They took their sacks off their backs and put them on the ground, and then they both sat down on the log, right
on the very spot where the Prickly Pair were hiding.
David and Dawn giggled, and with a cry of “Ouch” the two men sprang up, shouting with pain, and went for their
i\es down the track, with the Prickly Pair sticking onto them, and digging their spikes into them as hard as they could.
Out came David and Dawn from behind the tree, and they began to roar with laughter, for they could still hear
the screams of the hunters, who ran right from the bush into the town, where they stayed forever after.
Oh. said Dawn, what about Spike and Prickles ? I do hope nothing has happened to them.” But just as
she said this, the Prickly Pair came skipping through the bush, and they too were laughing.
One thing, said Spike, “those hunters will never chase Opossums again.”
The Opossum family then came timidly out of the hollow log, and thanked the Prickly Pair for being so kind to
t em, or they felt that Spike was right and that now they could play about without the fear of being caught by the
hunters.


HE Story of the Platypus
“OH Spike,” cried Prickles, the little fat Prickly Pair, “I don’t feel well.”
“What’s the matter ? ” inquired Spike.
The little fat Prickly Pair sat on the ground, he looked sadly up at his long thin
brother, and David and Dawn were quite worried, they stood with Tuckonie looking
down at Prickles.
“Well,” said Spike, “What’s the matter Prickles ? ”
“I don’t know,” said Prickles, “but I don’t feel well, I feel all prickly.”
Tuckonie looked closely at Prickles.
“There’s only one thing for it,” he said, “We’ll have to pay a visit to Doctor Platypus.
David and Dawn thought it would be most interesting to meet Doctor Platypus, and they hoped that he d be able
to do something for Prickles.
“Where do we find Doctor Platypus ? ” asked David.
“I’ll show you,” said Tuckonie, “we’ll have to travel there on the Magic Boomerang. ’
He put the Boomerang on the ground and they all stood on it. There was hardly room for all of them, but
they managed it somehow, although Prickles just managed to scramble on one end. Then Tuckonie said three magic
words and up in the air went the Boomerang, right away over the treetops to the home of Doctor Platypus, which was a
mud hut on the bank of a little creek. As soon as they had landed, Spike knocked on the door which was opened by
Doctor Platypus himself.
“Come in,” he said, “come in, and mind you don’t catch cold. I can’t keep the floor of this house dry, I m
always catching cold myself.”
David and Dawn were not a bit surprised at that because the water from the creek seemed to be running across the
floor of the house. However, they went in, and then Doctor Platypus said ;
Well, who’s ill ? I won't be able to do anything for him until I show my bill
Dawn laughed, and the Platypus looked rather offended. He had quite a big bill, it was a sort of flat beak and
he kept opening and shutting it importantly. Then Spike
“Please Doctor Platypus, my brother Prickles isn’t very
“Put out your tongue,” he said.
Prickles did as he was told, but he put it out rather
said ;
well.”
rudely and quickly pulled it back again. Dawn giggled.
David told her to be quiet. Then Doctor Platypus said ;
“Stay where you are, I won’t hurt you but I’m afraid I’y have to operate, this is very serious.”
Then Prickles started to dance about.
“No, no,” he said, “don’t operate, I’m better, I’ve never felt better in my life.”
Doctor Platypus looked quite pleased.
“Ihere you are,” he said, patting himself on the chest, “aren’t I a wonderful doctor? I’ve cured him already.
David and Dawn couidn t help thinking it was a funny way to cure anyone, but all the same Prickles did look much
better.
1 hen the Doctor cleared his throat again
“Now,” he said, “I’ll have to show you my bill. What are you going to do about it ?
Prickles looked at his brother Spike, and Spike quickly said :
“We haven't any money, but we’ll give you two Waratahs and a piece of Wattle,
Doctor Platypus shut his beak with a snap.
“Not enough,” he said, “I’m afraid I’ll have to keep you all here until my bill is paid.
Just then there was a loud croaking noise, and suddenly the house seemed to be full of frogs. David
were quite startled, but Tuckonie commenced to laugh.
“This often happens,” he told them, “the frogs and Doctor Platypus don’t like each other and the\ come
house and worry him.”
Doctor Platypus stamped his feet and strode up and down the room with rage. Every now and th
over a big bull-frog. Then Spike whispered to Dawn. „
over a Dig ouii-irug. i uen opuce wnisperea 10 lj awn. „
“Come on, let’s get out of here while he’s busy thinking about the frogs, he’s so angry that he s forg
f i_ j hut leaving Doctor * la -
The children thought this was a very wise scheme and they quietly stole out of the mu ,
typus to get rid of the frogs the best way he could.


The Home of Doctor Platypus, which was
a mud hut on the bank of a little creek.


HE Story of the Bandicoot
“YOU know Dawn,” said David, “it’s a wonder we don’t meet some of our old friends here
in the Australian Fairyland.”
“Well,” replied Dawn, “we’ve already met Matilda the Wicked Witch. I don't want to meet
her again.”
Tuckonie, the little black boy, grinned,
“I don’t like Matilda either,” he said, “but she doesn’t come here very often, we have more trouble from Innammcka,
the Mischief Maker.”
Just then Spike, the tall Prickly Pair, looked up and said, “I think there’s a giant coming this way.”
“I can’t hear anything,” said David.
Prickles the little fat Prickly Pair nodded his head to show that he agreed with his brother, and then Dawn distinctly
felt the ground shake. David said that he'd also felt it, and through the bushes came a huge giant. The strange thing
about him was that he had no boots on. He kept treading on sharp thorns and shouting with rage and pain.
“Why,” said David, “I think that’s our old friend the Giant who owns the Seven League Boots.”
Dawn looked up.
“Yes, it’s the same Giant,” she said.
The Giant suddenly saw David and Dawn.
“Hullo,” he bellowed, “have you stolen my Seven League Boots again ? ”
The Prickly Pair seemed very frightened, they ran and hid behind David and Dawn. And Tuckonie for once in
his life stopped grinning. David looked at the Giant.
“We haven’t stolen your Seven League Boots,” he said, “but we’d like to help you find them. Whom do you think
has stolen them ? ”
The Giant gnashed his teeth with rage.
“I do not know,” he shouted.
Just then there was a strange crackling noise, and the air seemd to be filled with smoke.
“Oh,” shouted Tuckonie, “we’re going to have a bush fire. Look at all the little flame fairies.
Dawn really became quite frightened, she clung to David s hand. Then Tuckonie said.
often causes bush fires.”
“This is the work of Innamincka the Mischief Maker. He
Suddenly the Giant shouted.
escape from the bush fire.”
“Oh if only I had my Seven League Boots, we could all
The air was getting thick with smoke, and all sorts of
escape from the flame fairies. David and Dawn were rather
ning out of the bush dragging a pair of boots with him.
Fairyland creatures were running hither and thither trying to
surprised and startled to see a very queer creature come run-
“Oh ! look,” cried David, “I think those are the Seven
League Boots.
The Giant gave a shout of tage, “Those are the Seven League Boots,” he bellowed, “and it’s that funny little rat
who’s stolen them.” \ '
“Who is that funny little rat ? ” whispered Dawn. Tuckonie pointed to the strange creature who was struggling with
the boots and trying to hide himself in one of them. He was turning and twisting his legs in every sort of way, and
all the while the flame fairies were dancing round him. The Giant dashed over and seized the Boots just as the strange
creature had turned his toes in to try and make them fit.
‘Ah,” shouted the Giant, “now you’ll stay like that for ever and ever. From now on you’ll be a Bandicoot.”
The funny little creature looked up at the Giant ; then he ran away as fast as he could, and David and Dawn couldn t
help smiling at the way his toes were turned in—the strange creature was indeed very bandy. The Giant hastily
seized the Seven League Boots and brought them over ; then he said some magic words over them and they grew to
a tremendous size. He put both his feet in them, but they were much too big for him. Then he shouted to David and
Dawn, the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie.
“Come on, get in the side of the Boots, there’s room for all of you. Hurry up, the flame fairies are getting closer.
David and Dawn, the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie made haste to obey, and soon they were safely tucked in the sides of
the Boots. Then the Giant gave another shout, and soon they were all sailing through mid-air safely out of the reach of
the flame fairies.


HE Story of the Willy-Wag-Tail
ONE day the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie told David and Dawn that they would like to take
them to the Fairyland School, as it was such fun. David and Dawn thought that they may as well
go along. Eventually they reached the school which was held down in the Magic Gum Gully
under the shady Wattle trees, it wasn’t really a school at all, because every one did exactly what
they wanted to do. There were all sorts of queer creatures at this school, the animals sat on
hollow logs, the birds on the branches of the trees and they all did their writing on big leaves with pieces of yellow
clay.
David and Dawn were rather surprised to find that the school master was none other than their friend, Old King
Cole, He didn’t seem to recognise them, however. He looked very funny in his schoolmaster’s cap and gown. He sat
up at the end of the class on a big ant heap, he must have been very uncomfortable because he kept fidgetting and brush-
ing the ants off with his birch. David leant over to Tuckonie and whispered.
“Why does King Cole sit on the ant heap ? ”
Tuckonie only smiled and shook his head. Then King Cole suddenly stood up and started to call the roll of the various
creatures who attended the school. It was strange to hear them answering. Dennis Dingo barked, Kevin Kangaroo
bound up and down in the air, and David and Dawn were surprised to notice that Alice Springs was sitting next to the
Kangaroo.
Suddenly Old King Cole called out <Te name of Willy-Wag-Tail, but there was no answer. Everyone in the school
started to whisper to each other. Old King Cole cleared his throat and called the name Willy-Wag-Tail again still
there was no answer. Then Old King Cole said.
"That little is always playing truant, he lives up to his name, he’ll have to be found, I won’t go on with
the lessons until he’s been found.”
At these words everybody seemed delighted and they all cheered in their own way. Then Old King Cole took
a big stick and beat heavily on a strange, round piece of wool which was hanging near the ant heap.
“Whatever is that ? ” said David.
And Spike whispered, That s the school bell, it’s a woollen gong. Surely you’ve heard of a woollen gong,
haven’t you ? ”
David looked rather puzzled and Old King Cole kept on beating on the gong and muttering to himself, but no one
was taking the slightest notice.
“But why does he beat on a woollen gong ? ” said Dawn.
But Prickles, the little fat Prickly Pair just shrugged his shoulders. Then suddenly there seemed to be a dis-
turbance at back of the class and Willy-Wag-Tail came fluttering into the school.
luckonie whispered to Dawn that each time Willy played truant his tail seemed to wag more and more. King
°l e t0 L WUIy ag ‘ Tall , to come out and stand in front of the class. The pert little bird hopped out on one foot
and eld its head on one side. Then King Cole asked him why he was late and Willy-Wag-Tail said that he couldn’t
I l- 6 V '°° gong ' At dds l^e ''hole class laughed and King Cole became very angry, he scowled so much
t lat is g asses c 1 off and then he couldn t see anything, so while he was looking for them all the creatures and animals
scampered out of the school and went down to the river, and the last David and Dawn saw of Old King Cole, he
was busy looking for his glasses.
That s the silliest school I have ever been to,” said Dawn when they left and she felt glad that the bush animals
did not go to her school.


HAT made the Kookaburra Laugh?
ONE morning. David and Dawn were awakened very early by Billy the Bell Bird.
The two children hastily scrambled up, and there they found the Prickly Pair waiting
for them.
“Good morning David and Dawn,” said Prickles brightly.
“Good morning,” echoed the children. Spike the other Prickly Pair didn’t say
anything, he just smiled broadly, then he nodded.
“Well,” said Prickles, “and what would you like to see to-day ? ”
Dawn thought for a moment and then she said, “You we haven’t seen any
Kookaburras since we’ve been visiting this part of Fairyland. Are there any here, Prickles ? ’
Prickles looked very wise for a moment, then he turned to David and asked, “Do you know what made the Kooka-
burras laugh ? ”
“No,” replied David.
Suddenly Spike spoke, “Why I thought everyone knew that,” he said, “it was laughing gas, of course,”
Both David and Dawn were surprised to hear this, and they were very anxious to discover what really made the
Kookaburra laugh so much. They went with the Prickly Pair to a large cave in the side of one of the Blue Mountains.
The Prickly Pair walked through the entrance of the cave, and David and Dawn followed them. Once inside it grew
very light. The children were astonished to find that they were really in a huge palace, it seemed to be built of gold
and silver and opals.
“This,” said Spike, “is the palace of the King of the Blue Mountains, and the Kookaburras do his cooking.”
“Oh, I didn’t know Kookaburras could cook,” said David.
“Of course they can cook,” said Prickles, “but they do all their cooking in a burrow at the back of the palace.
Come with us and we’ll show you.”
The children followed the Prickly Pair right through the palace grounds, till they saw ahead of them a huge hole in
the ground. They looked down this hole, and they saw that there were a number of steps. At the foot of the steps
they were astonished to see a huge kitchen where there seemed to be many Kookaburras clad in white cooks’ caps and
aprons. The Kookaburras seemed to be very busy carrying huge dishes of delicious looking food, popping cakes into
ovens, and getting in each other’s way.
“Well,” said David, “this is a surprise to me. And do the Kookaburras do all the cooking in Fairyland ? ”
"Nearly all,” said Spike.
Just then the children heard the hoarse, throaty chuckle of Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, and there he was standing
on top of the stairs. He was dancing about, and as soon as he saw the Prickly Pair and the children, he waved to them
to come on.
“Ooh,” said David, “I’m sure that Innamincka is going to make trouble.”
“You’re quite right,” said Spike, “I think he’s going to spoil the King’s dinner.”
Just then one of the Kookaburras seized a firefly and approached the biggest oven. The children looked on with great
interest, and they saw, as he opened the oven door, that there was a huge cake inside. The Kookaburra bent down and
turned on the gas. Suddenly he dropped the firefly and commenced to laugh. The other Kookaburras all looked in
some alarm, then they dropped whatever they were holding and rushed over towards the big oven. As soon as they
got near they started laughing also. The noise was terrific. Just imagine crowds of Kookaburras all laughing together !
David pressed his fingers in his ears, but the Prickly Pair didn’t seem to mind. Spike took Dawn’s hand, while Prickles
led David towards the big stove. As soon as they got near it the children and the Prickly Pair began to laugh also.
“Ooh,” gasped Dawn, “whatever is making us laugh ? ”
Then Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, shouted above the noise,
“I did it, I did it, I have made mischief again. I have filled the stove with laughing gas.”
David and Dawn were laughing so much that the tears were streaming down their faces. Suddenly there was an
angry shout from the back of the kitchen, and the King of
tiers.
the Blue Mountains strode in, closely followed by his cour-
“What does this mean ? ” he said. Nobody was able to
came a little further into the kitchen.
answer him, they were all laughing so much. The King
“Why is my dinner late ? ” he shouted. “I won’t stand
You’re all dismissed. Leave my kitchen all of you.”
this. I’ll never allow the Kookaburras to cook for me again.
The Kookaburras simply shrieked with laughter, then with one shriek they all flew up the steps out of the kitchen.
The King stamped his feet with rage. He came a little nearer to the stove, then he started to laugh. He laughed
and laughed until Dawn and David became quite worried. The courtiers all crowded round, and as soon as they got
near the stove they started to laugh until they were making more noise than the Kookaburras had ever made. At last
the King managed to struggle back to the steps, closely followed by David and Dawn and his courtiers. He was very angry
when he found that he had no one to cook his dinner, and the Kookaburras refused to return to the kitchen, so he
decided to make David and Dawn his cooks. Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, turned off the supply of laughing gas,
and David and Dawn tried their hands at preparing a meal for the King.
Meanwhile, the Kookaburras had flown away into the bush. They never tried cooking again, and they’ve never
forgotten the Laughing Gas, cverytime they think of it, it makes them laugh.


mm m w I iuF
/ 1
■' _d*** '*<4|«n , ..« w .ci-:- t ij#f:-*«-l ~ ,
It n- y-'M . JFJ ££ /■ ii■ i iflMMM Jim*.
~ ' >/ SKjto -
It- VK Yv El | _ * » t
i E I
V
: JE gjsisa |; 4 >i iarfr jk fig
,1^B v EBB Sk ''i'll! Mil i r~f* ai&ftUr
*r’ . IE
Prickly Pair r
hroufh the palace from
'ey saw ahea
of them a huge hole in the groun
re
ren
wt


HE Land of the Butterflies
“I do so want to see some Butterflies,” sighed Dawn.
“Well.” said Tuckome, “that’s easy. Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, has charge of them
all, but they live far away from here—quite a day’s journey.”
“But let us go,” Dawn answered, and Tuckonie agreed to show them the way.
Once more they were on the Magic Boomerang ; as they went the Wind came up behind them.
“Do you want a push?” it whistled.... and it blew with all its might at the Boomerang, which went faster and faster,
so that the children had to cling tightly to stop themselves from being blown away.
After they had gone for what seemed miles and miles, Tuckonie who was steering, pointed downwards, and when
David and Dawn looked they saw only a blue bank of clouds.
“Hold on,” shouted Tuckonie.... and Swish.... the Boomerang swooped downwards, right through the bank of clouds,
dodging tree tops and branches and it landed with a thump on a little clearing.
This was a strange land. Everything seemed so different, the sky was blue, the mountains were blue, the flowers were
brilliantly coloured and the trees seemed to be a lovely new colour.
“But where are the Butterflies ? ” asked David.
“Follow me,” Tuckonie answered, and he led them on to a track, which ended in a little hillock of sand. Here,
standing on the sand, was Innamincka, the Mischief Maker. In his hand he held a lump of butter, and with the other
he kept pulling off pieces of the butter and feeding it to lots of strange looking little Flies, who gobbled up the food the
minute it reached them. The children watched for some time. Then, when Innamincka had finished all the butter he
looked up.
“Hullo David and Dawn,” he said, “What do you think of my Butterflies?”
Dawn answered him, “What have you done to them Innamincka ? They are not like the Butterflies we have at
home, they have no beautiful coloured wings. . . .in fact they have no wings at all.”
“Wings, why these Butterflies arc far too greedy to be beautiful, all THEY think of is eating butter; but I like greedy
Flies, they are my pets, and I keep feeding them every day. Would you like to see where I keep my store of butter ? ”
He jumped up, and ran behind a rock nearby, and beckoned to the children to follow him.
“Ha, ha, ha,” came a sound from just above them, and there was Matilda, the wicked witch, gliding over their heads
on a wattle branch. She called out:
“I stole the butter, he, he, I stole the butter Innamincka, and you'll never find where it is hidden.” So saying,
Matilda turned her wattle branch around, and buzzed off into the distance.
Innamincka, for once, looked quite unhappy; but not for long. In a minute or two he trotted off into the bush,
looking very wise, and the Prickly Pair whispered to David and Dawn.
“He has some more butter hidden away, that Matilda doesn’t know anything about,” and he was right too, for when
Innamincka came back he had his hand full of food for the Flies, and he was smiling all over his face.
The little insects rushed all around him, waiting for their dinner, but Innamincka pushed them all back.... and
then he said :
“Listen Hies, this is all the butter left in this land, and when you have eaten it, there will be no more. Those
of you who are greedy, and eat it, I shall turn into nasty biting Sandflies, but those of you who are not greedy and who
wait, I will turn into real Butterflies, with lovely red, blue, yellow, white and black wings.”
When they heard this, the Flies all gathered into a circle, and talked to one another. One big fat one, who was greedier
by far, than all the rest, pushed his way out of the crowd, and said :
“Anyhow I'm hungry, and I’m going to eat the butter.” But as he said this his whole body began to change shape.
He grew wings on side, small thin wings, and from a fat little Hy he changed into a nasty Sandfly. Some of the
others tried to eat the butter, and the same thing happened to them. Then Innamincka picked up a handful of obedient
Flies drawing from his pocket a packet of white powder, he walked up and down and said a few magic words, and as each
one changed from a fat little Fly into a real Butterfly, it flapped its wings and floated up into the clouds, as light as
a feather.
“We shall see you in the bush,” called out the last one to David and Dawn, in a silvery voice. . . .and the children then
thanked Innamincka, who didn’t seem such a bad sort of a Mischief Maker after all.


w . v*
* , * <Ni'
And as each one changed from a fat hide Fly inti
a real Butterfly, it flapped its wings and floated uj.
into the clouds, as light as a feather.


HE Story of the Emu
“OH Dawn,” cried David, “just look at that lovely white Cockatoo.”
Dawn looked, and there on the branch of a tree above them sat a Snowy White
Cockatoo, with a most beautiful crest of yellow feathers coming from the top of his head.
When he saw the children, the bird called out in a screechy voice, “Scratch cocky; pretty
Polly; scratch cocky.”
Then he flew down at their feet, ruffled out his long clean feathers, and pranced
around with his chest stuck out as proud as a peacock. The Prickly Pair went and shook
hands with him, and Dawn put out her hand too, but the Cockatoo was not at all friendly. All his feathers stood up
on end, and he shrieked out loudly.
“Oh do be careful Dawn,” said David. Tuckonie laughed, and then he said.
“Don’t be afraid of this Cockatoo, he won’t hurt anyone. The only person he really doesn’t like is the Emu.”
“Emu, Emu; who said Emu? ” screeched the Cockatoo, raising a cloud of dust with his feet, and looking tremendously
annoyed.
“Why, don’t you like the Emu?” asked Dawn, and the Cockatoo replied sulkily,
“His legs arc much longer than mine.... and anyhow I have a beautiful yellow crest, and he’s quite bald on top,
which just shows you that lam a far finer bird than he.... but Ido wish my legs were just a trifle longer,” he added with
a dong sigh.
Dawn saw then, that though he had white feathers, ar *d a noble crest, the Cockatoo had very ugly short legs, and
she felt quite sorry for him.
“Why, here comes the Emu himself,” said Tuckonie, and around the comer came a big lumbering bird. He was
all legs—his feet were enormous, they were larger than David’s hands. In spite of all his finery the Emu had no crest,
and his head was bald and pink, which made him look older than he really was.
This Emu was just as jealous of the Cockatoo, as the Cockatoo was of him, and he strode right up to him and said
haughtily
“Huh, you just think your yellow crest is wonderful, don’t you, you vain bird ? But you would love to have legs like
mine. Look at your’s; why, they’re not long enough to walk on properly.”
The Cockatoo shrieked with rage. “Who cares if my legs are long or short ? ” he cried, “everyone in the bush knows
that you want a crest like mine. You ugly, bald headed old Emu ! ” At this the Emu blushed very red, for though
he had long legs, he knew the top of his head was not half so lovely as the Cockatoo’s, which made him very angry,
and he could hardly speak.
“I have a good mind to peck you.” he said to the other bird.
“You just try to.” shrieked the Cockatoo, and he rushed at Emu with all his feathers sticking up.
Just then David and Dawn heard the long, sharp chuckle of Innamincka the Mischief Maker, and soon they saw his
small figure come running through the bush. He looked at the two birds, and then he said
“Tut, Tut. What, quarreling again ? It’s time I put a stop to all this.”
Both birds ceased their noise, and rushed over to Innamincka, each one trying to find fault with the other, Inna-
mincka, put his hand up for the birds to be silent. Then he said
“So! The Cockatoo would like long legs, and the Emu would like a beautiful yellow crest! Very well, I shall give
you both what you wish.” And swish, from his pocket Innamincka brought forth his white powder, and he sprinkled
it over the birds, snapped his fingers twice, and with a chuckle of delight disappeared off into the 1 ushes. David and
Dawn were very surprised when they saw the two birds suddenly change their shape. The Cockatoo was getting higher
and higher from the ground. It was his legs; they grew and grew till they were quite as long as the Emu’s. .. .
As for the other bird, he began to get lower and lower, towards the ground; he had changed legs with the Cockatoo.
Tuckonie started to laugh, for this was funnier than anything he had ever seen, and neither the Emu nor the Cockatoo
looked at all happy about themselves. Tuckonie laughed so much that he rolled on the ground, and Spike and Prickles
had to help him to his feet again.
“Oh,” cried out David, “Look, the Cockatoo has gone bald.”
il \ es,” said Dawn, excitedly, “and the Emu has a yellow crest.”
When the Prickly Pair turned around they saw a most beautiful growth of yellow feathers on the top of the Emu’s
head. The birds were just about to start quarreling again, when they heard a loud barking noise. Ihe Emu went pale,
and said, “I think it’s Dan the Dingo ; he’s always chasing me.”
The Cockatoo looked scared too, and he said, “I’ll tell you what; let’s be friends, and give Dan the Dingo a fright.”
“It’s a good idea,” the Emu answered ; and so when Dan the Dingo came running near them, the two birds hid
behind a tree, and with a wild shriek they pounced on the animal. Dan gave a yell of fear when he saw these strange
looking birds, and without stopping to lock any further, he put this tail between his legs, and ran and ran until he was far
out of sight.
“There,” said the Emu, in a friendly voice, “I don’t think he’ll worry us again.”
“I hope not,” said the Cockatoo ; “and you and I will be friends from now on. Come along, let’s go and find
Innamincka the Mischief Maker, and get him to change us back into our proper shapes. I’m sure I don’t want to have
long legs, any more.”
And I, added his friend, “don’t want to have a crest. We'll never be jealous of each other again, we’ll be con-
tent with what we have ; ” and off they went into the bush.


HE Story of the Carpet Snake
LATE one afternoon, David and Dawn. Tuckonie and the Prickly Pair decided to go and visit
the Wattle Queen, who lived at the end of the gully.
When they were half way there, they heard a deep rumbling noise, away up in the clouds.
Tuckonie knew all the bush noises, and he said, “There’s going to be a thunder storm, we had
better find some shelter.”
Just then two big drops of water splashed at their feet, and in a few more minutes another roar of thunder crashed
over them.
“We’ll all get wet,” said the Prickly Pair together—they were not used to water.
“There’s a cave,” shouted Tuckonie, pointing to a large hole in the side of the rock ; “we can get in there.” He
scrambled in, and the others followed. Once inside, they found they could hardly see, so black was it, and it was really
rather frightening, for no one seemed to know who ow r ned the cave.
They stood still for a while, then a little green light appeared in front of them.
A soft slippery sound seemed to come from the green light, which came nearer and nearer, until it lit up all the
ground about them, and the children could sec quite plainly.
“It’s a Green Snake,” said Tuckonie and he whistled to the Snake, who came sliding over,
“What are you doing here ? ” asked the Snake.
“We came in out of the rain,” explained Prickles, “do you mind ? ”
“Not a bit,” said the Snake, “come on into the big room.” and he led them through the cave to a large room
built in the rock. It was full of snakes, dozens of different sorts of snakes, some of them long and thin, and others
just fat and short. Most of them, however were lying about asleep and curled up in the corners.
Dawn didn’t like snakes, and she clung tightly to David’s arm.
Then, from out of the air, seemed to come a tinkling silvery laugh, and there beside them stood the Wattle Queen,
and the Fairy Prince.
“Why,” cried David, “we were going to visit you. How did you get here ? ”
“‘We have just been married,” said the Wattle Queen, “and we are looking for Carpet Snakes to put on the floor
of our new home. Won’t you and Dawn come and help us choose one ? ”
“Oh we’d love to,” said Dawn, almost forgetting to be afraid any more. W’hile they were talking, a queer little voice
beneath them said
“Oh dear. I do wish people wouldn’t wipe their feet on me. Just because I’m a Carpet Snake everyone keeps tread-
ing on my back.”
Dawn suddenly felt something move under her feet. She gave a shriek, and jumped aside. When she looked down,
there was the prettiest little Carpet Snake, with coloured eyes, and a shiny skin.
“I beg your pardon,” said Dawn, “I didn’t mean to tread on you.”
“Oh that’s alright,” said the Snake, “everyone does it, I’m so tired of being used as a door mat.”
The Fairy Prince took the Wattle Queen by the hand.
“Suppose we buy that little Snake for our new home,” he said.
The Queen looked at the Snake. “You are indeed a pretty little fellow,” she said, “but if I buy you I hope you
will stay in the front hall, and not keep wandering about the other rooms of the castle.”
The poor little Snake nearly cried. “Please buy me,” he pleaded, “and I promise to stay in the hall if you will
give me plenty to eat. Really I shall.”
Just as the Prince was about to pick up the little Carpet Snake, there was a terrific roar, at the other end of the
What s that ? ’ said Dawn, and the Fairy Prince drew his golden sword. The Carpet Snake looked up.
It s the Tiger Snake, he said ; “he won t let anyone take me away, he’s such a cruel snake.”
There was another roar, and the Tiger Snake came right up to the children. He was wicked and ugly looking, and
he was far bigger than the Carpet Snake.
“Get away,” he roared, “and leave my Carpet Snakes alone, or I shall bite you.”
The Fairy Prince waved his sword, and shouted. “Move back from us, or if you don’t I shall drive you out of the
bush forever.” 7 7
There was an angry hissing noise, and the Tiger Snake didn’t seem to know quite what to do. As for the little
Carpet Snake, he knew he was safe for once, and he crept up behind the Tiger Snake, and bit him on the tail, which
was such a shock to him, that he rushed off, and never was seen again. Everyone laughed, and the little Carpet Snake puffed
himself up, and said, “Don’t you think I’m clever ? ”
Oh, very clever, answered Spike and Prickles, who would never have dared to bite a Tiger Snake.
The Carpet Snake looked up at the Queen.
“Please buy me now,” he said. “I won’t cost much, and I’m so tired of this place.
The Fairy Prince smiled. “Alright little Carpet Snake,” he said, “I’ll buy you, and take you to live in our new
home, and perhaps David and Dawn, and their friends will come and visit us.”
The children danced with joy, and promised on the next fine day, that they would spend the afternoon at the castle.
And by this time the rain had stopped, and it was time for them all to leave the snake’s cave, and to turn their
steps for home.


HE Story of the Lizard Kingdom
ONE day the children went for a walk along a mountain path, Tuckonie, who was ahead,
stopped quite suddenly, and cried “Look, Oh 100k.... come here David and Dawn.”
David was having an argument with the Prickly Pair but he forgot it and asked—
“What have you found ? ”
‘A cave,” said Tuckonie. “Look, here’s the entrance hidden in these rushes,
The children peered over his shoulder, and read on a little notice “To the Lizard Kingdom.”
David, who loved exploring, said “Let’s go in.”
Dawn wanted to stay outside, but David took her by the hand, and with Tuckonie leading the way, they crept
into the mouth of the cave. As they had just come from the sunlight, they could scarcely see. but they held tightly
to each other, and Tuckonie felt his wav along the walls with a stick. By and by, little glimmering red and green
lights flashed across in front of them. There was a soft buzzing noise and, sure enough, when their eyes became used
to the dark they could see there were hundreds of twinkling little fireflys, with soft silvery wings. Dawn wanted to stay
and talk to them, but the Prickly Pair got annoyed and grumbled so they hurried on.
All at once they saw a bend in the cave, and oh ! what a wonderful sight they saw. At the end of the room was
a throne on which sat the King of the Lizards. At his side was the Frilled Lizard, for he was the King’s Advisor. The
King seemed to be talking, and the children could just hear him say in a deep croaking voice.
“My subjects, there is one of the Lizard family in this country, who is called the Bearded Dragon, and until his
beard has been shaved off there will be no peace in the land. Who among you 'will dare to shave this Dragon ? ”
Nobody answered. Some of the Lizards turned and talked to their neighbours, for they were frightened, the Bearded
Dragon was very’ very strong. But one among them was brave. The Spiked Tail Lizard, pushed his way to the throne,
and said very humbly.
‘I will go. Your Majesty, I am not afraid, because my tail is spiked, and my armour is thick.”
“Hooray,” cheered all the Lizards at once, and the King, full of joy, called to his attendants to bring a Rock Kan-
garoo for the Spiked Lizard to ride. When all began to bustle about, the King noticed the children, and he pointed to
them saying,
“Who are you ? ”
They came before him and told him how T they had come into the cave, and the King looked very’ angry indeed, and
he made low growling noises in his throat. Then one of his attendants whispered something in his ear, and he smiled,
and turned to the children.
“W’ell.” he said, “Seeing that you are here, you might
Dragon.”
well help us, and see if YOU can’t shave the Bearded
David and Dawn thought this was a thrilling adventure, and the Prickly Pair, for once agreed. Tuckonie said he
would come along too, because five were better than four, so they jumped up on to the saddles of the Rock Kangaroos,
and away they galloped off with the Spiked Lizard.
It took a long while to reach the land of the Bearded Dragon, but when they arrived there, the Spiked Lizard told
them to alight from their Kangaroos and hide behind the nearest rock. They obeyed, and waited quietly. Soon they
heard a grunt, and peeping over the rock, they saw the Bearded Dragon only a little way off. The Spiked Lizard
sharpened his tail, and jumped on to the enemy’s back with such force that he knocked him right over on to his side.
Then began a fearful struggle, with the Dragon kicking his legs in the air. and the poor little Lizard trying to poke him
with his Spike, whenever he got the chance. Suddenly Tuckonie had a bright idea. He ran out from behind the rock,
and pulled from the ground a long sharp blade of grass. Then he looked in his pocket for a piece of soap which he always
carried, and he ran over to the Dragon and rubbed the soap on his beard, but it was dry. and the soap would not lather
at all. Tuckonie was very afraid that his plan would not work, but he noticed David running to the little creek nearby,
and cupping his hands together to carry water. When they were full, he rushed over to the Dragon, and threw the
water, Pouf! right in his face.... this gave him such a shock that for quite a minute he lay still.
In that time Tuckonie had rubbed the soap all over the wet beard, and hundreds of foaming bubbles appeared. Before
the Dragon had time to know what was happening Tuckonie had grabbed the blade of grass, and had completely shaven
off his beard.
The poor Dragon became quite tame now that he had lost his beard. The Prickly Pair put a grass rope round his
neck and gave the other end to David, who led him back to the Lizard Kingdom.
He promised never to fight the Lizards again, and as for David, Dawn. Tuckonie and Prickly Pair, the King of the
I izards gave them each a pair of silver firefly wings, which wag to bring them good luck wherever they went, for they had
helped to make peace for the Lizards.


& I
- --~-o^.- '~ - '~ WrU. J : : .. JuS J|fs ? ,' - **. f "
At his side ms the Frilled Lizar
for he was the King’s Advisor


HE Wedding of the Bunyip
ONE day the Fairyland Postman stopped at Wattle Dell and delivered letters for David and
Dawn, the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie. They were all very excited at receiving letters and hastily
opened them to find, to their surprise, that they had invitations to the wedding of Matilda, the
Witch and Bertie, the Bunyip.
“But fancy anyone marrying Matilda,” said Dawn; “she’s so ugly.”
“Oh, that’s nothing,” replied Tuckonie ; “she’s not nearly as ugly as the Bunyip, you wait until you have seen him ! ”
The invitations had been sent out very late and they discovered that they must start off at once if they wished to
be there in time. Tuckonie fortunately had the Magic Boomerang with him, so they all stood on it and off they went
soaring up over the Mountains.
The Wedding was to take place at the foot of the Bridal Veil Falls, and when they arrived they found that all the
birds and animals in the Australian Fairyland seemed to have been invited and were there already.
The Kookaburras were roaring with laughter; one of them stopped for a moment to tell the children that it was
the funniest joke he had ever heard, anyone marrying Matilda, the Witch. Then he shrieked with laughter again, join-
ing the rest of his unruly family.
The Butcher Birds were hastening round preparing the wedding feast, the Bower Birds were carefully arranging beau-
tiful flowered bowers, and up in the trees the Bell Birds had already begun to chime.
The Grasshopper and Kangaroo arrived together and seemed quite friendly; Alice Springs came with some Opos-
sums, and there were Koala Bears, Bandicoots, Wallabies, the King of the Lizards, and even Dr. Platypus was among the
guests.
There was a distant rumbling of wheels and as it grew louder and louder the animals stopped chattering to watch,
and into view came a dainty coach made of opals which, as they caught the light of the sun, kept changing colours in
the most beautiful way. A team of Dingoes that had all been brushed and tidied especially for the occasion drew the
carriage, and two Whip Birds sat at the front in scarlet livery and tall black hats.
The coach came to a standstill at the foot of the Bridal Veil Falls and out stepped Matilda looking very untidy, and
wearing a dreadfully tattered frock.
“You would think,” whispered Dawn, “that she’d put on her best frock, wouldn’t you ? ”
“Hurry up,” shouted Matilda, “hand me the Bridal Veil —hurry, there’s no time to be lost, Bertie, the Bunyip will
be here any moment —hurry I say ! ”
Two flurried birds hastened across to the falls and reached out their hands for the water. Of course as they approached
the Falls they got soaking wet from the spray, and beat a hasty retreat; this was a sign for the Kookaburras to b»gin
to roar with laughter again.
“You stupid fellows,” shrieked Matilda, as she rushed across and, to everyone’s amazement, snatched at the Bridal
Veil Falls and pulled them off the rocks in her hands; for the water had turned into a filmy white Bridal Veil.
Dawn helped Matilda arrange her veil, which was soft and very beautiful. Matilda looked tidied and, indeed more
pleasant than the children had ever seen her before.
There was the sound of another carriage coming up the mountain and then the Bunyip rattled into view riding in
a soap box driven by another team of Dingoes which, directly it caught sight of Matilda’s team, made a mad rush at
them tipping the Bunyip out of his soap box.
The Bunyip picked himself up out of the dust.
“Why, Matilda, I hardly recognised you, you look so smart,” he said, and then “Are you early or am I late?
Any way let s hurry up with the wedding ceremony. The sooner that is over the sooner we start the wedding breakfast.”
So the Bunyip took his place alongside Matilda, waiting for the wise old Owl to marry them. All the animals
cheered loudly, the Kookaburras stopped laughing, the Bell Birds chimed louder than ever, and the wedding began.


I #// ii ,1 > h^mBE!^HISmBB^BME1^^BF_uIjJJ&l- i v\ \ | J f M, \ * tll| I _, V\
So the Bunyip took his place alongside Matilda,
waiting for the wise old Owl to marry them.


HE Da nee of the Dingoes
ALL Fairyland was on tip-toe with excitement. The most wonderful thing had happened. There
was going to be a Ball in Fairyland. Invitations had been sent out and everyone was anxious for
the appointed hour to arrive.
When Spike, the tall Prickly Pair said to Dawn “Would you like to come to the Dingoes’
Ball to-night ? ” Dawn simply clapped her hands for joy and called to David, who was talking to
Tuckonie.
“David, wouldn’t it be simply marvellous to go to the Ball that the Dingoes are giving to-night.
“Why yes,” replied David, “It would be nice to go to a Ball in Fairyland. What time does it start, and where it
it to be held ? ”
“Oh. it’s to be held down in Moonlight Valley. If Tuckonie will lend us his magic boomerang I’ll take you there,”
said Spike. “The Dance will start when all the world is asleep. My word, there is not much time to spare, so if you
and Dawn get ready now we’ll leave almost right away.”
Tuckonie began to grin knowingly and started to give his boomerang an extra polish, for after all, it was something
to have a Ball in Fairyland and even the boomerang must look its best.
At last everyone was ready and the five friends scrambled on the boomerang and away they went—flying through
the stillness of the night—down to Moonlight Valley and when they arrived they found that the Ball had just started.
“Oh David,” said Dawn. “Isn’t it wonderful —why I’ve never ever seen anything so beautiful.”
“Yes,” replied David. “It is grand—just look at the footmen ; they’re Penguins, Aren’t their evening jackets smart ? ”
The Penguins did look neat for they were all dressed in their best evening clothes. They had travelled up from the
South Coast on the back of the Turtles. Do you know that when the Dingoes saw the Turtles, the first thing they wanted
to do was to make them into Turtle Soup to serve at Supper Time. But. of course, the King of the Mountains would not
allow this, and the dance started off nicely.
The Orchestra was the best that had ever plaved in Fairyland. The Lyre Birds played the most beautiful music on
each other’s tails.
The Valley was decorated in a most charming way. Silver cobwebs sprinkled with dewdrops and moonlight went
from tree to tree completely surrounding the dance floor, whilst here and there were little clusters of golden wattle.
David and Dawn spent quite a lot time meeting people for the Dingoes were really good hosts—they went round
meeting their guest politely barking words of welcome.
“I think we’ll sit down here and watch the fairy folk dancing, said Dawn to David.
“Yes let’s,” said David, as he helped Dawn up to a little mound of green grass,
“Whatever is the matter in the middle of the dance floor ? asked David. It looks as though the Turtles in
the middle of the dance floor are annoying other dancers.”
Then suddenly the whole Valiev seemed to be upset. The Dingoes barked and said that if the Turtles did not
stop interfering with the others who "ere dancing they would be put out of the V alley.
Just when things looked as though thev would be quiet again, in came Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, who had not
been invited to the Ball. He was dressed in evening clothes, and looked quite different. As he came in he was followed
by hoards of green locusts. They just swarmed round the Valley and made a green roof over the dance floor. When
they saw the lovely supper that had been prepared they ate it in a ver r short time.
Dawn appealed to Innamincka, “Oh, please, do not spoil the whole evening, everything has been so grand and we
were looking forward to a nice, long, pleasant evening.”
Innamincka just chuckled and seemed to delight in knowing things were going wrong. Soon all the leaves on the
trees and the grass in the Valley had been eaten by the h orr ible locusts. It was impossible for the dance to go on.
So the head of the Dingoes stood in the centre of the Valley and barked—“ There 11 be no more dancing to-night you will
all have to go home now. We’re very sorry the night has been spoiled but we should not have tried to keep all the
fun to ourselves.”
And so the Ball in the Moonlight Valley came to an early end all because the Dingoes had been selfish and had not
invited all Fairyland to the dance.


“What have you done ? ” said David.
Matilda turned to him.
“I’m trying to teach the Mopoke not to be so greedy,” s h e said, “that was really
a piece of pickled pork. He nearly broke his beak on it.”
a stone and I made it look like
“Oh the poor thing,” said Dawn.
The little Mopoke started to cry; tears rolled
Matilda, the Wicked Witch, laughed heartily.
down his checks, and the children
really felt very sorry for him.
“That’ll teach him not to be so greedy,” she said.
“That was horrid,” said Dawn.
Matilda, the Wicked Witch, didn’t take any
The little Mopoke cried and cried.
norice of her, she just climbed on to
her wattle branch and flew away.
“Cheer up,” said David, “I’m sure your beak
The little Owl stopped, and in between his
isn't hurting very much. Is there an
sobs he said :
ything we can do for you ? ”
“More-pork, more-pork.”
HE Message of the Mo poke
ONE day David and Dawn were playing with Tuckonie and the Prickly Pair when there was
a sudden flutter of wings, and the funniest little Owl flew down to the ground just at their
feet.
“Who is this ? ” said David.
"Oh that’s the postman,” said Tuckonie, “he’s brought a letter. “Let’s see who it’s for.”
_ • he children looked closer, and they saw that the little Owl did have a letter in his beak. It was addressed to the
Prickly Pair. Spike, the tall one, took it and opened it.
Whos it from? asked Tuckonie, who was rather an inquisitive little boy,
It s from our mother and father," said Spike ; “just a note to ask how we’re getting on. Here, you can read it
it you like Prickles.
Prickles took the note and read it. David and Dawn were more interested in the little Owl that brought the letter •
he stood quietly for a few seconds then he rushed up to the Prickly Pair and said ;
“More-Pork,” in a very mournful voice.
Oh, good gracious what’s the matter with him ? ” said David,
“It’s alright,” said Spike, “he’s the messenger of the bird and animal world; he always carries the letters and
he gets paid with pieces of pork. He s a very greedy little thing, he’s always asking for more.”
The little Owl looked up again.
“More-pork,” he cried.
David couldn't help laughing, the idea of an owl eating pork seemed to amuse him, but everyone else took it
quite seriously. Then Tuckonie ran away saying he’d be back in a few minutes. The Prickly Pair sat down on the ground
and read their letter again. In a few minutes Tuckonie returned carrying a piece of pickled pork. He threw it to the
little Owl who quickly gobbled it up. Then as soon as he’d eaten it he looked up again and said :
“More-pork.”
“Oh you greedy little thing,” said Dawn
But the little Owl took no notice of her. Suddenly there was a familar clicketty noise, and down came Matilda
the Wicked Witch. She looked at the Mopoke, and then she said :
“Well, are you asking for more again ? ”
The little Owl looked quite frightened. Then Matilda threw something on the ground, it looked to the children
very like a piece of pickled pork The little Owl ran and tried to eat it; then he jumped back looking more frightened
than ever and Maulda gave a wicked laugh.
Then Tuckonie ran away into the bushes, and soon he came back with two big pieces of pork and threw them to
die Owl. The bird immediately stopped crying, gobbled up the pork and flew away without even troubling to thank
Tuckonie.
“Well,” said Dawn, “I do think he’s a greedy little bird,
and messages in Fairyland.”
Still I suppose he works very hard carrying all the letters
“He does,” said Spike, “and he deserves all the pork he
it to him.”
gets, although he should thank people for it when they give
“Now eome along, let’s play this game that Tuckonie has
arranged.”


HE Story of the Southern Cross
ONE day when David and Dawn were playing with the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie, they received
a visit from Innamincka, the Mischief Maker. The Mischief Maker seemed to be in a very good
mood. He watched the children playing for some time, then he turned to Dawn and David.
“Have you met any of the star people since you’ve been in Fairyland ?
Dawn had always been rather afraid of Innamincka, but he spoke to her in such a friendly way that she didn t feel
in the least afraid.
“No,” she said, “we haven’t seen anv of the star people. Who are they and where are they ? ”
Innamincka chuckled in his funny throaty way; then he said. “Well, I’ve got wings, I can fly through the air. You
get on your Magic Boomerang and follow me and I’ll take y 7 ou to the land of the star people.
“Where do they live ? ” asked David, “we never see the stars in the daytime.”
Innamincka smiled. “They all go and live in the great big fleecy clouds in the daytime,” he said, “I’m going to
take you up to one of the clouds where you’ll meet them all. You’ll probably meet the Southern Cross. Come on
follow me.”
With these words Innamincka flew up into the air. The children followed by Tuckonie and the Prickly Pair hastily
scrambled on to the Magic Boomerang, and then they went after him. On and on they flew until they came to a lovely
big, white, fleecy cloud. David and Dawn were surprised to see that Innamincka was standing on the cloud and they
called to Tuckonie to make the Boomerang land where he was standing. Soon they were all standing on the cloud and
then Dawn looked round and she saw that there were thousands and thousands of funny looking little silver people, shaped
like stars.
“Why,” she cried, “these must be the star people.”
Innamincka smiled broadly, then Tuckonie and the Prickly Pair stepped off the Magic Boomerang, closely followed by
David and Dawn. The star people seemed to be very friendly and they did a little dance for the benefit of the visitors.
Then suddenly the children heard the tinkling of a little, silvery bell, and five lovely, silvery stars appeared and did a
dance forming a figure in the shape of a cross.
David leaned over and w’hispered to Dawn :
“I think that must be the Southern Cross,” he said.
“It is the Southern Cross,” said a loud voice behind them.
They looked round and were starded to see a big funny looking, person shaped not unlike the quarter of an orange.
“Who are you ? ” gasped Dawn
“I’m the man in the moon, of course,” answered the strange looking person.
Dawn couldn’t help laughing when the man said this, but she was very pleased to meet him just the same. Then the
five little stars that formed the Southern Cross danced again. Suddenly the tinkling of the little bell was heard and all the
stars scampered away and they were soon lost to sight.
“Where are they going ? ” asked David.
Innamincka answered him at once
“It’s nearly night time,” he said, “and they’re going to
the Southern Cross flying through the skies.”
do daeir nighdy work of lighting the sides. Look there’s
The two children looked in the direction in which Innamincka was pointing and they saw the little stars which formed
the Southern Cross flying through the skies ready to take up their posidon for the night s work.
The children sat on the cloud for quite a long while and they met many of the little stars and in time became firm
friends. During their stay they were taken for a walk along the Milky Way. At last their visit to Starland came to an
end, and they went back to Fairyland with Innamincka. He was really quite nice to them and David and Dawn began to
think he wasn t so bad after all, although he was inclined to be very mischievous at times.


WM t g;“|
I { I
t Kl, !
« v V* ’ll >’ A ’ / •;
) /
,_ .«.t 'iiAitM
Soon they were all standing on the cloud.


o Wthe Black Swans became Black
ONE day when David and Dawn were wandering through Fairyland picking flowers
and idly stopping to chat with one animal or another they noticed how excited and
noisy all the birds were, all fluttering from tree to tree saying, “Have you heard, have
you heard ? ” to each other, and before they could get any further the other birds re-
turned, “Yes indeed, we have ! ” so that the children could never hear what had happened.
At last they met a Kookaburra they knew. He was sitting on a low branch of a gum tree and roaring with laughter.
Two Koala Bears were sitting one on each side of him holding him so that he would not slip off the bough as he rolledi
about in helpless merriment.
“What’s he laughing about ? ” asked David.
“Haven’t you HEARD ? ” said the two Koalas, their eyes going very big and round in surprise. “Why a terrible thing
has happened, the beautiful White Swans of the Australian Fairyland aren’t white any more —they are BLACK."
“Black ? ” chorused the children. “However has that happened ? ”
Then one of the little Koalas told them that Innamincka had decided to write a book, a very long book, and he
thought that before he started he would make a big enough supply of ink to last him until he finished. Some Wombats
helped him and they dug an enormous hole in his Castle grounds and then made gallons and gallons of black ink and put
the ink into the hole. Well, it so happened that the next day the Swans were flying over and they came down onto what
they thought to be a glittering new lake. It was not until they had all dived in that they found their mistake, for every-
one of them came up out of the water, black.
“Poor Swans,” said the children, “can’t anything be done.”
“We can’t do anything,” said the Koalas. “If we leave go of this silly Kookaburra, who of course, thinks it is a huge
joke, he will just fall off the bough.”
Tuckonie suggested that they go at once to Innamincka’s Castle ; so he and David and Dawn climbed on to the Magic
Boomerang and off they went.
As they flew low over the castle grounds they saw all the Swans, and there was no doubt that they were as black
as ink.
They landed and went up to the miserable creatures. Innamincka was with them looking very serious.
“I did not mean to make mischief this time,” he said. “I like the Swans and meant them no barm.”
“Your meaning us no harm doesn’t make us white again,” said the Swans sulkily.
“No, that’s quite true,” agreed the children. “Innamincka you must do something about it.”
“What can I do ? ” asked the poor Mischief Maker. “I
the only Black Swans in the world.”
keep telling them they should not mind, because they are
Dawn looked at them for a moment.
“Do you know,” she said, “if we painted their beaks red.
and their feet too, they would look very handsome.”
This seemed to cheer the Swans up and they said it was a good idea, for then as well as being the only Black Swans
they would be the only ones with red beaks and feet.
Innamincka rushed off to the Castle and in a few minutes was back again with some pots labelled “Red Paint. This
side up,” and handing brushes to the children he began to help paint the Swans.
When they had finished, the painters all agreed that they found the Swans even prettier like this than when they had
been just ordinary white ones with yellow beaks and feet.
Can’t you imagine how happy this made the vain creatures ? They swam round gaily and went to the middle of
the lake and showed the children how well they could dive and swim, and then all flew off to show the other birds how very
beautiful they looked.
Innamincka thanked the children for helping him, for he hadn’t meant to do any harm and he had been very sorry for
himaelf.


HE Bower Bird’s Playhouse
ONE day David and Dawn and their three friends, Tuckonie and the Prickly Pair,
were wandering through Fairyland when they came upon the most lovely archway made
of fresh green branches woven together, and decorated with all kinds of flowers, wara-
tahs and magnolia blossom, branches of wisteria and many different kinds of blue flowers. While
they were there, thinking how pretty it all was, a little bird appeared in the archway and asked
them whether they would like to come through. Of course, they said they would love to and he
led them into a cool green tunnel-way which was delightful after the hot midday sun outside. At the far enc of the tunnel they
could see the sunlight outside again, but when their eyes got accustomed to the soft light they saw that the walls were
lined with dozens of little shelves in which stood pieces of glittering metal and some diamonds, shreds of blue silk and
blue flowers too.
“You love blue, don’t you ? ” said Dawn to the pretty bird.
“I think it is the most beautiful colour,’’ he replied ; “I collect everything I can which is blue. Innamincka gives me
the pieces of blue cloth left over from his new clothes ; the Fairies give me pieces too, and I keep them all here to play
with.”
Just then they heard someone outside calling—
“Are you at home ? ” And the bird hastened out to see who it was,
While he was gone Spike explained quickly to the children that this was a Satin Bower Bird, one of the gayest
creatures in Fairyland. They all built themselves bowers like this in which to play and they spent the whole of each
day prancing round and playing games together.
The Satin Bower Bird returned with another shyer bird whom he introduced as his young brother. They all shook
hands with this little fellow and then the first bird asked if they would like to see a dance. Naturally the children were
delighted at this suggestion and at once the young brother was sent off to find some of their friends.
Meanwhile the Bower Bird took them through his play-house showing them all his treasures. Fie gave Dawn an opal
she particularly liked, and he told them stories of all his lovely possessions. Idow one day, when living over the Blue
Mountains, he had seen an opal glittering on the ground, how another day he had found a beautiful shell on the river
bank, and the Koalas had given him a piece of pretty blue ribbon. Fie told them too, how the Butterflies saved for him
the scraps of butterfly-wing cloth they did not want.
“I love collecting pretty things,” he said simply.
Just then the young brother arrived back with six Bower Birds, three Grasshoppers and two Crickets. David and
Dawn were very mystified by the appearance of the Grasshoppers and Crickets, until the Bower Birds explained that
they were members of the Fairyland Orchestra and had kindly agreed to play some music.
They all trooped outside the bower and the Grasshoppers and Crickets opened little cases which they had left at the
doorway when they came in. Two took out tiny violins and three had flutes and they commenced to play the sweetest
tunes the children had ever heard, and a Bel! Bird, who was sitting in a tree nearby, flew across and added a tinkle
of bells.
Then the Bower Birds lined up in twos and commenced a gay jig to the fairy music, skipping and prancing. The
Prickl) Pair and David and Dawn joined in, while Tuckonie sat with the Grasshoppers and sang a little crooning song
in his own language, which nobody understood, but which sounded very pretty.
The> danced and danced, and David and Dawn and the Prickly Pair all got so hot that they went and sat down,
ut the Bower Birds tripped on and on. At last, however, even they got tired and the first one suggested they should
a go into the bower and rest. They all went into the bower and had cool drinks and then the five friends said good-
ie to t^le Bower Birds, Grasshoppers and Crickets, and thanked them for the enjoyable afternoon they had had. The
ower Birds in\ited them to come along any afternoon; they were always playing here they said. The children promised
t t ey would, and in the meantime they would look for some pretty things for the bowers.
“Flurrah, Flurrah,” cried all the Bower Birds, “that will be lovely.”


Then Spike said :
“I think it would be a good idea if you called it Scrubby.”
“Oh no,” said Dawn, “I don’t like that name.”
Spike looked quite offended but his brother Prickles said,
“Let’s call it Tubby.”
Neither David or Dawn liked the name Tubby. Then
Tuckonie, the little
black boy, came
forward and he said :
“I think Mirrabooka is a nice name, it means Southern
Cross.”
Both David and Dawn thought that Mirrabooka was a
beautiful name, and
it was then and
there decided to call the
TOR Y of Mirrabooka the Scrub Baby
ONE day while David and Dawn were having a lovely game with the Pnckly Pair
and Tuckonie they received a visit from the Curlew and the Mopoke. These two birds
were very upset, they said they’d found a little Scrub Baby and as they were very busy
they didn’t have time to take care of it themselves, so they had come to ask if David and
Dawn would take care of it.
The Prickly Pair clapped their hands with glee
“Oh, we love scrub babies,” said Prickles.
And Tuckonie grinned so much that his mouth almost stretched from ear to ear. David and Dawn didn't know
whether they would be able to take care of the Scrub Baby but they said they’d like to see it. Then Tuckonie put
his Magic Boomerang on the ground and they all got on it and away they flew through the air to the foot of the big
mountain. Then the Curlew and the Mopoke led them to a little heap of leaves, and there they found the dearest little Scru
Baby. Dawn fell in love with the dear little thing at once.
“Oh David,” she said, “isn’t it sweet ?
David looked rather doubtful, but he nodded his head. Then the baby opened its eyes and smiled and even David
thought is was very sweet. Dawn turned to the Curlew and the Mopoke.
“Oh,” she said, “We’ll be very pleased to take care of the Scrub Baby while we’re in Fairyland, won t we David ?
David said that they would and the Curlew and the Mopoke seemed very pleased. They said that Scrub Babies grew
up very quickly and the baby would be able to take care of itself before David and Dawn left Fairyland.
“Now,” said Dawn, “we’ll have to give it a name, what shall we call it ? ”
The Prickly Pair looked very wise and started whispering to each other.
baby Mirrabooka. Dawn picked the little thing up and carried it away to the cave where they were living. The Baby
slept peacefully so David and Dawn thought it quite safe to go for a walk. When they came back the baby was gone.
Dawn was in a terrible state, she sent for the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie and they decided that Mrs. Wallaby must have
taken the baby as her own baby had just grown up. Then off the children went to visit Mrs. Wallaby and sure enough
there she was carrying the Scrub Baby about in her pouch. She told David and Dawn how her own child had grown
too big to be carried about in her pouch and now she felt lonely, so she thought she was doing right when she decided
to look after Mirrabooka. Mrs. Wallaby seemed very fond of the little thing and she promised she’d always look after it,
so David and Dawn decided to let her have it, if they were allowed to visit it every day. Mrs. Wallaby agreed to this
and David and Dawn felt they were doing what was really best for Mirrabooka, as she would be well cared for and very
comfortable in Mrs. Wallaby’s pouch.


I
i || 1 I \^l^|
BjB *gst * 1 // MjSM^mMu H H X . f f I , § ■*] i /~\/jy^B*»
%\l V \ ? J IJ n *f . > / JgKfaf |J 1_ /r
h W 1 1 MB . i / / v 1 Vj'i v JJ£ ■
'^^b^4 k b«n^ji^ r Y flV/ V\ l Tf " w )JF m
l I \\ l\i I V »w 1# V * . fl Bp Jr *. Y/N, 1
fstej, f /A yt&ni
I 5» v T / ■ f\\i\ .V
Then the Baby opened its eyes and smiled
and even David thought it was very sweet.


HE Story of the Koala
ONE day, Tuckonie, the little fat black boy told David and Dawn that he would like to
go and visit the home of his people. So David and Dawn called to the Prickly Pair and
then they all journeyed to a big camp. Tuckonie was warmly greeted by his mother and
father and they made David and Dawn very welcome. The children had a wonderful time
playing with boomerangs, wommeras, spears and ail sorts of things, and Tuckonie’s brother
took a lot of trc.ble to try and teach David how to throw a boomerang. David improved
as the day went on, but he found it made his arm very tired. Dawn didn’t seem to like
the idea of learning to throw a boomerang, so she went along to talk to a lot of dear little black girls. She wondered
whether they had any dolls. Tuckonie said the little black girls didn’t play with dolls but they had the loveliest teddy
bears. Tuckonie said something to all the little girls in his native language and they all ran away and soon came back
with the sweetest and most beautiful toy teddy bears. Oh, how Dawn did enjoy herself, she cuddled each bear in turn
and she learned all their names.
When David tired of throwing the boomerang, he came over and seemed quite taken up with the teddy bears, only
he pretended that he wasn’t. Suddenly both David and Dawn heard a familiar whirring noise and looking up to the sky
they were horrified to see a witch riding along on a wattle branch. The wattle branch circled right round the camp
and then it slowly glided to earth.
“Why Dawn,” whispered David, “I think it must be Matilda.”
Oh no,” said Dawn, “What would Matilda be doing here ? ”
Everybody w’atched in silence as the witch climbed off her wattle branch and walked into the centre of the camp. Then
David w’as surprised to notice that her face was quite black, and yet there seemed to be something familiar about her.
’She looks very like Matilda,” Dawn said, “but her face is black.”
Suddenly the witch spoke and both children at once recognised the voice of Matilda.
“Well,” she said, “I suppose everybody’s enjoying themselves with the teddy bears.”
The little black children huddled together and their teddy bears were left lying on the ground. When Matilda saw
David and Dawn, she smiled at them in her usual nasty way, then she said.
“I suppose you thought Innamincka the Mischief Maker was the only bad person up here, I suppose you’d forgotten
about me ? ”
David bravely stepped forward, then he said.
“Why have you come here, and w’hy is your face black ? ”
Matilda looked quite angry and Dawn thought for a moment that she was going to hit David with her wattle branch,
but she only scowled and stamped her foot. Then she said.
I don’t know how I turned black, but I think it comes from being too much in the Sun.”
She went round and glared at the little black girls, then she looked at the teddy bears and laughed. She waved her
wattle branch in the air and mumbled a few magic words, then to David and Dawn’s surprise the teddy bears sat up
and looked round. The little black girls ran away screaming with fright and the little teddy bears looked surprised
also.
Matilda took one more glance at them, then she climbed on her wattle branch and flew away. The teddy bears ran
around for a while amazed and frightened, and then they ran towards the bush, closely following one another. David and
Dawn tried to help the little black girls catch their pets.
And that was how the Koala bears came to life, ever since then the little black children have had neither dolls nor teddy
bears, but they always feel very friendly to the Koalas and stroke them and pet them whenever they possibly can. And
it is because of the love the little black girls have for them that the Koalas are always so quiet and friendly.


And then they ran towards the bush, closely
following one another, David and Dawn tried
tn heln the little black a iris catch 'heir Gets.


HE Story of the Golden Fleece
ONE day a Flying Squirrel told the children that he had heard that the King of the
Blue Mountains possessed a great treasure, the most precious thing in the whole of
the Australian Fairyland, but he had it closely guarded and no one was ever allowed to
see it Dawn asked if she might just be allowed to have one peep, but the Squirrel said
he felt sure the King would not let her. Then Tuckonie, suddenly said :
“We must ask Innamincka ; he might lend us some of his invisible cloaks.”
“Invisible cloaks ? ” asked David in surprise.
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “they are magic cloaks which make the wearer invisible to anyone.”
The only way to find out whether Innamincka would lend them these precious clothes was to go and ask him.
u II I UAon to the Magic Boomerang. Away the Boomerang soared, up. and up, and over the trees and then
so they all climbed on to the Magic 800 g , climbed
it came gently to rest in the grounds of a castle. they naste s
webby stairs and at last found Innamincka sitting in one of the turrets.
He listened to their request, and then said :
“A good idea a very good idea, we will ALL go,” and he went across to a cupboard in the comer of the room and
g . .\ a A cnf the most lovely garments, some made of stars and others of rainbows, and even
opening it reveae ozen care fully went through all the motions of taking a cloak out of a cupboard, and shaking
The children watched and* ** amazement -T
but they heard his voice saying “I can see you, can you see me ?
“No,” they chorused, “Where are you ? ”
Then Innamincka gave .hem all Invisible Cloak, and .hey climbed on ,o .he Magic Boomerang asking anxiously if
they were all safely on because of course, they couldn’t see each other !
“To the Kina of the Blue Mountains’ Treasure House.” they shouted, and away they flew and at last SWOO P^J°*
The children Tuckonie. .he Prickly Pair and Innamincka and the Flying Squirrel all slipped quie.ly be,ween ,h.
Dingoes and tiptoed down .he cave which was li, by little star, hang.ng m lanterns.
A, intervals down ,he long passage .here were sonny boxes l« into .he wall and a Dingo with a rifle propped up
beside him was sitting there. Some of them sniffed suspiciously a, the v.s.tors wen. pas. but other, were busy
chatting with the stars that they didn’t notice at all.
Then a, las, thev came to a huge door and Innamincka produced a gold key and very quie.ly opened it ancl the,
thing in the room, to their great disappointment, was a fleece of golden-coloured wool.
Suddenly to their surprise, the Fleece spoke ;it said how glad it was to have someone to talk to sometimes, and
now tht 4 were here "would tel. them the story about the
country. How nowhere else in the world was there so much fine wool and all the other countries n
and their traders to our shores to buy it.
I. was a long story and began in the days far hack when Macar.hur brought the fir* Aunralm,
and it wandered on and on through days and years, droughts and times of pi y,
the children had been listening entranced for hours. Eventually they reluctantly_ said goodbye
slipped quietly past the Dingo sentries and out on to the cool moonlit mountamsi •
at last they knew the secret of the Australian Treasure The Golden F eece.


HE Story of the Flower Folk
ONE day the Prickly Pair took David and Dawn and Tuckonie to the land of the
Flower Folk. It was a wonderful place, in fact, David and Dawn had never been in
such a beautiful place in all their lives. There they met the Boronia Fairy, the Wara-
tah Fairy, the Christmas Bell Fairy, the Flannel Flower Fairy, the Pussy Grass Fairy,
and all sorts of wonderful and beautiful creatures.
“Why David,” cried Dawn, “I’ve never seen such wonderful colours all together, they
almost dazzle your eyes to look at them.”
The Prickly Pair seemed to know all the different flowers and they went about talking to them and making themselves
pleasant, and everybody was very nice to David and Dawn.
The flowers asked them to stay in their land for a few days, and they built them a beautiful tent made of lovely
strong leaves. It was really quite a strong tent, and David and Dawn were very comfortable there. Then one day
Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, visited the Flowerland. As soon as he came there was trouble. The Waratah and
the Wattle had a quarrel as to which had the best bloom. All day long they used to quarrel and for a while there was
no peace in flower land. David and Davn did their best to get the Waratah and the Wattle to make friends. They told
them that both their flowers were beautiful, but the Waratah said more people looked at him and that at one time he
was the National Flower, and the Wattle said that he had many more admirers than the Waratah, and that now he was
the National Flower. So the quarrel went on, and at last some of the flowers took sides. The Christmas Bells and
the Flannel Flowers said that they thought the Wattle was right, while some of the other plants sided with the Waratah.
At last David and Dawn grew very tired of this continual quarrelling, and they sent Tuckonie the little black boy to
look for Innamincka, the Mischief Maker, and ask him to come back and make peace. Away went Tuckonie on his
Magic Boomerang, and in a few hours he returned with Innamincka, the Mischief Maker. Innamincka gave his long
throaty chuckle, and then Dawn turned to him and said :
Oh, Innamincka, you ought to be ashamed of yourself for making trouble in Flowerland, everything was so beau-
tiful until you came here/’
David nudged Dawn, he didn’t want her to annoy Innamincka because one never knew what he might do. Inna-
mincka, however, did not seem to be offended. He merely went up to the Wattle Tree and waved his hands and
strangely enough all the Wattle blooms faded and the great big Waratah blooms started to grow from the Wattle Tree.
Then Innamincka walked over to the Waratah plant and waved his arms over it, and the Waratahs faded and Wattle
bloomed in their place. At this, all the other flower people started to laugh, but the poor Waratah and the Wattle weren’t in
the least amused and they begged Innamincka to give them their proper flowers back. Then Innamincka spoke again.
He said he d give them their proper flowers if they’d stop quarrelling. Both plants promised to stop quarrelling, and
then Innamincka waved his arms. Soon the Wattle had its own blooms and the Waratah had its own beautiful red
flower, and after that everything in Flowerland was peaceful. Flowerland proved such a wonderful place, everything
used was a beautiful petal, they were used to catch the dew that the flowers drank to quench their thirst. All letters
from Flowerland to the Fairy Queen were written on petals and the flowers were entertained in the evening with the
petals dancing in the rays of the silvery moon. David and Dawn learnt that sometimes the Starmen came to Flowerland
they were very tired, this was a great occasion and they were hopeful that they would see what the beautiful
flowers did to attract the Starmen.
Tuckonie found out that the Boronia knew all the flowers’ secrets and that the Starmen only came to Flowerland to rest
because the beds were so beautiful, so restful and so sweet.
It appeared that the Flower Fairies never went to sleep themselves, they spent the whole of their lives looking after
others.
Oh David, said Dawn, when it was time to leave, “this is one place in Fairyland that I must visit again and I
hope that Innamincka does not disturb this beautiful place with his mischief any more.”


HE Pride of the Parakeet
THE Parakeet was the vainest creature in all Fairyland. He was so vain that he used
to stand for hours and hours, at the edge of a pool, just gazing at his reflection and
saying :
“Oh my, oh my, I AM
handsome bird ! ”
The pretty gaily coloured Rosellas often flew down and teased him, calling
“Pretty polly, pretty polly ! ” but he only stamped his feet angrilv and called
“Silly creatures, you are all jealous because I am so beautiful.” Then he would
sigh happily and gaze once more into the water.
One morning Tuckonie and the Prickly Pair took David and Dawn along to see him.
but he would take no notice of them at all, although they said good morning very politely. He just strutted round
his pool and quickly glanced in to see if he was looking his best. Then he stretched and flapped his wings, and even-
tually said ;
“Good morning—if you think it IS a good morning. I NEVER think it to be a good morning when I only have
five visitors to see me. Why, vesterday I had three Lyre Birds and five Kangaroos and numerous lesser creatures all here
to see the handsome Mr. Parakeet.”
“Isn’t he the vainest creature you ever met ! ” whispered Dawn to Spike. Unfortunately the Parakeet heard what
she said and he rushed towards her shouting.
“You rude little girl ! ” which was most unfair because no one could possibly call Dawn a rude child.
Goodness onlv knows what would have happened; but just then there was a swishing noise and Innamincka alighted
on the ground and waved his wand at the Parakeet. The bird stopped still as if he were made of stone, and Inna-
mincka picked him up, then leapt into the air, shouting all the time
‘Til teach him not to be so vain ! ”
“Whatever are you going to do ? ” said David.
Innamincka chuckled, “I’m going to put him in a cage,” he said, “I 11 teach him not to be so vain.
“Oh you can’t do that,” cried Dawn.
“Can’t I,” said Innamincka, “That’s all you know.”
Then he leapt up into the air and disappeared from view, taking the poor Parakeet with him. The Prickly Pair
and Tuckonie were very worried at this and very soon they met the Emu. the Galah and some of the other bird creatures
and told them what had happened. The Emu asked David and Dawn to help set the Parakeet free and David and Dawn
agreed to do so.
The five friends were very worried at what had happened, because they had not wished the Parakeet any harm,
and Innamincka might be up to real mischief. They ran off to seek the advice of some of the anima s an \ er\
soon they met a Platypus to whom they told the whole story. The Platypus hastened off and soon came ac wit two
Beetles, a Lizard and a Bandicoot and a few small birds and the w’hole party crowded on to the Magic Boomerang.
Away they flew to Innamincka’s Castle and they went in and searched every turret and e\ er\ room, an a t e
cellars, but they could not find the Parakeet anywhere. Prickles suggested that they search the astle groun s too,
so they made their w r ay through the bush and evennially they saw the entrance to a Cave. In the Ca\e guarding the
Parakeet were Innamincka's servants the naughty little Bush Dwarves.
The Dwarves all shrieked at the rescue party and told them to go away, but suddenly Innamincka himself appeared
in the doorway and invited them in to see his prisoner, the Parakeet.
There was the Parakeet locked up in a cage looking not even the tiniest bit proud, but very sad and unhappy. He
spoke quite politely to his visitors, too.
The children persuaded Innamincka that this fright had taught the Parakeet his lesson, and now he would never be
so vain again, and at last the Mischief Maker agreed to set him free.
The next morning there was the Parakeet strutting round his pool again looking at his reflection in the water. But.
as a matter of fact, he was always quite polite to everyone, and even became friends with the Rosellas.


Eventually they saw the entrance to a Cave. In the
Cave guarding the Parakeet were Innamincka’s
servants , the naughty little Bush Dwarfs.


AIR YLAND'S Cricket Match
ONE beautiful summer morning, Tuckonie came up to David and Dawn and said. “How
would you like to go to a cricket match between the birds and the animals this afternoon ? ”
“I would love to,” replied Dawn, “I think it would be great fun to see all the different
Fairy Creatures playing cricket. What do you think David ?
“Yes Tuckonie,” said David, “we will go along. It’s nice of you to have invited us.”
So after lunch, David and Dawn with their friends, the Prickly Pair and Tuckonie, scrambled on to the Magic
Boomerang and away they went to the Fairyland Cricket Ground, which was a big clearing in the middle of the Bush.
When they arrived, all the animals and the birds appeared to be arguing as to who were the better players.
Although David and Dawn asked many questions, they couldn’t find out just how the match was to be played.
David went up to Mr. Wombat who was to do the scoring, and said, “I think if Dawn and I picked sides, it would
settle all the arguments.”
“A jolly good idea,” answered Mr. Wombat, “we’ll leave it in your hands.”
The children picked Dr. Platypus and Tuckonie as opposing Captains. Dr. Platypus said he would agree if he could
have the little cave man who was renowned as a fast bowler. This seemed to be quite in order with Tuckonie so long as
he could have the Kangaroo for his opening batsman.
Innamincka thought this funny, and he chuckled and chuckled and chuckled, for he knew that the Kangaroo would
knock the wicket over with his tail. Then Dr. Platypus chose the Emu as his second man. Tuckonie then asked for
the Koalas on his side, but the Koalas wanted to play with Dr. Platypus who was their family doctor. Eventually David
and Dawn had both sides selected, most of the animals were playing with Dr. Platypus, and most of the birds were on
Tuckonie’s side.
Then the fun started, for there were no bats, and no wickets. Someone suggested that the Wombats be used for bats
but the poor Wombats refused to have anything to do with the cricket match except keeping the score. It was suggested
that the Lyre Birds’ tails could be used for wickets ; but these birds wouldn’t stand still for more than a second.
However, David said he thought the difficulty could be overcome if they made wickets out of branches of gum trees,
and put three small branches at each end of the pitch. Mr. Bandicoot, the Umpire, thought it an excellent idea, so David
made the wickets. Then he and Tuckonie made bats out of pieces of wood.
At last everything was ready for the match to start, and Tuckonie, who had just won the toss, decided that the match
should start with the Kangaroo and himself as the opening batsmen. So in they went, and Dr. Platypus’ cave man
bowled the first ball.
Innamincka had to have a hand in the match, and while Tuckonie’s side was batting, he stirred the birds up to make
all the screeching noises they could. The Kookaburra laughed all the time, while the Cockatoos screeched and screeched
with all their might.
Before the match was over the sun began to sink over the distant hills; Dr. Platypus appealed against the light.
The appeal was upheld and stumps were drawn
David and Dawn both agreed that the Fairyland Cricket Match was excellent fun, and that although the game was
not finished and no-one actually won, everybody seemed to enjoy themselves immensely


And Tuckonie , who I
ad just won the
and himself as the opening batsi
WINN a CO.. PRINTERS. 53—SB BALFOUR STREET. SYDNEY
ar
ma
i


■■■** Jt \, JMF
Hr ,; 3^pP?SBjr
j^H\o
x T V .—"
<S • |g|f .; , n
