

J
'*v „ y c\hD DAW/V Wiru^^^
,\.V\ V tTAiJi! ' Th > £ 2bcioo
ram
sM' _
MHfi
r WllM^
fli«! H
n .^. : .Jl ~w -W
||#*||
/ / )V^P^^i<fl
,,u
i > . wn^n
|% jA i Sh ' fr v i9 ~y r »--*jP^jBy
Wf / r \\ 1 vj * | V JL1 *7 ' \ k i\iy{ / 4fcJ
jjBF/ i Ifj f^^rff)^l«
j jC\ j M~ v Sv i
riii ri43i /^B
MW
r , w^ 1 -dSCB
xf V ‘


/
£ I
wk
mbu^i
Bp ** f. - ~ *; «* i
* H /k | ; K i
.JP L / V nnfH-, /m IVfi
■ jp afepB?. k •. Wii-9 jPfmp* „ ! 1^P
HL ■ | v ■
1 J
I %
IS I BF 9
" if / : I , | \ y j m
In a twinkling of an eye they were above cities and plains,
forests and fields.


SNOWS present this little book to you
knowing that you are a follower of their
2UW Radio Entertainment, "David and
Daivn in Fairyland.”
The illustrations and stories tvill make you
better acquainted with the people and the
Magic Land into which George Edwards
takes you every night, from Monday to
Friday, at 6 p.m.
PRETEND
fust the loveliest thing a child can have
Is the wonderful thing we call pretend.
It isn’t anything you can buy or sell,
It doesn’t even begin or end.
It’s something that’s given to very few
It s something that always belongs to you.
Pretend is a thing that alters the world,
If once it comes your way.
Oh, pretend is a simply lovely thing,
That no one can take away.
And if I were you my whole life through,
I d hold tight on to pretend.
When things go wrong again and again,
} owll find twill oft be your dearest friend.


Snow White
ERHAPS you know the story of Snow White and how her wicked stepmother became
jealous and poisoned her with a piece of apple . . . but do you know the story of
Snow White as it was seen and heard by David and Dawn.'
)[[ Af Listen a while and I’ll tell you the tale: It was a fine spring morning ... one
/1 \| of those mornings when the air is like crystal and flowers are swaying in the
w/, breeze when David and Dawn came suddenly upon a steep bank. They climbed
down,’and what do you think they saw? Two silver railway lines going way,
SIJ W ay into the distance. And waiting there, ready for them to get on, was a tram.
But w hat a train! It was green, like moss, and all the window sashes and cushions
and railings were of chocolate and toffee and cocoanut-ice. Can you imagine it.
David and Dawn were so surprised that they couldn’t touch any of it. They thought it would dis-
appear if they touched it. They just sat down on top of the carriage and looked at each other.
Suddenly there was a toot-toot-toot . . . that exciting noise trains make when they are going to
start on a holiday trip ... and they were off. Where they went, I’m going to tell you in these stories,
so just make yourselves comfortable and listen to me.
First of all, they went through the most wonderful places. They could see castles in the air,
hanging dangerously out of the clouds, towers with beautiful maidens with long, golden hair that
made Dawn wish she’d taken more care of hers. Quaint little gnomes coming out of shell-hke houses
more trees and flowers than Dawn had ever seen in her life. On a big notice board, they read,
''THIS WAY FOR FAIRYLAND.”
The train stopped, and there they were—on the platform to meet them was Mr Grimderson.
He was the most important person in Fairyland. He was half-brother to Mr. Grimm and Mr. Anderson.
He introduced them to Snow White. She was sitting on a big chair looking just like a snowiia e.
Mr Grimderson said he must go, because he had to welcome some more people. People were always
arriving in Fairyland. Snow White chatted to them pleasantly, but she seemed a little worried about
something.
Suddenly there was a harsh, froglike noise. David and Dawn looked round .. . coming towards
them was a horrible old witch. She had on a frock of golden cloth, dressed as if she were somebody
beautiful instead of an ugly old witch.
She minced up to a large mirror hanging on the wail, and said in a high-pitched voice . . .
"Mirror, mirror, on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?”
The mirror just laughed . . . trilly, bell-like laughter, right in the witch’s face. She went pale
with fury, and then turned savagely upon Snow White. "I’m to be your stepmother for a fort-
night, and I’ll make you pay for this insult.”
She picked up an apple and handed it to Snow White, saying: Eat that.
David stepped forward. "Snow White, don’t touch that. It’s poisoned. It’ll kill you.”
Dawn wept loudly, partly from fright and partly from hunger. She was sorry now that she
hadn’t eaten the nice fittings on the train.
Snow White fell at their feet. The wicked stepmother danced happily round her. David and
Dawn were wondering if they ought to call somebody, when who should appear but a handsome
young man.
"What do you want?” snarled the old witch. "Who are you?”
"I’m Prince Charming. Get out of my way.” He leaned over Snow White and murmured: "Snow
White, Snow White.” Then gently, gently, he patted her on the back. And Snow White sat up,
coughing. She coughed up a piece of apple, and, turning round, gave her fingers to the Prince to kiss.
Then both of them together got into the Prince’s carriage and were driven off by a coachman dressed
in velvet.
"Gone,” sighed Dawn. "Oh, but wasn’t he wonderful? And the witch has also gone.”
David jumped up. "We’ll go too.”
Off they went until


Mirror, Mirror, on the wall,
Who is the fairest of them alli"
The Mirror just laughed!


Puss in Boots
HEY saw a gigantic Pussy Cat. He was blacker than coal with whiskers that stood
straight out. He had a long fluffy tail like a feather duster, and the arch of his back
was like a question mark. He sat licking himself and purring at the same time. On his
legs were long boots!
David and Dawn knew at once that this was Puss in Boots. "What shall we call
him, David?” Dawn said in a low voice. "Mr. Puss, do you think? Or would Puss
be very wrong?”
"Don’t call him anything. We’ll just address him as Sir,” said David.
"Good morning, Sir,” they chorused. "You’re Puss in Boots.” "Naturally,” said
the Cat, hiding a yawn with one paw. "And what do you want with me?”
"Well, we’d just like to know about you.” David said doubtfully. He wasn’t a bit sure if the
cat would be pleased. But he was. He arched his back, and purred through his nose, and danced
around in his boots, and waved his tail. Then he started on his life history.
"You know how my master had to clear out all the mice and how I caught them all. How I
came into possession of these wonderful boots. There isn’t another cat in all the world with boots
like mine.”
"Isn’t there, indeed!” said a mocking voice behind them. It was the old witch. With her came
a dragon, breathing blue fire. David and Dawn shivered.
"Don’t shiver,” whined the dragon. "I don’t know why everybody shuns me as they do. I’m
harmless, but they don’t like the look of me. I wouldn’t hurt anybody.”
"Poor old dragon,” Dawn said. "I’ll just pat you on the head.” Being a kind hearted person,
she couldn’t bear that anyone should be sad. The Cat was looking at the witch with a very horrid
expression in his eye. "Well, what other Cat has got boots like mine?”
"There will be plenty of cats with boots like yours. I’m making boots for all cats, and then we’ll
see, Mr. Puss in Boots, we’ll see.” She made a horrid croaking noise in her throat.
The cat smiled. "These are magic boots, and you can’t make boots like them. And you know it.
You’re only jealous.”
The witch screeched. "I’ll have those boots of yours yet.”
The cat got up and stretched himself. He preened his fur and looked at his whiskers in the
magic looking-glass. "Nice, nice.” He came towards the dragon, and Dawn told them to follow him.
"Let us have some peace. We’ll go to the palace, so we can’t be disturbed. I want to finish talking
about myself.”
"Oh, no you don’t, Mr. Cat!” said the old witch. "You stop where you are. I’m going to have
those boots this very minute.” David and Dawn felt terrified. What a fierce old woman this witch
was! The dragon puffed and puffed. He liked Dawn stroking him.
"When I get those boots you’ll be just an ordinary cat, and you won’t like that.” The old witch
danced and waved her broomstick in the air. The cat just got up, touched his magic boots, and dis-
appeared.
"Well, he’s gone!” said David.
"I might have known he’d do that,” snapped the witch. "He always does it. I’ll never get the
better of that cat. Every time we argue, he just touches his boots, and goes!” She mounted her broom-
stick and called to the dragon. The dragon woke up out of his blissful mood and went over to the
witch. Away they went, David and Dawn watching them with open eyes.
"All cats must be vain,” Dawn said, thoughtfully, "But I like Puss in Boots.”
"So do I,” David agreed. "And now, let’s go on. I can smell something cooking, and I’m hungry.”
Thev went on until the\ came co


J
Jack and Jill
"Come in. You’re just in time for lunch.”
"This is the House that Jack Built, and I own it.”
"I’ve heard about you,” Dawn said. "What a good smell lunch has!”
UCH a queer looking house standing in a big garden. , . . "That’s where the
food is coming from,” David whispered. "Shall we go in?”
"Let’s,” said Dawn. "I’m so hungry that I could eat anything.”
path they marched, looking braver than they really felt. They knocked at
and a cheerful looking young man greeted them.
"Oh, thank you, sir,” David replied very politely. "But could
lives in this house, or who owns it.”
at the door,
me who
And v asn t it a good lunch! Soup as clear as amber, a chicken that melted in the mouth, ice-
cream with walnuts and cherries. A grown-up lunch that Mother would never, never have permitted.
At lunch they were introduced to a crowd of the most interesting people. The Old Woman in the Shoe
vs as there, with all her children, Alother Ffubbard with her doggie. The dog was chewing an enormous
bone. Dawn was glad to see this. She’d always felt so sorry for him. Aladdin was there, with his
Lamp close by him, and three different princes and princesses. Why, even the table-cloth was placed on
the Magic Carpet.
Then after lunch .. . just listen to what happened. David and Dawn had wandered out of the
back of the house and they had come to the foot of a big green hill. Standing at the side of it were
two children. They glanced up quickly at David and Dawn, but they didn’t speak. Dawn thought the
girl looked very untidy. In a flash she knew who they were.
"David,” she said excitedly, "those people are Jack and Jill. This is their hill. No wonder they
aren’t very friendly.”
S " iff . ed - 1 d ° n,t See why they shouldn ’t be. Or why it’s their hill. Anybody can fall
down a hill if they want to.”
Dawn went up to the two children. "Do you mind if we play with you? We’d like to if you
would.” She smiled at them . . . and even David admitted that Dawn had a nice smile.
"No,” said Jack. "We’ve got too much to do. We’ve got to fall down this hill. Everybodv works
m Fairyland. We have to amuse the Children from Earth.”
"I’ve lost the sticking plaster,” Jill announced sadly. "I knew I’d lose something. I felt it early
this morning.” ° 7
"What’s that in your belt?” Dawn asked. And
there was the sticking plaster.
_ JjL 7 1 !! '’ • come on! ” { ac k ( : ried - "We’re late already.” And without stopping to thank Dawn, the
»pair of them hurried up the
of wl't L er‘’out o nfThI hem n’ i d j, Uf> th f y Went ’ in time to see Jack and J lll llft the P ail
he tumb.ed a„d Jit f ° oti "S' D °"" the hlll
ran lf* “T !. hem - Ev , en ‘ hou S h the P air hadn ' c b " n ™T polite to them. They
fn a second his ie “ t d °" " ‘ A hey the sweetest little fairy fly up to Jack and touch his crown.
iLh ' d ° W " « th ' f °°‘ ° f th ' a da ndel,on
said Mf K^ o1 d :: faVOUr - " E '' ide " t 'l' d «"’t intend to be late for the next tumble,- she
over "there''° me d ° W " * nd ~ that f “"" y “«*• P la “ ~ a V
Dawn followed him, until the two children found themselves in a


Cinderella
expect,” Dawn said wisely, "I expect they want
ANGLE of flowers and shrubs. "I
to be alone.”
"At least Jack and Jill might have said good-bye.”
David was not so thoughtful
Dawn said, cheerfully, "Never mind; isn’t this a strange place?”
They were now in a garden, a garden set out like a jeweller’s window, each
flower-patch on its own lawn. There were flowers swaying in the wind, changing
colour like opals, flowers like diamonds, rubies, coral and sapphires.
Dawn said softly to David: "I shouldn’t be surprised if this isn’t a Palace Garden.
There’s a row of marble steps leading up to heaven. Only palaces can afford so
much marble.”
David recovered from his bad temper. "Well, we certainly have been seeing a lot of royalty lately.
What this?” David stooped and picked up a shoe, shining glass, with a bow tied in glass. "Cinderella
must be somewhere around. Put the slipper back. The Prince has got to find that.”
Through the garden a little wind sighed. It grew dark suddenly, and a big, golden moon swam into
the sky. From under the trees came a tall, slim girl, dressed in rags.
"Cinderella!” cried David and Dawn. "Is it really twelve o’clock?” They looked at each other
in horror. Imagine being out at twelve o’clock! Midnight!
"Oh dear! don’t stop me to ask any questions. Of course, it’s twelve o’clock. And the ball’s
over, and I’ve lost my slipper, and I’m late.” Cinderella sighed. "And my sisters will be home be-
fore me.”
"Of course they will be home before you, dearie,” crackled a voice behind them. And there was
the old witch, shaking her head and waving her broomstick, and smiling at her black cat all at the
same time. "I’ve delayed you to-night; I’ve made you lose your way.”
"Come on, Cinderella,” David and Dawn said bravely. "We’ll help you find your way. Never
mind the old witch.” Between them they lifted up poor Cinderella and started off, with the chuckle
of the wicked old witch getting fainter and fainter in the distance.
In about five minutes they came out on to the road, which was as white as snow in the moonlight.
Alas' down the road galloped a coach with four horses. Hanging out of the windows were two of
the ugliest women David and Dawn had ever seen. One was fat and the other thin. The two wicked
sisters stopped as they came level, and getting out of the coach, they tried to drag Cinderella away
from David and Dawn. The two children screamed.
Down the road came a bugle call, clear as crystal, and down the road came a carriage, driven
at great speed by a man in a white silk coat and a satin hat. The carriage was made of gold. It
stopped near the ugly sisters, and out of the carriage stepped a prince.
"Prince Charming,” said David, with his best bow. "It must be you, because I can see you have
the glass slipper in your hand.”
"Correct,” said Prince Charming. "Now, madam, I’ll just put the slipper on here, if you don’t
mind. I’ve got an appointment with Sleeping Beauty in a few minutes.”
Cinderella moved forward, but the ugly sisters were before her. The witch, who appeared from
nowhere, cackled again, and goodness know/ when the Prince would have put the slipper on, had not
the Fairy Godmother arrived in a coach drawn by six white mice. In a second the shoe was on Cin-
derella’s foot and she and the Prince were galloping away in the carriage.
David and Dawn gazed after them, and when they looked round again, there was only the Fairy
Godmother, beaming at them. David and Dawn looked at one another. They seemed to be growing
sleepy, for the trees and the flowers were fading away, and the patches of moonlight grew fainter,
and fainter . . . and fainter.
In a second it was day, and they were in a ... .


/ a •« 'a* /Jj> : **» ; ' ’I iff Up
M||p. ' - '& 1 '^ ; ,jr ’ * /' tj c
From under the trees came a tall . slim girl dressed
in rags


Tom Thumb
INY field. It was like a pocket handkerchief, green with wild flowers dancing over it.
Running past it was a little rivulet with a tiny footbridge crossing it. David and
Dawn decided that they wanted to go over it. Far away in the distance were tiny houses,
no bigger than thimbles, covered with gaily coloured grass. There were tiny gardens,
full of flowers and trees. The fruit was no bigger than an apple seed.
Dawn gave a frantic hop. "Oh, David, something’s stung me!”
"You must have trodden on a thistle.”
They both looked down, and there, in the grass, was the smallest little man they
had ever seen. They gazed down on him amazed. "It’s Tom Thumb; it must be,”
Dawn whispered. David squared his shoulders. He felt bigger and broader than ever
before in his life.
A tiny voice came up to them. It sounded from the depths of the earth. "Who are you? What
are you doing on my property? You’re a couple of giants, I think.” It wasn’t a very trustful voice.
"I’m Tom Thumb, you know, and I don’t like strangers as big as you are.”
Dawn skipped for joy. And it nearly caused a tragedy. The earth shook under her, and Tom
Thumb was hurled to the ground. "Oh, dear, I am so sorry,” Dawn gasped. "I’d no idea I could
cause that.”
David picked up the little man ever so carefully and put him on a tiny rock. Tom Thumb drew
himself to his full height and extended a hand. "Pleased to welcome you. Ask me any questions about
my land you like, and I’ll answer you. I’m King of the Little People.”
David and Dawn bowed. "I’d like to know if it were you who stuck something into me,” Dawn said.
"I did,” Tom Thumb replied. "And here’s my sword to prove it.” He held up a sword that
looked like a tiny silver needle.
Dawn wanted to laugh. But instead, she said, "What do you do here, Tom Thumb? Who lives here?”
"All the Little People. All the gnomes and elves, and pixies and dwarfs. If you listen hard, you
can hear the dwarfs way down in the earth beating gold. Listen!”
They listened. Sure enough, there was a muffled noise of little hammers beating on some metal.
"What do they do with it when they have hammered it out?” David said, with interest.
"Oh, they make it into all sorts of vessels and fancy things. They make golden dreams, too. They
pile it all into caves under the earth. And sometimes the gold is found, and they call it treasure.”
"Oh, tell us some more,” Dawn pleaded. "It sounds so wonderful.”
"Then we have pastry cooks. They make honey drops, and golden kisses, and toffee. They make
great big cream horns, like those you always see in the shop window when you are coming home hungry
from school. There are Sandmen who make magic sands, and put them in big bottles with sprinkler tops.
You’ve heard of the Sandman, of course. Well, they store up the sand until the time comes to send it
round the world. It’s so fine that no one can sec it.”
"Oh, David, I’m just thrilled about it all. Do you think he’d take us round and show us the
Mmrkshop of all these people?”
"I’ll show you,” Tom Thumb shouted up to them. He had to shout to make himself heard. "Come on.”
Round the Land of the Little People David and Dawn went. Into the Musician’s shop where the
flute of the Pied Piper of Hamelin had been made . . .where the Emperor of China’s Nightingale had been
given a golden throat . . . into the Kitchen where they could see the Fairy Floss being made. Right
through the smallest, loveliest city in Fairyland. They even saw the Magic Carpet Shop, with the looms
and shuttles all ready for weaving.
Naturally, they had to move carefully to avoid treading on anything, but they got through with-
out a single accident. Dawn thought this marvellous. At home she just couldn’t help falling over
things. Then Tom Thumb brought them back to the little bridge and said good-bye. He waved to
them, his little sword glittering in the sun.
"I like Tom Thumb,” Dawn said sadly. "I wish I could stop there for always. The Land of the
Little People is very nice.”
"Never mind, Dawn,” David said, bravely. "Just look at what’s over here!”


Blue Beard
EHIND them was a castle with a narrow courtyard. "Ugh!” said Dawn, "isn’t it
dusty here?” "You know, Dawn, I don’t like leaving Tom Thumb.” David was
thoughtful. "Silly,” said Dawn. "What are you worrying about that for? You know
that anything can happen in Fairyland.” "Anyhow, I don’t like this place. It looks
creepy, somehow.” David viewed the surroundings with a gloomy eye. "I wish we
hadn t come here. ’ ' And we can’t get out,” Dawn said in a frightened voice. "Look,
the gates are closed!”
So the y w ere. They had nothing else to do but go on. So up the stone steps
they went. "I don’t think these people can ever have any visitors. The steps are so
dusty and dirty.” Dawn noticed that, of course. She had to sweep the steps at home
every morning and shake the mat and put it back right on the same spot where no one would trip up on it.
"Dawn!” David stopped suddenly. "Dawn!”
"What?” Dawn answered a little rudely. Boys were lucky they didn’t have to trouble about steps
or mats .... v
"Dawn, supposing this is Blue Beard’s Castle?”
"What!” Dawn nearly fell over with sheer fright. "Oh, David, it couldn’t be. It couldn’t be.”
back "there ” anyb ° dy around ’ but I think I saw a spot of blood on the ground
Dawn shneked with horror. "Oh, David, we’ll be killed. Our heads will be cut off. Oh, David,
m tightened. Dawn clung to David. David went pale, but he tried to hide the fact by puffing up
cheeks and standing straight up. "I’m not going to move from here,” Dawn said decidedly. "I’d
rather be murdered outside than inside that castle.” 7
IT then the l°n °P ened and a very small, very pretty girl came out. She was dressed in black
and her eyes were full of tears. "Oh, I’m so glad to see somebody,” she cried. "Come in, my dears
and I’ll give you some sherbet and cakes.” C ’ y ’
"You’re wrong about Blue Beard, David,” Dawn shouted for joy. "Come on, let’s go in.’”
Hr,n^° Wed) rT y u W f nd l1 then | ookin B cautiously round. The girl led them into a big room,
shaped like a^ckJ 7 °° j k * ° nly thin S s to be seen were swords. All kinds ... the ones
a whole ctnection C H scimitar s, completely round ones, long thin swords, short fat ones,
a -vsnole collection . . . and every one was stained red!
B e ard^C«tle' ea Tl, S r nk f° , ; er A oeS ' ha<J be '" ri S ht ’ and h “ e tb “ ‘he «*>tre o£ Blue
Different to ,„v d ° She brou S lu thcm fizzy drinks with a sweet smell,
the cTour „rmi„t " ““ d h**”- They ra ‘ h - “ k ‘ *-<="•~ jelly, and they were
other" wives 3 lie*has
other wives he has beheaded. I’m sure he intends to kill me, too.”
a tal/maVwVk 31 I" 0 ™™ 1 tbey beard a horse S aIIo P up in the Castle Yard. A minute later in strode
Spare me. spare me°!” § Fat ‘ ma 3 P iercin B shriek and screamed, "Don’t kill me.
hair I'nd drew k-° 0k °. f . h ' r CricS ' He dragged her to the floor by her beautiful golden
’„ „ d drCW h,S sword - Da '” d g°t up and shouted, "Stop that!” Blue Beard looked up, astounded.
prison for rf” ’“'..r' 0 ”? - You ’ re t a •’•“‘l* ™ have you arrested and thrown into
prison tor the rest of your life if you touch another hair of her head.”
i-This_, e hfsT„ d v d , r ° PPed F3tima and hiS , SWOrd - H <= t-oog fcick his head and roared w.th laughter.
V „ 5 b ° y ’ COme ' nt ° <=“*■« threaten me. Blue Beard. Ho, ho, ho, ha, ha, ha, ha!”
into the room " They do S ° d ‘ dnt of* T° V f ry ta " a “ d stron * men “amp “P the steps
"That’s fixed him ” thev A f Seized Blue Beard > and with one stroke cut off his beard,
nxed h.m, they said. And picking up Fatima, off they went.
in tiW^”'David fa?d Wn l<,oked “ " Tbey 3T b “" ■» b -thers. ,’m so glad they tame
, l av,d ’ 1 dld * ee l so proud of you, standing up to Blue Beard like that- ” n a
her brother’s arm. And David felt just the’ slightest bif proud of himself


The Seven League Boots
UDDENLY the earth seemed to rock and shake under their feet. The trees swayed
and the houses looked as if they would topple over any minute.
"Whatever’s that?” Dawn gasped. "It’s an earthquake, I’m sure.”
"But it can’t be. I’ve never heard of an earthquake in Fairyland.”
"You don’t know everything ,” Dawn pointed out, a little rudely. "Why
shouldn’t Fairyland have earthquakes the same as other places?”
"This isn’t an earthquake, anyhow. It’s somebody walking. He’s coming to-
wards us over the hills.”
Right away in the distance they could see somebody approaching. His shadow
lay in front of him, and it seemed to go for miles ahead.
"What a huge person this is! What big steps he’s taking!” David said.
Before he had finished speaking, a giant stood before him. He had the biggest boots you could
imagine, with soles ever so thick.
Dawn said: "Aren’t they the boots the Puss had?”
The giant’s voice boomed down to them: "What if they are? I’ve got them now, and no one is
going to get them from me. I can go seven leagues in one stride.”
"David,” Dawn whispered. "How far is seven leagues?”
"Twenty-one miles,” David answered.
"Just think. He can do twenty-one miles in one step. No wonder the earth shook under him.
He must just stroll round the world for a morning walk.”
"Hardly that,” laughed the giant, "Still, you can get around and see things this way.”
"Can you, indeed! Well, that won’t be for long,” cackled a horrible voice behind them.
They turned round, and there was the same old witch, complete with broomstick and cat. "Thought
you’d given me the slip. But no, oh, no, you hadn’t. I’ve had a magic self-starter put on this broom-
stick, and I can get to places in half the time.”
David and Dawn jumped for joy. What a marvellous place Fairyland was! You simply had not
the least idea of what was going to happen next.
David and Dawn felt a bit sorry about that self-starter. They rather hoped nothing would upset this
giant, he was so big and powerful, and wore such huge boots. The witch was cackling to herself and
stroking the cat. The giant was stretching out his legs and admiring the glossy sheen on his won-
derful boots.
Suddenly the witch jumped up. "Come, come. Hand over those boots. I want to be getting
along, and I’m tired of sitting on a broomstick. It’s rather awkward to handle with a cat.”
"I’ll not hand them over, so don’t you think I will,” replied the giant
” The giant shook in
"You hand them over, or I’ll turn you into a cabbage. Now then
his boots. The witch came near him.
David and Dawn shivered in fear. What tvas going to happen? Goodness knows what might
have happened if the Fairy Godmother hadn’t arrived just then. The witch was very put out when
she saw her. "Ah, come to take care of your giant, I suppose. But I’ve got him this time, and
he’s going to give me those boots.”
She turned round, but the giant had taken one stride and was away, twenty-one miles. The
witch snarled and, hoisting up her cat, sat herself on the broomstick, touched the self-starter, and went
off to chase him.
them again. They’ll chase each other all over
"Well,” said David, "I don’t suppose we’ll
Fairyland.”


TTy \ \
What a huge person this is! What big steps be is taking!


And round and
wore. Rainbow coloured
the silver spoons, and
-Ay/
thev were both standing alone.
Sinbad the Sailor
HE next morning David and Dawn called on Mr. Grimderson. "We haven’t seen the
sea since we’ve been here.” they complained. "Not seen it!” Mr. Grimderson was as-
tounded. "Just look out that window and you’ll see it.”
The children looked. Through
horse tossing his mane and prancing
"What’s that?”
the window they saw what looked like a white sea
over a golden shore. "David,” gasped Dawn,
It was a wonderful ship, with sails of scarlet silk, and masts of sapphire blue. As
ship was made fast, a strange song came over the water:
"We’ve a cargo of spice, and honey
Apples and chocolates too,
Piles of mince, and yellow quince,
That you eat with a silver spoon.”
"Oh, David, David, do you see who it is? It’s Sinbad the Sailor. That red faced man standing on
the deck.” All the fairies, giants, gnomes and elves recognised him too. They rushed out shouting,
"Sinbad the Sailor!”
"Let’s go, too,” Dawn suggested shyly. "May we, Mr. Grimderson?”
"Of course, of course, but don’t let him carry you off.” So away they went towards the sea that
looked like a blue plate on the china shelf at home, with the lovely ship right down the centre, anchored
to a wharf that sprang out of the waves.
Sinbad nodded down to them. "Come up, Dawn and David, and Mr. Grimderson, but mind the
cargo.”
"He knows our names,” David said to Dawn in whisper, "can you imagine that!” He was so pleased
that he forgot to look out for the cargo, and down he went, amongst heaps of fruits and thin trans-
parent cases that neither David nor Dawn knew anything about yet.
"I told you to mind the cargo,” Sinbad said crossly.
"Don’t be annoyed, please, Mr. Sinbad,” Dawn pleaded. "David is so interested . . . (Dassn liked
that word. It sounded so grown-up).
"Come and I’ll show you the ship.” They followed him round, munching chocolates and the
little cherries Mother said stained all their clothes. Sinbad showed them all the pearls he owned, all the
gorgeous silks he’d picked up in China, showed them the queer plants he’d found in ancient cities, told them
about the Old Man of the Sea, and showed them thin transparent cases that seemed to contain smoky
figures. David and Dawn were very interested. Sinbad even took them down the hold. It was a
wonderful plac It smelt of sealing wax and biscuits with icing on top —a fruity, rich kind of
smell. He too mem up aloft, where the sea looked like a blue pocket handkerchief, with golden
hemstitching. The wind bustled around and twirled round Sinbad. Grey smoke whirled round him.
Smoke seemed to be rising from the thin, transparent cases below.
"What’s that?” Dawn asked
"Oh, that’s the rest of our cargo, the most important part of it. That’s make believe.
"Make believe! Why, we didn’t know you carried it in funny looking cases like those. We ve uften
wondered where it came from.”
"I bring it,” said Sinbad. "All sailors bring it. It’s something we weave and make on starry nights
in foreign ports. It’s always our most important cargo.”
"But doesn’t it float away,” Dawn asked. "It seems so light. Look, it’f cdming, coming right up
1 51 , V
here.”
round and
"It’s wrapping you up, both of you,” Sinbad said. The children looked
round them wound a poppy coloured cloth, the same as Sinbad’s sailors w
merging the sea and shore, the apples and cherries, chocolates and grapes,
Sinbad’s
transparent, smoky cases, into one.
And the next thing David and Dawn knew,


* 0 * m0 ~* r ll rf jpr&SSS&m I -7 A |%jL\
I v ' » M A yryrd §
All the fairies, giants, gnomes and elves recognised him too.
They rushed out shouting "Sinbad the Sailor


Beauty and the Beast
"Just look at this beautiful garden.”
OME here Dawn,” cried David
They seemed to have been wandering round Fairyland all the morning. In
case you’ve never wandered round a fairyland, I must tell you that there are no
ordinary paths. Oh, no! Everything twists and turns, you never know what you’ll
find next. Castles perched in the clouds, with banners high over the towers, quaint
little houses made of honeycomb and wafers, garden paths, opening out . . . into
beautiful gardens, just like the one David found.
"Oh,” sighed Dawn, "I wish these big gates weren’t here. We could go in
then.”
"Nonsense,” said David, bravely. "Let’s try them. Mr. Grimderson said we
could go anywhere.”
The big gates opened to David’s touch. Into the garden went the children, hand in hand. "Oh,
David,” whispered Dawn, "it is like a dream. We might find almost anybody here. Sleeping Beauty
... or Cinderella, after she married the Prince. Even, even a princess.”
"Yes, we might and then, we might find the Beast,” David said wisely. "It seems too lovely
to be just empty.” And lovely it was. Stretching away in the distance, in terraces of flowers an
vines, trees with flowers like golden tassels, drenched in perfume.
"David!” screamed Dawn. "Look, what’s that? What is it, David, there, behind you?” She caught
David’s arm and turned him round. Coming toward them was the ugliest beast in the world. "It’s
the Beast,” David said, with a gulp. Not, of course that he was scared. Well, not very much, anyhow.
The beast came up, quite close. Dawn could feel his hot breath. She buried her head in David’s
coat, and clung on to him. "Good gracious, Dawn,” David said, in an astounded voice. "He’s actua y
crying /”
Dawn looked up. And so he was. The Beast was actually sobbing, the same way as Dawn herself
sobbed when Mother wouldn’t let her sit up and finish her story book. "Didn’t I tell you. This is the
Beast, and this is the garden of Beauty. He’s really a prince is disguise. He’s waiting to be kissed by
Beauty.”
"I’ll kiss him,” said Dawn, eagerly. "Then he needn’t stand there looking so awful.”
"You won’t do,” David said candidly, in the way brothers have. "She’s got to be beautiful, and
she’s got to be a princess.” Dawn felt a little annoyed. After all, not many people would offer to kiss
a nasty brute like that. Even if he were a prince in disguise. Dawn felt inclined to doubt the whole
thing But the next second she was sorry for it. Down the path was coming the most beautiful person
she had ever seen. A Princess, with golden hair that fell past the jewelled band round her waist. Her
gown was of some Eastern silk falling like snow' round her little feet, clad in silver slippers. A rea
Princess! And, wonder of wonders. She went straight over to the Beast, lent over him, and kissed him.
And instead of the Beast, there was a handsome prince. So handsome that Dawn wished suddenly she
was grown up. Up to the children they walked, and the sweetest little voice Dawn or David had ever
heard asked them to walk round the garden. And don’t you think Dawn and David were proud to be
seen with a real Prince and Princess? Of course they were. They walked all round the garden and saw
the white peacocks, flamingoes the colour of coral, flowers tall as houses, with long grasses growing up
between; saw the enchanting white palace set in the terraced lawns, and had afternoon tea. High tea it
was, with cream cakes and jellies and fruits, all served by blackamores with scarlet turbans. It was
too exciting. They might have been there yet, if suddenly Mr. Grimderson hadn’t appeared ... and when
thev looked round, Beauty and the Beast had gone. _


I’ll kiss him,” said Dawn, eagerly; "then he need not
stand there looking so awful.”


part of
a wa
,ne otb
is. There
St. Qeorge and the Dragon
are enjoying yourselves?” "It’s wonderful,” David
"Absolutely wonderful!”
O,” Mr. Grimderson said, "you
1 and Dawn said, both together.
of St. George and the Dragon?” Mr. Grimderson said,
at him. "Know it? Why, of course we do. It’s
"Do you know the story
David and Dawn smiled
history, nearly.”
"Well, take a look out of the window, and you will see somebody you’ll like.”
David and Dawn looked out of the window, and there, coming towards them,
was St. George. He was riding a white charger, and he was clad from head to
toe in silver armour. A red cross was on the front of his armour. He was the
most gorgeous figure David and Dawn had ever imagined.
He stopped when he came level with the children. "Jump up,” he said, "and come with me.’
Away they galloped. Over fields and meadows, past gloomy castles surrounded by moats. They
passed fields with jousts going on . . . men tilting at one another with long, queer looking sticks • • • •
things they had only read about in history books and tales of long ago. Then, out from nowhere, there
came a hideous dragon. He was large and fierce, with scales the size of dinner plates, and each one
polished and shining and ferocious. He breathed blue flames that coiled round him and gave him a
terrifying appearance. David and Dawn were panic-stricken. What would happen to them if St. George
didn’t kill the dragon? They wouldn’t be more than one mouthful to that dragon.
St. George stopped suddenly and said: "Get down and stand still. I want to have plenty of room
to kill this dragon. He’s a very hard dragon, by the look of him.”
The two children slipped off on to a grassy patch, and held on tight to each other s hands. T. he
earth shook under the impact of dragon and St. George. The dragon’s huge tail lashed the earth,
and the knight stood high in the stirrup. His lance gleamed in the sunlight and the on his
armour seemed to get redder and redder. They fought for a long time. First the knight would advance,
and then the dragon would. There was fire and blood everywhere. The dragon was bleeding and
breathing hard, but he still charged the knight, until suddenly the dragon seemed to sit right on the
end of his tail, and then over he toppled, beaten.
The Knight of the Red Cross and Silver Armour came back to them, sweeping off his helmet. They
saw a handsome young man, very fair, with a kind smile.
David saluted him smartly. "That was fine,
sir.”
St. George laughed. "Oh, no, he isn’t the first dragon I’ve killed. He won’t trouble this
the land any longer.”
"Imagine seeing a dragon fight! I can’t believe it even now,” Dawn said excitedly,
pleased too. After all, a dragon fight was far superior to a dog fight. And that was
fellows had seen. ___
David was
.11 the other
"What are we going to do now?” Dawn went on
"Why not wander around and see as much of the country as you can. This is enchanted country,
j j __ j ,
1 rose -red city lay in the hollow, its turret
you know, and there are all kinds of things happening here.”
David and Dawn looked in the distance .... a wonderful rose-re
and towers hidden in clouds.
"Now I’ve got to go,” St. George said, "but you people needn’t.”
"I think we’d better go,” Dawn said. She didn’t like the look of that horrid dragon. There
be others just as fierce.
So David and Dawn said goodbye to him, and when he was out of sight they went on. Tl
dered round until they came to a big wood, with beautiful green trees clustering round in group
were mushrooms growing in thousands. Suddenly Dawn said


-ed „
tall building, with a not.
Red Riding Hood
UST look, David,” said Dawn;
roof there among the trees.”
look at that sweet little house with the coloured
David looked in that direction and saw a tiny little house no bigger than a
doll s, surrounded by flowers. There were petunias growing like a row of exclamation
marks along the fence, roses climbing round the wall . . . everything in spic and
span order. The red gravel on the path was even swept in clean lines from the
edge of the lawn. It had a blue door with a yellow latch nearly as big as itself.
"I Wonder who lives there?” said David. They strolled over towards the fence.
nT° Y a U u ° U^ ht t0 S ° in? ” DaWn asked - " Let ’ s knock, anyhow,” said
Uavid, and he picked up the knocker and banged on the door.
at one r“her! narlinB ki ” d ° f “ V ° iCe " Uft U P the latch and walk in -” The two children looked
door HT’ " here have J we heard tba t before?” But they couldn’t decide, so they pushed open the
or and went ,n. Inside was just as neat as outside. Over in the corner was I huge double bed
very much biribboned." Wl ”‘ e dra P er,es ' Therc was an old lady in bed, wearing a white cap!
"Good afternoon, madam,” David said politely
111, ill; who said I was ill?” snapped the old
"Nothing, nothing, of course,” Dawn soothed,
is three o’clock in the afternoon, and you are in bed.”
"Hmph! I don’t see why an old lady like me
to be. Anyhow, sit down. I’m expecting a visitor.
There was another knock on the door, and in
Hood, m her cloak and hood, and basket over her
"We are sorry to find you ill.”
lady. "What do you mean by calling me ill?”
"David only thought you weren’t well because it
should not be in bed at three o’clock if she wants
When she’s gone I might have time to deal with you.”
walked . . . well, who do you think? Red Riding
arm.
and ° ld W ° man iSn ’* a ” old woman ' Sha ’ s « ba Bad Wolf
Sit still, then,” David answered. His nerves
had to cope with lately. Red Riding Hood walked up
you any better to-day?”
felt a bit upset with all these fierce beasts he had
to the old woman, and said, "Grandmamma, are
worse.”
"Not a bit,” snapped the old woman. "I feel
"But Grandmamma, your voice has changed.
"Cold? No; look at my eyes. Are they any
You haven’t caught a cold as well, surely?”
different?”
Red Riding Hood looked at her eyes, and she cried: "Why, Grandmamma, what big eyes you’ve got.”
sharp as a razor. "Get °r C j’ „'", d ,n aam f a woodman with a big axe, its blade as
It’s a wicked wolf, X wants ,o e aT youd’ 8 Your grandmother.
arrived. He felt a’bh rired™'/ bX/bravXof ‘(J jwa David WaS * lad the woodn ’ J " had
he would have rushed forward. As it was', he felt gLV about4e"«d°l h 6 "" ” a " y r<!a ' da " Ser
throulXhe tk XdX“„ W let%L°e 0d tran’it he take Sn t t s P ra "« ou * of bed and lf“‘
woodman followed him, flashing the'axe angrily in'the air' qU ' t<! wl,i " with W The
and d °\
soft rich voice':""! 1 warn vou m X,!'’w!,h’m"'° r" Calm . ed e ', elr Y bod y> and then she said in her
, come w,th me - I ’"> going to introduce you to somebody.”
a tall buildX XTa The DaW " “ W in fr °"‘ af tb '™


Jack the Giant Killer
ack the giant killer. GiAms^OT
WIT r so v U^rzz!%^ l 'X
£ ing to net «. ona Hut-
ried ifavid and Dawn pushed open the door and went
and photos scattered round. There was a V£B pasting up little bits of paper in
one corner of the room, and somebody and axes, knives,
a big book. All round the room er ® uyOUR CHOICE OF WEAPONS” was
a big book. All round the room were QICE Q p WEAPONS” was
pistols, guns, bows and arrows, catapults, and even a chopper. YOIR CHO
* 'ZZoZ-z zjzo£ ar - the ... *
..Of contse I know,” David said crossly. Really, Dawn tuns tty.ng at nn.es.
;jck the ad G r’t Mt"okL s f °Le y „Ty » Dawn, wondering how m uch he cou.d teasonably ask
her Da P w„ felt flattened at being called Madam. Nobody had even done that before. Madam .. . just as
if she were grown up. ~
"Well, really, nothing. We merely called in to meet you. ** * , tourists.” He pressed
i b U** riant Killer frowned. "Then I’m only wasting my time. You re tourists. v
■ >€££»= 533=552«- - -
thing was so serious. f , t that .. . ta ken your two children away to a
verybad. TlUeelnto it.” He called the young man over .... they whispered together
and then he went out. , . «
lack the Giant Killer came over to them and said, "I must apologise for sending h.m away. But
something urgent cropped up. We .are very busy at present We are having a Sale . cut pr.ces, you
know, and people are getting all their giants killed off whilst they can get a barga.n
David and Dawn started to laugh. They just couldn’t help it. They had never heard anythmg so
funny.
"Do you do very much business. -1 ” Dawn asked, curiously.
"We’re the busiest people in town ...”
The door fell in with a crash, and a huge giant strode into the room. He advanced in a horrible
fashion and said in a voice that made the bean rattle on its satin cushion • -u"You killed my brother . . .
the kindest giant in the world . . . and I’m going to kill you.”
Jack the Giant Killer did not turn a hair. "Name and address of your brother,” he said quickly,
and reached out for a big book off the shelf.
. «.««« f • if
"None of that nonsense,” roared the giant. "You’ve killed your last giant.”
Jack the Giant Killer just picked up a little silver whistle and blew - it. The Giant turned pale green
and turning round, fled out of the room.
"That’s settled him. This is a magic whistle, and he knows it,” Jack the Giant Killer said quietly.
"Now I’ll have to ask you to say good-bye. We are very busy as you can see.”
David and Dawn shook hands wdth him and went down the steps.
They seemed to be getting sleepier and sleepier, and the sky was dark outside


B f I 1 || I
■S I M i \
AH round the room were bung weapons—swords, axes,
ntves, pistols, guns, bows and arrows, catapults, and
even a chopper.


Babes in the Wood
HEY woke up under a pile of leaves. "We’ve been asleep,” David said with a laugh
"Fallen asleep in the woods. I wonder who put all these leaves over us.”
Under a big mushroom they could see a gnome peeping out at them. "Why, I
believe that he did.”
Dawn looked over at him. "Thank you,” she said shyly.
They got up and washed their faces in a brook as clear as crystal that flowed along
singing the quaintest little songs to itself.
"I’m hungry again,” David sighed. "I wish we could find something to eat.” And
just at that moment they saw some strawberries . . . and further along they found
peaches and blackberries, almonds and grapes. "It must be somebody’s garden,” Dawn
suggested.
"Well, let’s hope they don’t mind us taking their fruit. Look, Dawn, there’s a house over there.”
So there was. The sweetest, prettiest house you could ever see. It was white and shining, with
sparkling window panes and odd little chimneys, in fact, it seemed to be a house that only a fairy could
live in. But Dawn suddenly pulled David back. "Don’t let’s go in there, David. I think I saw a ter-
rible old witch behind the curtains.”
David was thinking hard. "Dawn, do you think that that house could possibly be the one Hansel
and Gretel found?”
The mere thought was enough. The two children raced out of the garden, and ran down the
path as fast as their legs could carry them.
"Ugh,” Dawn shuddered. "It’s not very nice when you really meet some of these fairy people. All
of fairyland isn’t as nice as we always thought.”
"I don’t suppose anything is, really, Dawn,” David said. "But the nice things, well, they are nice.”
"Why, David, here’s a pile of leaves, I wonder what’s under it?”
The pile of leaves moved suddenly. And out from under peeped two of the happiest little babies
in the world. They gurgled and beamed at the children, and held out fat little arms so sweetly that
Dawn was just thrilled with delight.
"It’s the Babes in the Woods,” she cried. "David, come here and hold one of them.”
David approached a bit sulkily. They were nice babies, of course, but you couldn’t expect a big
boy like David to want to hold them. What would the fellows say if they ever found out. But once he
had hold of the tiny baby he couldn’t help feeling pleased.
"Aren’t they pets,” said Dawn. "I wonder who covered thevt over?” But they soon found out.
Down from all the trees flew hundreds of birds. Red, and blue, and green and mauve coloured birds,
birds with plumes and beautiful coloured feathers, all with leaves in their beaks.
"They’re waiting to cover the babies up again. I don’t think they like us disturbing them.”
So David and Dawn put the babies gently back on the ground. In a second, the birds had covered
the children with the leaves. And can you guess what happened a moment later? The Wicked Uncle
stepped out from behind a tree! They knew he was the Wicked Uncle because he looked so angry.
"Where are the Babes? You must know. I’ve looked everywhere else but here.”
"We haven’t seen them at all. And if we had we wouldn’t tell you!” David said bravely. The
Wicked Uncle scowled and strode towards David. "I’ll teach you to give me impudence, you puppy!”
But before he could reach David, the birds swooped down and fluffed their feathers in his face so much
that he was nearly choked.
Suddenly the Fairy Godmother appeared. "You won’t meet the Wicked Uncle again, children,”
she said sweetly. "You’re going home.”
She held up a little bottle full of golden liquid. "Drink this,” she said, "and you’ll never quite
grow-up. You’ll always have youth in your heart, and always be able to wander in Fairyland. You
aren’t altogether leaving us. It will give you wings to your mind, give you beauty. Don’t ever forget
us, David and Dawn,” she finished wistfully. "Good-bye.”
It seemed to grow darker and darker, and they were sleepier and sleepier. In a moment they were
home.


*
jf-
.
| h . j*
V /I ■%
V /)■
/ *>V /
Ji v ■ 4*V
jfk /j\^
La ik > /. w&ti
He nos /ar 5 e and fierce, with scales the size of dinner
plates, and he breathed blue flames.
Shepherd &i\ ewmtm Ltd Printers, Yurong Street, Sydney,


V .
I
I .STS
I'
I-
'Pi' i
&
"S'
w__/
ftrf im
U,-' -A ]’lj f
r- I'
x M I
p Q/~2> ik
.W I »
* ,~a.r»- *
: * *
,'r^
11l liU m// ' Jf
- - ' i \ 'v £%
- --v y! t,v>J
is*
w\7i\ if * i * c*#
J» \\ X NM \ j| 1p “N v/|
' MTIU --7 / 1 //>nAr /, j > A^
IL * 1 I
Ns I w v
i W ■, u. ' Ss v "'l7 | '^^tft^
