

MOTHER
dawn
Lj G' ADYS LISTER.


c E. DAVIS
Popular Book Shur •
2C1 BOURK£$T.
'/ LBOURNF
r
• •
'


V
■
>
DAWN MOTHER
I •
%
I ' •


By the same author
LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
LITTLE ROUND HOUSE
THE HOUSE THAT BECKONS
THE SONG GOES ON
JENNIFER STANDS BY
GRANDPUFF AND LEAFY


♦
-
%
'
ft
w
tm.


\ Em % d
Vt £-$&'■ tf'd^pytcg*-' a
v•■ Ji “I - v
-;■ o oV "*- v ~n* c ' V
fcjL d . ■ £x, -gc.7
' r : ] '* ' a *
1 , I < ip _ . 1 ij
Jj_ l_p,
* c- -*~. —■ — • ~j“ —: — C _, _J* 1 . 7 „uA,^


DAWN MOTHER
GLADYS LISTER
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY LONDON


Set up, printed and hound
in Australia by
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
Registered in Australia for
transmission through the
post as a hook


I
TO
PETE AND SPRU
■


» ' / .


3*
38
45
52
59
6 5
72
77
8 5
9i
95
ioi
112
118
121
124
128
CHAPTER
I. WINGS
11. COUSIN ROBERT 5
111. DAWN MOTHER
IV. THE BIG HOUSE 16
V. THE TINY HOUSE BEHIND THE HEDGE -- - 21
VI. THE BOY IN THE PICTURE ... 27
VII. DENIS 31
VIII. EVERLASTING . 38
IX. NAUTILUS 45
X. THE CELLAR - 5 2
XL THE MERMAIDS 59
XII. MINETTA TELLS A STORY 65
XIII. VIRGINIA’S GREAT-AUNT 72
XIV. THE GROTTOS 77
XV. WONDERFUL NEWS 85
XVI. WHAT TO DO FOR THE BEST - - - - Q1
XVII. THE LONG WAY ROUND 95
IXVIII. THE BEACH ------- 101
XIX. THE PICTURE OUT OF THE FRAME - - - 112
MINETTA’S STORIES:
OLD GRANDFATHER WIND - - - - 118
SAD EYES 121
GRANDFATHER WIND IN A RAGE - - - 124
THE DOOR IN THE TREE - - - - 128


*
.
:
\
• ■ ■ i
■
, • -, ,
.
’
f
r
'
'
*
X -


CHAPTER 1
WINGS
There lived in the Big House at the top of the long winding
drive someone who loved to watch the birds, and because
the house was surrounded by trees there were many birds.
Gaily they chirped and called at daybreak, awakening her
whose habit it had been, of late, to draw aside the window
curtains each morning and watch the swift flight of wings
over the trees.
* ‘Wings! Wings!'' she would say, speaking her thoughts
aloud, and thinking of Robert.
Always at this early hour of the day Dawn Eversley
was happy about Robert, because she knew that he flew in
his plane above the clouds at dawn. He would think of
her and say, “Good morning, Dawn Mother/'
She would watch until the rising sun had chased all the
golden light of dawn away, then return to bed to sleep
a little longer.
But one day she was unable to sleep after the early
morning awakening. Her thoughts kept her awake. It seemed
as if she had a riddle to solve. She said to herself over and
over again, “Will I? Won't I? Will I? Won't I?"
Tap, tap, tap! A blue wren tapped on the window.
She was not surprised, because the little bird had been
there before, and she watched him with delight as he clung
with claws to the leadlights, and picked and pecked, pausing


a moment to peep curiously with bright eyes, turning his
head this way then that with quick movements.
“Five children 1“ Dawn held up her left hand and
counted off each finger with her right. “One, two, three,
four, five.”
Tap, tap, tap, tap, tap! came in answer.
“It's easy enough to count five, but what about feeding
and dressing and caring for five growing children?”
There was a flutter of blue wings and the little bird
flew off, as if he had given his answer and had nothing more
to say.
“Well, that seems to settle it.” Dawn yawned sleepily,
but she argued with herself a little longer before sleeping.
“It's all very well to say Ell have them all to live here,
but will that solve the problem? Is this house safe enough?
I must remember that they came all the way across the
world to find safety. Can I give it to them? I wonder, I
wonder! And Minetta starts school again to-day. It really
is time to discuss this with her.” She turned over, and in a
little while dozed off to sleep.
Tap, tap!
At first she thought the blue wren had come again.
“May I come in?” It was Minetta’s voice, and the next
moment she was in the room.
“Good morning, Dawn Mother! Do you know what
day it is?”
“Of course I do. It's the first day of school, and the
beginning of your second year of school in this new land.
Why, Eve been awake since dawn thinking about it.”
“And did the dawn say, ‘Good morning, Dawn'?”
“Little stupid!” Dawn smiled, and added, “Eve been
thinking of something else, too-something that’s worrying




me a great deal, and you are sensible enough to be told
about it. Em afraid that the very thing you and your little
sisters came to Australia to avoid may happen here, and
that you may all be in the same predicament as before/'
‘‘l won’t have to go away from you, will I?” Minetta
said, her voice, trembling a little as she climbed on to the
big double bed and took up her favourite position at the
end of it, opposite her adopted mother, and thinking as
she did so of the big double bed in her home in England,
where a similar discussion had taken place when she and
her four little step-sisters had talked about Australia. Aus-
tralia had been as far away then as England was now, and,
instead of Dawn’s voice, she seemed to hear Janine’s ‘‘Where
is Australia?”
‘‘Right down under, but you have to go all the way
round the world to get there.”
‘‘And we are going there?”
‘‘Of course we are! We’re going on a ship that will take
weeks to get there.”
Minetta’s thoughts turned to the long sea voyage, with
its excitements, its discomforts, and its length which had
seemed neverending. There had been many ports. The ship
had arrived at each by a roundabout route, and none of the
passengers ever knew when or where the next one would
be. And how strange it was, when at last they had arrived
in Australia—the place they had looked forward to for so
many weeks—that instead of feeling glad they had, at first,
been a little frightened, because it was the beginning of a
new life for them all, and because the ship had come to
feel like home and there was to be another parting.


CHAPTER 2
COUSIN ROBERT
Now we shall go back a little. In England, whenever there
was something to talk over, or one of the family needed
comfort through illness or hurts, the big double bed in the
nursery at Sunningdale, where Minetta and her baby step-
sister Judith slept together, became a kind of meeting place.
Mary slept in a single bed on the other side of the room,
and Janine and Patsy had a bed each in a room across the
passage-way. The double bed, however, seemed to belong
to all.
"I don't know anything about Australia, except that
Great-uncle Eversleigh lives there/' Minetta said.
“Tell us about him."
“He’s very old now. When he was young he was tall
and handsome and very rich, and he gave money to every
one, and he’s going to leave a great deal to my daddy."
“Suppose he’s given it all away?"
Oh, he couldn t do that, because the more he gives away
the more he gets. That’s what he said."
“Where does he get it from?"
“From Australia. There’s gold everywhere in Australia.
You just dig it out of the ground."
I m glad we re going there. I’ll get some for mummy,
and she’ll be able to buy everything she wants."
“Tell us more about Great-uncle Eversleigh."
“A long, long time ago, when my great grandmother


and great-auntie were young girls, he just walked into their
house one day and said, 'Em your cousin from Australia.
And they didn't know him, because he'd gone to Australia
when he was a little boy, and lived there until he was a
grown-up man. And when he saw my great-auntie he fell
in love with her—and I don t wonder, she was so lovely.
I've seen a picture of her. She had curly hair piled up high,
and little curls hanging at the back of her ears, and she
had laughing eyes. They were married, but they didn t live
happy ever after, because before there was any time to be
a ‘for ever after' my great-aunt died, and Great-uncle Evers-
leigh was broken-hearted and vowed he would never
marry again. That's why he is going to leave all his money
to us. And he's nearly a real uncle, because my great-aunt
and he were cousins. He had no other relations.
“And now your daddy is lost,'' said Janine.
“Only missing," Minetta corrected, “and that's quite
different, because it's hopeful, and he's sure to be found."
“I wonder what it will be like, going so far on a ship.
I wish mummy could come too, Judith sighed.
“Minetta's coming, and she’s like a mother. Besides, it's
for our good. Mummy says so and she wants us to go, and
I think it's exciting," said Janine.
“I wish we had a rich great-uncle. We haven't got any
relations in Australia," Patsy said.
“Great-uncle Eversleigh is the only one I have, but he's
sure to be glad to meet you all, and perhaps he’ll count you
his relations as well as me, because he hasn't any others;
and he might leave his money to you, too. Perhaps we
could live with him: he's sure to have a great big house."
“Have you written to him?"
“I don't know his address."


“Send it to Australia/' Patsy suggested.
“Australia is a big place. Eve looked on the map. It's
bigger than England."
“It must be very big/' said Mary, opening her eyes wide.
“Aren't you children in bed yet?" A tired, sad-looking
little woman stood at the doorway.
“Please, can't we stay up just a little longer, mummy
darling?" Janine asked. “Minetta is telling us about her
Great-uncle Eversleigh, the only relation she has in Aus-
tralia—and he's rich. When we go to Australia won't we
have any relations there?"
Mother shook her head. “What am I going to do
without you all?" she sighed.
“You've got Tony, and he'll keep you from being too
lonely."
Many people said that Minetta's step-mother had so
many children, “she didn't know what to do", but that
Minetta, although only a year older than the eldest, did
know what to do. She mothered all her little step-sisters,
and it was a pity, they said, to see one so young with
a head so wise, and no one, they declared, had ever known
a lonely child heart to be cured of loneliness by the large
family her father took into his care when he married a second
time, except a child as unselfish as Minetta.
When it was decided that Australia would be safe from
air raids, the tired bewildered little mother had consented
to send her family there, despite which she constantly said
“What am I going to do without you all?" and wondered,
as the time drew near for the children's departure, if she
were doing the right thing, and now, as the children dis-
cussed the coming event, began to realize, as if for the first
time, that she was very soon to be without her large happy


family. Standing in the doorway, staring with loving eyes
and a sinking heart, she was startled by a sharp rap at the
front door. , , , Tt .
“Who can that be?” She put her hand to her heart. It
beat rapidly, hopefully. Turning, she walked quickly down
the hall to the front door. “Perhaps it’s good news. Perhaps
Minetta’s father has been found,” she thought quickly.
The little girls sat quietly. They were listening and
hoping, too. They heard a masculine voice say, “Does
Minetta Harvey live here?” And up went their hopes and
their spirits. But the next words they heard sent them
crashing down again and set them wondering: “lam Robert
Eversley—a cousin from Australia.
A cousin-not a great-uncle! How came that?
“Yes. Come in.” Mother’s voice was heard inviting the
stranger in, then the sound of heavy footsteps following
mother’s light ones along the hall to the bedroom doon
The little girls hastily retired under the bed-clothes and hid
their heads-all except Minetta, who was at the wrong end
of the bed and had to sit up straight and in full view of a
tall soldier—an airman, who appeared at the bedroom door-
way towering behind mother.
“There she is.” Mother pointed to Minetta.
Four heads appeared over the top of the bed-clothes,
and four pairs of eyes stared curiously. This so surprised
the airman that he laughed aloud. It was a merry laugh, and
all the little girls sat up and laughed too, and pointed to
Minetta. Walking quickly to the bed, Cousin Robert took
the hand nearest to him and shook it.
“How do you do, Minetta?” he said.
“No, no, that’s Minetta.”
Three other hands pointed. Robert took one of these


and shook it, causing more laughter, and when this hand
was hastily pulled away to point again, he seized the next
one. Each little girl was mistaken for Minetta before Cousin
Robert found her. When he did he said, “How do you do,
Princess?” and stooped over and kissed her.
Minetta’s grey eyes, which were often blue and some-
times green, gazed seriously at her newly found cousin.
When he called her “princess”, her eyes crinkled at the
corners and seemed as blue as the sea.
“Princesses never have red hair!” she said, shaking her
curls.
Robert looked thoughtfully at Minetta’s copper-
coloured hair. “If I had anything to do with it they would,”
he said. “And they’d all have freckles on their noses, too!”
Minetta put both hands in front of her face and shook
her head. “No, not freckles,” she said. “Princesses have skin
like alabaster, or as white as driven snow.”
' 4
“I hear you are all going to Australia. My mother wishes
to have one of you to live with her, and as Minetta is a
kind of cousin I think she’ll have to be the one.”
There was consternation among all the little girls.
“Couldn’t she take all of us? We want to be with Minetta.”
“The house is big enough to take you all,” Robert said,
“but I doubt if my mother could look after you. There are
so many of you.”
“Minetta looks after us!”
“That’s helpful, but I think my mother just wants a
daughter. Having only ever had one son, she couldn’t man-
age a large family.”
Cousin Robert then sat on the side of the bed and talked
to the little girls about their father, whom he had met in
a camp in England. He had heard, from him, about all of


them. He told them of the letters he had received from their
father before he had become one of the missing, and also
of those from his own mother far away in Australia, in
which she had hinted at adopting Minetta.
Then he told them wonderful things about Australia,
especially about the blue sky and the bright sunshine, and
the beaches where long blue waves with white crests rolled
up on to wide shores.


CHAPTER 3
DAWN MOTHER
Exciting things happened from the day when Cousin
Robert appeared until Minetta and her four little step-sisters
went away on a ship that sailed for Australia. After a long
voyage they reached their destination. On arrival they were
taken to a place with other evacuee children, and waited in
a long crowded room for Robert’s mother who was to meet
them.
During the long voyage Minetta had felt important,
and a little different from the other children, because she
was the only one among them who was to be adopted. Many
were going to relatives, others to friends and most of them
to strangers, but all would be returning when the war was
over. She alone was to stay behind and live in Australia.
When daddy was found, she was sure he would come
to Australia too.
There was a great hubbub in the room as the children
were greeted by relatives, friends and guardians. Minetta’s
four little step-sisters clung tearfully to her, realizing that
they were to part from one another; and for the moment
Minetta lost her feeling of importance and wished that she
were not being adopted-that Great-uncle Eversleigh would
suddenly appear and claim her. Then she would tell him
about her step-sisters, and he would say, 4 'Minetta Harvey,
come and live with me. I am old and lonely. You may bring


your sisters too. It isn't right that any of you should be
parted."
A voice interrupted her dreams—a lovely voice with a
husky note in it. "Are you Minetta Harvey?"
"Yes."
"I am Dawn Eversley, your new mother. You met
Robert?"
Minetta nodded and stared. She had expected someone
quite different, for here was a lady lovely and fresh-looking,
not worn and tired as mothers often were. Minetta did not
speak for a moment. She had a strange habit of weaving
facts into whimsical ideas, and was saying to herself, "I have
had three mothers and only one father. First I had a real
mother (I can’t remember her), then I had a step-mother
(who had so many children), and now I have a new mother
(and she is young and lovely and her name is Dawn)!"
"New mother," she said softly, "Ell always want to
call you Dawn Mother."
"Why? Did Robert tell you he called me that?"
"No, but because you ate new and lovely-and dawn is
,> * 1
too.
Dawn Eversley laughed. “You strange little person!
That is a wonderful compliment, and it’s quite the loveliest
idea.” She turned to the little girls standing by, close to
Minetta.
“Are these your step-sisters? Robert wrote me about the
large family of girls. I wish I could take all of you home
with me.”
Minetta’s heart gave a great leap. “Oh, could you?”
Dawn Eversley shook her head. “Much as I'd love to,
I think it’s impossible. Everything’s been arranged, and
your sisters are going to very kind people. I’m sure. Besides,


I wanted a daughter. I don't think I could manage five. I
wanted someone to take Robert's place while he's away.
What are your sisters' names?"
"Janine, Patsy, Judith and Mary."
"What lovely names! And how old are they?"'
"Patsy and Janine are eight and nine—l'm ten, you
know—and Judith and Mary are five and six. Our brother
Tony is two, and he stayed at home with mother. We'll
miss him. My father went to fight in France, and he hasn’t
come back. We don't know where he is."
"Well, you certainly are a large family," Dawn said
quickly.
The little girls blinked back their tears and stood staring
at Minetta's new mother. Then Janine (the eldest of the
four) held out a small hand to be shaken, and each of the
others did also, in turn. Janine had blue eyes, and brown
hair that fitted closely around a fair-skinned oval face; Patsy
had the same, but was shorter and plumper, and had golden
lights in her brown hair. The two little girls had flaxen
hair and blue eyes.
Dawn knelt down and put her arm about Judith and
Mary, as they stood close together holding hands, and kissed
them both. "They’re too young to leave their mother," she
thought, and tears came to her eyes. "You may all come to
stay with Minetta very often," she said in the low voice with
the husky sound. This attracted Minetta, who liked things
that were different, and certainly her new mother’s voice
was different from any she had ever heard.
"Have your sisters met their guardians yet?" Dawn
asked Minetta, thinking delightedly, "I’m going to love my
new daughter."
"Not yet."


“Oh, here they are.”
A lady and gentleman hurried through the crowd, hot
and ' smilin g with relief at the children, said,
V ;™ ° f y° u children are Janine and Patsy? We are Dr
and Mrs Leeton.”
Minetta pushed Janine and Patsy forward. “Here they
. are. 7
The two children shook hands shyly with Dr and
rs Leeton, and all of the others politely did the same.
I am Mrs Eversley, ’’said Dawn to Dr and Mrs Leeton.
I 3m taking Minetta.” She put her hand around Minetta’s
shoulder. Ive fallen in love with her little sisters, too,
wr-t. f y 3re feellng sad about Parting from one another.
WC 'l. a^. t0 . arrange for them all to as often as
possible. Who is taking the two little ones?”
wt ,-^ r and rs Sweetapple, who live in a seaside town.
We live m one too.”
“Mr and Mrs Sweet apple? Judith and Mary are sure
to be happy with them.” said Minetta. "Is it a long wav
from us. Dawn Mother?”
, ° ur hom e is in a suburb on this side of the har-
hour, Dawn answered.
“Aren’t we going to be near Minetta?” The two small-
est girls, their eyes filling with tears, clung to Minetta, who
quickly knelt down and, putting her arms around them
tried to comfort them.
111 find Great-uncle Eversleigh, and we’ll all be
together, she whispered. "And besides Newcastle is sure
to beexciting, and Mr and Mrs Sweetapple sound delicious.”
The two children smiled through their tears, and before
t ey had time to feel sad again one of the escorts from the
ship joined the little group.


“Mr and Mrs Sweetapple are here/’ she said, and
whisked the two youngest children away.
“Say good-bye to Minetta," Mrs Leeton said to Patsy
and Janine.
Minetta swallowed hard, and struggled to keep back the
tears that would come to her eyes. Janine and Patsy, who
were clinging to her, wept a little.
“It’s all right/' she whispered. ‘Til try to find Great-
uncle Eversleigh."
Dr and Mrs Leeton shook hands with Minetta. “You
may come to see Patsy and Janine as often as you like,"
they said.
The next moment Minetta was alone with her adopted
mother.
“I think we'll go now, darling," said Dawn, and, before
Minetta had time to realize that she had parted from her
sisters, she was in a car beside her new mother, driving
through strange streets.


CHAPTER 4
THE BIG HOUSE
When Minetta drove in the car through the wide open gates
t h ° me wV P th£ long slo P ing d ™ unSef an
«chway o f trees, she felt a vast difference between her new
home and the one she had left in England. Dawn stopped
the car under a wide portico in front of the entrance to the
ouse and sounded the horn, and Minetta sat still. “My
SSSt “ * ' iCb “ Grea ‘-““' *-*>> •” 2
tall ' Ta V this SUitcase ’ Bridget ’” Mrs Eversley said to a
is Minftta 3 ’’ W ° man aPPe3red 31 the “This
I m glad to meet you, miss,**
Thank you, I am too.” And stepping down from the
- t me . tta was sur P ns ed when Dawn drove away in it
“No f MW 7 n iTu m .° ther g ° ing aWay she said.
be back in ™ n ° f S JUSt g °- ne t0 garage the car - She’ll
Bridver The garag< ; 1S at the baG k of the house.’’
Bridget led the way into a large square hall, then uo a
wide sfcunase to a hallway above. Minetta stared about her
The house was as big as a castle.
Opening a door, Bridget showed Minetta into an
extremely large »om. “This is you, bedroom." she said
here.’’ ' “ d Mmetta ln a faint voi ce. “I’ll get lost in


Putting the suitcase down, Bridget said, “You’ll soon
feel at home. Get your things off and come downstairs for
a cup of tea with your new mother.” She smiled, and left
the room murmuring, New mother! Calls her ‘new mother’
in a loving way-is quite at home with her already. And no
wonder! The mistress is like that-makes every one happy.”
Minetta walked to the window and, looking out, caught
her breath with surprise. Over tree-tops she saw a view of
the harbour where, only a few hours before, the ship which
had brought her and the children so far had glided quietly
into still blue waters at the end of its long journey. Then she
looked down, through the tree-tops, to lawns and terraced
gardens.
Turning next to look at her bedroom, she caught her
breath again. The green carpet made her think of green
foliage, and the white walls and white furniture of apple-
trees and apple blossom.
“It’s too lovely!” she murmured, looking about her
as she took off her hat.
Then she brushed her hair, and waited until the voice
with the husky sound called, “Minetta, Minetta! Come
down, darling! There’s a cup of tea waiting for you.”
Walking from the bedroom to the hall and looking
curiously about her, Minetta noticed many doors and had
glimpses of many bedrooms. In my last home there were
too many children and not enough rooms,” she thought.
“In this one there are too many rooms and not enough
children. There’ll be a bedroom for each one of them when
they come to stay with me. What a pity my new mother
isn’t Great-uncle Eversleigh! Then they could all come and
live with me for ever.”


She walked slowly down the stairs and, coming to the
last step, stood a moment wondering where to go next.
“Here I am,” again the voice with the husky notes.
“Come and sit here. You must be longing for a cup of tea.”
Dawn was sitting in a deep lounge under wide windows,
beside a low round table with a tea tray set on it. She pointed
to a chair beside the table.
“What a big house!” said Minetta in an awed voice,
walking slowly towards the chair.
“It’s called the Big House, and it’s one of the oldest in
Australia. There are really very few old houses in this part
of the world-not as in England—and even those few are
not very old really—hardly a hundred years.”
Minetta sat down on the chair, near the tea tray, and
waited while Dawn poured tea.
“Milk? Sugar?”
Minetta nodded. “Yes please. I wish I could find Great-
uncle Eversleigh!” she said with a sigh.
“Who's he, darling?”
“He's my great-uncle. And he's the only other relation
we’ve got in Australia, and he's very rich, and he hasn't any
children or any one else to leave his money to, so we thought
perhaps he might like to meet us.”
“I'm quite sure he'd like nothing better,” said Dawn
smiling. “In what part of Australia does he live?”
“We're not quite sure, but we hope it's New South
Wales.”
“And what else do you know about him?”
“He's tall and handsome, and he just gives his money
away, and buys presents for every one.”
“Isn't there a Great-aunt Eversleigh?”
“She died when she was young. That's why great-uncle


went back to Australia. And the name is spelt ‘-leigh'—not
like yours, '-ley'.”
“How long is it since he came back to Australia?' 1
“Years and years."
“That will make it very difficult to find him. He must
be very old. He may even be dead!"
“Oh no, he can't be," Minetta said with conviction.
“He's going to leave his fortune to daddy, and we haven’t
got it yet."
“Supposing he's married again?"
“He'd never do that,"-Minetta shook her head em
phatically-“because he said he would never marry again,


and that he was going to leave his fortune to his wife's
family, and daddy is the only one left/'
Dawn Eversley smiled at the little girl. '‘Oh I see, I see,"
she murmured. “It's lovely to have something like that
to look forward to. I don't know of any one who is going
to leave me a fortune."
"I was just thinking that perhaps you have one—that
perhaps every one in Australia has one."
"What makes you think that?"
"All this." Minetta waved her hand, taking in the whole
house. "And Great-uncle Eversleigh said, when he gave his
money away, ‘There's plenty more where that came from'
and he meant Australia."
"Did he indeed? I wish it were true."
"Isn't there gold to be dug out of the ground?"
"In some places, yes; but it isn't got very easily."


CHAPTER 5
THE TINY HOUSE BEHIND THE HEDGE
Minetta did not have time to feel lonely for the first few
days in her new home. Dawn took her for many outings to
wonderful beaches with long waves breaking on white sand,
and to bays with small waves lapping the sandy shores, and
for trips in ferry boats around the harbour.
She was bewildered by the names of many of the places.
She was also bewildered at the amount of shopping that had
to be done, for new mother discovered that the little girl
had outgrown most of her dresses and needed a whole new
outfit. Minetta had never dreamt that a small person like
herself could need so many things. There were dresses for
all occasions—wet weather, cold weather, fine weather, day
wear, evening wear, and even picnic wear. And then there
were presents.
“She's really like Great-uncle Eversleigh,” Minetta
thought. “Every one in Australia must be rich."
Quieter days followed these exciting ones, and Minetta
had many hours in which to find her own amusement.
Dawn Mother was busy during much of the day. Minetta
understood that her time was taken up with war work and
Red Cross Committee meetings, and other uninteresting
but important things. But the strangeness of her new sur-
roundings made her feel lonely and a little homesick.
She missed all her sisters, and walked from room to


room amusing herself by choosing a bedroom for each of
them. The one she chose for Judith was next to her own,
because she was the baby. It had the same lovely view of
the harbour. It was some time before she could decide about
Patsy's and Janine’s rooms; then she chose two on the other
side of the hall, because they were together. Some of the
windows overlooked the trees and the long drive, and Patsy
loved trees—especially tall ones she could climb. The other
windows overlooked a garden, and Janine loved gardens.
A small stairway off the first landing led to a landing above.
Here Minetta discovered another room. It was attic-shaped,
and from the windows there was a surprising view of the
harbour and, far beyond this, of the ocean. Mary was
adventure-loving, and this room suited her exactly, so it
was allotted to her.
Minetta was never lonely in the garden. The house was
set on the side of a hill, and there were steps down to terraced
gardens. A driveway curved upwards from wide gates, and
little pathways ran off this to interesting nooks and corners.
At the back of the house a tall cliff towered, and creepers
fell over the rocks. The front garden was terraced down a
steep slope to a level lawn. In the centre of the lawn there
was a fountain, with fish-like creatures spouting water from
wide-open mouths.
At the end of the driveway, tucked among trees and
behind a tall hedge, Minetta noticed the roof of a small
house. She could see the chimney and, choosing a place where
the foliage was thin, she pulled the branches aside and peeped
through. Much to her surprise, she saw a beautiful garden
with beds of brightly coloured flowers, and there was an
old man among the flowers.


He was tall and slender. He had white hair, for all the
world like a silver mist about his head. He was very, very old.
He stood near a tall tree, his head close to the white trunk,
the spindly branches of which towered high above him. He
stood as if listening. Suddenly he wrung his hands, and tears
fell down his cheeks.
“Oh dear! That might be Great-uncle Eversleigh-and
he’s still got a broken heart,’’ said Minetta to herself.
“Although he should be very happy with all those beauti-
ful flowers. Perhaps I shouldn’t be peeping at him. Maybe
it’s a secret sorrow. He is not rich enough to be Great-uncle
Eversleigh.’’
She turned quickly and hurried away, but the thought
of the old man worried her, and she went to Bridget.
“Why should any one be sad in a lovely garden?’’ she
asked.
“That I couldn’t tell you,’’ Bridget replied. “You do
have fancies.’’


Later, at dinner-time, Minetta asked Dawn Mother the
same question. .
“Why do you ask such a strange question r Uawn
laughingly asked.
“I saw an old man in a lovely garden. I peeped through
the hedge and saw tears fall down his cheeks.”
“Oh, that's Gardener. He and Robert were great friends.
He knew Robert’s father and loved him too. Robert doesn t
remember his father.” ~
“That’s like me. I don’t remember my real mother.
"Gardener has been here as long as any one can remem-
ber, and he loves his garden so much he certainly shouldn’t
be sad.”
“I wonder why he is. What is his name?”
“I always call him Gardener. I never think of his real
name.” . . , ,
Dinner-time to Minetta was the nicest time of the day.
Bridget waited, and Minetta felt very important sitting at
one end of the long table opposite Dawn Mother and being
waited upon as if she were grown-up. She was allowed to
talk, except when there were visitors; then she had to sit
quietly and listen. .
She was a little shy of visitors, and not interested in
grown-up people’s conversation, especially when it was all
about war and war work, committee meetings, and other
such subjects. And dinner-time was longer when there were
visitors—time passed slowly. Staring about her once, she
found something that interested her greatly: a large painting
of a little boy. It hung over the mantelpiece opposite to her,
and as she stared it seemed to her as if the boy stared back.
He had a strange expression in blue piercing eyes, and
although he seemed to look at her, he also gazed beyond


and far away. After that, the oftener she looked at the
picture the more fascinated she grew.
‘‘What’s the name of the little boy in the picture over
the mantelpiece in the dining-room?” she asked finally.
‘‘His name is Denis,” Dawn told her
‘‘Why does he look like that?”
‘‘Like what?”
‘‘As if he saw things that no one else can see?”
Dawn laughed. ‘‘Perhaps he does-who knows? There’s


a strange story about him. He was lost or kidnapped by
someone. No one knows what exactly/'
“Oh, tell me about it."
“He was a lonely little boy, and not very happy.
Children should all be happy."
“Oh, please tell me all about him."
“Some day I will. It's a long story, and rather sad."
Minetta thought about Denis a great deal, and often
stared at the picture.


CHAPTER 6
THE BOY IN THE PICTURE
Every morning when Minetta awoke, she jumped out of
bed and ran to look from her bedroom window, and every
day there was.a different picture to see.
Sometimes the water was like a mirror reflecting every-
thing—the ferry boats, the big liners, and even the little
islands. Usually it was blue, and the clouds above it were
very white. “I suppose the clouds have been dipped in the
blue water to make them white/' said Minetta to herself.
Sometimes the water was grey and ruffled, sullen and
cross-looking; other times it was grey and still, with deep
long reflections.
At the same hour every morning Minetta knocked at
Dawn Mother's door-“ Good morning, Dawn!"-and she
laughed, because it was lovely to say “Good morning,
Dawn!" And, after a sleepy kiss from Dawn, Minetta
would run to visit the other rooms. Opening the door of
each in turn, she would say, “Good morning, Judith!-
Good morning, Janl-Good morning, Patsy!'' Then quickly
up the small flight of stairs, “Good morning, Mary! Please
may I look out of your window?" And peeping, she would
find the world rimmed with the blue ocean, and perhaps a
ship on the horizon-maybe two.
At breakfast-time, which she spent alone because Dawn
Mother liked a breakfast tray in her bedroom, Minetta sat


at the end of the long table and, looking up at the picture
of Denis, talked to him for company.
After breakfast she went to get her flowers, which she
then arranged for the bedrooms she had chosen for her little
sisters.
Dawn Mother was always busy in the mornings because
the telephone rang frequently, and there were many people
she had to speak to, and there was little time for talking to
Minetta, although she said each day, *1 mean to take you
to the beach just down here as soon as I get a minute/'
“Can’t I go alone?”
I d rather take you. Perhaps I’ll have time to-morrow.”
And Minetta, staring from her window each morning
at the distant water, longed to get closer to it, and wondered
if to-day would be the day.
“Will you have a minute to go to the beach this
morning?”
“To-morrow perhaps, darling; if not, some day soon.
And when you re able to swim, you can go alone every
day.”
“Dawn Mother is very busy,” Minetta said to Denis
in the picture. “I’m glad I’ve got you to talk to, but I do
wish I knew all about you.”
It was several days before Minetta heard the story of
Denis. She contented herself by weaving fanciful ideas about
him, until one evening when Dawn was late for dinner,
and Minetta sat at the end of the long dining-room table
waiting for her. There were lighted candles in silver candle-
sticks reflected in the polished surface; a bowl of flowers
was reflected too. There was no other light in the room.
The candles cast flickering lights about the room and
on to the gold frame around the picture of the little boy.


Minetta discovered that from whatever angle she looked,
the boy still seemed to be looking at her. Leaning first to
one side of the table then the other—even leaving the table
and running from one end of the room to the other—she
found that his eyes followed her. As she sat at the table
again, the flickering lights surely made the little boy come
to life. His eyes lost their sadness and his lips seemed to
smile.
“I wish you could come down out of the picture,” said
Minetta. ”1 haven’t any one young to play with. It would
be rather fun to play together.” Then she noticed a reflection
in the table, and the picture of the little boy was in the
polished surface. Minetta talked to the reflection, and had
an exciting game of make-believe.
A footstep sounded, and Dawn Mother walked into
the room and stood still for a moment. “Who were you
talking to?” she said.
Minetta ran to meet her. “I was talking to Denis.”
“Oh dear, have you been waiting long? You must have
been very lonely, darling. I must be more punctual. You
need companionship.”
“No, no!” Minetta said, looking at the reflection in the
table, which was there until Dawn sat down. Then it dis-
appeared, and her reflection was there instead.
Minetta looked up at the picture. Denis’s eyes seemed
sad again, and his expression wistful. “Why is he so sad?
Please tell me,” she said, pointing to the picture.
Dawn Mother turned to look. “He was a lonely little
boy,” she said. “He had a selfish father who paid him little
attention, and a tutor who was stern and cruel to him. He
had no children to play with. No mother to love him.”
“No wonder he looks unhappy!”


‘Til tell you about him some day/'
Oh, please tell me now. ‘Some day' never comes."
Dawn laughed. "When we've finished dinner Eli tell
you. 111 have a few moments to spare before Igo out, so
you 11 find that ‘some day' has come after all."
Minetta waited patiently, and, when dinner was over,
Dawn went to a big armchair facing the picture and, sitting
in it, pointed to a stool near by. Minetta sat on the stool
and stared at the picture while listening to Denis's sad
though mysterious and exciting story. She wondered why
his riding habit should be careless-looking, his collar open
at the neck, his long, tight-fitting trousers turned up and
his feet bare. P
“He looks rich, so why is he barefooted?"
‘‘l don't understand. Perhaps it was the artist's idea."


CHAPTER 7
DENIS
"The story begins a long, long time ago," said Dawn—
"long before this painting was found. It was found in one
of the cellars of this house. You know where the cellar is?"
"Yes." Minetta nodded. "I found it after Fd explored
all the other rooms. It isn’t like a cellar; it’s more like a
passage-way."
"It was a passage-way once, to several cellars; and it
was in one of these that the picture was found. No one
knew whom it belonged to or why it was left there, or even
who painted it. However, the name Denis written under-
neath it recalled the old story—a sad and tragic family story.
That little boy is Robert’s great-uncle, and yours too. So
you see, you have two great-uncles."
"Oh!" cried Minetta. "Where is he?"
"He’s never been seen or heard of since he was as old
as you see him there."
"Didn’t he ever grow up?"
"That is what no one knows."
"Oh, why? Please tell me."
"Many, many years ago he lived in this house. In those
days there were only sailing ships, and it took many months
to get out to Australia-not only weeks as it took you, or
days as it would take Robert if he flew. Robert’s great-
grandfather was a pioneer, and Robert is too."


It seemed like years for us to get here,” said Minetta.
- j j SUpp ° se u dld ’ because you came a long way
ound and zigzagged here and there. But you can imagine
verv l,°rr| g “7 151 have seemed on a ship where there was
very little comfort, and every chance of being delayed by
storms and even becalmed It must have seemed centuries.
Howevpr C n S r 1 apartlcularl y voyage for a child,
rem.pj f Dems s father was coming to Australia at the
request of a wealthy uncle, and as Denis’s mother had died
chiU h -tU* S a I™! Baby ’ his father had no one to leave the
ch Id with and had to take him. Women passengers on board
helped to care for the little boy because-so the story goes-
tralfa^evenless!”^ 6 ** U Un P ° n arHval in Aus '
“He wasn't a very nice father."
„ .3Y e11 ’ was y°nng and thoughtless, and had the idea
had l f he A n 1 had De t nis - he ’ d still have had his wife. He
had loved her very dearly, you see, and she had died when
Denis was born. However, that has nothing to do with the
tory, except that it shows you why Denis was a sad and
forlorn chdd The uncle who had sent for Denis’s father
totheZh 7T ed u in Australia ' and left all his money
to the father and this house too. And it was just as it had
been while the uncle had lived in it. There were servant
horses in the stables and grooms to care for them and
gardeners to look after the garden, which was famous for
all the trees and shrubs in it that had been brought from
other countries. • 5
‘‘Surely Denis must have been happy, then?”
He should have been, but he was neglected more than
f . r ' His Hther, not used to wealth, thought of nothing
but selfish pleasures, and entered into a life of gaiety. He




entertained gay people, and left his child to the care of the
man who had been the uncle’s secretary and who now
became Denis’s tutor—though the child was hardly old
enough to have any one but a nurse to care for him.”
“What did the tutor do?”
“He gave Denis lessons, and punished him if he didn’t
do them properly. He wouldn’t allow him to leave the house
or to have any freedom at all.”
“Not even to play in the garden?”
“I suppose he could do that, but he was never allowed
to go far away. The garden was as big as a park, and he
could easily have been lost in it. There were no other houses
within miles then—not one to be seen anywhere.”
Minetta looked toward the windows. “There are none
to be seen now,” she said.
“That’s because of the trees,” Dawn explained. “And
the garden is cut off suddenly at the top of the high cliff.
There are quite a number of houses beyond the trees now,
but there were none before. The trees are very old, and have
grown taller and taller and hide any house near by.”
“Did Denis live here for long?”
“Not very. He was only a few years old when his father
brought him on the long voyage, and about your age when
he disappeared.”
“Oh, tell me about it—quickly!”
“His tutor took him riding every day. They never went
beyond the garden, since it was big enough for them to be
able to take rides through bush tracks without going beyond
it. One day, when there was a houseful of guests, there was
a picnic arranged, and the tutor and Denis were invited to
go too. Some of the party were riding and some went in
drags.”


“What are drags ?”
“Long open coaches drawn by four horses. That was
a popular way to go for a picnic in those days—just as we
go in motor cars to-day. However, Denis and his tutor went
on horseback. On the return journey, Denis rode beside his
tutor until they were nearly home; then he lagged behind.
At first the tutor didn’t notice that Denis was not beside
him, and when he did he thought he was following. So
he waited for a while, then rode back for him. He couldn’t
find him, and got alarmed. He shouted and coo-eed, but
there was no answer. Then he galloped back a long way,
but there was no sign of Denis. Turning his horse, he gal-
loped up to the party and told them what had happened,
and the father and any of his guests who were riding hurried
back to look for the boy.’’
“Did they find him?’’ Minetta asked breathlessly.
Dawn shook her head sadly. “No, nothing was ever seen
or heard of him again. He had disappeared completely. Not
even his horse was ever found.”
“Oh dear! I wonder what happened to him.”
“Some thought the tutor knew but wouldn’t tell;
others that bushrangers had kidnapped him and taken the
horse too; and there were even those who suggested that
he had ridden to the beach and disappeared in the quick-
sands. The search went on for days, but there wasn’t even
a trace either of him or of his horse. The father offered great
rewards, and when time passed and nothing was heard of
his son, he shut himself up in the house and was seldom
seen. He regretted his neglect of his child and brooded over
it, and where there had been gaiety and merry-making there
was now only gloom. Mystery and sadness hung about the
house, and those who visited it came and went quietly.


After a time, Mr Eversley grew to hate it, and, unable to
bear his sorrow, he went away and never returned. The
trees in the garden grew taller, the shrubs grew thicker,
and the garden became wild and dense, except for a part of
it around the house, which was cared for by someone.
"Gardener can tell you the age of all the trees. There's
a magnolia-tree—he'll tell you that it's nearly a hundred
years old. It's a wonderful sight when its flowers are out.
The oak-trees in the drive are the same age, and in the
spring, when the new leaves are out, it's like being in Fairy-
land to walk amongst them. I always think of elves and
goblins when I look up into the twisted branches."
"How did the garden get smaller?"
"Denis's father married again, and had another son,
who, when his father died, came out here from England.
I know very little about this part of the story, except that
the son didn't find the wealth he expected, and was quite
poor until land became valuable. Then he made a great deal
of money by selling the garden, and keeping for himself
only what you see now-which is considered a very big
garden, as gardens go."
"It's a beautiful garden. I love it.
"You are not the only one. Gardener loves it too. He's
worked in it as long as any one can remember, but he's really
too old to do the work now, and of recent years other
gardeners have been employed to do it."
"And didn't they ever find out anything about Denis?"
"Nothing. The worry of the unsolved mystery is sup-
posed to have turned the tutor's head. He lived on in this
house as a kind of caretaker when Mr Eversley went away,
and kept on looking for the boy, always hoping to find him;
but Denis was never found.


“And now it's time for sleepy heads to go to bed.”
“I do wish I knew what happened to him. Ed simply
love to find out.”
“That’s what a great many people wanted to do, but
they all had to give up. Now off to bed! And don’t dream
about Denis. Dream happy dreams!”
“Good night, Dawn Mother! I’ll dream that Denis
found a place where he could play and be happy. Perhaps
he found a ‘new mother’ and lived happily ever after!”
“I hope he did. Run off to bed now, dear. Oh, and
bring down my coat and bag, please. They’re on my bed.”
When Minetta returned with Dawn’s coat and bag, she
stared at the picture once more. “I do wish I knew what
happened to him,” she said. And when she went upstairs
again, on her way to bed, she walked slowly, because she
was making up a story about the little boy.
Making up stories was Minetta’s favourite pastime, and
listening to them was her sisters’ greatest joy; and, as her
sisters always wanted a happy ending, Minetta was turning
the sad story of Denis into a happy one.


CHAPTER 8
EVERLASTING
When Minetta walked out on to the driveway the next
morning soon after breakfast, there was a strong wind
blowing, which reminded her of the ship, and of the stories
she had told her little sisters and many of the other children.
Her favourite theme had been old Grandfather Wind, and it
had been a wonderful subject, especially when the wind had
whistled around the ship's funnels or howled about the
port-holes.
She searched for the magnolia-tree, and discovered it
when she looked from the top of the driveway. The wind
blew the dark green, shiny leaves about, and turned them
over, showing light brown velvet underneath. She admired
the great spreading branches of the tree, and wondered at
its age, and wished that it was in bloom. She had never seen
magnolia flowers.
After staring for a while, she walked down the drive
and, looking up into the branches of the oak-trees arched
overhead, remembered what Dawn had said about the
spring, and the elves and the gnomes. She thought the trees
could hardly look more beautiful than they did now, and
skipped merrily along, holding her hat with both hands.
That old Grandfather W r ind," she said, *is trying to
get my hat away to a place where I can't find it."
And just as she thought this, a strong gust of wind




pulled her hat from her head, caught it and blew it away
d ° Wn ßothe d r n dd Grandfather Wind!” she said, running
she was just about to pick it up when the wind
caught it again, and blew it over the tall hedge. She wond-
ered what she would do. and looking about, found a little
green gate through an archway in the hedge. She opened
fhe gate cautiously and peeped in. Her hat lay m a court-
yard 8 near another hedge much lower than the first one. She
slipped quietly through the gate and ran towards it, but
the wind caught it again, and this time blew it over the low
hedge. Quietly she walked to the hedge and peeped °vcr
Her hat lay on the ground at the feet of the old man she had
seen before, and, being closer to him, she was surprised a
his appearance. He was light and frail, and although e was
very tall, it seemed as if the wind could catch him and blow
him away too. She noticed that his eyes were very blue and
that his skin, although wrinkled, was pink and fresh-
looking. Then she forgot the man in her delight over the
garden It was small, but so full of flowers there seemed
hardly room to walk. T
Remembering her hat, she called softly, "Please may I
have my hat?” , . ,
The man turned his face towards her, and she noticed
that there were tears in his eyes once again. Stooping, he
picked up Minetta’s hat and walked along a path hidden by
tall flowers to a gateway in the hedge. Mmetta ran along
the other side of the hedge to receive her hat and, looking
up, stared for a moment without speaking. Then she said.
“How do you do? It’s a very, very long time since we met.
“Years and years,” the man replied.


I thought at first you might be Great-uncle Eversleigh,
but I know now who you are/'
“Who am I?"
“Everlasting/’ said Minetta. “And I am Minetta/’
“How did you guess my name, Minetta?"
“I just seemed to know/’ she replied.
But tell me about Great-uncle Eversleigh. Who is he?"
He s very old and very rich, and I think very lonely.
He’s going to leave us a fortune some day, but I don’t want
him to die because of that. I just want to meet him. Of
course he might be very useful."
“In what way?"
“If I get too lonely without my sisters, and Dawn
Mother still thinks we’re too large a family to adopt all of
us, he may ask us all to live with him."
“He may. Yet again, he also may have ideas about a
large family."
“Would you mind if I asked you something?" Minetta
said, changing the subject.
Not at all."
Are your tears tears of joy?"
That is a strange question."
“I only wondered because your garden is so lovely. You
couldn’t be really sad."
No indeed, I could not, so my tears must be tears
of joy."
At that they both laughed, and Minetta, holding her
hat in her hand, said good-bye and went back to the other
garden.
Just as she came out on to the driveway, she saw Patsy
and Janine coming towards her.
“Oh!" she cried out. “Dawn Mother didn’t tell me you


were coming." And she ran to meet them, as they did to
meet her, and they hugged one another excitedly.
Then, "How did you get here? Who brought you?"
Minetta asked.
"Dr Leeton. We came in the car. He rang your new
mother and told her he was coming to town on business,
and asked if she'd like to see us. She said, ‘Yes. What a lovely
surprise for Minetta!' So here we are!" Janine stopped for
breath.
"We've just arrived, and your new mother sent us to
the garden to find you. She says we can go anywhere in the
garden, but not out of it," Patsy said.
"There are plenty of places in the garden I can show
you," Minetta said. "There may be quicksands, too."
"What’s quicksand?" Patsy asked.
"A place where children can get lost, and where you
mustn't walk, because the sand runs away from you and
then runs back and buries you."
"I don't like quicksand!"
"We’ll only pretend about it then," said Minetta. "First
we'll go down this little pathway."
Janine and Patsy followed Minetta into a pathway
under one of the oak-trees that shaded the driveway. Ferns
grew on either side of the little path and there were plants
with shiny leaves and bright patches of colour-the kind that
grow under trees. The path led them downward to a garden
bordering a smooth green lawn.
"Oh, look at the fountain!"
"Are there any fish in it?"
They stayed a while to stare into the fountain and watch
the water flow from the wide-open mouths of the stone


dolphins. Then they walked to the gardens on the other side
of the lawn, where trees and shrubs grew thickly.
4 Tm sure we’ll find quicksands here,” said Minetta.
44 Why do you want to find quicksands, anyway? That’s
what I want to find out about.”
4 ‘There was once a little boy named Denis. He lived in
this house a long, long time ago. He was lonely and not
very happy. One day he rode away on his pony and was
never seen again.”
“Where did he go to?”
“Some people think he was lost in quicksands. That’s
what I’d like to know.”
Minetta ran hither and thither, and Janine and Patsy
followed as if playing a game of follow-the-leader.


“There isn't anywhere between all the plants and trees
that's big enough for a pony to get lost in," Janine said.
“The plants and trees have grown up since then," said
Minetta.
“But it looks like dark earth," Patsy objected. “It
doesn't look sandy to me—or quick."
“Perhaps it's too quick. I can take you somewhere else."
“Not out of the garden!"
“No, it's in the garden. It's a place where Everlasting
lives."
“Who'she?"
“He's a very nice old man, but he has tears of joy. Would
you like to meet him?"
“Yes-hut why does he have tears of joy?" Janine asked
“I don't know. We'll ask him."


CHAPTER 9
NAUTILUS
MINETTA led the way back to the long drive leading to the
little green gate in the hedge. Opening this, she walked into
the courtyard where her hat had lain a short time before.
Janine and Patsy followed.
“What a little house!" cried Janine, looking at the roof
of the house, which showed above the green hedge.
'‘That’s where Everlasting lives," Minetta said.
“He must be very small."
“No, he’s tall. Peep over the hedge and you’ll see."
They all peeped over, and there was Everlasting stoop-
ing and working among his flowers."
“I’m back again!" Minetta called.
Everlasting straightened his tall thin figure. When he
stood up he seemed very tall indeed. “Good gracious me!’
he said, “You did manage to get your family here after all?"
“This is Janine," Minetta answered, “and this is Patsy.
The other two, Judith and Mary, aren’t here yet."
“We’ve been looking for quicksands!"
“Quicksands!" Everlasting exclaimed, and a puzzled
look came into his eyes. “Quicksands are dangerous. I can
show you something much more interesting than quick-
sands."
“Would you mind telling us why you have tears of
joy in your eyes?"


Some day I will; but in the meantime there’s some-
thing else to talk about. Would you like to come in?”
We d love to. Can we go into the house? It’s such a
tiny little house. It looks too small for you to live in.”
It looks smaller than it really is, because it’s on the side
of a slope. Come and I’ll show you.”
They all walked through the opening in the hedge and
out into the garden, admiring the flowers and exclaiming
about them as they went. They followed Everlasting into
the tiny house. He opened the door, and upon entering they
found that there were several steps to walk down.
Now you see why the house looks smaller than it
really is,” Everlasting said.
The ceilings were low, but high enough to let Ever-
lasting stand to his full height and still leave room to spare.
He led the three little girls from the small hall into a long
narrow room, with windows on one side and glass doors
opening out on to a terrace on the other. Blue hydrangeas
in tubs on the terrace showed through the windows, making
a bright patch of colour. Flowers blooming brightly in the
garden beyond made the scene brighter still.
At one end of the room there was a fireplace, and the
mantel above it stretched from one side of the room to the
other. On this, shells of all sizes and shapes caught the little
girls’ attention.
Oh, what lovely shells!” Minetta exclaimed.
“I thought you’d be interested,” Everlasting said,
smiling down at his little visitors. ”1 have other shells-
boxes and boxes of them.”
“Oh, please may we see them?” Patsy asked.
"Sjt at this table.” Everlasting pointed to a low round
table. “I’ll bring them to you.”


The little girls pulled chairs up to the table and sat
down. Everlasting walked to a cupboard and took from it
several of the boxes, which he set on the table before them.
The children opened the lids and stared at rows of exquisite
shells.
Speechless with surprise, at first they could only exclaim,
“Oh! Oh! Oh!” Then Janine said,
“Please may we take the shells out of the boxes?”
“Certainly!”
“Oh, where did you get all these?”
“In many different places. I shall tell you a story.
Walking to the mantelshelf, Everlasting took a shell from
among several of the same kind, and held it up. This is a
nautilus shell,” he said. “It is the house of a strange little
animal who has a very long name but who is really only
a cuttle-fish—the only living cuttle-fish in the world. Would
you like to hear about the nautilus?”
“Oh yes, please!”
Everlasting, with the shell in his hand, sat down in an
armchair close to the little girls, and smiled as he watched
them. They all kept exclaiming about and admiring the
shells, and any that they took from the boxes they handled
carefully.
“When I was quite a small lad, I worked for boatmen,”
Everlasting said.
“Were they fishermen?” Minetta asked.
“No, but they sometimes, caught fish, and sometimes
they went long distances, though mostly they stayed about
the bay down there.” Everlasting waved his slender hand
towards the window. “These men made their homes in the
caves.”
“Did you live in a cave too?”


Everlasting nodded. “Sometimes.” he said.
. Dawn Mother is going to take me to the bay when
. I a f. t ’“ e ' She said 1 could swim in the sea or play on the
beach, Mmetta remarked.
‘lt was a better beach when I was a lad than it is now:
extern—” Fv St r tr . CeS ™ d and white hard sand,
P Everlasting paused for a moment.
same dme ePt What? ” ** girls all asked a < the
u E f ept Where the rocks ran far out and, at low tide
where there were pools of water with sandy bottoms. It was
there that I first got my love of shells and sea curios.”
Uid you find these shells there?"
. . S °” le of them - , The ot bers came from coral islands and
me Rwlso 1113 n ° r *’ where the boatmen sometimes took
e. It was on one of these trips that I saw a wonderful sight
, I thought I was dreaming.” g
‘‘Why?”
Because at sunset I saw a fleet of tiny ships sailing
though?^! 161 ' \7 aS ' n my boat at the At first I
thought the tiny ships must be manned by fairies.”
U-o-oh!
Everlasting held up the shell. It was frail and lovely
to look at. Does this remind you of a tiny boat?” 7
he little girls nodded, and stared with wide eyes
lives in fh; IS K he tlny h u U ff ° f a qUaint little Ash. He mostly
lives in this house in shallow water, and travels across the
sandy bottom searching for food. See these marks? They are
his rooms. He moves out of one into another, and fills the
one he leaves with gas. He really lives in a many-storied
house. When he wishes to come to the top of the water, he
s several of these little compartments with air, and so


floats easily to the surface. Then he lifts up a flap, sets it
like a sail, and off he goes. Sometimes he sails right out to
sea, but he does not go alone. All his family go too—his
brothers, sisters, cousins and friends.
t u watc k o d the tiny fleet sail gaily past. I thought
1 heard a sound and, leaning out of my boat, put my ear
close to the water, and—” Everlasting leaned towards Min-
etta and put the shell against her ear, “Can you hear it?”
he asked.
Minetta listened and nodded.
That is the song of the sea, and if you listen long
enough you will hear it telling many, many secrets.”
“Can we hear, too?”
Each little girl in turn listened and nodded. They heard,
but could not tell what they heard.
Where did the fleet go to?” they asked.
“That is a mystery. I could not find out.”
Perhaps they really were manned by fairies, who went
in them to the Island of Quicksand, and anchored them
there while they danced.” Minetta suggested. “Only fairies
would dare to tread upon quicksands.”
Well, that s an idea, but I would rather think it the
Island of Mother-of-Pearl. Look at the insides of all these
shells—see the rainbow colours!”
Minetta clapped her hands. “Of course, of course! And
that is the colour of fairy wings.”
Janine and Patsy stared into many of the shells, and
found rainbow colouring in most of them.
“Now,” said Everlasting, “you can put all the shells
away, and ITI give you each some flowers to take home.”
The little girls were delighted. Carefully they replaced
the shells into the boxes, and Everlasting as carefully put


rn
: I
mopuiye-
the boxes away, after which he went to another cupboard
and, taking a pair of clippers from the shelf, told the children
to follow him. He led them through the glass doors out on
to the terrace, then into the garden, and they were all
enchanted to see just as many flowers massed together here
as in the front garden.
"May I take some to Dawn Mother?" asked Minetta.
"Why do you call her Dawn Mother?"
"Because she is young and lovely, and my new mother."


NAUTILUS
She is all that—and still more; for she loves to help
people, especially those less fortunate than herself, and there
are few who know all the good she does/’
“Is that why she is so busy?"
"It certainly is."


CHAPTER 10
THE CELLAR
Everlasting had to stoop a long way to pick his flowers,,
but he was like a reed and bent easily. He used his clippers-
snip, smp—and off came a flower on its stalk, from a place in
the plant where it would never be missed. As he plucked the
flowers he gave some to each of the little girls to hold, and
very soon they each had a large bunch.
And now we must pick some for Dawn Mother.” He
smiled as he walked to a bed of tall stocks, where lilac and
pink and purple blooms made a wonderful show. "Dawn
Mother! How wonderful to have a Dawn Mother! This
land might easily be the dawn of new hope for a better
world, he said as if talking to himself, while continuing
to pluck his flowers.
The children followed him, sniffing at the delicious scent
of the stocks and exclaiming over their wonderful colours.
Jamne ran off to a far corner of the garden and discovered
a beehive.
‘Do you grow all these flowers for the bees?” she called.
"I allow the bees to gather pollen from my flowers, and
in return they give me honey,” Everlasting called back.
“Where does that little path lead to?” Minetta pointed
to a path that ran steeply over the rocky ledge.
You have sharp eyes,” Everlasting said, and, as if to.


change the subject, ‘‘Your way home is in the opposite
direction, and Em sure it's time to be going back now."
Minetta thought so too, and happy to be taking a gift
to Dawn Mother, carried the flowers that Everlasting had
picked for her.
Everlasting went to the gate with the little girls and
wished them all good-bye, and they each thanked him for
the flowers and for allowing them to look at his shells.
‘‘May we come again soon?" each asked him in turn.
‘‘You are welcome at any time," said Everlasting, and
stood watching them as they walked up the long drive,
carefully carrying their flowers.
When the children arrived at the Big House they found
that Dawn Mother had gone out.
‘‘l'll have to arrange her flowers for her," Minetta told
Patsy and Janine. ‘‘First, though, I'll put yours in water,
so that they'll keep fresh until you go home."
Janine and Patsy followed Minetta to the pantry, im-
pressed by her business-like manner. They watched her fill
two large bowls with water and place the flowers in them,
then take another bowl from a shelf and, having filled it
with water, arrange the flowers for Dawn Mother in it.
She carried this with great care, and placed it on the table
in the hall.
Bridget appeared then, admired the flowers, and told
the children she had something for them. She told them
to go into the dining-room, where they would find cool
drinks and something nice to eat. So they went and sat at
the table, and drank lemonade and ate cakes, and Minetta
pointed out to them the picture of Denis and told them a
story about him, but it was a happy story instead of a sad
one.


Dawn Mother said the picture was found in the cellar.
1 ve been in one of the cellars, but I haven’t seen all of them.
Only a passage-way is used now. The other ones are sealed
up.
“Could we go in the cellar?”
It would be rather fun. Yes, let’s!”
steep flight of steps from a pantry in the back hall
led down to the cellar. Minetta turned on a switch that lit
the way down the stairs. Another switch at the foot of the
steps lit up the cellar shelves, and here they saw rows of
bottles, tinned foods, china, glass and boxes. A light coating
of dust lay everywhere, and there was a musty odour.
Minetta was the first to discover a bricked-up doorway.
I wonder why it was closed up?” she said.
Then Janine found another one at the other end of the
passage-way. “I do wish it wasn’t bricked up. I’d love to
see where Denis’s picture was found. I wonder how long it
was there before someone found it?”
“There might have been other thing besides the picture
-perhaps-that. no one noticed,” said Patsy in an awed
whisper. There might be gold!”
They all searched for some kind of entrance to the cellars
but there was no opening to be found and, disappointed,’
they went back up the stairs again, and when they came
into the large hallway they found that Minetta’s new mother
had arrived home.
She was sitting in her favourite place-on the lounge
under the wide windows in the hall. She had an open letter
in her lap, and when she saw the children, she stooped
over the stocks on the table in front of her.
“These are delicious. Where did they come from?” she
inquired.


“Gardener sent them to you/’ said Minetta. “Was it
a surprise?”
“Yes, and it was very kind of him. And I have another
surprise, too. This letter is from Robert, children.” Dawn
took the letter from her lap and held it up. “He's where
all of you would like to be. Shall I read it to you?”
“Yes, please!”
“Come and sit beside me.”
The three children ran to her and sat on the lounge
beside her, and she read them several little pieces of the letter.
“ ‘Tell your newly adopted daughter-who is now
my adopted sister, besides being my fifty-fifth cousin—that
I am growing to love her home country and that I hope
she loves mine, because although they are so different they
are both British, and fine places to belong to. Tell her I have
been in country lanes, and have seen the tulips in Kew
Gardens, and bluebells under the trees, which somehow
remind me of Australia-because of the blueness, I suppose:
blueness that we Australians are used to, but which is seldom
to be seen in skies here. It’s rather exciting to see blue at
one s feet, instead of above.’
“Robert is poetical, but he wouldn’t like any one to
think he is,” Dawn Mother said, her eyes shining. “He
always wanted to be an airman, because the blue skies made
him happy; and he says he’ll always be able to find them,
however much they may be hidden by the clouds.
“We love the blue sky, too,” Patsy said, “and the blue
waters that run in and out everywhere.”
“It is rather wonderful, isn’t it?: And makes up for all
the lovely things you miss,” Dawn Mother said, then con-
tinued to read, “ ‘And how are Minetta’s children? She
promised to be a mother to them, and I hope she is managing


it. Give them all my love/ ” And so on, until the end of
the letter, when, putting it aside, she said, “And what have
you been doing while Eve been away?”
“We went to see Everlasting.”
“Who is Everlasting?”
“That's the gardener's name,” Minetta said.
“Is it? He's always been Gardener to me, but Everlasting
is a wonderful name for him. How did you find out?”
“I just knew.”
“Did you? Well, I suppose I should have known too,
because he surely is everlasting .”
“Perhaps he will last for ever.”
“I hope so, for he just seems to be part of this old home,
and every one loves him, although he does shut himself
away behind that tall hedge of his. Ever since Robert was
a tiny child they've been great friends. I think he misses
Robert.”
“He has a lovely little house,” Patsy said. “And it isn't
like any house I've ever seen.”
“It was once the stables, but after the tragedy of the
little boy Denis-Minetta knows all about him-the stables
were never used again, and many years later they were
turned into the gardener's house.”
“Why does he weep tears of joy?” Janine asked.
“Tears of joy?” Dawn Mother laughed. “That's a
good name for his tears, and it also is Minetta's idea, I can
f f
see.
The little girls laughed. They were delighted that
Minetta's new mother seemed to understand Minetta's story-
telling ways.
“He does have tears,” Minetta said seriously, “and of


course they can only be tears of joy. Ed want to weep tears
of joy, too, if I had so many lovely flowers/'
'‘Still, I think there’s another reason for his tears,” said
Dawn.
“Do tell us!”
“I think he’s sad because he can no longer work in the
big garden, which he feels belongs to him, and because the
flowers he grows are confined within so small a space instead
of making the Big House itself beautiful. He doesn’t approve
of the way other gardeners care for the big garden. He thinks
no one loves it or can look after it as he did; and I know
he grows his hedge very tall so that he may not see the
neglect that he is sure there is on the other side, nor other
men at work in his beloved garden.”
He showed us his shells.”
“Did he, indeed? Then he must have taken a fancy to
you. He only shows those to his very great favourites.”
He told us lovely stories, too.”
“He should be able to tell wonderful stories. Although
he seems always to have lived in this garden, I believe he
travelled a great deal when he was young. Perhaps some
day he will show you his grottos.”
“What are grottos?”
“Little caves in rocky ledges. He has fish ponds with rare
fish, and lily ponds with rare water flowers. That was
Robert’s favourite place in the garden.”
“Oh, where is it?”
“He’ll show you one day, Em sure.”
“Next time I see him Em going to ask him to let us
see his grottos,” Minetta said.
“Please can we come again soon?” Janine and Patsy
asked, leaning close to Dawn Mother.


“Of course you may. And by and by we shall get the
other two little ones from Newcastle, and you can all have
a happy time together for one whole week-end/'
The three little girls squealed with excitement.
“And don't forget that you'll be going to school very
soon, so make the most of your day. Run along to the
garden, now, and play!"
The day passed only too quickly, and when Dr Leeton
drove his car up the long drive in the afternoon to take
Janine and Patsy home, they did not want to go. However,
with a promise that they could come again very soon, they
left happily enough.
“We like our new mother and father,'' they whispered
to Minetta when they said good-bye. “We pretend that
we're adopted, too. And it's fun driving in the car." And
so off they went with Dr Leeton.


CHAPTER 11
-THE MERMAIDS
The day after Janine and Patsy's visit, Minetta was up
long before breakfast, dressed quickly and ran to the garden.
There she wandered up one little path and down another,
and soon she made an important discovery. She found that
the Big House was nearer the bay than it seemed.
Following a pathway, with steps here and there, that
ran steeply down over a cliff side, she came out on to the
beach.
‘l've found the way by myself!" she cried delightedly,
and, walking on the white hard sand, found that it slipped
away from her tread, so that it was difficult for her to make
any headway.
"This must be quicksand!" she thought. Then she
noticed rocks in shallow water and, paddling out to them,
jumped from one to another over clear pools of water. The
pools were shallow, with golden sand glistening in the
sunlight.
She twiddled her toes in the sand to see if it, too, was
quick. Instead, she found star-fish and sea-anemones, and
myriads of tiny fish swimming about. She looked for shells,
and even collected some and carried them in her handker-
chief. Then she found something she had not expected to
find. Mermaids.


Splash, splash! The mermaids swam towards her. She
saw four little laughing faces framed in white caps.
They might even be waterlilies," she thought.
Hullo! Why haven't you got your bathing-togs on?
Why aren't you in swimming?" the mermaids called to her.
"I’m just paddling," said Minetta.
"What's the good of that? Come on in!"
Minetta stared shyly. "I haven't got a costume."
"What's your name?"
"Minetta Harvey."
"I'm Ann Gilder."
"And I’m Virginia Fairfax."
And we re Judy and Topsy Stobo. Where do you
live?"
"Up there." Minetta pointed to the Big House, high
on the cliff.
"O-o-oh! You’re the evacuee then! Oh, you lucky thing
to live so close to the beach! We've got a long walk. Go on,
get your costume. We’ll wait for you!"
The mermaids turned away and swam towards the
shore, laughing and shouting, and splashing one another.
Minetta quickly ran back over the rocks to the beach,
and scrambled up the uneven slope and long steep pathway
to the Big House and, arriving, called as she ran up the
stairs, "Please, Dawn Mother, may I have a bathing-
costume?"
"Of course you may," Dawn said, coming from her
bedroom. "That's one of the things we didn't buy. I'll take
you shopping to-day. Where have you been?"
"I found some mermaids."
"Did you, indeed? What were their names?"


“They told me, but I can't remember them all-Ann
Gilder, Virginia Fairfax, Judy and Topsy something/'
“Stobo? Em glad you met those little girls because
you'll be going to school with them all very soon/'
“Oh. will I? How lovely! I'm glad. I like them so much.
They seemed to know me/’
“They know every one. They're the friendliest little
people.''
That afternoon in a city store, Minetta was allowed to


choose her own bathing-costume. She chose a white bathing
cap, too and when she returned to the house she said to
Dawn Mother:
“May I wear my costume now?”
“But it's too late to go swimming/'
“I don't want to go swimming. I just want to see if
the cbstume fits me.''
“Of course you may. Run along, then-and let me see
how you look in it."
A few minutes later, Minetta tripped down the stairs
in the bathing-costume, and with her cap pulled over her
head.
Dawn Mother who was sitting on the lounge in the hall,
said, “You do look nice, and your costume fits you beauti-
fully. I like the colour. I’m glad you chose blue. You look
just like a mermaid."
“What time do you think I could go to the beach to-
morrow, Dawn Mother?"
“As early as you like. I know you'll be safe with all those
little girls. They can swim, and know exactly how far out
to go-and that isn’t too far, because of sharks."
The next morning Minetta awoke at sunrise. Too
excited to wait until a more reasonable hour, she jumped
from bed and, putting on her bathing-costume, made her
way quietly downstairs, out of the house into the garden,
and then to the narrow pathway. Scrambling hastily down
this, she came to the beach. The tide was low, the rocks were
bare, and the water was so still that there were reflections,
in its strange glassy surface, of land, sky, and cloud. Not a
ripple was to be seen. The little waves seemed hardly awake
yet, and rolled lazily up on to the beach, far too sleepy to
hurry.


Minetta ran out on the rocks, and found the water a
little deep, so did not venture in. She remembered about
sharks and decided to wait for the mermaids, and while she
waited she stared into the pools between the rocks.
-It’s too early for the other mermaids," she said aloud.
‘Til try to find the quicksands while Em waiting."
"Whom are you waiting for?"
Turning to see who spoke, she found that it was Ever-
lasting. "Em waiting for the mermaids, and I am looking
for quicksands."
"You may find mermaids, but you’ll never find quick-
sands. Once there were quicksands, but they’ve gone now."
"How did they go?"
"There’s a story about quicksands."
"Is it about Denis?"
"How did you know about Denis?"
"Dawn Mother told me all she knew. Oh dear, I do
so much want to know what became of him. It s such a
mystery, and no one ever found out.
"Eve heard that there were some who knew."
"Oh, tell me, please!"
Everlasting turned, and waved his long hand towards
a road that wound down the hill. "That’s where the mystery
began," he said. "That road was once a track through the
bush, and that’s where Denis was riding his pony just before
he was lost." Turning again, Everlasting pointed in another
direction. "And those caves over there hold the secret of his
disappearance."
"Oh, do tell me-please!"
"Coo-ee! Coo-ee! Minetta! Minetta!" Four little girls
ran down the beach calling and shouting. "You’ve got your


costume! Come on in!” Then Ann, Virginia, Judy and
1 opsy all stood still and stared at Everlasting
”1 know these little girls.” he said. “I often see them.”
We see you too. Why do you chop the trees and scrub
away from the cliffs?” Ann asked.
I wonder why,” he answered, smiling.
Oh, please tell us properly,” Topsy said.
Some day I will. Go for your swim now. See, the tide
has turned and is coming in.”
„ ” Th f, waves are just awake and are sleepily rolling
o shore, Minetta said. "Soon they’ll run and tumble and
scramble on the beach, and Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr
will play with them.” 1
at MbJta 3re y ° U t3lking ab ° Ut? ” Vifginia asked ’ starin S
Come on in!” Judy shouted.
Ann dashed into the water after Judy. Minetta followed
more slowly but a push from Topsy, who ran after her,
sent her quickly into the water face downwards, and she
came up spluttering and laughing.


CHAPTER 12
MINETTA TELLS A STORY
Minetta was just beginning to think that it was always
fine weather in Australia, that the sky was always blue, and
that it never rained or was unpleasant, when a windy day
came.
She was wakened in the morning by the sound of wind
howling around the house. However, she jumped out of
bed, put on her bathing-costume and set out for the beach
where she was to meet all the other little girls. It was too
cold to go into the water, so she ran up and down the beach
until Ann, Topsy, Judy and Virginia arrived. Then they
all ran up and down together to warm themselves before
going in to swim.
“Oh, bother the wind!” Judy said.
The wind blew harder still.
“Ooh, I don’t want to go into the water,” said Ann,
shivering a little.
“Let’s shelter in the cave for a while,” said Minetta.
So they all ran to the cave and huddled together there,
draping dry towels around their shoulders to keep warm.
“Of course it’s all old Grandfather Wind’s fault,” Min-
etta said.
“Why?”
“Because I suppose he’s gone and wakened up, and he's:
cross and furious, and he’s rushing about in a temper.”


“Tell us a story, then/'
Old Grandfather Wind’s grandchildren Sea Breeze and
Gentle Zephyr play about, while he sleeps, as happy as can
be. But when he’s awake, they’re frightened and try to hide.”
“Where does he sleep?”
“Mostly on the ocean, because it rocks him to sleep.”
Minetta thought of her little step-sisters, remembering
how much they had enjoyed listening to her stories, so she
now told one to her little friends. But, although it was
rather fun telling stories, swimming was better fun still, so,
“Let’s go in swimming!” she said when she had finished
her story.
“But you can’t swim.”
“If you taught me I could.”
In a few minutes five little figures were battling about
in the choppy waves, Minetta keeping to the shallow water
and longing to be able to swim.
Judy punched hard in the air. “Go back to your sleep
old Grandfather Wind! she said. Tlow can you expect
Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr to play about while you’re
fussing around?”
This brought peals of laughter from the other children.
Later, when setting off for home tingling with warmth,
they made Minetta promise to tell them more stories.
“I will if you teach me how to swim.”
“Of course we will.”
Lessons in swimming became a serious business from
then on, and when the day arrived for Minetta to go to
school, she had almost learnt. But this fact was over-
shadowed by this new excitement.
“I’m so nervous and so excited,” she said to Dawn


r - - ' ,;.j;-
i •' ’ '


Mother,.who was driving her to school in the car, “that E
really don’t know what I'm doing."
You re lucky to know so many of the children," Dawn
Mother said, and you'll soon get over your nervousness."
In a few minutes' time the car stopped before a small
house with cream walls, a blue roof and yellow doors.
“Well, here we are."
This can t be it! ' Minetta exclaimed in surprise.
Surely this isn t a school. It looks more like the house that
Hansel and Gretel found in the woods. You know the one—
it was made of cakes and sweets and all kinds of goodies."
“Yes. I know. And Gretel broke a piece off the roof and
ate it. Would you like to try a piece of this roof?"
Minetta laughed. “It does look a little tempting," she
said. I hope it sas nice inside as it is on the outside. If it
is, they should have a notice up: 'Goodies for Children'."
“Well, that is an idea!" Dawn said. “And I believe that's:
what you really will find inside this school."
Even so, Minetta was a little shy as she followed Dawn
Mother through the little gate to the front door.
Miss King, one of the teachers, invited them in, and
Minetta did find the school as delightful inside as out; and
she quite lost her shyness when Ann Gilder, Virginia Fairfax
and Judy and Topsy Stobo took her away, while Dawn
Mother talked to Miss Hawthorne, the headmistress.
Before school commenced, the little girls had shown
Minetta the gymnasium and the playground, and had
explained everything; and when the bell rang, she went
into the school-room feeling quite at home. This room was
shaped like a half-moon and seemed to be all windows. She
stared at pictures on the wall, and found that many had been
done by the pupils.


The teacher greeted Minetta, then started lessons at
once. Minetta paid keen attention, and the first morning
passed pleasantly and quickly. The days that followed went
quicker still, for lessons were always interesting and even
exciting—especially on Friday afternoons, when there was
composition hour. Every one was allowed to choose her
own subject, and could even write a story. Sometimes one
of the stories was read aloud to the class.
Although Minetta could tell a story easily enough to
her little step-sisters and the mermaids, she found that
writing one was quite a different matter, and she was too shy
to try, although Ann and Virginia urged her to do so.
“Will you promise to write a story when we’ve taught
you how to swim properly?” Ann Gilder asked.
“Yesl”
“Will you promise that the story will be about the
secret that old Grandfather Wind’s grandchildren found for
him?”
“I’ll try.”
“Write it in composition hour as soon as we have taught
you to swim alone, then.”
One Friday morning, soon after this, Minetta swam her
first few strokes without assistance, and when she arrived
at school, instead of being able to pay attention to lessons,
she could think only about the story she had promised to
write. In the afternoon she did manage to write one; but
when she gave it to the teacher she felt confused and a little
embarrassed, for Virginia stood up and said,
“Please, may Minetta’s story be read aloud?”
The teacher smiled. “Of course,” she said. “I’m sure
it is good, because Minetta writes such a good composition.”


Ann, Patsy and Topsy glanced at one another, smiling
with delight.
Please, may I tell the story V* Minetta felt less shy of
telling the story, than of hearing it read aloud. "It's much
better when I tell it," she explained.
“I think that’s a very good idea,” the teacher said,
smiling. ‘‘l shall enjoy listening, too.”
The story was about a little boy who rode away on his
pony and was lost. When Minetta had finished telling it,
Virginia told Patsy and Patsy told the little girl next to


her that the story was a true one. This news was soon passed
round to every one, and after school the children crowded
round Minetta asking questions.
"It's only a fairy tale,” Minetta said.
“But it's a true story made into a fairy one,” Ann
insisted. She lived nearest to Minetta, and had seen the picture
and heard the story.
So Minetta explained that the real story had a sad
ending, and that she had made up one with a happy ending.
“Oh please, do tell us the true story!” Virginia begged.
“Oh yes, go on—do tell us!” all the little girls said in
chorus.
So Minetta told the sad story of Denis, and when it
was finished, all the little girls were silent, their spirits
strangely saddened, until Ann exclaimed,
“But that one hasn’t got a proper ending. It might
really have ended like Minetta’s story.”
This idea caught the children’s fancy. “So it might!
So it might!” they shouted, and ran off to play.
“Oh, I do think you are clever,” Ann whispered to
Minetta, with her arm around her.
Ann herself was very good at making up stories, but
hers were always about horses, because Virginia, who was
her greatest friend, loved horses, and as she liked to do the
illustrations, and could draw horses better than anything
else, the stories naturally had to be about horses.


CHAPTER 13
Virginia's great-aunt
It was not long before Minetta had been included in the
friendship between Ann and Virginia, and the three little
girls told one another many things. Virginia talked about
her pony, Ann talked about her dog, and Minetta talked
about her Great-uncle Eversleigh.
“As soon as I can, Fm going to look for him/' she said.
“Fm sure he has a wonderful house."
“I have a great-aanf/e," Virginia said, “and she has two
wonderful houses—one in the country and one not far from
school. I often go to the near one after school. It's on top
of a hill, and looks down over a garden that is as big as
the country. There are trees and trees, and hills and valleys."
“How wonderful!"
“And the one in the country—you can't see where it
begins or where it ends."
“Why?" Minetta asked in an awed voice.
“Because the house is so far away from everything.
When I stay there, I ride my pony every day to the gates to
get the letters from the letter-box, because it's too far to
walk."
“How exciting!"
“It is. Fll get my great-aunt to ask you to stay there
some holiday. I do wish I had my pony here," Virginia
sighed. “I do miss him."




“What’s his name?”
“Briar Rose, but I just call him Briar. Would you like
to meet my great-auntie? I can take you to see her some day,
after school.”
Minetta nodded. She was thinking that perhaps it was
better to have a great-auntie with two houses than a great-
uncle who might not even have one. Very soon after this
conversation Minetta met Virginia’s great-auntie, and fell
in love with her straight away.
Walking with Virginia up the long drive to the tall
house, Minetta felt a little nervous. She thought a tall grand
person must surely live in so important a place. When some-
one came to meet them with a basket on her arm full of
flowers, wearing a large shady hat and appearing so young,
Minetta caught her breath with surprise. The blue eyes were
young, and it was only when Minetta saw the white hair
almost hidden by the large hat, she remembered the fact that
here was a great-aunt .
When a crowd of children ran from the house, boisterous
and loving, clamouring for Aunt Mary’s attention, Minetta
was surprised to see how quickly they did what Great-auntie
Mary bade them. Her voice seemed to have the right kind
of magic in it to make young people do exactly as she wished.
Even baby Sally aged two, defiant to every one else, said,
“Ess, Auntie Mary, ess,” so anxious was she to please.
Minetta, looking on, said to herself, “At least when I
find my great-uncle I’ll have him to myself. Virginia has
to share her great-auntie with so many. If she were my
great-auntie, I’d want her all to myself.”
Great-auntie Mary seemed to have guessed her thoughts,
for she said, “They don’t all belong to me. My nieces love to


bring their friends—and I love to have them/’ and added,
“Would you like to see my garden?”
“Ed love to,” said Minetta.
“We’ll slip away quietly,” Great-aunt Mary whispered,
just like a little girl with a secret; and, taking Minetta’s
hand, she led her from the driveway, through a little gate,
on to a lawn.
“Why, it really has got hills and dales and valleys!”
Minetta exclaimed, standing still and looking at the lovely
garden before them, set out in wide rolling lawns that ran
from one embankment to another. Then there were other
lawns with flower beds in them; and other lawns, where
there were trees; there were trees, and distant trees, and more
trees. It was difficult to believe that it was all one garden.
“In the morning very early, my birds waken me. There
are so many, and it's such a joy,” said Great-aunt Mary.
“Come and Ell show you the glass-houses, the rose garden
and the shrubberies.”
At this moment Virginia and her cousins and friends
stormed through the little gate.
“Now, children,” great-auntie said, “down to the swing,
all of you, and play there until tea-time! Em taking Minetta
to see the garden.”
The children, led by Virginia, streamed down over an
embankment, to where there was a great spreading tree,
with a swing hanging from one of its branches.
“How many generations of my family have swung in
that!” Great-aunt Mary said, smiling, with a far-away look
in her eyes, as if her thoughts were upon many happy
recollections.
Minetta walked with Great-aunt Mary through the
lovely garden, and, as the children swung high and swung


low on the swing that hung from the tree, the sound of
their laughter floated through the still air. Auntie Mary
listened, and smiled that far-away smile again and Minetta
was sure that other voices echoed from far-away times. The
head gardener doffed his cap to great-auntie, and called her
Miss Mary. He seemed from far-away times too. There were
other gardeners—so many that Minetta lost count and soon
wondered how many there really were.
“Dawn Mother's garden must have once been as big as
this one," Minetta said.
“Yes, yes, that is the pity of it!” Great-aunt Mary
sighed. “Gardens grow smaller. Oh dear, I hear the tea bell!”
A distant bell rang. It was a long way back to the house,
and there were steps and embankments to climb, but Great-
aunt Mary led the way, tripping as lightly as Minetta.
Minetta never forgot the lovely tea at Great-aunt Mary's
home, or the beautiful gardens, or the wonderful games she
played with Virginia and her cousins.
“I hope you will often come here with Virginia,” Great-
aunt Mary said! “And perhaps you'll be allowed to come
with her to the country some holiday time.”
“I’d love to.”
Later, Minetta said to Dawn Mother, “I think Virginia
is very lucky to have a great-auntie. I wonder if Great-
uncle Eversleigh has two houses?”
“Very likely he has. Some day we’ll have to try and
find him.”


CHAPTER 14
THE GROTTOS
MINETTA wrote frequent letters to all her little step-sisters,
and scrawly little notes came to her in reply. Other letters
came to Minetta too-letters from her step-mother so far
away. In one way these letters were disappointing, for there
was never any news about her daddy in them. There was,
however, plenty about brother Tony and the funny things
he had to say; and the kisses he sent in crosses at the end of
the letter made up for any other disappointment.
One day, Dawn Mother explained to Minetta that, as
Mr and Mrs Sweetapple were coming to Sydney for a short
time, they had decided that there could be no better oppor-
tunity for Judith and Mary to pay her a visit. So Minetta
started to count the days, and arranged and rearranged the
bedrooms she had chosen for them.
At last the day of their arrival came. It was a Friday,
and Minetta was far too excited to attend to her lessons,
and when school was over she ran all the way home, burst
into the house and said to Dawn Mother, I must get fresh
flowers to put into their rooms.
“Why, you put fresh flowers there only this morning!”
“Yes, Fve been thinking it over, and I think Fd like
blue and gold instead of pink and red, because that would
suit their golden hair and blue eyes, so I must change them.
“You’ll have to hurry, then, because Fm taking you
with me to the station.


“Oh dear, I am glad to-morrow's Saturday and I won't
have to go to school. Judith and Mary will need looking
after. They're a little troublesome at times.''
Dawn Mother laughed. “You're a real little mother.
I don't know what your step-mother will do when they go
home again without you.''
Minetta's eyes clouded. “Oh dear! I think I'll miss them
dreadfully. I'm so glad I've got Judy and Topsy, and Ann
and Virginia, and Denis and Everlasting.''
“You strange little person! You talk of Denis as if he
were a real companion.''
“Well, he's so exciting—the same as Everlasting. Perhaps
Everlasting will show us his grottos. Oh dear, I'm wasting
time. I haven't picked the flowers yet!'' And Minetta ran
out into the garden.
“You'll have to hurry. We must leave in half an hour.
I think Mary and Judith should be in a room together."
“Yes, yes, I was thinking that, too. The attic room at
the top of the stairs, then," Minetta shouted from the
garden, and stooped to pick golden marigolds from a border
down the long drive, and afterwards Chinese forget-me-
nots.
Then she returned to the house and arranged the flowers
in a bowl, and ran up and down the small flight of stairs
many times before she was satisfied that everything was
right for her two little sisters. So she was out of breath
when she climbed into the car beside Dawn Mother.
“I'm glad we chose the attic room. It will be too dark
to see the garden when we get back, but you'll be able to
show it to them from the window at the top of the house,
and tell them all about it," Dawn Mother said.
And this was true enough, for the excited children, who




later peered from the car when being driven up the long
drive, saw only dark shadows; but when they looked down
from their bedroom window, it was a moonlit night, and
even the rim of the ocean could be seen beyond the bright
lights of the harbour and the tops of the trees in the garden.
Minetta sat on the bed beside her two little sisters and
told them stories, first about the house and garden, then
about Denis and, last but not least, about Everlasting. Their
blue eyes opened wide with excitement and their rosy cheeks
glowed as they listened. When at last two little heads nod-
ded sleepily and Minetta tucked the bed-clothes around
them, they went to sleep and dreamt dreams, of a little boy
called Denis who never grew up, and of someone called
Everlasting, who shed tears of joy, and had grottos with
real live fish and a treasure house of shells.
Minetta was proud of her little sisters, and of knowing
how to look after them. Very early the next morning she
attended to their baths, and saw that they dressed them-
selves properly and ate what was good for them. She
performed many little tasks without any fuss or bother,
and before Dawn was out of bed she took them to see
Everlasting.
"He’s just like I expected Great-uncle Eversleigh to
be, she explained, as they all walked under the trees down
the long drive, "except that he’s not rich and that he lives
in a tiny house.”
When they came to the tall hedge, Minetta called to
Everlasting. He was surprised to hear her so early in the
morning. He was in the garden, and called to them to
come in.
"The other two little step-sisters!” he exclaimed when
he saw the children. "How the family grows!”


‘This is Judith, and this is Mary.”
‘Will you show us your grottos, please?” Judith asked.
‘How did you know about my grottos?”
‘Minetta told us.”
‘‘Well, well! You've chosen a good time to ask me that,
for I was just about to feed my fish and to do all the little
necessary things. Come with me!”
Everlasting led the children around the pathway to the
garden in front of the house, and then to another steep little
pathway—the one Minetta had noticed on her previous visit.
This path ended with a long flight of stone steps, where
creepers and overgrown shrubs hid them from view. They
walked carefully down the steps, and found at the foot of
them another pathway, long and narrow, and hidden by tall
ferns. This led to small natural caves in the side of an
embankment, which was part of the Big Garden, An over-
hanging shelf of rocks made a natural division between that
garden and Everlasting's grottos. The rock made a rustic
roof, with just enough height for Everlasting to walk up-
right under it.
“There are my grottos,” he said.
The children were speechless for a moment; then their
exclamations of joy made Everlasting smile.
Small streams of water trickled over rocks into pools
on rocky ledges, and fell like tiny waterfalls from one pool
into another. Brightly-coloured fish swam among dainty
water plants. The children, as they followed Everlasting,
noticed that the grottos were warm and cosy.
“What is that?” Minetta asked, pointing to a glow of
light at the back of a piece of rock.
“That is always burning,” Everlasting replied.
“What is it for?”


“To keep the fish warm/’
4 ‘Fancy fish sitting in front of a fire to keep them warm! ’’
There were peals of laughter from the children, and
Everlasting smiled.
“I wish it was as easy as that,” he said. “The water has
to be kept warm. Eve made a cunning device here, but it
would take too long now to explain how it works.”
“Why has the water got to be warm?”
“Because I have tropical fish in the pools, and they’re
used to water that’s warm—but not too warm. They
wouldn’t be able to live in it if it were either too warm or
too cool.”
“What lovely colours!”
Anything more wonderful Minetta had never imagined.
The fish were small and delicate, with exquisite colours—
blue stripes, red stripes, rainbow shades. Some were even
transparent, with fins like wings; others had long delicate
feelers.
“What are those?” came a shout from Mary.
“Those are my walking fish.”
Mary had discovered a shallow pool. The other children
ran to look, and stared with wondering eyes at strange-
looking fish, some pink, others black. Instead of swimming,
they appeared to be walking along the bottom of the pool
upon four fins. They had long tails, and waved these as if
to keep their balance.
“Oh, look at the tortoise!” Judith cried. “Can I see
the tortoise, please?” Her attention had been attracted to a
little tortoise in the lily pond, showing between lily leaves.
Just the tip of the nose could be seen above the water.
Everlasting picked it up and held it on his hand. He
whistled softly, coaxingly, and the tortoise blinked white


•eyelids, and gradually the head emerged from inside the shell,
and also the ringed neck, which stretched out to its full
length. Next two claws appeared from under the shell, then
two more, and the little tortoise crawled along the palm of
Everlasting s hand. The children were delighted.
“It s a pity to tease him. He thinks it’s meal-time, though
it’s really a little early for a tortoise: he likes to sleep late.
13y and by, when the sun is warm, he’ll come out and climb
on the rocks beside the pool and take a sun-bath, and then
he’ll be ready for a meal.” Everlasting put the tortoise back
into the water.
“What does he eat?”
“Tiny pieces of meat. Tortoises like worms too, and
oatmeal, and they’re very partial to water snails.”
“I’d love to have that little tortoise for a pet,” Mary
said.
“I’m sure you would, but wouldn’t you rather see him
Eappy in this grotto? Come now, and I’ll show you my
lily pond. Later on, when the sun is bright, you will see
lots of lilies opening their petals out wide.”
Everlasting led the children along the narrow pathway.
He turned a corner, and—lo and behold!—a round pool of
water came into view. A pathway ran all the way around
the lily pond. Great shiny leaves lay on the glassy surface,
and green lily buds pointed to the skies, some with petals
just opening, others tightly closed.
“Now you may feed the fish.” Everlasting put his hand
into his pocket and filled each of the children’s hands with
fine crumbs.
Leaning over the water, they threw these in, and laughed
with excitement to see the fish dart upon the lightly floating


meal. Everlasting smiled, and turned back to his grottos. He
had many tasks to perform.
The children played happily until the sun came over
the trees and shed bright light on the lily pond. Then the
lilies, one by one, opened their petals. There were pink lilies,
blue lilies, some even pale yellow, and others red. Minetta
saw a white one reflected in the water, every petal clearly
mirrored, and thought she had never seen a lovelier sight.
“This is a beautiful place to live!” she murmured,
talking aloud to herself.
“Do you think so?” Everlasting had come quietly along
the path and now stood beside her. “Em glad you think so.
I know of nothing more beautiful than a waterlily reflec-
tion, except perhaps—that! ” He pointed. Minetta looked up
and saw her two little sisters. They were stooping over the
pool and staring at their own reflections.


CHAPTER 15
WONDERFUL NEWS
And now we are back again at the beginning of our story
and, knowing Minetta so well, we cannot think it at all
strange that she should ask, “And did the dawn say, Good
morning. Dawn'?” or that Dawn Mother should reply,
“Little stupid!”
But we had not reached the part where a knock came
to the door and Bridget entered the room with the morning-
tea tray and the morning mail. Bridget smiled slyly, for she
had placed one letter on the top of all the others, knowing
it would please her mistress.
As soon as Dawn Mother saw it, she gave a little gasp
of pleasure. “A letter from Robert 1” she exclaimed. “A
letter from Robert!”
Opening it hastily, she read pieces of it here and there,
turning the pages quickly, and Minetta knew that she was
reading something exciting.
“What is it? Please tell me!”
“Robert's coming back. Isn’t it wonderful? He may be
here at any moment, and for some time. He’s got work to
do in Australia.’’ Dawn went on reading, turning the pages
quickly.
“Oh, I wish daddy were coming too,’’ Minetta
murmured.


4 lt would be wonderful, darling. But isn’t it exciting
about Robert?”
Minetta kissed Dawn again. 4 ‘l’m so glad,” she said,
and slipped away quietly. She was glad about Robert, but
she was wondering what would happen now. Would she
be needed any longer? She knew she had been filling Robert’s
place during his absence, but would there be any room for
her now? And what about her little sisters? Dawn Mother
had said that they might all have to go away to some place
of greater safety.
She decided to go to Everlasting and tell him the news,
and ask him what he thought about everything. She ran
downstairs. Bridget was sweeping the big hall.
4 ‘Robert is coming home!” she called out, and she heard
Bridget’s exclamations of joy but did not wait to listen to
what she said. Running out of the house and down the long
drive, she arrived at the entrance to Everlasting’s garden,
almost too much out of breath to tell him the news.
She found him at work in the garden behind the tall
hedge. He was clipping off dead wood from a climbing rose.
“Robert is coming home!” Minetta called over the
hedge.
Everlasting paused in his work, straightened himself,
and his head appeared. “That’s wonderful news,” he said,
his eyes shining and the colour coming into his cheeks.
“Yes, but I’m a little worried about it,” said Minetta.
“That’s very strange. Why should you be? It’s surely
only a matter for rejoicing!”
“I suppose I’ve been too happy,” Minetta sighed. “This
is the only time that I’ve been really truly happy in all my
life, and I suppose I’m afraid something will happen to
spoil it.”




"This good hews could to
rji n^d y °“ »net„ entered the garden,
“ *2SSX S SZSSSSL" she said, "h„. I
haven’t had a really happy We , oncl!lsped his hands
d»SSK he aneweredT had unhappy
5 tondiness. I shudder to think of them now,
"Z y t:,r;r^o» P have been unhappy. Later I’ll
tel! you "1“”"““', , ou most know it’s very sad
, , F wfa Lte I’ve mLed my really truly mother
not to have a momer. Von sec you miss a
badly, although I can t ■ J has . of
moth., because fhe maTup for everything,
course there was dadd J’ mother w ith so many children,
But then there was a step-mo* of us There
and hj 'h Sot him to keep being everything to me;
very busy with their own ch.ldr.n,
“d "of couree°l m'q oite understand that, too."
"h was nto to have a really truly baby brother, though
but before I had time to
many Iwrlas.ing did
not sfKakrhen she cleared her Them
S l 'was nev«‘ 'muTmoney, although w. were all quite


sure—as Eve often told you—that some day Great-uncle
Eversleigh would die and leave us a fortune/'
“We’ll have to find Great-uncle Eversleigh soon, won’t
o f f
we:
“Yes. But Australia is so big. Still, I’ve got to find him,
because we must have more money when daddy comes back.
He couldn’t possibly be expected to have enough for so
many children.’’
“Quite so. We’ll have to start looking very soon.’’
“But I don’t know where to look, and of course I’m
busy at school. Do you think writing letters would be a
good way?”
“Yes-or perhaps advertising in the morning papers,”
“Oh, I never thought of that. That’s a wonderful idea.
How could I do it? Can you tell me? I wouldn’t like to
ask Dawn Mother, because she might think I’m discon-
tented; whereas I do believe that I’m all-round happy for
the first time in my life—and so happy I’m afraid something
will happen to spoil it, like Robert coming home.”
“Don’t you think that’s a little selfish of you, when you
think of the joy it will bring to Dawn Mother?”
Minetta hung her head. “Yes, I do-but I suppose it’s
natural to be a little jealous. And I’d thought Dawn Mother
might find a way to keep all of us if she felt lonely, but she
won’t now.”
“Of course it is most wonderful news,” Everlasting said,
and Minetta looked up and noticed tears in his eyes.
“Tears of joy?” she asked.
“Real tears of joy.” Everlasting hastily brushed his
hands across his eyes. “Some day, perhaps, I’ll tell you why.”
“Couldn’t you tell me now?”


Everlasting shook his head. <
"Is it the same as the reason for your being unhappy
when you were a child?”
"It has some connexion.
“You promised you d tell me.
"So I did, so I did.”


CHAPTER 16
WHAT TO DO FOR THE BEST
T HE puzzle as to what to do with the children became more
and more difficult to solve, and Dawn thought about it a
great deal and often consulted Bridget on the subject.
“It's a pitiful and very strange thing, Bridget, that
these children should have come all the way from their
own homes to escape air raids, and may have to face the
same trouble here. Those two babies, Judith and Mary, are
in a bad position in Newcastle. Mr and Mrs Sweetapple
can’t leave their home, because he’s in charge of munition
works there, and Dr and Mrs Leeton are worried too, and
want me to take Janine and Patsy. Port Kembla is even
worse than Newcastle, and Dr Leeton’s in charge of a hos-
pital there.”
“If you had the children here, Minetta would be a little
mother to them.”
“I know that, Bridget, but would they be safe here?
Should I take them to the country?”
4 'Well, that’s out of the question with Mr Robert
arriving at any moment.”
“It’s very difficult, of course. Anyway, I do think this
house is safe-the cellar, for instance?”
“I wouldn’t care to trust it, ma’am. There’s no get-
away.”
"Those other cellars-we could open them.”


“Farther into the bowels of the earth, and with no
getaway? I don’t like the idea,’ Bridget declared. „
“At anv rate I’ll have a man along to see about t.
In d.clomS ; man arrived with pick and shovel, and
the cellars were opened. They were dark and S loomy.
surprisingly large, and were exammed wkth torches^
"There’s no way out!” the man said. The house is so
old the walls may collapse, and
r rup raves on the beach are far safer than th , Y
“Yes, but that’s a long way to take children mtheeven
of an air raid. I don’t know what to do really. What are we
goin Dawnwas worried and puzzled, and could not make
UP mind, though the need^^
w?l, 8 o to him
Minetta talked all the way to the little house beh
the hedge, and just as they were nearing it she said. Ever
lasting is going to tell me his story.
' “What story?”
“DeaVm? interesting! No one has ever
heard in although many think there’s some.mystery ■ anach d
to him Strange stories have been rumoured about him even
that he’s wealthy and a miser. Of course it’s a 1
“Good morning. Everlasting!” Dawn hailed him from
the other side of the hedge. ‘‘Will you come to the Big House
and help me solve a problem? . • •>,,
“Good morning! I’d like to if I can. What is it?
“Just to help me find a place of safety m the event o
• • j »
air raids.


“Ed like to very much. Em interested in air raid shelters,
hut may I suggest that you take the long way round to the
house ?”
4 ‘What do you mean? I don’t know of a long way
round.”
‘Til show you, and Ell explain to you as we go. First
of all we need a lantern—just a moment!” Everlasting went
to the house.
While he was away, Dawn looked at the garden. “Ed
forgotten it was so lovely,” she said. “It’s a long time since
Eve been here. It was long before Robert went away. That
was his favourite tree.” She pointed to the tall tree with the
white trunk and spindly branches, where Minetta had first
seen Everlasting, with the tears in, his eyes.
“Something’s happened to the tree,” Dawn Mother
exclaimed.
Everlasting, returning with the lantern, heard this last
remark, and said, “That is the reason why my tears are not
always tears of joy.” He smiled down at Minetta. “That
tree is dying, and if it doesn’t die it will have to be destroyed
-and it was Robert’s favourite tree.”
“Why must it be destroyed?”
“If you put your ear close to it you’ll know the reason
why.”
Dawn Mother and Minetta walked close to the tree and
listened. They heard a strange sound.
“What is it?” Dawn asked.
“It’s a horde of borers. They’ve taken possession of
my tree, and they sound for all the world like an advancing
enemy. They’ll kill the tree that they’re invading, if I don’t
kill them; and in order to do so, I may have to destroy the
tree. That is what makes me sad-this multitude, in taking


possession of a beautiful part of the world, causes its destruc-
tion. Why must their way of living bring unhappiness
others? Surely they are wrongdoers-sapping the l ' fe fr
something which has lived for a hundred years and which
with its beauty, has given only joy and pleasure. I ca
understand it. but only know that in a larger sense this ml
thing is happening all over the world to-day. Come no ,
and we’ll take the long way round to the Big House.
Instead of walking towards the house, when they cam
out on to the driveway Everlasting turned towards the big
gates. Coming out of these, he took the way downhilk
“It must be a very long way round, Mmetta said.
“Perhaps you could tell us the story of your life on the
* *
W would be far more appropriate to teU the story of
the boy Denis who was lost and never found.


CHAPTER 17
THE LONG WAY ROUND
“Do you know what happened to Denis ?" Dawn asked.
She was walking on one side of Everlasting, Minetta on the
other.
“You said once that you did/' declared Minetta.
Everlasting nodded. “I can start the story where every
one else has left off-and finish it, too/'
"Really! That is interesting. But surely you don't know
what actually happened to the boy?" Dawn said.
"Yes, I do."
"Oh, please tell me quickly!" cried Minetta. "I've been
just longing to know the real truth. She was not quite
satisfied with her own solution of the problem.
"It seems incredible that any one should know," said
Dawn.
"I know the story, and ITI tell it to you as we go,
because we'll be following where the boy went when he
was lost."
"That sounds very exciting. It's a real adventure,"
"This road is where the boy Denis turned when he rode
off alone. It was a bush track then. He had often looked at
the harbour from his bedroom window at the top of the
house, and longed with a great longing to get close to it,
and he chose a time when he was out riding with his tutor."


“I suppose the window at the top of the house is the
one in Mary s room!” Minetta thought.
“Denis went riding every day with his tutor, and every
day he asked for permission to go to the beach, but that was
always denied him. JVlr Irvine was a strange man. He ha
a long sallow face, with small dark eyes and a stern expres-
sion, and he seemed to take pleasure in his authority oyer
Denis. The boy had only to want a thing for it to be denied
him. No, you cannot!' Denis heard that so often that it
dampened his spirit and made him miserable. No wonder
he was unhappy, with, as his only companion, a tutor who
seldom spoke to him except to deny him all pleasure. He
loved his father, but did not see him often.
“From his window he could see ships sailing through
the narrow heads, and small boats plying up and down the
harbour, and others at anchor close to the shore; and he
watched at all hours of the day and night. On moonlit nights
he saw dark shadows move over the bright waters, and he
knew that these were small craft, and wondered about them.
He saw these shadows move swiftly backwards and for-
wards and disappear in the shadow of a newly arrived ship.
Then he saw the boats return and become merged in the
darker shadows of the cliff near the beach. He wanted to
know where these boats hid in the daytime; he wanted to
see with his own eyes; and he became so intrigued at the
thought of the freedom that these boats meant to those who
used them that he made up his mind to become a sailor
one day. .
" ‘Father, why do small boats go out to the ships at
night?' he would sometimes ask his father.
“‘Why shouldn't they?' his father would reply.
‘There’s much business to be done when a ship arrives in


the harbour from far-away ports. These ships have been at
sea for many months, and the sailors and crew are glad to
come ashore/
“ ‘But why don’t the boats land at wharves instead of
at the beaches?’
“ ‘They may be smugglers, although that isn’t likely,
for there’s a keen watch kept for men who break the law.”
‘‘Denis opened his eyes wide. ‘Smugglers!’ he said.
“ ‘These smugglers often appear to be simple fishing
folk, while all the time they’re breaking the law.’
“ ‘Why can’t I go to the beach? Mr Irvine will never
let me.’


‘I suppose he knows best, but there seems little reason
why you shouldn't go/
“ ‘He says there are quicksands/
“ Tve heard that story too, but there's been no proof
of it. Maybe it's given out for some special reason.'
“ ‘Please, can't I go?'
" ‘To prove there are no quicksands may prove too
dear. I think it better you should abide by what your tutor
tells you.'
“So Denis kept watching from his window, and he saw
other interesting happenings. Carriages drove up the broad
driveway. He saw grand guests alight and enter the house,
and heard the restless stamping of horses' hoofs far into the
night. There were many gay parties. Peeping through the
banisters from the landing above, he often stared at the merry
company below. In winter-time the guests gathered in the
large hall around the wide fireplace, where great logs blazed.
Fiery lights shone upon the ladies' satin gowns, and dia-
monds and rubies sparkled on their bare arms and necks.
Gay laughter floated to his ears and brought him a strange
loneliness, for there seemed no place in all that happy throng
for a little boy.
“Often guests came to stay. On these occasions Mr Irvine
kept Denis in the attic on the top floor of the house, while
he read or painted pictures. Denis liked to watch his tutor
paint, but even this the tutor did not allow. He seemed to
hate the people who made up these house parties, and was
always silent and gloomy while the parties lasted. He did
not know about Denis's habit of staring through the ban-
isters, from the top of the stairs.
“One night, when Denis had crept from his bed and
down the first flight of stairs to his favourite place on the


landing below, •he stayed too long and, overcome with
drowsiness, fell asleep. Later, one of the lady guests found
him. Sorry for the forlorn child, she insisted upon seeing
him to bed, and even tucked him in and kissed him good
night. Denis slept that night and dreamt happy dreams, and
the next morning, wishing to see the lady again, he shyly
joined the guests at the breakfast table, and when his father
bade him return upstairs to his room and tutor, the lady
insisted that he be allowed to stay. While he sat at the table,
he heard that there was to be an excursion to a beach. He
had wished so often to go close to the sea that he now begged
for permission to go too, and, much to the boy's surprise,
the father gave his consent.
“It proved to be the most exciting day of Denis's life.
He had never dreamt that there could be such happiness.
First, the pounding of horses’ hoofs on the driveway when
the drag arrived drawn by four horses; then picnic hampers,
baskets of fruit, hams, poultry packed in under the seat; and,
last of all, the members of the party, including himself,
climbed in, and the horses thundered away down the long
drive.
“Mr Irvine, his father and some of the party went on
horseback. A beach some miles away had been chosen for
the picnic and, arriving there, Denis was overjoyed. He ran
up and down on the sand, and paddled in the shallow water,
and later in the day he even went bathing with the men of
the party. The ladies continued to pet and spoil him
throughout the day, and the men joked with him and teased
him. He was the centre of attraction as he had never been
before. At the end of the day, he was tired but still excited.
“Going, his pony had been ridden by one of the ladies,
who now wished to return in the drag, so Denis had to ride


ll ,
back with Mr Irvine, who was sulky and silent because he
had not enjoyed his day and Denis had. He was short and
sharp in his manner to Denis, and insisted upon riding rar
behind the drag and the other horsemen. Denis resented this
treatment and, its coming after so happy a day, he was rebel-
lious against it. When nearing home, he slowed his pony
and decided to disobey Mr Irvine’s orders. Coming to the
track that led to the beach, he turned into it and galloped
away.


CHAPTER 18
THE BEACH
Everlasting stood, as he came to a bend in the road. “This
is where he turned/' he said. “It was overgrown with bush
and wild country then."
“Did he find the beach?" Minetta asked.
“Yes, he came to the beach, though he was unable to
see it until he was quite close to it. He and his pony were com-
pletly hidden from view. It was no wonder that his tutor
and the rest of the party searched in vain."
“You'd have thought that the first place where they’d
look would have been the beach—especially as he'd so often
wanted to go there," Dawn said. “Surely they did look?
“They looked everywhere, but something had happened
to Denis in the meantime.
“He galloped his pony up and down the beach for a
while, then rode to the water's edge and into the shallow
water. Suddenly the pony sank. At first Denis thought it
was because the water had deepened, but a terrifying thought
then came to him. ‘Quicksands!' he cried."
“Quicksands! Quicksands!" Minetta said to herself as
they all walked on the beach and the sand ran away from
her feet.
“Do you think there were quicksands?" Dawn asked.
“Maybe, maybe!"
“Was Denis lost in the quicksands?"
“No, he flung himself from the pony’s back. He could


not swim, but he floundered in the water. He saw his pony
disappear, and screamed for help, then remembered nothing
else until he awoke/'
"Where did he wake up?" Minetta asked.
"At first he did not know where he was. He stared at
strange flickering lights, and wondered why the ceiling in
his bedroom was no longer white and smooth and far away,
but close and dark and rough-looking. He wondered also
why his bed was hard."
By this time Everlasting, Dawn and Minetta had come
to the rocks and small caves in the cliffs at the far end of the
beach, just beneath the Big House. Everlasting waved his
long slender hand and said, "Denis awoke here."
Minetta and Dawn walked close to the cave and peered
in. They noticed that it ran a long way back under the cliff.
Everlasting walked on, and they followed him. He came
to some tangled growth in the cliff side, and pulling part of
it away, he said, "This is the long way round."
"What do you mean?" Dawn asked. "That's the old
storm channel that's been choked for years past.
"That's what it's thought to be. In reality, it's a tunnel
that runs back a long way. If you care to come with me,
I'll show you where it leads to."
"Are you quite sure we can get through-that it isn't
blocked?"
"It is quite clear. I've been working on this every day
for a long time."
"Is that what you've been doing every morning when
we go bathing?" Minetta asked.
"Yes, that's what I’ve been doing."
Wonderingly, Minetta and Dawn followed Everlasting,,
who held the lantern and walked ahead to light the way.


“What did Denis say when he awoke?" Minetta asked.
“The first thing he said was, ‘Where is my pony?' "
Everlasting's voice echoed strangely as he led the way along
the narrow tunnel, stooping because his long figure was a
little too tall to stand upright. “ ‘Where is my pony?'
“He sat up shivering and staring about him. He found
he was in the cave-the one we have just left. Several men,
whom he took to be fishermen, sat beside a fire.
“ ‘Feeling better?' one of these asked.
“ ‘Where am I? Where is my pony?’
“He's safe too, and you’re lucky to be here. We dragged
you from the water. We saved your life. We dried your
clothes and made you warm and comfortable. Where do
you come from?'
“ ‘From the Big House.'
“The men looked at one another. ‘The Big House?
Then you must be the kid Mr Irvine teaches. Guess he gives
you the cane, too. How do you like him?'
‘He'll be angry with me because I disobeyed him. I
ran away.’
‘We are going on a long trip to-day. How would you
like to come with us? Then Mr Irvine wouldn’t be able to
find you.'
“ ‘Are you going in a boat?’ Denis asked eagerly.
“ ‘Yes, and we can show you wonderful things.’
I’d love to come. I never want to go home again.’
“Denis meant this. He was terrified at the thought of
his tutor's anger and his father’s displeasure because of his
disobedience. Now, instead of having to face all this, he was
to get his old wish at last: he was to journey forth upon
the sea.
“Denis lay back on his rough bed. He was dizzy, and




too tired to think. He slept again, and his next recollection
was of being in a boat on a smooth sea with long waves,
and of having a bright blue sky above. It was early morning.
The slanting rays of the sun came in a long pathway across
the water. By the time the sun was overhead, the men had
rowed their boat to an island. At first it appeared to be a
great rock, and there seemed no place to land. Denis ques-
tioned the three men.
“ ‘Where are you going, boatmen?'
The men pulled the boat in close to the rocky bay,
then around the rocks into still water. They jumped on to
a rocky ledge and anchored the boat, and told Denis to jump
out too. Denis did so, and was delighted with his surround-
ings. He saw a high cliff.
Can I go up there?' he asked.
“ 'Your place is here,' one of the men said, ‘and on the
beach. No wandering about on the top of the cliff!'
“Denis looked about him. Thousands of birds fluttered
backwards and forwards, but there seemed to be no human
inhabitants. There were, indeed, no people in that lonely
spot other than themselves. Later Denis found his pony
grazing on a grassy knoll not far from the cave in which he
and the men had established their quarters, and he learnt
that it had been carried there on board a lugger.
“The sea dashed great waves against half submerged
rocks, except where the boat had landed. Here there were
deep pools, and shallow ones far in under caves. Denis dis-
covered strange fish, queer-looking seaweed, shells and birds'
nests, and here, in the days and weeks that followed, he
found much to amuse and interest him.
“ ‘How long are we going to stay here?' he asked the
boatmen.


“Many times he asked this question, but only ever
received the same answer: ‘lt just depends.
“He did not know upon what it depended. The three
boatmen took it turn and turn about keeping watch from
a high cliff at all times of the day. The other two fished,
cooked, and kept house in the cave which they had made
into a comfortable home. At other times they lay on the
beach smoking and talking; and many were the wonderful
tales that Denis heard. One day the man on watch called to
the other two, who immediately ran along the beach and
climbed the cliff, Denis following.
“ ‘There she is!’ the man cried; and Denis, looking
where he pointed, saw a ship on the far horizon.
“All three boatmen hurried from the cliff and launched
the boat. They ordered Denis into it, then sailed out to sea.
“In all the years that followed, a white sail upon the
horizon was a signal to Denis for adventure and excitement,
and brought back to his memory the excitement of sailing
close to a great ship, of hearing creaking and straining, or
the clap-clapping of sails in the wind. He came, in time, to
expect to see cases bob up and down in the wake of the ships
on the crest of the waves. He learnt to help fish these cases
from the sea, to hold the rudder while the boatmen hooked
them on to long hooks. He knew that the boatmen were
smugglers, but did not care that he was helping them.
It was an exciting life, and he never questioned whether it
was right or wrong.
“Smuggling! He never learnt the contents of the boxes,
but he learnt many other things-how to be useful, alert,
and how to see in the dark. Each time the boatmen returned
to the caves below the Big House, he asked if he was to
return home, fearing yet wishing to see his father; and when


told that he was not to return, he was always more glad
than sorry, for he did not wish to go back to that existence
made dull and lonely by the tyranny of his tutor and the
indifference of his father.
“He did many odd jobs for the boatmen. At night-time
he held the lantern when the men rowed their boats out to
a ship and received goods, and he held it again when they
unloaded the goods on the seashore. He lit the way for
them when they carried these goods through a long dark
tunnel to great cellars and he had been performing this
task for a long time before he discovered that the cellars
were beneath the Big House/'
“Never!" Dawn exclaimed.
Everlasting paused, held the lantern high. The rays
lit up a flight of stone steps. “These steps," he said, “lead
to the cellar."
“Oh!" cried Dawn and for a moment she forgot Ever-
lasting's story. “These cellars will make a perfect air raid
shelter after all. There is a second way out. I’ll be able to
take all the children and needn't worry any further."
“But what about Robert coming home? Will you still
want us?"
“Of course I will. What difference will that make?
He’ll want you, too. It's wonderful to think we’ll be able
to get to the caves on the beach sheltered all the way. There
couldn't be a safer place."
“That’s just what I thought," Everlasting said, “And
I've been preparing this place for some time past."
“How wonderful of you, Everlasting!"
“Well," said Minetta, “Denis found his way home the
long way round. What happened then?"
Everlasting walked up the small flight of steps, and put


his hand upon the low ceiling and opened a trapdoor. This
had not been opened for so long,” he said, it took several
days to make it budge. You see, it moves quite easily now.
Dawn and Minetta stood at the foot of the stone steps,
staring with surprise.
“You may come up now,” he said, holding the lantern
high to light the way. “As I said, Denis did not know that
the cellar where he so often helped the men carry their goods
was beneath his own home. He discovered this when one
day Mr Irvine stood here with the lantern.
“ ‘You may come home now!' he said to Denis. This
is the way/
" ‘I don't understand/ Denis replied.
" ‘Your father is not here. He's gone on a long voyage.'
“Denis was relieved. Deep in his heart he loved his
father, and knew that smuggling was wrong; so, when he
found that his tutor was connected with it, he did not
wish to think that his father was too.
"Poor Denis! He must have hated meeting his tutor
again. And had the tutor known all the time where he was?”
“He did not know at first. In fact, he did not know until
the men returned after having kept Denis on that far beach
until his father had gone away.”
“But I can't understand why you yourself have never
told any one about it. Why have you kept it a secret for
so long?” Dawn asked.
"I couldn't tell.”
“Why? Oh, please do go on with the story! What
happened to Denis?”
“He lived in his own home with Mr Irvine, who was
in charge of the house.”


“Poor Denis! Did he have to do lessons instead of
going on lovely adventures ?" Minetta inquired.
“He did both, for the boatmen insisted upon taking
him with them whenever a ship came to port/'
“Why did they want Denis with them?”
“Well you see, Denis knew so much. They wanted him
to become one of themselves/'
As Everlasting answered these questions he led the way
through the gloomy cellars and then into the cellar leading
to the hallway of the Big House. Arriving there, Everlasting
stood quietly and looked around him. “It's a long time
since I was in this hall/' he said.
“Come and I’ll show you Denis's portrait," Minetta
said, and, taking Everlasting’s hand, she pulled him into
the dining-room.
Everlasting stood staring at the picture. “Where did
that come from?" he asked, in a voice hardly above a
whisper.
“It was found in one of the cellars before they were
bricked up," Dawn Mother said. “It was carefully packed,
and the frame was in perfect condition when it was found.
It's just as it has always been. I wonder who painted it!"
“The tutor Mr Irvine was the artist, I can tell you. He
was a great artist. And besides being an artist, he was a
good business man. He looked after his master's affairs."
Dawn looked at Everlasting in a puzzled way. “Ever-
lasting-Gardener!" she suddenly exclaimed in a startled
voice. “Are you Denis?"
“What makes you ask such a question?"
“Something in the expression of those eyes," she
answered, indicating the picture. “You cannot deny it. You
are Denis!"


“Let me finish my story/ ’
It was Minetta’s turn to stare at Everlasting, “I know
now!” she cried. “I always knew that the boy in the picture
reminded me of someone; and when I looked at you I
thought I knew you—remember?—and then when I looked
at the picture I thought I knew Denis. And all the time it
was because you were both the one person/'
“Well, now that you've guessed, I know you would
like me to finish the story.''
“We’ll find Great-uncle Eversleigh next," said Minetta
in almost a whisper.
“I am Great-uncle Eversleigh, too/’
“OH dear! Oh no! How can you be?
“Do tell us everything,’’ cried Dawn. “This gets more
puzzling every moment.''
“I never knew if my father had anything to do with
the illegal business methods of Mr Irvine. I know that my
tutor forwarded money to him, but letters took many
months to arrive and many months to return. By the time
questions were asked and answered, much time would be
lost, and many mistakes could have been made and much
deception practised. I’ve always given my father the benefit
of the doubt. I know he was never informed that I had been
found, although Mr Irvine led me to believe that he had
written to him and told him everything. My father’s seeming
indifference made me sad at times.
“Surprisingly enough, Mr'lrvine’s treatment of me
changed-became kindly. Later I found that he had carefully
accumulated a large amount of money for me. He continued
to give me lessons, and allowed me to go away with the
boatmen on all their trips. There was only one thing he
was determined about: I was never allowed to leave this


garden except by way of the caves and out on to the beach.
As I grew older I longed to meet my father again, and many
times asked permission to take the long sea voyage to see
him, but this was always refused. When, however, I had
grown to manhood, Mr Irvine quite suddenly told me that
I should go to see my father. He helped with all the arrange-
ments, and I set sail upon a long adventurous voyage.
“I never set eyes on my tutor again; nor did I find my
father, who had been dead for several months when I arrived
in England. Since then, Eve come to believe that Mr Irvine
knew this, and sent me away to get rid of me. Arriving in
England, I learnt for the first time that my father had
married again and that I had a half-brother, although I
could find neither brother nor step-mother. I went to my
mother’s relatives who accepted me as a rich relation from
Australia. I told them nothing more. I married one of my
cousin’s, Minetta’s great-aunt; so Minetta and I arc doubly
related.
"It’s true that I was generous with money—that I gave
many presents. I was happy-go-lucky. But my marriage
did not last long, nor did my money. I lost Minetta’s great-
aunt-the one I’ve heard you speak of, Minetta, with the
curls piled high and the laughing eyes. Later, I lost all except
a job in my own garden, a roof over my head, and enough
money for food. But I did not lose my happiness.”


CHAPTER 19
THE PICTURE OUT OF THE FRAME
"What happened when you came back to Australia?"
Minetta asked her Great-uncle Eversleigh.
"I found the house empty, and upon inquiry I was told
that Mr Irvine was in jail, having been arrested on a charge
of smuggling. I wondered what had become of the boatmen,
and hoped they had escaped to one of the islands we had
often sailed to. I went back to live in the old home, thinking
it belonged to me. It did too, until my half-brother came
to Australia to claim his inheritance. Then, fearful of telling
my story and of being jailed for smuggling, I simply told
him I was the gardener, hoping that some day Fd be able
to tell my story and claim my inheritance. But Fve lived
as the gardener ever since."
For some minutes, Everlasting had been looking at the
picture thoughtfully. "You say the picture is just as it was
when found-frame and all?"
"So I believe."
"I wonder if I may ask a favour?"
"Anything, anything!" Dawn said eagerly. "Why,
everything belongs to you. We have no right to it at all."
"No, you are wrong. My half-brother had equal rights.
The house, I have since learnt, was left to my father's two
sons, so it seems he had not given up hope that Fd be found.
My half-brother was Robert's grandfather, and, had I


insisted upon my rights, there would have been nothing to
prove that I was the other son. Indeed, I would have been
branded as an imposter/'
' ‘Surely your likeness to the picture would have been
enough?"
"The picture was not here then, you must remember.
I did not know about it. Mr Irvine seldom kept his paint-
ings. This is a surprise to me."
"What is the favour you wished to ask?"
"Ed like to take the picture out of the frame. There
may be something written on the back of it."
"How exciting!" cried Minetta. "Can we look now?"
"Yes, yes, of course! It will be most interesting. Can
you get it down, Everlasting?"
"I think so."
Although Everlasting was tall, he had to stand on a
chair in order to reach the picture. When he took it down
he stood it with its face to the wall. The back of the frame
was securely boarded with thin wood.
"Ell need some tools. Ell get mine."
"Oh ; please hurry, Everlasting! Hurry, hurry! It's so
exciting!" said Minetta.
Everlasting promised to hurry, but to Minetta it seemed
a very long time before he returned, and a longer time still
before he was able to remove all the wood from the frame.
"Oh, do hurry-do, do!"
"Patience, Minetta!" said Dawn. She was sitting in the
big armchair thinking deeply. "It really is the strangest
thing. How old are you, Everlasting?"
"Em not sure!"
"It must be quite eighty years ago since Denis dis-
appeared."


Everlasting nodded.
“To think that after all these years something that s
mystified every one for so long should be cleared up so
simply! It seems too amazing. Of course, the fact that you
had been an unhappy child and had changed from that to
a carefree and happy existence, explains why you never
really attempted to make yourself known. Just imagine
living at your father s very door all the time! It does seem
strange that no one ever recognized you.”
“Yes, but remember I was taken away and did not
return until my father had given up all hope of finding me.
By the way, he really did sorrow about his loss, though I
only learnt that later.”
“How long was it before your tutor knew?”
“Em not quite sure. He was a strange man. The boat-
men did their job and he did his. Each was necessary in the
business. They asked no questions. Ah, that’s the last piece!”
As he spoke, Everlasting ripped a piece of wood from
the frame. Then he took the picture out, and carried it to
the light of the window. Minetta and Dawn Mother fol-
lowed, and stared at something written in faded ink on the
back of it.
“I can just read it,” Everlasting said.
“Please read it aloud, then.”
“ ‘This is the portrait of Denis Eversleigh’-he taught
me to spell it that way-who disappeared with his pony
one . . .’ I can’t read that date. 1, his tutor, here certify
the following: Denis was kidnapped by men who, under the
guise of fishermen, smuggled goods into this country and
lived in the cave on the beach belonging to this property.
They kept the boy, knowing he had information that would
lead to their arrest. They took him to a far-away beach,


I — - **~ -^Zl— ~~ | - 1 , •- — ' r ~


and kept him there until all search for him was discontinued.
(Signed) M. L. Irvine/ ”
“That proves beyond doubt that you are Denis Evers-
ley,” said Dawn. “What a pity the picture wasn't found
before!”
“That would have made a totally different story—maybe
not quite as happy a one.”
“Certainly not as interesting. And now that there's
proof that you, also, own all this”—Dawn waved her hand
—“we must share it with you. I wish Robert were here!”
Everlasting smiled. “I gave up my inheritance. I've had
all that I've desired. My only wish now is that Minetta's little
sisters may share this home until they return to their own
home in England.”
“Oh Everlasting, please do tell me now why you have
tears of joy,” Minetta said.
“Because there was only one person in the world to
whom I wanted to tell my secret—that was before I knew
Minetta-and I thought perhaps I'd not be here when he
returned.”
“You mean Robert?” Dawn asked softly.
“Yes. I wanted to tell Robert.”
“And now, after all, you will be able to tell him.”
A tall figure stood in the doorway. Robert had returned.
It was he who had spoken the last words.
Everlasting came out of his front door very early the next
morning, and his eyes were shining with happiness. He was
wondering how soon Robert would be calling upon him,
and had hardly taken his first step before a whirlwind seemed
to come upon him. Minetta threw herself into his arms and
burst into a flood of tears.


“Dear me, dear me! What is all this about?”
“Tears of joy, tears of joy, Everlasting!” Minetta
gasped. “I couldn’t shed them anywhere else: tears of joy
seem to belong to this garden/’
“But tell me, what are they for?”
“For my daddy, who’s been found. He is a prisoner—
and well and unharmed. Oh, it’s too good to be true.
“When did you hear?’’
“Robert brought the news, and kept it as a surprise until
this morning, and I had to tell you at once, because my
daddy is your nearest and dearest relation.’’
“Nearest, but no dearer than my Robert and my Min-
etta,’’ Everlasting said with a happy laugh.


MINETTA’S STORIES
(Told by her, written down by her teacher)
OLD GRANDFATHER WIND
Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr are old Grandfather Wind's
favourite grandchildren, and while he sleeps on the big, wide
ocean they play about him. Often, when he sleeps soundly,
they rush off to the land and play with the little waves on
the seashore, or run fast around the hills, chasing one another
in and out among the leaves of the trees; but best of all
they love to play hide-and-seek in and out of the windows
and doors of houses, where often they hear people's secrets.
Sometimes old Grandfather Wind wakes up suddenly and,
before Gentle Zephyr and Sea Breeze have time to run away,
he catches them in his wide arms and takes them for a ride
over the top of the mighty ocean, which he whips into a
great fury until the little waves are dashed high on to the
rocks and cliffs. Then he lashes the trees on the seashore
and pulls the leaves off the boughs, and blusters around the
houses and howls down the chimneys, and tears away to
the mountains, roaring around the hills and gullies.
This makes his grandchildren a little frightened, because
terrible things sometimes happen. They love to play, and
don't care to see their friends the little waves dashed about;
they love the trees, and hate to see them bent to the ground
and to hear them groan and creak; and they do not like to see
the leaves torn off the boughs and blown hither and thither.




Besides, it spoils their favourite game, since they cannot get
into houses and hear people's secrets; for when old Grand-
father Wind carries them with him, all the windows and
doors are closed and they cannot get in anywhere. So they are
glad when old Grandfather Wind tires out, and takes them
back to the ocean, and goes to sleep again.
Fortunately he gets tired easily, because he is so old,
and he falls asleep quickly. But he grunts and groans in
his sleep, and it is often difficult to be quite sure that he
is not awake; so Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr wait awhile
near by, and then they blow gently away to the seashore
to tell their friends the little waves how sorry they are
about the dreadful time they have had; and then they go
to the trees and mountains. This takes time, but by and by
they are able to play their favourite game again and slip
quietly through the windows to listen, and now, instead of
secrets, they hear about all the damage old Grandfather
Wind has done, and they feel a little ashamed.
One day the two little winds were talking together,
thinking old Grandfather Wind was fast asleep.
"I don’t like going for rides with grandpuff,” Gentle
Zephyr said. “He’s unkind to all our friends.”
“We have much more fun by ourselves. He’s cruel and
selfish, and I’m not going with him any more, for we’re
certain to get the blame,” Sea Breeze said.
“How can we help it?” Gentle Zephyr asked. “He just
takes us.”
“We can hide.”
“But where can we hide?”
“Leave it to me. I’ll find a way,” Sea Breeze said boast-
fully. “I’ll beat old grandpuff yet!”
“Will you, indeed!” said Grandfather Wind in a deep,


grumbling voice. “I can hear you. And don't call me names!
You can go off by yourselves in the future, and come back
and entertain me with all the things you’ve seen and heard."
"You already have everything to interest you/’ the little
winds said. "You cannot want anything more. You have
thrilling adventures. You can wreck a ship, blow down
trees, unroof houses and do all the things that we can’t do.
You surely don’t want us to do that?"
"Tut, tut! You know you couldn’t even if you tried.
I am getting tired, though, with nothing but work, work,
work, and Ed like to rest a bit for a change, so Ell give
you a little of my strength and you can do some of the work
for me."
"Oh, no, no, please!" cried Sea Breeze and Gentle
Zephyr.
"Well, be off, now!" old Grandfather Wind roared.
"You two are welcome everywhere. No one shuts his doors
or windows against you! However hard I huff and puff, I
never get inside anywhere. You hear all the secrets, and I
never hear any." With this, he gave a great puff. "So off
you go and hear the secrets, and come back and tell me about
them. Keep me entertained, and then I won’t make you help
me be ruthless to your friends."
So Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr rushed away quickly
to do old Grandfather Wind’s bidding.
SAD EYES
There was once a little boy who was called Sad Eyes,
because every one had forgotten his name, but they remem-
bered his sad eyes. He was sad because there was only his
father to love-no mother, no brothers or sisters. Also,


there was a man called a tutor, who taught him lessons and
would never let him play. The only time he ever went out
was when he rode his pony, and then his tutor roe on a
horse beside him. The rest of the time he had to stay in his
room, which was high up on the top story of the house^.
He could see the seashore from the windows, and he
longed to run away through the trees and never come back
again, because he thought that his father did not love him.
One day, when he was out riding, Sad Eyes decided
to run away. He whispered to his pony, and it understood
him, and ran so fast and so far that they were both lost
and never seen again. Everybody wondered what could have
happened to them, and they looked and looked; but they
could not find them, because they did not know about the
little fairy people— how they are sorry for children who are
unhappy and lonely and have no one to play with.
At first Sad Eyes thought he was lost, and did not
know what to do. He found himself in a wood, and rode
his pony round and round, looking for a place to sleep. Soon
they were both tired and could not go any farther, so he
jumped off his pony’s back and looked for a place to rest.
He found a big tree with a hollow trunk, big enough
for himself to take shelter and rest. He put the pony’s reins
over a prong of wood near the tree, then crouched in the
hollow and fell asleep.
While he slept he dreamt frightening dreams. He dreamt
that his father was cross because he had run away, and that
his tutor locked him in his room and would never let him
out again. When he awoke he was very frightened indeed.
He did not want to go home ever again, but he was lonely,
so he put his head on his arms and cried, sobbing loudly.
Very soon he heard happy laughter all around him, and


this made him feel happy, too. He forgot his sadness, and
laughed also. Then, peeping from under his arms, he saw
fairy people dancing around him.
‘‘Have you come to live with us?” they sang. “Would
you like to be made happy?”
“Oh, yes, please! Who are you?” he said to the lovely
creatures dancing about him. But he need not have asked,
for he knew they were the little people belonging to Fairy-
land.
“Come with us!” they sang, and, dancing past him,
hurried away.
Sad Eyes jumped to his feet, and saw the little people
go through a hole in the hollow trunk of the tree. Peeping
into the hole, he found that it opened into a passage and
that it was wide enough for his pony and himself to get
through. So he sprang on to his pony and rode through
the hole, into twilight, and followed the sound of song
and of dancing feet a long way. He did not mind how far
it was, because he was happy.
Suddenly the passage opened into a wide space. There
were green fields, with daisies shining in the moonlight like
stars; and there were stars in the sky above, and fairies
dancing everywhere. They had lovely frocks that floated
about like mist in ever-changing shades of blue, and the
moonlight and the starlight shimmered through their wings.
Sad Eyes kept very still. He stared and stared, and hardly
dared to breathe for fear of disturbing the little people. But
soon they crowded round about him.
“We shall teach you to dance and sing and how to be
happy,” they sang. “And if you live with us for ever, we
shall teach you how to stay young always and to never
grow up.”


And Sad Eyes, remembering that he had been lonely and
unhappy among grown-up people, was glad, and he stayed
with the little people and lived happily ever after. He never
grew up, and no one ever stopped him from playing. He also
went for long rides on his pony and visited all the castles
belonging to Fairyland.
One day he came to a castle on a high cliff near the
sea, and Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr were there. They
had just left the Big House after hearing someone tell the
story of another little boy called Denis, and his horse, who
had disappeared a long time ago.
So they followed Sad Eyes and found out where he
lived and heard what had happened to him, then rushed
off to tell old Grandfather Wind the story, and asked him
to guess if Sad Eyes was Denis or another little boy.
GRANDFATHER WIND IN A RAGE
Old Grandfather Wind blew so strong and hard that he
caught up with Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr before they
had time to reach the seashore. Catching them in his wide
arms, he bellowed,
“Lead me to the house that has the secret of the little
boy who was lost/'
“It is on the top of a cliff, close to the shore/' his grand-
children answered. “But you won't find the answer to the
puzzle there, because no one has been able to find it."
“I'll find out!" old Grandfather Wind roared. “Lead
the way!"
Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr led the way, although
they hated doing it. However, when they arrived at the Big


House, all the doors and windows were closed, and they
could not get in, though their grandfather huffed and puffed
and rushed madly round and round, beating on the doors
and windows and rattling the handles.
At last he grew more furious and said, “You two can
get down a chimney/’
Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr slipped out of old grand-
father’s grasp and hid under the eaves, but he soon found
them again and chased them out, and lifted them above the
chimney, screaming, “In you go! In you go!’’ and dropped
them in.
There in the chimney they both stayed. Blit they were
rather crowded, and the little winds jostled each other about.
“Move over! You’ve got all the space.’’
“I can’t. You’ve got it all!’’
“I’ll make room for you,” their grandfather puffed. He
had placed his ear over the top of the chimney and had been
listening.
Now he thrust a long arm down the chimney and pushed
his two grandchilden into the room where the picture of
the little boy hung over the mantlepiece.
At first the little winds tried to get out again through
the window, but it was closed. They then rushed back to the
chimney, but in their hurry they got behind the picture
instead, and—crash, crash, crash-it fell to the ground.
“Thank you very much,’’ said a polite little voice, and
old Grandfather Wind, with one ear at the top of the
chimney and his long arm thrust down it, shouted,
“Who’s that? Who’s that? And what are you thanking
me for?’’
“For letting me out of the picture, of course.’’


Oh, it's you, is it? Then you can answer my riddle/'
Grandfather shouted. “What is your name?"
“Eve forgotten my name."
“Are you sure it isn't Sad Eyes?"
Sad Eyes? Who ever heard of such a name?" And a
happy laugh floated up the chimney.
“I want to know if you and someone called Sad Eyes
are one and the same person?"
“Whatever do you mean?"
I mean that when you were little you were lost with
your pony, and no one ever heard of you again, except in
the story of a little boy called Sad Eyes who was lost in the
same way, and taken to a wonderful place."
“But Eve been here always."
“What do you mean 'always'?"
“For ever and ever so long past Eve been hanging on
that wall—and oh, how glad lam now to be off it for a
while!"
Of course he s only a picture. How can he know?"
Grandfather Wind sniffed.
He was now getting tired of having his ear over the
top of the chimney, so he moaned down it, “Come out you
.ty y , •
two!
Catching hold of his two grandchildren, he pulled them
out of the chimney with all his might-and down came the
chimney.
Crash, crash, crash! The bricks fell on the roof, and
all the people inside the home cried out, “What a dreadful
storm!"
“No use trying to find out the secret from there," grand-
father grumbled.
“We told you so!"


“We’ll have to find the hollow tree," Grandfather said,
and blew off to the woods with his two grandchildren in his
arms.
They came to many hollow trees, but could not get into
the hollbws, because these were sheltered from them. This
made old Grandfather Wind angry, and he tore some of the
trees down. „
4 ‘Oh, please, please, don’t do that!” Gentle Zephyr
moaned. And Sea Breeze had tears that fell in great drops.
‘lt’s going to rain,” grandfather said. ‘Til get back to
my bed before it gets worse. And remember, next time you
find a secret, don’t have a riddle at the end of it. Then off he
blew to the ocean, while Sea Breeze and Gentle Zephyr
stayed behind. *
They were glad to be able to tell the trees that they
were sorry. Everything was quiet and peaceful after the
storm, and there was a great round moon.
Beside a fallen log they saw a tiny horse. Fairy folk
danced around him, and two little gnomes held open a door
in the trunk of a tree.
“It’s the stable for the horse.” Then Sea Breeze and
Gentle Zephyr remembered something and whispered
together. They thought to find the little boy called Sad
Eyes, but he was nowhere to be seen.
4 ‘Perhaps he’s gone home. Perhaps he really was the
boy in the picture, and when the picture came crashing down
he went home again for some reason or other.
“Who knows? Who knows?” the little winds sighed,
and blew gently back to old Grandfather Wind, who was
sleeping quietly again. ... , . . , ,
They were glad that the tree with the door m it had


l e -M Standing ’ f ? r thfi y W£ re sure that that was where
lost children were taken through into Fairyland,
THE DOOR IN THE TREE
One of the trees that old Grandfather Wind brought down
feU on the roof of a little house in the wood. There
°^l dr “ “ the house, alone, and they were frightened.
little Sto He a f r?> Say? ” Gf f g ’ the litk b ° y< asked his
little sister. He asked it over and over again “Father tnlrl
“ “the house and sec that nTharm came o
it. What shall I do? What shall I do?"
i Father Wlll surely not be angry,” Greta said, "because
a “ no ' “ blan,e - B ‘ Sifc be “ id « "«led
• Ye , s ’ but he als o said we couldn’t afford one-and I
thar i, 1 ) s 01ng to nun. I felt heavy drops come through
that hole the tree tore in the roof.” He did not know that
these were the tears Sea Breeze had shed.
, . „ fhe storm has passed now and the sun is shining
again, said Greta. "Mother will be home soon to cook our
evening meal, and she’ll know what to do.”
mncf E Ut fath u told t0 look after mother- It is I who
ust know what to do. I must mend the roof.”
But it s a big hole and will take something very big to
Srrv Sn S d°T^ g big 3nd too heavy to
mend the rooh" C ° Uld "'' mOVC the »
I don t mind the tree. It can stav thora r -
roots are still in the ground and it will grawagahT Wha?
I want to do is to mend the h„,e. I




bark from the trees in the wood. There’s time before the
sun sets to look for some.”
‘Til come with you,” Greta said.
You may come-but mind you, it is I who have to
mend the roof.”
‘Til help to carry the bark.”
‘‘That won't be necessary. I am big and strong, and will
carry it across my shoulders.”
“Til help you find it.”
Yes, you can do that, because you have sharp eyes.”
The two children set out and wandered on and on, but
they could find no bark large enough to cover the hole in
the roof of their home.
Oh, look at the bluebells!” Greta exclaimed.
‘‘We're not looking for bluebells; we're looking for
bark,” said Greg, keeping his eyes steadily on the tree trunks.
Greta tried not to look at the bluebells, but to search
for bark instead.
Old Grandfather Wmd had blown a great many pieces
from the trees, but in his fury had torn them to shreds and
scattered them here and there.
The bluebells must have hung their heads, or else they
would have had them blown off by the wind,” Greta said.
“Oh, bother the bluebells!” cried Greg. “I want to find
the bark.”
111 tr y not to see the bells, Greg,” cried Greta, “but
it's so hard, because they are everywhere and I do love them
so. Listen!”
“What was that?”
“It sounded like bells ringing.”
Greta and Greg stood still, holding each other's hands
and listening.


“I believe the bluebells are ringing/' said Greta.
“I must find something to mend the roof/' Greg said
in a low voice that shook a little. He tried hard not to listen
to the lovely sound.
But just then, in front of him, he saw something very
exciting—something that made him want, not to have to
look for bark or mend the roof, but to laugh and shout and
run. and forget that his father expected him to be older
than his years.
“What are you staring at?" Greta whispered.
“Look! They are ringing the bells," Greg whispered
back, pointing to a patch of bluebells.
“Who are ringing the bells? Em going to pick some."
Greta ran and Greg followed. Then they both saw a
lovely sight. Fairy folk danced on the bluebells and the
flowers bent and swayed and rang beneath the touch of
their dancing feet; and instead of plucking the flowers, the
children followed the sound of the bells. It led them this
way and that, on and on into the woods, until they came to
a great tree.
From its trunk hung bark quite large enough to cover
the hole in the roof. Greg held out his hand and took hold
of it, but instead of coming off, it swung open like a door,
and the sound of the bells came from within the tree, for
it was the tree with the door in it leading to Fairyland.
“I wonder what's inside there?" Greta asked.
“Let's find out," said Greg, once again wishing only
to play and to forget that he had a duty to perform.
Cautiously, they slipped inside the tree. It was dark, but
the sound of bells led away through a long passage. They
followed until it became light. Then they saw a garden
filled with bluebells, and a house made of flowers.


The children tiptoed to the front door, which had a
knocker on it like a snapdragon. They knocked, and the
door opened, so they walked in.
First they found a buttercup room, then a tulip one,
then a daisy room. Each room had a velvet carpet the colour
of its flower, a tall bed with a canopy, and a dressing-table
and chairs. None of these things were big enough for either
of the children, so they guessed that they all belonged to the
fairies they had seen dancing upon the bluebells. But where
were the fairies now?
“This is to mend your roof with.”
Greg started. Who had spoken? He had just entered a
room larger than the others, and it was made of green and
brown moss. At first he could not see who spoke, then it
seemed as if one of the walls moved and, looking closer, he
saw little faces peeping from behind it. It was not a wall,
but moss-covered bark, large enough to mend the hole in
roof.
“May I take it with me?” he cried.
“Of course you may. It’s for you, and it will not only
mend the hole in the roof, but give life to the tree that has
fallen, so that it may live and make your little home beautiful
for ever.”
Greg took the bark in both hands. “Here, Greta,” he
said, “you may hold the other end.”
Together the two children returned to the entrance of
the tree and managed to get the bark through it, although
they had to turn it sideways to do so.
It was a long way home, but they arrived there before
dark and before either their father or mother had returned.
Between them they lifted the bark to the roof, by climbing
on to the branches of an overhanging tree; and when they


placed it over the hole, it seemed to fit exactly, and the moss
clung to the roof, making it firm and sound. It seemed as if
it had grown there always.
When their father and mother came home they were
surprised and delighted.
4 ‘That saves a new roof/’ their father said
And ever after, any one passing that way through the
wood wondered about the half-fallen tree that held the little
house in its leafy arms, a patch of bluebells growing around
its half-upturned roots.


■ ' ' ,g 1
IC/- '
Halstead Press Pty Limited
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
J
m ' ■ , i ■-
f , o l i
ji # /
ly
\
*


\ ■
%


\
(


*
-
.
.


'
X
• ■
.
'


7
6 ef
HUi-3
Liri*^
i^H


'
I
■
T
■ %
I ' £ .
V «
■
i
.
k \ *
I
, -
» • . * * 1
■*
♦
U.
i
* •
f
* '
• #
* . ...
*
f
•*
