

IN CONNECTION VVITH THE WAR,
Wednesday, 21st November, 1917.
' JAN 19% ‘
(APPROVED BY AUTHORITY)
FOR USE IN THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY .


T/zis may be used instead of Morning or Evening Prayer.
All kneeling, the Jlz'm'ster 5/zall say:
GOD is our refuge and strength: a very present help in
trouble.
Let us confess our sins to Almighty God.
O MIGHTY and merciful God, our Redeemer and our Judge;
We come before thee confessing our many sins, and all
our forgetfulness of thee in the time of our wealth and in this
hour of judgment. Pardon, we beseech thee, all these our
offences, and cleanse us from our sins. Hear us, 0 Lord, for
thy mercy is great; and after the multitude of thy mercies
look upon us; through the merits and mediation of thy blessed
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.
O GOD, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy
and to forgive: Receive our humble petitions; and
though we be tied and bound with the chain of our sins, yet
let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us; for the honour
of Jesus Christ, our Mediator and Advocate. Amen.
T/zen, all sz’ana’ing, shall be said one or more of the Psalms
following .-
God reigneth. Psalms 20, 146. -
God our refuge. Psalms 25, 27, -16, 90.
God comforteth. Psalms 23, 34.
God helpeth. Psalms 42, 71, 91. -
Tlzm shall 6: read one of the Lesson: following:
1 Kings viii. 54-62
Isaiah lxiii. 7-16.
St. Matthew v. 1-12.
St. Luke xi. 1-13.
1 Timothy ii. 1-8.
1 Peter V. 6-11.


Tlzm, all kneeling, lite .llinislcr 5/zall say:
Let us pray.
0 UR Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name,
thy kingdom come, thy will be done, in earth as_ it is
in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. - And forgive us
our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against u_s.
And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us rom evil;
For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, For ever
and ever. Amen.
L ET thy merciful ears, 0 Lord, be open to the prayers of
thy humble servants; and that they‘maV obtain their
petitions make them to ask such things as shall please thee;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
T/zen slzall the prayers of the people ﬁe asked as followet/z,
and after each bidding, silence 5/zall be kept for a space.
Let us pray for the King and all in authority.
{Pause for silenl prayer.)
O LORD God Almighty, guide, we pray thee, our Sovereign
and all those to whom thou hast committed the govern-
nent of our nation and empire; and grant to them at this time
special gifts of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and
strength; that upholding what is right, and following what is
true, they may obey thy holy will, and fulﬁl thy divine purpose;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Let us pray for the sailors and soldiers of our King.
( Pause for silent prayer. )
O ALMIGHTY Lord God, the Father and Protector of all
that trust in thee: We commend to thy fatherly good-
ness the men who through perils of war are serving this nation;
beseeching thee to take into thine own hand both them and
the cause wherein their King and country send them. Be‘ thou
their strength when they are set in the midst of so many and
great dangers. Make all bold through death or life to put
their trust in thee, who a.rt the only giver of victory, and canst
Zave by many or by few; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
mm.
Let us pray for the sick and wounded, whether our own
or of the enemy, and for all who minister to them.
(Pause for silent prayer. ) i
ALMIGHTX’ God, who dost look down in fatherly love upon
all who suffer: We beseech thee to hear our humble
prayers for the wounded and the sick: give to each one of


them thy help, in spirit and in body, according to his need;
sanctify him, cheer him, and, if it be thy will, restore him. All
this we ask through the mediation of Thy Son, Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen. ' ' '
O MERCIFUL God, whose blessed Son went about doing
good; Uphold with thy strength and grace those who
do service to the wounded and the sick; grant to the ministers
of thy gospel faithfulness and love, to the physicians and sur-
geons wisdom and skill, to the nurses sympathy and patience;
and we beseech thee to protect and bless them in all dangers,
anxieties, and labours; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Let us pray for those who are in anxiety and in sorrow.
(Pause for silent prayer.)
ALNIIGHTY God, who art afflicted in the afﬂictions of thy
people; Regard with thy tender compassion the anxious
and the bereaved; bear their sorrows and their cares; give
them comfort and peace in thee; supply all their manifold
needs; and help both them and us to learn the lessons of thy
fatherly discipline; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ‘
ALNIIGHTX’ God, who hast taught us by thy prophets of old
that in quietness and conﬁdence shall be our strength,
sustain the people of this nation in their hours of suspense and
anxiety concerning the safety -of husbands, sons and brothers
engaged in warfare in distant lands, or prisoners in the hands
of the enemy. Give us patience to wait calmly for tidings of
them, and faith to feel that life and death and all things
work together for good to them that love thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
Let us pray for absent friends.
(Pause for silent prayer. )
O LORD our God, who art in every place, from whom no
i space or distance can ever separate us, we know that
those who are absent from each other are still present with
thee; we therefore pray thee to have in thy holy keeping those
dear ones from whom we now are separated, and grant that
they and we by drawing nearer to thee may be drawing nearer
to each other, bound together by the unseen chain of thy
love in the communion of thy spirit and the fellowship of thy
saints; that whether or not as seemeth best to thy Divine
Majesty .we meet together again here on earth we may surely
meet again a.t the resurrection of the just and go in together
to that house of many mansions which thou hast prepared for
them that unfeignedly love thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. -


Let us pray for those who are in poverty and in need.
(Pause for silent prayer. )
HEAVENLY Father, who by thy blessed Son hast taught
us to ‘ask of thee our dail bread: Have compassion on
them who through this war are brought to poverty or, hunger;
relieve their distress; make plain the way of help; and grant
thy grace unto us all, that we may bear each other’s burdens
according to thy will; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Let us pray for our Enemies.
(Pause for silent prayer. )
O LORD, who by thy blessed son Jesus Christ hast taught
us to love our enemies and pray for them that persecute us:
Have mercy upon all our foes; turn their hearts that they may
repent of the evil they have wrought; and grant that they and
we alike may forsake all hatred and malice, and be established
in the way of‘ righteousness and peace; through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Ame:/z. '
Let us pray that peace may be restored.
(Pause for silent prayer. )
O ALMIGHTY God, the refuge of all them that put their
trust in thee: We turn to thee in this time of trouble;
direct the course of this world, we humbly beseech thee’, in
accordance with thy holy will; take away whatsoever hinders
the nations from unity and concord; prosper all counsels which
make for the restoration of a rightful and abiding peace. And
this we ask for thy mercy’s sake, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. -
_ Let us pray that the present distress may be overruled
for the advancement of God’s kingdom.
(Pause for szlem‘ prayer.)
O THOU, in whose hand are the hearts of thy creatures,
shed abroad thy peace upon the world. By the might
of thy Holy Spirit quench the pride, anger and greed
which cause man to strive against man and people against
people. Lead all the nations in the ways of mutual help and
goodwill, and hasten the time when the earth shall confess
thee indeed for its Saviour and King, and no evil deeds of
men deﬁle thy glorious creation. Amen.


O ALMIGHTY God, who alone canst order the unruly wills
and affections of sinful men; Grant unto thy people,
that they may love the thing which thou commandest, and
desire that which thou dost promise; that 50, among the
sundry and manifold changes of the world, our hearts may
surely there be ﬁxed, where true joys are to be found; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
9 LMIGHTY God, the fountain of all wisdom, who knowest
our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in ask‘
ing; We beseech thee to_have compassion upon our inﬁrmities;
and those things which for our unworthiness we dare not, and
for our blindness we cannot ask, Vouchsafe to give us, for the
worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
find the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be -with us all evermore.
men.
W/7zere lllor7zz'ng or E7.'e_n'z'lzg Prayer is said, one or more of
the psalms and lessons indzcated may ée used, and all or any
of the ;‘oregoz'7zg prayers at zlze dz'scretz'o72 of the ﬂlinister.
In the Order of Holy Commzmion these Collects may be
used after the Collect of the Day, as followet/z:
LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, who hast brought thy judgments
upon all the earth, that the inhabitants of the world may
learn righteousness: ' We entreat thy Divine Majesty so to
turn the hearts of the people of this‘ land, that sorrowing for
our sins with true repentance, and trusting in the hope of thy
salvation, we may be renewed to do thee service and show
forth thy praise from one generation to another; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen. .
Prayer for those engaged in th'e War.
A_L3IIG‘HTY FATHER, who art everywhere present, we
pray thee for our brethren, friends and Allies who are
now serving by sea, land and air. Protect them from all evil;
uide them in the right way; and grant that we may all at
fast be gathered in the home which is above; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.


THE EPISTLE. Col. i. 3-12
THE GOSPEL. St. Matt. ix. 18-26
After the Prayer for Christ’: Church Militalit here on
earth may be said this Commemoration of the departea’:
O LORD, thou lover of souls, who through the mouth of
thy prophet of old hast declared that all souls are thine:
We thank thee for the brave and faithful dead, who have
willingly laid down their lives on the battleﬁelds in this war, or
succumbed to the perils of the deep or of the air. We bless
thee for the dauntless courage of the sailors and soldiers of
our Empire who have fallen in the cause of truth and right-
eousness. In thy hands, 0 Father, we leave their departed
spirits, for thou hast redeemed them through the blood of thy
dear Son. Grant us so to follow their good example in faith-
fulness, and endurance, even unto death, that we may be
found worthy of the crown of everlasting life, through the
merits of Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.
Before the blessing may be said t/zis T/zarzksgiving and
also the Prayer 7‘oZZowz'ng: '
ALNIIGHTY FATHER, Lord of Heaven and earth. we, the
children of the Empire which thou hast entrusted to us,
offer up unfeigned thanks for thy mercies vouchsafed to us in
this season of perplexity. We thank thee for the spirit of
unity made manifest throughout the dominions of our King,
for thy protecting hand over the trade and commerce of these
realms, for the ready response of our manhood to the call of
duty and for the spirit of keen devotion in the homes which have
sent them forth. We thank thee for the gifts of love provided
for the succour of the sick, the wounded, and the oppressed,
for the self-denying service of doctors, nurses, and chaplains;
for the endurance and heroism of our sailors and soldiers even
unto death; and for every token of success given to the Forces
of the Allies by sea and land and in the air. And humbly we
beseech thee to grant the continuance of these th favours,
imploring thee to write deeply on our hearts the lessons of
this conﬂict, that in penitence, faith and hope we may still
wait patiently upon thee for victory in due season, through
him who is the Prince of Peace, thy Son, Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. ’
Remember, 0 Lord, {what thou hast wrought in us, and
not what we deserve; and, as thou hast called us to thy ser-
vice, make us worthy of our calling; through Jesus Christ our
Lora. Amen.


PSALM xxxii.
1. Blegsed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven: arid
whose sm 15 covered.
2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth no
sin: and in whose spirit there is no guile.
3. For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away
through my daily complaining.
4. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my
moisture is like the drought in summer.
5. I will acknowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unright-
eousness have I not hid.
6. I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so
thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin.
7. For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer
unto thee, in a time when thou mayest he found: but in the
great water—ﬂQods they shall. not come nigh him.
8. Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shalt preserve me
from trouble: thou shalt compass me about with songs of
deliverance. _
9. I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein
thou shalt go: and I will guide thee with mine eye. V
10. Be ye not like to horse and mule, which have no
understanding: whose mouths must be held with bit and bridle;
lest they fall upon thee.
11. Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whoso
putteth his trust in the Lord, mercy embraceth him on every
side.
12. Be glad, 0 ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and
be joyful, all ye- that are true of heart. Gloria.
Lesson: Jer. iii., 12-19 (incl.), or Daniel ix.
3-19 (incl.).
Let us pray
Lord, have mercy upon us. .
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.


0 UR Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name,
thy kingdom come, thy will be done, in earth as it is
in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us
our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us.
ﬁnd lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil.
MEN. '
AN ACT OF PENITENCE.
i/Wz'm'ster: ‘‘All we like sheep have gone astray and have
turned every one after his own way. Who is blind as my ser-
vant or deaf as my messenger that I have sent? Who among
you will give ear unto this? Who will hearken and hear for
the time to come ?”
O Lord, we repent. We seek thy forgiveness, thy mercy,
thy compassion. We will turn again, and return to the Shep-
herd and Bishop of our souls. Open thou our ears that we
may hear; enlighten our eyes that we may behold; purge our
heart that we may rise and follow; purify our will that we
may work thy will. AMEN. .
We confess that we have forgotten thee, O Lord God, our
Master and our King;
Forgive and /zeal and save.
Where we have taken no account of thy Name in our busi-
ness or" our pleasure; .
Forgive and /Mal and saw.
Where we have hpped for wealth without regard for thy
Word and Law;
Forgive and heal and save.
_ Where we have "built our cities without remembering
thme honour;
I~‘orgz've and /zeal and save. '
- Where we have suffered material interests to invade and
possess our souls.
Forgive and heal and save.
Where we have asked for nothing but our own enjoyment
and success; {T ‘
Forgizxe and /zeal and save.
Where we ha_ve lost the touch of_ a common brotherhood
and have drifted Into war of class With class;
Forgizve and /zeal and save.


Where we ha_ve been aimless and self-satisﬁed, without
the fear of God or the discipline of duty; .
Forgive and /zeal and save.
Where we have to_lerated without protest evils that sap
the national life and nces that openly corrupt Lt; -
Forgive and heal and save.
Where we have failed to curb the awful domination of
gambling, drunkenness and lust;
Forgive and heal and save. '
Where we have lost the heart to believe that men can be
redeemed. “ ‘ 7 1 I J
Forgive and heal and save
‘ Wheré we_have not put out the powers of thy Kingdom
to heal the natlon of its wounds; , ‘
Forgive and heal and save.
Where we have bee_n barren and idle in our religion, self-
occupxed and self-pleasmg even 1n our F ather’s busmess;
Forgive and /zeal and save.
Where we have Ijnade the Name of God of none effect in
the counsels of the people;
Forgive and /tea; and save.
Where we have caused the Name of God to be blasphemed
among the heathen;
For give and /zeal and save.
Where by our sloth and worldliness, our selﬁshness and
sin we have obscured thy glory and betrayed the honour of
thy Holy Church; '
Forgive and /zeal and save.
After an inter:/'a[ of silent prayer, then shall the people
say this that foltoweth, after the Minister .'
TURN thou us, 0 good Lord, and so shall we be turned.
Be favourable, O Lord, be favourable to th people, who
turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. l-‘Yer thou art a
merciful God, full of compassion, long-suffering, and of great
pity_. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy
wrath thinkest upon mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord,
spare them, and let not thine heritage be brought to confusion.
Hear us, 0 Lord, for thy mercy is great, and after the multi-
tude of thy mercies look upon us; through the merits and
mediation of thy blessed Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.


AN ACT OF INTERCESSION.
O God, our Refuge and Strength, Who art a very "present
help in trouble, .
H ave mercy upon us, miserable sz'mzers.
O Saviour of the World, our only Redeemer and the Prince
of Peace, _ _
H ave mercy upon :15, mzseraéle smners.
O Gracious Spirit, Comforter, Who makest intercession
wlthm us,
- Have mercy upon us, mzseraéle szmzers.
O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and
One God, _ '
H ave mercy upon 21;, mzseraéle smners.
That it may ‘pléase thee to bless our Sovereign VLord King
George, and to give him VlCtOl‘_V‘ over all his enemies;
We beseec/2 Z/zee lo hear us, good Lord. .
That it may please thee to guard_our Empire _from the
dangers that beset it, and 1n thy own tlme to eslabhsh peace
and prosperlty amongst men;
We beseec/z tlzee to hear us; good Lora’.
That it may please thee to bless our Allies and to grant
them the restoration of a free and tra.nqull national life;
We beseee/1 2‘/zee to /tear us, good Lora’.
That it may please thee to be a strong Tower of defence
to all those who ﬁght for our country in our ﬂeets, and in
our armnes;
W.e Zreseec/z zlzee io hear us, good Lora’.
~ That it may please thee to give 'calmness and endurance
to our sailors and soldiers in the hour of peril, mercifulness,
and self-control in theday of victory;
We éeseec/z I/zée to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee_ to protect our brethren who go
forth to active dutv from thls State and Commonwealth; and
to watch over all those who are prisoners in the hands of the
enemy- We éeseec/z t/zee to hear us, good Lora’.
That it may please thee to comfort and support all those
who are anxious about dear ones facing danger by sea or by
land;
We éeseec/z thee to hear us, good Lora’.
That it may please thee to spread thy everlasting arms
around the wounded and the dying, both our own and of those
who ﬁght against us, and to comfort them with a knowledge
of thy love.
We Zreseec/2 I/tee to /zear 7/5, good Lord.


% That it may please thee to bless the ministrations of all.
Chaplains, Nurses, and Doctors to the healing of pain and
the baﬁishment of sorrow; :
We beseeclz thee Io lzear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to comfort all that mourn, to
defend and provide for the fatherless children and widows,
and all that are desolate andoppressed;
We beseech zltee to lzear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to give us grace to follow the
good example of all thy servants departed this life in thy
faith and fear, for whose witness unto death we bless and
praise thy holy Name;
We beseech thee to /zear us, good Lord.
That itpmay please thee to bless all those who have
returned from active service, and to keep them loyal to thee
in all temptations and difficulties;
We oeseeeh 2‘/zee to hear us, good Lord.
A That it may please thee to forgive our enemies and all
that *despite£ully use us;
We beseec/z thee to /tear us, good Lora’.
That it_may please thee to hasten the time when was
shall cease In all the earth, and men may dwell together In
godly union and concord; -
We beseec/z 2‘/zee to /zear us, good Lord.
(Silem Prayer.)
ALMIGHTY God, who hast promised to hear the petitions
of them that ask in thy Son’s Name; We beseech thee
mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have made now our
prayers and supplications unto thee; and grant, that those
things, which we have faithfully asked according to thy will,
may effectually be obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and
to the setting forth of thy glory; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. .
T/ze corzgregatioaz will izawktand.
AN ACT OF THANKSGIVING.
_For the victories that thol_l hast given to the ﬂeets and
armlcs‘of ourselves and our Alhes.
We bless thee, good Lord.
‘For the courage of our s_ailors and soldiers, for their
pa.tlen.cc 1n dark days, fqr thexr en_dur_ance of suffermgs and
pnvauons, for the devotlon of thelr llves at thelr co-untry’s
call. ,
We Hess lhee, good Lord.


For the response of our Empire in the cause of its defence,
for the _loyalty and ﬁdelity of Its members, for their large
generoslty and liberality.
We bless 2‘/tee, good Lora’.
For the willingness of those who have left home and pros-
pects to take up arms in defence of our common good.
We bless 2‘/zee, good Lora’.
For the brave steadfastness of those who have made it
easy for their dear ones to answer to the call of conscience
and duty.
I/Ve Hess thee, good Lord.
For the patient resignation and high example of Christian
fortitude shown by so many mhours of sorrow and bereave-
ment.
We bless 2‘/tee, good Lord.
For the self-denying service of doctors, nurses, chaplains,
and voluntary workers.
We bless 2‘/tee, good Lora’.
(Silent Prayer.)
O Holy Jesus, by thine Agony, by thy Cross, by all thy
sufferings, by thy precious Death and Burial, by thy perfect
sacriﬁce for sinful men, by thy tender compassion and sym-
pathy, plead for us and all the stricken, before the Throne of
Grace, that these our prayers may be acceptable to thee and
that we may have grace to see the answers which Love will
surely give.
We éeseec/z thee to hear us, goon.’ Lord.
Come down, 0 Holy Ghost, upon our'Church and Nation
and inspire us all, that with one heart and mind we may rise,
in this great Day of God, to our high calling in Christ Jesus
and may be able to tell our children the wonders God hath
done in our time as in the days of old.
Amen and Amen.
OUR Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name,
thy kingdom come, thy will be done, in earth as it is
in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us
our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass a ainst us.
And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us grom evil;
For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, For ever
and ever. AMEN.
BENEDICTION.
NATIONAL ANTHEM.


“Peace shall be upon Ismel.”——Ps. cxx ~22. 5.
God the all-terrible! King who ordainest
Great winds thy clarions, the lightnings thy sword;
Show forth thy pity on high where thou reignest:
Give to us peace in our time, 0 Lord.
God the Omnipotent! Mighty Avenger,
Watching invisible, judging unheard.
Doom us not now in the hour of danger
Give to us peace in our time, 0 Lord.
God the all-merciful! earth hath_ forsaken
Thy ways of blessedness, slighted thy word:
Bid not thy wrath in its terrors awaken:
Give to us peace in our time, 0 Lord.
So shall thy children. in thankful devotion,
La_ud him who saved them from peril abhorr’d,
Singmg in chorus_from ocean to ocean.
Peace to the nations, and praise to the Lord. AMEN.
“l have jzrayed for thee tha_l_ thy faith fail not.”-
St. Luke xxzz. 32.
In the hour of trial,
Jesu, pray for me;
Le-st by base denial
I depart from thee:
When thou see’st me waver.
With a look recall,
Nor for fear or favour
Suffer me to fall.
If with sore aﬁliction
Thou in love chastise,
Pour thy be-nediction .
On the sacriﬁce:
Then, upon thine altar ‘
Freely offer’d up.
Though the flesh may falter,
Faith shall drink the cup. AMEN.
“T/zy foét.stc[>:s are not /'rno7ml.”—~Ps. l.t'x£'iz'. la.
God moves in a mysterious way
His‘ wonders to perform;
He plants his footsteps in the sea,
And rides upon the storm.
Deep in unfathomable mines
Of never-failing’ skill,
He treasures up his bright designs,
And works his sovereign will.


Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take;
The clouds ye so much dread
Are big with mercy, and shall break
In blessings on vour head.
Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,
But trust him for his grace:
Behind a frowning providence
He hides a smiling face.
His purposes will ripen fast.
Unfolding every hour;
The bud may have a bitter taste,
But sweet will be the ﬂower.
Blind unbelief is sure to err;
And scan his work in vain;
God is his own interpreter,
And he will make it plain. AMEN.
The Lord watt/z between me and t/zec, w/zen we
are absent
one from (mot/2er.”~—Gen. xxxi-. 40.
For Absent Friends.
Holy Father, in thy mercy
Hear our anxious prayer,
Keep our loved ones, now far absent,
’Neath thy care.
Jesus, Saviour, let thy presence
Be their- light and guide,
Keep, oh, keep them, in their weakness,
At thy side.
When in sorrow, when in danger,
When in loneliness.
In thy love look down and comfort
Thelr distress.
May the joy of thy salvation
Be their strength and stay:
May they love and may they praise thee
Day by day.
Holy Spirit, let thv teaching
Sanctify their llfe;
‘Send thy grace, that they may conquer
In the strife.
Father, Son. and Holy Spirit, I
God the One _ln Three,
Bless them, gulde them, save them, keep
Near to thee. AMEN.
them


“Give ear, 0 Slzeplzerd of Israel, than that leadest foseph
like a ﬂocle.”—Ps. Zl/xx. I.
0 King of mercy, from thy throne on high
Look down in love, and hear our humble cry.
Thou tender Shepherd of the blood-bought sheep,
Thy feeble wandering flock in safety keep.
O gentle_Savipur. by_thy death we; live;
To contrlte slnners llfe eternal glve.
Thou art the Bread of heayenb,_ on thee we feed:
Be near to help our souls 1n txme of need.
Thou art the mpurner’s stay._ the si_nner’s Friend,
Sweet fount of Joy and blessmgs \vlthout end.
Oh come and _cheer us with thy heavenly grace,
Reveal the brlghtness of thy glorlous face.
In cooling cloud by day. in'ﬁre by night, _
Be near our steps, and make our darkness llght.
Go v_vhert_=, we go, abide where we abide. _
In life. In'death, our comfort, strength, and Guide-
Oh lead us daily with thine‘ eye of love,
And bring us safely to our home above. AMEN.
O God of truth, whose living word
Upholds whate’er hath breath,
Look down on thv creation, Lord.
Enslaved by sin and death.
Set up thy standard. Lord, that we
Who claim a heavenly birth
May march with thee to smite the lies
That vex the groaning earth.
Oh! would we join that blest array,
And follow in the might
Of him__ the Faithful and the True,
In ralment clean and whlte.
We ﬁght for truth! we ﬁght for God!
Poor slaves of lies and sin:
He who would ﬁght for thee on earth
Must ﬁrst be‘ true within.
Then. God of truth, for whom we long——
Thou who wilt hear our pra3'er——
Do thine own battle in our hearts,
And slay the falsehood there.
Yea, come! then. tried as in the ﬁre,
From every sin set free,
Thy perfect truth shall dwell in us,
.-And we shall live in thee. AMEN.
Wm. Andrc-ws Printing Cu. Ltd.. 236 Castlereagh St. Sydney.
