



The Daylesford District
s* — * e|vs)- •—%
' Y U X
THE Daylesford district claims the attention of those to whom
the question of a suitable locality for a pleasant holiday pre-
sents itself, and by reason of its splendid climate, ample accom-
modation, health-renewing mineral springs and easy accessibility,
attracts a large share of tourist patronage.
In addition to supplying full particulars of the various points
of interest in the district this publication furnishes information
as to the means and cost of reaching them.
Leaving Melbourne, passengers travel by either of two trains
daily, or by an additional train at midday on Saturdays only
during the summer months, to Woodend, 49 miles distant on the
Bendigo line, at an elevation of 1,840 feet above sea-level, and,
continuing their journey, proceed by the branch line train for a
further 27 miles to Daylesford, passing en route Trentham, with
its beautiful falls on the Coliban River, Lyonville, with its fine
bush scenery and mineral springs on the Loddon River, and
Bullarto, where is the reservoir which supplies Daylesford with
water for drinking and domestic purposes.
TRENTHAM.
Trentham, 15 miles beyond Woodend, lies 2,264 feet above sea-level,
and within a mile of the railway station are the famous Trentham
Falls where the Coliban River, here about 40 feet wide, takes an
immense downward leap of 100 feet.
A public reserve has been proclaimed in the vicinity of the
falls, and, particularly at holiday times, the banks of the stream
both above and below the falls are thronged with parties of
picnickers.
The fishing in the Coliban includes Loch Leven and rainbow
trout.
Accommodation is provided in the district by four hotels and
a boarding-house, and vehicles may be hired if it be desired to
drive to the falls.
LYONVILLE.
Lyonville, 4 miles farther on, is even more elevated than
Trentham, the station lying at a height of 2,408 feet above sea-
level. Along the course of the Loddon River are many mineral
springs, the nearest to the station being about half-a-mile distant
at the foot of a hill which rises to a height of over 500 feet above
them, affording from its summit a splendid outlook over the
surrounding country.
Blue Mountain, the highest point in the vicinity (2,600 feet), is
within easy walking distance. Good fishing may be had in the
Loddon and Coliban rivers, and comfortable accommodation is
provided at the local hotel and at an excellent boarding establish-
ment.
DAYLESFORD.
In position, Daylesford is centrally situated within easy distance
by rail of the three chief centres of population in the State, being
within 76 miles of Melbourne, 70 of Bendigo and 36 of Ballarat —


and, lying as it does a few miles north of the Dividing Range and
at an altitude of 2,040 feet above sea-level, it possesses special
advantages in its bracing climate and the magnificence of the
panoramic views obtainable from elevated points in and around
the township. A further determining feature in the popularity
of the district is the presence in every direction round the town
of numerous springs whose waters, charged with various mineral
ingredients, possess highly curative properties.
Many of the streams and lakelets in the district have, thanks
to the Acclimatization Society, been stocked with English, rain-
bow and Californian trout, which, with the native blackfish,
perch, and eels, will enable disciples of Isaac Walton to exercise
the “ Gentle art of luring the spotted beauties from their lair.”
For those whose sporting proclivities are not of so gentle a nature
plenty of shooting can be had —rabbits, hares and foxes being
plentiful.
The town, which has a population of 4,000, lies on the Wombat
Creek and is well laid out and substantially built. Among its
principal buildings are the Town Hall, Post and Telegraph Office,
Court House, Mechanics’ Institute, Free Reading Rooms and Cir-
culating Library with over 2,000 volumes, Masonic Hall, several
banks and a Hospital. The streets, business establishments and
private houses are lighted with gas. There is a recreation reserve
used for sports purposes, and a fine bowling green, with tennis
courts adjoining, in the centre of the town.
JUBILEE LAKE.
ACCOMMODATION.
In the matter of tourist accommodation Daylesford is well
equipped, there being several good hotels, a commodious coffee
palace, and numerous boarding-houses catering for the comfort
of visitors. Particulars are given in the Country Hotel and
Boarding-house Directory, obtainable free on application at the
Government Tourist Bureau, Collins-street, Melbourne.
POINTS OF INTEREST.
Those desirous of visiting the beauty spots in the neighbourhood
may depend on being able to avail themselves of the regular
driving excursions which are run throughout the summer months
to points of interest in the vicinity. These trips start from
Messrs. Cobb and Co’s, offices in the centre of the town, and as
the fares charged are extremely moderate many parts of the
district may be seen at small expense.


WOMBAT HILL GARDENS,
Situated close to the railway station and five minutes’ walk
from the post office. There are various entrances, viz., from
Victoria, Daly, and Hill streets. The hill upon which they
have been laid out rises to a further height of nearly 300 feet
above the town, and from its summit is obtainable a magnificent
panoramic view; 7 miles distant to the northward stands up
in bold relief the square-topped feature of Mount Franklin,
a very interesting extinct volcano, with the village of Franklin-
ford slightly to the north-west, while still further northward is
Mount Tarrengower, with Maldon at its foot.
SUTTON AND HARD HILL SPRINGS
Are only ten minutes’ walk from the post office going west
along Victoria-street. From the west end of Victoria-street finger-
posts denote the direction. These springs are within a short
distance of each other.
TIPPERARY AND FAIRY DELL SPRINGS.
The best method of reaching these springs is to go west along
Albert-street, passing close alongside the Nuggety-Ajax Gold Mine,
and continuing due west along a defined track to Sailor’s Creek;
the Tipperary Spring is in the western bank. By following the
water-race north for about a mile along the western bank Fairy
Dell will be reached. On returning from Tipperary, by following
the top race on the Daylesford side of the creek, the Devil’s
Staircase will be passed, whence an easy track leads into Victoria-
street.
JUBILEE LAKE,
Situated 2 miles south-east of the post office, has been formed
by throwing an embankment across the course of a small
creek, thus forming a sheet of water of some 35 acres in
extent. A beautiful garden has been laid out on the bank close
to the boat-shed and the caretaker’s house. Picnic parties will
be catered for at a moderate tariff by the caretaker, who will
also give all information concerning fishing and boating. A
mineral spring (soda) exists at the head of the lake. Cabs run
at intervals at ordinary fares of 6d. each way.
LEITCH’S CREEK MINERAL SPRING,
Situated east of Daylesford, is reached by a drive of 4 miles
along the Cemetery-road, or a walk of 2 miles from the Musk
Railway Station. Fares, lOd. first and 6d. second class return.
Drag fares as arranged.
BULLARTO RESERVOIR.
This ideal beauty spot, situated 8 miles from the town, may
be reached by drag or by train to Bullarto the highest railway
station in Victoria, lying 2,452 feet above sea-level. Fares, Is. 6d.
first and Is. second class return. Boats are on hire, and fishing
may be indulged in; a small fee is charged for the privilege of
angling in this water; tariff is obtainable from the caretaker.
Drag or cab trips may be specially arranged for.
MOUNT FRANKLIN,
Situated 8 miles north of the town. This is an extinct
volcano with an almost perfect crater, which forms an ideal
picnic resort, it being possible to drive into a natural amphi-
theatre through the lip of the crater, from which, in bygone
ages, when Mount Franklin was in active eruption, torrents of
molten lava flowed over the country and formed the rich
agricultural land of Glenlyon. A very fine panoramic view may


be obtained from the summit. Drags leave the town almost daily
to visit this spot. Ordinary fare, 2s. 6d. for the round trip via
Hepburn, returning through Dry Diggings.
KANGAROO FALLS.
These are situated on Kangaroo Creek, 5 miles to the north-east.
Drags and cabs run for parties as required. Fares by arrangement.
LODDON FALLS.
These beautiful falls are situated about 7 miles to the north-
east. A drive to this pleasure resort runs through fine undulating
and agricultural land. Drags run nearly every day, the ordinary
fare being 2s. 6d. return.
SAILOR’S CREEK FALLS.
The situation of these falls is 5 miles to the south. Drag fares
as arranged.
DEEP CREEK MINERAL SPRINGS,
Near Eganstown; a beautiful drive of 5 miles along the Ballarat-
road south-westerly from Daylesford. Drag fare, 2s. 6d. return.
THE PAVILION.
PORCUPINE RIDGE STRAWBERRY GARDENS.
A drive of 10 miles north of Daylesford. Ordinary fare, 2s. 6d.
return. These gardens are a favorite resort during the strawberry
season.
HEPBURN MINERAL SPRINGS.
The Hepburn mineral springs are 2 miles north of Daylesford
on the Spring Creek-road, practically a continuation of Vincent-
street, the main thoroughfare of the town. A frequent service of
cabs runs from Messrs. Cobb and Co’s, office in this street, and
cabs meet all trains, conveying visitors direct to Hepburn springs.
If preferred, however, a very pretty walk through the bush may
be made from Daylesford to Hepburn. Here the principal
attraction is found in the splendid mineral springs, which are
considered the finest in Australia. The waters of these now well-
known springs contain in solution magnesia, soda, iron and other
ingredients, and are reputed to possess great medicinal value as
a curative of various complaints—sufferers from rheumatism,
rheumatic gout, and from dyspepsia and other affections of the
stomach are stated to derive great benefit from a course of these
waters. Hot and cold baths have been provided by the local
municipalities, and invalids may obtain sulphur baths at small cost.


Many pleasant walks may be taken from the settlement on
Spring Creek —one, a pleasant ramble through the bush past the
New Argyle quartz-crushing battery, taking half-an-hour each way.
This is a delightful excursion during spring time, when the air is
fragrant with the perfume of the wattle, and the water of the
spring possesses a distinctive flavour peculiarly its own.
The walk to the Blowhole enables visitors to see how the course
of Sailor’s Creek has been diverted from its original channel by
gold-seekers, to enable its bed to be more easily exploited in the
search for the precious metal.
A more extended walk may be made to the Lithia springs, dis-
tant about 3 miles from the Hepburn springs, and passing the
Hepburn hamlet and Breakneck Gorge.
Visitors wishing to see macaroni in the making are at liberty
to inspect the premises of the Lucini factory, where is manufac-
tured some of the finest macaroni to be obtained in Victoria.
ACCOMMODATION.
In former years there was a certain limited supply of tourist
accommodation at the Hepburn springs, but this was swept out
of existence by a bush fire in 1906, and in response to public
demand there has sprung up a number of extensive boarding-houses
and cottages for hire, which, together with the well-known ‘ ‘ Hep-
burn Springs ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ Spring Creek ’ ’ hotels, furnish comfortable
accommodation for all classes of tourists, and this at holiday
seasons is taxed to its utmost capacity. For particulars see
Country Hotel and Boarding-house Guide, obtainable free at
Government Tourist Bureau, Collins-street, Melbourne.
TRAINS AND FARES.
Trains leave Melbourne twice daily all the year round for
the Daylesford line: one in the early morning, taking five hours,
and one, in the late afternoon, four hours to complete the
journey. Passengers by either of above trains require to change
carriages at Woodend. During the summer months an additional
train is run at midday, on Saturdays only, accomplishing the
journey in three hours, and passengers travelling by this train do
not require to change at Woodend.
Ordinary Holiday Excursion and
Return. Week-end Return.
Ist Class. 2nd Class. Ist Class. 2nd Class.
d. s. d, s. d. s. d.
Trentham . . 16 0 .. 10 8 .. 13 1 . . 8 10
Lyonville . . 17 0 .. 11 4 .. 13 8 . . 9 1
Daylesford . . 19 0 ~ 12 8 .. 15 6 . . 10 4
Ordinary return tickets are available for a period of two months,
and holiday excursion tickets are issued when advertised, and are
available for return as per advertisement.
SPECIAL CHEAP EXCURSIONS.
During the summer months (November to April) specially cheap
trains are run through from Melbourne to Daylesford at fortnightly
intervals. Tickets are issued at the following fares, and are
available for use on the special trains only going, and for return
by ordinary trains within one month. Journey may be broken on
return:—
Ist Class Return, 2nd Class Return
s. d. s. d,
Trentham .. .. .. 80 .. 54
Lyonville .. .. .. 86 .. 58
Daylesford .. .. 9 6 .. 6 4
By Authority: J. Kemp, Government Printer, Melbourne


Photo hthoqruphed at the. Department of Lands and/ Survey Melbourne/ by TFM c >'rauran,
/5 $ ./(7
