

:: - ■ ; .^rij
H' /r '
|| prcstrnfcnaii. Church of |)cto South ftlEalcs.
I ! HEATHEN MISSIONS.
6 ill
H
TO THE I
SABBATH-SCHOOL CHILDREN.
H . - - ' |
h John Lutton, Printer, 316, Oastlereagb-street, Sydney.
K, ■ f
n
ay
H
oj
(M
A
H
H
H
O
Cl
(I i
DA YSPPJNG.
NEW YEAR’S LETTER
f #7i J


Sydney, January i, 1879.
My Dea-r Young Friends, —
The Heathen Missions Committee of our Church have
requested me to send you the accompanying letter about
the Dayspring. It has been written for you by the Rev.
Joseph Copeland, who has been for many years a missionary
in the New Hebrides. It contains some very interesting
information about the mission vessel; and I have no doubt
you will read it carefully and do what it tells you. Wishing
you all a Happy New Year,
I am
Ever faithfully Yours,
JAMES COSH,
Convener of Heathen Missions Committee.


reque:
the I
Josep
in th
inforn
JAMES COSH,
Convener of Heathen Missions Committee.
I
t


THE MISSION VESSEL.
To the Sabbath School Children of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales,
My Dear Young Friends, —
Let me tell you a few things about the mission vessel
which you and other Sabbath-school children have given us
for the use of the New Hebrides Mission. I am sure that
those of you who have seen her will agree with me that she
is a neat and trim little vessel. We used to think the
former “ Dayspring” a handsome craft. She was indeed
well adapted for the mission work, and for ten years she
did her work well; but in many respects this “ Dayspring”
is a superior vessel. For one thing, she is a much faster
sailer than the other. She is a three-masted schooner of
160 tons register. Her sails are not so large as the former
“ Dayspring’s,” but there are more of them, and they are
more easily managed. She is longer and narrower than the
other was, has a much larger hold, and can carry more
cargo. This is an advantage, for we hope that the number
of missionaries on the islands will increase in time to come.
Many a time the old vessel was found too small to carry all
the things the missionaries required ; and I assure you it was
rather uncomfortable to be in her when her hold was stuffed
full of stores, and her decks covered with timber for build-
ing houses.
When the present “ Dayspring ” was being built she was
intended for a merchant ship, so the builders did not put any
cabins for passengers into her. But a mission vessel needs


a number of such cabins for the missionaries and their
families. So, after we bought her, we took a piece off her
hold, and made it into a cabin. This work has been done
well. Besides cabins tor the captain, officers, and steward,
she has six cabins for missionaries, a dining-saloon, and a
cabin tor native teachers and their families. In each of the
missionary cabins there are sleeping-berths, wash-hand-
basins, and other fittings. In the saloon there is a table ten
feet long, with settees on either side. There is also a book-
case, with books for the use of those on board, and a har-
monium. Every inch of space has been utilised for some
purpose, and the vessel is well adapted for her work. Her
crew consists of a captain, two officers, a cook, a steward,
four able-bodied seamen, and an apprentice. In addition
to these she has a boat’s crew of natives when among the
islands, tor communicating with the shore.
After years of experience we find that we cannot live and
labour among the natives of the islands without the
“ Dayspring.” It it is right for us to be there at all, it is
right and necessary that we have a vessel to go among the
islands, and between the islands and the colonies. What
would the people in New South Wales do if all the vessels
from Great Britain, New Zealand, and other countries
should stop coming ? What would the people in the towns
do were that to take place? Further, what would the
people who live along the coast north and south, and far up
country do if all the coasters were laid up, and all the rail-
ways were destroyed, and were all Cobb’s coaches to stop
running, and were all the drays to cease travelling ? How
would goods of all sorts, and provisions be forwarded, and
how would people get from one place to another ? And
what would become of all the newspapers, magazines,
letters, and telegrams, were all the postmasters and postmen
withdrawn, and all the telegraph and post offices dosed and


the wires cut ? Would there not be a deal of talk in town
and country, and no little consternation were all this to take
place ? The colony would be ruined.
Now, what the vessels and steamers from Great Britain
and other places are to you in New South Wales, what rail-
ways, Cobb’s coaches, drays, postmen, telegraphs, and
horses ar e-all these the “Dayspring” is to the missionaries
and native teachers. We can no more do without her than
you can do without them.
As you are dependent on vessels to bring you your tea,
coffee, and sugar, and a good deal of your clothing, boots,
and shoes, and whatever else the colony does not produce,
so there are very many things we need which do not grow,
and cannot be produced on the islands. We get more of
the necessaries of life from the colonies than on the islands.
We missionaries and our families cannot live on praise or
good wishes; we must have food, and as we are Europeans,
a good deal of it must be European. We cannot live in the
open air, and must therefore have comfortable houses ; and
we cannot go naked, so we must get clothing. Now take a
family anywhere in town or country, consisting of the father,
mother, and three or four children (for there are children
among us as well as in civilised places), and suppose they
could only go once , or at the most twice , in twelve months
to the shop or store to get everything they require. Would
it do for that family to take only ten shillings in their purse ?
And would half a pound of tea, and three pounds ot sugar,
and twenty-eight pounds of flour, and a bar of soap, and
three candles, and a single dose of medicine, and two-and-a-
half yards of calico, and one pair trousers, and two pairs
shoes, and a like proportion of other things, serve that
family for a whole year ? No ; they would require to take
many sovereigns in their purse, and they would require to
purchase in wholesale quantities —by the hundredweight, the


bag, the case, the cask, the chest, the gallon, the web, the
dozen, and the gross ; and it would take a horse and dray
to take the whole home, and a good large storeroom to hold
them. In New South Wales most people can go to the
shop every day and get the quality and quantity of goods
they want : we can only send at long intervals.
If you were down there and saw a missionary’s yearly
supplies landed on the beach, you would wonder to see so
many cases, boxes, casks, kegs, packages, and parcels, and
you would say, Well, what a pile ot stuff this is ! What can
all them be filled with ? When opened out in the store you
might see a cooking-stove, chairs, tables, sofas, bedsteads,
boots and shoes, ajl sorts of cloth and clothing, hats and
bonnets, tinware and earthenware, tea, coffee, sugar, butter,
cheese, jams, rice, oatmeal, treacle, flour, biscuit, beef, salt,
soap, soda, matches, kerosene, lamps, medicines, cordials,
lollies, toys, a doll, and twenty other things required about a
house for use or food. You might see books in the native
languages, slates, copy-books, pictures, pens, ink and pen-
cils, with which to teach the natives, and a bale or two of
material to clothe them, and to pay them for helping
to put up mission buildings, and as servants. You might
see, too, bundles of newspapers and magazines, parcels of
new books, and letters which will give the missionary and
his family what they have been longing for —the news from
the other islands or from their distant native land. Lastly,
you might see out of doors a house-frame, with windows,
doors, flooring, &c.; and sometimes a tank or a boat.
Nov,', if you multiply this pile of stuff by the number of
missionaries there, you will have some idea of the cargo the
“ Dayspring ” takes down every year.
Then, after she has delivered the supplies at the mission
stations, say by the end of April, she does not go the rest of
the season from island to island in ballast; she is often


full then as well as on the passage down. Once every year
she collects at one place all the missionaries from their
several islands, some being brought thirty, some sixty, and
others two hundred miles to the Synod, at which all the
business of the mission is discussed and arranged; and when
it is over she takes them back to their stations. Generally
there is a missionary or missionaries on board every trip she
makes, visiting the native teachers, or endeavouring to open
up heathen islands, or taking a trip for the sake of health.
Tnen there are often more or fewer teachers on board, either
on their way to some heathen island, or going home after a
period of service, or on a visit to their relatives. They have
their families with them, and no little stuff. -Then, occa-
sionally a number of natives,—perhaps twenty, fifty, or eighty
—are taken for a short visit to some island, that they may
see for themselves the change wrought by Christianity. On
their return they are sure to have a quantity of yams, mats,
and other property. Or she may make a long trip of
some thousands of miles to the eastward for a band of native
teachers, to be placed where an opening can be found on
any of the heathen islands.
Again, suppose a missionary runs short of something, say
flour, sugar, or medicine, he can, perhaps, by letting some of
his brethren know his wants, get a supply by the “ Day-
spring ” without going himself, and risking his life in a boat.
Or if a missionary wants servants or hands to help with
house-building or other work, if the natives on his own
island are unwilling, he can get by the “ Dayspring ” natives
of some other island who will give him the help he requires.
Or if he wants goats or cattle for their milk, the vessel gets
them at the older stations and takes them to him. Or if
native food is scarce on an island, the captain can purchase
and bring a supply of fowls, pigs, or yams from an island
where these things are plentiful.


Then, when December comes, and the vessel must leave
us for some months, she makes her last trip, and then sails
for the colonies. But she does not go empty. Each mission
ary puts on board his list of supplies for next yeai with his
mails and parcels and “ empties.” Often a mission family
goes by her, leaving the islands “ for good,” or for change of
climate; or there may be a widow with her child on board,
whose'husband is dead, and who is going back to her rela-
tives with a sore heart. Perhaps there may be some one on
his way to consult a doctor. As one cannot be got in the
New Hebrides, the patient must go to one in the colonies.
Perhaps, too, there may be children of a missionary, who
have left their parents, not because they wish to do so, but
because they must go to a civilized land to be educated,
and to escape the evils of uncivilized society.
Now I am sure that after reading these things you will be
fully satisfied that you have done a good and useful work in
helping to purchase the “ Dayspring.” Let me ask you to
bear her and her work in mind ; and when from time to time
you send in the contents of the mission-boxes for her sup-
port, don’t forget to pray that God may watch over her, and
bless the missionaries and the natives.
At the present time she is like a boy or girl that very much
needs a pair of new boots, —in other words, she requires new
copper. If she does not get this, the sea-worms will eat her
planks, and she will not be able long to do her work. She
will be put into dock and coppered this summer at a cost of
say £s°°- l am sure that ever 7 one °f y° u would like to
own a few inches of the needed copper and a nail or two,
and that every Sunday-school will make an effort to have
more or fewer sheets on the bottom of the “ Dayspring.”
How is the money to be got ? There is one way by which
some of you will think of getting it, and that is, by just
ashing your parents and friends for it. There are better


ways, however, which I shall point out to you. Could you
not save something off yourselves in the shape of pleasures or
treats, or could you not resolve to eat only half the quantity
of lollies you take at present ? Ask the doctor if you will
suffer by doing this, or even by giving them up altogether.
Or you might do some work and get paid for it. In this
way the money would be your own, and the giving of it
would be more unselfish than the mere dropping a gifted
coin into the mission box. There are other plans you might
try. You have heard of guinea-fowls and Spanish fowls and
dorkings, now I should like to introduce a new kind, viz.,
the missionary fowl , all the eggs of which are sold for
missionary purposes. Or what do you say to a missionary
apple tree ? There’s one of this sort in New Zealand, and
the apples one year brought thirty shillings. Failing these,
you might have a missionary cow. As some of you live in
the town and others in the country, you must adopt the plan
that suits you best. By consulting your friends, you might
devise something else and better than any of these, and I
shall be glad to hear of it, and let the children elsewhere
know that they may do likewise.
And then there’s great need of missionary hoys and girls
who, when grown up, will go and live among the heathen,
and tell them the way to heaven. There is one missionary
boy in Otago at present. His parents gave him up to be
a missionary at his birth. Have your parents thought of the
heathen, and dedicated any of you? Dr. Geddie, who
began the New Hebrides Mission, was so dedicated by his
parents. If all of you take to secular occupations, and
become blacksmiths, carpenters, shoemakers, tailors, engin-
eers, storekeepers, farmers, miners, clerks, lawyers, &c., &c.,
who will look after the Gospel ? If all were to become
sailors, how should we get our bread, butter, cheese, &c. ?
and if all were farmers, how could we get tea and sugar ?


When some live on shore and others go to sea, the world
gets on nicely ; and so in respect of the things needful for
the body and for the soul. While som e attend to the former,
let others look after the latter. Divide yourselves fairly,
then, that Christ’s kingdom be not hindered. The “ Day-
spring” could wait on twenty missionaries as well as on ten.
The harvest is great and the labour ers few. Who will go ?
Who will go ?
Your Well-wisher,
JOSEPH COPELAND.
P.S.—Might I ask Superintendents and Sunday-school
Teachers to bring these matters before their scholars, and to
ask those children who have not been in the habit of giving
their pence for missionary purposes to begin now and do a
little. Incidents relating to Missions might be referred to
on the first Sabbath of each month, and special prayer
offered.
J. C.
“ Have respect to the Goven ant, for the dark places of
the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty,”
John Lutiov, Printer, 316, Castlereagh-street, Sydney,


Mfiw mss»w.
The woik of Christian Missions on the New Hebrides Islands is
conducted by Missionaries in connection with various branches of
the Presbyterian Church, as follows :
Missionary. Appointed. Location. Church Supporting.
Rev. J. W. Mackenzie 1872.
Rev. Joseph Annand, m.a..1873.
Rev. 11. A. Robertson. .. .1872.
Rev. John Inglis 1852.
Rev. Joseph Copeland...lBsB.
R EV. T HOMAS KEILSON .. . 1866.
Rev. John G. Paton 1858,
Rev. D. Macdonald 1871
Rev. William Watt 1869
Rev. Peter Milne 1869
Mr. Oscar Michelsen 1878,
. Efate j p re8 byt er i an Church
:£SSZ [ &->-
, r laud.
. lanna )
.Aniwa’ ( Presbyterian Church
. Flat 6 j of Victoria.
I Presbvterian Church
• Aauna j of New Zealand.
.Nguna ) Presbyterian Church
-Not located j
* Getting the Aneityumese Old Testament printed.
Agent for the New Hebrides Mission :
Rev. Dr. Steel, Sydney.
NEW HEBRIDES MISSION VESSEL DAYSPRING.
The “ Dayspring ” is employed in carrying on the work of the Mis-
s:on, and is supported by the annual contributions of the Sabbath-
schools of the following Churches, viz., the Presbyterian Church in
Canada, the Free Church of Scotland, and the Presbyterian Churches
of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Tas-
mania, New Zealand, and Otago and Southland. The affairs of the
vessel are managed by a Board in Sydney, appointed by the New
Hebrides Missjon Synod.
'The Board consists of the following gentlemen :
Rev, Dr. Fullerton, J. H. Goodlet, Esq..
Rev. Dr. Steel, Robert Gray, Esq.,
Rev. R. S. Paterson, Captain Bremnkr.
Rev. James Cosh, Secretary.
Agent for the Dayspring:
Rev. James Cosh, M.A., Balmain, Sydney.
All communications respecting the Mission to be addressed to the Rev.
Dr. Steei., Sydney.
gggr’ All communications respecting the “Dayspring,” to be addressed to the
Rev. James Cosh, Balmain, Sydney.


Jh
