





DE ETTAS’ COMPANION
100 ERRORS CORRECTED
DE DIVAS’ GRAMMAR OF GRAMMARS
With Quotations from the best Authorities
MONS. CHAELIN
pfUrournx ;
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP ST.
(OFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST)


Moirs. Ciiaelin, late student in a Parisian College, informs
Attention is also especially requested to the following
the Public of Melbourne that he has just settled in this City
testimonial.
as a teacher of the French language, and begs to call their
“ South. African College,
attention to his Comparative Method. The chief advantage
“ Cape Town, April 5th, 1876.
of this method is that it reduces considerably the number of
grammar rules and exceptions, by showing how these are
“ I have very great pleasure in testifying to the Scholarship and
Character of Mods. Charlin. I have known him well for the last four
very often but the logical consequences of rules already
years, during which he has been French Master at the Cathedral
known, and how apparent irregularities correspond to some
Grammar School in this Town, of which I was then Head Master.
analogous irregularity in the English language. As far as
His tact, temper, and patience as a teacher were all that could be
the study of words is concerned, Mous. Charlin does not
wished, and the progress of his pupils was rapid and sound. This is
leave his pupils puzzled bv the numerous meanings each
not surprising when I add that Mons. Charlin is in deed and truth a
French word seems to have, for these are always referred to
Scholar and Philologist. He knows French as few men ever knew a
language, and by his Comparative Method of teaching he improves
one essential meaning, so as to bring the mind to a full
his pupils in English and Latin (when inquired) in the same time.
understanding of words and idioms. The retention of the
The success of Mons. Charlin with pupils has been proved again and
words is also made easier by their being connected with such
again in the University Examinations here, where they have taken
English forms as are most obviously related to them, and by
very high rank. The sooner he settles in some wider and more
their being compared with other French words already known.
appreciative sphere than Cape Town, the better for himself, but the
Although Mous. Charlie’s Comparative Method is grounded
worse for this part of this Colony. I have full confidence in recoin*
upon the history of the French and English languages, it is
mending Mons. Charlin in the highest terms to any one who wishes
to know French.
not necessary to say that it has been adapted to the practical
wants of ordinary English students, and that Mons. Charlin
Kev. Bindley, M.A., Cambridge.
never introduces an analogy that is not capable of being
Professor of English at the South African College, Cape Town.”
readily grasped by an ordinary mind, and that does not
afford a real help to the memory. Mons. Charlin being
aware of the importance of practice as well as of rapid
:0:
progress in and accurate acquisition of the subject, accustoms
his pupils by degrees from the beginning, to employ the
French language during the hours of instruction. As a
Terms: — Thirty Shillings per Month (two lessons a week.)
practical illustration of the very satisfactory employment of
Lessons in Latin and Mathematics on the same terms.
this method, Mons. Charlin refers the Public to a paragraph
which appeared in the Cape of Good Hope Standard of duly
Conversational Classes for Ladies are being formed in Town
15th, 1873: “ The three gentlemen who passed first in
and in the Suburbs. Terms : — Six Shillings a month.
French, out of the twenty-three candidates, in the late
University Examination, were the pupils of Mous. Charlin,
Eesiuence:
a gentleman lately settled among us. We congratulate
65 JIoad, Richmond,
him upon his success.”


PEEPACE.
Although three hundred mistakes can be pointed out in De
Fivas’ Grammar I have here limited my corrections to one
hundred, because I wished to allude to no mistake unless I
could refer the reader to one or several standard works
published in France, so as to avoid giving my own views on
the subject. It can be easily understood that I had to be
silent on very gross mistakes, for such mistakes as are caused
by the English idiom are generally so far from the habits of
the French language, that French grammarians could not be
supposed to mention them; hence the impossibility of proving
such mistakes by references.
De Fivas being an Englishman, one will not wonder if his
native idiom can be seen sometimes in his examples when he
composes or alters them, and also in his interpretations of
French grammarians. The English reader may be in doubt
as to what references he must rely upon, since De Fivas is
supposed to have affirmed nothing that was not' sanctioned by
the best modern grammarians, and I oppose to him also the
opinions of living grammarians who are undoubtedly men of
a great talent and learning. A few explanations are there-
fore required. On which French grammarians is De Fivas’
work grounded ? Are these modern grammarians ? Are
modern grammarians the only ones fit for teaching purposes?
Such are the questions I will try to answer by facts.


De Fivas says in his Preface that all his rules are sanctioned'
by the French Academy in the last edition of their dictionary.
Many will be surprised to hear the last edition alluded to is
of 1835 ; there has been none published since. But as will
he seen, in many cases De Fivas followed grammarians
anterior to that time, without taking notice of the changes
made by this edition of 1835.
De I'ivas says that his work comprises the substance of all
the most approved French grammars, but especially of the
Grammaire des Grammaires published in France by Duvivier.
The fact is, a good part of De Divas’ grammar is translated
from that work. Now what is this Grammaire des Grammaires
published lately in France ? The Gram, des Gram, by
Duvivier, a work of 1400 pages, was first published in 1820 ;
since then the body of the work has not been altered, but
only some remarks and corrections inserted by Lemaire. I
must add that in my comparing Duvivier with De Fivas, I never
saw Lemaire’s corrections introduced in the English book.
Moreover Duvivier’s work, as is shown by its heading, is
nothing but a collection of the opinions of former grammarians.
These quotations from Duvivier’s preface published in 1820
may be of some interest, I translate p. 9, “ I seldom took
the liberty of expressing my own opinion,” and “ I thought
proper t© adopt the plan followed by ancient grammarians.”
When one thinks that this last sentence was said in 1820, and
that the new De Fivas’ grammar is grounded upon the work
alluded to, one begins to form an idea of the extensive mean-
ing given by De Fivas to the word nexv. Duvivier gives a list of
sixty grammarians mentioned in his work. The oldest publica-
tion spoken of is of 1647, and the latest of 1820. Besides Duvi-
vier, another grammarian much used by De Fivas is Chapsal, who
published his Grammar in 1820 also. De Fivas, in the Key to
his Grammar, p. 41, admits he used Chapsal’s 30th edition
(which was published in about 1840, when Chapsal had not
made any alteration in his book). Lastly, De Fivas in his
grammar, p. 231, speaks of coins called louis and napoleons ;
elsewhere he speaks of aunes, when such things have been
unknown in France for a great many years. This last
particular shows that De Fivas has a decided antipathy
against innovations. De Fivas borrowed very little, if any-
thing, from other grammarians ; he sometimes altered the


rules given by Duvivier; and sometimes made rules himself,
not always for the better.
If the grammars of the last century, which have been the
grounding of De Fivas’ work, were faithful registers of the
language spoken then, there would be no objection to using
them ; for on the whole, the French Language has undergone
little change for the last two centuries. But such is not the
case. One of the best authorities in the matter, Marty-
Laveaux, said two years ago, in a work whose heading is De
I’Enseignement de notre Langue, “ Those grammarians of the
18th century were very fond of a method that allowed them to
dictate rules in the name of principles, and to accuse our
greatest writers of not knowing French, without taking the
trouble of learning their works. It is on such principles our
grammarians are giving their absolute rules and proclaiming
their infallible decisions. At each page, at each line of our
master-pieces, they found some infraction of their arbitrary
decisions. Nearly all elementary books still in use now, are
nothing but summaries of the works whose tendencies I have
just described.”
The two works I have chiefly used to correct De Fivas’
mistakes are Littre’s Dictionary and Lemaire’s Grammar.
Very different from the works spoken of by Laveaux, Littre’s
Dictionary, whose publication ended in 1873, will make an
era in the history of the French language. Littre, who is
actually a member of the French Academy, as well as of the
Upper House (Senat), gave to his work thirty-five years of
indefatigable labour ; and notwithstanding this considerable
length of time, one is amazed at the work that has been re-
quired to assemble and co-ordinate on an entirely new plan,
such an immense amount of materials. When I had to recur
to a grammar, I referred to Lemaire, who is holding an
eminent rank in the French University, and is unquestionably
one of our most learned living grammarians.
It may be said that I have contented myself with pointing out
some of De Fivas’ mistakes, without giving a general appre-
ciation of the work. I have spoken neither of very important
rules omitted by De Fivas, nor of the light under which he is
treating the difficulties of the language ; nor have I examined
whether he made any effort to show a link between his innu-
merable rules and exceptions, so as to refer them to a few general


principles. I only give to those who have education at heart,,
an opportunity of establishing a parallel between French as
learned in Melbourne, and French as taught in France, and
hope a change for the better will take place. I also trust
that the reader will excuse my native idiom sometimes affecting
my English.
C 5 Punt Road, Richmond,
December Ist, 1876.


DE FIVAS’ COMPANION.
On Page 20 De Fivas says “ Tres comes from rpig, thrice.”
This is a fanciful origin which has nothing in common with
modern philology. See Littre, v. 2., p. 2336.
P. 35 De Fivas says, “The French make use of the cardinal
numbers in speaking of sovereigns; the first of the series
excepted; but we say indifferently deux or second.” The
fact is that now we never hear second in this circumstance.
Littre at the word deux gives a good many examples of deux
being used after a sovereign’s name, whereas at the word
second he does not give any instance of second being used in
this circumstance. Moreover we read in Lemaire, p. 165,
“ Some grammarians pretend to say Charles second, Henri
second, and not Charles deux, Henri deux ; but custom goes
against their opinion.”
P. 51 De Fivas says, “ The pronoun on takes an 1’ after the
words et, si, ou, que, qui, and quoi. However on remains the
same when the word following it is le, la, or les. L’on for on
should never begin a sentence.” Littre at the word on quotes
an observation of the French Academy saying, “ Euphony alone
is the right judge in the choice between, on and Ton.”
Lemaire p. 231, gives no other rule; he gives even this example,
“ L’on doit honorer la vertu,” so beginning a sentence by Ton,
what De Fivas considers as a mistake.
Instead of De Fivas’ arbitrary and complicated rule
(borrowed from old grammars), English people should simply
know they can use 1’ before on to avoid the meeting of two
vowels, unless the meeting of two l’s makes it sound worse,
like in Si I’on l’a lu. But there is nothing compulsory.


Matriculation students who have to learn both De Fivas and
the Conscript may be puzzled when, after having learned this
rule they read in the Conscript, p. 87, “ et si on ne la gagne
pas, on ne doit plus compter dessus ”
P, 53 De Fivas says, “autrui comes from the Latin alterius.”
Another old, i.e. fanciful, etymology. The final s dropping in
French words is against the rules of genuine philology. See
Littre, word autrui.
P. 54 De Fivas says, “ Many grammarians class tel among
indefinite pronouns; but it is a real adjective.” We read in
Duvivier’s Gram, des Gram. p. 414, “ Tel is an indefinite pro-
noun in the following sentences and other similar, tel donne a
pleines mains qui ” This is an idle discussion perfectly
useless to English students ; but it would only be half bad if
correct.
P. 57 De Fivas, says “ Quel, quelle, quels, quelles, are
always followed by a noun expressed or understood.” Here
again De Fivas wants at any rate to find a word understood ;
he does not see that in his example, “ quelles sont-elles, ”
quelles qualifies elles (quel and qualify are connected). His
explanation by quelles (nouvelles) sont-elles, is simply absurd.
Lemaire, p. 177, examines a sentence of the same kind, saying,
“ quel fut alors I’etonnement de ’’which he explains by
“ I’etonnement fut quel,” and not as De Fivas would have
done by quel etonnement fut I'etonnement. Lemaire has in
view the Latin origin ; De Fivas, or rather his old masters,
consider quel exclusively in its present use. From a narrow
point of view must arise a wrong interpretation, which, if not
shocking in this case for those who do not make a special study
of it, would be impossible in other cases identical at the bottom.
P. 80 De Fivas says, “ porte-crayou.” In Duvivier’s Gram,
des Gram. p. 184, I find a note of Lemaire, saying, in 1873,
“ The Academy write portecrayon in a single word.” Hence
it appears that De Fivas took no notice of the change
brought by tbe Academy in 1885.
P. 05 De Fivas says, “ Dechoir forms its compounds with
etre.” Duvivier in his Gram, des Gram, said in 1820, “ Dechoir
takes the auxiliary avoir if taken in the meaning of a
progressive act; as, Depuis ce moment il a dechu de jour
enjour; (Academy). Modern authors such as Littre fully
confirm this rule against De Fivas.


P. 95 De Fivas says, “ Entrer forms its compounds with
etre.” Duvivier in his Gram, des Gram., p 474, said in 1820,
“ One must say II eut entre lui-meme dans ce sentiment II
semble que Ciceron ait entre dans les sentiments de Les
predicateurs ont entre en societe avec 11 a entre dans ma
chambre, since in these sentences one wishes to express
an action, not a situation.” Confirmed by Littre.
P 05. De Fivas says, “ Partir forms its compounds with
etre. Duvivier in his Gram, des Gram., in 1820, p. 473, makes
the same remarks, supported by quotations, as for entrer.
Confirmed against De Fivas by Littre ; see word partir.
P. 95 De Fivas says, “ Eentrer forms its compounds witli
etre.” Duvivier in 1820, p. 474, makes the same remarks as
for entrer. Confirmed by Littre ; see word rentrer.
P, 95 De Fivas says, “ Hepartir forms its compounds with
etre.” Duvivier in his Gram, des Gram., p. 473, applies the
same rule as for partir. Littre confirms Duvivier against De
Fivas ; see word repartir.
P. 95 De Fivas says, “ Hester forms its compounds with
etre.” Duvivier, p. 473, says, “ Hester is conjugated with
avoir, when expressing an action ; as, il a reste deux jours a
Lyon (Academy).” Confirmed by modern grammarians against
De Fivas; see Littre, v. 2, p. 1078.
P, 95 De Fivas says, “Tomber and retomber form their
compounds with etre.” This time Duvivier took his rule
from Duvivier’s Gram, des Gram. But in the edition of 1873,
Lemaire in his corrections says, “ I believe writers are at
liberty to use avoir with tomber, when they mean rather the
act than the result. It is so the Academy in their Dictionary
in 1835 give as an example, “ Les poetes disent que Yulcain a
tombe du ciel pendant un jour entier.” It appears that De
Fivas took no notice of the change made not to custom, but
to the rule, by the Academy in their Dictionary in 1835.
Littre in his Dictionary, terminated in 1873, fully confirms the
rule against De Fivas ; see v. 2, p. 2249, where are given nine
quotations in which tomber is conjugated with avoir.
P. 103 De Fivas sa/s, “ The verbs to which the old gram-
marians give generally the name of impersonal, and the modern
that of unipersonal ” It matters little for English people, to
know whether il pleut, for instance, is impersonal or uniper-
sonal ; they have quite enough to learn it means, it rains.


But since De Fivas thinks it necessary to argue, let us open
Duvivier’s Gram des Gram., edit, of 1873, where Lemaire,
contradicting the term used by Duvivier in 1820, says “ Since
the action expressed by these verbs cannot be attributed, to a
person or a thing, we prefer the term impersonal, the only one
adopted by the Academy in 1835.” Brachet, one of the lead-
ing philologists of the present day, in his Gram, published in
1875, only adopts impersonal, without mentioning unipersonal.
It is curious to see lie Fivas boasting his novelty at the very
moment he shows his ignorance of what has been going on
since 1820.
P. 103 De Fivas says, “ Some unipersonal verbs take etre,
as, il est resulte.” The mistake is such that grammars, namely
Duvivier, make no allusion to it. Where did De Fivas take
it from P I cannot say, but I believe it to be his own conjecture.
We find in Littre v. 2, p. 1680, “ Resulter is conjugated with
avoir when marking an action, and with etre when marking a
state.” He gives as a quotation this sentence taken from
Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois xx. 1, “ On les a comparees entre
elles, et il en a resulte de grands biens.”
P, 10? De Fivas gives in an exercise “ Si Ton reflechissait
que I’une des premieres obligations ” Reflechir (meaning
to mind, to think) cannot have a direct regimen, nor precede
a proposition beginning by que. Although Littre, v. 2, p.
1543, gives thirty-five quotations for the word reflechir, he
does not give a single instance of reflechir followed by que.
P. 11l De Fivas gives a model for the conjugation of verbs
ending in uer. If he gives a special conjugation, there must
be an irregularity that should be pointed out. With a single
remark, the whole verb could even be dispensed with. It
took me some time to find how this verb is irregular, which I
did not know. De Fivas puts two dots instead of one over i
w r hen followed by a vowel. lam of opinion that such a trifle
should not be spoken of to foreigners, they have enough to do
without it. But the worst of it is that the two dots are a
mistake. Littre who, v. 2, p. 2375, gives the conjugation of tuer,
v. 2, p. 1868 that of secouer, and in their respective parts that
of nearly all verbs ending in uer, does not put two dots over i
when followed by a vowel. Brachet, in his Grammar of 1875,
does not speak of it. It is to be found, however, in Duvivier,
published in 1820.


P, 115 De Fivas says, “ Conjugate in the same manner
(as employer) verbs in yer. The Acad, leaves the choice of
writing il paye, or il paie, je payerai, or je paierai; but the
best modern grammarians are agreed on the change of the y
into i, and present usage is conformable to their opinion.” De
Fivas is speaking here of modern grammarians of 1820 ; for
in Lemaire’s Grammar of 1869, p. 63, we read, “As for the
verbs in ayer, here is the model given by the Academy in 1835,.
present indicative ; je paye, tu payes, il paye or il paie, nous
payons, vous payez, ils payent or ils paient; je payerai, or je
paierai, je payerais or je paierais, this exception including all
the persons of these last two tenses. But in the imperative
and subjunctive, one must always write and pronounce, paye,
payons, que je paye, qu’il paye, &c.’’ If we consult Littre,
published in 1873, we find Lemaire confirmed. For Littre-
conjugates nearly all verbs ending in yer. At the word payer,
for instance, while regretting the anomaly by which the Acad,
conjugate differently verbs ending in oyer, and those ending in
ayer, he agrees with Lemaire to let us see that De Fivas’
documents are older than 1835. It follows that it is a mis-
take to write, as De Fivas advises to do, the imperative, the
subjunctive, and the first two persons of the present indicative
with an i, as in verbs ending in oyer. Therefore I will say to
an Englishman, with the Academy and against De Fivas, to
make it more uniform and safe, never change y into i in verbs
ending in ayer, since it is nowhere compulsory, and y before e
is sometimes required.
P, 118 De Fivas says, “ The imperative va takes an s when
followed by en or y.” After this, will not a student say, Yas
en France, that is to say a gross mistake? Lemaire had more
foresight when he said, p. 261, “ when followed by the
pronoun en ” Then only, the student knows he should
not say Yas en France, because en is not here a pronoun.
P. 118 De Fivas says, “ We sometimes say jefus instead
of j’allai.” Duvivier, in 1820, p, 623, said, “ Can one say, il fut
trouver son ami, instead of il alia trouver sou ami ? ‘lt was,’
says Yoltaire (born in 1691), ‘a license they took formerly, but
it is a mistake, because’ &c. Modern grammarians agree with
Yoltaire.” Littre in 1873 gives some four hundred quotations
for the word etre, but not a single one that could support De
Fivas’ rule.


P. 141 De Fivas says, " We sometimes employ the sub-
junctive of savoir instead of the indicative, but never without
a negative ; as, Je ne sache rien de plus digne d’eloge, I know
nothing more praiseworthy.” According to De Fivas we
could not say, II n’y a personne a la maison que je sache, for
je sache, which translates an English indicative, is without a
negative, since it is not in the same proposition as il n’y
a personne. Lemaire’s rule, p. 263, leaves no doubt —“ This
same subjunctive is also used after que following a negative
sentence.”
P. 141 De F ivas says, “ Je ne saurais is often used for je
ne puis (I cannot) ; yet we do not say, je ne saurais for je ne
pourrais.” Lemaire, p. 261, says, “The conditional je ne saurais
is put for je ne pourrais, and even for the present je ne puis.”
De Fivas took his rule from Duvivier; it is a quotation of
Menage, who wrote it in 1647. !See Gram, des Gram., French
edit., p. 548.
P, 154 De Fivas gives, “ were sewing,” which he translates
by cousirent in his Key ; the number 3 under sewing shows
well he did what he meant. This is not consistent with the
rule he gives p. 280 about the imperfect, when he says his
rule is infallible, which is far from being the case.
P. 175 De Fivas gives “ tout-a-coup.” It was spelt so
before 1835 ; since then we have been writing, with the
Acad., tout a coup. See Littre, v. 1, p. 844,
P. 197 The numbers 377, 378, 379, which I do not repro-
duce here, may be compared with what Lemaire says in his
Gram., p. 144, “ The use of the article before names of countries,
states and provinces, is submitted to some exceptions depending
on custom. Pretty often the article is omitted when these
nouns take an explanatory or general meaning; as, les peuples
d’Orient; les guerres d’Allemague; carte de France. But
this rule even is not uniform, and the omission of the article
is made much better with the feminine than with the mascu-
line; they say, Histoire de Normandie, but Histoire de
TArtois.” As can be seen, the rules given in De Fivas’ book
have scarcely anything in common with those given by our
eminent modern grammarian Lemaire. I could not find the
origin of De Fivas’ strange rules.
P, 198 De Fivas gives petits-pates; since 1835 the Acad,
has been writing petits pates. See Littre, v. 1, p. 1002.


P, 109 De Divas gives beaux-esprits; since 1835 the Acad,
has been writing beaux esprits. See Littre, v. 1, p. 1495.
P. 100 De Divas gives grands-seigneurs; since 1835 the
Acad, has been writing grands seigneurs. See Littre, v. 2, p.
1878.
P. 200 De Divas says, “ When the article is used before the
first of a series of nouns, it must be repeated before each. So
you will not say Les officiers et soldats, les freres et soeurs.”
What is a Matriculation student to believe w hen, after having
read De Divas, he sees in the Conscript, p. 129, “ Personne
n’osa souffler dans le pays, pas meme les p§re et mere”?
Lemaire, p. 139, says, “ When two substantives are associated
by the mind, so as to form so to say a single expression, the
article is used before the first only as, les arts et metiers;
ecole des ponts et chaussees ; les lettres et paquets; les
tenants et aboutissants (Acad.); les freres et soeurs ; les peres
et meres ; les officiers, sous-oflficiers et soldats.” De Divas’
remark about son, sa, ses, is equally false ; I will speak of it
afterwards.
P. 200 De Divas says, “ When two adjectives are united by
et, and one of them is intended to qualify a substantive ex-
pressed and the other a substantive understood, the article
must be repeated, in Drench, before each adjective; as I’histoire
ancienne et la moderne; les philosophes anciens et les
modernes.” Every one can read on Drench passports these
words “JS r ous prions les autorites civiles et militaires ”
As autorites is understood before militaires, De Divas would
like to see “ les autorites civiles et les militaires,” which w r ould
he one of the most laughable mistakes ever made by an
Englishman trying to speak Drench. De Divas’ sentence
would have a meaning quite different and rather ludicrous.
Besides Drench passports we can refer to Lemaire, p. 140,
“ If several adjectives are joined by a conjunction, although
they express ideas of a different order, the article is not re-
peated, provided no obscurity arises from this omission ; and
so we say, les lois divines et humaines (Acad.); les historiens
anciens et modernes (Montesquieu) ; les oiseaux domestiques
et sauvages (Buffon).”
P. 201 De Divas insists again upon the same rule, saying,
“ The substantive is not put in the plural.” Supposing the
reader who has not studied the subject beforehand can guess


■what De Fivas means, he will compare what Lemaire says, p.
152 of his Gram., “ We can say, Les rites gallican, mozarabe,
gothique (Acad.). Les deux peoples gentil et juif le regardent
comme leur centre (Pascal). Les laugues romane et tudesque
(Duclos). Les scenes et cinquieme (Voltaire).”
De Fivas took his rule from Duvivier of 1820.
P. 304 De F ivas says again, “ We can use indifferently
Henri deux or second.” See the remark on p. 35.
P, 300 De Fivas translates Take care of yourself by Prenez
garde a vous. There can be no doubt as to his intention; garde
is left out but given in the same lesson ; and he translates it
so in his Key. But for any French person the French means
Look out, beware. The mistake is so gross that I am rather at
a loss to find some printed reference. The reader will perhaps
accept as a proof the fact that there is nothing near to that
meaning in the two hundred examples Littre gives at the
word garde.
P. 314 De Fivas says, “ Certain words take no s in the
plural, such as words taken from a foreign language, and
which hare not yet been naturalized by frequent use ; as, des
■adagio, des quiproquo, des solo.” These three words have been
naturalized since the time De Fivas is speaking of, Littre, v.
1, p. 50 says, “ The plural of adagio is adagios ; v. 2, p. 1430 ;
the Acad, in 1835 writes des quiproquo, but now (in 1873) we
consider the words as French, and write des quiproquos.”
S*. 310 De Fivas says, “ Write without s in the plural des
contre-poison.” De Fivas took this rule from Duvivier of
1820. In the edition of 1873 Lemaire adds a correction.
Littre, v. 1, p. 786, says, “ The plural is des contre-poison or
des contre-poisons, because we can understand remedies
against poison or against poisons.”
P, 317 De Fivas says, “We write with an s in the singular
as well as in the plural, because there is always plurality in the
idea, un essuie-mains, des essuie-mains.” Littre, v. 1, p. 1501,
says, “Un essuie-main, des essuie-main or des essuie-mains,
because we can consider either the hand or the hands.” From
explanations given elsewhere by Littre, it follows that in these
cases, the second compounding word can be put in the plural,
even when the compound word is singular. But we avoid it;
and when it does not go against good sense, to follow analogy
we prefer un essuie-main, des essuie-mains.


P, 323 De Fivas says, “ When substantives are united by
on, the adjective agrees with the last.” Littre, v. 2, p. 875
says, “ The adjective relating to two or several substantives
constructed with ou is put in the plural; as, On demande un
homrae ou une femme Ages. Les SamoiMes se nourrissent
de chair ou de poisson crus.” The remarks made on the p.
264, regarding ou between subjects, -will explain this case
more fully.
P. 335 De Fivas says, “ The name of a nation takes a capi-
tal letter if it be a substantive.” He is not consistent with
himself when he writes, p. 82, “ II entend un peu I’anglais; and
p. 301, Je ne sais pas le frangais.” He should have said, when
being a substantive it applies to an individual.
P. 228 De Fivas gives us a list of adjectives which impart
a different meaning to the noun, according as they are placed
before or after it. De Fivas misunderstood altogether Duvi-
vier’s rule. If I say, Ce pauvre hornme n’a pas mange
depuis trois jours, some of De Fivas’ pupils will take it for
a mistake, because not alluding to the man’s genius, I put
pauvre before homme. However, this sentence is so correct
that you could not say Cethorame pauvre n’a pas mange. I have
often seen pupils mistaken by this list of adjectives. In fact,
the context, the circumstances, the tone, the construction of
other words are more to be looked at than the mere place of
the adjective. Asa proof, one can consult Duvivier’s Gram,
des Gram., p. 268, where the different acceptations of these
adjectives are discussed. If one looks for these adjectives in
Littre, one will see that for almost all of them, the same
meanings are found, whether placed before or after the noun.
De Fivas even, is not consistent with himself, for he gives, p.
46, “Un brave officier, a brave officer.” According to his list
it should mean an honest officer.”
P, 230 De Fivas says, “ Bon governs the preposition a; we
say, bona, good for.” In spite of De Fivas I must say that it
is seldom the case bon a can be translated by good for.
Littre, v. 1, p. 367, gives these examples, “ Bon pour la sante,
eaux tres-bonnes pour I’estomac, le quinquina est bon contre
la fievre, il n’est jamais bon de faire le mal, terrain bon pour
la vigne.” I could quote any amount of examples in which
the use of De Fivas’ rule would make sentences supremely
absurd.


P, 231 De Eivas says, “ Agreable governs de ; we say,
agreable de, agreeable to.” Littre, v. 1, p. 81, says, “Etre
agreable a I’oreille, au gout; vin agreable h boire ; la victime
fut agreable aux dieux ; pour se rendre agreables a un prince,
j\ un grand, a toutes les personnes qu’ils veulent gagner ; ”
and finally, “ Agreable requires the preposition a, as, agreable
{\ son maitre, agreable a voir.” Eor nearly all the adjectives
given, p. 230, 231, it would be easy to find De Eivas in fault,
he only saw one side of the question, and sometimes a very
narrow one. 1 believe this to be of his own make.
P, 333 De Eivas says, “Le deuxieme makes you think on
the third, it awakens the idea of a series, whereas, le second
awakens the idea of order without that of series. We say,
therefore, of a work which has only two volumes, voici le
second tome, and not le deuxieme.” This useless complication
should be crossed out, for Littr6 says, v. 2, p. 1867, “ Some
old grammarians pretended that deuxieme was better than
second, provided there were more than two things spoken of,
second ending an enumeration after premier, and deuxieme
indicating that it would be followed by troisieme. But this
reason, quite arbitrary, lets custom prevail against it.”
P, 233 De Eivas says, “ Dumarsais thinks that if we write
and pronounce le onze, it is in order not to confound I’onze
with I’once.” This absurdity would not be worth correct-
ing if it did not cause the student to conclude that onze and
once sound alike, which is not the case. The explanation of
Dumarsais is the only one that could be imagined in his time
(he died in 1757). They did not think it necessary then to
examine whether this was the only case of an aspiration with-
out an h, and whether the explanation of this single case
would be confirmed by other cases existing; and still less how
the aspirated h originated in Erench. For Dumarsais, as for
De Eivas, grammar making was a pretty easy work. It shows
again, how, from a narrow point of view must arise a wrong
interpretation.
P. 236 De Eivas says, “ Plus on lit La Fontaine, plus on
Tadmire.” On that sentence he adds in his Key, “Et plus on
I’admire would be a mistake. Plus, mieux, moins, autant,
placed at the beginning of two members of a sentence, must
not be joined by the conjunction et; and the reason is that
we have not to join these two prepositions, but to mark their


relation to each other.” To give more weight to hia rule De
Fivas says he took it from Chapsal, who wrote it in 1820.
For English people, whether they see here the name of
Chapsal or of anybody else matters little ; an authority can-
not fail to sound well to the one who is not a judge; but
for the one who knows, it is quite different. No respectable
grammarian would now think of taking Chapsal as an
authority; Chapsal was never a grammarian, although he
made up a grammar which they are still going on printing
for English sale. Chapsal was at one time popular; but
popularity has nothing to do with merit. The utmost dis-
credit has been thrown upon his work since his lawsuit
against Bonneau, whose grammar he imagined to copy in
order to correct his own. Bonneau then put Chapsal’s
grammar to pieces in a critique published in 1848. As for
the rule, we read against it in Littre, v, 2, p. 1176, “ The
correspondence of the two plus does not prevent from using
the conjunction et; as, Plus attentivement je les considere, et
moins je me persuade que I’idee que j’en ai puisse tirer son
origine de moi seul (Descartes, Medit, hi. 15); plus le tour
est bizarre et plus elle est contente (La Fontaine, Fab. ix. 16) ;
Plus obscure est la nuit et plus I’etoile y brille (Lamartine,
Eeponse aux adieux de W. Scott).” I may add these examples
taken from Duvivier’s Gram, des Gram., p. 829, “ Plus les
homines seront eclaires, et plus ils seront libres (Voltaire) ;
Plus ils s’accumulent et plus ils se corrompent (Eousseau).”
In Littre, v. 2, p. 591, “ Certes, plus je medite, et moins je me
figure que vous m’osiez compter pour votre creature ” (Eacine,
Brit. i. 2).
P. 343 De Fivas says, “ When two imperatives are joined
by the conjunction et or ou, and without a negative, it is
considered more elegant to place the second pronoun before
the verb.” De Fivas took his rule from Chapsal, who does
not say it is more elegant. Lemaire, p. 246, says that such is
the case sometimes, although getting less in use now. What
Lemaire is not required to say to French students, I believe
it necessary for the English ones; this construction sometimes
used formerly, and still more rare now, should be left to
native writers who know how to handle uncommon con-
structions without being ridiculous. This construction is
never used in conversation.


P, 248 De Fivas trnaslates He is not fit for society, by On
n’est pas propre pour la societe. He is not consistent with
himself, for he said, p. 230, “ The adjective propre governs the
preposition a, we must say propre a, fit for.” Littre who
gives some two hundred quotations for this word does not
give a single instance of propre followed by pour.
P, 249 He Fivas says, “ In an imperative sentence, when
affirmative, moi is placed after y; as, menez-y-moi.” Lemaire
in his Gram, of 1869, p. 190, says, “ Some in this case have
imagined to transpose the objects and to say menez-y-moi,
donnez-y-moi, mets-y-toi, jettes-y-toi. But these strange con-
structions are out of the usual rule.”
P, 249 De Fivas says, “ Possessive adjectives are repeated
before every noun of the same sentence. Mes pere et mere,
ses pere et mere, instead of mon pere et ma mere, son p6re et
sa mere, are phrases extremely incorrect, condemned by
Yaugelas, Wailly, &c.” Yaugelas condemned it in 1647 ;
since then grammarians have become a good deal less tyrannical,
for we find in Lemaire, p. 166, “ It is allowed to say, honorer ses
pere et mere.” It must be puzzling for Matriculation students
who have to learn both De Fivas and the Conscript, when in the
latter, p. 101, last line, they read “ Puisqu’un grand nombre
des malheureux etendus sur le champ de bataille avaient leurs
pere et mere''
P. 250 De Fivas says, “ Possessive adjectives are repeated
before the adjectives that do not qualify the same noun.”
Lemaire, p. 166, says, “ The Acad, (in 1835) allows to say,
Chacun sera juge selon ses bonnes ou mauvaises oeuvres.
They neglect repeating the possessive adjectives before the
qualificatives of a same noun, even if they express ideas of a
different order, when the meaning leaves no doubt.”
P. 252 De Fivas says, “ When its or their relate to inani-
mate objects, they are expressed by son, sa, ses, leur or leurs,
when joined to a noun qualified by an adjective, unless the
noun form the regimen.” De Fivas must have imagined this
rule himself. In any case it does not agree with this example
given by Lemaire, p. 168, “La mer sortit de son lit; ses eaux
couvrirent toute la terre.” There is no adjective to qualify
eaux; ses here, is not given in accordance with other De
Fivas’ paragraphs, and even it is against his last remark, when
he says that in all other cases, possessives must not be used.


De Fivas adds, “ When joined to the subject of the verb, the
latter is, or may be, followed in French by the preposition de.”
There is nothing like this in grammars published in France.
Besides, how could an English student know when some com-
plement beginning by de would render the sentence incorrect?
De Fivas adds, “ On all other occasions, its and their are ex.
pressed by en, before the verb, and by the article before the
noun.” Any amount of quotations can be given in which its
and their are translated by son, sa, leur, &c., although not in
the conditions required by De Fivas. We read, for instance,
in Lemaire, p. 168, “ Le commerce est comme certaines sources :
si vous detournez leur cours, vous les faites tarir (Fenelon).
Ce plan n’est pas encore le style, mais il en est la base ; il le
soutient, il le dirige, il regie son mouvement (Buffon).” In
these cases you use son, leur, although none of the four con-
ditions required by De Fivas is fulfilled. In short, De Fivas
has not the least idea of the principles to be followed in this
case.
P, 353 De Fivas says, “ The forms, my brother’s, your
sister’s are also rendered by a mon frere, a votre soeur.”
Although what De Fivas means to say is true, it is said in such
a way that generally students would translate, according to his
rule, It is my brother’s hat, by, (Test le chapeau a mon frere.
This sentence is only heard among peasants,
P. 358 De Fivas says, “ The relative pronoun ought always
to be placed near its antecedents ; any other place occasions
ambiguity. So Boileau is not to be imitated when he says;
La deesse, en entrant, qui voit la nappe mise.” Littre is so
far from thinking that any other place occasions ambiguity,
that he says, v. 2, p. 1423, “ When qui is separated from its
antecedent, one must take care not to render the sentence
obscure.” Littre then gives seven quotations with the inver-
sions spoken of, in which he approves the use of it, as it leaves
the sentence perfectly clear; one of these quotations is the
very same one De Fivas wanted to correct in Boileau.
P. 359 De Fivas says, “ From whom, is rendered by de qui,
and not by dont.” In Duvivier’s Gram, des Gram. I read, p.
381, “ Vous descendez en vain des dieux dont vous etes nee.”
And in Lemaire, p. 226, “ Portant sur son visage la majeste
de tant de rois dont elle tirait sa naissance.” How would De
Fivas translate dont in those sentences ?


P, 363 De Fivas says, “ Chacun takes son, sa, ses, when it
is placed after the direct regimen, or when the verb has no
regimen of that nature. Chacun takes leur, leurs, when it is
placed before the direct regimen.” De Fivas took his rule
from Chapsal. Duvivier, p. 403, says, “II yit Homere et
Esope qui venaient, chacun de leur maison.” Yenaient has
no direct regimen, and still sa is not used. The cause of the
mistake is always the same ; De Fivas won’t have anything
to do with ideas; he never tries to see the why of his
mechanical rules. Littre, v. 1, p. 536, says, “ Must we say, ils
ont pris chacun son chapeau; ils sont sortis chacun de son
cote; or, ils ont pris chacun leur chapeau, ils sont sortis chacun
de leur cote ? Both are said and both are correct. When son is
used, it is related to chacun considered as a distributive ; ils
ont pris, viz., chacun a pris son chapeau. When leur is used,
it is related to chacun considered as a collective; ils ont pris
leurs chapeaux, viz., chacun a pris le sien. At the Ist and
2nd person, chacun requires the possessive in the plural; nous
avons pris chacun notre chapeau; vous-etes parti chacun de
votre cote. It is not incorrect to say, Nous avons pris chacun
son chapeau ; vous etes parti chacun de son cote, but this
turn is obsolete.”
P, 364 De Fivas says, “ When two subjects singular are
joined by ou, the verb is put in the singular. When the
words joined by ou are of different persons, usage requires the
verb to be in the plural.” De Fivas took his rule from
Duvivier of 1820, who adds, p 579, “ According to examples
given by the Acad., the verb agrees sometimes with the last
subject, and sometimes with both.” In the edition of
Duvivier’s work of 1873, Lemaire adds that the examples
given by the Acad, and which Duvivier admitted reluctantly,
are perfectly correct and logical. Littre in 1873 says, v. 2,
p. 874, “ The decisions of old grammarians cannot stand
against syntax and custom. The necessary construction, lui
ou moi ferons cela, in which the alternative is most clearly
defined, shows that, generally speaking, it is the idea of a
conjunction that prevails; so that the plural is the most
natural construction. But the idea of a disjunction may also
prevail in the mind of the one who speaks, and then he is at
liberty to use the singular.”
P, 364 De Fivas says, “As the words Fun et Fautre


express plurality, the verb should be put in the plural.” De
Divas took his rule from Chapsal. Uuvivier in 1820, p. 583,
said, “ According to Yaugelas, Marmontel, and the Academy,
after I’un et I’autre, we can put the verb indifferently either in
the singular or in the plural.” Littre in 1873, v. 2, p. 2389
says, “ L’un et I’autre is sometimes considered as a single
subject, sometimes as a double one, according to the idea that
prevails in the mind ; and we say equally well, Fun et Fautre
vous a oblige, and Fun et Fautre vous ont oblige.”
P, 365 De Divas says, “ When the collective general is
followed by the preposition and a noun, the adjective, pronoun,
participle, and verb, agree with the collective general.”
Littre v. 2, p. 977 says, “ Must we write, la partie du pain
mange or mangee ? If all the bread is eaten the adjective
agrees with pain; whilst it is with partie, if a part only is
eaten.” It is only a consequence of the general rule of the
agreement of adjectives, applied by any sensible person. De
Divas’ arbitrary rule is false altogether.
P. 365 De Divas says, “ When a collective partitive is
followed by de, and a noun, the adjective, pronoun, participle,
and verb agree with the last noun, because it expresses the
principal idea; as, il trouva une partie des abricots manges,
he found a part of the apricots eaten.” The Drench as spelt
by De Divas would mean, I found a part of the eaten apricots,
i. e., these apricots having been put out of the stomach, I was
enabled to see a part of them. Every one can see that eaten
relates, not to apricots, but to part, and so is it in Drench.
Assuredly part is not considered here as an abstraction, but
conveys the idea of apricots in a certain amount. I cannot
find the origin of De Divas’ blunder. As a reference we read
in Littre, v. 2, p. 977, “ We must say, une partie du pain mange a
notre dejeune aurait sustente ce malheureux pendant plusieurs
jours; une partie du pain mangee avant le diner a empeche
que le reste nous ait sufii.” In the first instance mange is
related in our mind with pain ; in the second with partie.
P. 366 De Divas says, “Peu, beaucoup, and la plupart,
used by themselves require the verb in the plural.” De Divas’
mechanical rule will be in fault in this instance, taken from
Lemaire, p. 333, “ Peu lui suffit.”
P. 367 De Divas says, “ Synonymous nouns must never be
joined in Drench, by the conjunction et.” We read in


Lemaire, p. 154, “ Elle trouvait une noblesse et une grandeur
etormante dans ce jeune homme (Fenelon) ; Armez-vous
d'un courage et d’une foi nouvelle ; p. 236, La politesse et
I’affabilite est la seule distinction qu’ils affectent (Massillon).
In those instances, we have to deal with synonyms, at least
they are so in the writer’s point of view, who follows the rule
of agreement generally used with synonyms.
P, 36? De Fivas says, “ When two subjects are joined by
the following conjunctions, comme, de meme que, ainsi que,
aussi bien que, the verb agrees with the first subject, the
second being the subject of a verb understood.” Littre,
v. 1, p. 94, says, “ With ainsi que between two substantives,
the verb is put either in the singular or in the plural, accord-
ing to the intention of the one who speaks ; if expressing a
comparison, we will say, Le frangais, ainsi que I’italien, derive
du latin ; if the idea of conjunction prevails upon the idea of
comparison, we will say, Le frangais ainsi que I’italien derivent
du latin; v. 1, p, 246 : when two nouns are joined by aussi
bien que, the verb can be put either in the singular or in the
plural, because it can be related in our mind either to both
together or to one only.”
P, 373 De Fivas says, “ Accoutumer requires a before an
infinitive.” After that rule, a student would consider as mis-
takes these sentences, perfectly correct, taken from Littre, v.
1, p. 38, “ Les hommes n’ayant pas accoutume de former le
merite ; On est accoutume de se laisser aller au peche par
les caresses des femmes (Pascal); Le soin qu’on eut de garnir
la salle d’une foule de docteurs, moines et mendiants, qui
n’etaient pas accoutumes de s’y trouver, fit dire a Pascal
(Voltaire); Ons’accoutumede donner, comme le monde, a toutes
les passions des noms adoucis (Massillon); II vous importe de
vous accoutumer de bonne heure de hair I’injustice (Voiture).
P, 373 De Fivas says, “ Aimer requires a before an infini-
tive.” Littre, v. I, p 92, gives nine quotations for aimer a,
and seven for aimer de and an infinitive. We can read also
in the Conscript, p. 115, last line, “Je n’aime pas de moisir
dans un jardin.” It must be rather puzzling for Matriculation
students who have to learn both De Fivas and the Conscript.
P. 373 De Fivas says, “ S’attendre requires a before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 232, gives four quotations for s’at-
tendre de with an infinitive.


P, 273 De Fivas says, “ Consentir requires a before an in-
finitive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 748, always supported by numerous
quotations, thinks so little of condemning de, that treating the
synonymy of both expressions, he says, “ Grammarians have
tried to see a difference between consentir a and consentir de,
with an infinitive, but considering the examples taken from
authors, we cannot admit any material difference.
P, 373 De Fivas says, “ Demander requires either a or de
before an infinitive as it sounds best.” The mistake was here
to copy a remark made to French people concerning a slight
difference not generally admitted, but that has nothing to do
with a case known by every Frenchman, and not to be guessed
by foreigners. When the person whom you ask for something,
is expressed, de and a convey quite different ideas. Je vous
demande h faire cela, means, allow me to do that; Je vous de-
mande de faire cela, will you do that yourself. It is not the
only case of a rule being perfectly true and clear for a French
reader, and altogether false when translated instead of being
interpreted to foreigners. It is so you can see in Littre, that
we can use almost indifferently quand and lorsque. If an
Englishman after that were to say, Lorsque viendrez-vous ?
instead of Quand viendrez-vous, Littre could tell him he
alluded only to a slight difference, not affecting a case for
which there can be no doubt in France. The reader can refer
to Littre, v. 1, p. 1041, where the quotations confirm the differ-
ence spoken of.
P, 373 De Fivas says, “ Donner requires fi before an infini-
tive.” This does not agree with these quotations of Littre, v.
l,p. 1218, “ II fut donne a celui-ci de tromper les peuples et
de prevaloir contre les rois (Bossuet) ; C’etait a elle qu’il etait
donne de rassembler les gentils (Bossuet) ; Puisqu’il t’est
donne d’entrer dans le royaume de la nuit (Feneion) ; II n’est
pas donne a I’homme de porter plus loin la vertu (Voltaire).”
It would be easy to give a rule; but the use of de and a should
be learned in a more scientific point of view than it is done in
De Fivas ; and it would contradict many points in his Gram-
mar I have not spoken of. A thorough knowledge of the case
would be far more simple than a superficial one.
P, 373 De Fivas says, “ S’empresser, to be eager to, re-
quires either h or de before an infinitive, as it sounds best.”
De Fivas does not speak of s’etnpresser, meaning, to make


haste. But if the student were to meet with the latter, con-
sidering that De Fivas does not mention a different rule for this
last meaning, and that the two meanings, to make haste, and
to be eager, are very much alike, since the second one is only
a consequence of the first one, he would certainly follow De
Fivas’ rule with s’empresser, meaning to make haste. De
Fivas would be responsible for the mistake. Littre, v. 1 , p.
1362, says, “ With s’empresser, meaning to make haste, de only
can be used before an infinitive.”
P, 373 De Fivas says, “ Forcer requires h or de as it sounds
best before an infinitive, in the active sense, but always
de in the passive.” The remark about the passive sense is
false altogether. We read in Littre, v. 1, p. 1726, “ L’heresie,
depuis si longtemps redoubtable au trdne par la faiblesse des
regnes precedents forces ala tolerer (Massillon). Ceux-ci,
apres soixante et douze ans de guerre continuelle, furent forces
& subir le joug des Eomains (Bossuet). Nous sommes forces
a reconnaitre nos miseres (Bourdaloue).”
P, 273 De Fivas says, “ Habituer requires h before an infini-
tive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 1968, says, “We use either aor de be-
tween habituer and an infinitive; as, Souvent ce souffle pur
dont I’homme est anime ; Eedoute un autre ciel, et ne veut plus
nous suivre; Loin des lieux oil le temps I’habitua de vivre
(Chenier).” There is a difference between a and de better felt
than expressed, from which it follows that ia many cases de,
considered as a mistake by De Fivas, should be preferred.
P, 273 De Fivas says, “ Hair requires a before an infinitive.”
Littre, v. 1, p. 1972, says, “ Hair used negatively, requires
either &or de before an infinitive; as, Elies ne haisent pas de
primer dans ce nouveau genre de vie (La Bruyere) ;Si je
n’etais pas canusi, je ne hairais pas d’etre quaker (Voltaire).”
P. 273 De Fivas says, “ Se hasarder requires fi before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 1988, says, “We use either hor
de between se hasarder and an infinitive; as, Ceux qui se
hasardaient de faire passer les chevaux (Vaugelas); Si quelqu’un
se hasarde de lui emprunter quelques vases (La Bruyere); Je
me hasarde de dire qu’il se peut faire qu’il y ait au monde
plusieurs...(La Bruyere).”
P. 374 De Fivas says, “ Hesiter requires before an infini-
tive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 2015, gives two quotations for hesiter
with h and three with de; these are, Hesiter d’ob&r, c’est


faire I’oeuvre de Dieu avec negligence (Bourdaloue); Ils
n’hesitent pas de eritiquer des choses qui sent parfaites (La
Bruyere) ; Je n’ai pas hesite de vous soumettre mes doutes
sur cette mature (Voltaire).”
P, 274 De Divas says, “Inviter requires a before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 2, p. 151, says, “Inviter de is also
used sometimes; as, Ils avaient vu une galore ou on les avait
invites d’entrer (Moliere).”
P. 274 De Divas says, “ Oublier, meaning to forget how,
requires a before an infinitive ; and p. 275, meaning to forget
to, it requires de.” A pupil of mine who knows De Divas’
Grammar too well sometimes, said to me not long ago, “ J’ai
oublie a dire cela ” ; I told him he should say, “ J’ai oublie
comment on dit cela ” ; then De Divas was called as an
authority, and I had to conclude that De Divas alone was
responsible for the mistake. The fact is, that oublier a,
according to Littrd, always supported by numerous quo-
tations, means to forget to, without any idea of a science ; as,
v. 2, p. 878, “ J’oubliais a remarquer que la prison ou je,..
(Corneille); On n’avait point oublie a deliberer sur la
principale occupation de I’Academie (Pellisson) ; J’ai oublie &
vous dire qu’il y a des Escobar de difierentes impressions
(Pascal).” Ais used exactly in the same circumstances as
de, which is more common. But although De Divas is wrong
here, this first mistake is not the worst; for it only prevents
the pupil from using a preposition which is quite correct in
that meaning. It should also prevent him from understanding
those sentences in which, in spite of De Divas, a is used with
oublier, meaning to forget to ; but generally the context
would cause the pupil not to think of this fanciful rule. The
worst is that the pupil believes he can use oublier &, meaning
to forget how, and speaks accordingly, in such a way that he
must be either misunderstood or not understood at all. De
Divas’ blunder must be attributed to the fact that oublier k,
meaning to forget how, has been used formerly. But even if
this use of oublier k were not altogether obsolete now, De
Divas would be wrong. The mere translation of a word,
soever exact it be, gives almost always, to a greater or less
extent, a wrong idea of it. Learning by mere translation fills
the mind with false associations of ideas which contradict
each other, and are the greatest obstacle to progress.
3


Oublier h, as used in the seventeenth century, can certainly
be translated by to forget how; and, however, if you want
your pupil to associate this idea with the French expression,
you make him go a step backwards in his study. Oublier ii
meant to lose the hahit of performing an act, and never to
lose the knowledge of a scientific fact.
p, 274 De Fivas says, “ Penser requires a before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 2, p. 1048, who gives some hundred
and sixty quotations for the word penser, gives only one in
which penser is followed by h and an infinitive, and twenty-
two in which penser is followed by an infinitive without a
preposition. It is very seldom penser is used in De Fivas’
way. When to think of expresses a belief, penser is used
without a preposition; when it expresses a vague idea, a
supposition, a is used.
P, 374 De Fivas says, “Se resoudre requires a before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 2, p. 1665, gives five quotations for se
resoudre a, and twelve for se resoudre de and an infinitive;
as, “ Si on est dans le vice, la ligue qui mene a Dieu est d’y
renoncer et de se resoudre d’embrasser tousles moyens
necessaires pour en sortir (Nicole).”
P. 375 De Fivas says, “Differer requires de before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 1159, gives two quotations for
differer de, and four with a and an infinitive; these are,
“ J’ai differe ale dire. On ne doit pas differer a bien vivre.
J’ai toujours differe a vous faire reponse jusqu’a present
(Sevigne) ; Jusques a quand differerez-vous a nous faire
justice et a venger nos freres? (Bible, Machab. L, vi., 22).”
I may add that de is not so much used as a.
P. 375 De Fivas says, “Essayer requires de before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 1498, gives one quotation for
essayer with de, and four for essayer with h; these are,
“ Essayez sur ce point a la faire parler (Corneille, Horace,
i., 4) ; Est-ce done que par la vous voulez essayer if reparer
I’accueil dont je vous ai fait plainte? (Moliere, Amph. ii., 2);
Essayez un p'eu par plaisir a m’envoyer des ambassades, a
m’ecrire secr£tement de petits billets doux (Moliere, Gr.
Dandin i., 6) ; C’est le plus grand sujet de felicite de la
condition des rois, de ce qu’on essaye sans cesse h les divertir
par toutes sortes de plaisirs (Pascal).”
P, 375 De Fivas says, “Manquer requires de before an


infinitive.” Littre, v. 2, p. 431, says, “ Manquer, meaning not
to do what one ought to do, requires a before an infinitive;
as, On mesestime celui qui manque h remplir ses devoirs ;
meaning to omit, to forget to do something, not to get
something, it requires de.”
P, 375 De Divas says, “Refuser requires de before an
infinitive.” Littre, v. 2, p. 1551, says, “When we are
speaking of things for which, if granted, we would use
donner a, refuser requires h before an infinitive; as, il lui a
refuse h diner, h dejeuner.”
P, 277 De Divas says, “ Compter requires no preposition
before an infinitive.” Littre, v. 1, p. 709, gives one quotation
for compter without a preposition, and eight for compter de
with an infinitive ; as, “II compte de se retirer dans un
village (Denelon) ; II compte d’aller a Versailles (Sevigne);
C’est qu’ils comptent de n’etre jamais hommes (Rousseau);
Je compte de me reposer le reste de mes jours (Montesquieu);
Peut-elle compter d’en etre crue sur parole (Massillon) ; Je
compte de me repentir quelque jour (Bourdaloue).”
P, 377 De Divas says, “Esperer requires no preposition
before an infinitive ; but if used in the present infinitive, and
followed by an infinitive, it requires de.” According to De
Divas, when esperer is used at any tense but the present
infinitive, it must not be followed by de and an infinitive.
However, Littre, v. 1, p. 1492, gives the following quotations,
“ J’esperais d’avoir de quoi te satisfaire et repondre sites
dernieres lettres (Pascal); II espera de contenter son
ambition (Bossuet) ; J’esp6rais de verser mon sang apres mes
larmes (Racine, Berenice i., iv.); Ils esperent de jouir d’un
paradis ouils gouteront mille delices (Montesquieu).” Littre
gives only two quotations for esperer without a preposition
before an infinitive.
P. 378 De Divas says, “The English present participle,
preceded by the preposition for, explaining the motive of an
action, is also expressed in Drench by the infinitive with
pour.” The word also used here by De Divas refers to a
present infinitive, while the following example is at the past.
However, the student will be authorized by De Divas to use
the present, which conveys quite a different idea. Littre,
v. 2, p. 1249, leaves no doubt when he says, “ Pour with a
past infinitive means on account of.”


P. 381 I found in De Fivas many quotations which are not
altogether French. These sentences being so short, it is
almost impossible to ascertain the place they are taken from ;
but we find p. 281, 282, a little piece signed Bossuet. The
reader can find the original in Bossuet’s Discours sur I’Histoire
universelle, third part, towards the end of the third chapter.
De Divas made twenty lines out of forty-five. Not only he
shortened them in such a way as to render the French
ridiculous, but he added twenty-eight words of his own. It
is not every one who can imitate Bossuet’s style; but an
Englishman must know very little French to imagine he can
mix his own poor French with the one of the most inimitable
of our classics. To understand how ludicrous it looks, one
can picture to himself a Frenchman knowing English very
imperfectly, getting printed forty-five lines of Shakespeare
shortened by one half, with twenty-eight words of his own,
and presenting his mixture to French students learning
English,
P. 383 De Fivas says, “ The preterite indefinite expresses
something done in the course of the day, week, month, year,
or century in which we are.” Lemaire, p. 249, says, “The
preterite indefinite is used in any case indistinctly to recall
an accomplished fact.” According to De Fivas, one could
not say, Je vous ai ecrit le quinze du mois passe j but Lemaire
allows it, and we hear it every day.
P, 385 De Fivas says, “ The subjunctive is used after an
interrogation, and after a verb accompanied by a negation.”
One can scarcely read a page of French that does not
contradict De Fivas’ rule. Littre, v. 2, p. 1411, says, “After
certain verbs and certain constructions which imply a
possibility, a doubt, a negation, an interrogation, a command,
the subjunctive is used.” Littre is far less absolute; a
foreigner does not learn much by Littre’s rule, since it does
not say which are these certain verbs and certain con-
structions ; but, at least, he is not misled. Such sentence as,
Lui direz-vous que je sois venu ? which is not French at all,
is required by De Fivas, who would consider as a mistake
this quotation of Littre, v. 2, p. 1411, “Je n’ai pas oublie,
prince, que ma victoire devait a vos exploits la moitie de sa
gloire (Racine, Beren. iii., 1). This question of the sub-
junctive should be treated especially for the use of English


people; the rules given to French people are scarcely of any
use to foreigners.
P, 386 De Fivas says, “II semble, accompanied by an
indirect regimen of persons, il y a, il parait, il resulte, follow
this rule when used negatively or interrogatively, else they
require the indicative.” Littre, for il semhle, does not make
any distinction for the case it is accompanied by an indirect
regimen of persons. He says, v. 2, p. 1885, “It is the idea
the writer has in his mind that decides whether the indicative
or the subjunctive must be used. Il semble is more certain
with the indicative, more doubtful with the subjunctive.
When the sentence is either negative or interrogative, the
subjunctive must always be used after il semble. Il semble
que mon coeur veuille se fendre par la moitie (Sevigne) ; Il
semble que I’esclavage soit d’autant plus dur chez les nations
libres, qu’il y est plus injuste et plus etrange (Eaynal).”
Littre’s rule, supported by these and many other quotations,
is decidedly against De Fivas. According to De Fivas, one
should also say, Combien de temps y a-t-il qu’il soit arrive P
and so on for the other verbs. Ido not see a rule against it,
for grammarians in France could not think that such
sentences could ever be taught to foreigners. Any French
person above ten years of age, if he can make De Fivas’
sentences out, may tell what they are worth.
P, 387 De Fivas says, “ The subjunctive is used after the
relative pronouns qui, que, dont, ou, when they are preceded
by peu, or by an adjective in the superlative relative degree.
Among such adjectives are included le seul, I’unique, le
premier, le dernier.” This rule is false altogether. Leaving
the case to be explained by teachers, I will only quote against
De Fivas’ rule that sentence found in Littre, v. 1, p. 1217,
“Le premier tableau que j’ai vu a Chantilly est une tete de
St. Jean-Baptiste qu’on donne au Titien (Fenelon).”
P, 389 De Fivas says, “ After any of the conditionals, we
use the imperfect of the subjunctive, if we mean to express a
thing present or future.” De Fivas is in fault, not only in
this part of the No. 580, but also in the other parts, and in
the No. 579 which Ido not speak of. Against this one, we
read in Littre, v. 2, p, 1413, “ Shall we say je voudrais qu’il
vienne, or qu’il vint ? When the conditional is used without
a condition expressed, not only it is allowed to use the


present subjunctive, but generally it should be preferred.
We will say Je Toudrais qu’il vint, or better qu’il vienne; il
me serait agreable que cela se fit, or better se fasse; je
desirerais que vous passiez chez moi, and not que vous
passassiez.”
P, 300 De Divas says, “ Davantage can never modify an
adjective, and cannot, like plus, be followed by de nor que.”
And as an illustration, he adds, “We could not say II se fie
davantage & ses lumieres.” His example has nothing to do
with his rule. Besides, in spite of De Divas, this sentence is
quite correct.
P. 300 De Divas says, “ Davantage is always used abso-
lutely, either at the end of a sentence, or at the end of a
member of a sentence.” Some one who knows the question
beforehand, guesses that De Divas alludes to a rule of old
grammarians saying that davantage cannot be followed by de
and a complement, nor by que, meaning than. But a little
more careful reading of authors shows that this rule is
groundless, see Littre, v. 1, p. 956, who gives many quo-
tations against it. But as this use of davantage is not very
frequent, De Divas would only be half wrong if he did not
add that davantage must be either at the end of a sentence,
or at the end of a member of a sentence. It is a mistake
altogether. Even without reckoning the cases when
davantage is followed either by que or de, we frequently hear
sentences like this one, taken from Littre, v. 1, p. 956, “Ne
me rompez pas davantage la tete (Moliere, Misanth. iv. 3).”
P. 305 De Divas says, “Autour is a preposition which
requires a regimen.” Littre, v. 1, p. 252, gives autour both
as a preposition and an adverb without regimen; as, La
campagne autour est couverte d’hommes (La Bruyere) ; J’ai
laisse tout autour une troupe eploree (Corneille); II demeure
ici autour.”
P. 306 De Divas says, “ When before has no noun or
pronoun after it, it is generally expressed by the adverb
auparavant.” Dollowing De Divas, a student will surely
translate: put the noun after and the article before, by
mettez le nom apres et I’article auparavant, which would be a
gross mistake. Littre has more foresight when he defines
auparavant “at a former time,” v. 1, p. 245. Besides, De
Divas made another mistake; after his rule, one could not


use avant unless there is a noun or pronoun after it. Littre,
v. 1, p. 257, gives many quotations of avant used as an adverb
without a noun or pronoun after it; as, “ Mais je vais trop
avant et deviens indiscrete (Corneille); Tel on deteste avant,
que I’on adore apres (Voltaire); Elle est plus caressante et
plus libre qu’avant (Lamartine) ; Mais avant, pour pouvoir
mieux feindre ce (Molhsre).”
P, 307 De Fivas says, “ The preposition jusque requires a
after it.” He is not consistent with himself, for he gives,
p. 9, “The elision of e occurs in jusque before ici.”
According to De Fivas, p. 9, one must say, jusqu’ici; and
according to De Fivas, p. 307, one must say, jusqu’a ici.
The matriculation student will be still more puzzled when
reading in the Conscript, p. 125, “ Tine espece de satisfaction
interieure brillait jusque dans les yeux des servantes;” and
p. 126, “Je I’accompagnerai jusque hors des portes.” De
Fivas will be in fault in many other cases, for we say, Jusqu’
en, jusqu’ou, jusque-la, jusque sur, jusque sous, jusque par,
jusque vers, jusque contre, jusque pour, &c.
P, 308 De Fivas gives, “ A child ought not to obtain any-
thing because he asks for it, but because he has need of it.”
He translates in his Key and in his grammar by “ Un enfant
ne doit rien obtenir parce qu’il le demande, mais parce qu’il
en a besoin.” It is a mistake to translate it by le, and of it
by en, both relating to rien. Littre, v. 2, p. 267, says, “ The
pronouns le, la, les, cannot refer to a noun taken in an in-
definite meaning, that is to say without an article.” It must
be known that rien without an article is considered as an
indefinite noun by Littre and modern grammarians. The
same rule applies to efi, which stands here for thereof or
de le.
P, 310 De Fivas translates, “Abstained from eating for
fear of being poisoned,” by “ S’abstint de manger par la
crainte d’etre empoisonne.” Littre, v. 1, p. 880, who gives
the different idioms that can be formed with the word
crainte, does not mention par la crainte de. The mistake
in French is the same as would be made in English if one
were to say : he abstained from eating by the fear of being
poisoned.
P. 338 De Fivas translates clef fausse by wrong key.
Clef fausse is altogether out of use now. If you were to use


it, any French person would perhaps imagine you mean a
false key, but could never suppose you are speaking of a
wrong key.
P, 338 De Fivas translates morte eau by ebb tide. It is a
gross mistranslation. Morte eau, means neap tide; see
Littre, v. 2, p. 632. To be understood, students should
translate ebb tide by reflux or maree basse. Instead of
morte eau, obsolete now, we use petite maree.
Walker, May and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.




