



( ; % 3
V*„ '


f






5Pias


PVv\ N r r
M X > BT f
»-, \ ( I
t i * > t* .^T
-v |^
DEAD MENS GOLD
Roy Bridges
HODDERSSTOUGHTON LTD.LONDON


Printed in Great Britain


1 r : SEP. 1931


PHILLIP SCHULER


CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. the sea bell ...••■*•
11. THE WRECK OF THE INDIAMAN . . 11
111. A GENTLEMAN IN SEA PICKLE . . 23
IT. MORE OF MY UNCLE, JAMES INGLEBY . 30
V. A TOAST IN RIPE MADEIRA ... 37
VI. RODERICK SCORNE, SHIP’S BOY . . 46
VII. NIGHT AND MY UNCLE . • .52
VIII. CROSS-EXAMINATION OF MARGARET . 58
IX. WE GO FISHING . • • • •
X. ADRIFT ...••• 78
XI. ON NO MAN’S ISLAND .... 86
XII, GALLEON OF SPAIN .... 93
XIII. THE MYSTERY OF THE SEA BELL . . 103
XIV. THE SAND DUNES . • •


. 141
. 149
. 156
. . 164
. 170
. 179
. 188
. 203
. 213
. 227
. 287
. 247
Contents
CHAPTER
XV. THE VOICES AND THE FOOTSTEPS . 114
XVI. NIGHT ON NO MAN’S ISLAND . . . 121
XVII. WE ESCAPE FROM NO MAN’S ISLAND . . 130
XVIII. STRING OF A FIDDLE .... 141
XIX. AN OLD DANCE TUNE . . . .149
XX. LOSS OF MY UNCLE . . . .156
XXI. WE PREPARE A NEW VENTURE . .164
XXII. RETURN OF MY UNCLE . . , .170
XXIII. THE COMPANY OF ROGUES . . . 179
XXIV. NIGHT THOUGHTS OF MR. SPILLS . .188
XXV. THE CAVE OF THE BATS . . . 203
XXVI. DEAD MEN’S GOLD . . . .213
XXVII. FORTITUDE OF MY UNCLE . . . 227
XXVIII. CHAGRIN OF MY UNCLE. . . . 287
XXIX. RODDY TELLS HIS TALE . . . 247
XXX. FOR ENGLAND, HOME, AND BEAUTY . 255
XXXI. LONDON TOWN ..... 261


CHAPTER I
THE SEA BELL
“ ‘ These were thy merchants in all sorts of
things ; in blue clothes, and broidered work ;
and in chests of rich apparel, bound . .
My father’s voice was lost then in the roar
of the wind from the sea. It struck the shutters,
as if to wrench them from their hinges and
break the window-panes, and blow in on us.
The flame of the lamp flickered, and the wick
smoked. Fat rain drops tumbled down the
chimney, and hissed on the coals ; and drove
the ash from the hearth, like flakes of sea-
scud. My father did not lift his eyes from
the page, and his fingers traced the verses.
He read on, and before the wind was by, and
my ears took in the words again, I had lost
half a verse or more.
“‘ . . . wast replenished, and made very
glorious in the midst of the seas ’ ” (shaking
the lamp smuts from the page). “ ‘ Thy rowers
have brought thee into great waters ; the East


wind hath broken thee in the midst of the
seas . . .
I did not always listen when my father read
a chapter. My eyes and thoughts would go
a-wandering. I would forget him sitting, grim
and grey, before the lamp. I would stare up
at the high book-shelves, and at the three
yellow prints above them ; they were Hogarth’s,
and, boy as I was, I could not understand how
my father could endure Hogarth. I would be
wondering what was hid in the great chest of
scented Eastern wood by the door —the black
chest clasped with copper, and mottled with
queer little figures of pink and blue pearl shell,
and black and gold lacquer, walking under
trees of white silver bearing yellow fruit. Or
the curtains would wave in the draught, and I
would think to myself, that, if I went to them
on tip-toe, and pulled them aside smartly, I’d
find I used to shiver at the thought of
what I’d find. The curtains hung before the
window over the sea —I had loved to lie in the
deep recess of the window, and stare out over
the sea, ever since I could remember. In the
evening the sea might be red as blood ; gold
and purple ; or grey as lead, taking pattern
from the west. Or it would shimmer all salt
white under the moon, that came down to it


by a track of silver. It would be placid as the
sky; or wild with the storm that blew the
spray to the very windows, till the salt crusted
the panes.
The sea —what was beyond the sea ? I only
knew that there was the world across it, and
many strange countries and peoples. I had a
notion of these countries and these peoples
from the maps and the books of travel, from
which my father taught me. And, when I
pictured them, I wanted to be away from our
island —Wild Dog Island ; and to mix in the
great world ; and see the strange peoples, and
find friends. For I was lonely, and had been
lonely nigh all my fourteen years of life; and
I dreaded my father, dour and grey-headed,
and harsh of feature ; and I cared little for
Jeremy Otter, his man, nor yet for Margaret
Otter, Jeremy’s wife. Other companionship I
had none, save when the little ketch came dowm
from Sydney six times a year and brought us
our supplies ; and then I spent many a precious
hour in chattering to the skipper, McArdle,
and his crew. Many things they told me—
much that was false no doubt; much that
was true. Of the convicts that laboured about
Sydney, or wore their lives out at Macquarie
Harbour and at Port Arthur in Van Diemen’s


Land —the great isle to the south of us; of
daring escapes ; of desperate deeds; of cruel
punishments. Of the sealers, wild and lawless
men, who had escaped in the earliest days of
the Botany Bay settlement, and, peopling the
other islands of Bass Straits, had mated with
the Black People of Van Diemen’s Land; and
lived by wrecking, fishing, buccaneering, and
selling the brine-drenched flesh and downy
feathers of the mutton-birds —the puffins—such
as nested late October after October in the crags
of Wild Dog Island.
My father’s house was set on the cliffs one
hundred feet above the landing place of the
island. It was built of grey blocks of stone,
cemented with a mortar of lime and sand, and
roofed with shingles, split from the gum trees
in the heart of Wild Dog. It was furnished
with a rough, bare comfort, having in it a few
curious chests from India; boxes, tables and
chairs of Norfolk Island pine ; scraps of barbaric
textures of green and scarlet and cinnamon
and gold; many books; curious distorted
Eastern bowls of brass, and beaten platters.
The room in which we sat was lime-washed,
hung with the Hogarth prints; with many
leather-bound books piled against the walls ;
the black chest, the faded cinnamon and scarlet


curtains. The blaze of the great fire upon the
hearth and the clear light of the swinging ship’s
lantern lit upon my father’s pallid and cada-
verous face, his tumbling iron-grey hair; his
fine hands spreading out the pages of the Bible.
I mark my father now —John Ingleby —a lean,
lank figure of a man, clad rustily in black —his
linen scrupulous, his neck-kerchief tied loosely.
Facing him, myself—a brown, slim stick, in my
blue brass-buttoned coat, my flannel shirt, and
my thick trousers of white duck. Outside the
lamentation of great winds and waters, and the
endless patter of the October rains upon the
roof and windows. My mother ?—I could
recollect her but as a vision dimly remembered.
A lovely face, that, when I would conjure up
its lineaments, would fade from my brain !
My wandering thoughts had brought me much
trouble, while the nightly chapter was read —
many a cuff, and many a cut, too, from my
father’s long, lean Malacca cane. It lay always
by the Book on the table, lest I be so wayward
as to need a flogging. But on this night, when
my father read of the ruin of an old sea-city
and the wreck of richly freighted ships, my
fancy keeping pace held my thoughts on his
reading. I’d have escaped all chance of a
flogging but for the Bell.


“ ‘ Thou shalt be broken by the seas in the
depths of the waters,’ ” read my father.
And at that verse, while the wind dulled, I
heard the faint beat of the Bell. The Bell,
that I had fancied that I heard so many nights
of storm, when lying on my bed awake from
the roar of wind and sea, that I had forgotten,
long since, when first it had seemed to sound ;
the Bell that was to me an endless source of
wondering and imaginative flights; the Bell
that, I vowed, was hung and swung in some lost
sea cave by the ghostly hands of old drowned
seamen from the ships, that, I had read, came
sailing from Spain and Portugal and Holland
centuries before the English touched the Southern
coasts ; the Bell that on every night of storm
sounded to me, in a drear monotone, slow
stroke upon slow stroke the hours through, till
the wind was laid, and the sea was down once
more.
Clang ! sounded the Bell.
“ ‘ The inhabitants of the isles shall be aston-
ished,’ ” read my father.
Clang ! sounded the Bell. Thereat, forgetful
of whip and Book, I needs must jump from my
chair, and, plucking at my father’s sleeve, bawl
in his ear, “ Hark to the Bell ! ”
My father’s eyes gleamed chilly as he looked


at me; and he kept his finger to the page to
mark the place.
“ I never heard the Bell so loud as on this
night,” cried I, seeking to put a bold face on
it, though feeling the blood run to my cheek at
his dour aspect, and my back tingle, as if the
whip were already across it.
My father pointed to my chair. “To your
seat, sir,” snapped he. “ How dare you inter-
rupt me with these fooleries, when I am reading
the Book ? Have a care, sir ! ”
“ But, father, the Bell,” muttered I, sinking
discomfited into my chair.
He shifted his eyes from off me to the Book,
and read the chapter to its end. I heard no
word of it, having ears only for the tongue of
the Bell that sounded now in metallic mono-
tone ; and at brief intervals, as if its clapper
were stirred at each inward sweep of the sea.
And though the wind was mighty, and the
surf made a great sound, its voice was defined
above them, or else my ears with their straining
forgot the turmoil of the storm, and heard only
its clanging. My father droned the chapter
through in a mumble that had been lost to me
from the voices of the sea and the wind, had I
paid heed to him, and the matter that he read.
He shut the Book ; he clasped it carefully ; he


turned and glowered upon me. Red of cheek,
and foolish, I sat waiting for his admonition,
and the whip warm about me to point its moral
“ Now, sir, what’s this nonsensical notion of
a bell ? ” demanded my father.
“ Don’t you hear it, father ? ” I stammered
“ Listen —there ! ”
Clang ! sounded the Bell.
“ I do not hear it, my lad,” snapped he, his
fingers straying towards the whip. “I do not
hear it. Your shallow pate is stuffed so full of
all these godless fooleries that and his
pack poke into your ears, that you’re become
three parts a fool. Come, sir—here’s what will
bring you to your wits again ! ”
I slouched forward respondent to his lean
beckoning finger. His left hand had gripped
the collar of my jacket, and he had swung me
round, when —
Clang ! sounded the Bell.
Staring up at him I saw! his face change
curiously from cold anger to as near a similitude
of amaze as ever I had sighted upon it. Thus
we stood for full the space of a minute with
whip in air, and I waiting half bent towards the
chest, across which, save for the clang of the
Bell, I should have been sprawling ere that
instant for my flogging. The wind coming up


then howled round the house, and shut out all
other sound; but when it was gone by again,
through the night clanged loud the Bell. My
father loosed me; flung down the whip ; and,
walking to the chimney-piece, leaned his back
against it, and so stood looking down upon me,
while I stared up at him, agape that aught
should have stayed his hand when he was set
on flogging me.
“ What’s this Bell ? ” demanded he at
length. “ Have ’ee heard it before ? ”
“ On many nights, father.”
“On many nights ! On other nights than
this ? On other nights ? ”
“ Ay, whenever there is a great storm, and
the sea is up. But never have I known it so
loud.”
“ Why did you never speak to me of this
before ? ”
“ I thought you’d call me a fool for my pains ;
and flog me to drive such notions out of my
head. And I thought, if it was a bell, you’d
have ear for it yourself.”
He shot me a sharp look at that. Truth to
Stell, it was three parts a lie to tell him it had
ever been my thought, that he would have had
ears for the clanging of the Bell, no matter how
loud it had seemed to me.


Clang ! sounded the Bell.
“ Hark to it, father,” I cried, “ Hark to it!
What, don’t you hear it ? ”
He answered not a word, but, striding across
the room, plucked back the curtains. The black-
ness was ebon; but the rain and the scud
tinkled against the window panes. And sud-
denly the darkness of the pane was lit by a
white phosphorescent glare, that, flaring for an
instant, went out, and left the night in blackness.
Then I heard the Bell no more; I heard no
more of the turmoil of the storm. I heard the
boom across the waters ; I heard my father s
voice —
“ A ship —there’s a ship on the Dog’s Tooth !
Rouse Otter ! ”


CHAPTER II
THE WRECK OF THE INDIAMAN
Jeremy Otter and Margaret his wife lodged
in a little stone cottage to the rear of my father’s
house. I had snatched a lantern from the wall,
while my father sought his cloak ; and, lighting
the wick with a splinter from the fire, I rushed
from the room, and out by the great iron-
bound house door in search of Jeremy. Jeremy
was yet astir, for the red flame of the fire upon
his hearth leaped against the window of his
cottage as I tore helter-skelter through the
streaming rain across the courtyard to his
door. So fierce a blast came beating down,
that I was flung against the very door; the
lamp smashed from my hands ; and the light
with a flare and splutter went out. I beat
upon the door then, until Jeremy, red-faced
and stout, pipe in his mouth, and tasselled
night-cap on his head, drew back the bolts,
and let me in.


“ Oh,” said Jeremy; “ oh, ’tis you, Dick !
Is the master sick ? ”
Margaret Otter, lean, pallid, and grim, clad
in her tight black gown, white-aproned and
white-capped, did not stir from her chair;
but her keen black eyes behind the spectacles
perched on her nose peered at me like two
sparks.
“ No—no, Jeremy,” gasped I. “My father’s
well enough ! It’s a ship —on the rocks —the
Dog’s Tooth 1 Didn’t you hear the gun ? ”
“ The gun ! ” he repeated, blinking at me
batlike. “ I heard no gun. You heard no
gun, Margaret ? ”
She shook her head, her eyes seeming to
swing and flicker like the ketch’s lanterns on a
night at sea.
“ You’re to come at once, Jerry,” I cried.
“ Father’s going down to see if he can help.
And you, too, Margaret! We’re all going—
come along. Don’t stay a minute.”
“ The Dog’s Tooth,” growled Jeremy, dragging
down a thick pea-jacket and sou’-wester from
the wall. “ How should a ship come on the
Dog’s Tooth ? And what chance has a ship,
once bein’ there ? —Right, Dick, right —I’m
cornin’. Now, Margaret ! ”
She rose stiffly from her chair, and lit the


wick of a lantern, and handed the light to
Jeremy. She took down a long, thick tartan
shawl, and wrapped it about her neck and
shoulders—all the while saying nothing, but
moving silently, as was her wont. We went
out then, Jeremy bearing the lantern, I coming
after, Margaret at our heels. There was a
temporary break in the pelting rain; but the
wind had abated nothing of its strength. It
smote down between the house and the hut with
such a force, that it nigh tore the lantern from
Jeremy’s hands ; it sought to rend Margaret’s
shawl from off her shoulders, and for all the
heat of my excitement, drove like keen knives
into my body. The house door was flung back
with a crash ; and, against the lamplight that
lit the doorway, my father’s tall figure was
revealed ; his cloak wrapped loosely about his
lean body; his face pallid and cadaverous
beneath his hat brim. We crossed towards him ;
and at once spying me, capless and uncloaked,
he called to me, “ Get into the house, boy;
this is no night for you to be abroad.”
“ Oh, mayn’t I come too, father ? ” cried I.
“ I may be of some use.” But for answer his
hand shot out, and, gripping me by the collar
of my jacket, propelled me forward into the
house.


“No fooling, sir,” snarled he, “no fooling.
Keep up the fire; and set the kettle to boil.
Don’t you dare stir abroad, or ”
The tail of his threat was lost to me in the
sudden squall of wind that brought the door
to, and shut them out in the night, and left
me within the house. Raging, I made my way
to the living room; and, after piling a couple of
logs upon the fire, ran hastily to the -window
and peered out.
The moon had broken through the clouds;
but rode palely for the terror of the night. The
wind came violently; and with scarce an
interval —cannonade following upon cannonade,
and from below the cliffs the endless roll of
mighty drums. For the paleness of the moon,
for the black clouds that sought to compel it
back into the profundity, I could make out
nothing for the time —save the gleam of Jeremy’s
lantern as they moved across the cliffs. A
blue flare started suddenly from the sea —a
distress signal, I took it, from the wrecked
vessel; it showed me momentarily the outline
of the Dog’s Tooth ; the whirl of waters; the
black hull from which the flame was kindled,
the very outlines of shattered masts, and the
tangled rigging like so much torn cobweb. It
was so near that I saw all as in a picture. The


gale was loose at that, as if combining with
the sea to overwhelm their victim. Blackness,
then, the flare and the pallid moon enveloped
in the murk; nothing save the turmoil of
sound; the wind and sea commingling.
Nothing ? Ay, on that instant came up from
the sea a cry so awful that wind and sea were
pierced; and thought and brain could take
the impression of no other sound. I believed
then that the ship parted asunder, and the end
was come.
At that I could remain in the house no longer.
I snatched down my pea-jacket from its peg,
and pulled my cap about my ears. I piled up
the logs upon the fire ; and, swinging the great
kettle forward so that it might boil, I scurried
from the room. I heard my dog howl from his
kennel by the door that overlooked the sea
front; and I ran through the house to loose
him. As the door dashed open before the
wind, he leaped at me from his kennel, as
though to snap his chain, his eyes agleam, his
jaws aslaver.
“ Down, Pitch, down ! ” I roared, striking
his muzzle as he caught joyously at my hand,
flinging me back with his weight. Thereat he
fell to whining at my knees, while I loosed the
collar from his neck; and, as collar and chain


clattered to the wet cobbles, he plunged off in
the darkness.
“ Pitch ! ” cried I. “ Pitch —to heel,” but
he paid no heed, and, pulling the door to, I must
needs follow after.
The black squall had passed for the time,
and the moon hung like a flickering white lamp
in the break. It lit my way for me —across
the rough strip of herbage, now sponge-like
with the rain ; and thence through a scrub of
stunted gums and broom. Wet to the thighs, I
came out presently upon the flat terraces of
rock that crowned the cliffs. The wind and
the sea came up at me. Their voices were as
thunder. The wind cut through my garments
like a knife; and chilled my hands in my
jacket pockets. The salt spume from the
rollers, breaking high, fell on my cheeks, and
dulled my eyes like rain. Under the moon, I
made out the surge of the Straits coming pillar
upon pillar, and falling in ruins, and mounting
yet again, as if to crush the cliffs. The Dog’s
Tooth stood out all glistening in the moonlight;
between it and the shore of Wild Dog there was
nothing distinguishable —all was confusion, whirl-
pool, sea wrack. I marked the great retriever
standing out momentarily, as cut in stone,
upon the edge of the terrace; but the sea


surging up at him, to sweep him from the cliff,
he dashed back, barking furiously, and spying
me, came muttering and slavering to my side.
We went on then, smitten by wind and surf,
along the slippery, glistening rocks.
All this while I had not espied the lantern
borne by Jeremy. I took it that the three
would be down upon the pebbly beech, whither
the wash of the sea would bear the ruins of the
ship—and, maybe on floating spar, or raft, or
boat, some of her crew. I knew that, if I
approached my people, my father would bid
me return instantly to the house —therefore I
sneaked along the cliff above the beach, and
did not dare climb down. All the while I
called Pitch to heel, lest his resounding bark
betray me. At last I marked them gathered
upon the kelp-piled beach below —hanging to-
gether about Jeremy’s lamp. They must be
helpless to aid the hapless crew upon the wreck.
No boat could live in such a sea; but must be
swamped and flung in on the beach, or sucked
into the whirlpool between the jagged fang
and the further island. Even in calm weather
we believed that the current swept treacherously
between the two ; and none of us dared approach
the dangerous waters. The further island was
of considerable extent; but girt about with


cliffs, haunted only by gulls, and washed per-
petually by the tumultuous waters of the
Straits. No Man’s Isle, we called it, for no
man, to our knowing, had ever set foot upon it.
Therefore my father and Jeremy and Margaret
Otter could do no more than hang about the
beaches, and wait lest the sea fling up at their
feet some living member of the ship’s company.
Still clinging to the terraces, I stole, with
Pitch at my heels, above the three, making my
way towards a second strip of beach divided
from the first by a great pillar of rock that had
slid down the cliff’s side into the sea. The
black rain clouds, sweeping again before the
wind, now hid the moon’s pale face ; yet the
white rocks gave off a curious green phosphores-
cent shimmer. Slipping, sliding, at times nigh
shooting over the very edge of the cliff into the
cauldron below, I made my way perilously,
until at last I came out on the rocks above the
second beach. The beach was awash save for
the merest strip of strand; and that was pro-
tected only by a high barricade of torn kelp
and weed. The rain and the sea lashed my face,
as I climbed down the slippery rocks in the
darkness, with no purpose save the gratification
of my curiosity, and with small hope that I
might be of any aid to the helpless beings,


drowning from the wreck. If they had launched
a boat, it seemed impossible that it should
have lived. But if it lived, and were borne
shoreward by the breakers, it should be beached
either upon the first strip, where my father
and his servants waved the lantern for guidance,
or on the kelp-strewn beach, where I had taken
up my stand. I set my back against a crevice
of the rock, and stared out over the black
turmoil of waters, seeking to pierce the murk;
but the scud came so thick that my eyes were
stuck speedily with salt; and I could only
peer dimly through the shelter of my fingers.
The dog, growling defiance of the menace of the
sea, crouched by my side ; and at times slavered
and gripped at my hand, as though to drag me
back from peril. I cared nothing for the sea
that smote on the rocks like huge hammers,
and, when the moon evaded the clouds, flung
off a glittering phosphorescence. But even
when the squalls had passed, and the clouds,
having poured down their rain, swept onwards,
I could make out nothing. It seemed as if I
stood nigh the foot of a fall of water from many
feet above me. Its sound was endless as its
eternal turmoil.
From the wreck all this time I could hear
nothing for the wind and the breakers. I.


leant against the wet rocks, it seemed for the
better part of a half-hour, waiting in the hope
that out of the blackness a boat might yet be
borne ashore. All the while my hot excitement
protected me against the bitter chill of the wind,
that smote against me ; and the cold lash of the
surf upon my cheeks. Out of the blackness—
out of the turmoil —nothing —something !
New sound upon the sea commingling with
the wind, voices of the same note as its own
anguish —voices off shore ! I fancied then
that a boat had left the wreck, and come in
with the breakers ; and, leaning forward, my
fingers sheltering my face against the blinding
spray, I stood with eyes and ears straining to
make out sound and shape. I called out
presently, not knowing what, yet crying with
the full power of my lungs, hoping that, though
the wind flung back the voice against the rocks
in mockery, I still might make them hear, and
bring them to the kelp-lined break between the
cliffs. And then there came a wail from out
the blackness nigh in shore —a wail, that, being
nearer, seemed as loud and piteous as when the
ship was parted by the sea; and instantly I
left my place, and ran down over the pebbles
all awash wdth the sea, and leant against the
very wall of kelp that broke the forces of the


rollers. The clouds had parted yet again;
and the moon looked out upon the seas. I
believed then that I caught a glimpse of a boat
borne shorewards, and human shapes clinging
to it. Instantly the moon was swamped from
sight by the clouds ; and all once more wa*
blackness and turmoil. I screamed out —again,
and yet again—believing that the boat had
been capsized; and that a few poor, drowning
wretches yet clung to it; and that the sea,
plunging upon them, sought to beat them off
into the one destruction.
Again, shivering and sea-drenched, I was
leaning back against the rocks, waiting the
coming of the boat, scarce hoping that any
living thing should yet be left upon it. The dog,
crouching by my side, still moaned and slavered.
I was growing numb with the cold ; and my
senses were dulling, for all my hot excitement
and terror for the fate of the poor wretches
clinging to the upturned boat.
The dog had now left my side, and was barking
furiously upon the belt of kelp. I heard his
last yelp, as he plunged into the sea, and I
staggered down after him. The waves bore
him back presently to my feet —struggling
bravely. And then I marked that he had
gripped within his jaws a shapeless mass, that


clung about him, as if locked in death. Ah—
the sea had borne in the body of a boy, clinging
about the great dog, as if Pitch had reached
him ere he perished. I gripped the body then,
and putting forth my fullest strength, I dragged
it over the pebbles and up to the terrace under
the cliffs. I snatched my jacket off and wrapped
it speedily about it. And I climbed the cliff,
and darted off in search of my father and the
others, leaving the dog still barking furiously
by the body of the boy.


CHAPTER 111
A GENTLEMAN IN SEA PICKLE
A quarter of an hour thence my father and I
were staggering up the cliffs toward the house.
My father bore the boy in his arms, as easily
as if he had been a little child. And I walked
beside him, mad with excitement; for, when
we had climbed down under the cliffs, the four
of us, and flashed the light upon the white
upturned face, we found the great dog curled
warmly against the body; and indeed, as we
knelt beside the boy, he was drawing his breath
thickly. He was not dead, and Pitch had
saved him. My father dribbled a little brandy
between the shipwrecked lad’s lips, whereat
he shuddered violently, and was sick from the
salt that he had swallowed ; then, opening his
dim eyes, he blinked up at us, and relapsed
instantly into unconsciousness.
Wrapping the coat about him, my father
lifted him in his arms, and bidding Jeremy and


Margaret remain in the event of any other
from the wreck being flung ashore, and me to
follow him, strode away toward the house. All
this while my father had said nothing of my
disobeying him. I had enough knowledge of
him to be assured that he would not forget.
Yet, though I believed that on the morrow the
very devil of a flogging awaited me, I had small
concern for it, but thought only of the rescued
lad, whom he bore in his arms. He lived —at
least he lived ! A boy —my own age —that
meant companionship for me for a time ! It
would be a month ere McArdle and his ketch
sailed down to Wild Dog. So I was all aflame
with excitement at the thought of a new interest
in the island ; and, for the saving of the boy,
I forgot even the horror of the wreck, and all
the loss of life that it entailed.
We came to the house door, and dragged it
open. We passed into the living room —then
stood, the two of us, staring into the room.
The fire blazed nobly on the hearth. Before it
sat a stranger. He was a man of, it might be,
forty years —clean shaven, his yellow-red hair
crisply cut, and hanging in little salt-crusted
curls over his brows. His features were fine,
if hawk-like, and he had a pair of dazzling blue
eyes under his black-lined brows ; and his look


was turned impudently on us. He had on his
fine slim body a drenched cambric shirt, frilled
at the front; his white trousers were turned up
to the knee, his stockinged feet were stretched
out to the blaze. He was soaked with brine,
and from the heat of the fire a steam arose
about him like a cloud of smoke. At hand he
had the cut-glass decanter of wune from the
cupboard, a green goblet in his fingers steaming
with wine and hot water. At the sight of him
my father stood transfixed ; and my ears heard
the bitter curse that he muttered. The boy
slid from his grasp, and tumbled in a drenched
heap on the floor. Instantly the gentleman
arose ; the goblet yet clasped in his fine fingers ;
his right hand extended as in greeting.
“ Why, here’s the maddest piece of fortune ! ”
cried he. “My dear John, the fortune of the
sea has brought me to you—of all men in the
world ! ”
My father said no word, but stared at him,
his face livid and working, his hands clasped at
his sides.
Assuredly,” said the gentleman easily,
you know me, John ? ”
“ 1 you, yes,” muttered my father.
‘ Your hand, dear brother! ” said the
gentleman, smiling delightedly.


“ Are any saved but you ? ”
“ How should I know ? ” purred the gentle-
man.
“ That all should be drowned,” my father
went on, “ and you should live! That you
should come here ! ”
“ I w T as accounting it,” said the gentleman,
“ the finest piece of fortune that, w T here so
many were drow r ned, I should be flung from the
sea; and should land here —pickled in sea
salt. We marked your light on the cliff, John
—ere we struck. I had the curious fancy—it’s
been with me for days —that you and I
should meet soon. Why, I’ve been sailing the
world over, seeking you. Your hand, dear
brother ! ”
My father put his hands deliberately behind
him. “ Seeking me ! ” he said. “ What do
you want of me ? ”
“ A commission, brother —a commission to
find you.”
“ What is your profit on it ? ”
The gentleman sat down in his chair, and
spread his feet out to the blaze.
“My profit,” he repeated. “ Why, here’s the
same dour, old John ! My profit ? No profit,
save the finding of you.”
“ James Ingleby,” my father said, “ I have


prayed all these years that you and I might
never meet again.”
“ Uncharitable ! ”
“ I find you here —here of all quarters of the
world ! You seek me —say you —why ? ”
“ A commission—a commission from Is
that fine lad there —your son ? Your son—
and hers ? ”
“ Oh, enough,” my father said bitterly.
“ Enough ! ”
“ Pray make me known, John ! ” the gentle-
man went on unperturbed. “ Pray let me
know whether the lad’s my nephew ? Who’s
that you have lying at your feet ? Oh, the
boy ! The ship’s boy ! ”
My father turned from him abruptly, and,
stooping down, lifted the boy from the floor
on to the couch. He dragged down a cloak
from the wall and wrapped it warmly about
him, and going to the cupboard took out a
glass, and poured spirits into it, and water from
the kettle. He trickled a little of this steaming
liquid between the boy’s blue lips. “ What’s
the lad’s name ? ” he said then, turning to my
uncle.
The lad—oh, a young dog of the name of
Scorne. None other saved, John ? ”
“ Not to my knowledge.”


“ A pretty piece of fortune ! Here am I
saved by providence from the fate that befell
all of our company —save this lad ! ”
“ What was the ship ? ”
“ The ship —the ship, John—the Indus —one
of the East India Company’s vessels chartered
by me; in it I’ve been seeking you. We had
word at last in London that you had sailed to
New South Wales; therefore I, as the most
dutiful of brothers, came seeking you—at her
behest.”
“ Her behest! She lives then ? ”
“ She lives,” the gentleman said deliberately.
“ She will welcome you and her son.”
All this while I had stood staring at them
like a fool, having no eyes save for my father
and my uncle, forgetful of the lad whom Pitch
had drawn from the sea. She ! my mother!
She yet lived. At once I felt the blood run to
my head ; and my face burn for the joy of it.
My mother ! She lived ; and the fine sea-soaked
gentleman, my uncle, had come seeking us for
her! What mystery was here ? What had
parted my mother and my father, and brought
us both into the desolate island of the sea ?
At once, as if some chord of memory was stirred,
the face seen in my dreams, or recollected
from the past, was shaped, feature by feature,


for me. A lovely face —blue eyes, and golden
curls that tumbled over me; curls that I once
put out my hands to play with —warm lips on
mine ! As in a dream I marked my father’s
livid and cadaverous look, and my uncle’s hand-
some face, lit by those blue jewels of eyes.
Dear God, what mystery was here that yet
should be revealed ? I heard my uncle’s voice.
“ She lives ! She is the fairest lady in all
England! She calls you back again, my
brother —you and your son ! ”


CHAPTER IV
MORE OF MY UNCLE, JAMES INGLEBY
I marked my father, striving to control himself,
I marked him snatch the green decanter from
the table, and fill a glass and drain it at a
draught. I heard my uncle’s merry, mocking
laughter.
“ You’re still the sorriest of bears, my brother
John,” cried he ; “ you haven’t yet thanked
me for my pains. You haven’t said you’re
glad to see me. You haven’t even said that
you rejoice that I have landed safe and sound
from the sea ”
My father, standing dour and tall, his teeth
gritting, his eyes aglow like two coals beneath
his beetling brows, stared down upon the laugh-
ing gentleman.
“ I would,” he said, “ that you had drowned
in the sea, ere you came here.”
“ Unnatural brother,” protested my uncle


James, still laughing lightly; “before my
nephew, too ! Would you have me go back to
the sea, and drown myself for your pleasure ?
Looking at you, Ido believe you would. Why
here’s an unnatural brother, nephew mine!
What’s your name, lad ? —Richard, isn’t it ?
Your hand ! You’re glad to see me, as I to
see you and my brother. ”
I would have gone to him with hand out-
stretched to meet his fine white fingers. In-
stantly my father intervened, and shoved me
back, so that I went sprawling towards the
door.
“ Now, John, my dear John,” protested my
uncle, still lying in his chair ; “ you’re a very
bear —you’ve lost what polish London ever
gave you. We must have you back speedily—
you and the lad. What’s your name again,
boy ? ”
“ Richard ! ” I gasped, staring at both in
wonder.
“ Richard ! Rick, you’re a fine lad. Egad,
how the sight of you will gladden your mother’s
eyes.”
“No more,” my father broke in heavily.
“No more ! No mention of her in this house ! ”
“ The boy’s mother,” protested my uncle.
“ Your wife ”


“My wife—ay, my wife ! A sight to gladden
her eyes, say you, James. Turn back that
wicked mind of yours to what is past —and ask
yourself a question! Gladden her eyes! I
tell you that never shall the boy set eyes on
her—never ! ”
“ She calls for him—and you,” my uncle said
quietly, and at his inflection I was brought nigh
to tears.
“I do not know your motives yet,” my
father said bitterly. “ There is a mo-
tive ! ”
“Always—always seeking a motive,” pro-
tested my uncle.
“ Never forgetting you—the wrong you did.
Knowing you false —and vile ”
“ I am your brother, John.”
“ I am not likely to forget that, while I
live! ”
“ You seem to have forgotten ! ”
“ Nothing ! Nothing ! ”
“You wronged yourself—you wronged your
wife,” my uncle persisted steadily, “ the mother
of your son —and you did me a bitter wrong.”
“No word more ! ” with a sudden flame of
wrath.
“ And yet a word ! I say you wronged the
fairest, finest lady in all England. You leave


your wife, you snatch her son from her —you
do a cruel and bitter thing ! ”
“ I did my duty —only ! ”
“ You come to this forsaken quarter of the
earth and rob her not of yourself alone, but
of your son —her son ! The blow might well
have killed her.”
“At least,” my father muttered, standing
erect still, though his face worked and the
dank drops of sweat trickled down his brows,
“ I don’t rejoice in that.”
“ I did not wrong you so to think it. My
brother, believe that. I am come seeking you
—for her. I say, for her ! ”
“ You were ever her spaniel! ”
“ I was ever her slave. I shall be all my
life ! ”
“ And do you dare,” my father muttered
thickly, “ lie there and tell me that ? ”
My uncle smiled easily up at him. “ I am
not afraid of you, dear brother,” he said. “ I
dare to do my duty. I dare to tell you that
you did cruel injustice to a fair and noble lady
—I dare to bid you do your duty to your wife,
your son —yourself. Come back with me to
London ! ”
“ Never,” my father said. “ Never in all the
world ! ”


“ I’ll have to reason it with you,” my uncle
answered. “ To-night —I’m sick with the salt
I’ve swallowed. I want rest —refreshment !
but at least I’m here. By the will of fortune
I’m here. It should point the moral ! ”
“ Since you were a boy,” my father said,
speaking in dull and lifeless tones, “ you never
did a thing save that it had its motive. What’s
your motive now ? —what’s here ? Is our uncle
dead ? Is that it ? Did you come because the
knowledge that I might be alive kept you and
her—from setting your fingers on the money ?
Is that the motive ? ”
“No motive,” protested my uncle. “No
motive save my natural affection for my brother.”
“ Yet, is the old man dead ? ”
“ Ay, these two years.”
“ And his fortune ? What of it ? You were
on the Company’s ship. You’ve not inherited
it, or you’d not be lying there. What was his
will ? ”
“ Our Uncle Anthony,” said my uncle, “ was
generous to you.”
“ Ay, and not to you ? Didn’t you win the
game you played ? Come, the truth —if you
can speak the truth this once. Did you come
seeking me —because of some provision in the
will ? ”


“My brother John,” my uncle answered,
spreading his legs out comfortably to the blaze,
“ you decline to believe in my affection for
Q 59
you ?
“ Knowing you.”
“ Misjudging me ! Our Uncle Anthony’s will
left one half of his property to you; the other
half to me.”
“ On a condition ? ”
“ Have it so, then. On the condition that I
sought you wherever in the world you might
be, and restored you to your position in society.
Failing your restoration —or at least word of
your death —and I am happy that I find you
well and strong —the entire fortune —India
stocks, bonds, and ships —must go to charity.”
“ The motive! ” cried my father trium-
phantly. “ The motive ! ”
“ Have it so,” flashed my uncle, the fire
darting suddenly from his blue eyes. “ Have
it so, if you will. At least I’ve found you ! ”
“ And mark me,” cried my father, towering
over him, “ mark me, you’ll never touch a
penny of Anthony’s money. Never a penny !
I’ll not return ; I’ll not stir from this place.”
“ The loveliest lady in all England,” mut-
tered my uncle, leaning back easily in his chair.
“ Your wife —the boy’s mother ! ”


36 More of My Uncle, James Inglehy
The heat had gone out of my father. He
stood, his head sunken on his breast, his eyes
staring from his white face. And I shuddered
to mark in them, as he looked on my uncle, a
light sinister and terrible.


CHAPTER V
A TOAST IN RIPE MADEIRA
It was midnight ere I lay on my bed —the lad
Roderick Scorne slumbering by my side. I
was amazed yet —as in a dream. Outside the
wind came from the sea without cease. At
times the rain pattered on the roof; and beat
upon the panes. I lay snug ; yet might not
sleep for the thought of all the change that
had come into my life. My mother lived —the
loveliest lady in all England ; my uncle had so
named her. And by what chance w r as it that
she should be in England, and John Ingleby,
my father, should dwell with me on Wild Dog
Island ? They had quarrelled and parted years
since—that I knew. Boy as I was, I could not
guess the nature of their quarrel—only that my
uncle had shared in it. And lying in the dark
I sought to picture her —to fashion her from
dreams and from the faint, faint shadow of
37
2*


that lovely face that had looked down upon me
in my infancy. She lived ; and I must see her
—ay, though my father vowed that never
would he leave Wild Dog Island, and return to
London.
I marked my uncle’s purpose readily in his
stressing of the words, “ The loveliest lady in
all England ! ” To tempt my father back to
London —that the terms of my great-uncle’s
will be fulfilled ; and James Ingleby be a rich
gentleman. The thought of her —how should
my father —hard and bitter man as I knew
him —stay from the sight of her ? He had
never spoken of her to me. Once when I was
a little child I had dared ask, “ Is my mother
dead ? ” and he had turned upon me with
livid face and melancholy, brooding eyes; so
that I had shrunk from him. But never a
word had he answered to tell me whether she
was dead or yet alive. I took it that she was
dead, and that it grieved my father to hear
me speak of her. ... I carried with me still the
terror of his face. I had asked Margaret Otter
on that same day ; and she had answered —now
I marked the significance of her words —“ Dead !
Aye, dead to you, Dick, and the master.” If
she lived —ah, God, for the sight of her; the
sound of her voice ; the joy of her lips upon


my cheek! The loveliest lady in all Eng-
land !
My uncle must assuredly be a fine gentleman
in London. His foppish graces marked him
as different from my father, and from the
men whom I had known.
His handsome head, the manner of his sea-
drenched garments, his fine white hands, the
pleasant tones of his voice—l knew not whether
1 should love or hate my uncle yet. I had
gained no true knowledge of the man from the
interview between him and my father. My
father hated him, that w r as plain to me ; and
I had faith in my father for all his harsh-
ness.
But my uncle had spoken kindly to me —I
could recall the soft purring of his voice now,
as he called me, —“ Nephew T .” And my father,
and Jeremy, and Margaret were harsh and
hard.
For a while after my uncle’s mention of my
mother, my father had said no word, but remained
looking down —black and sinister —upon my
uncle lolling easily in his chair, with his garments
steaming and his fingers playing on the goblet.
And then the boy stirred; and opened his
eyes ; and coughed violently for the salt that
he had swallowed. My father turned his


attention then on him, whereas my uncle re-
mained still by the fire and stirred not a finger
to aid him. My father took a fresh bottle of
wine from the cupboard ; strengthened the
mixture in the glass, and held it kindly enough
to the lad’s lips, until he drank a little ; and the
colour commenced to come back to his lips
and cheeks, pallid for all their sunburn; and
the lad started to babble wildly to himself in
broken utterance of the wreck, and of the
captain, and of the men in the boat in which
he had left the ship. All the while, standing
at my father’s elbow, I watched him. He was
a lad of rather more than my own age, sturdily
built, having black curling hair; and he was
clad in a brass-buttoned jacket of coarse blue
stuff. Busying himself with him, my father
ordered me to bring blankets ; then, stripping
the lad’s drenched garments from him, he
wrapped him in the blankets warmly before
the fire.
Presently the boy was coughing and gazing
up at us dimly, and soon asking of us in a
weak and husky voice, “ Where am I ? ”
“ Safely ashore, my lad,” my uncle an-
swered.
“ But the skipper—the rest ? ”
“ Gad,” cried my uncle to my father, “ that’s


a question we might well ask ourselves,
John ! While you and I are paltering here,
we might well be on the beach giving a
hand to any poor devil come ashore. Though
it’s the very deuce of a night —and I, per-
sonally ”
My father glanced at him, and then at me,
“ My man and his wife,” he said drily, “ are on
the beach. They may need help —if any other
boat came ashore. So, as you’re ready to give
them a hand, we’ll go.”
“ I’m most confoundedly sorry for the poor
fellows,” my uncle said, leaning back in his
chair, “ but I’d have you recollect, John, that
to swim ashore in such a sea is a tax on any
man’s powers. However, there’s not the least
reason why you should not be down at the beach.
Pray don’t let me keep you. The lad and I’ll
do very well.”
From my father’s look I perceived that he
was anxious not to allow my uncle to remain
in my company. He answered harshly, “If
you’ve an atom of humanity you’ll come down
with me. You’re well enough ”
“ But all the clothes I have are the shirt
and breeches I have on me. I’ve lost my ward-
robe with the ship.”
My father snatched down a candle from a


shelf, and lit its wick at the fire. “ Come to
my room,” he muttered ; “ I’ll find you clothes
and a cloak. I’ve spent enough time here.
Keep an eye on the lad, Dick. Keep him wrapped
up ; and give him more wine. Now, are you
coming, James ? ”
“lam doing well by the fire,” protested my
uncle, standing up lightly; “yet humanity
prompts me to follow you, John —and to
accept your offer of a change for myself of
clothes, though you never had the taste to
choose a competent tailor; and I’ll assuredly
cut the sorriest figure in your clothes,” laugh-
ing lightly as he stepped after my father from
the room. At his laughter, his indolence—
while I thought of the poor fellows, who must
have been drowned in the sea—l felt that I
hated my uncle, as much as my father hated
him.
While my uncle remained in the inner room
to change his garments, my father returned to
me, and, as I stared at him, with tear-dull
eyes, he stood looking down upon me and the
boy, who lay stupidly by the fire. For a while
he said no word ; and then he muttered slowly,
“You heard all that he said, boy—you missed
not a word ? ”
“ Of course, father ! ”


“ He has a glib and ready tongue,” he said,
still fixing me with his cold eyes. “He has
been a liar from his youth up I would that
you had never set eyes on him.’?
“ But you’ll return to England, father ? ”
“ Did you miss what I said ? ”
“ Never a word of it, father ; only, my mother
—the thought of her ”
“ She’s dead to you and me,” he answered
harshly, though I marked the agony that
revealed itself in voice and look.
“ Why, she’s alive.”
“ She’s dead to me and you —these ten years
since, and more ! ”
“ And yet —and yet —to see her, father ! ”
“ When you are old enough,” my father
muttered thickly, “ you’ll understand. You’ll
know that I’ve done wisely and well for
you.”
“ But for her, father ? ”
“It was her choice ; she had the ordering of
it! Nay, there, I’ll say no more. Save this —
save this alone! —that I’ll not quit the island;
that I’ll not return, and that you’ll remain
here with me ! Later, I—l may bring myself
to tell you more ! Then —I think —nay know —
you’ll not seek London. Give an eye to that
fellow there ! Give him more wine, and heat


some broth. Then, if he can stir, get him to
bed —there’s room enough in it for both of you.
And mark this, my lad ! Don’t be misguided
by your uncle’s tongue. If you go listening to
him, mark me ! ”
“ Well, father ? ”
“ There’s the devil’s own flogging in store
for you —that’s all,” he answered savagely,
snatching up his staff and turning to meet
my uncle —now wrapped in a cloak of his, and
wearing his hat.
“ Ah, John,” my uncle laughed, “ warning
the lad against me ? That’s like you. My
dear Rick, I’m not the villain that your father
paints for you ! Poor company, if you will,
but not dangerous. Truly not dangerous!
Another glass of your Madeira, John, to keep
the cold out. It has a little of the sun’s divinity
in it, this wane of yours ! ”
My father, answering not a word, filled the
glass, and handed it to him. My uncle lifted it
high, so that the lamplight shone through the
amber wine like gold.
“ A toast ! ” he cried ; “ here’s a toast
for you, John, and Dicky, my nephew!
For England, wealth, and beauty! For
London, and old Anthony’s gold guineas
and India stock; for the loveliest lady in


England ! Your mother, Dicky ! Your wife,
John ! ”
My father said never a word ; but struck the
glass from my uncle’s hand. The wine splashed
down in a yellow shower; and the goblet cracked
upon the floor.


CHAPTER VI
RODERICK SCORNE, SHIP’S BOY
My uncle’s laughter was light and mocking;
but I saw the red blood run up to his cheek, and
his eyes flash like two blue jewels. Yet he said
no word, and laughing still, turned to the door
and went forth, my father following after. I
stood mazed a while, till, noting that the boy
stirred uneasily upon the couch by the fire, I
remembered my father’s bidding, and poured
a little wine between his lips. I took a bowl of
soup from the cupboard ; and, tipping it into a
little metal pot, I set it on the fire. The lad,
gaining a little strength from the warmth of
the wine, stirred yet again; and coughing, sat
up and stared at me.
“ Who are you ? ” he asked. “ Where am
I ? ”
“ You’re in our house,” I answered. “My
name’s Ingleby —Dick Ingleby. My dog pulled


you out of the sea ! Lie still! I’ll have some
soup for you presently.
“ What’s this place ? Is it Van Diemen’s
Land ? ”
“ No, Wild Dog. One of the Straits Islands.”
“ And the others —are any of them safe ? ”
“ I don’t know. There’s Mr. Ingleby, my
uncle, swum ashore ! He’s with my father now,
looking for the others, in case any come ashore.”
“ They’re all drowned —you think, then : the
skipper and the rest ? ”
“ I don’t know —I think ”
“ The skipper wouldn’t leave till the other
boats were away ! ”
“ What was his name ? ”
“ The skipper—oh, Greaves was his name I
We were ten days out from Sydney.”
“ One of the East India Company’s ships,
wasn’t she ? ”
“ Yes —the Indus ! Five hundred tons. We
were making down to Van Diemen’s Land.
Mr. Ingleby’s one of the Company, I think. It
was his wish that we sailed for Hobart Town —•
or we’d have been on our way to the Cape, or
to London.”
“ And you got blown out of your course.
You struck a couple of hours ago. You’re
quite safe, at any rate.”


too hard for my thinking. So I made off to
London; and shipped aboard the Indus. The
skipper wanted a boy.”
“ Haven’t you any people in England ? ”
“ My mother —yes.”
“ And you left her ? ”
I marked the tears swim up to his eyes. He
blinked and choked, and muttered thickly,
“ Yes —I left her. I sent her a letter though,
the day we sailed.”
I paused from stirring the soup, and stared
at him. This stout, strong fellow lying before
the fire had run away from school, and quitted
his mother with no more than a line of a letter.
His mother ! Mine ! For the thought of my
mother, for the dim memory of her face, for the
want of her, for my father’s threat —I fell sud-
denly to blubbering. My tears would have
spoiled the soup had they fallen into the little
bubbling pot.
For the shame that Scorne should see me
weep, I brushed my sleeve presently across my
eyes and muttered, “The smoke —it got into
my eyes.”
He said no word a while, and turning my
back upon him, I set myself again to the
stirring of the soup. He said soon, “ How long
have you lived on the island ? ”


“ You can’t,” I told him. “ You’ll have to
stay here for a month at least. Unless, of
course, any of the boats come ashore and
you care to try and make up for Sydney, or
down to George Town. In a week or so McArdle,
the skipper who brings us supplies, will be
down here with his ketch. Then you can get
away, if you want to.”
“ Want to ! Of course, I’ll want to. I want
to get home to England.”
Looking at him lying there, strong and
brown, I liked him 'well; and sickened for the
thought of speedy separation from the first
lad of my own age whom I had ever known.
“ I’m sorry you can’t stay here wdth me ! ” I
said.
“ Why ? ” regarding me wdth amaze.
“ Because I’ve never had a friend —I want
one. I’d like you to be my friend —that’s
why.”
He looked at me, grinning—his eyes dancing
oddly. And then suddenly he let the blankets
slip, and stretched out his right hand, and I
gave him my hand. With that hand-shake
Roderick Scorne entered upon the friendship
that bids fair to last our lives through.


CHAPTER VII
KIGHT AND MY UNCLE
It seemed hours ere I dropped asleep. The
wind upon the roof so nigh my head made such
great sound that I heard nothing of the return
of my father and the other three. I fell asleep
to dream of my mother, my uncle, and Roderick
Scorne, who was slumbering by my side, wrapped
in a woollen shirt of mine. But most I dreamed
of my uncle —handsome, indolent gentleman,
with the devil’s own eyes. They were dazzling
mine ! And suddenly I woke to find a flickering
candle shining on my face; and my uncle
looking down upon me, his lips curled back in
a smile. I sat up with a start, and blinked at
him stupidly.
“ Quiet, Rick, my lad,” he whispered, “ Quiet!
Don’t rouse that fellow ! And don’t wake your
father ! ”
“ What d’ye want with me ? ” I asked, still
stupid with sleep.


“ But a word. A word that I didn't have a
chance of speaking while your father was with
us. He’s asleep now ! He’ll not hear, if you’ll
come downstairs ?”
“ A word ! About what ? ”
“ A word —a message from your mother.
Will you come down ? ”
I was out of bed on the instant —disturbing
Roderick Scorne, who muttered and tumbled,
and even opened his eyes and blinked at us ;
but fell asleep instantly once more. My uncle,
shading the candle with his fingers, went stepping
stealthily before me ; and slowly I followed him
down the stairs into the living room. He was
wrapped in my father’s garments —an old cloak
about his shoulders —while his own wet raiment
hung over a chair before the fire. 11l as my
father’s clothes fitted his body, I marked that
he wore them with a curious grace ; indeed, it
was a characteristic of his, that I perceived in
all my subsequent acquaintance with him, that
however he might be clad, he graced the clothes
he wore.
The fire was burnt down into a deep bed of
coals; the lamp shone brightly; the room
was warm, and sweet with the fumes of fine
tobacco, that formed my father’s sole luxury.
My uncle had been smoking a long white church-


warden j and a bottle and a glass rested on tbe
table nigh to the chair on which he had been
sitting. A pillow and a pile of blankets lay
on the couch to form his bed, when he should
see fit to seek it. He took the pipe up, and, re-
lighting it with a scrap of bark, he sat down
in his chair. I crouched down in my shirt
upon the hearth before him, staring up at him
my mind filled with the thought of what he
had to tell me. Outside the rain had ceased;
and the wind came fitfully in gusts that were
feeble as zephyrs compared with the turmoil
wherein the Indiaman had gone to ruin on the
Dog’s Tooth.
“ You’re a fine lad, Rick,” my uncle purred,
blowing out a cloud of smoke. “ You’re more
like your mother than your father.”
“ Tell me,” I whispered, dreading to wake
my father, 11 what she said to you for me.
“ Rick, I take it you’ve not seen many
pretty women in your day.”
“ Only Margaret Otter to my clear recollec-
tion. Though to-night, when you told me my
mother was alive, I fancied that I recollected
her.”
“ Here is a lad with an exquisite joy before
him,” said my uncle, with his blue eyes dancing.
“ Here’s a lad who’s known but one woman all


his days —a none too choice example of her
divine sex ! Why, Rick, I envy you ! When you
come back to London and see beauty —rose lips,
fine eyes, a tangle of gold hair, or nut brown, or
black as night —when these lips utter magical
sounds and these eyes languish ; when you see
all the beauty that art begets in beauty—the
art of Paris, not our artless London —why, Rick,
you’ll be a man entering on a paradise you’ve
never dreamed of. Rick, I envy you, who’ll
know no dregs or heeltaps, and will find the
goblet of life very nectar. Nay, I grow prosy,
Rick. Your mother, say you ? —you have a
recollection of your mother ! Paint her for me,
Rick, ere I give the message.”
“ I think,” I answered, “ that she is tall and
fair. She has hair of gold—curling in ringlets
on her neck. She has very white arms, and
her hands are fine and cool. Her eyes are
blue —sea-blue —and her lips are always smiling.”
He broke in gravely, his blue eyes piercing
mine like two cold darts of steel. “ A true
picture, Rick —save for two things only. Her
eyes are blue ; and her lips smile ! Ah, lad,
her eyes are very wells of grief; and she smiles
no more.”
His voice resembled a fine-toned musical
instrument, and his clear thoughts and purpose


ever played upon it magically. At his words, I
felt my heart stir within me ; a lump came into
my throat; tears started from my eyes. The
thought of her —a fair and gracious being, her
eyes two wells of grief, her lips piteous !
“ She has not laughed ; she has not ceased
to mourn, since your father left her. And for
this, Rick, I —who love London ; who head the
fashions of England ; who am the last, even as
I am the greatest of the arbiters of modes and
graces —am come overseas —all these leagues
overseas —seeking brother and nephew. And
there was a message for you, Rick, if I should
find you —if you yet lived. * Tell my dear boy
my heart is broken for the want of him. Tell
him that I, his mother, call over the world for
him. Tell him that wanting him, I die !’ ”
My tears flowed freely now; and my heart
was torn in my breast.
“My brother charged me,” said my uncle
James, “ w r ith having come seeking him for a
base motive. That was not true. I come
because I am a gentleman; and a lady whom
I revere bade me come. I come to save her —
to restore husband and son to her. You have
her message, Rick. It teaches you your duty.”
“ My duty —ay, my duty ! ”
“ To spare nothing that may soften your


father’s heart! To plead with him —though”—
with sudden musical laughter—“ your tail tingle
with his cane —that he fulfil his duty to your
mother and yourself, and come back instantly
to England.”
The door of my father’s room creaked sud-
denly —it seemed with a strong draught stealing
in by some chink from the wind outside. I
scarcely marked it.
“ Failing his return, if he be deaf to your
entreaties —mine —it is your duty, Rick, to
leave him ! ”
“ Leave him ! ”
“ And come away to London with me. To
your mother, Rick—your duty is to your
mother. We can easily slip away without your
father’s knowledge ! ”
The door of my father’s room was snatched
open suddenly; and livid, cadaverous, and
blazing-eyed, he faced us. My uncle did not
stir from his seat; or set down his pipe.
“To bed ! ” said my father, in dull, lifeless
tones, pointing his finger at me, “ To bed ! ”


CHAPTER VIII
CROSS-EXAMINATION OF MARGARET
1 was so weary, that, when flying from my
father’s wrath, I climbed to my room and
tumbled into bed at the side of Roderick Scorne,
1 fell asleep speedily enough for all the turmoil
of my thoughts. There had been in my father’s
look the prospect of the very devil’s own flog-
ging. Twice that night had I disobeyed him.
1 had scarce dared ever before, since I was the
merest shrimp. To-morrow morning, I took it,
I should be walking with ruffled tail feathers ;
and should avoid hard bench or stool. Tet I
cared not. My mind was filled only with the
thought of all the disclosures of the night. The
joy at learning that my mother was alive was
more potent with me than my horror at the
drowning of all those hapless beings on the
wreck. None other had come ashore I took
it, though my father and the rest had waited
far into the night, and mayhap Jeremy Otter
and Margaret yet waited.


hand, lest I should rouse my father or my
uncle, I stole down the stairs. I glanced into
the living room, and marked my uncle sleeping
quietly upon the couch. It has ever seemed to
me that the face of a sleeper—save when it is
marked by the ravages of grief or disease, or
distorted by drunkenness or dissipation—reveals
that for the time the soul is absent from the
body ; and gone wandering, in what heaven or
what hell ? My uncle’s face, now that he slept,
was white and clean as the chiselled face of a
Greek statue, such as was depicted in a history
book of my father’s. The lips were curled and
smiling ; the weariness of years of fashionable
dissipation —so I took the habit of his life from
his own words, and from the manner of the
man —had vanished. He looked the merest lad
—fine, cleanly, handsome. I knew then that
the soul of the man looked forth only through
his eyes, when he was awake ; and that, if his
lips were false, and his face a mask for his true
purpose, his blue eyes —blue jewels of eyes —
would reveal his thoughts. Looking upon him
then, I liked him better —far better, than when
he had faced me on the previous night —ay,
even when he had stirred me with the message
from my mother. I withdrew silently and
went out into the sweet air of the dawn. Mar-


garet espied me instantly, and, coming to her
door, demanded shrilly, “ Well—well —what
may you be doing astir at this hour of the
morning ? ”
“ Did no other come ashore, Margaret ? ”
“ Not a soul —heaven rest ’em. Your father
and Jeremy are down at the beach now —have
been there half the night. And —take a word
from me, my gentleman ” fixing me with a
cold, keen eye.
“ What is it, Margaret ? ”
“ Don’t go chasing after the master this
mom ! Not yet! For if I know the signs he
is in a sour, sour temper. And if you’ve been
misconducting yourself —as I take it you have
been, for never is the time when you haven’t—
you may smart a bit earlier in the morning thar
you’re thinking.”
“ Thank ’ee, Margaret,” said I, “ I’ll be taking
your advice.”
“ And now you’re wanting coffee, hey ?
Well, come in by the fire a bit. Where’s the
young fellow ?—and what’s his name ? ”
“ His name’s Scorne —Roderick Scorne, Mar-
garet. He was ship’s boy on the Indus. He’s
asleep in my bed,” following her into the
cheerful cottage.
Early as it was, the room was spick and span.
3


The fire blazed on the hearth ; the kettle
bubbled and steamed. The pewter and the
brass on the shelves shone like so many mirrors
in the dancing flame. I seated myself in
Jeremy’s chair in the chimney corner, and re-
garded Margaret reflectively, while she poured
coffee from a bubbling pot into a mug for me,
and drew a lump of ship’s biscuit from a crock.
I was all eagerness to question Margaret con-
cerning my father’s past ; and yet, boy as 1
was, my father’s principle of reticence restrained
my babbling tongue. Old and tried servant of
our family, as I knew Margaret to be, I should
have had no purpose to question her regarding
my mother, save for a desire in me to know
more of my mother —desire that was yet keener
than my sense of the fitness of the interrogation.
While I gulped down my coffee, and crumbled
my biscuit, I watched her setting herself to the
kneading of dough for a batch of loaves.
“ Margaret,” I said at length, “ did ye know
much of my Uncle James in England ? ”
She shot me a sharp and sudden look, and
paused from the kneading. “ \WII ? ” she de-
manded.
“ Well, he’s a fine gentleman, isn’t he ? ”
“ And who,” snapped she, “ ever said he
wasn’t ? ”


“ So you knew him in England, then, Mar-
garet ? ”
“ I’m not denying it.”
“ Tell me, Margaret, what did my father and
he quarrel about ? ”
“ Never,” said Margaret glibly, “ have 1
meddled with the business of my betters —or
elders ” —with a wag of her head at me.
“ But you must have known, Margaret,” I
feinted.
“If you’re so anxious to know, ask the
master ! ” cried she, with an air of finality.
“ Oh, he wouldn’t tell me ! But, Margaret,
if you won’t ”
“ And I won’t! ” said she, plunging her
hands into the dough.
“ Well, Margaret, tell me why my father came
away here with me —without my mother.”
She withdrew her hands instantly ; and dust-
ing them with flour, came towards me. She
peered at me, with her head on one side, “ And
who,” she said, “ has been telling you this ? ”
“ Why, I heard my uncle talking to my father,
of course —Margaret, dear, won’t you tell me ?
Why is it ? Surely my father must love my
mother ? Why, she’s the loveliest lady in all
England, my uncle says ! ”
I saw then that old Margaret had grown


strangely white, and that her eyes burnt, as if
they reflected the leaping flame on the hearth.
She said no word, but stared at me.
“ If my mother is so beautiful,” I pursued
my question, “ why did my father leave her ?
Was he unkind to her ? Wasn’t she nice to
him ? Margaret, she’s as good as she’s beauti-
ful —isn’t she ? —isn’t she ? ”
The pewter mug splashed on the hearth stone ;
she paid no heed. Ere I knew it she had her
apron to her eyes ; and for the first time in my
knowledge of her, she was weeping.
“ Margaret, dear old Margaret,” I said, lean-
ing towards her, “ won’t you tell me ! Father
won’t! He’ll flog me, if I ask. But I want to
know ! I must know, Margaret ! Why are we
here, and she in London ? Why won’t my
father go to her, as my uncle wants him to ? ”
She said then, shakily withdrawing the corner
of her apron from her reddened eyes —her nose
red in sympathy —“ You mustn’t ask me,
Master Dick. Only I’ll say this —just this!
That your father’s hard ; but he’s good and
brave. And your mother —your dear mother —
is as good —as she’s beautiful. And that I’ve
prayed all these years that your father would
take you back to England —to her.”
“ But why doesn’t ray father love her ? ”


“ Oh, Master Dick, he does ”
“ He doesn’t seem to ! ”
“ Not to you ; no, not to you. Only a woman
could guess that. But he’s never ceased to
love her ; no one could.”
“ But why did they quarrel, Margaret, for
they must have ? ”
“ Master Dick, some one lied —that was why.”
“ Some one ? —who ?—was it my Uncle James ?
Why don’t you tell me ? ”
She said no word, but snivelled still. And in
her very silence I was answered.
My uncle ! Assuredly I had known all the
while it was the fine, handsome gentleman, my
uncle ! And that was why, for all his graces
and his purring, I had not liked him, as he would
have me like him. And that was why, his false-
ness, even to me, looked out of his blue eyes.


CHAPTER IX
WE GO FISHING
Margaret declared presently that she required
fish for breakfast. With all this company,
grumbled she, as she wiped her eyes and I sat
staring at her, she did not see how the stores
would last out. And when I ceased from wast-
ing good coffee, and pestering her with questions,
and spoiling her batch of loaves, maybe, I’d
rouse that lazy young dog upstairs, and try to
make myself and him of a little use. I fled
before the storm, knowing Margaret. I had
learnt enough. I w T as weary of the turmoil of
my thoughts. The prospect of a pull in a little
boat that we had in a cove to the leeward of
the island, and mayhap of a swim in one of the
deep pools in under the rocks, in company with
Roderick Scorne, was alluring enough. The
sun was high now, and the air was already sweet
and warm. And looking up, as I came out
from the hut, I saw that Scome was astir, for


he was staring out of the open window,
waved my hand up to him, and called, “ I’m
going for a swim, and to try to get some fish.
Will you come ? ”
“Of course,” he answered. “ But where’s
my trousers ? ”
“ You’ll find some duds of mine hanging on
a peg ; boots with them. They ought to fit
you. Your clothes won’t be dry yet. But
throw down my coat, will you ? It’s on the
chair.”
He slung my jacket down ; and I put it on.
I took the lines from where they hung ; and a
few boiled mussels from a pot of bait, I waited
then for Scorne. Margaret, her nose yet red,
and her looks frosty, stood with a mug of coffee
and a biscuit for his refreshment; and when
he came, a whit tightly clad in my garments,
she snapped, “ Well, my lad—well ? So you’re
alive, still, hey ? ” and, pushing mug and bis-
cuit into his hands, she shut the door upon us.
“No one else ashore ? ” he asked, gulping
down the coffee.
“No one yet. There may be some of them
left on the wreck, unless it’s gone down ”
It was slipping off the rock when we got
away in the boat,” he answered dolefully,
“ We’re going down to look—l take it.”


“ No,” I answered decidedly, “ we aren’t.”
“ Why not ? ” he demanded.
“ Well, you’ve tasted a rope’s end, haven’t
you ? ”
“ I have,” squirming uneasily.
“ That’s w T hy. If we go I’ll get something
warm. My father’s down there with his man ;
and I’ve got orders to keep away ! At least I
think it wiser. We’d better get the fish that
Margaret wants.”
“ Oh, very well,” he answered, swallowing
down the last of the coffee; and poking a
lump of biscuit into his mouth like a quid of
tobacco. “ I’m ready.”
“ Take an oar, then,” I said. “ One of the
boats is down to the leeward of the island.
Now come along ! ”
Shouldering the oars then, we tramped off
together —Margaret crying a warning to us to
keep wdthin the cove —talking amicably enough;
I telling him of our life on the island ; ex-
plaining that my father remained there because
he desired it, and preferred it to London —
whereat he stared at me, as well he might;
speaking of my uncle’s coming in search of us ;
and of our possible return. I gathered from
him that his father had been a mate on a mer-
chant vessel, and had been drowned in its wTeck


off the Goodwin Sands on the English coast,
ten years before ; that his mother lived on a
small independence in Devon; and that her
brother had persuaded her to send him up to
London to the school from which he had run
away. He had recovered from his exposure of
the night before, save for bruises taken when
he was rolled on the shingle. I took it that he
had led a dog’s life on the Indiaman ; and that,
save for the shock of the drowning of the men,
he could feel little personal grief. I liked him
well. I liked the clean health of him, and his
easy carriage ; his handsome head with its
curly black hair; his bright eyes, and the
laughter that rose so readily to his lips. He
was a year older than myself, I found ; and
the authority of his greater age and infinite
experience led him speedily to adopt an au-
thoritative tone with me. I resented it; yet I
condoned.
From the dwelling we climbed over the ter-
race of flat rocks toward the hollow that lay
on the top of Wild Dog Island as a dead vol-
canic crater. Reaching the highest point we
looked out over the island. South-west the
Dog’s Tooth was bare to the morning sun,
glistening with brine. About its base the rollers
of the Straits surged mightily, and at times the
3


spray obscured it in a glistening white cloud.
There was no sign of the wrecked vessel at its
base, but we could mark many black objects
floating on the sea — wTeckage, but no sign of
boat or raft, or of any survivor. Once we
espied the figures of my father and his man
Jeremy, moving over the rocks, with boat
hooks in their hands, and Pitch, the dog, run-
ning beside them.
“ What’s that place ? ” Scorne demanded
presently, pointing to a great mass of cliffs
beyond Dog’s Tooth, that marked the edge of
No Man’s.
“ No Man’s Island.”
“ Why do you call it that ? ” he asked. “ Be-
cause nobody lives on it ? ”
“ Yes. And because nobody’s ever been
near it. If you got caught in the current that
runs between it and Dog’s Tooth, you’d get
swept under the cliffs and drowned. That’s
even in fine weather.”
He nodded, and turned to look over Wild
Dog. The morn was clear and fine. The sun
rode white in a dazzling blue sky ; and the sea
was the same blue as turquoises, shining with
many gems of light. From the rain, the lank
grass and the fern under our feet were fresh
and green ; the whole pasture of the cup was


vivid green, till it passed down through the
break in the crater to the lower ground, where
a scrub of stunted gum and wattle stood out
as a blue-grey cloud. To the east of the island
lay a little cove, almost shut in by yellow
rocks, and save for the long waves that came
in slowly and broke in creamy spray at the
cliffs on its other side it was comparatively
placid. The cliffs went down abruptly there to
terraces of yellow rock, over which the swell
foamed lightly. The rocks held many pools of
a right depth for bathing. Save for the ap-
proach to the landing place the rocks were
hedged about with infinite tangles of kelp, that
rose and fell with every wave of the sea,
like some drowned thing. It was late October,
and, in a sheltered space below the edge of the
bowl, the grey puffins, having come in great
clouds before the storm, were assembled for
the nesting season. That promised sufficiency
of provender. The ground would speedily be
honeycombed with their nests ; there would
be fresh eggs and the fat young for eating.
These young birds were taken in dozens ; plucked,
squeezed for oil, split open and pickled in barrels
of brine. A fine and savoury dish they made —
like fat mutton, soused in brine and oil.
At the very first sight of us, making our


way nigh their nesting places, these birds rose
up in clouds, screaming shrilly, and flapping
about us as if to drive us off. We passed by
them, and made our way speedily across the
springing, spongy turf towards the cliff above
the bay. My father and Jeremy had cut a
flight of steps down the side, where a great mass
of cliff had parted and crashed upon the terraces
of rock ; and, climbing down, we came out pre-
sently upon the smooth yellow pavement. It
was littered with the wrack of last night’s
storm. It was strewn with fragments of drift-
wood ; bladder-sewn kelp like corked nets ; sea-
weeds purple, crimson, orange, white, and
blood-coloured; dead crabs with branching
claws; shells of opal hues. Flinging down
the oars by the boat drawn high out of reach
of the sea, and crying to Roderick to be heard
above the wash of the surf and the scream of
the sea-fowl, “ Yonder’s the pool —if you want
a swim; leave your duds here; ” I led the
way to my favourite bathing place.
We were stripped presently; and, racing
naked, the pair of us across the terrace under the
full blaze of the sun. The pool was like a tank
cut out of the solid rock. It might be fifty feet
wide, and twice as long: at no part was it
more than four feet deep. It lay under the


sun as a pool of crystal. Through its clear
waves played little fry, red and azure and gold ;
crabs scuttled over its sand, and broken pearl
shells littered it ; anemones flowered in crimson
and blue; and the seaweeds bloomed. With
the sun warm upon us we plunged into the
chill waters ; splashed noisily, and swam about
joyously, emerging presently, dripping and
gasping, to lie basking awhile in the sun, and
then to plunge again. Thus we spent a quarter
of an hour, it might be, till, recollecting that
Margaret -waited for her fish, and that we had
no time to waste, I cried out to Roderick, “ We’d
better get back and try the lines,” then raced
him across the terrace.
Aglow then we tumbled into our shirts and
breeches; and between us pushed the boat
over the rollers set for it down to the water’s
edge. Shut in from the full force of the sea,
the cove was comparatively placid, and the
rollers came in slowly, so that we launched the
boat easily, and rowed out on the waters of the
cove. We put a little off shore, till we had
come out over a reef, where, I knew well, we
should find our fish. I dropped astern the
rock that we used for anchor ; baited the lines
with mussels ; and we set, the pair of us, to
fishing. Roddy had the advantage of me


speedily. He drew up his line with a red and
silver cod flapping upon it; and he caught
three or more rock-cod of a fat girth, and a
spiny flat-head, ere I pulled up my first —a
miserable shrimp of a leather-jacket, which I
flung overboard again. All this while we were
talking, the two of us, of our lives, he of his in
England and on the Indiaman, and I of the
years spent on the island and of the prospect
of our return to London. I liked the fellow
more and more. This was my first friend —my
first companion of my own age. And never
again, I knew, would Wild Dog Island be the
same for me ; never again would I be content
to remain on it, after he had sailed away. That
my father would but return to London ! That
his old quarrel with my mother, which, I now
knew well, had been the work of my Uncle
James, might be at an end !
We had a dozen more rock-cod and flat-head
flapping and gasping in the bottom of the boat
ere I thought of return. I cried out then,
“ We’ll get back home, or Margaret will have
a word to say to us ! ”
Accordingly we pulled up the anchor, and
lay to the oars, purposing to return at once.
But folly came our way —folly that was to end
in a change of all our fortunes, and of my life


on Wild Dog Island. We marked an object
floating at the very entrance of the cove, flung
up and down by the heavier wash of the sea.
It was a great wooden chest, broken loose from
the shattered Indiaman, and borne in by the
sea —containing we knew not what treasure of
garments or food for us.
“D’ye see that chest there, Roddy ? ” cried
I, pointing to it, when first my eyes set on it.
“ I wonder what’s in it. It’s off the India-
man. Shall we make a try for it ? ”
“ It’s not safe,” he growled. “We may get
caught in the sea and sucked out. “ We’ll get
ashore ! ”
I have told that his age made him dictator
over me, and that I resented it, for all my
liking for him. That weighed with me now,
and I cried, “ We’ll have the chest first. I want
to see what’s in it.”
“ It’s not safe,” he repeated, with a flash of
his eyes, and a tightening of his lips.
“ You’re afraid,” sneered I, and, though he
blazed defiance for answer, he merely fell to his
oar, and rowed with me out towards the chest.
Laughing, though unoasy for the sucking in and
out of the sea at the heads of the cove, I set
myself to my oar and speedily had pulled nigh
to the chest. It seemed to evade us. Borne


thus far in by the sea, it was floating out once
more in the receding tide. The gulls screamed
warning to us ; the rollers on either side of
the heads cried peril. Tugging at our oars as
the boat rocked, we sent it speedily after the
chest.
It seemed then that we were caught in the
maw of the sea ! The waters roared hoarse
threats ; a great wave swept in to swallow us.
And, ere we knew, the boat was gripped and
borne out from the cove after the chest. We
had no time save to cry shrilly, the one to the
other, to hold to the oars. We were sucked
into a very whirlpool at the gates of the cove.
The sound of roaring waters sudden, and
fit to strike terror to our hearts.
My oar, rotted wdth age and the sea waters,
snapped suddenly in the rowlock. We were
spun round in a sick and dizzy whirlpool. My
heart stood still with terror, for I believed that
in an instant we should be overturned, and
flung into the sea, and borne in on the rocks,
and sucked to drown by the undertow. I
marked then Roddy Scorne crying out some-
thing that was lost to me, and struggling from
his seat to the stern of the boat to affix his oar
as tiller to steady us. The oar was plucked
instantly from his hand. A great wave bore


us out on its crest. And ere we knew, we were
through the narrow, storm-washed entrance to
the cove ; and oarless, helpless, carried forth
into the open sea. We were gripped in a
current —sucked out we knew not whither.


CHAPTER X
ADRIFT
It had all come so suddenly that I had scarce
time to pass a word to my companion. I cried
out to him now, clinging to the stem of the
boat, “ We’ve done it ! ”
He answered back, grinning bravely, “ You
have ! We’ll have to swim for it ! ”
“ What chance ? ” I roared out. “ We’d get
smashed under the cliffs. We’ve got to keep
her afloat. There’s a plank at your feet. Try
to steer with it. I’ll bail.”
Snatching up a tin dipper then, I fell to
bailing madly, while he, grasping the plank,
affixed it, and brought her head round so that
she might ride clearly in the current. We were
being tom out of the waves that broke heavily
at the entrance to the cove. I marked the
rocks at either side stand up, yellow and mon-
strous, through the foam of the sea breaking at
their bases. I was sick from terror and the


whirling of the boat. But we were running
easily, now that he clung to the makeshift tiller ;
and the current was bearing us on, as if we
had been in a rushing river. We were off
shore soon, and carried at an ever widening
angle from its surge. The turmoil of breakers
and the screams of the sea fowl were dying
out, we raced so speedily.
Plying the dipper, I had the boat clear soon
from w r ater that had washed into her, as we
were sucked between the heads. She rode
more lightly, and thus was borne on the more
swiftly. That gave me space to think; and
my thoughts terrified me the more. This cur-
rent —I had never known this current; but it
seemed we were borne about the island toward
the Dog’s Tooth, and No Man’s. Assuredly
we were heading that way, and at a great speed.
Instantly I dropped the dipper, and crawled
towards Roderick, who was still clinging to
the plank at the stern of the boat.
“ Roddy,” gasped I, “ we’re in the current
going towards No Man’s. If we can’t get her
out, we’ll be carried right in under the rocks.”
“ I thought so,” he muttered. “ They may
see us, though, from the island.”
“ There’ll be no time to get to us, if they do,
looking at the pace w r e’re going at. Can’t you


—can’t you bring her round. Out of it, I mean
—not if I help you ? ” hoping that we yet
might get her clear from the current despite
the loss of the oars ; and into the open sea that
would carry us back to Wild Dog Island, or
enable my father to reach us in the larger
boat that lay by the landing place below the
house.
“ I’ve been trying. The current’s too strong.
There’s not a chance ! Give me a hand and
see ! ”
Instantly I gripped the plank with him, and
sought to direct the boat to the edge of the
current. The plank was almost forced from
my hands. The boat’s head shifted a little, with
the one result that she rocked violently, as if
she would upset; and the spray broke over us.
We knew upon the instant that it was hope-
less. We were caught in the deathly grip of
the racing current, and must be swept inwards
to our drowning in the broken water amid the
rocks off No Man’s Island. I looked shoreward
then. I marked the house standing grey above
the red-brown cliffs ; the smoke blown inland
from Margaret’s chimney. I could make out
the cleft in the rocks, where the first beach
lay. My father and Jeremy should be there.
I screamed out —cry on cry ; I snatched my


shirt off my back, and waved it in the hope
that they might see. All this while Roddy
clung to the plank and kept the boat racing clear.
Shouting and waving still, I sought to attract
the attention of my father and the rest —sick
for the terror of our plight; and for the know-
ledge of what awaited us. The sea-gulls and
the puffins wheeled and screamed above us.
The sea was dazzling blue, and all aglitter with
sunlight, save for the green racing current, and
the white caps of water upon its surface. The
Dog’s Tooth came up through a haze of flying
sea fowl. The din of the birds became deafen-
ing. I cried out to Roddy, “ They don’t see
us ! They’ll never hear ! ” but for the clamour
of the puffins and the gulls, and the hoarse roar
of waters, I could not tell whether he heard
me. He answered nothing back, but clung
bravely to the plank, still sending the boat
racing clearly.
Now we were in a line with the Tooth. Peer-
ing that way I could make out nothing of the
wreck at its base, save that the sea beyond the
current was spotted with floating fragments
from it. The sight of the wreckage struck me
with a keener realisation of our peril. As all
the ship’s company save two had drowned, so
must we drown; and our bodies be sucked


into the whirlpool. And I screamed out again,
and waved my garment toward Wild Dog.
Only the puffins and the gulls screamed in
answer, enveloping us now in a grey cloud;
wheeling about us, dipping into the sea be-
yond the current for fragments of food from
the wreck. The rollers about the Dog’s Tooth
roared in menace. The cloud of birds grew
thicker —thicker still. It shut out the very
sun. The puffins were flying in thousands
about us, coming from the sea towards the
nesting places of Wild Dog, and the sur-
rounding islands. 1 had seen them come so,
year after year, in great clouds ; and I had
welcomed their coming, for they meant fresh
eggs, and the tender flesh of the young birds.
But now they robbed us of whatever chance we
had of being noticed from the shore, and
rescued from the current. I yelled at them
savagely ; they whirled about us still. Their
strident cry was louder in its volume than the
sound of the sea ; and the combined flapping
of their wings was as the beating of Death’s
pinions. They spun; they seemed to dance
a rigadoon upon the air ; they shrilled at us
with the very voice of the sea.
The speed at which the boat was being swept
forward was increasing. The water was broken


with reefs, which to my disordered thoughts
w r ere as so many snapping teeth. The roar of the
sea was hoarse and unending ; and growing loud
as the clamour and flapping of the birds. At
times, through breaks in the cloud of their
whirling wings and bodies, I made out the red
lines of the great cliffs to the left of us, going
high ; and shut out then by the birds as in a
mist. The boat rocked and bobbed, like a
float upon a fishing line. I gave up hope then
of rescue from the current, I thought only of
the fate that awaited us in the whirlpool below
No Man’s Island. I was glad that I was not
alone. The thought of Roddy with me was
strength to me. If he had not been with me
—clinging still to the plank at the stern of
the boat —I must have flung myself down and
shrieked in the very abandonment of terror.
I crawled towards him, believing that the end
was nigh.
“ WeTe under the rocks of No Man’s now,”
I screamed in his ear, to be heard above the
roll of the sea, and the cries and flappings of
the puffins. “We haven’t a chance ! ”
He answered steadily, “ I’m sorry for you,
Dick. But w r e may get through.”
“No hope,” I cried. “ I’m sorry, Roddy : it
was my fault. Good-bye ! ”


He smiled back at me. His face, I saw, was
white as death, but his eyes were brave. Hold-
ing still to the plank with his right hand, he
stretched out his left to me ; but while I yet
gripped it, as I knelt beside him, the plank was
twisted suddenly from his fingers, and the boat
spun round as in a very maelstrom. And we
were clinging together at the stern of the boat,
sick with the whirling ; blinded with spray ;
deafened by great waters. How the waters
boomed —like the sea washing into the pot holes
beneath the cliffs, but magnified into an endless
roll of mighty sound ! I believed then that
the end was come ; and the chill hand of death
seemed to touch my very heart.
And yet for all the turmoil; for all the
whirling, we were afloat. It seemed a very
eternity ere the boat was plucked forward.
Suddenly the light that I yet realised through
all the blinding spray and rush of waters was
blotted out; suddenly we were merged in dark-
ness. I thought to feel the waters closing over
me. I prepared to make a struggle for my
life. The booming sounds, as the wash of great
seas under the honeycombed rocks, such as I
had heard many a time from the cliffs of Wild
Dog Island, were now terrific; deafening to
ears and brain. All at once we were flung


violently forward in the drenching break of
spray. The boat crashed under us, groaned,
remained fast. Ere I knew it I had leaped to
my feet; and was racing forward, hand in hand
with Roddy, up a slippery terrace of rock
mounting steeply through the darkness towards
a twinkling star of light.


CHAPTER XI
ON NO MAN’S ISLAND
The seas roared after us. The spray washed
at our backs like chill showers of rain. The
walls of the cavern into which we had been
flung, gave forth thunderous sound. Still we
raced forward, going together higher yet toward
the guiding star of light. We were safe soon.
We were stumbling through a deep, dry bed
of sand. The light shining in lit up great
walls, snow white for the droppings of the
sea fowl. Suddenly turning a curve we came
out into the full blaze of light, that, striking on
our salt-dimmed, smarting eyes, blinded us for
the moment. We fell together weakly then
into a bed of fine white sand and skeleton-kelp.
“ We’re safe, thank God —we’re safe,” cried
Roddy joyously. “ We’ve got through, and
all.” '
“ Ay, but we’re on No Man’s Island, I take
it,” I muttered, rubbing my eyes, “ and how
we’re going to get back ”


But I broke off, for my heart swelled with
gratitude to Heaven that had preserved us
mercifully from drowning. I was sick and
weak still for the terror of our recent peril,
and for a while I lay gasping by Roddy on the
sand. Suddenly I felt him start up, and grip
my arm, as he cried, “ Look ! ”
I stood up then, leaning on his arm for very
weakness. I saw that we stood at the entrance
to a tunnel which pierced the cliffs encircling a
deep bowl like a crater. We were about thirty
feet from the bottom of the bowl; and above
us rose on every side, it seemed, white cliffs
going up to a height of it might be two hundred
feet or more. The crater was filled with glis-
tening white sand and salt crystals ; but a
little below us rested high and dry the hull of
a great ship—a ship of some red timber, mount-
ing at the stern into high turrets. Its port-
holes were like the sockets of so many eyes.
It seemed crumbling with the years. And from
its form I knew that I looked upon the skeleton
of some proud Spanish galleon, come seeking
new golden empires for the King, and wrecked
and stranded here in some terrible tempest
centuries before, to rot in the white bed of
sand. Yet how should it be shut in on all sides
by the cliffs, with the seas gone from it ? Later


I was to understand how it came piled up there ;
as yet I was filled with wonder ; and my chief
thought was to get down and examine it. My
mind was coloured rosily with thoughts of
treasure ; such as the old voyagers told of —in-
gots, doubloons, and gems —and the notion
drove from my brain all thought of the peril
which we had evaded, and all my dread lest
we should not be able to escape from the grim
stronghold of No Man’s Island.
“ Come on,” cried I. “ Let’s get down and
have a look at it! It’s a Spanish galleon; I
know it by its build.”
“ A Spanish galleon! ” he cried derisively.
“ Why, how should a Spanish galleon come
here ? There was never anybody in Australia
before the English: Captain Cook —and Bligh
in the Bounty, and all those fellows, they tell
us of at school.”
“ Haven’t you ever heard of De Quiros or
De Torres ? ” I asked, vaunting my know-
ledge. “ Why, the Spaniards were out here
years before ; so were the Dutch and the Portu-
guese. We English weren’t the first by a long
way ! ”
“ How the deuce are we going to get down ? ”
he asked, pointing doubtfully to the cliff, which
seemed to descend sheer for thirty feet.


“ We’ll have a try,” all eagerness I answered.
“ Come on ! ” and walking from the mouth of
the cave I went out on the terrace of rock in
the glaring sunlight. At once we roused a very
cloud of shrieking gulls from their nests. Their
eggs lay in little pot holes in the rocks ; and
the reek of dead fish greeted our nostrils foully.
The sea fowl squawked, and flapped about us,
and flew at us with beaks and wings, to drive
us back. We waved them off with our arms,
and emerged on the very edge of the terrace
above the sand. The bottom of the bowl
below us glistened white—with sand and dead
pearl shell, crumbled to powder. And then I
marked that there were little ledges on the
face of the cliff for the space of twenty feet or
more down which we might find a foothold ;
so gripping the edge of the cliff I commenced
to descend. The rocks were slimed and gummed
with fish scales, dropped by the birds ; and
when I was about ten feet down, my feet slipped
suddenly, and, ere I knew, I had gone flying
down into the deep, soft bed of sand. I fell
upon my back, and the shock drove the breath
out of me for the moment, but the sand broke
my fall, and gasping, presently I stood up
unhurt. Roddy, climbing more carefully,
reached the lowest ledge and then dropped.


landing on his feet, and sinking to his knees in
the sand.
“ Are you hurt ? ” he asked, and I shook my
head cheerfully. “ I’m right enough,” I said.
“ Now for the galleon ! ”
We commenced then to struggle over the deep
bed of sand. It was dry and piled loosely, and
we sank in it at every step we took. Little
puffs of sea-wind, sweeping in by the tunnel,
tinkled across it with the sound of tiny jingling
instruments. We went so slowly that it
nigh half an hour or more ere we approached
the hull of the great ship.
It towered above us —built of some red wood,
and preserved soundly in that dry place for all
the centuries that it must have rested there.
It was caught in the fangs of a brown jutting
reef, that had crushed in its planks and held it
there securely from sinking in the sand. Its
timbers gaped in places ; but for the most part
it was sound, save for the piercing of its bottom
by the reef. Its red sides were splashed by
the sea fowl; and the sea fowl rested within it;
for at our coming a cloud flew out shrilling,
and flapped about us. Its masts were gone;
but its great figure-head —it had been white and
gilded, for a little paint still showed upon it —
was intact. It was the figure of a woman—


nude to the breasts, and clad thence in a won-
drously fretted garment, all little suns and
flowers still faintly carved, with bronze nails
set in them for jewels. The green marks of the
mouldering nails ran down in streaks like paint.
Above the head of the woman was a crown like
a sun—a crown of bronze that no doubt had
been polished till it blazed on the sunlit days of
sailing on the Main ; but it was now blackened
and corroded, and sent down drippings of green
that imparted to the face the hues of a dead
woman. There had been vermilion on the lips ;
for, staring up at it, I marked a little smear yet
left in their parting. The name of the dead
galleon was blotted out; all shreds of rope
were gone ; but over the side appeared a wreck
of spars, rotten and broken with long years of
decay. The turret at the stern was gaping with
the storms of centuries, and the port-holes and
cabin windows were empty, or shut with round
discs of greened brass. Marvelling and silent
we walked about the vessel—stranded thus high
and dry in the mysterious crater—seeking the
means of climbing up its steep sides and mak-
ing our way on board. We found the means
presently. A rusting ladder of iron hung over
the side a little above our heads ; a part cor-
roded and broken lay at our feet ; but, though


we leaped to catch the lowest rung we could not
reach it.
“ Climb on my back,” said Roddy then, and
at the word I climbed to his shoulders ; and
lifting myself gripped the lowest rung. It
was secure and held me, and presently I drew
myself up on to it. I leaned down then,
and, succeeding in catching his hand, I aided
him to struggle up after me. The next instant
we had climbed the ladder, and were passing
over the broken bulwarks on to the galleon’s
deck.


CHAPTER XII
GALLEON OF SPAIN
The deck was comparatively sound in parts
still, though it was splashed and stained by the
sea birds; in places the planks had started from
the seams, and had rotted away into dangerous
holes. But, picking our way, we found the
main part of it firm enough under our feet, and
we stepped towards the companion way. The
metal rails were broken and fallen ; and, passing
down the steps, we found the w r ay closed by
a metal-studded door. We dashed ourselves
against it; and the rotting woodwork parted,
and opened ; but instantly so foul a reek came
up, as sickened us, and warned us that, until
the fresh air had flowed in, we might be over-
come by poisonous gases. We retraced our
way to the deck. It was clear save for broken
splintered spars, and masses of dust that seemed
to have been wicker baskets. A huge pistol,
brown and green with age, lay near the little
93
4


cabin that rose like a low tower nigh the stumps
of the mainmast. The doors of the cabin were
closed; and the windows sealed with thick
discs of mica or horn, green with the moulder-
ing of the brass about it. Intent on discovery
we flung ourselves together against the door;
and instantly it parted and crashed down.
Again came the escape of foul gases, and we
went sickly back. But not ere we had caught
a glimpse of what was within. Absorbed with
the strangeness and the terror of our discovery
we dared advance presently and peer in.
The cabin was lit with a faint green light from
the blurred windows, and the sun coming in
through the broken door. It had a central
table in it; above it a swinging lamp wrought
curiously in yellow porcelain and bronze. At
the table a figure sat in a great carven chair —
a figure that might seem the very presiding
spirit of the dead galleon—and for the moment
it bore a curious semblance to life. Its shrivelled
face was turned towards us; its beard was
yet upon its chin, its moustachios curled and
pointed ; its hair curling about its shoulders.
We marked the outlines of the proud Spanish
face, ere, at the full coming in of the air, it
seemed to change suddenly and die to dust.
The hair and beard floated away like ash before


the draught; the face grinned horribly at us
—shrivelled, mummified, decaying speedily in
the air. The body had worn a splendid cloak
of blue and gold—colours that seemed to fade
before our very eyes, and cloth that shrivelled
on its form, and fell to powder about it. It had
a draggled ruff about its neck, a rust-spotted coat
of mail and leather upon its breast; its legs
were hidden from us by the table. Before it
a decaying book was open—a book it seemed
of some devotions, for the dead man’s claws
lay between the parting of the leaves. There
were metal rings lying loosely on the outspread
fingers rings that seemed of old gold, and had
dull red and green jewels in them, and pearls
like the eyes of dead fish. Across the table
rested a naked sword—the hilt having on it
curious figures of ivory, and little knobs of gold;
and a huge pistol, inlaid with metal and chased
beautifully, lay beside it. Slipping forward we
nigh trod upon a figure lying prone and staring
up at us, as if in grisly mockery—the figure of
a big man—clad in coarse seaman’s rig, now
falling to powder; sea boots upon his legs;
gieat earrings of gold in his shrivelled ears;
and a bangle of corroded green metal about his
wrist. And in the bare bony fingers of his
right hand lay a great knife with an ivory handle,


telling, it seemed, that he had purposed all those
years before to kill him who sat at the table s
head with the book before him. A brazier con-
taining a grey ash and blackened fragments of
charcoal, and an infernal reek of sickly spices,
seemed to tell how the Spaniard in the blue coat
had come to his end, and why the bodies had
not rotted years before, and why the foul
gas had poured out at us from the sealed
cabin.
It had been a rich place ; it was a rich place
still. It had fragments of blue and gold tapestry
hanging by the windows, and blowing away like
ash flakes ; it had a deep blue cushioned couch
set in the wall. It was lined with panels of
rosewood —painted yet in parts, some of them,
with little golden suns, and twisted fish of
azure and vermilion. IBooks and decaying
things lay on the cabin floor ; a broken goblet
of green glass ; a huge flagon of silver chased
with figures of men and monsters, all blue-
black with age. Opposite to the couch was a
large chest of a black wood, bound with grey
strips of metal and studded with brass, and
inset in places with little suns and figures of
silver —much as the Eastern chest that was in
my father’s house on Wild Dog Island. Look-
ing in, we for a time said not a word —I, awed,


for the sight of the dead figures, for I had
never looked on death before, and Roddy star-
ing wide eyed, and pale faced.
Years ago, I muttered, looking down on
the mouldering skeleton by my feet; “ done to
death years ago ! And lying there all this
time ! ”
“ I wonder who they were ? ” said Roddy.
I suppose they left the ship’s log or some
papers to tell what ship it was, and where they
came from.”
“ A Spanish galleon,” I affirmed. “ There’s
a picture of a Spanish galleon in a history book
of my father’s. She’s built just like this ship
—one of the galleons of the Armada. This ship
may have come from Peru. My father said the
Spaniards sailed this way sometimes—hundreds
of years ago. She may have great treasure
aboard—lnca’s treasure.”
And what became, I’m wondering,” he said,
of the rest of the crew ? ”
“ Got aw r ay by boat, belike ”
“ And left those two here—eh ? ”
We 11 have a look round the island pre-
sently. Maybe we’ll find some traces of them.
But first of all I’m going to have a look at
what’s in that chest.”
We passed round the table then ; and my


foot struck suddenly against an ancient ink
horn, set in silver props like claws. A feather-
less quill, I noticed too, was stuck among the
pages of the book. Beneath the table I marked
some scattered sheets of parchment. Stoop-
ing, I picked them up, and held them to the light.
They had been inscribed in curious characters
in ink, but they were mouldering, and the ink
had faded almost away. No letters were dis-
cernible, so that if they bore the story of the
galleon and the fate of its master and crew,
they must be silent for ever.
We set fingers then on the black chest. A
curious key remained still in the lock; but it
was not turned, and we lifted the heavy lid
without difficulty, though it broke away in our
hands. And then we started back for the
sudden blaze of colours that came forth ; and
the sickly reek of spices that smote our nostrils
vilely. The chest was about three parts full of
little leather bags, one or two burst open, and re-
vealing stones that were blood red as the summer
sunset, and blue as the summer sea, and green
as the spring. There was a curious collar of
gold, stamped all with tiny suns ; and the rays
of each sun bore a little shining red gem, and
the disc of each sun was set with a milk-
white pearl. There was a rosary with a


crucifix of heavy yellow gold, and each bead of
yellow gold; a dagger with the haft ablaze
with little blue jewels that I took to be sap-
phires, like the other uncut gems. Rubies and
emeralds and sapphires ; gold in the bags, in
tiny nuggets, in dust; gold in solid ingots be-
neath the upper layer of skin bags; and little
packages of spices.
“ Roddy,” gasped I, “ there’s a king’s ransom
here in the box. Rubies—the blood-red stones
are rubies, and the blue stones sapphires ; and
the green are emeralds—l think. Roddy, it’s
all ours —if we get away safely ! ”
For the space of a quarter-hour or more we
would not leave the jewels. We lifted some of
the bursting bags on to the cabin table, and
poured out the glittering stones, and the golden
knobs and dust. We ran our fingers through
our treasure. We held up the red and blue
jewels against the light, so that they shone like
little lamps. We dragged ourselves away with
difficulty, I only taking the dagger and Roddy
the rusty Toledan rapier from the table. Truly
for all our youth the lust of this wealth was on
us—the very lust that had destroyed the lives
of the two figures in the cabin, and mayhap
many an Indian and soldier and sea dog of
Spain. Glancing at the seated Spaniard fear-


fully, as we passed out into the air, it seemed to
me that his jaws grinned at me, and that his
dead eyes gleamed from their cavernous sockets.
The air was sweet and fresh after the foul
gases, and the reek of spices in the cabin ; and
we drew it in in great gulps. Oppressed for
awhile as by some sinister influence of the
spectres in the cabin, we said scarce a word, but
peered back nervously, and paused faltering
awhile.
I said at last, “ Shall we have a look what’s
up in that tower in the stern of the ship ? Or
have you had enough of it ? I’m feeling a bit
sick ”
He answered, “ We may as well have a look
first, I suppose,”
In silence then we climbed over the decaying
deck ; it crumbled at times perilously beneath
our feet ; and it was foul with dead fish, and
the litter of the sea birds, that flew up at our
coming. We picked our way by the wreckage
of the mainmast, and came to the foot of an
iron ladder leading up into the high turret. We
nigh trod upon the dust of a grim thing lying
at its very foot —the outline of the skeleton of
a man, flesh and clothing long since vanished,
and yellow skull and bones grown into the rot-
ting decks, with two corroded rings of metal


marking where the ears had been. Stuck in the
deck still like a nail was the rusted blade of a
sword, hilt and haft broken away. Shuddering
at the sight we climbed up the ladder to the
narrow slip of upper deck; and looked in by
the open door of the round house. The door
had rotted from the hinges. The glass was gone
from the windows. All was littered and be-
spattered by the sea-fowl. The dust of three
skeletons rotted by the table, which had de-
cayed and fallen ; a rusted pistol was lying by
the door, and the head of an axe. There was
no shred of cloth left in the place ; the sea
chests and the bins were broken open and
seemed empty. The panels of the walls had
peeled away, and the woodwork was rotten,
and pierced, and it creaked at our footsteps.
Sick for the sight and the reek of fish that
accorded with the spirit of death upon the dead
galleon, I had no thought then save to leave
the vessel. I gasped to Roddy, “ Let’s get out
of this vile place ! All the gold and jewels in it
won’t make up for it, if we die on the island.
We’ve got to get off somehow! Let’s get
away ! ”
Instantly then w r e scrambled down the ladder
and across the deck. The sea fowl screamed
resentfully, as if they had been the wraiths of
4*


the dead Spaniards. We scurried from the ship,
and, climbing down the ladder, dropped to the
sand below. All the lust of wealth had gone
out of us. The sight of death weighed our
spirits down. My one thought—l take it
Roddy’s too —was to escape from the dreadful
crater, and, climbing to the heights of No Man’s
Island, discover what hope we had of rescue.


CHAPTER XIII
THE MYSTERY OF THE SEA BELL
The sand impeded our passage to the cliffs. It
shrilled and tinkled, as if enchanted, and the
little puffs of air sounded musically across it.
It was so soft and packed so lightly that we
sank to our knees in it at every step we took.
The sun blazed down upon our bare heads,
blistering our skin. The sea birds wheeled and
clamoured over us. Thus it must have been
nigh an hour, ere we dragged our weary limbs
from the galleon to the flat terraces of rock that
lay beneath the cliffs. Looking back as we
rested once, toward the space through which
the galleon had been sw r ept by the waves, I saw
that the way had once been open, but with the
wash of rain the cliffs had fallen in, and great
loose masses of rock lay tumbled loosely to-
gether to form the roof of the tunnel through
which we had passed.
Coming at last to the terraces, we fell down


and rested for very weariness, saying nothing,
but gasping, and sweating, and sick for the
blazing sun that smote down directly into the
crater. The rocks went up sheer to the height
of two hundred feet. No foothold showed, and,
looking about us, we could perceive no means
of escape from the prison, save by the tunnel
through which we had entered. We heard the
sea still thundering into it afar, and still the
puffs of air came tinkling across the sand and
dead sea shell.
At last, muttering to Roddy, “ We must get
on and see if there’s a way out ! ” 1 staggered
to my feet, and moved slowly round under the
cliffs, seeking a means of scaling the cliff, he
limping after. So for the space of a quarter of
an hour or more we continued our search. The
beat of the sun made me dizzy ; I parched for
water ; my tongue seemed glued to the roof of
my mouth. My lips cracked ; and my eyes
were smarting with salt and dazzled with the
vellow glare of the sun on the sands. Afar the
galleon seemed to flicker through a thin grey
smoke.
And then we came to a point where the face
of the cliff was broken. By the long wash of the
rain the side of the rock had cracked and parted
in great masses; and slid down, forming a


steep ascent, that, though perilous, might yet
be scaled. Above us I marked a fringe of grey-
green grass, and long ropes of creepers swinging
from the cliff. In silence still, for we were
wearied out, we commenced blindly to scale
the face of the cliff. The sea fowl were nesting
in the crevices of the rocks, and rose up startled,
till the air was rent with their shrieks and the
beat of their wings. Hugging the face of the
rock we climbed slowly, I going first, Roderick
at my heels. At times a rock would part, and
go dow r n with a sweep and rattle of rubble,
whereat the outcry of the sea fowl would be
redoubled. The time that we spent in the ascent
seemed infinite. The sweat fell from me in
trickles ; and thirst consumed me like a fever.
Yet we climbed without pause, not looking
down, for the sight must have made us dizzy.
At last a long green rope of creepers smote my
face ; I plucked at it, and found it firm enough
to bear my weight. Gripping the creepers then,
we scaled the last space of the cliff, until we
were upon its very edge ; and it seemed that
the green cap of the island swam up to meet us.
My senses reeled, and I fell forward on my face
on the very edge of the cliff, and Roddy tumbled
by my side.
I know not how long we lay there, the two


of us —sick and dazed and gasping. The sun
smote down upon our bodies pitilessly. But at
last I sat up, and found Roddy lying by my
side ; and at my touch he stirred, and together
we sat silently looking out dimly on the island.
We were on a wide green ledge, broken with
jutting pillars of rock, through which the blue
of the sea shone dazzling. At about a mile
away I made out Wild Dog Island stretching
below us ; and I could mark the very curl of
smoke blown from the chimney of Jeremy’s hut; —
ay, and I could mark, too, the great fang, the
Dog’s Tooth, and the lines of broken water that
rolled between the reefs, lying between us and
the island.
We rested in a tangle of green grass and rushes
many feet above the sea. No Man’s Island, I
made out, was many miles in extent. To my
left I could perceive a scrub of w'attles and
stunted gums, where the heights descended to
the lower ground ; but all about the island
was broken water, and the thunder of the surf,
creaming upon the rocks, came to us without
cease. Dazzling blue sea, rocks of white and
orange colour —they swam and flickered in the
heat that fevered my brows ; and I felt that
if I did not find water, I must go mad of the
thirst. But the rain that had fallen in the


night was all dried up with the blaze of the
sun. I staggered to my feet, and, motioning to
Roddy to follow me, I crept forward through
the rocks that stood up in a circle about us
like a ruined temple. And suddenly I heard
the stroke of the bell that had sounded to me
across the water so many nights on Wild Dog
Island. It was nigh at hand. Its voice was
loud and clear. It guided our footsteps in-
stantly ; and emerging from the circle of rocks
I perceived it suddenly. It rested on a great
bar of iron that its weight had bent; set upon
two round stones. It swung slowly, as if its
clapper were plucked by ghostly fingers; gather-
ing momentum until the clapper struck against
its side, and it gave out its sound. It was a
huge ship’s bell of copper, green and corroded
with years. I perceived, as I stood beneath it,
that it was adjusted cunningly upon two rocking-
stones, that rolled very slowly. The wearing of
the iron had cut great grooves in the basalt, so
that the bar on which the bell rested had sunk
down gradually till the rim almost touched the
ground. I perceived that it was so adjusted
that it would catch fully the wind coming
singing up over the cliffs, and, on nights of
storm, when the gale rode tempestuous, it
would ring loudly. I took it that it had been


hauled up with ropes from the galleon, by the
shipwrecked sailors, and that it hung there as
a signal, that might warn a passing ship —if,
indeed, any should come into the uncharted seas
those centuries ago —that men were on the
island. If there had been another signal—a
flag, a sail, or a garment set on a staff —it had
vanished long ago; but still the bell hung
upon the rocks, when all the galleon’s crew
were dead and gone ; and still it rang like a
ghost of a ship’s bell on nights of storm.
The breeze blowing up freshly from the sea
revived us somewhat. But still we were parched
with thirst, and had no heart for speaking or
for aught, save to find water. We left the bell,
therefore, and commenced painfully to move
from the green cap of the island down towards
a tangle of scrub that should cloak the running
of a stream. A gully of green foliage lay
between the cliff on wdiich the bell w'as set, and
a yet higher cliff, mounting to the east to a
thin, glistening pinnacle.


CHAPTER XIV
THE SAND DUNES
The way was easy now. We went down by a
grassy slope, burrowed by the puffins for their
nests. We saw no sign of water, nor any trace
of the vanished occupants of the island. We
passed speedily into a waste of sand, bound
lightly by grasses with vivid blades edged like
razors, and by bracken fern. We lost sight
of the sea, as we entered a narrow defile—sand
piled against the base of the cliffs to our left,
great hills of sand to the right, as blown up
from the sea. We passed down to the bottom
of the defile, for it resembled the dry bed of a
stream, and I hoped that in it we might find
a pool of water. But, save for the grass, the
fern, and clumps of a reddish-brown bush, the
bed was dead and dry. Fragments of decaying
sea shells—oysters and mussels—glistened on
the sand ; and a few bleached pebbles lay at
intervals. Lizards, grey and blue, quivered in


the sun ; and, starting at our coming, vanished
like streaks of light; and once a great snake
passed hissing in a very line of flame. The
sea birds called from the cliffs high over our
heads; but there were none in the sand dunes.
Flies assailed us in swarms, one bush was like
a green jewel with tiny beetles ; and swallows
flittered twittering before us. The sun struck
down directly into the dead stream bed ; the
sand seemed molten, and all things flickered in
waves of heat. The way to the scrub became
more desolate; the ferns and grass vanished;
and there was nothing to bind the sand save
the red brush. We went on for about a quarter
of a mile, ere I turned to look back at Roddy.
He came plodding after —-weaker than I from
his bruises and the exposure of the night before.
His eyes seemed filmy and glassy to me ; his
face was burnt brick-red, and his breath came
in gasps from his parted lips.
“ Roddy,” cried I, “ can you go any further ? ”
“Of course I can,” he muttered bravely.
“ I’m going to find water, not stay here and
parch.”
“ But you look deucedly sick, man.”
“ Not sicker than you ! ” he answered, with a
sudden feverish burst of anger. “If you can
do it, I can.”


But for all his brave words, I saw that his
strength was cruelly overtaxed. I went to his
side at once, and took his arm, and led him on.
We were moving down all this time toward
the scrub that should cloak a creek. The sand
was stained with iron in little pits, that once
had held water. The ground seemed damper,
for the ferns and rushes reappeared, and their
green was painted by patches of crimson heath
and clumps of monkey plants of gold, mottled
with brown. Little blue wrens flew from bush
to bush before us, and many musical voices
sounded ahead. The dead stream bed winding
suddenly brought us to the very fringe of the
scrub, which rose before us like a green wall,
I saw that it was a dense tangle of wattles,
thorns, and dwarfed lightwood; but the stream
bed seemed to pierce its depths; and I had
hopes that we might not find it impenetrable,
and that within it we might speedily discover
water. The shade of the scrub was merciful
after the yellow glare of the sand dunes. It
revived us both ; and we had strength enough
to force our way down the stream bed into the
depths beneath the trees, despite the thorns
that caught our garments and tore our flesh.
The place was all alive with tiny birds. At
times the density was broken with little open


patches, that were painted with the blood and
gold colours of the heath and the orchids. The
air was rent with the shrilling of insects ; and,
despite the shade, was thick with heat, though
we w T ere spared the blaze of the sun as on the
sand dunes; and no breeze came. Panting
and sweating, we struggled on, buoyed up only
by the thought of water.
It seemed that long ago the Spanish sailors
from the galleon had come that way. Lying on
the dead white rocks of the creek bed, I found a
little cup of brass, corroded, but still whole.
I picked it up, and showed it to Roddy, saying,
“ That shows there’s been water here once, at
any rate, doesn’t it ? ”
He said not a word in answer, but he nodded.
His breath coming in gasps alarmed me, and I
pushed on. I judged that long ago the scrub
had been cut through by the sailors; and that
it had grown back since; still for the most
part the w r ay was open, and we had little diffi-
culty in climbing down the cliff bed. Yet, so
broken and weary were we, that it seemed that
the w r ay would never end ; and that we should
perish of thirst, after having escaped the perils
of the sea. But suddenly I fancied that nigh
at hand I heard a tinkle, resembling the wind
passing over the sands about the galleon. I


paused an instant, and, hearing it more clearly
defined, I screamed out to Roddy, “ Water —
there’s water nigh,” and then raced forward.
And so I found it.
It was in the very heart of a little ring of
green grass, shut in by the tangle of scrub. It
was at the intersection of the dead creek bed
with the stream that came tumbling down from
the higher ground above the scrub. The water
flowing over the pebbles collected in a great jar
of earthenware, now three parts filled with silver
sand, but still containing enough for me to
dip up the bronze cup full for Roddy. For
myself, I knelt down by the bowl that the
Spanish seamen had placed there all those long
years ago, and lapped the water like a dog.


CHAPTER XV
THE VOICES AND THE FOOTSTEPS
The draughts of sweet cold water gave new life
to us ; but we were wearied out from the long
march and the terror through which we had
passed. Therefore we lay for a time resting in
silence on the strip of green turf by the stream,
and hearing it sing its way down to the sea;
and all about us rose the wall of green. Save
for the twitter of the birds there was no clear
sound ; the surf breaking upon the shore below
us was nigh shut out, and resembled only the
dull passing of the wind afar. The light leaked
in through the green roof above us in bars of
yellow gold.
It may be that the comparative silence and
the seclusion of the place oppressed me, or the
Indiaman’s fate on the preceding night ;or
the melancholy thoughts that my uncle had
aroused in me; or sheer physical weariness


from the sufferings of the morning. This much
I know, that over me crept presently a sense
of chill and gloom, as if the place itself inspired
it. The surge of the sea below was burdened
with melancholy. The notes of the birds were
like so many voices speaking thinly in the
scrub. The golden bars of light paled, as
though the sun was passing behind a cloud.
The place became a dull green—a green dark-
ness. I felt as if it were haunted by the spirits
of the dead mariners; and, peering fearfully
forward, while Roddy lay at my side asleep for
sheer weariness, I believed that I could hear
footsteps coming down the way that we had
come. I thought to see them in ghostly file
bearing beakers for the water—black, bearded
men in seamen’s rig; coloured and spotted
swathes about their heads; rings of metal
jingling in their ears ; high sea boots on their
legs. Assuredly the scrub grew silent, save for
the shuffle of their footsteps, and the low mutter
of their voices.
I was overwrought. I could not lie silently
and rest. I gripped Roddy’s shoulder, and
starting up, I cried, “ Come on ! Let’s get out
of this place! It’s haunted by the seamen
from the galleon ! ”
He muttered drowsily that he would stay


there and rest, till, more fully awake, he noticed
my scared face, and grinned at me.
“ Ghosts, eh ? ” he said. “So you’re scared
of ghosts ! ”
“ Roddy,” I muttered, “ I know I’m a fool.
But there’s something about this place. Some-
thing evil —like there was aboard the galleon.
Roddy, there may have been murder done here.
Listen, you can hear the footsteps ! ”
He had ceased to grin. I saw his face pale
suddenly, as he listened. I saw him lean
forward, his fingers on the hilt of the rapier-
gripping it, even as I gripped the jewelled
dagger. The very birds had ceased to pipe ;
but the footsteps shuffled, and the voices mut-
tered. Instantly we leaped to our feet, and
taking to our heels we ran down the green tunnel
that seemed to lead to the sea. To my dis-
turbed brain it seemed that the voices cried
out after us —lifeless voices without emotion;
yet voices—and that footsteps came pattering.
To this hour I cannot guess the explanation,
save that a current of air pierced the tunnel,
and stirred the sands, and gave whispering
voices to the leaves. I only remember that I
was shaking with terror, and that Roddy was
as scared as I, while we ran on. The thorns
tore our flesh, and ripped our garments. The


path grew so narrow, and. so much overgrown,
that we were compelled presently to drop upon
our knees, and wriggle through the dead under-
growth. We dreaded lest we move upon some
venomous reptile in the dead leaves ; yet the
murmur of the voices about the stream seemed
the greater peril. We were crawling now like
two serpents upon our bellies—so dense was the
scrub about us. At times we were caught in
brambles, and held, as if beyond the power of
ever extricating ourselves. We must have
spent nigh an hour in wriggling up the dry
tunnel —for the stream had long since dis-
appeared into the ground, and the hill slope
constantly ascended. The murmurs about the
watering place had died out —there was no
sound save of our passage through the scrub,
and, if we paused awhile to breathe, the sullen
murmur of the sea.
The scrub was slowly opening out. We could
stand upon our feet once more. The light came
in dazzling, and nigh blinded us, so that we were
compelled to go on with downcast eyes. The
turf was green beneath our feet again, save where
the heaths stained it with blood colour and
the orchids were blue or orange. The scrub
gave place to an avenue of tree ferns, standing
ups traight like palms, their trunks of ochre


brown, the fans of their leaves and their croziers
yet to unfold, as if cut from emerald. The
ground was spongy under our feet; and the
blazing sun made the place steam as with a
tropical heat. The sweat fell from us in thick
drops, and our thirst returned. The birds
darted from fern to fern before us like streaks
of flame colour, or of azure blue. My feet sank
at last into soft mud, and brown water filled
the hollow instantly. We knelt down, and
pressing back the rotting fern trunks, we lapped
up the water ; but it was tainted with decay,
and sickened us. We did not stay to rest,
thinking only to gain the seashore, and hoping
that there we might find the means of attracting
my father and the rest on Wild Dog, so that
our rescue from the island might be accom-
plished. Therefore we went on steadily among
the ferns —at times sinking to our knees in the
soft mud, and having great difficulty in pulling
ourselves out. Still we covered the treacherous
boggy place, and made our way gradually up
to the higher ground. The tree ferns gave
place to wattles and stunted gums, and the
spongy turf to stone that rang beneath our
feet. And presently we came beneath cliffs of
sandstone, going fifty feet above us. The
water splashed down from the rocks like rain,


and the face of the cliff was bearded with green
moss and ferns. Still the ascent of the cliff
was easy, for it had broken away in places, and
the fallen stone was bound with a tangle of
roots that formed a ladder for us. Gasping, we
drew ourselves up, and surmounting the edge we
found that we were immediately below the
highest point of No Man’s Island—the white
cone that I had noticed from the cliffs on which
the bell hung. The wind had almost died under
the heat; and a grey haze was drawn like a
veil over the sea. I could descry Wild Dog
Island dimly. I could make out the line of
pillars of rock, that had one time united it
to No Man’s. The sea boiled through them now
with thundering noise, and clouds of spray;
but thence the Straits lay open. On the other
hand we looked down from a sheer cliff to the
shores of No Man’s Island that had been pre-
viously hidden from us. The cone, that formed
the highest point of all the cliffs, descended
sheer into the sea. In the opposite direction
it seemed the lower cliffs extended for the
space of half a mile ; but beyond that they
descended abruptly into a wide bay, the sands
glistening in a silver semicircle about it; and
the spray leaping over reefs which guarded the
entrance.


120 The Voices and the Footsteps
Then we looked down on the scrub through
which we had come. The haze lay over it —
ghostly. It stirred at times drowsily with the
quivering air. The foliage was all a deep green,
unbroken —a deep cloud of green, caught in the
haunted place.


CHAPTER XVI
NIGHT ON NO MAN’S ISLAND
“ Roddy,” cried I, turning to him, as he lay
at my feet j it looks as if we’d never get
out of this place. No boat could come from
Wild Dog.”
“It serves no purpose waiting here,” he
answered. “ Let’s get down to the shore, if
we can, at any rate. It’s getting late— about
three o’clock, I should fancy. It looks as if
the water was pretty clear down in that bay.
Has any one ever reached the island that
way ? ”
“ in our time on Wild Dog. My father
and Jeremy dreaded the current too much.”
“There may be a chance of their landing
there. But we ought to give them a signal to
let them know we’re here. If we could only
make a fire. That scrub down there would be
m a blaze in a minute. That would show them
we’re here.”


“ Get some of that rotten wood, and break it
up,” I answered. “ I’ve got flint and steel and
tinder-box here in my pocket. I stuck them
there last night, when I lit the fire.”
“That’s lucky,” he said, laughing a little.
“ We’ll have such a blaze as will scorch the
ghosts out of that hollow, anyway.”
He set himself to collecting dry sticks, and
grinding them into powder. I struck the spark,
ignited the tinder; and, puffing at the tiny
pile of matchwood, presently had it ablaze.
Roddy had climbed a little way down the cliff,
and returned presently with a bundle of fern
leaves. Igniting them in the fire, we dropped
the blazing masses over the cliff into the scrub
below, and the fem leaves, falling like torches
into the dead brush, kindled it instantly. The
place broke into flame that leaped up the side
of the cliffs, as if to scale them. It caught the
great masses of parasitic creepers; it licked
away the fern leaves ; it sent the smoke up like
a cloud. Choking and gasping we drew away,
and, knowing that we had kindled such a signal
as must be seen from Wild Dog, we commenced
to pick our way down the cone of rock to the
terraces of the cliff below. The way was not
difficult. We were tramping presently over the
hot, sun-baked cliffs descending terrace by


terrace towards the bay. Turning back at
times, we saw the pillar of smoke ascending
mightier and mightier still, and heard the roar
of the fire, that now resounded more loudly
than the drums of the sea beaten at the bases
of the cliffs. Ere an hour was passed we had
reached the last terrace. The sun was com-
mencing to descend into the west. The smoke
made the haze thicker, and the disc of the sun
was becoming red and angry; but the bay
below was a dazzling, glittering blue, and the
sands formed a half-moon of silver. There was
a line of reefs across the mouth, and the sea
rolled upon it in foam ; still the line of waters
was not complete, and it seemed to me that a
passage ran between the reefs that, save in time
of storm, should afford the way for a boat.
And I marked with rejoicing that there was a
litter of wreckage on the beach, sucked in, I
took it, from the Indiaman—barrels floating,
and stranded spars and ropes. There should be
the material for a raft, and we should be able
to float out from the island, if the passage
between the reefs were clear, when the sea
went down.
The way to the beach presented no further
difficulties to us ; and it was well, for we were
worn out with our tramp, and sick with hunger.


Our thirst came back to us, and vve had only
a little drop of water in the bronze cup which I
had caught from the face of the ferny rock, and
which we proposed to save lest we found no
water near the shore. The last terrace de-
scended easily to the beach. It was all agleam
with silver sand and many coloured shells, and
patches of purple and saffron and green sea-
weed —ay, and it was littered in places with a
tangle of wreckage, and broken food from the
wreck. No bodies of the drowned —I rejoiced
that there were no bodies of the drowned.
Spars, and ropes, and planks, and barrels for
a raft; brine-sodden biscuit for food in plenty;
if we but found water, we should be secure for
the night ; and at dawn of the following day
we might set about building a raft to float off
No Man’s Island. Famished, we snatched up
some of the sodden biscuit and swallowed it for
all its salt; and we were compelled to drink
the last drop of water, to stay our thirst. That
gave us heart; and seeing that the beach shelved
gently, and there was no danger of undertow, I
called to Roddy, strolling along the beach and
searching the broken wreckage, “ Come in for
a swim. It’ll set us up again,” and I flung off
my garments, and made for the sea. It was
joyous to splash in the chill water after the


heat of the day. He following me, we lay in
the warm shallows and let the surf break over
us —until refreshed we made our way back to
the beach. We dressed, save for our shoes and
stockings ; and, filling our pockets with biscuit,
we commenced to walk barefooted along the
shore.
It was now late afternoon. The sun was a
vast stain of blood in the clouding west, and the
responsive sea was blood-colour. The very
gulls wheeling out over the waters were tinged
with the red reflection. The silver sand extended
for about half a mile to high sandstone cliffs ;
the beach was fringed with rushes and a scrub
of ti-tree, loaded with its pink and white
scented blossoms. Beyond the ti-tree the thicker
scrub stood like an impenetrable wall pamted
green, and shutting us in. The fire yet blazed
afar, and the smoke rose densely above the
cliffs. At first I took it that by now my father,
and my uncle, and Jeremy Otter had put off
in the sailing boat, seeking an approach to No
Man’s Island ; but, remembering then its grim
repute with us, I knew well that the current
would deter them from approaching the island
so late, and that they would not put out far,
nor seek to come about it to the lower shore
that night. We must be content therefore to
5


remain on the island till the morning; and, with
the thought of the voices and the footsteps about
the crystal spring, I dreaded indeed the coming
of darkness. We left the sand at last, and,
pulling our boots on our blistered feet, we
commenced to pick our way over the rocks below
the cliffs. Pools of salt water gathered in the
terraces as in tanks, and we found therein an
abundance of oysters and mussels. I pulled
my kerchief from my neck, and dragged a
sufficiency of shell fish from the rocks and filled
it, so that we might have them for the evening
meal. But now our one thought was water.
Fate played for us, for at one break in the
rocks, where the green grass and shrubs de-
scended over the edge, a little stream fell; and
gathered in a pool. We drank our fill rejoiced,
resolving to pitch our camp nigh the stream
for the night, if we could find a crevice in the
rocks that would give us shelter. We climbed
over the ledge that broke the terrace, and were
faced suddenly with the wide arch of a great
cave. It pierced the sandstone walls nigh to
the very edge of the cliff, and ropes of creeper
hung over it. It was very deep, I could per-
ceive, and would give ample shelter. The
Spaniards had been there, for, at one point
where the terraces were broken and the wash


of the sea came in, I marked a rustincr iron
ring let into the stone, with lead poured about
it to secure it there, so as to hold a boat. We
went into the entrance of the cave then, and
suddenly Roddy gripped my arm, and crying,
“ Look ! ” pointed to the wall.
The white sandstone had been daubed with
pigments, that, though dull with the years, still
revealed their purpose. There was a crude
picture of men —twenty figures or more
Spaniards in mail, bearing each his arquebus
and rapier, and Indians limned in charcoal and
having feathers on their heads, daubed with
crimson and blue. There was the picture of a
ship at sea a great galleon breaking upon a
reef; there were many curious letters nigh
blotted out with the decaying of the sandstone
wall; there were figures of Spaniards contesting
together. And set amid them all was a big
crimson cross, standing out like a smear of
blood upon the wall !
We moved yet deeper into the cave. But our
feet struck suddenly upon rattling bone and
jingling metal, and, marking the dread shape
lying there, I shuddered and turned sick, and
gripping Roddy’s arm, I cried out, “ Let’s get
out, I can t endure this place ! ” X scurried
forth, with him at my heels. My mind was


filled once more with a picture of the treasure
ship, manned by its Spanish crew of venturers,
come sailing from the Americas, and crossing
unknown seas, seeking ever new empire and
new lands of sun and gold for His Christian
Majesty of Spain. All these leagues from golden
Callao, or Vera Cruz; all these leagues to
founder in this desert place ; to madden and
to slay for the lust of the glittering rubies and
sapphires and yellow gold —and all to die. I
took it from the iron ring that they had had a
boat; and that some part of them had laden
it with treasure, and then put to sea —to perish.
So to this day the isle of death was haunted,
and no man might dwell in it. The wind
moaned about the cave like a ghost; the
creepers waved funereally; the sea fowl
screamed; and ever the eternal sea sobbed
and moaned in the deep pot holes as it came
rolling in. The red glow of the west was
vanishing. A grey haze was over the sea.
Afar the fire that we had kindled flung out its
scarlet banners against the dusk. Speeding
back in terror from the cave, and depressed with
the fatigues and perils of the day, we leaped
across the stream —pausing only to drink deeply
that we might not thirst again. We drew away
from the beach then into an open space sheltered


with ti-tree. We gathered a great pile of dead
brush and a few spars, and built our fire. We
roasted mussels and dried the sodden biscuit,
and with them, and the oysters, we fared well.
Wearily then we lay together on a couch of
ti-tree boughs nigh the fire, talking in low voices
of all we had passed through that day ; and of
our purpose on the morrow to build a raft and
seek to escape from No Man’s Island.
And now the darkness was come. The stars
were pale ; and the clouded vault of heaven
was haunted by the ghost of a wan moon. About
us the isle seemed all astir; —there were moaning
voices coming up from the sea ; voices in the
scrub, footsteps and shufflings in the sands
about us. Fearfully we piled high the fire,
and gripped the weapons we had taken from
the galleon. And yet, ere I dropped from sheer
weariness to sleep, it seemed to me that the
ghosts of the Spaniards had gathered in a circle
about us, and muttered vengefully that w r e
had stolen treasure from the keeping of the
dead upon the galleon.


CHAPTER XVII
WE ESCAPE FROM NO MAN’S ISLAND
The weariness of my body meant merciful rest
to me. I slept without dreaming, until the
dawn was on the isle. When I woke the fire
had burnt down to a few coals ; and I was very
chill. Roddy yet slumbered by my side; and
without rousing him I rose stiffly to my feet,
and built the fire into a cheering blaze. The
dew that had fallen in the night was on my
garments, and I was steaming speedily, as if
I had been drenched with the sea. The dew
weighted down the branches of the ti-tree in
the scrub about us. The skies above us were
a great bowl of pearl grey, but the light of the
rising sun already illumined the east. I moved
away from the camp fire presently; and walked
through the belt of scrub towards the shore.
The tide was high, and as yet the thin line of
sand made a bar of bone-white against the pale


grey of the sea. The day should be fair and
the sea calm, for there was no breeze, and only
the surf broke dully on the bar across the bay.
Standing there in the chill of the dawn I pon-
dered deeply over the events of the previous
day, and of the night that had preceded it.
All the dullness wherein I had dwelt so many
years with my father on Wild Dog Island had
passed in a whirl of adventure. My mind was
filled with the lively personality of my Uncle
James, and fired with the picture that he had
painted for me of London ; with the thought
of my mother-awaiting my father and me.
The loveliest lady in all England—snow white,
blue-eyed, and golden-haired—l had the memory
of her face before me now ! The memory—or
was it but an image that my uncle’s silver tongue
had conjured up; and did the fair, engaging
vision take the place of memory ? To see her ;
to love her and to be loved ! To know that
the drear, stern life upon Wild Dog Island was
at an end, and that my father and she were
reconciled, and that we were rich ; and happi-
ness lay before us all. My uncle had tempted
me, failing my father’s relenting, to get away
from Wild Dog and make my own way home
to England. But well I knew that, unless mv
father would sail from the island with me I


would not leave him; for hard and stern with
me, he yet, I knew it, loved me ! Ay, and I
loved him for the manhood of him —for his very
contrast to my uncle, brilliant, engaging, false !
And what of our treasure lying on No Man’s
Island ? I had the dagger stuck in the leather
belt about my waist. I pulled it out, and
marked the blue fire that burnt in the jewels
in its hilt. Treasure —there was a king’s ransom
in the chest of gems and gold, that the dead
men guarded on the galleon. Ay, and what
secret store should be hidden on the vessel,
that we had not yet lighted on —what shields
of Peruvian gold, what uncut Brazilian gems,
what w r ealth of ingots ?
I found myself w’ondering curiously as to
the effect of our tale upon my father and my
uncle. My father w r ould care not a whit ; but
I could mark my uncle’s eyes dancing like the
sapphires in the hilt of the dagger. Blue eyes,
that would leap like the summer seas ; that
like the sea were treacherous and false and
covetous. Eyes with the beauty of the sea
in them ; eyes with the sea’s eternal menace !
To recover the Spanish hoard, I scarce believed
that my father would care to land on No Man’s ;
but for such a treasure I did believe that my
uncle w r ould peril readily the lives of all of us


—ay, and his own. But that lay in the fortune
of the day to come. It might be that we could
not escape from No Man’s Island. So far as
I could observe from our tramp over the island
on the previous day, there was no approach
save only through the perilous tunnel, into
which our boat had been sucked ; and no way
out through the circle of cliffs except by the
little open bay; and that was guarded by a
line of reefs. It might be that when we built
our raft, for which ample material lay at hand
in the wreckage of the Indiaman, we could
not float out through the passage. And failing
that, I did not believe that my father would
dare bring the boat to the shores of the dreaded
island.
Now the pearl grey was changed to a light
green; and the sea grew green from the line
of the sky. Watching, I saw the green die out
in turn for an indigo blue, that gradually became
purple, and, from purple, rose colour for the
coming of the sun. The sun rolled up over Wild
Dog afar like a wheel of scarlet fire; and all
the sea flamed responsive. As the crimson
gave place to a clear white light, and the sky
through the melting of the sea haze took on
a clear dazzling blue that was reflected in the
mirror of the ocean, all the sea birds woke on
5*


the rocks. The cliffs were clamorous with
their outcry. They flew out in clouds over
the waters, darting down for fish or broken
fragments of food yet floating in from the
wreck of the Indiaman. I moved down to
the strand, and picked up some pieces of broken
biscuit for our morning meal. I climbed over
the rocks and filled with w r ater a little tin can
that had been washed up by the sea. Returning
then to our camp, I found that Roderick Scorne
still lay asleep ; and, ere I roused him, I set
myself to stirring the fire into a blaze, and filling
a little hole with mussels left over from our
last night’s meal. I raked the charcoal over them,
that they might form our breakfast, and set
the biscuit to toast on a stone by the fire.
The sun was high now, and the glistening dew
was drying speedily on the ti-tree around us.
The isle was musical with the song of birds ; and
the blue wrens flitted like streaks of gossamer
through the scrub about us. The fire that
we had kindled had burnt out in the bush during
the night, and only a few thin spirals of smoke
arose afar from trees yet burning. I knew that
my father and the others on Wild Dog must
have perceived our signals, and I hoped that
they would endeavour that morning to sail
round to reach us. It was at least a consola-


tion to know that they must have realised from
the fire on No Man s Island that we were yet
alive, and that we had achieved the impos-
sible, as it had always seemed to us on Wild
Dog, and landed on No Man’s. The mussels
commenced to hiss and steam from under the
coals, and I roused Roddy. At the touch of
my hand upon his shoulder he started up, and
sat blinking at me.
“ You’re a lazy dog, Roddy,” said I. “ Here
have I been astir this hour or more and getting
breakfast, while you lay snoring there.”
“ Morning—hey ? ” said he, yawning. “ How
did you sleep, Dick ? Did you hear anything
during the night ? ”
“ A horrible sound,” said I, “ when I woke.”
“ Oh—what was it ? ”
“ Your snoring,” I answered, grinning. “ Gad,
Roddy, how you snore ! ”
“ Don’t be a fool,” growled he, a whit ill-
tempered for having been roused. “ I’ve been
dreaming half the night. Those Spaniard fel-
lows and what we saw on the wreck. That
poor devil in the cave. Dick, like you, I think
the isle’s haunted. I woke once or twice, and
seemed to hear them stirring in the scrub there.
And their voices muttering that we’d been steal-
ing. I didn t dare go to sleep again for a long


time. I’ll be dam’ glad to get away from the
place —won’t you ? ”
“ Yes —and to come back and clear out all
that gold and stuff.”
“Will you dare ? I’ve a queer sort of
notion, Dick, that there’s a curse on the place
and the coin ; and that we’ll never benefit a
penny piece from it. Not we, or any man.”
“ I’ll warrant,” I said laughing, though un-
easy for his confirmation of what I myself had
been feeling, “ that my uncle won’t feel the
same about it, and that he’ll never rest till he’s
cleared the treasures out of the galleon, and
any more that he can find. That is, if we get
off.”
“ Ay —if we ever do.”
“ You’re dull company this morning, Roddy.
Of course we’ll get off. We’ll build a raft after
breakfast, and float her out. It’ll be some
time before the mussels that I’ve got baking
there are cooked. Will you come and have a
swim before breakfast ? It’s a hot morning.”
He stood up and stretched himself, yawning
lazily at the effort. He drank a little water out
of the tin, and followed me down to the beach.
We stripped, and bathed, and dried us in the
sun ; and all the weariness went out of our
limbs, for the chill of the sea and the golden


heat of the morning. The sun rode glorious in
the heavens ; and the ocean was all a dazzling
blue. There was no sign yet of my father’s
boat off the island; so we returned to the fire,
and ate our fill of mussels and dried biscuit;
and, rested awhile in the sun, we made our
way again to the beach in search of materials
for the raft. The sand was littered with wreck-
age, and we chose presently four light spars;
and, cutting the cordage with our knives, we
bound them in the form of a square. In an
hour our raft lay at the water’s edge, light, yet
sound enough, I thought, to carry us. We
set up a slim spar for a mast, and affixed to
it our jackets, that they might form a makeshift
sail. Shaping then a couple of planks for
paddles, we filled the can and the little bronze
cup with water; flung into a small broken
tea-chest as much biscuit as we believed would
meet our needs, and pushed the raft off shore.
It floated lightly, and though, when we scrambled
on board it, it seemed that it would be over-
turned, it bore us easily enough, and, I did
believe, with reasonable fortune, we should find
the means of escaping through the reef and
getting out into the open waters of the Straits,
where, if we shouted loudly enough, my father
and the others on the isle would pick us up in


the sailing boat. It would have been far safer
for us, I knew well, to have remained on the
island till they sought to reach us; but w T e were
hot with the folly of youth, and were all anxious
to be aw r ay from the gloom and terror of No
Man’s Island. The beach shelved slowly, but
soon our raft, forced onward with our paddles,
was moving outwards towards the centre of
the reef. The seas were now comparatively
calm ; yet the surf still broke sullenly upon
the reefs. A clear line of water lay between
the reefs, and thither we steered our frail raft.
We went slowly now, for w T e were caught by
the w T aste of waters breaking over the rocks,
and sweeping in towards the beach. It seemed
that we would never make the opening.
Pulling vigorously at our long paddles, we
still moved slowly out without disaster. If we
were overturned w r e still could swim back to
shore. The raft rocked and bobbed like a
cork. It strained beneath our feet. The noise
of the surf was thunderous. We averted our
eyes from the terror of it, and centred all our
energies and attention on the clear passage
through w r hich the seas rolled slowly. The
spray splashed on us like rain, but w r e were
caught suddenly in a receding wave, and plucked
forward. We bent to the paddles, seeking to


hold the raft to the centre of the passage, and
to escape disaster from the yellow kelp-hung
rocks protruding on either hand like jaws to
crush us. The sea racing out bore us with it.
The waves washed over us, and swept away
the chest with our store of biscuit. Ere \ve
knew, we had been pulled through the opening
and were out on the heaving waters of the
Straits. The breeze coming stiffly filled our
makeshift sail, and while I tended it, tugging at
the ropes as the sail bellied out, Roddy steered
with his paddle. We moved out slowly then
from the island. My heart swelled with
thankfulness to Heaven, and my lips mur-
mured a prayer, that, having been preserved
so long from destruction, we might yet be
saved.
Within an hour we were well off the island.
We could not direct our course toward Wild
Dog, for the breeze, though light, was too strong
for us. The waves washed over us, and drenched
us to the skin; and the raft rode heavily under
us. I think that, had we not been perceived
then from M ild Dog Island, we must have been
blown out to sea and drowned, for the strained
raft would have slowly foundered under us.
But sudden over the water came the joyous
sound of my uncle’s laughter, and from behind


140 We Escape from No Mari's Island
the rocks of Wild Dog, skimmed like a white
sea bird towards us my father’s little boat. I
marked two figures in it—my father and my
uncle ; and still I heard the sound of my uncle’s
laughter. Our voices rang out then across the
water, “ Ahoy ! Ahoy ! ”


CHAPTER XVIII
STRING OF A FIDDLE
My uncle drew his bow over the strings of
Jeremy’s fiddle. My father sat glowering at
him from the other side of the hearth, while I
lounged against the black Eastern chest. Roddy
already lay abed —wearied out by his toils and
troubles of the last couple of days. I was
wearied, too, yet, my father not denying me, I
stayed up awhile to listen to my uncle, although
the hands of the clock crept on towards mid-
night.
Never had the personality of my uncle so
enthralled me as on that night. He had become
possessed of Jeremy’s little fiddle, from which
the man was wont to produce shrill squeakings ;
he had charmed it to give out magical airs, albeit
Jeremy had never made more than dismal
music out of it. He had told many a merry
tale and jest, with an infinite wit and point;
at times, pausing from the recounting of some
joyous adventure, he would fall to playing an


air that fitted curiously the spirit of the tale.
He told of London ; and I conjured up London,
with fine buck and lady fair to grace it. He
told of India ; and the strings stirred like the
palms, or sighed like lovers in the scented
dusk ; he told us of, and he tempted from the
fiddle, the haunting Eastern music that he had
heard. Of the relations in which he stood
with us he had uttered not a word, while Roddy
remained with us—indeed, I did observe from
his occasional questioning of Scorne that he
regarded him as a mere cabin boy, and fitter
company for Margaret and Jeremy Otter than
for ourselves. It needed, indeed, close per-
ception to understand the fineness of my uncle’s
sneer, and the condescension of his patronage ;
but I perceived Roddy wince under it, and for
the time I hated my uncle, until, by a sudden
change to grace and elegance and wit, he had
again enthralled my fancy. But for all his
patronage of Roderick, my father would have
the lad with us. I had told him Roddy’s story
during the day; and that weighed with him.
Roddy therefore took his place with us, and
not with Otter and his wife ; and I did believe
that the lift of my uncle’s brows, when Roddy
sat down with us, occasioned my father a
certain grim satisfaction.


I had marked from the time I stepped into
the boat that mom a change in my father.
He had made no sign of welcome, while my
uncle stretched out both hands to greet me.
He had said only in his hard, cold voice, “ So
you’re safe, boy; you took a foolish risk.”
Still there was a look in his eyes that I had not
thought to see there ; and I marked presently
that his hand was trembling. Yet, throughout
the day, while I had poured forth the story of
our adventures, and what we had found upon
the island, he had listened silently, while my
uncle fired to the tale ; and his eyes lit up as
the reflection of the sapphires. And now the
rapier with the hilt of ivory and gold, and the
dagger shining with the blue fires of sapphires,
lay on the table. The blades were all agleam,
for my uncle had set himself at polishing them,
and had succeeded by long labour in clearing
them of the rust, so that their steel under the
light burnt almost as the jewels.
I mark the pair now —my uncle dazzling in
white linen, blue jacket, strapped trousers, and
polished shoes—for, by joyous fortune, a chest
of his garments had been washed ashore;
indeed, I had a notion that he had directed his
man, drowned upon the Indiaman, to endeavour
to save it. No one had landed from the wreck,


save only my uncle and Roddy; and now my
uncle sat, finely dressed and shaven cleanly and
curled, facing my grim, dour father, and I
leaned against the chest and watched my uncle.
He had been all eagerness to induce my father
to make an endeavour that same afternoon to
reach the island by the bay whence we had
come, with the purpose of removing the treasure.
My father had refused; and my uncle, smiling
slightly, had said no word more. But well I
guessed his thoughts had fled for the time
from the idea of inducing my father to return
to London; and that his mind was burning
with desire of this treasure that Roddy and I
had described to them.
“ I take it to be the test of a musician or an
artist,” said my uncle sententiously as the bow
flitted across the strings, “ whether he be able
or not to conjure up a picture by his art. 1
am no musician and no artist ”
“ Why, you play finely,” said I; “ much
better than Jeremy ever did ! ”
He made me a little bow. “ For criticism,”
said he, “we must have a standard of com-
parison. You have your standard ; and you
measure me by it. But lam about to test my
skill, such as it is, in fiddling. Mark me now !
Rick here has filled my mind with pictures of


his galleon—the galleon that drew so deeply
that it sank for the very treasure in it. I’d
paint the picture for you, Rick ! I’d conjure
up by my music how she came, this red maho-
gany ship. I’d have her sailing from Peru on
an eve with a red sunset, the sky rose-red, the
seas like pomegranate flowers —on the seas a red
ship. Shall our galleon have a great red sail,
Rick ? Shall she be all red —as gold is red, or
as blood is red —blood that runs for gold ?
Mark you the figure-head—and the copper sun
aflame about its brows. And the robe beneath
its breasts all vermilion and gold. And this
red ship, how shall she be named ? After some
pale saint ? Nay, for from your story, Rick,
this crimson-lipped figure was fashioned from
no saintly image ”
His speech and the golden music of the
violin jarred suddenly, as my father dragged
back his chair from the hearth.
“ Nay, no saint, no nun withering in a cloister
like a ghost before her time ! But an Indian
maid, my Rick! Maybe an Inca’s daughter.
She should wear a circlet of gold, and jewels
should bloom like blossoms on her robe. And
her lips should be very red —even as the figure-
head’s lips were very red. Mark the decks of
the galleon, Rick—d’ye see your princess there ?


Do you descry her in her barbaric robes ; and
her barbaric gems, that beautify barbaric beauty?
Walks she by the side of your bearded Don,
that would play Spanish hidalgo upon his decks,
and has this golden rapier poking from under his
cloak ? And must leave seamanship to his
seamen ? That sound ? A red macaw screams
—a rose-red macaw, a gift for the King of
Spain, stuck upon a wooden perch with a gilt
chain about his legs. That motive is the
scent of spices, for the hold reeks with spices—
nutmegs and cinnamon ; and the scent comes
up through the decks, and mingles with the
salt tang of the sea. The seamen have no
thoughts of the sea. For there is a precious
treasure on board. There are rubies and
emeralds and sapphires locked in secret coffers ;
and the Don has the keys—this forked-bearded,
moustachioed Don in the blue cloak. And yet
the thought of the red, and green, and blue fire
of the gems comes forth as madness. The mind
of the seamen is lit with the thought of jew r els,
as an Eastern darkness with fireflies, or as the
blood-red lamp that bums on the ship by night,
and drips in blood-red light into the sea. The
Don has no thought save for the red-lipped
w'oman.”
Again my father dragged back his chair, and,


starting, I peered at him, and saw that his
brows were bent, and his eyes aflame, as he
stared upon my uncle. I listened yet enthralled ;
and still the golden voice went on, and the
sea wind in the sails of blood sang from the
fiddle strings ; and the red galleon floated out
upon the sea of fancy.
“ New Empires yet for His Majesty of Spain !
Good Spanish troopers aboard—a Spanish priest.
New Empires for the King of Spain—new realms
celestial and terrestrial for Rome. Bearded
arquebusiers, tonsured monk, black gown with
a golden rosary burning on neck and breast,
and an evil yellow ring upon his saintly finger.
Over seas, over seas —even as Cortes sailed over
seas. Day, and the sea blue and brushed with
silver ; evening, and the sea blue, but with a
thin leaf of gold floating upon it. Hark there !
The sailors’ song; and the wind growing in
the sails. The sea grown green, and green
is the colour of evil. The creaking of the yards ;
the hoarse commands; sail shortened; the
priest at prayer; the breeze dropping, as if it
seeks to hide for the terror of the tempest that
comes stalking over the waters, like a green
lion, ravenous, topaz-eyed—the sun’s green
light; the screech of the macaw ! ”
1 know not what music he drew from Jeremy’s


fiddle. I only know that, while the bow stirred,
I heard the sea roll up before the wind ; I only
know that for all the weakness of the few poor
strings—though he spoke nothing—he smote my
mind with a picture of terror, as of advancing
tempest, and of night falling like an ebon curtain
over the frothing waters. His voice rang out
suddenly.
“ Over seas —over seas. Still over seas ! Be-
fore the tempest, Rick, this galleon, blown miles
out of the track of all ships that ever sailed the
world. Colour gone from the lips of the figure-
head ; colours washed from the sail ! A track-
less sea, an unknown sea, a blotted night, with
the heavens all black; and the wind and the
sea ; the wind and the sea ! Our Don, sea-
washed and cursing; our priest, at prayer.
Before the wind still —on a sea where never a
ship yet sailed —having neither pale moon nor
sick stars wherewith to guide her course. Borne
into a night that has no end. Wind and wave !
Breakers ! Breakers ! The cry of the red-lipped
woman ! The screech of the macaw ! ”


CHAPTER XIX
AN OLD DANCE TUNE
I guessed well my uncle’s purpose. It was to
fire my father to join him in the treasure hunt
that he had planned. At this hour I understand
how my uncle came to misinterpret the manner
of man that my father had grown to be. I
know now that my father had loved him, when
he was a lad ; and that my uncle, having good
looks and a gallant winning way -with him, had
led him to his will. And even at this hour
upon the island —despite the bitter quarrel,
that had driven my father out of England those
years since—my uncle James believed that by
the exercise of his supreme arts he yet could
sway him to his wishes ; yet draw him by
his magic out of the seclusion of the island
For the time he had forgotten their kinsman’s
will, and the terms of it that had compelled
him to come seeking my father all these leagues


over seas ; and he was all on fire with the golden
thoughts of the treasure whereof the delicate
rapier, with its lean blade and hilt ornate with
ivory and gold, and blue-jewelled dagger stood
testimony. But my father had refused to give
ear, I know not why, save to cross my Uncle
James ; wherefore my uncle desired to fire
him with the same spirit as inspired himself.
From his story of the galleon my uncle passed
to a finicking, mincing measure —a minuet, he
called it; describing to me the manner of the
dance, and depicting ladies in gowns of old
rose, or gold, or sky-blue, and gentlemen in
silvered satins and white velvet coats; and
thence to the swifter movements of a dance
that had joy in it.
“ Roses and light and laughter,” my uncle
said, pausing an instant from his fiddling.
“Do you recollect, John ? ’Twas fashionable
once on a time.”
“ Cease your fiddling, James,” my father
muttered. “ It’s time to be abed.”
“ But this one air more. Mark it and
recall it, John ! Joyous ! Does the ballroom
float up like Aladdin’s palace ? Can you
see the dancers bow ere they tread the
measure ? Roses, and light, and laughter.
Mark the roses, John —red roses, white roses


—roses red and white and golden, like fair
women ! ”
“ I warn you, James, have done ! ”
“ Nay, but this air ! Black suit, white shirt,
and glistening pumps. Gold gown and blue
and daffodil—white with a cluster of roses —
red roses ! Mark you the dancers, John ?
Have you forgotten ? The measure and the
dance, and her who danced with you ? The
silver white of her gown ; the roses on it; the
rose and the white of her, the heaven of her
e yes —her hair a priceless web of gold ? Mark
you the measure, John ? ”
It had changed from joy to sadness. The
fiddle strings sighed out the dance under his
magical fingers. And I knew who had danced
it —my mother and my father long ago. My
father sat ghastly and cadaverous ; and the
flame in his eyes should have warned my
uncle.
“ Roses —the roses break and flutter down—
what paper flutters with the roses ? Do you
remember, John ? ”
On the instant my father had started to his
feet, and crying, “ Stop ! By heaven, stop ! ”
had plucked the fiddle from him and flung it
to the floor. And, ere I knew, my uncle had
leaped to the table, and had snatched up the


rapier, and stood fronting my father with the
lean steel flaming from his hand. As horror-
stricken I started back to the wall and stood
staring at him, I marked the very devil of hate
within his eyes ; the hate that had inspired
him in the torture of my father—the hate
that spelt for me the loss of that he coveted
most of my father’s possessions. And I
hated my uncle, even as my father hated
him —for the cruelty of him; for the self
of him; the self that was his universe.
He had dared within my father’s hearing,
within mine, to bring up the scene —well
I guessed —of the last happy hour that my
mother and my father had ever known ; and
of some lying trick of his —a letter fluttering
down among roses, a lying letter —to break
up my father’s life, and part him and my
mother. I knew all that, looking upon him
murderous —blue light aflame in his eyes;
blue steel burning, quivering in his hand. My
father stirred not a step back ; but faced him
—fine and high and white, his eyes consuming
fire, that burned his brother, his rival, up.
Awhile they stood so, with me gasping between,
and then my uncle burst suddenly into a peal
of laughter—laughter jangling as false coin ;
and lowered the point of the rapier. “ Why


here,” cried he, “is a very pretty bit of
play acting, John. You did not like my
playing ? ”
“ You dared,” my father muttered thickly.
“ You dared to play that tune to me. I should
have killed you then ! ”
“ My own dear brother ! ”
Ay, I should have killed you. My brother,
you-a changeling at birth—a liar all your
days ! ”
“ A liar all my days ! Dear brother.”
“Ay, you schemed to part us—mine and
me ! You won your way and will. Was that
not in itself enough ? Didn’t that content
you ? ”
“ None deplored the parting more than I.
I’m here to bring you back to London—to
your wife, to your position in society. We’ll
have this treasure that the boy speaks of off
the island, and we’ll sail home together. As
brothers ’ ’
“Not a gold coin or gem from No Man’s
Island, my father said, “do you set fingers
on ! ”
“ Indeed ! Will you prevent me ? Now I’ve
a notion that I’ll suit my own fancy in the
matter, my dear John.”
The island s mine,” my father answ r ered.


“ A grant to me ! This group —Wild Dog and
No Man’s and the rocks. All the island’s
mine. And not a coin or jewel, I tell you,
James, shall you set claws upon. I’ll give
you no more rope. The treasure’s mine—the
bo vs’ ! ”
My uncle’s look was malevolent ; but his lips
curved into his finest sneer.
“ Now mark you, son of mine,” my father
said, “ this man, my brother, is a villain —your
enemy and mine. I bid you so regard him. I
bid you form your estimate of him. You
should have the breeding of a gentleman, though
you were brought up here. There’s that in
your birth and blood should make you gentle-
man. Judge of this, then —that he, in that
tune he played, dared to recall the night on
which I parted from your mother. Dared to
recall all the shame he brought on her, on you,
on me ! He dared to flaunt this in my face ;
he dared, while you stood by ! Mark him, and
judge! ”
My uncle made me a superb bow, and bent
the steel of the rapier. His eyes had all the
evil of the sea in them. I turned from him and
looked upon my father.
“ He lies, you say,” I muttered, my heart
pounding in my breast. “He is a villain —


you tell me that. And, knowing him for liar
and villain ”
“ Rick, Rick,” protested my uncle politely.
“ —You still believed his word against my
mother’s ! And for that you left her ! ”


CHAPTER XX
LOSS OF MY UNCLE
And in the morning he was gone. 1 had
climbed up to bed at my father’s sign ; but
had paused on the stairs to listen fearfully,
lest the quarrel between my father and my
uncle should grow more violent, and end in
bloodshed. There w’as absolute silence —save
that I heard the creaking of the door as my
father entered his room, without a word more
to his brother. And that it seemed a little
delicate melody stole up from Jeremy’s fiddle,
and that my uncle hummed a tune. Wearied
out with the exertions and the perils of the
past two days, I tumbled out of my clothes
and slipped into bed beside Roddy, who lay on
his back sleeping soundly. I fell instantly into
a dreamless sleep ; and slept till I was aroused
at daybreak by my father’s voice from the foot
of the stairs.
“ Dick,” cried my father. “ Dick ! ”


Yawning, I stumbled out of bed, and slipped
into my shirt and breeches, envying Roddy
that he should still sleep soundly. I took my
shoes and jacket in my hand, and went down-
stairs to my father. He was fully clad; his
face fresh and shining. My uncle was not in
the room ; indeed, he had never slept upon the
couch, for the pillow and blankets lay as I had
piled them ready for him. The fire was not yet
dead on the hearth; and his chair was drawn
up to it, as he had sat upon the previous night.
Jeremy’s fiddle lay with a snapped string on
the table; the door of the cupboard was open;
the wine-bottles and bread and meat that had
been there were gone. There was no sign of
the gold and ivory rapier or the jewelled dagger ;
and, when my father pulled open the drawer of
the black chest where he was wont to keep a
pistol, with powder and ball, that, too, had
been swept clear.
“ So,” said my father softly, “he has left
us. I take it that the boat’s gone too, and
that he’ll try for the treasure.”
“ He’d never land on No Man’s Island alone
—and get the treasure off,” said I. “ Shall I
come down with you to the beach, father ? ”
“ Ay, lad, come along,” he answered, taking
his hat and heavy cane. “ Get your cap.”
6


Together then we passed out into the morn-
ing. The sun was just risen, and the air was
sweet and cool with the breeze from the sea.
The sea birds from the nesting places filled the
mom -with clamour. My father, loosing Pitch
from the chain, strode on ahead of me ; but 1
raced after to come up by his side and walk
with him. I saw that his face was pale and
cadaverous, and that a fire burnt in his eyes.
He crossed the terraces of rock, and went down
by the steps to the landing place. The boat
was gone from its moorings, and the cave under
the cliffs where w r e were wont to store our oars
and mast and sails was empty. “ So,” mut-
tered my father, “ thief as well as liar! You
heard nothing of him in the night, Dick ? ”
“Nothing, father; I slept too soundly.”
He strode away from the cave on to the rocks,
where a channel was cut for running in the
boat. He stood there looking out to sea, his
hands at his brow to shelter his sight against
the glitter of the morning. Afar a bank of
pink sea mist veiled the horizon; but, staring
wdth him, I marked on its verge the flicker of a
white sail, like the wing of a sea bird.
“ The boat,” I cried. “ There’s the boat,
father ! He’s putting out to sea,”
He answered not a word ; but stood still,


staring out; and, looking up at him, I realised
by the working of his face, and the burning of
his eyes, the devil of rage that possessed him.
“ He’s not going to try for the treasure —
yet,” I said.
“ He’ll not forget it,” muttered my father.
“ I would that you had never told him, lad.
That he should set fingers on the gold and use it
as a means for new sin and shame for us ! Ay,
for us ! Have you learnt your lesson, Dick ? ”
“ My lesson ? ”
44 Ay, to know him for the villain that he is—
for all his smiles and laughter ? ”
“ I’ve learnt my lesson—yes,” I muttered.
He looked down upon me suddenly, and
gripped me by the shoulder, staring moodily
down upon me. “He had his way with you
at first,” he muttered. “ Yes—yes ! Confess
that you believed him and not me.”
“ I’m sorry, father. I’m very sorry if I’ve
hurt you.”
“It was ever his way,” he said. “He worked
his will with man and woman. It was so all
our lives in England—save with one.”
“ My mother, father ? ”
“ Your mother, ay, your mother. He lied—
he wove a tissue of lies, and netted me in it.
Twas all his work. And I, knowing him and


knowing her, believed him ! And all these
years I’ve spent, consumed, burnt up for the
thought of her —the want of her. And never
till last night did I realise. I had believed his
lies against her, knowing —what J knew. And
forgetting that she had chosen me instead of
him, when it was hers to choose between us.
And still I believed —all these years I believed.
When he came, two nights since, desiring my
return to England, I saw the one purpose in
it —to possess himself of a share of our Uncle
Anthony’s guineas. Clever old Anthony ! I did
believe that his advocacy of her counted so
much for his purpose —no more than to secure
my return to England, and the payment of
the legacy to him. Therefore I vowed that I
would not return. Until last night, when he
dared bring before me —and you —the picture of
our parting. It happened so, a letter among
the roses that he had given her. I left her
that same night—believing him ! Knowing him
liar —I believed him. The wickedness of it all
—my wickedness! But last night he burnt
the scales from my eyes. He had no thought
save to sear and torture me. No thought—for
the insolence of him —the villainy. And he
flung the dice too boldly; for upon his very
words I knew—l knew ; and I would that 1


had killed him where he stood. Save that he
was my brother, I had killed him then.”
He broke off for awhile, and stood staring out
to sea. “ I had purposed this very morn,” he
said at length, “ that we should sail—Otter and
his wife and the lad Scorne —for George Town.
We could have reached it easily in the boat,
and sailed back thence in a larger boat to take
the treasure from the island. I should have
left him here upon the island —while we were
away; and, having won the treasure, would
have sought a ship from Hobart Town for
London.”
I heard him with joy, despite all the angry
current of his speech, and all the white rage
that burnt in him. Return to London; see
my mother; make an end of the lonely life on
Wild Dog ! My heart leaped in my breast, and
my eyes dimmed for tears. I caught at his
hand; and breathless I cried, “ What does it
matter, after all, father, if he does get the
treasure ? All I care for—and isn’t it all you
care for ? is to get back to London and see my
mother. Oh, you must know what I’ve been
feeling since he told me that she was still alive.
And that she loved you and me, and wanted
you and me. McArdle and the ketch will be
here in a w r eek ; and then we can get away.


Even if he’s got the treasure off by then, what
does it matter ? You’ve money enough in
London ; you don’t want more.”
He muttered at last, “ You’re right, lad !
What does it matter, save that it gives him the
new means of wickedness ? And, if he comes
to London —by heaven, I’ll force the last penny
from him. I will, by gad! He shall have his
share of Anthony’s guineas—not a piece more ! ”
He paused and looked towards the beach,
where my uncle and the lad Roddy Scome had
come ashore. The sea was spotted still with
broken wreckage of the Indiaman, that had
not been sucked into the current and flung
back upon the shores of No Man’s Island. He
turned from me suddenly, and at a swift and
swinging walk commenced to tramp over the
terrace of rock. I went following after, with
Pitch racing by my side. I guessed well my
father’s purpose—to seek on the wreckage the
materials for building a raft or makeshift boat,
that would enable us to essay a landing on No
Man’s Island, and the removal of the treasure.
The colours of the jewels in the galleon’s cabin
were commencing again to bum in my brain —
a thousand miraculous points of flame, as the
very fireflies in an Eastern night that my uncle
had conjured up. Swiftly we crossed the ter-


races and climbed the rocks, and dropped down
on the littered beach. And there among the
broken wreckage lay the carcase of a small
boat —stove in ; but not so greatly damaged
that we might not repair it in a day or so, and
make an effort to reach No Man’s Island.
“ Not a jewel, or a bit of gold shall my brother
touch,” vowed my father, looking down upon it
triumphantly ; “not the value of a holy dollar.”


CHAPTER XXI
WE PREPARE A NEW VENTURE
We returned to the house then, and found
Margaret and Jeremy astir. Margaret had built
up the fire in the living room, and spread the
table with a clean cloth, and set the dishes for
our breakfast. There was no sign of Roddy
yet, and at my father’s bidding I climbed the
stair to rouse him. He lay still on his back ;
but he stirred as I came in, and muttering,
“ Hullo, Dick ! ” sat up, rubbing his eyes.
“ You’re a lazy dog, Roddy Scorne,” growled
I. “ Here have I been astir this hour, while you
lay there.”
“ What have you been doing, Dick ? ” asked
he, grinning lazily at me.
“ I’ve been on the beach with my father,” I
answered, perching myself on the sill of the
open window. “ Found a boat there. There’s
a job for you and me this day, my lad, patching
it up.”


“ What for ? In place of the boat we lost ?
Did your father flog you for losing it, Dick ? ”
“No ! ” I answered. u I wish he’d try his
hand on you, my lad. I’ve no doubt he will,
if you lie there much longer. The fact is, Roddy,
my uncle’s gone ! ”
“ Gone—eh ? ”
“ Taken our boat and gone in the night.”
“ The deuce he has ! Is he after the stuff on
No Man’s Island ? ”
“ Not yet, I take it. We saw the sail of the
boat, and he was putting out to sea.”
“ What’s his notion —d’ye think, Dick ? ”
asked he, slipping out of bed, and dragging off
his shirt.
“ I don’t know. Maybe he’ll make down to
George Town. He’ll be back though, to have
a try for the coin. No doubt of that, to my
mind. But if he’s not back in a day or two —
and if he aims for George Town, he can’t be
back much within a week—he’ll not find much
left on No Man’s.”
“ Isn’t there any settlement between here and
Van Diemen'a Land ? ”
“ Only the sealers.”
“ The sealers—who are they ? ”
“ Thievish gentry. ’Scaped convicts for the
most, from Botany Bay and Macquarie Harbour.
6*


They’ve lived in the Straits Islands for years
back. The very devil’s awn.”
“ How do they live ? ”
“ Like pirates of old, my boy. There’s ugly
talk of wrecking of some of the ships that have
been coming from India and the Cape. They’ve
had fat lickings from many of them. They play
the pirate, too, on occasion. And they’ve a
very fleet of boats of their own, stout craft that
they’ve built. They sneak up to the coast of
New r South Wales at times for stores, or down*
to Van Diemen’s Land. They sell mutton-birds,
and feathers, and oil. They’ve women with them
—Blacks from Van Diemen’s Land. It’s a
wonder to me they haven’t had word of the Indus
being wrecked, and come over here like a flight of
carrion crows.”
“ Have they ever troubled you here ? ”
“ Not they ! We haven’t enough to lose. And
if they did anything openly, they’d have
Governor Arthur and his police from Van Die-
men’s Land after them to wipe them out. Though
it’s a wonder to me that he’s never done more
than to wring the necks of a few of them —
absconders from Van Diemen’s Land. Still it’s
hard to get at ’em. The seas are not charted —
save for the ordinary track of ships —and not
much is known about the islands.’-’


“ What if your uncle falls in with them ? ”
“ I think he’d run the risk of having his
throat cut for the boat.”
He had slipped into his clothes, and was
pulling on his boots. He said no more ; but he
had said enough. He had put an uncomfort-
able notion into my head, that the likelihood
was that my uncle would come across a few of the
sealer gentry and buy them with a promise of
gold to share in the venture of lifting the treasure.
I knew that his mind was all on fire with our
talk ; and that he would not rest, until he had
made an essay for the treasure. Certainly I
had given him but a poor account of the where-
abouts of the galleon on the island, or yet of the
one landing place, despite his eager questioning.
He had been so ardent that, consciously or un-
consciously, I had set my wits to work at fencing
him. And I believed that he would need our
services to conduct him to the place where the
treasure lay. I guessed well that, ere long, I
should see more of my uncle.
When we descended the stairs to breakfast —
fresh bread, flakes of flat-head fried golden, and
steaming coffee —I told my fears to my father.
But he was gloomy and abstracted ; and he
said no word, and merely nodded. And gloomy
and abstracted he remained throughout the


meal. At last he pushed back his chair and
rose from the table. I started up after him, all
eagerness to be on my share in the repairing of
the boat, that we might cheat my uncle of his
purpose with the treasure. But my father,
waving me back, muttered, “ We won’t need
you, Dick. Otter and I can do all that’s to be
done. You can help us carry the tool chest
down to the beach, if you like ; but you and
Scorne had better spend your day fishing or
gathering eggs. You’ll be out of the way then,
at any rate ! ”
His tone was good-humoured ; and I could
not demur. We tramped down to the beach
with them, lugging the chest, and axes ; and,
leaving them there, Roddy and I took ourselves
back to Margaret. We sallied forth a half-hour
later with a sound provision of bread and salt
pork for the day ; a bag to fill with eggs from
the rookeries, and lines and bait for cod from the
rocks. The isle was all a blaze of green and
gold ; and the sea washed about it like a great
pool of blue water. The morning mist had
vanished away, but there was no sign of my
uncle’s sail on all the glittering sea. We spent
the day delightfully—bathing first in the pool
below the rocks ; and lying stark for hours in
the sun. We fished from the rocks ; and caught


a dozen or so of fat cod. Climbing then to the
mutton-bird rookeries, we purloined a full bag
of fresh eggs from the screaming birds that
flapped in scores about us and sought to beat
us back with beak and wing. It was evening
ere we descended from the cliff toward the house.
The sun was falling into the west like a ball of
yellow sulphur. The sea was commencing to
stir from its placidity before the rising of a
northern wind. The sound of hammering arose
still from the beach, where my father and Jeremy
Otter yet laboured at the repairing of the boat.


CHAPTER XXII
RETURN OF MY UNCLE
On the second night thence we sat, Roddy and
I, with our feet stretched out towards the blaze
of the fire on the hearth. Save for the foul
weather that had succeeded three days of sun-
shine we should have sailed from the island for
the removal of the treasure from No Man’s.
But during the night after my uncle’s departure
the wind had grown mighty again, and the
morning had broken tempestuous, with squalls
of shrieking wind and the chill of icy rain.
Therefore my father had judged it impossible
to make the approach to the island with safety,
although the boat had been repaired into sea-
worthiness, and rigged with tiller and oars and
a little mast and sail. We had provisioned it
well for the trip ; and, taking advantage of a
drop in the wind towards the second evening,
my father and Jeremy had started out to pull
the boat round from the exposed beach into the


cove, whence Roddy and I had been plucked on
the morning when we were caught in the current.
My father had said no word to me of his purpose
in removing the boat; but well I guessed that
he dreaded hourly my uncle’s return —maybe
in company with some rapscallions from the
sealers’ islands —and that he sought to get
the boat away from destruction at their hands
in the event of their landing suddenly upon
Wild Dog. I had spoken little with him
during the past two days. His old abstraction
and gloom sat upon him blackly. Only, when
he chanced to speak to me, I had noted joyously
the continuance of his kindness for me that had
replaced his old austerity and speedy choler at
any foolish speech or act of mine. He had
been working with a feverish haste at the boat.
I knew that he was set to the purpose of depriv-
ing my uncle of a hold upon the treasure. And
fully I realised how bitter was his feeling for
that gay and sinful gentleman, even as his love
for him —I knew it w r ell —had been great from their
youth up, until the revelation of my uncle’s
baseness had alienated my father from him for all
time. Myself, I was all ardour to leave the
island. Certainly, the thought of the precious
gems and gold burning in the coffers of the
galleon consumed me magically. And yet, their


witchery, and my desire to have them in safe
keeping, were far less potent with me than my
longing for England and the sight of my fan-
mother. The recollection, never obliterated
from the tablets of my memory, seemed now
limned clearly. I pictured her constantly—a
lovely lady in a silken gown, with jewels upon her
bosom and at her ears. I found myself picturing
her as she sat now in sorrow. I pictured the joy
of our coming, and the passing of all grief and
pain from her face. How the lily-white of her
should glow with rose colour ! Her arm about
me, her lips on mine—my mother—the loveliest,
the best beloved in England ! And I begrudged
the moments that went by inexorably without
her. I was all eagerness to be aboard a ship,
sailing from Hobart Town or Sydney for London.
The long months of voyage—how should I
endure the weariness of them ? Maybe we should
be becalmed with the copper sun, and the bur-
nished sea mocking me. Perchance we should
be wrecked upon some desert isle ; and be there
for years ere we were rescued by a ship and taken
home. The happiness of seeing her again was
too great for me ; and the wind and sea would
be envious of it.
So, aw-aiting my father’s return with Jeremy
from the boat—on which we hoped to sail on


the morrow’s dawn, if the day proved fair —I
sat in my chair, silent and abstracted. Roddy
himself was wrapped in an equal silence. It was
not customary for him, for, indeed, he was the
merriest company. But he, too, rejoiced at the
prospect of return, and I fancied that, as I
glanced at him, he was thinking then of how he
should find his mother in England ; and he was
penitent for the sorrow that he had caused her by
his mad venture of running away to sea. Indeed,
he had told me so earlier that day —staring
gloomily out to sea, and speaking huskily. And
he had been dull, for him —since then. Outside,
Margaret still went about her duties. Through
the window I could mark the red glow of her
lamp, and now and again I could hear the
clatter of dishes. She had shed tears, when
I had told her of the prospect of our imme-
diate return ; and she had flung her arms
about me —much to my discomposure, for I
hated sentiment; and had not expected it in
her. Though, truth to tell, the sight of her
joyous face, with the tears tumbling down her
furrowed cheeks, had moved me profoundly;
had I not pulled myself away and flung out
on the cliffs, I must have been blubbering in
her company.
And suddenly as we sat over the fire, wrapped


each in his own thoughts, we were aroused by
the sound of footsteps without, and by Margaret’s
shrill scream. Instantly we were on our feet
startled, as she came flying into the room—
white, staring-eyed, dishevelled. She sought to
bang the door after her, but it was too late, for
it was dashed in ; and, ere we knew, my uncle
slipped into the room. At his back appeared a
couple of hairy, bronze-faced fellows, clad
raggedly and rakishly, carrying each a musket,
and having each of them a pair of metal rings
glittering at his ears. At their heels came a
young man—a tall fellow, blue eyed and burnt
brick-red with sun and sea. His arms were
bare and hairy; he had on him a blue jacket
with brass buttons ; a tattered pair of blue
breeches thrust into bulging sea boots ; a long
knife in his leather belt; a bandana handker-
chief knotted about his curling hair. My uncle
stood with his head bare, bowing superbly to
Margaret. His beard grew scrubbily on his
chin for want of shaving ; his fine nose was
peeling with sun and salt ; his nankeen breeches
were stained with sea-weed, but the Toledan
rapier was perched at a rakish tilt at his side;
the blue hilt of the dagger burnt in his belt;
and his whole bearing was a superb mixture of
insolence and politeness. Meeting his searching


glance fixed on me, I glared at him, hating him,
as I had never hated him before.
“ A very good evening,” said my uncle.
“ Pray don’t be alarmed, my good woman —
you’re in no danger. Egad, no one of your
charming sex was ever in danger at my hands.”
“ What do you want here ? ” snarled I,
standing forward and facing him, while Roddy
scowled at my back, and Margaret toppled
trembling into a chair.
“ Nay, don’t be so inhospitable, Rick,” purred
my uncle. “Is my brother abroad ? ”
“ Ay, and it’s well for you !—What d’ye mean
by breaking in on us ? Who are these fellows
here ? ”
“ Very good friends of mine,” he answered
with a flourish of his hat. “ And good friends
of yours, therefore, Rick. Permit me to make
them known to you ! ”
“ Enough of this ! ” roared I. “ What’s
your business here ? ”
“ Nay, be polite, Rick ! Display your breed-
ing ! My very excellent friends —Mr. William
Bult, deserter from His Majesty’s Navy ”
“ Stow that ! ” growled the hairier fellow,
drawing back from the door. “ Get the young
swab and come away ! ”
“ Swab ! Nay, William! William! Mr.


Joseph Cody—once a guest of His Honour,
Lieutenant Governor Sorell of Macquarie Har-
bour ; —his son, young Joe : all islanders, who
hope to enjoy a better acquaintance with you,
Rick ! Gentlemen, my nephew ! Mistress Otter,
refreshment for these gentlemen.”
Margaret stiffened in her chair. “ You’re a
wicked man, James Ingleby,” said she, “ and
these men are fit companions for you, I’ve no
doubt. But I warn you, that if you set a finger
on Master Dick here —’twill go hard with you.
You’ve done the master harm enough without,
with your false, lying tongue. Have a
care ! ”
“ Still the same shrewish Margaret Otter,”
he answered laughing, and not a whit per-
turbed. “ Rick, we’ll be glad of your company
this night.”
“ I’ll not stir with you,” cried I, scenting hi*
purpose.
“ Rick ! Rick ! And I your uncle ! ”
“ That’s nought but shame to me ! What’s
your business here ? ”
“Ay,” gasped Margaret, “what’s your busi-
ness ? Go your evil way, James Ingleby, and
let honest folk take theirs. Have a care for
the master ! ”
“ WTiere is my brother ? ”


“ That I’ll not tell you,” flashed she, facing
him bravely.
“ Take the lad, and let’s get away,” growled
Bult, plucking at my uncle’s sleeve.
“ Your voice is the voice of wisdom,” pro-
nounced my uncle. “ Are you ready, Rick ? ”
“ I’ll not stir a step in your company ! ” I
answered, drawing back, and seeking in vain to
spy a weapon in the room.
“ You owe me obedience, dear lad. Need I
recall you to it ? ”
“ I know you for my father’s enemy and mine.”
“ You do me a grievous injustice, Rick. But
willy-nilly you’re coming with us ! ”
“ Why barge and barney with the swab ? ”
muttered Bult, scowling upon me. “ Knock ’im
on the ’ead ! ”
“ Come, Rick,” said my uncle. “We make
essay to move the treasure chest from No
Man’s Island —I and my friends here. And
you’ll show the way —you and no other. I
want your company; I’ve no taste for hob-
nobbing with ship’s boys. Come on ;we can’t
tarry here for you. We’ve a boat at the shore.”
“ I’ll not show you ”
“ By gad, sir,” cried Roddy, starting forward,
“ if that’s your purpose, take me, not Dick ! ”
“ Bravely said,” sneered my uncle. “Bravely


said, ship’s boy ! But I have a natural prefer-
ence for my nephew’s society; so await your
invitation —ship’s boy ! ”
I saw how Roddy burnt scarlet, and how his
eyes blazed at the whip lash of my uncle’s
tongue. He clenched his fists, as if to throw
himself upon him, but instantly Bult and his
fellows interposed, snarling and menacing.
“ Take him ! ” my uncle ordered.
Ere I knew, they were upon me. I struck the
fellow, Bult, with all my force in the face ; but
they had gripped my wrists upon the instant.
I heard Margaret’s shrill scream. I saw her
fling herself upon the youngest sealer, striking
at his cheeks. I saw her knocked back by his
furious blow ; and Roddy go down, as a heavy
candlestick, snatched up by my uncle, crashed
upon his head. Struggling impotently with my
captors, I was dragged from the room and out
into the night. My voice rang out furiously,
until a cloak was flung over my head ; and
choked and blinded I was dragged away.


CHAPTER XXIII
THE COMPANY OF ROGUES
My rage consumed me. I had no terror. I had
no thought save of burning hate for my uncle
and desperate purpose to outwit him and his
company of sealers. I found myself, as, clutched
by their rough hands I was borne swiftly on-
ward through the night, wondering whether my
father and Jeremy had yet heard the outcry at
the house, and would come after. But well I
knew that the two and Roddy—if he had
recovered from the blow dealt him by my uncle
—would have little chance of rescuing me. My
uncle and his sealers were armed to the teeth;
my father had but one pistol left him by my
uncle when he fled from the isle, and Jeremy
his old musket. I pictured my father’s burning
rage against my uncle for his new outrage ; and
well I knew his wits would speedily be at work
to outwit him and his precious company of cut-
throats. And I found myself wondering, too.


how I might delay my uncle and the sealers
when at last they set foot on No Man’s Island
and compelled me to guide them to the treasure
ship. I named myself the veriest fool that ever
I had given him the story of our discovery of the
wrecked galleon and the plate chest that it bore.
We were on the beach at last. The night was
clear, when the cloak was plucked from my
head. The moon rode full and white in the
heavens ; and the night breeze blew coldly on my
face. I would have uttered a yell instantly to
let my father know my whereabouts ; but the
old sealer, Cody, had clapped a pistol to my head,
and my uncle w'as uttering evilly in my ear.
“ So much as open your mouth, you fool —
and kinsman of mine, or no kinsman of mine—
I’ll not lift my finger to save you ! ”
The boat was lying pulled up into the shallows.
At the sight of us a little lean figure came
clambering over the side, and a shrill voice
squeaked, “ Ah, you’re soon back ! Is that the
kinchin there ? ”
I marked him under the moon —a shrimp
of a man, clad in an old gold-buttoned coat
from a naval officer’s back. Its tails reached
absurdly nigh to his ankles ; and he wore knee
breeches that seemed white under the moon,
and white stockings ; his feet were thrust into


a pair of buckled shoes. His face was staring
into mine. I marked his evil little eyes in his
pock-marked, sallow face, and the wisp of hair
that tumbled over his rat’s nose under his big
cocked hat.
“ Ah, my covey,” piped the shrimp; “ a fine
young covey ! So you’re to make us all rich, my
covey ! Fill our breeches pockets with shiners,
and send us back to London. A brave young
covey —thank’ee, young covey ! ”
I scowled upon him, but said no word. I was
straining my ears for the sounds of my father
and Jeremy’s footsteps coming in pursuit. There
was no sound save the hooting of an owl away
on the island, the sweep of the wind on the sea,
and the lapping of the water against the grounded
boat.
“In with him,” ordered my uncle. “ Lively
there, my lads. Now, Rick ! ”
They thrust me forward, and tumbled me
over the side into the boat. My uncle and the
Cockney followed after ; the sealers, thrusting
the boat off, came clambering over the sides,
and, with the Cockney, fell to the oars, until the
boat was in deep water.
My uncle, taking his seat to tend the tiller,
beckoned me to him, and mutely I obeyed. For
a while we went in silence. All the sea was


illumined by the moon, as by a great white lamp.
The sea moved in an oily surge ; and the wind
coming sluggishly still filled the sails, and sent
the boat on swiftly.
“ Rick,” said my uncle quietly in my ear. I
made no sign, and did not look at him, “ Rick,”
he proceeded, “ forgive my want of ceremony.
Never have I been so impolite. But necessity,
Rick ; necessity, Rick ; necessity. Let it acquit
me.”
“My Uncle James,” growled I, “I know
you for a villain. What’s your purpose with
me?”
“ You know wdiere the treasure lies, my lad.
I know the entrance through the reefs about No
Man’s Island. You’ll guide us the rest of the
way.”
“ You think so ? ”
“ I know it, my dear Rick. I have a very
deep and natural affection for you, my dear
boy ”
“ Oh, peace to lying ! ”
“My lad,” snarled he, with sudden livid
anger. “I am no disciplinarian. But mark
me, if you’re so far wanting in respect, I’ll be
compelled to teach you a lesson with a switch.
And mark me further, I’ll have my fill of the
gold and gems on the island. And, if you seek


to play me false, I’ll not stand between you and
this precious company. Mark the manner of the
men, my lad, and consider the wisdom of falling
in with our plans. Maybe I’ll spare a gold
piece or two for you. lam a generous uncle.”
“My Uncle James,” I muttered. “ D’ye
understand the risk you’re running ? ”
“ My lad, all life is a risk.”
“ D’ye know the reputation of the sealers ? ”
“ I am a judge of men.”
“ That should teach you that you’re likely
to touch not a piece of the treasure. You’re
more like to take a slit throat for your pains.”
“ Thank you for nothing,” he whispered, his
eyes blinking at me oddly.
“ Murderers and cut-throats all,” I went
on whispering. “ ’Scaped convicts, wreckers,
pirates ! How did you fall in with such a com-
pany ? ”
“ Men that I selected for my purpose from a
choice Rogues’ Paradise, not thirty miles from
here. Men for a desperate hazard ! My brother
compelled me to this course. I should have pre-
ferred to retain every gold piece in the family.
But you recollect his threat, my Rick—that
not a gold piece of it should I set fingers on.
And you know my brother.”
“My uncle,” said I, “ you do not know whae


you’ve undertaken. You don’t understand your
men. At best you’re likely to be marooned
with me on No Man’s Island, while these precious
gentry sail off with the chest.”
“ I have a pistol here,” my uncle said, tapping
his pocket. “ Your father’s pistol, that I bor-
rowed from him. Moreover I have powder and
ball. lam a pretty shot, Dick; I could tell you
of many a meeting at dawn —pistols for two:
gentlemanly affairs. And I have this Toledan
rapier, my Rick —and you, my Rick, have this,”
suddenly slipping the blue-hilted dagger into
my hand. “ Hide it under your jacket, Rick.
I am assured at least of this, that, comes
mischief from these fellows, you stand with
me.
“ Ay, for the time, I stand with you.”
“ I ask no more ! We’re sailing swiftly,
Rick. We should be off the reefs ere the moon
sinks. A word with my men, Rick. Take the
tiller ! ”
The sealers, huddled together under the mast,
had been muttering all the while among them-
selves. My uncle, crawling forward, stood lean-
ing against the mast.
“ Well, my men,” I heard him say, “ we’re
embarked seriously upon our venture.”
“ Ay; an’ what plot may ye be hatchin’ with


the young swab there ? ” growled Bult. “ Don’t
try to rook us now, my gentleman.”
“ Egad, my William,” cried my uncle, “ you’re
deucedly impolite. Hatch a plot to rook you !
Why, who told you of this treasure ? Had I not
needed your assistance, and been prepared to
bring you to the island, and fill your pockets
for you, need I have ever told you of the galleon,
and the gold that’s on it ? ”
“ Mark me, master,” muttered Bult, “ don’t
try to play us any tricks ! We’re in this with
you, and we shares and shares alike.”
“ Ay,” old Cody broke in. “We shares to the
last gold shiner. Is that understood, Mister
Gentleman ? ”
“ Nay,” cried my uncle, “ it is not understood.
You’ll be well paid for your share. The trea-
sure’s mine, and I am paymaster.”
“ You’re talkin’ now,” growled Cody; “ ay,
you’re talkin’. What I’ve said, says we all.
Isn’t that so, my lads ? ”
“ Ay, it’s so ! it’s so ! ” came in chorus.
“ You’re a gentleman,” piped the Cockney,
“ and a gentleman plays fair. And why, I asks
you, should you be thinkin’ to diddle us out of
our share of the dollars ? Share and share alike !
That’s what we’ve fixed on, and that’s what’s
to be ! ”


“ You’re a set of impudent dogs,” cried my
uncle, laughing. “ D’ye think to dictate to me !
That pistol of yours, my Cockney friend—
and those muskets ! Come now ! ”
I saw then that he had his pistol cocked ; and
that the rapier burnt in his hand.
“ Now, mister, now ! ” protested the Cockney.
“ The pistol,” cried my uncle. “ You think
to play with me ! ”
“ You’re playin’ with us,” snarled Cody.
“ You’re like to go overboard for your pains—
you and the young dawg there ! ”
“ I give you a minute only, Spills,” my uncle
said ; and the spell of his voice was potent.
“ The pistol! ”
I saw Spills rise in the boat; but instantly
the rapier flashed, and the pistol clanged from
the Cockney’s hands to the bottom of the boat;
and the Cockney went back, cursing foully.
Instantly my uncle kicked the pistol to me ;
and my fingers were on it; and I was by his
side, with the barrel covering them, and the
dagger gripped in my left hand.
“ Good lad, Rick,” said my uncle. “ Those
muskets, Cody and Bult —overboard with
them ! And that knife of yours, my lad,” to
the young sealer; “that very dangerous knife.
Don’t palter with me. Come ! ”


They crouched snarling at him like so many
savage beasts; but his will triumphed still.
He stood fine, alert, commanding—covering
them; and there was that in his voice that
would take no gainsaying. The muskets
splashed into the sea; the knife flamed like a
streak of light through the air. My uncle stood
laughing upon them triumphant. “Now,” he
said quietly, we re more likely to be a pleasant
party ! And mark me, my men, this boat is
mine ! You do my bidding, and it pays you.
Only don’t seek to palter with me —a gentle-
man ! ”


CHAPTER XXIV
NIGHT THOUGHTS OF MR. SPILLS
The moon, growing nigh the full, lit sea and sky ;
therefore we sailed securely and bore confidently
upon our course. I sat still in the stem of the
boat, while my uncle held the tiller ; and the
sealers tended the sail in turn. From the time
when my uncle relieved them of their weapons
they gave us not a word ; albeit they talked in
undertones among themselves, and, I doubted
not a whit, plotted for our undoing, when I should
have led them to the treasure. My uncle sat
oddly silent for him, giving me scarce a word;
and, glancing up at him from time to time, I
marked his face pallid in the moonlight, and set
as if carven by the chisel of some Greek sculptor.
His eyes, ashine under the clear white light of
the moon, seemed always bent intently on the
group of sealers. And all the while I was won-
dering to myself what was taking place on Wild
Dog ; and whether my father and Jeremy would


dare follow after ; or what the manner of theii
plan would be to snatch me from the keeping
of my uncle and the sealers. And I was cud-
gelling my brains for the means to outwit my
uncle and his pack of rogues ; and I determined,
that, if I must for my own safety lead them to
the treasure, I would seek the opportunity to
slip away and try to make off in the boat, leaving
the precious crew marooned. It might go ill
with my uncle at the sealers’ hands. I had
small care for that. I had given him aid that
night, only because I believed that I should at
least be safer with him commanding the venture
than if I were solely at the mercy of the sealers.
Yet, even at that hour, while I hated the man for
the injury that he had done my mother and my
father, and for the falseness of him, I could
not but admire the hardihood with which he had
tricked the sealers of their weapons, and the
compelling qualities that had been more com-
manding then even the direction of a sword
point and a pistol. I knew the power of the
man —more even than I had realised it when
he had extended his fascination on me and
sought to turn my heart against my father.
All this while we had been speeding about Wild
Dog, running in as nigh to the shore as we dared,
and evading the perilous current that swept in
7


a half-moon into the whirlpool below the rocks
of No Man’s. Beneath the row of fangs that
projected from the sea, as if a causeway of rock
had once connected the two islands, a clear
passage was afforded nigh our own island;
and this we now took, making through for the
open Straits, so that eventually we might put
back towards the reefs and the passage into the
bay. That way the ketch from Sydney that
bore us stores as it sailed down to George Town
was compelled to beat, in order that it might
reach a safe anchorage off Wild Dog Island.
In times of storm the approach to the island
was perilous ; and McArdle, the skipper, would
not dare approach ; but would beat on to Van
Diemen’s Land, with the result that we were
compelled to rely on our own resources of fish
and mutton-birds, and the vegetables that we
raised in a sheltered patch of deep soil, nigh to
the dwelling house.
But on that moon-white night we sailed se-
curely. The wind was strong enough to send us
racing; the foam flew at the bows; and the
water astern was lit with phosphorus. Within
the space of —it might have been an hour and a
half, we had cleared Wild Dog, and the dangerous
rocks ; and had taken in sail, so that the sealers
might row us in towards the channel in the reefs.


My uncle’s command was brief and incisive, and
the sealers obeyed as dogs before a whip. My
uncle’s grin at me was humoursome as he sat
down again by me in the stem of the boat.
And now No Man’s Island lay revealed before us
—the pinnacle, the cliffs, the lower lying grounds
across the rocky bar of the bay. The surf made
monotonous sound ; but, sheltered from the
strength of the increasing wind, the waters were
comparatively placid ; and, as I judged it, we
should have far less difficulty in pulling in than
Roddy and I had experienced in poling out our
raft three days before. All this while my uncle
had sought no directions from me. When my
father and he had picked us up from the raft, I
had given him a very rough notion of our way
of escape. But for the very suspicions that his
eager questioning had aroused—in the light of
my knowledge of him —I had given him no
account of the path that we had taken from the
galleon ; therefore he had, I judged it, deemed
it expedient to secure my services, so that the
discovery and removal of the treasure might not
be delayed. His voice rang out now clear and
definite. The rowers responded ; and my uncle
steered confidently towards the opening between
the reefs. The light of the moon upon the
waters directed him, for, while it marked the


breaking of the surf, like the tossing manes of
white horses, it revealed the narrow line of com-
paratively unbroken water leading into the bay.
The surf broke with the sound of drums. The
spray w r as blown like floating fog into our faces.
“ Pull ! ” cried my uncle suddenly. “ Pull
with a will ! ”
Responsive to the vigorous strokes of the
sealers, the boat shot forward like an arrow.
The spray fell as rain ; and the waters spouted
up before the bows. But, ere I realised it, we
were through, and sweeping upon the slow r rollers
tow r ards the beach. The line of sand made a
w T hite crescent against the blue grey of the scrub.
The cliffs stood up all glittering, as if silver with
frost. The surf moaned behind us ; but from
the island came no sound, save the sighing of the
ti-tree, as the wind swept across the scrub.
“ We’re here ! ” exulted my uncle, as we
swept in towards the beach. “My men, behold
the island of my fortunes ! ”
They gave him not a word in answer ; but,
peering forward by my uncle’s side, I caught the
eyes of the Cockney, Spills, and marked the
evil light that burnt within them And I found
myself reckoning of the passions that the en-
chantment of the ingots and the gems would
conjure up ; and dreading the peril, wherein


my uncle had placed himself and me by his most
injudicious selection of his company.
We ran ashore; and, prompted by my uncle’s
fingers on my shoulder, I roused myself stiffly,
and stumbled out of the boat into the sand. I
held the pistol still—concealed in the deep pocket
of my jacket; and the blue-hilted dagger I had
thrust into the leather belt that held my breeches.
My uncle was the last to step ashore ; and,
though he appeared to come with a careless air,
I marked that his fingers still clutched his pistol,
although his sword poked at his side. He
beckoned me to him, while the sealers gathered
in a knot a little apart. I knew that the fellows
itched to have the pistols in their keeping, and
to command the situation ; and I knew that it
would need the most untiring watchfulness on
the part of my uncle and myself if the tables
were not to be turned upon us.
“ Now, my lads,” cried my uncle, cheerily.
“ Now ? ”
“ Now, sir,” piped the Cockney.
“ Afore we goes any further,” Bult began
aggressively, “ wot I wants to know is ”
“ Precisely, Bult,” my uncle checked him.
“ What we all want to know is—what it is in
this young gentleman’s power to tell us. Now,
Rick, whereabouts is the ship.”


“ You’re taking it as certain,” said I, seeking
to put a brave face on a piece of bluster, “ that
I’m going to tell you.”
“ That is precisely why I have troubled to
bring you, my dear nephew,” sneered my uncle,
eyeing me malevolently.
“ Blast my eyes,” growled Cody, “ ain’t we
got eyes in our skulls —all of us ? And can’t we
see for ourselves ? Touch the young dawg
up with a boot —or a rope’s end ; that’s wot I
says, if we wants ’im. But I cawn’t see as we
wants ’im.”
“ The rope’s end is a commendable sugges-
tion,” pronounced my uncle. “ Thank you,
Cody.”
“ And I’ll do the leatherin’ of ’im,” volun-
teered the young sealer, with alacrity.
“ Nay there —nay, there,” cried my uncle,
fingering his pistol so suggestively that young
Cody recoiled with a snarl, “ there’ll be no need.
You’ll think better of it, Rick ! ”
“ You can’t find the track unless I guide you,”
said I. “ And I’m not going to guide you this
night.”
“ Meanin’ to say,” asked the Cockney, “ as
’tain’t a track to be took by night. And you’ll
take us in the momin’ ? ”
“ Yes —I’ll take you in the morning. There’s


not a possibility of crossing the cliffs in the
dark. I’ll take you in the morning—on a con-
dition.”
“ It’s not for young swabs to play sea lawyers,”
mouthed Bult, glowering at me.
“ My condition is that I’m paid my price,
that’s all.”
“ That’s understood, Rick,” muttered my
uncle.
“ Ay, you’ll get your price—ho, yus, you’ll
get your price,” chuckled Mr. Bult, as if there
were an undercurrent of humour in my condi-
tion or in his acceptance.
“ And we’ll bunk in the boat for the night ? ”
asked Spills, “ There’s a drop of grog aboard,
an’ a bit of bread an’ fish. An’ we’ve our pipes.
A fire, now, an’ a drop of hot grog all round ”
“ Take the keg, Spills ! ” my uncle conceded.
“ There’s not enough in it for you all to get
drunk on. But you’ll have to find another
camping place—permit me to inform you.”
“ Cause vy ? ” demanded Spills, observing
him wickedly from the corner of his eye.
“ For a very excellent reason, my good Spills,”
said my uncle. “ I desire to remain in command
of this venture. And I propose to take every
precaution that’s necessary to that end. My
nephew and I occupy the boat ”


“ But vere’ ve to sleep ? ”
“ There’s where we camped—just through
the scrub there,” said I. “If you take the
sails and build a fire, you’ll be w r ell enough.”
“ The sails,” said my uncle, “ I propose to
reserve for myself.”
They growled at that savagely, and stirred, as
if like savage animals they w T ould leap upon us ;
and bear us down. On the instant my uncle’s
pistol was out; and his back was against the
boat.
“ My meaning assuredly was clear enough,”
he said. “ I propose to retain command of this
expedition. And wdiat I will, you do.”
“ Have a care, master,” snarled Bult, mouth-
ing at him.
“My good fellow,” my uncle retorted, “ I
assure you that your advice is unnecessary; I
propose to be very careful. Take the keg;
light your fire; you’ll fare well enough. Is
that understood ? ”
“ Vy, in course it’s understood,” cried Mr.
Spills cheerfully, stepping briskly aboard the
boat. “ I’ll get the keg, ’Ere ’tis ! Now, my
coveys! ”
Leaping out again lightly with the little keg
upon his shoulders, he favoured us with a grin,
and with a wink. “ Nice dreams and good


sleep, mister and young genTm’n ! ” and went
off, the tails of his coat nigh touching the
ground; his hat cocked on one side of his
cropped head. The sealers, muttering and
grumbling, followed after. Bult, only pausing
to light his pipe, and to growl, “ We’ll ’ave a
word or two to say about this yer in the mornin’,
my fine fellers,” ere he stumped away into the
scrub.
My uncle leaned against the boat, and his
laughter rang out on the night air. “ A very
pretty display of primitive human passions,”
he said. “ Eh, my Rick ? D’ye not admire
the tact —the finesse —with which I handle
them ? As pretty a crew of cut-throats as
ever sailed with Henry Morgan ! Or yet Lol-
lonais ! On a small scale.”
“ Cut-throats, eh ! ” growled I in answer.
“ If you’d left the muskets and the pistol in
their hands, my uncle, you’d have been, ere
now, feeding the fishes.”
“ I’m not ungrateful, Rick. I’ve never mixed
yet with the scum of the earth ; therefore realise
them somewhat imperfectly. Still, they suited
my purpose well. I’d needed a backing to
treat with my brother.”
“ And your business is with rogues, not with
honest men.”


“ Have it so if you wish, Rick,” easily. “ Yet,
if you’ll throw in your lot with mine, and aid
me to lift the treasure —egad, why not to-night ?
You and I to-night! We’ll slip away —and
have the pickings of the treasure while they
sleep ! ’Twould be safer ! And I should relish
the thought of my worthy friend Bult, when he
knew. How d’ye say, Rick ? ”
I hesitated for an instant. I would have
followed him, welcoming the chance of evading
the sealers, but for the thought of my father
and the rest on the other island. And though
I was prepared to make alliance with my uncle
against the sealers, I could not make common
cause with him against my father, for I did
believe that he would yet outwit my uncle; and
that the longer I might keep my gentleman’s
fingers off the treasure, the more assured was
my father’s success. Therefore I answered:
“ We’ve no chance of reaching the galleon to-
night. You don’t realise the difficulty of the
country between here and the place where she’s
stranded. We’ll have to make the best of it;
and if these gentry play any tricks, try the
persuasion of our pistols.”
He leaned forward, and his wicked eyes
gleamed into mine. “My Rick,” he said,
grinning, “ I verily believe that you’ve more


brains than I credited to you. How if I exert
my authority and insist ? ”
“ You can’t compel me ! ”
“ Oh, for a slim Malacca cane ! ” my uncle
sighed, laughing, as he drew back. “ Rick,
never stood a lad so much in need of a flogging !
Lacking the cane —and, indeed, I never stood
preceptor to youth —I must needs waive my
authority. So, then, we remain here for the
night! ”
“ Unless you’re prepared,” I ventured, “ to
quit the island ; and put out now for Wild Dog.”
“ An Ingleby,” said my uncle, “ knows every
emotion save fear. Nay, my lad, we’ll wait
here; and to-morrow we’ll dragoon these
fellows into doing our bidding. Are you tired,
Rick ? ”
“ No —why ? ”
“ My dear lad, I’ve not had enough sleep for
a night or more. I can scarce keep my eyes
open. Yet I’ve no wish to close them for ever.”
“ You’re right,” said I. “ The sealers may give
trouble. I’ll keep watch, till the moon goes
down ; then I’ll rouse you.”
“ Good lad ! Take my pistol, lad —I’ll trust
you. Don’t spare to use it, if these gentry
show! Egad, how tired I am! Rouse me,
then, in an hour or so. We’ll share the watches


—as we’ll share the treasure. Good-night,
Rick ! ”
“ Good-night,” I said ; and while he climbed
into the stern of the boat, I perched myself in
the bows, my hands gripping the pistols.
I heard him drag the sails towards him to form
a couch ; and presently, glancing back, I marked
him wrapped in his cloak, with his hat drawn
over his brows.
Pulling my coat about me, I settled down
then to my watch. I marked, through the
blackness of the scrub, the red glow of the
sealers’ camp fire, and heard at intervals the low
murmur of their voices. The moon was still
clear and white on the sea, and the thin line
of sand was clearly defined; but, save for
the break of fire, the scrub made a blue-black
line; and the darkness and haze of the sea
enfolded the island. The wind murmured with
the sound of many whispering voices. The
surge of the surf on the bar was monotonous
and mournful. Again, as I sat in the boat, the
melancholy of the isle oppressed my spirits;
again the place seemed peopled with phantoms,
and the centuries’ dead tragedy of lust for
treasure shaped itself as a pageant before me.
I watched the silver sands with straining eyes.
I watched the scrub and heard the footsteps


and the voices. But suddenly the spell was
rent by the piping voice of the Cockney, Spills,
coming from the group about the fire, in the
most villainous perversion of a song.
“ All run after me, sir, me!
For ven purty fellows ve.
Purty maids are frank and free! ”
I guessed what carousal they made; and I
dreaded attack upon us, when their brains were
fired with grog.
“ Gad a mercy ; diwle’a in me !
All the lidies vish to vin me;
For their stays a takin’ measure,
For the lidies, oh, the pleasure !
Oh, such temptin’ looks they gimmee !
Vishin’ o’ my heart to nimmee !
Pat, and cry, you divvle, Jimmy ! ’
sang Mr. Spills; and laughter echoed out of the
scrub.
And so for the better part of an hour they
drank and sang ; until I heard them cursing
and quarrelling among themselves. Silence fell
then, save for the murmur of the wind, and the
drear monotone of the sea. The moon was
dying; and the bay was paling into a dull
grey from its resplendent silver and blue.
Bats flitted through the night; the footsteps
trod in the scrub; and the voices murmured.


I must have dozed ! I seemed to be falling
forward ! And all at once I was looking startled
into the villainous face of the Cockney, and he
was grinning malevolently upon me. I had
him covered on the instant, and hurriedly he
bobbed back.
“ What d’ye want here ? ” I snarled, leaning
towards him.
“ Nothink—nothink, young covey,” said Mr.
Spills discomfited, as he withdrew into the dark-
ness. “ I vos only thinkin’, only thinkin’—that’s
all!”


CHAPTER XXV
THE CAVE OF THE BATS
The moon was dead; and the East paled for the
dawn, ere I roused my uncle. All this time I
had not slept again ; but, dreading some new
mischief from Spills and his fellows, had sat
through the chill, dark hours, watching for their
coming. They had made no further effort to
molest us before I woke my uncle to take his
turn at watching. At my touch he started up
instantly, and sat peering at me through the
dawn.
“ Why, Rick —why, Rick,” cried he, “ this
isn’t kind! Here’s the mom nigh, and you
haven’t roused me till now.”
“ I did not want to sleep,” I answered, “ so
I let you take your fill.”
“ And you’ve watched the whole night !
My lad, you’re over generous. No sign of
our friends ? ”
“ Spills was down once, poking about the


boat,” I answered. “ I ordered him off, and
he w T ent. They’ve not been nigh since. Here’s
the pistols. You may need them.”
“ Thank’ee, my lad,” he said, peering toward
the reflection of the sealers’ fire. “ They’re very
quiet. I take it they’re lying snoring—drunk
with the spirits. Get to sleep, Rick ; I’ll keep
watch.”
I climbed forward accordingly to the bed of
sails he had just quitted, and, pulling the canvas
about me, fell instantly to sleep. I slept
soundly, and did not wake till the sun was hot
on my face —I was aroused then only by the
sound of voices. My uncle was perched with
his legs dangling over the side of the boat, and,
as I rubbed my eyes and sat up, I marked the
four sealers gathered in a sullen group upon the
sands.
“ Ah, Rick,” cried my uncle, “ you’ve slept
well. I have been engaged in a brief personal
explanation with our friends here. I’m sorry
I’ve roused you before your time.”
“ Wot I ses is ” began the sealer Bult
aggressively.
“ My good fellow,” said my uncle smoothly,
as he played suggestively with the pistols,
“ you’ve already said too much. You’re wont
to.”


“ Stow it,” growled the sealer. “ Oh, stow
it! My mates and me—talkin’ things over
like —has made up our minds to this yer. We
shares, and we shares alike ! ”
“ Precisely,” said my uncle, smoothly. “ You
share and you share alike. I’ve promised you a
fair return —not a penny more. The treasure’s
mine and my nephew’s. We’ll take our fill,
and pay you for the trouble of lifting it.”
“But, mister,” piped the Cockney, “I’ve
been thinkin’ ”
“ You were thinking over a pretty bit of
treachery last night, my friend,” my uncle
snarled. “ Had I been keeping watch, and
not my nephew, you’d have ceased to think —
once and for all. Mark me now, my men ! —I
have these pistols and this pretty bit of steel.
You’re unarmed. Might’s right; and the right
is mine. It’s no purpose of mine to rook you;
and I promise you a fair bargain. But I dic-
tate —not you! We start in search of the
gold and gems a half-hour hence —I command ;
you obey. Is that understood ? Of course ’tis
understood; for I have the cards,” and his
fingers played suggestively with the trigger.
They growled and muttered among them-
selves, and there was the very devil of hate
and greed in the little Cockney’s glittering eyes.


But they made no attempt to molest us, though,
gripping the jewelled dagger, I was expecting
them each instant to fling themselves upon us,
for all the deterrent pistols.
My uncle laughed in light and bitter mockery,
whereat old Bult quivered like a wild beast
beneath the lash of a showman’s whip.
“ There’s biscuit and dried fish in the locker
there, Rick,” said my uncle. “ Get out enough
for their breakfast. I take it they’re hungry.”
I found the food, and, gathering it in hand-
fuls, I passed it over the side to Cody, who
received it much as a snarling animal a bone.
But, taking it, they withdrew from the boat,
muttering and cursing among themselves; and
presently they passed up the beach to their
camp fire.
“ Rick,” said my uncle, “ you were right!
They’re a savage crew. But I hold the whip,
and they perforce obey.”
Until you’re off your guard,” I answered.
“ Then we’re likely to take a crack on the head
or a slit throat for our pains.”
M y good fellow, you’ll not find me winking.
But I’m deucedly hungry, Rick, though the
fare s the poorest. Some of that biscuit, pray,
my lad; and a little fish. There’s water in
that barrel—give me the cup ! ”


Silently I passed him the food and water
and took my own fill. The sun was high above
us ; the sea and the isle alight with the colours
of opal. Save for the shriek of sea fowl and
the rumble of surf on the reef there came no
sound from the island. And yet, I had a pre-
monition that my father and the rest were
astir, and that I might hope speedily for succour.
And I had a fanciful notion that my father
would yet outwit my uncle, and that the
precious gentleman and his company of sealers
would never set finger on the treasure. It was
my purpose accordingly to delay my uncle and
the sealers as long as possible from reaching
the galleon. As I sat, munching my biscuit
and looking out on the day, I recollected sud-
denly the cave of the painted rocks, whence
Roddy and I had fled at the sight of the skeleton.
It would serve at least the purpose of delay, I
thought, to conduct them thither ?
Within the space of half an hour the sealers
came slouching down to the beach —each man
among them with his tobacco pipe stuck between
his lips. I marked them for an evil rapscallion
crew ; and I should have marvelled still at my
uncle’s selection of his company, save that I
realised he was keen bent on the removal of
the treasure, and that the means to that end


counted with him not a whit, if only he might
achieve his purpose. He sat with his legs
swinging over the side of the boat—a fine and
slim and handsome gentleman, spick and span,
save for the scrubby yellow beard showing upon
his chin.
“ Now, my men,” cried my uncle.
“ Now, mister,” piped Jemmy Spills, respon-
sive.
“ Are you ready, Rick ? ” demanded my uncle
of me.
“ I’m ready, yes.”
“ Well, then, we’ll wait upon your pleasure ! ”
“ VVe’ll take a look at the cave first, then —
up there,” I said, pointing toward the cliffs.
“ That’s where the painted cave lies. We ought
to find something there. Later I’ll take you
to the galleon—on an understanding.”
“ That you have your share ? ” queried my
uncle, “ Can you doubt it, Rick ? ”
“ If I did,” I said, slipping over the side of
the boat, “ I’d not stir a step. You’d better
tell these fellows to bring a lantern —if you’ve
got one —and those ropes and a sack.”
He slipped one of the pistols into my hand;
and I set it ready in my pocket. The dagger
was stuck in my belt. He waved his hand and
issued his orders to the sealers, who, though


black and scowling, responded readily enough.
I led the party then along the sands to the
cliffs —the sealers coming after me, my uncle
taking the precaution of bringing up the rear,
that he might have an eye to the company, and
use his pistol in the event of a sudden onslaught
on me. All the way Jemmy Spills carolled in
his thin cracked voice ; the rest went on in
silence. But, when we climbed over the rocks,
and stood at the mouth of the creeper-hung
cave, even Mr. Spills w T as awed to silence. The
creepers, falling like green water from the cliff,
murmured, as if with mournful voices; the sea
sobbed under the rocks; and the breeze made
moan. The entrance to the cave was black
like a great tomb ; and the very blaze of sunshine
on the yellow terrace before it accentuated the
gloom of the deep hollow.
“ Light the lantern ! ” said I to Spills, who
carried it.
Silently he kindled a light, and lit the oily
wick; and, taking the lantern from him, I
entered the cave, the sealers and my uncle
coming at my heels. The lantern lit up the
entrance, as if the sand and stone were studded
with tiny flakes of gold. The red cross, and the
wrecked galleon, and the figures of Spaniards
and Indians stood out upon the avails. Ihe


skeleton was revealed, grinning, yellow with
age —every vestige of clothes gone, only the
bones lying at our feet. I heard Jemmy Spills’s
teeth commence to chatter, as he drew back;
but nerving myself I strode forward into the
darkness of the cave. From the great entrance
a black tunnel ran back into the heart of the
cliff. The lamp, flickering, gave only a pale
light; and I could make out nothing save the
glittering mica flakes. I could hear something
flap over my head ; but the others seemed not
to notice it, and came stumping at my heels.
The sand tinkled under our feet, for the way
was dry ; save for that we went in silence. The
blackness enveloped us. The tunnel extended
into the cliff, I judged, for the space of nigh a
hundred yards. The roof was high above our
heads ; but the space allowed us only to go
in single file. And suddenly the lamp revealed
that we stood in a great chamber of rock—and
the mica flakes in the stone, catching the lamp-
light, revealed its roof and walls. I say the
cavern was lit faintly as by the light from the
roof through a pane of mica, and in it were shown
all things dimly. I saw a great pillar of rock,
like the trunk of a lightning-stricken tree. I
saw revealed upon it the dim outline of a figure,
with a curious green bar of light coming from


the roof upon it —a figure that still wore many
jewels and had a circlet of gold like a sun about
the black hair coiled at its bony head. Red
jewels burnt among the finger bones ; red jewels
upon the breast —jewels that woke into twinkling
lamps at the light of the lantern. And at its
head something quivered and stirred —something
dim and indefinable —something that flew up
suddenly flapping into the darkness above us.
At that Jemmy Spills let out a shriek, and
taking to his heels, dashed into the tunnel, and
after him went the sealers, stumbling and
cursing. And only my uncle and I were left
shuddering alone in the cavern —alone in the
great stifling sepulchre, where lay the bones
of the Inca’s daughter —I knew it, I knew it —
with the red gems glittering upon her; and the
sacred sun burning about her skull. The shriek
of Spills and the flapping of the great bat had
stirred the denizens of the cave. They whirled
in a rigadoon like shades; they piped shrilly
with the thin voices of ghosts ; they flapped as
phantoms, and all the cave whirred with their
flapping. Sick and shuddering I would have
raced after the sealers —save for my uncle. His
laughter came echoing and defiant; and he
leaped forward to the broken pillar of rock,
whereon the skeleton rested. The bats came


whirling about him; piping, flapping; but I
saw him, through that cloud, snatch the golden
sun from the head and pluck the rings from the
dead fingers and the necklet from the neck.
The skull fell down and rolled towards me;
and still he laughed, and still the whirl of bats
grew denser. I saw the great bat flap down
as if to strike his face; and all at once the
lantern was plucked from my hands, as if with
ghostly fingers; and all was blackness save
for the arrow of green light. I could endure
no more. A bat flew into my face ; and with a
yell of panic, I turned and raced from the cave,
and into the throng of sealers gathered about
its mouth.
“ ’Anted ! ” cried Spills. “ The place is
’anted ! ’Ark to ’em ! ’Ark—they’re cornin’ !
’Ear them ! ”
But, as we recoiled from the cave, my uncle
slipped suddenly into the light. He w'as ghastly
pale; and the sw r eat ran from his face, and
the red sand stuck in the sweat like smears of
blood. In his right hand burnt the circlet of
gold —all sulphurous yellow and crimson and
green light it was, in the sudden blaze of the
sun ; and in the palm of his left hand the rubies
were red as blood, and his wrist was licked by
the necklet like a tongue of blood-red flame.


CHAPTER XXVI
DEAD MEN’S GOLD
My uncle pocketed the jewels with perfect
composure. The golden sun he strung to his
belt; and I marked how the sealers shrunk
from him with horror.
“ Beg pardon, mister,” growled Bult at last,
touching his greasy forelock.
“ Well, my man,” purred my uncle.
“ You’re not after takin’ them gew-gaws with
ye, mister ? ” asked Bult.
“ Why, to be sure ! ” my uncle answered,
grinning.
“ Dead man’s money is dead man’s money
still—ain’t that so, mister ? ”
“ Ay, ay,” the sealers muttered, responsive.
“ My good fellow,” responded my uncle,
“ you’re illogical. The whole treasure of the
galleon is dead man’s money —according to
your interpretation. And this is very precious
gold ; and the gems are worth a small fortune


in London or Amsterdam. I don’t see the
force of your objection. When I tell you that
you, one and all, receive your share, maybe
you’ll waive it.”
“ That party in there,” persisted Bult, wagging
his finger at the cave, “ was wearin’ them gew-
gaws ? You took ’em from that party. And
mark my words, no good’ll come of it. Bettei
put ’em back.”
“ You’re a damned fool ! ” swore my uncle.
“ The gold and the jewels are mine; in part
yours.”
o'
“ We’ll not set fingers on ’em,” growled the
sealers. “No good’ll come of ’em ! ”
“ Then,” cried my uncle, “ I’ll relieve you of
all responsibility. I took the gold and jewels ;
and they’re mine ! You’ll take your pay from
the stuff on the ship. Now it’s getting late, and
we’d best be stepping. Come, Rick ! ”
I shared the horror of the sealers, that he
had robbed the dead. I could not have set
fingers on the gems upon the Inca’s daughter.
I drew from him sickly, and without a word
I left them and commenced to make my way
across the beach toward the cliffs, that I might
lead them to the galleon. Muttering, the
sealers followed at my heels ; and after them
my uncle stepped jauntily, his rapier swinging


at his flank, his fingers clenched upon his
pistol. In comparative silence then we left
the beach, and climbed up to the baking, sun-
burnt cliffs.
An hour thence we stood looking down upon
the blackened remnant of the scrub, whence
the fire that Roddy and I had kindled had
swept. The wattles stuck up from the black
and grey ashes in blackened rods, and the tree-
ferns were scorched pillars ; but the fire, though
it had swept the gully, had burnt out in the
thick green scrub that encircled the tunnel to
the haunted spring. Green was the scrub that
day —an evil green, tossed by the sea wind
like a writhing dragon of green, murmuring as
with many voices. I felt the prescience of its
evil, even as I stood with my uncle and the
sealers on the cliffs looking down into the gully.
“ Your fire, Rick ? ” my uncle said. “ That
was your signal to us, eh ? ”
“ Yes ! The spring lies in the scrub there !
We have to make that way, and reach those
cliffs. The galleon lies in the hollow beyond.”
“ A dreary place,” my uncle said reflectively.
“ And peopled still,” I answered.
“ How peopled ? ” sneered my uncle. “My
good lad, you’re as superstitious as these fellows
here.”


I would have slid without word more down
the cliff side into the track by which Roddy
and I had come. But sudden, from the evil
green cloud of the scrub, came a cry so terrible
and shrill, that one and all of us recoiled and
stood, white-faced and staring. Evil and shrill,
and flung back by the rocks in evil and shrill
echoing ! The sealers broke into sudden harsh
blasphemings ; but my uncle’s laughter rang
out on the w r ind.
“ Don’t larf,” piped the Cockney. “ For
Gawd’s sake don’t larf like that, mister ! It’s
’er ! ”
“ Spills, you’re the veriest of fools ! Her —
who ? ”
“ Why, ’er ’oose skellington was in the cave !
’Er with the long ’air ! ’Er ’oose gew-gaws are
clinkin’ in yer pockets —that’s ’oo, mister —
that’s ’oo ! ”
“My men,” cried my uncle, “ whether you
like it or not, I’m going down ! ”
“ We’re not ! ” growled Bult.
“ Stay here, then, and lose your share.
You hear a bird screech, and you’re ready to
take to your heels and let the treasure go. If
you want to stay, stay ; but not a bit of gold
or a gem goes into your pockets. Now, Rick ! ”
Gripping the creepers then, I climbed down


the cliff; and, muttering still, the sealers came
after, with my uncle climbing down last. I
shuddered still for the terror of the cry. It
suggested to me nothing, save that the place
was haunted still; and that the voice gave
utterance to the terror of the dead that lurked
there. And yet I went on by the track amid
the burnt tree-ferns, for all my dread; and
after me the sealers and my uncle came, their
footsteps crunching among the cinders, and
the grey ash flying up in fine dust. Silently
w r e passed over the burnt ground ; silently we
came to the entrance of the green tunnel to
the spring. I saw that the fire had burnt the
dead leaves and the oaken needles on the path,
although it had left nigh unscathed the tangle
of green parasites, and the boughs that grew
over it. It occurred to me suddenly that the
cry which had come shrilling up had been
uttered by one of my friends, and that some-
where in the scrub they lay hid ; and that they
were bent upon my rescue and the frustration
of my uncle’s designs upon the treasure. Reason
asserting itself then, my terrors vanished from
my brain like smoke. In silence I beckoned
to the sealers to follow after, and crept into
the tunnel. Their greed conquered their terrors.
An instant they remained muttering among


themselves, and then the little Cockney set
the example by slipping after me, and his com-
panions followed. So we went wriggling like
snakes down the tunnel, even as Roddy and I
had gone. It took us, it might have been
twenty minutes, to reach the spring; and by
the time we drew out into the open space, and
stood upright, the sweat dropped from us for
the heat. The bubbling stream was sweet
music; and every man of us dropped on his
knees and filled his hands, and drank great
draughts of the water. The sun had made
golden bars on the grass at our entrance into
the haunted place; but it seemed, as if by
design, that it went out, and left us in the deep,
green gloom.
“ Well, my men,” my uncle laughed, “ where’s
your ghost ? I see no sign of her. Egad, what
a set of fools you are ! ”
“ Don’t larf so, mister ! ” the Cockney pro-
tested.
“Ay, stop your cacklin’,” muttered Cody;
“ I heard somethin’ then.”
“ My good fool ” my uncle began, still
grinning; but instantly he fell to silence, and
stood alert and poised like a fine and startled
animal. The footsteps came; I vow the
footsteps shuffled among the dead leaves and


the grass ; and the voices muttered and mur-
mured about us —the voices of dead men, the
voices of ghosts ! And the green light was evil
about us still.
Again I shuddered lest I had been mistaken
in my belief that the cry was the voice of one
of my friends ; again the horror of the haunted
place crept over me like sickness ! Shuffle of
footsteps, murmur of voices, the melancholy
soughing of the wind in the branches above us —
The voice ! Ay, the voice, awful and agonised—
yet menacing—nigh us ! Instantly the Cockney
let out a yell, and, stumbling forward, ran up the
gully that led toward the sand dunes. After
him went the sealers ; after them went we.
But my uncle was muttering savagely in my
ear, “ The fools! The fools ! That was no
ghost! That was my precious brother, or one
of your friends. My Rick, I’ll have the treasure ;
by gad, I’ll have the treasure, though it cost me
a brother and a nephew! Mark me, I’ll have
the treasure ! ”
I plucked myself from his detaining fingers,
and raced after the sealers. The sun was gone
behind a black mass of clouds ; but the dead gully
through the sand dunes was stifling in its heat.
The sweat dropped from me as I stumbled on.
I did not overtake the sealers till I came out


on the grassy space, where the great bell hung
between the rocking stones.
Jemmy Spills, yet shuddering with terror,
perched like a gnome upon the rock ; the three
sealers, malevolent and evil-eyed, leaned against
one of the boulders.
“My covey ! ” piped Spills, at sight of me.
“My covey, this ’ere’s the diwle’s own dance
you’re leadin’ us.”
“ I’m leading you to the treasure,” I answered.
“ I can’t help it if you’re scared.”
“ The hisland’s ’anted ! ” protested Mr.
Spills. “ I tell you, my covey, the hisland’s
’anted ! ”
“ That’s for you to judge ! ” I answered,
withdrawing from them.
“ Ay —an’ maybe’s it’s like yet to be ’anted
by the ghost of a young swab an’ ’is fine gentle-
man uncle ! ” growled Cody, taking his pipe
and commencing to fill it.
I marked then the glitter of a knife in Jemmy
Spills’s hands. I marked that the young sealer
gripped an ugly bludgeon, that he must have
found in the sand dunes. I marked that Bult
had been cutting his tobacco, and that Cody
fingered something beneath his jacket. Dread-
ing a sudden attack on me I gripped my pistol,
and would have covered them on the instant,


feeling that the storm which had threatened us
since first we landed on the island was even then
about to burst. But my uncle came stepping
across the turf, composed and smiling, with his
rapier swinging at his flank, and his left hand
stuck in his pocket, where he had placed his
pistol.
“ Well, my men,” said my uncle, smiling upon
them evenly. “ Well, none of you have fallen
victim yet to your ghost ? ”
“ We’ve stood nigh enough, mister,” barked
young Cody. “ Mark me ! ”
“ I shall be compelled to do so,” purred my
uncle, “ if you continue mutinous, my friend.
Now, Rick —which way ? ”
I turned to point whither the galleon lay.
And suddenly I stood, as if transfixed. For I
saw a great pillar of smoke fly up from the
deep bowl below the cliffs; and well I knew
that my uncle and his following were fore-
stalled ; and that my friends had been at work ;
and that the galleon went up in flame. My
companions saw it on that instant, one and all;
and, with a roar, were racing forward, my uncle
and I coming after. I marked how his wrath
cnflamed him, like a fine savage animal. We
were on the edge of the cliffs presently, and
looking down into the bowl. The smoke filled
8


it as if it were the crater of a volcano. The
ship was shrouded in smoke; but the flames
leaped high into the heavens, and the roar of
the fire was mighty. As breathless we stood
an instant, the decks gave way, for a roar of
flame went up ; and the sparks whirled into the
air. My uncle’s bitter cry of rage broke the
spell upon us.
“By hell,” cried Bult, “ what game’s this
you’d play with us, my gentleman ? ”
“ Ay,” gasped the Cockney, “ what’s the
gime ? ”
My uncle, drawing back from the edge of
the bowl, whipped his rapier from his side,
and his pistol threatened. And then I saw
that the sealers were armed —one and all. They
had each man a knife, for all our clearing of
the boat, and the young sealer gripped his
club.
“ You’ve tricked us, cap’n,” Cody roared.
“ And now, by hell, you’ll pay ! ”
“ Keep back,” my uncle said, and his voice
cut through the air like steel. “ I warn you;
don’t come nigh me! What game —what
trick, say you ? Ask him ! Ask the boy
there ! ”
I had my pistol levelled against them. I
gripped my dagger. My heart beat madly in


my breast for terror; and yet for the rage of
them, and for the baffling of my uncle, I laughed
upon them. Shrilly enough and falsely, I don’t
doubt; but still I laughed.
“ Is this your work ? ” gasped Cody, mouth-
ing at me. “Is this your golden ship —this
yer ? ”
“My work ! ” barked I ; “my work ! How
should it be my work ? Haven’t I been with
you since last night ? ”
“ If not your work,” my uncle cried, white
with rage, “ at least your father’s work ! ”
“ Ay —I don’t doubt that! Not a piece of
gold nor a jewel will any of you touch. You’re
outdone ! Ay —and so much as seek to lay a
finger on me, and I’ll promise you, one and all,
you’ll dance yet in the air with a rope about
your neck. Keep back, Cody —or I’ll put a
bullet through you.”
They hung, poised and waiting, in an evil,
menacing half-ring. The knives they held
quivered in their hands for their rage, even as
the rapier in my uncle’s grip quivered and
shimmered in the sun.
“ Take him ! ” my uncle said.
They leaped upon me. My pistol cracked,
but, for all their closeness, missed, and the
young sealer’s bludgeon smashed upon my


shoulder, and sent the dagger ringing to the
ground. Bult’s hands were tearing at my
throat for all my frantic struggling, and I saw
the gleam of Cody’s uplifted knife, and death
came down from it. But it fell suddenly into
my face, cutting my cheek in its passing, and
Bult was flung from me by a grip of steel. And
I had tumbled back, and lay sick and bruised
and bleeding, and staring up at the pretty play
between my uncle and the sealers. His pistol
cracked, and old Cody went back, cursing
foully, and gripping at his left arm; and his
companion rogues flung themselves instantly
upon my uncle. Astride me he evaded them.
His rapier burnt the air like flame. His breath
hissed through his lips. Knife quivering in his
hand, old Bult leaped upon him. The rapier
met him fully in the breast; an instant he
stood with knife uplifted ; and then fell into
the grass at the very edge of the cliff, and lay
there writhing, moaning, gasping. My uncle’s
laughter echoed through the air; and, bending
low, he caught old Cody’s staggering rush upon
the point of the rapier. He struck fairly. The
rapier caught the sealer below the breast bone ;
and his recoil whirled the sword from my
uncle’s hand. I saw the sealer’s huge figure
stand out upon the cliff an instant, ere he


collapsed and slid down with a crash and
whirl of rubble into the depths below. But
still were left the Cockney Spills and the lithe
young sealer, Cody ; and now my uncle was
weaponless, and with his bare hands must
meet their onslaught. The Cockney raced in,
his knife high to strike my uncle down; but
ray uncle’s fist cracked upon his jaw, and like
a log the fellow tumbled over and lay still.
I snatched the knife from his hand ; and
staggered to my feet to mark my uncle and the
young sealer now locked in an embrace that
only death could sever. My uncle gripped the
right wrist of the sealer, and the knife stuck up
into the air. My uncle’s left hand clenched
upon the sealer’s throat; but Cody twisted his
wrist as if to crack its bones. Sick and shaken,
I sought my opportunity to aid my uncle;
but my sight was dim, and my head mazed
with my fall; and, ere I might strike, the
struggling pair had whirled past me, and hung
upon the very edge of the cliff. I screamed
out then with terror, for it seemed that the
two must go down to death on the terraces below.
Both knew their peril, for I heard the sealer’s
choking cry of terror, and I marked my uncle’s
face white as very death ; his lips parted ; his
blue eyes strained and staring. His will


triumphed on the instant. The sudden terror
of the sealer aided him. I saw my uncle dis-
engage himself suddenly, and leap back into
safety. The sealer’s scream rent the air, as he
fell backwards over the cliff.


CHAPTER XXVII
FORTITUDE OF MY UNCLE
For the horror of the scene I lost consciousness
for the time. I lay there in the grass senseless ;
it might have been for half an hour. I woke
to lie awhile, staring up at the sun in a break
of the clouds ; to hear the moan of the sea,
the sweep of the wind, the endless lamentation
of the sea fowl. The blood upon my face was
drying, but the slash across my cheek throbbed
cruelly. This gave me recollection, and, sitting
up, I blinked at my uncle, who stood like a
lifeless statue looking down upon the bowl,
whence the smoke yet curled. The body of
the sealer Bult lay on the grass where he had
fallen ; and the turf was dabbled with scarlet;
but there was no sign of the little Cockney
Spills. It occurred to me on the instant that
my uncle had tumbled him down the cliffs
with the bodies of Cody and his son. As I


stirred, my uncle turned and looked upon me,
grinning.
“ Ah, Rick,” he said ; “ better ? ”
“ Ay, I’m better,” I answered, regarding him
sickly. “ Where’s Spills ? ”
“ The precious gentleman,” my uncle said,
laughing, “ has judged discretion to be the
better part of valour. He pulled himself
together, before I dealt with him as he deserved.
He’s somewhere —hiding. ’
“ Your venture has not prospered,” I said,
with bitterness.
“ Nay —it hasn’t prospered. I gave my good
brother too little credit for his brain. He’s
tricked me.”
“ You’ve seen no sign of my father and the
rest ? ” I asked, standing up dizzily.
“ Not a sign. I take it they’re on the island.
They must have heard the shots. My nephew,
I’m afraid you have in you the makings of a
very pretty liar. But one approach to the
island, said you ? And yet they did not come
that way; and yet they fired the galleon.”
“ I take it,” said I, “ that they’ve found it
possible to land through the cave down there,”
I answered. 44 I don’t know another waj.
You’ve to remember that the sea was calm
last night; and the approach should be easier


than when Scorne and I were washed through
the other day.”
“ And I was labouring under the delusion
that they had no boat,” my uncle said. “ I
tell you this, Rick—if I had, I should have
dealt with them ere I left Wild Dog last night.”
“ They had a boat,” I answered, relishing his
discomfiture. “They may be down in the
cave now. Shall we climb down and see ? ”
“ Not I! ” my uncle answered. “ I’ve no
wish yet to meet my brother. Naturally
And he’s not likely to have left a speck of
treasure in the galleon.”
I looked down into the hollow. The smoke
came still, but thinly; and I made out the
ruin of the galleon as a great mass of coals
and flame. My heart rejoiced then to know
that my father had triumphed over my uncle’s
trickery, and that he, doubtless, held the
treasure. Yet all the while I wondered that
he and Jeremy and Roddy had not heard the
pistol shots, and, guessing my peril, had not
come racing to my assistance.
At least,” my uncle said easily, “ I have
a thousand pounds’ worth of jewels and gold
about me. And even if my brother demand
the knife there with the jewels, I have a pretty
payment for my night’s venture. The rapier—
8*


I regret the rapier—yet I am not minded to
climb down the cliffs to find it. Unless you,
Rick, be prompted by desire to have that pretty
piece of steel ”
“ Not I 1 ” I answered. “ I’ve taken enough
risks in your company, my uncle.”
He stood looking upon me with a curious
light in his eyes. “ I like you, lad,” he said,
and his voice quivered as the strings of the
fiddle whereon he had conjured up the vision of
the galleon. “My lad, I like you. I have
spared none ere this, who has stood between
me and my will. I tell you but half an hour
since I was more than minded to give you to
the sealers, and so to strike my brother —
through you to strike my brother. I spared
you.”
“ I’m not denying that,” I said. “ I’m not
ungrateful. I know you saved my life.”
“ And after all, any hurt to you,” my uncle
mused, “ could have served no purpose of mine
—save only to strike my brother.”
“You hate my father; you have always
hated him,” I said bitterly. “ Why ? ”
“ Why, Rick, who knows the reason of love
and hate ? Solve the riddle, and you are
wiser than any man in the world yet. I never
loved my brother; I know not why, for once


he loved me. I came to hate him, long ere he
robbed me of the thing I wanted most. I
hated him—l know not why. And yet I love
you, Rick. I know not why—save that you
be your mother’s son.”
I had distaste for his theme. I had no
feeling of love for him—how could I have ?
and yet I had no hate. I only said, “ While
we talk here, the fellow Spills will have stolen
the boat and got away. If you’ll not come
down to the cave to find my father, at least
let us get back to the boat.”
“ Those poor fools there are dead, I take it,”
said my uncle, peering over the cliff. “ A fall
of two hundred feet would put an end to any
man. Rick, it might have been you and I
who lay there broken like eggs. It might have
been I—and yet I live ! And yet I’ve a thousand
guineas as good as clinking about me. And yet,
if I survive my brother’s displeasure, I’ve
thirty years of London before me! I live;
and the sun shines ; and this gold is yellow;
and these gems burn like red and blue lamps.
Ay, Rick, we’ll be stepping, if you’re well enough.”
“ I’m well enough,” I answered, mopping
my blood-stained cheek with my kerchief,
and snatching up the blue-jewelled dagger which
lay in the grass.


He nodded easily, and, without glancing at
the body of Bult he strode away, I following
after. The noon was high now, for the sun
burnt in the height of the heavens. The heat
was stifling, for the wind was almost dead. We
went by the bell, and down among the sand
dunes ; and we came to the spring, where we
drank our fill, and I washed away the blood
from my cheek. But, I knew r not the reason, I
heard no more the footsteps or the voices; and
1 had lost my terror of the place —maybe,
because the horror of that grim struggle on the
cliffs had driven forth the craven terror of
imagination. A while we rested there in the
shade, ere we crawled through the green tunnel,
and crossed the burnt ground. For my sick
weariness and overstrained nerves I could go
but slowly over the broken ground, and must
needs have the support of my uncle’s arm. I
had no horror for him, no aversion. I had no
feeling save of regret that he, who possessed
indeed the gift of leadership and the qualities
that make men great, was by the trick of
destiny the veriest villain. And all the while
we saw no sign of Jemmy Spills; nor yet of my
father and the rest; and my belief was that,
when we came down to the beach, we should
find no trace of the boat, and that Jemmy Spills


was already sailing off with what speed he might
to the haunts of the sealers among the islands.
Ere we came out upon the cliffs the sky had
become overcast with clouds, as for a thunder-
storm. The breeze was changing to the south,
but it came faintly yet; and the waters at
our feet were still, save for the thunder on the
reefs and at the bases of the cliffs. The storm
approached with such density, and with so
thick a sea haze, that, although it was only
nigh early afternoon it seemed that the darkness
of night approached. Therefore, though we
hurried down towards the beach, we could
make out nothing, and knew not whether the
boat lay there still, nor whether it had been put
to sea. Ere we reached the edge of the cliffs,
to climb down to the beach, the storm broke.
The wind surged up suddenly from the south.
The thunder rolled in the heavens like great
guns, and the lightning flamed through the
murk in bolts of silver fire. The clouds burst;
and the rain came down as a deluge. We were
compelled for a while to seek shelter under an
overhanging rock; and there, wet and miser-
able, we waited until the violence of the storm
was spent. It passed speedily as it had come ;
and the clouds swept on like the wings of a
great bird. The sun blazed again in a sky of


vivid blue, and the sea borrowed its colour.
Drawn still on the beach we marked the boat;
but in it sat a man, I knew him even at that
distance, and my joyous cry went echoing down
the cliffs. And I left my uncle’s side, and was
racing over the sands to meet my father, who,
leaping from the boat, came at a swinging stride
towards me. Then, for the first time in my
remembrance, his arms were clasped about me,
and I was laughing and blubbering like a fool.
“ Dick —safe, my lad —safe, thank God ! ”
“ Ay —safe, father —safe ! ”
“ That villain with you ? Where are his
fellows ? ”
“ Oh, it is the maddest of tales I have to tell
you —the rogues are all dead save my uncle and
one other. Didn’t you hear the shots ? Have
you got the treasure ? ”
“ I heard no shots. The treasure —that’s
still for the telling. Yourself, lad ! ”
“ I’ll tell you presently.”
“ Now, I’ve to deal with my brother,” mark-
ing my uncle come stepping slowly across the
sands. “ Wait in the boat, lad.”
“At least,” I cried, plucking his sleeve,
“ remember that he saved my life at his own
sore risk.”
He pushed me from him w T ith a rough tender-


ness and strode away to meet my uncle, while
I, dreading the event of their meeting, crept
wearily away to the boat. I saw them meet,
and marked my uncle’s offered hand, and my
father’s refusal to accept it. I marked my
father’s towering figure, and I knew that wrath
consumed him. His voice reached me across
the sands —terrible, monotonous. But never a
blow he struck; only he spoke on, and my uncle
sought in vain to interject.
The meeting between the pair lasted it seemed
to me the space of twenty minutes or more.
And at last my father came striding back to the
boat, and at his heels my uncle. My father’s
face was calm enough now; his greeting of me
good-humoured ; but my uncle’s face was set
like a mask of ivory, and his eyes revealed
nothing of the spirit within him. And not a
word spoke my father to him, as my uncle
aided him to push off the boat into deep water;
nor yet when we stepped in, and my uncle took
his seat and fell to his oar. Despite the storm
the sea was comparatively calm, and we made
the passage cleanly. My father sat wrapped
in deep thought; and, to my eager questioning
for Roddy and Jeremy, he answered only that
they should be awaiting us on Wild Dog Island ;
or come sailing to meet us. So we went silently,


I stupid with weariness, as I sat at the tiller.
And when we were at last clear of the reefs,
and my father and my uncle set the sails, I
looked back at No Man’s Island for the last
time. I saw a little figure break suddenly
from the ti-tree scrub, and dash across the
beach —the Cockney Spills. I saw him beckon
to us frantically; and heard his shrill screaming
and bitter blasphemies come echoing across the
water.
“ Spills ! ” I cried then to my father. “ That’s
the little villain, Spills —one of the sealers. Are
you going back for him ? ”
He seemed to pay no heed; but took his seat
to tend the sail. Only my uncle stood up,
looking back at the island. And his sudden
burst of laughter had all the old mockery in it.


CHAPTER XXVIII
CHAGRIN OF MY UNCLE
I WAS to have from Roddy the full story of
the manner in which he and my father and
Jeremy Otter found a means of landing on No
Man’s Island, and of tricking my uncle and
the sealers of their purpose to remove the
treasure. For I found Roddy awaiting me
when we sailed in to the landing place on Wild
Dog, in the gold of the afternoon ; and with him
Jeremy and Margaret. But all the time of our
sailing from No Man’s to Wild Dog, I had
scarce a word from my father, and none from
my uncle. I know not what had passed between
them at their meeting on the sands. I only
know that my uncle’s defiant spirit had been
quelled by the storm of wrath from my father;
and that from that time neither gave the other
a word.
My father sat tending the sail; I held the
tiller ; my uncle, lounging indolently in the boat,


set himself to the examination of the jewels
and the golden sun, which he had plucked from
the skeleton within the cave. Watching him,
I noted that the possession of these gems gave
him an exquisite pleasure, for his face expressed
it. And it seemed to me that he had forgotten,
or blotted from his mind, the scene within the
cave; and the dead thing, that once, I took
it, must have been red-lipped and beautiful,
even as he had told to the fiddle strings; and
that he had put from his mind the thought of
the blood that had run for lust of the treasure.
Howbeit, I had for him only gratitude that,
despite his first consuming rage, he had not
borne to see me murdered by the sealers ; and
at the peril of his own life had saved me from
them. And, watching him lazily as I sat in
the sun, I saw that the circlet of gold was a
choice and precious piece of workmanship; and
that at the point of each ray a little jewel was
set to form a point of rose-red flame. And the
red and the green and the blue jewels, and
the long necklet, were as so much fire in the
sun. My father must have noticed the blaze
of light in my uncle’s hands; but he made no
> and his pale and melancholy face revealed
nothing to me. Even at that hour, though I
knew well that he loved me, and that my safety


was a joy to him, I stood yet so much in awe
of him, that, though my tongue tingled to ask
questions —of Roddy and the rest and the
whereabouts of the treasure, —I dared not break
in upon his reflections ; but left him sitting
silent by the straining sail.
And now the thought of my great joy kindled
heart and mind for me. It was my father’s
purpose to return to England. And now at
last, I took it, we were about to leave Wild Dog
Island —and with us take many precious jewels
that should serve to enhance the beauty of my
mother. My heart ached for her; my soul
cried for her. For she had come out of the
shadows of my dreams and from dim memories,
that were as dreams of long ago, into an actual
existence that yet should be linked with my
own life. How I pictured her constantly—a
fair, pale, stately lady, who should win back
her happiness at our coming ; should drive the
gloom from my father’s mind, and add new
joy and delight to mine ! And, picturing her,
I could not marvel that my father should hate
my uncle, who had sought —for his own chagrin,
for his disappointment in his suit to her —to
part their lives for ever. And I found cause for
speculation, too, in the "manner of my father’s
future treatment of my uncle.


I wondered whether he purposed to let him
return to England with us; or whether he
would leave him on Wild Dog Island ; or would
part company with him at George Town. And
this much I knew, that to my father’s hate of
him had been added a new cause of bitter resent-
ment —my uncle’s removal of me from Wild
Dog on the previous night and his attempt,
with the assistance of the sealers, to trick us
of the treasure. I found myself conjecturing,
too, of the fate that should befall Jemmy
Spills on the haunted island. Food there was
in plenty, with the ship’s biscuit from the
Indus lying in soaked masses on the beach, the
mussels, and the oysters. But I knew well,
that, had I been marooned alone upon the
island, I must have gone mad with the very
terror of the gloomy woods ; the skeleton lying
within the cave; the eternal moaning of the
surf upon the bar. How should the little evil
Cockney endure the solitude ? And yet for
the memory of the assault upon the cliff, and
for the recollection of Spills’s face looking on me
from out the darkness, when I nodded on my
watch, I could not pity him.
With the comparative calm that had suc-
ceeded the thunderstorm we rounded Wild Dog
without difficulty ; and, avoiding the treacherous


currents we came with ease to the landing place.
And there upon the rocks to meet us, were
Roddy Scome, and Jeremy and Margaret; and
ere I knew, Roddy and Jeremy were shaking
my hands like pump handles; and Margaret
at intervals was seizing her opportunity to dab
kisses upon my face —the while Pitch, my dog,
slavered about me. My uncle stood by, smiling
as if gratified ; but they had no word of greet-
ing for him, and paid him no heed. My father,
leaping ashore, muttered, “ See to the boat,
Otter; and make it secure ! ” and so strode
up towards the house.
“ Shall we follow, Rick ? ” demanded my
uncle, noting, as I, the suggestive note in my
father’s voice; and realising from it that he
was concerned lest our gentleman should again
seek to slip away.
“ Presently,” I answered, “ presently. I want
a word with Roddy and my friends.”
“ Lucky Rick,” sneered my uncle, “ to have
such friends ! ”
At that Margaret Otter turned upon him
ablaze. “ Mr. Ingleby,” cried she, “ I called it an
evil night when first you set foot upon the island.”
“ Why, my good woman, if my memory serves
me aught,” he answered, “it was the very
devil of a night.”


“ And now,” she went on, “I say it was a
blessed, blessed night ! ”
“ Faith, my good Margaret, you’re incon-
sistent.”
“ A blessed night, because all the evil you
have wrought has come to nothing. Ay—and
because all the evil you did my mistress is at
an end. And because my master knows you
for the wicked man you are. And because
he’ll now go home to England ! ”
“ ’Twas why I came,” my uncle said, still
grinning at her. “If I have succeeded in per-
suading my brother to return to England, I
have not come in vain.”
She sought to beat down his jewel eyes with
hers ; and failing, she turned her back on him;
and, muttering that she must get back to prepare
supper for us, she followed my father up toward
the house. At that I cried to Jeremy and
Roddy, “ Can you see to the boat without
me ? ” and at their nods took after her. My
uncle followed me; but though he called to
me, “ Stay a moment, Rick, I’m coming with
you,” I paid him no heed, having no fancy for
speech with him; and I made off apace, with
Pitch racing and barking before me.
The sun was sinking in the west as I strode
into the house. It lit the room through the


little window panes. It blazed upon the treasure
piled high —upon a strip of canvas on the table
—on the gems; the shimmering crucifix and
rosary; the rotting bags of skin that held gold
dust. Truly they had made a clearing of the
treasure from the galleon, ere they set a fire-
stick to it. My father sat at the table ; but at
the sight of me he started up and caught my
hands in his, and so stood silently a while looking
down on me.
“You have it all,” cried I at last, peering
at the treasure.
“ Ay, we have it all. There’s fifty thousand
pounds’ worth, if I reckon it aright, my lad,”
he answered. “ May be much more. Enough
to make rich men of you and the other lad.”
“ And we’ll go back to England, all of us ? ”
said I; “ and find my mother. And be
happy ? ”
“ Ay, we’ll go back to England ; and find
your mother; and, if God wills, be happy!
And with us we’ll take every jewel and grain
of gold dust, plundered by the Spanish long
_ 35
ago.
“ Unless there be a curse upon it ”
“ God works mysteriously,” he said. “ The
treasure should have gone long since to Spain
—this treasure snatched from tortured Indians,


the toilers in the mines. It spells a solemn
obligation to you, Dick —to all of us.”
“ It means wealth and happiness,” I ventured,
looking covetously upon the glittering pile.
“It means the obligation that this wealth
wrought of misery shall go for the alleviation
of misery. For the relief of poverty —to bring
comfort to the sick, to give food to the starving !
So I read the purpose of it, Dick.”
“ But how did you succeed in getting it off
No Man’s Island ? ” asked I, “ before the
sealers came ? ”
“ That’s a long story, lad. Your friend
Scorne can tell you later. Now, while we’re
alone, tell me what passed upon the island.”
So I plunged instantly into my story. I
told him of our sailing by night; of what
passed in the darkness ; of the jewels that my
uncle plucked from the dead woman in the cave ;
of the cries from the spring ; and the assault
upon the cliff. And all the while he sat in moody
silence, his pallid face revealing nothing of his
thoughts or of his sentiment towards my uncle.
“Do I intrude ? ” demanded my uncle from
the doorway, as I ended the tale. He stood
there, a jaunty figure still, wearing his old
insufferable look of impudence, that I had
marked on him in his dealings with my father.


My father answered never a word, but his
lips smiled upon him. My uncle had stepped
into the room and stood staring down upon the
glittering treasure. And then at last the mask
was off him utterly ; and I beheld him for the
manner of man he w'as. His blue eyes lit with
all the evil light of the gems that he had plucked
from the Inca’s daughter; and his red lips
curled back covetously ; and his face worked
malignantly; and his fingers twitched, as if
at that hour he would essay to pluck the treasure
from us.
And all the while my father watched him,
his face expressing nothing, only his deep black
eyes glowing upon him. Then suddenly my
uncle flung back his head, and laughed as one
possessed.
“ Why,” cried he, choking and gasping,
“ fortune has played her cards for you, my
brother ! Old Anthony’s guineas are yours for
the most ; the treasure’s yours for the most,
save for a few poor gew-gaws that I chance to
have about me. Shall I add them to your
spoils, oh, my brother ? ”
Turning then upon us savagely, muttering
and laughing, and going on white-hot: “You,
my brother, to have all that’s worth aught to
me in life ! You to have these magical heaps


of jewels, and all this gold ! You, who never
had a taste for aught that makes gold precious.
You who’ve never cared for silks or fine stuffs,
or jewelled buckles—who’ve found no music in
the swish of cards or the rattle of dice ; who’ve
never known a golden vintage of France from a
thick Madeira. You who’ve never known the
joy of a woman’s love ! ”
Thereat my father rose up from his seat,
and stood facing him, his face revealing nothing,
only his eyes burning into his brother’s.
“ You’ve had all things in life that I should
have had ; the means to enjoy, without enjoy-
ing. All things—nay not all! Not all, my
brother —not all, not all ”
I knew the malice and the evil that envenomed
his speech. I understood with what he taunted
my father. Ay, and I understood, when my
father struck him suddenly a terrible blow,
that dashed him, stunned and bleeding, to the
floor.


CHAPTER XXIX
RODDY TELLS HIS TALE
Said I, as I tumbled into bed early that night —
for I was weary to death, “ Now for your story,
Roddy, my lad ! ”
“ What’s your father told you about it ? ”
demanded he, pausing, ere he blew out the
light.
“ Not a word ! I only know that you landed
on the island ; and got the treasure off; and
fired the galleon. Ay, and I heard a yell or
two in the scrub that made me fancy for the
time that my father disciplined you ! ”
“ And yet I’ll be bound you were as scared
as the sealers when you heard those yells ! ”
“ No, my lad, I only pictured you and the
way my father plied his switch; that was
all! ”
He blew the candle out, and laughing, perched
himself on the edge of the bed. Through the


open window the moonlight streamed in on his
white figure, for it was a clear night. And,
while I lay easily on my pillow, he fell to his
story.
“ Well, there’s very little to tell you, Dick,”
said he. “ Your father and Jeremy Otter were
nigh the house when they carried you off. And
I tell you your father fell into the very devil’s
own rage when we managed to give him a
notion of what had befallen—l was a bit dizzy
from the tap on my head, I may say. He’d
have taken after your uncle and his crew at
once, but for Jeremy. It was Jeremy planned
that we should make for the island ahead of
them. They were w T ell armed, d’ye see —and
we could not have stood against them ! ’Twould
have meant but the cracking of our own heads,
or the slitting of our throats ; and no advan-
tage to you from either. Well, then, your
father saw reason ! The sea was calm enough,
O 7
as Jeremy pointed out; and the current that
had borne you and me into the cave would
not be running so strong. So that, if we dared
essay it—and we must needs essay it to get
ahead of your uncle, and we could swim one
and all—the chances were that we’d be borne
into the cave easily enough; and mayhap
get off again. The certainty was that, if we


landed, we’d have first chance with the treasure.
Your father cared not a snap of the fingers
for the treasure. His one concern was you,
though why, I’m at a loss to understand.
’Twas I suggested that, if we landed, one of us
should make for the beach, and seek to slip
off with the boat your uncle and the rest of
you were in. And then we should hold the
cards ; and the game should be with us. We
were putting out from the cove that you and
I were sucked from in the boat the other morn-
ing, within a half-hour —the three of us. The
current was strong, but, to my amaze, not the
mill race that you and I found it. We had
but to steer, and we ran in safely—though
even then at the devil’s own pace —under No
Man’s Island. And the tide being high and
the sea smooth, we were sucked into the mouth
of the cave without upsetting ; and we beached
the boat without piling her up. I wonder,
Dick, that you never tried to land on No Man’s
before.”
“ There was no need for us to try,” I answered.
“ It’s a dangerous place except in the calmest
weather. And we knew of the place save only
by evil repute ; and we dreaded the current.
Get on, Roddy ! ”
“ What’s there to tell you ? We landed in


the cavern ; and, as we had a lantern with us,
we made our way easily enough out at the
other end. The boat you and I sailed in ap-
peared to have been washed away, for we saw
no sign of her. We fixed ropes down the
rocks, so as to let ourselves down —your father
and I —while Jeremy stayed to haul us up
again. And then we climbed to the galleon.
Those fellows in the cabin —I tell you, Rick,
they’d gone all to dust since we let the air in
on them ; but the gold and the stones were
all there waiting for us. We tried to get below
to have a look for aught else ; but everything
was in a state of rottenness, and the air was
too foul. The timbers had rotted all away in
places, and the hold and the cabins were blocked
with sand. So we didn’t stay; but turned
back into the cabin with the treasure. And we
worked the rest of the night, Dick, in shifting
the stuff ; and lifting it into the cave. AH this
while we were expecting to catch sight of you
and your friends; but never a sign did we see.”
“ And all the while,” said I, “ I was ex-
pecting to hear from you on the other side of
the island.”
“ You can take it that the stuff in the chest
was heavy. Why, it took us till the morning
to move it all —your father and I shifting it


from the ship, and Jeremy hauling it up into
the tunnel. And then, when we’d cleared it all,
Jeremy hauled us up too, and we had a snack
of biscuit. And then we arranged that your
father should make at once to the other side of
the island ; and that I, after showing him the
way you were likely to come, should slip back
and set a light to the ship ; and then give Jeremy
a hand at clearing off with the treasure. The
weather played for us, mark you; and it would
be easy enough to pull out of the current, if we
set our backs to it.”
“ And all the years we’ve lived on Wild Dog,”
said I, “ we’ve had no notion of the treasure.
After a try or two I think my father and Jeremy
made long ago to land on No Man’s, we’d given
it up as hopeless.”
“ Well, then,” pursued Roddy, “we made
off, your father and I, as far as the spring.
And I rested there awhile, and nearly went to
sleep; for you can take it that I was fairly
tired out by that time. But I fancied I heard
your company’s voices somewhere on the hill;
and then I let out those yells you heard. It
did not give me much time, I promise you, to
get back to the galleon, and put a fire-stick in
her. Gad, how the rotten old tub blazed.
And then I hailed Jeremy to pull me up; and


we had the rest of the treasure into the boat,
and were seeking to pull out of the cavern. I
tell you we had the very devil’s own task to
pull out of the cavern. We were weighted
down, too, with the stuff, and drew deeply. I
tell you, Dick, it went against the grain to see
Jeremy drop some of the heaviest bars over-
board ; and I fancy that Jeremy himself shed
tears. At least, I heard him groan dismally.
Even so, had it not been for the tide running
out, we’d never have pulled out of the Devil’s
Cavern. I name it so, Dick, for my hands are
blue blisters, and my back cracking still. Hours
it took us, to get into daylight; and another
hour to pull from the current and make for
Wild Dog. We were not fit for much after
we got ashore, I promise you; but yet we’d
have been making for the other side of the
island to look for you and your father, if Mrs.
Otter hadn’t spied the sail! It was taking a
risk leaving you with ’em ; but what else could
we do ? We hadn’t the arms ; they had ; and
we calculated on your uncle’s standing by you
in case of trouble.”
“He did, as I’ve told you ! Gad, Roddy, I
wish you could have seen the game he played
on the cliffs after we saw the galleon going up
in smoke 1 ”


“ And now what’s to come of it all ? ” asked
he, slipping into bed.
“ Why, we’ll be off for George Town in a day
or so. And then for England! Roddy, my
lad, you and I are not like to go begging if
ever we land with the stuff in England.”
“ But what of your uncle —is he to go with
us ? I haven’t a word to say against your
relations, Dick, but the chances are that if
he goes with us we’ll not have much of the
treasure, when we land in England.”
“ I don’t know my father’s purpose with him,”
I answered sleepily. “At any rate, he’s not
likely to have much chance of slipping away
to-night.”
“ Why, where is he ? ”
“ Well, he’s under lock and key. In Otter’s
hut —and Jeremy and Pitch are keeping an eye
on him, I’ll promise you. Roddy, my lad, I’m
tired ; I’m going to sleep.”
“ So’m I,” he muttered from his pillow, and
pulled the blankets about him. And that
indeed was the lot of my uncle for the night.
He had not joined us at supper; but had been
served in Jeremy Otter’s living room. No word
had passed between him and me; and he had
not approached me. But my father and he
had talked long and bitterly, while I dozed


over the fire; and, at the close of their con-
versation, I had heard my father’s instructions
to Jeremy. Now, as I lay in my bed, I could
hear my uncle playing upon Jeremy’s cracked
fiddle ; but ’twas the very ghost of a tune.


CHAPTER XXX
FOR ENGLAND, HOME, AND BEAUTY
On the following evening we sailed from Wild
Dog Island for George Town in Van Diemen’s
Land. We had packed the treasure in strong
boxes of Norfolk pine; and we had distributed
the boxes between the two boats —my father
and Roddy and I going in the larger sailing
boat; Margaret and Jeremy in that from the
wrecked East Indiaman. From the house,
where we had dwelt all these years, we were able
to remove only the black Eastern chest, and a
book or two that my father cherished, and a
few rare bits of Indian tapestry that hung about
the house. The remainder we left for McArdle
to carry away on the ketch, if he chose, to
make what profit on it he might in George
Town or Sydney. A letter to him was left on
the table by my father, pending his arrival at
Wild Dog wdth the stores intended for us. My
father’s one aim now that his exile was at an


end was to return to England ; and the few
household goods that had served us well enough
those years upon the island, and the books that
had relieved his melancholy and his solitude,
mattered nothing to him.
We had worked all day, the five of us, in load-
ing and provisioning the boats. We kept a
careful eye upon my uncle, lest he should seek
to trick us still and slip away in one of the
boats. And all that day my uncle lounged
about the cliffs, and basked lazily in the sun,
and had never a word for any of us. Once
only I came nigh him ; and then his lips smiled
at me indulgently, while his blue eyes pierced
me. But there was no hate in his look for me;
and, indeed, to this hour, I credit him with
having had a certain easy liking for me as
my mother’s son ; ay, and to this hour it is a
matter of bitter regret to me, that he, with
all his charm and grace and lively wit and
love of daring adventure, must needs have
been my father’s enemy and mine. I had no
hate for him at that hour; I have none now
—only regret. I have wondered often since,
what was his true sentiment towards me then;
and whether he regretted even as I. At least
he had saved me in my hour of supreme peril;
at least he had risked his own life for that. And


I deplore the trick of destiny that made him
fortune’s fool, and wasted his talents to his
race and time. His eyes—and they beat down
mine—revealed nothing as he sauntered by,
swinging a wattle-switch and humming a tune.
I took it to be my father’s purpose to leave
him on the island while we sailed away; and,
for the thought of his defence of me on No
Man’s, I pitied him. Once I dared approach
my father to question him ; but I took only a
flea in my ear for my task. Indeed, I think
that my father was still undecided in his pur-
pose —whether to follow the safe course and
leave him on the island to be removed thence
by McArdle, whose ketch was due at Wild Dog,
or to take him with us, and to risk fresh tricks
from him. I was distressed when I found time
to think of my uncle ; but all that day I had
little care for aught save for sailing; and was
possessed by the wildest excitement for the
thought of leaving Wild Dog, and voyaging
home to England and my mother. And Roddy
and I were the maddest of young fools that day,
and took, the pair of us, many a cuff from my
father and Jeremy for our pains.
By evening all was in readiness. The last
box of treasure was aboard. The boats were
provisioned with fish, and mutton-birds, and


biscuit, and a keg or two of water for our two
days’ sailing down to George Town. And ere
we left the house finally, my father read us a
chapter —the three of us being present while
Jeremy watched the boats, lest my uncle seek
to slip away. Then, bidding us go down to the
boats, and await him there, my father left the
house to seek my uncle, whom I perceived
sitting moodily enough then upon a rock nigh
the cottage. So we left them —and the three
of us, with Pitch racing before us, went slowly
down the cliffs towards the boat, where Jeremy
waited, smoking placidly.
What passed between my father and my uncle
I do not know. I do believe that my father,
generous in his final triumph, offered that my
uncle should accompany us to George Town,
and there part company with us and make the
best of his way home to England alone. And
that, even at that hour, my uncle could not
bring himself, for all his desire to be away, to
accept his brother’s generosity ; but chose to
remain upon the island alone, with the prospect
of being removed in a few days’ time by McArdle,
and sailing thence upon the ketch. I say Ido
not know ; it may have been, or may not have
been so. Only I know my father, generous
and honourable, for all the hardness that his


sufferings seemed to have bred in him, came
alone to the boats where we awaited him, and
curtly bade us push off. So, leaping in, we
sailed from Wild Dog for the last time. The
sunset was nigh, and all the sea was a very
sheet of precious red gold. The Dog’s Tooth
stuck up as a flaming pinnacle of jasper, and
No Man’s Isle was veiled in purpling mist. But
all Wild Dog stood out —its yellow bird-haunted
cliffs ; its green cap ; the smoke still curling from
the chimney of our house. Despite my joy at
the thought of departure for England, I felt
my eyes dim suddenly for tears for all the
remembrance of the dull long years that locust-
like had eaten up my boyhood, and for my
attachment for the island, such as one and all
of us must hold for the place where we have
spent our youth.
So we set sail into the golden sea ; and left
Wild Dog, and my uncle alone —even as the
little scamp Spills was alone on No Man’s
Island. Gazing back for the last time, I per-
ceived my uncle suddenly standing upon the
cliff above the landing place, still nigh us, and
looking down on us. I have seen a picture of
Napoleon Buonaparte, the Emperor of the
French, standing so at St. Helena, when all his
glory and his kingdom had passed from him.


I tell you, that in the clear evening air, my
uncle looked just such a statuesque and gloomy
figure, gazing down upon the golden straits;
and I conjectured for myself all the bitter malice
that possessed him; and all the sense of his
brother’s triumph; and all the realisation of his
own loss and loneliness.
The breeze filled our sails. The sun sank
into crimson seas. The twilight was upon the
waters. Still looking back, I perceived against
the far horizon the white flicker of a sail, as a
sea-bird’s wing ; and I knew, as I slid down
beside Roddy at the stem of the boat, that
McArdle’s ketch was already bearing down upon
Wild Dog Island, and that my uncle’s marooning
was like to be a brief one. My father, I took
it, noted nothing ; and I said never a word to
him, for I feared lest, for the greater safety
that our sailing in the ketch would offer, my
father might direct us to put back to Wild
Dog, and that our departure thence would be
delayed for a day or two. I was burnt up by
my ardour to be away from Wild Dog Island,
and sailing home upon a ship for England.


CHAPTER XXXI
LONDON TOWN
Upon an Autumn night of the following year
my father and I were in London. We had
sailed home by the East Indiaman, the Ganges,
leaving Hobart Town in the previous December.
I tell you that I grudged every day that we
must needs spend in Van Diemen’s Land, ere
we could find a ship ; and that the hospitality
of Sir George Arthur, Governor of the Colony,
who chanced to be an old friend of my father’s,
accounted nothing. Ay, and I grudged the
long, long voyage for all its wonders, and for
all the companionship of my father, who had
grown young again, and had put off his old
austerity; and of Roddy Scorne ; and of fat
Jeremy and lean Margaret, who sailed with us.
But ere we sailed from Hobart Town we had
it from His Excellency the Governor of Van
Diemen’s Land that an expedition had been


sent from George Town to pay a visit to those
sealers for the disciplining of them; and to
take a look at Wild Dog and No Man’s Islands,
lest my uncle and Jemmy Spills be still upon
them. Now, in a letter to my father, after
we were settled in London, Sir George Arthur
informed him that his men found Mr. Spills
still living a Crusoe-like existence upon No
Man’s Island; and, recognising him for an
absconder from the penal establishment at
Rocky Hills on the East Coast of Van Diemen’s
Land, had carried him back thither to serve
the remainder of his original sentence for filching
in London. But of my uncle they found no
sign, and of him I have yet to tell.
From the time of our arrival in the Thames
my father had paused only to place the chests
that contained the treasure in the keeping of
the East India Company, to be locked securely
away till he might direct that it should be
transferred to the keeping of his bankers. And
that afternoon I parted —with many hand-
shakes and wishes for our speedy meeting once
more —from Roddy, at the White Hart Inn,
whence he took coach to make his way down
into Devon to find his mother. Ay, and let
me here say, that, though she mourned him as
dead, he found her yet living in his old home,


and for yourself you may imagine the joy of
their meeting. For Roddy came home rich
with his share of the treasure, though he had
sailed but as a ship’s boy for John Company.
But now my father’s one thought was to find
my mother. I could realise now the station in
life that my father had quitted, when, in his
madness, he had left my mother years since.
For, while Jeremy and Margaret remained at the
inn, we went forth, and we paused a while
to visit a tailor, where we were measured and
fitted for wardrobes that would not shame us
in London. And I was clad then and there
in a smart suit —white breeches, a frilled shirt,
brass-buttoned blue jacket, cap, and a blue
cloak to match —with the promise that my
new garments, for which I had been measured,
should be sent to me without delay. And
thence we drove through the city to my father’s
attorneys ; and, while I sat in the carriage, he
remained closeted with them for the better
space of a half-hour. My mind was in a whirl
with the glories of London —the crowded streets ;
the gaily dressed and bustling company; the
vast and roaring traffic of the streets. But my
mother —how long before I should see my
mother ?
“ We’re going now, Dick, to my own house,”


announced my father, as he stepped into the
carriage beside me. “ Maybe we’ll find your
mother there.”
I answered not a word, for the joy of it nigh
choked me. My father put his arm tenderly
about me; and, looking up at him, I saw that
his own eyes were dim for tears, and that he
was as moved as I. Off again then into the
clattering streets, and impeded by the traffic,
going all too slow ; and thence, after the space
of an hour, —it seemed a day,—driving into a
wide and handsome street, and drawing up
before a great house. But as we leaped out
and climbed the steps, and passed into the
porch beneath the huge armorial bearings, I
perceived sadly that the blinds were drawn,
and that the house seemed shut up and deserted ;
and when my father rang the bell, the clamour
went echoing as through an empty house.
A while we waited, until footsteps came sounding
slowly through the hall; and with a screech
of bolts the great door was opened to us. A
footman stood there, powdered, and clad in
sombre livery of blue, peering out on us. I
saw that my father was strange to him, for he
gave him no sign of recognition.
“!s your mistress within ? ” demanded my
father.


“ She’s within, sir; but she sees no one,”
the fellow answered.
“ Yet she will see us,” my father answered,
passing in with an air of authority. “ Come,
Dick. Take my name to her, my man I ”
“ Yessir, certainly, sir ! ” the footman said,
staring at us. “ What name, sir ? ”
“ Ingleby ! ” my father answered ; and at
that the fellow gave a gasp, and started back,
staring at us.
“ Come in, sir,” he stammered at last. “ Pray
come in, sir ! ” and led the way across a splendid
hall with gloomy hangings, and great paintings
in gilded frames ; and through the faded curtains
into a room, where he left us hurriedly. I had
scarce an eye for the glory of the great, gloomy
room ; my heart beat in my breast and tears
dimmed my eyes. But I perceived that it was
resplendent with gilded mirrors; and tapestries
of green and gold hanging on the walls, and
painted portraits of ladies and gentlemen—one
in a laced and ruffled suit suggesting my uncle
—and that the thick carpet was of a faded
green; and the furniture faded with it. My
father stood with his arm about me, facing the
door; and I heard him draw his breath pain-
fully, and felt the nervous tremor of his
fingers.


The curtain was drawn back; and a lady
stepped into the room —a lady, in a sweeping
gown of sombre silk, with delicate laces at
wrist and bosom; a lady white-haired and
lily-pale. Ay, he had lied —my uncle had lied.
The loveliest lady in all England ! —true enough ;
—the fairest and sweetest, and best for me —
and yet white-haired and pale, with all the
splendour of her youth and beauty long since
mourned away. She stood, hands outstretched
—awaiting us. She murmured only, “My
dears —oh, my dears! ” ere she swayed, and
would have fallen, had not my father leaped
towards her, and caught her in his arms. . . .
Now of my uncle only, ere my tale ends.
For I have naught to tell of the joy of our
homecoming, and of what passed between us
three ; or of my great-uncle Anthony’s will;
or of the value of the splendid treasure. This
only; that on the third night thence we drove
to see the play —my mother, in a pale grey
gown, with pearls milk-white upon her neck
and arms, and shining like silver moons in
her white hair; my father, a fine and handsome
gentleman in black suit and glistening linen ;
and I, comfortless and cramped in my stiff
frilled shirt, my white breeches, and my black
silk-faced jacket.


We descended before the lamp-lit front of
Covent Garden, and we were conducted in
state by the manager to a box. And there,
while my mother and father sat together in the
shadow of the curtains and smiled at me, I
leaned forward excitedly to take it all in—
the splendid spectacle of fair ladies and fine
gentlemen; the blaze of colour from the house ;
the candles and the lamps ; the rose, the sky-
blue, the saffron, and the green of silken gowns;
the glitter of jewels ; the flash of feathered fans ;
the endless hues, set off by the sombre modes
of the men. My eyes were caught suddenly
by the sight of a gentleman sitting alone in a
box opposite to us.
He was magnificent. His linen was dazzling ;
he had diamonds in his frilled shirt; diamonds
upon his fingers; he had a shining quizzing
glass at his right eye. He was profusely curled,
and shaven to perfection; and I was so nigh
that I could mark the powder over his sun-
burnt face. My uncle—in the very pink of
fashion; my uncle unabashed —peering upon
me. He took the quizzing glass from his eye;
and standing up in the box, he bowed to me
in the sight of all. Ay, he dared bow to me;
hand to heart, false smile on his false lips. As
I recoiled, and sought the shadow where my


mother and my father sat, not yet perceiving
him, I marked still the evil flicker of his blue
eyes, and the insolence upon his handsome
face, even as I had noted them first upon Wild
Dog Island. A fine gentleman, a leader of the
fashions —so I perceived him ; so he was yet
to seem to London for years to come ! But it
seemed that he espied my mother and my
father then, for he went livid suddenly; and
paused in his third bow, while the house stared
at him. He drew back ; and, the shadow of
the curtains enveloping him, I saw him no
more.
So I have told my tale.
THE END
Made and Pnnud to Great bruatn
Bated, Walton A Vtney, LdLondon and Afletbury




3 I SOB 01759155


-


