

t
\
V
\
Hp
311.^1^0^^-
3>3-78


CO
o
o
<
CM
LO
CM
Q
LO
LU
o
cri
LL
2
Q
■
h-
■
o


• -A* . -
\ V'v* •
N OUR GRAND EFFORT TO PUT CATHOLIC EDUCATION WITHIN THE REACH
OF EVERY CATHOLIC CHILD IN AUSTRALASIA, LET US NOT FORGET ONE
CLASS OF CHILDREN WHOSE STATE CRIES OUT MOST IMPERATIVELY FOR
THE EXERCISE OF ALL OUR ZEAL.
DEAF-MUTES IN AUSTRALASIA.
That there are deaf-mutes in Australasia the Census records inform us.
In 1891 there were 1366. It has not been feasible to obtain official returns
of the number of Catholic deaf-mutes ; but we may make an approximate
estimate. Let us suppose that there is the same proportion of the deaf-
mute population Catholic as there is of the general population. In Austra-
lasia 21 1 per cent, of the whole population was Catholic in 1891 ; 21.1 per
cent, of 1366, the total deaf-mute population, gives 288, the probable
Catholic deaf-mute population of Australia and New Zealand. Now if we
wish to arrive at the number of Catholic deaf-mutes, still susceptible of
of being educated, that is, let us say those under 21 years of age, we must
further reduce this number. As definite statistics on this point for all the
colonies are not available, we must proceed again by analogy. The NS.
Wales Census gives us the number of deaf-mutes under 21 as 57 per cent,
of the total number in the colony. If we suppose this proportion to hold
in the colonies we shall have 57 per cent, of 288 i. c. 164, as the Catholic
deaf-mute population of Australasia under 21 years of age.
CATHOLIC DEAF-MUTES IN AUSTRALASIA
These 164 may be divided into two classes, those who have acquired
- «# 0
so far as they are capable that knowledge of God and their duties, without
which they cannot hope for salvation, and those who have not.
In the Institution at Waratah, N.S.W., fifty children have been in-
structed as Catholics and are still living in these Colonies (ten non-
Catholics have also passed through.) Allowing then for the very small
number who may have received Catholic instruction at the hands of
Private teachers, there yet remain nearly two hundred children, in whose


darkened souls the true Sun of Justice has not yet arisen, who have nc
learned Jesus Christ, or who have not known the necessity of
united with the one true fold of which He is the Shepherd. Two hundre<
Souls wandering in darkness with little comfort in this world and n<
hope for the happiness of the next, and the means of changing all thi
ready to our hands !
PECULIAR STATE OF DEAF-MUTES IN RESPECT 01
INSTRUCTION.
Many people, many priests we might also add, do not realize th
peculiar isolation and utter darkness in which the soul of a deaf-mute i
wrapped up. It can only be this ignorance of their unfortunate state tha
makes some think thev will be able to acquire sufficient relieious instructio
in ordinary schools or from their parents at home, and makes others s
callous regarding the eternal welfare of these afflicted children, as to sen*
tri nnn.rnthnlm TnQfifHtmnQ
It should be known and remembered that once a deaf-mute's mind i
furnished with a definite set of views on any subject, it is nearly impossibl
to either remove or alter those views afterwards. So when they learn, a
they do in Protestant Institutions, that instead of regarding with the fflic
devotion of children their Holy Mother the Catholic Church, they mus
<rr>rn hpr a.i an old-fashioned and error-tearhinv Institution, it is not to b
wondered that they come home to their Catholic parents with, it may be ;
smattering of knowledge, but without that greatest and dearest treasure o
knnwlodcrp thp trnp faith in thp onp trnp Chnrrh
And such as they return from the Protestant Institution, such they re
main for their lives, an enduring reminder to those who love them, that i
had been better to have left them in the darkness in which God placed then
at birth, than to introduce them into the darkness of error, the work o
nn rrrvrl Ixr mpn
We hesitate to write it down, but we cannot forget the case of a youn:
girl the child of excellent Catholics, who had been brought from a Protest
ant Institution to the Dominican Convent at Maitland. This Catholic chiL
had been so misguided and corrupted in an educational Institution, and on
conducted under Government auspices, as to show manifest signs of disap
proval at the sight of objects used in the Catholic worship, and she refuse
for a long time to take food from the Nuns or to communicate with them i:
, I,l* . 1 i i •
Nor can the deaf-mutes acquire sufficient religious instruction at th
hands of teachers not skilled in teaching this peculiar class. As well migh
you expect to receive instructions on the mixing and use of colours fror


CATHOLIC INSTITUTION FOR DEAF-MUTES, WARATAH, N.S.W
It was the sense of the necessity of Catholic Education for our deaf
mutes that moved the Bishop of Maitland and the Dominican Nuns of hi
Diocese to inaugurate eleven years ago the Institution at Waratah, an<
which also prompted the action of the Fathers of the Australasian Chunk
in Plenary Synod assembled at Sydney in 1885, to give that Institutioi
their approval and promise of assisiance.
In the belief that they were doing a work of the first importance t(
Religion in all Australasia, and with an assured hope of general co-opera
tion, the promoters of this work of Catholic Charity laid the foundations o
an Institution large enough to supply the needs of the whole Continent
They went to very large expenses in this undertaking, and they providec
the Institution with every requisite for the most perfect form of Deaf-mute
; I
h rlurdtmn tn Imm frmnrl 1 n tC pai Intn mc
THK HIFFF RFMT MP DF A F.MT TTF TMQTP T ir.TTMK
They have engaged the services of Religious Sisters who are adept
in the different systems in vogue among educators of the Deaf and Dumb
viz. : the so called manual and oral systems, in both of which, separately o
in combination, according as the capabilities and needs of individual pupil
dictate, instruction is imnarted.
PDruanrvr mrr \1? nriTU mo \ nuc
The Sisters are now providing the means of giving a training in usefu
trades to those girls or boys who have the age and aptitude necessary fo
receiving such training. Girls are taught scientific and practical dressmak
ing, stocking-weaving, laundry work, cooking and domestic service ; am
arrangements are being made to have the boys, for whom a separate resi
m e Koao cnppi Qll \r orprTprl tQiirrVif iicpfnl tr^rlpc
\ r \ S~\ / \ TP TItTT O \ TM A
It must be clear to anyone giving the matter a thought that such ;
work cannot attain even a fair measure of success unless it have a goo(
number of pupils. Not that very much pecuniary aid is to be expecte(
from the pupils themselves or their parents, for these are largely belonging
to the very poor class. But a number is necessary to make a class hav<
that life and spirit without which it must languish. As to the provision o
funds for the work as it has been already begun, and the continuance o
it on the lines laid down, this must of necessity depend largely on Charity
But the Sisters have every trust that it the work is being done, if all tht
Catholic Deaf-mutes in the country are enabled to avail ot the advantage:
this Institution affords, the Good Providence in whose name and for whos(
—. _1 _ a 1 ___ I_l *ll _i. !i. 1 _ i. i* -1 4- ttto t-\ 4- - ♦a'a rv n c* l V> f 1


NATIONAL I.IHR FI ft v nr A i-io .-rt u t »n
first wish and desire is THAT THE EXISTENCE AND NATURE OF THEIR WOR]
MAY NOT BE UNKNOWN IN ANY AUSTRALASIAN HOME WHERE ITS ASSISTANC
7 IS NEEDED. For such a knowledge of their Institute they must natural!
depend on the goodwill and holy zeal of the Pastors of the people, th
priests of Australasia, to whom they take this opportunity of commending
themselves and the work in which with God and under God they are engage*
for His greater honour and glory.
It so often happens that the clergy report cases of deaf-mutes for whos
mere conveyance to Waratah means are entirely wanting, that we cannc
close this appeal without a request to those who can afford to comply wit
AX A '. . / : . " ' * * "
it, to help us by a subscription towards providing for destitute subjects th
means of conveyance to our Institution.
FTN AXTrTAT
■ it*- ft ■
There is now a debt on the Institute of which is the residu
of the outlay for the land and buildings at Waratah. This debt involve
an annual payment of £325 in interest, for which moderate rate the Nun
have to thank the charitable generosity of a ladv in Enuland.'
To help them in paying this interest and maintaining the Institute
which is conducted with the strictest economy, the Nuns must rely almos
entirely on the charity of the annual subscribers and other charitabl
benefactors, as the fees received from the parents of the Deaf-mute
thpmsplvpt; arp vprv small.
The kind cooperation of all in this work of Catholic Charity i
most earnestly invited. Visitors to the Institution anxious to see the effort
that are being made on behalf of this interesting class of our fellow
creatures will be very welcome, and all benefactors shall share in the daif
prayers of the Dominican Communities in N. S. Wales, and in the prayer
of the children themselves —that voiceless tribute to their Creator which i
to the visitor so touching an element in the condition of the educate*
T~\ r * ' '
• • # • «


3 • ,
•
.
&
.
'- * ~•€•^-^.saKfs.s
•
.
-•
. ■
k
-■
*
■
-
\ t
•
jjjjsF w <sE - ;*" p jj jjBS || J&uljiS • Bj£ | S >j| ' 1= ;■
•
*
w
s
\
*s
-
