

f (A Sketch of the Early Digging Days),
I
ii.l
!
\ OF EAGLEHAWE
' ’ , BY
’ < THOMAS BKfiCKLN s
(Late. ZBALAND),
PUBLISHED by
ft
i(
ii
I /
JOHN ROBSHAW, MITCHELL STREET, BENDIGO
*i‘"" “ ‘ r M M’>Tn“ * * •Hn““““Vr’v““‘“M|i“*iii*“* SJ*- “ijr“ * “mii“ “ "ii** * '“"T** s
♦
“NEWS” JOBBING OFFICE, Hargreaves Street, Bendigo.
H. CEEDGIW GrTOIST.
pi/| F MANUFACTURING JEWELLER AND WATCHMAKER, No, 7, PALL MALL-
j r :\ | L Having purchased the business of JOSEPH & CO., I have now the Largest and most
iv: 1 i F Sel ect Stock in Bendigo. £lO.OOO WORTH OF GOODS TO CHOOSE FROM New
; '■/ I ' Goods to hand every month. Watches by all the best Makers, guaranteed for 4 years.
: /1\ i A Prices will be found very low, as I import direct.
i[j 5 i |f SPECTACLES A SPECIALITY -The l.atest Method for testing the eyes—a Pair of
i )•/ i V Best Brazilian Pebbles, supplied for 7s 6d. All kinds of Smoked snd Colored Glasses for
: 1 1\ |j y protecting tiie eyes, and every kinds of Optical Goods.
j\j/ j jL, H. CREDGINGTON, JEWELLER AND OPTICIAN, 7 PALL MALL.


The now Justly Celebrated FIRM of
D. WHYTE & CO,
Introduced on Old Bendigo the grand system of doing business
strictly on the CASH PRINCIPLE both in buying and selling, and
showing how the advantages derived therefrom are appreciated is
best told by the large business done at our three stores :
We continue to give the BEST VALUE in this Golden City,
and invite inspection of our large stocks of
CHINA, INDIAN & CEYLON TEAS,
We cannot be beaten for quality and price, and ask a trial of our
Is, Is 3d, and Is 6d per lb.
All the best Brands of Wines and Spirits in Bottle and Bulk.
Bottled Ales and Porter, all brands and prices. Bendigo and
Albury Wines (sweet and dry), in bulk at 4s, ss, and Gs per
gallon ; 10s, 15s and 18s per dozen.
The Largest and best selected stocks on Bendigo of TEAS,
GROCERIES, WINES and SPIRITS, IRONMONGERY,
CROCKERYWARE, &c., &c.
New arrivals here and others give us a trial order and judge for yourselves.
Goods delivered free to all parts of the district, and carefully packed for
rail. Samples and price lists on application.
ID, WHITE <&; CO.,
CASH GROCERS, WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS, BENDIGO.


apt •w* ■«*?>*“' ‘
¥ LJ LJ
f
L (A Sketch of the Early Digging Days),
of e^g-eezet^we:-
•*i BRA6KE|\I tv
(tat© KEW SBAUURD),
PUBLISHED BTf
JOHN ROBSHAW, MITCHELL STREET, BENDIGO
•«##«*s
"‘‘NEWS” JOBBING OFFICE, Hargreaves Street, Bendigo.




OF E/t®bE-
JH/cWK.”
“Thank you! I’ll drink no more with you;
I’m a stranger here ; its my turn to ‘ shout,
Then I’ll be off— I’ve some work to do—
But who is this Rogers they rave about ?
What has he done to create such fuss ?
How has he caused such endless talk ?
To use a slang phrase— ‘ Why is this thus ?
Who is this Rogers, of Eaglehawk ?”
“ Tell him, Harry, for you were there
Close to the mine, and you ought to know—
Listen mate, if you’ve time to spare,—
You have’nt been long upon Bendigo ?”
“ It’s just a fortnight to-day, and yet,
Although but a Sydney ‘Cornstalk,”
I’m very anxious to hear, you bet,
The story of Rogers, of Eaglehawk.”
“ Harken ! stranger, to the story,
Short it is, and to the point,
Some folks say, we know no glory,
For the times are out of joint;
I’m not lam’d in old romancing,
I’m not vars’d in times gone by,
Days when errant knights went prancing,
Fighting for a lady’s sigh,
Or her glove may-be, but stranger,
Never ’neath the silver sun,
By the bravest knightly ranger,
Was a nobler action done,
Than the deed I’m going to dwell on ;
August, on the thirtieth day,—
That’s the very time it fell on, —
Rogers rescued Sampson Bray
How it happen’d ! Mate,'you wonder?
When I think on it, I know,
We have heroes still, by thunder !
They were working down below ;


They had charged four holes,—All ready
Safe are all the fuses placed ;
Up they’re haul’d, so firm and steady,
Yet there’s little time to waste ;
Twenty-five feet up,—when slipping
From his hold, poor Sampson Bray.
Fell where deep the dark was dipping,
Down the shaft, and there he lay.
Quick as lightning, Rogers thundered—
‘ Let me down ! Oh ! down again !’
Though the engine-driver wonder’d,
Still he turned the engine 'hen ;
Down went Rogers, quickly leaping
From the bucket, on he flew,
To the spot where death was creeping
Through the fuses ; then he drew
Three of them away. Thank Heaven !
Ah ! but there’s a fourth—too late—
He cannot find it and is driven
Now to rest on God and fate :
Down beside his mate he crouches
Down beside his mate to die ;
Soft as down are stony couches.
When upon them brave men lie :
Loud reports—the hole exploded—
Showers of stones and debris fell,
And the drive with smoke was loaded,
Loaded like a pit of hell.
“ Are they dead ?” “No! boys they’re living,”
Haul them quickly to the plat!
Let us thanks to Heaven be giving—
That’s my tale, mate ; on this Flat
I have lived a working digger
Well nigh three and thirty year,
But I’ve never known a bigger
Hero, than our hero here. ”
“ Mates, I’m not much given to gushing,
But when I listen’d to that there talc,
At times I felt my cheeks a flushing,
And then I fancied they turned quite pale ;
Tears in my eyes at times were starting—
But hang it, lads, I’ve a way to walk,
Fill up the glasses, as we’re parting,
We’ll drink to Rogers of Eaglehawk.”
I •?'9


PREFATORY,
“Dear Old Bendigo !” Yes, that’s the expression
the veteran digger uses when he refers to the
Golden Capital of the Northern district.
Wherever you meet him, be it on the Shotover or
the Arrow, Hokitika on Kumera in the South
Island of New Zealand, or in the rich quartz mines
of the Thames in the North Island of the same
colony, the old Bendigonian never forgets his
heart’s first love. He will tell you of the glorious
times he had in the early days of Ballarat, and will
take you in “spirit” to the “ Old Charlie Napier;”
he will descant on the wealth of the Beech worth
diggings, and will describe the “ pot” he made at
Ararat, without much emotion, but when he talks of
Bendigo a gentle moisture gathers in his eyes as if
he were dreaming of some old flame who had won
his boyish heart in the fardand over the sea. The
reason of this affection for Bendigo, it is difficult to
explain. Perhaps the romance which attached to
to the trip up to the diggings in the golden days,
has a good deal to do with it. The Black Forest,
for instance was surrounded with mystery in those


times and the notorious “ Captain Melville ” was a
terror to travellers. Then you had to pass through
Forest Greek, another field laden with the precious
metal, and onward still through a picturesque
country, until you reached the New Eldorado of the
North. There is a certain euphony about the
word “ Bendigo” which attracts the ear, and this
may have something to do with the attachment to
the district which permeates the ancient miner s
breast. Be the cause what it may, the fact remains
that the term “Dear Old Bendigo,” has become a
household word in all mining communities through-
out Australasia. It is not intended in this brief
sketch to deal with the rise and progress of the
great goldfield, which is at present such a centre of
attraction. That task has been well and ably done
by a native of the place, Mr George Mackay, in his
“ History of Bendigo,” a work which should be in
the possession of everyone who takes an interest in
this region of golden marvels. The writer of the
following pages arrived here when a boy, and from a
bo} r ish standpoint observed some of the exciting
scenes around him. Had he possessed mature
knowledge at the time, he might have been able to
pick up numerous incidents which would have
furnished material for the production of something
equal to Bret Harte’s charming work, “ The Luck
of Roaring Camp.” As it is he only hopes to give
his readers an opportunity of spending a cheerful
half-hour on “ Dear Old Bendigo.”


GOlsD l GOU>D l GOLaD!
Gold ! Gold ! Gold ! —What a magical cry to conjure by ; what
a watchword to summon armies together; what a slogan to rouse
men to deeds of daring. The fiery cross that was wont in times
past, to be sent through the glens and over the mountains of
the Scottish Highlands, to call the clans to battle, was not
half so potent in stirring men’s hearts and warming men’s blood
as the simple cry of Gold ! Gold ! Gold ! In the early Spring
of 1851 the valley upon which the city and the suburbs 'of
Bendigo now stand slept in peaceful solitude. The easy-going
shepherd lay on the greensward and watched his flock browsing
over the emerald slopes and flats. The creek unpolluted then,
coiled along singing its meliflous song under the branches of the
richly perfumed wattles that leaned over its banks ; while on the
park-like table-land, the stately gum-trees stood here and there like
majestic sentinels set by nature to guard the scene. If our
friend the shepherd were of a poetic turn, he might well exclaim
with the poet—
“ This silent glen, this silent glen,
Oh ! how I love its solitude !
Far from the busy haunts of men,
Far from the heartless multitude ;
No eye save Nature’s sovereign beam,
No breath but Heaven’s to break the dream,
No voice but yonder babbling stream,
Dare on the ear intrude.”
The odds are, however, that our friend the shepherd of those
days, was only acquainted with the verses of Frank Macnamara,
otherwise “Frank the Poet,” who gained a reputation by glori-
fying such heroes as “ Jack Donohoo,” Johnny Troy,” and other
knights of the bush. Just as Spring was stealing upon the heels
of Summer, the glittering dross was discovered peeping from
under the tussocks and tree-roots, and the drowsy shepherds and
wondering blackfellows were filled with astonishment. The
news flew like wildfire and in a few months time the peaceful
valley was changed into a scene of bustle and excitement. The
stately gum-trees vanished and the scented wattles were forced to
lay their yellow ringlets in the dust. The kangaroo and
wallaby leaped away into the dark wilds, followed by the
screeching ’possum. The magpie’s musical notes were unheard
and the gay plumaged parroquets were gone. The frightened
blackfellows sought other hunting-grounds, and the yell of the
dingo was only heard afar off. A philosopher who had visited


the scene in the early Spring and came back again in twelve
months’ time, might have wept over, what would have appeared
to him, a terrible act of vandalism. But philosophers were few
and far between in those days, and dreaming poets were unknown.
The ring of the pick and the whirl of the windlass made sweeter
music to the digger’s ear, than the band of the Coldstream Guards
could have produced, while the rocking of the cradle thrilled him
with a nameless delight. The tender mother might warble softly
to her babe as she rocked it to sleep. Her bosom might swell
with fond emotion as she watched her darling closing its bright
eyes in its little wicker bed; but her feelings would be tame com-
pared to those excited in the breast of the digger as he watched
his beloved ones, his precious idols, glittering in the wash-dirt as
he rocked them to life. The cry of Gold ! Gold! Gold ! had
been heard at Ballarat, Forest Creek, and other places before it
had swept over Bendigo Valley, and thousands of brave young
men, aye and old men too, had crossed the ocean in search of
fortune. The news of the Bendigo rush excited, however, more
enthusiasm in the Old World than did the finds on the other
fields. From the green fields and stirring factories of Old Eng-
land, thousands of sturdy men rushed to the seaports and set
sail for Victoria. The Highland shepherd left his flocks to
wander on the “ heather hills,” and the Lowland tiller left the
handles of his plough and hastened to Glasgow or Greenock to
catch the “ first ship.” The cry echoed from the Giant’s Cause-
way to Slieve-na-mon, and from Cork to Dublin. Paddy has
never been behind hand when venturesome undertakings are
heard of, and when these undertakings lead to a golden goal, his
courage, like that of John Bull and Sandy, becomes strengthened
Well, when he heard of Bendigo and its marvellous wealth his heart
jumped to his mouth, and flinging aside his flail, hook, scythe and
spade, he packed up his traps and prepared to start for the
“ diggins’.” Aye, grey-eyed Norah and dark-eyed Kathleen might
sob, and even his “ poor ould mother” might wail, but Pat had
made up his mind to seek his fortune. “ Arrah don’t cry dar-
lints,” he might have been heard saying, “ don’t cry mavourneen,
shure I’ll soon be back agin wid haips of goold from Bindego.”
And he went. It must not be imagined for a moment that it was
from the ranks of toil alone that the golden army was recruited.
“ All sorts and conditions of men” from the highest to the
lowest caught the yellow fever and crossed the ocean to worship
the Golden Calf. Many of the adventui’ers returned
with fortunes and settled in the Old Lands, but
the majority of them never gazed again on the green fields of
“Merrie England,” the heath-clad hills of “ Bonnie Scotland” or
the Emerald Plains and valleys of “Sweet Innisfail.” Thousands


of them are sleeping the long sleep ’neath Australasian skies, and
thousands of them are still engaged in the noble task of nation-
building—Melbourne the Marvellous, Ballarat the Beautiful, and
Bendigo the Boundless—boundless because of its inexhaustible
treasures have all sprung into life at the cry of Gold ! Gold !
Gold 1
Advertisements.
GOOD -WHSTB.
Why drink ardent spirits when you get a bumper of the purest
Australian Wine, at
Nothing but the very best and purest vintage kept at
gsi«i«sisr§
Where is
Sciallcro’s Wine Hall ?
On the left-hand side of Bull-st., going frotn Pall Mall to Market Square
DON'T FORGET SCIALLERO’S.
TMS &W Am © X MM
ACCIDENT & GUARANTEE
Insurance Co. of Australia, Limited.
CAPITAL - - ... £lOO,OOO
Registered under the Company's Statute, 1864
HEAD OFFICE
62 QUEEN STEEL, MELBOURNE,
New South Wales branch, 80a, Pitt St., Sydney ; Queensland Branch,
279, Queen St., Brisbane.
Directors :
A. 0. MacDONALD, Esq., JOHN MacMEIKAN, Esq.
F.1.A.V., Chairman PERCY GARDEN, Esq.
R. GAMLIN, Esq. W. P. SMITH, Esq., J.P.
ARTHUR EARL LEWIS, General Manager.
Bendigo Branch:
27 VIEW STREET, BEND I GO.
G. S. FREWIN, Manager.


BENDIGO IN 1857.
Those who wish to become acquainted with the stirring events
which transpired on the diggings between 52 and 57, will find
them graphically chronicled in Mr. Mackay’s “ History of
Bendigo.” The digger-hunting raids, the rows with the police,
the nfurders, the outrages, and robberies which occurred, are
therein described, in a most readable form. The writer of these
pages did not reach the field until the beginning of 1557, and
therefore cannot treat of the more exciting times which preceded
that year. Although he had been more than twelve months in
the colony the writer knew nothing of the Bush, and the varied
sensations which thrilled him on the journey up may be more
easily imagined than described. On a lovely morning in February
one of Cobb’s Coaches, driven by Mr. Carter, familiarly known as
“Long Carter” ploughed its way through the Black Forest. I
use the word “ ploughed ” advisedly, for the track in those days
was a terrible one. Ruts and bog-holes abounded on all sides and
it required consummate skill on the part of the driver to steer the
coach along. Mr. Carter, who, by the way, is now settled in the
Waikato country, New Zealand, was one of the best whips on the
road, and the style in which he handled the “ ribbons ” on the
morning in question, is still vividly impressed on the writer’s
memory. The road through the Black Forest was alive with
human beings of all sorts, sizes and nationalities making their
way to Bendigo. The loads which some of them carried were
sufficient to test the strength of pack-horses, but they bore them
along as if they were feathers. And treating of feathers recalls a
funny incident that came under our notice at Gisborne. When
changing horses at the Old Bush Inn, a hale and hearty young
fellow, with a face beaming with good nature and good health,
approached the door of the hostelry, and threw an immense bundle
off his shoulders The perspiration was pouring over his forehead
and down his cheeks. Filled with curiosity one of the passengers
asked him what he was carrying. “Faix its a feather bed me mother
made me take with me when I was leavin’home,. but begorra I think
I’ll sell it to the landlord.” This roused the risibility of the
bystanders, as may well be supposed, and after a couple of “rounds”
had been dispensed, mine host was induced to give the young
Irishman two pounds for the feather bed. When pocketing the
money Pat, addressing those around, exclaimed —“ Boys, if any of
ye come from the neighborhood of Ballinaslow, don’t write home
and tell me mother that I’ve sould her feather bed, or it’ll break


the poor ould woman’s heart.” Not the least interesting objects
that were passed on the track through the Forest were the bullock
teams, and their drivers. The elegant epithets used by the
latter in coaxing their oxen along, would have delighted the
soul of Chesterfield, could his lordship have been
present in the flesh to hear them. Such choice expressions as the
following were quite common—“Redman, you blessed angel!”
“ Come here, Damper, you blooming beauty!” “Get up, Poley,
you son of a seraph !” etc., etc. Reaching the pretty little hamlet
of Woodend we had time to survey Mount Macedon. That noble
hill was not then denuded of its timber, and its stately grandeur
was seen to great advantage. There was more romance about the
Mount at that time than there is now. “ Mountain Mag’s Hut,”
and “ The Hanging Rock ” were places of special interest. Then
there were some magnificent springs near the top, always, in
winter and summer, throwing out volumes of pure cold water.
The facilities which the deeply-wooded glens of the Mount af-
forded for the production of “Potheen” were very great, and
many a ton of the blackest “ Station Sugar ” went up through
the forest in gunny bags and came down in casks. In later times
this spirit was called by the Woodenders, “Nardoo” after the
plant discovered by Burke and Wills. This digression is delay-
ing us, however, so we must hurry along through the bogs of
Carlsrhu, and by the fertile farms of Kyneton. Over the Coliban
we go, and by the pleasant slopes of Taradale, only stopping to
give the horses a drink at McCormicks’ pub. in Sawpit
Gully. Forest Creek is reached, and then the first
genuine picture of digging life bursts upon the view. All is
life, bustle and excitement. Puddling mills, tubs, cradles, wind
lasses, picks, shovels and all the other gear used in alluvial
mining is in active motion, and there is a cheerfulness about
the whole place which indicates that the diggers’ hearts are in
their work. On we go through Castlemaine, a very thriving
town at that time. This was before they began to
mow the grass in Market Square. It is gratifying to think that
Castlemaine is now regaining its old vitality. Barker’s
Creek is passed and the Big Hill is reached ; and now
we are in Bendigo, for Kangaroo Flat and Golden Gully form
part of the great Gold-field. And what was Bendigo like in 1857 1
some curious readers may ask. Well it was a real live place, and
no mistake. The town of Sandhurst had assumed very respectable
proportions,.and there were a number of good buildings in it. The
old order was fast changing and giving place to the new. The
“ belltopper” was encroaching on the domain of the “ Cabbage-
trees and black frock coats were to be met with here and there.
Still there was sufficient of the old style left to make Bendigo and


its inhabitants very interesting to the stranger. Saturday
afternoon was the time to see Sandhurst at its best. Work
was knocked off about midday and the diggers brushed
themselves up and casting aside their every day togs,
attired' themselves in their best clothes. Saturday was the
great gold-selling day. In addition to the various banks, every
store of any pretensions, besides all the druggists’ shops bought
gold. It was interesting to notice the rivalry existing among the
principal buyers. One would vie with the other in “dressing the
windows ”as it was called. This operation consisted of ranging
as many sovereigns and nuggets, as the gold-buyer could procure,
in fancy designs, on black velvet or colored paper, placing in the
centre a heap of the precious metal to attract the passing diggers.
The old wooden matchbox was in general use for carrying the
gold to the buyers, but in numerous cases, the matchbox was too
small for the lucky digger’s week’s earnings, and chamois leather
bags were called into requisition. The principal gold brokers
were located on View Point at the time in question. Gold
brokers such as “ Tom ” Carpenter and Mr. Bannerman took
the lead in the gold-buying business, and then came
Dr. Boyd, Mr. H. Jackson, Mr. Harris, and Tolhurst
Brothers. Mr. George Tolhurst who managed the last-
named establishment, is now a Bank Manager in
New Zealand, in which colony he has won “ Golden opinions
from all sorts of people ” who have been brought into contact
with him. View Point was also a remarkable part of the town
owing to the fact that the old wooden Courthouse, in which
“Bendigo Mac” dispensed justice, was located there. It stood
close to the bank of the ugly sludge channel that carried the
sluggish mud out through the flat. “ Bendigo Mac,” the terror
of evil-doers was a “ character,” and the stories told of him would
afford material for a very interesting volume. He was at heart
an autocrat, but a just autocrat, and it required a man of his
stamp to deal with the roughs who infested the district in those
days. It must not be supposed for a moment that the rough
element preponderated on the field. Nothing of the sort. The
blacklegs and blackguards were only a handful after all. The
great majority of the miners were a splendid lot of fellows.
“ The boys who wore the yellow pants in those old days, were
men.” Pall Mall was then, as it is to-day, the principal thorough-
fare. The chief place of amusement was the Shamrock Concert
Hall, kept by Messrs. Heffernan and Crowley. The Haymarket
Theatre in the square was the place where the legitimate drama
held sway, the boards of the Shamrock being devoted to concert
business. It was in the old Haymarket that the writer first had
the pleasure of seeing and hearing poor G. Y. Brooke and Mrs.


Robert Heir. The play was the “ Lady of Lyons ” with
“ O’Callaghan ”as the afterpiece. It was a treat of no ordinary
character, and the impression produced on the mind and heart of
at least one in the audience has never been effaced. The chief
“ Star” at the Shamrock was Mr. 0. R. Thatcher, styled the
“ Inimitable ” Thatcher, deserves a chapter to himself, and shall
have it later on. At the end of 1857, or the beginning of 1858,
Abbott’s Lyceum Theatre was opened. I think it was Emma
Stanley with her “ Seven Ages of Woman ” who first appeared on
its boards. Tim putting up of the big lamp in front of the hotel
was regarded as a big event in Sandhurst. The ghost of the big
lamp still remains, and on passing it the other day, many old
memories flashed through the writer’s mind. Many excellent
companies delighted big audiences at the Lyceum and at the
Shamrock also. On the stage of the latter, besides Thatcher,
there were many capable performers. Artistes such as Madame
Sara Flower, Madame Carandini, Miss Urie, and Madame Yitelli,
not to speak of Madame Strebinger, are seldom met with now-a-
days. Then there was Herr Strebinger, who like Neil Gow,
“ Could play the fiddle week”
and a host of other clever entertainers. The Teutonic element
was very strong in Bendigo then, and the Hamburg Hotel in High
street was a favorite resort. That was the great dancing
house of Sandhurst, and as German Bands were
plentiful, the dances never lacked good music. On
Christmas morning 1857, a big fire took place in Williamson
street, destroying one side of that thoroughfare. It commenced
somewhere about Steen’s Coffee Mills and made its way to the
rear of the Shamrock Concert Hall. There was tremendous
excitement as it was feared it might reach Pall Mall and sweep
away a long row of wooden shops and stores. “ Billy” Heffernan,
with that energy which always characterised him, was rushing
about superintending the removal of beer and spirits from the
Shamrock cellars. Free drinks was the rule that morning and
the quantity of “ She-Oak” and dark brandy consumed was
enormous. A detachment of the Fortieth regiment was stationed
at Bendigo and a number of soldiers were told off' to guard the
goods that were heaped in the centre of the street.
Some of the Fortieth men were very lively boys, and,
if report speaks truly, they carried on some very pretty games in
order to raise the wind. On one occasion a burly son of Mars
raised a terrible hullabuloo on the Mall by dragging his red coat
on the ground and threatening to fight any “ adjective” civilian
on Bendigo. Still the men of the Fortieth afterwards proved
themselves plucky fellows, when facing the Maories on the plains


of Waikato and elsewhere. The Maories are no chickens to fight,
and the Fortieth found in those brave savages foemen worthy
of British steel. In 1857 the “ Bendigo Advertiser,” conducted
by Mr., afterwards the Hon., Angus Mackay, was the only news-
paper in Sandhurst, but a little later on the “ Bendigo Mercury ”
was established by Mr. Forrester Sullivan afterwards Minister
of Mines. This publication however did not have a long life
although it was a very creditable production. Not long after-
wards the “ Bendigo Independent ” came into the field started by
Mr. Charles Mackenzie, afterwards purchased by Mr. J. G.
Edwards, and has since improved and increased in usefulness
up to the present day. On the sth of April, 1862, the
“ Bendigo Evening News ” first saw light, the proprietors being
Messrs. Harcourt, Riley, Le Maitre and Hughes. After a few
months Le Maitre and Hughes retired from the partnership, and
afterwards Mr. Riley sold his interest to Mr. Harcourt, who,
having run the “ News” for over 30 years, sold it on the first of
the present month, October ’92, to Messrs. Briggs Brothers and
Co., natives of Bendigo. The outlying gullies and flats were
hives of industry then. They are perhaps quite as prosper-
ous now in a sense, but in the alluvial days the gold passed
through the hands of a large number of persons, and as a matter
of course, it was scattered more freely among the trades people.
There were about 2,000 Chinese on the field in 1857, and “John”
occasionally amused himself by inspecting the wash-dirt of his
European neighbours. Whenever caught in the act his punish-
ment was prompt and effective, S till “John” had his good traits,
as Thatcher has pointed out: —
“ The Chinaman traverses the wide world through,
On the diggings him you’ll find,
Staggering under a big bamboo,
While his pig-tail hangs behind ;
If a stranger be inquisitive,
And to ask him questions try,
A vacant stare poor John will give
And “ No Savey ” he’ll reply.
He’s a quiet poor fellow, deny it who can,
And there’s many worse than the Chinaman,’
’W'jyv:
SSW


OLD BENDIGONIANS
The term of thirty-five years makes great changes in every
community, and many of the “ old familiar faces” of Bendigo have
long since disappeared. Several of them are resting on the
picturesque hill sides of Otago. Mr William Hefiernan “ went
to sleep” at a ripe old age, in the beautiful city of Dunedin.
Mr Edward (Ned) Ryan, died in Dunedin Hospital. Mr Samuel
Bastard also died in Dunedin. Numbers of old Bendigo diggers
have left their bones on the banks of the Molyneux and Shotover
and in the gullies of the West Coast. A good many of the
ancient stock are still living in Maoriland, one of the most pro-
minent of them being Mr. Charles Bird, formerly of the firm of
McPherson and Co. Mr Bird is now manager of the Fern Hill
Club, and is very popular among all classes in Dunedin. Mr
George Tolhurst, formerly of Tolhurst Brothers, is chief manager
of the Union Bank. Mr Lawrence Ryan, keeps a snug hotel in
Central Otago. Mr Shadrack Jones, a prominent Bendigonian
in the old times, practised as a physician in Otago of late years,
but has returned to Australia ; Charley Armstrong, formerly of
Armstrong Brothers, lived in Dunedin for over twenty years, but
is now living in Melbourne. Mr Abraham Solomon, well known
in Bendigo formerly, still looks fresh and blooming under the
glitter of his three golden balls, in George street, Dunqdin. Mr
Bladiere of Huntly in 1857, also made a home for himself in
New Zealand.
Mr R. T. Wheeler, a very old Bendigonian, carries on the
business of a news agent in Dunedin.
There are several others, whose names have slipped my
memory still living in the “ Land of the Maori and Moa.” I
cannot enumerate the names of the “ Old Identities,” who have
passed away in Bendigo since the “ fifties,” but I can remember
a few of them. Mr Henry Jackson, one of the most respected
citizens of Sandhurst, is dead, so are Mr Connelly, Mr Irons,
Mr. Harney—the genial John—Drs. Smith and Hoyle, “Bendigo
Mac” of imperishable fame, and many other men of note. The
ecclesiastical ranks have been thinned by the removal of many able
men, the chief of whom, are the Rev. Dr. Backhaus, the Rev.
Dr. Nish, and the Rev. Joseph Dare. In the ranks of journalism
two justly esteemed and talented men are now missing—the Hon.
Angus Mackay and Mr Haverfield.
Mr J. K. Robshaw, one of the leading booksellers and pub-
lishers of Sandhurst died some years ago, and, the at one time
well-known, W. P. Neal has also passed away.
There are many old Bendigonians still remaining on this side


of “the river.” Mr. George Lansell, the “Golden King,” is still
“ booming” this field along with that spirit of enterprise which
has always characterised him. The Hon. J. H. Abbott, M.L.0., is
as active as ever in promoting the best interests of the district.
Mr. J. J. Casey, adorns the judicial bench. | Dr. James Boyd and
Dr. Atkinson are still to the fore, as also is Dr Eadie. Mr T.
H. Henderson, who passed the best of his young days in Sand-
hurst, now reigns at the old “ Beehive,” founded by Francis
Brothers in the early days. Mr John Crowley, still wears well,
and Mr Jacob Cohn is still a prominent citizen, and one of the
warmest supporters of the Art Gallery.
Mr. Hayes and Mr. O’Hagan are vigorous business men yet.
Mr. John Robshaw cannot be classed with the very old Ben-
digonians, but he is sufficiently long here, to have identified him-
self with the rise and progress of the city. Mr. Hugh
McDevitt is also entitled to be ranked among those who
have grown into the riper manhood with the place. Mr,
Alexander Bayne is an old Bendigonian who has done much for
the district and a good deal for himself. Mr. F. Sciallero is a
Bendigonian of forty years standing, and, though he has not made
a fortune, his eye is as clear and bright as it was a quarter of a
century ago.
There are scores of others on the field, who knew the place
when it was in its golden prime, but as I am a mere bird of
passage, I cannot recall their names. It must be gratifying to
the pioneers of Bendigo, who are still in the flesh, to note the
wonderful progress which is observable on all hands. Where old
gullies gaped, and worked-out claims appeared in all their
mullocky ugliness, beautiful lakes, surrounded by charming
gardens, delight the eye. The sludge-channel, at one time an eye-
sore, now helps to ornament the well-laid-out grounds of the old
Camp Reserve.
The Art Gallery itself, apart from the other fine public insti-
tutions, is a< credit to the citizens, and more particularly to those
who have donated the fine pictures which decorate its walls. The
two gifts of the Hon. W. I. Winter-Irvine, one on canvas and
the other in marble, would alone be considered rare treasures in
any of the best galleries of the Old World. That the Art
Gallery is appreciated by the citizens is evidenced by the large
number who daily visit it. In the matter of tree-planting the
Bendigonians have done wonders. The once naked streets are
now ornamented by rows of shady trees, first initiated by the late
town clerk, Mr George Avery Fletcher, and everything pos-
sible has been done by the City Fathers to make the place
worthy of its reputation as the Great Central Goldfield of Vic-
toria.


A
PUGILIST.
The Cornish and the Irish did not get on very well together in
the early days of the diggings. The more demonstrative of the
Irish population were in those times designated “ Tips.” It did
not matter a farthing rush-light from what part of Ireland
the men came the unfortunate County of Tipperary had to
bear the brunt and the blame of any little row that took place.
In 1857, a shindy over some claim-jumping business occurred at
Long Gully between a set of Cornishmen and a body of “ Tips.”
Instead of a general mellee it was considered by the leaders of
both parties that the most satisfactory method of settling the
dispute would be for the rival factions to select a champion to do
battle for those concerned. The Cornishmen choose for their
representative a big fellow of seventeen stone named Trelawney,
and the “ Tips’, took for their champion a very popular leader
named John Strong. Although Mr Strong was not a member of
the National Church of Ireland, he was a strong Nationalist, and
like many other Protestant Irishmen he was ever ready to fight
for his native land, John weighed sixteen stone, and out of this
his heart alone must have weighed twelve stone. He is now
settled in Dunedin, and the writer can vouch for the fact that
there is no more genuine man living on this side of the equator.
Sunday was generally the day set apart for “ milling matches,”
and, on the occasion under notice, the principals and their
seconds and backers met in strong force. Trelawney was in
splendid form; and J ohn Strong also seemed well up to the mark.
The Cornishman looked fierce, but the Irishman, like “My Uncle
Toby,” could not look fierce if he tried. He was the sort of man
to say to a fly—“ Get thee gone, I will not harm a hair of thine
head. There is room enough in this world for thee and me.”
Well, iust as the men were about to shake hands preparatory to
the combat, a gentle dew seemed to gather in John’s eyes, and
turning to one of his seconds, he said, in a pig’s whisper—“ Dan
me boy, will you hand me my handkerchief out of my coat
pocket?” Dan complied wondering what John wanted with the
“ wipe.” On receiving the kerchief, the Irishman placed it to his
eyes, and sobbed audibly. “ What’s the matter John ?” said
Dan. “Avery simple matter, Dan,” replied John. “The last


man I fought with, died after the battle, and it has been a weight
on my conscience ever since.” This was whispered in such a
manner that the Cornishman and his seconds could overhear the
remark. A hurried consultation took place .between the latter,
after which Mr Trelawney approached John and holding out his
hand, exclaimed. “I be thinking you’re not a bad sort of fellow
after all, although you be an Irishman, and we’ll go and have a
quiet glass together.” The invitation was at once accepted, and
for a long time afterwards the Cornish and the Irish lived on
very friendly terms in Long Gully.
A VETERAN CON-
STABLE
In the early digging days the police were detested by the
miners, and from all accounts they richly merited the contempt
in which they were held. They were then the tools of tyranny
and, though, doubtless, there were many good and true men
among them, still as a body, they allowed themselves to be made
the minions of a petty despotism which nearly plunged the whole
colony into revolt against the Government of the day. The
Constables of Bendigo now are as popular as those of the older
times were unpopular. In physique they are the finest
body of police I have seen in Australia, and while enforcing the
law they never overstep the mark and strain it. The most pro-
minent figure in the Bendigo police force is Senior-Constable
Barry, an officer who for nearly thirty years, has performed his
duties with that sagacity and intelligence, which has earned for
him the respect and esteem of all classes of citizens. Although he
possesses the education and the general knowledge to fit him for the
highest position, he has never sought promotion,but has contented
himself with his present rank. Mr Barry may well exclaim,
altering the well known lines in Tennyson’s “ Brook,”
“ Traps may come and traps may go,
But I go on for ever. ”


THE ‘INIMITABLE”
THAT6HER.
In 1857 Mr. C. R. Thatffier was a good-looking though rather
effeminate young man of twenty eight or thirty years of age
He had a wonderful gift for rhyming, and all events of any
consequence were worked into verse by him and set to popular
airs. Now and then he got into trouble through his songs, and I
remember on one occasion a Mr. Costello, from the Axe Creek,
took him to task rather severely for some satirical rhymes which
the “Inimitable” had written. Thatcher possessed a very fair
voice and the crowded audiences that used to assemble nightly at
the Shamrock Concert Hall, were enthusiastic in their approval
of his efforts. Miss Urie, the best singer of Scottish ballads we
have ever had in the colonies, contributed greatly to Thatcher’s
success on the stage. She used to sing duets with him, and as
these were on local subjects they always “ took ” with the diggers.
As an illustration of the merit of these productions, I quote an
extract from one of them. There was a German gentleman in
Sandhurst then named Mr. Herman Scheide, who kept'a registry
office, and he sends a young woman to a gentleman who requires
a general servant. The employer was the “ Inimitablfe ” and the
servant Miss Urie. After some introductory remarks the
applicant for a situation begins in the following strain:—
“ Good Morning, Sir, Good Morning,
A. visit to you I’ve paid,
1 hear that your good lady
Requires a servant maid ;
Mr Shiede, of the registry office
Has sent me here to you.
You’ll find me very handy,
And I trust that I shall do.”
The “ Inimitable” then replies—
“ Now, young woman, a word with you,
Tol the roll the rido, tol the rol the re !
Just let’s know what you can do ?
Tol the rol the rido, the rol the re !
Are you all there at cooking grub ?
Not afraid to iron or scrub 1
And can you stand the washing tub ?
Tol the rol the rido, tol the rol the re !”


The applicant curtesies and replies—
“ Oh, yes indeed sir, I can cook,
Fal, la lal a 10, fal a lal a la !
Make a pie too, likewise soup,
Fal, la lal a la, fal a lal ala !
I can cook a nice beef-steak,
Puddings also I can make,
I can also wash and bake,
Fal, la lal a la, fal a lal a la !”
The explanation being satisfactory an engagement is entered
into but not before the employer stipulates that no “followers”
will be permitted. The applicant very naturally objects to this
arrangement and sings—
“ I’ve .a cousin here and he’s a trap,
A bobbing round, a bobbing round ;
And he is such a nice young chap,
And he comes bobbing round.”
The “ Inimitable ” cannot stand the “ trap ” at any price—
“ Then if your cousin does come here,
A bobbing round, a bobbing round ;
Then I shall quickly interfere,
And spoil his bobbing round.”
After some mutual explanations the engagement is arranged.
One of Thatcher’s greatest “hits” was his song of “Bullock Creek”
in which the adventures of certain lady and gentlemen bathers
in that stream were chronicled with graphic fidelity. In those
times Bullock Creek was celebrated for its leeches, and on the
occasion in question, they displayed their vitality to very great
advantage. Thatcher took a big interest in our Chinese
brethren and in numerous lyrics immortalised “John.” One of
the best of these gives an account of a love adventure in which
a certain Mr. Clung Chong loses his heart to an interesting lady
rejoicing in the sobriquet of “ Cock Eyed Ean.” The story is
told as follows:
‘ ‘ Good people, all give ear I pray,
To what I am about to say ;
I’m giving you now in a song
The married life of poor Chiog Chong.’ :
This Chinaman as I’ve been told,
At digging made a lot of gold,
To get a wife then, was his plan
Was’nt he a domestic Chinaman ?
Some girls he leer’d at, merely laugh’d
While others banter’d him and chaff'd.
At length a girl named “ Cock-Eyed Fan,”
Took pity on the Chinaman.”


The poet then proceeds to describe the attractions of the fair-
one, and to narrate some exciting scenes which occurred in con-
nection with the honeymoon. Suffice it to observe that the
marriage was not a happy one, and that “John” and “Fan”
agreed to separate in a short while after their nuptials. Like
the majority of versifiers Thatcher paid a lot of attention to the
fair sex. His verses teem with love incidents, and love in those
days was quite a different thing to that sensation your genteel
poets gloat over. I don’t suppose Thatcher ever read “ The
Gardener’s Daughter,” or if he did he failed to benefit by that
charming poem. His love lyrics, if they can be designated by the
title of lyrics, are of the rough home-spun pattern. He describes
human nature, as he saw it, in its most crude state as witness
the following :
Oh, Stephen Cain was a nice young man,
And he came to Bendigo
In the days when Eaglehawk was young,
About five years ago ;
And he rose with the cock at five o’clock,
And toiled until ’twas late,
And fortune kindly smiled on him
For he took out twelve pounds weight;
And he sang “ Hurrah for Eaglehawk !
Hurrah ! for the digger’s life !
I like this country jolly well,
So I’ll go and look out for a wife.”
The poet then describes how the gay young dog, Stephen
Cain, took a trip to Melbourne and found a wife. The “ subse-
quent procedings ” —to borrow a phrase from Bret Harte—tended
to demonstrate the truth of the old adage that “ the course of
true love never did run smooth.” Although Thatcher was
pocketing about £2O or £3O a week by his songs, his heart
seemed to cling to the Old Land—
“I remember, I remember,
Life in London years ago,
This colony compared with it,
Is dismal stale and slow ;
Oh, wherefore did I leave my home.
And cross the briny seas,
For there I once enjoyed myself,
And knew no end of sprees.
‘ ‘ I remember, I remember,
How the folks kicked up a fuss,
And hurried to the park to see
The hippopotamus ;
To view the varieties outside,
A shilling you would pay,
And ’twas worth all the money,
For to see the monkey’s play.


Thatcher’s best effort in my opinion was * Petticoat Lane.”
A clever though rather coarse parody on “ Norah McShane.”
Here are a couple of verses :
“ I’d like now to drop into old Harry Potter’s
Wnere they serve up the slap-bang so stunning and hot,
Oh, could I but get at the sheep’s heads and trotters,
I fancy I’d walk into them like a shot ;
I’d satisfy soon my most craving desires,
Do my pennorth o’ pudding again and again ;
And slip into the fried fish of old Mother Myers,
That buxom old Jewess in Petticoat Lane.”
Oh ! don’t I remember the day when by water
To Old Greenwich Fair I escorted my Sal
Along with Bet Muggins, the chimney-sweep’s daughter,
And Curly-Eliza—the water-cress gal.
I’ll never forget how they rumpled their muslin,
Rolling slap down the steep hill again and again;
And how coming home, the Old Tom they kept gussling
And straggered home lushy to Petticoat Lane.”
Poor Thatcher died in China and his songs are out of print.
He was not a genius but he was the possessor of much originality
and his name will ever be associated with “ Dear Old Bendigo.”


A GRAVE IN THE BUSH.
The author of these pages was informed of an incident which
took place in the Bendigo Yalley before the big rush occurred. A
lovely young lady, possessed of high educational attainments,
came out from England in 1850, as governess to a squatter’s
family. A student of Oxford University was passionately fond
of her, and notwithstanding the opposition of his parents who
belonged to an old patrician family followed her to Victoria, ar-
riving in Melbourne only to hear of her sudden death She was
buried somewhere on the Ravenswood Run in the centre of a
grove of wattles, surrounding one venerable old box-tree.
incident suggested the following lines :
LILLIAN.
In a forest far away.
One small creeklet day by day,
Murmurs only this sad lay—
“ Peace be with thee, Lillian !”
One old box-tree bends his head,
One broad wattle shades her bed,
One lone magpie mourns the dead.
“Peace be with thee Lillian !”
Echoes come on every breeze,
Sighing through the ancient trees,
Whisp’ring in their melodies—
“ Peace be with thee, Lillian !”
Mystic midnight voices melt
Through each leafy bower and belt,
Round the spot where friends have knelt.
Peace be with thee, Lillian !
When the Summer moon mounts high,
Queen of all the speckless sky,
Showers of silver softly lie
O’er the grave of Lillian.
When the dying blossoms cling
To the skirts of parting Spring,
Wattle censors softly fling
Rich perfume o’er Lillian.
Dear old forest, wild and free,
Horae of Nature’s euphony,
Pour thy requiem psalmody
O’er the grave of Lillian.
Guard that daisy-quilted sod,
Thou hast there no common clod,
Keep her ashes safe, for God
Makes but few 7 like Lillian.
Sceptics ask me if that clay
In the forest far away,
Is part of her ? I only say—
Flowerets breathe out Lillian,


Prom her grave their sweets mount high,
Love and beauty never die,
Sun, moon and stars, earth, sea and sky,
All partake of Lillian
THE BENDIGO FIRE BRIGADES.
In a previous chapter reference was made to a big fire
which occurred on Christmas morning, 1857, in which one half
of Williamson Street was burned down. On that occasion the
Bendigo Brigade distinguished themselves, and during the long
term of years that has elapsed since then the members of the Ben-
digo fire brigades have ever been ready at the call of duty to sacrifice
life and limb if necessary in order to save the lives or property of
their fellow citizens. Considering the courage and daring of
these brave men, the following verses will not be out of place in
this little work :
; THE TRAMP OF THE FIRE BRIGADE.
’Tis grand to hear the trumpet clear,
When it calls the soldier on,
To prove his might in the field of fight,
Where gallant deeds are done ;
And the gallant tread, of the troops when led,
By their leader’s flashing blade.
Sounds loud and true—but there’s music too
In the tramp of the Fire Brigade,
No prouder tramp
In field or camp,
On march or on parade,
Than the firemen’s tread
As they rush ahead,
Hurrah for the Fire Brigade.
The flames flash high, and the lurid sky
Reflects the fiery glare ;
And the inmates shriek, and the timbers creak,
And the crackling rafters flare ;
And the deep-toned bell, with brazen knell
Makes frantic cries for aid ;
Keep back, keep back, and clear the track—
Make room for the Fire Brigade !
No prouder tramp
In field or camp,
On march or on parade,
Than the firemen’s tread
As they rush ahead,
Hurrah for the Fire Brigade !
That noble band, at their chief’s command,
Mount up on the crumbling walls,
With axe and hose, where the red flame glows,
And the blazing rooftree falls ;


The crowd retreat from the scorching heat,
But the firemen undismayed,
With courage true, the flames subdue,
Hurrah for the Fire Brigade !
No prouder tramp
In field or camp,
On march or oh parade
Than the firemen’s tread
As they rush ahead,
Hurrah for the Fire Brigade !
OlsD BENDIGO
Let Poley go with Redman ; mind be careful of the steer ;
Bring Bob and Rambler from the creek, they’ll find good picking here.
Just fling this she-oak on the fire ; there, catch that end, now throw—
This ’minds me of our maiden trip to dear old Bendigo.
Old Bendigo ! the very name is treasured in my breast— *
Just pass the billy this way, Jack. Not boiled yet? Well, I’m blest,
If that there wood will ever burn ; this ironbark is slow—
You know the gully of that name on dear old Bendigo.
Oh, when we camped upon the track —that damper must be done—
Around the the blazing log at night, what tough old yarns were spun
By Sydney Ned, and Derwent Bill, and Murrumbidgee Joe !
Where are they now ? Ah, mate they’ll drive no more to Bendigo.
I can’t help laughing when I think—old mate, just pass a chew—
Of that ere time when Murphy’s team got bogged at Carlsrhu.
Big Barney Fagan shouted—whilst the wheels were bedding low—
“ Faix, boys, there’s some deep sinking on the road to Bindigo.
Mount Macedon is gazing down as proudly as of old,
And Alexander s lofty brow looks over fields of gold ;
They never shift ; but where are all the friends we used to know
On Castlemaine and Forest Creek, and dear Old Bendigo.
No other land has mustered such a kingly race of men
As that brave golden legion on the march to fortune then ;
The digger’s shirt was freedom’s badge ; beneath it honor’s glow
Lit up a generous manly flame on dear old Bendigo.
Old mate of mine, together we have roughed it, through the bush
For twenty years, and Time begins to lay his frosting brush
Upon our heads ; but in our hearts the flowers of friendship grow
As fresh as when we planted them on dear old Bendigo.
I sigh whene’er I think upon—Jack, pass along the grub—
The music of the puddling mill, the cradle, and the tub ;
The hurdy-gurdies, German bands, and minstrels too—why blow
It you’ve upset the tea —on dear old Bendigo.
The track of life is sometimes smooth, at other times ’tis rough;
But we must take it as it comes—this beef is rayther tough—
I feel a spider on my cheek—l’ve caught the varmint—no ;
Why, bless me 1 if it ain’t a tear for dear old Bendigo.


Advertisements.
JOHN ROBSHAW
(Established 1868),
LAW, COMMERCIAL & GENERAL
STATIONER,
Has always on hand'a Large Assortment of
Ledgers, Journals, Cash Books,
Day Books, Law Forms,
Memorials, Parchment, &c.
A CHOICE SELECTION OF BIRTHDAY, WEDDING,
CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR’S CARDS.
Diaries, Calenders and Almanacs for
1893 Now Ready.
School Requisites of Every Descripton at Lowest Current Rates.
COMMERCIAL STATIONERY of Every Description.
Bookbinding, Printing, Engraving, Embossing, &c., &c.
LICENSED TO SELL REVENUE STAMPS
JO H m RQBs u A ?,
BOOKSELLER and STATIONER,
METOMEILIE' MM3M©(Dc


Advertisements,
ASK FOR
OOHF’S
zx: ix: x:
Is Justly CELEBRATED over the Colony.
COHN’S Old-Established Brewery.
BRIDGE STREET, BENDIGO.


ADVKRTISEIM KNfS.
eBW®»S» BOTSL.
For about forty years the above Popular Hostelry has held
a high place in public estimation. In the days of “ OLD
BENDIGO ” it was a favorite resort of visitors to this great
goldfield, and at the present time it is frequented by those who
believe in Quiet, Comfortable Quarters, at Strictly MODERATE
CHARGES.
The Proprietor makes a Special Feature of the
SCOTCH AND IRISH WHISKIES,
which he always keeps in Stock.
jjjmsoira very old mmm whisky
Can always be obtained at the Criterion.
THE
CfilTlfilOl Hdflh
Is Situated in the most CENTRAL PART of the City,
CLOSE to tlx© MARKET and TOWZV HATE.
HUGH McDEVITT, Proprietor.


Advertisements.
JVIAURKSE JVIORAN,
HOUSE AND ESTATE AGENT,
VALUATOR AND GENERAL COMMISSION AGENT,
Williamson Street, Sandhurst.
AGENT FOR -
THE NORTHERN FIRE AND LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY
(Established 1836.)
Capital £3,000,000. Annual Revenue over £700,000. Life Premiums
£607,000. Interest £143,000, Accumulated Funds £3,421,000.
PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION COY.,
Conveying First and Second Class Passengei s and Cargo to Sydney, Ade-
laide India, China, Japan, Europe, and Western Australia.
THE TRUSTEES, EXECUTORS, & AGENCY CO.,
This Company is empowered, by Act of Parliament, to act as Executor
Trustees, Agent, &c., and is also authorised to relieve existing
Trusteed of their Responsibilities.
ABSENTEES’ ESTATES MANAGED.
Health! Health!! Health!!!
BHTTSE THAW WHALTH
EUCALYPTI! EUCALYPTI!!
THE MOST WONDERFUL REMEDY OF THE AGE. FOR
COUGHS, COLDS, ASTHMA, and all Bronchial Affections.
Be sure you get the Genuine Brand,
S-A..TSrnDICR -A_JSTID SOITsTS,
LBEJSTIDXGrO,


Advertisements.
HEEL.A. IR, ID FACTS.
During the Eleven years that I have been on Bendigo,
MARVELLOUS IMPROVEMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE IN
PHOTOGRAPHY
Bendigo having obtained the reputation of producing some of the
finest photographs seen in the colonies. I have SPARED
NO EXPENSE in obtaining the LATEST
INS TBITME NTS AND ACCESSORIES.
With these I am endeavouring to surpass my previous efforts,
and trust to still merit the public confidence by producing HIGH-
CLASS WORK at MODERATE PRICES.
ARTIST AND PHOTOGRAPHER,
WILLIAMSON STREET, BENDIGO.
tKtye (OLitR
COMFORT, CLEANLINESS AND CIVILITY,
Is the Motto of this old-established House.
MODERATE CHARGES
GOOD MEADS,
EXCELLENT BEDS,
■BEST BRANDS OF SPIRITS,
PUREST WINES,
FIRST CLASS ALES
EVERYTHING OF THE FINEST QUALITY AT THE
COURT HOUSE HOTEL,
Corner of Pall Mall and Mundy Street.
THOMAS HOGAN, Proprietor,


Advertisements.
PEOPLE VISITING this flourishing town would do well to call
at the
SHIMOfiI n#m.
Where the very best brands of wine and whiskey are always in
Stock.
The ales on tap are of the highest quality.
Mrs* KEARNEY, Proprietress
ESTABLISHED. 1852.
Veniy Jackson i to.
FARMING, MINING,
AND
L IROMMiI fiER S
VIEW POINT,
BENDIGO.


Advertisements.
OPPOSITE FOUNT AIN,BENDIGO.
ALBION CLOTH HALL,
R, RAMAGrE, Froprietoir,
TAILOR, HATTER AND OUTFITTER.
Has always on stock the choicest assortment of
TWEEDS,
COATINGS, and
VESTINGS
In this district,
Coupled with workmanship and style unsurpassed.
HA TS, SHIR TS. TIES. Etc. .
In all the latest styles and in endless variety.
Note the address,
Ra RAMAGE,
View Street,
N.jk—Thc Bendigo Art Gallery is opposite.
ZBEISriDXGS-O.


•f ±
JJendsrson and pdissnn.
£37,000 STOCK
BMPlfil.CMffflK
FURNITURE & PURNISHINIig.
Waueh's Improved
IS NOT A DYE, BUT WILL
RESTORE GRAY HAIR
TO ITS NATURAL COLOR,
CAUSE A GLOSSY LUXURIANT GROWTH.
Cleanses the head of DANDRUFF, Prevents the hair from fall-
ing out, and is perfectly harmless.
Far superior to any of the imported articles and less than half the
price.
Ocl at
WALLEE ami Solf,
HOMCEPATHIC and PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTS,
Mitchell Street, Bendigo.
Proprietors of the celebrated preparations of Refined EUCALYP-
TUS EXTRACT, Eucalyptus Soap, & Eucalyptus Lozenges.


IN ALL
NERVOUS, and COMPLI-
CATED COMPLAINTS
CONSULT THE EMINENT LADY SPECIALIST,
Dl. ELIZA intrant U
WHO IS
The only Legally Qualified LADY SPECIALIST in the
Southern Hemisphere.
CONSULTATION FREE
CURE GUARANTEED.
CONFIDENCE ABSOLUTE.
THE BENDIGO EOLETI6 INSTITUTE,
o 1 Jet -Kj-Hi i opposite nauwdy
■
,<r T r™ T j ELL STREET (opposite Railway Station),
