

Death of an Old Citizen.
Itlr. Jacob Richard Clarke.
“ Our obituary of to-day announces the death of another
old citizen, who was for many years connected with the
progress of literature and art in this city, Mr. J, R. Clarke,
For many years Mr. Clarke, of George Street, was known
as one of the leading booksellers and music publishers of
Sydney. He was long associated with the late Mr. W. P.
Woolcott, and the title pages of many of the music albums
and of the principal pieces of music published in the colony
bore the imprint of Clarke and Woolcott, and later of J. R.
Clarke, especially those of Boulanger, Henry Marsh, and
other well-known pianists of 35 years ago. Mr. Clarke's
Repository of Music was the resort of all the musical and
dramatic artists of those days. Here were constantly to
be met Lucy Escott, Catherine Hayes, Madame Anna
Bishop, Madame Sara Elizabeth Flower, the Carandinis,
Rosalie Durand, the brothers Lyster, Squires, Farquarson,
Armes Beaumont, G. Y. Brooke, Kitts, Kean, Booth, and
almost every other celebrated artist who visited our shores.
Mr. Clarke’s knowledge of pictures, and especially of
every class of engraving, was proverbial, and he was an
acknowledged authority on the subject of church
architecture. He studied the subject at Taunton, his
native place. Mr. Clarke was 72 years of age. In late
years he kept an art repository in Pitt Street, near Bridge
Street, and subsequently held a Government appointment.
He has left a grown up family.”—“ Evening News"
“ Town and Country Journal ,” and “ Illustrated Sydney
News,” July 13th, 1893.


. . . '1 1
-
.
.
■
■
1,1, I, 11 n,! iniii > ipr nriinr.irwn n-inMiii-riitinniitiiTmrrFiTiiTrmiT- - '-'T JiiiWTir r '" : Tlin—H


ANOTHER OLD CITIZEN GONE.
“ The death of another old citizen, who was for many years
connected with the progress of literature and art in this city,
Mr. J. R. Clarke, has just been recorded. For many years Mr.
Clarke, of George Street, was known as one of the leading
booksellers and music publishers of Sydney. He was long
associated with the late Mr. W. P. Woolcott, and the title pages
of many of the music albums and of the principal pieces of
music published in the colony bore the imprint of Clarke and
Woolcott, and later of J R. Clarke, especially those of Boulanger,
Henry Marsh, and other well-known pianists of 35 years ago.
Mr. Clarke’s Repository of Music (says the Evening News) was
the resort of all the musical and dramatic artists of those days.
Here were constantly to be met Lucy Escott, Catherine Hayes,
Madame Anna Bishop, Madame Sara Elizabeth Flower, the
Carandinis, Rosalie Durand, the Brothers Lyster, Squires,
Farquarson, Armes Beaumont, G, V. Brooke, and almost every
other celebrated artist who visited our shores. Mr. Clarke’s
knowledge of pictures, and especially of every class of engraving,
was proverbial, and he was an acknowledged authority on the
subject of church architecture. He studied the subject at Taunton,
his native place. Mr. Clarke was 72 years of age. Of late years
he kept an art repository in Pitt Street, near Bridge Street, and
subseqnently held a Government appointment. He left a grown-up
family, of which Mr. J. W. R. Clarke. J.P., of this City, is one.
To the above we may add the fact that, although not a Roman
Catholic, very few faces were more familiar at old St. Mary’s
than that of Mr. Clarke, who for forty years attended the
principal mass on Sundays. He was a very high churchman,
and he was a grandson of Mr. John Clarke, Jun., son of Mr
John Clarke, Member of Parliament for Taunton. Born at
Honiton, July 11th, 1788. Mary Joggett, Born at Taunton,
December 29th, 1790, parents of 12 children.—“ The Freeman's
Journal, July 22nd, 1893.”
Ueciwieaccit in
Note.— Mr. John Clarke, who represented the town of Taunton for many
years, during the reign of King William the third, being elected thereto
in the year 1699, in conjunction with Mr. Speke, of Jordans. Mr. Clarke
was a man of some note in his day ; he was a personal friend of John Locke,
who wrote his Treatise on Education at his house, Ohipley Park, near
Wellington, now destroyed by Mr. Sandford . . . Locke dedicated the
book to his friend, and many letters from one to the other are still extant,
and evidence the kind feeling and respect which the great philosopher had for
his patron. It may be of some interest to know that some of Mr. Clarke’s
descendants are still living in the good old town their ancestor once
represented. His son died November 7th, 1861, in the 79th year of his age.


'TA-fy
61 &U I o
PC C<s^U{
1508
01581048
