

30R PETERSON.
HIS WORK FOR MUSICAL EDUCA
TiON.
CAREER IN MELBOURNE.
We regret to announce the death of
Professor F. S. Peterson, Ormond professor
of music at Melbourne, which occurred at
5 p.m, yesterday at his residence, in the
"University grounds, Carlton. During his
illness he had been attended by Drs. S.
V. Sewell and N. M‘Arthur. He had been
in bad health for some months, and only
recently Mr. W. A. Laver, vice-director
of the Conserve toriurn, was deputed to
take, over his work temporarily, it being
realised that the professor would not be
able to resume his duties for some con-
siderable time. Deep sympathy will be felt
for Mrs. Peterson and her family in their
bereavement.
Professor , Peterson was bom in Edin-
burgh in 1861, his father, John Peterson,
being- a merchant of that city- His general
education was conducted at .Watson’s Col-
lege, but he specialised, subsequently in
music at the Edinburgh University, and
continued his studies at Dresden. In 1884
he was elected organist and choir master of
Palmerston-place Church, and in 1893 he
became teacher s of pianoforte and theory in
the Edinburgh Ladies’ College, the largest
institution of its kind in Scotland, while
a year later, in 1894, he was also appointed
as music master at Fettes College. In
1891 he became a bachelor of music at
Oxford University. During these years he
delivered many lectures upon musical sub-
jects in various districts of Scotland, and
in 1892 he became associated with the
“Monthly Musical Record,” to which he
contributed largely. In 1891 he became
deputy examiner in music to the Edinburgh
University, and in 1896 became honorary
local examiner to the Royal College of
Music, London. He was appointed as Or-
mond professor at Melbourne in 1901, suc-
ceeding Professor Marshall-Hall in the
position ill March of that year, and since
then his work has been closely associated
■with musical progress of the Univer-
sity. He took the keenest interest in
Australian music,'and in particular directed
bis attention to the examination side of
the question, devoting care and trouble to
the improvement of the general standard of
examinations, with the object of raising
the status of music in the Commonwealth.
In this connection he succeeded in bring-
ing about the affiliation of Adelaide Uni-
versity wdth Melbourne.
A further matter to which the professor
devoted his attention was the introduc-
tion into Australia of the normal concert
pitch. This was a point of the greatest
importance to the students under his care,
many of whom went to Europe to con-
tinue their studies at one or other of the
great schools there. Their work was ren-
dered far easier by the adoption in the
Commonwealth of the normal pitch used
universally on the Continent. Professor
Peterson’s work was crowned by the erec-
tion of the Conservatoriuin and of Melba
Hail. Throughout his career here he was
most ably assisted by his talented wife,
who is well known to Melbourne resident*’
Professor Peterson’s best and most im-
portant work was probably that which he
did with the pen, for the furtherance and
improvement of musical education. He
published numerous articles, papers and
books dealing with the subject, to some
of which considerable value is attached.
He wrote most of the musical articles in
“Chambers’s Encyclopaedia,” and was the
author of “The Pianist’s Handbook,”
“The Elements of Music,” “Introduction
to the Study of Theory” and other works,
earning the highest appreciation of Sir
John Stainer, among other authorities,
who valued very highly his work as critic
and author.
The funeral will leave Professor Peter-
son’s residence, in the University grounds,
on Tuesday, at 3 p.m. The University Con-
servatorium will be dosed to-day and to-
morrow.


>m .‘B9SU ung—-Zo.' i
* ‘ B :^;ho^“ovomoHoaißv (
■b guuuoS ' 1( > 01 - Fnw: a Photograph bv '/as. Balmain, Edinburgh.
M-e-iapow <A *p T ., Mr .


Supplement to Alma Mala, Melbourne, April, igoi. From Photographs by Haney S’ Sutcliffe.
1. The Student-Players. 2. “ Weighing their Words.” 3. “ Frog in your throat ?”
“Cbe dfvogs” at Ormond College
11 and 12 april, 1901.
