

DEATH OF MIL T. CARRINGTON
Deep regret will be felt at the announce-
ment of the death of Mr. “Tom” Carring-
ton, controller of the illustrated pages of
“The Australasian” and dramatic and art i
critic of “The Argus,” which occurred at
his residence, lona avenue, Toorak, yester-
day morning. Though he had reached the
age of 75 years he had enjoyed splendid
health until about a fortnight ago, when
disquieting symptoms appearing, he was
compelled to seek medical advice. con-
dition from the first gave cause for deep
anxiety, but it was not expected that the.
malady from which he suffered ■would so
quickly run its course.
Mr. Carrington was known to very
few people by his full name of Francis
Thomas Dean Carrington- He Was born in
London on November 17, 1843, and was
educated at the City of London School.
After his early training in drawing, which
included a course at South Kensington,
he commenced drawing for Clarke and Com-
pany, of Paternoster Row, a title page to
one of Mayne Reid's novels being his first
! appearance in print. Australia, as a land
lof gold rather than as an art at-
tracted Mr. Carrington in the early six--j
! ties, and his first experiences m V ictona
i were associated with the around
Wood’s Point, Jericho, Jordan, and Crooked
River. It was in 18156 that Mr. Carrington .
joined Melbourne “Punch,” then a keenly j
clever satirical paper, with much ot the
spirit and a great deal of the talent which
had made London “Punch so striking a 1
feature of political and social life m Png- ;
land. The special gift of Mr. Carrington |
was a whimsical humour which extracted I
the very essence from ar\y political situa- |
i tion. It was in that lino that he made a ]
name so distinctive that few can realise now .
the high favour with which his ‘ Punch j
cartoons were regarded by the public. V ic-
torian politics were going through their most
stirring period, and passions ran very high,
but Mr. Carrington, while playing a dis-
tinguished part and profoundly influencing
opinion, employed the art of caricature so
genially that the “victim” enjoyed the por-
trayal no less than the public, the rise,
triurvoh. and the fall of the Berty party
embraced the period from,lB/5 to l»8k and
Mr. Carrington lived through every phase
of it with a . zest equal to the
most active of the politicians. 1
During ,this long controversy subscribers
to “Punch” 1 waited, for the. familiar j
weekly contributions fronm "i.C.: He.
Could create humour but ot material ap-
parently unpromising. For instance, when
1 the famous “embassy” to England returned j
the Opposition demanded insistently that a
statement of its expenditure should he pro-
duced. and finally, with a rectitude ot winch
politicians are sometimes guilty, _ it pre-
sented a balance-sheet and paid into the
Treasury a surplus of sixpence! Mr, Car-
rington clung to that “magic sixpence'
until it appeared to be a part of the politics
of the day. It dropped from pockets, was
picked up by small boys, occasionally it
appeared in the firmamentbut, it was
always playing its part Personal ami
facial characteristics were also exploited to
the full by Mr. Carrington, until politicians
I were known as well in the streets as in the
lobbies of Parliament. The smile of Mr.
Francis Jxmgmorc and the boots ot Major
Collate! Smith would have been familiar to t
any “Punch” reader had there oeen no
other lines in the drawing. And he made
great plav with that oddity “Henderson
Africa mis,” the black newsvendor, who be- s
came a figure in the politics of the day, and:
was “nominated” in a spirit of derisive i
banter by a group of anti-Berryitcs
to be the third “ambassador to Loudon.
Mr Carrington, in a word, made lull use
of every phase of public life, and while
he played the humorist with astonishing
success his work had a practical value, for
it helped materially to the ultimate defeat
earlv in 1880 of the party which had been
returned' on Mav 11, 1877, in such over-
whelming strength that the Opposition
I numbered only about sixteen in a House of
1 84 members. The part which Mr. Carring-
ton played in the long campaign was greatly
appreciated by the Constitutional party ot
the time, and he was presented with
a substantial testimonial arranged by public
subscription.
his association with “Punch” Mr.
m became a member of the pro-
>aper until the latter part of the eighties,
for some years “The Australasian
iketcher” had been principally under his
direction. When, about this time, the
‘Sketeher” was merged in .“The Aus-
ralasian” and a pictorial department was
tdded to it, Mr. Carrington was placed in
•barge. He retained the position without
i break up to the time of his last illness.
During his connection with “The Aus-
ralasian” he became dramatic and art
:ritic of “The Argus. - ’ His criticism was
narked by a grace of diction
md a subtlety of expression not
ipproached by any of his contem-
toraries in that branch of newspaper work,
the years in no way dimmed the freshness
if his outlook nor his appreciation of the
node of the moment. No one was more
sensible than he of the decline of the stage
is an institution, and no one regretted it
note. But he could take the stage as he
"ound it, and in its movement of life and
mlour and its buoyant gaiety enter into
,he spirit of an audience spending a pleasant
•vening. Jn other ways he did a good
leal of writing, for both “The Argus” and
‘The Australasian,” mostly in the form of
ketches and light articles. He sometimes
icted as locum tenens for “Woomera,” and
if ten contributed to the “Passing Show.”
He wrote with a facile pen,''and humour
vas ever bubbling out of him. With
i lively social instinct Mr. Carrington
nade many friends. He was a foun-
lation member of the Yorick Club.
He saw a generation come and go on “The
Wgus” and “The Australasian.” His older
olleagues greatly appreciated his fine quali-
;ies as a journalist and as a friend, while
:o younger men he was always a helpful
ind kindly adviser.
The funeral will be strictly private.
