





4t ' ~ .v’
DEATH
den vanskelige dsd.
Niels Lyhne.
Mary Christina was going to die.—For
sixty years, come March, she had been an
inhabitant of the earth, and she had suffered
her full share of life’s vicissitudes: she had passed
from girl to woman, had loved and been loved, had
borne children and tended children, had watched
young faces lose their youth, and harden, and grow
unbeautiful; she had cared for graves; had resigned
herself, in the course of years, to the creeping on of
age: she had wept, and laughed, and been in-
different, mostly indifferent, as is man’s way; but,
now, she was going to cease to be, and nothing
would please her, or sadden her, or leave her
merely cold, again.
She knew what was coming, before anyone else;
for she had had a presentiment: so, at least, she
called it, one grey November afternoon, when, with
icy hands outspread, she crouched low over a fire
from which she could derive no heat.
That day, while a sharp wind was causing the
last, tattered leaves to whirl madly on their stalks,
Mary Christina had journeyed to a distant quarter


of the town. Her business done, she entered a
crowded conveyance. As she sat and let her eyes
range over the row of faces opposite her, faces
worn with toil, and reddened with exposure to the
wind, she said to herself: “My God, how ugly
people are! ” But, in the same breath, a small,
inner voice rebuked her: “Be thankful to be
among them, Mary Christina! What if you were
never out-of-doors again?” To which, elliptically,
she made answer: “Better now than in spring,
when things are freshening up.”
Mary Christina was going to die.
That night, the hour being come, she took off for
the last time the wrappings in which the world had
known her, and, with as little covering as she
would ever again need, lay down between the
sheets that witness the incoming and the outgoing
of mortals.
But the lying down and folding of the hands is
not enough; it is no such easy matter as that to
die. The way out of life is as darkly mysterious as
the way in.
Thus, after having ever been one of those stoics
who look upon illness as a moral failing, to which it is
dishonourable to yield ; after having born her casual
ailments as mutely as a suffering animal, Mary
Christina now began to fling about on her bed, in
such a manner that every one within call was needed
to restrain her; and to utter shrill, shameless cries,


which echoed through the house. Beads of mois-
ture rolled from her forehead and made round
spots on the sheet, or splashed the hands of those
who held her.
A stranger, summoned in haste, sat beside her
bed. Before him, a scrupulous, womanly reserve
dropped like a rent veil.
The well-known faces of her children —children
now in the eyes of Mary Christina alone —hung
over her. Hand after hand sought hers, sweat-
bedewed ; and from the lips of the youngest
broke man’s most human cry: “ Oh, mother . . .
mother! ”
But though these, of all living creatures, had
been in Mary Christina’s thoughts ever since they
had come into the world; though she had watched,
night for night, till she knew their eyes closed in
sleep, harrassed by the fears that only a mother
knows: though, up to the last, her love had thrown
out a thousand arms, to safeguard them on their
divers ways ; she was now as indifferent to them as
to the several strangers who moved round her bed. —
And the withdrawal of her warm affection seemed,
to those who had been used to shelter beneath it,
like the first significant victory gained by death
over life.
For Mary Christina, the centre of existence had
shifted: henceforth, her desire was only to herself.
First came the idolatrous attention demanded by


her body —this strong, personable body, still ablaze
with energy, and resolutely desirous of living. It
was made the object of a religious care; untiring
were the endeavours to ward off the inevitable.
The minutest variations in the heat of the blood, in
the pulsations of the heart, were verified and con-
trolled. Hitherto, she had lived unconscious of her
vital functions; now she, too, shared the palpitating
interest in their course. For all these things, now
of a morbid importance, were possible disarmers of
the great enemy, of the griping, gutting pain, to
repel which, was her chief concern. This came at
intervals. It began somewhere in the distance, far
away, drew rapidly nearer, darkening the bed with
the shadow of its wings; it hovered over her,
circling like a vulture, she lying defenceless and
terrified; then, with one swoop, it descended and
settled on her, plunging beak and claws into the
shuddering flesh. She looked at those about her,
with wild eyes, dumbly imploring them, praying to
them, as to gods, to shield her from it: but they
did nothing. It tore at her, sick and faint with
anguish; the muscles of her body twisted into
knots; she heard her own shrieks rend the air.
For longer than eight long days, she fought this
fight, returning time and again to the encounter, in
which, each single time, she left more of her
strength. Little by little, however, the force of her
struggles declined, and the hope that had sustained


her, the hope of once coming off conqueror, died
out. She still swallowed, w T ith avidity, the bitter
draughts that were held to her lips; she submitted,
gladly, to the importunate services of the nurse,
which broke in, by night and by day, on her hard-
won rest; she still gave desperate battle, when the
agony sucked at her; but it became a mere blind
instinct to live, without faith in the issue.—And the
watchers round the bed began to avoid her eyes, in
which, at moments, the death-secret was legible.
For eight days and over, she disputed each inch
of ground, and those whose lot it was to stand and
look on, felt the limits of human endurance strain
to breaking-point. Then, however, a change was
visible. The pain still wrung her, in savage bouts;
but Mary Christina did not answer to it, as at first;
her nerves were losing their fine power, both to
feel, and to interpret the feeling. She ceased to
resist so ardently, let the anguish engirdle her, do
its worst. Now that her nerves were drowsier, too,
she was able, the moment she ceased to suffer, to
sink into repose, a tranquil, twilight state, on the
borderland between sleep and waking; and the
experiences of a lifetime had numbered no goodlier
pleasure than this: the wishless well-being that
follows on a vanishing pain.
Her dark hair, fine as silk, was gathered loosely
round her head; iced cloths were strapped to her
brow; her large, worn hands lay folded on the


sheet. The watchers stifled their own flickering
hopes, and gave up asking her how she did; for she
could hardly bring herself to return a pressure of
the hand: all else was immaterial to her, so long as
the agony was kept at bay, and she not roused from
her present sweet reprieve. They moved on tip-
toe, fearful of disturbing her; for they believed she
slept. But she was not asleep—as one saw, who
bent more nearly over her: the dark pupils were
fixed, beneath the half-fallen lids, like the unclosed
eyes of one already dead.
In these benign moments, when her torture
slackened, Mary Christina lay and let pictures pass
before her —pictures, fragments, flashes —of the life
which, until now, had been hers; and, compared
with this intensely personal past, which had its rise
in mistiest morning memories, even her children
seemed unfamiliar to her —the chance associates of
an hour.
Fifty years ago! . . . The walls of the room
expanded, then fell in, like the sides of a card house.
It was a wide and sunny square; before an old-
fashioned house with a shiny brass knocker, under
a pale blue English sky, heaped with bulbous
masses of cloud, a group of children played. One
had hair of a light, flaxen colour, which flapped to
her waist-line, floated behind her as she ran. She
was the wildest and merriest of all; she threw the
ball highest; she caught it most surely as it came


to earth again. In a spirit of wantonness, elated by
her own skill, she threw it so high and so far that it
did not return: it had gone over the wall of a
neighbouring garden. They were not allowed to
enter this garden; the ball, her ball, of which she
had been so proud, was lost for ever, and through
her own folly. She sat down on the steps, and wept
bitterly. Her playfellows, unable to comfort her,
stole away . . .
Years had passed. Overhead, a lowering grey
sky; which was yet no greyer than the flat stretch
of earth beneath. Snow was in waiting, but, so far,
only a few detached flakes had fluttered down. On
a hard-frozen pond, people were skating: a young
girl stood at the edge, and followed their bird-like
dartings and skimmings. She wore a scarlet hood
on her head. Seen against the prevailing dulness,
this hood burnt like a flame. Two young men
passed, swinging their skates; one turned to look
at her, and she caught an admiring word. He had
bright, merry eyes. She reddened; then, obeying
an impulse, took to her heels and ran, never pausing
till she had crossed the home threshold. Too big
for such frolics, they rebuked her; but she only
smiled at them in return, not grasping what they
said. Her thoughts were singing; life seemed
suddenly to mean undreamed-of wonders —the
unravelling of a magic coil . . .
And again the years moved forward. It was
p4MM9pa*”i


summer now. The sun went down, huge, flam-
boyant, in a violet-streaked sky. At the bottom of
a tangled old garden, in a thicket of raspberry-
bushes, she stood with heaving breast, striving
to repress tears of shame and disappointment.
Throughout the afternoon, he had seemed to avoid
her, had kept at the side of her friend. Now, she
made as if she were gathering fruit; but the basket
on her arm was empty: she stared unseeingly at
the streaky red and gold of the western sky.
While she stood thus, a world of bitterness in her
young heart, a hand was laid on hers, and a kind
voice said: Mary Christina ... I missed you
. . . I came to look for you . . . The little fancy
basket dropped from her nerveless fingers, dropped
among the bushes; and there it was left, to lie and
rot. How foolish of her it had been to forget that
basket! It was made of green straw; had a pretty
twisted handle. Why had she never gone back to
look for it?—what had blotted it from her mind?
Did it still lie, where it had fallen —a shapeless,
sodden mass? Or had strange hands recovered
it ?. . . Who lived now in the home of her
girlhood ? Did other young lips meet beneath
the flames of the evening sky? . . . other feet
tread the familiar paths, whence hers had for ever
passed ?
The sick woman stirred uneasily, and moved her
head. It was deep night; the house was still, the


room sunk in shadow. The darkness oppressed
her; she tried to look about her, and moaned. At
the sound, a soft-footed Sister of Mercy rose from
out a patch of gloom, and bent over her, present-
ing a cup to her dry lips: as she drank, Mary
Christina’s fixed and feverish eyes met the stiff
white linen of wimple and bands. The draught
soothed her; at once her lids half closed again;
and the watcher shrank back into the corner from
which she had sprung.
Before she had reached it, and sat down again to
her beads, Mary Christina seemed to hold a living
child in her arms, gathered two tiny feet into the
cup-shaped hollow of her hand. A fire burnt in
the grate; wine-red curtains were drawn against a
night of lashing rain. Out on the highways, and in
the storm-swept fields, these icy rain-stripes spelled
a shuddering desolation; within, in the safe, warm
room, husband and wife knelt to examine each soft
line and curve of the miracle that was theirs. —
Surely there was no better joy than this joy! . . .
.fv - -
p '
See! —how his hand grasps mine! He listens
. . . he smiles! Never was such a child born
before! . . .
Another turn of the wheel, and the babe was cold
to the touch: she stood pressing a little dress to
her face, and eating her heart out, with vain regret.
How she had struggled, and rebelled! She had
then believed that no after-grief could equal this
. i... &****•■
41* - - 'W.


grief for the little dead child, (so long since become
one with the earth it lay in); for this faint life-spark,
of which all but herself speedily forgot the exist-
ence. It had not been so; many a greater grief
had overtaken her: with the passing of the years, it
sometimes seemed as though sorrow’s bowed and
grey-veiled form would never again quit her side.
She had learned that it is easier to see a child die,
unspoiled, than to watch it change, grow hard,
betray its soul; had even come to rely on death,
as on the fundamental stay of life —the bedrock,
beneath loose and shifting sands.
But after this last precise vision of the waxen
babe that awaited her in the land of shadows, the
memories came crowding thick and fast; she could
not follow each singly to an end. The later years,
too, had been so like, one to another; and they had
flashed past with a dizzy quickness: one day she
had been thirty, and it seemed only on the morrow
that she was sixty —an old woman stretched out to
face death. With the far-reaching sight granted to
dying eyes, she lay and looked back at the confused
pattern of her life, as at some richly-worked arras,
and surveyed it; but without emotion. Now, the
many happenings that composed it, struck no
answering chord in her; and it passed belief to
think that she had once been stirred to the depths
of her soul by them. In this hour of profounder
knowledge, she saw that they had only been dreams


and shadows—delusive images that had tricked her
brain. Nothing of them had persisted; nothing
been real or lasting: her hand had caught the
frayed edge of no perdurable garment. The won-
ders had been a chimera; the evils, too. And their
hold upon her had been an imaginary one: her in-
most self, the vitalest part of her, had remained
unmoved by them, and unharmed. She had not
striven in mortal combat; for there had never been
a combat to engage in. That was still another
illusion —perhaps the greatest of all. Life, tapped
at its core, stripped of its rainbow gauds, meant —
she knew it now —a standing dumbly by, to let
these dream-things pass. Now that she was done
with it, with life and living, and could view it as a
whole, she saw that this was what it came to: one
was never really of it; it only seemed so, at the
moment. One’s soul held aloof, shy, proud, chill,
while past it bore an unsubstantial pageant of vary-
ing places, and their accompanying ghosts. Some-
times, these shapes held out their arms to us; some-
times, we stretched yearning hands to them. For
a brief suspense, there appeared to be an entangle-
ment ; then, one or other yielded, and the proces-
sion went on as before. Love had no more reality,
no more enduring-power, than the lover’s arms ; the
dream-child we reared, changed, and passed; joy
passed and pain, and the windy excitements of the
day.—And memory, turning on the steps of death’s


threshold, for a last backward glance at the sun-
tipped mirage, could impossibly distinguish one
transient image from another. Now, they all looked
alike; they were alike: there had been no real
difference between them. Joy and grief, love and
hate, rapture and despair, were, in very truth, one
and the same —the thin, blue spire of smoke, that
ascended from a phantasmal fire.
And having achieved this ultimate wisdom, the
dying woman was lapped by a great peace: not
again would she choose to be of life. Now, she
asked for rest —only rest. Not immortality: no
fresh existence, to be endured and fought out in
some new shadowland, among unquiet spirits; but
deep, deep rest, with the heavy brown earth flat-
tened down above her, and every wish stilled at
last. Without substance, without meaning, it had
all been an idle beating of the air; but it was over
now; and she thanked God that it was so. Never
again, the laceration of a sunset, the agony of a
fading autumn day! Only sleep; the sleep of
nothingness: an eternal forgetting . . .
She lay and let death’s torpor steal over her,
dimly noting its progress. But, towards evening,
when the cold blue eastern shadows fell, she made
the instinctive effort of the dying: sought to flee
the unfleeable, while there was yet time.
“ I will get up and go away . . . far away.”
She was raised in her bed, and propped by loving


arms; then laid down again; for she was unable to
support the weight of her own body: her head, all
a-tremble, sank from side to side, like a top-heavy
flower on its stalk.—And the sensation of sinking,
of being sucked under by a current she could not
stem, began anew. It was like being caught and
swept round in a whirlpool: for a time, she would
ride high, on the same level; then came the dizzy
downward drop, and she was by so much nearer
to the black, serpent-like, central shaft, so much
farther from the blue roof of the sky. Down . . .
down . . . down ! —a giddy whirl towards the
horrors of the dark; and so it would go on, in ever-
contracting circles, till the awful moment when she
whirled no more, and when the churning waters met,
with a crash like that of thunder, above her head.
Then, the vertigo ceased, and a merciful weak-
ness came to her rescue. Her thoughts, drawing
to an inseparable tangle, escaped her, and were
re-absorbed in the Supreme Thought, from which
they had primarily come forth. Though her eyes
remained open, doctor and nurse no longer hushed
their voices when they spoke of her: for them, she
was already numbered among those mute or inar-
ticulate things, which, because they cannot make
protest, are held insensible to hurt and affront.
Life ebbed lingeringly, unwillingly. A muddy
pallor overspread her face; her breath came snort-
ingly; the pinched nose strained upwards. But the


heart beat on, throbbing through the dead body,
till long after midnight.
Then this, too, ceased.
The weeping watchers retired, with the sense of
relief in their breasts that accompanies death ac-
complished ; and the withdrawal of their lamenta-
tions left a great vacancy in the room. The black-
robed woman who remained, raked out the embers
of the fire, and pushed back the chairs from the
bed. On the eyes of the thing that had been Mary
Christina, she laid two squares of damped muslin ;
and, as she did so, she made fervid intercession
with the other Mary —the Gracious Namesake of
this poor soul that had gone unblessed into the
darkness. The coverings decently stretched and
folded, she turned out the gas, and set a night-light
in a glass of water. —It threw living shadows on the
wall.


The De La More Press Ltd .
32 George Hanover Square , London , /if'.


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
, f\Cf I K




