

DEATH OF AN OLD CITIZEN.
Our obituary of to-day announces the death of another
old citizen, who was for many years connected with the
progress of literature and art in this city, Mr. J. R. Clarke.
For many years Mr. Clarke, of George-street, was known as
one of the leading booksellers and music publishers of
Sydney, He was long associated with the late Mr. W. P.
Woolcott, and the title pages of many of the music albums
and of the principal pieces of music published in the colony
bore the imprint of Clarke and Woolcott, and later of J. R.
Clarke especially those of Boulanger, Henry Marsh, and
other well-known pianists of 35 years ago. Mr. Clarke’s
Repository of Music was the resort of all the musical and
dramatic artists of those days. Here were constantly to be
met Lucy Escott, Catherine Hayes, Madame Anna Bishop,
the Carandinis, Rosalie Durand, the brothers Lyster, Squires,
Farquarson, Armes Beaumont. G. Y. Brooke, Kitts, Kean,
Booth, and almost every other celebrated artist who visited our
shores. Mr. Clarke’s knowledge of pictures, and especially
of every class of engraving, was proverbial, and he was an
acknowledged authority on the subject of church architecture,
He studied the subject at Taunton, his native place. Mr.
Clarke was 72 years of age. In late years he kept an art
repository in Pitt-street, near Bridge-street, and subsequently
held a Government appointment. He has left a grown up
family.”—“ Evening News,” “Town and Country Journal”
and “ Illustrated Sydney News” July 13th , iBqj.




jfi
ANOTHER OLD CITIZEN GONE.
The death of another old citizen, who was for many years
connected with the progress of literature and art in this city,
Mr. J. R. Clarke, has just been recorded. For many years
Mr. Clarke, of George-street, was known as one of the lead-
ing booksellers and music publishers of Sydney. He was
long associated with the late Mr. W. P. Woolcott, and the
title pages of many of the music albums and of the principal
pieces of music published in the colony bore the imprint of
Clarke and Woolcott, and later of J. R. Clarke, especially
those of Boulanger, Henry Marsh, and other well-known
pianists of 35 years ago. Mr, Clarke’s Repository of Music
(says the Evening News) was the I’esort of all the musical and
dramatic artists of those days. Here were constantly to be
met Lucy Escott, Catherine Hayes, Madame Anna Bishop,
the Carandinis, Rosalie Durand, the brothers Lyster,
Squires, Farquarson, Armes Beaumont, G. Y. Brooke, and
almost every other celebrated artist who visited our shores.
Mr. Clarke’s knowledge of pictures, and especially of every
class of engraving was proverbial, and he was an ac-
knowledged authority on the subject of church architecture.
He studied the subject at Taunton, his native place. Mr.
Clarke was 72 years of age. Of late years he kept an art
repository in Pitt-street, near Bridge-street, and subsequently
held a Government appointment. He left a grown-up family
of which Mr. J. W. R. Clarke, of this city, is one. To the
above we may add the fact that, although not a Catholic,
very few faces were more familiar at old St. Mary’s than
that of Mr. Clarke, who for many years attended the princi-
pal Mass on Sundays.—“ The Freeman's Journal July
22nd , iSgj.


