

PrrH pfvm
C 5 *> , i
DEATH’S WARNING VOICE.
I,OSS OF THE
A SERMON,
TRINITY CHURCH, EAST MELBOURNE,
ON SUNDAY EVENING,
14 33 V. 1U • NT. YV
BENEFIT OF THE MELBOURNE &
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
lllclboutne:
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER, 30 SWANSTON STREET,
BLUNDELL AND FORD, PRINTERS, LITTLE FLINDERS STREET WEST.




DEATH’S WARNING VOICE.


I need hardly say that this Sermon was not written with any
view to publication. A limited number of copies have been printed
at the request of some members of my congregation, for circulation
amongst them and their friends; and I pray God that whatever
of His Truth it may contain, free from human dross, may be blessed
by the Great Head of the Church, through His Spirit, to the
comfort and growth in grace of His own people, and may awaken
the thoughtless and indifferent to a sense of the reality of those
solemn subjects, Death, Judgment, and Eternity, for Jesus Christ’s
sake. Amen.
H. N. W.
East Melbourne,
April 4, 1866.


DEATH’S WARNING VOICE.
LOSS OF THE S.S. LONDON.
A SERMON,
PItEACHED AT
TRINITY CHURCH, EAST MELBOURNE,
ON SUNDAY EVENING, MARCH 25, 1866,
REV. H. N. WOLLASTON.
SOLD FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE MELBOURNE AND SUBURBAN
CITY MISSION.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
pclboitme:
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER, 30 SWANSTON STREET.
186 6.


BLUNDELL AND FORD,
PRINTERS,
LITTLE FLINDERS STREET WEST.


DEATH’S WARNING VOICE.
A. SERMON.
“There were present at that season some that told Him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices, and
Jesus, answering, said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were
sinners above all the Galileans because they suffered such things ? I
tell you, nay; but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those
eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye
that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem ? I tell you
nay; but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.”—Luke xiii. 1-5.
These two events, the slaying of a number of Galilean
Jews in the temple by Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor,
and the falling of the tower of Siloam, by which eighteen
men were killed, are not mentioned by Josephus, the Jewish
historian, and nothing more is known of them than what is
here recorded. We learn from him, however, that the Gali-
leans were very wicked, and much disposed to broils and
seditions. Pilate, the Roman Governor of Judsea, and Herod,
the tetrarch of Galilee, as the Gospel history tells us, had a
quarrel with each other, and very likely Pilate indulged a
particular enmity to the subjects of Herod. It is most
probable that a tumult in the Temple was excited by the
turbulent Galileans, in which, perhaps, the aged Zacharias,
father of John the Baptist, was killed (Matt, xxiii. 35), and
that Pilate took occasion of this to come upon them suddenly
with his soldiers, and show his hatred to them and Herod,
their lawful sovereign, by slaying them, and thus their blood
would mingle with that of the sacrifices which the priests
were offering up in the Temple. After hearing this account
of the murder of these Galileans, and coipmenting upon it,
our Lord adds himself another similar case to warn them—a


case which had, probably, occurred not long before, and with
which they were all familiar—the fall of the tower of Siloam,
which stood over the fountain of Siloam, situated at the foot
of Mount Zion, and by which eighteen persons were killed.
Now, our blessed Lord, always on the watch to seize an oppor-
tunity of instructing the people, took advantage of these two
sad disasters to teach them a lesson which should be engraven
on their minds, and caused his saying to be recorded by the
Holy Spirit to convey that lesson to us.
Let us then, in humble dependence upon divine grace, (1)
unfold the lesson which Christ here intended to teach the
Jews; and (2) apply that lesson practically to ourselves.
I. It is quite clear the Jews entertained the belief that all
disasters and calamities were visited upon the sufferers as a
retributive judgment of God for their sins, and no doubt it
was this belief that induced them to draw the attention of
the Saviour to the bloody death of these Galileans. This
same ignorant notion was displayed by them on a former
occasion, when they asked him with reference to the blind
man, “ Who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born
blind ?” and the answer which He gave on that occasion
was very similar in character to that given here in the text,
“ Jesus said unto them, ‘ neither has this man sinned nor
his parents/ 33 —meaning thereby not that he and his parents
were not sinners, for that no doubt they were —but neither
their sin, nor his own sin, was the cause of his being born
blind; that that blindness was not inflicted upon him as a
punishment for his own sin, or that of his parents. And in
the case before us our Lord repudiates the absurd and un-
charitable doctrine that because these Galileans, and these
men who were killed by the fall of the tower of Siloam, had
died a violent death, therefore they had been cut off by
God’s retributive justice as a punishment for being greater
sinners than others. Jesus said, “ Suppose ye that these
Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans because they
suffered such things. I tell you, nay ! Or those eighteen
upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, and slew them; think
ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
Jerusalem ? I tell you, nay \ 33 Jesus assured them that
it was a sin to draw so uncharitable a conclusion respecting
these men. The fact that men often come to a sudden and


untimely end is no proof at all that they are more wicked
than others. And so far from fostering such a delusion, our
Lord emphatically warned the living Jews that they were no
better than those who had been killed, for he said, “ Except
ye repent,” except ye forsake your sins, and turn to God,
“ye shall all likewise perish;” i.e., ye shall be destroyed in
a similar manner. No doubt these words to the Jews were
prophetic, and had reference to the terrible calamities which
were in store for them at the siege and sack of Jerusalem,
when, because they did not repent and turn to God, hundreds
of thousands perished in like manner. Thousands died by
the sword of the enemy —thousands by each other’s hands
in the bloody strifes which raged within the walls—and thou-
sands more by the falling and burning of the buildings during
the siege. On them this prophecy was fulfilled, or, rather,
this threat was executed to the letter, a few years after it was
made. Perhaps there never was any reproof more delicate
and yet more severe than this. They came to him believing
that these men who had perished were peculiarly wicked.
Jesus did not tell them that they themselves were as bad as
those who were killed, but he left them no alternative but to
infer that they were; for if they did not repent, he told them,
they must soon likewise be destroyed. We know that they
did not repent, and therefore they “ likewise” perished.
Our Lord here does not teach that God never visits men on
this earth with judgments for their sins, for there can be
no doubt that the destruction of Jerusalem and the exile of
the Jews was a punishment inflicted upon them for their sins
as a nation; just as it w T as certainly a national judgment
which fell from heaven upon France at the close of the last
century, when that unhappy country was deluged with blood
and suffered misery such as no other country ever suffered for
years, because she had impiously defied the Lord of Hosts,
and openly refused any longer to own and worship Him as
God. But He wished to teach the Jews, as well as to teach
us, that although sin will always in the end work out its own
punishment, and therefore avenges itself upon the sinner, yet
that this is not the day of justice or retribution; that whilst
God visits nations for their sins by permitting, or, perhaps,
ordaining some national calamity to fall upon them, He does
not single men out as the objects of His special anger—He
does not directly visit men with His wrath here, by bringing


trouble and calamity upon them, because they are more
wicked and sinful than others —for He “ maketh His sun to
shine upon the evil and upon the good, and sendeth rain
upon the just and on the unjust.” The Jews could not
believe this, as many cannot believe it now, but it is true
nevertheless; and to judge of a man being a favourite of
Heaven or the reverse, on account of his prosperity and
happiness or of his sufferings and afflictions here, is to judge
the God of Heaven, and to exhibit an antichristian spirit
hateful to Him w r ho has declared that the day of judgment
will be the day of justice, when perfect justice will be dealt
out equally to all, the saint and the sinner alike; when every
man shall be judged, rewarded, and punished—not according
to what he has enjoyed or suffered in this life—which will in
no way affect his eternal destiny —but according to his
works and life, “ whether they be good or whether they be
evil.”
11. Now let us endeavour to apply practically to ourselves
the lesson which our blessed Lord has taught us in this
incident recorded in the text. There is nothing, my dear
hearers, more mysterious and inscrutable than the ways of
God in his providential dealings with his creatures.
Although we know that He is a God of infinite justice, and
perfect love, and boundless mercy, to doubt which is the
very height of impiety, yet we often witness so many things
in the world permitted by Him, which at first sight appear to
controvert this belief, that Satan is continually tempting us
to think that He is acting very arbitrarily, and contrary to
what we conceive to be the principles of Divine love, justice,
and mercy. We often see, for instance, the infidel, the
godless and profane man, enjoying all the blessings and
bounties of the world, health, strength, wealth, position, and
influence; whilst the godly and humble follower and servant
of Christ is the victim of sorrow, and suffering, and poverty,
disease, and trial; and though the Christian knows that affliction
is often the greatest blessing, and that when the Lord chastens
his servants it is because He loves them, yet this does not
seem just to the world, or even sometimes, I fear, to believers.
And when we search the Scriptures for a reason for this, and
try to discover why God often afflicts so grievously those
who love and serve Him, and bestows so many temporal bless-


ings on those who hate Him, we can only find this, “He
will do what he will with His own; He will have mercy on
whom He will have mercy, and He will have compassion on
whom He will have compassion.” And faith must accept
this decision, and how before the Supreme Sovereignty of
Almighty God! We see as a matter of fact and experience
that God permits what we esteem a calamity and misfortune
to visit those who are undoubtedly His people and His
friends, as well as those who are His avowed and open enemies.
We cannot shut our eyes to the fact that there is no apparent
principle of universal justice displayed in this world; that
men are not visited here according to their deserts; that re-
wards and punishments are not proportioned to the virtues and
vices of mankind; that this world, which lieth in the arms of
the Wicked One, is not the place where justice can he equally
administered; and that we must patiently wait until that day
whensin, Satan, death, and hell shall be banished from our world,
and when truth, justice, and righteousness shall prevail and be
amply vindicated before the assembled universe of angels and
of men. Ido not think, so far as my experience goes, that
many Christians in these days entertain the old Jewish notion,
condemned by our Lord in the text, that every calamity
which befals men, either in their own persons or in those who
are near and dear to them, is a penal visitation for sin, an act
of retributive vengeance on the sufferers for their offences.
We do not, I think, in our own minds often connect a great
catastrophe or misfortune with the sins of those who are its
victims. No doubt . every trial, every affliction, every
bereavement, is the fruit and result of sin, for were there no
sin there would be no sorrow; but this is the work of sin
and not of God; it must “ needs be ” that sin should reap the
bitter fruits of the seed which it sows. “ Whatsoever a
man sows that he must also reap,” and some of these fruits
aredisease and suffering anddeath; but wemust be tremblingly
alive to the impiety which would regard Him as a vengeful
and vindictive Being in His dealings with the children
of men. He says Himself that He has “no pleasure in
the death of the wicked,” and all His powers and
sympathies are enlisted in thwarting the acts and
machinations of Satan to draw us towards destruction, and
in neutralising the awful effects of our own sin and wicked-
ness. It was solely because He saw that if left to ourselves


we should all perish miserably and everlastingly, the victims of
sin and of our natural corruption and depravity, that He gave
and sent His only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, to die and
suffer for us, in our place, that all who believe on Him might
receive a full pardon, and have everlasting life.
Our blessed Lord in the passage before ns distinctly warns
us that whilst we must leave the unravelling of the mysterious
workings of His providence in the various calamities which
afflict mankind in this world—which spare not the good more
than the evil, or the godly more than the ungodly—until that
day when all secrets shall be revealed, and when we shall see
that all His judgments are acts of the purest justice tempered
with mercy; we are not to conclude that He does not love
those whom he grievously afflicts, or that those whom he cuts
off suddenly by death are objects of his wrath and vengeance.
These Galileans, He says, were not more wicked than other
Galileans, and we may infer from His words that some of
them were better men than many who then stood before
Him, and less deserving of punishment. In every great
calamity or disaster, a record of which forms so large a
portion of the history of this fallen, suffering world, and
which issues in the death of a number of our fellow-
creatures, there are always, or nearly always, some who
love God, and His Son Jesus Christ, and who, therefore, are
fit to die; and whom God cuts off by death, not for
their sins, but that they may be translated the sooner into
their eternal rest of the heavenly Canaan—
Far from a world of grief and sin,
With God eternally shut in—
which entirely disproves the ungodlike notion, that these
calamities are in any sense penal or retributive to the sufferers
by them.
Our Lord’s words are, “ Suppose ye that these Gali-
leans, &c.” As a striking illustration of this truth we
have only to consider well the circumstances of such a
terrible disaster as the recent loss of the steamship London,
with nearly all hands on board, which cast a passing gloom
over the whole country, which has thrown so many families
into mourning; made so many widows, orphans, and childless
parents; broken so many hearts, blighted so many bright
hopes, and brought sorrow, grief, and desolation to so many


households. No calamitous event which has occurred within
my own recollection has made so deep an impression upon
ray mind as this; never did I feel more powerfully the force
of those words of our beautiful burial service, “ In the midst
of life we are in death : to whom shall we seek for succour
but of Thee O Lord; but O Lord God most holy, O Lord
most mighty, O holy and merciful Saviour,thou most worthy
Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of
death to fall from Thee.” The news came upon us like a
thunder-clap. The magnitude of the calamity at the first shock
swallowed up every other feeling; the awful thought that
within five days of leaving port, in health and happiness and
hope, many of them looking forward with eager anticipation
to join their friends and relatives in Australia, 220 living
souls, with one long, low, wailing cry of agony, sank beneath
the mighty waters, there to remain until at the trumpet blast
“ the sea shall give up her dead,” and small and great shall
stand before the throne and bar of God ! Well might the
contemplation of the dreadful scene on board that doomed
ship make our hearts quail and tremble, and draw from our
lips a hearty ascription of praise to our good God who has
spared us from a share in that affliction which has caused
many a hearth to be desolate, and many a long-cherished
hope to be blasted for ever ! But now, when the first exciting
and paralysing effects of the sad news is over, and we are
enabled calmly to reflect upon the awful catastrophe in all its
bearings; with a Christian faith and a Christian hope,
we are enabled to take a much less gloomy, and far more
hopeful view of it. Our hearts can echo the words of
the Spirit, “He hath done all things well.” As believers in
the Lord Jesus Christ as our salvation and our hope, we have
much to bless God for, in the loss of that great ship and her
costly human freight.
We know, and rejoice in the knowledge, that amongst
those who thus perished were some who did not put
off their day of preparation to meet their God until they
saw death staring them in the face, and until the brave
captain announced to the awe-struck passengers that the
ship's doom was sealed, that all hope of saving her was
gone, and that that iron vessel must quickly be their shroud.
We know that there were many true-hearted Christians on
board; men and women to whom death was no calamity, but


an eternal gain; who were very dear to the heart of God
and of the blessed Jesus; who, during that “ horrible
tempest,” amidst peals of thunder and flashing lightning, the
raging of the great deep, the howling of the blast, and the
roaring of the elements, where fire, and air, and water
seemed to mingle and to mix in one dark, lurid, swirling
pool of chaos and confusion, were watched over and cared
for by Him who is the God of Storms, and who sent down
His angels from His throne on high to minister unto them,
because they were “ the heirs of salvation;” who, as the
waves washed the last prayer from their lips, and they sunk
beneath the waters, were carried on the wings of these bright
messengers of love and mercy, through storm, and wind, and
tempest, up into the realms of eternal light and glory, into
the presence of their Saviour and their God ! This indeed
my brethren, is a sweet consolation to the sorrowing friends
of those who have thus departed to be with Christ, and
which will enable them, when the sharp sting of affliction is
partially blunted by time, to bend their hearts in meek
submission to the Divine will, and say, “It is the Lord; let
Him do what seemeth Him good. Shall not the God of all
the earth do right ? Though He should slay me, yet will I
trust in Him. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
Thou didst it.” And in the full belief of their eternal safety,
and that they “ are taken away from the evil to come” by a
good and merciful God, they may say in faith and hope—
Thou art gonejto thy grave—the wild billows T’olled o’er thee,
The Lord of the Ocean provided thy shroud ;
But from those briny deeps, the Saviour’s arms bore thee,
And carried thee upwards to glory and God!
Amongst those who have thus been cut off and removed
from earth to heaven to be with Christ were three well known
to many of us, who worshipped in this Church during the
short time which elapsed between its opening and the sailing
of that unfortunate ship which carried them home, and
which has since proved their grave. They all sat in that
seat on the last Sunday they Avere in Victoria, and this was
the last place in which they heard the Gospel of Christ
preached; and, had it pleased God to bring them back to
us again, they would probably have been occupying that seat
at the present moment. Doubtless the circumstance that


they and their family were well known and respected by
many of us has added much to the pain and sorrow
with which we received the sad intelligence, and which
we feel not so much for the dead as for the living;
but I rejoice to say that the poor, widowed, Christian
mother, who at one blow has lost three affectionate
and devoted children, is wonderfully supported under
her terrible trial, and has found —as all will find who
go to God for succour —the truth of that divine promise, “ My
grace is sufficient for thee.” She knows that “it is the Lord’s
doing,” though “it is marvellous in her eyes;” and certain
of the salvation of her loved ones who have gone before, she
will in faith and patience wait her heavenly Father’s own
good time to reunite her to them in glory. Christ is and has
been for many years her “ all in all,” and she knows that His
everlasting arms will sustain her, and on Him alone she fully
trusts to restore her to her own again in that blessed place
“where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary
are at rest.”
And, my brethren, if we cannot as Christians view the
death of those who have died in Christ as a calamity, as cer-
tainly we cannot, for they have entered into rest, however much
we may feel for the afflicted survivors, neither can we regard
the loss of those who have in that ill-fated ship died in un-
belief as an unmitigated calamity, still less as a judgment
upon them for their sins. Viewed in the gospel light, God’s
mercy only is manifested in their destruction. Do you ask
how this can be 1 I answer, if the righteous are saved by
death from the evil to come, so also the wicked are saved by
death from a greater evil to come. We may be perfectly
certain that those who are cut off by any sudden calamity in
their sin are so cut off in mercy, and not as a punishment;
for God assuredly knows who will repent and believe in
His Son before they die, and who will not; and as cer-
tainly as He will not suffer any one to die in his sins
whom He foreknows will embrace Christ and salvation,
so when He cuts off wicked and ungodly men by death.
He does so only because He foreknows that they would
never repent had they lived one hundred years; and
hence what appears to us as a judgment and punishment for
sin, is really and truly a great act of mercy and kindness;
for as every man shall be rewarded hereafter according to his


works and life, and in exact proportion to the sins which he
commits, so the unbeliever, the longer he lives, increases the
amount of his guilt, and secures to himself a greater damna-
tion, and a more terrible punishment hereafter. Hence, my
friends, if we view such a disaster as this in its proper light,
look at it from a Christian point of view, we shall see in it
nothing but mercy —mercy to the dead in Christ, and mercy
to the dead in sin; mercy to the saved, and mercy to the
lost. And to the living it is a mercy, and intended by God
as such. To the sorrowing and bereaved Christian it is
God’s way of showing his love. He wounds him in his
dearest and tenderest earthly affections, that He may lead
him to fix his heart upon those heavenly treasures Avhich
are eternal, and which the world can neither give nor
take away —wean him from a love of earth, and make
him sit loose to the world, its cares and interests—
make him more earnest, watchful, faithful, prayerful,
and self-denying, and more patiently run the race that is
set before him, “ looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of his faith.” And to the believer, afflictions,
sorrows, and trials are always blessings and always mercies;
for they ever draw the suffering soul nearer to God, and
to the Cross of Him who loves him “ with an everlasting
love.” And to the godless and unawakened ones these trials
are intended by God as mercies and not as punishments—
great mercies, which are often blessed and sanctified to their
salvation. They are intended to warn them of the shortness
and uncertainty of life, and to prepare them to meet their
God; to awaken them to a sense of their awful danger, and
to show them what a terrible thing it is to go into the
presence of a just and holy God without one sin forgiven,
without any hope of pardon and acceptance. To them, and
to all who neglect the great salvation offered in the Gospel,
are those emphatic words spoken, “ Except ye repent ye shall
all likewise perish;” not indeed in the same way or in like
manner, but in a far more terrible way —perish spiritually
and eternally. “ Except ye repent ye shall all perish ever-
lastingly,” Christ says. Whatever others may be, good or bad,
whether they die in Christ or die in sin, saved or lost, look to
yourselves, unbelievers ! for except ye repent and turn to
God your Saviour, now that ye have the life to do it, ye shall
likewise perish —perish for ever, body and soul; perish miser-


ably, perish hopelessly and eternally, in that pit of woe and
agony, where “ the worm never dies and the fire is never
quenched.”
But, my dear hearers, there is a feature in the account
we have received of the loss of the London which invests
invests it with a peculiar interest to the Christian, and which
greatly mitigates his anxiety respecting the eternal welfare
of many on board that vessel. I allude to the fact that in
His providential arrangement the Lord mercifully sent on
board one of His ministering servants, who proved himself a
true Christian hero, and whose untiring labours amongst the
dying and the wretched during those three eventful days were
doubtless owned and blessed of God to the salvation of
many souls. No doubt there were in that unhappy crowd of
passengers many a soul who, up to that time, had never sought
God and His forgiveness through Christ, but who obtained
the gift of the life-giving Spirit of Grace in answer to the
agonizing prayers of that faithful Christian minister, Daniel
Draper : who received Christ Jesus believingly into their
hearts through his means, and will be his “ crown of rejoicing”
to all eternity. Who can tell what mighty miracles of grace
were effected during those three awful days and nights of sus-
pense, and fear, and terror, before the ship went down,wrought
through the instrumentality of that earnest man of God ?
Oh, my friends, his was a blessed, a heavenly mission ! Happy
and privileged was he to be permitted thus nobly to die in
harness, doing his blessed Master’s work ! The few glimpses
which have been preserved to 'us of that awful scene, slight
as they are, reveal to us a touching and impressive picture.
Only imagine, brethren, if you can, that solemn prayer
meeting in the large saloon of the ill-fated ship, whose hours
were numbered, at twelve o’clock on the night before
she sank, where all were crowded together without
distinction of rank or quality. The surging of the angry
waves without, ever and anon bursting over the vessel, and
making her tremble to the very keel ; the howling of the
blast, the roaring of the great deep, the frightful plunging of
the ship in her death agonies, and the tearless tenor and
despair depicted on those livid and ghastly countenances ; and
that man of God, calm, resolute, and self-possessed, pouring
out his soul in prayer to his long-known and long-loved God
and Father in heaven, thatHe would for Jesus Christ His Son’s


sake have pity upon those who were not yet saved, and pour
out His converting and saving grace upon them; and like
the prophet Moses of old, standing amidst the living and the
dying, and holding up aloft the brazen serpent, the cross of
Christ our Lord, and crying, “ Behold the Lamb of God, that
taketh away the sins of the world; look unto Him and be
ye saved. Come unto Jesus —He will yet receive you; cast
yourselves trustfully into His arms of love; His blood can yet
cleanse you from all sin —now is your accepted time, now is
the day of salvation.” Many a Bible is opened now, and
souls who never thirsted before are now eagerly drinking in
the words of eternal life, “ Call upon Me in the day of trouble,
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me; when thou
passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through
the rivers they shall not overflow thee; lam the Lord thy God,
the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour. Yea, though thou walkest
through the valley of the shadow of death, fear no evil, for I
am with thee. My rod and My staff shall comfort thee; come
unto Me and ye shall find rest to your souls.” And then
that servant of God is seen —like his prototype, St. Paul,
during that awful storm in the Adriatic Sea, in the ship
Castor and Pollux, 1800 years ago —going from group to
group, exhorting, encouraging, pleading with them to come
to Christ, and as one by one came to him with the earnest
request, “ Mr. Draper, pray with me,” cheerfully complying;
offering up on their behalf burning words of supplication to
the throne of grace, and pouring balm into their wounded
spirit, and ever and anon crying aloud to the Lord God
of Israel, “ O God, may those who are not converted
be converted now—hundreds of them !” And so his
faithful and courageous voice is heard hour after hour
in earnest prayer, mingled with the storm, until the
waves poured in upon them and drowned that voice in
death, but only to re-emerge a moment after in that happy
deathless world where his prayers of faith were changed into
songs of victory ! We must hope, and we will believe, that a
prayer-hearing and a prayer-answering God brought many to
himself during that solemn time, gathered even at that
eleventh hour into Christ’s heavenly fold.
But before I close I cannot help remarking with feelings
of indignation upon a letter which appeared in the papers
a few days since from some one in London, which, after


relating all that is known of the last hours of that un-
happy man Brooke, the actor, on which I forbear to dwell,
and which can only give pain to all right-minded Christians
—the writer states, upon the authority of one of the sur-
vivors, what, even if it were true instead of false, it were
heartless cruelty to the survivors in this colony to publish,
viz., that in the opinion of this informer and that of two
others, whose names he gives, “if the passengers had
exerted themselves more for their own safety and attended
less to the pious exhortations of the good clergymen, more
would have been saved; to quote Gardner's words, ‘ The
praying paralyzed them !’ " A cruel and a heartless lie, even
upon the testimony of others who were saved; for we are
assured that whilst the wretched crew were below refusing to
work, all the male passengers worked night and day at the
pumps, and that every effort was made to save the sinking ship,
until the captain declared to them that all hope was gone, or,
to use his own words, “Nowyou may go and say your prayers."
But putting aside this wanton statement as utterly false in
fact, the impiety and infidelity which it displays in the minds
of those who made it,’ and those who believe it, is awful to
contemplate. “ The praying paralyzed them /" Hard and
perverted indeed must the heart of that man be who could
utter such words, and yet ever hope himself for pardon from
that God who has commanded us to pray always to Him
without ceasing, and who assures us that it is only by prayer
that we can ever hope to reach the kingdom of Heaven; and
especially of one who has by a miracle of mercy been himself
rescued from a watery grave, in which 220 of his fellow-
creatures and fellow-passengers sank to rise no more.
Surely, when we find such an atheistic sentiment as this
expressed by some of the survivors Avho have just received so
signal an instance of God's favour, how forcibly must we feel
that they at least were not prepared to die, and tremble to
think what their doom would have been had it pleased God
to permit them to go down with the ship. No one who has
any proper idea of God—no one who has any notion what-
ever of the nature and value and power of prayer—would have
given expression to such a heathenish sentiment ; and no one
with a spark of feeling would have cast such a reproach upon
those who are gone, and then publish it in this colony to
add poignancy and bitterness to the sufferings of those


who are already bowed down under the weight of their
affliction.*
“ The praying paralyzed them ."' My brethren, did you ever
hear of such a phenomenon before ? Did you ever know a
man—were you ever yourselves— “paralyzed” by prayer ?
Prayer, which is the source of all strength to the believer in
prayer ! Prayer, which God delights to hear every moment of
our lives ! Prayer has raised many a man from a coward to
a hero, but it never yet “ paralyzed” the heart and nerve of
any man; and it may be very safely asserted that in that
doomed ship those who prayed the most were amongst those
who worked the hardest to save her. Cowardice and laziness
are no companions of earnest prayerful men; nay, we are
told that the Christian ministers whose “ pious exhortations’*
(as this writer sneeringly calls them) helped to drown the
ship, according to his statement, worked regularly at the
pumps in their turns, and when not so engaged, employed
their time in their welcomed spiritual duties amongst the
crowd of unhappy passengers; but when all hope was gone
and work was useless, they wisely gave all their little remain-
ing time to prayer and exhortation. If it had been God's
will to save that ship, those very prayers would have saved her;
as doubtless they did save eternally many souls in her.
That she was not saved is no way attributable to the
prayers offered up by them, but to the will of God,
who had determined that she should he lost ; for had
He designed to save her, nothing that men could have done or
left undone could have tlrwarted His purpose. “ The praying
paralyzed them !” What an atrocious charge is this against
the God of heaven and earth, who delights in prayer ! It is
virtually saying that, because those unhappy people in their
misery called upon God continually to help them, knowing
that “ vain was the help of man ;'' because they trusted in
Him wholly in their extremity, and thought first and fore-
most of saving their souls alive and securing God's mercy
and salvation; therefore He deserted them, and allowed them
to perish miserably in the waters. That, in fact, their prayers
to God were the cause of their destruction; that but for their
* It is only just to Gardner to state that since this sermon was
preached a letter has appeared in the Argus, denying that he gave expres-
sion to any such sentiment as that attributed to him above.—H. N. W.


prayers to Him they might have been saved ! “ Paralyzed”
many of them were, no doubt, and who can wonder? Paralyzed
by terror, by cold, by fasting, by insupportable anxiety and
suspense; but paralyzed by prayer, never ! Whatever of
energy or strength of purpose; whatever faith they had;
whatever resignation they displayed during those terrible
hours; whatever they were possessed of that was good, and
true, and noble, and brave, and praiseworthy—that they had
in answer to prayer; and the best, the worthiest, and most
appropriate epitaph that we could write upon their tomb
would be “ THESE DIED IN PRAYER.”
It was only yesterday afternoon, and after I had prepared
ray sermon, that I learnt a touching circumstance connected
with the shipwreck, which only adds to the interest of the
scene, and enhances our hope that Christ the Good Shepherd
found many a wandering sheep in that vessel. One of the
passengers saved, the last man who left the ship before she
sank, states that just as he was about to drop into the boat,
which he only succeeded in doing by holding on a rope with
his teeth, and, standing on the poop deck, he distinctly heard
the voice of Mr. Draper giving out that beautiful hymn—
Rock of Ages! cleft for me,
Let me liide myself in Thee;
and the last sound that met his ear was the united voices of
the doomed congregation singing their last hymn on earth,
before they met to sing their first song in heaven ! A few
seconds afterwards the noble ship went down with her
immortal freight, whose “ place on earth will know them no
more for ever.” Indeed, my friends, all that we know of the
circumstances attending the loss of the London, almost
justifies the epithet applied to it by one who has suffered
grievously by that disaster, but who sees in it, by faith,
more of mercy than of judgment; who spoke of it to
me as a “ beautiful shipwreck”—a shipwreck which has
broken many hearts, but a shipwreck which has saved
many souls !
And now, my dear friends, in dismissing you once
again to your several homes, to enter upon the duties of
another week, let me beseech you to ponder well the
subject which has occupied our thoughts and attention to-
night. I shall indeed have cause to rejoice, if what I have


said may be blessed by the Spirit of God to some of your
hearts. I much fear there are some of you here present who
are not prepared to meet Death should he come suddenly
upon you; yet Death is ever near you, although it concerns
you not. Perhaps your death may not be accompanied by
such terrible circumstances as that of those whose loss we
deplore, but you are never for a moment safe from his grasp.
This may be, and perhaps will be, the last Sabbath you will
be permitted to worship in this house. God may know that
your hours are already numbered, though you may not.
Youth (I speak especially and emphatically to the young),
and health, and strength are no safeguards against the
hand of death. Some of you may be just as surely
near your graves as those unhappy passengers of the
London were, when, only five days before they were
engulphed in the angry waves, they left their native shores.
This fearful occurrence speaks volumes to our hearts. With
trumpet tongue it cries, “ Prepare, oh, prepare to meet
thy God ! It is appointed unto all men once to die, and
after death the judgment !” If prepared by a simple trusting
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, depending upon His blood alone
to cleanse you, His righteousness alone to cover you, and
His Holy Spirit alone to sanctify you; then you may meet
Death without a pang of fear, and even rejoice in the prospect
of his speedy coming, for you are sure and safe, free from all
harm, and death will be your “ gain ” whenever and wherever
it may come upon you. But if you make not your peace
with God through Jesus Christ now in this your day of grace,
there is no hope for you, for “ except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish.” If you lose your present opportunity of
being reconciled to God, and being saved by His grace, you
may never have another; and having faithfully warned you
and pleaded with you in my Master’s name to accept His
great salvation, I am free from your blood, and God will not
require it at my hands ! May God the Holy Spirit bless and
sanctify my words this night to all your hearts, my beloved
brethren, and bring you all to the knowledge and faith and
hope and love of Christ our Saviour, for His holy name’s sake.
Amen.
BLUNDELL AND FORD, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




ONE SHILLING, POSTED 2d. EXTRA..
LOSS OF THE LONDON,
WITH SERMONS ON THE MELANCHOLY EVENT
THE
REVS. JAMES BALLAKTYNE AND JOHN EGGLESTON.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF R EV. D. J. DRAP E R.
INTRODUCTION BY REV. DR. CAIRNS. ‘
FOUR SHILLINGS, POST FREE 6d. EXTRA.
NAPOLEON,
THE DESTINED MONARCH- OF THE WORLD,
* • ,
AND FUTURE PERSONAL ANTI-CHRIST.
THEE BEY. 3VE. 33 -A. XT EB,
AUTHOR OF “ THE COMING BATTLE. - ’
ONE SHILLING, POST FREE 2d. EXTRA.
PREACHING CHRIST CRUCIFIED;
A SERMON, BY THE
REV. J. O S AA7" AXj ID DYKES, A.HUE.
Published by request of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.
NIGHOL’S SERIES OF PURITAN DIVINES.
SETS COMPLETE, PER VOL. 4s. ‘
NICHOL’S SERIES OF PURITAN COMMENTARIES,
Including Stock and Torshell on Malaclii; Bernard and Fuller on Ruth ;
Hardy on Ist John; &c., &c. Each Series of .3 volumes, £l.
THE SUNDAY MAGAZINE.
EDITED BY REV. T. GUTHRIE, D-D.
Subscription, 7s. per Annum.
A. J. SMITH,
SO S W A N S T O N STIFIIEIET,
Near Collins Street.
