

DEATH OF THE EMPEROR OE GEt,.«.
(FREDERICK III).
JUidress of Condolence to the Queen.
Legislative Assembly oj New South Wales, Wednesday, June 20, 1888.
Sir HENRY PARKES rose to move ;
(1.) That the following address of condolence
to the Queen be adopted by this House :
To the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty :
We, the members of the Legislative Council and Legisla-
tive Assembly of New South Wales, in Parliament assem-
bled, desire to approach your Majesty with the renewed
expression of our loyal and devoted attachment to your
Majesty’s throne and person, and to convey to you our
profound sympathy in the great bereavement which your
royal house has sustained by the death of the august hus-
band of the good and beloved Princess Royal of Great
Britain and Ireland.
We pray that the All-Wise Ruler of events may give to
your Majesty all comfort and support in this heavy
affliction.
On behalf, and in the name of the Legislative Assembly,
Speaker.
(2.) That Mr. Speaker be requested to sign
such address, on behalf of the Legislative As-
sembly, in conjunction with the President of the
Legislative Council, on behalf of the Legislative
Council, and that the address be forwarded by
telegraph and by post.
He said : I need say but few words, I
think, in recommending this motion to the
acceptance of hon. members. This day fifty-
one years ago an English maiden succeeded
to the ancient throne of England, That
woman —seemingly so much a favoured
child of fortune—has lived a long and bril-
liantly-chequered life, during which Great
Britain has advanced in all true elements
of civilisation in a greater degree than it did
during the reigns of all her predecessors.
In the course of this remarkable life the
Queen has met with some of the heaviest
sorrows that could fall upon man or woman.
In the summer of her life she lost her
husband, a man'of rare accomplishments,
and of rave conceptions of the functions
of government, and a man who was fast
becoming a favourite witli the people over
whom she reigned. Since then she lost a
daughter, than whom there were few more
noble ladies in the land, —I need not say
that I refer to the Princess Alice. Again,
she lost a favourite son, a man of pure,
delicate organisation, who had already
become well-known in the world of litera-
ture and art. These are heavy afflictions
for any person to sustain, and I need
hardly point out with what marvellous
fortitude derived from that Christian faith
which is so grand a support to all in afflic-
tion, and with what discernment and care-
ful study of her queenly duties the Queen
went through these trials. She has now
lost one who had long stood near to her
in the husband of her eldest daughter,
the Princess Royal of Great Britain and
Ireland. That princess, as we well know,
has at all times been the very idol of the
British people, and she is now regarded as
among the ablest women of all Europe.
The very highest authorities bear testi-
mony to the Empress Dowager Victoria,
as being beyond all doubt, apart from her
brilliant station, one of the ablest and one
of the most humane women in all Europe.
It is on the occasion of the death of the hus-
band of that great English princess that I
ask the House to assent to this address,
and I feel assured that there will be no
dissentient voice in this Assembly.
Question proposed.
Mr. DIBBS : I am sure that hon. mem-
bers on this side of the House will permit
me, in seconding this motion, to cordially


. e fallen from
s head of the Go-
ectly in accord with
Jiehon. gentleman has
ve that on this mourn-
,nall best show our sy in-
ner most gracious Majesty the
ler affliction by avoiding a super-
e of w T ords. Words, after all,
tely express the sympathy which
Sir HENRY PARKES rose to move :
(1.) That the following address of condolence
to the Empress Victoiia of Germany be adopted
by this House :
To her Imperial Majesty, the Empress Victoria, Princess
Royal of Great Britain and Ireland.
May it please your Majesty :
We, the members of the Legislative Council and Legis-
lative Assembly of New South Wales, in Parliament as-
sembled, desire to approach your Majesty with the expres-
sion of our deepest sympathy in the heavy burden of
affliction and sorrow which you have been called upon by
the Almighty to sustain, in the removal from your side of
the illustrious ruler of a great people, whose death is an
ii reparable loss to the cause of freedom and human pro-
gress.
We pray that the Divine blessing may rest upon your
Majesty, and that you may be long spared to exercise
those noble qualities of mind and heart which have made
your life so conspicuous in the highest stations of human
authority.
On behalf, and in the name of the Legislative Assembly,
Speaker.
(2.) That Mr. Speaker be requested to sign
such address, on behalf of the Legislative As-
sembly, in conjunction with the President of
the Legislative Council, on behalf of the Legis-
lative Council, and that the address be for-
warded by telegraph and by post.
He said : In asking the House to assent
to this address to the widow of a foreign
sovereign, I am perfectly sure that the
close connection between the governments
of Germany and England, as well as the
aspirations entertained in common by the
two peoples, will be an ample justification.
The lady to whom this address is proposed
to be sent is, as I had occasion to say a
few moments ago, one of the ablest, one
of the most humane, and one of the most
devoted of women living on the face of the
earth. This is no eulogium passed on a
royal personage ; for if the great princess
who has met with so sudden an affliction
had been born in the lowliest circles of
life she must have become a singularly
active and benevolent woman. It is a
most interesting study at all times to
watch the efforts of persons in obscure
JUtbrcoo of Couholcurc to the (Empress 'iXictorin of (Hermann,
we even in this remote part of the empire,
in common with other of her subjects,
offer to her Majesty. We have at all times
shared in the joy and sorrow which have
fallen to her Majesty’s lot during her
long reign ; and believing that in these
few words I express the feeling of her
Majesty’s subjects in this portion of her
dominions, I second the motion.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
life, who gradually rise step by step and
effort by effort to a position of influence
and usefulness, and sometimes to command-
ing power; but it always has appeared to
me not less interesting, and not less in-
structive, and not less remarkable when
persons born in the very highest stations
in civilised life awaken to a true sense
of their duty as members of the human
family. In the illustrious case of the late
emperor and the noble princess, his widow,
there has been a singularly happy union
between two individuals. The son of the
late Emperor of Germany and King of
Prussia, when he married the Princess
Royal of England, formed a picture of
wedded love which, perhaps, is in its his-
tory almost a romance; and as these two
lives rolled on together, amidst the most
exalted circumstances, every day showed
that they more and more awakened to a
sense of their duty to their subjects and to
the world in the exalted places which they
occupied. The noble princess, who is now
in the bereaved position of widow of the
late emperor, has devoted her life to acts
of benevolence—to service in the hospitals,
attending the sick and the wounded in the
great battles of Germany and in visitations
to the poor up to this very hour ; for when
her husband was dying she left the side of
the man who, of all others in the world, was
most idolised by her, and attended to the
war.tsof the poor subjects of theempire who
weresufferingfromtheeffectsofseverefloods
which had devastated parts of the country.
She only returned, as it were, in time to
be present when her illustrious husband
breathed his last. He, although the son of
one of the most powerful monarchs in the
world, showed in every step of his life a love
of progress, a love of freedom, a flowing out




. e fallen from
e head of the Go-
ectly in accord with
.hehon. gentleman has
ve that on this mourn-
.nail best show our sym-
her most gracious Majesty the
ler affliction by avoiding a super-
e of words. Words, after all,
,tely express the sympathy which
JUhrcsß of Couholcurc to the
Sir HENRY PARKES rose to move :
(1.) That the following address of condolence
to the Empress Victoria of Germany be adopted
by this House :
To her Imperial Majesty, the Empress Victoria, Princess
Royal of Great Britain and Ireland.
May it please your Majesty :
We, the members of the Legislative Council and Legis-
lative Assembly of New South Wales, in Parliament as-
sembled, desire to approach your Majesty with the expres-
sion of our deepest sympathy in the heavy burden of
affliction and sorrow which you have been called upon by
the Almighty to sustain, in the removal from your side of
the illustrious ruler of a great people, whose death is an
ii reparable loss to the cause of freedom and human pro-
gress.
We pray that the Divine blessing may rest upon your
Majesty, and that you may be long spared to exercise
those noble qualities of mind and heart which have made
your life so conspicuous in the highest stations of human
authority.
On behalf, and in the name of the Legislative Assembly,
Speaker.
(2.) That Mr. Speaker be requested to sign
such address, on behalf of the Legislative As-
sembly, in conjunction with the President of
the Legislative Council, on behalf of the Legis-
lative Council, and that the address be for-
warded by telegraph and by post.
He said : In asking the House to assent
to this address to the widow of a foreign
sovereign, I am perfectly sure that the
close connection between the governments
of Germany and England, as well as the
aspirations entertained in common by the
two peoples, will be an ample justification.
The lady to whom this address is proposed
to be sent is, as I had occasion to say a
few moments ago, one of the ablest, one
of the most humane, and one of the most
devoted of women living on the face of the
earth. This is no eulogium passed on a
royal personage; for if the great princess
who has met with so sudden an affliction
had been born in the lowliest circles of
life she must have become a singularly
active and benevolent woman. It is a
most interesting study at all times to
watch the efforts of persons in obscure
we even
in conn
offer to 1
shared i
fallen t
long rei
few woi
Majesty
dominioi
Quest:
(Empress
life, who
effort by
and a sefi
ing powf
me not icas mteresung, ana not less in-
structive, and not less remarkable when
pei sons born in the very highest stations
in civilised life awaken to a true sense
of their duty as members of the human
family. In the illustrious case of the late
emperor and the noble princess, his widow,
there has been a singularly happy union
between two individuals. The son of the
late Emperor of Germany and King of
Prussia, when he married the Princess
Royal of England, formed a picture of
wedded love which, perhaps, is in its his-
tory almost a romance; and as these two
lives rolled on together, amidst the most
exalted circumstances, every day showed
that they more and more awakened to a
sense of their duty to their subjects and to
the world in the exalted places which they
occupied. The noble princess, who is now
in the bereaved position of widow of the
late emperor, has devoted her life to acts
of benevolence—to service in the hospitals,
attending the sick and the wounded in the
great battles of Germany and in visitations
to the poor up to this very hour ; for when
her husband was dying she left the side of
the man who, of all others in the world, was
most idolised by her, and attended to the
wantsof the poor subjects of theempire who
were suffering from theeffectsofseverefloods
which had devastated parts of the country.
She only returned, as it were, in time to
be present when her illustrious husband
breathed his last. He, although the son of
one of the most powerful monarchs in the
world, showed in every step of his life a love
of progress, a love of freedom, a flowing out


of his heart to his fellow-men, which makes
his loss a loss to civilisation and the world.
He stood as one of the most stately
figures on the stage of European politics
in the midst of an armed multitude, num-
bering some 20,000,000 ; and it is impos-
sible to estimate in the fortunes of the
world how much the world will suffer by
his removal from that most responsible,
most perilous, and most unrivalled position.
Had the Emperor Frederick lived, it can-
not be doubted that the power of a highly
cultivated mind, of a benevolent heart, of
large sympathies going out to his fellow-
men would have exercised a most benefi-
cent influence on the destinies of more
than one nation ; but he has been removed,
and it is impossible for the shrewdest and
most far-seeing of European statesmen to
comprehend and grasp what will be the
ultimate result of his removal from the
great stage where he was so important a
factor. But his widow has been left;
fresh from her work in practical benevo-
lence, as I have pointed out, she has been
left to an overwhelming sorrow. She has
acquired such a position that the most
competent judges of men and women in
high places say that there is no one in all
Europe above the Empress Victoria. As
this great princess is a child of our Queen,
as she is a link which still connects the
great power of Germany with the power
of Great Britain, it is impossible for us
not to have an intelligent sympathy, a
deep feeling with her in all her sorrows
and afflictions. There is probably no Eng-
lish woman whose name stands higher than
hers in works of Christian charity and
true practical benevolence. The name of
Florence Nightingale is the only one
known to me which is entitled to prece-
dence over that of the Empress Victoria
in all the wide, practical field of true
benevolence; and that the empress may
long live, and may still pursue the noble
part which she has marked out for herself,
and which she has filled with so true, a
womanly instinct, and with such a unique
disposition in all her heavy daily duties,
notwithstanding the grandeur with which
she was surrounded—that she may live to
continue to do all these things must be the
prayer of every true Englishman, and of
every true lover of the human race. I
have nothing more to say ; but I feel that
I am discharging a duty in which I fairly
represent the feeling of this House, the
feeling of this country, and of every part
of her Majesty’s dominions.
Mr. DIBBS : On behalf of this side of
the House, I cordially second the motion
which has been so gracefully and eloquently
moved by the head of the Government.
I am perfectly certain that every right-
thinking man throughout the world must
have a feeling of deep sympathy for the
Princess Victoria in the irreparable loss
which she has sustained. Of course, it is
not usual in a colonial legislature for an
address of this character to be sent to the
widow of a foreign monarch ; but, as the
Premier has put it, the Princess Victoria
is the daughter of our own illustrious
Queen. Those of us who are old enough
—and there are many here—to have
watched the career of the princess almost
from the day of her birth to the day when
this great calamity overtook her, must
have admired her conduct in the difficult
position in which she was placed, and the
noble manner in which she has followed
the footsteps and characteristics of her
great mother. We, as Englishmen and
Australians combined, feel proud that the
daughter of an English queen should have
occupied so high a position in the world
as that of empress of the great German
nation ; and in this remote corner of the
world we are justified in sending our
humble tribute of condolence to the prin-
cess, and in expressing our sympathy at
the great calamity which has befallen, not
only the German people, but also the whole
world, by the death of a man who, had he
been spared to continue in the position
which he occupied for so short a time,
would probably have made a mark in the
history of the world as one of its greatest
monarchs.
Question proposed.
Mr. Buchanan moved that the address
be amended by omitting the words, “Whose
death is an irreparable loss to the cause of
freedom and human progress.”
Debate ensued.
Sir HENRY PARKES : I desire to
say two cr three words in consequence of
the course this debate has taken. The
hon. member for Carcoar has asked what
loss would accrue from the omission from
the address of the words “an irreparable
loss to freedom and human progress 1”
There would be the loss of a just testimony
V'AVS'rT/^/?,?
' U - IV* -11


to a great man —the loss of a sober testi-
mony to truth itself. The hon. member
for Northumberland (Mr. T. Walkei')asked
another question—“ Tell us of one thing
the emperor didl” I will tell the hon.
member of one thing the emperor did.
He dedicated a gifted life from his earliest
youth to his dying hour to the cause of
reformation in his own country, and to the
promotion of freedom wherever he could
promote it, and to the cause of a common
humanity. This is the one grand god-
like thing he did. What can mortal man
do more than to dedicate a life to the ser-
vice of his fellow-creatures 1 I am amazed
that any person could ask how this man
could be a friend to freedom. He was
born under not an absolute monarchy,
but what was generally understood as a
severe constitutional monarchy—the mon-
archy of Prussia. From his boyhood his
sympathies were so strongly opposed to
the great influences around him that he
lost favour with the powerful men of the
court. He lost favour with his own
august father, who nevertheless loved
him dearly. Throughout his life he
pursued this course as a grand pro-
fessor of liberty in the place where ser-
vices of that kind are more valuable than
in any other place—in the very heart of
organisations opposed to liberty. How
was he a friend of liberty 1 In a way ten
thousand times greater than all the per-
sons who with lip service pretend to ad-
vance her cause. He was the inspiring
genius of every liberal movement. That
grand man, under whose, advice the Ger-
man empire was consolidated, was so op-
posed to this noble and glorious prince
that a coolness subsisted between them
throughout his life ; and it has been said
in high circles that no one deplored his
coming to the throne more than that great
man, Bismarck. He had so demeaned
himself, supported by his glorious wife,
that if he had lived it cannot be doubted
that he would have spread a benign in-
fluence throughout the institutions of
Germany. He gave noble earnest in his
short reign that he was bent upon carrying
out his great mission in his own coun-
try, and in the world ; and if there is
Ayes.
Noes.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBBB
any friend of freedom in any condition of
life, it is where he arises amidst the iron
pressure of surrounding cixcumstances,
and uses in a god-like manner every op-
portunity to carry out wise thought, and
a benevolent spirit, and to gradually
change that despotism with which he has
been allied into a fabric of well-ordered
constitutional liberty for the benefit and
the promotion of the equality of his fellow'-
men. That is one noble, continuous, life-
long thing that the late emperor did for
Germany, for civilisation, and for the
world of men and women who so deeply
need such generous and self-sacrificing
service.
Question —That the words proposed to
be omitted stand part of the address—
put. The House divided :
Ayes, 60 ; noes, 3 ; majority, 57.
Abbott, Joseph Kethel, A.
Abbott, J. P. Lee, C. A.
Abigail, F. Lees, S. E.
Ball, E. J. Lyne, W. J.
Barbour, K. Martin, W. F.
Burdekin, S. McCourt, W.
Burns, J, F. McFarlane, J.
Chapman, M. McMillan, W.
Clarke, W. Melville, N.
Colls, T. Merriman, G.
Cooke, H. H. Neild, J. C.
Crouch, F, G. Nobbs, J.
Dalton, T. O’Sullivan, E. W.
Dawson, H. Parkes, Sir Henry
Day, G. Roberts, C. J.
Dibbs, G. R. Ross, Dr. A.
Ewing, T. T. Ryrie, A.
Farnell, Frank Smith, Frank J.
Fletcher, J. Smith, Jago
Garrard, J, Smith, S.
Garrett, T. Stevenson, R.
Garvan, J. P. Stokes, A.
Gormly, J. Street, J. R.
Hawken, N. Sutherland, J.
Hawthorne, J. S. Teece, W.
Henson, W. Tonkin, J. E.
Holborow, W. H. Wilson, A.
Hutchison, A.
Inglis, J. Tellers,
Ives, I. E. Brunker, J. N.
Jones, T, Greer, J.
Tellers,
Garland, C. L. Buchanan, D.
Walker, T.
Question so resolved in the affirmative.
Original question resolved in the affir-
mative.
