

PARLIAMENT OF TASMANIA.
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
DEATH OF
THE HONOURABLE G. G. BECKER
SPEECHES DELIVERED IN
THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
20th MAY, 1941


PARLIAMENT OF TASMANIA
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
DEATH OF
THE HONOURABLE G. G. BECKER
SPEECHES DELIVERED IN
THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
20th MAY, 1941
9062


HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY.
Tuesday, 20th May, 1941.
DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE G. G. BECKER.
Mr. COSGROVE (Denison—Premier).—l desire to movt
a motion without notice. The motion is—
, “ That this House expresses its deep regret at the
sudden death, on the 24th April, 1941, of Mr. George
Godfrey Becker, for twenty-six years a Member of
this House, and for some time a Minister of the
Crown: places on record its appreciation of his devoted
services to the State; and respectfully tenders to his
widow and members of his family sincere sympathy
in the bereavement which they suffered.”
It is unnecessary, Mr. Speaker, for me to speak at any
length with regard to the service the late Mr. Becker gave
to this State as a Minister and as one of the Members of this
House. He came into the House many years ago, and from
the time of his entry here he paid very strict attention to
the work of Parliament. Though chiefly interested in matters
affecting country districts, Mr. Becker took a keen interest
in matters affecting the State as a whole. His speeches were
always worth listening to. During debates, although quite
vigorous in expressing his opinions, he never indulged in per-
sonalities. There was nothing personal so far as the late
Mr. Becker was concerned. It is important that we should
be here and discuss all matters that come before us without
going into personalities. As one of the Members of this
House, Mr. Becker always carried out this principle, and his
speeches were remarkably free from bitterness.
The late Mr. Becker served as a Member of this House
for a period of twenty-six years. He was first elected as a
Member for Bass in 1912, and with one break of three years
(1931 to 1934) he served continuously as a Member.
He was Chairman of Committees from 1914 to 1916
during the term of office of the first Labour Government, and.
when Labour was successful at the 1925 elections, he was
appointed an Honorary Minister in the Lyons Ministry.
3


Later he became Attorney-General and Minister for Educa-
tion. He was appointed an Honorary Minister in the present
Government in August of last year.
Mr. Becker took a keen interest in Local Government
matters, and was, for a time, a Councillor of the Fingal
Municipality. He was Chairman of the Main Roads Main-
tenance Board for some years, and the older Members know
of the fine work he did in that capacity. The Main Roads
Maintenance Board was one of those Committees which were
set up by Parliament. It did excellent work in bringing
the main roads up to a very high standard, although handi-
capped through lack of plant and money for the construction
and maintenance of roads, for which provision was made
later. During the time Mr. Becker was Chairman of the Main
Roads Maintenance Board the first bitumen was laid down in
the State.
His death is a loss, not only to Members of our party,
who deeply regret his passing, but to Honourable Members
on the other side of the House. Members of my party will
miss him very much indeed, particularly when we meet to
discuss proposals for Parliament and Bills to be brought in.
At such meetings his judgment and experience were of in-
estimable value to the party.
Parliament itself is the poorer for Mr. Becker’s passing,
and it is sad and regrettable that, during the past couple of
years, Tasmania has lost four of its very prominent sons—
men whom we could ill-afford to lose at the present time.
The heavy death toll among Members of this House has
probably been caused by Members, out of a sense of duty,
sticking to their work at a time when they should have been
safeguarding their health; they simply carried on and put
the welfare of the State before their health.
It is with regret that one is called upon to move a resolu-
tion of this description. The least we can do is to pass the
motion and place on record our appreciation of the unselfish
service rendered by the late Mr. Becker.
Mr. BAKER (Franklin —Leader of the Opposition).—On
behalf of Honourable Members on this side of the House, I
join with sincere regret in this expression of sympathy which
has been moved by the Premier. The news of the passing of
Mr. Becker came as a great shock to Honourable Members
on this side of the House, who felt the very greatest regret
at his passing. We know that some time ago he suffered from
4


ill-health, but he seemed to be much better lately. Quite
irrespective of party feelings altogether, every Honourable
Member of this House will miss very much his Cheerful and
lovable disposition. As the Honourable the Premier stated,
he discussed every question in a spirit of good temper, and
there was never at any time any tone of bitterness in his
remarks. He was the first Member of the Opposition Party
with whom I had any association. I came into political life
in 1928, and was asked by Mr, McPhee to be his Attorney-
General, I took over from Mr. Becker at the time, and I
must say that in handling the various matters that fell to
me, 1 did feel that Mr. Becker had applied himself with fair-
mindedness and commonsense in his previous dealings with
them. There was scarcely a single thing I took over from
Mr. Becker with which I had any difficulty in subsequently
handling. Throughout all the years Mr. Becker was in
political life the relationship between him and Members of
my party has been of a most cordial and happy description.
We have noted the passing of many Members of this
House. Many are missing from their places, and new faces
are coming in. Since the last election five new members have
replaced others who have gone. The death toll has been a
heavy one, and this has naturally been reflected in the public
life of the State.
It is with great regret that we join in this resolution, and
we are happy indeed to express our sincere appreciation of
the Work the late Mr. Becker has done for the State.
Sir WALTER LEE (Wilmot). —As senior Member of the
House I would like to join with the Premier and the Leader
of the Opposition in paying tribute to our late friend, the
Honourable Member for Wilmot, Mr. Becker. It is my privi-
lege to have been associated with him during a long period, as
he came to the House three years after I did. We were brought
into contact quite a lot, and I always felt it a privilege to
regard him as a personal friend. It was always a pleasure
to meet him; he was always the same cheerful George Becker
wherever you met him.
I was personally very grieved when I heard of his illness,
and when he ultimately passed away I was very sorry indeed.
One goes along the journey of life. First one and then
another drops out along the path, and it makes one think very
seriously of life and its demands.
5


There is no one in this Chamber or in the other Chamber
who was here when I first entered this House. One has only
to look at the gallery of Members, past and present, to know
how many have passed to the great beyond. It brings back
to us who are living that death has taken a very heavy toll
indeed of those who gave their services to the State. We
have had several of our Members removed by the grim hand
of death, some of them in the prime of life—men whose
services could be ill-spared,
I heartily join with the sentiments expressed by the
Honourable the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in
regard to the many good qualities of our late friend (Mr.
Becker).
When I took over the portfolio of Lands and Works, Mr,
Becker was Chairman of the Main Roads Maintenance Board,
and I would like to pay a tribute to his work on that Board.
This work was carried out under great difficulties because of
the lack of machinery and legislative power he should have
had, and which were in later years provided. In spite of this,
Mr. Becker did excellent work on our main roads and high-
ways system.
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to offer my sincere
sympathy to Mr. Becker’s widow and family. Theirs is a
loss none of us can understand.
I would again say that, in the passing of Mr, Becker, I
personally lost a great friend and the State a good servant
and citizen.
1 support the motion.
Mr. D’ALTON (Darwin —Minister for Agriculture).—l
also support the motion moved by the Honourable the Premier,
and want to pay a tribute to my great friend, the late Mr.
Becker, in regard to his work, not only in this House, but
outside of it, and particularly to his association with me as
my deputy in the Labour movement. As far as the Labour
movement is concerned, Mr. Becker passed through many
troublesome times—times which would have caused most
people to give up in despair. Despite the rough handling,
he stuck to his convictions, regained his place in the move-
ment, and became an Honorary Minister.
Listening to Sir Walter Lee when he spoke of the heavy
death toll of persons in public life, I was reminded that only
the other day I saw a photograph of all Members of both
Houses, taken in 1934. Out of the 48 Members, 20 no longer
hold their seats, no less than 12 having died.
6


To Mrs. Becker and her family I extend, on behalf of the
Labour movement, sincere sympathy in the bereavement they
have suffered.
Mr. WRIGHT (Darwin). —I wish to associate myself with
the motion before the House. My association with the late
Mr. Becker occurred when he was Chairman of the Main
Roads Board, and the fact that he was responsible for the
use of bitumen on our roads has already been mentioned. I
am happy to say that my association with the late Mr.
Becker was very much the same as that expressed by the
Leader of the Opposition and Sir Walter Lee. He was
genial and conscientious in his work. A good man has passed
away, and the State is much the poorer for his passing.
I desire to extend to his family and the party to which he
belonged my sincere sympathy.
Mr. MADDEN (Bass —Honorary Minister). —I would like
to associate myself with the expressions of regret and
sympathy which have been uttered by the Premier, the Leader
of the Opposition, and other Honourable Members in speaking
to the motion. My reason for rising is because, long before 1
came into public life, on one occasion I sought the advice of
one whom I knew to be my friend, Mr. George Becker. He
tendered me quite a lot of advice, and in the years that have
passed since then I have found that that advice was never
wrong. I will always cherish the memory of the wise words
Mr. Becker spoke to me. During the time I was associated
with him in the party’s activities he always proved to be a
tower of strength, a staunch colleague, and a great friend.
It has been said that Tasmania will be the poorer for his
passing; I subscribe to that view. When we look over the
career of this most able Tasmanian, who, in the days of his
youth, lived in an isolated area of the State, and consequently
did not have the privilege and benefit of the educational
facilities that to-day are readily available to the youth of
Tasmania, we realise how hard he must have worked in an
endeavour to improve himself. At last he came into the
public life of this State, and from that time he rendered
singular service to Tasmania.
Finally, I say we all mourn the loss of Mr. Becker. His
passing is to be lamented. To his widow and the members of
his family we offer our deepest sympathy in their great sor-
row. I feel that the memory left by our departed colleague
and friend will be for ever cherished. He was a good husband
and father, and by his demise Tasmania has lost one of its
most able sons.
7


Mr. SPEAKER (Hon. D. J. O’Keefe). —Before putting the
motion I would like to say a few words. Ever since Mr.
Becker made his entry into political life, he and I were
personal and political friends. I would like to say that I
think there are very few members in any Parliament who
possessed in a greater degree that combination of qualities
fitting them to represent the people than the late Mr. Becker.
It was always a pleasure to listen to him when he took part
in debates. A complete absence of any bitterness was a
striking feature of all his speeches. He had a complete
knowledge of everything pertaining to primary production,
and the primary producers of this State have lost a good
friend.
I will ask Honourable Members to pass the motion in
silence.
H. H. Pimblett, Government Printer, Tasmania
8


