

DEBATE
ON THE
PREROGATIVE OF PARDON,
AS INVOLVED IN TL 4
{|iu[ilinci‘ 1 0t(|ci[ '|)moi|crs
SPEECHES
THE HON. HENRY PARKES, COLONIAL SECRETARY,
Hon. G. W. ALLEN,
Messrs. R. DRIVER, J. STEWART, and W. H. COOPER,
Against Mr. Combes’ Motion Intercepting Supply, June, 1874.
WITH A PREFACE BY “ VINDEX.”
SgKneg:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., General Letter-press and Lithographic Printers,
10S Pitt Street.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




DEBATE
ON THE
PREROGATIVE OF PARDON,
AS INVOLVED IN THE
|(dcaac of ftardincr | offjcr |}mot(q*
SPEECHES
THE HON. HENRY PARKES, COLONIAL SECRETARY,
Hon. G. W. ALLEN,
Messrs. R. DRIVER, J. STEWART, and W. H. COOPER,
Against Me. Combes’ Motion Inteecepting Supply, June, 1874.
WITH A PREFACE BY “VINDEX.”
-SgOneg:
GIBBS, SHALLARD & CO., General Letter-press and Lithographic Printers,
108 Pitt Street.




PREFACE.
This collection of the principal speeches delivered in the Legislative
Assembly against the motion recently proposed by Mr. Combes,
in reference to the contemplated exile of certain criminals, has
been published in order that some antidote may be provided for
the poison which has been so carefully instilled into the public
mind. , .
It is a national calamity that we have amongst us certain
politicians who regard falsification of facts and distortion of law
as being perfectly pleasant and permissable amusements, ami who
add to this singular delusion the more dangerous supposition,
that the country, and the people, and the whole fabiic of
Government, are created for their personal profit. The recent
proceedings —which have invested the unhappy criminal, Gaidinei,
with some dangerous attributes of notoriety, and to some
extent made him a hero—exemplify this. No thought of
possible injury to the people, no caution as to the safety of our
institutions, restrained those who were bent upon the satisfaction
of a mean personal ambition. All kinds of falsehoods, with i egai
to the exercise of the prerogative of pardon, have been circulated
with an industry which would have been creditable had it been
exhibited in furthering the welfare of the community, but which
directed to assaults upon the fundamental principles of liberty and
o-ood government, was simply despicable. The energy devoted by
certain notorious charlatans, to this abominable work, is indee
alarming, as an evidence of something more than a reckless disregard
of the public interest or the primary elements of honour. That
such men should so act is perhaps not very surprising ; and those
who remember the disreputable juggles with which they have re-
created and advantaged themselves in former times, will not
• \V\Awx.vl
w


wonder at their recurring to the same line of business with renewed
vigour. But that such men should meet with toleration, that
impostors, who have shewn themselves ever eager to betray
the solemn trusts confided to them, who are ever foremost among
the libellers of our institutions, and the fomenters of sedition—
that such characterless champions should not be driven with
ignominy from political life, is a rather ominous circumstance.
It is a fact which tends to shew that the shame which has no blush,
the audacity which makes no pause, the indecent avarice of
place and pay which flaunts itself before the people as though it
were a virtue, has ceased to be offensive. This not
from any evil disposition on the part of the public, but it is the
natural effect of custom, which confers upon the who
habitually perpetrate these outrages “ a property of easiness, ” and
causes their misdemeanours to be regarded as mere matters of
course. No one admires this vileness ; but few reprobate it as it
should be reprobated; the reason being, that it has grown so
common a vice as to create no attention whatever. There is here
a great danger menacing the public life of this country. The
venom of this thing, if allowed to spread, will fatally infect the
whole system of Government. Corruption and falsehood will be
as ordinary, and as little regarded here, as they have come to be in
the state affairs of some other countries ; and therefore thoughful
persons cannot pass lightly over the crimes which have been recently
committed against the people. Whatever may be the political
canons of “ easy virtue” which the Robertson and Forster samples
of humanity have established for themselves, there can be in all true
minds but one opinion as to the conduct of men, who, lor the mere
purpose of ministering to their own pitiful ambition, and utterly
careless of any other result, sedulously disseminate the most danger-
ous untruths. Whatever excuse may be made for some party
leader, who in the heat of conflict utters an unfounded allegation,
or makes an unfair inference, nothing can palliate the action of
men who, rendered desperate by the knowledge that their own
unworthiness has closed against them the path to power, seize
upon a popular weakness, stimulate a popular frenzy, and stiive
to elevate themselves by practicing upon a panic. Such has
been the conduct of those political pretenders who have raised
so great a storm throughout this country, by their howls at Ins
Excellency the Governor, in reference to his exercise of the
Prerogative of mercy. They have used every art which could
excite° the fury of the people against certain unhappy helpless


wretches, over whose degraded bodies they hoped to clamber into
office. They, being set in that place wherein they were bound to
withstand the clamours of unreasoning hate, did not scruple to
raise a clamour themselves by scattering lies throughout the
country, —vile seeds from which they hoped to gather a corrupt
harvest. They conjured up false causes of alarm, they manu-
factured bugbears, they wrote out long lists of crime, and piled
up the whole damning catalogue upon the heads of those wretched
men, who having expiated their offences against the laws, were
about to be offered a chance of redemption in distant lands.
They neither knew nor cared to know what, beyond their own
personal benefit, might be the outcome of the storm so raised.
They neither comprehended, nor cared to comprehend the great
constitutional reasons which should have kept them silent.
They were ready to hail the advent of Judge Lynch, to join in
any clamour, to plunge into any whirlpool, in the hope that some
curling eddy might fling them into the seats they coveted.
The readers of the speeches contained in this pamphlet will
see that the course pursued by the Government has been, through-
out these lamentable proceedings, the only just and dignified
course, but they will hardly believe the full baseness of the
means taken to discredit the Administration, and to befoul the
character of his Excellency the Governor. They will see that
in the case of these prisoners, the prerogative of pardon has been
carefully and constitutionally exercised ; but they may not realise
the fact that those Vho have raised all this unseemly clamour have
been, for years past, parties to similar exercises of that prerogative;
the fact that those who have alarmed the country by assertions
that these prisoners were to be turned loose to ravage the land,
knew well that the men were to be exiled from these shores, and
would pass away from us for ever ; the fact that those who ob-
jected to the exiling of them as illegal, knew well that there was
in existence an Act of Parliament authorising such exile, the fact
that an ex-minister, who was loudest in his abuse of the Governor
for his clemency, was himself the premier of a Government which
released bushrangers wholesale, which turned loose upon society,
murderers, who, having been sentenced to death, spent but two or
three years in gaol t the fact that this same ex-mimstei who
* The Act II Viet. No. 11.
+ See Extract. /


EXTRACT from Return of Prisoners serving terms of not I
-S a>*
| g Offence for which tried.
ci 'u
ft*
Date of
Name of Judge.
Sentence.
Conviction.
3 Robbery with arms
14 Mail-robbery
20 Robbery under arms ..
38 Murder....
43 Robbery under arms ..
60 Robbery, being armed
64 *Forgery and uttering .
72 Murder
73 Murder
74 Murder
78 Highway Robbery
79 Murder
83 Robbery under arms ..
84 Robbery, being armed
and horse-stealing.
87 R obbery, being armed..
109 Robbery with arms
110 Mail-robbery
118 Robbery, being armed,.
121 Robbery under arms
153 Robbery under arms
157 Robbery under arms
158 Murder
159 Robbery under arms
3 May,
29 April,
27 Oct.,
11 Oct.,
17 April,
19 Oct.,
22 Feb.,
April,
April,
10 April,
14 April,
24 Mar.,
15 Oct.,
16 Oct.,
16 Oct.,
15 April,
25 Sept.,
30 Oct.,
28 June,
30 June,
16 April,
3 Sept.,
21 Oct.,
Milford
Milford
1864 Stephen,C.J.
1866 Hargrave ...
Faucett
Stephen, C.J.
Cheeke
Cheeke
Cheeke
Hargrave ...
Stephen, C.J.
Wise
Milfora
Sheppard ...
Sheppard
Wise
Stephen, C.J
Cheeke
Wise ..
Stephen, C.J,
12 years roads
15 years imprisonment..
10 years
Death; commuted
hard labour for life.
10 years roads
5 years roads
4 years roads
Death; commuted
life, &c.
Death; commuted
life, &c.
Death; commuted
life, &c.
15 years
15 years hard labour o:
the roads.
12 years
10 years
10 years roads
10 years, Ist yr. in iron
15 years roads, Ist yea
in irons.
14 years, Ist year ii
irons.
10 years
14 years, Ist year i:
irons.
15 years hard labour ..
Death ; commuted to 1
years roads
10 years roads
*“ My dear Lord Belmore, —We have been tal king over the * * * case in the and
however, undesirable to write on the Office papers until your Lordship’s vii


lan one year, released under remission of sentence, irrespective of
jgulations.
Time served
ihen absolute
*r conditional
ardon granted
ars months
5 0
7 0
2 6
3 0
2 6
0 10
1 10
I 8
1 8
4 9
5 10
7 0
5 6
4 6
4 10
6 6
8 0
7 6
Date of release, and whether
absolute or conditional Pardon.
24 April, 1869 ; absolute
28 April, 1871 ~
5 6
8 6
27 May, 1869
11 Aug., 1869
19 Nov., 1869
25 Aug., 1870
22 Dec., 1870
5 11
8 6
6 Dec,, 1870 ~
6 Dec., 1870
4 6
31 Dec., 1870
23 Feb., 1870
16 Mar., 1870; conditional
26 April, 1870 ■,,
28 April, 1870 ~
2 Aug., 1870
14 Oct., 1871; absolute
22 Sept., 1871
31 Mar., 1871
16 Nov., 1871
1 Jan., 1872 ~
Name of
Colonial Secretary
4 Mar., 1872; conditional
25 Mar., 1872
of time being.
20 April, 1872 ; absolute..
.Tobn Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
Charles Cowper
John Robertson
Charles Cowper
Charles Cowper
John Robertson
Charles Cowper
Charles Cowper
Charles Cowper
Charles Cowper
Charles Cowper
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
John Robertson
Nature of advice
or opinion of Minister, if any,
all think it would be well to release him so that he may be at home on
were known to
me. Yours faithfully,— John
Some remission recom-
mended.
on papers.
Recommended.
The Cabinet think it would
be well to release him, so
that he may be at home on
.Christmas Day.*
Recommended.
Recommended,
Recommended.
Recommended.
Kobertson, 19 December, 1870.
Christmas Day. I thought it,


censured Mr. Parkes for not advising the Governor upon petitions
of pardon, never advised a Governor himself upon such matters
when he held office; the fact that this same ex-minister who
accused Mr. Parkes of shirking responsibility, himself when in
office, begged for a Governor’s opinion upon the case of a prisoner
whom he desired to favour before he committed himself to request-
ing that that prisoner might be released in time to join his family’s
Christmas dinner; the fact that another ex-minister, who was
bitterest of all in his denunciations of the Government, for the
proposed release of Gardiner at the end of ten years, had, himself,
written and signed a strong recommendation upon a petition that
the same prisoner should be released at the end of seven years and
a half; * nor the fact that a third ex-minister, who more recently
left office, and, who also stigmatized the action of the Government
as unconstitutional, was at the very time of that action a member
of the Government he condemned, now joining in a vote against his
former colleagues, though he had been a member of the Cabinet
when the thing that he assailed, was done.t In order rightly to
appreciate the sentiments which actuated the Robertson-cum-
Forster-cum-Butler-cum-Lucas alliance it is necessary to bear these
circumstances in mind. And beyond these evil features of the
conspiracy, we have one other significant fact, which affords con-
clusive evidence of the vileness of the whole proceeding.— lt was
admittedly known to the conspirators that the carrying of the motion
of censure would not prevent the release of the prisoners. What
more complete proof is needed of total disregard of the public
interest 1 These gentlemen who set the community in a turmoil,
and professed that their sole desire was to prevent certain prisoners
being set at liberty, and who wished to unseat the Government
upon that issue, have since confessed that the prisoners could not
in any case have been kept in gaol; that if a new administration
had been formed to do this special work, that administration could
* See Mr. Forster’s Minute on the petition for Gardiner’s release,
t Mr. Butler was in office as Attorney-General when the proceedings
with reference to Gardiner’s petition—which proceedings he characterised as
unconstitutional —took place. Whether he knew of those proceedings or
not, whether he approved of them or not, his voting against his former
colleagues upon a matter which occurred before he left the Cabinet, was a
gross breach of good taste, if not worse. Had he continued a member
of the administration, he could not have given such a vote, and in combining
with the opposition to censure something for which he constitutionally bore
a share of the responsibility, he took a course, which it is to be hoped future
politicians will be slow to follow.


not have done it; that, whatever the result, no ministry could
urge the Queen’s representative to break his word. Then what
object had these disturbers of the public peace? Is it not clear
that their only desire was to attain office; and that their assumptions
of patriotism and disinterestedness were shameful and audacious
deceptions ? The coolness with which this confession is made, is
not the least remarkable part of this truly remarkable transaction.
There is a brazen shamelessness about the thing which indicates a
lamentable degree of demoralization. The worst of men are
usually desirous of “ assuming a virtue, though they have it not
but here are men who avow that they have practised a deceit, who
admit that they have been trying, not to aid the country, but
themselves, who confess that the sole result of their conspiracy,
had it succeeded, would have been to confer the emoluments of
office upon their honourable selves. ,
It is much to be regretted that the public press should not
have treated this subject with more care and less of prejudice.
It appears as though the panic created by the hungry aspirants
for power had infected even the journalists of the colony.
A constant cry of alarm was kept up. Pictures of the desola-
tion to follow the exile of the prisoners were frequent in the
columns of the newspapers. The records of crime were searched
in order to furnish catalogues of past iniquity, which should more
effectually add to the public fear, and prejudice the case of men
who had nothing to do with the crimes so catalogued. When the
Assembly negatived Mr. Combes’ motion, several newspapers fore-
boded that the twenty-tour prisoners, on their release, would form
a band and ravage the country. The merest examination of the
facts would have shewn that few of these men were to be
released ; and that it was not even true that they were to leave
the gaol in company. How ridiculous does all this absurd terror
appear when we consider the real state of the case I—that the
majority of these men were to receive conditional pardons (the con-
dition being banishment from the country at their own cost) that
they were to go into exile, not in one gang, but severally, and at
different times, and to different countries ; and that most of those
thus entitled to pardon had absolutely declined to accept the
mercy offered them, and had elected to remain in gaol rather
than take their liberty, clogged as it was with the punishment
of expatriation. The action of these prisoners is, indeed, a
singular commentary upon the frantic wrath which has been
aroused in some minds at the prospect of their departure from
the country. Only five men out of the four-and-twenty, have


taken the conditional pardon, and these have gone to China
and Japan; one has been released under the Good Conduct Regula-
tions, without having received any extra mitigation of his sen-
tence ; and FIFTEEN have chosen to serve out their period
of punishment in gaol, rather than to accept the conditional pardon
which would compel them to quit the country. All this was
explained by the Colonial Secretary in his place in Parliament. It
is a national misfortune, that the journals of the colony should have
been steadfastly blind to these facts—that, being in that place
where truth is demanded of them, they declined to speak the
whole truth, but manufactured unwholesome fictions, and refreshed
their readers with sensational commentaries upon circumstances
which had no real existence.
But the country press cannot be accused of more than want
of care. It has not added malicious mendacity to its errors of
judgment. That super-eminence of wrong-doing, the oldest and
largest, and richest, and silliest newspaper of the country, has
taken to itself. There are probably very few persons who regard
the opinions of the Sydney Morning Herald with any sentiment
stronger than contempt. The wretched drivel in which it utters
Its daily libel upon the institutions of the colony, the feeble
maunderings, which in its columns do duty for comments upon
public affairs, excite no warmer feeling than that of un-
qualified derision. But in its criticisms of the recent proceedings,
the principal journal of the country has shewn itself admirably
fitted to lead that chorus of misrepresentation, which has charac-
terised the discussion of this subject. It has not only ignored
facts, but has persistently falsified them. It has accused Mr.
Parkes of having advised his Excellency the Governor in con-
nection with the release of these prisoners, and of having added to
that sin, the still graver one of shirking responsibility, and
sheltering himself behind his Excellency. Both these charges are
absolutely false. The Premier has over and over again stated that
he gave no advice to the Governor upon this matter; and no
person possessing common sense could for a moment suppose such
a statement to be untrue. No minister would dare to utter such a
falsehood, under any pretence whatever. Even if there were
an idiot so witless as to think such an error could be committed,
he would be bound to believe the premier’s statement until it were
shown to be contrary to fact. But the Herald having uttered this
atrocious falsehood, aggravates it with another and a one.
It sta#es that the Premier having advised the Governor, shirked
the responsibilty of doing so ; while in its own report of the debates


in Parliament, there are recorded those words of Mr. Parkes
in which, while affirming that he had given no advice to the
Governor, he said he would NOT shirk any responsibility. It is
by no means difficult to trace the source of these slanders. They
come from the Opposition benches; whence, rendered acrid by the
spite of the hon. member for Illawarra, they are dribbled into the
columns of the Herald. The Herald acquires its facts and some of
its unwholesome fancies from the Opposition; its notions of this
matter are derived from a gentleman, who having nearly
three years ago signed a petition for Gardiner’s release, now uses
the result of his own act, as a weapon against the Government;
for it is well known that Mr. William Forster is a contributer
to the Sydney Morning Herald , and filters into its pages no small
portion of that stammering spite, and disconnected diatribe which
the rules of Parliament would otherwise force him to retain in his
system.
Were all the facts of this case such as they are stated to be by
the opponents of the Government—were the release of these
criminals attended with all the aggravating circumstances which
malice has invented—the conduct of those who have so strongly
exerted themselves to propagate sedition would be bad enough.
Their purpose was as evil as the means by which they desired to
accomplish that purpose. They designed to afflict the country
with a Government of harpies, the marks of whose claws yet
linger in the flesh ; they proposed to elevate to the place of power
men who have shewn thbmselves to be both incapable and corrupt;
and to depose from the Premiership one who is biinging this
colony to the fore-front of the Australian group—a man whose
capacity for statesmanship is unsurpassed in this hemisphere, and
whose political character gains immeasurably by comparison with
that of his assailants.


On the Order of the Day for going into Committee of Supply
being read Mr. Combes moved :
“ (1.) That the Question be amended by omitting all the
“ words after the word ‘ That,’ with a view of inserting in their
“ place the words, ‘ this House disapproves of the release of the
“ ‘ long-sentenced prisoners whose names are set forth in the
« ‘Return laid on the Table of this House by the Honourable the
“ ‘ Colonial Secretary, on the 22nd May, 1874, including the name
“ ‘ of the notorious prisoner Gardiner.’
“ (2.) That the foregoing Resolution be presented to the
“ Governor.”


HON. HENRY FAMES’ SPEECH.
Mr. Parkes : The lion, member for Bathurst had made a speech
which he took the liberty of saying was in tone hardly befitting
the large subject the lion, member had taken in hand. He
scarcely thought it was becoming to present to the House sensa-
tional pictures of some particular phase of crime. Crime, he
supposed, in all its phases was repulsive, and a thing of which we
might draw the most vivid and deterrent pictures • but the ques-
tion with which we had to deal was one which ought to be
approached in a very calm, patient, and thoughtful manner. The
hon. member had given a very wide range to his speech, and had
brought under review the whole question of prison management,
and the whole system of carrying out the sentences of the Courts
of Law. The hon. member had said some things which he thought
would have been better left unsaid. He did not think that the
hon. member had any fair ground for accusing him of disingenu-
ousness in these proceedings. (Hear, hear.) He thought that
hon. members on both sides of the House must admit that he had
offered every information in his power. [Mr. Forster : Oh, oh.]
The hon. member was a single exception. [Mr. J. Robertson :
Oh, oh.] Then there were two hon. members, both of whom had
a special interest in any question which might be supposed to
embarrass the present Government, and who, unlike leaders of
opposite sides in the House of Commons, eagerly took advantage
of any occasion which would bring about what they most desired.
If hon. members persisted in interrupting him, they must not be
surprised if they elicited from him replies of a similar character.
He was disposed to deal with this question without saying a single
word to which any one could take exception if he were allowed to
proceed. The hon. member told them that it was his fixed deter-
mination to do all he could to prevent what he called a “ great
wrong.” He need not have told them that, for although he had
manifested no great determination on any other question, he had
certainly given evidence of a determination to do something now.
The hon. member told them they might suppose they were still


living under prerogative government. Well, so far as this ques-
tion—the exercise of the Royal prerogative of pardon—was con-
cerned, he would simply say that whatever form of government
they lived under, that power hitherto in this colony had been
exercised independently of the Minister. (Hear, hear, and No.)
He would prove it from the lips of successive Governors, and,
what was of more importance, from the action of different
Ministers. [Mr. Forster : Hear, hear.] The hon. member quoted
from “ Broom’s Commentaries,” and said that in Sir Erskine May’s
book they were told that the House of Commons had the right to
advise the Crown, and that Mr. Canning described the House of
Commons as a Council of control • and that Mr. Pitt, as far back
as nearly a hundred years ago, spoke of the House of Commons as
having a Constitutional right of inquiry. The hon. gentleman
quoted from a number of similar authorities to the same effect.
Not a single person had denied these powers of the House of
Commons or similar powers on the part of the Legislative
Assembly. (Cheers, and cries of Yes.) Then the hon. gentleman
said that it was admitted that the House had a right to advise and
control the exercise of the Royal prerogative, and he quoted again
from a number of text books, and from the utterances of distin-
guished men who had given general opinions on questions of Con-
stitutional principle ; but he had failed to produce one solitary
instance where the House of Commons had attempted to control
the exercise of the Royal prerogative. (Cheers.) He simply
defied the hon. gentleman, or any other hon. gentleman, to pro-
duce one solitary instance where either House of Parliament
within the present century had attempted to control the exercise
of the Royal prerogative. (Hear, hear.) One solitary case would
be more to the purpose than fifty authorities in these general terms
on matters of principle. They knew well enough that the House
of Commons had power to do anything. It was shown that it
once had power to behead a king. It had power to do anything
if it thought well; but in the practical business of governing
England the Imperial Parliament had learned to impose upon itself
wise and accepted restraints, which were now a part of Constitu-
tional practice ; and it would be much more to the purpose to show
them where it had ever endeavoured to control the Royal preroga-
tive of mercy. (Cheers.) It certainly had interfered by asking
questions, but scarcely ever to the extent of calling for papers, and
in most cases it had interfered in the cause of mercy, when there
had been an attempt to use the prerogative precipitately or harshly.
The hon. member spoke of Lord Brougham’s resolutions; but he
could not understand any application that the carrying of those


resolutions could have to the present case. The Assembly carried
a resolution the other night which was directly in the teeth of the
Constitution Act. (Cheers.) But would that override the pro-
visions of the Constitution Act 1 It was one thing to carry a
resolution expressing opinions as to how things should be done,
and it was quite another to control the doing of these things,
especially in the exercise of the Royal prerogative. The hon.
member for Bathurst occupied some little time in telling them
what were the powers of the Secretary of State. No one
doubted the powers of the Secretary of State, nor did the hon.
gentleman’s observations in that regard in any way touch the
question they had to deal with in any of its branches. No one
had called into question the powers of the Secretary of State.
Then the hon. member alluded to what he called the direct instruc-
tions to the Governor by Lord Kimberley’s circular despatch, and
as far as he (Mr. Parkes) could judge—and he said it with great
deference—the hon. member entirely misunderstood the drift of
that despatch. In the first place he ought to have been aware that
the whole of these despatches together formed correspondence
which, instead of proving that the practice of England existed
here, as the hon. member put it, incontestably proved that the
matter was in a state of doubt and required instructions. The
despatch of Lord Belmore in 1869 was written for no other rea-
son than to obtain instructions. It was written for no other pur-
pose than because things here were in a state of doubt, and that
neither the Governor nor his Minister knew what to do. The
very despatch which originated this correspondence proved incon-
testably that the matter was in an unsettled and unsatisfactory
state. The effect of these despatches was not to leave the question
in the state in which the hon. gentleman appeared to think it
always ought to have been in, but to remove it from the ordinary
category of the business transactions of the Government. There
was no other possible reading of these despatches than that the
Governor was in a marked and peculiar manner to exercise his own
power and to act upon his own judgment in his intercourse with his
Ministers on this subject, and to regard the advice he was instructed
to seek from them in a special and in an exceptional sense. And,
moreover, there was certainly no reason to suppose that the
Governor was instructed to ask advise of his Ministers except
when he thought of granting a pardon. The hon. member had
failed to read the despatches, or, if he had read them, he had failed
to understand them. Then the hon. member complained in detail
of his (Mr. Parkes’) answers to his questions. He did not see
how the answers he gave to the hon. gentleman were justly open to


complaint. He answered him as fully and as explicitly as it was
possible for him to do; but the hon. member took special excep-
tion to his saying in answer to his fifth question “ The date for the
case to be re-submitted to his Excellency is the Bth July. iliat
was strictly the case. His Excellency’s decision was that the case
might be submitted at the end of ten years, and his (Mr. Parkes )
office was so guarded and scrupulous in communicating this deci-
sion of his Excellency that it was given in precisely the same
terms in the communication made to the gaol authorities. The
only communication made to the gaol authorities, and the on y
communication, therefore, made to this prisoner according to the
ordinary practice, was this“ lam directed by the Colonial
Secretary to state, for your information and guidance, that his
Excellency the Governor has been pleased to approve oi youi
bringing the prisoner’s case forward for consideration when he
shall have served ten years of his sentence.” That was precisely
the decision arrived at by his Excellency. It was very true that
his Excellency, on some subsequent petition, appeared to have
written a minute which was never acted upon, because the office
had acted upon the decision when it took place. Under some im-
pression that he had done more than he really had done, his Excel-
lency wrote the following minute : —“ I have already decided to
o-rant a conditional pardon at the termination of ten years
imprisonment.—H.R., 7-12-72.” That minute rested just where
the Governor wrote it; but the communication to the gaol autho-
rities in the ordinary course of business was by the letter he had
already read, and precisely adopted the language of his Excellency s
first minute. His office, which was the medium for making this
communication, considered its duty discharged in communicating
the first decision. The hon. gentleman stated, also, that he firmly
believed pressure had been used with his Excellency, he (Mi.
Parkes) supposed the hon. member meant that the Ministry had
in some way urged this decision. [Mr. Combes : No.] He was
very glad to hear the lion, member say it was not so. That was
all he had to say on the speech the hon. member had made, and he
now came to the case upon which the House was asked to pro-
nounce an opinion. He would like to bring the minds of hon.
o-entlemen, if he might be permitted to do so, to as undisturbed and
calm an examination of the whole matter as was possible. (Hear,
hear.) In the first place, he was inclined to ask what it was that
had been done in the cases of those prisoners who now formed the
subject of the hon. gentleman’s motion. He made no complaint
whatever of his moving a resolution other than the one of which
he gave notice. He though c the hon. member did all that could


be expected, in giving notice that he intended to bring this subject
before the House. They must bear in mind that he was not now
raising the question whether it was right or whether it was wrong
—whether the House might deem it expedient or inexpedient,
wise or unwise, to grant these remissions of sentence ; but he main-
tained that what had been done was directly in accordance with
the prison policy of the British nation. (Hear, hear.) There had
been no extreme act of mercy in these cases —there had been no
extraordinary release from punishment which was not in accord
with the principles, tendency, and policy of the mother country in
the treatment of prisoners; and he thought that if he at all estab-
lished that, he should establish a great deal in justification of the
course taken by His Excellency the Governor. He should in the
course of his observations show —and he thought he should sho w to
the satisfaction of every hon. member whose mind was open to con-
viction —that in this colony, up to the present time, the Governor
had exercised the prerogative of mercy without reference to his
Ministers as a rule. Of course he did not mean that his Excel-
lency had not referred occasionally to Ministers for further
information, or to the Attorney-General, for his view of the law,
but he should be able to show that the prerogative of mercy in this
colony had been exercised by the Governor on his independent
judgment, and that Ministei’s had not practically interfered. He
should be able to show that the release of prisoners and the mitiga-
tion of punishment had been going on under all Governor's and
under all Administrations. In the year 1870, when the hon.
member for West Sydney was in office with Sir diaries Cowper,
there were fifty prisoners released in a shorter time than the regu-
lations would admit. One was Vane, wixo under a sentence of
fifteen years was x-eleased in five years. In the year ending on the
30th April, 1872, the year when the hon. gentleman was in office with
Sir James Martin, fifty-two prisoners were released in the same man-
ner. He thought he should be able to show that what had been done
in this case was in accord with the course of the administration of jus-
tice in this respect in the mother country, and that it was in accord
with the practice here, and that prisoners had been continually re-
leased before the expiration of the terms of their sentences by all
Governors and under all Administrations. He now came to what
had been done in this case. The petition in Gardiner’s case must
have been got up two and a half years ago, because it was two and
a half years ago, at the very least, since he saw that petition when
it was brought to him for signature. This petition was written
on a uniform kind of paper, which was not always the case with
documents of this kind. The petition itself was from the two


sisters of the prisoner Gardiner—Mrs. Griffiths and Mrs. Gale—
and all the other sheets attached to it had this heading—there was
no signature signed to any one of the sheets that had not this
heading : —“ We, the undersigned, beg most respectfully to recom-
mend the foregoing petition to your Excellency’s merciful con-
sideration, and more especially from the desire to reform evidenced
by the prisoner before capture, and his conduct since his
incarceration, and trust that your Excellency may be pleased,
under all the circumstances of the case, to deem the period of the
sentence already expired sufficient for the ends of justice.” That
was pretty deal’. It 'would not be denied that the persons who
signed their names to that were of opinion that the prisoner Gardiner
ought to be released at the end of seven and a half years. That
could not be explained away. Every signature was added to sheets
that had this heading preceding the signature. If the hon. member
for Bathurst or the hon. member for West Macquarie had been
asked to sign a petition of this character, and they had thought it
their duty to state any facts they were aware of in the prisoner’s
favour, while at the same time they could not agree with the
recommendation of the petition, they would have taken care to say
that they could not join in the recommendation. If those hon.
members knew some favourable facts which they thought they
ought to state, they would guard themselves from being supposed
to concur in this heading. They would do as he had often seen
done in similar petitions, they would take objection to the recom-
mendation, and then state what they wished to state. They would
say that they could not concur in the prayer of the petition, but
that they felt it their duty to state so and bo. Mr. Forster’s name
was written to his minute on one of these sheets, and it was written
without any exception to the recommendation of the petition which
preceded it. That was the fact, and he did not wish to place any
forced construction upon it. Was not the minute itself equally as
strong as the preceding recommendation 1 There were only two
signatui-es to the original heading recommending the instant release
of the prisoner Gardiner, and the third signature was that of the
hon. member Mr. Forster, preceded by his own minute, which he
{Mr. Parkes) looked upon as an additional recommendation. He
desired to treat the case as fully and as fairly as he was capable of
doing. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Forster’s memorandum was in these
words
Having been referred to in a Petition for the mitigation of the sentence
of Francis Christie, as holding the office of Colonial Secretary when an
outbreak occurred in Darlinghurst Gaol, I have much pleasure in testifying
to the fact of Christie’s good conduct on that occasion, as well as to his


general conduct during the entire period of his incarceration, so far as it
came under my notice in either case. lam glad to record this opinion, so
that it may operate as it ought in the prisoner’s favour. And so far as these
and other circumstances mentioned in the Petition entitle his case to the
favourable consideration of the Government, I am willing to add my
testimony and recommendation.
December, 29, 1871. WILLIAM FORSTER.
Mr. Forster : Hear, hear.
Mr. Parkes : Well, the petition was for the prisoner’s instant
release. (Hear, hear.) What was meant by an ex-Premier writing
that he states these facts with a view that they may operate in the
prisoner’s favour, without any qualifying words in reference to the
prayer of the petition—without saying a single word that he did
not agree with the recommendation 1 “So far as these and other
circumstances mentioned in the petition entitle his case to the
favourable consideration of the Government, I am willing to add
my testimony and recommendation.” He supposed if you added a
recommendation to something else, it was to be presumed that it
was added to another recommendation. Was it not adding to the
recommendation of the petition 1 That was the meaning he put
upon it, and the meaning that he thought would be put upon it by the
country. There was a gentleman of wealth, education, and high re-
finement, who had held the office of Solicitor-General, who signed this
recommendation, that “ We trust your Excellency may be pleased,
under all the cii-cumstances of the case, to deem the period of the
sentence already expired sufficient for the ends of justice.” That
was when the prisoner had served seven and a half years. This
petition was signed by a number of persons of undoubted reputa-
tion ;by several members of Parliament; by a gentleman who
had filled the position of Solicitoi’-General of the colony, and
had therefoi’e been answerable for the due administration of criminal
justice. It was signed by another gentleman who had been in the
position of a Minister of the Crown—who had been twice Colonial
Secretary, and once Premier. Was it not likely, then, that this pe-
tition would receive every consideration at the hands of his Excel-
lency. And was it not intended to be viewed with consideration 1
Did any one put his name to that paper without intending that the
weightof his name, and of his standing in the country, should attach to
the recommendation'? [Mr. Forster: Hear, Hear.] Hedidnotthink
that any one who signed that petition could be justified in any way
trying to explain away the fact. To his mind it had always appeared
that men should pause, and think very deliberately before giving
the weight of their names and of the position they occupy to a
document of this kind. And, although he was neither in office
nor in Parliament at the time, and because he had filled the office


of Colonial Secretary, he refused to attach the weight of the office
he had been permitted to hold to the recommendation oi t is
petition when it was brought to him. _
Captain Onslow : What were your private sentiments I
Would you have signed it if you had not held office! _ _
t\Pj- Parkes : He would not have signed the petition undei
any circumstances. (Hear, hear.) But even if personally he had
been disposed to sign it, he should not have done so for the reasons
he had <nven. Some observations had been made upon a minute
that he had thought it his duty to write on sending these papers to
his Excellency the Governor. That minute simply pointed out
the names and the standing of the most conspicuous persons who
had signed the petition. It seemed to him that he was bound m
iustice to the prisoner to point out to the Governor, who was then
a stranger in the country, the positions which those gentlemen
occupied. And he should act in the same way to-morrow, or at
any other time. It seemed to him that it was his duty to point
out any circumstances he knew which appeared to be m the pri-
soner’s favour, at the same time stating the crime he had committed
the reputation he held, and all the circumstances of the case as well
as he knew them. He had before described, in a speech he had
occasion to make on a previous evening, that he did make it lus
business to see his Excellency in reference to this case, and to enter
into a conversation with him, not for the purpose of giving advice,
but to place his Excellency in possession of all the information he
could affecting this case. He told his Excellency that this man
was the most remarkable prisoner in the history of this country.
H e explained to his Excellency that this prisoner was reputed to-
be the ringleader of a series of gangs of bushrangers that had in-
fested the country some years ago, and that he was reputed to be
the organizer and leader of the band of men who robbed the gold
escort in the year 1862. He told his Excellency that this man
had been arrested for offences of a very heinous character, and had
received the sentences which the papers showed. He explained a
the same time that this man appeared to be connected with a family
of good character, as far as he could learn. He explained that
there was a number of persons of standing and high reputation
who appeared to take an interest in this case; and he also explained
that the prisoner’s conduct had been uniformly good ever since he
had been in gaol. That was the substance of lus conversation
with his Excellency. He explained all he knew on both sides, and
he conceived that it was bis duty so to do. It was only right foi
him to say that since these discussions had taken place his Excel-
lency had told him he was under the impression that he (Mr.
Parkes) was not unfavourable to a merciful consideration of this


case. (Heai’, hear.) But it was right also to say that his Excel-
lency admitted, in the most direct terms, that he never offered any
advice; and that his Excellency never asked any advice from him
in reference to this matter. His Excellency might have formed
such an impression as he had alluded to, for they often found, after
■explaining a matter in the simplest manner possible to their own
minds, that an impression had been obtained which very much
surprised them. All he could say was that what he wished to do,
and what he thought he did, was to explain both sides of this case
to give the gaol history of the prisoner, the nature of his crime,
and the sentence he had received; and on the other side, his good
conduct in prison, the real character and standing of the persons
who seemed to be in his favour, some of whom had undoubtedly
signed this petition for his release at the end of seven and a half
years, and the character, as far as he knew, of his relatives, who
had petitioned for his release. With regard to the prisoner Gar-
diner, he felt it necessary to say that perhaps he, of all men in this
country occupying a similar public position, knew least of him.
When the gold escort robbery took place he was 13,000 miles away.
It took place in June, 1862. He did not leave England on his
return to the colony until the October following. He did not arrive
here until the end of January, 1863. He then remained in private
life for a considerable time, paying little attention to public affairs.
He believed that he never read the report of the trials of the escort
robbers. To account for that, he might explain that as a rule he
never read the reports of trials of this character. But there were
other reasons. He was immersed in transactions of his own which
occupied his attention entirely for a considerable time after his
arrival, and he paid little attention to Gardiner; and he well re-
membered feeling surprise on returning from England that this
man, whose name he had never heard of prior to his leaving the
colony, had become a kind of criminal hero. Well, things went
on, and he never thought of Gardiner until he took office in 1866,
because he had no occasion to think of him. While on his hist
visit to Darlinghurst Gaol, Mr. Read, the principal gaoler, pointed
out a prisoner to him and told him that was Frank Gardiner. Of
course he looked at the prisoner, but from that day he had nevei
exchanged a single word with him, though he had visited the gaol
probably forty times, and for this very reason that he had imposed
upon himself as a rule of his life never, while Colonial Secretary,
to enter into conversation with prisoners, even though he had
known them before their imprisonment. It appeared to him that
this was a right rule; but he found that this rule was not observed
by others. The late Chief Justice who tried this case, on, visiting


the gaol, entered into a long conversation with him. He found
that others, including members of Parliament, often did the same
thing. He had felt it right to state that, as far as he was con-
cerned, he knew less of this prisoner than any one who had occu-
pied the same position as himself, and it had not been until recently
that he had given himself the trouble to try and get information
respecting him. As far as he could understand, there did not
appear to be legal evidence that he was engaged in the escort rob-
bery. The Attorney-General of the time (Sir James Martin)
declined to put him on his trial because, as he said in a minute, the
evidence was insufficient. The evidence against Gardiner appeared
to have been that of the approver, Charters, uncorroborated by a
single circumstance except the sergeant of police stating that he
thought he could swear to Gardiner’s voice. The hon. member for
Illawarra (Mr. Forster) must know a great deal more about this
case than he did, because the hon. gentleman was Colonial Secre-
tary in 1859, when the prisoner was released after five years’ im-
prisonment, from two cumulative sentences of seven years each.
Mr. Forster : That was his first offence.
Mr. Parkes : He admitted that Gardiner had not then
acquired notoriety, and that the hon. gentleman’s attention might
not have been specially called to the case. Nevertheless, it was
a remarkable release of a prisoner convicted of two offences of
enormity, for which he received two cumulative sentences of seven
years each, to be let out of gaol after five years’ imprisonment.
This was a more remarkable release than any other he knew of.
From a report of proceedings in the Assembly, some years ago,
which he had occasion to refer to that day, he noticed that the
hon. melnber (Mr. Forster') said, in reference to this question of
pardoning, that no act of the kind was done when he was in office,
without his advice and consent. If that was so, he must have
advised and consented to the liberation of Gardiner, though the
papers did not say that. The hon. gentleman probably acted in
the same way as others had done. The hon. gentleman was Colonial
Secretary again, some four years afterwards, when the Government
refused to put Gardiner upon his trial for the escort robbery, and
the hon. gentleman was also Colonial Secretary for some consider-
able time after Gai'diner’s imprisonment commenced. Now,
recently, it had come to the knowledge of the Government that
there was reason to suppose, though it did not appear to be proved,
that this prisoner was identical with a person wlxo, in 1850, com-
mitted a robbery in Geelong, Port Phillip at that time being a
part of this colony, and was convicted and sentenced to seven
years iprprisonment, and subsequently escaped from Pentxidge.


This was unknown to the Government, and unknown to the Compt-
roller of Prisons until about eight or nine days ago. This know-
ledge appeared to have been in the possession of the police for
some time past, but lion, gentlemen who knew anything about
police operations knew that it was one principle of effective police
action to keep everything secret unless there was some necessity for
making it known. This was necessary, for the promotion of
efficiency in the Police Department, and it was necessary, also,
that prisoners, when they were let out of gaol, might have an
opportunity of getting an honest livelihood. A policeman in
England would be dismissed from the service if, without good
reason, he made known that which would tend to prevent the
reformation of a criminal on leaving gaol. He thought this
explanation was due to the police; but he found (and he was
going to allude to this matter in order that the hon. member for
Illawarra might have an opportunity to state what he knew of
this Pentridge affair) that when the hon. member was in office,
and immediately after Gardiner’s conviction, Mr. .John Thomas
Smith, then Mayor of Melbourne, applied to him for permission
to see the prisoner, to ascertain whether he could identify him as
the person who had been confined in Pentridge, and escaped. The
hon. gentleman granted the following order to Mr. Smith :
To the Gaoler, Darlinghurst.
Dear Sir, —Mr. J. T. Smith, Mayor of Melbourne, is desirous of seeing
the prisoner Gardiner, with the view of ascertaining his possible identity
with a person of his description some time ago confined in Pentridge
Stockade, Victoria. You will, therefore, be good enough to afford Mr.
Smith such facilities as may be consistent with your convenience and duty.
I am, &c.,
WILLIAM FORSTER.
He could easily understand that the hon. gentleman might not
have attached much importance to this at the time, and that he
might never have come into conversation with Mr. Smith after his
visit to the gaol. And what he should like to know and if
time had permitted he should have communicated with Mr.
Smith on the subject—was whether Mr. Smith, after this visit to
the prisoner, in 1864, informed the hon. member for Illawarra
that Gardiner was the same person who had escaped from Pent-
ridge.
Mr. Forster : It will be upon record in the office.
Mr. Parkes ; It is not on record.
Mr. Forster ; Surely the result is known in the gaol.
Mr. Parkes ; It was very improbable that the result would
be known there. Mr. Smith would not be likely to tell the
gaoler that Gardiner was the man who had broken out of Pent-


ridge. He would be more likely to go back to the Colonial Sec-
retary and tell him.
Mi*. Forster : He certainly told me nothing that I recollect.
Mr. Parkes should consider it his duty to communicate
with Mr. Smith, to see what was the result of this interview.
The case of Gardiner came before his Excellency the Governor in
the way he had explained. His Excellency decided, not that the
prisoner should be liberated at the end of seven and a half
years, but that, if the prisoner’s conduct continued good, after ten
years' the case might then be brought before his Excellency
again. That was the decision arrived at upon the case submitted.
This decision had been spoken of as if it was an unconditional
release a release under some extraordinary circumstances. The
punishment was an imprisonment of ten years, in the face of uni-
formly good conduct, accompanied by banishment for twenty-two
years" afterwards. Now, he ventured to say, that that was a
severer punishment than any sentence short of death in the former
days of darkness in England, when sentences of transportation
were inflicted upon persons found guilty of crimes of equal magni-
tude. The punishment of persons in England in the last century,
and in the early years of this, was transportation for life for
offences of equal magnitude, but that was nothing to be com-
pared to the punishment of ten years’ close imprisonment, with
twenty-two years banishment afterwards. And he learned, on the
highest authority that could be obtained, that, a few years ago,
there was not a single prisoner out of all the many thousands in
the gaols of England, who had been in detention ten years. To
shew that he was not making this statement recklessly, he would
produce his authority. That authority was Sir Walter Crofton,
an Imperial officer, who stood second to none in his knowledge of
prison management and penal discipline, and as a witness of expe-
rience on a subject of this kind. And how was that evidence
ffiven *? It was given before a Royal Commission, with the Duke
of Richmond at its head, and comprising Mr. Gathorne Hardy,
Sir John Taylor Coleridge, Dr. Lushington, Mr. Bright, Mr.
George Ward Hunt, and other gentlemen of equal standing and
eminence. Sir Walter Crofton, in giving his evidence, in answer
to the Chairman, the Duke of Richmond, said :
The convict system in this country, and in Ireland, was devised without
any regard whatever to the possibility of keepiegmen for their lives, or for any
very long period in confinement, in England particularly—they were always
sent to the colonies after certain periods of detention ; and I do not believe
that, at this moment, you have men who have been ten years under deten-
tion in the convict establishments of this-country. In Ireland we have had
them for periods ranging from ten to fifteen years under our notice. I


have known men, and have particularly observed them, who have been
fourteen and fifteen years under imprisonment, I obtained, within the last
few days, from Captain Whitty, who is now at the head of the convict
establishment in Ireland, a return of the number of men who are at present
under detention in the Irish convict prisons, and have been so for a period
exceeding ten years. , . , There are now, in the Irish convict prisons,
70 male convicts under life sentences, and 9 female convicts. Exceeding
10 years under detention, there are 28 males and 7 females ; exceeding 12
years, there are 18 males and 1 female; exceeding 13 years, there are 13
males and 1 female; exceeding 14 years, there are 3 males and 1 female ;
exceeding 15 years, there are 2 males. There is one man, I understand’
who has been 15 years and 8 months.
And that was the only instance in the United Kingdom, or Ire-
land, of a man having been more than fifteen years in confinement.
On the cessation of transportation a statute was passed to punish
criminals within the United Kingdom, and the highest sentences
that could be imposed under that statute, in lieu of the old sen-
tences of fifteen years, or any longer period of transportation, was
imprisonment for not less than six years, nor more than ten. What
was it that the prison reformers, from Howard down to our own
day, had been contending for 1 and the rank of prison reformers
of the present century had included men of the highest and purest
character, the most profound learning, and the most distinguished
position. And what had been their object? Their object had
been to ensixre the punishment of offenders being carried out in
accordance with the dictates of humanity—that, for example, the
health of the prisoners should not suffer from their being put in
unhealthy situations. Whilst the law was considerate in pro-
tecting society, it had been contended that society was not protected
by any revengeful law, or by any indiscriminate severity of punish-
ment. It had been contended, that it was the duty of the State,
in the highest interests of society, to hold out hope of redemption to
every prisoner who came under the sentence of the law. Statesmen,
philanthropists, jurists, and all who had given the subject prac-
tical consideration, had unanimously held the opinion that hope
should be held out to every prisoner. (Hear, hear.) And so
much was that practice recognised in other countries that in Bel-
gium, where capital punishment had been abolished, and where
imprisonment for life had taken the place of capital punishment
for such crimes as murder, imprisonment for life was frequently
reduced to imprisonment for twelve years. That was the evidence
given before the Royal Commission. Well, on the testimony of
such authorities as he had quoted, it was clear that the spirit of
revenge had passed away from the laws of civilised countries; such
a spirit as he had seen in these discussions had no part in the con-
sideration of these questions by enlightened men. Society had no


interest in immuring men in prison for their lives. Better by far
take them to the gibbet; better by far put them to death than
imprison them indiscriminately for life. The opinion of eminent
men in our own country was entirely opposed to that vindictive
spirit in the administration of the law. Without exception, the
opinions of persons who had thought upon the subject were
unanimous in this view—that offenders against the laws of the
country in which they lived ought to be divided into two distinct
classes. He did not know any person, whose opinion was entitled
to the slightest weight, who dissented from that view—that
offenders ought to be divided into two separate classes, habitual
offenders and casual or accidental offenders. (Hear, hear.) There
was a class of persons in the mother country—he hoped there
were none answering to the same class here who were born to
habits of thieving, trained to it as regularly as children in purer
circumstances were trained to habits of industry. They lived by
depredations upon property throughout their lives, and died thieves.
Undoubtedly there was a large class of such persons in the mother
country ; and hon. gentlemen would be astonished to hear, upon the
authority of Mr. W. R. Greg, that no less than one hundred thousand
prisoners were released unconditionally in England every yean
In addition to those releases there were not fewer than two thousand
released under tickets of leave every year, whose crimes ranged up
to those of the highest enormity. The police took cognizance ot
their proceedings, but did not inform people who they were, m
order that the liberated persons might have a chance of sell-
redemption. He had alluded to the enormous criminal class in
England in order to draw a comparison highly favourable to this
country. Mr. Matthew Davenport Hill, a very high authority,
stated "that amongst the habitual criminals detection was so seldom
that it was supposed that not more than one conviction took place
to some sixty depredations. Mr. Hill gave the police returns on
the proportion of convictions for forging Bank of England notes,
and according to that return, during a period of thirty-two years,
the convictions for forging Bank of England notes had been only
as one to one hundred and sixty-four cases of forged notes pre-
sented to the bank for payment. But what he desired to call
attention to was that in this country there was good reason to
suppose that comparatively few offences took place where detection
did not follow, and that arose, not from the superiority of- the police
force, which, however, was quite equal to that of England, but
from the circumstances of the country rendering detection much
more easy than it was in a dense population of thirty millions. He
now came to the list of the twenty-four cases which had attracted


so much attention here. The great majority of the men in that
list answei strictly to the category of criminals who were other
than habitual criminals. It could not be doubted that the greater
number of those young men, natives of the country, had, until
they were inveigled into the crime of bushranging, lived industri-
ous and reputable lives, and he was somewhat amused at the hon.
and learned member for the Western Gold-Fields (Mr. Buchanan)
■\vho was continually interrupting him, and by his interruptions
expressing his opposition to the statements he (Mr. Parkes) was
making. The hon. and learned gentleman, nine years ago a few
months after the conviction of two of the men in'the list moved
a resolution in favour of the release of those two men at that time.
The hon. and learned member, on the 7th March, 1865, moved the
following resolution: —
That au address be presented to the Governor, praying that His Ex-
cellency will be pleased to cause the instant release of the prisoners Bow
and Fordyce, found guilty of robbing the gold escort from Forbes, and sen-
tenced to death, but reprieved by His Excellency, against the advice of hia
Ministers, on the ground that it was contrary to the practice of the English
tribunals to accept the unsupported testimony of an approver, and stating
that the release of those prisoners is also desired in consideration of the
rregular and improper, if not illegal nature of their trial and conviction.
He now came to what had been done in regard to the proposed
release of these persons; and then he should proceed to show what
had been the course taken in this country in the exercise of the
prerogative of mercy under other Governments. The cases of
these persons had been considered mainly on the ground that for
the most part the offenders belonged to an exceptional class. It
was beyond doubt that in most cases these young men had never
come under the observation of the police, or been known to offend
against the law before they had taken to bushranging. And what
had been done ? With respect to the proposed release of these
twenty-four men, the remissions of sentence by the express exercise
of the prerogative of pardon did not, in the majority of the cases,
greatly abridge the period of sentence below what might have been
obtained under the legal regulations. The difference was this : by
the gaol regulations, a man who was sentenced to ten years was
entitled to his release at the end of eight years; but under the
exercise of the prerogative in this instance, he was released at the
end of seven years and six months, or only six months short of the
legal term. The man who was sentenced to fifteen years penal
servitude would be entitled by the regulations to be released at
the end of eleven years and three months; by the exercise of the
prerogative he was released at the end of eight years and nine


months. A man who received a sentence of thirty years could
claim his release with good conduct at the end of twenty-two years
and six months; hut under the special mode of treatment these
men had received, he would •be able to claim it at the end of
seventeen years and six months. Of the twenty-four men whom
it was proposed to release, ten only would be liberated in the
colony, leaving fourteen to be exiled : and this exile meant not
merely banishment from the colony, but banishment from all the
Australian colonies and from New Zealand, whilst if they returned
they were liable to be arrested and made to serve out the remain-
der of their sentences. On inquiry he had found that there was
scarcely a case known of an exile returning to the colony. Now
let them see what had been done by other Governors, and before
the arrival of Sir Hercules Robinson. In the year commencing
June 20, 1864, and ending June 20, 1865, there were 80 persons
released in the same manner. Within one year no less than 190
applications for remission were submitted, of which 110 were
refused and 80 were granted. In the year 1870, in Mr. Cowper’s
last administration, no less than 44 prisoners were released uncon-
ditionally, and 5 exiled, making altogether 49 ; and amongst these
was Yane, the bushranger, who had been sentenced to fifteen
years’ imprisonment, and was released at the end of five years.
In the year ending April 30th, 1872, 49 prisoners received uncon-
ditional pardons, and 3 were exiled, making a total of 52 ; and this
system of release had been going on year by year unmarked by the
House until the present moment. He was speaking now solely of
persons in whose favour the prerogative of mercy had been exercised.
In the year 1862, ME Cowper, who had held office as Colonial
Secretary longer than any other person in the colony, and whose
great administrative ability was universally acknowledged, had a
letter read to the prisoners at Cockatoo, Darlinghursb, and Parra-
matta, pointing out to them that the door of hope was not shut
against them, but that by good conduct they might open it at any
time through the exercise by His Excellency of the prerogative of
mercy. He should take exception to the adoption of so unusual
a course as this, of having a letter written specially to be read to
the prisoners, making the official announcement that the prerogative
of mercy was open to them. On one occasion, while Mr. Cowper
was in office, and the hon. member for Sydney West (Mr. Robertson)
was his colleague, the Governor released nine persons in ordei’ to
celebrate the Prince of Y7ales’s birthday. On another occasion,
the cases of twenty-nine prisoners were submitted for the
consideration of His Excellency, who assented to their
release. [An hon. member; “ What were their crimes 1”]


It had been asked what were their offences ? One of them was a
sentence of fifteen years for rape. Perhaps hon. gentlemen might
think that a trifling offence. He did not know what importance
hon. members attached to it, but he knew that most persons re-
garded it as a serious crime; and yet this man, who was convicted
in 1862, and was sentenced to fifteen years, was one of the pri-
soners released in 1870 by the Ministry of which Mr. Robertson
was a member—thus serving eight years instead of fifteen years,
through the exercise of the prerogative of mercy. Another of the
men was sentenced to ten years for robbery under arms, and was
released at the end of five years, being relatively a much shorter
term of imprisonment than any of the prisoners in this list had
undergone. These were two of the cases, and there was a long list
of similar cases which he might go through did he think proper.
The hon. member who made this motion had contended that Min-
isters in this country occupied the same position as the Home
Secretary in England : and this assertion had been cheered by the
hon. member for Sydney West (Mr. Robertson),'but that hon.
gentleman when in office had never occupied that position, nor, as
the hon. gentleman knew well, had he ever occupied anything like
it. The question was not whether it ought to be so, but whether
it really had been so. He was prepared to show conclusively that
it had not been so. In these despatches they had the statement of
Sir Alfred Stephen, who, having been Chief Justice during the
term of office of every succeeding Administration, ought to be in a
position to know the practice that had prevailed. They had also
the statement of Sir Hercules Robinson, who had now been two
years in the colony, and who had had every opportunity of con-
sulting persons of authority on the matter. On this testimony the
state of things in this colony was that the Colonial Secretary had
been solely the instrument of placing before His Excellency all
the facts of the several cases, and that His Excellency exercised
the prerogative of mercy without advice. He had himself filled
the office of Colonial Secretary close upon five years, and he could
say that such had been the course of practice during the whole
time he had been in office. He had adopted that course because
he had always understood that it was that which had been adopted
by his predecessors in office ; and he could readily understand how
in a country like ours, which was a dependent country and merely
a part of the British Empire, there must necessarily be defects in
our Parliamentary government. We had no treaty rights, there
were very many things we had not the power of doing, and it was
not in the nature of things that we should have complete indepen-
dent powers so long as we remained the mere colony of a nation.


That being so, he was content to leave this solemn and sacred
power of the exercise of the prerogative of mercy, of abridging sen-
tences which had been arrived at upon sworn testimony in the
Courts of Law, entirely with the representative of the Crown ; and
as far as his opinion went, he believed it would be best to leave it
so. (Loud cries of No, no ! and Yes, yes !) As a member
of this community, and as one who had taken as active and sub-
stantial a part in the affairs of the country as any other person in
it—as one who was more anxious for the character and permanent
good of the country than for any other thing in life, he declared
that, in his opinion, this power of pardon would be more safely
and more beneficially exercised by the Governor than by anyone
else. (Hear, hear.) That was his individual opinion, and he
would come to the constitutional part of the question just now.
He need not go beyond what Sir Alfred Stephen and Sir Hercules
Robinson said, to show that this, as he had stated it, had been the
practice in this country. Sir Alfred Stephen, at the time he was
writing, was the acting Governor of the colony, and he said :
The Colonial Secretary, in whose department all correspondence on the
subject of crime, after conviction, is carried on, does not in the first instance
express any opinion on a petition for pardon or mitigation. He may have
done so in a few cases, but as a general rule he certainly does not. The
mode of dealing with the petition is determined, and in effect all references
concerning it are directed by the Governor, a very considerable portion of
whose time is occupied (I may say in every week) in the investigation of
and deliberation upon such cases. Neither does the Governor, in general,
confer with any Minister on them.
They must bear in mind who this witness was. He was for
over thirty years the Chief Justice, and at the time he spoke he
was the acting Governor of the colony. If this learned gentleman
did not know what the custom was, who was to know 'I Well,
His Excellency the present Governor said this :
Hitherto the practice here has been for all applications for mitigation
of sentences to be submitted to the Governor for his independent decision
thereon. Some are sent to him direct through the post by the petitioners,
others are presented personally by influential persons interested, whilst the
remainder reach him through the Colonial Secretary’s Office, without any
expression of opinion from the Minister. Taken altogether these applica-
tions are numerous. I have not kept any count of them, but I should
think that a weekly average of twelve would certainly be below the number.
All are carefully perused by the Governor. Some—in which the grounds
stated, even if proved, would be insufficient to justify remission—are
summarily rejected; others, upon which inquiry may seem desirable, are
referred for the report of the Sheriff and the sentencing official, and some-
times the opinion of the Crown law officer is asked for. Previous
petitions and papers in each case, if any, are carefully perused, and
eventually the Governor gives his decision according to his own independent
judgment.


Hon. members opposite perhaps questioned the authority of Sir
Alfred Stephen; perhaps they questioned the authority of the
Governor. Neither of those gentlemen was likely to know so
well as hon. members knew ! But, if so, let us see what Mr.
Cowper said on the subject,—Mr. Cowper, who was the chief of
the hon. gentleman who had cheered the very opposite doctrine.
In the year 1860, nine years ago, and when Mr. Cowper had
passed through his great and powerful Administrations, he delivered
his opinion on this subject in his place in this House, he could have
no doubt amidst the cheers of the hon. member for Camden, Mr.
Garrett. (Laughter.) A motion was brought forward about the
case of two men named Levey and Shoveller. The motion was
brought forward by the hon. member for the Western Gold Fields,
and was seconded by the Hon. John Bowie Wilson, who was no
longer a member of this House, but who had previously held office
as Secretary for Lands. Mr. Cowper, in his speech on that occasion,
said that he was not surprised at anything the hon. member for the
Western Gold Fields might say, but he was astonished that a
motion like that should be seconded by a gentleman who had held
office as a Minister of the Crown.
Mr. Buchanan : What was the motion 1
Mr. Parkes : For papers.
Mr. Buchanan : Condemning 1 ?
Mr. Parkes had no doubt it was condemning. (Laughter.)
The hon. member would not hesitate to bring forward a motion
condemning the universe, and would be prepared with irrefragable
proof that it was strictly in accordance with the principles of
Christianity. (Laughter.) Mr. Cowper on that occasion, as
reported in the Sydney Morning Herald , said :
He was not surprised at the motion from the quarter it emanated; he
was surprised that a gentleman who had occupied the position of a Minister
of the Crown, and ought to know better, should have seconded the motion.
The hon. member must know that Ministers very rarely interfere with
matters of this kind ; and when the House is asked to pass a censure
against the Government for exercising the prerogative of mercy, it is more
particularly levelled against an individual who was not there to defend
himself. There were hundreds of prisoners whose petitions were received
by him, but he never looked at them, because he thought this was one of
those matters with which the political Ministers should interfere as little
as possible. These papers came before him every day, and he simply
initialed them and sent them on to the Judge who tried the case, and then
they came before his Excellency, who decided the matter on his own respon-
sibility. He thought the charges that had been made so recklessly this
afternoon might have some foundation; therefore he said that the hon.
member (Mr. Wilson) knew well that these papers were seldom seen by the
Colonial Secretary, therefore the Act was one almost entirely in the pro-
vince of one individual. But he was not going to shelter himself with that


argument, because the House might say be was responsible and that these
were matters which he ought to interfere with and ought to be held respon-
sible for. In this particular case, so far as he recollected, his Excellency
did ask his opinion, and he found that in February a petition for the
remission of sentence was refused. He thought he understood the hon.
member to say it was refused by the Government who preceded him, and
whom he had so lauded ; but that was not the fact, because the petition was
dealt with soon after he came into office, and the letter written soon after
the death of Mr. Elyard proved this, therefore it must have been his (Mr.
Gowper’s) act, and not that of the hon. member for the Lachlan. The hon.
member wished to know why the petition was refused in February and was
granted in April. He understood the Jewish Rabbi had been to his Excel-
lency in this particular case, because, when the gentlemen composing the
deputation came to him, he assured them he had no power, and they then
went and saw his Excellency personally, and he believed the Jewish Rabbi
was one of those who interested himself in this case. His Excellency had,
however, conversed with him on this case. And Mr. Darvall, who was
Attorney-General at that time, also stated his opinion, and the decision of
his Excellency came after that discussion. But the hon. member seemed
to think this case was one of extraordinary atrocity and that no interest
had been made sufficient to justify the Executive Government in the course
they took. Here was a petition, signed by 250 persons, including a clergy-
man of the Church of England, the Church of Rome, and other respectable
persons, and this went to the Judge, who made his report, and it then
went to his Excellency. He used no influence with his Excellency, and
never spoke to him on the subject until he asked him. He took no interest
in the matter. He had interfered on one or two occasions but he had made
no impression. He did so in the case of Spicer, although it was publicly
stated that he did all he could to keep him in gaol. He complained of
Spicer being kept in gaol, but his Excellency refused to abate his sentence,
and it was only after repeated remonstrances that he pardoned Spicer ; and
yet he had been accused of having hept him in gaol. He thought that
it was hardly fair that he should be accused of tyranny in one case and
corruption in the other. He believed this discussion would be most injuri-
ous, and that this interference with the prerogative was injurious. It
would not affect the individual aimed at, nor would it affect
him. He cared not whether the House passed this vote of
censure or not, because he had never taken any interest in the matter. It
was possible that some persons might have spoken to him about it, but he
distinctly asserted that his Excellency asked him about it after the petition
was sent in February, and that in April the Governor gave way and exer-
cised the prerogative. In the case of Shoveller, a longer term of imprison-
ment elapsed. The petitions were signed by respectable persons who had
known the prisoners for some time.
He had, he thought, clearly shown that the system which had pre-
vailed in this colony until now, through all Administrations, had
been for the Minister to inform the Governor of all the facts of
the case, and to leave the exercise of the prerogative of mercy
entirely to his independent judgment. (Hear, hear.) In some
cases, as had been stated by his Excellency, and as he had stated
the other night, and as he stated now, the Minister might point
out any new features, or any new facts; and in some few cases—


and they were very few—the Governor might ask for the advice of
his Minister. The Minister never advised unless he were asked
for an opinion. He had proved on the authority of Sir Alfred
Stephen, of his Excellency the Governor, and of Mr. Cowper who
had held office as Prime Minister longer than anyone else, that in
this country the prerogative of mercy had been withdrawn from
the range of ordinary Ministerial functions. The Minister had
supplied the facts, had obtained the reports, and submitted them ;
and if at any time he had been asked for his opinion, the Minister
gave that opinion • but that in nearly all cases when an opinion
had been sought, it was that of the Attorney-General, on some
point of law. He interfered very recently in one case in this list,
and that was the case of the boy Brookman, the circumstances of
which had been already explained to the House. The boy was
inveigled into a gang of bushrangers when he was only fourteen
years of age ; he was apprehended and tried for a capital offence.
His conduct in gaol had been very exemplary. He was now
twenty years of age. He had learned to read and write, and had
been thoroughly educated as well as the gaol school could educate
a man. On account of the pleading of his mother, who was
undoubtedly a reputable woman, and who had pleaded very hard
that the boy should be released in the colony, he being her only
son, he (Mr. Parkes) had expressed the opinion/ to his Excellency
that he thought it would be better to release him in the colony
rather than that he should be exiled. He thought this youth
would be much more likely to commence a new course of life
under the influence of his mother, his home, and his friends, than
he would be if he were thrown adrift upon the world. He simply
expressed that opinion, and that was the extent of his interference.
In another case, where a man was imprisoned for cattle-stealing, a
number of new features had been brought before the Government
which made the case somewhat peculiar. One was that this person
had been informed that he would be tried at a given date, and
that in place of that he was tried several weeks earlier, and at
another place, where he could not obtain his witnesses nor engage
any one for his defence. In that case the opinion of the late
Attorney-General was taken, and, on that opinion, his Excellency
released the prisoner. Except in cases of this kind, where some-
thing peculiar presented itself, no advice had been offered by any
Minister. The papers proved that. All the papers he had looked
at showed simply that they were inferred to the Governor without
advice. They simply had the initials upon them of “W. F., C. C.,
H. P.”, or whoever it might be. They simply showed that they had
been referred without any opinion being expressed upon the papers.


Mr. Forster : No ; they do not show that; certainly not.
Mr. Parkes : Now he came to the despatches which had been
laid before the House. In July, 1869, a despatch was written by
Lord Belmore to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, which
showed clearly that the matter was in that state of perplexity and
doubt that both the Minister (Mr, John Robertson) and the
Governor desired explicit instructions. In Lord Belmore’s words
he wanted to know what weight the recommendation of the
Colonial Secretary ought to have with the Governor—whether, in
fact, the latter was bound by his instructions to act upon his own
independent judgment or not. He need not go through the replies
of Earl Granville and Lord Kimberley of a later date, or the
despatch which reached the colony about twelve months ago from
Lord Kimberley in answer do Sir Alfred Stephen. It was suffi-
cient that these despatches to anyone who would patiently read
them, showed that what was contemplated by the Secretary of
State was that the Governor should continue to decide these cases
upon his independent judgment—(No)—but that before pardoning
he should seek the advice of his Ministers. [Mr. Garrett : Hear,
hear.] But did not that place the case entirely out of the ordinary
range of Ministerial advice ? The Minister was not to be called
upon to advise in the case unless the Governor proposed to pardon.
What position would a Minister be in in such a case as that? If
he dissented from the Governor’s advice he would be placed in the
most objectionable light of objecting to mercy being extended.
What position would he bo in as a responsible Minister to come in
when the matter had been considered by some independent
authority that was not responsible to parliament.
Mr. Hoskins : The Governor is responsible.
Mr. Parkes: What, the Governor?
Mr. Hoskins : Yes.
Mr. Parkes: The hon. gentleman had to read up another
chapter upon constitutional law.
Mr. Hoskins : We will find out whether he is responsible
or not.
Mr. Parkes : The Governor was responsible to his masters
(hear, hear), and was not responsible to that House. (Hear, hear).
A Minister would go into the consultation, when he would simply
be employed to confirm and support the decision of the Governor,
but he would have no voice in the consideration of cases where a
pardon was refused in the first instance. He, for one, would not take
that position (hear, hear) • and all the Parliaments in the world
would not compel him to take it. (Cheers). There was one
thing—he was master of his own course of action ; and neither the


fear of Parliament, nor the edict of the Secretary of State, would
induce him to take the position of giving advice whei'e he would
be responsible without any adequate authority. The case, as
raised by these despatches, came before him in this perplexed
state; and on account of the pressure of Parliamentary business
throughout this long session, he certainly would have deferred it
until the recess in order to give a more calm and undisturbed con-
sideration to the whole matter; but under these discussions he
became very sensible of the awkward part of the situation as
affecting the Governor—a gentleman of distinguished ability who
had filled every position he had occupied as a servant of the
Crown with honour, and who, as Governor of this colony had, he
believed, as lively a sense of his obligations as a constitutional
Governor as any man who ever lived. (Cheers). Here was this
distinguished man, the Governor of the country, exercising upon
the whole as he thought he had conclusively shown, the Queen’s
prerogative in accordance with the principles of criminal treat-
ment in the mother country and other parts of the empire.
(Hear, hear). And he had been ruthlessly attacked in that House
where he had no power of defending himself, and where he had no
position which would enable him to explain his conduct. He was
attacked recklessly in most ungentlemanly terms, and his Ministers
were comparatively helpless in defending him or in keeping his
name out of these intemperate parliamentary conflicts. (Cheers
and laughter). He had one way of doing it—by taking upon the
Government the whole responsibility; and he met the question so.
He declined to accept this divided responsibility, he declined to
exercise this inferior kind of advice, but he was willing to meet
the thing fairly in the light of the constitution, and to be answer-
able for his decision upon every case, accepting'as a consequence
that if in any case their advice was not accepted Ministers would
resign office. (Cheers). But the question had never been in that
position before. The Government placed it in that position now.
(Cheers). The case in this country had been exactly what he had
stated, and until now a Ministry had never stepped into the
position of being directly responsible to Parliament in cases of
pardon as in all other cases.
Mr. Forster : I have listened for two hours to the hon.
member, and have not heard a single case to show the truth of
what the hon. member states.
Mr. Parkes : Does the hon. gentleman say that Mr. Cowper’s
speech did not show it.
Mr. Forster ; I do not know what the practice was in Mr.
Cowper’s time.


Mr. Parkes ; In the hon. gentleman’s own time he did not
believe he could show it. He did not believe the hon. gentleman
could find one case in a hundred where he had himself given his
advice and opinion.
Mr. Forster : I had the right to do it and never gave it up.
Mr. Parkes ; The hon. member must have given it up in prac-
tice by not doing it. Even now the difference between the Minister
in this country and the Home Secretary would be very material.
The Home Secretary virtually decided the question; but the
Governor, as an Imperial officer, would have to examine each case
himself; and the advice of the Minister might at any time be
refused, the Governor, of course, taking the consequences. This
was not the case in England, There was no instance of the
advice of the Home Secretary being refused. The Crown had
practically delegated the prerogative to the English Minister; and
he thought it would be better for him to show what was the
position of the Home Secretary. The absolute power which the
Secretary of State exercised had been made a matter of complaint by
a number of eminent lawyers and jurists, and all kinds of expedients
had been suggested to take what was considered a dangerous
power out of his hands. Many persons of considerable eminence
had proposed a Court of Revision, or a body of assessors composed
of retired Judges, to consider these cases, instead of the Home
Secretary, on account of what had been supposed to be abuses in
the Home Office. The Royal Commission, which sat to consider
the question of capital punishment in 1868, examined Mr.
Walpole who had presided over the Home Office; and they
■examined Sir George Grey, who at that time had at different
periods filled the office of the Home Department for twelve
years. The following were passages from the examination of Mr.
Walpole:—
* *
483. Duke of Richmond : Will you be kind enough to state what is
the general practice at the Home Office ? The practice at the Home Office
may be stated very shortly. Wherever there was a case of a man found
guilty of murder, or of any other offence for which Capital Punishment was
inflicted, before murder was the only offence for which it was inflicted, the
practice was, when the matter was brought before the Home Office, to ex-
amine the memorial which was sent with reference to that case; to
consult the Judge who had tried the case ; to have a report from the
Judge of the evidence; to lay before the Judge any new facts or any
facts which had been brought under the notice of the Secretary of State, and
to request from the Judge a report as to his opinion upon that new evidence,
or upon the matter. Upon all those materials being brought before the
Secretary of State, he was then in a position, not in the least degree to rehear
the case, but simply to advise the Crown whether there were any circum-


stances which would justify the exercise of mercy either in an absolute or
in a qualified sense ; that is to say, either pardon or a commutation of
punishment.
484. That brings me to the point of the possibility or the advisability
of establishing what is called a court of appeal, or a new trial. Has that
subject occupied your attention at all ? It has very much occupied my
attention.
485. First of all, I understand you to think strongly that there must
be, as is generally admitted, a final appeal to the Sovereign in all cases ? I
expressed that opinion very strongly indeed, and I do not see how you can
possibly avoid it. I think that there must be that prerogative vested some-
where, that is to say, in the Sovereign, and I cannot conceive how it would
be so well exercised, so well as by and through the Secretary of State acting,
of course, upon his responsibility in making a recommendation. lam very glad
that your Grace has mentioned that point, because one of the circumstances
which induces me to think that you ought not to have a Court of appeal in
cases of murder or in any criminal cases, as a matter of right, would be this,
that when you have had your appeal, you will leave the parties still as
free as they are now to go on pressing upon the Home Office, that is to say,
upon the Crown through the Home Office, to alter the punishment ; and all
the objections which are urged against the exercise of that prerogative by
the Home Office now (such objections as that the Home Secretary is rehear-
ing alone, which is not accurate, what has been determined by the J udge
and jury) would be ten times aggravated, because he would then be rehear-
ing also what had been determined by the Court of appeal and by all the
Judges who had decided the case in the Court above, lhat is one reason
why I think that a Court of appeal would be most objectionable. The other
reason given by Lord Wensleydale I entirely concur in, namely, that it
would be really an appeal for the rich and not for the poor. Another reason
is, that I cannot conceive, if you once admit an appeal on the part of the
criminal, how you can refuse to grant an appeal on the part of the prosecutor ,
it would be the most one-sided justice in the world, and society, in my
opinion, could not be secure if you were to say that an additional chance of
escape should be given to the criminal when you did not give to society an
equal power of saying, “You have escaped improperly, and now we will
have you brought to trial again.”
He (Mr. Parkes) read this evidence because he was fully aware of
the objections which were raised to the exercise of this power by
the Home Secretary, and these objections would be made with
stronger force hereafter. It seemed to prove that the last and
final appeal must be to the Crown.
501. Mr. Gathorne Hardy : In fact, a great deal of matter comes
before the Home Office which is not calculated to come before a Court at
all ? It could not be done.
502. Matter which is very proper for inquiry before the tribunal of
mercy, but which would be very unfit to be brought before a Court of
justice? Yes. If the public would only bear in mind that the Home Office
is not a Court of appeal, but a Court of mercy, and that its function is
merely to ascertain whether circumstances justify an alteration or mitigation


in the punishment, I think that their opinion with reference to the practice
of the Home Office would be very materially changed.
503. Dr. Lushington : But sometimes it operates as a Court of appeal,
take Smethurst’s case ? It may operate as a Court of appeal.
504. Mr. W aldington : In a few cases where the question is one of
guilt or innocence it must act as a Court of appeal ? Yes.
505. Not judicially, but of necessity, it must advise the Crown whether
the case is sufficiently clear to justify the sentence being carried out ?
Quite so.
506. Not only in capital cases, but in all other cases ? Quite so.
507. Mr. Gathorne Hardy : And in effect it must continue to exist
whatever intermediate Court you may have ? lam confident it must.
508. Mr. Neate : In your experience* is it not very unusual for the
Home Secretary to act at variance with the recommendation of the Judge
who tried the case ? Ido not think that it is usual to do so in one sense,
because I really believe, from my experience at the Home Office, that there
is no necessity to differ from the Judge who tried the case. Now and then
there is such a necessity, and then the Secretary of State does take upon
himself the responsibility of differing.
509. There is no settled rule at the Home Office that you will not act
at variance with the recommendation of the Judge after you have put the
case before him ? Certainly not.
510. Duke of Richmond : The judgment of the Secretary of State is
entirely unfettered ? Absolutely unfettered.
511. He decides according to his own judgement and conscience ? I
think you may take it that everything which is done by the Secretary of
State in revising the punishment, is done entirely upon his own responsi-
bility, but with all the aid which he can get.
********
He had had a purpose in reading the views of Mr. Walpole, because
they seemed to indicate the course that should be taken, and the
rules that should be applied in examinations of the kind in this
country. The evidence seemed to prove also that whatever scheme
might be devised for the consideration of these cases, you could
not get rid of the necessity for a final appeal to the Crown. He
had another extract from Sir George Grey, who had been in office
for twelve years.
*******
1502. Duke OF Richmond : I apprehend that each case which comes
before you for the exercise of mercy must stand upon its own merits ?
Certainly.
1503. It is very difficult to define what ground would actuate you in
recommending the Crown to exercise the prerogative of mercy ? Certainly;
but I may say, generally, that there are a number of cases so clear that
although there are very few in which there is not some petition, yet they
admit of no doubt whatever, and the petition is not entertained.
1505, In these cases, has the Secretary of State invariably a commu-
nication with the Judge ? No ; but when the memorial states facts or
circumstances, or considerations which, upon the face of them, might be
regarded as having an important bearing upon the case, that memorial is
invariably sent to the Judge, and he always answers it in writing ; but if


any doubt remains, or if bis answer is not a very decided one, be either
offers to come to tbe Secretary of State, or tbe Secretary of State requests
to see bim, and then tbe subject is very fully discussed ; and I should add,
with tbe assistance of tbe Under Secretary, Mr. Waddington, although tbe
nndivided responsibility of the decision exclusively rests in all cases with
the Secretary of State.
1507. Mr. Ewart : Do you think that tbe Home Office should state
their reasons when they grant a reprieve ? I have done so occasionally,
where it has been possible to do it. In the Worcester case, I gave my
reasons to the Mayor of Worcester ; but generally speaking, they are not
given.
1508. You would not recommend that it should be done ? No, not in
all cases.
* * * * *
That seemed to be the position of the Secretary of State, and the
practice that obtained in England upon the authority of
two men of eminence, who had held the office of Home
Secretary, one of them for a period of twelve years. He
now came to another part of the subject, which was rather a
delicate one —the extent to which the House of Commons has
interfered in cases of this kind. That interference did. not in any
way correspond with the representations made of it by the hon.
gentleman who moved this resolution. The House of Commons
occasionally asked questions, but he had not found a case where
they went the length of pressing for the production of papers.
A question might be asked, and the Secretary of State might
answer it, and motions had been made for the production of papers,
but he had not found a case where the motion had been passed.
He would give four quotations, not from text-books, or from
writers on government, where the object was to lay down general
rules, but in the words of distinguished members of both Houses
of Parliament, engaged in the practical business of government.
The first opinion was from the Marquis of Normanby, in the
House of Lords, who said :—“ I think it would be inconvenient
and unusual, as a general principle, to lay before the House the
grounds on which that discretion proceeds which dictates leniency
or severity on the part of’the responsible advisers of the Crown.”
The Marquis of Westmeath asked—“ 1 again ask whether this
commutation has taken place under the sanction of the Judge who
tried the prisoner.” The Marquis of Normanby replied—“ I
must decline answering the question, because I could not do so
without discussing the whole subject.” The Duke of Newcastle,
on another occasion said: —“ It was a most delicate matter for
either House of Parliament to interfere in any matter connected
with the administration of justice, and still more with regard to
the exercise of the prerogative of mercy which belonged to the


Crown. He thought it would be most improper of him to give
any other answer to an inquiry, that ought not to have been made,
than that in this case the usual course would be followed by the
Government in respect of any repi’esentation which might be laid
before them.” Sir George Grey, in the House of Commons,
speaking upon a motion for the production of papers, which was
not pressed, said :
It is a solemn responsibility—a most painful duty ; but, at the same
time, I cannot accept the doctrine of the hon. member that the Secretary of
State is bound to consider the verdict of a jury in a capital case as absolu-
tely final, and to refuse to investigate any alleged facts which may be stated
to him tending to alter the view of the case submitted to the judge and
jury. The duty of a Secretary of State would be easy, if in all cases he
refused to receive any appeal for mercy founded upon facts not stated at the
trial. But he cannot shrink from the performance of the duty which is
now imposed upon him, however painful it may be. If he did, his conduct
would meet with universal condemnation. In the present instance I could
not, consistently with the discharge of my duty, have taken any other
course. The case was most extraordinary, and the hon. member has only
partially stated the circumstances ; but I am not going into the evidence,
because this House is not competent to sit as a court of appeal.
Well, then, on another occasion, Lord Macaulay used these
words in the House of Commons, speaking to a motion respecting
the conduct of the Secretary of State in the exercise of the pre-
rogative of pardon:
I have no hesitation in saying, with regard to this power—the preroga-
tive of mercy—that I would rather entrust it in the hands of the very
worst Ministry that ever held office than allow it to be exercised under the
direction of the very best House of Commons. (Hear, hear.)
What then became of the House of Commons being a Coun-
cil of Control over the exercise of the prerogative of mercy 1 It
had been said, on the authority of Mr. Canning, by the hon.
gentleman who moved this resolution, that it was so; but Lord
Macaulay went on to say, that he did not know a case where the
House of Commons would be justified in interfering ; if any such
case could be conceived, it would be some case of monstrous
oppression. Lord Macaulay’s words were these ;
I do not know a case in which, as a member of the House of Commons,
I should be disposed to interfere with the Ministry in advising the Crown
on this matter. If I could contemplate such a case, it would be some case
of most momentous necessity—some flagitious and monstrous case of
oppression—something like the severity that had been exercised in the
reign of King James the Second against those who had taken up arms
against him in the Monmouth rebellion —some case the mere mention of
which would be enough to make the blood boil—to make the hair of one’s
head stand on end.


That was the only case—some extreme cases of oppression,
where he could conceive of the possibility of the House of Com-
mons interfering with the exercise of the prerogative of mercy.
In this country, where he supposed Ministers in future would be
held directly responsible for advice in'every case, the number of
petitions for mitigation was perfectly startling. He did not know
what the number might be, but the Governor, who had dealt with
all these cases hitherto, said they must be quite twelve a week.
And in every case the personal influence brought to bear had a
tendency to regard every case as an exceptional one. In other
words, there was very little disposition on the part of any one to
consider these cases upon any general principle, but in the light
of special circumstances, known to the individual in the particular
case. Every set of petitioners, or single individual, who interfered,
considered that at all events the present case was a case that ought
to be complied with, and used every influence that could be used
to obtain compliance with it. He had stated before, and he stated
now, that even in looking through the papers in these cases, and
sending them to the Judges or to the Benches, and getting other
facts in order that the fullest information should be placed before the
Crown, and seeing persons who interested themselves in the cases, —
even in this mode of treatment, fully one-fourth of his available
time for office work, apart from the business of Parliament and
purely political duties, was taken up. If this system of petitioning
was to be kept up, it would be almost enough to fill up the whole
of one Minister’s time. He mentioned these things because he
trusted that members of Parliament, at all events, would impose
some little restraint upon themselves in pressing Ministers—(hear,
hear) —whether he was in office or out of office. One thing he
thought the change was likely to lead to, to a harsher treatment of
prisoners. (Hear, hear.) He was speaking now not for himself,
or for his colleagues, but for the Ministers who might succeed them.
When they had to exercise virtually the whole power, they ought
to be left free and unfettered to act upon their own judgment and
sense of duty. All men were liable to influence, often uncon-
sciously ; but it would be necessary for the Minister, whatever his
purpose or his object might be, to be as cautious as possible, for his
own sake, and to resist all importunities for the mitigation of sen-
tences. He did not say that he should refuse all applications ; but
he should resist until he could resist no longer from the force of
the facts. (Hear, hear.) He thought he had shown that the par-
ticular cases which had led to this discussion were not very unusual,
according to the practice in this country, except that in one feature
there had been twenty-four cases grouped together for considera-


tion at one time. But with that exception the course was not
very unusual or in disaccord with the practice of remission that
had prevailed in this country. He thought the discussions that
had taken place would produce a great deal of harm. These dis-
cussions to the extent that they had gone, without definite con-
sideration and without careful thought, must produce harm. It
must injure the reputation of the country if it went forth that
there was an immunity for criminals here which was inconsistent
with the treatment of prisoners in other parts of the Empire, and
which, if it went forth, would not he a fact. It must do harm as
far as it interested and stirred up discussions among persons who
sympathised with prisoners ; and it must do harm where, as in one
case he had noticed, resolutions were submitted by persons who
had inconsiderately busied themselves, which were negatived at a
public meeting. It must do harm to awaken any manifestation of
feeling which would seem to be unfavourable to the repression of
crime ; and loose and intemperate conduct upon all matters ot this
kind must result in mischief to the community. With regard to
this resolution, it appeared to him, to say the least of it, a most
ill considered and injudicious resolution, which could produce no
good effect, and which affirmed in part what very few persons
would desire to affirm. It affirmed, for instance, that the House
disapproved of the release of Bow and Fordyce, notwithstanding
that a number of lion, members said that they ought to have been
released seven years ago. (No, No).
Mr. Garrett said the resolution, in favour of their release,
was negatived unanimsly one time, and only four members voted
in favour of it at another.
Mr. Parkes : When the statement was made in the House
that they ought to be released, several lion, members had cheered.
Then the resolution affirmed that this boy Brookman should not
be released. He did not believe that there many persons
who understood this case who would not be in favour of the
release, and he unhesitatingly said that this was as proper a case
for the exercise of the prerogative of mercy as was ever submitted
to the Crown. This return also included a number of cases of
persons whose release would be favourably received by nearly
every one in the community, and which would be treated leniently
in any part of the British dominions. If it was right to release a
bushranger after serving five years, how could it be wrong to
release these young men who stood in the same position after they
had served double that period. It seemed proper for him to state
that, as far as he could learn-from the police authorities, and from
the authorities in charge of the prisons, comparatively few persons


released after long imprisonment returned to a course of crime in
this country. He did not say that none did.
Mr. Webb : Six out of twenty-four.
Mr. Parkes : He did not think that this was a very large
proportion among the worst class of cases, as these were said to
be. There was every reason to believe that of all those who had
been exiled, as far as any knowledge had been obtained of them, by
far the majority had adopted a reputable course of life under new
circumstances. He had seen papers within the last day or two
addressed to Mr. Head, of the gaol, from several of these men,
showing that they adopted an entirely new course of life, and in
many instances were now living as respectable members of society,
and they knew that that was the case in former days under
transportation from the mother country. Some hon. gentlemen
appeared to be under the impression that sentences imposed in
course of law under English rule were carried out according to
the letter of these sentences. That was not the case.
Mr Buchanan : The more’s the pity.
Mr. Parkes had nothing to say to a gentleman who said that.
He had heard the expression in that House “ what was the use of
sentencing men to thirty years’ imprisonment if it was not
intended that they were to serve thirty years. That was never
contemplated in the whole scope of their criminal jurisprudence in
any part of the British Empire. If it were, it would lead to the most
calamitous results, for there would be no distinction made between
the well-conducted and the ill-conducted. It would remit them to
the old times of darkness and rude justice, which happily had
passed away from the face of England and of the whole civilized
world. He had already shown by the Statute law of England
which was passed on the cessation of transportation, that for the
longest sentence of transportation the period of imprisonment in a
gaol in England, was not to be less than six, nor more than ten
years ; and for shorter periods of imprisonment, the punishment
substituted was correspondingly shortened. He had already shown
that in all the gaols of England, with the multitudes of prisoners
passing through them, there was not supposed to be one single
person imprisoned over ten years. He had shown that in an
enlightened country, Belgium, where constitutional government,
and laws similar to those of England prevailed more perfectly than
in any other continental nation, imprisonment for life which
took the place of the punishment for death, was very frequently
commuted to twelve years’ imprisonment. The very object, the
very essence of the modern system of treating prisoners was to
recognise good conduct—to hold out a hope to the prisoner that


would lead to his reformation. What would he the state of things
if this merciful and enlightened system did not prevail 1 Suppose
all their prisoners were immured in dungeons for the terms to
which they were sentenced without reference to conduct in prison,
their gaols would be twice as large as they were, their prison
population would be twice as large as it was. It was only by this
merciful and wise exercise of authority in consideration of good
conduct that the penal establishments of the country were kept
within reasonable bounds ; while at the same time there was a
second and sometimes a third chance held out to a prisoner to
abandon the pursuit of crime and take to an honest life. But the
effect would not stop here. Besides doubling the expenditure of
money, the prisoners, being without hope, would be driven to
despair. (Hear, hear). They would be savages within iron cages.
The slaughter of their keepers would be of frequent occurrence,
and they would produce in this land—lighted up with the living
principles of Christianity—something of the pandemonium that
existed in Norfolk Island, and in Tasmania, in the convict days
now happily passed away. (Hear, hear). Was it to come to this
—that they were to fan the flame of revenge in the execution of
their laws and drive the criminal population to desperation by the
severity of their punishments, for their prisoners were men and
women after all 1 While he was and always had been in favour
of severely dealing with the prison population of the country—
while he was and always had been in favour of the Government
devising every safeguard for the protection of life and property, he
did not believe that the best interests of the country would be
answered by carrying out any such harsh, un-English, unen-
lightened views as he had heard propounded in this House since
these discussions commenced. He believed that it was a duty in
dealing with these sentences under the law to respect the opinions
of the Judges. It was a duty also to place the prisoners under
the healthiest state of prison management, to employ them so as
to compel them to contribute as largely as possible to their main-
tenance, to instruct them as far as was practicable, and if their
conduct proved that they were deserving of consideration, to
enable them before they were overtaken by old age, and before
they became helpless, if possible, to start on a new career, and
live honestly. That was the view taken by the first statesmen in
England—that was the view taken by the first statesmen in
America—and that was the view taken by the first statesmen
among continental nations. And he, at all events, whatever
others might think, was content to follow humbly in the footsteps
of those enlightened men. (Cheers).


HON. G. W. ALLEN’S SPEECH.
Mr. Allen said the hon. member for West Sydney had made a
speech of over two hours in length, but a greal deal of it had
not been relevant to the question. He did not intend to follow
the hon. gentleman in this respect, but would merely refer to that
part of his speech in which he spoke of the practice that had
existed since the establishment of responsible government. He
had no intention of expressing any opinion upon the propriety of
releasing Gardiner or the other prisoners. For obvious reasons he
should abstain from doing so.
Mr. Garrett : But that is the question. .
Mr. Allen did not think that was the only question before
the House. He rose partly to correct some statements that had
been made by previous speakers • to offer a few observations as to
the law as it existed prior to the recent minute of the Governor
and Executive Council; to refer to the practice almost uniformly
existing since the establishment of responsible government, and to
advert to the alleged responsibility of the Government in matters
of this kind. Perhaps he might refer in a few words to the
recent changes made in dealing with prisoner’s under sentence. He
should follow to some extent in the path of the hon. member for
Yass. The law on the subject, so far as it affected the administra-
tion of the prerogative of the Crown, was to be found in the
Governor’s commission, and in the general instructions to
Governors, these instructions being intended to guide Governors in
the exercise of the powers entrusted to them by their commission.
The hon. member for Argyle properly pointed out that the
Governor’s commission dealt equally with all the prerogatives of
the Crown delegated to the Governor, including the prerogative of
pardon. The hon. gentleman referred to the sth, 6th, and 7th
paragraphs in the commission. The sth had reference to the
appointment of Judges, Justices, Commissioners of the Peace,
authorizing the Governor to appoint the same. The 7th autho-
rized his Excellency to suspend or remove certain officers. The
6th clause referred more immediately to the question now before the
House. It authorized the Governor in the name, and on the be-
half of her Majesty, to exercise the prerogative of pardon. The
hon. member for Argyle referred to this clause for the purpose of


showing that the Governor was thus empowered to deal with all
matters of government and prerogative. Confining our considera-
tions to the commission, it was unquestionable that all the prero-
gatives of the Crown, including the prerogative of mercy, were,
so far as the Crown of England could do so, thereby vested in the
Governor alone. But the exercise by the Governor of the
powers given in his commission were limited by the general in-
structions issued to Governors. He could not forbear saying that
this document—an important State paper—directing the Governor
in the exercise of the powers entrusted to him, limiting the exer-
cise by him of the prerogatives of the Crown, including the prero-
gative of pardon, exhibited a singular want of clearness and exact-
ness of language. The eighth clause of the Commission was as
follows :
And we do hereby direct and enjoin that, in the execution of the
powers and authorities committed to you by our said commission, that you
do in all cases consult with our said Executive Council, excepting only in
eases which may be of such a nature that, in your judgment, our service
would sustain material prejudice by consulting our Council thereupon, or
when the matters to be decided shall be too unimportant to require their
advice, or too urgent to admit of their advice being given by the time
within which it may be necessary for you to act in respect of any such
matters. Provided that in all such urgent cases you do subsequently, and
at the earliest practicable period, communicate to the said Council the
measures which you may so have adopted, with the reasons thereof.
The ninth clause authorised the Governor, in the exercise of the
powers committed to him, to act in opposition to the advice of the
Executive Council, and to report to the Secretary of State his rea-
sons for doing so. The hon. member for Argyle referred to this
eighth section for the purpose of showing that the Governor
should act with the advice of the Executive Council in all matters
of government, and also in the matter of granting pardon. Bead-
ing this section alone it would unquestionably be so held. But
going further they found that this section was controlled by the
14th paragraph. The hon. member for Argyle said this referred
simply to capital cases. But if they read the preamble they
would find that it referred to all cases of pardon :
And whereas we have by our said commission authorized and em-
powered you, as you shall see occasion, in our name and on our behalf to
grant to any offender convicted of any crime in any court, or before any
judge, justice, or magistrate within our said colony, a pardon, either free or
subject to lawful conditions.
And then it directed the Governor to call upon the Judge pre-
siding at the trial of any offender who might be condemned to
death to make a written report upon the case, which report was
directed to be taken into consideration at the first meeting there-


after of the Executive Council, and the Governor was further
directed not to pardon or reprieve any such offender until after
receiving the advice of the Executive Council thereon. He (Mr.
Allen) had always considered this instruction as superadding a
condition or direction in capital cases, and had acted upon this
conviction. Soon after taking office, a petition for remission of
sentence came before him, and thinking that this should be dealt
with in a similar way with other matters, upon the advice of a
responsible Minister, he minuted his opinion before sending
on the petition to his Excellency the Governor. He was
then informed that such proceeding would be irregular;
that the practice had always been to send the petitions to the
Governor, without any expression of opinion; that it was his
Excellency’s duty to act upon his own independent judgment
entirely; and that it was only in cases where his Excellency desired
an opinion upon a matter of law, or some information upon some
question of fact, that he referred the case to his Ministers. This
led him to look more carefully into the matter, and he found that
it had been the uniform practice for the Governor to deal with
cases without the intervention of his Ministers unless he desired
their advice or assistance. He could not find the record of any
advice tendered by the Executive Council or by any Minister in
respect of any petition for pardon before it was considered by the
Governor, or after a decision had been arrived at by him. Knowing
the able men who had held office as Colonial Secretaxy and Attor-
ney-General, and finding no evidence of any objection to this
practice, he felt constrained to modify his opinion. Had they not
concurred in this practice, he felt that there would have been some
record of their dissent. But coming to the words of the clause,
the preamble referred generally to the power of pardon, and
directed a certain course of action in dealing with capital cases.
Taking this clause by itself, the maxim, Expressio unius exclusio
alterius, was perfectly applicable. He should not attempt to
labour this argument, after it had been so ably dealt with by the
hon. member for Yass. None but capital cases were directed to be
reported upon by the Judge or refeiTed to the Executive. As the
commission vested the prerogative of pardon in the Governor, and
none but capital cases are by this clause directed to be referred for
consideration of the Executive Council, it follows that all cases
other than capital cases would I'emain to be dealt with by him
alone. Of course it was necessary, in considering a document, to
read it so as if possible to give effect to every clause of it. And
here arises the difficulty. It must be admitted that neither the
construction contended for by the hon. member for Argyle, nor


that by the hon. member for Yass, was free from doubt. If the
hon. member for Argyle were right, and the Bth clause was intended
to apply to the prerogative of pardon as well as to other matters,
there was no need whatever for the 14th clause. (Hear, hear.)
All that was necessary was to direct that the repoi’tfrom the Judge
should be obtained. But the preamble went further. It referred
to the general question of pardon, and thus the clause dealt with
all offences, but prescribed a certain rule in reference to cases of
capital punishment. If, on the other hand, the hon. member for
Yass was right, and it was intended to confine the consideration of
capital cases to the Executive Council, there should have been in
the Bth clause some exception or reservation ; but the Bth clause
made no exception or reservation whatever. He thought he had said
enough to show there was a great want of clearness in the general
instructions to the Governor, and that the clause referred to had
been interpreted by equally clever men in a different manner. It
was said that the present Justice held that the Governor was
bound to consult the Executive Council in all applications for re-
mission, but there had been other men of high legal standing in
office as Attorney-General, while the practice was otherwise, who
do not appear to have concurred with him in this opinion. He
thought, therefore, that the hon. member for Argyle was not justi-
fied in dictatorially laying down the law so as to fix responsibility
upon Ministers for not tendering advice. He might here say that
the case under discussion happened while the hon. member for
Argyle was Attorney-General and a responsible Minister.
Mr. Buchanan : He denied that.
Mr, Parkes : He cannot deny it.
Mr. Allen said the dates would show that the hon. gentle-
man was a Minister. It was quite possible that the hon. gentleman
was not aware of the decision at which the Governor had arrived.
Neither were any of the colleagues of the hon. gentleman, except
the Golonial Secretary aware of it. But, although he did not
know the result, was it equally certain that he did not know a
petition had been received, and was under consideration V
Mr. Buchanan : He says he was not aware of it.
Mr. Allen said the hon. gentleman was the Attorney-General
at the time. A report was required from the Judge, in the depart-
ment over which the hon. gentleman presided. Was there not
then some ground for believing that the hon. gentleman was aware
of the matter, or had such information as should have led him to
make inquiry 1 If this was so, did not his opposition against his
former colleagues come with a bad grace from him'? Might it not
be that subsequent events had given strength to his opinions as to


the responsibility of Ministers. But it was said by him and by
the lion, member for West Sydney (Mr. Bobertson) that this
responsibility of Ministers had always existed. If so, what
necessity was there for the minute of the hon. gentleman while in
office as Colonial Secretary, or for the despatch of the late Governor
requesting instructions from the Secretary of State whether, in
cases of petitions for pardon, he should act upon his independent
judgment, and what weight should be attached to the recommenda-
tion of his Ministers. He thought that these words clearly proved
that the hon. gentleman did not then think the practice had been
as he now represented it. The hon. member in his minute said :
It is submitted, therefore, that in all future cases the reference to the
Judges on legal points or evidence should continue, but that an expression
of the opinion of the Minister should accompany the petitions submitted,
whatever they be—such expression being viewed as embodying no more
than a recommendation in the matter, of which the decision is within the
competency of his Excellency.
The hon. member for West Sydney gave a very lame reason for
this minute, and he thought that the hon. gentleman must have
felt that his action in this matter was strong evidence that the
uniform practice had been as described by the Colonial Secretary
and the hon. member for Yass. Coming to the practice that had
obtained, he thought it hardly necessary for him to go over that
ground again after it had been so clearly derlt with by the
hon. member at the head of the Government and the hon.
member for Yass. Besides the despatch from Lord Belmore, to
which he had referred, despatches from the present Governor and
from Sir Alfred Stephen clearly proved it. Sir Allred Stephen
said in one place —
The only questions which have arisen here relate to a different, although
a kindred point; namely, in what cases the Governor ought to consult his
Ministers before granting or refusing a pardon, and how far, if at all, he is
bound by their opinion. •
Referring to the second clause in the general instructions to which
he had referred, Sir Alfred Stephen says :
By the Governor’s instructions (clause 8 in those issued to Lord Belmore),
he is “in all cases” to consult with the Executive Council, except when
material prejudice would be sustained thereby, or the matters shall be too
trivial or too urgent to render such cqnsultation advisable.
And then Sir Alfred Stephen asked for instructions :
Now, does this instruction apply to cases of petition for pardon or
mitigation where the sentence is not capital? By clause 13 the Governor
is specially required to consult his Council in capital cases, and not to grant
Ox withhold a pardon, until after receiving their advice. Nevertheless, he
is to act eventually on his own deliberate judgment, whether the Council
shall have concurred with him or not.


And then in another part of his despatch he stated clearly and
distinctly, what the practice had been :
The Colonial Secretary, in whose department all correspondence on the
subject of crime after conviction is carried on, does not in the first instance
express any opinion on a petition for pardon or mitigation. He may have
done so in a few cases, hut as a general rule he certainly does not. The
mode of dealing with the petition is determined, and in effect all references
concerning it are directed by the Governor, a very considerable portion of
whose time is occupied (I may say in every week) in the investigation of
and deliberation upon such cases. Neither does the Governor, in general,
confer with any Minister on them; although occasionally he asks the
Colonial Secretary or Attorney-General to advise him.
The present Governor, in his minute, says with regard to the
practice—
Hitherto the practice here has been for all applications for mitigation
of sentences to be submitted to the Governor for his independent decision
thereon. Some are sent to him direct through the post by the petitioners,
others are presented personally by influential persons interested, whilst the
remainder reach him through the Colonial Secretary’s Office, without any
expression of opinion from the Ministers.
He thought, too, that the statements of the hon. member for Yass
should have great weight with the House on this question of
administrative arrangements. That hon. member had spent thirty-
seven years in official life—he had been Clerk to the
Executive Council, and for many years Under-Secretary in a
very important department. And surely the hon. gentleman must
have had ample opportunities of learning what the practice was.
He (Mr. Allen) preferred to rely upon the evidence afforded by
the despatches from which he had quoted, and the statements made
by the hon. member for Yass, than upon any views put forth in
political or party speeches. Besides these, there were the state-
ments of Sir Charles Cowper and the present Colonial Secretary,
who together had held office for two-thirds of the period during
which we had had responsible government.
Mr. Parkes : Over twelve years.
Mr. Allen : Over twelve years out of the eighteen years during
which responsible government had existed. The practice was clearly
stated by Sir Charles Cowper, not merely in the speech which has
been quoted, but in his evidence given before a select committee
of this House.* But the hon. and learned member for Argyle said
* Extract from the evidence given by the Hon. Charles Cowper, M.P.,
before a Select Committee of the Legislative Assembly, on the case of
James Hihburd :
1. By the Chairman : You are the Colonial Secretary ? I am.
2. And Vice-President of the Executive Council ? Yes,


that there was no distinction made between this question of
pardon and any other Government question. But would hon.
members concur in that statement 1 All other matters from the
appointment of the Judges of the land to that of the lowest clerk
in the departments, from the most important act of administration
to the least, was brought before the Executive Council, and no
appointment was made, or act done, except on the advice of the
Executive. (Hear, hear.) But had any petition for pardon ever
been so dealt with 1
Mr. Combes ;It certainly should have been. (Hear, hear,
and No, no.)
Mr. Allen ; He was not saying what should have been done.
He was not advocating it as a right course; he was only stating
what the practice had been since responsible government was
established; and no petition for pardon had ever been dealt with
by the Executive Council during that time.
Mr. Hoskins : In Hovell’s case.
Mr. Allen : That was a capital case, and was of necessity
dealt with by the Executive Council. The hon. ✓ and learned
member for Argyle admitted that the Executive Council had
not in practice given the Governor advice, alleging as the
obvious reason that in almost every case where mercy had
3. Can you describe to the Committee the usual mode in which,
petitions for pardon or commutation for sentences are dealt with by the
Executive Government ? In all, except capital cases, they are dealt with
by the Governor-General, passing through the hands of the Colonial Secre-
tary. In capital cases the Executive Council is consulted.
4. Is that the general course, or is there any deviation from it ? It
is the course invariably adopted. I do not remember a single deviation
from it. '
5. The Executive Council does not deliberate upon commutations of
sentences, except in capital cases ? Ido not remember an instance.
6. The Governor acts of his own motion ? He does. Except in one or
two instances, I do not remember to have made a remark upon a petition
for commutation. I preferred leaving matters of that kind to the Gover-
nor-General, for various reasons ; but, perhaps, in one or two cases, cer-
tainly in not more than half-a-dozen, since I have been in office, I have
made a remark on a case ; but, generally, I have passed on the petitions,
as in this case, to the Governor-General, leaving His Excellency to the
exercise of his discretion as regards the commutation, as a prerogative of
the Crown.
7. You occasionally have had conversations with the Governor-
General upon these petitions ? Ido not remember a single instance of ever
having spoken to His Excellency upon any case, except one, when I
requested His Excellency, as a personal favour, to pardon a man who had
formerly been in my service, and he declined to do it, though it was after-
wards granted.


been exercised no important consideration attached to it. But
could the hon. and learned member or any other member
point out a single case, however grave, in which the Governor had
submitted a petition for remission to the Executive Council 1 He
knew of none. And surely it would not be contended that there
had not been hundreds of cases of as great importance as the
appointment of a junior clerk, or the promotion of some officer in
the service. Ail such cases come before the Executive Council,
and if it had been intended under the eighth clause of the general
instructions that in the matter of pardon the Governor was in all
instances to act on the advice of his Ministers, some cases would
surely have come before the Executive Council. He thought it
must be admitted that whatever the law was, and whatever the
practice ought to have been, the practice had been as had been
stated by the hon. member for Yass and the Colonial Secretary.
He thought he had clearly shown that a most important difference
had been made between the dealing with petitions and with other
matters of government. The Governor had always dealt with
petitions, and sought advice only when he desired it, and he knew
of no case where the Minister had tendered advice. It had been
said that Ministers should have remonstrated with the Governor
on learning his decision. As he before stated, none of them,
except the Colonial Secretary, knew of it; and it was not clear
that the Colonial Secretary knew of it, although it was probable
that he did. But was it not then too late 1 Should a Minister
appeal to the Governor to overrule his decision in a case which
was within his own peculiar province 1
Mr. Coombes : If he saw the Governor was wrong, of course
he ought.
Mr. Allen ; Such a proceeding would place the Colonial
Secretary in a very anomalous position in respect to the Governor.
He did not believe that any case had occurred where a Minister
had remonstrated with the Governor in such a matter. It would
clearly be within the case put by the Governor in his minute, and
open to the same objections. The minute said—
In all cases in which the Governor proposed to mitigate the sentence
his decision would have to be approved and confirmed by the Minister who
might, if he saw fit, veto the merciful intentions of the Governor. It
appears to me the Governor and the Minister would occupy somewhat ano-
malous positions in such cases. Under a constitutional form of government
the Crown is supposed to accept or reject the advice of responsible Ministers;
in this matter the Minister would adopt or reject, as he pleased, the advice
of the representative of the Crown.
Besides, the only decision which it is even probable that the Colo-
nial Secretary saw was one at the foot of the petition refusing the


prayer, but directing that the matter should be x’econsidered at the
end of ten years. And that, too, appeared to have been the only
reply given to the prisoner or his friends. The other minute did
not appear to have been seen by the Colonial Secretary, nor
was it communicated to the prisoner. It did not appear to him to
have been intended by the Governor as a second decision upon the
cases, but as merely saying, “ I have already dealt with the mat-
ter.” He admitted that unfortunately the words were of a stronger
character. (Hear, hear, and laughter.) He did not mention these
matters for the purpose of shifting the responsibility or blame, if
any there be, from the Ministers to the Governor. They were, as
he believed, the facts of the case; and he was inclined to think
that His Excellency the Governor intended at the time only what
his minute stated, that the petition for the prisoner’s liberation
should be open to reconsideration. The Governor had not been
long resident in the colony at the time the petition was presented,
and did not perhaps fully realise, as many did, the enormity of the
man’s offences, and he was doubtless greatly influenced by the large
number of persons who recommended the prayer of the petition in-
cluding the names of members of Parliament and other influential
persons. He asked hon. members whether, under the circum-
stances of the case, it was advisable to pass the resolution submit-
ted. It appeared to him that instead of a censure upon the Min-
isters it would be a censure upon the Governor, who was not
responsible to that House. And then again it expressed disap-
proval of the release of all the prisoners in the return laid on the
table. (Hear, hear.) He believed that many members of the
House would assent to the liberation of some of the prisoners.
Others were nearly due for their release under the prison regula-
tions. And if it had not been for the notorious prisoner Gardiner,
he did not think we should have heard any objection to the release
of these men. But the resolution censured the Governor for
releasing all the prisoners. And sui’ely hon. members would pause
before they passed such a resolution. He did not desix’e to prevent
discussion in that House upon any act of the Governor or the
Government. He did not think it desirable to limit the free
expression of opinion, and he thought that the expression of
opinion that had been made so genex-ally throughout the House was
entitled to and would receive respectful consideration by the Gover-
nor. He knew nothing of the course of action which His Excellency
the Governor would take, but he thought, if the Governor could
see his way open, consistently with the honour of the Crown, to
re-open the case, he would do so, in deference to the very general
expression of opinion in this House, as readily as if the hon. mem-


ber’s resolutions were passed. He had intended to refer to some
portions of the speech of the hon. member for West Sydney, in
reference to the practice of granting pardons. Many of the cases
referred to by that hon. gentleman had nothing to do with the
question, but he should not occupy the time of the House further.
He would now leave the matter in the hands of the House. He
thought that hon. members who were not prejudiced by party
feeling, would pause before they gave assent to the resolution.
(Hear, hear.)


ME. JOHN STEWART’S SPEECH.
Mr. John Stewart said : I think it is about time for this
House to bestow some attention upon the motion submitted by
the hon. member for Bathurst, Mr. Combes. Three nights this
debate has been going on, and we have had learned and eloquent
essays upon various matters, especially the Boyal Prerogative and
the Constitution, but they do not seem to me to be closely con-
nected with the question raised by the hon. member for Bathurst.
He asks us to disapprove of the release of twenty-four bush-
rangers, and I should have no hesitation in voting with him, if
his motion were founded on fact. I do not think there can be a
dozen men in the whole colony who could appiove of the release
of these prisoners. Those who remember the state of the colony
a few years ago, when bushranging was so prevalent, cannot but
be alarmed when they hear that twenty-four bushrangers are to
be let loose upon the colony, free to recommence their depreda-
tions ; but I am under the impression that the Press, and the
public, and this House, have all been assuming rather too much
on this matter. At the time when it was first reported that Gar-
diner was to be liberated, and, again, when it was reported that
other prisoners were to be liberated, the Press all over the colony
raised an outcry, as if these prisoners were to be let loose among
us. It was reported that the bushrangers now in gaol were to be
released, to prey upon the public as they did before. Every one
said so. In fact, I never knew the colony to be so unanimous
before upon any one subject. I confess that I was alarmed myself
when I first heard that these men were to be liberated; but,
when 1 came to look into the matter for myself, as I always do
before voting, I found, to my surprise,.that not one of the prisoners
so often referred to was to be liberated. Not one of those men-
tioned in the list on the table. Not one was to be released in
such a way as to enable him to become a pest to the people of this
colony. The motion, or amendment, submitted by the honourable
member for Bathurst, assumes that the prisoners are to be released,
and all the objections raised against their release is founded upon
the assumption that the prisoners will be free to resort to the
crimes for which they were convicted. It is evident that the hon.


member for Bathurst thought that the prisoners were to be uncon-
ditionally released. He asks us to disapprove of the release of
the prisoners whose names are set forth in the Returns laid upon
the table on the 22nd May, 1874, including the name of the noto-
rious prisoner Gardiner. I suppose the word release can mean
nothing but liberation or discharge, absolute and unconditional;
but, to make sure that I understand the hon. member rightly, I
have referred to an authority which cannot be disputed. In
Ogilvie’s Imperial Dictionary I find the verb to release defined
thus—“ To set free from restraint of any kind, either physical or
moral; to liberate from prison, confinement, or servitude. 2. To
free from care, pain, trouble, grief, &c. 3. To free from obligation
or penalty, as to release one from debt, from a promise or covenant,
4. To quit, let go, as a legal claim, as to release a claim, or
forfeiture.” And the same authority thus defines the noun :
“ Release, liberation, or discharge from restraint of any kind, as
from confinement or bondage. 2. Liberation from care, pain, or
any burden. 3. Discharge from obligation or responsibility, as
from debt, penalty, or claim of any kind ; a quittance.” It must
be evident that the hon. member used this word advisedly, and
fully understood its meaning. He thought the prisoners were to
be absolutely released, and he disapproved, as we all did, while
under that mistake. But what does the list say 1 I suppose that
hon. members will be. much surprised to find that not one of
the prisoners here mentioned is to be released or liberated. The
list contains the names of twenty-four prisoners, including Gar-
diner’s, and every one of them may have a conditional pardon,
but not one may have a release. Members, after all they have
heard and said, may think this incredible. Let them look at the
list. They must see that this alters, very materially, the whole
aspect of the case. The hon. member for Bathurst asks us to dis-
approve of a proceeding which has never been proposed or con-
templated. He might as well ask us to disapprove of his incar-
ceration or decapitation. Nobody, I hope, will ever think of such
a thing, but it will be time enough to vote against it when pro-
posed. If we had understood, from the first, that neither Gar-
diner nor the other prisoners were to be released, discharged, or
liberated, I don’t think we should have had this debate. Who
would raise his voice against these men being let out of prison
if they were unable to do us any harm ? Some might think
there is no great difference between exile and liberation, but I
think the difference is immense, both to the prisoners and to the
colony. The hardship of being banished is felt to be so great,
that three of the prisoners have actually refused to accept the


pardon on that condition. None, however, would refuse libera-
tion. Whatever exile is to the prisoner, it is an undoubted advan-
tage to the colony. We should be relieved, not only from the bur-
den of maintaining the prisoners, but, in all probability, also
relieved from the risk of future depredations by them. It should
be remembered that the men must be let loose at sometime ; they
cannot be kept in prison for ever. Most of them will have to
be let out in three, four, or five years. Is it not better to exile
them than to keep them in gaol for a few more years, and then
set them free unconditionally 1 If Gardiner were kept in gaol
until his sentence expired, he would be fit for no place but a gaol.
Mr. Combes : What was to prevent these men from return-
ing to the colony 1 ,
Mr. Stewart : The hon. member is shifting his ground now.
The Victorians had had a law in operation for the last twenty
years which prevented the introduction of expirees into that
colony.
Mr. Combes : But we have no such law.
Mr. Stewart : What Victoria has done we could surely do ;
but we need no such law against the return of these exiles. These
men are known to the police, and if they returned to the colony
the police would have a better chance of detecting them than they
would have with strangers. We have been told that it would be
unjust to send our prisoners loose upon other parts of the world,
and certainly it does seem strange that we should declaim against
receiving expirees from other countries while we deported our own
prisoners ; but before we could say that such a course was unfair,
we must be sure that our exiles find their way to places in which
they are objectionable or unwelcome. When taken away from
their associates there is every probability that these men may be
induced to lead a different life, and become good members of
society. To assume that they are unwelcome everywhere is to
assume more than we know. We know that Victoria is against
receiving men who have been banished for their crimes from other
lands, but we know it only by her laws. Other places can protect
themselves by the same means, if they desire protection. If we
are not to exile any prisoners, for what purpose have we the 11
Victoria, No. 341 Was that Act intended to be a dead letter and
inoperative 1 This Act allows the Governor to deport criminals
at the end of two years.
Mr. Parkes : And without regard to the offence.
Mr. Stewart ; This Act was framed twenty-seven years ago,
and yet it is only now that hon. members begin to find out that it
is in existence. Why, if the Governor had not acted upon it, as


directed, we should have had hon. members inquiring why his
Excellency had not given the colony the advantages derivable from
the Act. If, however, the Parliament were against the operation
of this Act, it ought to be repealed ; but until this is done the
Governor is right to act upon it, and before we repeal it in the
interests of other people, we should have some evidence that other
people suffer from its operation. We may be told that this condi-
tional pardon, or exile, is such a remission of punishment as to en-
courage the growth of bushranging tendencies. I don’t think so.
Banishment, self banishment, is to most men as severe a punish-
ment as imprisonment in gaol. But at the same time it is quite
possible that before long this House may be called upon to pass
some stringent law against bushranging. In this colony it is a very
serious offence against the welfare of society, and ought to be put
down at all hazards. There are many temptations to the crime,
many opportunities, and any scoundrel has sufficient capacity to
commit it. It is contagious, and it is disastrous. If severe
penalties would put it down, severe penalties should be inflicted. I
would flog as well as imprison every person found guilty on his
first conviction, and I would make death the penalty for the
second conviction. It has been shown during the last ten years
that mere imprisonment is not sufficient to check the evil. It
begins with horse stealing, goes on to bushranging, and from bush-
pranging to murder; and to check a crime so disastrous to the
colony we must resort to more efficient remedies. The sooner it is
known that the legislature is prepared to impose the heaviest penal-
ties, the better for the colony. We may possibly have to hang
some few of these ruffians, who will neither work nor want, but
their death would be no loss to the country, and the example
would be effectual. Now, I should like to know what this motion
is to effect. Is it expected that the Governor is to revoke the
conditional pardons he has granted ? Do hon. members desire to
subject his Excellency to such a humiliation as that 1 I hardly
think they can mean anything so derogatory to him and to us.
What then, is intended by this motion ? Is it intended to censure
the Government? From the long essays we had had on Consti-
tutional Government, on the Royal prerogative, and other kindred
matters, I have no doubt that the intention is to censure the
Government. Ido not think the people of this colony desire to
cast any censui’e on the Ministry ; but if we are to censure them
we should know what for. They have as yet done nothing unusual,
nothing unlawful, and nothing injurious. That which they have
done in this matter has been done by every Ministry that preceded
them ; and although they and their predecessors had not fully


asserted their right to control the Royal prerogative, that matter
has now, thanks to this debate, been rectified for the future. If
Ministers have gone out of their way to grant conditional pardons
for the purpose of injuring the colony, or for purposes of their own,
such as strengthening their position, let them be condemned. It
becomes us to consider calmly what mischief Ministers have done,
that we should rush to a vote against them. It is clear to me that
many of us, and especially the hon. member for Bathurst (Mr.
Combes) have taken part in this debate solely because they believed
that twenty-five convicted bushrangers were about to be let loose
upon the colony, free to recommence their criminal career. Now
that this mistake has been fully exposed, the best thing the hon.
member for Bathurst can do is to withdraw his motion.


MR EICHAED DEIVEE’S SPEECH.
Mr, Driver had always supposed that it was the boast of
Englishmen to regard every man as innocent until he had been
found guilty ; but, from the tone which this debate had assumed,
he was led to believe that there was some truth in the saying, that
things were reversed at the antipodes. He had heard Gardiner
described as the prince of scoundrels—(Hear, hear) —a villain of
the blackest dye—(Hear, hear) —the organizer of a band of robbers
who had gone about plundering and murdering in every direction.
(Hear, hear.) If that were the case, why had not Gai'diner been
brought before the Courts of Justice? The crimes alleged must
have been known to the Attorney-General of the day, if they had
been committed by Gardiner, who had now been in gaol ten or
eleven years. He signed the petition for his release, and he was
prepared to justify it. He did not say that he did not sign the
petition, because he happened to sign a recommendation on a fly
leaf annexed to the petition, and he had no desire to avail himself
of any such quibble. If he had committed any great atrocity, he
had done so in very good company, because, on the same sheet of
paper, he found the names of Mr. W. B. Dailey, Mr. W. Forster,
and Dr. Moffitt, a gentleman well known in this city for his benevo-
lence and charitable actions. (Hear, hear.) Gardiner was
originally tried for shooting at troopers Hosie and Middleton,
with attempt to murder, and the second count charge! him with
intent to do grievous bodily harm. He well recollected being
present at the prisoner’s trial, and he had the highest legal authority
in the land for stating that the evidence for the prosecution was
not of the most satisfactory character. [Mr. Cooper : Hear,
hear.] The prosecution was conducted with extreme fairness to
the accused, and there was none of that yelling and shrieking for
blood at the hands of the jury, which sometimes took place in
our courts of justice. The prisoner was acquitted on the first
charge, by twelve respectable jurymen, some of whom were known
to hon. members of this House. The prisoner had had a fair
tidal, and yet hon. members had, over and over again, expressed
themselves, in the course of this debate, that the prisoner ought
to be hung if he had three lives. Gardiner afterwards pleaded


guilty to a charge of stealing from Mr. Horsington, but the charge
could not have been proved, because the prisoner had a number of
witnesses to prove an alibi on the day named in the indictment.
He admitted to his solicitor that he committed the robbery, but
not on that day. , Had the trial gone on, Mr. Roberts assured-
him, no later than the day before yesterday, that he had reason to
believe as complete an alibi could have been established in the
second case as was ever established in any court in the world, as
many respectable persons could have proved that Gardiner was,
on the day named by the prosecutor, some miles away at a race
meeting. There was some evidence of the statement put forward
by Gardiner, at the time of his conviction, that when he left the
colony it was his intention to lead an honest life, and he did not
think, considering all the circumstances at the time, and knowing
well that, by pleading guilty, Gardiner could not expect at the
hands of the then Chief Justice of the Colony, or any other
Judge, a very light sentence, he thought it was the very strongest
possible evidence in support of his statement. These were the
only two cases for which Gardiner was now suffering. They had
heard a great deal in the course of the debate about Gardiner’s
attack upon the escort, his planning these murderous assaults, and
everything else, but where was the evidence in support of it ?
[Mr. Cooper: Hear, hear.] , He submitted that, in dealing with
cases of this sort, it was the bounden duty of every hon. member,
before he attempted to prejudge the Ministry or the Governor, to
be satisfied that legal evidence would be forthcoming to prove the
guilt of Gardiner upon the various charges referred to. Who
ever mentioned Gardener’s name in connexion with the escort
robbery? Who gave any evidence tha.t he was there at all,
excepting the evidence of the appi'over, Charters ? (Hear, hear.)
It was true that Sir Janies Martin, in one of his minutes, pointed
out that Sergeant Condell believed he recognized him by his voice,
but would that be held, by any twelve sensible men in the world,
as sufficient corroborative testimony of the evidence of an approver ?
Well, in the utter absence of any evidence of this kind, was it
fair, was it merciful, to treat this man as if he were convicted
upon the various charges brought against him, not only in this
House, but in the country? [Mr. Forster: hear, hear.] That
being so, he was very glad to hear the cheer of the hon. member,
because he expected to hear from him of all others—after the
action he took with reference to the release of Gardiner—the
best speech of the debate in favour of the course the Government
had adopted. [Mr, Cooper ; Hear, hear,]
Mr, Forster : I do not.


Mr. Driver said be certainly should be surprised if he did
not hear it, because the hon. gentleman was one for whom he had
always entertained the very highest respect. He had looked upon
the hon. gentleman for years as being one of the most honest
politician, in the colony, and if he departed from this it would
indeed surprise him. He could not imagine that the hon. member
could think that his signature and recommendation would never
receive at the hands of the Governor that high consideration which
such a recommendation deserved. [Mr. Cooper : Hear, hear.]
He could easily understand tlje Governor not paying attention to
the signatures of men who were not distinguished by their social
or political lives. He could understand hundreds of signatures of
the class he had referred to being passed over unnoticed ; but he
could not understand how the signature of any man who had been
for years before the public and who held office in various Govern-
ments of the country could have been unnoticed. [Mr. Forster ;
Hear, hear.] It must have had its weight with the Governor, and
he had no doubt it had great weight. (Hear, hear.) He therefore
really could not understand but what they ought to receive from
the hon, gentleman the best speech of the debate, a speech given
with the undoubted ability of which the hon. member was the
possessor, in favour of the course the Government had taken on
this occasion.
Mr. Forster : We will see.
Mr. Driver : Well, we see many strange things in a time
like this. (Hear, hear.) They had seen and heard on many
occasions strange conduct and strange votes, when it was expected
that a crisis was at hand, and he should be prepared almost to ex-
pect anything. But the hon. member as he before stated would sur-
prise him, if he voted against his own written minute. [Mr. Cooper :
Hear, hear.] If the charges against Gardiner had been proved
in a Court of Justice, he was willing to admit that he deserved
hanging if he were twenty Gardiners. (Hear, hear.) But these
charges never had been proved \ it was wrong therefore to punish
him for alleged offences, of which he had never been found guilty.
(Hear, hear.) He (Mr. Driver) signed the petition, and he did so
for the reasons he had given. He signed it because he believed
from what he had heard, and from what he had read and seen that
Gardiner had given strong evidence of intended reformation. And
as he believed that mercy was a divine attribute, he considered it
no sin to put his name to that petition on behalf of Gardiner’s
release, and he would do it again to-morrow in the face of any
evidence to convince him or a jury of the country that he was
guilty of other and more serious charges. For reasons best known


to those by whom these resolutions were drawn, another lot of
names had been referred to. [Mr. Forster : Hear, hear.]
With two of these names only had he the slightest acquaintance.
He never heard the other names before in his life, but he had some
knowledge of the characters of two of them—Bow and Fordyce—and
as he had already expressed his opinion upon the cases of these two
men, he should not trespass upon the attention of the House on
the present occasion by repeating what he had stated. But he
believed now most solemnly, as he had always believed, that it was
a crime to keep these men in prison for one hour. (Hear, hear.)
He believed so to this hour. He believed that in that trial, to
use the language of Sir James Martin—he believed “a more scan-
dalous miscarriage of justice never took place in this or any other
country,” and he could not really believe that he was listening to
the well-known voice of the hon. member for West Sydney (Mr.
J. Robertson) when he told them that he was a party to the execu-
tion of Manns, and that he would be no party to the release of
Bow and Fordyce. He refused to tender to the Governor any
advice on that occasion, his reason being that the Government had
already given their advice. The only inference that could be
drawn from the speech of the hon. member was that, whilst the
Governor displayed some desire to act with mercy on that occasion
the Government declined to give the advice which they themselves
considered they should have tendered, and left his Excellency to
act upon his own discretion. He never could understand why
these men had been kept in pi’ison. He believed they had heard
the hon. member for the Whs tern Goldfields —upon moving in the
House, some years since, for the immediate release from custody
of these two men—denounce in the strongest terms the conduct of the
Government of the day for keeping them in prison ; and yet they
had heard the hon. and learned member—although the names of
these men were included in this list—ready to condemn the
Government. The hon. gentleman, lawyer as he was—[Mr.
Cooper : Not lawyer.]—ought to know, and did know, that the
practice was never to condemn any man without a hearing. The
hon. gentleman, possibly without knowing much about any of these
cases, had joined in the wholesale condemnation of the Governor
and Ministry on this occasion. He could easily understand the
feelings of the hon. member for Bathurst, and of hon. gentlemen
who had lived in districts where gangs of ruffians were infesting
these places, and shedding blood. They could vent their feelings
in a matter of this sort in the strongest possible terms. He stated
some eleven years since that he had no sympathy with the ruffians
who darkened the history of the country, and he had none now.


He knew there were many of his countrymen who would vote on
that side of the House who would have as little sympathy with
them as he had himself—(hear, hear) —but great excuses were to
be made for many of the young men who were led into temptation
and crime. [Mr. Forster : Hear, hear.] Many of these
people whose names were doubtless included in the return now
upon the table, and alluded to in the amendment of the lion, member
for Bathurst were men, he believed, reared in the far interior,
without education and without religious instruction, of any kind,
(Mr. Cummings : Heai’, hear.) There was no one to keep them in
the path of duty, and he believed that some act of mercy might be
extended to them, although no one sympathised with them in their
crimes. [Mr. Fitzpatrick ; Hear, hear.] He believed it had been
thrown out by more than one hon. member, that sympathy with
these criminals and the protection they had received in the country
districts was the cause of the long reign of terror that overspread
the country. [Mr. Webb: Hear, hear.] The hon. member for
West Macquarie said “Hear, hear.” It was not sympathy that
encouraged bushrangers in this country for so long a period, but
it was the ease with which, in too many cases, the ill-gotten gains
were disposed of. He had heard of one well-known storekeeper in
the Western district, who had one of the best business places whilst
these robberies were being committed, and when it was feared by
those who had obtained possession of their ill-gotten gains that all
notes would be refused at the banks—(Mr. Hill : Hear, hear)
—one storekeeper actually pasted a placard on his window an-
nouncing that he would take all notes. They knew that in the
town of Bathurst bank notes forming the proceeds of these rob-
beries were taken, because it was a matter of notoriety that one
person, if not more, figured at the Police Court charged with
having these notes in his possession. The charge was very pro-
perly dismissed, because it was brought against a well-known trades-
man there, who was considered, and rightly too, a very respectable
and estimable member of the community. But it was, no doubt,
done in other districts of the country. These storekeepers and
others who cashed the notes when brought to their warehouses
were not all natives of the colony. He had heard something in
this debate too, alluding to these men, and to their sympathisers,
and to “ flash natives.” The hon. gentleman who made the remark
ought to look at home, and he was quite certain that although
they had growing up amongst them far more rowdyism than one
would like to see, and which every one identified with the pros-
perity of the country would desire to see nipped in the bud, yet
such rowdyism was not alone to be found in New South Wales.


[Mr. Parkes ; Hear, hear.] Let any one take up the English
papers, and he would find accounts of rowdyism and fiashness in
older countries before which any little specimen of flashness in this
unfortunate colony dwindled into insignificance. [Mr. Hill :
Hear, hear.] He did not desire to oiler any opinion upon the con-
stitutional question involved in this debate, because that was a
matter which had already been very fully discussed by hon.
members, and anything he could possibly say could not throw any
further light upon the matter. But he desired to trespass upon
the attention of the House for a short time longer, because he was
aware that the vote and the speech of every man who took part in
this discussion would be commented upon with anything but
fairness—(hear, hear) —by certain classes of the community out of
doors. He thought that possibly the speeches on both sides would
be commented upon unfairly—[Mr. Forster : Hear, hear] —but
lie felt convinced, from what he had already seen and heard, that
the speeches and motives of those who took part in this discussion
against the amendment of the hon. member for Bathurst would
not receive that fair treatment which it was the right of every man
to expect. Allusion had been made very frequently in the course
of the debate to the refusal of the late Chief Justice to join in the
recommendation to mercy of the prisoner Gardiner. He did not
think those who knew him (Mr. Driver) would for a moment
suppose that he ever in his life was actuated by a feeling of
hostility to the gentleman to whom he had referred. On many
occasions that gentleman-had behaved in the most kind and friendly
manner to him at a time when friendship was very much required.
He entertained the same opinion of him still, but nevertheless, he
could not help thinking that many of the sentences passed by him
upon young men who were tried before him, were, to say the least
of it, very severe. He was borne out in this view by an extract
which he would read from a minute written by His Excellency
Sir John Young some time since, who said :
To the inequality of the sentences I think it would be well to draw
the attention of the Judges of the various Courts, and invite them to meet
and confer together, with a view of reconciling the diversity of practice and
opinion in this respect. Comparing, however, the practice which prevails
in this colony with that in the British Islands, the excessive severity of the
punishments awarded is apt to cause doubt, even more than the inequality
already alluded to. The imprisonment of a young person of from eighteen
to twenty-five years, for five, seven, or even more years, for the offence of
stealing a horse or a cow of the value of from £1 to £5, seems cruel and
oppressive; and, under all the circumstances of the country, beyond all
measure of justice or reason,
Now what had most of the natives of this country been convicted
of ? Cattle and horse stealing ; and in too many instances, instead


of the punishments which Sir John Young considered too severe—
three years for the first offence, which Sir John Young considered
cruel and oppressive—they have been sentenced to seven, ten, and
in some cases, fourteen years’ imprisonment.
Mr. Hoskins : They used to hang people in England for
stealing a cheque, and that not so long ago.
Mr. Driver was not talking of England now. Sir John
Young went on to say :
Instances of this severity are frequently brought before me, while
persons in Sydney, stealing property of greater value from a shop or dwell-
ing-house, usually get sentences of only two years or less. Indeed, a case
of receut occurrence in Victoria may be referred to as in point An officer
in a bank, in a confidential situation, entrusted with the custody of money,
embezzled £2OOO, was convicted of the offence, and sentenced to two years’
imprisonment. There is no proportion between the guilt in this ease and in
that of most of the persons convicted of cattle or horse stealing. The
former—the guilt of an educated man betraying a trust—is clearly more
heinous than that of a peasant boy who steals a half-wild cow or horse, an
offence scarcely worse than poaching—than stealing a hare or a pheasant in
England. No doubt there is lawlessness and wrong in the act, and it is
usually the first step to worse. I do not desire to extenuate it in any
degree, but surely it ought not to be visited with a heavier penalty—with
twice or thrice a longer term of imprisonment—than a robbery to a much
higher value, aggravated by breach of trust, and committed under circum-
stances of far less temptation. (Hear, hear.)
Those were the views entertained by the then Governor of the
colony, Sir John Young, upon this point; and he had also reason
to know that a minute was in existence by Mr. Justice Milford,
who spoke at the time these sentences were passed as being
unnecessarily severe, and that if bushranging was put down in the
country some mitigation of the sentences might be allowed. Now
a few months ago, when these cases were under consideration, it
was believed that bushranging was stamped out in this country.
Unhappily it had turned out that there was very small foundation
for that belief. But was that a reason why the intention of the
Judges in the first instance should not have been fully and fairly
carried out, and a mitigation made in favour of many of these
people h He had a number of cases where prisoners had
been released from custody, long before the expiration of their
sentences, by lion, gentlemen who were not now members of the
Government. He had seen a return of many persons liberated
during the when time the hon. member for West Sydney was Colonial
Secretary, and yet no complaint had been made, and no indigna-
tion meetings had been held, or anything of the kind, because
that gentleman was simply performing his duty. So long as the
law remains in its present state the Government would be com-
pelled to follow out that law. If the law was so bad that it led


to the release of a class of persons who were not worthy citizens
and colonists, why not at once repeal the law. But to show the
extreme unfairness with which that debate had been conducted on
the other side—[Mr. Parkes : Hear, hear] —hon. members had
spoken as if it were the intention of the Government to release
this gang in Sydney or the country to-morrow. Nothing of the
kind was ever contemplated. They would be permitted to
exile—
Mr. Hoskins : They will soon exile back again.
Mr. Driver would thank the hon. gentleman not to interrupt
him. It never was the intention of the Government to do other-
wise than to allow these men to exile. Since the passing of the
Act which conferred this special power upon the Governor, some
dozens of persons have been suffered to exile. Could
hon. members opposite point to one single case where any one of
these persons has returned to the country.
Mi\ J. S. Smith ; Bushrangers 1
JVIr. Driver : Well, there were many worse classes of men in
this country than bushrangers. He considered that the man who,
by fraud and chicanery, robbed his friends of thousands, was worse
than Gardiner, or any other bushranger.
Mr. Buchanan; Not worse.
Mr. Driver ; Well, then, as bad. He did not believe that
these people would return to the country, and he thought if they
were out of the country society would be benefited to a veiy
large extent. But hon. members opposite would not admit that
these men were to be exiled, but put it forth that they weie to be
let loose, whereas nothing of the kind whatever was intended.
He was sorry it had been found necessary in this debate to retei
to the name of his Excellency the Governor.
Mr. Buchanan ; It is his own fault.
Mr. Driver did not say it was not, but hon. members had
not only made use of his Excellency’s name, but they had done so
more freely than, taking into consideration the whole of the cir-
cumstances of the case, they were fairly entitled to do. He believed
that his Excellency, since his arrival amongst us, had evinced a
desire to become acquainted with the wants of the country, and
to further its interests, and in this case he had shown one quality
that he was sorry to see was not appreciated by the hon. member
for the Western Goldfields, and many other gentlemen who had
addressed the House on this question, because he (Mr. Driver) in
common with those hon. members to whom he referred had been
taught to believe that “ mercy is a refined virtue, held sacred by
all good minds.” It was a pity that those hon. membeis to


whom he had alluded did not possess those good minds there
referred to.
If possessed by the monarch it adds a brilliancy to every gem that
adorns his crown : it gives glory to his Ministers, and an unceasing fresh-
ness to the wreath which decks the warrior’s brow. It is the companion of
true honour, and the ameliorator of justice, on whose bench, when enthroned,
she interposes a shield of defence on behalf of the victim impenetrable to a
sword. As the vernal showers descend from heaven to enliven and
invigorate the whole vegetable system, so mercy, resting on the heart of
man— when its vital fluids are condensed by rancour and revenge, by its
exhilarating warmth returns perverse nature to its original source in pure
streams. It is the chief attribute of that Deity on whom the best as well
as the wisest of us must rest his hopes and dependence ; it is a duty we even
owe to our enemies. To show mercy and forgiveness is highly pleasing in
the sight of our great Greater, who hath said, ‘ ‘ Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy, ” not only in this transitory life, but at the final
day of retribution, when summoned at his tribunal, and the actions of our
mortal lives are unfolded to view. Although justice may demand the
awful fiat, we hope His mercy will avert the awful doom.
It was for the exercise of mercy that hon. members were now
invited to condemn the conduct of his Excellency the Governor.
(Cheers.)


ME. WALTEE E COOPEE’S SPEECE
Mr. Cooper said : He had been for a long time puzzling his
brains to understand what could be actuating hon. gentlemen
opposite, but after the exhibition —the lamentable exhibition—of
impotent malice which they had just witnessed, he was no longer
surprised. The hon. member for Illawarra (Mr. Forster) had
commenced his speech by deprecating personality; complained
that the Colonial Secretary had been very personal; and then
commenced to attack the Colonial Secretary and half-a-dozen other
gentlemen in the grossest manner possible. He called the Colonial
Secretary a coward ; he called the hon. member for the Hume a
slave ; he called the gentleman behind him (Mr. Hill) impertinent;
he said some hon. members had extorted money ; and he said that
he (Mr. Cooper) received money for his vote. No doubt all the
other charges had just as much foundation as the last one; the
sole foundation for which was the hon. member’s diseased ima-
gination. (Hear, hear.) This was the gentleman who was ac-
tuated by a stern sense of duty ; who threw aside all personal
considerations; who was a pure, unadulterated patriot; who went
into office simply to serve the country; and who, as he professed,
had no other motive of any kind whatever. It was amusing to
notice how the venom of the hon. member had been stirred up by
contemplation of the fact that the Colonial Secretary was paid.
Several times in the course of his address he reiterated this ob-
servation, that the Colonial Secretary was doubly wrong because
he was “ paid.” It was extremely galling to the hon. gentleman,
no doubt, that the Colonial Secretary should be paid, while he—a
person of such distinguished merit —was out in the cold, among
the “ great unpaid.” He could not get over this annoying circum-
stance, but had recurred to it over and over again. (Hear, hear.)
The hon. gentleman had given them an explanation in this minute
of his, which, if it did not give any satisfaction to his admirers,
must afford a very satisfactory explanation of his political conduct.
It gave a clue to the hon. gentleman’s character. He said he
signed that minute under no sense of responsibility ; that he could
not be called to account for signing it, and that therefore, he signed it.
[Mr. Parkes : Hear, hear.] That was a pretty specimen of the


political honesty of the hon. member. [Mr. Lloyd : Hear, hear.]
He admitted that his signature was a sham, that he was
irresponsible for it, and that if he had ever thought he would be
held responsible for it he would have refused to give it. The hon.
member always took great credit to himself for his honesty, but
nobody else gave him much credit for it, and this case certainly
showed that his idea of honesty was somewhat peculiar. The hon.
gentleman had also taken occasion to advert to many things that
he had not done. He told them he had not extorted money ;he
had not advised the Governor in certain things; he had not done
anything. He was, in fact, the self-constituted chief of the great
Do-nothing Party, and was no doubt admirably fitted for the
position ; but it would have been much more satisfactory to the
House and to the country if the hon. gentleman, instead of
describing what he had not done, had told them what he had done.
He (Mr. Cooper) had watched the hon. member’s career for many
years, and had never discovered that he had done anything which
entitled him to the thanks of the country. But he thought he
should be able to show that the hon. gentleman, in connection
with the pardoning of criminals, had done something which he
condemned when imitated by other people, (Hear, hear.) The
hon. member laid down the doctrine that the Governor could do
no wrong. The hon. gentleman must be a recent convert to that
extraordinary belief. He had on one occasion recommended the
appointment of certain persons to the Legislative Council; the
Governor refused to follow the advice, and the hon. gentleman
resigned his office in consequence. He wondered if the hon,
gentleman thought the Governor did no wrong then ?
Mr. Garrett ; The Governor did nothing at all. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Cooper: The Governor refused to accept the hon. member’s
advice with regard to the appointments. The hon. member also
said he had in all cases, when transmitting petitions for release of
prisoners, advised the Governor thereon. The hon. gentleman had
certainly transmitted many petitions to the Governor, and he
believed in all cases adorned them with the wonderful initials,
W. F. But what was the meaning of those initials'? What
recommendation did they convey? and was the recommendation
latent in those magical letters always carried out ? If those initials
meant that a prisoner was to be released and the Governor kept
him in gaol, did the hon. gentleman then resign his office ? (Hear,
hear.) It was evident that either the statement that he had
always forwarded his advice to the Governor was altogether
groundless, or else he stood in the position of having his advice
refused, and yet retaining his office. But the hon. member had


recognized the supremacy of the Governor in these matters. In
the case of Lorando Jones the hon. member made one of a reputa-
tion that waited upon the Governor with a petition for that
criminal’s release, and he went outside of the Executive Council,
knowing that the Governor and not the Executive had the power
of pardoning. And yet the hon. member came there and argued
that the Governor had not the right to exercise the prerogative of
mercy. (Hear, hear.). He (Mr. Cooper) did not rise to speak in
this debate with any idea that any argument he could adduce was
likely to shed any new light upon the subject or influence the vote
of any hon. member. He simply wished to record his protest
against the gross outrage which was proposed to be perpetrated—
an outrage inconceivably greater than anything which Gardiner
ever did in this country, great criminal though he might be. He
believed that a motion of this kind was one of the most damaging
which could possibly be brought forward—not only damaging in a
moral sense, but because it- tended to displace a fundamental
principle of Constitutional Government. Taking the motion upon
its merits, he supposed hon. members considered it a motion of
censure on the Government. How could it be 1 The Government
had taken no action in the matter. This much decried act was not
done by the Executive. (Hear, hear.) The motion, therefore,
could not possibly be a censure on the Ministers ; it must be a
censure upon the power which had acted in this matter-—an attack
upon the Governor —and, consequently, an attack upon the Crown
which his Excellency represented. And the peculiarity of this
motion was that it could not possibly be conveyed to the Governor,
because no means were provided for addressing his Excellency.
Mr. Garrett : There is the usual provision at the end of the
resolution.
Mr. Cooper : Well, I have not noticed it. (Laughter.) I was
not aware of it, as the motion has been changed from its original
form. But upon the merits of the case, as to whether the Gover-
nor’s action was right—as to whether this man Gardiner should be
released or not
Mr. Stewart : He is not to be released.
Mr. Cooper : Whether this man should be taken out of gaol
and sent into exile, he maintained that the Governor was perfectly
justified in the course he took, and he was certain that any hon.
gentleman opposite, in the same position, would have done pre-
cisely what the Governor had done.
Mr. Teece : On the advice of the Colonial Secretary.
Mi’. Cooper ; The hon. member knew that no advice was given.
(Hear, hear.) But apart from the constitutional aspect of the


question, the Governor had acted rightly; and he said that nO'
man in the community, having any influential petition presented to
him, would have acted in any other way than the way in which the
Governor bad acted. That petition was signed by several hun-
dreds of people, by many influential citizens—by one gentleman
who had been Solicitor-General of the colony, by another who had
been three times a Minister, and by others of considerable influence.
And the Governor, seeing this, knowing that the prisoner had
behaved well in gaol, feeling that the punishment of ten years’ im-
prisonment was very severe, that the punishment of exile was very
severe, and that no possible harm could result to the community
from the man’s departure,—seeing this, the Governor had, he con-
tended, acted justly and properly ; and he maintined that no man
who had a spark of right feeling could find fault with the Governor
for what he had done in this matter. (Hear, hear.) One of the
worst features in this debate had been the ruffianly attacks madn
upon the Governor, who had been almost accused of a predilection
for criminals, and of a desire to let loose a swarm of ruffians upon
the country. He was sure hon. members could not imagine that
the Governor had had any such desire ; and having that certainty,
he said that the making of such vile accusations, by persons who
knew they were untrue, was a lamentable symptom of demoraliza-
tion. Another very lamentable featui’e in this debate had been
the mixing up of the history of all the ruffianism in this country
with the careers of these men who were to be released —putting
upon the head of Gardiner and these other men all the crimes that
had ever been committed. The hon. member who had introduced
this motion had spoken most eloquently of the shooting of people,
none of whom Gardiner had shot; and the hon member for
West Macquarie (Mr. Webb) had depicted in moving terms
an awful attack upon some little girl, an outrage of which
Gardiner and the other men were entirely innocent. How could
the action of any number of bushrangers affect the guilt or
innocence of Gardiner, or the question as to whether or not he was
to be kept in prison 1 These arguments were altogether unworthy
of consideration. He had always considered the hon. member for
Argyle, until be had heard him speak in this debate, to be a
gentleman of a kindly disposition. He had always thought that
gentleman had, in the discharge of his public duty, conducted the
prosecutions of these unfortunate men, while doing his best to
secure the ends of justice, with a desire not to press too hardly
against them. He should have thought that, having done his best
to bring these men to justice, he would have been content not to
persecute them further; but having brought these men to justice-


and secured their punishment, the hon. gentleman now came to per-
secute them still further, and, prevent them receiving mercy at the
hands of the Governor of this colony. He thought this was a
lamentable aspect of the question, and if he stood alone he
would enter his protest against conduct such as that. Hon.
members showed themselves the reverse of human when they
displayed such miserable vindictiveness against these unhappy
men. (Hear, hear.) This motion seemed to him to be constitu-
tionally and morally bad. It offended against a noble and vener-
able principle of English law, and it evidenced a desire to inhibit
the free course of mercy—a desire which was incompatible with
the humanizing tendency of modern civilization. One might
expect to find an upright judge compelled by a stern sense of duty
to obstruct an act of clemency; one might expect to find an
officer of the law, hardened by the usage of his office, reluctant
to admit the sway of pity. But there was no compulsion in this
case. No inflexible duty compelled the hon. mover of this resolu-
tion to this ungracious act ; and he (Mr. Cooper) thought that the
hon. gentleman was assuming an awful responsibility. He did
this thing from choice. No one had charged him with the task.
He did it from the dictates of his own fallible judgment, and he
did it in defiance of the recorded opinions of scores of his fellow
colonists. To err upon the side of mercy was a natural and safe
instinct of benevolent humanity; but to appear by choice upon
the other side—to cry “ punish ” when the power that punished
would pardon —to strive to drown the voice of pity in an angry
clamour —this was no manly deed. (Cheers.) He flung to the
winds the senseless babble about expediency and the ends of justice.
It was not his duty, nor was it the hon. member’s, to ask why this
prisoner should be delivered from his prison. The prayers for his
release had not been offered up to them ; nor did in them rest all
the knowledge of good and evil that they should presume to set a
guard upon the Governor’s conscience, and tell these hundreds of
petitioners that they were wrong. If the hon. member thought
them wrong, let him send in a counter petition, setting forth his
protest, and thus absolve his conscience; but, if he were wise, let
him leave the responsibility of dealing with this prisoner where
the law had placed it. (Cheers.) Frequent reference had been
made to the action of former Ministers in connection with the
exercise of the prerogative of mercy, and the most extraordinary
statements had been made. Hon. members had stated that the
release of twenty-four criminals at once was unprecedented, and
they had endeavoured to make it appear that these criminals were
all to be turned loose upon society at the same time. They knew


very well that these men were not to be released all at once ; that
they were to be taken out of gaol and exiled at intervals extending
over twelve months. And as to this being an unprecedented
thing, those who raised that cry knew that former Governments
had carried out this system to a much greater extent than was now
proposed, and had set free much greater numbers of prisoners
within the same period. (Cheers.) The Government of which
the horn member for West Sydney was a member released eighty
men within the same space of time.
Mr. J. Robertson ; How many men have this Government
released in the time 1 These men are all bushrangers.
Mr. Parkes : They are not all bushrangers.
Mr. Cooper : He denied that there was any peculiar
enormity in bushranging which should make it a crime above all to
be detested. He thought there were other crimes quite as detest-
able. Some of these men released by former Governments had
committed crimes quite as black as any committed by any of these
twenty-four criminals ; and there were more than twenty-four of
such cases on the list of ruffians whom the hon. gentleman oppo-
site had let loose. He saw on the list homicides, burglars, high-
waymen, cattle stealers, persons convicted of rape, perjurers, and
other criminals equally bad. With what face could gentlemen
who had done this thing by wholesale, attack a Government for, to
a small extent only, following their example. The hon. member
for Illawarra had peculiarly distinguished himself in this way.
The hon. gentleman had been privy to the release of Gardiner
himself on a former occasion. Gardiner, having been sentenced to
fourteen years’ imprisonment, was' released by Mr. Forster’s
Government at the expiration of five years ; and he should like to
know whether the hon. gentleman advised the release himself. If
so, the hon. gentleman did the same thing that this Government
was now condemned for doing. It was no matter whether the
release of Gardiner was after a first offence or a fiftieth, the
principle was the same. And after Gardiner was finally secured,
the hon. gentleman, who happened then to be in office, actually
made an exhibition of the man in gaol by allowing multitudes of
people to go and see him ; and he suppo ed the hon. gentleman,
struck with remorse at the torture which he thus inflicted on the
prisoner, thought afterwards to compensate for it by signing a
petition for the prisoner’s release. The hon. member said that he
was not in favour of Gardiner’s release, and that his minute on
the petition was a qualification. Let us sec what the qualification
was. He would read the minute of the hon. member ; and he
might remark that the minute in question certainly was a unique


specimen of grammar. Of course, errors of grammar were the
least serious of the hon. member’s errors, and, therefore, this par-
ticular error might not be considered important. But the hon.
member’s attack upon the member for Canterbury (Mr. Hill) in
reference to this minute invested even his bad grammar with interest.
The hon. member for Canterbury had been accused of signing a
paper which made him out to be Colonial Secretary—a manifest
absurdity. But here we had a document in which the hon.
member for Illawarra actually declared Christie to be Colonial
Secretary. (Cheers and laughter.) That statement was not
correct surely. The minute said :
Having been referred to in a petition for the mitigation of the
sentence of Francis Christie as holding the office of Colonial Secretary
—(Cheers and laughter)—when an outbreak occurred in Darlinghurst
Gaol, I have much pleasure in testifying to the fact of Christie’s good conduct
on that occasion, as well as to his general conduct during the entire period of
his incarceration, so far as it has come under my notice in either case. 1
am glad to record this opinion, so that it may operate, as it ought, in the
prisoner’s favour. And so far as these and other circumstances mentioned
in the petition entitle his case to the favourable consideration of the
Government, I am willing to add my testimony and recommendation.
(Cheers.) If the hon. gentleman’s minute stopped at the words
“ good conduct,” of course it might, by a stretch of imagination,
have been taken as a mere qualification ; but in the last lines of
the minute the hon. gentleman passed a eulogium upon the
prisoner, and distinctly recommended that the prayer of the peti-
tion should be carried out. The recommendation was far stronger
than any signing of the petition could be ; and it was absurd for
the hon. gentleman to endeavour to get out of the position he was
placed in, by a quibble. (Hear, hear.) The hon. member for
West Macquarie (Mr. Webb) came out in a manner that surprised
him ; for this hon. gentleman, who had expressed such abhorrence
of bushrangers, had himself been the means of letting loose upon
society one of the most notorious criminals.
Mr. Webb : It is not true.
Mr. Cooper : A prisoner who, after being sentenced to
fifteen years’ imprisonment, had been released at the expiration of
seven years.
Mr, Webb denied it.
Mr. Cooper said he was informed that the hon. gentleman
presented a petition for the mitigation of the bushranger Foley’s
sentence, and that that prisoner had been set free through his in-
strumentality.
Mr. Webb said he knew nothing about Foley.
Mr. Cooper : The conduct of the hon. member for West
Macquarie was sufficiently bad ; but what was to be thought of a


gentleman who, after doing his best to secure the pardon of a
prisoner, came down to the House and virulently assailed the
Executive for doing the very thing which he recommended should
be done 1 How should they gauge the honesty of such a man?—
how treat him, save with unmitigated contempt 1 ? If there was
anybody responsible for Gardiner’s release, it was the lion, member
for Illawarra. He had not the slightest doubt that Mr. Forster’s
minute would procure his release, if He were released ; and he was
satisfied that the lion, gentleman must have signed this minute
with the idea that he was doing something to procure this prisoner’s
release. He treated the hon. gentleman’s excuse as a quibble that
was utterly unworthy even of him. The hon. gentleman had said
that because he was not to be held responsible for his act, therefore
he had signed the paper ; and the inference was that no sense of
moral responsibility controlled him; that the only thing to make him
act uprightly was the fear of being called to account for his
actions. (Cheers.) A nice kind of honesty this. The hon. gentle-
man’s sense of i-esponsibility would have weighed against his sense
of justice; but being entirely free to dispense mercy, and at the
same time put his opponents in a difficulty, he signed the petition,
A great diversity of opinion appeared to exist with respect to the
practice of previous Governments in regard to the prerogative of
mercy. The hon. and learned member for Argyle, whilst reading
Constitutional law in one way, maintained that the practice had
wrongly taken a contrary direction. It was astonishing how
enlightened men became when they left the Government and
assumed a position of irresponsibility. The hon. and learned gen-
tleman was a member of the present Government for more than
twelve months, and it was singular that it did not strike him that
a wrong practice had been followed.
Mr. Butler : Whilst I was in the Ministry I advised upon
every case of pardon that came under my notice. I do not
mean to say there not have been cases that I was not
made aware of. I advised both the Colonial Secretary and the
Government.
Mr. Cooper :He would like to have a rough estimate of the
number of cases in which the hon. and learned gentleman gave
his advice. If the hon. and learned gentleman did not advise in
every case, he clearly committed a breach of principle. The hon.
member and some others thought that the responsibility of advising
the release of criminals should rest upon the Executive Council,
But what would be the result if such a practice were adopted ?
How would an unfortunate prisoner fare if his fate and the fate of
the Government were weighed against each other ? Especially if


we had in the Government gentlemen who signed minutes upon
petitions, and then came down to that House to state that they
only signed them under a sense of irresponsibility. If we had
such Ministers in office, he could easily understand that a prisoner
would obtain but very scant justice. If a Government were to
be put out of office on such a question, we might depend upon it
the prisoner would not be released ; and it was not desirable to
place such a power in the hands of a Government, because it must
tend to cripple the exercise of the prerogative of mercy. In Eng-
land it was the duty of the Home Secretary to exercise the
prerogative ; but he was not responsible to Parliament for it. The
Home Secretary acted as a delegate of the Crown, acted altogether
irrespective of the opinion of Parliament, and no act of his had
ever been questioned in the Parliament of England. Repeated
quotations had been made from the Governor’s Instructions and
Commision, and it had been argued that under them he must seek
the advice of the Executive Council; but what had that House to
do with the Governor’s Instructions hSo far as that House was
concerned, they were private; the Governor alone could put a con-
struction upon them ; and for that construction the Governor was
responsible to the Crown that sent him here. It was for the
Governor to interpret the instructions which he received from the
Imperial authorities, and so far as we were concerned we could
not prevent his disobeying any one of his instructions. (Hear,
hear.) He had a very strong, perhaps a very improper, prejudice
against quotations of other men’s opinions. These tedious
rehearsals of the thoughts of other men seemed to him to be use-
less, if not absolutely mischievous. 'At the best they were mere
opinions— mere deductions from some facts which were equally
accessible to all men; and he preferred examining those facts him-
self, and forming his own judgment of them, rather than to accept
the conclusions of other men, however eminent. (Hear, hear.)
He had not, therefore, been much impressed by the abundant
quotations of opinion introduced into this debate; he thought
they were simply evidence of self-distrust, of want of self-reliance
on the part of those who used them ; and he feared hon. members
were getting too prone to follow the example of some religious per-
sons and cling to the expositors of a creed than to the creed itself.
And as in religion, so in politics, one could find abundant authority
in support of any absurdity. The hon. member opposite (Mr.
Combes) could, no doubt, produce a string of eminent personages
in support of his peculiar theory ; the Colonial Secretary, on the
other hand, could quote a similarly imposing array of the author-
ities on the other side. But these conflicts of quotations resulted


in continual drawn battles ; they reminded him of hostile armies
constantly manoeuvring, but never engaging; and, though the
manoeuvres might be very pretty, they resulted in nothing. He
did not need to seek for expositions of a self-evident truth. He
went to the Constitution itself, and he found thei’ein the plain,
unmistakable, unimpeachable fact, that the prerogative of pardon
was vested wholly in the Crown. It was a thing which stood
alone, which was like no other prerogative, which was indeed an
integral part of that great principle of protection to the individual
subject, on which was based Magna Charta itself. Let hon. mem-
bers consider the case of some person accused of a heinous crime.
That person could not be convicted except upon the verdict of
twelve of his peers ; and even then, he could not be hurried off to
the gallows, though the jury found him guilty, and though the
Judge sentenced him. The death warrant must first issue from
the Executive, and even then, when the fatal noose was round the
criminal’s neck, the Royal pardon could deliver him from death.
Thus our laws provided for a prisoner several chances of escape;
and a felon deprived of one of those chances, and dying on the
scaffold in consequence of such deprivation, was a murdered man.
The jury who convicted him could not any further compass his
death; the Judge who sentenced him could not cause the sentence
to be carried out; the Executive who issued the death warrant
could not stay the exercise of the Royal clemency. The combined
action of all these powers was necessary to secure a felon’s death;
but any one of these powers acting singly could rescue the felon
from his doom. The jury could acquit; the Judge could amelio-
rate the sentence ; the Executive could refuse to authorise the execu-
tion ; the king could pai'don. Therefore it was easy to see that
the Constitution, while preventing a tyrannous exercise of power,
put no restriction upon the quality of mercy. The object was to
crush despotism, cruelty, and oppression ; not to hinder men from
being humane. Thus the argument of the hon. member for Yass,
as to the Executive being called upon to advise the execution of a
felon, was an argument that told against the hon. member’s view.
It was in mercy ordained that the concurrence of the Executive
should be obtained to the death of a felon ;it was also in mercy
ordained that the Executive, having power to prevent the slaying
of a man, should have no power to prevent his being pardoned by
the king. Let hon. members cast aside all commentaries upon
the law, and go to the law itself. Let them consult the three great
Constitutional bulwarks—Magna Charta, the Gonjirmatio Cartarum
and the Petition of Right; and they would find these principles
in them all. Those great defences of our liberties contained abun-


dant provision for protecting the individual subject; they contained
not one single line curtailing in the smallest degree the royal pre-
rogative of mercy. The words of Magna Charta were :
No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or disseised, or outlawed, or
banished, or any ways destroyed, nor will we pass npon him, nor will we
send him, unless by the lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the
land.
Those were the words of the Great Charter ; and they were grand
words, securing a noble independence to every Briton. They
rendered the king powerless to inflict summary punishment upon
the meanest criminal j but there was not in these words, or in any
single line of this or any other of the great Constitutional laws of
England, anything to restrain the king from pardoning the meanest
criminal. In the renewed Charter of Henry 111. theie was the
same clause, and no limit to the king’s mercy ; and that Charter
had been confirmed by succeeding generations more than thirty times.
In one special instance, however, there had been a restriction
placed upon the exercise of the Royal prerogative of mercy. In the
Bth article of the Act of Settlement, passed in the year 1700, it was
enacted —
That no pardon under the Great Seal of England be pleadable to an im-
peachment by the Commons in Parliament.
This was the only limitation of the Royal prerogative to be found
in English written law; and hon. members would no doubt see
that that this limitation implied the existence of a prerogative of
pardon which was to be exercised effectually in all cases save the
one therein specially excepted. But he would ask hon. members
to read the Petition of Right, every phrase of which was a curb
upon the arbitrary cruelty of kings, and a protection to individual sub-
jects ; let them read it, and they would see that while it rendered the
king impotent to crush, it left him free to succour. (Cheeis.) He
desfred further to explain his view of the manner in which the
prerogative of pardon had grown up, and the principles upon which
it was based. It was not based upon any written law, nor, as he had
shown, was it restricted by any written law; but though its origin was
very remote, and though it was the most complete and unassailable
of all the prerogatives of the Crown, yet in the past ages it was sub-
ject to restrictions which in modern times had been The
tendency of modern legislation had been to remove restrictions
upon the prerogative—a tendency quite in keeping with the growth
of philanthropy and civilization. In the time of Richard 11, the
king could pardon justifiable homicides only. In the time of Heniy
YIII, earls palatine pardoned criminals for offences committed
within their palatinates, and only in Henry’s reign was that pre-


rogative taken from those great nobles and annexed to the Crown.
But even then the prerogative was restricted by the laws relating
to appeal trials. A private subject against whom a crime was
committed could appeal to justice against the criminal, and prose-
cute him to the death, and the king had no power to interfere. If
that criminal were convicted the king could not pardon him, nor
if he were acquitted could the Crown prosecute him a second time
for the same offence. But the appellant could pardon him ; and if
the criminal had been prosecuted by the Crown and acquitted, he
could be tried again a second time, on appeal, for the same offence.
This law existed up to the time of George 111, and, therefore, the
Statute of George 111., which abolished the law, annexed the pre-
rogative of pardon wholly and completely to the Crown. The
same principle which gave to a private subject in appeal trials the
right to pardon, gave the king the right to pardon. The king was,
in a case of offence against the public peace, the injured party ; all
crimes Avere crimes committed against him ; he \vas in all cases the
prosecutor—recognised as such daily in our courts of law ; and,
therefore, his prerogative of pardon rested upon a simple, plain,
common-sense principle. (Hear, hear.) But it had been said that
Parliament could control that exercise of the prerogative of mercy ;
and the lion, member for Bathurst had said that the function of
Parliament was to “ watch ” and to “ control ” the Crown. He
should like to know where the ton. member picked up that
wonderful piece of Constitutional Hav. It certainly had the merit
of novelty, and indeed he believed the hon. member could claim
for himself the credit of having not merely discovered but invented
it. The Parliament certainly possessed a quasi control over the
acts of the king’s ministers—that was to say, Parliament held the
purse, and made their granting of supplies to the Crown condi-
tional upon the Crown granting certain things to them; but
theoretically, according to the letter and spirit of the Constitu-
tion, the king was the governing and controlling power, and the
Parliament was a merely representative body, constituted for the
purpose of making known the people’s grievances to the king.
(Hear, hear,) But the king redressed all grieA r ances himself ;
the king enacted all the laws ; and in former times all statutes
took the form of petitions to him. Let hon. members look at the
preamble to any Act of this Legislature, and they would see that
it was enacted “ by the Queen,” with the “ advice and consent ”of
Parliament. The Parliament’s power over the Crown was entirely
negative. It could refuse to grant money to the king ; but it owed
its very existence to the king ; who could at any time dissolve it
by a few scratches of the pen. (Cheers.) The hon. member (Mr.


Combes) bad talked a good deal of the power of the Crown, and the
theory that the “king can do no wrong,” and had sneered at the
Divine right. The hon. member had been followed by many mem-
bers who affected wisdom on this point, and spoke of the Divine
right as being the basis of the kingly prerogative. The doctrine
of the Divine right was a superstition of the past, and any one who
imagined that it was the basis of any kingly prerogative whatever
knew nothing of the institutions under jwhich we lived, I hat
doctrine was as utterly dead to Englishmen as were the false gods
of the Greek mythology; and he ventured to assert that there was
not in the British dominions one man who would not scorn it.
Those who chattered of the Divine right, and sneered at the sacred-
ness of kings, had failed to grasp the full grandeur of that sublime
conception which was the apex the ciowning g oi y ®
British freedom. To such persons the great maxims of the
Constitution were as feeble fictions. Such phrases as ‘ Die
Kin* can do no wrong,” “ The King is the fountain of honour
and justice,” “The King never dies”—these legal aphorisms
sounded like childish fables to those who regarded them solely
as applied to some frail mortal who wore a crown, ihey were
not so applied. We knew that kings were weak and wicked
men—that they sometimes committed great crimes—that they,
like other men, were the prey of disease and death. But the
great Ideal of which each succeeding king was the personification
—that sublime concentration of all the power, and honour, and
wisdom of the State—that principle of Sovereignty which wis
enthroned in the people’s hearts—was truly invested with the
attributes he had mentioned. The Man who sat upon the throne
might be struck dead ; but the Idea that he personmed lived for
ever. The Man might be weak, imbecile, corrupt; the Idea was
übiquitous, perfect, and immortal. It was the ideal king of wine i
iurists spoke when they said that the king was present in every
court of law, that the king could do no wrong, that the king never
died. Sovereignty was present in every court of law ; Sovereignty,
which was the source of right, could never do a wrong; and Sove-
reignty was immortal—for as one man’s dying hand let fall the
sceptre, it passed into a warm and vigorous grasp ; and though
the Man was dead the King still lived. This was the sublime
conception of the British Constitution, and he said that that noble,
that Divine Ideal, was rightly invested with the heavenly attri-
bute of mercy—that mercy which was “ mightiest in the mighty
which became “ the throned monarch better than his crown;
and surely « earthly power did then show likest God s when
mercy seasoned justice.” (Cheers.) With regard to the Gover-


nor’s position here, it was no doubt contended that even if the
king possessed the sole right to pardon, his viceroy did not. There
was some apparent, but no real, truth in the argument. The
king’s viceroy was as the king—equal in power, equal in frailty,
■equal in dignity—so far as we were concerned. He was to us the
personification, not of the king, but of that same Ideal which the
king himself personified to the English people. He was to us the
living embodiment of the principle of Sovereignty, and the king
himself was neither more nor less. True, he might be removed,
but not by us; and if he were removed, his office lived, just as
kingship would exist though the king were dead; and the casting
down of the man from his high office no more abolished vice-royalty
than the removal of a bad king abolished the royalty which that
bad king polluted. We had no right to regard the Governor as a
mere deputy. He was to us the Crown; and possessed, in his
dealings with us, the same power which belonged to the Crown in
its dealings with the English people. Therefore, he said, that the
prerogative of mercy belonged wholly to the Governor, and that
this Assembly had no right to question it, or hinder its free
exercise. (Cheers.) The hon. member for Camden (Captain
Onslow) had quoted the case of Hovell and Rangi, and had
alluded to the action taken as confirmatory of his idea that the
Executive had power to limit the authority of the Governor ; but
that case had proved clearly directly the opposite of what the hon.
member desired to prove. There could be no clearer case than
that. The Governor had released these prisoners, and had been
censured for so doing by the Imperial authorities. Now, if it were
the Imperial authorities to whom the Governor was responsible,
they had a perfect right to censure His Excellency \ but if His
Excellency, or his Ministers acting with him, were responsible to
this House, the Imperial authorities had no right to do so. The
case was thus clearly against the hon. gentleman’s own view.
(Hear, hear.) He regarded this motion as bad in every sense.
He was opposed to it upon constitutional grounds, but he was
still more opposed to it upon its own demerits, for he regarded it
as inculcating a cruel, revengeful, and detestable principle, and as
a dark stain upon the records of this House. The hon. member
(Mr. Combes), as he thought, hardly realised the full extent of the
terrible responsibility which he had incurred. He, violating the
kindly canons of human brotherhood, which taught charity, for-
bearance, and compassion, was eager, not to aid, but to crush a
fellow-creature. He constituted himself the avenger of blood, and
came hot and impetuous to his ghastly work. He strove to pluck
down upon a fellow sinner’s head the stroke which justice hesitated


to give. He stood by the prison door to thrust back the poor,
broken, desperate captive whom mercy would set free. He did
this, trampling upon a score of human hearts, heedless of the hun-
dreds of voices calling for this prisoner’s release. He, setting up
his will against the opinions of a thousand men as good as he,
interposed, not to rescue but to slay. He (Mr. Cooper) had no
words in which to speak his horror of this thing. Were Gardiner
tenfold the villain that he was, he could not bar his path to mercy.
On those who freed him, if the act were wrong, let the burden
rest. He (Mr. Cooper) might raise his voice here as the advocate
of mercy, but he could never, as he hoped himself for mercy, call
down vengeance on a fellow man. Think of the iniquity of this
thing. Let it be supposed that this man had been cast for death,
and that the accents of pity and supplication rose up to the power
which held the criminal’s fate; let them imagine that power,
softened, by the pitiful appeal—hesitating to strike, resolving not
to strike—and so sending into that criminal’s heart hope and
repentant thoughts. Let them imagine, then, when this sweet
light shone in upon the broken soul—let them imagine this shriek-
ing Nemesis starting up and clamouring for blood. Why, the
fate of the doomed captive would be less terrible than the fate of
the man who doomed him, if that man were not heartless utterly.
While the victim lived, his dark figure blotted out all results
beyond. Nothing could be seen but the bad man ; nothing thought
of but his evil deeds. But when that figure fell, what a rush of
vain regrets, what terrible remorse would overwhelm his destroyer
—if he were human. He, crying for vengeance when a thousand
voices supplicate pardon, would carry in his heart a curse. And
what was the mover of this resolution seeking to do 1 He was
striving to consign Gardiner to a living tomb, to inflict on him a
lingering death-in-life, to crush hope out of his soul, and people his,
prison with the phantoms of despair. Should we join in this vile
deed 1 Should we pluck down these curses on our heads 1 Should
we pend this wretched man back into his lonely cell, there to spend
long years, dashing his angry heart against the desolations of a
wasted life—a hopeless, helpless prisoner, envious of the dead?
No ! There were Aithin these walls, he hoped—there were within
the limits of this land, he thought—not many men so infamously
bold. (Cheers.)


[On Thursday, June 18th, Mr. Combes moved the adjournment of
the House, to call attention again to the cases of the prisoners
which formed the subject of the previous motion. He was
followed on the same side by Mr. Buchanan, Captain Onslow,
Mr. Lucas, Mr. Forster, Mr. Oakes, Mr. Garrett, Mr. Burns,
and other Members, while only Mr. Nelson spoke from the
Ministerial point of view. The discussion having continued until
past midnight, Mr. Parkes rose about half-past 12, and delivered
the following Speech.]


HON. HENEY FAMES’ SPEECH,
Mr. Parkes said; A course has been taken during this dis-
cussion which is always deprecated when indulged in by others —
that is talking about appealing to the country. Now, I am as
well prepared to appeal to my constituents or the electorates of the
entire colony as any man in the House. (Cheers from the
Government benches.) I do not fear the result of an appeal.
(Cheers.) Ido not believe this most unwise attempt to get up an
excitement in the country has the sanction of the people of the
country (cheers) —and I venture to say that this unwholesome,
this overfed excitement which has been fostered by all kinds of
sinister means will very soon have a recoil. (Cheers.) I venture
to predict that the common sense of the English people will see
that the prisoner Gardiner is not concerned in this matter, that
no question of the public safety is hei’e, but that in reality, at any
hazard to society, gentlemen opposite are simply wishing to
accomplish their own ends and throw dust in the eyes of the people.
I will go before any body of my countrymen and make this
apparent to the unanimous satisfaction of impartial men so
sound in fact, and entirely defensible is the case. The hon. and
gallant member for Camden (Capt. Onslow) has talked with a
disposition and a tone, a malignant feeling, and an invention of
motive, which remind me more of the criminal chaiacter than
anything I have seen in my life. (Cheers from the Government
benches.) Why the hon. member has a skill in inventing motives
for other men which can only spring from a criminal disposition.
I say before the world, that nothing affords greater _ evidence of a
criminal nature than the invention of criminal motives foi othei
men’s actions. (Hear, hear.) And when that is done without
the support of fact or argument, or plausible reason, the conclusion
is irresistible that nothing but a low and mean nature could strike—
Mr. J. S. Smith : I move that the words be taken down. I
want to know whether “ low and mean nature ” are parliamentary 1
The words taken down and read by the Clerk were “ a low
and mean nature.”
Mr. J. S. Smith : As applied to the hon. member for Camden.


Mr. Parkes ; I was not speaking of the hon. member for
Camden at that moment. My words then were applied to a
general case.
Mr. J. S. Smith moved, —“ That the words used in reference
to the hon. member for Camden are unparliamentary, and ought
to be withdrawn, and an apology offered to the House.”
Mr. Parkes : I suppose I have now the privilege of stating
what I did say. I made some allusions to the hon. member for
Camden, which I had concluded; and I had then commenced to
speak on a different thread of my subject altogether, using the
words mentioned, but not in allusion to the hon. member for
Camden. What I said was this—that when I found certain things
in any one it afforded me evidence of a low and mean nature. I
had then left the hon. member for Camden, and had applied the
words to any one who chose to act in a particular manner.
Mr. Speaker : My recollection of the words used by the
hon. Colonial Secretary is, that they were, “ I think this dis-
position to attribute improper motives is evidence of a mean
and low nature.”
Captain Onslow said it was quite immaterial to him what
the Colonial Secretary said of him. Nothing that came from that
hon. gentleman could affect him in any way.
Mr. J. S. Smith believed that the words were applied to the
hon. member for Camden, and he did not care one iota for the
disclaimer of the hon. member at the head of the Government,
because if that hon. member made a statement, and any other
individual made a statement to the contrary, he would believe the
other individual’s statement.
Mr. Garrett thought these words used to any individual
member, or to any number of members collectively, were unpar-
liamentary.
Mr. Cooper : The Speaker says they are not unpar-
liamentary.
Mr. Garrett : The Speaker had said nothing of the kind.
The words, he thought, ought to be withdrawn, and the motion too.
Mr. Speaker said if the matter was intended to be pro-
ceeded with, the Colonial Secretary had better withdraw—it was
the usual course.
[Mr. Parkes accordingly left the Chamber.]
Mr. Forster understood the words to be applied to the hon.
member for Camden, but if the hon. member maintained that he
did not apply them to him, he (Mr. Forster) did not believe the
hon. member’s disclaimer. (Oh. oh, and Hear, hear.) He could
not believe it against the evidence of his own senses.


The question, on Mr. Smith’s motion, was then put, and
negatived on the following division :
Ayes, 6.
Mr. J. Robertson Mr. Forster Mr. Garrett ) 'p e n ers _
Combes Lucas J. S. Smith )
Noes, 22.
Mr. Lloyd Mr. Greville Mr. De Salis
Allen Taylor Fitzpatrick
Farnell Nelson Cunneen
Sutherland Tunks Macintosh
Piddington Hurley (C.C.) Cummings
Scholey Bennett Stewart | TeUerSt
Wearne W. C. Browne Cooper j
Driver
On re-entering the chamber Mr. Parkes was greeted with
loud cheers from the Government benches.
Mr. Parkes resumed : The hon. member, my colleague in
the representation of East Sydney, whom I am sorry not to see
in his place, has been pleased to make a speech. In my younger
days I had some opportunities of forming a crude judgment of
what constitues a demagogue, but I never saw so complete a type
of one as is presented in the person of the hon. member for East
Sydney (Mr. Oakes). The hon. gentleman stands up here and
talks in barren generalities, the stock phraseology of stump
orators, about things which he is not capable of comprehending.
(Ministerial cheers.) The hon. gentleman always tells us how
anxious he is to support the present Administration. Now the
hon. gentleman had not the slightest chance of coming into this
House at all, except by the support of the friends of the present
Ministry. (Cheers from the Ministerial benches.) The hon.
o-entleman represented his native town until there could not be found
a decent minority to vote for him. The hon. gentleman was a
member of this House twenty years ago. when I first came into
it. I remember well expressing to a man who now occupies one
of the most distinguished positions in this country an opinion
favourable to Mr. Oakes. That gentleman turned round to
me and said —“ That is the greatest sneak in this Council f and
from that day to this the hon. gentleman’s conduct has justified
the estimate of his political character then formed. He is a
gentleman who is for 'ever pretending to be the friend of some
body of men, while he is secretly endeavouring to discredit them,
and to work them some injury. (Cheers.) The hon. member
and I shall certainly meet before the electors of this country, and
we shall then see who has the approval of that body of electors


on this, and the general course I have taken in public life. And
what was the kind of rubbish the hon. gentleman delivei-ed him-
self of to-night. He told us he had no doubt his Excellency had
represented this matter fairly to the Secretary of State. lam
quite sure his Excellency’s reputation cannot suffer after that—
(ironical cheers.) “ But,” says he, “ this cannot be known for
several months.” And in sapient tones the hon. member asks—
“ls this the Responsible Government we are living under 1 ?” It
seems the hon. member imagines that his Excellency should go
and show him his despatches before he presumes to send them on
to the Secretary of State. This shows the crude ideas the hon.
gentleman has upon most branches of constitutional government,
and that is a fair sample of the trash presented to the House
time after time by the hon. gentleman. The hon. member boasts
of being the father of the House; but the records of the House
are perfectly barren of any services rendered by him to the
country. Something has been said of the justification for
raking up all the crimes of these robbers and murderers of past
years, and cataloguing them in the public press. I can scarcely
conceive of a mind so diseased as to think a public service is ren-
dered by such a course as this. If there is anything calculated to
inflame the worst feelings of the population, it is this display of
this catalogue of crimes. Going to the mother country—the grand
old land of which we are all so proud—instinct with benevolence,
instinct with Christianity, the pioneer of civilization all over the
world—going to England herself, we may, if we rake from out the
holes and gutters all that is criminal, string together a catalogue of
crimes red enough to satisfy the most sanguinary of gentlemen
opposite. But such a thing would be looked upon as iniquitous;
and to pander to the popular appetite in the way in which it
has lately been done, is a disgrace to the conductor of one of the
daily journals of this country. (Cheers.) If men are just—if
they have the common instincts of justice—they will, in the case
of a person who is admitted to be a criminal of enormity, be scru-
pulous not to heap upon his blackened head one single atom of
responsibility more than his just share. The blacker the criminal,
the greater his crimes, the more scrupulous will every man with a
rightly constituted mind be not to charge against him the slightest
semblance of a sin beyond those which have weighed him down.
And if this is a correct standard by which to judge our fellow
men, and in the sight of God it is, what is to be thought of persons
who visit upon the prisoner Gardiner’s head every crime that has
been committed by others 1 I say it is unchristian, unjustifiable
by all laws human and divine—l say it is an eternal disgrace to


those who give themselves so much trouble to do it. We have
had some talk to-night, as on previous occasions, about the instruc-
tions of the Secretary of State to the Governor to seek the advice
of his Ministers in exercising the prerogative of pardon. Why,
the instructions of the Secretary of State are of that nature that,
as I have already explained, I would not accept upon any terms
the position which they assign to the Minister —(cheers) —of such
a nature that his Excellency the Governor, the representative of
the Crown in this colony, says that it would be impracticable to
carry them out. (Cheers.) We have been told, as if it was a
plain and unmistakable instruction to the Governor, that his Ex-
cellency is to ask the advice of his Ministers on all cases ; whereas
the instruction is as plain as language can make it that he is simply
not to grant pardons without their advice ; leaving him at liberty
to deal with all other cases as he may think fit; and that is a
position for a Minister which, whatever others may do, I will not
accept. And that is the position which I have boldly refused to
accept. (Cheers.) Whatever hon. gentlemen may say, for the
first time in this country, and by my effort, and my effort alone,
the Minister here has now the same power in these matters as the
Home Secretary in England. Now, as to the practice, I say again
that it is most incontestably proved that the practice in this country
up till the other day has been for Ministers not to interfere with
the exercise of the prerogative of pardon. I have here the
evidence of a gentleman who is the best witness on this subject,
given before a select committee of this House. (Hear, hear.)
Here is the evidence of Sir Charles Cowper, given at a time when
the hon. member opposite (Mr. Robertson) was his colleague—
(hear, hear) —when he was in the midst of his longest and strongest
Administration. Sir Charles Cowper, in his evidence before the
select committee, stated that he had never once interfered in these
prison cases; or rather he gave an exception which proved the
rule by saying he did once interfere in attempting to obtain the
pardon of an old servant of his; but that the Governor refused
his advice. (Hear, hear.) In order that there may be no mistake,
I will read the evidence. Sir Charles Cowper is asked the follow-
ing questions and gives the following answers :
1. By the chairman : You are the Colonial Secretary? I am.
2. And Vice-president of the Executive Council? Yes.
3. Can you describe to the committee the usual mode in which petitions
for pardon, or commutation for sentences, are dealt with by the Executive
Government ? In all, except capital cases, they are dealt with by the
Governor-General, passing through the hands of the Colonial Secretary. In
capital cases the Executive Council is consulted.


4. Is that the general course, or is there any deviation from it ? It is
the course invariably adopted; Ido not remember an instance.
5. The Executive Council does not deliberate upon commutations of
sentence except in capital cases ? Ido not remember an instance.
6. The Governor-General acts of his own motion ? He does Except
in one or two instances, I do not remember to have made a remark upon a
petition for commutation. I preferred leaving matters of that kind to the
Governor-General for various reasons, but perhaps in one or two cases, cer-
tainly in not more than half a dozen since I have been in office, I have made
a remark on a case, but generally I have passed on the petition, as in this
case, to the Governor-General, leaving his Excellency to the exercise of his
discretion as regards the commutation as a prerogative of the Crown.
7. You occasionally have had conversations with the Governor-General
upon these petitions ? Ido not remember a single instance of ever having
spoken to his Excellency upon any case, except one, when I requested his
Excellency, as a personal favour, to pardon a man who had formerly been
in my service, and he declined to do it, though it was afterwards granted.
We have it therefore on the evidence of a gentleman who has been
the longest time Colonial Secretary, and who has a better adminis-
trative knowledge of the affairs of this country than any other man
—we have it conclusively and beyond the possibility of a doubt,
that the practice has been that the Colonial Secretary never in any
ray interferes by giving his advice; and that although in one case
in which he was personally interested Mr. Cowper interfered, the
Governor refused to act upon his advice. Now what do we find
since 1 The hon. member for Kiama asked me some fortnight or
so ago if I would give returns of the remissions of sentence for the
last five years. Since then, every clerk in the Colonial Secretary’s
office that could be spared from the current business has been
employed in wading through those voluminous cases; and after a
fortnight’s hard work, I shall be able to lay the returns on the
table of the House to-morrow. These returns will show that
during the time the hon. member for West Sydney (Mr. J.
Robertson) was Colonial Secretary—from the Ist January, 1869,
until he retired from office in May, 1872, a period of three years
and a few months—lßo prisoners were x-eleased by the exercise
of the prerogative of pardon. (Cheers.)
An hon. member ; Bushrangers 1
Mr. Parkes : Yes, bushrangers, robbers, and murderers.
An hon. member : Were they exiled 1
Mr. Parkes ; No, most of them were let loose in the colony.
I hold in my hand a list of some of the prisoners, and it includes
bushrangers, murderers, and other prisoners. Here are some of
the offences ;—Robbery with arms, twelve years on the roads,
released after five years; mail robbery—l suppose that is bush-
ranging—fifteen years, released after seven years ; death, commuted


to imprisonment for life, for an unnatural crime, released after
eleven years; death, sentence commuted to imprisonment, for
murder, released at the end of three years (Hear, hear); robbery
with arms, ten years on the roads, released after five years (Hear,
hear); highway robbery, ten years, released after seven years
(Hear, hear); robbery with arms, fifteen years, released at the end
of seven years. (Hear, hear.) I find amongst these cases that
there is a note of the hon. member’s which he addressed to Lord
Bel more, and which Lord Belmore made an official document.
(Hear, hear.) This document asked Lord Belmore to release a
prisoner because the cabinet wished him to be at home on Christ-
mas Day. (Laughter and cheers from the Government benches.)
The other night, the hon. member—in a way which no man of a
fair mind would have descended to—distorted my remarks in a
case where I was endeavouring to draw a distinction between a
small community like ours and a great nation like England with
thirty millions of people, and where Ministers are generally men
of great wealth and rank not easily approached by the bulk of the
community. I was using the best power of language I possessed,
to show the vast difference between a small community like this
where we all know one another, and a great nation like England,
consisting of thirty millions of people, and where the Ministers of
the Crown could not be easily approached ; but the hon. member
distorted my language in a way that, whatever he may think, will
only injure, if it be possible to injure, his own reputation. (Hear,
hear.) The hon. member tortured my language to make it appear
that I had been rubbing shoulders with “ thieves and scoundrels,”
to use his own elegant words. But a Prime Minister who has
such an interest in a prisoner as to wish him to be at home on
Christmas Day, must have been rubbing shoulders much more closely
with prisoners than I have ever done. (Cheers.) But the best part
of the note is to come. The hon. gentleman asked to be informed
of Lord Belmore’s views on the subject before he wrote his own
views on the official papers. (Cheers and laughter.) There is a
responsible Minister, —(Cheers) —trying to pump the Governor for
his views on the case before he ventured to express his own opinion
of it. (Hear, hear.) This was a nice specimen of ministerial
responsibility ! (Cheers.) The hon. member for Illawarra, (Mr.
Forster) is remarkable for complaining piteously of this House,
and not only of this House, but of Parliamentary Government
itself, because he says it does not allow questions to be decided
upon their merits. Times out of number we have heard this
repeated wail about the impossibility of getting the sense of the
House through party feeling; and the hon. member often qualifies


what he has said of the present Administration by saying it had
always been so, and always would be so, and that as long as party
exists it will be impossible to get a candid expression of the con-
victions of hon. members on any question. But to-night he told
us that all blunders and crimes of Ministers ought to be seized
upon in the interest of party to turn a Government out of office.
(Hear, hear.) That may be all very right. Everything is fair in
love and war, I believe ; but it is hardly consistent with the
piteous wail of the hon. member about subordinating to party zeal
a fair discussion of questions and a fair eliciting of truth as the
result of that discussion. The hon, gentleman told us that this
question above all others ought to be made a party question, and
he then went into a disquisition upon the first duty of the Govern-
ment to maintain law and order, notwithstanding that two and a
half years ago he himself was willing to have released this
prisoner Gardiner. (Cheers.) The hon. gentleman will find when
this appeal is made to the people, of which he was the first to
speak to-night, and which I only spoke of when provoked into it
by the challenges of others—the hon. member will find that, how-
ever he may view his conduct in relation to that petition, nine-
tenths of the people of the country will consider him as the chief
signer of it. (Cheers from the Government benches.) Ido not
believe at this moment but that the hon. member’s intention was
that this prisoner Gardiner should be released unconditionally then
and there. (Cheers.) The petition prayed distinctly and em-
phatically for that release. (Hear, hear.) It stated distinctly and
emphatically that the punishment Gardiner had suffered was
sufficient. (Hear, hear.) . The hon. gentleman deliberately,
having read the petition, attached his name to it, expressing in his
minute his desire to add all he knew in the shape of a recom-
mendation, in order that it might operate in Gardiner’s favour,
(Cheers.) There is only one meaning to this action of his—(hear,
hear) —and that is that two years and a half ago he was the
principal person who pronounced that Gardiner should be there
and then unconditionally released. (Hear, hear.) It is a most
dishonest act to come down here and try before Parliament and
the world to explain this deliberate recommendation away. What
then is the hon. member’s word worth—what does all his eloquence
mean—what does all his argument amount to—what is the value
of any action in a man who, when it suited him, would have been
willing to unlock the gaol door and let this man out upon society,
and who now comes to this House and talks about law and order
being endangered by the release of this man at the end of ten
years—not released into society but into banishment 1 He speaks


of it as a thing which the House, above all others, ought to place
its seal of condemnation upon. (Hear, hear.) The hon. member
has been pleased to speak of me on many occasions in terms of
bitter reproach, but if I had done an act deliberately and design-
edly like that, with no pressure upon me, no temptation to lead
me astray, I should detest myself ever afterwards. The hon.
member may be called crotchety and honest, but I say that the
hon. member is one of the most dishonest men in the political life
of the country—(Government cheers) —a man whose weapons,
like the aboriginal’s boomerang, while they are apparently
directed to one object, are intended to strike at another. Time
after time we see this gentleman exerting all his ingenuity,
bracing himself up to the utmost of his political strength, to vin-
dicate a cause which in his heart he intends to damage. That was
the case when the Public Schools Bill was before Parliament. It
was then supposed that there was a majority in favour of State
aid to religion, and the hon. member, knowing that, made a speech
of the most zealous secular character in favour of the secular
features of the bill, and he concluded by saying that while he
should vote for the second reading, all those who were in favour of
State aid must, necessarily, vote against it. (Hear, hear). That
is the double-faced character and the drift of the hon. gentle-
man’s oratory at all times ; and the repudiation of his own
recorded action, in connection with this prisoner’s petition, is now
the crowning shame of his tortuous path all through the seven-
teen or eighteen years of his political life. The hon. member
spoke of my want of faith to my colleagues and my friends; but
I, of all men in the country, have a large' number of my first
political friends standing around me to-day. (Hear, hear). But
the hon. member has denounced every man who has had any
political position in this country —Mr. Donaldson, Sir Watson
Parker, Sir Charles Cowper, Sir James Martin, and Mr. Robertson,
who, at one time, the hon. member said, was so loathsome that he
could not be approached, except with a pair of tongs. (Govern-
ment cheers). The hon. gentleman denounced Sir James Martin,
after he had sat in the same Cabinet with him, as a bully and a
perjurer—(Hear, hear)— referring to events which took place long
before he joined that gentleman in the Cabinet. I can under-
stand men, who have been friends, quarreling over some event of
the day, but I cannot understand men, who have been in intimate
association as members of the same Cabinet, travelling back for a
cause of quarrel to events that took place before that association.
The hon. member has denounced the friend of his school days,
Mr. Eagar, when it suited him j and, from the time the hon.


member entered political life until to-day, lie has sat villifying,
obstructing, and denouncing, without any effect whatever upon
the country, every ministry in succession. (Hear, hear). What,
then, does it matter to me, that the hon. member, who has violated
his word, given to a helpless prisoner (at the solicitation of
the weeping sisters of this prisoner), should expend his worth-
less breath in villifying me 1 (Cheers.) What is it to me, that
this man, who, when it suited his own purpose, to advance his
own fortunes, would repudiate his own name, given on behalf of
a wretched prisoner, is always ready to denounce me 1 The hon.
member denounces everybody. The hon. member denounced
Sir George Gipps in far worse language than he has applied to
me; the hon. member denounced Sir John-Young in the vilest
terms. The hon. member has denounced the present Governor,
and would denounce his own parents if it suited his purpose.
(Government cheers.) It is true that I offered the hon. member
office, of which he is never weary of telling the public. And I
have every reason to believe that the hon. member would have
offered me office if his master would have allowed him to do so.
This has been explained to me by persons whose authority I can-
not question. Looking at the state of parties at the time when
I was entrusted with forming an administration, I felt it was my
duty to overlook any personal feeling, to overcome my sense of
the element of weakness which I felt the hon. member would be
to me, and I did offer a place in the present administration to the
hon. member, and I rejoiced when the hon. member refused to
accept it. I felt that I was then released from one of the most dan-
gerous quicksands before me. I could not forget that a very dis-
tinguished member of this House, Sir James Martin, had said
that the hon. member was disagreeable as an opponent, dangerous
as a supporter, but fatal as a colleague. (Government cheers.)
The hon. member says that he does not concur with the hon.
member for Bathurst that the Governor is to be blamed. I suppose
the hon. gentleman wishes to ingratiate himself with his Excellency
in view of his shortly being one of his Excellency’s advisers.
The hon. member has changed from the time—not very long
ago —when he poured out the vials of his abuse upon his
Excellency, since he has now become his apologist. I regret
as much as any one the introduction of his Excellency’s name into
these debates, but I am not answerable for that improper intro-
duction ; I will, however, venture to say that his Excellency will
not set any particular value upon the services, as his Excellency’s
apologist, either of the hon. member for Illawarra or of the hon.
member for the Hunter. The hon. member for the Hunter (Mr.


Barns) has said that he would like to know what his Excellency
thinks of all this. Now I would advise the hon. member to go
down to Government House and ask his Excellency. His
Excellency is a well-informed, courteous gentleman, and will no
doubt at once open out his confidence to so distinguished a
member of the House as the hon. member for the Huntei’ an
hon. member who is ever rising in the House to repeat what
others have said before him, and always in much less effective
language than othei's have employed —an hon. member who
reminds me of the type of patriot of whom Sir Robert Walpole
spoke. This great statesman, to whom England owed so much,
said upon one occasion, that patriots were the easiest things in the
world to be manufactured —he had only to refuse an unreasonable
request, and xxp sprang a patriot at once. So the hon. member
for the Hunter had been converted into a patriot, because the
Government had not been able to make the hon. member Chair-
man of Committees. The Government were disposed to serve
him, but the hon. member was his own enemy, and so clearly
proved his own unfitness for the office that we found it impossible
to get the House to accept him. The interest this hon. gentleman
takes in the Governor will, I am sure, be properly appreciated by
his Excellency, especially as the hon. member, no doubt, anticipates
being one of his Excellency’s advisers. Then we are told, that
the Government represents a minority of the House, how, is
there a man in the House who supposes that if the late vote had
been a dii’ect vote of censure the Government would have held
office a day on the casting vote of the Speaker. (Hear, hear.) If
hon. members are willing to settle this dispute, let them bxing
forwai'd a motion of want of confidence, instead of prolonging this
organisation to defeat the business of the country. And I would
like those country constituencies who are now suffering from want
of a fair share of representation to mark those who are their
enemies, and who irefuse to do them justice by wasting the time that
ought to be given to the Electoral Bill. There are three hon.
members of this House, of whom the hon. member for the
Hunter is one, who have made a thousand speeches amongst them
during this session, and there is not enough matter in the thousand
speeches to till a single page in the newspaper. How is it possible
that the business of the country can go on if hon. members will
inflict this eternal wash of twaddle upon the House. Hon.
gentlemen opposite must not try any longer to deceive the country
by raising these disturbances in order to cover the peculiax line of
tactics they are adopting. With regard to this matter, let hon.
membei’S opposite tender a motion of want of confidence. The


Government will not do one act of business until that vote is
decided, and if the Government do not defeat it by a majority of
more than half a dozen they will accept it as a defeat. There
is a challenge for hon. members, and I will add that I do not wish
to remain an hour longer in office than I can be supported by a
majority of the House. Though many of our friends are now
away and out of reach, we would not in the present state of the
House, even, accept a victory obtained by a narrow majority. My
belief is that the Government has two-thirds of the Assembly in
its favour, and the division the other night has satisfied me
that the opponents of the Government do not number one-third
of the Assembly. lam quite satisfied that notwithstanding the
disingenuous, unscrupulous, and unjustifiable efforts which have been
made to mislead the sense of the country, the large mass of the
people is with the Government. And why should it not be sol The
present is the first Ministry that has made New South Wales a
power in the world, that lias successfully maintained its position,
character, and influence. We are the first Ministry to carry out the
policy professed in opposition. We did not come into office dis-
paraging our predecessors in office, but with the purpose of using
the position we had attained to carry out the principles we had
always proposed to carry out. This we have done more than any
Government which has preceded us, and we have in consequence a
lai’ge majority of the older colonists in our favour, since it is seen
that now, for the first time, the Government has made the name of
the colony a name of influence and respect in the world—a name
that is at last beginning to be known in England, and respected
in other colonies. The time has at last gone by when the colony
can be treated with that amount of contumely which she has
received in former years. We have not lodged members of our
Administration in judgeships or in highly salaried offices—we have
not sought to obtain popular favour by pretending to reduce our
salaries, and taking the money back after all when leaving office.
We have not raised public loans for public improvements,
and then spent a large portion of it in giving entertainments
to our Parliamentary friends. We have done none of these things.
The people of this country, who have no interest in any of the
squabbles that take place in this chamber, will not fail to draw a
j ust distinction between us and men who spend their lives in
tiding over their constantly recurring political difficulties, and who
have no strength left to serve the country. Hon. gentlemen do
not hesitate to accuse me of treachery and every kind of political
delinquency, but I challenge them to prove any one of these charges.
(Hear, hear.) In the case of my late colleague, Mr. Butler, for


whom I still retain great respect, and the best wishes in the world,
I would like to know who is open to censure —thathon. gentleman
or myself, if the case is fairly considered. My late friend and
colleague was a member of this Government, cordially concurring
in our every act until a given day ; never having any dispute on
any question of policy ; never taking exception to any principle
laid down, up to a given day; and then he left us, not upon any
public question, nor because we had departed from any principle
of policy laid down, but because we could not do a thing in which
he had a strong personal interest. (Hear, hear.) I should like to
know, if the question is fairly considered, who is to blame, I, for
doing what I considered best for the interests of the country, or
the hon. member, for trying to hold me to a hastily-given promise
(if it could be called a promise) against the public interest. I
would like to know whether upon this case, fairly stated, I am to
be charged with a want of faith. No man in the world who had as
much generosity as I had always believedmy late colleague to possess,
would have hesitated to release me from such a promise, supposing I
had given one, or would have held me to a hasty expiession
made in the heat of friendship, when he afterwards saw that I
could not carry it out. Is there anything in this to justify men
who are in no way concerned, in continually bringing it up, to tix
upon me a want of faith to my friends 1 I feel that I have
always been a very good friend to Mr. Butler —I do not wish to
say how, but in a way which no man ought to forget. And though
I generally sit still under aspersions, 1 have befriended hundreds in
this country. But it is not my habit to talk of the good deeds X may
have done in my private relations with other men. The hon.
member for Illawarra has thought fit to comment upon how some
hon. members have voted. I cannot understand what warrant any
hon. member has to speak of the way in which another hon.
member votes. (Hear, hear.) The very fact that these hon.
gentlemen seem to miss some persons from the division, shows that
they have taken the improper means of getting votes that they char ge
the Government with—that they have adopted the very tactics
that they charge against the Government. We know, in fact, that
they have obtained promises of support by the explanation that
the motion would not affect the Government in any way (Heai,
hear) —yet afterwards they attempt to work it into a vote of
censure." This is proof that they have resorted to unscrupulous
means to obtain votes. I wish to repeat what I said the other night,
that I never could regard the late vote as a vote of want of confi-
dence. It was a vote that might possibly have led to extreme con-
sequences —not that we should have taken any extreme steps


under a sense of obligation, but under a sense of justification, a
sense that we were released from political obligations, and left free
to take our own course—feelings that our opponents can hardly
comprehend. It would have placed us in a position that would
have justified us in selecting our own course. We should not hare
been restrained by any sense of obligation either to the public or to
the Parliament in the matter. It is impossible for me to say what
would have been the consequences, but the motion was negatived
by the casting-vote of the Speaker, and that was as practical
a negation of such a motion as if it had been negatived
by a substantial majority. If it had been a vote of want
of confidence, we certainly would not have accepted the
Speaker’s casting vote. (Hear, hear.) With regard to how far
we represent the House and the country, I dissent, altogether,
from the unanimity of opinion among the newspapers. I
am not accustomed to allude to the newspapers. Ido not
think my reputation depends upon the newspapers. I believe I
can stand in the face of the opposition of the newspapers, and,
without any adventitious aids. I stand upon twenty-five years
of faithful service to the country. I admit I have committed
many errors, but I have never shirked my duty at any time, and I
have never shrunk from the free and bold expression of my
opinions. I have never been driven to do what I have seen done
by an hon. member of this House—l have not gone about, cap in
hand, to beg votes “ for the sake of poor old Harry.” I have
never been reduced to that position, and though I have passed
through some eighteen contested elections, I have never can-
vassed a vote in my life, and yet I have polled more votes than
any man who ever lived in the country. I have never had occa-
sion to think what the newspapers would say. I have hitherto
been able to live without them, and, if I was not, I should be
content to die, so far as my political life is concerned; and I dissent,
altogether, from this unanimity of opinion amongst newspapers;
and I venture to tell you, with the voice of prophecy, what will
be the end of all this hubbub. There was, naturally, a feeling of
alarm amongst those persons who had suffered by the ravages of
the bushrangers, when it was industriously circulated that the
Government were going to release, in one batch, twenty-four
bushrangers. No wonder that there was some feeling of alarm.
When the truth came out, however, it was discovered that the
statement was a base lie. When the truth came out, it was
found, not that these men were to be liberated in one batch, but
that their cases had simply been dealt with together, because they
were, for the most part, the cases of young men, natives of the


country, whose offences belonged to a particular era of crime ; and
it was found that the prisoners had been dealt with in exactly the
same way as the 180 prisoners in previous years, when the hon.
member (Mr. Robertson) was in office, the only distinction being,
that these cases were considered all together, while the proposed
remissions extended over a period of twelve months. Then, they
are not to be released in the colony. They are to be exiled, for
the most part. That is a punishment that, in severity, is classed
next to death by all nations. Banishment from one’s native
country is the chief punishment, if life is not taken away. Banish-
ment is a punishment that has more of the sanction of Divine law,
and of all human laws, than any other. The first offenders, our
first parents, were not put to death, they were exiled ; and from
that time until the present, every nation in the world has reserved
to itself the right of banishment as a punishment. While the
punishment is severe, it offers, in a more effective way than any
other punishment, the means of self-redemption to the persons
subjected to it. How many a happy home in this country was
founded by a poor exile. How many a virtuous son, how many a
virtuous daughter of this soil owe their being to exiles. And,
when we see some of the men who would not have been in
being but for exiles, raising their howls against this law of
exile, it is enough to freeze the heart with contempt for the inhe-
rent baseness of human nature, under some sets of circumstances.
(Cheers.) This punishment is perfectly justifiable in relation to
other countries. We do not send these exiles to any country. Any
country can lock the door against them, but it is the condition of
exiles that they must wander on the face of the earth until they
find a resting place. Another gross misstatement that has been
circulated is that our exiled prisoners are cast upon our neighbours.
Special care is taken that none of them shall go to the neighbouring
colonies. They must go so far away that they will, in all proba-
bility, never return; and as far as the police records go, there is
not an instance of an exile returning before the expiration of his
sentence. They can go to Japan or to the States of South
America. Looking at what is proposed to be done in the case of
the prisoner Gardiner, there has never been any proposal to reduce
his sentence by a single day. What has been proposed is, that
after suffering ten years’ imprisonment he shall suffer the rest of
his sentence in banishment. One of the most necessary conditions
in the treatment of prisoners is, that they shall be treated without
distinction, without noise, without parade; and that they shall be
allowed to sink silently and unnoticed into the mass of their fellow
creatures j and the greatest injury that has ever been done in my


time to the real interests of this country has been done, perhaps
unconsciously and unintentionally, by the hon. member for
Bathurst. (Cheers.) Nothing is so calculated, as the excitement
he has stirred up, to awaken all the worst feelings of the half-
tutored young men who live in the wilds of this country, and who
are supposed to be capable of being worked upon by the heroisms
of criminal life. There is nothing so calculated to awaken the
feelings of this class of persons as the noise and parade that have
been made of this great criminal’s case. The true friends of the
country will be disposed to deal with him, not with unnecessary
harshness, not distinguishing him by any exceptional treatment, but
they will deal with him in a spirit of severe implacable justice,
purified from all vindictiveness, in view of the treatment of
other men similarly placed. I venture to prophecy that the
result of all this turmoil will be, that sensible men, all through
the country, will see the real object of the persons who have made
all this commotion about these prisoners! People will be con-
vinced that gentlemen opposite would be perfectly willing that
the four-and-twenty prisoners should be exiled, provided that Mr.
Parkes were exiled with them. That is the real object. (Hear,
hear.) The object to be gained by those hon. members is not the
protection of society, but the facilitating of their own advent to
offices of trust and emolument. (Cheers.) And 1 should like to
know what position they woiild be in if called to power. There
are but four-and-twenty of these patriots. There are not more
than eight'offices, and there are nearly sixteen ministers expectant,
with eight followers. The hon. member for the Tumut, and the
larger hon. member for Canterbury, will be contending for the
“ Works.” (Laughter.) There will be the hon. member for
Illawarra, and the venerable member for West Sydney (Mr.
Robertson), contending for the Premiership. (Laughter.) There
will be the hon. member for Bathurst, and the hon. member for
the Hunter contending for the “ Mines.” And we shall have
the hon. member for the Murrumbidgee, and, perhaps, the hon.
member for West Macquarie, or that distinguished colleague of
mine, Mr. Oakes, contending for the Treasurership. And each of
these candidates for office will only have half a man for a following.
How is the country to be governed by such rank and file—sixteen
leaders and eight followers 1 (Laughter.) The hon. member for
Camden (Mr. Garrett) suffered a great slight and wrong at the
hands of his party in not receiving office sooner. In my opinion,
the hon. gentleman is the ablest man of them all. (Ironical cheers.)
In my judgment, the hon. member is the man of highest character
and fairest capacity amongst them; and, if I had to take my choice


of a Minister from the Opposition, I should firmly hope to see a
Garrett Administration. I should have more faith in the lion,
member, in his undoubted vigour, his undoubted soundness upon
many important questions, than I should have in many of the other
aspirants. (Cheers and laughter.) 1 apologise for not placing.the
lion, gentleman in his proper place —the Lands. But there, again,
we have three or four competitors. And what would be the case
if Mr. Hoskins got the Works] Just fancy the black cloud that
would come over the baby simplicity of the othei and gieatei
aspirant for office. • Fancy that powerful representative of the
people, the great member for Canterbury, again having to pace the
street whilst the formation of a Ministry is going on ; fancy him
again having to ordei' his gloves and put on his best vest in vain,
and again having after all to sigh, in his baby innocency, out in
the bitter cold. (Laughter.) Do you not think the hon. member
would again become a patriot ] Do you not think he would find
another grievance ] Do you not think the gifted member foi
Camden (Mr. Garrett) would be again prepared with his graceful
simile of the weary tramp getting a lift on the road for his kids by
lending a little of his superfluous strength to propel the bullock
dray. (Laughter.) What is the use, then, of all this insane
obstruction] Gentlemen of much lower capacity can go on
obstructing. They can go on repeating themselves until every
one is weary of listening to their voices. They can go on
wasting the precious time, which is important to other persons,
with the vain hope of driving hon. members out of the House,
and driving them to their homes in the country. But this sort of
thing will not tell upon the electors; and I venture so say that
the country, which in the long run is always right, will come
to a right verdict upon all this unnecessary, all this inflated, all
this unsubstantial alarm about these prisoners, whose cases,
after’ all, form no exception to what has been goijrg on
for years. We have for seven and twenty years, under
the law of the country, been allowing our prisoners, without refer-
ence to the magnitude of their crimes, to exile after they have
served not less than two years. And no hon. member who has
been in office, and no hon. member in his place in Parliament, has
ever complained of the law and this exile. The Governor
could have exiled Gardiner eight years ago, under the law of this
country that has been acted upon for the last seven-and-twenty
years. There is nothing new, nothing unusual, nothing which in any
way fixes blame upon the present Ministers. We have been spoken
of as if we had invented this system of pardon, as if we had some
interest in the liberation of these prisoners ; whereas we have but


proceeded in just the same way as previous Governments have
been going on year after year. The hon. member for Camden
(Mr. Garrett) put a new complexion upon this question by saying
that the Government had decided now not to release any of these
prisoners, and that we were therefore going to inflict great injustice
upon them. Whether the prisoners were released, or whether
they were kept in prison, the Government would, it seemed, be
doing wrong. (Cheers and laughter.) If the Government had
done nothing in the case of the prisoner Gardiner, and a motion
had been made to censure the Government for not letting him oot
of prison, I firmly believe the hon. member (Mr. Forster) would
have voted for it. (Cheers).


SYDNEY I
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., LETTER-PRESS AND LITHOGRAPHIC PRINTERS,
PITT STREET, NEXT UNION BANK.


JAtf>
rqg>cf%




