

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
DEBATE
IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ON THE
PETHERICK COLLECTION BILL.
17th OCTOBER, 1911.
[. Reprinted from the “Parliamentary Debates .”]
F. 15788.




PETHERICK COLLECTION BILL.
Second Reading.
Mr. FISHER (Wide Bay—Treasurer
and Prime Minister) [5.55].— I move—
That this Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill confirms the agreement which was
entered into between the Commonwealth
Government and Mr. Petherick, who had a
very valuable collection of literature of all
kinds, including the historical records of
Australasia and the Polynesian Islands.
It was a collection, not only valuable
from a monetary and literary point of
view, but one which, if once allowed to
be scattered, could not, in my opinion,
have been recovered. During my first
term of office I discovered through a
mutual friend that Mr. Petherick had,
under a verbal promise by a previous Min-
ister, brought his valuable collection from
England to Melbourne, and housed it in
the Exhibition Building. Many persons
were very apprehensive that, in case of a
fire, the collection would be destroyed.
Mr. Petherick, I remember well, was
under the impression then that he was en-
titled to more consideration from the Com-
monwealth Government than he had re-
ceived. After having interviewed him my
feeling was that no effort should be spared
to secure for the Commonwealth his col-
lection of literature and historical records
of every kind. Happily it fell to the lot
of the honorable member for Angas, when
he was Attorney-General, to finally con-
clude the agreement with Mr. Petherick,
and, I think, with Mrs. Petherick. At
one time it was thought that it would be
sufficient if the agreement were signed by
the parties thereto, but I agree with those
who think that an agreement of this im-
portance should be incorporated in an Act
of Parliament. This Bill, which comes
from the Senate, provides for the payment
to Mr. Petherick of an annual fee for
certain services which may be rendered
when he is able to render them, or services
which may be nominally rendered. If
they are rendered in accordance with the
wish, and under the direction of the Lib-
rary Committee, that will be sufficient to
satisfy the conditions of the agreement. I
am entirely with those who drew up the
contract in this liberal way. I think that
it is a good bargain, from our point of
view, and we ought not to be too strict
or discriminating regarding Mr. Petherick.
He has done for Australia in this con-
F. 15788.
nexion that which, perhaps, no other liv-
ing man could have done, and we, on our
side, ought to deal with him very liberally.
I agree that for disciplinary purposes
the archivist ought to be under the
Library Committee, but I do not think it
is necessary to dwell on that point. This
may be a suitable occasion for me to re-
mind the House that gifts have been made
to the Library from time to time,
for which, I am sure, the Library
Committee have thanked the donors,
and the members of this National
Parliament must be exceedingly grateful.
I may express the hope that the last be-
quest has not yet been received of portraits
or statues of notable public men, whose
memory may be perpetuated in this way,
or, especially, of records, manuscript and
otherwise, of an important kind that may
now be in the possession of private people.
I trust that those in possession of such re-
cords will accept the suggestion that they
would be better preserved, and be of more
utility to the Commonwealth and the public
generally, if they were placed in the valu-
able collection already formed, and became
part of the historic material of Australia
and the adjoining islands. This Bill ought
not to be delayed, for in that there is
danger. In the event of Providence remov-
ing the donor, matters might become very
complicated ; and, indeed, if a layman may
express the opinion, the collection might be
altogether lost to the Commonwealth. On
that point legal members will be better able
to advise; but it seems to me that, until
this Bill becomes an Act, we have no
security in our possession of this valuable
collection. I .submit the measure in the
hope that it will be dealt with and passed,
not as a party matter, but as an agree-
ment to be unanimously hailed as a fair
bargain. Putting aside the question of
payment, we have to thank Mr. Petherick
for the wav in which he held on to this
collection, and for the manly and generous
way in which he offered it as a national
heirloom to the Federal Parliament.
Mr. GLYNN (Angas) [6.3]. —It is very
proper to introduce the Bill, because, even
if the agreement* were in itself sufficient,
the responsibilitv was rather too much to
saddle the Library Committee with. So
far as I remember, the reason for the
second agreement was that, at first, there
was an assignment, called a deed of gift,


to the President of the Senate, drawn up,
I forget by whom, but as a layman would
do the work —in good faith. For the
security of the Commonwealth, the usual
legal method was afterwards adopted, be-
cause the Commonwealth was accepting not
only a gift, but giving some consideration
for an exceedingly valuable collection and
the services of Mr. Petherick, subject to
the Library Committee. The deed of gift
might have divested the property in the
books from Mr. Petherick to the President;
and it was desirable that any doubt should
be removed by a second indenture.
Mr. GROOM (Darling Downs) [6.5]. —
I desire to echo what the Prime Minister
has said as to the great obligation we are
under to Mr. Petherick for making this ar-
rangement with the Commonwealth. Had
this library and collection been dispersed,
we should have had to pay thousands of
pounds to get it together again.
Mr. Fisher. —We should never have got
it again.
Mr. GROOM.—At all events, we should
probably never have got it as complete as
it is. Australia is deeply indebted to Mr.
Petherick. There is already a very fine col-
lection in the Mitchell Library in Sydney ;
but there is no reason why, as far as pos-
sible, there should not be at the Capital of
the Commonwealth a complete library of
all works relating to Australia. It is most
desirable that the suggestion made by the
Prime Minister should be made widely
known. The Library Committee would be
exceedingly glad of any gifts of books,
pamphlets, or plates which throw any light
on the history of this country.
Mr. Fisher. — Manuscripts also,
Mr. GROOM. —Any documents which
may be of value when the historian under-
takes to write the history of the Common-
wealth of Australia.
Mr. West. —A history of the trade
union movement would be a great idea !
Mr. Fisher. —The history of any move-
ment.
Mr. GROOM. —Even the biography of
the honorable member for East Sydney
might be of some value. It is most de-
sirable that the suggestion of the Prime
Minister should be made known throughout
the country. It is a common experience,
in the outlying parts, to come across old
and valuable books of historical value; and
it would be better for those to be in a
central collection than to remain where they
are likely to be lost.
Mr. Fisher. —This debate may help in
that way.
Mr. GROOM.—I rose, not only to ex-
press gratitude to Mr. Petherick, but to em-
phasize the importance of such books and
records being placed in safe custody.
There is a tendency, more and more, to im-
press Australians with the value of their
own history ; and, even from an educational
stand-point, that is well. I am glad to see
that the Australian Natives Association
has taken the matter up in several of the
States, and is doing much to assist in col-
lecting early records, with a view to pre-
serving them in some imperishable form.
This is most valuable work, which I am
sure will be appreciated by all who take
an interest in the history of this country.
Mr. HALL (Werriwa) [6.B]. —I desire to
add my tribute of admiration of the genero-
sity of Mr. Petherick in presenting this col-
lection to the Commonwealth. As one
who has had the privilege of looking over
the collection on a number of occasions,
and of having some lengthy talks with Mr.
Petherick, I venture to say that there are
very few, if any, in Australia as capable
as he in getting such books and documents
together, and fewer who, having got such
a collection together, would have the gene-
rosity to hand it over to this Parlia-
ment. I hope that we accept this collec-
tion in the light of a gift—that we
are passing this Bill, not in any sense as
making a bargain to pay Mr. Petherick for
what he has given, for the Bill is nothing
of the kind. In the ordinary course of
nature, the small amount which will be
paid under an agreement of this kind can-
not in any way compensate a man for a
life’s work and sacrifice. I confess that,
when I hear appeals being made for fur-
ther gifts of the kind, I cannot help think-
ing that if those to whom the appeals are
made could see the rather shabby way in
which we have treated the Petherick collec-
tion by thrusting it away in a vault where
no one can find it, the response might not
be so generous. No doubt the Library Com-
mittee has its difficulties, but I regret that
the things which are Australian should be
buried very low.
Mr. Fisher.—We are not masters of
the House.
Mr. HALL.—If we are not entitled to
remove books from one part of the build-
ing to another it cannot be helped; but
there is, in the north wing of the Library,
a collection of autobiographical works and
ancient novels which are rarely looked at,
and might very well give place to the
Petherick collection.


Mr. Groom, —They belong to the State When one travels, and sees what has been
of Victoria.
Mr. HALL.—Quite so; but they could
be well cared for in the basement. We
should have nearer at hand the collection
which is more interesting to the Australian
people, so that we could see and examine
it with greater ease. The matter, however,
is within the province of the Library Com-
mittee. The example which Mr. Petherick
has set is calculated to create a genuine
Australian spirit, and we shall all feel
gratified if others, noting it, act upon the
Scriptural injunction, “Go thou and do
likewise.”
Mr. JOHN THOMSON (Cowper)
[6.12]. —The introduction of this Bill gives
us an opportunity, not only to express our
appreciation of Mr. Petherick’s valuable
gift to the Commonwealth, but to suggest
that the little that has been done in the
way of preparing matter for our future his-
torians should be considerably amplified. I
think we might go further, and direct the
preparation of a statement setting forth the
meaning of the many native names given to
towns and districts in Australia. A great
number of the people residing in those towns
and districts are quite ignorant of their
meaning. In my own electorate there are
many places bearing native names, many of
which were given to them by the aborigines
and generally suggest some feature of the
country. In some cases, these districts bear
the names of animals which used to be
found there, while in others striking charac-
teristics of the country, as it existed in the
primeval days, have been perpetuated.
Mr. Fisher.— Every name tells a tale.
Mr. JOHN THOMSON.—That is so.
We know but little of the history of the
language of the Australian aborigines, and
we shall know much less unless we take
steps to bring together all the available in-
formation relating to it. We should col-
lect these names, ascertain their meaning,
and tabulate them in such a way that
future residents of these places will have
a knowledge of their derivation. I dare
say that not 5 per cent, of those who live
in towns bearing native names are ac-
quainted with their meaning, and I think
that something should be done in the direc-
tion I have indicated. I join with those
who have preceded me in expressing my
satisfaction with the action of the Govern-
ment in introducing this Bill with a view of
securing for all time to the people of Aus-
tralia a collection of works that will un-
doubtedly perpetuate some of the very early
historical features of our great country.
done in other countries in this direction —
when one observes in other lands the value
that is attached to everything of historical
interest —one must freely recognise that
there is much that we have not yet done
which might well be taken in hand, and I
hope that the suggestion I have made will
be acted upon.
Mr. SPENCE (Darling) [6.15]. —As one
of the Library Committee who entered into
the arrangements for securing this great
gift to the Commonwealth, I desire to ex-
press my sense of the magnificent liberality
displayed by Mr. Petherick. His action in
presenting to the Commonwealth such a
rare and valuable collection is certainly a
very patriotic one. The collection embraces
books of which there is no copy
extant, while in other cases only one or
two copies are available. It represents some
thirty years of watchful care, as well as
considerable expenditure, and although it
is worth a good many thousands of
pounds, Mr. Petherick freely gives it to
Australia. Together with a number of
other honorable members, I recently
visited the Old* 'World, where the im-
portance of preserving old buildings and
monuments and all thait tells in a material
way of the history of a country is
realized to the full. In Great Britain,
committees are being appointed to restore
various old buildings. I agree with the
honorable member for Cowper that we
should take steps to ascertain the meaning
of the native names given to many of our
towns and districts before those who
know their derivation pass away. I am
satisfied that if some of the older fami-
lies of Australia could only be brought
to recognise how greatly we should ap-
preciate such an action, they would come
forward with many letters and papers that
would be of great historical value to the
Commonwealth. On the Library table at
the present time we have a facsimile of a
page from Captain Cook’s journal; and
in the libraries and museums of the Old
World one sees documents and papers
which money could scarcely purchase.
The average man thinks that these mat-
ters are of no concern, but they are cer-
tainly of great importance to Australia.
The Commonwealth is indebted to Mr.
Petherick, and I am sure that we all ap-
preciate his generosity in making such a
handsome gift to the nation. Ever since
the collection was taken over by us. Mr.
Petherick has been working upon it, so
that it is purely a gift to Australia. A


good deal more might be added to it, and of descriptions of country life and inci-
Mr. Petherick, I am sure, would be ready dents appearing in country papers. We
to assist us with suggestions. Referring
to what the honorable member for Cowper
has said regarding native names, it may
not be generally known that Ballarat, or,
more correctly speaking, “ Ballaarat,”
means a place of rest.
Mr. Deakin. —A resting-place.
Mr. SPENCE. —Yes, it is a very ap-
propriate name, but, unfortunately, it is
now the custom to omit the medial “ a ”.
The honorable member for Ballarat should
take steps to have if restored.
Mr. Deakin.— “ Ballaarat ” is now only
the official spelling of the name.
Mr. SPENCE.—We should look to the
Postmaster-General’s Department to see
that the correct spelling of these native
names is retained. Whenever I am asked
to give a name to a new postal district,
I invariably suggest an aboriginal one,
believing that we should have protection
for Australian names as well as for Aus-
tralian goods. The complaint made in
regard to the housing of the collection
is a very natural one. I am sure that
the Library Committee does not approve
of the collection being stored away in the
basement; but we have to remember that
it is only a temporary home. We hope to
get away to the Federal Capital by-and-
by, and we shall have there a Library
so built as to insure absolute safety.
Any one who visits the wonderful Mitchell
collection in Sydney will see what a costly
task it is to provide a suitable place for a
collection of this kind. It is easier said
than done. I do not suppose the State
authorities would object to our mak-
ing use of one of the wings of the
Library here, but many changes would
be necessary in order to secure safety
for the collection. It is not the kind of
thing that could be put upon open shelves.
Books and papers of this kind must be kept
safe, and be under supervision. For many
reasons of this kind, we have been forced
to put the collection in the only place avail-
able for it in the building, and there Mr.
Petherick has been very busy cataloguing
and getting the work finished that will com-
plete the collection. I hope that when we
do go to the Federal Capital we shall ap-
preciate the importance and rarity of the
collection, and see that it is added to by
every means in our power, before these
documents and other historical records dis-
appear from Australian life. The Com-
mittee have been getting collections made
have been having things of this kind, which
give local colour, collected in clippings.
They will be useful to future writers of
Australian stories, and also to the historian
of the future, because they record many
facts and incidents of importance of which
all trace would be lost if steps were not
taken now to preserve them, while the men
who can tell the story are still alive. I con-
gratulate the Government on introducing
the measure, and am sure the House will
be unanimous in passing it.
Mr. ATKINSON (Wilmot) [6.22].—1
am very glad to see this Bill introduced,
and hope it will be speedily passed. I do
not think that we have moved in this matter
as quickly as we ought to have done. We
have a most valuable collection of early
Australian records, and, although we are
not housing it at present in a fitting place,
I hope we shall have before long a
national repository for collections of the
kind. It is quite time the Commonwealth
took in hand the question of collecting the
early material of Australian history. It
will not only be serviceable to us, but it
will be very serviceable to generations to
come. I wish to add my meed of
thanks to those which have already
been accorded to Mr. Petherick. I
feel that he has done not only a patriotic,
but an extremely generous thing in offering
this collection to the Commonwealth. Had
it been dispersed by sale in England, where
it was a few years ago, we should have had
no chance of getting it together again.
Now we not only have the collection, but
we are very fortunate in having retained
the services of Mr. Petherick himself as
archivist. There is no one better fitted than
that gentleman to judge of the value of
records and any other interesting relics
that may be offered to the Commonwealth
for purchase. He will be able to guide us
as to the true value of these things, as
well as could be done by anybody we know,
and he will be able to tabulate and place
them in their proper positions far better
than most other people could. On that
ground alone we are very fortunate in hav-
ing secured his services.
Mr. THOMAS BROWN (Calare) [6.25].
*—l have had the pleasure of looking
through Mr. Petherick’s collection, and con-
sider it invaluable. It is certainly one of
the best of the kind that I have seen, and
if it were allowed to be broken up and dis-
tributed, it would be practically impossible
for the Commonwealth to get together again


all those valuable rarities that Mr. Pethe- and of the greatest use to those engaged in
rick ha’s been able to collect in his long life-
time, and as the result of his expert know-
ledge and experience in that particular kind
of work. I am pleased to know that the
Government are now taking' the matter
seriously in hand, and propose to deal with
it on the lines laid down in the Bill. I
have felt that it was scarcely fair to Mr.
Petherick or the Commonwealth that the
question should be hung up, as it
has been for so long. Ever since the col-
lection was handed over to the Library
Committee there has been a considerable
amount of uncertainty about it. It has
been in suspense, something like Mahomet’s
coffin. Mr. Petherick did not know what
the Commonwealth intended to do, and the
Commonwealth, apparently, had not time
to give to the matter that attention which
was necessary and desirable in order to
bring it to a proper settlement. In those
circumstances, it is scarcely to be wondered
at that Mr. Petherick was disposed—if he
was so disposed, although I do not know
that it was so—to feel that his gift was not
altogether appreciated by and acceptable
to the Commonwealth. I am sure, how-
ever, that those honorable members who
have looked into the collection appreciate
its high value, and that we are all de-
lighted now to know that the Government
are bringing the matter to finality. There
are certain matters in connexion with it
which I should like to urge upon the atten-
tion of the Government. The collection
should certainly be properly housed, be-
cause, of course, the present accommodation
is only a makeshift, and is very unsatisfac-
tory ; but, under the present arrangement
with the State Parliament, whose premises
we are occupying, we cannot encroach too
largely upon their space. If, however, it
is at all possible to give the collection better
accommodation, the matter ought to be con-
sidered. At the. same time, I recognise
that its natural home is in Commonwealth
territory, and the sooner we get it there and
properly housed the better it will be for
all interests concerned. In connexion with
this valuable collection of old Australian
literature and records, I notice that Mr.
Petherick has been engaged for a con-
siderable time past in compiling a very
unique catalogue of Australian literature
of all descriptions from the earliest days.
He has brought it, I understand, up to
date, and to a high degree of perfection.
The publication of that work would be a
most valuable addition to the collection,
historic or literary research. In addition
to taking over the Petherick collection, the
Government should arrange, if they have
not already done so, with Mr. Petherick
to complete that portion of his life’s work,
and take steps to print and publish it. It
should not be left in manuscript form. I
believe the complete work will run into a
considerable number of volumes.
Mr. Deakin. —Run into volumes ! Does
the honorable member mean that a mere
list of the names of books would occupy
that space?
Mr. THOMAS BROWN.—The work
gives, not only the names, but also a short
description of the contents of each book.
This makes it all the more valuable. A
mere list would be valuable to some extent,
but a bibliography of Australian literature
such as Mr. Petherick has compiled be-
comes a most valuable work. It is because
of its great value that I am urging the Go-
vernment to utilize Mr. Petherick's ser-
vices in completing it, if he has nor already
done so, and then to have it printed and
published. It would be of great value, not
only to the Commonwealth and to Aus-
tralian writers, but also to writers and
libraries all over the world. lam glad
that we have among us patriotic men of the
stamp of Mr. Petherick.
Sitting suspended from 6.31 to 7-45 p- m -
Mr. THOMAS BROWN.—We owe a
debt of gratitude to Mr. Petherick for the
valuable collection which he has presented
to the Commonwealth, because, in a young
country like this, it is difficult to secure
material such as he has brought together,
which grows in value with the lapse of
time. Material of this kind is very easily
lost. For instance, in the campaign which
preceded the adoption of Federation, a
large quantity of literature was produced
and published, mostly in pamphlet form,
and it is surprising how little of it is ob-
tainable now after a lapse of only twelve
years. Except in the collections of those
who have made a hobby of gathering to-
gether publications of this kind, practi-
cally none of it remains. At the time, ii
was not considered of value, and was not
preserved, but in the years to come it will
be invaluable. We should foster the col-
lection of pamphlets, manuscripts, and let-
ters. I noticed that much of the interest
attaching to the Glasgow Exhibition was
due to the display of old manuscripts. I
there saw the original copy of Burns’ pat-
riotic poem, “ Scots wha hae wi’ Wallace


bled,” as well as the manuscript of some not the better for having been in the cus-
of Sir Walter Scott’s great works. We
should do what we can to preserve any-
thing of interest pertaining to Australia.
Something should also be done for the pre-
servation of aboriginal names. It is diffi-
cult to ascertain the correct pronunciation of
these names, which are generally musical,
though they do not appear to be so when
printed. Furthermore, as applied to dis-
tricts, they usually have a meaning indicat-
ing the nature of the country, or something
pertaining to it. It would be interesting to
have these names tabulated, with their cor-
rect pronunciations, as nearly as could be
ascertained, and their meanings. In most
cases, the pronunciation which we have
adopted is so far from the original that a
blackfellow would be unable to recognise
the words. No two Government Depart-
ments spell these names alike. The name
of my electorate, Calare, is spelt in different
ways, and so is the name of the place
where I live. Possibly, none of the spell-
ings is a correct phonetic record. The Go-
vernment of New South Wales appointed
a Commission to deal with this matter, but
I have not heard whether it has submitted
a report. In any case, no change has been
effected. What is needed is an inquiry
which will cover the whole Commonwealth.
The work should be commenced at once, be-
cause the aborigines are rapidly disappear-
ing, and, in the years to come, it will be
impossible to get the information that is
needed.
Mr. KELLY (Wentworth) [7.53].—1
regret that the honorable member for Calare
has not explained why the Library Com-
mittee has treated the Petherick collection
so shabbily. Although that collection is in
some respects unique, it is stored in a base-
ment, on shelves where the books are not
protected from the dust, and maps are
stowed away in drawers and cupboards; it
is treated as a collection would be treated
by one who did not know its value, or had
not the means to deal with it properly.
I have no doubt that we took over Mr.
Petherick’s collection largely because he
felt that we were in a better position
than himself to spend the money neces-
sary for the proper protection of the trea-
sures which he had passed his life in ac-
cumulating. The Library Committee
should offer an explanation of its conduct in
this matter. If honorable members visit
the basement—l should not be surprised to
hear that none of the members of the Lib-
rary Committee have done so—they will
find that some of these valuable records are
tody of the Commonwealth for a year or
two.
Mr. Thomas Brown. — That is not a
fair reflection on the Committee, who have
done their best.
Mr. KELLY.—I did not hear a single
word from the honorable member on the
subject.
Mr. Glynn. —Because the honorable
member was not here before dinner, and
the matter was discussed in his absence.
Mr. KELLY. —Then why have not the
members of the Library Committee protested
in this chamber before? It is of no use
for the ex-Attorney-General to try to sup-
port the honorable member for Calare and
the other members of the Library Com-
mittee in this matter, because they had only
to direct the attention of this House to the
fact that they could not secure supplies to
enable them to properly house this collec-
tion. If they had done so, honorable
members would have seen to it that this
Australian inheritance was properly looked
after. If the members of the Committee
with whom, I understand, the honorable
member for Angas in his spare hours occa-
sionally sits, had been seized with a proper
sense of their responsibility they would
have insisted upon this collection being pro-
perly looked after. The trouble is that
the members of the Library Committee
seem to have regarded themselves as ap-
pointed to fulfil perfunctory duties of an
ornamental nature, because the House has
paid them the compliment of appointing
them to it. Their work is not regarded
as a trusteeship, and I doubt very much
if the Committee have seriously considered
the problem of properly housing this col-
lection. If they have, their absolute unfit-
ness for the duties of their position is
shown by the shelving they have chosen for
the collection.
Mr. Riley.— They are waiting until we
go to the Federal Capital.
Mr. KELLY.—I am afraid that that
is the kind of consideration which must
have influenced them. It is the worst
economy in the world to refuse to spend
a few pounds to properly shelve a price-
less collection. Until this measure was in-
troduced I had not heard a whisper of
any reluctance on the part of the Govern-
to provide proper shelving and accommoda-
tion for the Petherick collection. I under-
stand, from the honorable member for
Angas, that before the dinner adjournment
the honorable member for Calare did ex-
press contrition


Mr. Glynn. —l did not hear the hon- Committee should be able to give some ex-
orable member. I left the chamber at
twenty-five minutes past 6 o’clock, and I
did not hear what the honorable member
for Calare said.
Mr. KELLY. —Then apparently the
honorable member for Angas was prepared
to interrupt without knowing what he was
speaking about. The members of the
Library Committee appear to be anxious
to protect themselves in this matter, but I
am not making an attack upon them. It
seems to me that they have regarded them-
selves as a sort of ornamental body, ap-
pointed for no definite purpose. I am glad
to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Chair-
man of the Library Committee has taken
steps to enable him to give some explana-
tion, and, I hope, apology, for the neglect
of the Library Committee in this regard.
In view of the high office which that hon-
orable gentleman holds, I think he should
blush with shame, when he considers the
neglect of the -Library Committee to take
the necessary steps for properly housing
the Petherick collection. I often go down-
stairs to inspect the collection, but when
I do so, I am almost afraid to ask to
be allowed to see the maps. They have to
be dragged by Mr. Petherick out of cup-
boards in which they can scarcely be kept
free from dust. They have to be unfolded
and folded in the same way every time;
and any one who understands such mat-
ters will agree that it does them no good
to be handled in that way. I have
often felt that what we want is a live
Library Committee, presided over by a live
chairman; a Committee that would really
endeavour to do something to safeguard a
collection in connexion with which it is
thought worth while to pass an Act of this
Parliament. Under this measure, we are
to spend a year practically by way
of purchase money for this collection. Mr.
Petherick does not desire to sell it. He
regards it as the highest privilege a man
could have to make a literary collection of
this unique character, and he wishes to be
guaranteed the right to look after it. I
venture to say that when he signed the
agreement, he had not the least idea that
the collection would be endangered in the
way it has been by the neglect of the
Library Committee. I notice that the Com-
mittee consists of Mr. Speaker, Mr. Anstey,
Mr. Brown, Mr. Glynn, Mr. Groom, Dr.
Maloney, Dr. Salmon, and Mr. Spence.
I do not wish them to speak at the moment,
but I do think that the members of the
cuse for their want of action in this matter.
They might bring up a report on the sub-
ject. Here we have a very valuable pro-
perty, acquired at great expense by the
Commonwealth, and a Committee appointed
by this House has done next to nothing to
make it safe. It is not housed as well as a
second-hand bookseller would house a num-
ber of second-hand volumes by Marie
Corelli. The Library Committee are re-
sponsible for the disgraceful way in which
this collection is now kept; and it seems
to me that, instead of talking grandiosely
about books which he would like to see pur-
chased, it would have been better if the
honorable member for Calare, as a member
of the Committee, had given some excuse
for the neglect of their trusteeship in the
management of this unique collection.
Mr. MCDONALD (Kennedy) [B.2].—As
chairman of the Library Committee, I wish
to inform the honorable member for Went-
worth, who I know was joking, that he
adopted a peculiar method, which might
lead those who know him to think that he
was “ pulling somebody’s leg.”
Mr. Kelly.— l rise to order, Mr.
Deputy Speaker. I wish to know whether
the honorable member for Kennedy is in
order in suggesting that an honorable mem-
ber, in addressing the House, was doing
so in a jesting spirit. Although an honor-
able member may endeavour to restrain his
feelings, he may be imbued with a stern
sense of public duty. I should like to
know whether the words used by the hon-
orable member for Kennedy are in order;
if not, perhaps they will be withdrawn.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—If the
honorable member for Kennedy has used
any words which are offensive to the hon-
orable member for Wentworth, I have no
doubt they will be withdrawn.
Mr. McDONALD.—I willingly with-
draw ; and I accept the statement of the
honorable member for Wentworth that he
was in deadly earnest in what he said. If
that be so, there is only the more reason
why some reply should be made to him.
I am satisfied that no member of the House
took his statement seriously; but, unfor-
tunately, such statements, when printed
outside, are regarded seriously. The hon-
orable member made a charge against the
Library Committee, and referred speci-
fically to the ex-Attorney-General, the hon :
orable member for Angas. I wish to say
that there is no member of this House,
and no one who has ever been a member of


it, who has put in so much work volun-
tarily, considering the busy man he is, as
has the honorable member for Angas,
in connexion with the Library Com-
mittee. He is one of its most active
members, and has not spared himself
in any way to further the interests of
the Library. It is not right for any
honorable member to make such accusations
as those made by the honorable member for
Wentworth, when he is ignorant of the
actual facts. The Committee have done
everything that was possible to have the
Petherick collection housed and preserved
in as efficient a manner as possible.
Mr. Kelly. —How much has been ex-
pended on shelving, for instance?
Mr. McDONALD. —I cannot remem-
ber the exact amount that has been spent,
but if the honorable member had fre-
quented the Library more often, he would
have known that the whole of these books
are now carefully preserved in cases with
glass doors. Evidently the honorable mem-
ber cannot have been in the Library recently.
Mr. Kelly. —The glass doors have
only been put up within the last week or
fortnight.
Mr. McDONALD. —Allow me to tell
the honorable member that some months
ago I signed the document that paid for
the glass doors. The honorable member,
therefore, has again made a mis-statement.
Mr. Kelly. —l must rise to order. I
submit that the honorable member is not
only out of order in charging me with
having made a mis-statement, but has also
been deliberately unjust in saying that I
have not been down in the part of the
building where this collection is preserved
within the last two or three weeks.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—WiII the
honorable member state his point of
order ?
Mr. Kelly. — l submit that it was out
of order for the honorable member for
Kennedy to say that I had made a mis-
statement.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—If the
honorable member takes offence at that
word
Mr. Kelly. —lt is not a question of
taking offence. The honorable member
accuses me of making a mis-statement, and
that is the sort of thing that will bring
about a breach of the public peace. I
should like to know whether that expres-
sion is not out of order; and, if so,
whether it should not be withdrawn.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—The hon-
orable member for Kennedy is in order.
Mr. McDONALD. —I am not aware
that 1 said anything that was out of
order; but 1 point out that the honorable
member has made another mis-statement.
He has stated that he was down in the
rooms where the collection is kept within
the last three weeks, and that the books
are not cased yet. Allow me to tell the
honorable member that they were cased
about June last.
Mr. Kelly.—No.
Mr. McDONALD. —I tell the honor-
able member that they were. It is useless
for him to say that they were not, because
I know that they were.
Mr. Kelly. —The honorable member
simply says he signed the requisition.
Mr. McDONALD. —I signed the
paper under which payment was actually
made for the glass doors. Personally, I
do not mind what may be 'said about my-
self, but it is not fair that these things
should be said about the Library Com-
mittee. I can assure the House that
everything has been done to make Mr.
Petherick as comfortable as possible in
the part of the building that he occupies.
Statements that have been made about the
collection not being housed properly
might lead the public to believe that_ a
valuable collection of historical material
was being kept in some part of this build-
ing where it could not be carefully looked
after. I quite admit that the rooms
in which the collection is preserved are
not the best that we could desire. Every
one must realize that. But, unfor-
tunately for us, this magnificent building,
which the State of Victoria has been ex-
ceedingly good in allowing us to occupy,
does not permit of better accommodation
being provided. It is not reasonable to
ask the State authorities to remove a large
number of their own books from the upper
Library, where they are at present shelved,
to some other part of the building, where
they would require to be re-catalogued at
considerable expense to us or to the State
—to say nothing of the damage that might
be done to the books by so removing them.
We have done our best to enable Mr.
Petherick to place on view a portion of
his collection which ne desires to exhibit.
The wish has been expressed in an article
in one of the newspapers that the collec-
tion should be taken away from this build-
ing and preserved in the new Melbourne
Public Library building. I hope that no-


thing of the kind will be done. I trust of records have already been published by
that° the collection will never leave the the New South Wales Government. There
that the collection will never leave the
hands of the Federal authorities. We
know its value and desire to preserve it.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —The next move
should be to the Federal Capital.
Mr. MCDONALD. —I quite agree with
the honorable member. I admit that
the shelving is not all that we could de-
sire. But it would be of no use for us
to incur heavy expenditure in placing the
books on more elaborate shelving. The
shelving which we have provided is quite
adequate for present requirements. If we
were to enter upon any great expenditure
we might in the course of a few years
be compelled to incur it all over
again, because whatever arrangements
we made for preserving the collection
in this building might be quite un-
suitable for preserving it when we get
to the Federal Capital. I can assure the
House, however, that the collection is be-
ing looked after, and I am satisfied that
no one can look after it better than the
gentleman who is in charge of it now —
namely, Mr. Petherick himself. He has
come to me on several occasions, and
when we found out what his requirements
were we endeavoured to meet them as
as far as possible. The honorable
member for Cal are spoke of the value
of a collection of the literature per-
taining to the Commonwealth published
prior to Federation. I venture to say that
this Parliament possesses one of the best
collections of that kind of literature in
Australia. We have been collecting it from
the very inception of Federation, as the
honorable member for Angas can testify.
The late Mr. G. B. Edwards took an ex-
ceptional interest in the matter, and in
everything connected with the Library. As
far as concerns historical records, of which
the honorable member for Calare also
spoke, I may state that the Committee is
doing everything possible. One of the last
acts performed by the late Minister of
External Affairs, Mr. E. L. Batchelor,
was to write a letter to the Library Com-
mittee handing over to us the administra-
tion of the money placed upon the Esti-
mates for the printing of Australian re-
cords originally commenced by the New
South Wales Government. The subject will
l)e dealt with at the next meeting of the
Library Committee. I am very pleased that
this work is to be handed over to
them. What is proposed to be done
in this matter is this. Eight volumes
are still in manuscript records extending
from 1811 to 1836. These manuscripts
still await publication. The New’ South
Wales Government are prepared to hand
them over to us for the purpose of pub-
lication. It will probably take a period
of nine years to complete the task. Sub-
sequently, we hope to extend the records
from 1836 to 1856, when responsible go-
vernment was established. From that date
omvards, records will be collected and pub-
lished so as to make a complete documen-
tary history of Australia. I do not know
of a body of men w'ho have taken a keener
interest in collecting and preserving the re-
cords of their people than have the mem-
bers of the Library Committee. I do not
make that remark because I am connected
with the Library Committee. I know no
more of their efforts than I have gathered
during the last twelve months or so, but I
do know that they have not left a stone un-
turned in trying to make the collection of
records as complete as possible. I believe
that we have the best collection of records
of this particular class which is to be
found in any library in Australia, not even
excluding the Mitchell Library itself. In
these circumstances, I hope the House will
render all possible assistance. I may men-
tion that, at the very beginning of their ex-
istence, the Library Committee determined
to make this not merely a Parliamentary
Library, but a National Library for Aus-
tralia. With that object in view, they
have worked continuously and energetically
during all these years, and, in my opinion,
they deserve every credit for what they
have done. I desire to again acknowdedge
the special interest which the late Mr. G.
B. Edwards took in the work of the
Library Committee. I believe that what he
did in laying the foundation for a National
Library will stand as a monument to him.
I wish to thank the honorable and learned
member for Angas and Senator Sir Josiah
Symon for assisting me in the selection of
books during the last twelve months when
I have been chairman of the Library Com-
mitee, and for the tireless energy which
they have displayed. I can appreciate a
joke as much as can the honorable mem-
ber for Wentworth, who, I think, jvas not
serious when he made his speech this even-
ing. I can assure him that evervthing
is being done to have the Petherick
collection housed as well as possible,
having regard to the inconvenient circum-
stances in which we are placed at present.


I believe that, when it is transferred to its
future home, it will be a special feature
of interest in the Federal Capital.
Mr. KELLY.—I desire to make a per-
sonal explanation with regard to the remark
of the honorable member for Kennedy that
my statement that the Petherick Library is
not yet properly protected was a mis-state-
ment. With the honorable member for
Fremantle, I visited the rooms in which
the collection is housed a moment or two
ago, and found that the work for which
the honorable member for Kennedy says he
holds the receipt has not yet been done.
Almost one-half of the collection is still
without glass doors, and unprotected from
dust, and the improved accommodation for
the remainder was provided only recently.
It may be that my memory was at fault
when I said that I made a visit a fortnight
ago, but I have been down to the rooms a
couple of times this session, and the work
was not done then.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—The hon-
orable member must not debate the matter.
Mr. Kelly.—l do not intend to do so,
sir. Up to that point I find that my state-
ment was correct, and that Mr. Speaker
has apparently been misinformed. In re-
gard to the treatment of the manuscripts,
books, and so forth, if honorable members
care to go down, they can see for them-
selves the state in which they are.
Mr. Wise.—ls this a second-reading
speech ?
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—The hon-
orable member is not in order.
Mr. Kelly.—As I am not in order,
sir, in inviting honorable members to go
down and see the dreadful state of this
library I shall resume my seat.
Mr. HOWE (Dailey) [8.19]. —I confess
that I do not know the value of the utter-
ance made by the honorable member for
Wentworth. I was not very much im-
pressed with it. I rather felt that he was
more concerned to express himself with his
customary smartness than to deal seriously
with the question before the House. My
view may be right or it may be wrong ; we
cannot know. I feel that I am impertinent
in attempting to address myself to this
question. I have not seen the Petherick
collection but I will do so at the earliest
possible moment. As a book-lover I admire
and respect those who do collect, and I pay
my deference to Mr. Petherick, who has
rendered a great service in making this gift
to the Commonwealth. I appreciate the
action of the Administration by whom this
collection was taken over, and who, I trust,
will, at a very early date, see that it is pro-
perly housed. If the honorable member
for Wentworth feels that the books are not
being adequately protected, I hope that,
soon after this measure is passed, he will
experience no further cause of complaint
in connexion with this valuable library. I
hope also that I shall be able to make a
contribution of newspapers, and, perhaps,
of a volume or two in practical apprecia-
tion of Mr. Pethenck’s work and the action
of the Ministry.
Mr. BRUCE SMITH (Parkes) [8.21].
—I think it would be a very great misfor-
tune of we were to allow any spirit of con-
troversy to enter into this discussion. I can
readily understand that the little difference
between the honorable member for Kennedy
and the honorable member for Wentworth
arises from the fact that the former could
not readily throw off the Speaker’s manner
and the latter was treating a very serious
question in his usual light-hearted way.
Mr. Joseph Cook. —We do not get the
Speaker on the floor every day.
Mr. BRUCE SMITH.—I think that if
ever there was a Bill brought forward in
this House which ought to be discussed
aside from party feeling, it is this one. It
does not ask us for authority to do some-
thing, but asks us to approve something
which has been done. I heartily approve
of what has been done. I was a member
of the Library Committee when this ar-
rangement was entered into. I discussed
the matter from time to time with Mr.
Speaker Holder. I thought then, and I
think now, that the Commonwealth is ex-
ceedingly fortunate in securing this magni-
ficent collection for the moderate sum which
would need to be invested in order to pro-
duce an annual salary, if so it may be
called, to Mr. Petherick as the Archivist
of the Comonwealth. I have known Mr.
Petherick in connexion with this collection
for upwards of thirty years. He has had
the true archivist’s spirit during all these
years. I knew from time to time that he
was gathering, at much cost to himself,
and with great personal deprivation, this
splendid collection of books, papers, manu-
scripts, maps, pictures, and a variety of
articles ; and the amount which the Com-
monwealth is asked to invest in order to
pay him his honorarium is ridiculous, be-
cause we are getting not only the collec-
tion itself, but also the services of Mr.
Petherick, who is one of the most scholarly
collectors in Australia. We are get-
ting his services as the curator of
this collection, and as the adviser of


all those people—whose number we
hope to see increase—who take an in-
terest in the archaeology of Australia. We
should remember the name of Mr. Speaker
Holder in this connexion. I think that the
whole collection was first brought under his
notice. He was a man of a scholarly mind,
with a great love of literature and history.
When he discovered that Mr. Petherick had
this collection, and was willing to dispose
of it to the Government on the terms ar-
ranged, he strongly advised that the offer
be accepted, trusting to the love of history
on the part of the Federal Parliament to
confirm the arrangement he had made. In
my mind, I shall always attach the name of
Speaker Holder to this collection, because
he was saturated with the idea of our pos-
sessing it* When I explained to him what
I knew of the Mitchell Library—because I
had the privilege of a personal acquain-
tance with the donor—he was intensely in-
terested, and, perhaps, a little disappointed
to find that the Petherick collection was
not really so great and so varied as that
which the New South Wales people have
erected a special building for. At the same
time, he anticipated that, by the Common-
wealth Parliament devoting a liberal sum
-every year to the increase of the collection,
we should some day vie even with the Mit-
chell Library. As to the value, I may say
that the Mitchell collection, which contains
not only books, but pictures, diaries, manu-
scripts, maps, atlases, coins, and a great
variety of other material, has been estimated
as worth The Petherick col-
lection is not so large, but it is very valu-
able, and has occupied Mr. Petherick’s
time, I should say, for forty or fifty years.
We are getting this for the equivalent of
paying Mr. Petherick a
year, which, for a scholar of his repute, is
a modest consideration for so valuable an
officer.
Sir John Forrest. — It is only an annual
payment of a year.
Mr. BRUCE SMITH. But that
amount is the sum required to produce
a year.
Sir John Forrest. —That sum will not
produce jQ SOO a year.
Mr. BRUCE SMlTH.—Originally, it
was intended to buy the collection ; and it
was estimated to be worth
Mr. McDonald. — There were various
estimates from £ 6,000 to
Mr. BRUCE SMlTH.—lnstead of giv-
ing that sum, we have made an arrange-
ment to employ Mr. Petherick as Archivist
at £5OO a year, and that annual payment
capitalised comes to a very small sum. Yet
for a year, we secure this collection,
coupled with the services of Mr. Petherick.
Sir John Forrest.—l understand that
this a year is not continuous, but only
during Mr. Petherick’s lifetime.
Mr. BRUCE SMITH.—So long as we
have his services, we pay him a year.
It is not proposed to pay the ,£SOO after
his death, but I think it would be as well
not to anticipate that. In my opinion,
this is a priceless collection, containing
things which cannot be bought for money
to-day ; there are many instances in which
there is no copy or replica. During the
early history of the Commonwealth, it is
invaluable to us to have the advice of Mr.
Petherick as collector of more data of the
kind; because we hope some day that the
Commonwealth will have the finest collec-
tion of Australian historical data in all its
various forms that is to be found in any
part of the world. The Mitchell Library
at present is the best; and 1 desire honor-
able members, who are not so familiar as
I am with that collection, to know that Mr.
Mitchell made it a condition of his gift that
a special branch of the Public Library
should be constructed in order to hold it.
As a matter of fact, the New South Wales
Government have actually constructed the
Mitchell branch before they have built their
library; and honorable members who visit
Sydney may see a magnificent building in
Macquarie-street wholly devoted to this col-
lection. I do not at all agree with the
honorable member for Kennedy, who, as
chairman of the Library Committee, says
that we should continue to preserve these
valuable books and manuscripts in the base-
ment of Parliament. We must remember
that as soon as the Capital is sufficiently
built for Parliament to meet there, it is in-
tended to move the collection; but I think
we ought to give the Victorian people an
opportunity of seeing it. It is not a col-
lection to be laid out on a table, or on
bookshelves, and the public allowed indis-
criminately to inspect it. That is .not done
in the case of the Mitchell Library. There
are very competent assistants to the curator
who show the people over that library ; and,
if it is desired to see the most valuable por-
tions in the way of coins, manuscripts,
diaries, and so forth, visitors have to be
introduced, and shown over by the curator
himself. I do not see why we should not,
as an act of generosity to the people of
Victoria, who have been good enough to


grant us the use of this building for so
many years, invite the Government of the
State to afford some habitation for the
collection in some part of the Exhibition
Building. Mr. Petherick could be in at-
tendance there as our Archivist, and the
Victorian people, who care to avail them-
selves of the opportunity, might be enabled
to see through the collection before it is
finally removed to the Federal Capital.
Mr. Fenton.— There is danger of fire at
the Exhibition Building.
Mr. BRUCE SMITH.— I admit that
danger; but, if the collection cannot be
sent to the Exhibition, then I think the
people of Victoria might have an oppor-
tunity to see it here. If a little more
money were expended on the basement of
Parliament House, it would be possible for
the limited number of people who wish to
see these things to do so in a more con-
venient manner. I quite agree with the hon-
orable member for Wentworth that, at pre-
sent, with all that has been done, the whole
collection is very much cramped. Maps are
put in drawers one on the other in such a
way that sometimes twenty or thirty have
to be turned over, and drawn out, with all
the risk of injury, in order that a particular
one may be shown. Seeing that we have paid
no rent for this building, we could very well
afford, I think, to lay out a little more
money on the basement preparatory to in-
viting the people of Victoria to come and
see these very curious historical documents.
This is, I think, a convenient time to say
that Mr. Petherick has been for years—in
fact, the whole of his lifetime—preparing
material for an index of Australian biblio-
graphy. It is a book which, if published,
will fill half a dozen volumes, but it will
be the most complete bibliography, or index
to Australian historical data, that has ever
been published. I should like the Library
Committee to consult with Mr. Petherick and
to consider whether it would not be possible
for the Commonwealth Parliament, in return
for this great collection, to contribute a sum
sufficient to enable him to publish this work.
It will never pay from a publisher’s, or an
author’s point of view, but it will redound
to the credit of the Commonwealth if this
great work—for it will be a great work —
is published for the benefit of the world.
We all look forward to a glorious future for
Australia, and I think the glory of our
future will be very much enhanced if such
libraries as that of the British Museum were
supplied with a copy of a work including
practically every known and literary detail
with regard to the data of Australian
history. I ask the chairman of the Library
Committee to lay the suggestion before his
fellow members with a view to ascertain-
ing whether Parliament is prepared to
advance a sufficient sum to enable
Mr. Petherick to publish this work.
Honorable members will find in the
Bill a fairly comprehensive statement
of the contents of this Library. The sche-
dule in describing the collection to be ac-
quired speaks of books, pamphlets, plates,
maps, and manuscripts. The same classes
of data are contained in the Mitchell
Library. In that Library there are con-
temporary paintings of Cook’s ships as they
left the English ports, and oil paintings of
the ships that accompanied him as they re-
turned to England. There is also a won-
derful collection of pamphlets that were
discovered in different parts of England —
pamphlets that had been printed by people
who had come out here, and who had re-
corded in them their early experiences of
the first days of Australia. I should like
to assure the honorable member for Dailey,
who confessed that he had not seen the
Petherick collection, and also other honor-
able members, that a visit would convince
them that it is by no means a dry-as-dust
affair. They would find Mr. Petherick
delighted to have an opportunity of show-
ing them the great variety of material in
his possession, and I am satisfied that an
hour or two spent in looking over that ma-
terial would create in them a new interest
in the early history of Australia. I have
much pleasure in supporting this proposed
confirmation of the arrangement made with
Mr. Petherick, and I congratulate, not only
the Library Committee in having brought
the matter to a head, but Australia, and
the people of Australia, on having acquired
such a valuable collection.
Mr. W. ELLIOT JOHNSON (Lang)
[8.37]. —I am very glad that this matter
has at last been brought to something ap-
proaching finality. It has been hanging
fire for many months, and has been caus-
ing Mr. Petherick some anxiety. I am
pleased to learn from Mr. Speaker that
something has been done to improve the
means of keeping this collection free from
the risk of injury, because for a consider-
able time it was a source of continual com-
plaint on the part of Mr. Petherick him-
self that he could, not secure proper accom-
modation for it, and that precautions
that he had suggested for preserv-
ing it from the risk of injury from damp,


dust, and climatic changes had not been
adopted. The neglect to take these precau-
tions gave him very much concern for many
months. Whether he had had, up to that
time, access to the Library Committee to
explain to them the nature of his sugges-
tions I do not know, but I strongly ad-
vised him to lay his grievance before some
of the members of the Committee. I as-
sured him that I believed the composition
of the Committee was such that it would
try to meet his wishes in any reasonable
way. Whether he saw the Committee I am
not sure, but for some time I met
him frequently, and on almost every occa-
sion he complained of the lack of proper
provision against the risks of which he had
spoken. I am glad that something has
been done with a view to preserving this
very precious collection. After Mr. Speaker
had assured the House that he held re-
ceipts showing that the necessary work had
been done the honorable member for Went-
worth informed us that he thereupon
visited the rooms in which the collection is
housed, and found that the work had only
been half done.
Mr. McDonald. —All that Mr Petherick
asked for was done.
Mr. W. ELLIOT JOHNSON.— I am
not taking the Library Committee to task.
I have not had an opportunity to visit the
Petherick Library since the opening of the
present session. I used frequently to visit
it, and shall do so again, but I have not
seen it, nor have I seen Mr. Petherick,
since the opening of the present session.
The collection unquestionably is all that
has been claimed for it, and it would be
difficult, if not impossible, to replace it.
I am glad that this Bill has been brought
forward, and that the whole matter has
been dealt with, as it ought to have been
some time ago. As to the suggestion made
by the honorable member for Parkes that
the collection should be removed to the
Exhibition Building, and thrown open for
public inspection, I think that a good deal
of injury might be done to it by the trans-
fer. The less such a collection is handled
for transport purposes the better. Some
of the papers, documents, and valuable
specimens are old and worn, and
are very tender to handle. More-
over the Exhibition Building itself is
hardly a safe place when we consider the
risks of fire, and if the location of the col-
lection were even temporarily changed every
effort would have to be made to see that
the building to which it was re-
moved was, as far as possible, fireproof.
The public were permitted to have ac-
cess to portion of the collection, as
honorable members who were in the last
Parliament will remember. On that occa-
sion the Queen’s Hall was used for
the purpose of displaying a number of
articles, and many members of the public
availed themselves of the opportunity of
visiting it. Everything, of course, could
not be shown in so small a space, but so
far as space and the means at command
would allow, some of the most interesting
portions of the collection were made avail-
able for a brief time for the inspection of
the general public.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —Members are al-
lowed to show visitors over the Petherick
Librarv now.
Mr.' W. ELLIOT JOHNSON.—Yes,
but honorable members generally may not
know that they can do so. I suppose the
general public do not know where the col-
lection is to be seen, and, if they did, they
would probably have a great deal of diffi-
culty in finding it. It is not housed in the
best place, but I am sure the Committee
have done the best they could in difficult
circumstances. The room is, I think, fairly
damp-proof. Although if may be cold and
cheerless looking, we have to remember
that it is only a temporary habitation, and
the necessity for providing proper accom-
modation for the collection ought to be
another argument to induce honorable mem-
bers to push forward with the construction
of the Federal Capital, so that we may
make suitable provision at the earliest
moment, with the most up-to-date contriv-
ances against climatic and other adverse
influences, to insure the safety of the col-
lection for many years to come, if not, in-
deed, for ever. I wish to ask the Library
Committee, or the House, whether it is not
worth while to adopt a suggestion, which
has been made by Mr. Petherick himself,
that a special form of index should be used
in connexion with the collection. I under-
stand that he has perfected a system of
indexing, cross indexing, and cataloguing,
by means of which the references to any
event may be found at almost a moment’s
notice. By this system any particular
point in Australian history, for instance,
may be traced through quite a number of
volumes. It impressed me, when Mr.
Petherick explained it, as being a very
complete system, and he seems to have
spent a tremendous amount of time over
it, and to have set his heart upon having


it adopted. If the Committee have not
already gone into the matter thoroughly,
I would suggest, if I may do so without
appearing to be impertinent, that it might
engage their serious attention.
Mr. RYRIE (North Sydney) [B.4#.] —I
wish to express a word of appreciation on
the consummation of the arrangement in
connexion with Mr. Petherick’s magnificent
gift to the Commonwealth. I am free to
admit at once that I have not yet seen the
collection. I am honest about it. I am
sure there are a large number of members
who have not seen it, but, perhaps, they
will not admit it. I am sorry that I have
not seen it, but I can assure the House
that it will not be long before I do in-
spect it. I hope then to meet Mr. Pethe-
rick, and I am sure that he will take a
great deal of pleasure in showing me, as
he has shown other honorable members,
many of the ancient relics and records
which he has been successful in gathering
together.
Mr. Tudor. —I suppose there will be a
rush down there to-morrow.
Mr. RYRlE.—There will be. I should
like to see a list of those honorable mem-
bers who have not yet seen the collection.
I think I am the only honest man among
the lot, because I admit that I have
not seen it. Mr. Petherick is deserving
of the thanks of the whole community, and
I am, indeed, pleased that such expres-
sions of appreciation of his action have
come from all parts of the House. It is
quite right that we should appreciate the
actions of such men as he, who have done
such valuable service to their country. I
am sorry that there are some men who have
done invaluable work for their country in
the past, and have not received at the hands
of the public, or at the hands of the Go-
vernments of the States, or at the hands of
the Commonwealth Parliament, the recogni-
tion to which they are entitled. If I
may be allowed to do so, I should like
to refer in particular to Mr. William
Farrer, the wheat expert, whom I can
class among my intimate friends. He was
an acquaintance of mine from my child-
hood, and he is a man who has done as
much for Australia as any man we have
ever had in this country. Honorable mem-
bers who are interested in our primary pro-
ductions will admit that that gentleman has
done great service for this country.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—Does the,
honorable member propose to connect those
remarks with the subject before the Chair ?
Mr. RYRIE.—I am dealing with the
question of the recognition of the services
of men who have contributed in a great
degree to our progress, or who have been
responsible for handing down to us valu-
able possessions. Mr. Petherick has handed
to us this valuable collection, while Mr.
William Farrer has greatly benefited us
in another way by giving us the result of
all his researches and experiments in wheat
growing. I have come to the conclusion
that Mr. Farrer’s services were not recog-
nised, and appreciation was not shown to
him in the same way as has been done in
the case of Mr. Petherick.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—The hon-
orable member must not pursue that line
of argument.
Mr. RYRIE.—I will content myself
with saying that I highly appreciate the
magnificent gift which Mr. Petherick has
made to the Library of this Parliament. I
trust that the valuable collection will be
suitably housed, and that, when the par-
liamentary buildings and the Common-
wealth library are completed at Canberra,,
it will be properly provided for there. I
hope that I shall be among those who will
have the honour of visiting it at that time,
and that Mr. Petherick will still be alive
and well, and in charge of it, and able
to show us his valuable and interesting re-
cords. lam exceedingly pleased that Mr.
Petherick has been employed at his pre-
sent work by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. I take it that the per annum
which he receives is only to be looked upon
as a suitable recompense, to which he is
well entitled. I am pleased to know that
he will have congenial employment in
looking after the valuable records and
books which he has gathered together, and
which I am sure he dearly loves.
Mr. SAMPSON (Wimmera) [8.54]. —It
would be difficult to add much to the many
expressions of appreciation which have
been uttered regarding the wonderful re-
sults of the life work of Mr. Petherick in
collecting his valuable Library of the early
records of Australia. I have visited the
Library on several occasions, but one visit
was enough to demonstrate the industry,
the research, and scholarly application of
the gentleman who has brought together,
and placed at the disposal of the Common-
wealth, this magnificent collection. It is
a mistake to speak of the collection as hav-
ing been purchased by the Commonwealth.
In reality, the gentleman whose life’s work
it has been to bring together the records of


the early days of Australia, has offered it
as a gift to his country. The honorarium
which it is proposed to offer him is not
more than an adequate compensation for the
work of looking after the collection, and
compiling the valuable index on which he
is engaged. It is evident that more money
is needed for the proper preservation of
these treasures.
Mr. Bruce Smith, —And they should be
added to.
Mr. SAMPSON. —Every encouragement
should be given to Mr. Petherick to add to
them, and more money should be placed at
his disposal for the proper treatment of
the valuable charts and maps which form
part of the gift, as well as for the preser-
vation of the books. The index to which
I have referred supplies an epitome of
almost every book and document in the col-
lection. The collection consists of about
11,000 items, of which about 6,000 are
books, and the remainder pamphlets, plates,
charts, portraits, curios, &c. Its present
value is very great, but nothing like the
value which it will have in the future. It
should be made the nucleus of a much more
extensive collection, to remind future
generations of the patriotism, self-sacri-
fice, and ability of those who laid the foun-
dation of what we hope will become a great
country. In this connexion, I suggest some
permanent memorial of those associated
with our early days or connected with
the establishment of our nationhood by
the framing of the Federal Constitution.
We have not shown the reverence for the
past which is exhibited by the people of the
United States of America, where it is cul-
tivated in the State schools and in the uni-
versities. This sentiment is growing here,
and we should do everything possible to
foster it. We might very well perpetuate,
by marble statues or inscriptions in pro-
minent places in our Parliament House,
the names of the great men associated with
the foundation of the Commonwealth. A
few years ago, when the new building for
the University College of Arts and Sciences
in New York was designed, a Hall of Fame
was set aside for the perpetuation of the
memory of those who are, or who will be-
come famous in the political, literary, and
military history of America. It has been
decided that about twenty names shall be
chosen in the first instance, and four or
five added annually afterwards. Great
care has been taken to choose a Committee
competent to select the names of those most
entitled to the honour and reverence of their
countrymen. This Committee is composed
of professors of history, scientists, pub-
licists, editors, authors, and Judges of the
Supreme Courts of the Federation and of
the States.
Mr. SPEAKER. —The honorable mem-
ber is now going beyond the question.
Mr. SAMPSON.—I simply wish to point
out that, in addition to preserving valuable
documents, maps, and similar records, we
should take steps to perpetuate the memory
of those who have built up our nation, the
pioneers whose names are the pride and
glory of our history. With others, I con-
gratulate the Parliament upon having
secured this magnificent collection as a gift
from Mr. Petherick. I hope he will be
long spared to give his valuable assistance
in still further perfecting the collection, and
that Parliament will not hesitate, when the
time arrives, to find the money necessary to
preserve such valuable documents and re-
cords as they should be preserved, and to
enable Mr. Petherick to complete the
valuable index to it as a record of its con-
tents, which might be distributed for the
information of people in Australia who have
not an opportunity to personally inspect it.
Mr. FINLAYSON (Brisbane) [9.6].
The main purpose which seems to be served
by this debate is, for the first time, to let
members of this Parliament, and the public
generally, know that there is such a thing
as the Petherick collection. I freely and
frankly confess that I have not seen the
collection, and that, until this Bill was in-
troduced, I was not aware of its existence.
I have no desire to apportion blame for ray
ignorance in the matter.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —The matter was
considered by this House previously, and
the Library has been open all the time.
Mr. FINLAYSON.—I have paid very
frequent visits to the Library, but I have
seen no notice there that a valuable collec-
tion of this kind was housed in any part
of this building. I am delighted that this
Bill is brought forward, though its con-
sideration appears to me somewhat belated,
and that some action is now to be taken to
express, not only our appreciation of the
value of the collection, but also the neces-
sity for properly housing it. The debate
should serve a useful purpose. There can
be no question in the minds of honorable
members of the priceless value of a collec-
tion such as this seems to be. Its value
will increase in very great ratio as the


years go by. It is not only a credit to Mr.
Petherick, but an advantage to the Com-
monwealth, that we have a gentleman who
is willing to give such a valuable collection
for the benefit of the people of Australia.
I do not know that the States can be said
to have been altogether remiss in this re-
spect, because the various State Govern-
ments have devoted some attention to the
collection of early historical data within
their own particular spheres of action.
Now that we have a Commonwealth collec-
tion of the kind, we should take every
opportunity to improve it, and especially to
see that it is carefully and properly looked
after. I agree entirely with the honorable
member for Parkes, who suggests that this
collection should be removed from its pre-
sent location in the basement of this build-
ing to some place where it would be easily
accessible to the general public as well as
to members of this Parliament. lam ac-
cepting the statements of honorable mem-
bers as to its value, and I may say that T
have a profound respect for men who de-
vote their time and money to making such
collections. In my opinion, they are in-
valuable. To say that we have no better
place to put such a collection, and to ac-
commodate Mr. Petherick, the donor of it,
than the basement of this building, is not
to our credit. Mr. Petherick deserves,
and his collection deserves, better of us.
The Commonwealth will lose much in
dignity, and a proper appreciation of such
a gift, if we allow the collection to remain
any longer in the basement of Parliament
House. I understand that the Government
of Victoria are at present going in for a
very large extension of the State Public
Library. The honorable member for
Parkes suggested the Exhibition Building
as a suitable place for this collection.
Mr. Bruce Smith. — I see the difficulty
there, in the danger from fire.
Mr. FINLAYSON. —There would be
considerable objection to locating the col-
lection there; but I think we may assume
that the new Public Library building in
course of completion in Melbourne is not
expected to meet only present requirements,
and possibly some spare room might be
found in that building which be
available for the housing of this collection.
It has been suggested that, as we are likeb
to remove to the Federal Capital in a few
years’ time, it would be unwise to go to anv
considerable expense in this matter; but I
say that any expenditure that would tend
to the proper preservation of the books,
papers, pictures, curios, and such other
things as may be included in the Petherick
collection, would be money well spent, even
though it should be necessary later to re-
move the collection to the Federal Capital.
I do not suppose that even the most
sanguine of us expects that we will be
housed in the Federal Capital within the
next ten years; and to condemn the Pethe-
rick collection to the basement of this
building for ten years would show an utter
lack of appreciation of the value of the
gift. As we are accepting the collection
under the remarkably generous provisions
of the agreement dealt with in the (Bill,
we should be equally generous in our ac-
ceptation of the gift and in our apprecia-
tion of its value, and should see that Mr.
Petherick, and the books and papers he is
giving us, are properly looked after. " On
the passing of this Bill, the Library Com-
mittee should consider the matter of recom-
mending to the Government a sufficient ex-
penditure of money to secure that this col-
lection will be housed in a manner that
will be to the honour of this Parliament,
and where it will be available, not only
to members of this House, but to the public
of the Commonwealth, at all times, and
under such circumstances as will guarantee
its care and protection, and, at the same
time, its proper appreciation and use by the
public.
Mr. FOWLER (Perth) [9.13].—1t is
quite a pleasant change to find introduced
in the midst of our party warfare a subject
which can be discussed free from 'party
bias, and on which only two definite
opinions are expressed, neither of which can
be said to come from either side in par-
ticular. The first opinion is that, as a
Commonwealth Parliament, we have been
very fortunate in being able to secure this
magnificent collection on the terms indi-
cated in the measure before the House. The
second opinion is that it is a matter for
regret that so unique and valuable a collec-
tion should be housed under circumstances
which have made it absolutely impossible,
even for members of this House, to know
that it is in existence. When the honorable
member for Brisbane stands up and tells
us that, until this Bill was introduced, he
had been quite unaware that we had such
a collection in our possession in this build-
ing, that is a significant indication that, in
some way or other, we have been remiss in
stowing away in the vaults of this building
what we acquired under the agreement in-
cluded in this Bill. I admit at once the


difficulty of making necessary and proper
provision for a collection of this kind, in
circumstances that are of a temporary
character. In view of the fact that, in the
course of a comparatively short period we
shall remove to another part of the Com-
monwealth, it must be admitted that we
cannot embark upon any very expensive
project in connexion with this matter.
It struck me that there is an opportunity
of displaying at least a few of the more
interesting features of Mr. Petherick’s col-
lection just outside this chamber. The
Queen’s Hall, as it is called, is at present
a bare, barn-like structure. Surely some cases
could be displayed around it containing
some of the more interesting exhibits,
which would relieve the bareness of the
walls and give an additional attraction to
visitors, apart from that of politics.
Sir John Forrest. —Some of the ex-
hibits were displayed in the Queen’s Hall
for a while.
Mr. FOWLER. —I am reminded that
some of the exhibits were there for a
time, and I think they might have been
kept there continuously.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —They were re-
.moved when it was considered undesirable
•to keep them there any longer.
Mr. FOWLER. —There may have been
reasons for their removal; but if they had
been placed in locked cases they would
have been as safe in Queen’s Hall as they
are in their present quarters. It occurs to
me in this connexion that it is hardly fair
that Mr. Petherick should be obliged to
spend the greater part of his time in the
dismal vaults beneath this building. The
temperature there is anything but pleasant,
and the fact that the sunlight very seldom
enters some of the rooms would, I think,
justify Mr. Petherick in expecting that
more comfortable surroundings should be
provided. To come to the general question,
R think it a very fortunate circumstance
t >r Australia that we have had a gentle-
man -with -the enthusiasm and discernment
of Mr. Petherick to make this collection.
Any one who has only a slight acquaint-
ance with history has no difficulty in com-
ing to understand and appreciate the
’ alue of such a collection as this, com-
menced so early in the history of our own
country. One needs to go only a little
way into the history of other coun-
tries to realize what a serious defect
is, and has been, the lack of in-
terest taken in historical documents in al-
most every part of the civilized world until
F. 15788.—b
comparatively recent years. While Aus-
tralia has very little of a past behind her,
still that little is of sufficient interest and
importance to justify all the activities of
the Federal Parliament. In time the col-
lection with which we are now dealing
must be enlarged, so as to make it more
efficient and effective for all time. I
think that the Parliament, and the Library
Committee in particular, might very well
direct their attention to securing as good a
collection as possible, not only of the
bibliography of our Australian abori-
ginals, but of all matters connected with
their history and social conditions. In
fact, we should as soon as possible make
the beginnings of a museum of the his-
tory, the ethnography, and other peculiari-
ties of that rapidly diminishing race which
preceded us in the occupation of this con-
tinent. There is no doubt that in the
past the Australian aborigines attracted
very little attention, regarded as they
were by the early settlers as an inferior
race, and I believe by scientific men as
perhaps the lowest race of human beings
on the face of the earth. That view,
however, has of late years been entirely
abandoned, thanks to the investigations of
men like Professor Baldwin Spencer, Mr.
Gillen, and others, who have shown us
that the Australian aboriginals were in
many respects nossessed of what might
almost be called culture. Many of their
social habits and customs are exceedingly
interesting. A very earnest effort ought,
in my opinion, to be made to preserve for
future scientific purposes every scrap of
knowledge that can be acquired with re-
gard to the dialects of the Australian
aboriginals. This alone is a very inter-
esting field of investigation; and I be-
lieve one that will be very profitable in
the future, in view of the interest that is
taken in philology, and of the immense
issues that are frequently decided chiefly
on a philological basis. Incidental to
this consideration, I have often been dis-
gusted, in travelling through Australia, to
find how comparatively few aboriginal
names have been utilized in the nomencla-
ture of our towns and districts. It is very
amusing to any one who comes from the
Old Country, as he travels, in Australia
and visits the various suburbs and town-
ships, to find oneself running from an
English town —as far as name is con-
cerned—into an Irish one, thence into a
place with a Scotch name, and perhaps
back again into another with an English
name, all within the space of a


very few minutes. It is a thousand
pities that, instead of this absurd and
crude method of nomenclature being
adopted, people did not fall back
upon the very euphonious names of the
aborigines. I hope that, in whatever
direction we extend the work of Mr.
Pdtherick, this matter of enlarging the
knowledge of those who come after us in
reference to the natives, will not be for-
gotten. I have very much pleasure, in-
deed, in supporting the measure before
us; and I hope, in common with other
honorable members, that some steps will
be taken to make the value of this collec-
tion more apparent to the general public,
and much more accessible to students, than
it is to-day. By so doing, we shall not
only be treating the collection justly, but
we shall to a certain extent be creating an
interest in the subject which ought to be
productive of useful results.
Mr. PALMER (Echuca) [9.25.]. —I rise
to support the second reading of this mea-
sure, but in view of the great value attach-
ing to the Petherick collection it is very
regrettable indeed that the House was not
asked before to confirm an agreement which
I notice was arrived at two years ago.
Further, I regret that on this occasion we
are not asked to sanction the expenditure
which is necessary in order to put these
valuable mementoes in a more accessible
place. I think that the Ministry might very
well consider the advisability of inserting
a clause to empower the Library Committee
to incur considerable expense for that pur-
pose, so that the true value of the collec-
tion could be established in the public mind
as well as in our minds.
Mr. Fisher.—lt could not be in a safer
place than where it is.
Mr. PALMER. —That may be so, but
the place is so safe that apparently no one
can discover it.
Mr. Fisher.—lt is quite a mistake to
think that valuable documents are given out
of a collection of this kind to any person
who chooses to call and ask for them.
Precautions have to be taken to insure their
safety.
Mr. PALMER.—I apprehend that if the
works are so valuable that they cannot be
safely made available they will be of very
little use indeed to the public. I have
learned to-night for the first time that it is
permissible for members of Parliament to
take their friends to the vaults to view this
collection. If that is so, the fact should
bo made known.
Mr. Fisher. —lt is quite open to mem-
bers of Parliament to take their friends
to the rooms, subject, of course, to what-
ever regulations the Library Committee may
make.
Mr. PALMER.—That is an important
piece of news. I indorse the statement of
the honorable member for Parkes that the
Petherick collection should be put in some
place where it could be of very much more
value than it is likely to be where it now is.
So long as Mr. Petherick lives a great deal
of value will attach to the books and re-
cords from the fact that he is at hand
to explain them. Wherever they may
be placed they will be absolutely safe in
his charge, for there is no doubt that he
is an enthusiast. His life has been spent
in making the collection. To suggest that
there is a danger of books being purloined
or destroyed while he is in charge of them
is, I think, an assumption which the Prime
Minister was not justified in making.
Mr. Fisher. —The honorable member
knows nothing about the matter. At the
British Museum he would not be allowed
to handle a book without a special per-
mit.
Mr. PALMER.—That is all very well.
But Mr. Petherick is placed in the vaults
of this chamber, and in a climate which is
not suitable. If any honorable member will
make a visit to it this evening he will find
that the place is very suggestive of rheuma-
tism, and a good many other things. That
is, I think, hardly just to Mr. Petherick,
seeing that he has handed over the collec-
tion to the Commonwealth, and is to get
nothing more than a salary of a year.
In my opinion, he should be provided with
better accommodation. The Government
are to blame for not having afforded us
a much earlier opportunity to express our
opinion on this subject, and also for not
having placed the collection in a very much
better, and by no means less safe place
than at present.
Mr. FISHER (Wide Bay—Prime Minis-
ter and Treasurer) [9.31]. —The debate has
been interesting, and if it were continued
for another day I think that the Petherick
collection would be magnified until it would
appear to be equal to the best in the British
Museum.
Mr. Palmer. — I do not think that any
one has said that.
Mr. FISHER.—I have a very high ap-
preciation of this collection from the Aus-
tralian point of view, and whatever fault


is attachable to the last Government, no
blame lies against the door of the present
Government. When I closed with the offer
of Mr. Petherick during my first term of
office, the collection was housed in a room
in the Exhibition Building, where, if a fire
had taken place, not a single volume could
have been saved. Subsequently, the Go-
vernment retired, and their successors
entered into an agreement with Mr.
Petherick, which the House is now asked
to confirm. Last session was a very busy
one, and the passage of this Bill was in-
terrupted by the prorogation of Parliament.
The agreement which was first entered into
was thought to be sufficient, but the honor-
able member for Angas was not sure whether
it would do, and therefore a second agree-
ment, covering the whole case, was pre-
pared and embodied in a Bill which, I
think, was the better way to proceed. I
agree with a great deal of what has been
said by honorable members regarding the
wider use of native names, but no blame is
attachable to the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment. I do not know that any statement
made here will effect an alteration. Speak-
ing generally it is the surveyors and the
State Ministers who are to blame.
Mr. Greene. —The Lands Department.
Mr. Groom. —And the Railway Depart-
ment.
Mr. FISHER.—The State Ministers
have a considerable say in the naming of
places. I have known a Minister of Rail-
ways to alter the name of a place. I re-
cognise, of course, that the Postmaster-
General may have some control in this re-
gard. lam one of those who believe
largely in the use of native names, because
they are descriptive of places. Generally,
when one understands what a term means,
one knows exactly the character of the
locality, for instance, whether it is watered
or hilly, or the kind of growth which it
produces. From that point of view the
use of the native name is valuable. This
discussion has, I think, been useful in an-
other way. Not only will it draw public
attention to the historical documents in the
Petherick collection being valuable, but it
may induce many persons to present his-
torical documents to parliamentary libraries
so that they can be taken care of, and ulti-
mately tabulated. It is quite an error for
honorable members to think that this col-
lection is valuable from a mere spectacular
point of view. These documents are really
of value to men and women who wish to
investigate the early history of the country,
and who can devote their time and talent to
discovering the real facts. In many instances
there may be two documents or more declar-
ing a certain event to have taken place at
different times, and, though each statement
may be honestly made, the truth may lie in
one or the other, or in neither, and between
the two. It is only by close and competent
investigation that these documents can
prove to be of value ; and, therefore, it is
of no consequence whether they be shown
for one year or more. No greater mistake
coula be made than to remove these docu-
ments from this building with a view to
displaying them elsewhere. The super-
vision and protection would prove very ex-
pensive.
Mr. Archibald. —They are objects of
study, and not of amusement.
Mr. FlSHER.—Exactly; and many of
them could not be allowed to pass into 4:he
possession of visitors except under the per-
sonal supervision of an attendant. We
need not exaggerate the importance of the
documents ; but, in the meantime, while
they are being properly catalogued, and the
person to whom we are greatly indebted for
their collection is here to describe them,
they ought to remain within Parliament
House. The collection is placed in the
vaults because there is no better place in
the building; but so far from the basement
being disagreeable, there is plenty of natu-
ral light on most occasions, and, while in
the winter the rooms are heated, in the
summer they are exceedingly cool and plea-
sant. I had not the pleasure of hearing
what Mr. Speaker said on behalf of the
Library Committee, and I understand that
there is no bar on members taking their
friends, under proper circumstances, to
view the collection ; and, therefore, all who
desire to do so will have ample oppor-
tunity. I am glad to find that the feeling
of the House, in regard to this matter,
is in accord with that of another place.
We have too long delayed taking action,
not only to preserve historical records, but
to commemorate the learned and able
men who have done so much for this
young country, and who are passing away,
leaving very little behind by which we can
recognise them in feature or otherwise. I
hope that, before the session closes, the
Government will have an opportunity of
appealing to honorable members to place a
substantial vote on the Estimates to com-
memorate the notable and leading men of
the early Federal days. This is a fitting
occasion to refer to the subject, becauve


death is telling all too heavily on us, and
the time is ripe for such action as I have
suggested.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee :
Clause i (Short title).
Mr. DEAKIN (Ballarat) [9.41]. —I cor-
dially concur in the remarks which have
been made as to the value of this collec-
tion. It is a rare collection, and has found
its proper place. The life work of Mr.
Petherick has been thrown into its careful
acquisition from some sources which are
now closed, and has resulted in the re-
covery of many documents and records
which would otherwise have been lost.
This would have left a blank in our early
history. I congratulate the Government on
the passing of a Bill which will enable
us to present to the future Library of the
Federal centre of Australia a" collection
worth very much more money than we are
paying. It will be a lasting possession of
the Australian people.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 2 and 3 and schedule agreed
to, and the Bill passed through its remain-
ing stages.
MELBOURNE : J, KEMP, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.


1508
01188635


