

DECK
TENNIS
1944
Rules of the Game
COPYRIGHT
AUSTRALIAN ARMY AMENITIES
SERVICE




DECK TENNIS
In producing Deck Tennis, the object was to put up a
complete set, comprising Net, Posts, Guys, Pegs and an im-
proved unbreakable patented ring, at a popular price.
Deck Tennis will be welcomed by all lovers of sport. It is
easily learned, and yet offers plenty of scope for a practised
skilful player. It can be played on any level space, and whilst
a full court requires a space of 30 feet by 17 feet, that area is
not absolutely necessary. A good game can be had on a much
smaller space, even down to half the area of a full-size court.
This makes Deck Tennis an excellent game for the home as
well as Schools, Colleges, Athletic Clubs, Boarding establish-
ments, Roof Gardens, Picnic Parties, etc.
PLAN OF COURT.
Plan Not to Scale.


Description of Game.
Equipment.
A .great advantage of Deck Tennis is that it can be played
wherever the necessary space is to be found. The ground may
be grassed, asphalted or gravelled, and, although it is desir-
able to have a level surface, it is not essential.
The dimensions of the full-size court are 30 feet by 17 feet
for a double set, and 28 feet by 15 feet for a single. The
court is marked out similar to a lawn tennis court, as shown
by the plan printed on page 1.
The Deck Tennis net is 17 feet in length and one foot six
inches in depth, and is suspended between two posts (as shown
on the plan). The top of the net is to be five feet from the
ground. The posts are kept in place by means of the gyy
ropes and pegs supplied with the set. The court is divided into
four bases—two on either side of the net, and of equal
dimensions.
The patented Deck Tennis ring is 61 inches in diameter,
and about one inch (diameter) in thickness. It is made of
sponge rubber, moulded in one piece, and weighs approxi-
mately 5i ounces. The Deck Tennis ring is thus unbreakable
and practically indestructible. It is also of great resiliency, and
so soft in texture that a player is unlikely to be hurt if struck
on the face. It is the construction of the Deck Tennis ring
which makes the game so fast and so intensely interesting.
The Game.
Desk Tennis is played in a similar way to lawn tennis except
that the Deck Tennis ring is used instead of racket and ball.
The ring is tossed over the net in such a manner that it is dif-
ficult for the opponent to return. Serving and scoring is exact-
ly the same as in lawn tennis, likewise "foot faults,” etc.,
Deck Tennis may be played by either two or four persons.
When two persons play, it is termed a "single” game, four
players making a "double” game.
Laying Out a Deck Tennis Court.
The outside playing lines of a full-sized double Deck Tennis
court are 30 feet by 17 feet, and it is desirable to have a dis-
tance of five or six feet to spare at each end of the court, and
about a foot on either side. For a single court, the outside
playing lines are 28 feet by 15 feet, or a foot inside the double
court lines.
The court is to be marked out either with Deck Tennis
marking-out tapes (or any of the white marking-out mixtures


obtainable at any sports depot), as shown in the sketch on
page 1.
The posts are to be placed about six inches outside the side
playing lines and in such a position that the net will hang
across the exact centre of the court.
The Game.
The "Double-handed” Game.
(1) For the double-handed game (four players— two on each
side), the court is 17 feet in width and 30 feet in length. It
is divided across the middle by a Deck Tennis net tightly sus-
pended between two posts, which stand six inches outside the
court on each side. The height of the top of the net is to be
five feet from the ground at the posts. At each end of the
court, parallel with the net, and at a distance of 15 feet from
it, are drawn the base lines, at the end of which are joined the
side lines. Half way between the side lines, and parallel with
them, is drawn the half-court line, which divides the court into
two eual parts, called the right and left half-courts. (See
sketch).
First Rally.
To play the game, players take up positions on opposite
sides of the net. The server, standing outside the base line of
his righthand half-court, commences the game by tossing the
Deck Tennis ring over the net into the half-court diagonally
opposite. The receiver on the opposite side is to catch, with
one hand, the Deck Tennis ring, and return it immediately
into either of the half-courts on the server’s side; the server
(or, in the case of a double game, his partner) then catches
the Deck Tennis ring and returns it again into either of his
opponent’s bases. And so the play continues until a player
fails to return the ring, when it is said to be "dead,” thus com-
pleting a "rally,” and a score against the defaulting side.
Example:—Players are A and B against C and D. (See
sketch).
"A,” standing outside the base line of the righthand half-
court, tosses the Deck Tennis ring into C s base, diagonally
opposite. "C” then is to catch the Deck Tennis ring with one
hand and return it immediately into either 'A” or Bs base
"A” or "B” is to catch the Deck Tennis ring and return it im-
mediately into "C” or "D’s” base-—and so the play continues
until one side defaults, when the Deck Tennis ring becomes
dead, and the rally is completed.


Second and Remaining Rallies.
i rV 16 set5 et 7 e f," A ” now serves from outside the base line of his
lefthand half-court into the opponents’ half-court diagonally
opposite, and play continues, as in the first rally, until the
Deck Tennis ring is again "dead.” "A” would then again
serve from behind his right base line, and so on, alternately,
until the first game is completed. In the second game "C”
would become the server. Play is continued, "C” serving the
several rallies until the second game is completed. After com-
pletion of the second game, partners change places—i.e., B and
, become th e servers respectively. And so the game continues,
players serving alternately, until the set is completed.
Scoring.
On either side winning the first rally, the score is called 15
lor that side; on either side winning the second rally, the score
is called 30 for that side; on either side winning the third rally
the score is called 40 for that side; and the fourth rally, won
below- Slde ’ 15 SCOred " game ” for that player; except as
If both sides have won three rallies, the score is called deuce;
and the next rally won by either side is scored advantage for
that side. If the same side wins the next rally, it wins the
game; if it lose the next rally, the score is again called deuce;
and so on until either side wins the two rallies immediately
followmg the score of duece, when the game is scored for that
Winning the "Set.”
The side who first wins six games against the opponent’s
four games or less, wins the set. If both sides win five games
each, then play must be continued until one side wins two
consecutive games, thus winning the set.
General Rules.
7 h ,e c , hoi^ e °j “ d f» and right of serving in the first
game shall be decided by toss, provided that, if the winner
oi the toss choose the right to serve, the other side shall have
wiLlrf r°u sldeS ’ and V h vcrsa; and > P rovided that the
th f to “ , lf . he so prefers, require the other
player to make the first choice.
(2) The players shall stand on opposite sides of the net;
«U*s Wh ° first de l hvers , the , Tennis ring shall be
called the server, and the other the receiver*


(3) At the end of the first game the receiver shall become
the server, and the first server shall become the receiver; and
so on alternately in the remaining games of the set.
(4) The server shall, before commencing to serve, stand with
, ot k feet at rest on the ground, outside the base-line, and with-
m the limits of an imaginary continuation of the half-court
and side-line, and thereafter the server shall not run, walk, hop
or jump before the Deck Tennis ring has been delivered, but
the server may raise one foot from (and, if desired, replace it
on) the ground, provided both feet are kept outside the base-
line until the service has been delivered.
(5) The service shall be delivered from the right and left
half-court alternately, beginning from the right in every
game; and the Deck Tennis ring shall be served into the half-
court diagonally opposite. In the event of the Deck Tennis
ring falling on the line, the service will be considered good.
(6) When serving the Deck Tennis ring, the hand shall not
be raised higher than the player’s shoulder.
(7) It is a fault if the server commit any breach of rules 4
or 6, or if the service be delivered from the wrong half-court;
or if the Deck Tennis ring served touch the net; or if it drop
out of court or in the wrong court.
(8) After a fault, the server shall serve again from the same
half-court from which he served that fault, unless it was a fault
because served from the wrong half-court.
(9) Only one fault shall be allowed. Two faults constitute
a double fault, and the receiving side gain a score. A fault
may not be claimed after the next service has been delivered.
(10) The server shall not serve until the receiver is ready.
If the receiver attempt to catch and return the Deck Tennis
ring, but fail to do so, but touch the ring with a finger or
hand, or any part of the body, it is a score against him.
(11) The Deck Tennis ring is in play from the moment it
leaves the server’s hand (unless a fault is made) until—
(a) The receiver fails to catch and return it,
(b) It has dropped on to the ground, into the net, or out
of court.


(c) It has touched either of the players or anything he
wears, except the one hand with which it is caught
and returned.
Two hands are not allowed.
(12) Should the receiver’s hand be higher than the shoulder
when receiving, or in play, it must be brought below or in line
with the shoulder before returning.
(13) The Deck Tennis ring shall not be knocked back. It
must be caught in one hand and returned, as required by
rule 12.
(14) The Deck Tennis ring must be returned immediately;
the ring becomes dead if a receiver takes a step after catching
and before returning it, and a score shall count against that
player.
(15) In case a player is obstructed by any accident not with-
in his control, or be impeded or interfered with by a spectator,
and fail to catch the Deck Tennis ring, it shall be considered
an accident, and the rally played over again; but where a
permanent fixture of the court is the cause of the accident, the
point shall be counted. The benches and chairs placed round
the court, their occupants, the umpire and linesman, shall be
considered permanent fixtures. If, however, the Deck Tennis
ring in play strike a permanent fixture of the court (other than
the net or posts) before being received, the point is lost.
(16) It is a good return —
(a) If the Deck Tennis ring touch the net or post, pro-
vided that it passes over either and drop into the
court.
(b) If the Deck Tennis ring be returned from outside
the post or lines either above or below the level of the
top of the net, even though it touch the post or net,
provided that it drops into the proper court.
(17) The server wins a stroke—
(a) If the receiver fails to catch and immediately return
the Deck Tennis ring.
(b) If the receiver allows the Deck Tennis ring to touch
any part of his clothing, body, or two hands.
(c) If the receiver returns the Deck Tennis ring in play
so that it drops outside any of the lines which bound
his opponent’s court.


(d) If the receiver commits a breach of any of the rules
(18) The receiver wins a stroke—
(a) If the server serves two consecutive faults.
(b) If the server fails to catch and immediately return the
Deck Tennis ring in play.
(c) If the server allows the Deck Tennis ring in play to
touch any part of his clothing, body, or two hands.
(d) If the server returns the Deck Tennis ring in play so
that it drops outside any of the lines which bound
his opponent’s court.
(e) If the server commits a breach of any of the rules.
(19) In the event of any dispute arising, such shall be
settled by an umpire. The rules of Lawn Tennis, as adopted
by the various Lawn Tennis Associations of Australia, shall be
adopted when practicable.
Deck Tennis set consists of two varnished posts, two pairs of
guys, four pegs, net fitted with canvas top band and extra
strong tarred rope headline, and one patented improved un-
breakable ring.






Horticultural Press Pty. Ltd.,
78a Victoria Street, Melbourne.
