

ECLARATION OF NEW ENGLAND RIGHTS
THIS, THE SIXTH CONVENTION OF THE NEW ENGLAND NEW
STATE MOVEMENT, SOLEMNLY DECLARES;
WE THE DELEGATES HERE ASSEMBLED, affirm our allegiance to Her Majesty
the Queen and our respect for the laws of Australia.
Those laws we recognise as being implicit in and derived from the Australian
Constitution. Therefore we declare our unswerving loyalty to the Constitution and
pledge ourselves to uphold its principles.
There may come a time in the history of democratic communities when the citizens
assume a clear obligation to take all steps possible to remove the obstacles erected to
prevent the fulfilment of the fundamental law. Such an obligation now resides with
the New England people because the rights conferred upon them by the Constitution
have been withheld, evaded and ignored by the legislature of New South Wales.
For the past thirty years the people of New England have humbly, respectfully and
persistently sought the grant of these unchallengeable rights promised by the words
and the spirit of Chapter Six of the Commonwealth Constitution. This Chapter
contains an implied promise to confer on suitable communities, willing and able to
manage their own affairs, the right of self-government in accordance with the basic
tenets of British democratic practice.
Recognising the force of the arguments advanced by the New England people, the
Government of New South Wales caused the appointment of a Commissioner to define
the boundaries ?of areas suitable for self-government as States of the Commonwealth
and as to areas in which referenda should be taken to ascertain the opinions of the
electors on any question in connection with the establishment of New States.?
The Commissioner found that the area now known as New England was an area
suitable for self-government as a State of the Federation, and recommended that the
people should be given the opportunity of expressing their opinion by referendum on
the issue. This advice has been rejected and the people of New England have been
denied the fundamental privilege of expressing their opinion on an issue of vital
importance to them and to the nation as a whole.
Frustrated in the achievement of their constitutional destiny and denied the oppor-
tunity of expressing their opinions as free Australian citizens, the New England people
now appeal to the citizens and legislatures of the Commonwealth to support their
demand for full partnership in the Federation, which has been suppressed by the
Parliament of New South Wales.
appeal to the Commonwealth Parliament to initiate steps to revise the Consti-
tution in order to facilitate the creation of New States.
We demand that the New South Wales Legislature grant a referendum as a prelimi-
nary to the establishment of New England.
request all local government bodies in the New England area to co-operate in
pressing the issue to a successful conclusion.
WE DECLARE, for the following irrefutable reasons, that the establishment of the State of New England would extend
democratic principles and practice, provide a new supporting pillar for the Constitution, add strength to the Commonwealth,
accelerate development, and contribute substantially to the defence security of Australia:
In the annals of British history, local self-government, ignored, has led to disaster; granted, has preserved and
extended democratic thought and application.
The right of self-determination, an integral principle of the United Nations, has the legal and moral support of the
Australian Commonwealth.
Rich in production, fertile in resources, the State of New England would rank as Australia's fourth most productive
State, with an income exceeding the production income of the existing States of South Australia, Western Australia
and Tasmania.
Therefore, the ability of New England to support a stable Government is superior to the capacity of half the States
of the present Federation.
The establishment of New England would permit local people to concentrate on the solution of local problems now
neglected by a remote legislature dominated by metropolitan representatives.
The release of the enthusiasm and the utilisation of the energy of the New England people, now repressed, would
permit an acceleration of the development of resources and the dispersion of population and industry to fertile areas
inadequately developed.
The admission of New England to full partnership in the Federation would redirect capital expenditure and enable
the more equitable redistribution of national funds for the purposes of decentralisation, food and raw materials pro-
duction, and intensive settlement outside the capital cities.
The formation of the New England State would provide a new rallying point for national progress and enthusiasm;
and by encouraging the dispersion of strategic industries, population, and administrative services, would modify the
risks to Australian security inherent in the present system of centralising factories, people, and defence installations
in a few metropolitan centres.
Therefore we warn the Legislatures of the Commonwealth and New South Wales that if they persist in denying to the New
England people their right to determine their political future, these Legislatures will be culpable and open to the charge that
they have deliberately conspired against Australian survival and progress. If these Legislatures, or either of them, persists in
their refusal to consummate the promise implied in the Australian Constitution, and thereby jeopardises the future safety
and development of Australia, then this Convention declares its intention of taking decisive steps to ensure the observance
of the spirit and letter of the Constitution.
Authorised by the Sixth Convention of the J\[ew England K[ew State Movement, held at Grafton on October the
Third, Nineteen Hundred and Fifty 'two.
Davies & Cannlngton Pty. Ltd,, Printers, King St., Newcastle.
