

St. Mildred’s Church
Bread Street
City of London
Irirication of
Itationat Historical JEcmorial
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
Founder of Australia.
Born 11 th October, 1738
Died 31st August, 1814
WEDNESDAY, 7th DECEMBER, 1932,
at 12 noon.
A request is made to the congregation to stand during the Prayers.


(Drtur of
“ God Save the King.”
Ipsalnt 100
(Jubilate) Stanford.
0 be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands : serve the Lord
with gladness, and come before his presence with a
song.
Be ye sure that the Lord he is God : it is he that hath
made us, and not we ourselves ; we are his people, and
the sheep of his pasture.
0 go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and
into his courts with praise : be thankful unto him, and
speak good of his Name.
For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting : and
his truth endureth from generation to generation.
Amen.
Ipra^r
The Lord’s Prayer.
Prayer for the King and all in Authority under him.
Almighty God, the fountain of all goodness, we
humbly beseech thee to bless our Sovereign Lord,
King George, the Parhaments in all his dominions, and
all who are set in authority under him ; that they may
order all things in wisdom, righteousness, and peace,
to the honour of thy holy name, and the good of thy
Church and people ; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


Prayer for the British Empire.
Almighty God, who rulest in the kingdom of men, and
has given to our Sovereign Lord, King George, a great
dominion in all parts of the earth : Draw together, we
pray thee, in true fellowship the men of divers races,
languages, and customs, who dwell therein, that, bearing
one another’s burdens, and working together in brotherly
concord, they may fulfil the purpose of thy providence,
and set forward thy everlasting kingdom. Pardon, we
beseech thee, our sins and shortcomings : keep far
from us all selfishness and pride : and give us grace to
employ thy good gifts of order and freedom to thy glory
and the welfare of mankind ; through Jesus Christ thy
Son our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost
be all glory and dominion, world without end. Amen.
Prayer for Australia and Homeland.
0 Almighty God, whose Divine Providence ordereth
all things and guides and rules the destinies of Nations
and Peoples: We thank Thee that out of much toil and
heroic struggles our beloved and honoured Australia
has become a great and distinguished Member of the
British Empire and Commonwealth.
We honour Australia, ever loyal and in times of
danger ever ready to give her full offering of Life,
Strength, Means and Resources to serve and help the
Motherland in the day of her trial. We pray that every
blessing spiritual and material, may by Thy Divine
Grace, follow Australia in the path of Honour, Loyalty,
Peace and Fidelity and Manly enterprise.
Thou hast blessed her, 0 Lord, with many gifts from
Thy Natural and Spiritual bounty and in grateful return
may Australia and we with her give Thee the Honour
due unto Thy name and strive by the use we make of
them to deserve Thy Goodness to us.
Forgive, 0 Lord, all the faults, errors and sins we may
have been responsible for in the course of National
development through the years that are past, and create
in us a great love for the fulfilling of Thy laws of Eternal
righteousness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Imoit
Romans, Chap. XII, verses 6 to 21.
The Right Hon. The Lord Mayor.
(Alderman Sir Percy Greenaway.)
Hjimn
All people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice ;
Him serve with fear, His praise forth tell;
Come ye before him and rejoice.
The Lord, ye know, is God indeed ;
Without our aid He did us make ;
We are His flock, He doth us feed ;
And for His sheep He doth us take.
0 enter then His gates with praise,
Approach with joy His courts unto ;
Praise, laud, and bless His name always,
For it is seemly so to do.
For why ? The Lord our God is good ;
His mercy is for ever sure ;
His truth at all times firmly stood,
And shall from age to age endure. Amen
JUr&r^as
The Lord Bishop of London.


Lead us, heavenly Father, lead us
O’er the world’s tempestuous sea ;
Guard us, guide us, keep us, feed us,
For we have no help but Thee ;
Yet possessing every blessing,
If our God our Father be.
Saviour, breathe forgiveness o’er us ;
All our weakness Thou dost know ;
Thou didst tread this earth before us.
Thou didst feel its keenest woe ;
Lone and dreary, faint and weary,
Through the desert Thou didst go.
Spirit of our God, descending,
Fill our hearts with heavenly joy,
Love with every passion blending,
Pleasure that can never cloy ;
Thus provided, pardoned, guided.
Nothing can our peace destroy. Amen.
Xituftuttan
By the Lord Bishop of London.
lolmttama
(a) “Advance! Australia.”
(b) “ Land of Hope and Glory.”
Elgar.
At the close of the Service the Congregation will remain seated until
the Prince George has been conducted by the Lord Mayor from his seat to
the Vestry. The Congregation on leaving the Church will take up their
positions in the reserved space in front of the Church to witness the Ceremony
of Unveiling. A Procession consisting of the Clergy, the Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs, the Alderman and Members of the Ward of Bread Street, the
Australian Minister in London, the Dominions Minister, and the special
Overseas Representatives will then escort His Royal Highness the Prince
George to the foot of the Memorial.


JU Cmmmtg of Unimlmg
Alderman Lord Wakefield will ask the Lord Mayor, as
Chief Magistrate of the City, to accept the Admiral Phillip
Memorial on behalf of the Citizens of London.
The Lord Mayor will accept the gift and invite the
Prince George to unveil the Memorial.
The Prince George will unveil the Memorial.
tteMratton of tlj* JEmorial
by
Theßt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of London,
The Laying of Memorial Wreaths at the foot of the
Monument.


Ulintit
0 God, our Help in ages past,
Our Hope for years to come ;
Our Shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal Home !
Under the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure ;
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Before the hills in order stood.
Or earth received her frame.
From everlasting Thou art God
To endless years the same.
A thousand ages in Thy sight
Are like an evening gone ;
Short as the watch that ends the night
Before the rising sun.
Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
Bears all its sons away ;
They fly forgotten, as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
OGod, our Help in ages past,
Our Hope for years to come ;
Be Thou our Guard while life shall last,
And our eternal Home. Amen.
ISmMrftcrn
“GOD SAVE THE KING.”
Wreaths will be placed on the Memorial by, amongst others . the Lord Mayor,
representing the Citizens of London ; the Australian Minister in London ;
the High Commissioner for New Zealand ; the Agent-General for New
South Wales ; Mr. Douglas Hope Johnston, the Official Representative of
the Families of the Founders of Australia ; Mrs. D. Hope Johnston, repre-
senting the Women’s Pioneer Society of Australia ; Mrs. Bruce Marriott,
representing the Royal Australian Historical Society.


