

Landing Place
|| Captain Cook
spht 1770
Official Proceedings
veilveilve 6TH MAY 1899
mcm&tt
Scgftc-aadgic''
a ’’ xls^ci
Kurd I






FROM THE ORIGINAL PICTURE BY DANCE IN THE GALLERY OF GREENWICH HOSPITAL
CAPTAIN JAMES COOK,


OEDI6ATION 0F
oaptain Cjool^s
* Place.
Kxirr\ell, Botariy Bay.
Department of Bands,
November, 1899.
andlnp






NOTIFICATION OF RESUMPTION OF LAND UNDER
THE “PUBLIC WORKS ACT OF 1888,” 51 VICTORIA
No. 37.
PROCLAMATION.
New South Wales, ) By His Excellency the Honorable Sir
to wit. ( Frederick Matthew Darley, Knight
g j Commander of the Most Distinguished
Order of Saint Michael and Saint
Fredk. M. Darley. George, Lieutenant-Governor of the
Lieutenant-Governor. Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
VX/HEREAS I, Sir Frederick Matthew Darley,. the
* ' Lieutenant-Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the
Executive Council, have directed that a certain public work,
that is to say, the Establishment of a Public Park at Kurnell,
Botany Bay, in the said Colony, the estimated cost of which
does not exceed twenty thousand pounds, shall be carried out
under the provisions of the “ Public Works Act of 1888,” as
an authorised work by the Minister for Lands as Constructing
Authority; and that the land described in the Schedule
hereto, which is in my opinion required for carrying out the
said work, shall be acquired either by appropriating so much
of the said land as may be Crown Land and by resuming so
much of the said land as may be private property under the
“ Lands for Public Purposes Acquisition Act,” as adopted by
the “ Public Works Act of 1888,” or by purchasing the same
under Part 111 of the last-mentioned Act : Now, therefore,
I, the said Governor, with the advice aforesaid, in pursuance
of the “ Public Works Act of 1888,” do declare by this noti-
fication, to be published in the Government Gazette and in
one or more newspapers published or circulated in the Police
District wherein the said land is situated, that the Crown
Land comprised within the description set forth in the
Schedule hereto has been appropriated, and the private pro-
perty within such description has been resumed, for the public
purpose aforesaid, to the intent that upon the publication of


this notification in the Gazette, the said land described in the
said Schedule hereto shall forthwith be vested in the said
Constructing Authority as a corporation sole on behalf of Her
Majesty, for the purposes of the “Public Works Act of 1888,”
for an estate in fee simple in possession, freed and discharged
from all trusts, obligations, estates, interests, contracts,
charges, rates, rights-of-way, or other'easements whatsoever ;
and to the further intent that the legal estate therein, together
with all powers incident thereto or conferred by the said last-
mentioned Act, shall be vested in such Constructing Authority
as a Trustee: And I declare that the following is the Schedule
of the land hereinbefore referred to :
Schedule.
County of Cumberland, parish of Sutherland, at Cape
Solander, area 35 acres 2 roods 13 perches, being part of
James Birnie’s 700 acres grant, and being the land included
in portions 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, and 89 of
the subdivision of Kurnell township, as shown on plan 908
deposited at the Land Titles Office.
[Ms. 99-1,380 Ind.]
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the Great Seal of the Colony to be hereto
affixed, at Government House, Sydney, this seven-
teenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine, and in the
sixty-second year of Her Majesty’s Reign.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. H. CARRUTHERS.
[8529]
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN !


NOTIFICATION OF RESUMPTION OF LAND UNDER
THE “PUBLIC WORKS ACT OF 1888,” 51 VICTORIA
No. 37.
PEOCLAMATION
New South Wales,! By His Excellency The Honorable Sir
to wit. f Frederick Matthew Darley, Knight
s j Commander of the Most Distinguished
Order of Saint Michael and Saint
Fredk. M. Darley, George, Lieutenant-Governor of the
Lieutenant-Governor. Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
WHEREAS I, Sir Frederick Matthew Darley,. the
Lieutenant-Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the
Executive Council, have directed that a certain public work,
that is to say, the Establishment of a Public Park at Kurnell,
Botany Bay, in the said Colony, the estimated cost of which
does not exceed twenty thousand pounds, shall be carried out
under the provisions of the “ Public Works Act of 1888,” as an
authorised work by the Minister for Lands as Constructing
Authority; and that the land described in the Schedule hereto,
which is in my opinion required for carrying out the said work,
shall be acquired either by appropriating so much of the said
land as may be Crown Land and by resuming so much of the
said land as may be private property under the “ Lands for
Public Purposes Acquisition Act,” as adopted by the “ Public
Works Act of 1888,” or by purchasing the same under Part
111 of the last-mentioned Act : Now, therefore, I, the said
Governor, with the advice aforesaid, in pursuance of the
“Public Works Act of 1888,” do declare by tins notification,
to be published in the Government Gazette and in one or more
newspapers published or circulated in the Police District
wherein the said land is situated, that the Crown Land com-
prised within the description set forth in the Schedule hereto
has been appropriated, and the private property within such
description has been resumed, for the public purpose aforesaid,
to the intent that upon the publication of this notification in


the Gazette, the said land described in the said Schedule hereto
shall forthwith be vested in the said Constructing Authority
as a corporation sole on behalf of Her Majesty, for the pur-
poses of the “ Public Works Act of 1888,” for an estate in fee
simple in possession, freed and discharged from all trusts,
obligations, estates, interests, contracts, charges, rates, rights-
of-way, or other easements whatsoever ; and to the further
intent that the legal estate therein, together with all powers
incident thereto or conferred by the said last-mentioned Act,
shall be vested in such Constructing Authority as a Trustee :
And I declare that the following is the Schedule of the land
hereinbefore referred to :
Schedule.
County of Cumberland, parish of Sutherland, at Cape Solan-
der, area 2 acres 0 roods 8 perches, being part of James Birnie’s
700 acres grant, and being the land included in portion 85 of
the subdivision of Kurnell township,—as shown on plan 908
deposited at the Land Titles Office.
[Ms. 99-2,843 Dep.]
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the Great Seal of the Colony to be hereto
affixed, at Government House, Sydney, this twenty-
fifth day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine, and in the
sixty-second year of Her Majesty’s Reign.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. H. CARRUTHERS.
[9996]
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN !


NOTIFICATION OF RESUMPTION OF LAND UNDER
THE “PUBLIC WORKS ACT OF 1888,” 51 VICTORIA
No. 37.
PROCLAMATION
New South Wales, "I By His Excellency the Honorable Sir
to wit. i Frederick Matthew Darley, Knight
Commander of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of Saint Michael and Saint
Fredk. M. Darley, George, Lieutenant-Governor of the
Lieutenant-Governor. Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
WHEREAS I, Sir Frederick Matthew DarleV, the
Lieutenant-Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the
Executive Council, have directed that a certain public work,
that is to say, the establishment of a Public Park at Kurnell,
Botany Bay, in the said Colony, the estimated cost of which
does not exceed twenty thousand pounds, shall be carried out
under the provisions of the “Public Works Act of 1888,” as
an authorised work by the Minister for Lands as Constructing
Authority; and that the land described in the Schedule hereto,
which is in my opinion required for carrying out the said work,
shall be acquired either by appropriating so much of the said
land as may be Crown Land and by resuming so much of the
said land as may be private property under the “Lands for
Public Purposes Acquisition Act,” as adopted by the “ Public
Works Act of 1888,” or by purchasing the same under Part
111 of the last-mentioned Act: Now, therefore, I, the said
Governor,with the advice aforesaid, in pursuanceof the “Public
Works Act of 1888,” do declare by this notification, to be
published in the Government Gazette and in one or more
newspapers published or circulated in the Police District
wherein the said land is situated, that the Crown Land com-
prised within the description set forth in the Schedule hereto
has been appropriated, and the private property within such
description has been resumed, for the public purpose aforesaid,
to the intent that upon the publication of this notification in


the Gazette, the said land described in the said Schedule hereto
shall forthwith be vested in the said Constructing Authority
as a corporation sole on behalf of Her Majesty, for the pur-
poses of the “ Public Works Act of 1888,” for an estate in fee-
simple in possession, freed and discharged from all trusts, obli-
gations, estates, interests, contracts, charges, rates, rights-of-
way, or other easements whatsoever ; and to the further intent
that the legal estate therein, together with all powers incidqpt
thereto or conferred by the said last-mentioned Act, shall be
vested in such Constructing Authority as a Trustee : And I
declare that the following is the Schedule of the land herein-
before referred to :
Schedule.
County of Cumberland, parish of Sutherland, at Cape
Solander, area 25 acres 2 roods 19£ perches, being part of
James Birnie’s 700 acres grant, and being the land included in
portions 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, and 76 of the subdivision of Kurnell
township,—as shown on plan 908 deposited at the Land Titles
Office.
[Ms. 99-2,980 Dep.]
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the Great Seal of the Colony to be hereto
affixed, at Government House, Sydney, this second
day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and ninety-nine, and in the sixty-second
year of Her Majesty’s Reign.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. H. CARRUTHERS.
[10169]
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN !


Minute Paper for the Executive Council.
Subject: Setting apart a Public Reserve at Captain Cook’s
Landing Place.
Mis., 99/2,860, Dep.
Department of Lands,
Sydney, Ist May, 1899.
Whereas, in order to commemorate the landing of Captain
James Cook, R.N., then in command of His Majesty’s ship
“ Endeavour,” on the shores of Botany Bay, on the 28th day
of April, 1770, at a place situated on land afterwards resumed
under the Lands for Public Purposes Acquisition Act, it is
considered desirable and for the public benefit that the said
land, together with other land of the Crown, on the ocean
side of the land resumed (which lands—about 251 acres in all—
are more particularly described in the Schedule hereto), should
be set apart and dedicated as a Public Reserve. It is therefore
recommended to His Excellency the Lieutenant-Govemor„and
the Executive Council that the said lands be declared a Public
Reserve under the name of ‘ ‘ Captain Cook’s Landing Place, ”
and dedicated for the use and enjoyment of the public for all
ti me.
THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
County of Cumberland, parish of Sutherland, at Cape Solander,
area, 251 acres more or less.
Commencing at the intersection with the high-water mark
of Botany Bay of the westerly prolongation of the southern
boundary of portion 77, being part of an area of 35 acres 2
roods 13 perches resumed for the purposes of a public park at
Kurnell by notification in Government Gazette, dated 22nd
March, 1899, and bounded thence by a line partly forming the
said boundary of the said portion 77, bearing south 67 degrees
east to the waters of the South Pacific Ocean ; and thence by
those waters and the waters of Botany Bay northerly,
westerly, and southerly, to the point of commencement.
J. H. CARRUTHERS.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
and the Executive Council.
The Executive Council advise that authority be granted for
setting apart a Public Reserve, at Captain Cook’s landing place,
as herein recommended. — Alex. C. Budge, Clerk of the
Council, 2/5/99.
Approved.— Fredk. M. Darley, Lieut. -Gov., 2/5/99.
Min. 99-19. Confirmed, 9/5/99.


6ommittee
Appointed by the Honorable J. H. Carrutiiers,
Secretary for Lands, to carry out the proceedings
in connection with the Dedication of Captain
Cook’s Landing Place.
William Houston, J.P., Under Secretary for Lands.
Edward Twynam, Esq., Chief Surveyor.
Cecil W. Darley, Engineer-in-Chief, Public Works.
Walter Liberty Vernon, Esq., Government Architect.
Harris A. G. Curry', Esq., J.P. , Chief Inspector, Depart-
ment of Lands.
James Walter Grimshavv, District Engineer, Public Works.
Arthur Stanton Cook, Assistant Architect.
Victor Cohen, Accountant, Department of Lands.




c
1
M
REQUEST THE HOETOtTE OE
-on /At /At AAtc/ita/to.'n
AlccA’ d SAa-ntAny AA/ate a/ AfflcUrit//, ■o'n (£Aa/ti4</<zy y tvf/ay /,
Ay (g<cceAAe'uty /At AAc.ttt/e'ntm/A/ytX'V-M.'rLtxi.
The favour of un early answer is requested, addressed to
The Secretary, Kumell Dedication Committee, '
Department of Lands.




Saturday,
6tb May, 1 899.
Landing * Place.


* * * *
Extract from Captain Cook’s Journal, Satur-
day, 28th April, A.D. 1770.
“ At daybreak we discovered a bay, and anchored
“ under the south shore about two miles within
“ the entrance, in six-fathom water, the south point
“ bearing S.E. and the north point E., latitude 34° S.,
“ longitude 208° 37' W.”
“ Illustrious Cook, Columbus of our shore,
To whom was left this unknown world t’ explore;
Its untraeed bounds on faithful chart to mark,
And leave a light where all before was dark !”
—William Charles Wentworth
* * * *


- - - -
* * * * *
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
and Suite, His Excellency Admiral Pearson
and Suite, the Right Honorable the Premier,
and Members of the Executive Council will
be conveyed by Steamer “Dawn” to Kurnell,
and landed in boats manned by seamen
of H.M.S. “ Goldfinch ” and N.S.W. Naval
Brigade.
On landing, the Vice-Regal party will be
received by a Guard of Honour from N.S.W.
Naval Brigade.
The Band of the Permanent Artillery
will play the National Anthem.
The Vice-Regal party will proceed to
Dais.
Ceremony of Dedication will commence
at 3 p.m.
The Clerk of the Executive Council will
read the Minute of Dedication.
His Excellency will then declare the land
dedicated.
The Secretary for Lands will thank His
Excellency the Lieut.-Governor on behalf
of the People, and will invite His Excellency
the Admiral to unfurl the Flag.
Salutes will then be fired from H.M.S.
“ Goldfinch ” and Bare Island Battery.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN!


PROGRAMM
PERMANENT ARTILLERY BAND.
/ K\urnell,
SATURDAY,
' 6tti MAY, 1899.
T 4 ?
1. March - - “Honeymoon” - , Rosey,
2. Overture - “Le Due d’Olonne” - - Auber,
8. Waltz - - “ Donan Welben” - - Ivanoviei
4. Selection - - “The Geisha” - Jones
S. Mazurka
“ Centifole”
Eilenberg
6. Selection - - “lolanthe” - Sullivan
7. Song - “Whisper, and I shall hear”
8. Selection - - “La Poupee” - - Audran.
Ur|der tl\e direction of Bai\diriaster Hdtct\irisor\
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4


Q $7
CAPTAIN 000 KS
bandinci Place
-o At cn-
or\ 28tti April, 1770.
Saturday, 6th May, 1899.


Special Train for Kogarah,
“A” Platform, Redfern,
12-8 p.m.
On arrival Train, Kogarah,
12’22 p.m. Tram to Sand-
ringham, 12-24 p.m.
Luncheon, 12-45 p.m.
Steamers “Dawn” and
“Dayspring” will leave Jetty
at 150 p.m.
Dedication Ceremony by
SIR FREDERICK DARLEY,
Lieutenant-Governor, at
3 p.m.
Steamers return to Sand-
ringham at 4 p.m.
Guests leave Sandringham
4 45 p.m., Kogarah 5.3 p.m,,
arrive Sydney 518 p.m.


As the accommodation is very
limited, none but invited guests
will be permitted on the steamers
“ Dawn” and “ Dayspring.”
The Railway Tickets issued for 2%/h
April will he available for use on 6 th
May, 1899.




NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS.
DEDICATION TO THE PEOPLE
Captain Cook’s Landing Place,
KURNELL BEACH.
SATURDAY, 6th MAY, 1899.
VIA SANS SOUCI.
THROUGH RETURN TICKETS at 2s. 3d. First Class, and 2s.
Second Class, will be issued at Sydney by Trains leaving- Sydney from
BTO a.m. to 2TO p.m. (inclusive), available by all trains and trams to
Sans Souci, thence to Kurnell Beach, and back lo Sandringham by
Steamer. Children Half Fare.
Tickets at proportionate ra'es will also be issued both for rail and
steamer at intermediate Illawarra Suburban Stations.
Steamers will run to and from KURNELL BEACH
as under:
SansSouci | Grey- Grey- Grey- and
£3l j S ”"-'S “ “T fX
Leave 'j Rose „ Rose Rose ,
Kurnell ll' C and , ' A and Eclipse and E re A and
Beach for )- h n °“" d Eclipse b ™ nd Eclipse p.m. Eclipse hound Aurora
Sandring- | a ' ’ a.m. .‘, ’ p.m. I*3o p.m. P'5 11- P’.™’
ham at J 9 30 10’30 11 30 12 30 4'30 5 515
Return Fares 9d. Adults ; sd. Children.
VIA LADY ROBINSON’S BEACH.
Passengers may also proceed via Lady Robinson’s Beach by trains
leaving Sydney, from 9TO a.m. to 2.25 p.m. (inclusive). Return
Fares Sydney to Lady Robinson’s Beach, Is. 3d. First Class; Is.
Second Class; fares by Steamer (Natone), Bd. return.
Children Half Fare.
The liability of the Railway Commissioners is limited (exclusively) to
the Railway journey to Rockdale, and Railway and Tramway journey to
Sans Souci respectively.
By Order of the Commissioners,
Sydney, May, 1899.
H. McLACHLAN, Secretary.




Dedication of i\)e
andinp-place
of Captain Cool^.
The Honorable Joseph Hector Carruthers, M.P.,
when Secretary for Lands, took advantage of the
opportunity which his position in the Government
afforded of giving effect to a wish he had long enter-
tained of having the public placed in possession of the
historic site of Captain Cook’s landing-place at Botany
Bay. The land having passed into private hands in
the year 1815 (when a grant of 700 acres, which
included the site, was made to James Birnie, Esquire),
it became necessary for the Crown to resume it, and,
accordingly, during the earlier part of 1899 an area
of 63 acres 1 rood and \ perch was resumed, which,
together with a block of adjoining Crown lands,
amounting in all to about 251 acres*,His Excellency the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council,
approved to be set apart as a public reserve. Having
regard to the national interest which the event was
necessarily calculated to excite, it was deemed appro-
priate that a formal and public dedication of the
reserve should be made by His Excellency the Lieu-
tenant-Governor, the Honorable Sir Frederick Darley,
K.C.M.G., and it was arranged that the ceremony
should take place on the 28th April, 1899, that being
the anniversary of the date of Captain Cook’s landing.
* On measurement, the area has been ascertained to be 248 acres


Unfortunately, the very unpropitious state of the
weather necessitated a postponement until the 6th
May—the date on which Captain Cook sailed from
Botany Bay—and, happily, that day was one of the
brightest and most genial that could possibly have
been desired.
The large party of invited guests, among whom
was His Excellency Admiral Hugo Pearson, R.N.,
who had promised to take part in the proceedings,
proceeded by train from Redfern to Sandringham and
there partook of luncheon at Tollemache’s.
After luncheon, at which the only toast, that of
“ The Queen,” was loyally honored, the guests were
conveyed by steamer across Botany Bay. The Vice-
Regal party on arrival within a short distance of
the shore were met by a Naval Guard of Honor and
debarked in boats manned by crews from Her
Majesty’s Ship “ Goldfinch,” which, under orders
from the Admiral, had steamed from Sydney Harbour,
and taken up a position in the Bay.
On landing, a Guard of Honor comprising 100 rank
and file of the New South Wales Naval Brigade
received their Excellencies, whilst the Band of the
New South Wales Permanent Artillery Forces played
the National Anthem. The party was escorted to
a dais erected on the rise of the hill at the rear of
the monument erected by the late Hon. Thomas Holt,
M.L.C., to commemorate the landing of Captain Cook,
and, after all the guests had arrived, the ceremony of the
day was opened by the Clerk of the Executive Council,
Mr. Alexander Campbell Budge, reading the following
minute of dedication.


Minute Paper for the Executive Council.
Subject: Setting apart a Public Reserve at Captain Cook’s
Landing Place.
Mis., 99/2,860, Dep.
Department of Lands,
Sydney, Ist May, 1899.
Whereas, in order to commemorate the landing of Captain
James Cook, R.N., then in command of His Majesty’s ship
“ Endeavour,” on the shores of Botany Bay, on the 28th day
of April, 1770, at a place situated on land afterwards resumed
under the Lands for Public Purposes Acquisition Act, it is
considered desirable and for the public benefit that the said
land, together with other land of the Crown, on the ocean
side of the land resumed (which lands —about 251 acres in all—
are more particularly described in the Schedule hereto), should
be set apart and dedicated as a Public Reserve. It is therefore
recommended to His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor and
the Executive Council that the said lands be declared a Public
Reserve under the name of “ Captain Cook’s Landing Place,”
and dedicated for the use and enjoyment of the pnblic for all
time.
THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
County of Cumberland, parish of Sutherland, at Cape Solander,
area, 251 acres more or less.
Commencing at the intersection with the high-water mark
of Botany Bay of the westerly prolongation of the southern
boundary of portion 77, being part of an area of 35 acres 2
roods 13 perches resumed for the purposes of a public park at
Kurnell by notification in Government Gazette , dated 22nd
March, 1899, and bounded thence by a line partly forming the
said boundary of the said portion 77, bearing south 67 degrees
east to the waters of the South Pacific Ocean ; and thence by
those waters and the waters of Botany Bay northerly,
westerly, and southerly, to the point of commencement.
J. H. CARRUTHERS.
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor
and the Executive Council.
Speeches were then delivered by the Lieutenant-
Governor, the Admiral, and the Secretary for Lands.


THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR’S
SPEECH.
The Lieutenant-Governor, who was received with
cheers, said : Your Excellency, Mr. Carruthers, ladies
and gentlemen, this day 129 years ago, that singularly
gifted and most renowned navigator, Captain James
Cook, having some days before, on 28th April, set foot
upon the spot we now stand on, set sail from this bay
to continue his work of discovery and exploration to the
north. Before leaving he hoisted the English Hag, and
took possession of the land for the Crown of England.
(Cheers.) Thanks to the energy and patriotic zeal of Mr.
Carruthers, to whom all praise is due, I have the honor
of dedicating an ample reserve surrounding this spot
to the people of New South Wales as a place for their
recreation for ever. Perhaps it is expected of me
that I should pronounce an eulogium upon the gallant
Englishman who, born of peasant parents in the
humblest walk of life, commenced his sea career as a
boy on board of a collier; who entered his Majesty’s
service as a man before the mast, who raised himself
to be at the time of his sad and untimely death a post
captain in his Majesty’s service. When he was here
he was a lieutenant commander of a small barque of
370 tons, built for a collier, but, nevertheless, in
Captain Cook’s hands well adapted for navigating


unknown and uncharted seas. I have said you might
expect some eulogium from me, but I think it is better
that I should read to you some paragraphs from the
eulogium which was penned at the time by a contempo-
rary who appreciated and who knew him. I allude to
Admiral Forbes, then commander of the fleet, the
officer who refused to sign the conviction of Admiral
Byng. Admiral Forbes wrote a long eulogium, which
is inscribed upon a pillar set up in the grounds of
Sir Hugh Palliser, who was Cook’s first naval com-
mander. “He possessed,” says Admiral Forbes, “in
an eminent degree all the qualifications requisite for
his profession and great undertakings, together with
the amiable and worthy qualities of the best men.
Cool and deliberate in judging, sagacious in determin-
ing, active in executing, steady and persevering in
enterprise, using vigilance and unremitting caution,
unsubdued by labour, disappointments, and difficulties,
fertile in expedients, never wanting presence of mind,
always possessing himself, and the full use of a sound
understanding. Mild, just, but exact in discipline, he
was a father to his people, who were attached to
him from affection, and obedient from confidence.
His knowledge, his experience, his sagacity, rendered
him so entirely master of his subject that the greatest
obstacles were surmounted; the most dangerous
navigation became easy and almost safe under his
direction. If the arduous but exact researches of this
extraordinary man have not discovered a new world,
they have discovered seas unknown and unnavi-
gated before. They have made us acquainted with
island people and productions of which we had no


conception. And if he has not been so fortunate as
Americas to give his name to a continent, his pre-
tension to such a distinction remains unrivalled, and
he will be revered while there remains a page of
his own modest account of his voyages. If public
services merit public acknowledgment, if the man
who advanced and raised the fame of his country is
deserving of honor, then Captain Cook deserves to
have a monument raised to his memory by a generous
and grateful nation.” (Cheers.) Such and more was
the eulogium penned by a distinguished man who
knew him well, and was in a position to appreciate
the great services rendered to his nation by Captain
Cook. As to Captain Cook, one word more. A touch-
ing incident is related of his father. That man, having
risen from the peasant to the somewhat better position
of farm bailiff, at 70 years of age learned to read, so
that he might study the voyages of his illustrious son.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, as I have said, on this
day, 129 years ago, he sailed out of this bay. Eighteen
years come and go, when in January, 1788, Captain
Phillip, with Captain Cook’s charts at his disposal,
sails into this bay at the head of the first fleet of eleven
ships. Within a few days they find this not to be a
suitable place for such a settlement as they contem-
plated. Captain Phillip makes a boat excursion to
the north, enters Port Jackson, and with marvellous
foresight selects the site of the future capital of this
great colony. (Cheers.) During the course of the
next year—l7B9—an account of his voyage and of
the settlement in Port Jackson is published in England,
and this publication contains a prophecy which has
been wonderfully fulfilled. The nymph “Hope” is


supposed to be standing on the rocks bordering Sydney
Cove, now Circular Quay, and she thus declaims :
“Hear me,” she cried, “ ye rising realms ! record
Time’s opening scenes and Truth’s unerring word.—
There shall broad streets their stately walls extend,
The circus widen and the crescent bend ;
There ray’d from cities o’er the cultured land,
Shall bright canals and solid roads expand.
There the proud arch colossus-like bestride
Yon glittering streams and bound the chafing tide ;
Embellish’d villas crown the landscape scene,
Farms wave with gold and orchards blush between.
There shall tall spires and dome-capt towers ascend,
And piers and quays their massy structures blend ;
While with each breeze approaching vessels glide,
And northern treasures dance on every tide !”
Then ceas’d the nymph ; tumultuous echoes roar,
And Joy’s loud voice was heard from shore to shore.
Her graceful steps descending press’d the plain,
And Peace, and Art, and Labour join’d her train.
(Cheers.) Oh ! for a nymph to prophesy with equally
unerring word for the next 129 years as to the future
prosperity of this Colony, I have no doubt as to the
past, so in the future the prosperity will increase in
geometrical progression. No one can foretell what
this Colony and Australia may attain. Unlike any
other of England’s great possessions, the soil of Aus-
tralia has never been stained with the blood of war.
God grant that it remain so—(cheers) —and that Peace
and Art and Labour may still follow in the train
of Hope, and that the Australian people may prove
themselves to be worthy descendants of that race of
which Captain Cook was so notable an example.
(Cheers.) I have now the honor and great pleasure


of declaring this reserve to be the Captain Cook
Reserve, and to be dedicated for the recreation of the
people of New South Wales for all time. (Loud
cheers.)
THE NAVY’S TRIBUTE.
Admiral Pearson, who was received with cheers,
said : The subject of Captain Cook has been so
exhaustively spoken of by the Lieutenant-Governor
that I shall just give to you what the navy thought
about Captain Cook as my part. We respect him for his
work, and we consider that no man could have done
more than he did in the days gone by. He had a
vessel which was not half the size of the ‘'Goldfinch”
lying out there, no steam, no Sydney to come to if he
got on a rock—(laughter)—no charts to go by, and
without all those aids he succeeded not only in dis-
covering this Colony, but also in passing through the
Barrier Reef up in the north which, as many of you
know, is one network of shoals. It is marvellous how
he and his crew could have done it in those days.
(Cheers.) The New South Wales Government should
be most distinctly congratulated on having such a
permanent memorial of Captain Cook, and I think that
in the days to come that the population of this large
Colony will be thankful and very glad of it. (Cheers.)
It will be my duty to-day to break the flag. Captain
Cook was the last man who performed that ceremony
on this spot, and it will be to me a very great honor
to follow in his footsteps. (Loud cheers.)


MR. CARRUTHERS’ SPEECH.
The Minister for Lands, who was received with
applause, said : I desire to tender to His Excellency
the Lieutenant-Governor the public thanks for his
official act of dedicating this classic spot to the people
of New South Wales for all time. (Applause.) I
also desire to express the warm appreciation we must
all feel at the presence as a participator in the
ceremony of the Commander-in-Chief of the Naval
Force in these waters, His Excellency the Admiral.
(Applause.) It is extremely appropriate that the
chief performer in this unique ceremony should be
our most distinguished colonist, who for over forty
years has made his home amongst us, and who has
largely devoted to the service of his adopted country
the learning and experience of a master mind—
(cheers) —and no less appropriate is the part which
His Excellency the Admiral will take in these pro-
ceedings, for he is the worthy representative of that
great sea Power to which we owe not only the dis-
covery and the possession of these shores, but the
continued security which for 129 years we have
enjoyed in absolute peace in this far-distant quarter
of the empire. (Cheers.) It was England’s great
sailor, Cook, who in 1770 on this point first raised
the British flag ; it was an English admiral, Phillip,
who pioneered the way of colonisation and again
raised the flag in 1788 ; and to-day, after a lapse of
over a century, it is again a sailor chief—our Admiral
who unfurls the flag which is to proclaim this spot


sacred to the people in commemoration of the event
which has been the germ of its great history and
great destiny. (Applause.)
IN PRAISE OF CAPTAIN COOK.
As the Plymouth Rock is the most sacred ground to
the Americans, so may this historic place, rich in its
traditions, be the one place in our island continent
more consecrated than another to the great man who
here first set foot upon our shores, and in his foresight
secured for the empire, our country and our people, a
territory unsurpassed in the whole universe. It is to
no unworthy man that we give honor this day. Cook
was no mere favourite of fortune. From the humble
beginning of a lad in a village grocer’s store, next as
a seaman on a collier, he rose, if rise it be, to the
position of an A.B. seaman in H.M. Navy. In four
years he gained the rank of master, and shortly
afterwards that of captain, by his own sheer and
indomitable energy and ability. (Applause.) When
past the age of 30, he took up the study of mathe-
matics, and in four years had so progressed as to be
be entrusted with work in surveying and in navigation
which required the possession of no small amount of
mathematical and scientific knowledge. As if it were
an augury of the future of these great lands, our very
founder was one who fought his way to success by
unaided efforts, by industry, and by patient but per-
severing labour. His life is a noble exemplar to the
people of Australia, who live under institutions which
freely open the door to fame and power to those who
exhibit even in a less degree those great qualities so


vivid in Cook’s life. (Applause.) I have no desire to
reflect upon the past; but it is a matter lam sure for
congratulation that this land is at last rescued from
the hands of any private individual or land corporation.
What blind folly ever induced the Government of
New South Wales to part with this area of land for a
paltry £1 per acre? It may be mere sentiment on nfy
part to rescue this land as a national birthright; but
after all sentiment about great events and great men
to whom the world owes much is but the spark which
tires men to similar achievement. I was saying a
moment or two ago that it was appropriate to
have here to-day their Excellencies the Lieutenant-
Governor and the Admiral. May Igo a little further,
and, at the risk of a charge of egotism—a charge
which I would like to avoid on this occasion, but
which will be found excusable I trust—l desire to
say that there is a certain amount of appropriate-
ness at least in my participation in this function
to-day, not merely because I am the Minister for
Lands, but because I have the honor to represent a
constituency which can lay claim to having been
traversed almost throughout by the great Captain. I
have in my possession temporarily (thanks to the
courtesy of Mr. Huntington) a fac-simile of Cook’s
own chart of Botany Bay, and it shows that he
proceeded in his boats up Cook’s River as far as the
dam and up George’s River as far as Salt Pan Creek.
He landed at the very point whence the steamers
proceeded this morning, viz., at Sans Souci, for this
chart has thereon marked his landing there at the
site of an aboriginal well. His journals, too, record
the fact that he made short exploring trips into what


is now the municipal districts of Rockdale, Kogarah,
and Hurstville, so that the electorate of St. George
can claim the singular distinction of having been
visited along the whole length of its foreshores and
across country by the great navigator.
SACRED GROUND.
Your Excellencies and ladies and gentlemen can
well appreciate the feelings of the people who live
adjacent to this bay when I say, that to them par-
ticularly it will be a relief to know that in future they
will not be trespassers when they visit this sacred
ground. (Applause.) I need not dwell on £he facts
already so well known, that within this reserve there
is the Commemorative Tablet or plate erected by the
Philosophical Society, nor that yonder stands the
tree planted by the present Duke of York—that
planted by his brother, the Duke of Clarence, having,
as of ill omen, died within a year or so of its being
planted. Forby Sutherland, who died of consumption,
lies buried close by. His burial place was pointed
out years ago either by the blacks or by some member
of Cook’s own expedition, for it is tolerably certain
that in Phillip’s fleet there were some of Cook’s
fellow voyagers. At any rate, for years and years
there was an enclosure, supposed to be Sutherland’s
burial place, and the old post stumps were found and
identified quite recently. The site tallies with that
given by Cook—namely, close by the stream from
which he took in his supply of water. There can be
no reasonable doubt that this is the actual scene of
Cook’s landing, for we have the testimony of two
old and respected colonists —Mr. Alexander Berry


and Dr. Douglas—that in the early part of this
century a blackfellow, hoary with age, who had
actually witnessed the landing, identified to them this
spot as the landing place. Cook’s private log and his
charts also leave no room to doubt that here on this
silver beach he actually first trod Australian soil.
DERIVATION OF KURNELL.
The name “ Kurnell ” is enveloped in doubt, but I
am sorry to have to cast any suspicion upon the origin
given by those who say that it is a corruption of the
native name of “ Kundul.” Now, I have special
facilities for access to old records and maps, and I
have recently inspected the original map made by Sir
Thomas Mitchell of these parts. He was most careful
to preserve aboriginal names whenever existing. In
his map there appears none such for this locality, the
one name appearing thereon being “ Connell ” as the
first grantee of Quihray, just east of this spot.
Further investigations show that in 1828 John
Connell acquired the title to this land and erected
thereon his home. The land became known as
“ Connell’s ” or “ Connell’s Corner,” and it is easy to
perceive that the blacks would corrupt that name to
“ Connul,” and later on to “ Kurnul.” This version
is corroborated by descendants of Mr. Connell now
living, who declare the origin to be as I conjectured.
However it may be, the name “Kurnell” is sufficiently
original, whether it be aboriginal or not, to be retained
for all time as the name of this historic ground. And
now may I conclude with the hope that, as the public
are to be the possessors of this reserve, it will be
worthily preserved by them, and that its use will


ever be associated with the best character of the
people. Let all right-minded men be its trustees,
guarding its monuments with its memories, so that
no vandal act of destruction shall desecrate it.
(Applause.) Let it remain as a memorial for all time
of the great achievement of one of the world’s greatest
men, and as a reminder of those great qualities of
courage and devotion to noble purpose which, as they
made him great and illustrious, can also make us as
a people worthy inheritors of the vast territories of
which he has made us the proud possessors. (Cheers.)
UNFURLING THE FLAG.
His Excellency the Admiral then released the union-
jack from the folds in which it had been hoisted, and
as the flag fluttered in the breeze it was saluted by
H.M.S. “ Goldfinch ” and also by the battery at Bare
Island. The band of the Permanent Artillery played
the National Anthem, and the people cheered.
At the invitation of the Minister for Lands, cheers
were then given for His Excellency the Lieutenant-
Governor and for His Excellency the Admiral.
Mr. Hawthorne called for cheers for the Minister for
Lands, and there was a vigorous response.
The ceremony having concluded, the people strayed
over the site to note the objects mentioned in the
speech of Mr. Carruthers as having an especial historic
interest.


In order to effectively carry out the objects of the
dedication, Mr. Hassall, who on the 14th September,
1899, succeeded Mr. Carruthers as Secretary for
Lands, decided to recommend the appointment of—
The Hon. William John Lyne, M.L.A.,
The Hon. John See, M.L.A.,
The Hon. Thomas Henry Hassall, M.L.A.,
Joseph Hector Carruthers, Esquire, M.L.A.,
William Houston, Esquire, Under Secretary
for Lands,
Cecil West Darley, Esquire, Engineer-in-Chief
for Public Works,
as Trustees. His Excellency the Governor, with the
advice of the Executive Council, approved of the
appointments, and the Gazette notice announcing the
decision was published on the Bth November, 1899.




OAPTAIN 000 K.
Is Life and Voyacjes, °
Services to New Holland
an d to M an. °
R Biographical Sketch
by
ALFRED McFHRLHND.




CAPTAIN COOK.
His Life, Voyages, and Services to New
Holland and to Man.
A S the Government of New South Wales has
recently “ resumed” that portion of the shore of
Botany Bay at or very near to which (Kurnell Point)
the famous Captain Cook effected a landing on 28th
April, 1770, and a public celebration of an event so
interesting and instructive having been decided upon,
the following pages are written in its elucidation :
Until Dampier, the buccaneer and King’s Captain,
appeared on the field of exploration upon New Holland
shores in 1688 and 1699, no Englishman, or other
European, had done so, and the entire of its south-
east, eastern, and north-east coasts were absolutely un-
known. Neither had Torres Strait been ever traversed
by any ship from the time (1606) that the little Dutch
yacht, Duyfhen , had crossed it, coming from the
southern seaboard of New Guinea and entering the
Gulf of Carpentaria (thus discovering New Holland,
or the great “ South Land ” as it was then called) ;
though a gallant Portuguese sailor, but then in the
service of Spain, swept it from end to end three months
later, when on his way to Manilla, after he and Quiros
had found and revealed a few of the islands which they


styled the “ Land of the Holy Spirit ” (subsequently
designated “ The Great Cyclades,” and the “ New
Hebrides ”) ; nor was it until very many years subse-
quently that that strait acquired the name of He
“Torres,” and all knowledge of his achievements, or
that of the Duyfhen , had meanwhile passed from
men’s minds. In like manner, Bass’ Strait had never
been seen or heard of by any European until long after
1606, or 1706 either; and Van Diemen’s Land and
New Zealand, which, along with the Friendly Islands
or Tongan Group, had been discovered by Tasman in
1642, were not again sought by ships for a considerable
period afterwards; while all the lovely isles., of the
Central and Southern Pacific (save Tahiti) might as
well have been blotted from that ocean for anything
that was known about them ; and quite as little was
known of the Antarctic, not to speak of the Arctic,
regions ; in other words, the mists of obscurity, or pall
of nothingness, had settled upon large portions of the
southern hemisphere from the middleof the seventeenth
century. It was, therefore, time (humanly speaking)
that the wand of a deliverer should be waved over
them, and his voice bid them “ awake ” ; and as the
man is seldom wanting when the occasion for him
arrives, he was given when James Cook arrived at
Tahiti, in the Endeavour , in 1769.
His story is peculiarly worthy of our study, for
among all those who, in any age or clime, have risen
by their intelligence, acquirements, and persevering
exertions to honorable position and fame, scarcely any
one has done so much for man, or is entitled to more
grateful remembrance, especially from those who hold
the shores which he discovered or gave to England


BIRTHPLACE (
DF
— 1 BBS 1
i ihri i
& : r_j N "*"'’ T ‘
: CAPTAIN COOK, MARTON,
, lylBp
m n r y
. ■'■ ’ «• y ''• ,ti:'.i[ ;’
YORKSHIRE.




and us. As he wrote of himself, in July, 1776, when
about to sail on his third memorable voyage, “ with
the assistance of a few good friends,” he had “ passed
through all the stations belonging to a seaman, from
that of an apprentice boy in the coal trade to a post-
captaincy in the Royal Navy,” and the voice of his
country, as well as that of all distinguished navigators,
has long assigned to him the foremost place amongst
discoverers of whatever nation or day.
His parents were peasants, his father having com-
menced life as a farm labourer, though he afterwards
rose somewhat higher in the social scale; and his
mother was a cottager’s daughter, and both were
objects of tender care and solicitude to their son from
the time he could earn a shilling. In turn, they were
indeed proud of him, and at the age of 70 the father
learned to read, that he might be able to peruse the
journal of one of the “ Captain’s ” notable voyages.
The latter was born at Marton, near Stockton-on-Tees,
in Yorkshire, on 29th October, 1728. I shall not
write of the very little “ schooling ” he ever got, or of
an early residence at Staith’s, where the German Ocean
was before him ; fearless fishermen and hardy mariners,
the stock of the place ; and a desire to seek his fortune
upon the deep arose within him, which eventuated in
his going to sea as a “ship’s boy” in a coasting collier.
He was then 18, and he remained in the service of the
same employers for several years, though rising step
by step, and in better vessels, successively, until he
became mate of a large one trading to Norway and
other places. By this time he had become a thorough
seaman, having steadily applied himself to mastering
his duties in every position assigned to him, till war


was about to break out between England and France,
in 1755, when he resolved to join the Royal Navy,
hoping that he might step from before the mast, ere
long, and gain the quarter deck, as other stout hearts
had done in those stirring days. And there was good
ground for that hope, since even then he had managed
to acquire a fair education by his own efforts, was
master of his calling, and marked by unusual intelli-
gence ; while he was of robust constitution, inured to
labour, and capable of enduring the severest hardships.
As Sir Walter Bysant tells us : “Every north-easterly
gale that had buffeted the collier’s boy and sailor
between the ports of Newcastle and London, and
every night spent in battling with winter gales on
the North Sea, had helped to build up his strength
and endurance, and add to his seamanship; and great
was the indifference with which he submitted to every
kind of self-denial—a man who felt no bodily trials,
who desired no better fare than was served to those
under him, who looked upon rough weather as the
chief part of a sailor’s life, who was never sick, and
who never rested in the discharge of duty.”
Such was the young man who, in May, 1755 (being
then 27), volunteered for the King’s service, and
entered as an “able-bodied seaman” on board the Eagle ,
a frigate of 60 guns, commanded by Captain (after-
wards Sir Hugh) Palliser, with whom he had part,
during the four succeeding years, in British conquests
in the West Indies ; and (however humble that part
was) Palliser, perceiving Cook’s assiduity and capacity,
became his friend ever afterwards ; but no amount of
friendship, or anything short of his having exhibited
much proficiency in seamanship and navigation—


perhaps, therefore, having acted as master’s mate, and
acquired at least some knowledge of mathematics and
astronomy since he joined the Navy—could have pro-
cured for him the promotion that followed ; for, in
May, 1759, by which date the Eagle had returned to
England, Cook was appointed master, successively, of
three ships of war, a position, in such a ship, which
was then considered more important in many respects
than that of a lieutenant, though inferior in rank. At
the time of his appointment to her in that capacity,
the Eagle was on the point of sailing for the North
American Station as part of Admiral Sir Charles
Saunder’s fleet, who, with General Wolfe, was besieging
Quebec ; and being thus brought before the enemy,
Cook’s capacity, daring, and coolness in danger were
speedily exhibited. It was necessary to take soundings
in the channel of St. Lawrence, between the island of
Orleans and the North Shore, so as to enable the
Admiral to place his ships in opposition to the enemy’s
batteries, and cover Wolfe’s projected landing. Captain
Palliser, who now commanded the Shrewsbury, recom-
mended Cook for this difficult and dangerous service ;
and he was occupied upon it for many consecutive
nights, as it could not be performed in the day time.
At length his proceedings were discovered by the
French, who laid a trap to catch him, by concealing
in a wood near to the water a number of Indians,
with their canoes, and as the barge in which he was
making the survey passed by, these darted out upon
him and gave instant chase. His only chance of escape,
and to save the notes of the soundings he had taken,
was “to run for it.” He, therefore, pushed for the
Isle of Orleans, with a horde of yelling savages


pursuing at full speed ; but the English hospital,
where there was a guard, was before him, and for this he
made, his men straining at their oars for life and duty’s
sake, and the bow of each canoe almost on the barge’s
stern; but a desperate effort sent the white men ahead
till they touched and leaped upon the shore, Cook
carrying his papers, and followed by his crew, as the
Indians sprang on the quarter of his boat, which they
bore away in triumph, but the master and his party had
baffled the main design. The notes were saved, and
he succeeded, in spite of all difficulties, in furnishing
the Admiral with a correct and complete draft of the
channel and its desired soundings.
Cook’s name then became associated with a brilliant
incident in British history, since Captain James
King states that he piloted the English boats which
carried to the attack the daring Highlanders and
other troops that were then to scale the heights of
Abraham, in front of Quebec ; and a scene of more
intense interest can scarcely be conceived. It was
a starless night (13th September, 1759) ; those heights
towering above the river ; a line of silent boats, filled
with stern-faced men, gliding on, and bearing for the
only foot-hold path up the beetling crags ; the tiller
ropes in Cook’s own hands, and by his side the gallant
soldier who led them all, stilling the beating of his
heart with the soft cadence of an immortal elegy.*
* The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly o’er the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth, e’er gave,
Await, alike the inevitable hour —
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.


A landing is effected; the rapid muster instantly
succeeds; with a desperate ascent on hands, knees,
and feet, and then the resistless rush of the Gael, and
our light infantry; the bugle’s call and rolling drum ;
“Montcalm to the rescue!” (Montcalm, “the wise
and chivalrous ”) burst from the French camp, and his
brave followers are soon about him ; so are the glitter
of bayonets and flash of the claymore by the side of
Wolfe. Musketry rattles at every point; the roar of
cannon and shouts of the combatants add to the
battle’s din. The regiments of Roussilon, La Sarre,
Guienne, Langnedock, and Bearn are face to face
with our bravest “ Braggs,” “ Kennedys,” and Las-
celle’s men, Anthrusers “pets,” and Fraser’s High-
landers, and they are soon vieing with each other in
deadly struggle for the honor of France and England.
Hither and thither rolls the fight, and hard it were to
tell with which side that honor rests, till “ Advance !”
“ Advance !” rings down the British line ; from 4,000
British throats there is an exultant cheer, and high
over all resounds the Highland slogan. Both generals
fall; but “ Charge, charge, my men !” are the last
words of Wolfe; and charge they did as thunder bursts
from the lurid heaven, or the seething ocean rushes
onward in headlong course. Then the French begin
to waver, break, and fly—Quebec is England’s—
Canada is won ; and the shout of victory greets the
longing ear of Cook, who waited at his post below in
charge of the boats, anxious but hopeful.
For the sake of brevity, I must pass over the next
ten years of Cook’s life, which were spent chiefly at
Halifax, on or near to Newfoundland, and at Labrador,
where he did some admirable work as Director of


Surveys for the British Government; and during
respites from which he devoted attention to perfecting
himself in mathematics and astronomy—so fitting him-
self for the efficient discharge of duties such as those
that subsequently devolved upon him in the South and
North Pacific—as well as in making several voyages
to and from England in a vessel provided for him by
the Admiralty, those being his first separate commands.
And whilst at “ Home,” during one of these intervals,
he married Miss Elizabeth Batts, a lady who is described
as “ being singularly beautiful, her manners good, and
full of dignity, and herself well educated.” She was
also very gifted in the use of her needle. In the Sydney
Museum there is an exquisite piece of work, embroi-
dered upon silk, by Mrs. Cook, “ when her husband’s
return from his third renowned voyage was expected,
and it was to have been worn as a vest when he would
be presented at Court,” though with him, as well as
with Wolfe, “ the path of glory led but to the grave.”
She loved, too, in after years, to talk of how, on the
day of their wedding, “ she walked with Mr. Cook
across the neighbouring meadows to the church that
made them one.” She proved an affectionate wife, but
survived him more than half a century, having died at
Clapham in 1835, aged 94.
In 1767 he had completed the necessary surveys on
North American waters, and he was 39 years of age,
of which he had been twenty-five at sea. Whilst at
“ Home” he resided in a small house, still standing, on
the Mile-end Road, London, near to where the People’s
Palace now rears its imposing form ; and it could not
have been thought, either by the retired master-
mariners who then dwelt in the neighborhood, or by


himself, that the tall, spare, and eager-looking, yet
kindly courteous, man who passed in and out of that
humble dwelling, or sat by its door with wife and
children, would achieve a higher reputation, and leave
a more honored name than perhaps any one of the gay
and courtly millions who have frequented that vicinity
at any time since. His respites from labour were,
however, but few and brief; and thenceforward his
life was mainly spent in the southern hemisphere, in
the labours and cares it brought, and in the new world
it revealed. And if (as I infer from the absence of
descriptive power or marked illustrations in his jour-
nals) the varied scenes of strangeness and loveliness
which met his eye in that hemisphere made slender
impression upon him, that must be chiefly attributed
to the hard lines in which his youth was spent, and to
the severe training in exact science by which he had
prepared himself for the arduous duties he was now
about to enter upon. It may even be that a dulness
in the imaginative faculty fitted him the better for
that closeness of observation and simple narrative style
of writing which he undoubtedly possessed. At any
rate, a desire having been expressed by English savants ,
in the beginning of 1768, that the transit of the planet
Venus over the sun’s disc, which it had been calculated
would occur in June of the following year, should be
observed from some Pacific island, and thus furnish
the best means of determining the distance of the sun
from our earth ; and some delay having taken place in
the selection of the right man to take the direction of
the expedition, Sir Edward Hawke, then at head of
the Admiralty, declaring that he would “ rather lose
his right hand than sign an act so derogatory to his


profession as the appointing of any one but a King’s
officer to such a position” —as had been suggested—it
was finally decided, upon the recommendation of Mr.
Philip Stephens, a Secretary to the Admiralty, and
of Sir Hugh Palliser, that it should be offered to
Mr. Cook, then still a sailing master in the Navy,
but, in the opinion of those gentlemen, the best
man in England for the service ; and though the
promotion of a master to such a command was then
almost unheard of, his friends knew his merits and
stood to him. He was a king’s office!’, too, thus meeting
Hawke’s stipulation. Accordingly, on the 25th May,
1768, Cook received a commission appointing him to
a lieutenant commandership in the Navy, and two
months later he sailed from England in the Endeavour ,
bound for Tahiti, whence the wished-for “observation”
was to be made. Of that vessel, her officers, and sea-
men much might be written did space permit. Suffice
it, that observation was successfully made in April,
1769, after which Cook speedily discovered the beau-
tiful group which he named the “ Society Islands ”
from their propinquity and the amity of their inhabi-
tants to each other, as well as to the hospitable recep-
tion given to the expedition when visiting them —a
group to which the picture presented by the Danish
geographer, Malte Brun, of the South Sea Islands
generally is peculiarly applicable: “ A new Cythera
emerges from the bosom of the enchanted wave ; an
amphitheatre of verdure arises to our view ; tufted
groves mingle their foliage with the brilliant enamel
of the meadows; and an eternal spring, combining
with an eternal autumn, displays the opening blossom
along with the ripened fruits.” Moreover, Captain


Cook (to give him the title by which he was thence-
forth generally and properly known) learned for and
taught to Europe as much about the climate, soil,
natural products, history, and people, manners, customs,
wars, pastimes, and canoe fleets, &c., &c., of that group
and Tahiti as has been acquired ever since. He then
proceeded to New Zealand, which he circumnavigated,
and gave like information regarding that country, its
islands and natives, amongst whom he distributed
useful plants and seeds, imparted useful arts, and won
their affection, repaid by the consideration and justice
of all his dealings with them.
It was there, too, that a memorable, but then little
appreciated, circumstance arose. Though nothing was
yet known of the eastern seaboard of New Holland,
and his then voyage might have brought him within a
week or day’s sail of it, the instructions given to him for
its prosecution made no allusion to that undiscovered
seaboard ; they merely prescribed that, after visiting
New Zealand, he should “ return Home by whatever
route he should think best.” Noting a planet’s passage
athwart the sun seems to have been deemed of more
moment than completing the outline of a fourth part
of the great “ South Land,” and ascertaining all that
could then be mastered about it. At any rate, Captain
Cook carefully exercised the power of choice then to
be made and vested in him. He convened a council
of his officers to assist him in determining it. It has
been well said that the cabin of a great English war-
ship, with its bristling guns, silent discipline, and all
pervading evidences of dignity and might, is the most
fitting place in which a monarch of England could
receive the sovereign of another land ; but there may


be occasions on which, to the thoughtful mind, a still
worthier picture would be presented on board a king’s
ship, however humble comparatively in herself and in
the officials sharing in the scene—as where the reveal-
ing of a new country, and the birth-bells of a new
people, hang in a balance that may bring speedy
awakening or preserve their torpidity, since issues like
those are of far more importance than the pomps of
sovereigns. And such a scene there was when James
Cook and his youthful but trusty lieutenants assembled
in council in the cabin of the Endeavour , to decide
upon their homeward course from New Zealand, and
incidentally, therefore, to determine whetheran attempt
should then be made to disclose the yet undiscovered
coast and inhabitants of a very large portion of the
“South Land,” dispel the mysteries that still brooded
over its eastern waters, and secure for England a dis-
tinction which various Dutch commanders and her own
Dampier had dreamt of long years before—not to speak
of the nearness of De Bougainville (an ardent French-
man) to part of that coast in 1768 ; —the more so, if
we be allowed to feel that the memories and sympa-
thetic influences of dead, yet ever-renowned, naviga-
tors, —of Quiros, Schooten, and Le Maire, Tasman, De
Flaming, and the old buccaneer and King’s Captain
I have just named (each of whom had sought, but had
been forced to forego, the attaining of those shores) —
hovered over that council, and with generous ardour
kindled the zeal and bred the hearts of the gallant
sailors who now surrounded him on whom the mantles
of those worthies had fitly fallen; until, with one
voice, they cried (in spirit, at least), “We should sail
westward, westward ho! till we meet the fair land


of the ‘ south,’ whose eastern board the white man
hath never yet beheld, but England now must win ;
we shall sweep, too, from east to west that long,
narrow sea to which the Duyfhen, the Glenvinck, and
the Roebuck gave their colours an age ago, but
could not pass throughout.” While the genius of
prophecy, echoing the cry, “ pictured that eastern coast
as yet to gleam with corn and wine, throb to the
delving pick and busy arts of peace, swarm with
herds and flocks, resound to the hum of cities, and
expand the commerce of the earth ; and that strait,
glistening with the flags of many a people, a centre
of activity, a very highway between the east and
west, becomes a deathless evidence of England’s fame.”
And as the phantom forms of the dauntless dead,
who till then may have pervaded that little room,
or their ennobling influence at least now been felt,
there may have risen to the mental eye some symbols
of a coming nation that now is springing into being,
and soon, in countless numbers, shall hold and govern
that South Land, its broad plains and teeming vales,
and give them the freest institutions which society
admits of—a nation that fears none other, but desires
to be just, and shall establish a far larger share of
equality amongst men, and rightful brotherhood amidst
those whom God hath made in his own image, than has
been hitherto known. “It was therefore resolved, as
the result of the council’s deliberations,” wrote Cook
in his journal, “to return Home by the way of the East
Indies, by the following route : —‘ Upon leaving this
coast of New Zealand, to steer westward until we fall
in with the east coast of New Holland, and then to
follow the direction of the latter to the northward, or


what other direction it may take, till we arrive at
its northern extremity ; or, if this should be found
impracticable, to endeavour to fall in with the land,
or islands, discovered by Quiros.’ ” —(Cook’sManuscript
Journal, Tripartite , Australian Museum, Sydney.)
Sailing, then, on 31st March from Cape Farewell
in the Endeavour , by that time out from England
twenty months, he proceeded in a south-westerly direc-
tion for eighteen days, occasionally meeting with birds
“ that were certain signs of approaching land ” ; and
on the morning of 19th April, 1770, the south-eastern
coast of New Holland loomed from the haze, being
first seen by Europeans through the eye of
Lieutenant Hicks, at Cape Everard, within the terri-
tory of the present colony of Victoria, or about 50
miles south-west of Cape Howe, the extremity of the
now “ dividing line ” between the former and New
South Wales of to-day. From that point Captain Cook
trended more than a fourth part of the coast of New
Holland, following its direction mainly north-east,
north, and north-west, up to “ Possession Island ”
a little east of the entrance to the Gulf of Carpentaria ;
but that coast being then entirely unknown, he was
forced to keep at such a distance from it as precluded
his observing numerous bays, headlands, and inland
reaches that afterwards became notable, yet perceiving,
amongst other places, and naming, Ram Head, Gabo
Island, Mount Dromedary, and Bateman’s Bay, Point
Upright, the Pigeon House, and Cape George, Jervis
Bay, Hat Hill or Mount Kembla, and other shores of
“ Illawarra ” during the earlier part of that route;
noting, as he did so, occasional “ smokes,” indicative
of inhabitants, on the intermediate mainland parts,


their mountain ranges, and general features, but only
twice seeing any of the natives, and only once (unsuc-
cessfully too) deeming it prudent to attempt a landing
—at Watta Moola—till he reached and entered the
now well known “ Botany Bay,” on 28th April, 1770,
or nigh 130 years ago, and anchored “ within its
south head, abreast of a small village consisting ,of
eight or nine huts”; or as an extract from Captain
Cook’s journal of Saturday, 28th April, 1770, puts it:
“At daybreak we discovered a bay and anchored
under the south shore, about 2 miles within the
entrance, in 6 fathom water, the south point bearing
S.E. and the north point east, latitude 34° S., longitude
208° 37 W.” But it should have been previously men-
tioned (since Dr. Hawkesbury, to whom the Admiralty
entrusted the publication of Cook’s journal, omitted,
in his edition of the Book based upon it, all allusion
to the circumstance) that, while in the vicinity of
Cape Everard, the thoughtful navigator was the first
to moot the question whether or not the southern
shores of New Holland, which he was then skirting,
were portion of, or severed by a strait from, Van
Diemen’s Land, which Tasman had discovered 128
years before, and which question was not finally
determined until 1798-9 (by Surgeon Bass and Mr,
Flinders). He was also the foremost European who,
when sailing between Capes Everard and Howe, passed
into and traversed several leagues of the northern
seaboard of that strait, thus preceding each of those
intrepid men in that service, as well as the “ piratical
convicts ” who intervened in its exploration between
him and them over a still greater distance, when making
dash for freedom from their Sydney quarters in 1797.


The occurrences which took place at Botany Bay
during Captain Cook’s stay there—what he saw, did,
and thought of it and its Aborigines, their habits and
doings, with the excursions made into the adjacent
woods and districts, their natural history and pro-
ducts, and what those natives thought of him, his
ship, and ship’s company, ought to be too familiar to
all Australians to permit of reiteration here. I shall,
therefore, merely state that he described the bay as
“ seeming to be tolerably well sheltered,” and referred
to “ meadow land ” thereabouts, a description and
reference that were converted by the Doctor into
“ well sheltered,” and “ the finest harbour in the
world”! thus exposing Cook to unmerited criticism and
unjust censure; while the name he gave to the bay
was not “ Botany Bay, from the quantity of plants
found there,” as Hawkeswith would make us believe,
but “ Sting-ray Bay, from the quantity of that species
of fish got in its waters.” In like manner, the immense
territory which Cook discovered, and called “ New
Wales” in the body of his journal and on some thirty
or forty headings of its pages, was altered by some
one into “ New South Wales” in the Book. Still more
unjustifiably, the Doctor omitted from the Book whole
passages of interest contained in the journal, and
substituted for them idle disquisitions of his own,
with vain conceits borrowed from the ancient classics,
of which the illustrious captain knew nothing and
cared nothing. It is pleasant to turn from such acts
to the fact that within eighteen years from Cook’s
landing at Botany Bay, the squadron of La Perouse,
another renowned navigator and a courtly gentleman
of France, also rested there (though it lay at the end


WKMrM
W&h' A• * --tST' ‘
' 1 J?'
.
4 # *$$$£-
Vf|t| : p *'•
, r-r=r'"
. i il
' **
MEMORIAL TO MARK THE LANDING PLACE OF
CAPTAIN COOK
AT KURNELL,
ERECTED BY THOMAS HOLT M.L.C.




of the world, as it were), but on the opposite or north
side of the bay ; and from their respective stations
each could see the spot, upon sands or upland, on
which the other walked, or would walk, musing on
past and planning fresh voyages. Yet, if man pro-
poses, a higher Power disposes ; and within a few
months from his leaving Botany Bay, one of them was
wrecked on “ Yanicolo,” part of the Santa Cruz Group
recently annexed by England, and escaping thence in
a little vessel built there, was either killed on another
and still unascertained isle of the Pacific, or went
down upon it, and now rests beneath its waves ; while
the other, within a few years from bidding farewell to
our shores, perished on the rocks of Hawaii, by the
dagger of an assassin.
On 6th May, 1770, Captain Cook resumed his voyage
northwards from Botany Bay, and during the next
three months trended, up to Cape York, our eastern
and north-east coasts, then previously unseen by any
European ; and such were the obvious and, to a pru-
dent navigator, the probable dangers of that seaboard,
that he felt it necessary to “ have a man in the chains,”
or constantly taking soundings while his ship was
under weigh, by day or night, for nearly two consecu-
tive months, and over a course of more than 2,000
miles in extent—a vigilance never before practised by
or required of any navigator—since apparently endless
groups of islands, detached isles, and shoals lay on his
left for a very lengthened portion of it (from “ Bunker’s
Group ” onwards); and on his right the mighty Pacific
raged and thundered against the “Great Barrier Reef,”
from oft' Cape Townsend to the entrance to Torres
Strait, an immense stretch with only four narrow


“ passages ” through it that were not blocked with
coral “ ridges,” coral “fields,” coral “ parterres,” and
“ negro heads,” or blackened knobs ; while the width
of channel between that reef and the mainland ranged
from 10 to 100 miles; and those islands and isles,
though varied in size, outline, and aspect (whether
beheld in the early morning, under the midday sun,
or the radiance of evening) are as beautiful in form,
colour, and quivering tint, as are the birds of glowing
wing that flit around them—yet terrible in their grind
to the hapless ship which strikes upon them as would
be the rending grip of a serpent’s tooth on one of those
birds. But in spite of all Cook’s assiduity the
Endeavour , when off the river called after her (now
“ Cooktown ”), became impaled on a dark night upon
an outlying, sunken, branch of that reef, and had to
lie there for many, very many, hours —a position
from which nothing but the splendid seamanship
of her captain, and the unswerving endurance
and devotion of her gallant crew, could have extri-
cated her (as they did), but with gored sides and
some of her timbers “ground to the thinness of the
sole of a shoe.” Yet I need not follow the repairing
of the ship at Endeavour River, when got off the rocks
and warped thither, nor specify the events which
occurred there (interesting though they are); neither
will necessary brevity permit me to follow her progress
to Possession Island, sometimes without but generally
within the “ Great Barrier,” on an oflf-shoot of which
she had been lacerated. But when at that island
(about 27th August, 1770) Cook took possession for
the Crown of England of the whole eastern coast of
New Holland, from latitude 38 S., or that of “ Hicks’


>
03
> <
< £T
QJ O
K
£ §
H °
“ H
Sc |
C 5 j
<
i i
< o
- 1 2
« i
*
'wSffi o UJ
\ mw o x
I MmL o *-
o
HRfDJ - H
< o
IHH9 i—
< S
jsSSljj o «
Q-
I
H
5
O
£T
Li.
O




Point, in the Strait of Bass, to the latitude of Posses-
sion Island (in 10| S., Torres Strait), with all the hays,
harbours, rivers, and islands situate thereupon. He did
not define, or attempt to define, its western boundary,
because it was not known to what limit in that
direction the Dutch might have claims; and it was
not for eighteen years afterwards, or under a provision
in Governor Phillip’s commission, that Van Diemen’s
Land (which had been visited meanwhile by Captain
Furneaux and Cook himself) was proclaimed subject
to British authority.
Having left Possession Island, the Endeavour
touched at the south coast of New Guinea, then made
for Batavia (where further repairs were effected), and
reached Home {via the Cape of Good Hope), on 12th
July, 1771, having thus concluded a voyage which, in
the language of Captain Flinders, “ whether as regards
the extent of his discoveries and the accuracy with
which they were traced, far surpassed all that had
gone before.” That tribute was enhanced by the fact
that it came from the hand and breast of the earliest
and most distinguished of the gleaners who followed
him, and was himself an eminent discoverer ; while
Malaspina, a notable Spanish navigator who visited
our shores in 1793, did not hesitate to declare that
the illustrious Englishman “ had left nothing to anyone
who might re-tread his path but to admire the accuracy
of his observations, fidelity of his charts, and services
to mankind.” It should be added that so sedulous
were Captain Cook’s efforts during the voyage then
concluded to preserve the health of his officers and
crew, that he did not lose a single man from sickness
throughout the whole of it until arriving at Batavia ;


but there and at sea, after leaving its pestilential
marshes, many deaths occurred from diseases con-
tracted in that “ graveyard ” —events that made a
deep impression upon his mind, and caused him to
turn his attention during the succeeding voyages, even
more earnestly than he had previously done, to the
very best and most complete means for maintaining
the health of seamen when upon long voyages (that
had been usually accompanied by fearful ravages from
flux and dysentery) —means which he afterwards
adopted with most favourable results, and thus set an
example to other commanders which has had the effect
of saving thousands of lives that would have„other-
wise been sacrificed since then.
It was soon after the close of that first voyage that
Mr. Westall’s celebrated portrait of Captain Cook was
made public, and (with one or two other aids) supplied
materials for the following account of his personal
appearance and habits ;—“ In height he was tall, spare
of body, and, though good looking, plain both in ad-
dress and bearing ; his head was small; his hair, which
was of a dark colour, he wore tied behind; his eyes
were brownish, quick and piercing, and his eyebrows
prominent, thus giving his countenance an air of
authority—but that was no more than an appearance,
for he was beloved by his people, who looked up to him
as a father, and obeyed his commands with alacrity ”;
or, as another writer puts it, “he was mild and just,
but exact in discipline.” His constitution was strong,
his mode of living temperate —“ he could eat or drink
anything—restless in the discharge of duty, and his
labours almost incessant. He was modest withal, and
rather bashful, but of an agreeable, lively conversation,


INSCRIPTION ON COPPER TABLET UPON CLIFF
AT KURNELL.




sensible and intelligent. In temper he was hasty,
and he brooked not opposition, for in some degree that
was a consequence of his earnestness and zeal, untiring
energy and self-denial, and of his exactitude when
dealing with not only the weak, the lazy, and in-
capable, but with himself also; and he was, at same
time, of a disposition the most friendly, benevolent,
and humane.” Within a few years from his death all
his three sons were no more, and he had few, if any,
intimate friends who could hand down to us a reliable
account of his private, social, life. Scarcely anything
of it is, therefore, now known. The loss is ours, how-
ever, and as a self-made man up to the time of his
first memorable voyage, he required not the help of
friendship, while almost the entire of the remainder
of his days were spent at sea. Still we may well believe
that the quiet home at Mile-end was the abode of
simple pleasures and close family ties, whether ruled
by the tall form, firm hand, and wise counsels of the
thoughtful father during his brief intervals from toil,
or by the gentle presence of “ the handsome mother,”
who always graced it.
Captain Cook’s second and third voyages bore him
to other regions than New Holland, though he visited
the southern shores of Van Diemen’s Land and the
New Hebrides, amongst many other places; and
though Hawkesworth’s Book mangled and perverted
descriptions which Cook’s journal gave of our eastern
coast, and otherwise defaced the latter, it led to the
presence of Britain’s “ Occupation Fleet ” upon it in
1788, and to that wondrous colonization which, in
spite of every obstacle, has never been equalled else-
where amongst the nations of the earth. The necessity


for conciseness in this little pamphlet requires that
I shall not here detail the incidents of those sub-
sequent and extraneous voyages, beyond mentioning
that they were marked, on the theatres of them, by
like splendid seamanship, varied and important dis-
coveries, zeal, endurance, and other high qualities that
characterised the first. Still, as a biography should be
impartial above all things, I cannot but here refer to
unhappy occurrences that arose, one at the Society and
the other at the Friendly Isles, in which, giving way
to temper and obstinacy, he inflicted far too severe
punishments upon some of their people for compara-
tively trivial offences; and hisown deathand thatof nine
of his seamen on a Hawaian shore in 1779, was occa-
sioned by similar defects in his constitution. But let
those (if there be any such) whose own failings are
equally few and slight, and whose services to mankind
have been half as great as James Cook’s, harp as they
may at the imperfections then evinced. They were as
specks merely on a noble career, and will be readily
condoned by generous minds, especially by the people
of that part of the great South Land which he revealed
to their fathers, and is now held by themselves.
Alfred McFarland.


UNIVERSITY PRIZE POEM.
CAPTAIN COOK MEDITATING
AUSTRALIA’S FUTURE.
Rev. w. h. h. yarrington,
M.A., LL.B.
(Delivered at the Opening of the Great Hall, University of Sydney.)
MEMENTO OF THE DEDICATION AT KURNELL
His Excellency Sir Frederick Darley,
6th MAY, 1899.
SHE stillness and the hush of evening lay
O’er sleeping nature ; and the quiet bay
Calmly reposing, as in tranquil sleep,
Stirred not, save as the swelling from the deep
Came stealing o’er it, just as gentle breath
Lifts the soft bosom that in seeming death,
By passions all untortured, quiet lies,
Untorn by anguish, undisturbed by sighs ;
So slept the waters, o’er whose face a beam
Of softest light, e’en as a living stream
Of purest silver, lay ; while from her throne
Amid the floating clouds in beauty shone
The regal moon—a mild and holy calm
Hung o’er the scene ; and like an incense-charm,
The fragrance that from woodland fiow’rets swept —
Flow’rets that with the dews of evening wept—
Came o’er the waters with the gentle air,
Then rose to Heaven like a hallowed prayer !


Resting upon the water’s surface lay
A noble ship, that, in the peaceful bay,
Sought from the ocean’s fierce unrest repose ;
And here her wand’rings found a happy close ;
Here, where no more the angry billow rolls,
Nor lurking rocks are feared, nor treach’rous shoals.
Hushed was each sound ; nor heard the boatswain’s call
Nor hoarse command, for sleep was over all—
Sleep, peaceful sleep ! The ship a spectre stood,
Floating, uncertain on the air or flood,
While o’er her web-like rigging and the spars
The moonlight brooded ; and the twinkling stars
Were seen the midst. Is there no creature there ?
And is that ship a phantom of the air ?
No—-on the silent deck appears a form ;
’Tis of a seaman whom full many a storm
Hath tossed. It is the form of him whose name,
From age to age, shall, with undying fame,
To every son of this bright land be taught.
’Tis Cook ! —who treads that deck in lonely thought !
Yes ! there is he, of Britain’s sons the first
Upon whose view, in all its beauty, burst
This sunny land, where now we dwell; yes, there,
Gazing on all around, so still, so fair,
Into his soul he drinks its quietness ;
And o’er his spirit visions dreamlike press,
Then fleeting vanish ; while his pensive mind,
Which to the past and present hour is blind,
Thinks on the future of this happy land—
Thinks, as he gazes on the woodgirt strand,
Upon the time when far and wide around,
Those groves shall echo to the axe’s sound—
Those woods, through time unmeasured that had been
Of savage life the fruitless, wasted scene ;
Beneath whose spreading boughs—the opossum’s home —
The kangaroo and stately emu roam—
Woodlands that oft the war-cry wild had heard,
Which, like the screaming of some dreaded bird
That floats above, strikes terror to the weak ;
Whose echo is the wailing, wild death-shriek !


He sees the time when those primaeval trees
Shall pass away, as waving with the breeze,
In golden beauty, harvests rich appear,
To glad with bounty, and with plenty cheer :
He sees, with humble roof, the cottage rise—
Where dwells the peasant who, industrious, plies
With toil the fertile land ; and there, his mate,
The partner of his life, whose heart, elate
With happiness, amid her children dwells ;
Hers is the joy, that with affection swells ;
’Tis hers to soothe his mind when cares oppress,
And, with her gentleness, his home to bless.
There happy dwell they, while with plenty crowned
The village rises to the view around.
Thus, with her pictures, fancy doth beguile
The dreamy thoughts of him, who prays the while
That not delusive what he sees may prove,
And that the scenes before his mind which move —
Of cities rising into pomp and power —
Of noble buildings, that with dome and tower
Shall stand for ages, and with solemn spell
Recall their ancient majesty, and tell
When first to God temples were high upraised,
And when, with lifted hearts, in hymns was praised
The goodness that did bless : —tell of the time
When first from belfry tower was heard the chime
Of Sabbath bells tell of the years gone by,
When Austral’s sons with boldness dared defy
All dangers that their onward course withstood,
Until they’d won whate'er was great and good :
Prayed he these things—which were but of the brain
Might, in reality, live o’er again !
And, as he trustful sees fair learning’s seats
Rise in their grandeur, joyfully he greets
The sight, and, as an earnest sure, he prays
That these may be ; and that in future days
Sages and poets should, within those walls,
Be nurtured ; and from out those college halls
Men, who in wisdom learned should watchful stand,


And guard with sacred care their native land :
That thence should come poets with souls of fire
Whom genius should, with burning thoughts, inspire
To sing prophetic ! Preachers, strong in God,
Who shall declare the truth of Him that trod
This earth ; whose faith through ages long shall live
And, to all nations, the sweet bondage give
Of brother’s love !
Such are the thoughts of him,
Across whose brain, in shadowy outline, dim
The future passes ; such the fervent prayer
Which for this land, so beautiful, so fair,
He offers up to God ! That it may be
For ever glorious, and for ever free !
[Copies of the above Poem were distributed at the
Kurnell Dedication by order of the Hon. J. H.
Carruthers. ]
STe)


W. A. Gullick,
Government Printer.




Cook’s Charts, Nos. Ito B.—No- 7.
“ Historical Records of New South Wales.
40706
S 3 2/
Photo-lithographed by W. A. Gullich, Government Printer, Sydney, N.S. W.


: . ’>
■ \
:{■
■
; ;
■ ■ • . ■
V i
&




fiiz<sd
WA. GuUuHi/ Government' Printer
