





DEED OF SETTLEMENT
THE AUSTRALASIAN
STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
DATED Ist JULY, 1851.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.




INDEX TO THE CONTENTS
OF THE FOLLOWING DEED, BUT FORMING NO PART THEREOF.
Auditors :
Appointment and powers
ad interim
Audit Accounts
further
Disqualification
Powers
Qualification
Remuneration
Special
Balance Sheet (see Auditors)
Books, to be kept
Buildings, power to purchase and erect
Business, place of
Bye Laws, &c.
Company :
Capital
increase of
Dissolution
in no other way
Incorporation
Limitation of liability of Shareholders
Objects
Property, personalty
Trusts, not bound by
Cheques ....
Deed :
Proprietor :
Directors —See also Meetings and Trustees :
Appointment of first
Auditors, appointment of, ad interim
Books
Building, erecting, &c.
Business, mode of
Candidate for Office
notices of
Chairman, casting vote, when
not
election of
Deputy, election of
Assignee to execute, except as mentioned
Execution of Deed, condition, precedent
Rights not conferred, unless deposit and calls paid
suspended if calls over due
Transferee to execute, except as mentioned


Directors — Continued: — clause.
Chargeable, when . . . . . 104
not ..... 104
Constitution and general powers of . & . , . 37
Defective election or appointment not to invalidate acts done . 47
Dissolution of Company . . . 105, 6,7, 10, 11
in no other way
Disqualification
Duties
Election of
38,-46
47
— defects in, not to invalidate acts done
Half-yearly balance sheet
report
Indemnity
Lot
Management of affairs of the Company
Minutes of proceedings
Officers, appointment of
Power of
as to initiatory matters
respecting bye-laws, &c.
Qualification for
Real estate
Removal
39, 43
49
Remuneration
Resignation
Resolution rescision
Retirement
41, 42
42
notice of
Shares, calls in arrear, dividends not to be paid.
Trustees, control over ....
power to remove, and enforce reconveyance, &c.
Unqualified, penalty ....
Vacancy, casual ....
Drafts
Incorporation of Company ;
Act of Council for
Interpretation clause
Manager :
See Officers.
Meetings of Proprietors :
Adjournment
Notification
Application of profits after dividends
Capital, power to return
and recall
Chairman casting vote
52, 76
when not
46, 76
Deed, power to interpret
Defective votes not to invalidate
Dividends
Dissolution of Company
105, 6,7, 10, 11
109
in no other way
Doubts, explanation of Deed
Half-Yearly General
audit and balance sheet
further
business of
Report .
Minutes of proceedings
Powers
Questions, how decided
46, 65


Meetings of Proprietors— Continued: —
Special General
business of
calling
notice
proof of
Votes :
Mode of voting . ,
Number of .
Proprietors interested not to vote
Proxies, effect of
to be in -writing and deposited .
Notices ;
Service of
Officers :
Appointment of.
Chargeable for acts, when
exceptions
Security by
Partners :—See also Shares.
Administrators of deceased
Action and suit between, and Company
admission
effect of refusal
Agreement
Assignee of bankrupt and insolvent
Association
Bankrupt .
Committee of lunatic
Execution and levy, reimbursement
Executors of deceased
Female marrying
Husband of female
Individual rights renounced
Insolvent .
Interested, not to vote at meetings
Joint Proprietors
Limitation of liability
Lunatic
Notices, &c., service of
Trustee of bankrupt and insolvent.
Witnesses—competent to be .
Writ, &c., service of
Proprietors :—See Partners.
Proxies :
Effect of
To be in writing and deposited
Shares :—See also Partners
Allotment of
Assignment of new
Calls for instalments.
for deficiency, &c.
Defects in election or appointment not to invalidate acts done
Indemnity .....
Not to vote .....
Debts to Company to be paid notwithstanding partnership
and proceedings in Equity not to be instituted for an accoun
and partnership not to be pleaded in bar
Deceased .....
CLATSE.
64, 7
66, 7, 8
69
100, 1
33


Su a uEs— Continued.
Calls in arrear—dividend on shares
interest
Certificate of
Corporation not to hold
Creation of new shares
Deeds, custody of
Deposit on
Forfeiture of
may be discharged
sale and transfer of forfeited shares
Instalment on
Lien on
New, assignment of
creation of
in whom vested
Number of
Proprietors rights and liabilities
Sale of within limited time after death, &c.
Transfer of, how authenticated
proof of
Transferable
calls to be paid up
consent of Directors required
Transferee, privileges and liabilities
Transferor, release from liability
Trustees :—See also Partners.
Action and suit .
Admission on trial .
effect of refusal to give
Appointment
Arbitration
Civil proceedings
Criminal proceedings
Deed to be produced
copy to be evidence .
Directors—power over Trustees
Insolvency proceedings
Notices, &c., service of
Power of Attorney by
Receipts by
Releases to witnesses
Remedies against
Removal
Resignation
Suits .
Writ, &c., service of.
Trusts :
Cestui que trust not recognized
exception
Company not bound by
Voting ; —See Meetings of Proprietors under that title.
Writ :
Service of
CLAUSE.
90, 1, 8


Snilmturr made the first day of July in the year Preamble
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-one
Between the several parties who by themselves or their
agents or attorneys duly authorised in this behalf have
subscribed or shall subscribe their names to and have
sealed and delivered or shall seal and deliver these presents
Whereas the several persons whose names are hereunto
subscribed and whose seals are hereunto affixed have
agreed to establish a Joint Stock Company for the purpose
of carrying on the business of trading with steam and
other vessels and of constructing and repairing steam and
other vessels machinery and boilers whether belonging
to the Company or not and for other the purposes herein-
after mentioned under the name style and title of
thMmm Item Jtoigutiim Cmnpumj with such Capital in
such respective shares and under and subject to such
covenants rules regulations and provisions as are herein-
after expressed and contained tjjlS SttfrCHtlirt General mu-
-353 itnEßßftJj that i n pursuance and performance of th e tualc(nendnt
said agreement and in consideration of the premises each
of them the said several persons who now are or at any
time hereafter shall be parties to these presents for himself
and herself severally and respectively and for his and her
several and respective heirs executors and administrators
doth hereby covenant promise agree and declare with
and to the others and each and every of the others of
them their and each and every of their heirs executors
and administrators in the manner following (that is to
say)
I. That the several persons now or hereafter parties to Association,
these presents shall and will whilst holding shares in the
Capital of the Company be and continue a Joint Stock


Company or partnership under the name style and title of
“ The Australasian Steam Navigation Company ” from the
day of the date of these presents until the said Company
shall be dissolved under the provisions in such behalf here-
inafter contained
Agreement to 11. That each of the several persons parties hereto
observe the . 1 r
articles. whilst he shall be a holder of any share or shares in the
Capital shall and will observe and perform fulfil and keep
all the covenants articles stipulations and provisions in
these presents contained and all additions alterations
variations and modifications which may hereafter be made
in pursuance of the provisions hereinafter contained which
are or ought to be observed performed fulfilled and kept by
him in respect of or in relation to such share or shares and
in relation to the said Company and its affairs according to
the true intent and meaning of the same respectively and
the same shall be binding upon the heirs executors
administrators and assigns of every such Proprietor.
Management 111. That the general management of the business of the
rectors and Company shall be and the same is hereby reposed in the
vlduai ° f part- Board of Directors hereinafter more particularly mentioned
ced! renoun ’and subject to the limitations herein contained and the
powers hereby vested in General Meetings of the Proprie-
tors the individual parties hereto do hereby for themselves
severally and respectively and for their several and respec-
tive heirs executors and administrators renounce and
disclaim all right to interfere in the management of the
affairs of the Company or to inspect the books of the Com-
pany or to enter into any contract or engagement so as to
charge or bind the Company or the properties funds
securities or moneys of or belonging to the Company And
each party hereto hereby binds himself his heirs executors
and administrators that he and they shall and will keep
harmless and indemnified the said Company and their


lands goods chattels funds and securities from and against
all losses costs damages and expenses occasioned by any
contract or engagement made or entered into by him or
them as aforesaid.
IV. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors at Power to ap-
the expense of the Company to apply for and endeavour to of } f °Councii
obtain an Act of the Governor and Legislative Council of conations! t 0
the Colony of New South Wales to incorporate the
Company under the name style and title of the Australasian
Steam Navigation Company and from time to time to apply
for and endeavour to obtain such other Act or Acts of the
Legislature of the said Colony or of any Legislature or
other competent authority now or hereafter to be established
elsewhere in the Australasian Territories or in any other
colony country or place to which the trade of the said
Company may at any time be extended as the Board of
Directors may consider calculated to facilitate their legal
remedies and advance the general interests of the Company.
And for the purpose of obtaining such Act of Incorporation
or such other Act or Acts as aforesaid it shall be competent
for the Board of Directors on behalf of the Company to
comply with such conditions as may be imposed by any
such Act or Acts anything in these presents inconsistent
with such conditions notwithstanding And every provision
herein contained inconsistent with the provisions of any
such Act or Acts shall during the continuance of the said
Act or Acts be suspended and shall be of no force and effect
in the colony country or place to which the Act or Acts
containing such provisions respectively shall relate but
after the expiration of the said Act or Acts by effluxion of
time or otherwise every such provision herein contained
shall again be in full force.
V. That the objects of the Company shall be the Objects of the
carrying on the business of trading with Steam and other Company ’


vessels between the ports and places in the Australasian
Colonies and also such other Colonies and Countries as
may be determined upon at a meeting of Proprietors duly
convened for that purpose And also of constructing and
repairing steam and other vessels machinery and boilers
whether the property of the Company or not And
for all or any of the purposes aforesaid it shall be law-
ful for the Directors for the time being of the Company
to engage hire build or purchase suitable premises
and to erect the necessary machinery for the carrying
on of all such operations and works and from time
to time to hire and employ all necessary workmen servants
and apprentices and to become parties to any indenture of
apprenticeship with or without a sum of money to be paid
by way of premium by or on behalf of any such apprentice
and to agree for the instruction of any such apprentice in
the trade or handicraft so carried on by the Company and
to provide proper persons to instruct such apprentice
accordingly and to pay such wages and salaries to all such
workmen servants and apprentices as shall be thought
proper.
Place of Bu- VI. That the business of the Company shall be carried
on in such place in the City of Sydney and also elsewhere in
the Australasian Colonies and other colonies and countries
as aforesaid as the Board of Directors shall from time to
time determine on And also if it shall be determined
according to the provisions hereinafter contained to
establish agencies the business of such agencies shall be
carried on in such places as the Board of Directors may
from time to time determine upon.
Capital of the VII. That the capital of the Company shall consist of
Company. e ighty thousand pounds hereinafter designated the
original Capital to be contributed in four thousand
shares of twenty pounds each and of such further sum or


sums of money as may hereafter be raised by the creation
and sale of new shares of the like amount as hereinafter
provided to an extent not exceeding the further sum of
four hundred and twenty thousand pounds.
YIII. That the several persons being original parties to Agreement to
. ii i pay deposit &
these presents shall and will severally contribute to the instalments
said original Capital in proportion to the number of shares
set against their respective names in manner following
that is to say sixteen pounds per share to be paid on the
day of the date of these presents or upon execution
hereof by any such persons as shall not have become
parties hereto until after such date and the remaining
sum of four pounds per share in one or more instalments
as the Board of Directors shall see fit.
IX. That the Board of Directors may call for thecaiis of in-
payment of all instalments at such times and places as^ares!* 8 ° n
they may determine by public advertisement in the
Sydney Government Gazette or one or more of the
principal newspapers published in Sydney or by notice
conveyed by circular letters as hereinafter provided
Provided always that no instalment shall be required
to be paid within a shorter period than three months
after the time at which a previous instalment has become
payable.
X. That every instalment so to be called for shall bear interest on &
interest from the day on which the same shall become due clnT. 617 ° f
at the rate of eight per centum per annum And the amount
of such instalment with interest as aforesaid shall if the
same be not paid within the time to be appointed for that
purpose be recoverable by action of debt in the name of
the Manager of the Company or by the Company in its
corporate name in case it shall be incorporated And on
the trial of every such action it shall not be necessary to
prove the appointment of the Directors by whom such call


was made nor any other matter except that the defendant
at the time of making such call was a holder of one or
more shares in the Capital of the Company and that such
call was in point of fact made and notice thereof and of
the time fixed by the Directors for payment thereof given
in the manner herein provided.
Calls to make XI. That if at any time it shall be certified by the
cies or meet Auditors that the assets of the Company are not sufficient
emergencies. mee t; its liabilities or that an emergency has arisen
which makes a call or calls expedient it shall be lawful for
a General or Special General Meeting of Proprietors to
direct a call or calls to be made upon the Proprietors in
proportion to their shares for a sufficient amount to make
up such deficiency or to meet such emergency as the case
may require and thereupon the Board of Directors shall
make such call or calls accordingly and the same shall be
payable by the respective Proprietors at such time or times
as the Directors shall appoint and shall be recoverable in
like manner as calls of original subscribed capital are
hereby made recoverable Provided that no such calls shall
be made to an extent exceeding in the whole the amount
of the previously paid up capital and that the same or such
part thereof as shall be found to be no longer necessary
shall as soon as conveniently may be be returned to the
several Proprietors paying the same.
Forfeiture of XII. That in case default shall be made by any of the
shares on , . . , »
default. several parties to these presents in the payment ot any call
that shall be made and become payable on his or her share
or shares for the space of six calendar months next after
the same shall have become payable it shall be lawful for
the Board of Directors to declare the share or shares on
which such default has been made and the deposit and
calls previously paid thereon and all benefit and advan-
tages whatever attending the same to be absolutely for-


feited to the Company And the person or persons making
such default shall thereupon in respect of such share or
shares cease to be a member of the Company Provided
nevertheless that the Board of Directors may if they think charged,
fit upon the application of the Proprietor or late Proprie-
tor discharge any share or shares from forfeiture and
restore the same or any part thereof to such Proprietor
on such terms as the Board of Directors may think fit, and
in the event of such discharge the forfeiture shall be held
not to have occurred and the rights and liabilities of the
Proprietor making default not to have been in anywise
affected And provided further that it shall be lawful for
the Board of Directors if they think fit instead of declaring
such share or shares to be forfeited to enforce payment of
the calls with interest as hereinbefore provided or to sell
so many of the shares of any Proprietor so making default
as may be necessary and sufficient to pay the amount
payable upon the whole of such Proprietor’s shares and all
expenses costs and charges occasioned by any action for the
recovery of such calls or otherwise howsoever by reason of
the non-payment thereof.
XIII. That after the original Capital of eighty thou- grease b °*
sand pounds shall have been fully paid up but not sooner creation of
it shall be lawful from time to time for a General nc " shares '
Meeting of the Proprietors constituted as hereinafter
mentioned and called for the purpose of considering the
propriety of increasing the Capital of the Company by
the creation and sale of new shares by a resolution to be
passed by the majority of votes of the Proprietors present
at any such Meeting in person or by proxy to create such
further and additional shares of twenty pounds each as may
be deemed advisable but not exceeding the sum of five
hundred thousand pounds inclusive of the original Capital
and to direct the mode in which such additional shares
shall be allotted and disposed of and to determine the time


for the payment of the amount thereof Provided always that
the Proprietors actually present at such Meeting in person
or by proxy shall be possessed in the aggregate of not less
than half of the actual paid up Capital of the Company.
New shares XIV. That all new shares which shall be created by
rectors m iiS;ii an y resolution for the increase of the Capital of the
assigned to Company as hereinbefore provided and all forfeited shares
purchasers. r J r
shall until the same shall respectively be assigned to the
purchasers thereof be vested in the Board of Directors of
the said Company for the time being in trust nevertheless
for the benefit of all the Proprietors but such new shares
shall not be deemed to represent any part of the Capital
of the Company until they shall have been so assigned.
original as- XV. That all new shares to be created according to the
nlwThares. oi provisions hereinbefore contained when they shall have
been allotted or disposed of and so soon thereafter as the
amount thereof together with such premiums if any as
may be payable thereon shall have been duly paid ac-
cording to the provisions to be made in that behalf shall
be assigned to each person entitled thereto by and by
means of a memorandum of assignment and agreement
to be made and entered into by the Board of Directors
and such person and to be signed by three of the
Directors and such person whereby the said Board shall
declare that such person has become entitled to a new
share or new shares of the amount of twenty pounds
each in the Capital Stock of the Company and shall
assign the same to him accordingly and whereby the latter
shall agree to accept the said new shares and to submit
to and conform himself to all the articles stipulations
and agreements in this Deed of Settlement contained
And the persons becoming Proprietors of such new shares
shall thereupon and upon the execution by them re-
spectively of these presents or a duplicate thereof have


in every respect the same rights and be subject to the
same liabilities as the Proprietors of the original Capital.
XVI. That the share or shares forfeited in pursuance of s a i e and
any provision herein contained shall as soon as possible e^ e e r d of
after such forfeiture be disposed of by public sale or shares *
private contract to such person or persons as may be
willing to accept the same and to execute these presents
for such reasonable price as may be obtained for the same
and thereupon a transfer or assignment of the forfeited
share or shares shall be made to the purchaser thereof by
the Board of Directors and shall be signed by three of
such Directors Provided nevertheless that it shall be
lawful to withold any such forfeited shares from immediate
sale and to retain the same in the hands of the said Board
for a reasonable time in every case in which it is hereby
made competent to the Board of Directors to discharge
such forfeiture and in which they shall think it probable
that an application for such discharge will be made by the
Proprietor or late Proprietor and that it would be proper
to discharge the same upon such application being made.
XVII. That every Proprietor shall have a separate and Rights and
distinct right to his or her share for the time being in the
Capital of the Company and shall be entitled to and inte-
rested in the profits and liable and subject to the losses of
the Company in proportion to the amount of paid up
Capital held by him or her but subject nevertheless to the
provisions hereinafter contained
XVIII. That as between the Proprietors of the several Capital and
shares and their respective real and personal representa- the Company
tives the said Capital and all the funds and property of theSty e mthout
Company and the share and shares of each Proprietor shall survivorship '
be deemed personal estate and be transmissible as such
And that there shall not be benefit of survivorship among


the Proprietors in respect of the said Capital funds and
property.
ferabie. tranS ' XIX. That subject to the restrictions herein contained
every separate share in the said Capital but not any frac-
tional part of a share shall be transferable and assignable
by the Proprietor of such share or shares to any other
person or persons and so over again by him her or them as
fully and effectually as any other interest is by law assign-
able so as such assignment or transfer be made in such
manner and form as the Board of Directors shall from
time to time settle and determine and the execution
thereof be duly attested to the satisfaction of the Board
of Directors.
Not without XX. That no transfer of any share or shares shall be
consent of Di- , i i
rectors. made to any person or persons whether a member or
members of the Company or not without the consent of a
Board of Directors at one of the Board meetings of the said
Company.
No transfer XXI. That no share or shares shall be transferred after
till calls paid ,
u p- any call has been made by the Board of Directors until the
amount of such call in respect of such share or shares with
the interest due thereon if any shall have been paid.
Transferor XXII. That on the completion of the transfer of any
liability. share or shares and the execution of this deed or a dupli-
cate thereof by the person or persons to whom the same
shall be transferred the previous holder of such share or
shares shall as between the Proprietors and himself be
exonerated and released from all claims demands obliga-
tions and liabilities in respect of such share or shares and
from all further observance and performance of any cove-
nants conditions stipulations or agreements herein con-
tained or which may be contained in any supplementary


deed bye-law or regulation of the Company And the
person or persons to whom such transfer shall be made
shall have the same privileges and be subject to the same
liabilities as the original proprietor.
XXIII. That in all cases wherein a Proprietor either indi-
by himself or jointly with any other person or persons and prietors to
whether directly or indirectly shall become debtor to the toek\hare° n
Company or to any person or persons for their use and
behoof or shall be under engagement to the Company
of any kind such debts and engagements shall be first
and paramount charges upon the share or shares of such
Proprietor and the dividends or bonuses or interest
accruing thereon before all other creditors of such Pro-
prietor and before his or her assigns voluntary and legal
And it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors if they
shall see fit to prohibit and restrain the transfer of the
share or shares of such Proprietor or the payment of the
dividends or bonuses and interest (if any) accruing thereon
until all and every such debts and engagements shall have
been fully paid and satisfied and to apply all such dividends
and bonuses and interest in or towards the payment of
such debts or engagements And if such Proprietor shall
fail within a time to be fixed by the Board of Directors
to pay and satisfy all such debts and engagements the
share or shares of such Proprietor shall thereupon become
forfeited to the Company And it shall be lawful for the
Board of Directors without notice to such Proprietor
absolutely to sell the said shares or so many thereof as
shall be necessary and sufficient for the purpose either by
public sale or by private contract and to apply the proceeds
thereof together with the dividends and bonuses and
interest due thereon in liquidation of such debts and en-
gagements and the balance of the nett proceeds of any
such sale shall be paid over to the late Proprietor of
such shares.


Execution of XXIV. That no person or persons shall be deemed or
deed condi- / g
tionprecedent taken to be a Proprietor of or to have any interest in any
ship™ pnetol share or shares of the said Capital until he or she shall
have executed this deed or a duplicate thereof either in
person or by attorney Provided however that this article
shall not prevent the Company from requiring payment
of and recovering the deposit or any call upon shares
agreed to be taken by any person nor shall it protect him
from any liabilities to which he may have become subject
by the acceptance of them and the contribution of Capital.
Execution of XXV. That failing the payment of such Deposit as
confer lights aforesaid upon the original shares and of every call that
ancfcailrthen may have been made and be payable upon any share or
due be paid. s h ares a t the time of the execution of this deed by any of
the several parties hereto such execution shall not as
against the Company confer upon the party executing any
of the rights or privileges of a member of the Company
but nevertheless he shall be subject to all the liabilities of
the Proprietors to third parties.
nights sus- XXVI. That no Proprietor shall be allowed to attend
pended if calls A
overdue. or vote at any meeting oi Proprietors or to receive any
dividend or exercise any other right or privilege under or
by virtue of these presents before the amount of every call
which shall have been made and shall have become pay-
able and overdue in respect of his share or shares together
with interest thereon if any shall have been fully paid and
satisfied.
Transferee of XXVII. That every person to whom any original new
Jgnee of new o r forfeited share or shares shall be allotted or assigned or
shares to exe- 1 w hom anv share or shares shall be transferred shall
cute deed un- J
less previous- w ithin six months after the date of such allotment assign-
ly executed , ,
by him in re- ment or transfer execute this deed or a duplicate tnereot
shares^ ° thcr unless he shall have previously executed it in respect of
shares held by him at the date of such assignment in which


case such execution shall take effect in respect of the
newly acquired shares and shall apply to the same fully
and effectually notwithstanding that such transferee shall
afterwards sell and transfer the shares in respect of which
he originally executed the deed And in default of such
execution within the time limited the shares in respect of
which default shall have been made shall be absolutely for-
feited to the Company Provided nevertheless that the
Board of Directors may if they think, fit upon the applica-
tion of the person to whom such assignment or transfer
shall have been made discharge any share or shares from
forfeiture and restore the same or any part thereof to such
person on such terms as the Board of Directors may think
proper And in the event of such discharge the forfeiture
shall upon such execution of this deed or a duplicate
thereof as aforesaid be held not to have occurred and the
rights and liabilities of the person making default shall be
deemed not to have been in anywise affected Provided
also that in the case of a transfer of shares the transferor
shall until such execution of this deed by the transferee or
until such forfeiture of the shares transferred be deemed
and taken to be the continuing Proprietor of the same for
all purposes except only as against the transferee in respect
of the receipt of dividends and disposal of the shares.
XXVIII. That no body corporate shall be entitled to
hold any share or shares in the Capital of the Company. No corpora-
tion to hold
shares as
XXIX. That when a share or shares shall be vested in such *
two or more persons jointly or in common or otherwise the Of joint Pro-
one of such persons or of the survivors of them whose name oniyto S be re-
shall stand first in the books of the Company as one of the ceS d
owners of such shares or the sole survivor of such two or poses ‘
more persons shall be considered and deemed the Proprietor
of such share or shares for the purpose of voting and
receiving dividends and of receiving any notice that may be


required to be given But all the parties shall be liable
jointly and severally to the Company for the fulfilment of
all the Covenants herein contained and any notice given
to either of them shall be deemed good notice to all of them.
Custody of XXX. That every deed or instrument of transfer and
deedsoitrans- . . . , .
fer. every other deed or instrument in writing on which the
right of any Proprietor may be founded or an attested copy
of every such last mentioned deed or instrument shall be
deposited and kept at the office of the Company and no
such deed or instrument of transfer shall be valid or
effectual until so deposited But every such Proprietor
shall be entitled at all times by writing under his or her
hand to require the same to be produced and shown forth
to himself or herself or to such person or persons as he or
she shall require on payment of all reasonable costs and
charges attending the production and showing forth of the
same.
be°noticedun- XXXI. That the Company shall not be bound in any
tore tidSuat' manner by any trusts or equitable interests affecting any
share or shares of the Capital standing in the name of any
person or persons or to take any notice of any such trusts
or equitable interests And the receipt of the Proprietor in
whose name the shares shall stand in the books of the
Company shall notwithstanding any such trust or equitable
interest and notice thereof to the Company be a good and
sufficient discharge for the money which may become
payable by the Company in respect of the share or shares
standing in the name of such Proprietor and the Company
shall not be bound to see to the application of the money
paid upon such receipt And a transfer of the shares by
such Proprietor shall when complete be binding and
conclusive against all persons claiming by virtue of such
trusts or equitable interests whether or not the Company
have had notice of such trusts or equitable interests.


XXXII. That no Legatee Next of Kin or Cestui que No
~ # next of kin,
Trust claiming under the will of any deceased Proprietor or cestui que
shall as such become a Proprietor of any share or shares cognised, but
of the said Capital but in all cases where Legatees or administrator
Next of Kin of deceased Proprietors or such Cestui que only *
Trusts shall become entitled to or interested in any such
share or shares the executors or administrators of such
deceased Proprietors shall be considered as the holders of
the share or shares and shall be the only persons entitled to
become Proprietors or to procure some other person or
persons to become a Proprietor or Proprietors in respect
thereof.
XXXIII. That the husband of any female Proprietor or^ 910 f harcs
J oi temale pro -
the executors or administrators of any deceased Proprietor pnetor mar-
_ , , , rying and of
or the committee of any lunatic Proprietor may on deceased iu-
production of satisfactory evidence of title either elect to Solvent 11
become a Proprietor in respect of the shares to which
he shall be entitled in either of these capacities or procure
any other person or persons to become a Proprietor or
Proprietors in respect of such shares but the trustees
or assignees of any insolvent or bankrupt Proprietors
shall not be entitled to become a Proprietor in respect
of the share or shares of such insolvent or bankrupt
Proprietor but shall procure some other person or per-
sons to become a Proprietor or Proprietors in respect thereof
Provided always that no person shall be entitled to receive
any dividends or other profits which shall be declared
on the shares of such female deceased lunatic insolvent or
bankrupt Proprietor accruing after her or his marriage
death commission of lunacy insolvency or bankruptcy until
some person or persons shall have become a Proprietor or
Proprietors in respect of such share or shares And the
person or persons who shall ultimately become a Proprietor
or Proprietors in respect of such share or shares shall be
entitled to such last mentioned dividend and profits and


the full right and interest of and in such share or shares
Bale of such And provided further that if no person shall become a
taken 8 up Ty Proprietor in respect of such shares within the period of
party entitled y ears f rom the d a t e 0 f suc h ma rriage death or
commission of lunacy or of the insolvency or bankruptcy
of any member who shall be residing out of the Colony
respectively then the rights herein reserved to such
husband executor administrator committee trustee or
assignee respectively shall cease and determine and it shall
be lawful for the Board of Directors to sell the said shares
and to retain the proceeds together with the interest and
profits which shall have accrued previously to such sale
until the person legally entitled thereto shall establish his
claim to the satisfaction of the Board of Directors and such
person shall not be entitled to claim interest on the amount
so retained And also that if no person shall have become
Proprietor in respect of the shares of any member or mem-
bers who residing within the colony shall become insolvent
or bankrupt within the period of six months after the bank-
ruptcy or insolvency of such bankrupt or insolvent Pro-
prietor it shall be competent to the Board of Directors if
they shall think fit to sell the said last mentioned shares
by public auction or private contract for the best prices
that can be reasonably got for the same and the nett
proceeds of such sale shall in such case be paid over
by the Board of Directors to the said Trustee or Assignee
for the benefit of the said insolvent or bankrupt.
Transmission XXXIV. That all persons claiming any shares by trans-
letTeanl mission or claiming a right to procure another person
£an transfer tQ k ecome a Proprietor according to the provisions of the
ticated by a i as t preceding clause shall before he shall be recognised as
ec ara 10 a Proprietor of such share or shares or before he shall be
permitted to procure another person to become a Pro-
prietor as the case may require and every Guardian
Committee of a lunatic or other person claiming a right


to act in a representative character on behalf of a Pro-
prietor shall before he shall be permitted to become a
Proprietor or receive any dividends or transfer any shares
or exercise any of the rights and privileges conferred by
this Deed authenticate such transmission or right by a
declaration in writing setting forth the material facts which
declaration shall be made and signed by some credible
person before some Justice of the Peace or Notary Public
and shall be subject to the consideration and approval of
the Board of Directors.
XXXV, That if such transmission be by viitue of the transmission
marriage of a female Proprietor the said declaration shall ™ ama s e
contain a copy of the register of such marriage or other
particulars of the celebration thereof and shall declare the
identity of the wife with the holder of such shares and if
such transmission have taken place by virtue of any testa-
mentary instrument or by intestacy the probate of the will
or letters of administration or an official extract therefrom
shall together with such declaration be produced to the
Manager of the Company and if the right to become a
Proprietor or to procure another person to become a
Proprietor be claimed in consequence of insolvency or
bankruptcy or of any appointment as a Guardian or as a
Committee of a lunatic a certificate signed by the Commis-
sioner of Insolvent Debtors or Bankrupts or the Master in
Equity as the case may require shall together with such
declaration be produced and left with the Manager of the
Company And if any right to make a transfer be claimed
by virtue of any power of attorney the power of attorney
shall be so produced and the same or an attested copy thereof
shall be left And upon such production and the due
execution of these presents in either of the cases aforesaid
by the person electing to become Proprietor as aforesaid
or by the person so as aforesaid procured to be such
Proprietor the shares shall (but subject to the provisions


in that behalf hereinbefore contained) be transferred in the
books of the Company into the name of the person or
persons entitled to become a Proprietor in respect thereof.
Certificates of XXXVI. That every Proprietor shall be entitled to
shares. J r
receive a certificate under the hand of three of the
Directors countersigned by the Manager of the number
of shares held by him or her in the Capital of the
Company and the amount paid thereon but such certi-
ficate shall not be transferable and shall only be evidence
of the title of such Proprietor at the time such certificate
was signed And the books of the Company shall be con-
clusive evidence of proprietorship in all matters in dispute
between the Company and any member or members
thereof and every or any person claiming any interest in
any share or shares of the Capital thereof.
Constitution XXXVII. That there shall be six Directors of the
poter ge ?f lal Company duly qualified as hereinafter provided and such
rectors ° f Dl ' Directors shall constitute the Board of Directors of the
Company and any three of such Directors assembled at an
ordinary or duly convened special meeting of Directors
shall be competent to the transaction of all the affairs of
the Company and shall possess and exercise all the powers
herein conferred on the Board of Directors.
Appointment XXXVIII. That the first Directors of the Company
QuaKfication' shall be Robert Campbell Thomas Ware Smart Henry
and “dsArmitage John Bales John Gilchrist and William Ranken
cltiof qualifi ‘Scott Esquires who shall be and continue in office from
the day of the date hereof until the Half-Yearly
General Meeting to be held in the month of July next
and until they shall respectively go out of office by lot as
hereinafter provided and that after such last mentioned
period the said Directors shall go out of office under
the provisions hereinafter contained and in their stead and
place Directors shall be selected from amongst the Pro-


prietors possessed of twenty-five shares at the least in the
Capital of the Company but no Propietor shall be eligible
or qualified to be or act as a Director of the said Company
who shall be an uncertificated insolvent debtor within
the meaning of the acts of the Governor and Council
5 Victoria No, 17 and 7 Victoria No. 19 or any act to
be passed for the relief of insolvent persons or who shall
have made an assignment for the benefit of his creditors
and shall be still undischarged in respect of his debts or
who shall after his election as a Director fall within such
disqualification as aforesaid or who shall be absent from
the colony for the space of six calendar months during his
term of office or who shall during such term without
leave from the Board of Directors absent himself (except
on account of illness) for three months from the meetings
of the Board or who shall cease to be a holder of twenty-
five shares in the Capital of the Company.
XXXIX. That the Board of Directors as soon as they Removal
shall receive notice of the non-qualification or disqualifi-
cation of any person then being a Director of the Com-
pany shall forthwith proceed to enquire into the matter at
a meeting of the Board of Directors specially convened for
the purpose and if they shall be satisfied that such
Director is not duly qualified or is disqualified they shall
declare the office of such Director to be vacant and the
same shall thereupon become vacant and such Director
shall be removed from the direction of the Company and
the Board shall then take the necessary steps for filling up
such vacancy by a new election Provided always that
such non-qualification or disqualification shall not extend
to render illegal or invalid any act deed matter or thing
done or executed or suffered to be done or executed for or
on account of the Company by such person assuming to
act as a Director prior to such declaration of vacancy but
every such act deed matter or thing so done or executed


or suffered to be done or executed by such person before
his actual removal from office shall be held to be valid
binding and conclusive upon the Company and the Pro-
prietors thereof any preceding disqualification for his
office notwithstanding.
Powers and XL. That the Board of Directors shall have full power
toll ° f to receive applications for and to allot the several shares in
the Capital of the said Company and in the meantime to take
all proceedings that may be necessary for the formation of
the Company and to receive such deposits or calls as may
be made on shares and out of such deposits or calls or other
moneys to pay and satisfy all costs and charges in any way
connected with the formation of the Company And every
act deed matter or thing made done executed and per-
formed by the said Board of Directors in pursuance of such
appointment or of the powers herein conferred and every-
thing heretofore done by them in or about the formation
of the said Company the preparation of these presents or
the application to the Legislative Council for an Act to
incorporate the Company shall be binding and conclusive
on the Company and on every Member thereof.
Retirement of XLI. That at the half-yearly General Meeting to be held
Directors. t h e mo nth of July next one of the said first Directors
shall go out of office by lot And in like manner at each
subsequent half-yearly General Meeting to be held an-
nually in the month of July another of the said Directors
shall retire by lot until the whole of the original Directors
have so retired or vacated office and thereafter at every
succeeding half-yearly General Meeting to be held
in the aforesaid month of July annually the Director
who shall have been longest in office shall retire by
rotation And it is hereby declared that any Directors
whether one of the original Directors or not who shall
so retire shall be capable of re-election.


XLII. That the names of each of the Directors who Notice of
shall so retire or go out of office by lot or rotation shall ILtlunKUt-
be ascertained and determined by the Board of Directors
themselves at least one month before the time of every
such retirement and the names of such retiring members
shall be forthwith published in one or more of the news-
papers published in Sydney as the Directors may think
fit for the information of the Company.
XLIII. That any Director may at any time vacate his Resignation
office by sending in his resignation to the Board of or removal by
Directors And a general meeting of the Proprietors 1 lol>riLtul *
specially called for the purpose shall have power at any
time to remove from his office any Director for negligence
misconduct in office or any other reasonable cause
Provided always that the Proprietors present at any such
general meeting in person or by proxy shall be possessed
in the aggregate of not less than one-half of the actual paid
up Capital of the Company.
XLIV That in case of any vacancy or vacancies in the Fining up of
office of Director occasioned by death resignation disquali- cy in the I)i-
-fication or removal from office such vacancy or vacancies rectlon *
shall within fourteen days after the same shall first happen
be filled up by the appointment by the Board of Directors
of another or other duly qualified Proprietor or Pro-
prietors who shall continue in office until the next half-
yearly or Special General Meeting and at such
Meeting some duly qualified person shall be elected to fill
such vacancy who shall continue in office until the expira-
tion of the time that such deceased disqualified removed or
retiring Director might have continued in office Provided
always that if such vacancy or vacancies shall happen within
sixty days next before the half-yearly General Meeting
it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors by a resolution
to be entered in their Minutes to direct that such vacancy


or vacancies shall remain over until the said half-yearly
General Meeting And provided further that if two or
more such vacancies shall have to be filled up together
at any such half-yearly or Special General Meeting the
person elected by the greater number of votes shall be
allowed to elect the vacancy which he may prefer to fill.
Notice by XLV. That every Proprietor who shall become a can-
candidates for # m r • . .
the office of didate for the office of Director whether a retiring Director
or not shall give notice thereof to the Board of Directors
in writing to be left at the place of business of the Com-
pany in Sydney fourteen days at the least before the day
of election and the names of the candidates who have given
such notice shall be published in one or more Sydney
newpapers seven days at the least before the day of
election And no person shall be eligible who shall fail
to give such notice.
In case of XLVI. That when and so often as at the election of
Xf y of any Director or Directors there shall be votes for more
candidates than there shall be vacancies and in conse-
quence of any two or more candidates having an equal
number of votes it cannot otherwise be determined which
of those candidates shall be the person or persons to
supply the vacancy or vacancies it shall be decided by lot
amongst those candidates which of them shall supply the
vacancy or vacancies And the person or persons in whose
favour such decision shall be made shall be considered
duly elected.
Section or ap- XLYII. That no irregularity informality or illegality
Directed o^ n the election of any Director or in the appointment of
? ffic< rF® i lot t 0 any Officer of the Company shall be taken or construed
invalidate J r j
acts. to render illegal or invalid any act deed matter or thing
Directors to ° J , ,
enquire and done or executed or suffered to be done or executed by
interestedDi- such Director or Officer in pursuance of such election


or appointment before notice in writing shall have been
given by a Proprietor or Proprietors to the Board of determina-
Directors of the irregularity informality or illegality of
such election or appointment But upon receipt of such
notice the Board of Directors shall unless the Director
or Officer shall voluntarily resign or retire proceed to
enquire into the objection to such election or appointment
at a meeting specially convened for the purpose And if
the Board of Directors shall be of opinion that such
election or appointment is void they shall declare the
office vacant accordingly and the same shall thereupon
become vacant and a new election or appointment as the
case may require shall be had or made And if they shall
consider the election or appointment valid they shall decide
accordingly and such decision shall be final Provided
that if and when the question shall be as to the validity
of the election of any Director such Director shall not
take part in the determination thereof.
XLVIII. That if any person holding the office of a Penalt y , on
O' ' unqualified
Director shall whilst unqualified or disqualified as herein- Directors act-
before provided do any act matter or thing in the capacity m °‘
of a Director except at the instance or with the approbation
of the Board of Directors after notice of his nonqualifica-
tion or disqualification he shall forfeit and pay to the
Company the sum of one hundred pounds or such less
amount as the Board of Directors may upon his removal
from office think fit to declare as for a breach of covenant
with the other Proprietors of the Company and the shares
standing in the name of such person shall be liable for
the payment of such penalty.
XLIX. That the yearly sum of five hundred pounds shall Remunera-
be paid to the Directors out of the funds of the Company tors,
as a remuneration for their services and such remuneration
shall be distributed amongst the Directors in such manner
as the Board of Directors shall from time to time determine.


rebate* the Board of Directors may from time to time
order of their make such regulations for their own proceedings and fix
and e tVmcs S 0 f such times for their ordinary and special Meetings as they
shall think fit But any Director may at any time by
meeting call writing under his hand direct the Manager to convene a
Special Meeting of the Board of Directors for the consider-
ation of any matter relating to the business of the Company
Provided that the object of such Meeting be expressly
stated in the notice convening the same and that such
notice be left at the usual places of residence of the several
Directors or put into the Sydney Post Office to their last
known address in the colony not less than twenty-four hours
before the time specified for holding such Meeting.
Resolution of LI. That every resolution order or direction made and
may Ct be S re- passed or given at any Meeting of the Board of Directors
scmded. shall be liable to be rescinded amended or altered at any
other Meeting by the same Directors by whom the same
was made and passed or given or by a majority of the Di-
rectors at a Meeting at which a larger number of the
Directors are present Provided that in the last mentioned
case notice shall either be given to the Directors by whom
the resolution order or direction was made passed or given
of the intention to move for a recision amendment or alte-
ration thereof or that the consideration of such motion shall
if either of the last mentioned Directors shall so require be
adjourned to a future Meeting And provided also that no
such recision amendment or alteration shall invalidate any
act matter or thing done or submitted to under or in con-
sequence of such resolution order or direction whether in
the interval between the making and passing and the
amendment recision or alteration of the same or after such
recision amendment or alteration and before notice thereof
shall have reached the place and the persons at and by
whom any such act matter or thing shall be done or sub-
mitted to.


LII. That all questions coming before the Board of Ma J orit y of
. i Ti Directors to
Directors for consideration shall be decided by the decide ques-
majority of the votes of Directors present and not de- Chairman to
dining to vote or disqualified from voting and if there vote. acaBtmg
shall be an equality of votes the Chairman of the Meeting
of Directors shall have a casting vote.
LIII. That the Board of Directors shall cause correct ? linute ® t 0 be
kept of pro-
minutes of their proceedings to be entered in a book to be ceedings at
kept for that purpose and called the Minute Book and Doctors,
such minutes shall be signed by the person presiding at
each meeting and such minutes shall be full and con-
clusive evidence that the proceedings therein recorded
took place at a Meeting of a Board of Directors regularly
holden and that the person whose name is subscribed to
such minutes did sign the same and such minutes shall be
held to be sufficient authority for every act deed matter
or thing that may be lawfully done in pursuance thereof
Provided however that the rough minutes made at any
such Meeting shall be read over at such Meeting and that
the entry of such minutes in the Minute Book shall be
read at the opening of the next Meeting of Directors and
shall be subject to correction if any error be detected
therein and that if at any time after the formal entry
thereof in the said Minute Book any such error be de-
tected and pointed out by any Director and established to
the satisfaction of a Meeting of tlfe Directors an entry
thereof shall be made in the said Minute Book and shall
be referred to and read in connexion with such original
minute or entry.
LIV. That all drafts or cheques on any Bank shall be Drafts to be
drawn and signed by one Director for the Board and Director for
countersigned by the Manager of the said
Provided that in case any extraordinary disbursement fi|nedbytwo
exceeding the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds be Directors and
J r countersigned


by the Mana- required the draft or cheque for the same shall be signed
cr er# A A O
by two of the said Directors and countersigned by the
said Manager.
General LV. That the Board of Directors shall (subject to the
powers ot V J
Board of Di- powers herein conferred on General Meetings of the Pro-
rectors. . . ° ..
pnetors and to the specific directions and restrictions
hereby given or imposed to and upon them) have the
entire management of the business of the Company and of
the application investment and disposal of its funds and
shall and may in all matters not specially provided for by
these presents act as to them shall appear best calculated
to promote the interests of the Company And it is hereby
expressly declared that the powers specially herein con-
ferred shall not be deemed to abridge in matters not
distinctly provided for the general powers above granted.
Power of LYI. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
rectors to from time to time to make such bye-laws and regulations
w bye for their guidance in any matter not herein specially
provided for as to them shall seem meet And also from
time to time to repeal alter and vary such bye-laws and
regulations and to make others in their stead Provided
always that such bye-laws and regulations shall not be
repugnant to these presents or to any laws rules or
regulations made and passed at any General Meeting of
Proprietors.
kind or houses LVII That shall be lawM f ° r the B ° ard ° fDireCt ° rS
or build £ 0 purchase in fee simple or for any less estate or to take
houses for oi- r 1 J . .
fices, &c. upon lease suitable premises for the transaction of the busi-
ness of the Company or to purchase lands and to erect and
put up all needful and necessary erections and buildings
on any land now or hereafter to be acquired And also at
any time or times hereafter to sell let demise exchange or
otherwise dispose of any lands houses and premises in such


manner as they may think most advisable and to cause
the same to be assured and conveyed accordingly.
LYIII. That the Board of Directors shall cause regular
and distinct books of account to be kept at the place oftobekept.
business of the Company in Sydney in which books the
Company's whole affairs and transactions shall be duly
entered.
LIX. That the Directors shall annually in or about the Election of
month of July elect from amongst their own body a
Chairman and Deputy Chairman And the Chairman so
elected or in his absence the Deputy Chairman or in
absence of the latter the Director who shall be elected
Chairman by the Directors present at any meeting of the
Board shall preside at all meetings of the Board.
LX. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors Directors to
from time to time to appoint a Manager Solicitors Agents cers°cierks°&c'
and such officers clerks and servants as the business to sa iaSes
the Company may require and from time to time to andfixduties-
remove any such Manager Solicitors Agents and other
officers clerks and servants at their discretion And also
from time to time to fix alter and vary the duties to be
performed and the amount of remuneration to be given
to each of such Manager officers agents clerks and
servants and to pay and discharge the same out of the
funds and property of the Company And also for and on
behalf of the Company to delegate to such officers as may
be appointed such powers as the said Board of Directors
may consider necessary or expedient for the transaction
of the business of the Company.
LXI. That such manager agents and other officers officers & c .
clerks and servants respectively shall give such security as secu '
the Board of Directors shall from time to time fix and de-


termine for the due application of and accounting for all
moneys bills and other securities received by them on behalf
of the Company and for their good and faithful conduct in
their respective offices or situations.
general'meeu That half-yearly general meetings of the Pro-
ings of Pro- prietors shall be held at the place of business for the time
pnetors. , . L
being of the Company in Sydney or at some other con-
venient place in Sydney to be notified in the advertisement
of such meeting in the respective months of January and
July in each year and the Dhectors shall cause an adver-
tisement of the time and place of holding such meetings
to be inserted in one or more of the principal newspapers
published in Sydney for the space of fourteen days at the
least before the appointed time.
haif^ neS yearly LXIII. That the business of every half-yearly General
general meet- Meeting shall be to fill up the vacancies which shall then
exist or take place in the Board of Directors and to do such
other matters and things as are herein particularly required
or allowed to be done thereat And also to receive the
report of the Directors to be then made and to consider and
decide on such matters and things as may then be brought
forward by the Board of Directors relating to the affairs of
the Company or which may be brought forward by any
Proprietor who shall have given to the Board of Direc-
tors fourteen days’ previous notice at the least of his
intention to bring such matters and things forward at
such meeting.
Calling Spe- LXIV. That subject to such notice as hereinafter
cial gGllGlftl
meetings. required Special General Meetings of the Proprietors shall
be held at such times and places as the Board of Directors
may determine And also if any number of Proprietors
not less than ten and being qualified to vote at such
meeting shall at any time by writing under their hands


require the Board of Directors to call a Special General
Meeting for any purpose relating to the Company it shall
be incumbe7it on the Board of Directors to call the same
Provided that in every such requisition the object for
which such Special General Meeting is required shall be
distinctly expressed And if such requisition shall not be
complied with within fourteen days after the same shall
have been left at the office of the Company in Sydney it
shall be lawful for the Proprietors signing such requisition
of their own authority to call a Special General Meeting
to be held at the place of business of the said Company in
Sydney or some other convenient place in Sydney for the
consideration of the same matters relating to the Company
as were set forth in such requisition.
LXV. That at every Meeting of the said Proprietors Questions to
all motions and questions which shall be then submitted a° d s how' d of
for the determination of the Meeting shall be primarily St if re-
decided on by a show of hands by the majority in number qmred *
of the Proprietors or their proxies then personally present
but if three or more Proprietors present qualified to vote
shall be dissatisfied with such show of hands they may
demand a ballot upon such question or motion and such
ballot if so required shall be taken accordingly.
LXVI. That except as hereinafter provided fourteen Notice of
days’ notice at the least shall be given of all such Special meetmgs *
General Meetings of the Proprietors either by advertise-
ment in one or more of the Sydney newspapers or by cir-
cular letters addressed to the several Proprietors as herein,
after provided And in such notice there shall be distinctly
expressed the objects for which the Meeting is convened
And the business of such Special General Meeting shall be
to consider and dispose of all such matters and things
relating to the business of the Company as may then be
brought forward in accordance with the notice given as
aforesaid and no other.


Special "one- LXVII. That in cases of emergency and urgency in
in cases” 1 of which it shall appear to the Board of Directors essential or
omcis,(nc>. ranch importance to the interests of the Company that
certain matters should be brought under the consideration
of a Meeting of Proprietors with greater promptitude than
the notice hereinbefore required could admit of it shall be
competent to the Board of Directors to convene a Special
General Meeting by advertisement or circular letters to be
holden within not less than twelve hours of the publication
of such advertisement or the posting of such letters And
such Meeting shall possess all the same powers as a Special
General Meeting held in the ordinary course hereinbefore
prescribed.
Notices
Circular
ters.
b y LXVIII. That when and so often as it shall appear to the
a Board of Directors or to the Proprietors who shall call any
Special General Meeting upon default of the Directors to
comply with a requisition for that purpose to be desirable
to give notice by circular letters instead of public advertise-
ment of any Meeting of Proprietors or of any adjournment
thereof or of the object of any such meeting or to give any
other notice required by these presents or which may be re-
quired by any future rule regulation or resolution it shall be
competent for the Board of Directors or for such convening
Proprietors to address such circular letters and send the same
by post to the several Proprietors at their respective resi-
dences or at the last place of residence which shall have been
notified to the manager of the Company or to address such
notice (if the Board of Directors or such proprietors shall
so think fit) to any executor or administrator of a deceased
Proprietor or the committee of a lunatic Proprietor or the
guardian of an infant Proprietor or next of kin to an intes-
tate Proprietor or the trustee or assignee of an insolvent or
bankrupt Proprietor or to the agent of any Proprietor absent
from the Colony in case such executor administrator com-
mittee guardian trustee or assignee and agent respectively


shall have certified their respective titles or representative
positions to the Manager of the Company and have commu-
nicated their names and addresses And in case any Pro-
prietor whomsoever shall not have communicated his ad-
dress to the Manager and in respect of shares which by death
or operation of law shall have ceased to be vested in the
Proprietor in whose names the shares shall stand in the
books of the Company and shall not have become vested
in any new Proprietor according to the provisions herein
contained it shall be unnecessary for any such letter to be
written or addressed to any person whomsoever but the
Proprietor or party entitled shall nevertheless be bound by
all the acts of any such Meeting of Proprietors in the
same manner as if he had received notice thereof.
LXIX. That the testimony of the Manager of the Proof of no-
Company that the said letters were to the best of his SettersT™*
knowledge and belief written and addressed in conformity
with the provision hereinbefore contained together with
the evidence of the person appointed to despatch the said
letters or the testimony of any other credible person that
the same were respectively put into the Post Office at or
before the times respectively herein required for the giving
of the notices conveyed by such letters shall be con-
clusive evidence of the due service of the said notice.
LXX. That it shall be lawful for a General Meeting of Power of Ge-
Proprietors by a majority of votes to make new laws regu-
lations and provisions for the Company and to amend alter Rations. re "
and repeal all or any of the existing laws regulations and
provisions of the Company Provided such new amended
or altered laws regulations and provisions do not extend to
or amend alter or repeal all or any part of the laws regula-
tions and provisions established and settled by these
presents for limiting the individual responsibility of the
respective Proprietors of the Company as between them-


selves And provided farther that no such new amended
or altered laws regulations and provisions shall be in force
till confirmed at a subsequent General Meeting by the
votes of Proprietors holding more than one-half of the
actual paid up Capital of the Company.
Defective LXXI. That no law resolution or proceeding passed at
to ar *y half-yearly or Special General Meeting shall be
proceedings of p eac h e d or invalidated on the ground that any person
general meet- r . *ll
ings. voting at any such meeting was not entitled to vote
thereat.
Number of LXXII. That each of the Proprietors or Shareholders
mode of To d in the said Company shall be entitled at the meetings of
s 6 ‘ Company to vote m proportion to the number of shares
in the Capital Stock held by him or her according to the
following scale that is to say for ten shares one vote for
twenty shares two votes for forty shares three votes for
sixty shares four votes for eighty shares five votes for one
hundred shares six votes for one hundred and twenty
shares seven votes for one hundred and forty shares eight
votes for one hundred and sixty shares nine votes for one
hundred and eighty shares ten votes for two hundred shares
eleven votes for two hundred and twenty shares twelve
votes for two hundred and forty shares thirteen votes for
two hundred and sixty shares fourteen votes for two
hundred and eighty shares fifteen votes for three hundred
shares sixteen votes and an additional vote for every fifty
shares above the last mentioned number of three hundred
shares And all questions to be submitted to any meetings of
the Proprietors shall be decided by the majority of votes of
Proprietors present and voting in person or absent and voting
by proxy And any Proprietor absent from any such Meeting
may give his or her vote or votes by proxy Provided that
the person appointed to act as proxy shall be a Proprietor
of the Company and that no Proprietor shall be entitled


to vote as the proxy of another or other Proprietor or Pro-
prietors to represent more than twenty-five votes in
addition to his own.
LXXIII. That every proxy shall be in writing under Proxy to be in
. . , „ _ . i • , writing and to
the hand of the proprietor of the share or shares in respect be deposited,
of which such proxy shall be given or in the case of a Pro-
prietor absent from the colony under the hand of his agent
duly authorised by power of attorney to receive dividends
and to make sale of his share or shares And such proxies
respectively shall at least one day before the same
shall be allowed to he acted upon at any Meeting of Pro-
prietors be delivered to the Manager of the Company
together with the power of attorney in case of a
proxy appointed by agent and such proxy shall be in such
form as the Board of Directors shall from time to time
agree upon.
LXXIV. That every Proprietor who shall have appointed Effect
J 1 A L proxy
such Proxy as aforesaid shall for all the purposes of
the Meeting of Proprietors and of every adjourned Meeting
and Ballot to which such Proxy shall be applicable
but not for the purpose of composing the number of
Proprietors whose personal presence is requisite to pre-
vent adjournments be considered as present by such
Proxy And all the votes and acts of the Proxy in that
capacity shall be as valid and effectual subject to the
qualifications and provisions in these presents contained
as the votes and acts of the Proprietor appointing him
would have been if such Proprietor had been present
and had voted at any such Meeting of Proprietors or
Ballot.
LXXV. That no Proprietor who shall be a paid officer Proprietors
of the Company other than the Directors Auditors and officers except
Solicitors shall be qualified to vote at any Meeting of Pro-


Directors Au- prietors either as a Proprietor or as the Proxy of another
ditors and So- * . 1
Heitors not to Proprietor.
vote.
LXXVI That the Chairman elected by the Board of
Directors as hereinbefore provided or in his absence the
ings of Pro- Deputy Chairman or in the absence of the latter such
prietors and . . .. , ~
casting vote. Director as the Proprietors present shall elect snail pre-
side at all Half-Yearly General and Special Meetings of
Proprietors And on all questions submitted to any such
Meetings the Chairman presiding shall have the votes to
which he shall be entitled as a Proprietor and also a
casting vote in the case of an equality of votes except only
in the case of election of Directors hereinbefore provided
for.
Exclusion of LXXVII. That if two or more Proprietors present at any
Proprietors of Meeting of Proprietors shall object to the vote of any other
terested" Proprietor and shall prove to the satisfaction of the majority
any question. 0 f Proprietors then present that the person whose vote
has been objected to has an interest in the question on
which the vote is to be taken beyond that which he may
have therein in common with the other Proprietors then
and in every such case the Proprietor whose vote has been
objected to shall not be allowed to vote on the question
and shall be incapacitated from voting on such question
as the proxy of any absent Proprietor.
Adjournment LXXVIII. That every General and Special Meeting of
Proprietors shall adjourn to a future day if ten Proprietors
attendance, qualified to vote shall not assemble within one hour after
the time fixed for such meeting And unless the said
number of Proprietors shall be present the meeting shall
not be competent to transact any other business than
fixing the time for the adjournment of such meeting And
no such adjourned meeting shall proceed to any other
business than fixing the time for further adjournment


unless the said number of Proprietors shall be present
at the same.
LXXIX. That every such adjournment as aforesaid Notification
shall be notified to the Proprietors either by circular letter S journment.
or by public advertisement in one or more of the Sydney
newspapers.
LXXX. That minutes of all the proceedings of Minu *es of
proceedings at
every Meeting of Proprietors held pursuant to these presents meetings and
shall be entered and kept in the Minute Book of the Com-
pany and shall be signed by the person presiding at such
Meeting And such minute shall be full and conclusive
evidence that the proceedings therein recorded took place
at a Meeting duly called and held pursuant to these presents
and that the person whose name shall be subscribed
thereto was the Chairman at the Meeting at which such
proceedings took place and that he signed such minutes
And such minutes shall be binding and conclusive on
all the Proprietors of the Company and all other persons
claiming any interest in any share or shares in the Capital
of the said Company.
LXXXI. That the first Auditors of the Company shall
be Michael Metcalfe and Lawrence Joseph Spyer Esquires of Auditors,
and at the Half-Yearly General Meeting to be held in the
month of July next and at the Half-Yearly General Meetings
to be held in the month of July in each subsequent year
two Proprietors shall be elected by a majority of the Pro-
prietors present in person or by proxy to act as Auditors
during the year then next ensuing and the retiring Auditors
shall be re-eligible And such Auditors shall be fully
authorised at all reasonable times to inspect the books of the
Company and to examine the accounts and affairs of the
Company generally and to call for the production to them
at the place of business of the Company in Sydney of all


books vouchers writings and documents concerning the
same and all assets of the Company and to call in the aid
of the Officers Clerks and Servants of the Company or
any other person competent to give information as to the
Company’s affairs.
Qualification LXXXII. That the qualification for an Auditor shall
of Auditors. k e h e b e a Shareholder in the said Company and
he shall be also subject to the like disqualifications as a
Director of the said Company and every Auditor who
shall act as such whilst unqualified or disqualified shall
receive no remuneration for hie services and shall forfeit
and pay to the Company the penalty of twenty-five
pounds to be appropriated to the use of the Com-
pany.
Appointment LXXXIII. That in the event of the death resignation
of Auditors # , at , . , . r m
ad interim on or disqualification of any Auditor during his term ot omce
nation&c. Slg ' it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors to appoint
any other duly qualified Proprietor to act as Auditor until
the next ensuing General Meeting when the vacancy shall
be filled up by election.
E-emunera- LXXXIV. That the half-yearly sum of twenty-five
tionsto/ 'pounds shall be paid in equal proportions to the Auditors
as a remuneration for their services and shall be paid
and discharged out of the funds and property of the
Company.
Half yearly LXXXY. That the affairs and transactions of the
w sheet ba ’ Company shall be brought to a just and true balance by
the Board of Directors up to the thirty-first day of Decem-
ber and the thirtieth day of June in each and every year
And a balance sheet shall be prepared containing a true
statement of the affairs and transactions of the Company
and the nett profits of the Company during the half-year


immediately preceding and shall as soon as possible there-
after together with all securities vouchers accounts and
documents necessary for verifying the same be submitted
by the Board of Directors to the Auditors And such
Auditors shall examine the books of the Company and if
they shall find such balance sheet to be correct they shall
sign the same in testimony of their having examined
and verified the several entries therein contained And
the balance sheet so signed shall be submitted to the
Half-Yearly General Meeting of the Proprietors next
after the date to which the said balance sheet shall
relate.
LXXXVI. That if it shall appear to such Half-Yearly & be
General Meeting desirable that the Company’s affairs called for *
should be more fully investigated it shall be lawful
for such Meeting either to direct the said Auditors to
enquire into and report upon the affairs of the Company
generally and fully or in their discretion to appoint any
two or more other Proprietors as Special Auditors for that
purpose.
LXXXVII. That the Board of Directors shall together Rectors’
. , , ° naif yearly
with the balance sheet hereinbefore mentioned cause to be report,
laid before the Proprietors at each Half-Yearly General
Meeting a Report on the Company’s affairs previously
approved of at a Meeting of the Board of Directors and
bearing the signature of its Chairman and such Report
shall contain the recommendation of the Board of
Directors as to the appropriation of the profits.
LXXXVHT. That the balance of nett profit shall be P eclaration
„ . . r of dividend
available tor the payment of a dividend at such rate and and disposi-
at such time as the Proprietors present at such Half- lance of nett
Yearly General Meeting shall declare And the balance pioiits '
of nett profit remaining if any after providing for the


payment of such dividend shall be carried forward to the
credit of the Company to be appropriated and disposed of
in such manner and form as the majority of the Proprie-
tors present at such Meeting shall determine.
As to divi- LXXXIX. That no dividend shall be paid in respect of
shares l on any share upon which any instalment or instalments shall
he in arrear until such instalment or instalments shall have
been duly paid and satisfied nor in respect of the share
or shares of any person or persons who shall not have
executed these presents But it shall be lawful for the
Board of Directors unless they shall declare a forfeiture of
such share or shares to retain all dividends on account of all
instalments in arrear until the same shall have been paid
And the Proprietor entitled thereto shall not be entitled to
claim interest on the amount of such dividends during
the time they have been so retained by the Company
And upon a forfeiture of such shares being declared such
dividends shall be appropriated to the uses of the Company.
Appointment XC. That (while the said Company shall he unincorpo-
under 1 control rated) the said Robert Campbell Thomas Ware Smart John
D “Eales John Gilchrist and William Ranken Scott and the
future Tms- surv i V ors and survivor of them shall be trustees and trustee
tees.
with and by whom and in whose names or name any con-
tracts engagements or dealings may be entered into on
behalf of the Company subject to such limitations as the
Board of Directors may think fit and in whose names or
name may be made and taken out all grants conveyances
leases assignments and assurances of property for the
benefit of the Company and all other instruments and
securities which may be made or taken And the Board
of Directors shall take from such Trustees or Trustee a
declaration of trust as to such property as shall be so
vested in them or him respectively and shall require such
Trustees or Trustee when the Board shall see fit to grant


convey assign or assure the said property as the Board
shall direct and appoint and after their or any of their
ceasing to be such Trustees or Trustee it shall be lawful
for the Board of Directors from time to time to appoint
some other persons or person to be Trustees or a Trustee in
their or his stead for the several purposes before men-
tioned.
XCI. That such Trustees or Trustee may at any time Resignation
resign such Trusteeship on giving notice to the Board ofof d Trustees
Directors and accounting for all moneys and effects received mentofwcon-
by them or him and executing such conveyance assignment vey* nce &c *
or assurance as the Board of Directors may require And
the Board of Directors may at any time remove any such
Trustees or Trustee and shall in the event of their or his
refusing to execute such release conveyance assignment
or assurance as the Board of Directors may require or any
power of attorney as hereinafter required or to account for
the property and moneys received by them or him adopt
all legal means to enforce the execution of such release
conveyance assignment or assurance and to compel such
Trustees or Trustee to account.
XCII. That every receipt which shall have been given Receipt of
by any Trustees or Trustee for money received by them or^J eeBnot-
him in respect of any property or of any securities for withstanding
r J r J misapphca-
money vested in them or him either as purchase money ovtion &c-
-otherwise shall be a good and sufficient discharge to the
person paying the same who shall not be afterwards re-
quired to see to the application of or be answerable or
accountable for the misapplication or non-application of
the money so paid by him Provided that such person
was not at the time of any such receipt cognizant of any
such misapplication or non-application accompanying such
receipt or of its being in the contemplation of such Trustees
or Trustee.


Directors XCITT. That the Board of Directors may require such
may require . . ,
power of At- Trustees or Trustee during the continuance of their or his
Trustees °te Trusteeship to execute to such persons or person as the
suJ P &c? n in Board may appoint such joint or joint and several powers
their names. or severa i powers of attorney with or without a power of
revocation as may be necessary for enabling the persons or
person so appointed in the name of such Trustees or
Trustee to execute any deed conveyance assignment or
assurance of the properties rights or interests or any of
them which may be vested in them or him as such Trustees
or Trustee and to sue prosecute or defend any action or
suit at law or in equity or to petition for the sequestration
of the estate of any insolvent debtor or to prove in any
insolvent estate when sequestrated or in any other way
to enforce any claim due to such Trustees or Trustee in
respect of the subject of their or his Trusteeship or to
defend any claim or demand made on such Trustees or
Trustee in respect thereof and to discontinue abandon
release or become nonsuit in any such action suit or
proceeding.
Power to XCIV. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
commence
and defend on behalf of the Company to commence and prosecute m
actions &c. 1 r ,
the name of the Irustees or irustee 01 the Company or in
the name of the Chairman or other public officer or in the
name of any other person or body who may by any Act of
Council or other authority be empowered to sue or be
made liable to be sued on behalf of the Company any
action suit or proceeding at law or in equity or insolvency
against any person or persons whomsoever whether a
member or members of the Company or not to enforce any
claims due by such person or persons to the Company
And to defend any action suit or proceeding that may be
To abandon instituted against the Company And also to compromise
SSrtoar-or abandon any such action suit or proceeding. And also
to submit any matter in dispute to arbitration and abide
by such reference and submission and every award to be


made pursuant thereto And also to compound any debt To compound
1 .... give time &c.
or debts due to the Company and to join in any instru-
ment of composition or any conveyance or assignment of
the estate of any person indebted to the Company or in
any letter of license granting time to such debtor for the
payment of his debts And also to take proceedings for
procuring the sequestration of the estate of any debtor to
the Company as insolvent or to cause him to be declared a
bankrupt or insolvent according to the laws for the time
being and to do all such matters and things in relation to
the estate of such insolvent or bankrupt and to the claim of
the Company against the same and to the proceedings in
insolvency and bankruptcy as may be done by an ordinary
creditor And also to prefer and prosecute charges for the t 0 prosecute
stealing or embezzlement of the moneys or property be- cnmmally '
longing to or deposited with the Company or for any fraud
forgery crime or offence committed against or with intent
to defraud the Company and to abandon the same And To give re-
also to execute and to receive such general or other release nesses. 10
or releases as may be necessary for discharging any person
produced as a witness in any action suit or proceeding from
any claim or demand which may be necessary to be released
in order to qualify such person to give evidence as a wit-
ness in such action suit or proceeding And for the
purposes aforesaid or any of them the said debts moneys
goods effects securities or other property shall be deemed
to be the absolute property of the Trustees.
XCY. That every Proprietor who may be indebted to the Proprietors to
Company or to the Trustees or any other person or body on
behalf of the Company shall upon demand pay to the person
duly authorised by the Board of Directors in that behalf reiluixin * “•
11 , COUIIt to DG
all or such part of his debt as may at the time be due and taken of . the
payable and shall be so demanded and shall not adopt
institute any proceedings in a Court of Equity or otherwise
for procuring any accounts to be taken in relation to the


partnership existing by virtue of this deed of settlement
And in case any such Proprietor shall make default in pay-
ment of the debt which may be so due and demanded of
him then the amount of such debt may under the order of
the Board of Directors be recovered from such Proprietor
his heirs executors or administrators as liquidated damages
And every party to these presents hereby agrees that any
debt which may be so due by him and demanded and in
payment whereof there shall be such default shall and
may be recovered as liquidated damages.
Partnership XCYI. That in any and every action or suit at law or in
not to be set J _1 .
up as a bar to equity wherein a Proprietor or Proprietors shall be plam-
suitbeingsus- tiff or plaintiffs and the Company or any Trustees or other
persons or body acting on behalf of the Company shall
be defendants and vice versa it shall not be competent for
either of the parties in or to such action or suit to set up
the partnership created by this deed or by or in respect of
this association as a bar to such action or suit being sus-
tainable And such parties respectively shall upon the
trial or hearing of any such action or suit and in all or any
proceedings which shall be had in or in relation to any
such action or suit be obliged to waive and forego the
objection to any such action being tried at law or to any
such suit being instituted or prosecuted in equity by reason
of the plaintiffs and defendants being partners in the Com-
pany And no objection shall at any time be taken on the
ground that all the Proprietors are not made parties to any
such action or suit And upon any trial of any such action
or any hearing in any such suit it shall be imperative on
the Board of Directors to produce or cause to be produced
Board of Di- these presents or a duplicate thereof and also the powers
ducetbisdeed of attorney (if any) under which these presents or a dupli-
actio°n. trialof cate thereof shall have been executed by any of the parties
thereto or such of the same instruments respectively as
shall be in the custody or power of the Board of Directors


and the same respectively shall be read and used on or in
any such trial hearing action or suit without any proof of
the due execution of the same respectively And the
matters and things in this present clause stated shall and
may be used in evidence on or in the same trial hearing
action or suit and shall have the same force and effect as
and by way of admission from the parties respectively as if^iB io 0 * s tlie
the same matters and things had been reduced to writing herein con-
previously to such trial or hearing as admissions in the
cause in the usual form and had been signed by such
parties or their respective attorneys irrevocably And
either of the parties shall if required by the other of them
consent to the Court or to any Judge of the Court in which
such action shall be brought or suit commenced making an
order wherein shall be embodied the matters and things
last aforesaid as admissions from the party against whom
such order shall be sought to be read and used in evidence
or in any such trial hearing action or suit by the party
obtaining such order And if any Proprietor shall act in Forfeiture by
contravention of this article and shall thereby succeed in hTcontraven?
defeating the claims of the Company against him his^ cle of this
shares in the Capital of the Company shall upon such for-
feiture being declared by the Board of Directors (which
they are hereby authorised to do as to all or any of such
shares as they may think fit) be absolutely forfeited to the
Company.
XCVII. That in all cases where it mav be necessary for Service ofno-
J J tice on the
any person to serve any notice writ or other proceeding at Company,
law or in equity or otherwise upon the Company service
thereof respectively upon the Manager for the time being
by leaving the same at the office of the Company at Sydney
or if the Company shall have suspended or discontinued
business by serving the same personally on the Chairman
of the said Company or on some person who was such
Chairman at the time of such suspension or discontinuance


of business or by leaving tbe same in such last mentioned
case with some inmate at the usual abode of such Chair-
man or late Chairman shall be deemed good service of
the same on the Company.
Proprietors .° f XCVIII. That no objection shall be taken by or on
behalf of the Company or by or on behalf of any Pro-
prietor to the reception of the evidence of any Proprietor
when tendered in any action or suit matter or proceeding
in any Court of Justice between the Company and any Pro-
prietor or Proprietors or between any Proprietor or
Proprietors and any other Proprietor or Proprietors upon
the ground of interest or on any other ground arising out of
such Proprietorship and this clause may be received and
read as a waiver of any such objection by the Company or
by any Proprietor or Proprietors as the case may re-
quire.
Printed co- XCIX. That each and every printed copy of these pre-
deed verified sents which shall bear the signature of the Manager of the
o b f y th S e lgn m ra! Company attesting that the same is a true and correct
dence be evl ' copy °f th e original shall in all proceedings at law or in
equity between the Company and individual Proprietors
thereof or between several Proprietors be received as
sufficient evidence of this deed and of every clause article
stipulation and agreement herein.
Reimburse- C. That if any execution shall issue against any
vidual Pro . individual Proprietor or Proprietors or former Proprietor
specforSlor Proprietors or his or their property and effects upon a
a CUt judgment decree or order obtained against the Company
against the every such Proprietor or Proprietors shall be reimbursed
1 * out of the property and effects of the Company for all
moneys paid and for all damages costs and expenses
incurred by him by reason of such execution or of the
action or suit in which the same shall have issued or in


default of such reimbursement by contributions from the
other Proprietors of the Company as and subject to the
limitations hereinafter provided.
Cl. That if any such Proprietor or former Proprietor Remedy if not
, . . . . , reimbursed
ms executors or administrators shall not be reimbursed out of the Pro-
out of the property and effects of the Company it shall be company, * u
lawful for him his executors or administrators to recover
the same or so much thereof as shall be unpaid together
with the costs charges interest and expenses less the
amount of his own share or contribution thereon from the
other Proprietors their executors or administrators who
shall be liable to pay the same in proportion to the amount
of the stock held by them respectively in the said Company
And in case the said Proprietor shall fail by reason of
insolvency or from any other cause to recover the whole
of the same the solvent Proprietors shall also contribute
and be liable to pay their proportion of the deficiency
also Provided however that such Proprietor shall not be
entitled to recover any part against any Proprietor
who shall have paid for the purposes of the Company
a sum equal to the amount to which his liability
as a Proprietor is limited by the provisions herein con-
tained in that behalf nor shall he so recover against any
Proprietor to an extent which would make the contri-
butions or payments of such Proprietor exceed such
limitation.
CII. That no Proprietor shall in any case be bound to Limitation of
pay or contribute on account of the said Company or in hllblllt) ’
respect of his shares therein a greater sura in addition to
his original share of the Capital than a further sum of
equal amount.
CIII. 1 hat the Chairman Deputy Chairman Directors indemnity to
Trustees and other Officers of the Company and each and spect of their
every of them their and each and every of their heirs acts '


executors and administrators shall be indemnified and
saved harmless out of the funds or property of the Com-
pany from and against all costs charges losses damages
and expenses which they or any or either of them or their
or any or either of their heirs executors or administrators
shall or may incur sustain expend or be put unto for or on
account of the Company in consequence of any act deed
matter or thing which they or any or either of them may
do or cause to be done in carrying or endeavouring to carry
into effect the objects and purposes of the Company or in
or about any indictment information presentment action
suit process proceeding or arbitration to be brought com-
menced carried on prosecuted defended or entered into for
or on account thereof or for or by the order or direction
of the Board of Directors or in any wise relating thereto
respectively or otherwise in or about the execution of their
respective offices or trusts except such costs charges losses
damages and expenses as shall happen by or through the
wilful neglect default or wrongful act of such Chairman
Deputy Chairman Directors Trustees and other officers
respectively.
Officers to be CIV. That the Chairman Deputy Chairman Directors
Trustees and other officers of the Company for the time being
and each and every of them and each and every of their heirs
acts? 8 and administrators shall be charged and charge-
able only for so much money as they and each of them shall
respectively actually receive by virtue of their respective
offices or trusts And any one or more of them shall not
be answerable or accountable for the receipts of the others
or other of them nor for the acts neglects or defaults of the
others or other of them but each of them for his own acts
receipts neglects or defaults only nor for the insufficiency
or deficiency of title to any estate or property which may
And not to be from time to time be purchased by or by the order of the
e r xcepr ible for Board of Directors for or on behalf of the Company nor


for the insufficiency or deficiency of any security or securi- wilful default
ties in or upon which the moneys of the Company shall or wrongful acts
may be placed out or invested by or by the order of the
Board of Directors nor for any other loss misfortune or
damage which may happen in the execution of their
respective offices or in relation thereto except the same
shall happen by or through their own wilful neglects
defaults or wrongful acts respectively.
CV. That it shall be lawful for a General Meeting of general pro-
the Proprietors specially called for that purpose in pur- solution of
suance of a recommendation from the Board of Directors Company ’
to enter into a resolution to dissolve the Company but
such resolution shall only be carried by the votes of Pro-
prietors possessing not less than one-half of the actual
paid up Capital of the Company and shall be of no force
or effect until confirmed by the votes of Proprietors holding
not less than two-thirds of the paid up Capital of the
Company at the Half-Yearly Meeting next immediately
following.
CVI. That until the affairs of the Company shall be ?* otwithstand
O n . r J mg resolution
nnaiiy wound up and all claims and demands upon the to dissolve ail
Company shall be fully paid and satisfied and a final the Directors
division shall have been made of the residue of the moneys tors
of the Company the several provisions herein contained
and all the powers privileges rights and duties of the Board
of Directors and of the Proprietors respectively shall
notwithstanding any resolution to dissolve the Company
remain and continue in full force so far as the same may
be necessary for winding up the concerns of the Company
or for enabling the Board of Directors to dispose of and
call and get in the funds and property of the Company
or to pay and satisfy all claims and demands upon the
Company or to make such final division as aforesaid.


Dissolution in CVII. That if at any time hereafter it shall appear to
case ox losses. J L L
the Board of Directors that losses have been sustained
equal in amount to one-half of the paid up Capital of the
Company it shall be incumbent on the Board of Directors
to submit a statement of such losses as soon as possible to a
Special General Meeting of the Proprietors And it shall
thereupon be referred to the Auditors for the time being
and such other Special Auditors as such General Meeting
may appoint to assess the said losses and to examine the
whole state of the Company’s affairs and to report thereon
to a subsequent General Meeting to be convened for the
purpose of receiving and considering such Report and if at
such subsequent meeting the said Auditors shall confirm
the estimate of loss previously submitted by the Board of
Directors the business of the Company shall from and
after the date of such subsequent General Meeting be
confined to the winding up of its affairs and converting
into money all its property and effects and distributing the
same Provided nevertheless that it shall be lawful for
such Meeting to enter into a resolution to continue the
business of the Company and to write off the losses from
the Capital of the Company and thereupon such business
shall continue until the next Half-Yearly Meeting of the
Proprietors and any adjournment thereof which shall have
power to confirm or modify such Resolution by the votes
of Proprietors possessing not less than two-thirds of the
actual paid up capital.
Reduction CVIII. That if it shall appear at any one of the Half-
and return of y i „ General Meetings hereinbefore required to be held
surplus capi- J y . , . r
taiwith.power there is no immediate or prospective employment tor
the full amount of the Capital actually paid up and if a
diminution of the Capital shall have been recommended in
the report made by the Board of Directors to the Proprie-
tors at such Meeting it shall be lawful for such General
Meeting to enter into a resolution to diminish the Capital


of the Company in such manner and to such amount as
shall be specified in such resolution And in pursuance of
such resolution the Board of Directors shall cause the
surplus Capital to be paid back to the several Proprietors
but the amount so paid back may again be called for
by the Board of Directors in the same manner as if
the amount had never been brought into the Capital
Stock.
CIX. That it shall not be lawful for any Proprieb 01* Or Partnership
J L not to be dis-
any number of Proprietors to dissolve the Company other-solved except
wise than is herein provided And notwithstanding thevided!” >prs
changes which will from time to time take place among
the Proprietors by death or retirement or by the accession
of new Proprietors and notwithstanding that any Pro-
prietor for the time being may become bankrupt or
insolvent or may be convicted of felony or may commit
any other act by which a common partnership would be
dissolved the partnership hereby formed shall neverthe-
less subsist and the covenants herein contained shall
at all times until such dissolution as aforesaid be in
full force and effect as between the Proprietors for the
time being.
CX. That from and after the expiration of twelve £ ffairs of
j L Company to
calendar months next after the declaration of the final be entirely
division of Capital as aforesaid and the publication twelve
thereof in the New South Wales Government Gazette bnaf h diviL°on
or some principal public newspaper in Sydney aforesaid w dissolu ’
no action at law or suit in equity shall be sustainable by
any Proprietor against the Company or any other Pro-
prietor thereof or against the Trustees Directors or other
Officers of the said Company for or in respect of the
transactions and affairs of the Company or in anywise
relating thereto but the accounts of the Company shall
after the expiration of such period as aforesaid be finally


and conclusively settled and shall not be re-opened
by any of the Proprietors on any ground or pretence
whatsoever.
Powertotake CXI. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
insolvent^law tf the Auditors shall report that the assets of the Company
or of any law are insufficient to meet its liabilities or when the affairs
for the wind-
ing up of 0 f the Company shall be directed to be wound up to take
Joint Stock r J r ,
Companies, the benefit of any act or law for the sequestration ot tne
estate of the Company as Insolvent or of any act or law
for facilitating the winding up of Joint Stock Companies as
the case may require and to do and submit to all matters and
things on behalf of the Company which may be required
to be done or submitted to for the above purposes.
interpreta- CXIL That in the construction of these presents
tion clause. un ] ess the same shall be inconsistent with or repugnant
to the expressions used in these presents the expression
“ The Company ” shall mean the Company hereby
established and the word “Directors” shall mean the
Directors for the time being of the Company and the
expression “ Board of Directors ” shall mean Directors
present at any Meeting of Directors to be held pursuant
to the provisions herein contained or the majority of them
and the word “ Proprietors ” shall mean persons holding
shares in the Capital for the time being of the Company
and the word “Shares” shall mean shares in the Capital
for the time being of the Company and words in the
singular number shall be construed to include or apply
to several persons or things as well as one person or thing
and words in the plural number shall be construed to
apply to one person or thing as well as to several persons
or things and the words importing males shall be construed
to include or apply to females as well as males and the
word “ person” or 4C persons ” shall be construed to include
a body or bodies corporate as well as an individual or


individuals unless in any of the above cases it be other-
wise specially provided or there be something in the
subject or context repugnant to such meaning or con-
struction And wherever under any of the provisions
herein contained a certain number of days or other
period is required to elapse in order to ground or give
effect to any act deed matter or thing whatsoever or any
number of days or other period is fixed for any purpose
whatsoever the first of such days or the first day of
such period shall be reckoned exclusive and the last
of such days or the last of such period shall be reckoned
inclusive in the computation of the days or period
required and every act matter or thing hereby autho-
lised or directed to be done at one time or at any
time or without reference being made to time may
with the like requisites or formalities as are hereby
required be also done at several times or from time to
time as often as occasion may require or may be deemed
expedient and in every case where in these presents ge-
neial expressions are used in connexion with powers
directions or things such general expressions shall not be
limited or controlled to or by the particular powers direc-
tions or things with which the same are connected and
that words or expressions denoting authority or per-
mission shall be construed as words or expressions of
authority or permission merely and shall not be con-
strued as words or expressions denoting direction or
compulsory trust.
That if any doubts shall hereafter arise as to Doubts as to
the true meaning and construction of the several clauses don
and provisions of this deed or of any Rule or Regulation
of the said Company the said Directors either voluntarily f® neral meet "
or upon the requisition of any ten Proprietors of the said
Company shall call a Special General Meeting in manner
above appointed for the purpose of expounding and


determining the same And the sense and meaning given
by the majority of the Proprietors actually present at such
Meeting to any such clause rule regulation or provision
shall be deemed the true sense thereof.
IN WITNESS whereof the parties to these presents
have hereunto put their hands and seals the day and year
first before written.




. /, -at l
, ' l 'r J V-* v £ /Wjv< t**.
i;K - - rftffisaSl
y ; c t
