





gab of Settlement
THE MERCANTILE BANK
OF SYDNEY.
V *
HINTED BY ROBERT BONE, AT THE “PHCENIX OFFICE,”
140, Pitt Street North.
18(39.


m.
* •
§
.
* ' \
m
• $ .* . ..
• * _
. .
.
#
i
»
m
.# ,
*• ,
► *
M


tM touo
r T
INDEX
PART I.
Peeliminaey Clauses.
CLAUSE. SUBJECT. PAGE.
1. Interpretation Clause 2
2. Name of the Company 3
3. Business of the Company 3
4. Place of Business . 4
5. Act of Incorporation... 4
6. Preliminary Expenses 5
PART 11.
Capital, Shaees, Teansfees, Calls
and Dividends
7. Capital 5
8. Increase of Capital 6
9. Execution of Deed of Settlement condition precedent to
becoming a Shareholder , 6
10. Number of Shares to be held by one person 7
11. Shares to be Personal Estate 7
12. Shareholders to participate in Profit and Loss 8
13. Calls 8


CLAUSE. SUBJECT. PAGE-
14. Recovery of Calls 9
15. Forfeiture of Shares 9
16. Sale of Forfeited Shares 19
17. Shareholders’ Register 19
18. Registered Proprietor to be considered Shareholder and
trusts not recognised 11
19. One Shareholder only to be recognised 12
20. Transfers, how made 1“
21. Conditions of Transfer 12
22. Ownership of Shares on Decease, Marriage, Lunacy, or
Insolvency 1®
23. As to Shares of Female Proprietors on Marriage, and of
Deceased, Lunatic, and Insolvent Proprietor 13
24. As to Dividends on such Shares 15
25. Title to be submitted 15
26. Responsibility of previous holder to cease 15
27. Shareholders need not execute Deed twice 16
28. Reserve Fund 19
29. Management and application of Reserve Fund 16
30. Dividends 17
31. Interim Dividends 17
32. Payment of Dividends 16
PART 111.
Directors, Trustees, Auditor and Officers —their
Powers and Duties.
33. Directors 16
34. First Directors 19
35. Power to increase number of Board 19
36. Retirement of Directors 19
37. Qualification of Directors 20
38. Candidates to give notice 20
39. Vacation of office 21


CLAUSE. SUBJECT. PAGE.
40. Remuneration of Directors 21
41. Chairman of the Board 21
42. Meetings of Board 22
43. Special Meetings of Board 22
44. Further provision as to Chairman of Beard and as to votes
thereat 22
45. Directors not to vote when interested 23
46. Minutes of Board Meetings 23
47. Books of Account 23
48. General powers of Board 24
49. Appointment of Manager and other officers 24
50. Branches or Agencies 25
51. Management of Branches or Agencies 25
52. Power of Borrowing 25
53. Power to buy Land, or Build Offices, &c 25
54. Directors empowered to bring and defend Actions, &c 26
55. Letters of Attorney 27
56. Bills of Exchange, &c., how Drawn, &c 27
57. Power to diminish capital 28
58. Rules and By-Laws 28
59. Auditor 29
60. Auditor to retire and new election to take place 29
61. Auditor’s duties 29
62. Vacancies how supplied 29
63. Trustees 30
64. Resignation of officers 30
65. Removal of officers 30
66. Resignation of Trustees and power to appoint other Trustees 31
67. Indemnity to Directors and other officers 31
PART IV.
Annual and Special Meetings.
68. Annual Meetings 33


CLAUSE. SUBJECT. PAGE.
69. Special Meetings . 33
70. Ten Shareholders may call Special Meeting 33
71. Chairman of the Company 34
72. Minutes of Annual and Special Meetings 34
78. Mode of Voting 35
74. Shareholders’ Register to be decisive 36
75. Adjournment 36
76. Proxies 37
77. Manager or Secretary not to act as Proxy 38
78. Attorney under power may vote 38
79. Proceedings not to be impeached 39
80. Power of Annual and Special Meetings 39
81. Exclusion of the Votes of Shareholders specially interested
in any question 41
82. Doubts in regard to the construction of the Deed of Settle-
ment to be determined by a Special Meeting . 41
PART V.
Geneeal Clauses.
83. Shareholders not to be restricted from transacting business
with the Company 42
84. Inspection of Books 42
85. Shareholders not to set up Partnership, &c 42
86. Notices from the Company 44
87. Power of winding up 45
88. General undertaking 46


gecd of Settle intent
“ THE MERCANTILE BANK
OF SYDNEY.”
THIS INDENTURE made the First day of July
One thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine BETWEEN
THE SEVERAL PERSONS who have executed or who
shall hereafter execute these presents WHEREAS it
has been agreed and determined to form a Joint Stock
Company under the name and style of “ THE MER-
CANTILE BANK OF SYDNEY ” as a Bank of Deposit
and Discount and for the purpose of carrying on the
business hereinafter particularly specified NOW THIS
INDENTURE WITNESSETH that each of the several
persons parties hereto DOTH hereby for himself severally


and respectively and for his several and respective heirs
executors and administrators covenant agree and declare
with and to the others and each and every of the others
of them their and each and every of their heirs executors
and administrators as follows :
PART I.
Preliminary Clauses.
1, THAT in the construction of these presents unless
inconsistent or at variance with the context the expression
“ The Company ” shall mean the Company hereby formed
the words “Director ” “Auditor ” “ Manager ” “ Secretary ”
“Trustee” “Shareholder” shall respectively mean Director
Auditor Manager Secretary Trustee Shareholder for the
time being of the Company The expression “ Deed of
Settlement” shall include these presents and any other
Deed or Deeds hereafter to be made in explanation or
extension of its provisions and any additions or alterations
that may be made to or in these presents in pursuance or
by virtue of the powers herein contained The word
“Insolvent” shall in addition to its usual legal signification
mean and include any person making an assignment for the
benefit of or any composition with his creditors And the
word “ Assignee ” shall in such case mean and include the
Trustee or Trustees of such Deed of Assignment Words
whether in this clause or elsewhere appearing in these
presents importing the singular number shall include the
plural number and words importing the plural number shall


include the singular number and words importing the
masculine gender shall include females and bodies cor-
porate as well as individuals and all shareholders who
shall execute these presents shall he and shall be
deemed to be parties to these presents.
2. THAT the several persons parties hereto or who shall Name of the Com-
at any time become parties hereto shall and will whilst
holding shares in the Company be remain and continue a
Joint Stock Company for the express object of carrying
on the business thereof as hereinafter specified under the
name style and title of “The Mercantile Bank of Sydney
upon with under and subject to the terms and conditions
rules provisions and agreements hereinafter contained and
that they the said several persons parties hereto shall and
will at all times so long as they shall continue Share-
holders in the Company promote and advance the interests
of the same to the utmost of their power and that the
Company shall be held to have commenced on the day of
the date of these presents and shall have continuance until
the same shall be dissolved under or in pursuance of the
provisions herein contained.
3 THAT the objects and business of the Company are Business of the
' , . r? T> i r Company.
and shall be the formation and carrying on of a Bank ot
Deposit and Discount and the granting of Letters of
Credit on its Branches or Agencies or on other Banks
or Banking Agents or connexions abroad the Loan of
Money on Cash Credit Accounts Promissory Notes
Foreign or Inland Bills of Exchange or other negotiable
instruments or documents or on any of the above with


the collateral security of Real or Leasehold Estate or
Mortgages thereon or of Liens Mortgages or Pledges
Maritime or otherwise of Ships Freight Merchandize on
shore or afloat Warrants Orders Warehouse Receipts or
Certificates for the custody delivery or transfer of Hoods
or Merchandize Liens on Wool Stations or Runs Sheep
Cattle Horses or other live stock on Wool Tallow Hides
and other dead stock in any of the Australian Colonies
or elsewhere the selling and disposing of any such property
the obtaining Loans with or without Security and making
other financial arrangements the dealing in Money Bullion
Specie and Exchanges of and with all countries and in Notes
Bills or other Securities for Money and the carrying on
all kinds of Mercantile and Financial Agency and Banking
operations and the doing of all other acts and things
requisite for the furtherance of the above objects including
the power to unite or amalgamate with buy up or absorb
any other company wheresoever instituted and the estab-
lishment of such Agencies or Branches in any part of the
world as may be deemed expedient.
4. THAT the principal business of the Company shall
be carried on in the City of Sydney in such place as the
Board of Directors may determine.
5. THAT the Board of Directors may when they shall
think fit apply to the Legislature of the Colony of New
South Wales for such Act of Incorporation or quasi
Incorporation as they may deem expedient and from time
to time any other Acts of the same or any other Legis-
lature as they may consider calculated to facilitate the


legal remedies and advance the general interests of the
Company and for the purposes aforesaid or any of them
they shall he at liberty to comply with such restrictions as
may be imposed as a condition for obtaining such Acts or
any of them and shall be at liberty to sign or authorize any
one or more of their number to sign any petition
or application to the said Legislature for the purposes
aforesaid and the costs and expenses of and incidental to
such applications shall be paid out of the funds of the
Company.
6. THAT all past and future expenses of and attendant Preliminary ex-
upon the establishment of the Company and the prepara-
tion of every Deed or Instrument of Settlement and Act of
Incorporation or quasi Incorporation and every meeting
and transaction relating thereto respectively shall be
advanced and paid in the first instance by the Board of
Directors out of the first moneys received on account of
the subscribed capital and that all the acts of the promoter
or promoters of the Company shall be and are hereby
ratified and confirmed.
PART 11.
Capital Shares Transfers Calls and Dividends.
7. THAT the Capital of the Company shall be One capital,
hundred and twenty thousand pounds sterling and the
same shall be divided into 12,000 shares of £lO each and of
such further sum or sums of money as may be hereafter


raised by the creation allotment and sale of new shares
as hereinafter provided.
Increase of Capi- 8. THAT in case it shall he determined hy any Annual
or Special Meeting under the powers for that purpose
contained in Clause 80 to increase the Capital of the
Company by the issue of new shares the amount number
and manner of allotment thereof and the mode in which
the instalments and the times at which the same shall he
contributed shall he determined hy the resolutions to be
passed at such Meeting and all new shares shall he offered
either to the then existing Shareholders in proportion to
the shares held hy them or to the general public or other-
wise and either at par or at a premium as may he
determined on at such Meeting as aforesaid and in case
of the same being offered to the Shareholders such offer
shall he made hy notice from the Manager or the Secre-
tary specifying the number of shares to which each Share-
holder is entitled and limiting a time within which the
offer if not accepted will he deemed tc be declined and
after the expiration of such time or on the receipt of
an intimation from the Shareholder to whom such notice
is given that he declines to accept the shares offered
the Directors shall he at liberty to dispose of the same in
such manner as contingently directed at such Meeting as
aforesaid and failing such direction then as they may think
most beneficial to the Company.
Execution of o THAT no person shall he deemed or taken to he a
Deed of Settle- v 1
precedent*'to* 11 Shareholder or he entitled to any rights or privileges as
shareholder. euc l l until he shall have executed the Deed of Settlement


either in person or by Attorney Provided always that
this clause shall in no way restrict the liability of a person
accepting any new shares in the Company to pay the
deposit and calls thereon and otherwise to comply with
the terms of any contract in reference to such shares.
10 THAT no person shall be allowed to hold less than Numberofshares
1 to be held by
ten or more than ten thousand shares and no person one person,
acquiring any share beyond ten thousand other than by
marriage or as executor or administrator or legatee of any
deceased Shareholder shall be entitled to claim or receive
the dividends payable upon or in respect of the shares
above such number of ten thousand but the dividends upon
such excessive shares shall be forfeited and transferred to
and form part of the Eeserve Fund Provided neverthe-
less that if any person shall hold or shall acquire by
means of marriage or as executor or administrator or
legatee of any deceased Shareholder more than ten thou-
sand shares such person may transfer the excessive shares
or share and in case such transfer shall be made within six
calendar months next after the acquisition of such shares
or within such extended period as the Board of Directors
shall permit then but not otherwise the transferee shall
thereby become entitled to any dividend or bonus declared
thereon since the acquisition thereof as aforesaid.
11. THAT all the property of the Company shall as Sh s^I t ° s^t J’ er '
between the several Shareholders thereof and their
respective real and personal representatives be considered
and deemed to be personal estate and that no benefit
of survivorship shall take place amongst the Shareholders


Shareholders to
participate in
profit and loss
so that each of the Shareholders as between 'one another
shall have a distinct and separate right to his shares and
the same shall he vested in him to and for all intents and
purposes as part of his personal estate but under and
subject to such provisions in the Deed of Settlement as
shall for the time being affect such shares.
12. THAT each Shareholder shall be entitled to and
interested in the profits and be liable and subject to the
losses of the Company in proportion to his shares and the
shares of every Shareholder shall before and in preference
to every other right or claim whatsoever be subject to and
charged with all debts liabilities and engagements due
from or current and subsisting between him and the
Company in whatever way such debts liabilities or
engagements shall arise whether in respect of his direct
transactions with the Company or mediately or otherwise
and whether they be those of such Shareholders solely or
jointly or in partnership with any other person and the
Board of Directors may and they are hereby authorised and
empowered to cancel and extinguish and declare forfeited
or to sell and dispose of the shares of any Shareholder
either wholly or in part as the case may seem to require
by way of or towards satisfaction or liquidation of all or
any part of such debts liabilities or engagements.
13. THAT the several persons parties to these presents
shall and will severally contribute to the capital in propor-
tion to the number of shares held by them respectively
to the extent of Ten pounds on each such share by
such instalments at such times and in such manner as the


Board of Directors may determine and notify by public
advertisement or circular letter as herein provided and each
such instalment shall be considered and deemed a Call and
each person accepting new shares (if any should be issued)
shall pay up the amount thereof in such instalments and
at such times as may be determined on under the powers
for that purpose herein contained and each of such instal-
ments shall be considered a Call and no Shareholder shall
be allowed to pay up the whole or any portion of his share
or shares except in manner herein provided or to be here-
after determined as aforesaid.
14. THAT every Call shall bear interest from the day on Recovery of Calls,
which the same shall become due at the rate of twelve per
centum per annum until paid and the amount of such Call
with interest as aforesaid shall be thereafter recoverable by
the Board of Directors by action and on the trial of every
such action it shall not be necessary to prove any matter
except that the defendant or the person through whom he
claims was at the time of making such Call a holder of
shares in the capital of the Company and that such Call
was in point of fact made and notice thereof and of the
time fixed by the Board of Directors for payment thereof
given in the manner herein provided.
15. THAT in case default shall be made by any of the Forfeiture of
several parties to these presents in the payment of any
call on his share or shares for the space of three months
next after the same shall have become payable it shall be
lawful for the Board of Directors to declare the share or
shares on which such default has been made and the calls


previously paid thereon and all benefit and advantage
whatever attending the same to he absolutely forfeited to
the Company and the person or persons making such
default shall thereupon in respect of such share or shares
cease to he a member of the Company Provided neverthe-
less that the Board of Directors may if they think fit upon
the application of the Shareholder or late Shareholder dis-
charge any share or shares from forfeiture and restore the
same or any part thereof to such Shareholder on such
terms as they may think fit And provided further that it
shall he lawful for_ the Board of Directors if they think fit
instead of declaring such share or shares to he forfeited to
enforce payment of the calls with interest as hereinbefore
provided or to sell so many only of the shares of any
Shareholder making default as may be necessary and suffi-
cient to pay the amount due upon the whole of such Share-
holder’s shares and the expenses costs and charges to be
incurred in respect thereof.
16. THAT the share or shares forfeited in pursuance of
any provision herein contained shall and may be disposed
of by public sale or private contract and be then trans-
ferred to the purchaser by the Board of Directors
Provided nevertheless that it shall be lawful but not com-
pulsory upon the Board of Directors to withhold any such
shares from immediate sale and retain the same in their
hands for a reasonable time in every case in which it may
under the provisions herein contained be competent for the
Board of Directors to discharge such forfeiture.
17, THAT the names and places of abode of the Share-


holders together with the number of shares held by each
of them shall from time to time be entered and written in
a book to be kept for that purpose to be called “ The
Shareholders’ Register” and every Shareholder who
shall at any time change his name or place of abode or
being a female shall marry and the'Assignee of every
Shareholder who shall become bankrupt or insolvent and
the Committee of every Shareholder who shall be found a
lunatic and the personal representative or legatee of any
Shareholder who shall die shall immediately upon and after
any of the said events leave a notice at the office of the
Company stating his her or their name or names or new
name or new names and place or places of abode and when
a female Shareholder shall have been married then the
name and place of abode of her husband.
18. THAT any person who shall be registered as a Registered Pro-
*' r ~ i ™ i prietor to be
holder of shares shall as between him and the Company be considered
Shareholder
a Shareholder of the Company to all intents and purposes in and trusts not
' _ , recognised.
respect of such shares provided he shall have executed the
Deed of Settlement and the Company shall in no way be
affected by express or implied notice of any trust or equit-
able charge imposed on any share or of any disposition
thereof by Will until the personal representative or legatee
shall have become proprietor thereof as herein provided
And further that the “ Shareholders’ Register” shall as
between the Company and any person claiming to be
a Shareholder in respect of any shares be prima facie
evidence on behalf of the Company to show who is
a Shareholder of the Company in respect of such
shares.


19. THAT when shares shall be vested in two or more
persons jointly or in common or otherwise the one of such
persons or of the survivors of them whose name shall stand
first on the books of the Company as one of the owners of
such shares or the sole survivor of such two or more per-
sons shall be considered and deemed the Shareholder in
respect of such shares for the purpose of voting and
receiving dividends but all the parties or their representa-
tives shall be liable jointly and severally to the Company
for the fulfilment of all the covenants herein contained and
any notice given to- either of them shall be deemed good
notice to all of them Provided that in case of the absence
from the Colony of Hew South Wales of the first named of
such joint Shareholders the other appearing next upon the
Shareholders’ Register as joint Shareholder shall be allowed
to vote and receive dividends in respect of the shares so
held unless the first named Shareholder be legally repre-
sented and claim to act.
20. THAT subject to the restrictions herein contained
every separate share but no fractional part of a share shall
be transferable as effectually as any other interest is by
law transferable so as the transfer thereof be in accordance
with such regulations as the Board of Directors shall from
time to time make respecting the form and preparation of
the instrument of transfer and the fees if any payable
thereon and the general mode of effecting the same and no
transfer shall be effectual unless such regulations be com-
plied with.
21. THAT no share shall be transferred (except by will


or devolution or operation of law) without the consent and
sanction of the Board of Directors and no share shall as
regards the exercise of any rights or powers by a transferee
be considered transferred while any liability of the Share-
holder to the Company shall remain undischarged or until
the Transferee or new Proprietor or one of the joint
Transferees or Proprietors if more than one as the case
may be shall either in respect of such or some other share
have executed the Deed of Settlement.
22 THAT on the decease of any Shareholder his execu- Ownership of
shares on de*
tor or administrator or legatee on the marriage of any
female Shareholder her husband on the lunacy of any solvency.
Shareholder his committee and on the insolvency of any
Shareholder his assignee shall be considered the owners of
the shares standing in the name of such Shareholder res-
pectively and as such shall be entitled to the privileges
mentioned in the next clause.
23 THAT the husband of any female the executor or as to shares of
Female Pro-
administrator or legatee of any deceased or the committee prietors on
° “ marriage and
of anv lunatic Shareholder may elect either to become a of deceased
J J lunatic and
Shareholder in respect of the shares to which he shall pro-
be entitled in either of these capacities subject to the con-
sent and sanction mentioned in Clause 21 or to procure
any other person to become such Shareholder but the
assignee of any insolvent Shareholder shall not be entitled
to become Shareholder in respect of the shares of such
insolvent but shall procure some other person or persons
subject to the approval or sanction aforesaid to become a
Shareholder in respect thereof Provided always that no


person shall be entitled to receive any dividends or other
profits on the shares of such female deceased lunatic or
insolvent Shareholder accruing after her or his marriage
death commission of lunacy or insolvency until some
person shall have become a Shareholder in respect of
such shares and the person who shall ultimately become
such Shareholder shall be entitled to such last mentioned
dividends and profits and the full right and interest to
and in such shares Provided further that if no person
shall become a Shareholder in respect of the shares of any
such female deceased or lunatic Shareholder within the
period of two years from the date of such marriage death
or commission of lunacy respectively then the rights herein
reserved to such husband executor administrator legatee
or committee respectively shall unless the Board of
Directors shall otherwise direct cease and determine and it
shall be lawful for the Board of Directors to sell the said
shares by public auction or private contract for the best
price that can be reasonably got for the same and to
retain the proceeds together with the interest and
dividends which shall have accrued previously to such
sale until the person legally entitled thereto shall establish
his claim to the satisfaction of the Board of Directors and
such person shall not be entitled to claim interest on
the amount so retained and if no person shall have become
a Shareholder in respect of the shares of any insolvent
within the period of six months after his insolvency then
the right herein reserved to such assignee shall cease and
determine and it shall be competent to the Board of
Directors in their discretion to sell the said last mentioned
shares as aforesaid and the net proceeds of such sale


übject to any claim on tlie part of the Company shall in
inch case be paid over by the Board of Directors without
nterest to the said assignee for the benefit of the estate
>r creditors of the said insolvent.
24. THAT any of the persons becoming owners of As j°J““ d s s
shares in any of the representative capacities mentioned
in the last clause and whether they shall exercise the
powers therein reserved to them or not shall be entitled
to receive any dividend which shall have become due on
such shares before his title to the same shares accrued but
the dividends which shall become due on the same shares
after his title shall have accrued shall remain in suspense
until some person shall be duly registered as a Shareholder
in respect thereof.
25. THAT before any husband executor administrator sub-
committee or assignee shall be at liberty to exercise any
of the powers contained in the last two preceding clauses
he shall leave for inspection at the office of the Company
in Sydney the usual evidence of his title in order that a
minute thereof or extract therefrom may be entered in
the books of the Company or shall otherwise prove and
establish his title to the satisfaction of the Board of
Directors.
26. THAT whenever any shares shall be duly and
effectually transferred to a new holder according to the to cease,
stipulations of these presents then but not till then the
responsibility of the previous holder as a member of the
Company in respect of such shares shall (so far as the law


will in that behalf allow) cease and determine and such
previous holder and all persons claiming by from or under
him shall be exonerated and released from all subsequent
claims demands liabilities and obligations in respect of the
same shares and from all future observance and perform-
ance of the covenants conditions stipulations and agree-
ments in the Deed of Settlement contained in respect of
the same shares and the purchaser shall thenceforth with
respect to all liabilities and engagements incurred on
account of the same shares stand in the place of the
previous holder to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
Sh need°not S exe 27. THAT every person in whom any shares shall vest
twice Deed hy transfer or otherwise and who previously to such vest-
ing shall have executed the Deed of Settlement and who
shall be a member of the Company to all intents and pur-
poses in respect of any other shares shall as to all the
shares so vesting in him as aforesaid be considered as a
Shareholder from the date of the transfer to him being
sanctioned and shall not be required nor shall it be neces-
sary for him again to execute the Deed of Settlement.
Reserve Fund. 28. THAT in each year the Board of Directors shall
if they shall think fit retain and lay aside such portion
of the net profits of such year as they shall think fit and
the same shall be retained for the forming and maintaining
a fund to be called “ The Deserve Bund.”
Management 29. THAT the Deserve Fund shall be carried to a
and applica-
nt)" of Keserve separate account in the books of the Company and the
same shall be as well a Deserve fund to meet and provide


against any extraordinary demands upon the Company
or any losses it may sustain and to replace any losses
of capital as also a Reserve Fund for the purpose of
supplying from time to time any deficiency which may
arise in the profits of any year and of preventing as
far as may be a fluctuation in the" amount of the
dividends of successive years and the said Reserve
Fund may be applied for the several purposes aforesaid
by the Board of Directors in their absolute discretion and
the said Reserve Fund shall in the event of a dissolution
of the Company belong to and form part of the capital.
30. THAT previous to the Annual Meeting which shall Dividends,
be held in the month of July in the year One thousand
eight hundred and seventy and to every subsequent Annual
Meeting during the continuance of the Company the
Board of Directors shall subject to the regulations herein
contained determine upon such dividend or dividends or
bonus out of the clear profits of the Company as they in
their judgment shall think fit and at every such meeting
the amount of such dividend or dividends or bonus shall
be declared to the Shareholders.
31. THAT it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors interim Divi-
dends.
if they see fit to declare and pay to the Shareholders an
Interim dividend for the half year which will expire on the
31st day of December in any year but such interim divi-
dend shall form part of and be deducted from the annual
dividend which shall be ascertained and declared after the
close of each of the Company’s financial years pursuant
to Clause 30.


32. THAT within seven days after a dividend or divi-
dends or interim dividend or dividends or bonus shall be
declared out of the profits of the Company the Manager
or Secretary shall give or cause to be given notice of the
dividend or dividends or bonus and when and where the
same shall be payable and shall in conformity with such
notice pay to each Shareholder on demand to be made at
any time within six years but not afterwards the amount
of dividend or bonus on his shares provided every liability
accrued on such shares shall have been paid but in case
any such liability shall not have been paid then subject to
the provisions of the Deed of Settlement such Shareholders
shall receive the balance of such dividend after deducting
the amount of such liability with the interest due thereon
or such dividend shall be applied in part payment of such
liability and in no case shall interest be allowed on any
unclaimed dividends or bonus.
PART 111.
Directors Trustees Auditor and Officers their powers
and duties.
33. THAT there shall in the first instance be Two
Directors of the Company duly qualified as herein provided
and such two directors shall form the Board of Directors
and either of such Directors until the number of the
Board shall be increased as hereinafter provided shall at
any time and place appointed for a meeting of the Board
and in the absence of the other of them possess the full


powers of the Board or (so far as the term is applicable to
an individual) form a quorum but that when and so soon
as the number of the Board shall be so increased as herein
provided any two of the Directors present at a meeting of
the Directors shall form a quorum or Board of Directors
and possess the full powers of the Board.-
34. THAT the Honorable Alexander Campbell and the First Directors.
Honorable John Hay shall be the first Directors of the
Company.
35. THAT the said Alexander Campbell and John p^ t b 0 e i r I 1
Hay shall while continuing Directors have power without Board-
further reference to the Shareholders of the Company at
any time or times to increase the number of the Board so
that the entire number thereof shall at no time exceed
four Directors and for that purpose they shall have power
to appoint any person or persons qualified as herein
provided to fill such office or offices.
36. THAT at each Annual Meeting one Director shall Re^™ s t of
retire from office such retirement (as to the first Directors)
to be in the rotation in which their names appear in Clause
34 (unless either of such Directors shall voluntarily retire
out of rotation) until each of the first Directors shall have
so retired or otherwise ceased to be Directors and for the
above purposes a first Director shall only be considered
such during his first term of office and then in each
succeeding year the Director who shall have been longest
in office shall retire and so on from time to time during
the continuance of the Company but any Director so


retiring shall be immediately eligible for re-election And
any Director who shall be at any time re-elected shall for
such purpose be deemed to have been in office only from
the time of his last re-election and at such Annual
Meeting as aforesaid a Director or Directors shall be
elected to fill the place of the Director so retiring as
aforesaid as also any other vacancy in the Board. Pro-
vided nevertheless that in case at any time from any cause
whatsoever such new election shall not be made the
retiring Director or the Director who ought to have
retired as the case may be shall continue in office until a
new Director shall be elected in his room.
37. THAT the Directors shall be selected from amongst
the Shareholders possessed of shares in the Company on
which the sum of Two thousand five hundred pounds at
least shall have been paid up and not being Directors of
any other Bank in Sydney and that no person shall
be eligible as a Director who shall be an uncertificated
insolvent or who shall within three years previously to the
time appointed for the election have become insolvent
and if any Director shall during office cease to hold the
requisite qualification in shares or shall become insolvent
he shall thereupon become disqualified and his office shall
thereupon and thenceforth be vacated Provided that no
act or resolution of any Board of Directors shall be
rendered void by reason of any Director acting or con-
curring therein being then disqualified.
38. THAT no Shareholder shall hereafter be eligible at
an Annual or Special Meeting for the office of Director


unless he shall have left notice in writing at the office
of the Company in Sydney addressed to the Board of
Directors of his intention to become a candidate for such
office fourteen clear days at the least before the day of
election.
39. THAT in case any Director shall omit or neglect to Vacation of
attend the Board Meetings for the space of three calendar
months without leave of the Board of Directors the office
of such Director shall be deemed to be vacated at and
from the expiration of such three calendar months as
aforesaid unless the Board of Directors shall otherwise
determine within one calendar month after the expiration
of such three calendar months as aforesaid.
40 THAT until the increase of the number of Remuneration of
. Directors.
Directors under the power for that purpose hereinbefore
contained the Directors shall be entitled to no remunera-
tion for their services but on such number being increased
a sum not exceeding Six hundred pounds per annum (to
be determined on within this limit by the Board) shall be
allowed to the Directors by way of salary or remuneration
for their services to be distributed amongst them in such
manner as the Board of Directors may from time to time
determine.
41 THAT until the increase in the number of the chairman of the
• Board.
Board of Directors under the power for that purpose
herein contained each of the said first Directors in rotation
shall preside at the Board of Directors as Chairman thereof
for the period of one calendar month so that the said


Alexander Campbell shall be the Chairman for one calendar
month and the said_ John Hay for the succeeding calendar
month and so on in succession but that after the number
of the Board shall be so increased as herein provided the
Board of Directors shall from time to time from amongst
their own body elect a Chairman to preside at the Board
with full power to revoke such election and the same
power again immediately to exercise and such Chairman
shall continue in office until the expiration of his then
term of office as Director unless his election or appointment
be revoked as aforesaid and the Chairman of the Board of
Directors for the time being shall be the Chairman of the
Company.
Meetings of 42. THAT the Board of Directors shall meet as often
Board. ,
and at such time and place as they may from time to time
appoint for the dispatch of business at the office of the
Company in Sydney or elsewhere.
Special Meetings 43. THAT the Manager or Secretary shall call a Special
Meeting of the Board of Directors whenever required and
for the time appointed by one or more Directors but
twenty-four hours’ notice of such Special Meetings and of
the business to be transacted thereat shall be given by the
Manager or Secretary to each Director then being in
Sydney or its environs.
1 pr to 44. THAT after the increase of the number of Directors
Boar™ nd as to as herein provided in case of the absence or incapacity of
votes thereat. Chairman the Director present who shall have been
longest in office shall preside at the Board and all questions


coming before the Board of Directors whether as at
present constituted or after the increase in their number
as herein provided shall be decided by the majority of the
individual votes of the Directors present and not declining
to vote or disqualified from voting and in case of an
equality of votes the Chairman or other, person presiding
in addition to his individual vote shall have a casting
vote.
45. THAT no Director shall be allowed to vote on any Di^ t e or^ h “° t
proposition motion or matter in or in relation to which he terested-
shall in any manner be directly or indirectly interested.
46. THAT minutes of the proceedings of each Meeting M Mee ti n g 3.
of the Board of Directors containing the name of the
Directors present shall be made and entered in a minute
book and be read over and confirmed or otherwise at the
next Meeting of the Board of Directors and signed by the
Chairman of the Meeting at which such minutes shall
be so confirmed and every such book shall be kept at the
office of the Company for the time being and the minutes
so entered and signed as aforesaid shall be conclusive
evidence of such proceedings and that they were made and
took place at a Board of Directors duly held and convened
conformably to the Deed of Settlement.
47. THAT the Directors for the time being shall cause Ac
to be kept at the office of the Company all such necessary
and proper books of account disclosing the transactions
and dealings of the Company and the profits gains or
losses thereof as they shall think expedient and shall cause


General powers
of Board.
Appointment of
Manager and
other officers.
such boohs once in every year and previously to each
Annual Meeting to be settled adjusted and balanced and a
balance sheet and general summary of the accounts and
affairs prepared and shall before such Annual Meeting
submit the same to the Auditor.
48. THAT subject to the regulations contained in the
Deed of Settlement and the powers conferred on Annual
and Special Meetings the Board of Directors shall have
the entire control over the receipt and payment of the
moneys of the Company and generally the entire manage-
ment and control of the affairs and business of the
Company the application and investment of its funds the
transfer and assignment of shares and the form by which
the same shall be effected and shall and may in all matters
not specially provided for in the Deed of Settlement act as
to them shall appear best calculated to promote the interests
of the Company and it is hereby expressly declared that
the powers specially conferred on the Directors in and
by the Deed of Settlement shall not as to matters not
distinctly provided for be deemed to abridge the general
powers above granted.
49, THAT the Board of Directors shall have full power
from time to time to appoint a Manager or Secretary of
the Company or both and to determine the duration of
office and the mode and amount of remuneration of such
officer or officers and to remove such officer or officers at
pleasure and they shall also have power to appoint and
remove all subordinate clerks and servants of the Company
and to determine the amount of their remuneration.


50. THAT it shall be competent for the Board of Branches or
Agencies.
Directors to establish any such Branch or Agency of the
Bank and at any such place or places within the British
dominions or elsewhere as they may determine Provided
that the establishment of any such Branch or Agency shall
be reported to the next Annual Meeting. '
51. THAT for the purposes of carrying out the objects M B ™^™® s nt or of
indicated in Clause 50 the Board of Directors shall have full Agencies,
power to appoint Managers or Agents of such Branches or
Agencies with power to associate with them local Directors
or a local Director and to depute to such person or
persons such powers as they shall deem advisable and to
make such regulations for the management of such
Branches or Agencies as they shall deem expedient And
the remuneration of such officers the amount of security
to be given by them for the due discharge of their duties
and their removal from office shall be entirely in the hands
of the Board of Directors.
52. THAT for the purpose of borrowing or raising Powerofßorrow .
money or in recognition of loans or deposits or otherwise ng '
in the course of business the Board of Directors may issue
Bonds or Debentures Deposit Receipts and other obliga-
tions at any time and in any form or manner and for any
periods which they may from time to time determine.
53. THAT it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors Power to buy
to purchase in fee simple or for any less estate or to take offices,°&c. m
upon lease a suitable house and premises in Sydney or
elsewhere for the transaction of the business of the


Directors em-
powered to
bring and de-
fend Actions,
&c.
Company or its agencies or branches or to build a suitable
Banking House or Banking Houses on land purchased for
that purpose also to take and hold until the same can be
advantageously disposed of for the purpose of reimburse-
ment only and not for profit any lands houses merchandize
ships and other real or personal estate in satisfaction
liquidation or discharge of any debt due to the Company or
in security for any debt or liability either hand Jtde incurred
or come under previously and that whether such property
shall be subject to any existing charge or incumbrance
in favor of the Company or not And also at any time or
times thereafter to sell let demise exchange or otherwise
dispose of all or any of such messuages offices houses lands
property and premises in such manner as they may think
most advisable |ind to cause the same to be conveyed or
assigned accordingly.
54. THAT the Board of Directors shall have full power
' on behalf of the Company in such name or names as for
the time being shall be legally competent for them to
adopt for that purpose to commence prosecute conduct
and defend for and on behalf of the Company any action
suit or proceeding in any court of law equity insolvency
admiralty or other judicature against any person or
persons whomsoever (whether a Shareholder Manager
Secretary or not) or against his estate for recovering any
debts or enforcing any claims or demands due to or for
any other matter relating to the concerns of the Company
and to discontinue compromise or abandon the same and
also to institute any criminal proceedings against any
person or persons whomsoever (whether a Shareholder or


not) for embezzlement fraud forgery or other crime or
offence and the same to discontinue or abandon and also
at their discretion to enter into and execute any bond or
agreement for the reference or submission to arbitration
of any dispute or controversy between the Company and
any person or persons body or bodies corporate or other-
wise including any Shareholder in the Company and to
submit and abide by every award made in pursuance
thereof and to compound and to accede to and execute or
authorize to be executed any Deed of Composition or
conveyance or assignment for the benefit of creditors made
by any debtor to the Company and to give time for the
payment of any debt and to abandon any debt which may
seem to the Board of Directors bad.
55. THAT the Board of Directors shall have full power of At-
to make sign seal and execute any power or letter of
attorney for enabling any other persons or person jointly
or severally to act on behalf of the Company in any
transaction business matter or thing which shall be stated
in such power or letter of attorney such letter or power to
include a power of substitution if thought desirable and
the business when done transacted or executed by any
such attorney or attorneys or any substitute appointed
thereunder shall be of the like force and effect as if the
same had been done transacted or executed personally by
the Board of Directors.
56. THAT the Board of Directors or such person or BiiisofExchange
persons as they shall authorise in that behalf shall exclu- & c .
sively have power to sign draw endorse and accept all bills


of exchange cheques drafts promissory notes and other
negotiable instruments in the name or on account of the
Company and no cheque bill note or negotiable instrument
signed drawn endorsed or accepted in any other manner
than by the person or persons so respectively authorised
as aforesaid shall be binding on the Company and each of
the Shareholders doth hereby expressly renounce and
disclaim all right and title to sign draw accept or endorse
any cheque draft bill note or other negotiable instrument
whatsoever in the name of the Company or to contract any
engagement or engagements so as to bind charge or pre-
judicially affect the same unless he shall be expressly
authorised so to do in pursuance of any of the provisions
of the Deed of Settlement.
57. THAT it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
to diminish the capital for the time being either by the pur-
chase and extinguishment of shares or by a rateable return
of capital to the shareholders if it shall appear that there
is no immediate or prospective employment for the full
amount thereof and also to revive and reissue the extin-
guished shares and again call for the returned capital if the
said Board of Directors shall at any subsequent time think
it advisable to do so.
58. THAT it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
from time to time to make such by-laws and regulations
as they shall think expedient so as the same be not in-
consistent with or repugnant to the Deed of Settle-
ment or to any laws and regulations made and passed at
any Annual Meeting of the shareholders and from time


to time to alter or repeal the same and make others in
their stead.
59. THAT there shall at all times be one Auditor Auditor,
of the Company whose remuneration shall be fixed by
an annual meeting and who shall perform the duties
herein mentioned and that Christopher Eolleston shall
be the first Auditor and that no Director shall be an
Auditor.
60. THAT at each Annual Meeting the Auditor shall A and°new
retire from office but shall be eligible for re-election and at t 0 take
such Meeting an Auditor shall be elected to fill the place
of the Auditor so retiring as aforesaid or the vacancy in
the Auditorship however otherwise occurring Provided
that if at any time from any cause whatsoever no such new
election shall take place the retiring Auditor or the one
who ought to have retired shall continue in office until a
new election shall take place.
61. THAT the Auditor shall previously to each Annual Auditor’s duties
Meeting examine the balance sheet and summary of
accounts to be submitted to him by the Board of Directors
shall count the cash and inspect the securities of the Com-
pany and if such accounts shall be found correct shall sign
the same.
62. THAT every vacancy in the office of Director or Vacancies how
Auditor occurring in the interval between the Annual
Meetings shall be temporarily supplied by the Board of
Directors as soon as possible after such vacancy shall occur


and every person who shall be appointed to supply any
such vacancy shall continue in office until the then next
Annual Meeting (when the vacancy shall be supplied by
such Meeting in due course) or whichever shall first happen
until a Special Meeting called for the purpose of supplying
such vacancy.
63. THAT the said Alexander Campbell and John Hay
shall be and they are hereby appointed the first Trustees
of the Company and in the names of the Trustees of the
Company until the incorporation thereof all grants convey-
ances mortgages leases assignments and assurances of
property for the benefit of the Company and all other
instruments and securities shall be taken and made and
they shall hold all the property so vested in them and
release convey assign and assure the same from time to
time to such uses and upon such trusts and in such
manner as the Board of Directors shall appoint or direct
and their receipts shall be sufficient discharges on behalf of
the Company for any purchase or other moneys they may
receive under the said trusts.
64. THAT every Director Auditor or other officer of
the Company other than a Trustee may at any time vacate
his office by sending his resignation in writing to the
Board of Directors but he shall be taken and considered to
continue in office until such resignation shall have been
duly accepted by the Board.
65. THAT at any Special Meeting duly convened and
held in manner herein provided and called for that purpose


any Director Trustee or Auditor may be removed for
negligence misconduct or other reasonable cause.
66. THAT any and every Trustee may at any time Resignation of
9 _ « Trustees ftud
resign his trusteeship on giving notice to the Board ot power
Directors and accounting for all moneys effects securities Trustees.
and property received by or come to his hands and
executing such conveyance assignment or assurance as the
Board of Directors may require and the Board of Directors
may at any time remove any Trustee or Trustees and shall
have full power to appoint a Trustee or Trustees in the
room of any retiring removed incapacitated or deceased
Trustee and in the event of any retiring or removed
Trustee refusing or neglecting to execute any such
release conveyance assignment or assurance of the trust
property as may be deemed requisite by the Board of
Directors or to account for the moneys effects securities
and property aforesaid the Board ot Directors shall be at
liberty to adopt all legal and equitable means requisite for
enforcing the same.
67. THAT the Directors Trustees Shareholders and indemnity to ni-
-odicers of the Company shall from time to time and at all ° ther officers,
times be saved harmless and kept indemnified by the
Company from and against all costs charges damages
penalties losses and expenses which such persons or any of
them may sustain incur or be put unto in or about the
execution and discharge of their respective powers trusts
and offices and in or about any action suit or proceeding
either at law or in equity or otherwise in which they or
any of them shall or may as Directors Trustees Shareholders


or Officers of the Company be Plaintiffs or Defendants or
otherwise be concerned or by reason whereof they or any
of them may become damnified unless the same shall be
sustained or incurred by reason of the wilful neglect or
default of the parties or party sustaining or incurring the
same respectively or unless such parties or party shall have
refused or declined or neglected to submit the conduct
management prosecution or defence of any such action
suit or proceeding to the Board of Directors and that the
amount of such costs charges damages and expenses for
which an indemnity is intended to be hereby provided
shall immediately after the same shall have been sustained
or incurred and although the same shall not be ascertained
attach as a lien upon the funds of the Company and as
such shall as between the Shareholders have priority to all
other claims and demands whatsoever and it shall be the
duty of the Board of Directors out of the same funds to
pay and make good the same and none of the Directors
Trustees Shareholders or Officers shall be answerable or
accountable for the others or any other of them nor for the
acts deeds or defaults of the others or any other of them
but each of them for his own acts deeds and defaults only
nor for any person or persons with whom any money or
effects of the Company shall be deposited for safe custody
or otherwise nor for the insufficiency or deficiency of any
security upon which the moneys of the Company may be
placed out or invested nor for any loss damage or misfor-
tune which may happen to the capital or profits or funds
of the Company unless the same shall happen by his or
their respective wilful act or default.


PART IV.
Annual and Special Meetings.
68. THAT an Annual Meeting of the Shareholders shall A "’“' 3 al Meet *
be held at the office of the Company or at some other con-
venient place in Sydney on such day as the Board of
Directors shall appoint in the month of July -in each
year and fourteen days previous notice shall be given of
the time and place of holding such meeting.
69. THAT the Board of Directors may call Special special Meetings.
Meetings for such purposes and to be held at such times
and places in Sydney aforesaid and as often as they may
think proper and shall cause fourteen days previous notice
of any Special Meeting to be given and in every such
notice the object or objects of the Meeting shall be fairly
stated.
70. THAT ten or more Shareholders (holding in the Ten shareholders
\ o may call Speci-
aggregate Two thousand shares or upwards) may at any ai Meeting,
time or times by requisition in writing under their hands
left at the head office of the Company and stating fairly
the objects of the Meeting require the Board of Directors
to call a Special Meeting within three weeks from the day
of the delivery of the requisition and in case the Board of
Directors shall neglect or refuse for fourteen days after
such requisition shall be so left as aforesaid to comply with
such requisition the Shareholders signing such requisition
may call such Special Meeting by giving fourteen days
notice thereof and every such notice shall fairly express
the objects of such Special Meeting and the day and hour


and place within the City of Sydney when and where the
same shall be held and also shall set forth the delivery of
the requisition to the Board of Directors and their neglect
or refusal to call such Special Meeting and shall also con-
tain the names of the Shareholders signing such requisition
but no business shall be transacted at any Special Meeting
other than that for which it shall have been expressly
called.
i 71. THAT at every Annual Meeting and Special
Meeting the chair shall be taken by the Chairman of
the Company if present and willing to act but in case
such Chairman be not present or not willing to act then
by another of the Directors or in case of the absence of all
the Directors or of all the Directors present being unwilling
to act then by one of the Shareholders such Shareholder to
be chosen by the majority in number of the persons
qualified to vote then personally present without regard tc
the number of votes to which they are entitled and the
chair shall be taken before any other business shall be
transacted at such Meeting and the Chairman who may
preside at such meeting shall regulate the proceedings
thereat and may if he shall think fit take part in the
discussion of the meeting and shall not only vote as any
other Shareholder but in case of an equality of votes shall
have the casting vote as Chairman in addition to his
individual vote or votes.
72. THAT minutes of all the proceedings of every
Annual Meeting and Special Meeting shall be entered and
kept in the Minute Book of the Company and shall be


signed by tbe person presiding at sucb Meeting and such
minutes shall be full and conclusive evidence that the
proceedings therein recorded took place at an Annual or
Special Meeting duly called and held pursuant to these
presents and that the person whose name shall be sub-
scribed thereto was the Chairman thereat and that he
signed such minutes And such minutes shall be binding
and conclusive on all the Shareholders and all other
persons claiming any interest in respect of any shares in
the capital of the Company.
73. THAT at any Annual Meeting or Special Meeting Mode of voting,
all motions questions propositions which shall then be
submitted for determination shall unless otherwise herein
specially provided be primarily decided by the majority in
number of the persons present qualified to vote on a show
of hands but if any person qualified to vote shall be
dissatisfied with such show of hands he may demand a
ballot upon any motion question or proposition then
depending before such meeting and such Ballot if
demanded shall be taken accordingly and all such motions
questions and propositions shall (except as hereinafter
otherwise provided) be decided by a majority of votes and
upon every ballot the right of the Shareholders to vote
shall be regulated as follows that is to say: —Every holder
of ten shares but less than twenty shares shall have one
vote every holder of twenty shares and less than forty
shares shall have two votes and so on at the rate of one
vote for every additional ten shares up to the number
of one thousand shares and after the number of one
thousand shares every holder of such shares shall be


Shareholders’
Register to be
decisive.
entitled to a vote for every additional fifty shares up to
the number of five thousand shares after which number no
additional shares shall confer an increased voting power
and upon any Ballot every Shareholder present and
qualified to vote may deposit in a Balloting Box to be
provided for that purpose and to be placed on the table
in front of the Chairman of the meeting a paper on which
shall be written the number of votes which the Share-
holder depositing the same shall claim to have and also
his name and his assent to or dissent from the motion
or question then before the meeting or his vote for any
particular candidate or candidates as the case may be and
two of the persons qualified to vote at and present at such
meeting willing to act to be chosen by the majority in
number of the persons qualified to vote at and present at
such meeting shall as scrutineers retire and investigate
and report to the meeting the result of such ballot and the
same result shall be declared by the Chairman of the
meeting and shall be entered in the book of the pro-
ceedings as the decision of the meeting.
74. THAT in case any doubt or controversy shall arise
at any meeting as to the number of votes which any
Shareholder may be entitled to give the same may be
determined by reference to the Shareholders’ Register
which shall be conclusive evidence (as to the right of
voting) of the number of shares in respect of which such
Shareholder shall be entitled to vote.
75. THAT any Annual Meeting or Special Meeting or
adjourned Annual or Special Meeting may be adjourned or


further adjourned from time to time to such day and hour
and to such place in the City of Sydney as shall be deter-
mined and after a motion of adjournment shall have been
carried no other business shall on any pretence be brought
forward and no such adjournment shall take place for a
longer period than seven days and it shall not be necessary
to give any notice of such adjourned meeting and no other
subject or business shall be proposed debated or transacted
at any adjourned meeting than the subject or business for
which the original meeting was called or held and which
was not commenced or was left unfinished at such original
or adjourned meeting and the persous entitled to vote who
shall be present at any adjourned meeting although they
may not have been present at the meeting whence the
adjournment took place and who respectively may be
qualified to vote may vote at such adjourned meeting and
every adjournment shall be deemed a continuation of
the original meeting.
76. THAT every Shareholder who shall be qualified to Proxies,
vote at any meeting of the Company may by writing under
his hand appoint another Shareholder (also in his own
right qualified to vote) to vote for him at such meeting
specifically but no proxy shall be in force or available at
any other meeting except an adjournment thereof than
that for which it was expressly given or intended to apply
and each proxy shall be in the following form or to the
following effect that is to say: —“I hereby appoint
“ my proxy to vote for me and in my name at a meeting of
“ the Shareholders of the ‘ Mercantile Bank of Sydney ’
“ to be holden on the day of and


“ at any adjournment or adjournments of such meeting
‘ Dated the day of And every,
Shareholder who shall have appointed such proxy as afore-
said shall for all the purposes of the meeting for which
such proxy shall have been appointed and at which such
proxy shall attend and vote be considered as present and
all the acts and votes of the proxy in that capacity shall be
as valid and effectual as the acts and votes of the Share-
holder appointing him would have been if such Shareholder
had been present and had personally acted and voted at
such meeting Provided always that in case two or more
proxies signed by the same Shareholder shall be presented
or offered at any such meeting all such proxies shall be
null and void Provided also that before any proxy shall be
entitled to vote he shall leave the instrument appointing
him such proxy with the Manager or Secretary.
77. THAT the Manager or Secretary shall in no case
be appointed to act as a proxy or be allowed to vote for or
on behalf of any other person whomsoever either as Proxy
or Attorney but nothing herein contained shall be con-
strued to deprive him of his personal vote as a Shareholder
if he be such.
78. THAT if any person or persons other than the
Manager or Secretary who at the time any meeting of the
Company shall be held shall be duly authorised by Letter
of Attorney under the hand and seal of any Shareholder
then absent to receive the dividends and to sell the shares
or capital of the Company belonging to such Shareholder
so absent as aforesaid such person or persons shall be


entitled to attend vote and act at any meeting of the
Company and all acts and votes of such person or per-
sons so authorised as last aforesaid shall be as valid
and effectual as the acts and votes of the Shareholder
so absent as aforesaid would have been if such Share-
holder had been present and had actually voted at such
meeting and such Shareholder shall be considered as
present Provided that before any such person or per-
sons so authorised as aforesaid shall be entitled to
vote or act at any meeting of the Company he shall
have produced the said Letter of Attorney to or shall
have left an attested copy thereof with the Manager
or Secretary at least forty-eight- hours before such
meeting.
79. THAT no law resolution or proceeding made or Proceedings not
passed at any Annual Meeting or Special Meeting shall be ca. be impeach '
impeached or invalidated on the ground that any person
voting at any such meeting was not entitled to vote
thereat.
80. THAT an Annual or Special Meeting shall from p oW er of Annual
time to time have full power to regulate and control all the Meetings. ol3,l
affairs management capital and concerns of the Company
including its Branches and Agencies also fading the
previous exercise of the powers of Clause 35 by the
persons in whom the same are vested to exercise the
powers of such clause Also to appoint the Directors
Trustees and Auditor of the Company and to remove the
same and to supply any vacancies arising in such offices
Also to alter and change or add to the objects and


business of the Company Also to amalgamate with buy up
or absorb any other company carrying on a cognate
business Also to increase the capital of the Company in
the mode prescribed by Clause 8 and to make all necessary
regulations for the calling up of the same Also to dissolve
and wind up the Company Also to alter or repeal all or
any of the clauses of the Deed of Settlement and the Laws
Regulations and Resolutions which shall from time to time
be made subsequently to the date thereof in pursuance of
any power therein contained or in force for that purpose
affecting the capital profits business or concerns of the
Company or other the matters referred to in this Clause
And also to make and pass any new Law or Laws Regu-
lation or Regulations for the better management of the
Company and the capital profits business or concerns
thereof and any resolutions passing such laws or regula-
tions shall be as binding and effectual to all intents and
purposes as if such laws and regulations were inserted and
contained in the Deed of Settlement Provided neverthe-
less that no such alteration of the objects and business of
the Company nor any such amalgamation shall take place
nor shall the capital of the Company be increased nor
shall the Company be wound up or dissolved nor shall any
clause of the Deed of Settlement nor any existing Law
Resolution or Regulation of the Company be effectually
repealed or altered nor any new Law Resolution or Regu-
lation be valid unless effected by a Resolution of an Annu-
al or a Special Meeting at which persons qualified to vote
representing at least three fifth parts of so much of the
Capital of the Company as shall for the time being be
held by the Shareholders resident in the Colony of New


South "Wales shall have voted either in person or by proxy
and that two thirds in number of such votes shall be in
favour of such Eesolution and unless notice shall have
been given to the Manager or Secretary by some Share-
holder at least fourteen days previous to such Meeting of
an intention to propose Resolutions effecting such objects.
81 THAT if two or more Shareholders present at any Exclusion of the
votes of Share-
Annual or Special Meeting shall object to the vote of any
other Shareholder and shall prove to the satisfaction of the i llO8 ’
majority in number of the Shareholders then present that
the person whose vote has been objected to has an interest
in the question on which the vote is to be taken beyond
that which he may have therein in common with the other
Shareholders then and in every such case the Shareholder
whose vote has been objected to shall not be allowed to
vote on the question and shall be incapacitated from voting
on such question as the proxy of any absent Shareholder.
82. THAT the Board of Directors either voluntarily or Doubts in regard
* ... _ „ rn 111 11T • to the COU-
unon the requisition of any five Shareholders holding in struction of
1 " the Deed of
the ao-trreerate not less than one thousand shares may call Settlement to
oo ° be determined
a Special Meeting in manner herein appointed for the pur- by
pose of expounding and determining the true meaning and
construction of any of the several clauses and provisions of
the Deed of Settlement or of any rules or regulations of
the Company and the sense and meaning given by the
majority of the persons entitled to vote at such meeting to
any clause or provision of the Deed of Settlement or to
any rules or regulations of the Company shall be deemed
the true sense and meaning thereof.


PART V.
General Clauses,
Shareholders not 83. THAT subject to the restrictions in the Deed of
to be restricted
from transact- Settlement all or any of the parties to these presents and
mg business " 1
with the Com- a ll and every person or persons who shall be hereafter
pany. J A A
interested or have any shares in the Company may at
any time or times hereafter apply for and accept loans
discount bills or notes or transact any other business
with the Company in the same manner and on such terms
as if they or he were not members of or interested in the
Company.
Inspection of 84. THAT no Shareholder (not being an Officer entitled
thereto) or any person or persons claiming or to claim by
through under or in trust for him shall be entitled under
any pretence whatsoever to inspect or have in equity a
discovery of all or any of the books accounts or writings
of the Company except such as may be produced for his
inspection at any meeting of the Company and except the
Deed of Settlement and the Shareholders’ Eegister.
Shareholders not 85. THAT in any and every action and suit or other
to set up part- _
nership, Ac. proceeding at law or in equity wherein the Company or
any person or persons on behalf of the Company shall be
plaintiff or plaintiffs or the Company or any person or
persons on behalf of the Company shall be defendant or
defendants it shall not be lawful for any Shareholder or
any of the parties in such action or suit to set up the
partnership created by the Deed of Settlement of the
Company as a bar to such action or suit being sustainable


and such parties respectively shall upon the trial of any
such action at law and in any proceeding in any such suit
in equity waive and forego the objection to such action
being tried at law or to any such suit being instituted or
prosecuted in equity by reason of the plaintiff or plaintiffs
or defendant or defendants being partners in the Company
and no objection shall at any time be taken on the ground
that all or any of the Shareholders are not made parties to
any such action or suit and upon any such trial or in
any such suit it shall be imperative on the Manager or
Secretary to produce or cause to be produced the Deed
of Settlement if required so to do and the same shall
be read and used on the said trial or hearing and in any
such suit without any proof of its due execution and the
matters and things in this clause stated shall and may be
read in evidence on the same trial or in any such suits
and shall have the same force and effect as and by way
of admissions by the parties respectively as if the same
matters and things had been reduced to writing previously
to such trial or to the hearing of the cause as admissions
therein in the usual form and had been signed by such
parties or their respective attorneys irrevocably and either
of the parties shall if required by the other of them consent
to the Court or any Judge of the Court in which such
action shall be brought or suit commenced making an
order or orders wherein shall be embodied the matters and
things last aforesaid as admissions by the party or parties
against whom such order shall be sought to be read and
used in evidence on the trial of any such action or in any
such suit by the party or parties obtaining such order and
in case any proceeding at law or in equity shall be instituted


against any Shareholder by or on behalf of the Company
he shall not in relation to such proceedings take adopt or
institute any proceedings in any Court of Equity for
seeking a dissolution of the Company or causing or pro-
curing any accounts in relation to the partnership which
may exist by virtue of the Deed of Settlement to be
taken between all or any persons whomsoever nor shall
he by demurrer or otherwise in any suit in equity object
to such suit on the ground that no dissolution of the
Company has been prayed and the final judgment or
decree which may be obtained against the Company or
other person or persons on behalf of the Company in
any action or suit at law or in equity which shall have
been under the conduct and management of the Board of
Directors shall be final and conclusive upon and shall bind
all the members of the Company and such judgment or
decree shall be forthwith satisfied and performed.
86. THAT in every case in which a notice is by these
presents directed or authorised to be given the same shall
unless otherwise provided for by the Deed of Settlement
be given either by advertisement to be inserted in any one
or more of the leading newspapers published in Sydney or
by a circular letter addressed by post to the several Share-
holders of the Company recognisable under the Deed of
Settlement as such at their respective residences as appear-
ing in the Shareholders’ Register or as last notified to the
Manager or Secretary pursuant to Clause 17 as the
Board of Directors or the persons giving such notice shall
determine and it shall not be necessary to send a circular
letter to any person who shall not appear as a Shareholder


in the Shareholders’ Eegister and every such advertisement
or circular letter shall be effectual for all purposes for
which such notice is required to be given and every such
notice if given for the purposes of an Annual or Special
Meeting shall be deemed sufficient if it fairly state the
objects of such meeting so as to convey such objects to a
reasonable mind and where it shall be inconvenient to
express the details of such objects in the notice itself such
details shall be simultaneously lodged in a separate form
with the Manager or Secretary at the Office of the Com-
pany in Sydney where the same shall be open for the
inspection of the Shareholders and the notice shall in such
case refer to such detailed statement.
87. THAT if in pursuance of any of the powers con-
tained in the Deed of Settlement the Company shall be
dissolved the Board of Directors shall with all convenient
speed wind up and settle and bring to a final rest and
balance the accounts and affairs of the Company and for
giving effect to such winding-up and settlement but for no
other purpose the Company and the powers of the Board
of Directors and the powers of the Annual and Special
Meetings shall be held to be subsisting and continuing
anything hereinbefore contained to the contrary notwith-
standing and the Board of Directors shall subject to the
powers hereby given to Annual and Special Meetings have
all such further power and authority as may facilitate the
winding-up the Company and of doing in that behalf all
that the Board of Directors may deem expedient and such
of the capital of the Company as then shall not consist of
money and so much of the capital and profits of the Com-
Power of winding
up.


CLf'
fciiuo . .
pany as shall remain after answering the claims and
demands thereon shall be paid to and distributed amongst
the Shareholders and their respective executors and admin-
istrators in the proportions in which they shall then be
respectively entitled thereto as and when the Board of
Directors shall deem expedient.
General under- 88. THAT each of the several persons parties hereto
whilst a holder of any shares and his heirs executors and
administrators shall and will for and in respect of such
shares whilst remaining part of the assets of the covenantor
observe perform fulfil and keep all the covenants articles
stipulations and provisions including all additions altera-
tions variations and modifications to be made in pursuance
of the provisions in the Deed of Settlement contained which
are or ought to be observed performed fulfilled and kept
by him the covenantor or his heirs executors and admin-
istrators respectively in respect of or in relation to such
shares according to the true intent and meaning of the
same covenants articles stipulations and agreements respec-
tively and that the covenantor if an officer of the Company
will perform all the duties imposed on him as such officer
from time to time when and so often and so long as he shall
be appointed to and accept such office according to the
directions stipulations and agreements contained in the
Deed of Settlement.
IN WITNESS whereof the said parties hereto have
hereunto set their hands and seals the day and
year first above written.


fr. o _
y/UXtt f /* 4 ~
c~.< ■■■


