



■ • •»*. . .
=—=———
m
| h~ !
_
U<h X-
(l^4^
111 is*
H C - £*£ »»*
sasVHOand
*H- ■
r /,-,-.
A
L


COLLECTION^V
f|[ Xahonal librarv |jm
Canberra IJJ




DEED OF SETTLEMENT
OF
THE NEW SOUTH WALES
MARINE ASSURANCE COMPANY.
DATED Ist OCTOBER, 1851.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND EAIEEAX,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.




INDEX TO THE CONTENTS
OF THE FOLLOWING DEED, BUT FORMING NO PART THEREOF.
CLAUSE.
Agent, appointment of . . . . . ,55
Audit —Half-yearly balance sheet . . . . . 75
Auditors, appointment and powers of . . .72
ad interim . . . . . 74
Qualification and disqualification of . . .73
Remuneration of - . . . . 72
Balance sheet . . . . . .75
Ballot at Half-yearly and General Meetings . . . . 35
Proprietors may demand . .... 67
Bonus to be paid out of reserve fund . . . . . 77
Books—Proprietor not entitled to inspect . . . .90
To be inspected by Auditors . . . . . 72
Buildings, power to purchase and erect . . . .47
Business, place of . . . . . 4
Bye-Laws, Directors to make . . . . .43
Calls, agreement to pay . . . , . . 6
Recovery of and interest on . . .7
To be paid before transfer . . . . 11
Overdue, rights suspended . . . .15
To make up deficiences, &c. . . . , . 50
Capital, amount of and how divided .... 2
Return of part . . . . . , 95
To be personalty . . . . .12
Chairman of Directors . . . . , . 51
At General Meetings . . . . .71
Company, name of . . . . . . 1
Capital of . . . . .2
Commencement of . . . . . 1
Continuance of . . . . . .1
Dissolution of . . . . . 96
only under provisions in Deed . . .99
Chairman of . . . . . 51
Incorporation of . . . . .53
Debts of to be paid in cash . . . . . 91
Service of notice on . . . .93
Entire close of . . . • . 100
May take benefit of Acts . . . . .101
Objects of . . . . . . 3
Property of personalty . . . . .12
Not bound by Trusts . . . 19


Confirmation of preliminary proceedings .... 104
Construction of clauses of Deed . . . . . 102
Covenant, mutual ...... 1
To keep provisions of Deed . . . • . 104
Debts of the Company to be paid in cash . . . .91
Deed of partnership to be produced on trial . . . . 88
Construction of clauses in .... 102
Transferee to execute, except in cases . . . 16
Directors, constitution and general powers of . . . 26
Appointment of first . . . . . 27
Notice by candidates for office of . . .34
Chairman of, casting vote . . . . . 38
election of . . . .51
Qualification and disqualification . . . . 28
Mode of election of . . . .35
defects in not to invalidate acts . . . 29
General power of Board . . . . .41
To regulate their own proceedings . . . . 37
To take land, build, &c, . . . . .47
To lend money on securities . . . . . 48
To raise money by negociating securities . . .49
To make calls . . . . . . 50
To appoint officers . . . . .52
To apply for Act of Council , . . . . 53
To execute power of attorney , . . .64
To appoint agents, &c. . . . . . 65
To call Special General Meetings . . . . 59, 61
To appoint trustees . . . . . . 81
To remove trustees . . . . .82
To commence and defend actions . . , . 84
Powers of, to continue notwithstanding resolution to dissolve . 98
Indemnity to . . . . .94
Interested not to vote . . . . . 39
To keep minutes of proceedings . . . .42
To make bye-laws . . . . . . 43
To fix rates of premiums . . . . .46
Two may protest . . . . . . 40
May purchase shares .... .44
Majority of, to decide questions . . . . 38
Removal of unqualified ". . . . .29
Remuneration to . . . . . 36
Resignation of . . . . . .31
Retirement of » . . . , 30
Suspension of . . . . • • 82
Casual vacancies of . . . . • £3
Dissolution of the Company . . . . .96
In case of losses . . . . . . 97
Dividend, declaration of. . . . . .79
Upon shares where calls in arrcar . . . . 80
Execution against Proprietor to be reimbursed . . .85
Remedy of Proprietors . . . . . 86
Porfeiture of shares on default ..... 8


Forfeiture — Continued. :—
Sale and transfer of . . * . • ®
If no transfer of excess of limited number . . .14
Unless Deed executed . . . . . 16
May be discharged . . . • .16
Acting contrary to Deed . . . . . 88
Incorporation of Company ..... 53
Indemnity to Directors, officers, &c. . . . . . 94
Insolvent, Company may take benefit of Act . . .101
Instalments, agreement to pay , . . «•
Interest on calls ...... 7
Interpretation clause . . • • . . 103
Lien upon shares for individual debts . . . .13
Meetings of Proprietors, powers of . • « 63
Adjournment 0f...... 64
Chairman of, and casting vote. . . . . 71
Power to construe Deed ..... 162
Minutes of proceedings to be kept . . . . 65
to be evidence . . .65
Questions at, how decided . . . . . 67
Half-Yearly General, business at . . . . 58
retirement of Directors . . . 30
when to be held . . • .57
Chairman at , . • . . 71
audit and balance sheet . . . 75
Directors’ report . . . . 76
Special General, calling of . . • .59
business of . • . . 60
cases of emergency . . .61
notice of • . . . 60
circular and proof of . . .62
Notices to Joint Proprietors . . . . . . 17
Of Special General Meetings . . . .60
By circular . . • • . . 62
Service of, On Proprietors . . • .62
Service of, On Company . . . . . 93
Officers ; Appointment of . . • .62
Indemnity to . . • . . 94
To give security...... 56
Partners—Legal representative of deceased . . . . 20
Assignee of insolvent or bankrupt . . • .21
Committee of lunatic . . .« • 21
Partnership not to be pleaded in bar . . . .88
Account not to be required . . . . . 89
Dissolution of . . . . ■ • .96
in case of loss ... .97
not allowed except as herein . . .99
Competent witnesses notwithstanding . . . . 92
Policies - How to be signed . . • • .45
Power of Attorney of Proprietors . . • . . 23
By Directors ...... 54
By Trustees . . . • . . 83


Premiums, rates of, to be fixed . . . . . 46
Proprietors, mutual covenant by . . . . 1
Interest of, in Company . . . , 12
Where debtors to the Company . . . ,13
To hold limited number of shares . . . 14
Rights suspended if calls overdue . . . .15
Shares of deceased . . . . . 20
Joint ....... 17
When released from liability . . . . . 18
May remove Director . . . , .31
Interested not to vote . . . , . 68
May demand ballot . . . . .67
Execution against to be reimbursed . . . . 85
Remedy of . . , . .86
Submit to be sued . . . . . . 87
Not to set up partnership as a defence , . .88
In debt to Company not to require account . , . 89
Not entitled to inspection of books . . . .90
Evidence of, not rejected . . . , . 92
Powers of, retained notwithstanding resolution to dissolve . 98
Proxies to be in writing . . . . . . 69
Number of . . . , .69
Effect of . . . . . . . 70
Reserve Fund, payment to . , . . .77
Augmentation of . . . . . 78
Secretary to countersign policies . . . . .45
Testimony of, as to notices . . . , . 62
Not to hold proxies . . . . ,69
Shares : Number of . . . . . 1
Amount of . . , . .1
Of female Proprietor marrying . . . . 21
Deceased lunatic, insolvent, or bankrupt . . . 21
Forfeiture of . . . . . 8
may be discharged .... 8
Sale and transfer of forfeited shares . . . . 9
Proceeds of sale of forfeited shares . . . .78
Instalment upon . . . . . . 6
Number to be held by one Proprietor . . .14
Lien on for individual debts . . . 13
Sale of excess . r .... 14
Purchase of by Directors . . . . . 44
Register ...... 24
To be evidence of ownership . , . . . 25
Transmission of, how authenticated . . .22
Proof of transmission . . . . . 23
When transferable . . . . .10
Form of transfer . . . . . . 10
Calls to be paid. . , . . .11
Transferee of, frivileges and liabilities . . . . 16
To be personalty . . . . .12
Unappropriated . . . . . . 5
Under will of deceased Proprietor . . . .20


Transfer of forfeited shares . . . . . . 9
By sanction of Directors . . . . .10
Form of . . . . . 10
Not allowed until calls paid . . . .11
Of shares in excess of limited number . . . . 14
Trustees, appointment of . . . . .81
Declaration of trust . . . . . . 81
Power of attorney by . . . .83
Receipts of . . . . . . 82
Remedies against . . . . .82
Resignation and removal . . . . , 82
Trusts —Cestui que trust not recognized . . , .20
Company not bound by . . . , 19
Vacancies in office of Director and Auditor . . .58
In office of Auditor by death, &c. . . . 74
Of Director casual . . . . ,33
Votes of Directors . . . . • . . . 38
Of Directors interested . . . . .39
Defective not to invalidate proceedings . . . . 66
Number of and mode of voting . . . .67
Of interested Proprietors , . . . . 68
Of Chairman ...... 71
Writ, service on Company . . . . . 93




DEED OF SETTLEMENT.
This indenture made the first day of October in the]
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-one
Between the several persons whose names and seals are or
shall be hereunto subscribed and affixed Whereas it has
been considered that great advantage would accrue to the
mercantile and shipping interests of New South Wales and
to the community generally if the provision for effecting
marine and other assurances were extended And whereas
at meetings held with that object on and before the twenty-
eighth day of August last it was agreed by the several
parties attending the same to form a Joint Stock Company
to be called “The New South Wales Marine Assurance Company”
and that the Capital thereof should be the sum of One
Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds which should be
divided into seven thousand five hundred shares of twenty
pounds each, and that the owner of each share should in
respect thereof pay a deposit of ten shillings per share
And whereas at the last of such meetings Edward Knox,
Stuart Alexander Donaldson, John Henry Challis, John
Gilchrist, John Fairfax, and John Walker Esquires, were
chosen the first Directors of the said Company And
whereas Benjamin Buchanan, David Jones, Donald Larnach,
James Milsora, Ralph Mayer Robey, and George Witt
Esquires, were appointed to act with the said Directors in
preparing a Deed of Settlement for the said Company, and
performing and taking all needful acts and proceedings
for obtaining the necessary Act of Council for facilitating
proceedings by and against the said Company, and for such
Date,
Preamble.


other purposes as should be deemed expedient and subjecting
the Proprietors to such liabilities conditions or restrictions
as the Legislative Council or the Government might impose:
And whereas in pursuance of the said agreement, the said
capital has been divided into seven thousand five hundred
shares representing the sum of twenty pounds each, which
shares have been allotted to the several persons who have
executed these presents: And whereas the said last
mentioned persons have paid a deposit of ten shillings in
respect of each of their said shares. J/llltO tl]lß UttU?
that each of the said several persons parties
hereto for himself and herself severally and respectively
and for his and her several and respective heirs executors
and administrators, doth hereby covenant agree and declare
with and to the others and each and every of the others of
them, their and each and every of their heirs executors and
administrators.
Mutual cove-
nant.
I. That the several persons now or hereafter parties
hereto shall and will whilst holding shares in the capital
of the said Company remain and continue a Joint Stock
Company for the express object of carrying on the
business thereof under the name style and title of “ The
New South Wales Marine Assurance Company” under
and subject to the rules provisions and agreements herein-
after contained ; and that they the said several persons
parties hereto shall and will at all times so long as they
shall continue Proprietors of the said Company, promote
and advance the interest of the same to the utmost of their
power; and that the said Company shall be held to have
commenced on the day of the date of these presents and
shall have continuance until the same shall be dissolved
under or in pursuance of the provisions herein con-
tained.
11. That the Capital of the said Company for carrying
Capital.


on and conducting the business thereof shall consist of one
hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, and be divided
into seven thousand five hundred shares of the amount of
twenty pounds each, which said capital, together with the
accumulating premiums on Assurances effected for the
Company, shall be invested and employed as hereinafter
provided.
111. That the objects of the said Company shall be to
effect Marine and other Assurances of or upon vessels
in harbour and at sea, and of or upon the cargoes and
property in and on board the same.
Objects of the
Company.
IV. That the business of the said Company shall
be carried on in the City of Sydney, and such other place
or places as the Directors shall in that behalf direct.
Business to be
carried on in
Sydney.
V. That in case any of the said shares shall remain
unappropriated and unsubscribed for, they shall be taken
by the Directors of the Company and held by them for the
general benefit of the Proprietors, and shall be disposed of
from time to time in such manner as the said Directors
shall think fit.
Disposal of
unappropria-
ted Shares.
VI. That the several persons parties to these presents
shall and will severally contribute to the said original!
capital in proportion to the number of shares set against
their respective names to the extent of twenty pounds on
each such share, by such instalments at such times and
places and in such manner as the Board of Directors
may determine and notify by public advertisement or
circular letter as hereinafter provided : And also shall J
and will duly pay all such calls as shall be made in the
manner hereafter mentioned for the purpose of meeting
any losses of the Company or any emergency for which the
Board of Directors may deem it necessary to make such
calls.
5 Agreement to
. pay instal-
l ments.
Calls to pay
’losses.


Interest on
and recovery
of calls.
VII. That every instalment so to be called for shall bear
interest from the day on which the same shall become due
at the rate of twelve per cent per annum, and the amount
of such instalment or call with interest as aforesaid, may be
recoverable by action of debt, if the same be not paid
within the time to be appointed for that purpose, and on
the trial of every such action, it shall not be necessary to
prove the appointment of the Directors by whom such calls
were made, nor any other matter except that the defendant
at the time of making such call was a holder of one or
more shares in the capital of the Company, and that such
call was in point of fact made and notice thereof and of the
time fixed by the Directors for payment thereof given in
the manner herein provided.
• VIII. That in case default shall be made by any of the
several parties to these presents in the payment of any call
that shall be made and become payable on his or her share
or shares for the space of two months next after the same
shall have become payable, it shall be lawful for the Board
of Directors to declare the share or shares on which such
default has been made, and the deposit and calls previously
paid thereon, and all benefit and advantage whatever
attending the same, to be absolutely forfeited to the
Company; and the person or persons making such
default shall thereupon, in respect of such share or shares
cease to be a member of the Company: Provided never-
theless that the Board of Directors may if they think fit
upon the application of the Proprietor or late Proprietor
discharge any share or shares from forfeiture, and restore
the same or any part thereof to such Proprietor on such
terms as the Board of Directors may think fit ; and in the
event of such discharge, the forfeiture shall be held not to
have occurred, and the rights and liabilities of the Pro-
prietor making default not to have been in anywise
affected ; And provided further that it shall be lawful for
Forfeiture of
shares on
default, !


the Board of Directors if they think fit, instead of declaring
such share or shares to be forfeited, to enforce payment of
the calls with interest as hereinbefore provided, or to sell
so many only of the shares of any Proprietor making
default, as may be necessary and sufficient to pay the
amount due upon the whole of such Proprietor’s shares,
and all expenses costs and charges.
IX. That the share or shares forfeited in pursuance of
any provision herein contained shall, as soon as practicable i
after such forfeiture, be disposed of by public sale or
private contract for such reasonable price as may be
obtained for the same ; and thereupon a transfer or assign-
ment of the forfeited share or shares shall be made to
the purchaser thereof, by the Chairman of the Company
or by such other Director as the Board of Directors may
appoint: Provided nevertheless that it shall be lawful to
withhold any such forfeited shares from immediate sale,
and to retain the same in the hands of the Chairman for
a reasonable time in every case in which it is hereby made
competent to the Board of Directors to discharge such
forfeiture.
Sale and trans.
fer of forfeited
shares.
X. That subject to the restrictions herein contained,
every separate share in the said Capital, but not any
fractional part of a share, shall be transferable or assignable
by the Proprietor of such share or shares to any other
person or persons, and so over again by him or them, as
fully and effectually as any other interest is by law
assignable, provided that such assignment and transfer
be sanctioned by the Board of Directors, and be made in
the following form, and that the execution thereof be duly
attested to the satisfaction of the Board of Directors, and
the transfer be lodged with the Secretary of the Company
at the time of transfer, and remain with him.
Shares trans -
ferable.


Turn all bt[ tym that
of in consideration of the sum of £
to him paid by of doth hereby
bargain sell and assign unto the said his
executors administrators and assigns shares of
him the said of or in the capital
stock of the Xew South Wales Marine Assurance Company
To hold the same under
and subject to the conditions provisions and regulations in
the co-partnership deed of the said Company contained and
other the conditions and regulations for the time being
thereof And the said doth hereby
accept the said shares under and subject to
the said conditions provisions and regulations As witness
the hands of the said parties this day of
A.D. 185
No transfer
until calls
paid up.
XI. That no share or shares shall be transferred after
any call shall have been made by the Board of Directors,
until the amount of such call in respect of such share or
shares, with the interest due thereon (if any) shall have
been paid ; nor shall any transfer or assignment take place
or be valid, until the Proprietor making such sale shall
have fully paid up and discharged all debts claims and
liabilities which such Proprietor may be under to the
Company (except any liability upon open policies).
XII. That as between the Proprietors of the several
shares and their respective real and personal representatives
the said capital and all the funds and property of the
Company and the share and shares of each Proprietor
shall be deemed personal estate and be transmissible as
such ; And that there shall not be benefit of survivorship
among the Proprietors in respect of the said capital funds
and property ; And every shareholder shall be entitled to
and interested in the profits and subject to the losses of
Capital and
property of
the Company
to be person-
alty without
survivorship.


the Company, in proportion to the number of his shares
in the capital thereof.
XIII. That in all cases wherein a proprietor either by
himself or jointly with any other person or persons and
whether directly or indirectly, shall become Debtor to the
Company or to any person or persons for their use and
behoof, or shall be under engagements to the Company of
any kind, such debts and engagements shall be first and
paramount charges upon the share or shares of such
proprietor and the dividends or bonuses accruing thereon,
before all other Creditors of such Proprietor, and before
his or her assignees voluntary and legal and it shall be
the duty of the Board of Directors, if circumstances shall
appear to require such precaution, to prohibit and
restrain the transfer of the share or shares of such
Proprietor, or the payment of the dividends accru-
ing thereon, until all and every such debts and engage-
ments shall have been fully paid and satisfied; and if
such Proprietor shall fail within a time to be fixed by
the Board of Directors to pay and satisfy all such debts
and engagements, the share or shares of such Proprietor
shall thereupon become forfeited to the Company, and it
shall be lawful for the Board of Directors, without notice
to such Proprietor, absolutely to sell the said shares or so
many thereof as shall be necessary and sufficient for the
purpose, either by public sale or private contract, and to
apply the proceeds thereof, together with the dividends
and bonuses due thereon, in liquidation of such debts and
engagements ; and the balance of the net proceeds shall be
paid over to the late proprietor of such shares.
Debts of indi-
vidual Pro-
prietors to
give a lien on
their shares.
XIV. That no person shall be allowed to subscribe for or
by reason of purchase or otherwise, to hold more than
three hundred shares in the capital of the Company;
and if any transfer of shares shall be executed in
Limit to num-
ber of shares
held by one
. Proprietor.


favour of any Proprietor by means of which the shares
of such Proprietor would, if the same w r ere allowed
to take effect, exceed the above prescribed number,
such transfer shall be wholly inoperative in respect
of so many of the shares comprised therein as would
be in excess of such number; But if any person shall
by means of marriage, or as executor or administrator
of any deceased Proprietor, acquire so many additional
shares, as, with those previously held by him, shall amount
to more than three hundred shares, such person may transfer
the share or shares exceeding such number; and in case
such transfer shall be made within six calendar months next
after the right of such person as aforesaid shall have
accrued, then but not otherwise, the transferee shall become
entitled to any dividend or bonus previously declared in
respect of such share or shares; and if no such transfer
shall be made within such period of six months, the
dividends and bonuses (if any) due on such shares so in
excess shall be forfeited to the Company; and in case
such transfer shall not be made within eighteen months
after the accruing of the right thereto, the shares so in
excess, together with all dividends and bonuses due
thereon, shall be absolutely foreited to the Company.
XV. That no Proprietor shall be allowed to attend or
vote at any Meeting of Proprietors, or to receive any
dividend or exercise any other right or privilege, under or
by virtue of these presents, before the amount of every call
which shall have been made and shall have become payable
and overdue in respect of his share or shares, together
with interest thereon (if any) shall have been fully paid
and satisfied.
nights sus-
overdue^ calls
XVI, That every person to whom any share or shares
* l
shall be assigned or transferred, shall within three months
after the date of such assignment, or transfer, execute this
Transferee of
shfITGS to exo-
cute Deed un.
exeSted°by y


Deed or a duplicate thereof, unless he shall have previously i
executed it in respect of shares held by him at the date of!
such transfer, in which case, such execution shall take
effect in respect of such newly acquired shares, and shall
apply to the same fully and effectually, notwithstanding
that such transferee shall afterwards sell and transfer the
shares in respect of which he originally executed the deed;
and in default of such execution within the time limited,
the shares in respect of which default shall have been
made, shall be absolutely forfeited to the Company: Pro-
vided nevertheless that the Board of Directors may, if they
think fit, upon the application of the party to whom such
assignment or transfer shall have been made, discharge any
share or shares from forfeiture and restore the same or any
part thereof to such Proprietor, on such terms as the Board
of Directors may think proper; And in the event of
such discharge the forfeiture shall, upon such execution
of this Deed or a duplicate thereof as aforesaid, be held
not to have occurred, and the rights and liabilities of the
Proprietor making default shall be deemed not to have
been in anywise affected: Provided also that in the case
of a transfer of shares, the transferer shall, until such
execution of this Deed by the transferee, or until such
forfeiture of the shares transferred, be deemed and taken
to be the continuing Proprietor of the same, except only
as against the transferee and in respect of the receipt of
dividends and the disposal of the shares.
him in respect
ri of other
L shares.
XVII. That when a share or shares shall be vested in
two or more persons jointly or in common or otherwise, the
one of such persons or of the survivors of them, whose name
shall stand first in the books of the Company as one of the
owners of such shares, or the sole survivor of such two or
more persons, shall be considered and deemed the Pro-
prietor of such share or shares, for the purpose of voting
and receiving dividends and of receiving any notice that
I Of joint Pro-
prietors one
! only to be re-
, cognized for
' certain pur-
j poses.


may be required to be given; but all the parties shall be
liable jointly and severally to the Company for the fulfil-
ment of all the covenants herein contained; And any
notice given to either of them shall be deemed good notice
to all of them : Provided that in case of the absence from
the colony of the first named of such joint Porprietors, the
other appearing next upon the Share Register as joint
Proprietor shall be allowed to vote in respect of shares
so held.
Sed er from'
liability.
That on the completion of the transfer of any
share or shares, and the execution of this Deed or a dupli-
cate thereof by the person or persons to whom the same
shall be transferred, the previous holder of such share or
shares shall, as between the Proprietors, be exonerated and
released from all claims demands obligations and liabilities
in respect of such share or shares, and from all further
observance and performance of any covenants conditions
stipulations or agreements herein contained, or which may
be contained in any bye-law or regulation of the Company.
be° noticed 10
rectcfs 1 think"
fit.
’ XIX. That the Company shall not be bound in any man-
• ner by or be required to take notice of any trusts or equita-
ble interests affecting any share or shares of the Capital
standing in the name of any person or persons ; But the
receipt of the Proprietor in whose name the shares shall
stand in the books of the Company, shall notwithstanding
any such trust or equitable interest and notice thereof to the
Company, be a good and sufficient discharge for the money
which may become payable by the Company in respect
of the share or shares standing in the name of such
Proprietor; And the Company shall not be bound to see to
the application of the money paid upon such receipt; And
a transfer of the shares by such Proprietor shall when
complete be binding and conclusive against all persons
claiming by virtue of such trusts or equitable interests,


whether or not the Company have had notice of such trusts
or equitable interests: Provided however that when the
Company shall have had such notice, it shall be in the
discretion of the Board of Directors to refuse or sanction
every such transfer, and to require the concurrence of the
person or persons so claiming: And provided also that
when the Company shall have had such notice, it shall in
like manner be in the discretion of the Board of Directors
to refuse to pay any dividend or bonus to the registered
Proprietor without the concurrence of the person or
persons claiming in respect of such trusts or equitable
interests.
XX. That no legatee, next of kin, or cestui que trust,
claiming under the will of any deceased Proprietor, shall as
such become a Proprietor of any share or shares of the said
capital; But in all cases where legatees or next of kin of
deceased Proprietors, or such cestui que trusts shall become
entitled to or interested in any such share or shares, the
executors or administrators of such deceased Proprietors
shall be considered the holders of the said share or shares,
and shall be the only persons entitled to become Proprietors
or to procure some other person or persons to become a
Proprietor or Proprietors in respect thereof.
No legatee
next of kin or
cestui que
trust to be re-
cognized but
•executor or
administrator
only.
XXI. That the husband of any female Proprietor,
the executor or administrator of any deceased Proprietor, or
.
the Committee of any lunatic Proprietor, may on pro-
duction of satisfactory evidence of title elect either to become
Proprietor, in respect of the shares to which he shall be
entitled in either of these capacities, or to procure any
other person or persons to become a Proprietor or
Proprietors in respect of such shares subject to the approval
of the Directors; But the trustee or assignees of any
insolvent or bankrupt Proprietors, shall not be entitled to
become a Proprietor or Proprietors in respect of the share
prietor on her
marrying and
of deceased
insolvent or
P r °-


or shares of such insolvent or bankrupt Proprietor, but
shall procure some other person or persons to become a
Proprietor or Proprietors in respect thereof: Provided
always that no person shall be entitled to receive any
dividends, or other profits, which shall be declared on the
shares of such female, deceased, lunatic, insolvent, or
bankrupt Proprietor, accruing after his or her marriage,
death, commission of lunacy, insolvency, or bankruptcy,
until some person or persons shall have become a Pro-
prietor or Proprietors in respect of such share or shares,
and the person or persons who shall ultimately become a
Proprietor or Proprietors in respect of such share or shares,
shall be entitled to such last mentioned dividends and
profits and the full right and interest to and in such share
or shares; And provided further that if no person shall
‘become a Proprietor in respect of such shares within the
■period of two years from the date of such marriage, death,
commission of lunacy, insolvency, or bankruptcy, respec-
tively, then the rights herein reserved to such husband,
executor, administrator, committee, trustee, or assignee,
respectively, shall cease and determine and it shall be
lawful for the Board of Directors to sell the said shares
by public auction, or private contract, for the best
prices that can be reasonably got for the same and to
retain the proceeds, together with the interest and
dividends which shall have accrued previously to such
sale, until the person legally entitled thereto shall establish
his claim to the satisfaction of the Board of Directors;
And such person shall not be entitled to claim interest on
the amount so retained; And also that if no person shall
have become Proprietor in respect of the shares of such
bankrupt or insolvent Proprietor, within the period of
three months after the bankruptcy or insolvency of
such bankrupt or insolvent Proprietor, it shall be
competent to the Board of Directors, if they shall think fit,
to sell the said last mentioned shares as aforesaid, and the
Sale of such
taken. 8 up Ty
party entitled,


nett proceeds of such sale shall in such case be paid over
by the Board of Directors to the said trustee, or assignee,
for the benefit of the estate or creditors of the said
insolvent or bankrupt.
XXII. That all persons claiming any shares by trans-'
mission, or claiming a right to procure another person to<
become a Proprietor, according to the provisions of the last i
preceding clause, shall before he shall be recognised as a
proprietor of such share or shares, or before he shall be
permitted to procure another person to become a proprietor,
as the case may require, and every guardian, committee of
a lunatic, or other person claiming a right to act in a
representative character on behalf of a proprietor, shall
before he shall be permitted to become a Proprietor, or
receive any dividends, or transfer any shares, or exercise
any of the rights and privileges conferred by this deed,
authenticate such transmission or right by a declaration
in writing setting forth the material facts, which declara-
tion shall be made and signed by some credible person
before some Justice of the Peace or Notary Public, and
shall be subject to the consideration and approval of the
Board of Directors.
, Transmission
of shares by
(other means
than transfer
'j to be authen-
ticated by a
1 declaration.
XXIII. That if such transmission be by virtue of the i
marriage of a female Proprietor, the said declaration shall ]
contain a copy of the register of such marriage, or other
evidence of the celebration thereof, and shall declare the
identity of the wife with the holder of such shares ; And if
such transmission have taken place by virtue ot any testa-
mentary instrument, or by intestacy, the probate of the will
or the letters of administration, or an official extract
theref. om, shall, together with such declaration be pro-
duced to the Secretary of the Company ; And if the right
to become a Proprietor or to procure another person to
become a Proprietor be claimed in consequence of
Proof of trans-
mission by
marriage will
&c.


insolvency or bankruptcy, or of any appointment as a
guardian, or as a committee of a lunatic, a certificate signed
by the Commissioner of Bankrupts or Insolvents, or the
Master in Equity, as the case may require, shall together
with such declaration, be produced, and left with the
Secretary : And if any right to make a transfer be claimed
by virtue of any power of attorney, the power of attorney
shall be so produced and an attested copy left; And upon
such production, and the due execution of these presents, in
either of the cases aforesaid, the share or shares shall be
transferred in the books of the Company, to the name of the
person or persons entitled to become a proprietor in
respect thereof, or under any transfer in pursuance thereof.
XXIV. That the name and place of abode of every Pro-
prietor, with the number of shares held by him, shall from
time to time be entered in a book to be kept for that
purpose, to be called the “Share Register” and every
“ Proprietor” who may change his name or place of abode,
or being a female shall marry, and the assignee or trustee or
assignees or trustees of every Proprietor who shall become
bankrupt or insolvent, and the committee of every Pro-
prietor who shall be duly found a lunatic, and the executor
or administrator of every Proprietor who shall die, shall
immediately upon and after any of the said events, leave a
written notice at the office of the said Company, stating
their, his, or her names or name, or new name or names,
aiid place, or places, of abode, and when a female Proprietor
shall have been married then the name and place of abode
of her husband ; And the Share Register shall be open to
the inspection of the several Proprietors and of all other
persons at all reasonable times.
Share regis-
ter.
Share register
to be evidence
of ownership,
XXV. That the Share Register shall at all times be
... °
pnma facie evidence to show who are the Proprietors for
the time being entitled to a share or shares of the Capital of


the said Company and the number of their respective
shares.
XXVI. That there shall be six Directors of the Com-1
pany, duly qualified as hereinafter provided; and such 3
Directors shall have the entire control, management, and,
direction, of the Company, and the business thereof, and
shall regulate the mode and terms of carrying on such
business conformably to these presents; and any three of
such Directors assembled at an ordinary or duly convened
Special Meeting of Directors, shall be competent to the
transaction of all the affairs of the Company, and shall
possess and exercise all the powers herein conferred on
the Board of Directors.
Constitution
and general
powers of
Board of Di-
rectors.
XXVII. That Edward Knox, S. A. Donaldson, J. H.
Challis, J. Gilchrist, J. Fairfax, and J. Walker, Esquires
shall be the first Directors of the said Company and shall
respectively continue in office until their retirement as
hereinafter mentioned.
, First Direc-
tors.
XXVIII. That the Directors shall he selected fromc
amongst the Proprietors possessed of fifty shares at the least
in the Capital of the Company; But no Proprietor shall be
eligible or qualified to be or act as a Director of the Com-
pany who shall be a Director, Auditor, or paid officer, of any
other Assurance Company in Sydney, or who being indebted
to the Company, shall fail to satisfy such debts within a
time fixed by the Board of Directors for that purpose, or
who shall within three years preceding the day of election
have taken the benefit of any Act for the relief of Insolvent
Debtors or who shall within that time have been bankrupt,
or have made an assignment of his estate for the benefit of
his creditors, or have made a composition with his cre-
ditors, or who shall after his election as a Director, become
bankrupt or insolvent, or make an assignment of his estate
Qualification;
of Directors.


for the benefit of his creditors, or compound with his cre-
ditors, or who shall be absent from the colony for the space
of six calendar months during his term of office, or who
shall during such term without leave from the Board of
Directors absent himself, except on account of illness, for
three months from the meetings of the Board.
XXIX. That the Board of Directors as soon as they shall
receive notice of the non-qualification or disqualification
of any person then being a Director of the Company, shall
forthwith proceed to enquire into the matter, at a meeting
of the Board of Directors specially convened for the purpose;
and if they shall be satisfied that such Director is not duly
qualified, shall declare the place of such Director to be
vacant, and the same shall thereupon become vacant, and
such Director shall be removed from the Direction of the
Company; and the Board shall then take the necessary
steps for filling up such vacancy by a new election:
Provided always that such non-qualification or disqualifi-
cation shall not extend to render illegal or invalid any
act deed matter or thing done or executed or suffered
to be done or executed for or on account of the Com-
pany, by such person whilst acting as a Director prior
to such declaration of vacancy ; but every such act, deed,
matter, or thing, so done or executed, or suffered to be
done or executed, by such person before his actual removal
from office, shall be held to be valid binding and conclusive
upon the Company and the Proprietors thereof, any
invalidity or preceding disqualification for his office
notwithstanding.
Removal of
SSSS 4
Retirement of
Directors.
XXX. That one of the hereinbefore named first Directors
shall go out of office at each successive General Meeting
hereby directed to be held in the month of October as one
of the General Half-Yearly Meetings until the whole of
them shall have retired; and such retirement shall take


place in the following order; that is to say, John Walker,
John Fairfax, John Gilchrist, John Henry Challis, Stuart
Alexander Donaldson, and Edward Knox. And thereafter
at every succeeding Half-yearly General Meeting to be
held in the month of October, the Director who shall have
been longest in office shall retire by rotation, and the
Director so retiring shall not until the next ensuing
election thereafter be eligible for re-election.
XXXI. That any Director may at any time vacate his
office by sending in his resignation to the Board of Directors;
And a general meeting of the Proprietors specially
called for the purpose shall have power at any time to
remove from his office any Director for negligence,
misconduct in office or any other reasonable cause:
Provided always that the Proprietors present at any such
General Meeting, in person or by proxy, shall be possessed,
in the aggregate, of not less than one-half of the actual
paid up capital of the Company.
Resignation of
Directors and
removal by
Proprietors.
XXXII. That the Directors shall be empowered, if it
should appear expedient to them, to suspend from offi.ce one
of their body; such suspension to be notified to a General
Meeting of the Proprietors to be called within three weeks
from the time of such suspension; and the Proprietors
assembled at such meeting are hereby empowered to con-
firm or annul such suspension ; and in case of confirmation
they shall proceed to the election of a Director in the place
and stead of the Director so suspended.
Directors may
suspend one of
their body.
XXXIII. That in case of any vacancy or vacancies in the
office of Director, occasioned by death resignation disqualifi-
cation or removal from office, such vacancy or vacancies shall,
at a General Meeting of the Proprietors, to be called within
three weeks of such vacancy occurring, be filled up by the
election of another or other duly qualified Proprietor or
Filling of ca~
tlon *


Proprietors, who shall continue in office until the next
Half-Yearly or Special General Meeting; And at such next
meeting some duly qualified person shall be elected to fill
such vacancy, who shall continue in office until the expira-
tion of the time that such deceased disqualified removed
or retiring Director might have continued in office; Provided
always, that if such vacancy or vacancies, shall happen
within sixty days before any Half-yearly General Meeting
it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors by a resolution,
to be entered on their minutes, to direct that such vacancy
or vacancies shall remain over until such Half-yearly
General Meeting; And provided further that if two or
more such vacancies shall have to be filled up together at
any such Half-yearly or Special General Meeting, the
person elected by the greater number of votes, shall be
allowed to elect the vacancy which he may prefer to fill.
Notice by can-
didates for the
office of Di-
rector.
XXXIV. That every Proprietor who shall become a can-
didate for the office of Director, shall give notice thereof to
the Board of Directors in writing, to be left with the
Secretary at the office of the Company in Sydney, fourteen
days at the least before the day of election ; and the names
of the candidates who have given such notice, shall be
published in one or more Sydney newspaper or newspapers,
seven days at the least before the day of election ; And no
Proprietor shall be eligible who shall fail to give such
notice.
XXXV. That the election of Directors and Auditors at
General Meetings shall be by show of hands unless two
or more Proprietors qualified to vote shall demand a ballot;
And such ballot, if demanded before the Chairman shall
have pronounced the question decided, shall be granted,
and scrutineers shall be nominated by the majority in
number of the persons duly qualified to vote then present;
and the ballot shall be under the direction of the scruti-
neers.
Mode of elec-
tion of Di-
rectors.


XXXVI. That the yearly sum of £5OO shall be paid to
the Directors out of the funds of the Company, as a
remuneration for their services, and such remuneration
shall be distributed amongst the Directors, in such manner
as the Board of Directors shall from time to time deter-
mine.
Remunera-
tion to Direc-
tors.
XXXVII. That the Board of Directors may from time to
time make such regulations for their own proceedings, and
fix such times, and make such orders for their ordinary and
special meetings, as they shall think fit: But any Director,
or the Secretary of the Company for the time being, may
at any time by writing under his hand convene a Special
Meeting of the Board of Directors for the consideration of
any matter relating to the business of the Company:
provided that the object of such meeting be expressly
stated in the notice convening the same, and that such
notice be left at the usual places of residence of the other
Directors, not less than twenty-four hours before the time
specified for holding such Meeting.
i Directors to
regulate the
order of their
proceedings
and times of
meeting.
XXXVIII. That all questions coming before the Board of
Directors for consideration, shall be decided by the majority
of the votes of Directors present and not declining to vote
or disqualified from voting ; and if there shall be an equality
of votes, the Chairman of the Meeting of Directors shall in
addition to his vote as a Director have a casting vote.
‘Majority of
Directors to
decide ques-
tions but
Chairman to
have a casting-
vote.
XXXIX. That no Director shall be allowed to vote or be
present at the board upon any application for any assu-
rance or for the discount of bills or notes or otherwise,
where he is himself a party as principal or surety or on any
other proposition, in which it shall appear to the Board
of Directors that he has a pecuniary or personal interest;
And if any Director shall act contrary to this prohibition,
he shall forfeit to the Company the sum of one hundred
Director not
to vote where
himself or cer-
tain relations
interested.


pounds, as for a breach of covenant with his co-proprietors,
and the shares standing in his name shall be liable for the
payment of such penalty : Provided that it shall be com-
petent to the Board of Directors, or any Meeting of Pro-
prietors, to remit the whole or any part of such penalty,
if they shall think fit.
XL. That whenever on the occasion of any application
for Assurance, discount, or advance of money, involving an
amount of not less than two thousand pounds, being
submitted to any Meeting of the Board of Directors, two of
the Directors present, shall after deliberation thereupon,
think fit to protest against the proposed assurance, discount,
or advance such assurance discount or advance shall be
withheld, notwithstanding that a majority of votes shall
be given in favour thereof: Provided that such dissenting
Directors shall enter and sign their protest with the reasons
for the same in the Minute Book.
Upon protest
of two Direc-
tors against;
any Assu-
rance, &c., of'
£2OOO the
same to be 1
withheld.
XLI. That the Board of Directors shall, subject to the
general powers herein conferred on General Meetings of
the Proprietors, and to the specific directions and
restrictions hereby given or imposed to and upon them,
have the entire management of the business of the Com-
pany, and of the application investment and disposal of its
funds; and shall and may in all matters not specially pro-
vided for by these presents, act as to them shall appear best
calculated to promote the interests of the Company : And
it is hereby expressly declared that the powers specially
herein conferred shall not be deemed to abridge, in matters
not distinctly provided for, the general powers above
granted.
General pow-
ers of Board
of Directors.
XLI I. That the Board of Directors shall cause correct
minutes of their proceedings to be entered in a book to be
kept for that purpose and called the Minute Book; And
Minutes to be
SinJ pr of
Directors.


such minutes shall be signed by the person presiding at
each meeting or by such person as the said Board shall
specially appoint; And such minutes shall be full and con-
clusive evidence that the proceedings therein recorded
took place at a meeting of a Board of Directors regularly
called, and that the person whose name is subscribed to such
minutes did sign and was duly authorised by the Board of
Directors to sign the same; And such minutes shall be held
to be sufficient authority for every act deed matter or thing
that may be lawfully done in pursuance thereof: Provided
however that the rough minutes made at any such meeting
shall be read over at such meeting and also at the opening
of the next meeting of Directors, and,shall be subject to
correction if any error be detected therein, and that if at
any time after the formal entry thereof in the minute book,
any such error be detected and pointed out by any Director
and established to the satisfaction of a meeting of the
Directors, an entry thereof shall be made in the minute
book, and shall be referred to and read in connexion
wdth such original minute or entry.
XLIII. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
from time to time to make such bye-laws and regulations for
their guidance in any matter not herein specially provided
for, as to them shall seem meet; and also from time to time
to repeal alter and vary the same, and to make others in
their stead: Provided always that such bye-laws and
regulations shall not be repugnant to these presents, or
to any laws rules or regulations made and passed at any
General Meeting of Proprietors.
Power of Di-
rectors to
make bye-
laws.
XLIV. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
if they shall think proper, with and out of the funds of the
Company, to purchase, at such price as the Board shall
deem reasonable, any share, or shares of the Company ;
Provided always that the number of such shares purchased,
Directors may
purchase and
extinguish
shares.


shall not in the whole exceed one thousand five hundred :
And upon such purchase the shares purchased shall be
extinguished ; but it shall be lawful for the Board of
Directors to revive and re-issue the same if at any time
thereafter they shall think it of advantage to the Company
to do so.
Policies to be
signed by-
three Direc-
tors and coun-
tersigned by
the Secretary.
XLV. That all and every the Directors for the time being
shall have power to sign policies of assurance issued by
the Company; and all policies shall be signed by three of
the Directors and countersigned by the Secretary; and such
policies shall be made and issued on the terms and con-
ditions, and in such manner and form as the Directors
shall order; and every such policy shall be deemed to be
the act of the Proprietors, and binding upon them their
heirs executors and administrators; Provided that every
such policy of assurance may from time to time be varied,
by altering names sums terms and descriptions, according
to the agreements that shall be made for such assurances.
XLVI. That the Directors shall fix the rates of premiums
according to which assurances shall be made, and con-
tinued, and the prices of policies to be paid for all
assurances issued by the Company; and may regulate and
vary the same; And all premiums shall be duly paid
either in cash, or by approved bills or notes, at the discre-
tion of the Directors.
Directors to
fix rates of
premium. ;
XLVII. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
to purchase in fee simple or for any less estate, and in
such name or names as they shall think proper, or to take
upon lease, a suitable house and premises in Sydney, for
the transaction of the business of the Company, or to
build a suitable office on land purchased for that purpose ;
and also at any time or times thereafter to sell let
demise exchange or otherwise dispose of such land houses
Power to take
land or build
houses for
offices, &c.


3) *■ S <^^6
Resolved. —Whereas, it is deemed expedient to extend the business of the Company, and for
that purpose to authorise the Board of Directors to establish Agencies for Assurance in sucli
places as they may think fit. And, whereas, it is considered that the existing laws and
regulations of the Company do not sufficiently provide for the establishment thereof.
Therefore, it is resolved and ordered that the Board of Directors shall have full power to
appoint from time to time, and at such places as they may think fit, Agents for the purpose
of effecting on behalf of the said Company, Marine or other Assurances of or upon Vessels
in Harbour and at Sea, and of and upon the Cargoes or Property in and on board the same,
and of or upon any insurable risk connected therewith respectively, under and subject to
such regulations and restrictions as the said Board shall deem necessary or expedient. And,
also, that the Board shall have power to appoint Local Directors, if they shall think fit, at
any place at which they shall establish an Agency, and to confer on such Local Directors
such powers as they shall deem expedient for the more efficient and safe conduct of the
affairs of the Company at such place. And every such Agent shall have Authority to sign
and issue Policies for and in the name of the Company, for effecting such Assurances as
aforesaid, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner and form, as the said Board of
Directors shall order. Provided that all such appointments shall be made by an instrument
under the Seal of the Company, and be signed by three of the Directors and countersigned
by the Secretary.”




and premises, in such manner as they may think most
advisable, and to cause the same to be conveyed accord-
ingly.
XLVIII. That it shall be competent to the said Board of
Directors to advance money in the purchase or discount of'
Government or negociable securities, and on mortgages of:
real estate and live stock and liens on wool, or on the
security of merchandise or ships ; but it shall not be com-
petent to them to invest any portion of the capital ol the
Company in the purchase of any real or personal estate
or property except as aforesaid, and except such as may
be reasonably required for the actual use of the Company :
Provided nevertheless that it shall be competent to the
said Directors to take lands houses merchandize ships liens
on wool and any other real or personal estate, in payment
of or satisfaction for any debts which shall have previously
become due, or of any liability to come due to the Company,
which shall have been permitted to be incurred in the
regular and legitimate course of business, but which shall
afterwards appear to the Board of Directors not to be
sufficiently secured ; Provided nevertheless that it shall be
the duty of the Board of Directors to realize upon such
properties as soon as conveniently may be, and to cause
the same to be sold or disposed of for the benefit of the
Company, and to be conveyed or assigned to the purchasers
thereof; Provided also that no liens on wool shall be
taken except upon the ensuing clip, and that no mortgage
on sheep or cattle or horses shall be taken for a period of
more than twelve months.
f Power to lend
money on se-
f curities, and
to take lands
f in satisfaction
of debts.
k
XLIX. That it shall not be lawful for the Board of Direc-
tors to make or accept any promissory notes or bills of ex-
change, or to borrow or take up monies on loan, except in
manner following ; but it shall be lawful for the said
Directors, from time to time as occasion shah arise lor
Directors em-
powered to
raise money
by negotiating
securities of
Company, &c.


raising money for the purposes of the business of the
Company, to negotiate such of the bills or promissory
notes for the time being held by the Company or under
discount as they may consider advisable, or to assign or
sell and transfer any security belonging to the Company ;
and the endorsement of such bills or promissory notes by
any two or more Directors for or on behalf of the Company,
shall be binding against every member thereof.
Provision for
calls to make
up deficiencies
oi t meet
emergencies.
L. That if at any time it shall appear to the Directors,
sor shall be certified by the Auditors, that the Assets of
’ the Company are not sufficient to meet its liabilities or
that an emergency has arisen which makes a call or calls
expedient it shall be competent to the said Directors to
make a call or calls upon the Proprietors, in proportion
to the number of their respective shares for a sufficient
amount to make up such deficiency or to meet such emer-
gency, as the case may require ; And such call or calls
shall be payable at such time or times as the Board of
Directors shall appoint, and shall be recoverable against
the several parties hereto by action of debt or otherwise
in like manner as calls of the subscribed capital of the
Company are recoverable ; and shall afterwards be wholly
or partially returned to the Proprietors making payment
thereof, if the same, or part thereof be no longer required.
LI. That the Directors shall elect from time to time from
amongst their own body a Chairman of the Company who
shall continue in such office for such period as the
Directors may fix; And the Chairman so elected, or in
his absence, the Director who shall be elected by the
Directors present at any Meeting of the Board to be
Chairman of such Meeting, shall preside at all meetings
of the Board; and in case of vacancy in the office of
Chairman of the Company before the expiration of his
term of office as aforesaid the Directors may proceed to the
election of a new one.
Election of
Chairman.
24


LIL That it shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
from time to time to appoint Surveyors, Secretary, Solicitor,,
and such other officers clerks and servants as the business of
the Company may require, and from time to time to
remove any such Surveyor, Secretary, Solicitor, or other
officers clerks or servants at their discretion ; And also
from time to time to fix alter and vary the duties to be
performed by, and the amount of remuneration to be given
to each of such Surveyors, Secretary, officers clerks and
servants, and to pay and discharge the same out of the
funds and property of the Company ; And also for and on
behalf of the Company, to delegate to such officers as may
be appointed, such powers as the said Board of Directors
may consider necessary or expedient for the transaction
of the business of the Company; And also from time to
time to direct and appoint to whom and in whose name, on
behalf of the Company, all securities, of whatever nature
or kind to the Company, shall be given and taken.
Directors to
Sj to sa iaSes
and fix duties
LI n. That the Directors shall be at liberty forthwith to
apply to the Legislative Council of the Colony, for such
Act of Incorporation or otherwise as they may deem expe-
dient, and for that purpose shall and may submit the
Proprietors to such individual liabilities and comply with
such restrictions as may be imposed as a condition for
obtaining the said Act; And any three or more of the
said Directors shall and may sign any petition or applica-
tion to the said Council for that purpose; and the
Directors shall and may pay the costs and expenses of and
incident to such application out of the funds of the
Company.
1 Directors may
apply for an
Act of Coun-
cil.
LIV. That any three or more of the Directors, may at]
the request of the Board, make sign, execute and deliver \
any power or letter of attorney, for enabling any other
person or persons jointly or severally, to act on behalf of
Directors may
execute power
of attorney.


the Company, in any transaction business matter or thing
which shall be stated in such power or letter of attorney ;
and the business when done transacted or executed by
such Attorney or Attorneys, shall be of the like force and
effect as the same would have been, if done transacted or
executed personally by the Board of Directors.
Board may
make arrange-
ment for the
conduct of
agency.
LY. That the Board of Directors shall have full power
to appoint any agent or agents, and to enter into any
arrangement with one or more Bank or Banks, banker or
bankers, in New South Wales or elsewhere, authorizing
him or them to act as the agents of the said Company, for
the payment or arrangement in England or elsewhere, as
aforesaid, of all losses upon Assurances or otherwise, and
to transact such matters for the said Company in connexion
with, and for the purposes of the business thereof, allowing
to the said agent or agents, bank or banks, banker or
bankers, such remuneration by way of commission or other-
wise, as the Board shall in their absolute discretion think
fit.
LVI. That such Secretary, and other officers clerks and
servants respectively, shall give such security as the Board
of Directors shall from time to time fix and determine, for
the due application of, and accounting for all moneys bills
and other securities received by them on behalf of the
Company, and for their good and faithful conduct in their
respective offices or situations; And all shares in the
Capital of the Company held by any such Secretary or
other officer clerk or servant, may be retained by the Board
of Directors, as a security for the good and faithful conduct
of such Secretary or other officer clerk or servant in their
respective offices or situations.
Officers &c, to
8 e y
EVIL That Half-yearly General Meetings of the Proprie-
tors shall be held at the office of the Company or at some
Half yearly
LTof m prt
prietors.


other convenient place in Sydney, to be notified in the
advertisement of such meeting on such convenient days
as the Directors shall appoint, in the respective months of
April and October in each year ; And it shall be the duty
of the Secretary of the Company to cause an advertisement
of the time and place of holding such meetings to be
inserted in one or more of the principal newspapers pub-
lished in Sydney, for the space of fourteen days at least
before the appointed time.
LVIII. That the business of every Half-yearly General
Meeting shall be to elect and fill up the vacancies which.
shall then exist or take place in the Board of Directors
and offices of Auditors and to do such other matters and
things as are herein particularly required or allowed to be
done thereat; And also to consider the Report of the
Directors to be then made, and to consider and decide on
such other matters and things as may then be brought
forward by the Board of Directors relating to the affairs of
the Company, or which may be brought forward by any
Proprietor who shall have given to the Board of Directors
seven days’ previous notice at the least of his intention to
bring such matters and things forward at such meeting ;
and also, if the majority of Proprietors then present shall
think fit, to consider any proposal or resolution, which
may notwithstanding the absence of such notice thereof to
the Board of Directors, be made by any Proprietor then
present: Provided however that the said meeting shall
not then proceed to determine upon any such matter or
thing then first brought forward, or any resolution or
motion then first proposed or made, otherwise than by
negativing any proposal or motion so made, if five Pro-
prietors then present and holding fifty votes in their own
right, shall require that the said meeting be adjourned for
the purpose of further considering the same ; in which
case such adjournment shall be made, and notice thereof
Business of
half yearly-
general meet-
ings.


shall be given as hereinafter provided with respect to
Special General Meetings.
Calling of spe-
cial general
meetings.
LIX. That subject to such notice as is hereinafter re-
quired, Special General Meetings of the Proprietors shall
be held at such times and places as the Board of Directors
may determine; and also if five or more Proprietors
holding not less than five hundred shares in the Capital of
the Company, shall at any time by writing under their
hands require the Board of Directors to call a Special
General Meeting for any purpose relating to the Company
it shall be incumbent on the Board of Directors to call the
same ; Provided that in every such requisition the object
for which such Special General Meeting is required shall
be distinctly expressed ; And if such requisition shall not
be complied with within ten days after the same shall have
been left at the office of the said Company in Sydney, it
shall be lawful for the Proprietors signing such requisi-
tion, with three other Proprietors, of their own authority,
to call a Special General Meeting to be held at the said
office of the Company in Sydney, for the consideration of
the same matters as were set forth in such requisition.
• LX. That except as hereinafter provided ten days’
notice at the least shall be given of all such Special
General Meetings, either by advertisement in one or more
of the Sydney newspapers, or by circular letters addressed
to the several Proprietors as hereinafter provided; And
that in such notice there shall be distinctly expressed the
objects for which the meeting is convened; And the
business of such Special General Meeting shall be to
consider and dispose of all such matters and things relating
to the business of the Company as may then be brought
forward in accordance with the notice given as aforesaid,
and no other.
Notice of
meetings.


LXI. That in cases of emergency and urgency, in which |
it shall appear to the Board of Directors essential or of]
r r (
much importance to the interests of the Company, that
certain matters should be brought under the consideration
of a Meeting of Proprietors with greater promptitude
than the notice hereinbefore required could admit of, it
shall be competent to the Board of Directors to convene
a Special General Meeting by advertisement or circular
letters, to be holden within not less than five days of the
publication of such advertisement or the posting of such
notices ; And such Meeting shall possess the same powers
as a Special General Meeting held in the ordinary course
herein prescribed.
m cases ot
emergency.
LX 11. That when and so often as it shall appear to the
Board of Directors, or to the Proprietors who shall call
any Special General Meeting upon default of the Directors
to comply with a requisition for that purpose, to be
desirable to give notice of any meeting of Proprietors,
or of any adjournment thereof, or of the object of any
such meeting, or to give any other notice required by
these presents, or which may be required by any future
rule or regulation, by circular letters, instead of public
advertisement thereof, it shall be competent for the Board
of Directors, or for such Proprietors, to address such
circular letter and send the same by post to the several
Proprietors at their respective residences, or at the last
place of residence which shall have been notified to the
Secretary of the Company, or to address such notice to any
executor or administrator of a deceased Proprietor, or the
committee of a lunatic Proprietor, or the guaidian of an
infant Proprietor, or next of kin of any intestate Pro-
prietor, or the trustee or assignee of any insolvent or
bankrupt Proprietor, or to the agent of any Proprietor
absent from the colony, in case such executor, adminis-
trator, committee, trustee, or assignee, and agent, respec-
Notices by cir-
cular letters.


tively, shall have certified their respective titles or
representative positions to the Secretary of the Company,
and have communicated their names and addresses ; And
in case any Proprietor whatsoever shall not have com-
municated his address to the Secretary ; and, in respect of
shares which by death or operation of law shall have
ceased to be vested in the Proprietor in whose name the
shares shall stand in the books of the Company, and shall
not have become vested in any new Proprietor according to
the provisions herein contained, it shall be unnecessary for
any such letter to be written or addressed to any person
whatsoever, but the Proprietor or party entitled shall
nevertheless be bound by all the acts of any such meeting
of proprietors, in the same manner as if he had received
notice thereof; And the testimony of the Secretary of the
Company or of any two of the Proprietors convening any
such meeting as aforesaid, that the said letters were to the
best of his knowledge and belief, written and addressed in
conformity herewith and the evidence of the person
appointed to despatch the said letters that the same were
respectively put into the Post Office, at or before the
times respectively herein required for the giving of the
notices conveyed by such letters, shall be conclusive evi-
dence of the due service of the said notices.
nerafmeetings
to make new
laws, and re-
guiations.
LXIII. That it shall be lawful for a General Meeting of
Proprietors, by a majority of votes, to make new laws
regulations and provisions for the Company, and to amend
alter and repeal all or any of the existing laws regulations
and provisions of the Company; Provided that no such
new, amended, or altered laws regulations and provisions
shall be in force till confirmed at a subsequent General
Meeting, by votes of Proprietors holding more than one-
half of the actual paid up capital of the Company.
attendance. 6111
LXIV. That every General Meeting may be adjourned
Proprietors present to a future day if seven Pro-


prietors holding in the aggregate not less than five
hundred shares shall not assemble within half an hour
after the time fixed for such meeting: And unless the said
number of Proprietors shall be present, the meeting shall
not be competent to transact any other business than
fixing the time for holding an adjournment of such meet-
ing ; And no such adjourned meeting shall proceed to
any other business than fixing the time for a further
adjournment, unless the said number of Proprietors shall
be present at the same; And the adjournments shall be
advertised in one or more of the Sydney Newspapers.
LXV. That minutes of all the proceedings of every
General Meeting, shall be entered and kept in the Minute
Book of the Company, and shall be signed by the person
presiding at such Meeting; And such Minute shall be
full and conclusive evidence that the proceedings therein
recorded took place at a General Meeting duly called and
held pursuant to these presents, and that the person whose
name shall be subscribed thereto, was the Chairman at
the General Meeting at which such proceedings took
place, and that he signed such minutes ; And such minute
shall be binding and conclusive on all the Proprietors of
the Company, and all other persons claiming any interest
in respect of any share or shares in the Capital of the said
Company; Provided however that before every Meeting
shall be dissolved the rough minutes then taken by the
Secretary or other officer or person appointed to take the
same, shall be distinctly read over to the Meeting, and
shall be open to be observed on by the Proprietors present,
and shall in case the accuracy thereof shall be disputed,
be confirmed or amended according to the opinion of the
majority of the Proprietors present; And provided also
that the minutes of every Meeting of Proprietors shall be
read over before the commencement of the other proceed-
ings, at the next Half-yearly or Special General Meeting,
Minutes of
proceedings at
meetings and
their effect.


and shall then also be subject to correction if any error
therein be discovered; But so nevertheless that the
discovery of any error therein shall not invalidate any
act or proceeding which may in the mean time have
been done or taken place under or in consequence of
the erroneous minute.
Defective
votes not to
invalidate
oTneraimee
LXVI. That no law resolution or proceeding, passed at
any half-yearly or Special General Meeting, shall be
impeached or invalidated, on the ground that any
person voting at any such meeting, was not entitled to
vote thereat.
f LXVII. That at all meetings of the Proprietors to be
;held after the expiration of three months from the day
L of the date of these presents, every Proprietor shall
have a vote for every ten shares in the capital of the
Company which shall have been held by him or her
respectively for the space of three calendar months at
the least, next before the date of such meeting and shall
then be held by him; but at all Meetings of the Pro-
prietors held within three months from the date hereof,
every Proprietor shall have one vote for every ten shares
held by him at the time of such meeting ; And all ques-
tions to be submitted to any meetings of the Proprietors,
shall be decided by the majority of votes, except in such
cases as are herein otherwise provided; And any three
Proprietors present at any such meeting shall be entitled
to demand a ballot before a vote on any question before
the Chairman shall have pronounced the same decided ;
And every Proprietor absent from any such meeting may
vote by proxy ; but no Proprietor shall be entitled to vote in
respect of any shares held by him over and above one
hundred and fifty shares.
Number of
votes and,
mode of voting
at General
Meetings. 1
Exclusion of
the votes of
proprietors (
LX VIII. That if two or more Proprietors present at any
General Meeting, shall object to the vote of any other


proprietor, and shall prove to the satisfaction of the
majority in value of proprietors then present, that the
person whose vote has been objected to has an interest
in the question on which the vote is to be taken,
beyond that which he may have therein in common
with the other Proprietors, then and in every such case,
the Proprietor whose vote has been objected to shall
not be allowed to vote on the question, and shall be
incapacitated from voting on such question as the
proxy of any absent Proprietor.
specially in-
terested in any
question.
LXIX. That every proxy shall be in writing under i
the hand of the Proprietor of the share or shares in t
respect of which such proxies shall be given, or in the 8
case of a Proprietor absent from the Colony, under
the hand of his Agent, duly authorised by power of
attorney to receive dividends, and to make sale of
his share or shares; And such proxies respectively
shall, before the same shall be allowed to be acted
upon at any Meeting of Proprietors, be delivered to
the Secretary of the Company, together with the
power of attorney or an attested copy thereof, in case
such proxy be appointed by an agent, to be deposited
and kept at the office of the Company in Sydney ;
Provided that proxies shall be held only by pro-
prietors of the Company, and that no Proprietor shall
be entitled to give more than thirty proxy votes, and
that the Secretary of the Company shall not in any
case be allowed to hold a proxy.
’ Proxy to be
in writing and
Ito be depo
k sited.
LXX. That every Proprietor who shall have ap-
pointed such proxy as aforesaid, shall for all the purposes 1
of the General Meeting, and of every adjourned General
Meeting, and ballot, to which such proxy shall be
applicable, but not for the purpose of composing the
number of Proprietors whose personal presence is
Effect of
proxy.


requisite to prevent adjournments, be considered as
present by such proxy; and all the votes and acts of the
proxy in that capacity shall be as valid and effectual,
subject to the qualifications and provisions herein
contained, as the votes and acts of the Proprietor
appointing him would have been, if such Proprietor
had been present and had voted at any such General
Meeting or ballot.
> LXXL That the Chairman of the Company elected
by the' Board of Directors as hereinbefore provided or
’in his absence the senior Director present shall
preside at Half-yearly General Meetings of the Pro-
prietors : Provided that until the order of seniority
shall be established by the death, retirement, or
removal from office, of the first Directors appointed
by virtue of these presents, the Proprietors present
at such Half-yearly General Meetings, shall in the
absence of the Chairman of the Company elect a
Chairman of the Meeting from the Directors then
present; And at all Special General Meetings the
Proprietors present shall elect a Chairman of such
Meeting ; And on all questions submitted to any such
Half-yearly or Special General Meeting the Chairman
presiding shall have the votes to which he shall be
entitled as a Proprietor, and also a casting vote in the
case of an equality of votes, except only in the case of
the election of Directors.
chairmanship
Proprietors
vofe. castms
LXXII. That George Witt and Donald Larnach
Esquires shall be the first Auditors of the said Company
and who shall continue in office for the term of one year
from the first of October one thousand eight hundred
and fifty-one and until the election of successors under
the provisions hereof, unless they shall sooner die,
resign, become disqualified or be removed ; And at
Auditors’
election.


the General Half-yearly Meeting to be held in the
month of October in each year two Proprietors shall
be elected to act as Auditors during the year then next
ensuing ; And one of the retiring Auditors (to be
determined by lot) shall be immediately re-eligible;
And such Auditors shall be fully authorised at all
reasonable times, to inspect the books of the Company
and to examine the accounts and affairs of the
Company generally, and to call for the production
to them at the office of the Company, of all books
vouchers writings and documents concerning the same,
and all coin securities, and other assets of the Com-
pany, and to call in the aid of the officers clerks and
servants of the Company or any other person com-
petent to give information as to the Company’s affairs ;
and the Auditors shall receive half-yearly, as a remune-
ration for their services the sum of twenty-five pounds
out of the funds of the Company.
LXXIII. That the qualification for an Auditor shall
be his being a Proprietor of the said Company, but he
shall be subject to the same disqualifications as a
Director of the Company ; And every Auditor who
shall act as such whilst unqualified or disqualified
shall receive no remuneration for his services, and
shall forfeit and pay to the Company the penalty of
one hundred pounds, to be appropriated to the use of
the Company and applied to the augmentation of the
reserve fund.
Qualification
of auditors.
LXXIV. That in the event of the death, resignation,
removal or disqualification of any such auditor, during i
his term of office it shall be lawful for the Board of]
Directors to appoint any other duly qualified Pro-
prietor to act as Auditor until the next ensuing Special
General or Half-yearly General Meeting when the
vacancy shall be filled up by election.
Appointment
of auditors ad
interim on
• death resigna-
tion & c.


fudit y Tnd
balance sheet,
LXXV. That the affairs and transactions of the Com-
pany shall be brought to a just and true balance by
the Board of Directors on or before the first day of
April and the first day of October in each and every
year; And a balance sheet shall be prepared con-
taining a true statement of the affairs and transactions
of the Company, and shewing the nett profits of
the Company during the Half-year immediately
preceding and shall as soon as possible thereafter,
together with all bills, securities, vouchers, accounts,
and documents necessary for verifying the same, be
submitted by the Board of Directors to the Auditors ;
And such Auditors shall examine the books of the
Company and all necessary documents and vouchers,
and sign such balance sheet in testimony of their
having examined and verified the several entries
contained therein : And the balance sheet so signed,
shall be submitted to the Half-yearly General Meeting
of the Proprietors to be held in the said months
respectively.
Directors’ half
yearly report.
LXXVI. That the Board of Directors shall together
with the balance sheet hereinbefore mentioned, cause
to belaid before the Proprietors at each Half-yearly
General Meeting, a Report on the Company's affairs
previously approved of at a Meeting of the Board of
Directors and bearing the signature of the Director
presiding at such Meeting; and such Report shall
contain the recommendation of the Board of Directors
as to the appropriation of the profits.
Payment to
reserve fund
out of profits.
LXXVII. That out of the ascertained profits of each
half year, a sum not less than five per cent, of the
amount, according as the Half-yearly Meeting shall de-
termine, shall in the first place be appropriated towards
the formation of a reserve fund to provide for occasional


losses in excess of the amount in hand from premiums ;
And such reserve fund shall not be allowed to be
distributed by way of dividend or bonus, until it
shall amount to more than twenty per cent, upon
the actual paid up capital of the Company, but after
it shall at any time have reached that amount, it shall
be lawful for a Half-Yearly General Meeting in pur-
suance of a recommendation of the Board of Directors,
out of such reserve fund to declare a bonus to be
payable to the Proprietors on and after a day to be
fixed by such General Meeting ; Provided always that
the reserve fund shall not thereby be reduced below
an amount equal to ten per cent, upon the paid up
capital of the Company : And Provided further that
after the declaration of such bonus no further bonus
shall be declared until such time as the reserve fund
shall again amount to more than twenty per cent, upon
the actual paid up capital of the Company.
LXXVIII. That the proceeds of all forfeited shares
excepting as herein otherwise provided, and all
forfeited dividends and dividends remaining unclaimed
for the period of six years after the same shall first
have become payable, and also all damages which may
be recovered from time to time under the covenants
articles stipulations and agreements herein contained,
or under any laws or regulations which may be here-
after established, shall be applied in augmentation of
the reserve fund.
Augmentation
of reserve
fund.
LXXIX. That after such appropriation for the for-
mation of a reserve fund, the balance of nett profit shall
be available for the payment of a dividend at such rate
as the Board of Directors shall declare at the Half-
yearly General Meeting; And such dividend shall
become and be payable to the Proprietors accordingly
Declaration of
dividend.


without interest at a time to be then fixed by the
Board of Directors, or at any time thereafter within
the period of six years from the time so fixed, but not
afterwards ; And the balance of nett profit remaining,
if any, after providing for the payment of such
dividends shall be carried forward to the profit and
loss account of the ensuing half-year for the purpose
of equalizing future dividends. -
LXXX. That no dividend shall be paid in respect of
any share upon which any instalment or call shall be
in arrear until such instalment or call shall have
been duly paid and satisfied, or in respect of the
share or shares of any person or persons who shall
not have executed these presents ; But it shall be law-
ful for the Board of Directors, unless they shall
declare a forfeiture of such shares, to retain such
dividends on account of such instalments, until the
same shall have been paid; And the Proprietor
entitled thereto shall not be entitled to claim interest
on the amount of such dividends during the time they
have been so retained by the Company ; And upon a
forfeiture of such shares being declared, such dividends
shall be appropriated to the uses of the Company.
As to divi-
shares on
are in arrear. 3
LXXXI. That it shall be lawful for the Board of
Directors from time to time, to appoint such person or
persons as they shall think proper, being Proprietors,
to be a trustee or trustees, with and by whom and
in whose name or names any contracts engagements
or dealings may be entered into on behalf of the
Company, subject to such limitations as the Board of
Directors may think fit, and in whose name or names
may be made and taken, all grants, conveyances,
mortgages, leases, assignments, and assurances of
property, for the benefit of the Company, and all other
Appointment
of trustees
under Board
of Directors.


instruments and securities which may be made or
taken ; And to take from such Trustee or Trustees a
declaration of trust as to such property as shall be so
vested in him or them respectively ; And to require
such trustee or trustees, when the Board should see
lit, to grant convey assign or assure the said property
as the Board shall direct and appoint.
LXXXII. That such trustee or trustees may at any
time resign such trusteeship on giving fourteen days’
notice to the Board of Directors and accounting for all
moneys and effects received by him or them and
executing such conveyance assignment or assurance
as the Board of Directors may require; And the
Board of Directors may at any time remove any such
trustee or trustees and shall, in the event of his or their
refusing to execute such release conveyance or
assignment or assurance as the Board of Directors may
require, or any power of attorney as hereinafter
required, or to account for the property and moneys
received by him or them, adopt all legal means to
enforce the execution of such release conveyance
assignment or assurance, and to compel such trustee or
trustees to account; Provided always that every
receipt which shall have been given by any trustee or
trustees for money received by him or them in respect
of any property or of any securities for money vested
in him or them, either as purchase money or otherwise,
shall be a good and sufficient discharge to the persons
paying the same, who shall not be afterwards required
to see to the application or be answerable or accounta-
ble for the misapplication or non-application of the
money so paid by them ; Provided that such persons
were not at the time of any such receipt, cognizant of
any misapplication or non-application accompanying
such receipt or of its being in the contemplation of
such trustee or trustees.
Resignation
and removal
of Trustees
and enforce-
ment of recon-
veyance &c.


Directors may
require
power of at-
torney from
Trustees to
any person to
sue &c, in
their names.
LXXXIII. That the Board of Directors may require
such trustee or trustees, during the continuance of his
! or their trusteeship, to execute to such person or persons
as the Board may appoint, such joint or joint and
several power of attorney with or without a power of
revocation as may be necessary for enabling the
person or persons so appointed, in the name of such
trustee or trustees to execute any conveyance or
assignment of the properties rights or interests or any
of them which may be vested in him or them as such
trustee or trustees, and to sue prosecute or defend any
action or suit at law or equity, or to petition for the
sequestration of the estate of any insolvent debtor, or
to prove in any insolvent estate when sequestrated, or
in any other way to enforce any claim due to such
trustee or trustees in respect of the subject of his or
their trusteeship, or to defend any claim or demand
made on such trustee or trustees in respect thereof,
and to discontinue abandon release or become nonsuit
in any such action suit or proceeding.
LXXXIV. That it shall be lawful for the Board of
Directors on behalf of the Company to commence and
prosecute in the name of the trustees of the Company,
or in the name of the Chairman or any public officer
who may by any Act of Council be empowered to sue,
or be made liable to be sued on behalf of the Company,
any action suit or proceeding whatsoever, against any
person or persons whomsoever, whether a member
or members of the Company or not, to enforce any
claims due by such person or persons to the Com-
pany ; And to defend any such action suit or
proceeding that may be instituted against the Com-
pany ; And also to compromise, or abandon any such
action suit or proceeding; And also to submit any
mat ter in dispute to arbitration, and abide by such
Power to com-
fend° e actions
&c '
To abandon
S P To miarb°i-
iration.


reference and submission and every award to be made
pursuant thereto, and for that purpose, to authorize
any two of the Directors to execute bonds or articles of
submission to arbitration ; And also to compound any i
debt or debts due to the Company, and to join in any ?
instrument of composition, or any conveyance or
assignment of the estate of any person indebted to the
Company, or in any letter of license granting time to
such debtor for the payment of his debts ; And also to
take proceedings for procuring the sequestration of
the estate of any debtor to the Company or to cause
him to be declared a bankrupt or insolvent according
to the laws for the time being, and to do all such
matters and things in relation to the estate of such
insolvent or bankrupt, and to the claim of the
Company against the same, and to the proceedings in
insolvency and bankruptcy, as might be done by an
ordinary creditor ; And also to prefer and prosecute!
charges for the stealing and embezzling the moneys 0
or property belonging to or deposited with the Com-
pany or for any fraud forgery crime or offence com-
mitted against or with intent to defraud the Company,
and to prosecute or abandon the same; And also toi
execute and to receive such general or other release n
or releases as may be necessary for discharging any
person produced as a witness in any action suit or
proceeding, from any claim or demand which may be
necessary to be released, in order to qualify such
person to give evidence as a witness in such action
suit or proceeding.
To compound
give time &c.
To prosecute
criminally.
To give re-
leases to wit-
nesses.
LXXXV. That if any execution shall issue against
any individual Proprietor or Proprietors or former Pro-
prietor or Proprietors or his or their heirs executors
or administrators, or his or their property and effects.
. , , , , .
upon any judgment decree or order obtained against
Reimburse-
JJ rs execution
upon a juds-
ment against
the Company.


the Company every such Proprietor or other such
person or persons against whom such execution shall
have so issued, or his or their executors or adminis-
trators, shall be reimbursed out of the property
and effects of the Company, for all monies paid and
for all damages costs and expenses incurred by him
or them by reason of such execution, or of the action
or suit in which the same shall have issued, or, in
default of such reimbursement out of the said property,
then and in that case by contribution from the other
Proprietors of the Company, as and subject to the
limitations hereinafter provided.
nhnbu?sifci not
out of the pro-
Company.
LXXXVL That if any such Proprietor or former
Proprietor, or other person or persons as aforesaid, his
or their executors or administrators, shall not be
reimbursed out of the property and effects of the
Company, it shall be lawful for him or them, or his
or their executors or administrators, to divide the
amount of the moneys to be paid with interest damages
costs and expenses or so much thereof as he or they
shall not have been reimbursed, into as many equal
parts as there shall then be shares in the capital of
the Company not including shares then under
forfeiture; And every Proprietor for the time being
of the Company, and the executors or administrators
of every deceased Proprietor, shall in proportion to
the number of their shares, contribute and pay one
or more of such parts, on demand, to the Proprietor,
or other person or person against whom such execu-
tion shall have issued, or his or their executors or
administrators ; And upon neglect or refusal to pay
such contribution it shall be lawful for such Proprietor,
or other person or persons, or his or their executors or
administrators, to sue for and recover the same against
the Proprietor or the executors or administrators of


any Proprietor who shall so neglect or refuse as
aforesaid, as a debt or demand recoverable at law and
distinct from the accounts of the partnership; And
if such Proprietor, or other person or persons against
whom such execution shall have issued, his or their
executors or administrators shall by reason of the
bankruptcy or insolvency of any Proprietor, or
from any other cause but without any neglect or
wilful default on his or their own part, be prevented
from recovering any proportion of the moneys interest
costs damages and expenses which he shall have been
so paid as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for him or them
again to divide such proportion as shall not have been
received by him or them into as many equal parts as
there shall then be shares in the capital of the Com-
pany, not including the shares under forfeiture, except
the shares in respect of which such default shall have
happened ; And every Proprietor for the time being
of the Company, except as aforesaid, shall rateably
according to the number of his shares, upon demand,
pay one or more of such last mentioned parts to the
Proprietor, or other person or persons against whom
such execution shall have issued, his or their executors
or administrators, and in default of payment he or
they shall have the same remedies for the recovery
thereof, as are hereinbefore given in respect of the
original contribution ; And if any proportion of such
money interest costs damages and expenses shall still
remain unpaid by reason of any such bankruptcy
insolvency or other cause as aforesaid, such Proprietor
or other person or persons as aforesaid, his or their
executors or administrators shall have in like manner
from time to time and by way of accumulative remedy,
the same powers, according to the circumstances of
the case, of again dividing and enforcing payment
of such proportion until he or they shall in the end,
Covenant to
pay rateably.


be fully reimbursed the whole of the said moneys
interest costs damages and expenses excepting the
portion if any payable by himself or themselves as a
contributor or contributors under these provisions.
> LXXXVII. That in order to encourage dealings by
3 parties with the Company in the way of the business of
r such Company, and to avoid the inconvenience at law
>or in equity, arising from the number and fluctuation of
f Proprietors, the Proprietors shall submit to be sued in
the name of the Chairman or Trustees, or in the name
of any other person or persons in whose name or
names the business may have been conducted on
behalf of the Company, as the case may require, by
any person having any claim or demand against the
Company, and shall not set up as a defence the non-
joinder of the other Proprietors or any of them as
parties to any proceeding that may be taken in
respect of any such claim or demand ; And that any
judgment decree or order made in any such proceeding
shall be binding upon the Company, and upon
the Proprietors thereof, and upon each and every
Proprietor ; And that this clause shall in any such
proceeding, be deemed and taken to be a waiver of
any objection as to the want of parties, and may be
read in Court as conclusive proof of such waiver.
be
sued in the
name of the
Chairman or
Ind nr to
partfesT ant of
Partnership
not to be set
up as a bar to
suit being
sustainable.
LXXXVIII. That in any and every action or suit at
law or in equity wherein a Proprietor or Proprietors
shall be plaintiffs, and the Company or any trustees or
other persons acting on behalfof the Company shall
be defendants, and vice versa , it shall not be competent
for either of the parties in or to such action or suit to
set up the partnership created by this deed or by or in
respect of this Association, as a bar to such action or
suit being sustainable ; And such parties respectively


shall upon the trial or hearing of any such action or
suit and in all or any proceedings which shall be had
in or in relation to such action or suit, be obliged to
waive and forego the objection to any such action
being tried at law or to any such suit being instituted
or prosecuted in equity by reason of the plaintiffs and
defendants being Proprietors in the Company ; And no
objection shall at any time be taken on the ground
that all the Proprietors are not made parties to such
action or suit; And upon any trial of any such action
or any hearing in any such suit it shall be imperative
on the Board of Directors to produce or cause to be
produced these presents or a duplicate thereof, and also
the powers of attorney (if any) under which these
presents or a duplicate thereof shall have been
executed by any of the parties thereto or such of the
same instruments respectively as shall be in the
custody or power of the Board of Directors, and the
same respectively shall be read and used on or in any
such trial hearing action or suit without any proof of
the due execution of the same respectively : And the
matters and things in this present clause stated shall
and may be used in evidence on or in the same trial,
hearing action or suit, and shall have the same force
and effect as and by way of admission from the parties]
respectively, as if the same matters and things had {
been reduced to writing previously to such trial or 1
hearing, as admissions in the cause in the usual
form and had been signed by such parties or their
respective attorneys irrevocably ; And either of the
parties shall, if required by the other of them, consent
to the Court, or any Judge of the Court, in which such
action shall be brought or suit commenced, making an
order, wherein shall be embodied the matters and
things last aforesaid, directing that the same shall or
may be read and used in evidence upon or at any such
Board of Di-
rectors to pro-
duce this deed
on trial of ac-
tion.
Effect of the
provisions
herein con-
tained.


trial or hearing, for the party obtaining such order, as
admissions from the party against whom such order
shall be sought ; And if any Proprietor shall act in
contravention of this article, and shall thereby succeed
in defeating the claims of the Company against him,
his shares in the capital of the Company shall, upon
such forfeiture being declared by the Board of
Directors, (which they are hereby authorised to do as
to all or any of such shares as they may think fit) be
absolutely forfeited to the Company.
Forfeiture by
in contraven-
tScie.° f thls ar '
LXXXIX. That every Proprietor who may be in-
debted to the Company or to the trustees or any person
on behalf of the Company, shall upon demand pay to
the person duly authorised by the Board ofDirectors in
that behalf, all or such part of his debt as may at the
time be due and payable and shall be so demanded,
and shall not adopt or institute any proceedings in a
Court of Equity or otherwise for procuring any accounts
to be taken in relation to the partnership existing by
virtue of this Deed of Settlement; And in case any
such Proprietor shall make default in payment of the
debt which may be so due and demanded of him, then
the amount of such debts may, under the order of the
Board of Directors be recovered from such Proprietor
his heirs executors or administrators as liquidated
damages ; And every party to these presents hereby
agrees that any debts which may be so due by him
and demanded, and in payment whereof there shall be
such default, shall and may be so recovered as
liquidated damages.
Proprietors to
pay their indi-
vidual debts
to the Com-
pany without
requiring ac-
count to be
taken of the
Partnership.
XC, That no Proprietor of the Company not being
a Director or Auditor, nor his executors or adminis-
trators, legatees, assignees, or creditors, or any other
person claiming through under or in trust for him,
No Proprie-
tor not being
a Director or
Auditor en-
titled to in-
spect Books.


shall be entitled to inspect any of the books
documents or writings of the Company, except such
as may be produced for inspection at any General
Special or Adjourned Meeting of the Company, and
the Share Register Book.
XCI. That all the debts and liabilities of and incurred
by the Company, and to which the funds of the Com-
pany shall be liable, shall be paid in cash, by the order
or resolution of the Board of Directors.
All debts of
the Company
to be paid in
cash.
XCII. That no objection shall be taken by or on
behalf of the Company, or by or on behalf of any Pro-
prietor, to the reception of the evidence of any Pro-
prietor when tendered in any action or suit matter or
proceeding, in any court of justice, between the Com-
pany and any Proprietor or Proprietors, or between
any Proprietor or Proprietors, and any other Pro-
prietor or Proprietors, upon the ground of interest or
on any other ground arising out of such proprietor-
ship : and this clause may be received and read as a
waiver of any such objection by the Company, or by
any Proprietor or Proprietors as the case may require.
Evidence of
Pr °P rietors -
XCIII. That in all cases where it may be necessary
for any person to serve any notice writ or other pro-
ceeding at law or in equity or otherwise upon the
Company, service thereof respectively upon the
Secretary or upon any Director for the time being, by
leaving the same at the office of the Company at
Sydney, or, if the Company shall have suspended or
discontinued business, by serving the same personally
on the Secretary or a Director or on some person who
was such Secretary or Director at the time of such
suspension or discontinuance of business, or by leaving
the same, in such last mentioned case, with some
Service of no.
company. the


inmate at the usual abode of such Secretary or Direc-
tor, or late Secretary or Director, shall be deemed
good service of the same on the Company.
• XCIY. That the Chairman, Directors, Trustees, and
r other officers of the Company, and each and every of
them, their and each and every of their heirs execu-
tors and administrators, shall be indemnified and saved
harmless out of the funds and property of the Com-
pany, from and against all costs charges losses damages
and expenses which they or any or either of them or
their or any or either of their heirs executors or
administrators shall or may incur sustain or be put
unto, for or on account of the Company, in consequence
of any act deed matter or thing which they or any
or either of them may do or cause to be done in
carrying into effect the objects and purposes of the
Company, or in or about any indictment information
presentment action suit process proceeding or arbi-
tration to be brought commenced carried on prosecuted
defended or entered into for or on account thereof,
or for or by the order or direction of the Board of
Directors, or in anywise relating thereto respectively,
or otherwise or in or about the execution of their
respective offices or trusts, except such costs charges
damages and expenses as shall happen by or through
the wilful neglect or default of such Chairman Direc-
tors Trustees or other officers respectively.
Indemnity to
officers in re-
spect of their
acts.
XCY. That if it shall appear at any one of the Half-
yearly General Meetings hereinbefore required to be
that there is no immediate or prospective employ-
ment for the full amount of the capital actually paid
up, and it a diminution of the capital shall have been
recommended in the report made by the Board of Direc-
tors to the Proprietors at such meeting, it shall belawful
Part of capital
Sed be to re '
Shareholders,


for such General Meeting to enter into a resolution to
diminish the capital of the Company, in such manner
and to such amount as shall be specified in such re-
solution ; And in pursuance of such resolution the
Board of Directors shall cause the same to be paid
hack to the several Proprietors; but the amount so
paid back may again be called for by the Board of
Directors in the same manner as if the amount had
never been brought into the capital stock.
XCYI. That it shall be lawful for a General Half-
yearly Meeting of the Proprietors, in pursuance of a
recommendation from the Board of Directors, to enter
into a resolution to dissolve the Company ; but such
resolution shall only be operative if carried by the
voles of Proprietors possessing not less than three-
fourths of the actual paid up capital of the Company,
and shall be of no force or effect until confirmed by
the votes of Proprietors holding not less than three-
fourths of the paid up capital of the Company, at
the Half-yearly Meeting next immediately following.
General pro-
vision for dis-
solution of
Company.
XCVII. That if at any time hereafter it shall appear
to the Board that losses have been sustained equal i n
amount to one-third of the then subscribed capital of
the Company, it shall be incumbent on the Board of
Directors to submit a statement of such losses as soon
as possible to a Special General Meeting of the Pro-
prietors ; And it shall thereupon be referred to the
Auditors and such other Proprietors as such General
Meeting may appoint, to assess the said losses, and
to examine the whole state of the Company’s affairs,
and to report thereon to a subsequent General Meeting
to be convened for the purpose of receiving and
considering such report; And if at such subsequent
Meeting the said Auditors and other Proprietors
Dissolution in
case of losses.


shall confirm the estimate of loss previously submitted
by the Board of Directors, the business of the Com-
pany shall from and after the date of such subsequent
General Meeting be confined to the winding up of
its affairs and converting into money all its funds and
property, and distributing the same ; Provided never-
theless that it shall be lawful for such Meeting to
enter into a resolution to continue the business of the
Company and to write off the losses from the capital
of the Company ; and thereupon such business shall
continue until the next Half-yearly Meeting of Pro-
prietors, which last mentioned meeting or any adjourn-
ment thereof, shall have power to confirm such
resolution by the votes of Proprietors possessing not
less than three-fourths of the actual paid up capital.
Not with-
standing rcso-
lution to dis-
powers' 1 of the
affafr^dosed! 1
XCYIIL That until the affairs of the Company shall be
finally wound up and all claims and demands upon the
Company shall be fully paid and satisfied, and a final
division shall have been made of the residue of the
moneys of the Company, the several provisions herein con-
tained and all the powers privileges rights and duties of the
Board of Directors and of the Proprietors respectively shall,
notwithstanding any resolution to dissolve the Company,
remain and continue in full force so far as the same may
be necessary for winding up the concerns of the Company,
or for enabling the Board of Directors to dispose of the
funds and property or to pay and satisfy all claims and
demands upon the Company or to make such final division
as aforesaid; Provided always that all such property and
funds as shall not be disposed of within the period of two
years from the date of the second General Meeting of the
Proprietors hereinbefore referred to, shall be immediately
thereafter sold by public auction without reserve, to the
highest bidder in such lots as the Board of Directors may
approve.


XCIX. That it shall not be lawful for any Proprietor
or any number of Proprietors to dissolve the Company
otherwise than as herein provided, and notwithstanding
the changes which will from time to time take place
among the Proprietors by death or retirement or by
the accession oi new Proprietors, and notwithstanding
that any Proprietor for the time being may become
bankrupt or insolvent, or may be convicted of felony,
or may commit any other act by which a common
partnership would be dissolved, the partnership hereby
formed shall nevertheless subsist, and the covenants
herein contained shall at all times, until such dissolu-
tion as aforesaid, be in full force and effect as between
the Proprietors for the time being.
Partnership
solved except
“^“. ehypr °'
C, That from and after the expiration of twelve
calendar months next after the declaration of the final
division of capital as aforesaid, and the publication thereof
in the New South Wales Government Gazette , or some other,
public newspaper in Sydney aforesaid, no action at law or 1
suit in equity shall be sustainable by any Proprietor
against the Company or any other Proprietor thereof, or
against the Trustees Directors or other officers of the said
Company, for or in respect of the transactions and affairs of
the Company, or in any wise relating thereto ; but the
accounts of the Company shall after the expiration of such
period as aforesaid be finally and conclusively settled, and
shall not be re-opened by any of the Proprietors on any
ground or pretence whatsoever.
Affairs of
be entirely
months "from
disjoin"
tiou -
Cl. That it shall be lawful for the Board of Direc-
tors if the Auditors shall report that the assets of the
Company are insufficient to meet its liabilities or
when the affairs of the Company shall be directed to
be wound up, to take the benefit of any act or law for
the sequestration of the estate of the Company as insol-
Power to take
the benefit of
insolvent law
or of any law
for the wind-
ing up of
Joint Stock
Companies.


vent, or of any act or law for facilitating the winding up
of Joint Stock Companies, as the case may require,
and to do and submit to all matters and things on behalf
of the Company which may be required to be done or
submitted to, for the above purposes.
CII. That the Board of Directors either voluntarily or
upon the requisition of any twelve Proprietors holding
in the aggregate five hundred shares, may call a Special
General Meeting in manner hereinbefore appointed, for
the purpose of expounding and determining the true
meaning and construction of the several clauses and
provisions of the Deed of Settlement, or of any rule or
regulations of the said Company, and the sense and
meaning given by the majority of the persons entitled to
vote at such meeting, to any clause or provision of the
Deed of Settlement, or to any rule or regulation of the
said Company, shall be deemed the true sense and
meaning thereof.
Doubts in re-
gard to the
construction
of the clauses
rules regula-
tions or pro-
visions of the
Deed of settle-
ment to be de-
termined by a
special gene-
ral meeting.
Interpretation
CIII. That in the construction of these presents the
expression “ the Company” shall mean the Company
hereby established ; and the word “ Directors” shall mean
the Directors for the time being of the Company; and the
expression “ Board of Directors” shall mean Directors
present at any meeting of Directors to be held pursuant to
the provisions herein contained, and the word “ Pro-
prietors” shall mean persons holding shares in the capital
for the time being of the Company; and the word “ shares”
shall mean shares in the capital for the time being of the
Company; and words in the singular number shall be con-
strued to include or apply to several persons or things as
well as one person or thing; and words in the plural
number shall be construed to apply to one person or thing
as well as to several persons or things ; and words import-
ing males shall be construed to include or apply to


females as well as males ; and the words person or persons
shall be construed to include a body or bodies corporate
as well as an individual or individuals; unless in any of
the above cases it be otherwise specially provided, or
there be something in the subject or context repugnant
to such meaning or construction; and wherever under
any of the provisions herein contained a certain number
of days or other period is required to elapse in order to
ground or give effect to any act deed matter or thing
whatsoever, the first of such days or the first day of such
period shall be reckoned exclusive and the last
of such days or the last day of such period shall be
reckoned inclusive in the computation of the days or period
required; and every act deed matter or thing hereby
authorized or directed to be done at one time or at any time
or without reference being made to a specific*time, may
with the like requisites or formalities as are hereby
required be also done at several times or from time to
time as often as occasion may require, or as may be
deemed expedient; and in every case where in these
presents general expressions are used in connexion with
powers directions or things, such general expressions shall
not be limited or controlled to or by the particular powers
directions or things with which the same are connected ;
and that words or expressions denoting authority or
permission shall be construed as words or expressions of
authority or permisson only and shall not be construed
as words or expressions denoting direction or compulsory
trust.
CIV. That each of the several persons parties hereto
whilst a holder of any share or shares in the capital of the
said Company, and his or her heirs executors and admin-
strators, shall and will, for and in respect of such share or
shares, observe perform fulfil and keep all the cove-
nants articles stipulations and provisions, including addi-


tions alterations variations and modifications to be made in
pursuance of the provisions in the Deed of Settlement
contained, which are or ought to be observed performed
fulfilled and kept by him or her or his or her heirs
executors and administrators respectively, in respect of
or in relation to such shares according to the true
intent and meaning of the same covenants articles
stipulations and agreements respectively; and the cove-
nantor will perform all the duties of “ Director, Auditor, or
Trustee,” from time to time, when and so often and so long
as he shall be appointed to and accept the office of
Director, Auditor, or Trustee of the said Company, accord-
ing to the directions stipulations and agreements contained
in this Deed of Settlement; and the damages and costs which
may be recovered from time to time under this covenant
shall be paid over to the Board of Directors to be applied
by them as part of the reserved fund or capital of the said
Company as they may think fit. AND THIS INDEN-
TURE FURTHER WITNESSETH that the said several
persons parties hereto have and each and every of them
hath ratified and confirmed, and by these presents do and
each and every of them doth ratify and confirm all the acts
deeds matters and things which up to the day of the date
of these presents have been made done executed and per-
formed for the purpose of procuring the said act, preparing
the deed of settlement allotting shares, receiving deposits
and taking preliminary measures in regard to the
establishment of the Company or in regard to the business
or property thereof or in anywise relating thereto IN
WITNESS &c.
Confirmation
of preliminary-
proceedings.


SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY KEMP AND FAIRFAX,
LOWER GEORGE STREET.






