

Deed of Settlement
OF THE
TOMATO
COAL MINING COMPANY.
SYDN EY:
SHERRIEF & DOWNING!, BOOKSELLERS ANT) STATIONERS,
286, GEORGE STREET.
1861,


INDEX
TO THE CONTENTS OF THE FOLLOWING DEED, BUT FORMING
NO PART THEREOF.
Pago. Clause.
Adjournment—
-41 Of Mootings if insufficient number .. S 3
42 Of Mootings if business not, completed.. .. ~ .. 85
Association—
-4 Formation of ~ .. .. .. .. ~ .. X
Auditors—
-43 Appointment of first .. .. .. ~ .. !)0
43 When Directors ineligible as .. .. .. ~ .. 90
44 Election and powers of ~ .. 91
44 Appointment of, ail interim .. ~ .. .. .. 92
21 Equality of votoa on election of ~ .. ~ .. ~ 41 '
44 Half-yearly Audit and Balance Sheet .. .. .. .. 93
45 Appointment of Special .. .. .. .. .. .. 94
Balance Sheet—
-25 To ho prepared half-yearly .. .. ~ ~ .. 51
38 To ho sent to Shareholders .. .. .. .. .. 75
38 Bad and doubtful debts to bo deducted .. 74
Books—
-29 To bo kept and balanced ~ .. .. ~ .. HO
7 Place of business ~ .. .. .. 7
Calls—
-1 0 Board may make ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .. 27
17 To bo advertised .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 28
17 Interest upon and recovery of .. .. 29
17 If not paid sharas to be forfeited .. .. .. .. 30
31 May bo enforced though Deed unexecuted .. ~ ~ 02
48 No dividend if in arrear,, .. ~ ~ .. .. 102
Capital—
-7 Amount of and how divided .. .. ~ .. ~ 8
7 To bo personalty ~ .. .. .. .. .. ~ 9
38 May bo reduced and returned .. .. ~ ~ .. 78
Chairman—
-14 Now shares vested in .. ~ 23
23 How elected .. ~ .. .. ~ .. ~ 44
23 To preside at Board meetings ~ . . ~ ~ .. 44
24 Casting vote .. .. ~ .. ~ .. ~ 48
42 Of meetings of. Shareholders .. .. .. .. 88


Clause
1
3
4
' 7
l2
ll2
ll3
lOB
lO9
ll3
ll6
2
61
O7
lO4
llO
Dieeotohs —
6 Management of business by .. ~ .. .. .. ‘1
16—17 May make calls .. .. .. 27 —28
IS First, throe to form n Hoard .. .. .. .. 31
19 Qualification .. .. ~ 88
18 Retirement .. ~ .. 32
19 Removal of unqualified .. 34
20 Resignation by, and removal by Shareholders., .. .. 36
20 . Filling up casual vacancy .. 36
20 Suspension of ~ .. .. 37
21 After suspension not to interfere .. .. ~ ~ 38
21 Notice by candidates ~ .. .. ~ ~ .. 39
21 Modo of election ~ ..... ~ ~ ~ .. 40
21 Equality of votes on election .. ~ .. .. ~ 41
22 Defects in election ~ .. ~ .. .. .. 42
22 Unqualified or disqualified noting as .. ~ .. .. 43
23 To elect Chairman .. ~ .. ~ .. .. 44
23 Remuneration to Managing ~ .. .. .. .. 46
23 To regulate order of proceedings .. ~ .. .. 46
24 Resolutions of, may bo rescinded ~ .. .. .. 47
24 Majority to decide 48
24 To keep minutes ~ .. .. 40
25 General powers of .. .. .. .. ~ .. 60
25 To prepare half-yearly Balance Sheet ~ .. .. .. 61
28 To commence and defend actions, &c. .. .. .. ~ 62
27 To mako By-Laws ~ .. ~ ~ .. .. 63
27 To apply for Act of Council ~ ~ ~ .. .. 64
27 To taka offloos ~ .. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 66
29 To appoint Officers, &c ~ ~ .. .. 68
8 Authority to purchase land .. ~ ~ ~ .. 6
fi Rower to sell or louse property of Company ~ .. .. fi


Dnusornns— Omi tinned.
Page Clivusq
28 May make or indorse Bills and "borrow money ~ .. 67
28 All moneys to be lodged in and drawn out of Bank under
regulations .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
29 To make half-yearly Report .. .. .. .. .. 60
39 May convene Special General Mootings ~ .. 70
43 "When ineligible as an Auditor .. .. .. .. .. 90
48 To declare Dividends 101
40 Indemnity to ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 106
60 Answerable for their own acts .. ~ 106
62 May take benefit of Insolvent Act .. 112
Dividends—
-48 Declaration of . . .. .. ~ .. .. .. 101
48 On slmros, if calls in .arrow .. .. .. .. .. 102
48 On forfeited shares ~ .. ~ ~ ... .. 102
Dissolution—
-60 Of Company by resolution .. ~ 107
61 In case of losses ~ , , ~ .. .. •. 109
62 Custody of Deed, &c. upon .. .. .. .. .. 110
62 Winding up of affairs .. ~ .. 11l
63 No, except under Deed of Settlement .. 113
Foupumuuj—
-13 Of shares .. .. ~ .. ~ 20
13 Sale of shares under .. ~ .. .. .. .. 21
17 Of shares if calls unpaid . . .. 30
33 If proprietor pleads partnership .. .. • • ■ • 67
Indemnity—■
49 ' To Officers, &c. ~ ~ , , ~ .. .. . • 106
Insolvency—
-62 Of Company 112
I NTEIU’IIETAT'ION —
63 Clause .. ~ .. .. .. .. H 4
Lands—
fi Authority to purchase .. .. .. .. .. • • 6
(i Authority to sell, lease, &o. .. .. .. .. • • 6
Meetings op SirAiißiioLnisns—•
14 General, may oronto now shares .. .. •• 22
20 „ may remove Director .. .. .. •. 36
41 „ may make new laws, &c. .. .. . . .. 82
41 „ adjournment if mooting insufficient, 83
42 „ to be notified 81
42 ~ 'adjournment if business incomplete ■■ •• 86
42 „ Chairman of .. .. . . 86
43 ~ Delay in election at . . .. . . . . . . 87
43 ~ Minutes of ~ .. .. .. ■. ■ ■ 88
48 „ Defective votes at ~ .. .. .* , w.'B9
■io „ Voting at .. .. ..


Meetings op SHAnEiioLiuuts Continued,
Page , ■ Clause
37 Half-yearly appointment of first ana successive ~ .. 71
yy M Business thereat .. .. 72
37 () Directors’Report at .. .. .. 73
23 „ Balance Sheet to ho made up 50
38 „ Reports, &c. at, to ho circulated 73
3g )( May dimmish capital .. .. .. ~ 70
44 „ For election of Auditors ~ 91
44 „ Audit and Balance Shoot .. ~ .. ~ 93
45 „ May direct farther audit 94
20 Special Fill up vacancy in Directors !' 3(1
20 „ Confirm or annul suspension .. .. ~ .. 37
30 „ Determine construction of Doud .. ~ .. (11
38 „ Calling of 1 .. .. 77
39 „ Notice thereof .. .. .. 78
39 „ In case of emergency .. 79
SO „ May resolve on dissolution 107
Notice—
-39 Of Special General Meetings .. .. ~ .. .. 78
40 By circulars .... .. .. .. .. .. HO
41 Proof thoroof ~ .. .. .. .. .. ~ 81
42 Of adjourned meetings .. .. K J
48 Service of, on the Company ~ 103
Oppicers—
-22 Defects in appointment of .. <| 2
29 Appointment of .. ~ .. • S 8
29 To give security if required .. .. .. ~ .. S 9
47 Not to vote .. .. ioo
49 Indemnity to .. ~ ~ ~ ~ log
50 Answerable for their own acts .. ~ ~ ~ ~10(1
Proxy—
-45 Vote by ~ 05
46 In-writing and form of .. 37
If Effect of .. .. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ " 1)3
47 Not to he a paid officer .. ~ ]no
Secretary—
-13 May convoy forfeited shares ~ ~ ~ ~ w 2)
15 New shares convoyed by .. ~ ~ ~ , p 24
29 Appointed by Directors 53
29 To givo security if required .. ~ ~ ~ t _ 51J
37 To call half-yearly General Mootings 71
48 Service of Notices on __ 1() ;j
Shareholders—
-6 Renunciation by ~ .. ~ .. _ t _ ,j
9 Shares of deceased .. ~ ~ 1 j.,
9 Husband of female—Executor of deceased, committee of lunatic,
or assignee of bankrupt ’ 14.
12— When released from liability 1H—•)()
13— To execute Deed " ’' 20--62
'■ and liabilities of “ fi;)
"‘"-To pay individual debts "


IS iiAiiK iioMintH— Con limml.
I‘ngi) (Jliutae
31 Debts of, to give a lion on shares .. .. .. .. 66
32 Of joint, one to 1)0 recognised .. . . ~ .. .. 08
33 Not to plead partnership .. .. • ■ ■ ■ •. 87
31 Submit to be sued .. .. .. .. .. 08
34 To 1)0 reimbursed by Company .. . . .. .. ■ ■ OS)
37> Uomody if not reimbursed .. .. .. .. .. 70
38 Limitation of liability .. .. .. ■■ 70
39 May call Special Ghmornl Mooting .. ••• •• 79
47 Whun interested not to vote ~ .. .... .. 90
7 Shakes — 10
7 Division of capital into shares .. .. .. . . .. 8
7 To "bo personalty,, ~ .. ~ .. .. .. 9
8 Hold in trust .. ~ .. ~ .. .. .. 12
9 Of doooasod Shareholder .. .. .. •• 18
9 Of fomnlo Shareholder marrying, Executor, Committee of
Lunatic or Trustee of Bankrupt .. .. .. 14
10 Transmission of, to ho authenticated ~ .. .. .. Id
11 Proof of, hy marriage, will, to. ~ .. .. I. 10
8 Allotment of .. ~ ~ ~ .. .. .. 11
11 How transferable .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 17
11 Not to ho hold hy Corporation .. . i .. '.. 17
11 Not to ho transferred if calk unpaid .. .. .. 17
13 Tmnsforrco of, to sign Deed .. .. .. .. 20
13 Sale and transfer of forfeited .. .. .. .. 21
14 Creation of now 22
14 Vested in Chairman ~ .. .. .. .. .. 2 3
16 Assignment of now .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
17 Forfoitod on non-payment of calls .. ~ .. .. 30.
Shark Hf.oistbh —
Id To ho kept, .. ~ ~ .. .. .. .. 27,
10 Evidence of ownership ...... ~ .. 20
40 To determine number of votes ~ ~ .. .. 90
TnAtrsMHi-
11 Of shares .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 17
12 Custody of deads of .. .. .. .. .. •• 10
Trusts —
8 Nowl not to bo noticed ~ ~ ~ .. .. 12
Votes—
-21 In cose of equality for Director .. .. .. .. 41
24 Questions to ho decided hy majority of 48
24 Of Chairman .. .. .. .. .. .. . ■ 43
32 Of joint shareholders <><l
42 Of Chairman of mootings ~ .. .. .. .. HO
43 Defective .. .. .. .. .. . ■ • • H 9
46 Number, and mode of taking .. .. .. ■■ 96
46 .By proxy .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 06
43 Determined hy share register ~ .. ~ ~ 91)
47 If interested shareholders .. .. .. ■. .. 99
47 Of paid officers .. .. ■.. .. .. .. 100


DEED OF SETTLEMENT.
Jfllb'-CLtIIXX made the twenty-first day of-j
September in the year of onr Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-one between Sato Samuel of Sydney
in the Colony of New South Wales Esquire John
Donald M‘Lean of Sydney aforesaid Esquire
Alexander Campbell of the same place Esquire
Francis Mitchell of the same place Esquire and
Edward Brooking- Cornish of the same place Esquire
and the several other persons whose names and seals are
or shall he from time to time hereunto subscribed and
affixed of the first part and Staunton Spain of
Sydney aforesaid Gentleman (a person nominated only
for the purpose of being a Covenantee for the benefit of
the Company intended to be hereby established) of the
second part Whereas the said Saul Samuel and Johnj
Donald M‘Lcan are absolutely seised of or otherwise well
and sufficiently entitled to All that piece or parcel of
Land containing by admeasurement five hundred acres
be the same more or less situated in the county of
Gloucester and parish of Stockton commencing at
the south extreme of the west boundary line of Mr. A.
M. Beveridge’s eight hundred acres grant and bounded
on the east by seventy-five chains and fifty links of
that boundary line bearing north on the north by
seventy-two chains of the south boundary line of Pepper-
corn’s grant bearing west on the west by the east
boundary line of Mrs. M‘Lean’s six hundred and forty
acres grant bearing south sixty-eight chains to Hunters
Liver and on the south by Hunters Liver downwards
to the south extreme of the west boundary line of
A. M. Beveridge’s grant aforesaid Lescrving never-
theless
Parties.
Recitals.


theless to George Mitchell Harper and Janet Wright
Harper all that parcel of land containing by admeasure-
ment one acre portion of the above described five
hundred acres being around the Well known as
“ Tomago Well” commencing on the left hank of
the Elver Hunter aforesaid at a stake twenty chains
easterly along the river bank from the south ex-
treme of the east boundary line of Mrs. M‘Lean’s six
hundred and forty acres grant of Kilcoy an apple tree
marked thirty-six links north of the stake and bounded
on the east by a north line of three chains and fifty
links on the north by a west line of three chains one
hundred and twenty-five links and on the west by a
south line of two chains one hundred and seventy links
to the Biver Hunter and on the south by the llivcr
Hunter downwards to the stake twenty chains easterly
along the river bank from the south extreme of the east
boundary dine of Mrs. M‘Lean’s six hundred and forty
acres grant of Kilcoy aforesaid and also reserving a
right of road one rod in width from the last-mentioned
point of the Kilcoy property along the river bank to
the said one acre of laM with liberty nevertheless to
resort to and use the said Well known as the “ Tomago
Well” Together with all and singular houses out-
houses edifices and buildings thereon erected and built
And together wdth all the coal plant tramways rail-
ways machinery and other fixtures thereon or on any
part thereof which are of a freehold nature And
together with all mines of coal and other mines ores
and minerals upon or under the said land and heredita-
ments or any part thereof as joint tenants (subject never-
theless to a certain Indenture of Lease of one hundred
and twenty-eight acres of the surface of the said land
bearing date the fourth day of November one thousand
eight hundred and fifty-nine and made between James
Williamson of the one part and Eohert Gordon of the
other part) And Whereas it appearing that there
is a considerable quantity of valuable coal on or under
the


the said land and hereditaments the said Saul Samuel and
John Donald M'Lean have valued the said land and
hereditaments and the plant and machinery and rolling
stock thereon at the sum of twenty thousand pounds
And Whereas the said Sard Samuel and John Donald
M'Lean have determined to form and establish a Joint
Stock Company for the purpose of raising the coal on, or
under the said land and hereditaments and for other the
purposes hereinafter mentioned and contained to be
called “The Tomago Coal Mining Company” with a
capital of twenty thousand pounds to be divided into
five thousand shares of four pounds each and such
further capital as shall hereafter be raised in pursuance
of the provisions herein in that behalf contained And
Whereas the said Saul Samuel and John Donald M'Lean
have agreed that the said land hereditaments and
premises shall be vested in and belong to the said Com-
pany at the price or sum of twenty thousand pounds
And Whereas each of them the said Alexander Camp-
bell [Francis Mitchell and Edward Brooking Cornish
hath agreed with the said Saul Samuel and John Donald
M'Lean to purchase and take one thousand of the said
shares amounting in the whole to the sum of twelve
thousand pounds and the said Saul Samuel and John
Donald M'Lean have each agreed to take one thousand
of the said shares amounting to the remaining eight
thousand pounds which said two several sums of twelve
thousand pounds and eight thousand pounds make
together the said purchase money or sum of twenty
thousand pounds for which the said Saul Samuel and
John Donald M'Lean have agreed to sell the said land
hereditaments and premises And it hath accord-
ingly been agreed that each of them the said Saul
Samuel John Donald M'Lean Alexander Campbell
Erancis Mitchell and Edward Brooking Cornish shall
have and be entitled to one thousand of the said
shares upon which four pounds per share is to be
considered as paid up And by a certain Deed Poll
or


or Declaration of Trust bearing or intended to bear
even date with these presents under the hands and seals
of the said Saul Samuel and John Donald MCLean the
said Saul Samuel and John Donald M‘Lean did declare
that they the said Saul Samuel and John Donald MfEean
and the survivor of them and the heirs of such survivor
and their or his assigns should stand seised of the said
land hereditaments and premises upon the trusts therein
mentioned for the benefit of the said Company dB-oh)
tin's Inbrnturr fcntncgsttfi that in pursuance of the
agreements aforesaid and in consideration of the premises
each of them the said parties hereto of the first part
for himself and herself severally and respectively and
for his and her several and respective heirs executors
and administrators doth by these presents covenant
promise declare and agree with and to the others and
other of them and each and every of them their and
each and every of their heirs executors administrators
and assigns jointly and severally and (as a separate
covenant) with and to the said Staunton Spain his
executors and administrators in manner following (that
is to say)
I. The several persons parties to these presents
shall and will whilst holding shares in the capital of the
Company be and continue a Joint Stock Company
or Partnership for the express object of carrying on the
business thereof nnder the name style and title of
“The Tomago Coal Mining Company” subject to the
provisions and agreements herein contained from the
day of the date of these presents until the said Company
shall be dissolved under the provisions in such behalf
herein contained and they the several parties hereto
shall at all times so long as they shall continue share-
holders of the Company advance the interests of the
same to the utmost of their power
1 11. Each of the several persons parties hereto
whilst he shall he a holder of any shares in the capital
shall
Testatum—
Mutual Cove
nant.
Association.
Agreement to
observe the
Articles.


slia.ll and will observe perform and keep all tile cove-
nants articles and provisions in these presents contained
and all additions alterations and modifications which
may he made in pursuance of the provisions in the Deed
of Settlement contained which are or ought to be
observed performed and kept by him in respect of or in
relation to such shares and in relation to the Company and
its affairs according to the true intent and meaning of
the same covenants articles and agreements respectively
And the same shall he binding upon the heirs executors
administrators and assigns of every such person
111, The object and business of the Company shall <
be to work or contract for the working of the coal and
other minerals in or upon any land of which the said
Company may from time to time be owners or lessees
To purchase or take on lease coal or other mineral lands
or the coals or other minerals thereupon or thereunder
and to work the same To follow up and act upon
any trade or purpose mentioned in any regulations for
the management or conduct of coal or other mines in the
said Colony of New South "Wales already promulgated or
hereafter to be promulgated To purchase the necessary
machinery for working the said mines or for testing the
mining capabilities of any land purchased or taken on
lease or intended to be purchased or taken on lease or tho
coal or minerals whereon are or may be purchased or taken
on lease or intended to be purchased or taken on lease by the
said Company or for draining any mines or any other pur-
pose in connection therewith To export sell or otherwise
dispose of all coal or other minerals to be raised from any
land belonging to or taken on lease by the said Company
or from any land whatsoever To dispose of the timber on
any such land To raise fire-clay make and dispose of fire
bricks To make and dispose of coke To let or sell any
such lands and to construct railways roads wharves and
other matters necessary for the promotion of the objects of
the said Company And for such other purposes as shall
from time to time be agreed on as hereinafter mentioned
IT,
Objects of tho
Company.


IV. The whole management of the business of the
i Company shall be and the same is hereby reposed in the
Board of Directors herein more particularly mentioned
and subject to the hmitations herein contained and the
powers hereby vested in general meetings and special
general meetings of the shareholders the individual
parties hereto do hereby for themselves severally and
respectively and for their several and respective heirs
executors and administrators renounce and disclaim, all
right to interfere in the management of the affairs of the
Company or to inspect the books accounts or writings
of the Company except the Deed of Settlement and the
Share Register or (unless appointed as herein provided)
to sign accept or endorse any bill note or negociable
security in the name of the Company or to enter into
any other contract or engagement so as to charge or
bind the Company or the properties funds securities
or moneys of or belonging to the Company
> V. The Board of Directors are hereby authorised to
■ purchase or take on lease all such lands mines ores
' and minerals as they may from time to time consider
necessary The conveyances or leases of any lands
mines ores and minerals wherein the said Company
may be interested prior to the passing of the Act of
Incorporation herein provided for shall be made to the
said Saul Samuel and John Donald M c Lean in trust for
the said Company But upon the passing of such Act
of Incorporation all lands mines ores and minerals
theretofore or thereafter purchased or taken on lease on
behalf of the said Company shall be conveyed demised
assigned to or vested in the Corporation And the
Directors are also empowered to construct all such
railways roads wharves and other matters as may be
necessary for the purpose of carrying into effect the
objects of the said Company
I VI. The Board of Directors are hereby empowered
to sell or demise any land wherein the Company may be
interested or any timber thereon or any other property
of
Management
to ho in Direc-
tors and rights
of individual
Partners re-
nounced.
Authority to
Directors to
make all ne-
cessary pur-
chases or
leases.
Power to Di-
rectors to sell
or lease Pro- 1
party of Com-
pany.


of the said Company as they may think advisable But
so that no sale or lease of any land (except in the case
of timber or the surface only of any land or of the pro-
duce of any land or of any surplus or cast off machinery
implements or other articles which it may he neces-
sary from time to time to dispose of) shall he made
or granted without the concurrence of a general
meeting or special general meeting of the shareholders
YII. All meetings of the shareholders and Direc- ]
]
tors .and the principal business of the Company shall he
held and carried on at such place in the city of Sydney
as the Board of Directors shall from time to time deter-
mine on and also if it shall be determined in pursuance
of the provisions herein contained to establish Agencies
the same shall be carried on at such places as the Board
of Directors may from time to time determine upon
CAPITAL.
VIII. The capital of the Company shall consist of
twenty thousand pounds sterling to be contributed in
five thousand shares of four pounds each and of such
further sum or sums of money as may hereafter be
raised by the creation and sale of new shares as herein
provided
IX. As between the shareholders and their respec-
tive real and personal representatives the said capital
and all the funds and property of the Company and the
share and shares of each shareholder shall be deemed
personal estate and be transmissible as such and there
shall not be benefit of survivorship among the share-
holders in respect of the said capital funds and
property
SHARES.
X. The shares and interest of the shareholders of
and in the capital and of and in the property and effects
held or to be held by or for the said Company or
connected
Place of liusi"
nosa.
'Capital of tlio
Company.
Capital and
property ciftho
Oompuny to 1)0
personalty
\vi thtmt sui'vi-
vorship.
Shares.


connected therewith and of and in all profits and losses
which shall he received or sustained in the prosecution
and carrying out of the objects or purposes of the said
Company shall he considered as divided into five thou-
sand parts or shares and in case and whenever any new
shares shall he created under the provisions herein for
that purpose contained the interest of the shareholders
of and in the said property profits and losses of the said
Company shall he considered as divided into the said five
thousand parts or shares and such number or numbers
of new shares as shall from time to time he so created
as aforesaid
XI. That each of them the said Saul Samuel John
Donald M‘Lean Alexander Campbell Eranois Mitchell
and Edward Brooking Cornish shall have and be entitled
to one thousand of the said shares making in all five
thousand shares the whole capital on which namely
twenty thousand pounds being four pounds per share is
fully paid
) XII. The Company shall not be bound in any
manner by any trusts or equitable interests affecting any
: shares standing in the name of any person or to take
any notice of any such trusts or equitable interests but
the receipt of the shareholder in whose name the shares
shall stand in the books of the Company shall notwith-
standing any such trust or equitable interest and notice
thereof to the Company be a good and sufficient dis-
charge for the money which may become payable by the
Company in respect of the shares standing in the name
of such shareholder And the Company shall not be
bound to see to the application of the money paid upon
such receipt And a transfer of the shares by such share-
holder shall when complete be binding and conclusive
against all persons claiming by virtue of such trusts or
equitable interests whether the Company have had
notice of such trusts or equitable interests or not Pro-
vided however that when the Company shall have had
such notice it shall be in the discretion of the Board of
Directors
Allotment of
shares.
No Trusts to
bo noticed
unless the Di-
rectors think
fit.


Directors to refuse to sanction any such transfer and to
require tlie concurrence of the person or persons so
claiming and in case such sanction shall he refused then
any deed or instrument whereby a transfer of such shares
shall he attempted shall he wholly inoperative And
provided also that when the Company shall have had
such notice it shall in like manner he in the discre-
tion of the Board of Directors to refuse to pay any
dividend or bonus to the legal shareholder without the
concurrence of the persons claiming in respect of such
trusts or equitable interests.
XIII. No legatee next of kin or cestui erne trust i
U I
claiming under the will of any deceased shareholder c
shall as such become a shareholder of any shares But 3
in all cases where legatees or next of kin of deceased [
shareholders or cestui qm trusts shall become entitled'
to or interested in any such, shares the executors or
administrators of such deceased shareholders shall he
considered as the holders of the shares and shall he the
only persons entitled to become shareholders or to pro-
cure some other persons to become shareholders in respect
thereof.
XIV. The husband of any female shareholder or.
the executor or administrator of any deceased share-
holder or the committee of any lunatic shareholder may'
on notice in writing to the head office of the Company'
at Sydney and production of satisfactory evidence of’
title either elect to become a shareholder in respect of:
the shares to which lie shall he entitled in either of these
capacities or procure any other person to become a
shareholder in respect of such shares hut the trustees or
assignees of any insolvent or bankrupt shareholder shall
not he entitled to become a shareholder in respect of the
shares of such insolvent or bankrupt shareholder but
shall procure some other person to become a shareholder
in respect thereof Provided always that no person shall
he entitled to receive any dividends or other profits which
shall he declared on the shares of such female deceased
0 lunatic
No logntoo
next of Inn or
cestui quo trust,
to bo ronog-
iu«od l.mt nxi -
ontnr or ml-
niiuintrator
only.
As to ahnvoH
of fonmlo
Blmro'holdor
. on hor marry-
ing and of
■ docoaaod luna-
tic and insol-
‘vont or lianlc-
,rupt slmru-
lioJdor.


lunatic insolvent or bankrupt shareholder accruing after
Ms or her marriage death commission of lunacy insol-
vency or bankruptcy until some person shall have become
a shareholder in respect of such shares And the person
who shall ultimately become a shareholder in respect of
such shares shall he entitled to such last-mentioned
dividends and profits and the full right and interest of
i and in such shares And provided farther that if no per-
; son shall become a shareholder in respect of such shares
■within the period of two years from the date of such
marriage death or commission of lunacy respectively
then the rights herein reserved to such husband executor
administrator or committee respectively shall cease and
determine and it shall he lawful for the Board of Direc-
tors to sell the said shares by public auction and to retain
the proceeds together with the interest and dividends
which shall have accrued previously to such sale until
the person legally entitled thereto shall establish his claim
to the satisfaction of the Board of Directors And such
person shall not he entitled to claim interest on the
amount so retained And if no person shall have become
a shareholder in respect of the shares of such insolvent
or bankrupt shareholder within the period of three
mouths after the insolvency or bankruptcy of such insol-
vent or bankrupt shareholder it shall he competent to
the Board of Directors if they shall think fit to sell the
said last-mentioned shares by public auction and the
net proceeds of such sale shall in such case he paid over
by the Board of Directors to the said trustee or assignee
for the benefit of the estate of the said insolvent or
bankrupt.
XV. All persons claiming any shares by transmis-
sion or claiming aright to procure another person to be
a shareholder according to the provisions of the last pre-
ceding clause shall before he shall he recognised as a
shareholder of such shares or before he shall be permitted
to procure another person to become a shareholder as the
case may require and every guardian committee of a
lunatic
Sale of such
shares if not
taken up hy
party entitled,
Transmission
of shares hy
other means
than transfer
to he authen-
ticated hy a
declaration.


lunatic or other person claiming a right to act in a
representative character on behalf of a shareholder shall
before he shall be permitted to become a shareholder or
receive any dividends or transfer any shares or exercise
any of the rights and privileges conferred by this Deed
authenticate such transmission or right by a declaration
in writing setting forth the material facts which declara-
tion shall be made and signed by some credible person
before some Justice of the Peace or Notary Public and
shall be subject to the consideration and approval of the
Board of Directors.
XYI. If such transmission be by virtue of the :
* 1
marriage of a female shareholder the declaration shall ]
contain a copy of the register of such marriage or other
particulars of the celebration thereof and shall declare
the identity of the wife with the holder of such shares
And if such, transmission have taken place by virtue of
any testamentary instrument or by intestacy the probate
of the will or the letters of administration or an official
extract therefrom shall together with such declaration
be produced to the Secretary of the Company And if
such right be claimed in consequence of insolvency or
bankruptcy or of any appointment as a guardian or as a
committee of a lunatic a certificate signed by the com-
missioner of bankrupts or insolvents or the master in
equity as the case may require shall together with such
declaration he produced and left with the Secretary And
if such right be claimed by virtue of any power of
attorney the power of attorney shall he so produced and
left And upon such production and the due execution
of these presents in either of the cases aforesaid the
shares shall be transferred in the hooks of the Company
to the name of the person entitled to become a share-
holder in respect thereof.
XVII. Subject to the provisions and restrictions
herein contained and to the approbation of the Board of
Directors every separate share hut not any fractional
part of a share shall be transferable and assignable by
the
Proof of trans-
mission liy
.marriage "will
&ci.
Slimes iiviim-
.faroble.


the shareholder of such share to any other person as
folly and effectually as any other interest is by law
assignable so as such assignment and transfer be made
in such manner and form, as the Board of Directors shall
from time to time settle and determine and the execution
thereof duly attested to the satisfaction of the said Board
Provided that no body corporate shall hold any
shares Provided also that no shares shall be transferred
after any call shall have been made by the Board of
Directors until the amount of such call in respect of
such shares with the interest due thereon if any shall
have been paid.
t XYIII. On the completion of the transfer of any
shares and the execution of this Deed or a duplicate
thereof by the person to whom the same shall be trans-
ferred the previous holder of such shares shall as between
the shareholders and so far as regards such shares be
exonerated and released from all claims demands obliga-
tions and liabilities in respect of such shares and from
all further observance and performance of any covenants
conditions stipulations or agreements herein contained
or which may be contained in any supplementary deed
by-law or regulation of the Company and the person to
whom such transfer shall be made shall have the same
privileges and be subject to the same liabilities as the
original shareholder.
XIX. Every deed or instrument of transfer and
every other deed or instrument in writing on which the
right of any shareholder may be founded or an attested
copy of every such last mentioned deed or instrument of
transfer shall be deposited and kept at the office of the
Company And no such deed or instrument of transfer
shall be valid or effectual until so deposited But every
such shareholder shall be entitled at all times by writing
under his hand to require the same to be produced and
shown forth to himself or to such person as he shall
require on payment of all reasonable costs and charges
attending the production and showing forth of the same.
XX.
Transferror
released from
liability.
Custody of
Deeds of
transfer.


XX Every person to whom any original new or'
forfeited shares shall he allotted or assigned or to whom |
any shares shall he transferred shall within six months!
after the date of such allotment assignment or transfer J
execute the Deed of Settlement or a duplicate thereof l
unless he shall have previously executed it in respect of
shares held hy him at the date of such allotment assign-
ment or transfer in which case such execution shall take
effect in respect of the newly acquired shares of such
person and shall apply to the same fully and effectually
notwithstanding that such person shall afterwards sell
and transfer the shares in respect of which he originally
executed the deed And in default of such execution
within the time limited the shares in respect of which
default shall have been made shall he absolutely forfeited
to the Company Provided nevertheless that the Board
of Directors may if they think fit upon the application
of the party to whom such allotment assignment or
transfer shall have been made discharge the shares from
forfeiture and restore the same or any part thereof to
such shareholder on such terms as the Board of Directors
may think proper And in the event of such discharge
the forfeiture shall upon such execution of the Deed of
Settlement or a duplicate thereof as aforesaid be held not
to have occurred and the rights and liabilities of the
shareholder making default shall be deemed not to have
been in anywise aifected Provided also that in the case
of a transfer of shares the transferor shall until such
execution of this Deed by the transferee or until such
forfeiture of his shares transferred be deemed and taken
to be the continuing shareholder of the same except only
as against the transferee and in respect of the receipt of
dividends and the disposal of the shares.
XXI. All shares forfeited in pursuance of any pro-
vision herein contained shall in a reasonable time after
such forfeiture in the discretion of the Board of Direc-
tors be disposed of by public sale or private contract to
such persons as may be willing to accept the same andto
execute
Trww&roo of
shares to
execute Deed
unless pre-
viously execu-
ted by him in
respect of
‘other shares.
Salo anil
transfer of for-
feited shaves.


execute these presents And thereupon a transfer or
assignment of such shares shall be made by the direction
of the Board to the purchaser thereof by the Secretary
of the Company or by such Director as the Board of
Directors may appoint Provided nevertheless that it
shall be lawful to withhold any such forfeited shares
from immediate sale and to retain the same for a reason-
able time in every case in which it is hereby made com-
petent to the Board of Directors to discharge such
forfeiture and in which they shall think it probable that
an application for such discharge will be made by the
shareholder or late shareholder and that it would be
proper to discharge the same upon such application
being made And in case of forfeiture for non-payment
of calls the proceeds arising from any such sale shall be
applied in payment of the call or calls in respect whereof
default shall have been made and the surplus thereof if
any after deducting the expenses of such sale shall be
placed to the credit of such defaulter with the Company.
XXII. It shall be lawful for a general or a special
general meeting of the shareholders constituted as here-
inafter mentioned and called for the purpose of consider-
ing the propriety of increasing the capital of the Com-
pany by the creation and sale of new shares by a resolu-
tion to be passed by the majority of votes of the share-
holders present at any such meeting in person or by
proxy to create such further and additional shares of
four pounds each as may from time to time lie deemed
advisable and to direct the mode in which such additional
shares shall be allotted and disposed of and to determine
the time for the payment of the amount thereof Provided
always that the shareholders actually present at such
meeting in person or by proxy shall be possessed in the
aggregate of not less than half of the actual paid up
capital of the Company.
XXIII. All new shares which may be created by
any resolution for the increase of the capital of the
Company as hereinbefore provided and all forfeited
shares
Creation of
now shares.
Xew shares
vested in
Chairman
until assigned
to purchasers.


shares shall until the same shall respectively be assigned
to the purchasers thereof he vested in the Chairman of
the Company in trust nevertheless for the benefit of all
the shareholders.
XXIY. All such new shares when they shall have (
been allotted or disposed of and so soon thereafter as thei
amount thereof together with such premiums as may be
payable thereon shall have been duly paid according to the
provisions to be made in that behalf shall he assigned to
the persons entitled thereto by memorandum of assign-
ment and agreement to he made and entered into under
the direction of the Board hy the Secretary of the
Company or hy the Chairman or any other Director
appointed hy the Board of Directors for that purpose
whereby the said Secretary Chairman or Director shall
declare that such person has become entitled to so many
new shares of the amount of four pounds each in the
Capital stock of the Company and shall assign the same
to him accordingly and whereby the latter shall agree to
accept the said new shares and to submit and conform
himself to all the articles stipulations and agreements in
the Deed of Settlement contained and thereupon the
persons becoming shareholders of such new shares shall
have in every respect the same rights and be subject to
the same liabilities as the shareholders of the original
capital.
SHARE REGISTER.
XXY. The name and place of abode of every j
shareholder with the number of shares held by him shall
from time to time be entered in a book to be kept for
that purpose to be called the “ Share Register ” and
every shareholder who may change his name or
place of abode or being a female shall marry and the
assignee or trustee of every shareholder who shall
become bankrupt or insolvent and the committee of
every shareholder who shall be duly found a lunatic
and
Original
assignment of
new shares.
Share Regis-
ter.


and the executor or administrator of every share-
holder who shall die shall immediately upon
and after any of the said events leave a written notice
at the head office of the Company stating his or her
name or new name and place of abode and when a
female shareholder shall have been married then the
name and place of abode of her husband And the share
register shall be open to the inspection of the several,
shareholders at all reasonable times.
XXVI. The Share Register shall at all times be
prinidfacie evidence to slioav who are the shareholders
for the time being entitled to a share or shares of the
Capital of the said Company and the number of their
respective shares.
CALLS.
XXYII. That the Board of Directors may require
and call for the payment by the shareholders of newly
created shares of the whole amount payable on any such
newly created shares held by them respectively either
altogether or by such instalments as the Board of
Directors shall think lit Provided that notice of such
call expressing the time and place when and whore the
payment is required to be made shall bo given one
calendar month at least before the time appointed for
the payment of the same And each shareholder shall
pay the calls so respectively made accordingly and with
interest thereon at the rate of ten pounds per centum
per annum from the day when such call shall have been
made payable if not paid on such day And the Board of
Directors shall have full power by action of debt or other
lawful proceedings to sue for or direct any action or suit
to be brought for the recovery of the amount of every
call and interest thereon at the rate aforesaid from the
day when the same was due or payable until payment
thereof from any person refusing or neglecting to pay the
same as aforesaid And on the trial of any such action
or
Sliaro Regis-
ter to bo
ovidonco of j
ownership.
Board may
make calls
subject, to
oertainregula-
tions and
evidence in
notion for
calls.


or suit it shall not be necessary to prove the appointment
of the Directors who made the call or any other matter
except that the defendant at the time of making such
call was a holder of one share or more in the said Company
and that such call was in fact made and (where neces-
sary) such notice given as is directed by the Deed of
Settlement And thereupon the said Company or the
person or persons who shall represent the said Company
in any such action or suit shall be entitled to recover
what shall he due upon such call with interest thereon
And also if the Board of Directors shall think fit it shall
be lawful for them to sell the shares held by such person
in the manner herein directed.
XXYIII. The Board of Directors may call for the
payment of such instalments respectively at such times i
and places as they may determine by one or more public
advertisement or advertisements in one or more of the
public newspapers or by circular letters as herein provided.
XXIX. Every instalment called for shall hear in-:
terest from the day on which the same shall become due i
at the rate of ten per cent, per annum And the amount of
such instalment with interest as aforesaid shall he re-
coverable by action if the same be not paid within the
time to be appointed for that purpose as aforesaid.
XXX. In case default shall be made by any of the;
parties to these presents in the payment of any call that
shall he made and become payable on his shares for the
space of three calendar months next after the same shall
have become payable it shall he lawful for the Board of
Directors to declare the shares on which such default has
been made and the deposit and calls previously paid
thereon and all benefit and advantage whatever attend-
ing the same to be absolutely forfeited to the Company
and the person or persons making such default shall
thereupon in respect of such shares cease to be a member
of the Company Provided nevertheless that the Board of ]
Directors may if they think fit upon the application of!
the shareholder or late shareholder discharge any such
d shares
Calls of instal-
ments on
shares.
Interest on
and recovery
of calls.
Forfeiture of
shares on de-
fault of pay-
ment of calls.
'Forfeiture
,may be dis-
charged


shares from forfeiture and restore the same or any part
thereof to such shareholder on such terms as they may
think fit and in the event of such discharge the
forfeiture shall he held not to have occurred and the
rights and liabilities of the shareholder making default
not to have been in anywise affected And provided fur-
ther that it shall he lawful for the Board of Directors if
they think fit instead of declaring such shares to he for-
feited, to enforce payment of the calls with interest as
herein provided or to sell so many only of the shares of
any shareholder so making default as may he necessary
and sufficient to pay the amount payable upon the whole
of such shareholder’s shares and all expenses costs and
charges.
DIRECTORS.
XXXI. There shall he five Directors of the said
i Company and three Directors shall form a Board or
Quorum The said Saul Samuel J ohn Donald MiLean
Alexander Campbell Brands Mitchell and Edward Brook-
ing Cornish are and shall he the first Directors.
! XXXII. At each general meeting hereby directed
to he held in the month of January in each year one
Director shall retire from office such retirement until the
first Directors shall have retired to he in the following
order namely Alexander Campbell John Donald
M'Lean Sard Samuel Brands Mitchell and Edward
Brooking Cornish then in each, succeeding year the.
Director who shall have been longest in office
shall retire and so on during the continuance of
the said Company And any Director who shall, at any
time he re-elected shall he deemed to he and have been
in office from the time of such re-election But all the
said first Directors shall retire before any new or re-
elected Director shall retire Provided nevertheless that
in case at any time from any cause whatsoever no such,
new Director shall he elected as aforesaid the retiring
Director shall he considered as re-elected and shall con-
tinue in office until a new Director shall he appointed
Provided
Directors —
FirstDireotors
Three to form
Board.
Eetiroment of
Directors.


Provided nevertheless that any retiring Director shall
thereupon he eligible for election.
XXXIII. The Directors shall he elected from £
amongst the shareholders and each Director shall he
possessed of one hundred shares at the least but no
shareholder shall he eligible or qualified to be or act as
a Director who being or becoming indebted to the Com-
pany shall fail to satisfy his debts within a time fixed by
the Board of Directors for that purpose or who shall
within three years preceding the day of election have
taken the benefit of any Act for the relief of insolvent
debtors or who shall within that time have been bank-
rupt or have made an assignment of his estate for the
benefit of his creditors or have made a composition with
his creditors or who shall after his election as a Director
cease to be possessed of one hundred shares become
bankrupt or insolvent or make any assignment of his
estate for the benefit of his creditors or compound with
his creditors or who shall be absent from, the Board for
any longer period than two calendar months without
leave of the Directors.
XXXIY. The Board of Directors as soon as they ]
J 1
shall receive notice of the non-qualification or disqualifi- ]
cation of any person, then being a Director of the Com-
pany shall forthwith proceed to enquire into the matter
at a meeting of Directors specially convened for that
purpose and if they shall be satisfied that such Director
is not duly qualified shall declare Ms office to be vacant
and the same shall thereupon become vacant and
such Director shall be removed from the Direction
of the Company and the Board shall then take the
necessary steps for filling up such vacancy Provided
always that such non-qualification or disqualification
shall not extend to render illegal or invalid any act deed
matter or thing done or executed or suffered to be done
or executed for or on account of the Company by such per-
son assuming to act as a Director prior to such declara-
tion of vacancy but every such act deed matter or thing
so
Qualification
of Directors.
Removal of
unqualified
Directors.


so done or executed or suffered to be done or executed by
such person before Ms actual removal from office shall
be held to be valid binding and conclusive upon the
Company and the shareholders thereof any invalidity or
preceding disqualification for his office notwithstanding.
XXXY. Any Director may at any time vacate his
office by sending in his resignation in writing to the
Board of Directors And a general meeting of the share-
holders specially called for the purpose shall have power
at any time to remove from his office any Director for
negligen.ce misconduct in office or any other reasonable
cause Provided always that the shareholders present at
any such general meeting in person or by proxy shall be
possessed in the aggregate of not less than one-third of
the actual paid up capital of the Company.
XXXYI. That in case of any vacancy in the office
of Director occasioned by death resignation disquali-
fication or removal from office such vacancy shall within
two months after the same shall first happen be filled up
by election (at a special general meeting to be called for
the purpose) of some duly qualified shareholder to the
office (unless the general half yearly meeting shall take
place within such two months whereat some duly quali-
fied person shall be elected to fill such, vacancy) and such
person elected shall continue in office until the expira-
tion of the time that such deceased disqualified removed
or retiring Director might have continued in office Pro-
vided always that if two or more such vacancies shall
happen to be filled up together at any special general or
half yearly meeting the person elected by the greatest
number of votes shall be allowed to elect the vacancy
which he may prefer to fill,
f XXXYII. In case the conduct or position of any
Director shall be such that Ms continuance in office shall
appear to the Board to be prejudicial to the interests of
the Company it shall be lawful for the remaining four
Directors at a meeting of Directors specially convened
for that purpose to suspend such Director in case he
should
Eosignation
of Directors
and removal
by Share-
holders,
Filling up of
casual vacancy
in. tiro Direc-
tors,
Suspension of
Director.


should refuse to resign And the Board sliall call a
general meeting of shareholders who may if they think t
fit confirm such suspension and remove such Director or t
may annul such suspension and reinstate such Director
in his office.
XXXVIII. After the suspension of any such Director;
as aforesaid he shall not he at liberty to interfere in the !
business or affairs of the Company until such suspension’
shall he annulled and he shall forthwith deliver up to!
such person as the Board of Directors shall appoint alh
the keys used hy him as such Director as aforesaid and'
all. hooks papers moneys property and effects of the Com-
pany in his possession or control.
XXXIX. Every shareholder who shall become a'
candidate for the office of Director shall give notice
thereof to the Board of Directors in writing to he left at
the head office of the Company in Sydney fourteen days
at the least before the day of election and the names of
the candidates who have given such notice shall be pub-
lished in one or more Sydney newspaper or newspapers
ten days at the least before the day of the election and
no shareholder shall he eligible who shall fail to give
such notice.
XL, The election of Directors and Auditors at :
general or special general meetings shall he hy show of
hands unless two or more shareholders qualified to vote
shall demand a ballot and such ballot if demanded before
the Chairman shall have pronounced the question de-
cided shall he granted and scrutineers shall, be nominated
hy the majority in number of the persona duly qualified
to vote then present and the ballot shall he under the
direction of the scrutineers.
XLI. When and so often as on the election of any
Director or Auditor it shall happen that in consequence
of any two or more candidates having an equal number
of votes it cannot otherwise he determined which of such
candidates shall he the person to supply the vacancy it
shall he decided hy lot amongst such candidates which of
them
Special gene-
ral mootings
to confirm or
annul suspen-
sion.
Director dm--
ingsusponsion
not to intor-
foro in liusi-
noss or affairs
of tlio Com.
puny.
Director when
' suspended to
, deliver up
keys, &e.
, Notice l)y can-
didatoa for tho
! oflico of Di-
,rector.
; Mode of eloc-
ution of Dii'cc-
;‘tora.
r la oiiao of
equality of
) votes.


them shall supply such vacancy and the person in whose
favour such decision shall he made shall he considered
duly elected.
XLII. No irregularity informality or illegality in
the election of any Director or in the appointment of any
officer of the Company shall he taken or construed to
-render illegal or invalid any act deed matter or thing
done or executed or suffered to he done or executed hy
such Director or officer in pursuance of such election or
appointment before notice in writing shall have been
given by a shareholder to the Board of Directors of the
irregularity informality or illegality of such election or
appointment But upon receipt of such notice the Board
shall unless the Director or officer shall voluntarily re-
sign or retire proceed to inquire into the objection to
such election or appointment at a meeting in the case of
a disputed election of a Director of not less than three
Directors other than, the one whose election is disputed
specially convened for the purpose And if the Board of
Directors shall he of opinion that such election or ap-
pointment is void they shall declare the office vacant
accordingly and the same shall thereupon become vacant
and a new election or appointment as the case may re-
quire shall he had or made.
XLIII. If any person holding the office of a
Director shall whilst unqualified or disqualified as here-
inbefore provided and having a knowledge thereof do
any act matter or thing in the capacity of a Director
except at the instance or with the approbation of the
Board of Directors after notice of his non-qualification
or disqualification he shall forfeit and pay to the Com-
pany the sum of one hundred pounds or such less amount
as the Board of Directors may upon his removal from
office think fit to delare as for a breach of covenant with
the other shareholders of the Company and the shares
standing in the name of such person shall be chargeable
with the payment of such penalty and may be sold by
the order of the Board of Directors to discharge the
same. XLIY.
Defects in
election or ap-
pointment of ■
Directors or
officers not to
invalidate acts
but upon dis-
covery the
officers to re-
tire or bo re-
moved.
Penalty on
imquanflod
nh'ootors
noting.


XLIY. The said John Donald M‘Lean shall be the:
first Chairman of the Company and the Directors shall
elect annually at their first meeting after the general
half-yearly meeting in the month of January from
amongst their own body a Chairman of the Company and
such Chairman shall be capable of being re-elected And
in case no new election shall take place in any year or
such election shall be delayed beyond the proper time
the Chairman of the previous year shall continue in
office until such new election shall take place And the
Chairman so elected or in his absence the Director who
shall be elected Chairman by the Directors present at
any meeting of the Board of Directors shall preside at
the meetings of the Board.
XLY. The yearly sum of three hundred pounds:
shall be paid to the Directors out of the funds of the
Company as a remuneration for their services and such
remuneration shall be distributed amongst the Directors
in such manner as the Board of Directors shall from, time
to time determine And further that the Board of Direc-
tors may if they think fit from time to time appoint one 3
of the Directors to act as Managing Director with such
powers as they may think fit and with such remunera-
tion to be paid out of the funds of the Company as the
Board may from time to time determine And the amount
of any further or other remuneration to the Directors
shall or may be settled and fixed at a general meeting of
the said Company.
XLYI. The Board of Directors may from time to:
time make such regulations for their own proceedings 3
and the despatch of business and also appoint such times •
for their ordinary and special meetings as they shall 1
think fit but any two Directors may at any time by
writing under their hands convene a special meeting of
the Board of Directors for the consideration of any
matter relating to the business of the Company Provided
that the object of such meeting be expressly stated in
the notice convening the same and that such notice be
left
i Election of
Chairman.
Eomunoration
to Directors.
Managing Di-
rector.
Directors to
regulate the
order of tlio
proceedings
and times of
mooting.


left at or posted to the usual places of residence or busi-
ness of the other Directors not less than twenty-four
hours before the time specified for holding such meeting.
XLYII. Every resolution order or direction made
and passed or given at any meeting of the Board of
Directors shall be liable to be rescinded amended or
altered at any other meeting or meetings of the Direc-
tors by whom the same was made and passed or given
or by a majority of the Directors at a meeting at which
a larger number of the Directors are present Provided
that in the last-mentioned case notice shall either have
been given to the Directors by whom the resolution order
or direction was made passed or given of the intention
to move for a rescission amendment or alteration thereof
or that the consideration of such motion shall if either
of the last mentioned Directors shall so require be ad-
journed to a future meeting And provided also that no
such rescission amendment or alteration shall invalidate
any act matter or thing in the meantime done or sub-
mitted to under or in consequence of such resolution
order or direction.
XLVIII. All questions coming before the Board of
Directors for consideration shall be decided by the
imajority of the votes of Directors present and not declin-
ing to vote or disqualified from voting And if there
shall be an equality of votes the Chairman of the meet-
ing shall have a casting vote in addition to his vote as
Director.
XLIX. The Board of Directors shall cause correct
minutes of their proceedings to be entered in a book to he
kept for that purpose and called the Minute Book and such
minutes shall contain the names of the Directors present
and he signed by the person presiding at each meeting
or by such person as the said Board shall sjiecially
appoint and such minutes shall he full and conclusive
evidence that the proceedings therein recorded took place
at a meeting of a Board of Directors regularly called
and that the person whose name is subscribed to such
minutes
Resolution of
Directors may
be rescinded.
Majority of
Directors to
decide ques-
tions. Chair-
man to have a
casting Tote.
Minutes to be
kept of pro-
ceedings at
meetings of
Directors.


minutes did sign and was duly authorised by the Board
of Directors to sign the same and such minutes shall he
held to he sufficient authority for every act deed matter
or thing that may be lawfully done in pursuance thereof.
L. The Board of Directors shall subject to the regu-
lations herein contained and to the powers herein con-:
ferred on general and special general meetings of the :
shareholders and to the specific directions and restrictions
hereby given or imposed to and upon them have the
entire control and management of the business of the
Company its revenue and affairs and of the application
investment and disposal of its funds and capital and also
of the hooks of the Company And shall regulate and
determine the mode and terms of carrying on the business
thereof And shall and may in all matters not specially
provided for by these presents act as to them shall appear
best calculated to promote the interests of the Company
And it is hereby expressly declared that the powers
specially herein conferred shall not he deemed to abridge
in matters not distinctly provided for the general powers
above granted.
LI. At every general half-yearly meeting the Board
of Directors shall present a balance sheet or general
summary of the accounts of the Company up to and
including the thirty-first day of December and the
thirtieth day of June next preceding such meeting and :
such further statement or report of the then condition of
the affairs of the Company as the Board shall deem
expedient for the interests of the Oonpany to be made
public and every such, balance sheet or summary shall
be signed by the Chairman of the Company for the
time being and certified by the Auditors and shall
he binding and conclusive on all the shareholders their
executors administrators and assigns as an admission
of the truth and correctness of the matters therein stated
unless some error shall he discovered therein and notice
thereof given to the Board before the next general meet-
ing and in that case such error so notified shall he cor-
k reeled
General
powers of
Board of Di-
rectors,
Tho Directors
shall present a
halauee shoot
or summary of
the accounts of
tho Company
at every gene-
ral meeting.


rected and set forth in the next balance sheet or summary
of the affairs of the Company.
LII. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors
’ on behalf of the Company to commence and prosecute in
the name of the Trustees of the Company or in the name
of the Chairman or other public officer who may by any
act of the Legislature of New South Wales be empowered
to sue or be made liable to be sued on behalf of the Com-
pany or in the corporate name of the Company if it shall
be incorporated any action suit or proceeding at law in
equity or insolvency against any persons whomsoever
whether members of the Company or not to enforce any
claims due by such persons to the Company And to
defend any such action suit or proceeding that may be
instituted against the Company And also to compromise
or abandon any such action suit or proceeding And also
to submit any matter in dispute to arbitration and abide
by such reference and submission and every award to be
made pursuant thereto And also to compound any debts
due to the Company and to join in any instrument or
composition or any conveyance or assignment of the
estate of any person indebted to the Company or in any
letter of license granting time to such debtor for the
payment of his debts And also to take proceedings for
procuring the sequestration of the estate of any debtor
to the Company as insolvent or to cause him to be de-
clared a Bankrupt or Insolvent according to the laws for
the time being and to do all such matters and things in
relation to the estate of such Insolvent or Bankrupt and
to the claim of the Company against the same and to the
proceedings in insolvency and bankruptcy as might be
done by an ordinary creditor And also to prefer and
prosecute charges for the stealing or embezzlement of
the moneys or property belonging to or deposited with
the Company or for any fraud forgery crime or offence
committed against or with intent to defraud the Company
and to prosecute or abandon the same And for the pur-
poses aforesaid or any of them the said debts moneys
goods
Power to com-
mence and de-
fend actions,
&c.
To abandon
compromise
or refer to ar-
bitration.
To compound
give time, &o.
To prosecute
criminally.
Property to
bo considered
as belonging
to Chairman,
&c.


goods effects securities or other property shall be deemed
to be the absolute property of the said Chairman or other
public officer or of tbe incorporated Company as the case
may be.
LIXI. It shall be lawful for the Board of Directors:
from time to time to make such bye-laws and regulations :
for their guidance in any matter not herein specially pro-
vided for as to them shall seem meet And also from time
to time to repeal alter and vary such hye-laws and regu-
lations and to make others in their stead Provided
always that such bye-laws and regulations shall not be
repugnant to these presents or to any laws rules or regu-
lations made and passed at any general or special general
meeting of shareholders.
LIY. It shall he lawful for the Board of Directors:
at the expense of the Company to apply for and endeavour i
to obtain an act of the Governor and Legislature of the;
Colony of New South Wales to incorporate the Company
under the name style and title of “ The Tomago Coal
Mining Company” and from time to time such other act
or acts of the Legislature of the said Colony as -the Board
of Directors may consider calculated to facilitate their
legal remedies and advance the general interests of the
Company And for the purpose of obtaining such act of
incorporation or such act or acts as aforesaid it shall be
competent to the Board of Directors on behalf of the
Company to comply with such conditions as may he im-
posed by any such act or acts anything in these presents
inconsistent with such conditions notwithstanding And
every provision herein contained inconsistent with the
provisions of such act or acts shall during the continu-
ance of the said act or acts be suspended and shall be of
no force and effect But after the expiration of the said
act or acts by effluxion of time or otherwise every such
provision herein contained shall again he in full force.
LY. It shall he lawful for the Board of Directors to:
purchase in fee simple or for any less estate and in such;
name or names as they shall think proper or take upon'
lease
Power of
Board of Di-
rectors to make
Bye-laws.
Power to ap-
ply for Act of
Council and
submit to con-
ditions.
Power to take
or 'build land
houses for
offices, &c.


lease erect build and put up suoli lands buildings houses
offices wharves staitlis and the necessary machinery for
shipping goods as the Board shall think fit for the pur-
pose of carrying on the business of the Company in
Sydney or at any other place or places where an agency
or agencies may hereafter be established And also at
any time or times thereafter to sell let demise ex-
change or otherwise dispose of such land houses pro-
perty and .premises in such manner as they may think
most advisable and cause the same to be conveyed and
assured accordingly And also to purchase all such ma-
chinery plant engines materials and other things as may
in their opinion be necessary to promote the objects of
the Company.
LYI. The Directors shall cause all moneys received
for and on account of the Company as and when the
same shall be received to be paid and delivered to the
Oriental Bank Corporation or such other Bank as the
Board of Directors may from time to time select which
Bank shall place the same to the credit of the Company
and the same may be withdrawn therefrom for the pur-
poses of the Company and not for any other purpose or
by any other means by cheques in writing signed by two
Directors and countersigned by such paid officer of the
Company as the Board of Directors may from time to
time appoint.
EVIL That it shall be lawful for the Chairman or
• any two of the Directors in pursuance of any resolution
of the Board of Directors to that effect to make accept
and indorse such Bills of Exchange or Promissory Notes
on behalf of the Company for any purposes connected
with the legitimate affairs and concerns of the Company
as the Board of Directors may think necessary And also
y to procure such advances and borrow such moneys and
otherwise obtain such moneys for the benefit and pur-
poses of the said Company upon the security of the
capital and property of the said Company or otherwise
as the Board of Directors shall think necessary.
LVIII.
To erect
wharves
staiths ma-
chinery for
shipping &c.
To Iray ma-
chinery, to.
All moneys to
1)0 lodged in
and drawn out f
of Bank under
regulations. S
Directors may
make or in-
dorse Bills for
purposes of
tlio Company.
Borrowmoney


LVIII. That it shall be lawful for the Board of:
Directors from time to time to appoint a Managing Di- i
rector Secretary Manager Solicitor and such other offi-
cers clerks and servants as the business of the Company
and of its agencies may require and from time to time to
remove or suspend any such Managing Director Secre-
tary Manager Solicitor and other officers clerks and
servants at their discretion And also from time to time
to fix alter and vary the duties to he performed and the
amount of remuneration to he given to each of such
Managing Directors Managers officers clerks and ser-
vants and to pay and discharge the same out of the
funds and property of the Company And also for and
on behalf of the Company to delegate to such officers as
may be appointed such powers as the said Board of Di-
rectors may consider necessary or expedient for the
transaction of the business of the Company.
LIX. Such Managing Director Secretary Manager
and other officers clerks and servants respectively shall
in every respect abide by and perform the orders and
regulations of the Board in the conduct of the business, of
the Company and shall if required by the Board give such
security as the Board of Directors shall from time to
time fix and determine for the due application of and ac-
counting for all moneys bills and other securities re-
ceived by them on behalf of the Company and for their
good and faithful conduct in their respective offices or
situations And all shares in the capital of the Company
held by any such Secretary Manager or other officer
clerk or servant may be retained by the Board of Direc-
tors as a security for the good and faithful conduct of
such Managing Director Secretary Manager or other
officer clerk or servant in such respective offices or
situations.
LX. The Board shall cause to be provided and kept
at the head office and at each agency office of the Com-
pany all necessary and proper books of account wherein 1
shall be entered in a fair regular explicit and plain man-
ner
Directors to
appoint offi-
cers clerks, &o.
and to x'ogu-
Into salaries
and fix duties.
' Officers, &o.
to give secu-
rity if required
&o.
1 Proper books
to bo kept and
balanced twioo
a year.


ner all receipts payments transactions and dealings by
or on behalf of the Company and all profits gains and
losses arising therefrom And also an account of the
dealings and investments that shall be made with or of
the capital of the Company and of the moneys deposited
with the Company and how the same have been applied
and paid from time to time and shall during the continu-
ance of the Company up to and including the thirtieth
day of June and thirty-first day of December in every
year in such manner as to the Board shall seem correct
and equitable cause the said books to be settled adjusted
and balanced And on every such balancing the Board
shall take and make up a fair accurate full and explicit
statement account and balance-sheet showing clearly
and justly the debts credits and liabilities of the Com-
pany and the amount and nature of the assets thereof
and the then fair value of the same and the profits and
gains and losses which shall have been made or incurred
by the Company and on each such balancing reference
shall be had to the then value of the assets of the Com-
pany.
LXI. The Board of Directors either voluntarily or
upon the requisition of any three shareholders holding in
the aggregate not less than five hundred shares may call
‘aspecial general meeting in manner herein appointed
for the purpose of expounding and determining the true
i meaning and construction of the several clauses and pro-
visions of the Deed of Settlement or of any rule or regu-
lation of the Company And the sense and meaning
given by the majority of the persons entitled to vote at
such meeting to any clause or provision of the Deed of
Settlement or to any rule or regulation of the Company
shall be deemed the true sense and meaning thereof.
SHAREHOLDERS.
DXII. No person shall be deemed or taken to be
1 a shareholder of or to have any interest in any share of
'the said capital or be entitled to any rights or privileges
as
Doubts in re-
gard to the
construction
of the clauses ,
rules regula-
tions or provi-
sions of deed
of sottlomout
to bo deter-
mined by a
special general
mooting.
Execution of
deed condition
precedent to
proprietorship


as a member of the Company until lie or she shall have
executed the Deed of Settlement or a duplicate thereof
either in person or by Attorney and complied with al
the provisions thereof which may he applicable to his or
her case Provided however that this article shall not
prevent the Company from requiring payment of and
receiving the deposit or any call upon shares agreed to he
taken by any person who shall not have executed this
deed or a duplicate thereof.
LXIII. Every shareholder shall have a separate:
and distinct right to his or her share or shares for the]
time being in the capital of the Company and shall he
entitled to and interested in the profits and liable and
subject to the losses of the Company in proportion to
the number of shares held by him or her subject never-
theless to the provisions of the Deed of Settlement.
LXIY. Every shareholder who may he indebted to i
the Company or to the trustees or any other person oni
behalf of the Company shall upon demand pay to the
person duly authorised by the Board of Directors in that'
behalf such debt or such part thereof as may at the time;
he due aud payable and shall he so demanded and shall;
not adopt or institute any proceedings in a Court of
Equity or otherwise for procuring any account,s to he
taken in relation to the partnership existing by virtue of
the Deed of Settlement and in case any such shareholder
shall make default in payment of the debt which, may he
so due and demanded of him then the amount of such
debt may under the order of the Board of Directors be
recovered from such shareholder his heirs executors or
administrators as liquidated damages And every party
to these presents hereby agrees that any debts which may
he so due by him and demanded and in payment whereof
there shall he such default shall and may he so recovered
as liquidated damages.
LXY. In all cases wherein a shareholder either by
himself or jointly with any other person and whether
directly or indirectly shall become a debtor to the Com-
pany
Eights and
liabilities of
1 shareholders.
i Shareholders
to pay their
■ individual
, debts to the
' Company
. without ro-
-1 quiring ao-
, count to bo
taken of the
, partnership.
Debts of indi-
vidual share-
holders to give
a lion on their
shares.


pany or to any person or persons for the use of the Com-
pany or shall be under engagements to the Company of
any land such debts and engagements shall be first and
paramount charges upon the shares of such shareholder
and the dividends or interest accruing thereon before all
other creditors of such shareholder and before his as-
signs voluntary and legal And it shall be lawful for the
Board of Directors if they shall see fit to prohibit and
restrain the transfer of the shares of such shareholder or
the payment of the dividends accruing thereon until all
and every such debts and engagements shall have been
fully paid and satisfied And if such shareholder shall
fail within a time to bo fixed by the Board of Directors
to pay and satisfy all such debts and engagements the
shares of such shareholder shall thereupon become for-
feited to the Company and it shall bo lawful for the
Board of Directors without notice to such shareholder
absolutely to sell the said shares or so many thereof as
shall bo necessary and sufficient for the purpose by pub-
lic auction and to apply the proceeds thereof together
with the dividends and interest due thereon in liquida-
tion of such debts and engagements and the balance of
the net proceeds of any such sale shall bo paid over to
the late shareholder of such shares.
LXYL When any shares shall lie vested in two or
more persons jointly or in common or otherwise the one
' of such persons or of the survivors of them whose name
shall stand first in the books of the Company as one of
the owners of such shares or the sole survivor of such
two or more persons shall be considered and deemed the
shareholder of such shares for the purpose of voting and
receiving dividends and of receiving any notice that may
be required to be given but all the parties shall be liable
jointly and severally to the Company for the fulfilment
of all the covenants herein contained And any notice
given to either of them shall bo deemed good notice to
all of them Provided that in case of the absence from
the Colony of the first-named of such joint shareholders
the
Of joint share-
holders ono
only to Ik)
recognised for
certain pur-
poses.


the other appearing next upon the Share Register as
joint shareholder shall he allowed to vote in respect of
shares so held,
IiXYII. In any and every action or suit at law or inJ
equity wherein a shareholder shall he plaintiff and the i
Company or any trustees or other persons acting on behalf!
of the Company shall be defendants and vice versa it shall 1
not be competent for either of the parties to such action
or suit to set tip the partnership created hy the Deed of
Settlement or hy or in respect of the association thereby
created or referred to as a bar to such action or suit
being sustainable And snob. ■ parties respectively shall
upon the trial or hearing of any such action or suit and
in all or any proceedings which shall he had in or in re-
lation to any such action or suit be obliged to waive and
forego the objection to any such action being tried at law
or to any sneb suit being instituted or prosecuted in
equity by reason of the plaintiffs and defendants being
partners in the Company And no objection shall at any
time be taken on the ground that all the shareholders
are not made parties to any such action, or suit And
upon any trial of any such action or any hearing
in any such suit it shall he imperative on the Board of:
Directors to produce or cause to be produced the Deed of
Settlement or a duplicate thereof and also the powers of:
Attorney (if any) under which the Deed of Settlement or
a duplicate thereof shall have been executed by any of
the parties thereto or such of the same instruments res-
pectively as shall he in the custody or power of the Board
of Directors and the same respectively shall he read and
used on or in any such trial hearing action or suit with-
out any proof of the due execution of the same respec-
tively And the matters and things in this present clause
stated shall and may be used in evidence at or in the
same trial hearing action or suit and shall have the same
force and effect as and hy way of admission from the
parties respectively as if the same matters and things had
been reduced into ’writing previously to such trial or
p bearing
Partnership
not to ho sot
up as a har to
,auy action or
suit being sus-
tainable.
' Board of
y Directors to
• produce tbo
?X)oodofSottlo-
■ mont on trial
k of action.
i Effect of the
provisions
ilioroin con-
taiaod.


hearing as admissions in the cause in the usual form
and had been signed by such parties or their respective
attorneys irrevocably And either of the parties shall if
required by the other of them consent to the Court or
any Judge of the Court in which such action shall be
brought or suit commenced making an order wherein
shall be embodied the matters and things last aforesaid
as admissions from the parties against whom such order
shall be sought to be read and used in evidence on any
such trial hearing action or suit by the party obtaining
■ such order And if any shareholder shall act in eontra-
'vention of this article and shall thereby succeed in
defeating the claim of the Company against him his
shares in the capital of the Company shall be absolutely
forfeited to the Company.
LXYIII. In order to encourage dealings by parties
with the Company in the way of the business of such
Company and to avoid the inconvenience at law or in
equity arising from the number and fluctuation of share-
holders the shareholders shall submit to be sued in the
name of the Chairman of the Company by any person
having any claim or demand against the Company and
shall not nor shall the said Chairman or Trustees or the
Board of Directors set up as a defence the non-joinder
of the other shareholders or any of them as parties to
any proceeding that may be taken in respect of any such
claim or demand And any judgment decree or order
made in any such proceeding shall be binding upon the
Company and upon each and every shareholder to the
extent of the limited liability hereby agreed upon by
the shareholders amongst themselves And this clause
shall in any such proceeding be deemed and taken to be
a waiver of any objection as to the want of parties and
may be read in Court as conclusive proof of such waiver.
LXIX. If any execution shall issue against any
individual shareholder or former shareholder or his
property and effects upon a judgment decree or order
obtained against the Company every such shareholder or
former
Forfeiture hy
party acting
in contraven-
tion of this
article.
Agreement to
submit to bo
sued in the
name of the
Chairman or 1
the Trustees
and not to 1
plead -want of'
parties.
Eeimhurßo-
meut to indi-
vidual share-
holders in
respect of exe-
cution upon
judgment.


former shareholder shall be reimbursed out of the pro-,
perty and effects of the Company for all moneys paid'
and for all damages costs and expenses incurred by
reason of such execution or of the action or suit in
which the same shall have issued or in default of such
reimbursement he shall be entitled to contribution from
the other shareholders of the Company as and subject
to the limitations herein provided.
LXX. If any such shareholder or former share-:
holder or his executors or administrators shall not bei
reimbursed out of the property and effects of the Com-:
pany it shall be lawful for him his executors or adminis-
trators to divide the amount of the moneys to bo paid
with interest damages costs and expenses or so much
thereof as he shall not have been reimbursed into as
many equal parts as there shall then be shares in the
capital of the Company not including shares then under
forfeiture And every shareholder for the time being of
the Company and the executors or administrators of
every deceased shareholder shall in proportion to the
number of his shares contribute and pay one or more of
such parts on demand to the shareholder against whom
such execution shall have issued or to his executors or
administrators And upon neglect or refusal to pay such
contribution it shall be lawful for such shareholder or
former shareholder his executors or administrators to sue
for and recover the same against the shareholder or the
executors or administrators of any shareholder who shall
so neglect or refuse as aforesaid as a debt or demand
recoverable at law and distinct from the accounts of the
partnership And if such shareholder or former share-
holder against whom such execution shall have issued
his executors or administrators shall by reason of the
bankruptcy or insolvency of any shareholder or from
any other cause but without any neglect or wilful default
on his own part be prevented from recovering any por-
tion of the moneys interest costs damages and expenses
which he shall have so paid as aforesaid it shall be lawful
for
against the
Company.
Remedy if not
reimbursed
out of the pro-
perty of tbs
Company.


for him or them again to divide such proportion as shall
not have been received by him or them into as many
equal parts as there shall then be shares in the capital of
the Company not including the shares under forfeiture
except the shares in respect of which such default shall
have happened And every shareholder for the time being
of the Company except as aforesaid and the executors or
administrators of any deceased shareholder shall rateably
according to the number of the shares of such share-
holder or deceased shareholder upon demand pay one or
more of such last-mentioned parts to the shareholder or
former shareholder against whom such execution shall
have issued his executors or administrators And in
default of payment he shall have the same remedies for
the recovery thereof as are hereinbefore given in respect
of the original contributions And if any portion of
such money interest costs damages and expenses shall
still remain unpaid by reason of any such bankruptcy
insolvency or other cause as aforesaid such shareholder
or former shareholder his executors or administrators
shall have in Mice manner from time to time and hy way
of accumulative remedy the same powers according to
the circumstances of the case of again dividing and
enforcing payment of such portion until he or they shall
in the end if a former shareholder he fully reimbursed
the whole of the said moneys interests costs damages and
expenses and if then a, shareholder the whole excepting
the proportion appropriated to the shares held hy himself
[Provided however that no such contribution shall he
demandable to an extent greater than a sum equalling
the original amount of the shares in respect of which
the same shall he in any case demanded and that when-
ever any individual shareholder shall have paid hy calls
to meet losses or by contribution a sum equalling the
original amount of snob shares he shall no longer he
liable to pay any further amount either hy reason of any
call or as contribution at the instance of any other share-
holder against whom, an execution upon a judgment
against the Company shall have issued.
GENERAL
Covenant to
pay rateably.
Limitation of
Lability.


GENERAL MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS.
LXXI. That the first half-yearly meeting of share-]
holders shall he held in the month of January onel
thousand eight hundred and sixty-two to be called in the
manner herein prescribed and thereafter successive half-
yearly general meetings of the shareholders shall be
held at the head office of the Company in Sydney or at
some other convenient place in Sydney to be notified in
the advertisement of such meeting in the months of
July and January in each year on such day as the Board
of Directors shall see fit to appoint for holding any such
meeting And it shall be the duty of the Secretary of the
Company to cause an advertisement of the time and
place of holding such meetings to be inserted in one or
more of the principal neAVspapers published in Sydney
for the space of ten days at least before the appointed
time.
■ LXXII. The business of every half-yearly general
meeting shall be to fill up the vacancies which shall then
exist or take place in the Board of Directors and to do
such other matters and things as are herein particularly
required or allowed to be done thereat and also to con-
sider the report of the Directors to be then made and to
consider and decide on such other matters and things as
may then be brought forward by the Board of Directors
relating to the affairs of the Company or which may be
brought forward by any shareholder who shall have given
to the Board of Directors seven days’ previous notice at
the least of his intention to bring such matters and
things forward at such meeting.
LXXIII. The Board of Directors shall together
with the balance sheet herein mentioned cause to be laid :
before the shareholders at each half-yearly general
meeting a report of the Company’s affairs approved
of at a meeting of the Board of Directors and
bearing the signature of the Chairman of, such meeting
and such report shall contain the recommendation of the
Board of Directors as to the appropriation of the profits.
LXXIY.
Half-yearly
general meet-
ings of share-
holders.
livimnosa of
hall-yearly
gnnorul
juootingfl.
1 Directors'
half-yearly
■ reports.


LXXIV. In making up the balance sheet to be
'submitted to every half-yearly general meeting it shall
bo in the power of the Directors to charge to debit
of profit and loss account not only all debts due to the
Company which, shall appear to the Board of Directors
to be bad debts but also all such as shall appear to them
to be of a doubtful character And in case any such
debts shall afterwards be recovered the amount thereof
shall be again carried to the credit of the profit and loss
account.
LXXY. The reports made by the Board of Directors
at any half-yearly general meeting of shareholders and
the balance sheet exhibited thereat and the half-yearly
accounts as certified by the Auditors and also the
minutes of proceedings at all such meetings shall be
printed and circulated amongst the shareholders as soon
as conveniently may be by letters addressed as herein
provided with respect to notice of special general
meetings.
LXXYI. If it shall appear at any one of the half-
yearly general meetings hereinbefore required to be held
that there is no immediate or prospective employment
for the full amount of the capital actually paid-up and
if a diminution of the capital shall have been recom-
mended in the report made by the Board of Directors to
the shareholders at such meeting it shall bo lawful for
such general meeting to enter into a resolution to
diminish the capital of the Company in such manner
and to such amount as shall bo specified in such resolu-
tion And in pursuance of such, resolution, the Board of
Directors shall cause', the same to bo paid back to the
several shareholders but the amount so paid back may
again be called for by the Board of Directors in the
same manner as if the amount had never been brought
into the capital stock.
LXXVII. Subject to such notice as is herein re-
quired special general meetings of the shareholders
shall be held at such time and places as the Board of
Directors
Had and
doubtful debts
to bo deducted
from profits
half-yearly.
Directors'
reports and ’
balance shoots,
and Auditors'
reports, to lie
communicated
to share-
holders by
letter.
Reduction and
return of
surplus capital.
with power to •
recall.
Calling of
apodal'general
mootings.


Directors may determine And also if any number (not
less than four) of shareholders holding not less than five
hundred shares in the capital of the Company shall at
any time by writing under their hands require the Board
of Directors to call a special general meeting for any
purpose relating to the Company it shall be incumbent
on the Board of Directors to call the same Provided
that in every such requisition the object for which such
special general meeting is required shall be distinctly
expressed And if such requisition shall not be complied
with within ten days after the same shall have been left
at the head office it shall be lawful for the shareholders
signing such requisition of their own authority to call a
special general meeting to be held at the head office or
some other convenient place in Sydney for the considera-
tion of the same matters relating to the Company as
were set forth in such requisition.
LXXYIII. Except as hereinafter provided ten days:
notice at the least shall be given of all such special
general meetings of the shareholders either by adver-
tisement in one or more of the Sydney newspapers or
by circular letters addressed to the several shareholders
as herein provided And in. such notice there shall be
distinctly expressed the objects for which the meeting is
convened And the business of such special general
meetings shall be to consider and dispose of all such
matters and things relating to the business of the Com-
pany as may then be brought forward in accordance
with the notice given as aforesaid and no other.
LXXIX. In cases of emergency and urgency in!
which it shall appear to the Directors present at any!
meeting of the Board of Directors duly called essential'
or of much importance to the interests of the Company
that certain matters should he brought under the con-
sideration of the shareholders with greater promptitude
than the notice hereinbefore required could admit of it
shall be competent to the Board of Directors to convene
a special general meeting by advertisement or circular
letters
Notice of
mootings.
Special
general meet-
ings in oases of
emergency.


letters to lie holden within not less than live days of the
publication of such advertisement or the posting of such
notices And such meeting shall possess all the powers
of a special general meeting held in the ordinary course
hereinbefore described.
LXXX. When and so often as it shall appear to the
Board of Directors or to the shareholders who shall call
any special general meeting (upon default of the
Directors to comply with a requisition for that purpose)
to be desirable to give notice of any meeting of share-
holders or of any adjournment thereof or of the object
of any such meeting or to give any other notice required
by the Deed of Settlement or which may he required hy
any future rule or regulation hy circular letters instead
of public advertisement thereof it shall ho competent for
the Board of Directors or for such shareholders to
address such circular letters and send the same by post
to the several shareholders at their respective residences
or at the last place of residence which shall have boon
notified to the Secretary of tire Company or to address
snob notice (if the Board of Directors or the Secretary
shall so think fit) to any executors or administrators of
a deceased shareholder or the committee of a lunatic
shareholder or the guardian of an infant shareholder or
next of kin to an intestate shareholder or tho trustee or
assignee of an insolvent or bankrupt shareholder or to
the agent of any shareholder absent from tho Colony in
case such executors administrators committee guardian
trustee or assignee and agent respectively shall have
certified their respective titles or representative position
to the Secretary of the Company and have communicated
their names and addresses And in case any shareholder
whatsoever shall not have communicated his address to
the Secretary and in respect of shares which hy death or
operation of law shall have ceased to be vested in the
shareholder in whose name tho shares shall stand in the
hooks of the Company and shall not have become vested
in any new r shareholder according to the provisions
♦ herein
USTotico liy
circular
letters.


herein contained it shall he unnecessary for any such
letter to he written or addressed to any person whatso-
ever But the shareholder or party entitled shall never-
theless he hound hy all the acts of any such meeting of
shareholders in the same manner as if lie had received
notice thereof.
LXXXI. The testimony of the Secretary of the i
Company that the said letters were to the best of his]
knowledge and belief written and addressed in con-
formity with the provision hereinbefore contained and
that they were delivered out hy him for the purpose of
being despatched by post according to their respective
addresses and that he verily believes that the same were
respectively put into the Post-office at or he lore (he
times respectively;.herein for the giving of the
notice conveyed hy, r such letters shall ho conclusive evi-
dence of the due service of the said notice.
IiXXXIIv afrattho lawful for a general or a spe-
cial general meeting of shareholders hy a majority of
votes to make new laws regulations and provisions for
the Company and to amend alter and repeal all or any
of the existing laws regulations and provisions of the
Company and to add to alter or vary tho objects or
purposes of the Company Provided such new amended
or altered laws regulations and provisions do not extend
to amend alter or repeal all or any part of the laws regu-
lations and provisions established and settled by these
presents for limiting the individual responsibility of the
respective shareholders of the Company as between them-
selves And provided further that no such new amended
or altered laws regulations and provisions shall he in
force till confirmed at a subsequent general or special
general meeting.
LXXXIII. Every general meeting and special gen’e- •
ral meeting shall adjourn to a future day if five shareholders i
holding in the aggregate not less than one thousand shares !
shall not assemble within half an hour after the time fixed
for such meeting and unless the said number of sharehold-
g ers
Proof of notieo
hy circular
letters.
■ Power of p;e-
-p noral mootings
L to mako now
. laws and ro-
-1 g'ulationn.
Ailjournimtnt
of mootings
for insuffioiont
attoiMlimco,


ers shall he present the meeting shall not be competent to
transact any other business than fixing the time for hold-
ing an adjournment of such meeting which adjournment
shall not exceed fourteen days from such meeting And
no such adjourned meeting shall proceed to any other
business than fixing the time for a further adjournment
unless the said number of shareholders shall be present
at the same.
LXXXIY. Every such adjournment as aforesaid
shall forthwith be notified to the shareholders either by
circular letters or by public advertisement in one or more
of tbe Sydney newspapers.
LXXXY. At any general or special general meeting
‘or adjournment thereof at which five persons qualified
to vote and bolding in tbe aggregate not less than one
thousand shares shall be present such persons or the
major part of them in number present at such meeting
may adjourn tbe same to such day and hour and to
such place in the city of Sydney as they shall think
proper But no such adjournment shall take place for
a longer period than seven days And no other
subject or business shall he proposed debated or
transacted at any adjourned meeting tha,n the subject
or business for which the original meeting was called
and which was not commenced or was left unfinished
at snob original or adjourned meeting And the persons
entitled to vote who shall ho present at any adjourned
meeting although they may not have been present at the
meeting whence the adjournment took place may vote at
such adjourned meeting and every adjournment shall ho
deemed a continuation of the original meeting.
, LXXXYI. That the Chairman elected by the Board
of Directors as hereinbefore provided or in his absence
the senior Director present shall unless he shall decline
to do so preside at all half-yearly general meetings of the
shareholders Provided that until the order of seniority
shall he established by the death and retirement or re-
moval from office of the first Directors appointed by
virtue
Notification
of such
adjournment.
Adjournment,
if business not
completed.
Chairmanship
at meetings of
shareholders 1
and casting
vote.


virtue of these presents the shareholders present at such
half-yearly general meetings shall in the absence of the
Chairman elect their own Chairman from the Directors
then present and at all special general meetings the
shareholders present shall elect their own Chairman and
on all questions submitted to any such half-yearly or
special general meeting the Chairman presiding shall
have the votes to which he shall be entitled as a share-
holder and also a casting vote in the case of an equality
of votes (except only in the case of the election of Direc-
tors herein provided for).
LXXXVII. In case any of the elections directed
by these presents to be made by the shareholders at cer-
tain meetings or within specified times shall not be made
at such meetings or within such times it shall neverthe-
less be competent to the shareholders to make such elec-
tions respectively at any half-yearly or special general
meetings held subsequently.
LXXXVIII. Minutes of all the proceedings of:
every general or special general meeting shall be entered;
and kept in the minute book of the Company and shall
be signed by the person presiding at such meeting And
such minute shall be full and conclusive evidence that
the proceedings therein recorded took place at a general
or special general meeting duly called and held pursuant
to these presents and that the person whose name shall
be subscribed thereto was the Chairman thereat and that
he signed such minutes And such minutes shall he bind-
ing and conclusive on all the shareholders and all other
persons claiming any interest in respect of any shares in
the capital of the Company.
LXXXIX. No law resolution or proceeding passed!
at any general or special general meeting shall be im - c
peached or invalidated on the ground that any person)
voting at any such meeting was not entitled to vote
thereat.
AUDITORS.
XO. There shall at all times be two Auditors of the^
Company
L In case of de-
lay in oloo-
‘ tions directed
4 to lie made at
1 fipoclfiedinnot-
. ings or times
elections may
. bo made at
subsequent
. meetings.
; Minutes of
proceedings at
. meetings and
their effect.
Defective vote
not to invali-
date proceed-
ings of gene-
ral meetings,
Auditors,


Company to perform the duties hereinafter mentioned
one of whom shall he a shareholder of the Company and
the other need not be a shareholder And the first
Auditors shall ho appointed by the Board of Directors
and shall remain in office until the half-yearly meeting
held in the month of January one thousand eight hun-
dred and sixty-two And no Director shall ho' eligible to
be elected an Auditor for twelve months after retiring
or removal from (Ik’s Board.
XCL At every general meeting to bo held in the
month of January in each, year the Auditors shall retire
from office and two others shall be elected by the share-
holders during the year thence next ensuing one of such
retiring Auditors being eligible for ro-clcction And such
Auditors shall ho fully authorised at all reasonable times to
inspect the hooks of tho Company and to examine the
accounts and affairs of the Company generally and to
call for the production to them at five head office of the
Company of all hooks vouchers writings and documents
concerning the same and all securities and other assets
of tho Company and to call in the aid of the officers
clerks and servants of tho Company or any other person
competent to give information as to the Company’s
allair.s.
XCIL In tho event of tho death resignation or
disqualification of any such Auditor during such term
of office it shall ho lawful for the Board of Directors to
appoint any other duly qualified person to act as Auditor
until the next ensuing special general or half-yearly
general meeting when tho vacancy shall he filled up by
appointment.
XOTII. The aifairs and transactions of the Company
. shall he brought to a just and true balance by the Board
of Directors on or before tho thirtieth day of June and
the thirty-first day of December in each and every year
and the Auditors shall immediately thereafter count
the cash balance and a balance shoot shall he prepared
and signed by the Chairman of the Company containing
a
Appointment
and powers of
auditor!' 1 .
Appointment
olauditorH ad
interim on
doutli, &e.
Half-yearly
audit and
balance alioot.


a true statement of the affairs and transactions of the
Company and the net profits of the Company during the
half year immediately preceding and shall as soon as
possible thereafter together with all bills securities
vouchers accounts and documents necessary for verifying
the same be submitted by the Board of Directors to the
Auditors And such Auditors shall examine the books
of the Company and certify such balance sheet in testi-
mony of their having examined and verified the several
entries contained therein And the balance sheet so
signed shall be submitted to the half-yearly general
meeting of the shareholders.
XOIV. If it shall appear to such general meeting
desirable that the Company’s affairs should be more fully
investigated it shall be lawful tor such general meeting
either to direct the said Auditors to inquire into and
report upon the affairs of the Company generally or in
their discretion to appoint any two or more shareholders
as special Auditors with the like powers for that purpose
Provided always that the shareholders so appointed shall
be duly qualified to be elected Auditors as hereinbefore
provided.
VOTES AND VOTING.
XCV. At all meetings of the shareholders every:
shareholder bolding ten and under thirty shares in the,
capital of the Company shall have one vote Every share-’
holder holding thirty shares and under sixty shares two
votes Every shareholder holding sixty shares and under
one hundred shares three votes And for every fifty shares
which any shareholder shall hold beyond one hundred
shares he shall he entitled to one vote more Provided that
no shareholder shall have a greater number of votes than
twenty And after the expiration of three months from the
day of the date of these presents no shareholder shall he
entitled to vote in respect of shares which he shall not
have held for the space of three calendar months And all
questions to he submitted to any meetings of the share-
holders shall be primarily decided by the majority in num-
ber
Further audit
may bo called
fox-:
Number of
votes and
mode of vot-
ing nt general
mootings.


bor of the persons present qualified to vote on a show of
hands except in such cases as heroin otherwise provided
And any two shareholders present at any such meeting
qualified to vote shall he entitled to demand a ballot which
ballot shall bo granted if demanded before the Chairman
shall have pronounced any question decided And any
shareholder absent from any such meeting may give his
or her vote or votes by proxy Provided that the person
appointed to act as proxy shall, bo a shareholder,
t XOYI. In case any doubt or controversy shall arise
at any meeting as to tho number of votes which any
shareholder may ho entitled to give the same may bo
determined by reference to the share register which shall
be conclusive evidence (as to the right of voting) of the
number of shares in respect of which such shareholder
shall he entitled to vote.
XCYIL Every proxy shall he in writing under the
1 hand of tho shareholder of the shares in respect of which
such proxy shall he given or in the case of a shareholder
absent from the colony under the hand of his attorney
or agent duly authorised by power of attorney to receive
dividends or to make sale of his share or shares And
such proxies respectively shall before the same shall he
allowed to he acted upon at any meeting of shareholders
he delivered to the Secretary of the Company together
with the power of attorney or an attested copy thereof
in the case of a proxy by attorney or agent to he by him
deposited and kept at the principal office of the Company
in Sydney And every such proxy shall he in the form or
to the effect following—“ I hereby appoint—— :
my proxy to vote and act for me and in my name at the
general meeting of the shareholders of the Tomago
Coal Mining Company to he held on the day of
and at every adjournment thereof and at any ballot that
may he demanded at such meeting or at any adjourn-
ment thereof Dated this” Provided always that in the
case of shareholders not residing within thirty miles of
the city of Sydney a general proxy may he given in the
following
Votes by
proxy.
Cases of doubt
Blmi'ohoUlurs
number of '
votes to 1)0
settled by re- 1
feronci) to
“ share regis-
ter.”
Proxy to 1)0 in
writing- and to
1)0 deposited.
Form of
proxy.


following form. “ X hereby appoint -my proxy,
to vote and act for me and in my name in the event of 1
my own absence at any or every general or special gene-
ral meeting which until the revocation of this appoint-
ment shall he held of the shareholders of the Tomago
Goal Mining Company And at any or every adjourn-
ment of any or every such meeting respectively and at
any or every ballot that may be demanded at any or
every such meeting or at any or every adjournment
thereof Dated this .day of ”
XOVIII. Every shareholder who shall have ap-]
pointed such proxy as aforesaid shall for all the purposes 1
of a general or special general meeting and of every
adjourned general or special general meeting and ballot
to which such proxy shall be applicable (but not for the
purpose of composing the number of shareholders whose
personal presence is requisite by the Deed of Settlement)
be considered as present by such proxy And all the votes
and acts of the proxy in that capacity shall be as valid
and effectual (subject to the qualifications and provisions
herein contained) as the votes and acts of the shareholder
appointing him would have been if such shareholder had
been present and had personally voted at any such
general or special general meeting or ballot.
XOIX. If two or more shareholders present at any]
general or special general meeting shall object to the]
vote of any other shareholder and shall prove to the'
satisfaction of the majority in number of shareholders 1
then present that the person whose vote has been objected
to has an interest in the question on which the vote is to
be taken beyond or apart from that which he may have
therein in common with the other shareholders then and
in every such case the shareholder whose vote has been
objected to shall not be allowed to vote on the question
and shall be incapacitated from voting on such question
as the proxy of any absent shareholder.
0. No shareholder who shall be a paid officer of the!
Company other than the Directors Auditors and Solicitors <
shall •
General proxy
■form of.
Effect of
proxy,
Exolusion of
yotea of share-
holders spe-
cially inter-
ested in any
question.
: Shareholder
being paid
officer (except
Director Au


ditor and Soli-
citor) not to
vote.
■ shall be qualified to vote at any general or special general
meeting of shareholders either as a shareholder or as the
proxy of another shareholder.
DIVIDENDS.
f 01. The net profit shall be available for the payment
of a dividend at such rate as the Board of Directors shall
declare at the half-yearly general meeting And such
dividend shall become payable to the shareholders ac-
cordingly at the time to be then fixed And the balance
of net profit remaining (if any) after providing for the
payment of such dividend shall be carried forward to the
profit and loss account of the ensuing half-year for the
purpose of equalizing future dividends.
Oil. No dividend shall be paid in respect of any
share upon which any call shall be in arrear until such
call and interest shall have been duly paid and satisfied
or in respect of the shares of any person who shall not
have executed these presents But it shah be lawful for
the Board of Directors unless they shall declare a for-
feiture of such shares to retain such dividends on account
of such call and interest until the same shall have been
paid And the shareholder entitled thereto shall not be
entitled to claim interest on the amount of such divi-
dends during the time they shall have been so retained
by the Company And upon a forfeiture of such shares
being declared such dividends shall be appropriated to
the uses of the Company.
GUI. In all cases where it may be necessary for
any person to serve any notice writ or other proceeding
at law or in equity or otherwise upon the Company ser-
vice thereof upon the Secretary for the time being by
leaving the same at the office of the Company at Sydney
or if the Company shall have suspended or discontinued
business by serving the same personally on such Secre-
tary or on some person who was such Secretary at the
time of such suspension or discontinuance of business or
by leaving the same in such last mentioned case with
some
Declaration of
dividend.
As to divi-
dends upon
shares upon
which calls
are in arrear.
Service'of
notice on
Company.


some inmate at the usual abode of such Secretary or late
Secretary shall be deemed good service of the same on
the Company.
CIY. Each and every printed copy of the Deed oh
Settlement which shall bear the signature of the person f
who was Secretary of the Company at the time of suchf
signature attesting that the same is a true and correct |
copy of the original shall in. all proceedings at law or in
equity between the Company and individual shareholders
thereof or between several shareholders And in all
proceedings by parties other than shareholders against
the said Company wherein notice to produce the Heed of
Settlement shall have been, given and the same shall not
be produced be received as sufficient evidence of the
Deed of Settlement and of every clause article stipulation
and agreement therein.
CY. The Chairman Directors and other officers of-
the Company and each and every of them their and each ‘
and every of their heirs executors and administrators
lands goods and chattels shall be indemnified and saved
harmless out of the funds or property of the Company
from and against all costs charges losses damages and
expenses which they or any or either of them or their or
any or either of their heirs executors and administrators
shall or may incur sustain expend or be put unto for or
on account of the Company in consequence of any act
deed matter or thing which they or any or either of
them may do or cause to be done in carrying into effect
the objects and purposes of the Company or in or about
any indictment information presentment action suit pro-
cess proceeding or arbitration to be brought commenced
carried on prosecuted defended or entered into for or on
account thereof or for or by the order or direction of the
Board of Directors or in anywise relating thereto res-
pectively or otherwise in or about the execution of their
respective offices or trusts except such costs charges
losses damages and expenses as shall happen by or through
the wilful neglect or default of such Chairman Directors
and other officers respectively. OYI.
'Printed copies
of tlie Deed of
Settlement
verified by
■ signature of
Secretary to
1 bo evidence.
'indemnity to
officers.


Officers to bo
chargeable
only in res-
pect of their
individual re-
ceipts, &o.
) OYI. The Chairman and Directors for the time
being of the Company and each and every of them and
each and every of their heirs executors and administra-
tors shall bo charged and chargeable only for so much
money as they shall respectively actually receive by
virtue of their respective offices or otherwise And any
one or more of them shall not be answerable or account-
able for the receipts of the others or other of them nor
for the acts neglects or defaults of the others or other of
them but each of thorn for his own acts receipts neglects
or defaults only nor for the insufficiency or deficiency of
title to any estate or property which may from time to time
be purchased by or by order of the Board of Directors for
or on behalf of the Company nor for the insufficiency or de-
ficiency of any security or securities in or upon which the
moneys of the Company shall or may be placed out in-
vested or secured by or by order of the Board of
Directors nor for any other loss misfortune or damage
which may happen in the execution, of their respective
offices or in relation thereto except the same shall
happen by or through their own wilful neglects or de-
faults respectively.
DISSOLUTION OP COMPANY.
OYII. It shall ho lawful for a special general
meeting of the shareholders specially called for the pur-
pose of taking into consideration, the propriety of dissolv-
ing the Company to enter into a resolution to that effect
but such resolution, shall ho of no force or effect until
confirmed hy the votes of shareholders holding not less
than one-half of the paid up capital of the Company at
another special general meeting to he held within not less
than thirty days of the previous meeting.
OYII I. Until, the affairs of the Company shall he
finally wound up and all claims and demands upon the
3 Company shall ho fully paid and satisfied and a final
1 division shall have boon made of the residue of the
1 moneys of the Company tho several provisions herein
contained
Cion oval pro-
vision for dis-
solution.
Notwith-
standing reso-
lution to dis-
solve nil the
powers of tho
Directors and
proprietors
to bo retained


contained and all powers privileges rights and duties
of the Board of Directors and of the shareholders respec-
tively shall notwithstanding any resolution to dissolve
the Company remain and continue in full force so far as
the same may be necessary for winding up the concerns
of the Company or for enabling the Board of Directors
to get in or dispose of the funds and property of the
Company or to pay and satisfy all claims and demands
upon the Company or to make such final division as
aforesaid Provided always that all such property and
funds as shall not be disposed of within the period
of three years from the date of the second meeting of the
shareholders hereinbefore referred to shall be imme-
diately thereafter sold by public auction without reserve
to the highest bidder in such lots as the Board of Direc-
tors may approve.
OIX. If at any time hereafter it shall appear to:
the Board of Directors that losses have been sustained
equal in amount to one-half of the then subscribed Capi-
tal of the Company it shall be incumbent on the Board
of Directors to submit a statement of such losses as soon
as possible to a special general meeting of the share-
holders and it shall thereupon be referred to the Audi-
tors for the time being and such other special Auditors
as such meeting may appoint to assess the said losses and
to examine the whole state of the Company’s affairs and
to report thereon to a subsequent special general meeting
to be convened for the purpose of receiving and consider-
ing such report And if at such subsequent meeting the
said Auditors shall confirm the estimate of loss
previously submitted by the Board of Directors
the business of the Company shall from and after
the date of such subsequent meeting be confined.
to the winding up of its affairs and converting
into money all its funds and property and distributing
the same Provided nevertheless that it shall be lawful
for such meeting to enter into a resolution to continue
the business of the Company and to write off the losses
from
till affairs
closed.
Dissolution in
case of losses,


from tlie capital of the Company and thereupon such
business shall continue until the next general meeting
of shareholders and any adjournment thereof which
shall hare power to confirm such resolution by, the
votes of shareholders possessing not loss than three-
fourths of the actual paid up capital.
OX. Upon the determination or dissolution of the
Company the Deed of Settlement and all documents
books and papers belonging to the Company shall be
disposed of in such, manner as a general meeting or
special general meeting shall after the dissolution of the
Company determine.
CXI. Uroin and after the expiration of two years
next after the declaration of the final division of capital
as aforesaid and the publication thereof in the New
South 'Wales Government Gazette or some other public
newspaper in Sydney aforesaid no action at law or suit
in equity shall, bo sustainable by any shareholder against
the Company or any other shareholder thereof or against
the Directors or other officers of the said Company for
or in respect of the transactions and affairs of the Com-
pany or in anywise relating thereto but, the accounts of
the Company shall after the expiration of such period as
aforesaid be finally and. conclusively settled and shall
not bo re-opened by any of the shareholders on any
ground or pretence whatsoever.
n CXII. It shall, be lawful for the Board of Directors
if the Auditors shall report that the assets of the Com-
pany are insufficient to meet its liabilities or when the
affairs of the Company shall be directed to be wound up
to take the benefit of any Act or law for the sequestra-
tion of the estate of the Company as insolvent or of any
Act or law for facilitating the winding up of Joint Stock
Companies as the case may require and to do and sub-
mit to all matters and tilings on behalf of the Company
which, may be required to be done or submitted to for
the above purposes.
CXIII.
Custody of
Deed of Set-
tlement, &a.
Affairs of
Company to
l)o entirely
closed in. two
years from
final division
upon dissolu-
tion.
Power to fallen
the benefit of
insolvent law,
&o.


OXIII. It shall not be lawful for any shareholder:
or any number of shareholders to dissolve the Company;
otherwise than is herein provided And notwithstanding
the changes which shall or may from time to time take
place among the shareholders by death or retirement or
by the accession of new shareholders and notwithstand-
ing that any shareholder for the time being may become
bankrupt or insolvent or may be convicted of felony or
may commit any other act by which a common part-
nership would be dissolved the partnership hereby formed
shall nevertheless subsist and the covenants herein
contained shall at all times until such dissolution as
aforesaid be in full force and effect as between the share-
holders for the time being.
OXIY. In the construction of the Deed of Settle-
ment the expressions “ Board of Directors” and “ Board”
shall mean three Directors at least present at any meet-
ing of Directors to be held pursuant to the provisions in
the Deed of Settlement contained and the word “ Share-
holders” shall mean persons holding shares in the capital
for the time being of the Company the words “ Directors”
“ Auditors” shall respectively mean Directors or Auditors
for the time being of the said Company and the word
“ shares” shall mean shares in the capital for the time
being of the Company The expression “ general meet-
ings” shall mean general half yearly meetings of the
shareholders and every adjournment thereof respectively
The expression “ special general meetings” shall mean
all and every other meetings of the shareholders and
every adjournment thereof respectively The expression
“ Deed of Settlement” shall include these presents and
any other deed or deeds addition or additions alteration
or alterations hereafter to be made in addition or exten-
sion explanation or alteration or in pursuance or by
virtue of the provisions herein, contained or any of them,
and words in the singular number shall be construed to
include or apply to several persons or things as well as
one person or thing and words in the plural number
shall
Partnership
not to ho dis-
solved except
, as hereby
provided.
Interpretation
clause.


shall be construed to apply to one person or thing as
well as to several persons or tilings and words importing
males shall he construed to include or apply to females
as well as males and the word “person” or “ persons”
shall he construed to include a body or bodies corporate
as well as an individual or individuals unless in any of
the above cases it be otherwise specially provided or
there be something in the subject or context repugnant
to such meaning or construction And wherever under
any of the provisions herein contained a certain number
of days or other period is required to elapse in order to
ground or give effect to any act deed matter or thing
whatsoever or any number of days or other period is
fixed for any purpose whatsoever the first of such days
or the first day of such period shall be reckoned exclusive
and the last of such days or the last day of such period
shall be reckoned inclusive in the computation of the
days or period required And every act matter or thing
hereby authorised or directed to be done at one time or
at any time or without reference being made to time
may with the like requisites or formalities as are hereby
required be also done at several times or from time to
time as often as occasion may require or may be deemed
expedient and in every case when in the Deed of Settle-
ment general expressions are used in connection with
powers directions or things such general expressions shall
not be limited or controlled to or by the particular
powers directions or things with which the same are con-
nected And that words or expressions denoting authority
or permission shall be construed as words or expressions
of authority or permission merely and shall not be con-
strued as words or expressions denoting direction or
compulsory trust.
CXY. All past and future expenses of and attendant
upon the establishing of the Company and the prepara-
tion of every deed or instrument and Act of Council and
every meeting and transaction relating thereto respec-
tively shall be advanced and paid by .the Board of
Directors
Payment of
preliminary
expenses.


Directors out of the profits of the Company in such
manner as the Board of Directors shall think fit And
this Indenture further witnesseth that .the said several
persons parties hereto have and each and every of them
hath ratified and confirmed and by these presents do and
each and every of them doth ratify and confirm all acts
matters and things which np to the day of the date of
these presents have been made done executed and per-
formed for the purpose of procuring the said Act prepar-
ing the Deed of Settlement alloting shares and taking
preliminary measures in regard to the establishment of
the Company or in regard to the business or property
thereof or in any wise relating thereto.
In witness whereof the said several parties to these
presents have hereunto set their hands and seals.
d (frdxfji that the above and fifty-four preceding
pages contain a true and correct copy of the Deed of
Settlement of the Tomago Coal Mining Company except
as to the execution of the said Deed by the parties As
Witness my hand the day of 18
. Confirmation
of preliminary
. proceedings.
Secretary to the Company.
Sherrill and Downing, Printers, 256, George-street, Sydney.
