

jf w^M |MaMk#iwW l !W l <™
C-"
DEED OF SETTLEMENT
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
(iramil Jtaranre Canijiniuj.
ilk




DEED OP SETTLEMENT
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
GENERAL ASSURANCE COMPANY,
BEING AN EXTENSION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN FIRE AND LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY,
TOGETHER WITH
SUPPLEMENTARY DEED.
SYDNEY :
PRINTED BY ALEXANDER W. DOUGLAS, ATLAS OFFICE,
40, HUNTER STREET.




INDEX
To the Contents of the following Deeds, hut forming no
part thereof.
Clause.
Accounts. —Separate Books for Fire and Life to be kept
~ Marine /8
91 19
Agents.—Appointment of 30 & 80
Auditors. —May be appointed •• •• 55
Business of Company.—Place of 29
"What to consist of 28
Bye-Laws. —Not repugnant to Deed of Settlement may be
made by Directors • - 60
Repealed and new ones made by two General
Meetings
Jlinroo mm hp madp.. . • • 6
Calls.—On Shares may be made •• ®
A/Tnct tip ndvprlißpd .. ••
Must be advertised
Binding on Proprietor 7
If not paid, Shares may be sold 8
Capital. —Amount of 2 & 76
How divided
How to be paid up 5
May be increased
To be personalty
Company. —Name of, Preamble and 76
Capital of • • • • 2& 76
Commencement of
Dissolution of 66, 66, 67, & 84
Chairman and Deputy Chairman of 37
Certificate. —Of number of Shares held by Proprietor.. 16
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.— To be chosen.. .. 37
To have casting vote 37
19 19 °
Checiues.— To be signed by two Directors and Secretary.. 35
Casting Vote,— -Chairman or Deputy Chairman .. .. 37 &48
Deeds.— To be signed by three Directors 32
Deeds of Settlement, —To be open for inspection of
Proprietors ...... 68


Directors.—Number of . > 31
Constitution, and Genera! Powers .. .. 31
Qualification .. 38
Term of Office . .« 41 &42
Three to sign Policies .. .. 32
Not to vote when they are Relatives or are
interested 36
Must not be Director of any other Insurance
Company.. .. .. .. 38
Absent Three Months, seat to be vacant .. 39
Names of Retiring Directors must be adver-
tised 44
Vacancy must be filled within Three Months 45 &46
May be suspended for conduct prejudicial to
the Company .. 45
Candidates must give 14 days notice.. .. 47
To appoint all Officers of Company .... 49
May make bye-laws 50
To cause proper Accounts to be kept .... 53
Dissolution of Company 65, 66, 67, & 84
Dividend. —Not to be declared for three years .... 56
When to be declared .. 58
Fire and Life Business.— May be discontinued .. 65 &84
General Meetings, —When to be held 57
Annual, 14 days notice to be given.. 57
12 Proprietors required to
form 59
Doubts as to meaning of clauses in
Deeds of Settlement to be re-
solved by 66
Liability of Shareholders. — 23 & 79
Marine Assurance. —Added to original business .... 77
separate accounts to be kept for 78
Officers of Company. —To be appointed and discharged
by Directors 49
Proprietors, —Two or more names of, conjointly .... 12
Names to be registered 16
Individual to be indemnified by the Company 24
Proprietors.—Discharged from liability, upon giving
public notice of having sold Shares ~ 25
Twelve may require a Special Meeting to
be held 51
Not entitled to see Books, unless a Director 68


Policies, —To be signed by Three Directors ...... 32
Proxies. —Limit of 13
Form of .. 13
Not valid until produced to Secretary .... 14
Qualification. —For Director .. .. .. . 38
Quorum ~ .. 48
Receipts. —Binding on Company, if signed by Secretary
or Agent .. 33
Shares.-— Unsubscribed for to be the property of Company 4
Full amount not to be paid unless call made 6
Number to be held by one Proprietor.. .. 10 & 81
Number of, in Company 2 & 76
Special Meetings. —May be called on requisition of 12
Proprietors .. .. .. 51
Secretary. —To be appointed by Directors .. .. .. 49
Not to be Shareholder in any Assurance
Company 42
Transfer of Shares. —Form of 17
To be prepared by Secretary .. 17
Not valid until approved by Board 17
Not to take place until all liabilities
to Company are satisfied .. 26
Trusts. —Company not bound by .. .. 18
Votes. —Number for each Proprietor .. .. 11 &82
Of joint holders of Shares .. 12
Of Trustees of Insolvent Partner .. 12
May be given by proxy .. .. 13
Not valid until Deed of Settlement signed .... 15
To be by show of hands, or by ballot .... 61




DEED OF SETTLEMENT
i||te ( MlnUni\m made the twentieth day of May, in preamble and
mutual contract.
the year of our Lord One thousand eight hundred and thirty-six,
between the several persons whose names and seals are hereunto
affixed. Whereas, at divers Meeting heretofore held, and par-
ticularly at a Meeting holden on the 13th day of May instant, it
was agreed by and between the parties hereto, that a Joint Stock
Company should be established at Sydney, in the Colony of New
South Wales, under the style or Firm of the “Australian Fire
and Life Assurance Company.” And whereas, it was also
agreed that a Deed should be executed containing such declara-
tions, rules, regulations, restrictions, conditions and provisoes as
are hereinafter contained, ||[lUl tljIS WWumty,
that in pursuance of such agreements, and for the purpose of
carrying the same into effect, they, the several parties whose
names are hereunto subscribed and seals affixed, for themselves,
and each of them, for himself or herself severally and respectively,
and for his, her, or their several and respective heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, and not the one for the other of
them, or the heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns of the
other of them, do, and each and every of them, doth covenant,
promise, declare, and agree, to and with the other or others of
them their and each and every of their respective heirs, exe-
cutors, administrators, and assigns, in manner following, that is
to say.
I.—That the several persons parties hereto as aforesaid, and That the parties
the several persons who may hereafter become parties hereto, to the Deed, or
either by purchase from the original parties herein, or by ope- Jte” tecomehpar-
ration and effect of law, shall be, remain, and continue Co- ties, shall be and
partners and Joint Stock Proprietors of and in the said Capital „°r s'in' 1 1he° John
Stock of the Company of A 200,000, or of so much thereof as S an C \°f f £2 e oo°ooo
shall actually be paid up, and form the Capital of the said Com- or of so much as
pany under the Clause and Agreement in these presents in that
behalf hereinafter contained accordingly, and in proportion to the the number of


their Shares, for number and amount of their several and respective Shares of
carryhV" P on e the O ne Hundred Pounds each, for the purpose of carrying on the
business of the business of the said Company, for the period of thirty-one years
company. f rom the date hereof, under the said style of the “ Australian
Fiee and Life Assurance Company,” and subject to and
under the Rules, Regulations, Covenants, Conditions, and Agree-
ments herein contained, or hereafter to be agreed upon or estab-
lished in manner hereinafter provided for.
capital to consist 2. —That the Capital Stock of the said Company shall be and
of £200,000. cons i s t of the sum of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds, but may
ges csau=e iu. increased in such manner as hereinafter mentioned,
capital stock to 3. —That the said Capital Stock of Two Hundred Thousand
Pounds shall be divided into Two Thousand Shares of One
Hundred Pounds each, every one of such shall be numbered in
See .-.iu.cr.ee, numer ical progression, and be thereby hereafter identically dis-
tinguished.
shares unsub- 4.—That in case any of the Shares shall remain unsubscribed
. a^the'disposal of for an( f unappropriated on the day of the date of these presents,
Directors. such unappropriated Shares shall be taken by the Directors to be
appointed as hereinafter mentioned, and held by them for the
general benefit of the Proprietors of the said Company, and shall
be disposed of from time to time in such manner as the said Di-
rectors shall think fit, or retained by them if they should deem
it more expedient.
capital stock to s.—That the Fund or Capital Stock of the said Company
instalments" by P aL( f i n such manner and by such Instalments as herein-
after mentioned ; that is to say, that each of the said parties
shall, on executing this Deed, pay the sum of One Pound as a
deposit on each and every Share of One Hundred Pounds, the
sum of Two Pounds on each and every Share on or before the
first day of June now next ensuing, and the like sum of Two
Pounds on each and every Share shall be paid on or before the
first day of July now next ensuing to such person or persons, and
in such manner as shall hereafter be appointed by the Directors
of this Company, and no Assignment or Transfer of any Share
or Shares shall be valid and effectual until the said three instal-
ments on such Share or Shares shall have been first duly paid.
Directors em- 6-— That it shall be lawful for a majority of the Directors, at
further d cai°is make a Meeting specially convened for that purpose, to make any
further call upon the Co-partners in the said Company, if they
shall deem such call to be requisite or expedient, and no Share-
No shareholder holder shall be allowed to pay up the whole or any portion of his
unless a n caii U R or er Shares unless a call be so made by the Directors for that
made. ' DUi’POSe.
purpose.


7. —That in case the majority of the said Directors at a calls binding on
Meeting so convened as aforesaid shall resolve and determine to Pr°Pnetors-
call for the payment of any additional sum or sums of money for
the purposes of the said Company, the several parties hereto
shall and will respectively pay or cause to be paid into and to
the benefit of the said Capital Stock of the said Company such
sum or sums of money as shall have been at such Meeting deter-
mined on and agreed to.
8. —That on failure of payment of any or either of the said in- on failure of pay-
stalments, or of the further calls to be made as aforesaid, for the
space of One calendar month after the same shall be notified by sen shares of De-
public advertisement in two or more of the newspapers published of
in Sydney, it shall and may be lawful to and for the Directors for Directors binding
v j' %j qpj defaulters.
the time being of the said Company, and they are hereby
authorised and empowered to put up for Sale by Public Auction,
one or more of the Shares of the Partner so making default, and
sell and dispose thereof to the best bidder. Provided always
that previous to such sale the Directors shall cause public notice
thereof to be given weekly for One calendar month in two of
the newspapers published in Sydney aforesaid, before the day of
such sale, and from and out of the proceeds of such sale to pay
into the said Capital Stock of the said Company the full amount
of such further call or instalment, and after deducting the neces-
sary expenses of such sale, to pay over the balance, if any, to .
the credit of the said defaulter : and it is hereby declared and
agreed that the transfer of such Share or Shares to the purchaser
thereof, by the said Directors, shall be good and valid, and as
binding upon the person or persons so making default, as if he,
she, or they had actually transferred the same, and the said
Directors shall and they are hereby authorised to issue new New Certificates
certificates for such Shares to the purchaser thereof. t 0 be granted.
9. That the Capital Stock of the said Company may at any capital may be
time from time to time be increased beyond and above the
amount of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds, in such manner as and value con-
the major part in number and value of the whole body of Proprie- ,fcn
tors of the said Company shall so determine at a Special General
Meeting to be convened for that purpose, and of which Meeting
at least One calendar month’s public notice shall be previously
given, and if such proportion of the Proprietors of the said
Company shall fail to attend the said Meeting, it shall be
incumbent on the Board of Directors, to be appointed as here-
inafter mentioned, to obtain the assent in writing of such a
majority as aforesaid before any such increase of Capital can take
place; and if it shall be determined in manner aforesaid that


an increase of Capital shall take place, the same shall be raised
by the sales of Shares of One Hundred Pounds each, and the
admission of new Subscribers, who shall, on their executing these
presents be considered as Shareholders and entitled to exercise
and enjoy the same rights, privileges, and advantages, and be
subject to the same liabilities, conditions, and regulations, as if
such additional capital had formed the original capital of the said
Company, and such new proprietors had been original parties to
these presents.
No Member to 10. That no Member of the said Company shall possess or hold
so l shMes e in h ws directly or indirectly more than Fifty Shares in the Capital Stock
own right, except unless the same shall have accrued to him or her by marriage,
act oT'iawJ 0 ami or as Legatee, Executor, Administrator, or other lawful re pre-
no dividend pay- sentative of a deceased proprietor ; and if his or her number of
able on Shares ini 1 i i i • , _ ..
held in excess, shares shall by any means but those above mentioned exceed the
~ i t 81 number of fifty Shares, the Dividend and Interest payable in
also Addenda, respect of those Shares which are held contrary to this agreement
shall sink into and become merged in the Capital Stock of the
Company and form part thereof.
Each Member to 11. That each of the Partners or Shareholders in the said
every o Fivlshares Company who shall hold Five Shares or upwards, shall be entitled
he holds, hut not to One vote in the deliberations and resolutions thereof ; and
the e whoie. ten m such Partner or Shareholder shall have One vote for every
See Clause t 2. Five Shares he may hold, but under no circumstances shall be
entitled to more than Ten votes in the whole, notwithstanding
the number of Shares he or she may respectively possess,
shares standing 12. That whenever any Shares shall be vested in two or
in two or more more persons jointly, or in common, or otherwise, such one of
party’s’ name to the said persons resident in the colony whose name shall stand
Proprietor 16 * 1 the on books of the said Company as one of the owners of
such Shares, shall be considered and deemed the sole and
absolute owner thereof, for all the purposes of voting and acting
as a Proprietor; but no Trustee or Trustees of an insolvent Co-
Partner or Shareholder shall be allowed to attend any of the
Meetings of the said Company, or to have any vote in the
deliberations and resolutions thereof.
votes may be 13. That the votes of the Partners or Shareholders in the
fer&on by Company, may be given either in person or by proxy, pro-
proxy by a Mem- vided that the person holding such proxy be a Partner or
Shareholder of the said Company, and not holding more than
ten proxies at the same time, nor shall a proxy delegate his
power to a sub-proxy. And every such proxy shall express
whether it be given as a general proxy or a proxy to enable the
holder thereof to vote at any one, two, or more particular


Meetings only, and such proxy shall be in the form or to the
effect following;
I, A B, one of the co-Partners or Shareholders of the Joint Form of Proxy.
Stock Company, called the “ Australian Fire and Life Assurance
Companydo hereby authorise and appoint C D. to be my
proxy at all meetings of the said Company, and to vote for me
in and upon all matters and things
(“ or,’ “at any Meeting or Meetings of the said co-Partners or
Shareholders ” here describe the time such Meetings are to be
held, and the nature and purposes thereofj then proposed,
relative to the concerns of the said Company, unless, I, myself,
shall be personally present.
As witness my hand this day of
in the Year of our Lord, 183
14. That no appointment of proxy shall be valid until the p r0 xy invalid tm
same be produced to, and left with the Secretary of the said UC th dan s d ecre-
Company, and that every such proxy shall be deemed to be tary, and revok-
revoked by any subsequent authority to be signed by the maker sequent T/point-
thereof, or by any other act by which he or she shall express a ment-
determination of revoking the same.
15. That no person or persons who shall or may at any time no Proprietor by
or times hereafter, become entitled to any Share or Shares in the h°ave P any
said Company, either by purchase or descent, or other operation vote tm the Deed
of law, shall lie entitled to have any vote in the affairs or reso- thef/stlares ™ e d
lutions of the said Company, or to receive any dividend which g i e s r t t ®^ l ’ te and a
may become due on such Shares, until he, she, or they shall have granted,
executed these presents, and bound himself, herself, or themselves
to conform to the provisions thereof, and other the regulations
for the time being of the said Company, and his, her, or their
Shares shall be duly registered in the Books of the said Company,
and a Certificate thereof given to him, her, or them.
16. That the names and additions of all the Partners or Names and ad-
Shareholders in the said Company, together with the number °a n^ har he
of Shares held by each of them, shall be from time to time number of their
written and entered in a book to be kept for that purpose, so
entered in a hook
that each and every proprietor, for the time being, and the extent
of his or her interest in the said Company may be known, and be given which
of which entry an extract shall, at the request of any or every of
such Shareholder be made and delivered to him, her, or them, the holder; cer-
and such extract shall, as to the said Company, be at all times
deemed sufficient evidence of the interest of the respective parties cei 6 -
to whom the same shall be granted at the time of the granting tiflcates he pro-
thereof; and such extract or certificate shall express that no : priors
valid transfer, mortgage, or disposition whatsoever of the Shares sen.


mentioned therein, can be made until the party whose name is
set forth in such certificate as entitled to such Shares, shall have
fully paid and satisfied all his debts, engagements, and liabilities
to or with the said Company, both due and current, as also until
such extract or certificate be produced at the Office of the
Company, save and except when the Directors shall sell the
Share or Shares of any defaulter in the said Company as here-
inbefore provided.
Transfer. 17. That all Assignments and Transfers of Shares in the said
Company shall be made in or according to the following form,
and shall be prepared by and under the care and superintendence
of the Secretary of the said Company for the time being, and
when perfected shall be registered in the Books of the said
Company ;• but no Assignment or Transfer of any Share or
Shares shall be valid unless the name or names of the proposed
purchaser or purchasers thereof shall be first submitted to and
approved of by the Board of Directors for the time being.
Form of Transfer. Know all Men hy these Presents, that A. 8., of
in consideration of the sum of £
to him paid hy C. D. of doth hereby
bargain, sell, and assign unto the said C. I)., his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, Shares of him (her or
them) the said A. B. of or in the Capital Stock of the “ Aus-
tralian Fire and Life Assurance Company ,” numbered
to hold the same under and subject to the Conditions,
Provisoes, and Regulations in the Copartnership Deed of the
said Company contained and other the Conditions and Regulations
for the time being thereof. And the said C. D. doth hereby
accept the said. Shares and subject to the said Con-
ditions, Provisoes, and Regulations.
As Witness the hands of the said Parties, this
day of in the Year
of our Lord, 183 ,
Member in whose
18. That the person by whom or in whose name any Shares
stand uf ilai 'b" - >e or stand, shall, to all intents and purposes whatso-
deemed the ab- ever within the meaning of these presents, be deemed at Law
Company ail, l Equity the absolute, sole, and beneficial holder thereof,
hound by trusts, and shall as such be the only person known to or recognized by
the said Company in all matters whatsoever relating to such
Shares; and the Company shall in no case be bound to notice
or be affected with express notice of any trust or equitable
charge imposed on any Shares, or with any gift thereof by
way of Legacy until the Legatee, Trustee, or Mortgagee shall
have become a Proprietor and Partner of the said Company


by executing these presents and fulfilling the conditions in that
behalf herein contained.
19. That every person or all persons who shall be entitled Husband of Fe-
to or possess any Share or Shares, as the husband of a female
proprietor, executor, administrator, or legatee, shall be at ministrators, or
liberty to dispose of such Shares, or at his or their option to itberty sen
become a Proprietor and Copartner in the said Company on option to
executing these presents and complying with the conditions become 1 Partners
herein contained ; but any such husband, executor, adminis-
trator, or legatee, who shall not elect to become a Proprietor of . th eir refusal,
in the said Company in respect of the Shares vested in him or over pro-
ber in such capacity, and also the Assignee of - every Insolvent
Proprietor shall sell and dispose of the Shares so vested in him ° ce require
in any such capacity as aforesaid, and in case of neglect or
refusal so to do within Six months, if resident in New South
Wales, Van Pieman’s Land, or neighbouring Settlements, or
within Two years, if resident in distant countries, it shall be
lawful for the Directors for the time being to sell such Shares
by Public Auction, giving due notice thereof to the parties in-
terested, and paying over to him, her, or them the proceeds of
the sale of such Shares after deducting all necessary expenses ;
Provided always that if such husband, executor, administrator,
or Legatee, elect to dispose of such Shares as he, she, or they
shall so become entitled to, it shall not be lawful for them to
dispose of less than one whole Share to any person or persons
willing to become the purchaser or purchasers thereof.
20. That before any assignee of a bankrupt or insolvent, or Before Assignees
any executor, administrator, or legatee of a deceased Pro- °. r Representa-
prietor, or any husband of a female Proprietor shall sell, transfer, receive dividends
or assign any Shares vested in him or her in any such capacity, for m-
or be entitled to receive the dividends thereon, as also before offices of the
any such husband, executor, administrator, or legatee as dements under
aforesaid shall be entitled to become and be deemed a Proprietor which they claim,
or Copartner in the said Company in respect of such Shares,
he or she shall give notice of their title if resident in New South
Wales, Yan Dieman’s Land or the neighbouring Settlements
within Six months ; and if resident in distant countries, within
Two years from the period at which their title shall accrue, by
producing and submitting, for inspection at the Offices of the
said Company the Deed or Instrument of Assignment, Probate
of the Will, or Letters of Administration under which, or the
Certificate of Marriage with the person in whose right he or she
shall claim to be entitled to the same Shares.
21. That the property of the Company, as between the shares to be Per-


sonai Estate Pro- Shareholders thereof shall always he considered Personal Estate,
praters interes- and every Shareholder shall be entitled to and interested in
i t oss, in and°to the the profits, and subject and liable to the losses of the Company
no’survivorship 8 * n P ro P ort i° n to his Shares in the Capital Fund or Joint Stock
disposable by win thereof; and there shall be no benefit of survivorship amongst
distributable 6 ’ on the Shareholders, 'but every Shareholder shall have a distinct
intestacy. and separate right to his Shares for the time being in such
Capital or Stock, and so that the same may be subject to his
disposition by Deed or Will, or in case of intestacy, be trans-
missable to his personal representatives as part of his personal
Estate and distributable accordingly.
Debts due to the 22.—That all debts, liabilities, and engagements due to or
shareholders^ 0111 with the said Company by or on the part of any and
g/veaparamount every Proprietor either in respect of cash advances, or balances,
shares° n their or rulll ™g hills, or notes, or on account generally, and whether
in respect of direct transactions with the Company, or mediately
or otherwise, shall at all times and in all cases be the first and
See Clause S 3, paramount lien on all the Shares and Stock of such Proprietor
solely or jointly, or in partnership with any other person ; and
the Directors for the time being may, and they are hereby em-
powered to sell and dispose of the Shares of such Proprietor,
either wholly or in part as the case may require, by way of or
towards satisfaction or liquidation of all or any parts of such
debts, liabilities, and engagements.
Proprietors not 23.—That the several Proprietors or Co-partners of the said
HaWe to each Company, their, his, or her heirs, executors, administrators, or
other beyond the . r " ’ ’ . ’ ’ ’ ’
amount of their assigns shall not, in any case or event, as between themselves,
respective shares k e answera |q e or liable to the Capital Stock thereof, for or in
respect of the debts or other demands or calls upon the said
Company, beyond his, her, or their respective Share or interest
See clause 7s his, her, or their Testator or Intestate respectively, and for
the purpose and with the intent of preventing any of the parties
insuring their property or assuring their lives with this Company,
from claiming from the private property of any individual or
individuals who shall, at any time, be a Proprietor or Co-partner,
or Proprietors or Co-partners of this Company, any sum or sums
of money that the Capital Stock or Funds of the Company might
not be sufficient to pay, it is hereby agreed and declared, that in
every Policy granted by this Company, the following proviso
shall be inserted.
Proviso to be in- “Provided always, and it is hereby expressly provided and
PoUcy m every “ declared, to be the true intent and meaning of this undertaking,
“ that the Capital Stock and Funds of the said Company for the
“ time being, shall alone be answerable for any demands there-


“ upon under this Policy, and that no Member of the said Com-
“ pany shall, under any circumstances, be subject or liable for
“ more than the amount of his share of the said Capital Stock or
“ Funds of the said Company; and which share is set opposite
“ his signature to the Deed of Settlement, or the Deed consti-
“ tuting the said Company, or in some Supplementary Deed, or
“ in any other Deed or Deeds referring thereto, anything in this
“ Policy to the contrary notwithstanding.”
24. —That in case any demand shall, at any time or times, be individual Pro-
made upon any individual Partner or Proprietor of the said demnifiod 0 by the
Company, for, or in respect of any debt or obligation owing by company.
the said Company, and not incurred by them individually ; or if
he, she, or they shall sustain or be put unto any loss or damage
by reason of any action, suit, or other proceeding at law or in
equity, being prosecuted or instituted against him, her, or them,
through or on account of his, her, or their being a Proprietor or
Co-partner in the said Company, all and every such Proprietor
or Co-partner in the said Company, all and every such Proprietors
or Co-partners shall be from time to time indemnified and saved
harmless by and out of the Capital Stock of the said Com-
pany, and the growing proceeds thereof.
25. —That every Proprietor or Shareholder in the said Com- Retired partners
pany who shall have sold and disposed of his Shares and Interest discharged from
in the said Joint Stock or Capital thereof, and who shall retire my
therefrom, and shall announce and promulgate such retirement of retire-
in such public newspaper as may be by the Directors hereafter
agreed upon, shall be and is hereby exonerated and discharged
from all liability, claim, or demand whatsoever, to which he, she,
or they might be liable under and by virtue of these presents.
26. —That no Transfer or Assignment of any Share or Shares n 0 transfer valid
of the Capital Stock of the said Company shall take place or be debts and
valid until the Partner or Proprietor making such sale shall have company are
fully paid up and discharged all debts, claims, demands, and ®ans paid up d aU
liabilities which such Partner or Proprietor may be under to the
said Company, nor till the full amount of all calls for further
payments towards the Capital Stock of the said Company shall
have been paid and satisfied.
BUSINESS OF THE COMPANY.
27. —That the Directors of the Company, appointed as here- Directors may
after mentioned, may commence the business of the Company at commence busi-
. . J , . , „ , , . ‘ , ness when they
such time as they may think fit, although the Capital ot the think proper.
Company should not be wholly subscribed, or the entire number
of Two thousand Shares taken up.


Business of the
28.—That the business of the Company shall consist of
Company. granting Insurances against loss by Fire on Houses, Furniture,
Vessels, and Goods in Harbour, and property of every descrip-
tion, at the discretion of the said Directors ; also in effecting
Assurances on Lives, Survivorships, and Endowments, and of
granting and purchasing Annuities and Reversions, and all other
matters relating to Assurance, usually done and performed by
Assurance Companies similarly formed and now existing in Great
Britain.
Business to be 29.—That the business of the Company shall be carried on in
ney 18 an°d'mrec- ie town °f Sydney, and in such other places to be appointed as
tors’authorised to hereinafter is mentioned. And the Directors shall provide a
premises. ° r rent House or Office for that purpose in some public place in the said
town ; and they are hereby authorised and empowered by and
with the funds of the Company»to purchase the fee simple or take
the lease at a yearly rent, of any house or building they may
think eligible ; and such houses or buildings to sell again, ex-
change, or otherwise dispose of for the benefit of the Company,
at their discretion, and to give discharges for the purchase
money, and such lands, houses, and buildings shall, for all the
purposes of these presents be deemed personal estate, and part of
the Capital of the said Company, and shall be vested in the said
Directors as Trustees thereof, for the benefit and on behalf of the
said Company, upon such Trust as will effectually secure the
object and intention of this Deed in relation thereto.
Directors may ap- 30.—That the said Directors of the Company shall and may,
pomt Agents. from ti me to establish any Branch Office, or appoint any
Agent or Agents in any town or place within the limits of the
Colonies of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, with
s-e ciause so such clerks and servants as they the said Directors may think
ami Addenda, fit, for the purpose of carrying on the business of the said
Company as hereinbefore mentioned, and at their discretion
suppress and discontinue any such branch offices or establish-
ments, or dismiss any agent or agents, and all other individuals
connected with the conduct and management of such branch
offices' or agencies. And all such branch offices, agents, and all
clerks and other servants shall, at all times be under the control
and government of the said Directors, as fully and in the same
manner in all respects as the officers and servants of the
establishment in Sydney,
DIRECTORS.
Management of 31. That subject and without prejudice to the powers herein-
company to be a fi er given to the general meetings, the entire management of


the business concerns and affairs of this Company shall be, and vested in twelve
is hereby vested and reposed in Twelve Directors, to he elected
and appointed in manner hereinafter mentioned, and such and of affairs,
all future Directors shall have the sole and exclusive control,
management, and disposal of the capital, stock, funds, estate, see Addenda,
property, affairs, and concerns of the said Company, and shall
regulate and determine the mode and terms of carrying on and
transacting the business of the Company. And it shall be law-
ful for the Directors for the time being to invest so much of the
said Stock as shall at the time be paid upon the respective
Shares of the said Proprietors, and the profits and other
accumulations of and on such Stock, in the purchase of freehold
or leasehold estates, or in the purchase of any government or
public securities which may hereafter be issued, or of Share or
Shares in any of the banking or other companies in the said
Colonies of New South Wales or Yan Dieman’s Land, or in the
Shares of canals or railroads within the said colonies ; and it
shall also be lawful for the said Directors for the time being, to
make advances or grant loans to any person or persons by way
of mortgage, on the deposit of title deeds, or on bond to such
amount, at such a rate of interest and upon such terms as they
the said Directors may think fit, and to make such other
advances upon such other security as they shall think fit; and
it shall also be lawful for them, the said Directors for the time
being, to discount bills of exchange or promissory notes, or to
make partial advances on the same, as they in their discretion
shall think fit; and it shall also be lawful for the said Directors
to purchase any Share or Shares in this Company which may
hereafter be offered for sale either by public auction or private
contract on behalf and for the use and benefit of the said Com-
pany. That all the estate and effects of the Company be and
they are hereby declared to be vested in the said Directors for
the time being, as Trustee thereof, for the use and benefit of
the said Company.
32. —That it shall and may be lawful for the said Directors Directors to exe-
for the time being, or any three of them, to sign and execute all cute Deeds-
deeds, policies, and other instruments for the purpose of effec-
tuating the purposes of the said Company, and it is hereby
declared that the receipt or receipts of such Directors, or any
three of them, shall be sufficient discharges for all monies paid
to them on behalf of the said Company, and such person or
persons paying such monies, shall not be answerable or account-
able for any misapplication or non-application thereof.
33. —That any receipt or receipts for sums payable annually Recei P ts for re_


newai of Policies or otherwise, for or on the renewal of any policy or policies,
Secre 6 tary Sned by s^ia " be deemed and taken to be sufficient discharge or sufficient
discharges (and binding on the Company) to the person or
persons paying the same, if signed by the Secretary to the said
Company, or by the agent or agents out of the town of Sydney.
raiHn°mone may That the said Directors (or the Board of Directors
1 money- appointed as hereinafter mentioned) shall have the controlled
right, liberty, and power of calling in, receiving and enforcing
payment of all monies due and owing to the said Company,
whether due by deed, bond, note, or other contract.
Drafts to be 35.—That all drafts or cheques upon the bankers of the
Directors'an cube Company, be signed by two of the said Directors for the
secretary. time being, and countersigned by the Secretary.
Directors not to 36. —That no Director shall he allowed to vote on any pro-
OT o tbeTr h reiations P osytaon or motion for investing Capital by the purchasing of
are interested in freehold or leasehold land or other property, by making advances
such vote. or i enc q n g an y sum 0 f money on mortgage or otherwise, or in
deciding as to the propriety of the said Company taking any
risk, insuring any property against fire, or granting any assurance
on the life of any party or parties applying for the same, if he
the said Director, or any person standing towards him in the
relation of partner, father, brother, child, father-in-law, or son-
in-law (or females standing in the same degree of relationship,)
or in any other way which he may be either directly or indirectly
interested, shall be the person or one of the persons to whom
the said freehold or leasehold land or other property so intended
to be purchased shall belong, or the person or one of the persons
to obtain such money on mortgage, or the person or one of the
persons to whom the property belongs required to be insured,
or the person or one of the persons whose life is to he insured.
Directors to 37.—That the said Twelve Directors shall annually choose
man an fr° m amongst themselves, a Chairman and Deputy Chairman,
chairman. and at all General Meetings of the Proprietors, such Chairman
and in case of his absence, such Deputy Chairman, and in the
absence of both, a Chairman by and out of the Proprietors, pro
tempore ) shall preside and have a casting vote in the decisions
thereof.
Qualification of 38. —That no Proprietor of the said Company shall be eligible
Director, for or e } e( q e q a Director thereof, who shall not be possessed, in
his own right of at least Twenty Shares in the Capital Stock
of the said Company, or who shall have becone insolvent or
stopped payment, or who shall be a Director of any other
“ Fire or Life Assurance Company; ” and in case any person
who shall have been duly elected a Director shall fall within


any of the disqualifications aforesaid, his office of Director shall
cease and become vacant.
39.—That if any Director do not attend at any one Meeting Director not at-
of the Board of Directors during the period of three consecutive months
months he shall be considered as no longer a Director, and considered as no
his office of such shall cease and determine, unless it shall lon&er a I)ireotor
appear to a majority of the other Directors that such absence
has been caused by illness or other unavoidable circumstances,
and has not been detrimental to the Company.
40. —That Twelve of the Proprietors of the said Company Twelve Proprie _
duly qualified shall, at the first General Meeting of the Pro- tor . s t 0 !> e aP-
prietors, be appointed Directors of the said Company, pointed Directors
41. —That the Twelve Proprietors who shall be first appointed Directors a p-
Directors of the said Company, continue Directors for one year P^ ted t 0 co . n ~
from the first day of August next, and thenceforth until some one year,
other Directors be appointed in their place, or they or any
of them become disqualified by any of the means aforesaid.
42. —That at the expiration of one year, to he computed from At the expiration
the said first day of August next, two of the Directors appointed ? f ever r succeed-
shall go out of the office of Director by lot, and that the like g 0 ° nut
number of such Directors shall, in like manner, go out of office by \ ot i tidl the
, ~ . ’ 6 whole be changed
at the expiration of the second and every subsequent year, until or re-elected,
the whole of the said Directors shall have been changed or re- senior dv
elected, after which, at the expiration of every subsequent year, rectors to go out
the two then senior Directors shall vacate the said office by annually-
rotation.
43. —That in order to fill up the vacancy which will occur in vacancy how to
the Direction, at the expiration of every year, there shall be be filled up.
elected by ballot, at the General Meeting next before the day
of the expiration of each occurring year, out of and from such
of the Proprietors of the said Company qualified to become
Directors, as hereinbefore mentioned, two persons to be Directors
of the said Company for the year ensuing, at which election
Directors retiring by ballot or rotation, may be re-elected to the
said office, and put at the bottom of the list,
44. —That the names of each of the Directors who shall so „ „ .
n , , . ini . Names of retiring
retire or go out oi omce by lot or rotation, shall be ascertained Directors to be
and determined amongst the Directors themselves, at least one f^rmatfon 01 *©?
month before the time of every such retirement; and the names the Company,
of such retiring Directors shall be forthwith published in such
newspapers as the Directors may think fit, for the information
of the Members of the said Company.
45. —That in case of vacancy in the office of Director shall be in ease of death or
occasioned by the resignation, death, or disqualification of any 1011


new Director to one or mo re of the Directors for the time being (except in the
be appointed in , . • n s , & - „ -, .
three months, case hereinafter next mentioned,) every such vacancy shall within
Three calendar months after the same shall happen, be filled up
by the election at a Meeting to be called for that purpose of
another duly qualified Proprietor, who shall thereupon continue
to act in the said office of Director during the time that such
retiring, deceased, or disqualified Director would or might have
continued in office : Provided that in case the conduct of any one
Director shall, at any time, be such that his continuance in office
shall appear to at least nine of the other Directors for the time
being, to be prejudicial to the interests of the Company, it shall
be lawful for such other Directors, or any nine of them, to sus-
Directors may be P en d such Director; and in that case to call a Public Meeting of
suspended. the Proprietors within one month from such suspension, which
Meeting shall determine whether such Director shall continue in
office.
such vacancy as 46.—That every such vacancy in the office of Director which
in three months' shall take place within the space of three calendar months next
the P rece ding the ordinary time of election, shall remain unfilled till
current year and the next ordinary time of election, and the name or names of the
election Si re- Directors who shall occasion such vacancy or vacancies, or any
main unfilled, two of them (provided they shall exceed that number,) shall
stand in lieu of one or both of the vacancies that would have
taken place by lot or rotation at the time of such general
election ; and in case such vacancies shall exceed the number of
two, such vacancies over and above that number shall be filled
up under the next preceding clause, notwithstanding the same
shall occur within three months next preceding the ordinary
time of election.
No Member shall 47.—That no Member of the said Company, after the first
S hau not signify election of Directors, shall be capable of being elected to the said
his intention to office of Director, either at a time of general election, or on the
one oi the Boards . . ’ , ° 7
of Directors four- resignation, death, or disqualification of any other Director who
the* 1
tion - Directors hereinafter mentioned, at least fourteen days previous
to the day of election his, willingness to act as a Director of the
said Company, in the event of his being duly elected ; and the
names of such Candidates shall be by the Directors published in
some of the Newspapers for the information of the Proprietors.
Four Directors 48.—That four or more Directors shall constitute a Board for
Board nStltUte a the management and conduct of the affairs of the Company,
which Board shall hold its sittings at the Office of the Company
See Addenda. on SU(J h days an d times as may be considered necessary and
convenient for the dispatch of business, and the Chairman for the


time being shall have a deliberative as well as a casting vote at
such Board.
49. —That the said Directors to be appointed as hereinbefore officers and ser-
mentioned shall, and they are hereby authorised to appoint a pany! ° 16 ° m
Physician, Surgeon, Solicitor, Secretary, Surveyor, and other
officers and servants to the said Company. And it shall be
lawful for the said Directors, and they are hereby authorised
and empowered, from time to time, to discharge all or any of
such officers, and all other servants, whenever they in their dis-
cretion may think fit, and to appoint others in their place and
stead, with such salaries, wages, and allowances as they think
reasonable; and at all times hereafter it shall be lawful for them
the said Directors for the time being to dismiss any officer, or
other servant, and appoint others in their place and stead, as
they shall see just occasion : Provided that the said Directors
shall not at any time appoint any person to be Secretary to this
Company who shall be a Shareholder or Co-partner in the same
or any other Assurance Company ; and if after such appointment
shall take place, such Secretary shall become a Shareholder or
co-partner of this or any other Assurance Company, that then
the said Directors shall immediately discharge such Secretary,
and apoint another in his place and stead.
50. —That such Board of Directors shall and lawfully may, Directors may
from time to time,. make such rules, provisions, orders and not k repugnant'to
regulations, touching the government, carrying on, and manage- * h e Deed,
ment of the affairs of the said Company (provided the same are
not repugnant to the rules and regulations herein contained,) as
they shall think fit and expedient.
51. —That any Twelve Members holding together at least one th™safa
hundred and twenty Shares in the Joint Stock of the said company may re-
Company may, from time to time, and at any time as they shall aiu spedaTal-
deem expedient by writing under their hands, addressed to the neral Meeting,
said Directors, require a Special General Meeting of the
Members of the said Company to be convened: provided that
in every such requisition the object for which such Special
General Meeting is required to be called, must be clearly and
fully expressed ; and thereupon the Directors shall, within four-
teen days, or as soon as circumstances will admit, convoke such
Meeting accordingly, for considering the subject mentioned
in such [requisition and at which Meeting no other subject or
question shall be discussed or determined.
52. —That the Directors for the time being shall and may at Directors to
a Board to be assembled as aforesaid, order the commencement, a™ons nd defend
prosecution, and defence, and enter or cause to be entered ap-


pearances, or file common or special bail, and accept of, or make,
and deliver any declarations, pleading, or other proceedings
in any action or actions, suit or suits, at law or in equity, for
or in respect of any sum or sums of money, debts, dues, titles,
claims, and demands whatsoever of or relating to the affairs of
the said Company: or order the abatement, discontinuance,
or nonsuit thereof, and to compromise or to leave to arbitration
the matter or matters in question or dispute, or otherwise act
therein in every manner and respect, as they the said Directors
shall think most conducive to the benefit and interest of the
said Company.
Directors to 53.—That the Directors for the time being shall cause all
and r °lc- necessary and proper books of account to be provided and
counts to be kept kept at the office of the said Company, and they shall cause
to be written and made in those books, fair, explicit, and true
entries of all receipts, payments, transactions, and dealings by
or on behalf of the Company, and of all profits, gains, and
losses arising therefrom, and also an account of all dealings
and investments which shall be made with or of the capital of
the Company, or of the money deposited with the Company.
Two sets of 54.—That the said Directors in keeping all such accounts
kept k onefor in- books of account before mentioned, shall cause two
surances against distinct and separate sets of books of account to be kept, one
other "for Life for the purpose of containing the accounts of the Insurances
Assurances. against loss by Fire, and the other containing the accounts of
Assurances on lives, and shall keep not only the books in the
two departments entirely distinct from each other, but also ail
documents and papers relating to each respectively, as if each
of the said departments belonged to and were under the manage-
ment and control of different companies. And the said
Directors shall cause the said books containing the accounts
of Insurances against loss by Fire, to be settled, adjusted, and
balanced up to and upon, or as soon as may be after the first
day of July in every year; and the said books containing the
accounts of assurances on lives to be settled, adjusted, and
balanced up to and upon, or as soon after as may be the first
day of July, which will be in the year of our Lord 1841, and
so on from that time up to the same day at the end of each
succeeding five years. And the said Directors shall, at the
said respective times, cause to be made out full, true, and
explicit statements and balance sheets for each of the said
departments, separately and distinct from each other, exhibiting
the debts and credits of the Company in each department
respectively, and the amount and nature of the Capital and
18


Property thereof, and the then fair value of the same, and the
profits and losses of the Company, and all other matters and
things requisite for fully and explicitly manifesting the state of
the affairs of the said Company, and (after the lapse of three
years from the time the said Company shall commence business
as hereinafter mentioned) the amount of the dividend they
recommend to be paid on the respective Shares.
55. —That in case the said Proprietors (not being less than Auditors may be
half the whole number present) shall be dissatisfied with such tiiink r( it
balance sheets or accounts, it shall and may he lawful for necessary,
them to appoint three Auditors to be taken from the body of
the Proprietors, to inspect and check such accounts; and the See Addenda,
said Auditors when chosen, are hereby authorised and em-
powered to examine and report on the state of the affairs of
the Company, and for that purpose to have full access to all
books, accounts, and other documents connected with the
said Company; and also to employ such of the clerks and
officers of the said Company as the said Auditors may find
necessary in preparing such report, and which report shall be
subscribed by the auditors and delivered to the Proprietors at
their next General Meeting. The said Auditors, before pro-
ceeding in their examination, shall sign a declaration of secrecy
of the affairs of the said Company.
56. —That no dividend or division of the profits in the Fire no dividend to
Department be declared or be made until the expiration of three m g!j) s e t d three
years from the commencement of business by the Company, years.
(unless the same shall be directed to be made by the Proprietors
at a General Meeting, specially convened for that purpose) for
the purpose of establishing a surplus fund to meet any unforeseen
or extraordinary demand on the said Company, and to equalize
the dividends afterwards payable to the several proprietors of
the said Company, and that the said Directors may after the
lapse of three years as before-mentioned, annually set apart and
appropriate out of the profits of the said Company, such sum as
they may think proper, not exceeding one-fourth of the profits in
any one year, for the purpose of increasing the said Surplus Fund.
57. That a General Annual Meeting of the Members of the General Meetings
said Company shall be convened, and holden at the Offices of the t 0 1)6 he]d-
said Company, in Sydney aforesaid, on the first day of July in See Addenda,
each and every year during the continuance of these presents, or
within three weeks thereof. And that the time of holding such Fourteen days’
General Meeting shall be advertised in some of the public news- notice t 0 be s iven
papers at least Fourteen days prior to the time at which it shall
be intended to take place.


tifree 58. That at or after the end of the first Three years, and ap-
appropriation of propriation of the Profits of the Company towards the Surplus
dividend 16 Fund as aforesaid, the said Directors shall within one month
made - after the said first day of July in every year, publicly declare the
dividend, and shall cause the same to be forthwith divided
among, and paid to the proprietors in proportion to their Shares
of the subscribed capital of the Company, at such time and in
such manner as the said Directors may think fit; whereof the
said Directors shall give public notice.
not P auend to meet 0 59.—That if at any Annual General Meeting of the Company,
ing to be m< ad- twelve of the proprietors qualified to vote shall not assemble
joumed, and p rocee( j t 0 business within one hour from the time fixed
for the meeting, no choice of Directors shall be made, nor shall
any business be done at that time ; but in such case there shall
be another meeting of the said Company at the same, place and
time on the same day in the following week, when any number of
the proprietors so qualified then present, may proceed to business.
may 6ral n^ke tin or 60.—That it shall be competent for any iwo successive
repeal byelaws&c general meetings of the said company, whether annual or special,
duly convened and held in manner* herein provided, to repeal
all or any of the bye-laws or provisional regulations which shall,
subsequently to the date of these presents, have been made by
the Directors for the time being, affecting the property or
concerns of the Company, and which shall be submitted to any
two such successive general meetings, and to make any new
laws, orders, regulations, or provisions for better managing the
Company, and the business, affairs, and concerns thereof; and
to amend or to alter, repeal or make void any of the existing
laws, regulations, and provisions thereof, and to cause all or any
of the bye-laws and provisional regulations which may be so
adopted and confirmed, and all or any of such new laws, orders,
regulations, and provisions, and all or any of such resolutions for
the repeal or avoidance of existing laws or provisions to be
embodied into any Supplementary Deed of Settlement to be made
for the conduct or government of the Company, and the same
whether embodied into any Supplementary Deed of Settlement or
not, shall be as binding and effectual to all intents as if the same
were inserted and contained in these presents, and generally to
determine on any question, matter, or thing relative to the con-
cerns of the Company which shall arise in the course of the conduct
at d management thereof, and which shall be brought before any
such aforesaid meetings. Provided nevertheless, that no
act, Order, or resolution be done or passed at any such meetings
as aforesaid, so as to release or exonerate all or any of the Pro-


prietors of the time being of the Company from their respective
liabilities as co-partners therein, or from their covenants in that
behalf contained in this Deed or any Supplementary Deed to be
made as aforesaid, or to affect or infringe upon the rateable of
proportionable division of the profits and liability to the losses of
the Company between the proprietors, or to affect or alter the
provision hereinafter contained for the dissolution of the Company.
And provided also that there shall always be an interval of at
least one calendar month between the holding of the first and
the holding of the second of any two such aforesaid General
Meetings.
61. —That at every meeting of the said Company all motions Decision of Gene-
and questions which shall then be submitted for the determination to be
of the meeting, shall be primarily decided on by a show of hands of hands or by
of the majority in the number of the proprietors then personally lf de '
present, but if three or more proprietors present, qualified to
vote, shall be dissatisfied with such show of hands they may
demand a ballot upon such question or motion, and such (if so
required) shall be taken accordingly.
62. —That the Secretary, Agents, and other officers of the give
said Company shall provide and give such securities and execute security,
such deeds, covenants, and assurances as the said Directors
may require.
63.—That no Director or other officer or servant of the said Officers not to be
Company, his or their heirs, executors, or ad minis shall eaXTther nor
be charged or chargeable with any monies, goods, chattels, or for the rise or fan
effects other than they respectively shall receive, and shall in no effects' Ue of° f tile
case be answerable or responsible for the acts of each other, but Company.
each and every of them be answerable for any rise or fall in the
price of the effects, or the insufficiency or deficiency in title of
value of any mortgages or other securities in or upon which
the capital of the said Company shall have been invested, nor
for any other loss, misfortune, or damage which may happen
in the execution of the aforesaid offices and trusts, except the
same shall be occasioned by wilful default or neglect.
64.—That the Directors and other officers for the time being Officers to be
of the said Company shall from time to time and at all times be exC ept in cases
saved harmless and indemnified by the Company from and of wilful neglect,
against (and it shall be the duty of the Directors as such, out
of the assets and effects of the said Company being under their
control, to replace and pay) all costs, charges, losses, damages,
and expenses which they or any of them may incur, sustain, or
be put into, in and about the execution and discharge of their
respective trusts and offices, or in or about any action, suit, or
21


proceeding either at law or in equity, in which they or any
of them shall or may whilst acting in pursuance of these presents
be concerned, or by reason thereof become damnified unless the
s'ame shall be sustained or incurred by reason of the wilful neglect
or default of the parties sustaining or incurring the same respec-
tively, or unless such parties shall have refused or declined to
submit the management or prosecution or defence of any such
action or proceeding to the Board of Directors of the said
Company.
Company may 65.—That if at the expiration of five years from the date of
faring 1 m property these presents, three-fourths of the proprietors in number and
against fire. value at a Special General Meeting convened for the purpose
(of which meeting at leat three months previous notice shall be
given) shall determine that the said Company shall discontinue
insuring property against losses by fire, that then and from thence-
forth that part of the business of the said Company shall be
discontinued, and that the Directors for the time being shall then
take such measures for winding up and closing the concerns and
affairs in that department of the, said Company as the said
Directors shall, in their discretion, consider most advantageous
and expedient, and if such proprietors shall determine to dis-
continue that part of their business relating to Insurances against
loss by fire, and three-fourths of the said proprietors in number
and value, resident in the colony of New South Wales, shall
think it advantageous and expedient that the business of the Life
Department be also discontinued as far as the nature of such
Power to cease Department will admit; that then it shall be lawful for the said
business. Directors for the time being, to buy up and purchase the Life or
other Policies granted by the said Company, and otherwise to
See Clause 84. grant or give full compensation to all or any of the said parties
who shall have then insured their Lives or the Lives of others
with the said Company, and to do all other acts that shall be
necessary for relieving the said Proprietors from their liabilities,
and for winding up and closing the Concerns and Affairs of the
Company.
At the dissoiu- 66. That as soon as, and immediately after the said Directors
effectf C to ipa 'be shall have paid and satisfied all Claims and Demands upon the
divided, said Company, and relieved them from all Debts and Engage-
ments, that then the said Company shall be dissolved, and all
the Land, Buildings, and Saleable Property of the Company shall
be sold, and the Monies to arise by such Sale, together with
other the Monies, Debts and Effects of the said Company, shall
be divided amongst the several Members according to their
respective interests.


67. That if at or after the expiration of five years the said Proprietors to
Company shall not'have been dissolved as hereinbefore mentioned, ™. e f g a y
then at the expiration of twenty-nine years from the date of determine
these Presents a Special General Meeting of the Proprietors of nersMp\hau Pcon-
the said Company shall be convened, for the purpose oftinue-
determining whether a Dissolution of the Company shall take
place at the end of the term of thirty-one years hereinbefore
limited as the duration of these Presents and of the Co-partner-
ship hereby created, or whether the said Co-partnership shall
be extended to any and what greater length of time ; and if
two-thirds of the Proprietors, to be ascertained as hereinbefore
appointed, shall be desirous that the said term of thirty-one
years shall be prolonged, and that the said Co-partnership shall
continue beyond that period, the said Term and Co-partnership
shall be prolonged and continue accordingly for the further term
or period that shall be by such Meeting agreed on, and shall be
binding on the Members of the said Company in the same
manner as if such further and additional term had been originally
expressed in these Presents. And this present Deed of Settle-
ment shall be and continue of the same force and effect for
such further and additional period as for the term of
thirty-one years, hereinbefore mentioned. But if two-thirds
of the said Proprietors shall determine that the said Co-partner-
ship shall cease at the expiration of the said term of thirty-one
years, the Board of Directors for the time being shall take such
fit and necessary measures for winding up and closing the con-
cerns and affairs of the said Company, and for dividing the
capital thereof among the Proprietors according to their respec-
tive Shares and Interests, as the said Directors shall in their
discretion consider most advantageous and expedient.
68. That these Presents and all and singular other the Deeds, Deed and rules
Kules, and Regulations of the said Company shall be deposited inspection oT ro* 3
at the Offices of the said Company, and shall at all times be open prietors.
to the inspection .and perusal of the several Members thereof,
upon his, her, or their leaving notice in writing to that effect at
the said Offices of the Company, one day. before such perusal
and inspection shall be required, but no Proprietor or Proprietors
of the said Company, not being a Director or Directors thereof,
shall be entitled to see, or require the production of the Books of
Account of the said Company.
69. That if any doubt shall hereafter arise as to the true Doubts'in regard
meaning and construction of the several Clauses and Provisions ■
of this Deed, or of any subsisting Rule or Regulation of the said clauses to be re-
Company, the said Directors, either voluntarily, or upon the rai Meeting, Gene '


requisition of any twelve Proprietors of the said Company, shall
call a Special General Meeting in the manner above appointed,
for the purpose of expounding and determining the same, and the
sense and meaning given by the majority of the Proprietors at
such Meeting to any such Clause, Rule, Regulation or Provision,
shall be deemed the true sense and meaning thereof.
Deed to take 70. That lastly it is hereby declared and agreed by and
day C of its r date. Ule between the several parties to these presents, that notwith-
standing the dates of the subscriptions of the respective parties
hereto, the Contract shall be held to have commenced on the day
of the date of these Presents.
In Witness whereof the said Parties to these Presents have
hereunto set their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year first
above written.


AUSTRALIAN
GENERAL ASSURANCE COMPANY,
BEING AN EXTENSION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
FIRE AND LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY,
EFFECTED BY
SUPPLEMENTARY DEED,
DATED 6th MARCH, 1839.
SYDNEY :




SUPPLEMENTARY DEED.
DATED 6th MARCH, 1839.
By Indenture of the above date, provision is made for adding
Marine Assurance to the business of the Company, in case all
the Shareholders should acquiesce in the arrangement; and
in default of this, to form, in the alternative, a separate Marine
Assurance Company, consisting of the parties executing the
new Deed.
AH the Shareholders of the original Company having now
either executed the new Deed, or testified their acquiescence
in such manner as to bind them in a Court of Equity, that part
of the new Deed which applied to the conditional formation of
a new Company has become inoperative; and it will be more
convenient to set forth here such parts only of the last mentioned
Deed as are now in force for the regulation of the consolidated
Company, henceforth to be called the “Australian General
Assurance Company '
After reciting the general purport of the preceding Deed, the
Deed of 6th March, 1839, proceeds as follows;
bfihereasi the business of the said Australian Fire and
Life Assurance Company has been carried on at Sydney aforesaid,
pursuant to the terms of the said Deed of Settlement, but no call
having been hitherto made by the Directors, pursuant to the
regulation in that behalf hereinbefore referred to no higher
amount than the instalments appointed by the said indenture as
aforesaid, amounting in the whole to £5, has hitherto been paid A “gh”J e p up
up by the proprietors on account of each Share of AlOO. And , '
\ J 1 . 1 ,, . ■ ■ ~ ~ , , , . ~ General wish of
whereas it is the unanimous opinion oi the twelve subsisting proprietors to add
Directors, duly elected pursuant to the said Deed of Settlement, ne t 0 As h ™ r ‘
and it is also, so far as can at present be ascertained, the opinion business of tha
of all the subsisting proprietors, that it is expedient to add Com P an y-
Marine Assurance to the business of the said Company ; and
whereas such opinion has been declared unanimously at a Special


General Meeting convened and held in conformity to the regulation
declared at hi that behalf, but, inasmuch as the Members present at such
special General meeting may not have power to bind the absent Members to
Meeting n j -l
such extent as would be requisite for the purpose of appropriating
the funds of the said Company towards a distinct branch of
Assurance, not provided for by the said Deed of Settlement;
the said Directors, and the other Members of the said Company,
who have already declared themselves to be desirous of entering
Agreement to into the business of Marine Assurance, have mutually agreed
sionai Company and determined to form a Provisional Joint Stock Company, or
the original Com Co-Partnership, for the purpose of effecting such last mentioned
pany when ail assurance, and which shall subsist independently of the said
OTtMegaieffect" Australian Fire and Info Assurance Company, so long as any or
either of the continuing Shareholders in the said original Company
shall decline to agree to the consolidation of the business of such
original Company with that of the Company so to be newly
formed as aforesaid, but with a view, nevertheless, to such con-^
solidation, whenever the same can be legally effected with consent
of all necessary parties. And whereas, at the Special General
Meeting aforesaid, it was also agreed, that a Supplementary Deed
of Settlement should be entered into, for effecting the purpose
aforesaid. Now this indenture witnesseth, that in pursuance of
Mutual Covenant ga jq a g reemen t, they, the several parties, whose names are
hereunto subscribed, and seals affixed, for themselves and each
of them, for himself and herself respectively, and for his, her,
or their several and respective heirs, executors, administrators,
and assigns, do, and each and every of them doth covenant,
promise, declare, and agree to and with the other or others of
them, their, and each and every of their respective heirs, executors
administrators, and assigns, in manner following, that is to say ; —-
Then follow the Rules of the provisional Marine Assurance
Company which would have taken effect absolutely , if the
Company had been separately established. (Clause 1 to 70
inclusive.)
Then are inserted certain provisions for facilitating the coali-
tion of the Companies, by purchase of Shares of dissentients and
otherwise; on which it has not, however, been found necessary to
act. (Clauses 71 to 75.)
The remainder of the Deed continues in operation, and may
be considered as now forming, in conjunction with that of 20th
May, 1836, the present Deed of Settlement of the Australian
General Assurance Company. It is, therefore, now appended,',
as follows;
Mode in which 76, —But in case before any such dissolution of or final separa-
28


tiun as aforesaid of the Company hereby provisionally established, consolidation
these presents shall be executed by all the persons who shall Funds’’ o shLi to be
for the time being be entitled by law • and the true intent of if an
the said in part recited Deed of Settlement, to be recognized as concur.
Proprietors and Shareholders in the said original Australian
Fire and Life Insurance Company, then and from (thenceforth
all such Proprietors or Shareholders, being also Proprietors and
Shareholders of corresponding Shares in the said Company
provisionally formed, shall become Co-partners and Joint Stock
Proprietors in and of a consolidated capital fund, to be formed
by the union of the said two Companies, and to consist of the
sum of 50400,000, (unless the capital be further increased in
accordance with the regulation in force in that behalf,) which
sum of ,£400,000 shall be divisible into 4000 Shares of £IOO
each, two of which Shares shall be allotted to each holder of
one Share of the like amount in the said original Company, and
the instalments which shall have been respectively paid up by
the several Shareholders on account of each Share of £IOO in
the said original Company, and also on account of each Share
of £IOO in the said provisional Company, shall be added together
into one sum, or moiety of which shall be the amount paid up
in respect of each share of £IOO in the said consolidated Company,
the businesSfcWhereof shall thenceforth be carried on during the
remainder of the said original term of thirty-one years, or any
lawful extension thereof, under the style and firm of the
“ Australian General Assurance Company subject to and style of the Com .
under the regulations and agreements contained in the said in pany so formed.
part recited Deed of Settlement, or heretofore agreed or hereafter Such’Company to
to be agreed on, as bye-laws or additional regulations in manner b o f
therein provided for, but with and subject also to such supple- settlement in
, . ’ , , , " , „ conjunction with
mentary -regulations, and such alterations and qualifications of the following
the said original Deed of Settlement as hereinafter contained and
provided, that is to say,
77. —That in addition to the business of the said Fire and Extension of
Life Assurance Company, prescribed by the 28th regulation of to Asau _
the Deed of Settlement thereof, the said proposed consolidated ranee.
Australian General Assurance Company, shall be extended to
Marine Assurance, and to all matters usually done or performed
by Marine Assurance Companies in Great Britain.
78.—That in addition to the distinct and separate accounts Distinct account
of the two several departments of the said Fire and Life “obekept™ 1 * 16 **
Assurance Company, which are by the said Deed of Settlement
thereof required to be kept, the Directors of the said consolidated
Company shall also keep distinct the books and accounts, and all
29


documents and papers relating to the department of Marine
Assurance; and the books and accounts of such department
shall be balanced up to and upon, or as soon as may be after,
the first day of July in every year.
Rules as to pro- 79.—That so much of the 23rd clause of the said Deed of
uinttin P °uabiiity Settlement, as requires that a certain proviso therein particularly
to be in no 'longer set forth be inserted in every policy granted by the Company,
bmdmg. for the purpose of restricting the liability of the Members of the
Company, to the amount of their or his respective Share or
Shares of the Capital Stock or funds thereof, shall cease to
be obligatory.
BranciiEstabiish- 80.—That in addition to the establishment of branch offices
™Tertain te ptaces an( l agencies within the limits of the colonies of New South
not specified in Wales and Van Dieman’s Land, as authorised by the thirtieth
ongmai Deed. c i ause 0 f the said original Deed of Settlement, the same may also
See Addenda at an y Town, Port, or place in New Zealand, or
within the limits of the Australasian Colonies, or of the Con-
tinent of New Holland. And that the addition of any other
place or places whatsoever, may be authorised by any bye-law
of the Company to that effect.
Former limita- 81. That after the consolidation of the said two Companies,
shares each t^ie num b er °f Shares which it shall be lawful for any one
Member extern Member to possess or hold, except by title of Marriage, or
ded to a hundred, otherwise, as specified in the tenth Regulation of the said Deed
See Addenda, of Settlement; shall be extended to One Hundred Shares in lieu
of Fifty, as provided by the last-mentioned Regulation.
And of ten votes 82.—That the number of Votes for any one Proprietor, which
to twenty. py t p e eleventh Regulation of the said Deed of Settlement is
limited to ten, may in future extend, but be limited to twenty.
Purchasers 'of 83.—That notwithstanding any thing contained in the twenty-
oneratedtbybe ex ’ Regulation of the said Deed of Settlement, the'consent of
Director’s assent, the Directors, when obtained to any sale and transfer of Shares,
uaMities 1 ” 8 shall exonerate the purchaser from all liability under such Regu-
lation in respect of any claims or demands against the person
selling or transferring the same,
clause regarding 84. — That the sixty-fifth Clause of the said original Deed of
Don e a t° f thT end Settlement empowering three-fourths of the Proprietors in number
of five years and value at a Special General Meeting, convened at the ex-
piration of five years in manner therein mentioned, to discontinue
wholly or in part as therein particularly mentioned, the business
of the said Company shall, in case the consolidation of the said
two Companies shall take place before any such discontinuance
in wffiole or in part of the business of the said Company shall
thereby have been effected, be thenceforth revoked, and in lieu


thereof it is hereby provided, that in case at any time pending
the continuance of any Company subsisting by virtue of these Three . fourthg in
presents, whether during the original or any extended term number and
thereof, three-fourths in number and value of the Proprietors southWuiel
resident in New South Wales, shall determine either to dissolve Shareholders, to
, i • i n , , . . i ■ he empowered to
the said Company or Co-partnership, or to discontinue any one dissolve the corn-
er more branches of the business thereof, or to resume any one or pany> or adandon
more such branches after the same shall have been once or oftener departl™ent a 'of its
discontinued, or to add to the business of the said Company any pf e s a “^|. at
new or other lawful business in the nature of Assurance not pre-
viously undertaken or contemplated ; it shall be lawful for such
three-fourths of the said Shareholders, computed and resident
as aforesaid, without the consent, or notwithstanding the dissent
of all or any of the remaining Proprietors by any writing under
their hands, notifying such their determination, to authorise the
Directors of the said Company to carry the same into effect, and
by the same or any other writing, to instruct the Directors for
the time being as to the means by which the same shall be
accomplished ; and the Directors shall upon every such occasion
adopt the measures which shall appear to them most advantageous
and expedient for the purpose expressed in such determination,
so far as they shall not be expressly controlled by such In-
structions.
In witness &c.
€n nil to itijima tjr m Iftxmnb fijiall man
WE, whose names and seals are hereunto affixed, being
Proprietors of Stock and Co-partners in a certain Joint
Stock Company, carrying on business at Sydney under the style
and firm of ®j]k Iratraliau fcml iMmurr Cmnpmi,
which Company is formed by the extension of a Company pre-
viously existing under the style and firm of the JllljtrHlimi
f\U anil till Sugar ailtt Canipami, severally send greeting.
rahweas the said Joint Stock Company is at present regulated
by the joint operation of two several Deeds of Settlement, the
one bearing date the twentieth day of May, one thousand eight
hundred and thirty six, forming the said Company 'under the
name of the Australian Fire and Life Assurance Company, and
the other supplementary thereto bearing date the sixth day of
March, One thousand eight hundred and thirty nine, and incor-
porating Marine Assurance into the business of the said Com-


pany, and establishing such Company under the present name of
the Australian General Assurance Company, the
parties to these presents are desirous of adding to the laws and
regulations of the Company the Covenant and Declaration be-
tween the partners thereof hereinafter contained. there*
fore, the said several parties hereto Uo hereby each for himself
and his respective heirs, executors, and administrators covenant,
declare, and agree to and with the others, and each and every
other of them, their, and each, and every other of their exe-
cutors, administrators, and assigns, in manner following, that is
to say, ®hat in any and every action or suit at law or in equity
in winch a Proprietor or Proprietors of the said Company shall
be the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, and the Company, or its public
officer or officers, or any other person or persons for or on behalf
or on account of the Company, the Defendant or Defendants, and
vice versa, it shall not be competent for either of the parties in
such action or suit to set up the partnership, by the said deed or
deeds created or otherwise subsisting between the parties, as a
to such action or suit being sustainable; and such parties
respectively shall, upon the trial of any such action at law, and
in any proceeding in any such suit in equity, waive and forego
the objection to such action being tried at law, or any such suit
being instituted or proceeded in equity, by reason of the plaintiff
or plaintiffs, defendant or defendants, being partners in the Com-
pany, and no objection shall at any time be taken on the ground
that all or any of the Proprietors of the Company are not made
parties to any such action or suit, and upon any such trial, or in
any such suit, it shall be imperative on the Directors to produce
this Deed, and also any Deed or Deeds by which the party or
parties to such action or suit shall have covenanted to abide by
the rules and regulations of the Company, and the same shall be
read and used on the said trial, and in any such suit, without
any proof that any Proprietor or Proprietors of the Company,
except the party or parties to such action or suit hath or have
executed either of these presents, or any deed or deeds by which
he, she, or they shall have covenanted to abide by the rules and
regulations of the Company, and the matters and things in this
clause stated, shall and may be read in evidence on the same
trial, or in any such suit, and shall have the same force and
effect as, and by way of admissions from the parties respectively,
as if the same matters and things had been reduced to writing,
previously to such trial, as to the hearing of the clause as admis-
sions in tbe cause in the usual form, and had been signed by such
parties or their respective attorneys irrevocably ; and either of


the parties shall, if required by the other of them, consent to the
court or any judge of the court in which such action shall be
brought or suit commenced, making an order or orders, in which
shall be embodied the matters and things last aforesaid, as ad-
missions from the party against whom such order shall be sought
to be read and used in evidence on the trial of any such action or
in any such suit by the party obtaining such order; and the final
judgement or decree which may be obtained against the Company
or its public officers, or any person or persons concerned for or
on behalf or on account of the Company, in any action or suit at
law or in equity, which shall have been under the conduct and
management of the Directors, shall be final and conclusive upon,
and shall bind all the proprietors of the Company, and such
judgement or decree shall be forthwith satisfied and performed.
it is hereby declared and agreed that the foregoing covenant
declaration shall have the like effect in all respects with regard
to the parties hereto as if the same had been originally contained
in the said Deed of Settlement of the twentieth day of May, one
thousand eight hundred and thirty six, and had been confirmed
by the said supplementary Deed of Settlement of the sixth day
of March, one thousand eight hundred and thirty nine, and shall
have full operation with respect to the parties executing
these presents, notwithstanding all the proprietors or shareholders
of the said Company shall not execute the same.
En ®ttness whereof the said parties to these presents have
hereunto set their hands and seals the day of
one thousand eight thousand and forty three.
33


4 /Vfp
<2 i L_ \ o
Sr i 3 zT *
ADDENDA,
The following alterations and additions affecting the foregoing
Deeds of Settlement of the Company have from time to time
been made with consent of the Proprietors, since 6th March,
1839, the date of the Supplementary Deed.
increased num- 1840. Number of Shares increased from Two Thousand to
ber of Shares. ,
lour Thousand.
Life Branch. 1843. Life Branch discontinued.
Fire Branch. 1844. Fire Branch discontinued.
Number of Du ~ Number of Directors reduced from Twelve to Six.
rectors.
Quorum. 1847. Number of Directors required to form a quorum reduced
from Four to Three.
Number of 1848. Limit of number of Shares which may be held by one
shares which one Proprietor extended from One Hundred to Two
Proprietor may 1
hold. Hundred.
Half-yearly » Instead of Annual Meetings only, Half-yearly Meetings
Meetings. ordered to be held, and Auditors (nut exceeding two)
Auditors. to pg e i ec t ef i a t the meeting held in January of each
year.
Agencies. 1851 Power given to Directors from time to time to establish
Agencies in any part of Great Britain or Ireland.
incorporation. 1857. Company incorporated by Act of Parliament of New
South Wales.
A. W. DOUGLAS, PRINTER, ATLAS OFFICE, HUNTER STREET.




