

REV. CHARLES VOYSEY, 8.A., j
YICAR OF HEALAUGH,
ON THE HEARING OF THE
CHARGES OF HERESY
PREFERRED AGAINST HIM IN THE
* CHAN CEE Y COURT OF YORK,
ON THE Ist DECEMBER, 1869.
LONDON:
TRUBNER & CO., GO, PATERNOSTER ROW.
1869.




The of p “Sl>ng: and Stone be obtebed of Messrs. TeObnbu & Co.,
„ w ’ at tfa e prices undermentioned •
Vol. 1 for 1866 R „ „ ,
Vol. 3 for 1868 t ’’fj 6s ■ P ost -
Vol. 4 for 1869 I s ' or 7s - hy post.
Vol. 4 for 1869 I s ; or 7s - 10d - ]
Vol. 2is out of print. /s ' » » ~
The Preface to Vol 4 contains some remarks on the Chancellor’s Judgment.


In publishing the following pages as my defence before the
Chancery Court of York, on the Ist December, 1869, I acknow-
ledge, with the greatest pleasure, the invaluable services of my
counsel, Mr. J. Fitz James Stephen, Q.C., and Mr. John Westlake,
and of my solicitors, Messrs. Shaen and Eoscoe. Their help in
the preparation of this document must, indeed, be so obvious,
that this acknowledgment is less necessary for the enlightenment
of the ordinary reader than for the relief of my own almost
inexpressible feelings of thankfulness to my legal advisers.
Heaiaugh VICARAGB,
December 2nd, 1869.




Marth, 1869.
REV. CHARLES VOYSEY’S
DEFENCE FUND.
Subscriptions in aid of the defence of the Rev. Charles Voysey against the
proceedings of the Archbishop of York are received by Messrs. Robarts, Lubbock
and Co., 15, Lombard Street, E.C., and by the London and Westminster Bank,
St. James’s Square, S.W., where accounts have been opened in the name of the
above Fund ; or by Wm. Henry Domville, Esq., 15, Gloucester Crescent, Hyde
Park, London, W.
The undermentioned have consented to their names being placed on the List of
the Committee. The two last named will act as Trustees, with power to add to
their number, and to make all such regulations as they may think expedient.
Should any balance remain after carrying out the objeet of the Fund, the
surplus will be disposed of according to the decision of a General Meeting of the
Subscribers.
Subscribers are not considered to pledge themselves to any of the Rev. Charles
Voysey’s opinions.
COMMITTEE.
The Viscount Adare.
The Viscount Amberley.
Brown, Joseph, Esq., Q.C.
Campbell, Rev. Lewis.
Guise, Sir W. V., Bart., F.L.S.
Huth, Henry, Esq.
Jowett, Rev. Professor.
Kirkman, Rev. Thos. P., F.R.S.
La Touche, Rev. J. D.
Lyell, Sir Charles, Bart., F.R.S.
Reynolds, Col. John W.
the favour of an early subscription is requested,
in full, for publication.
Roberts, Rev. J. B.
Ruskin, John, Esq.
Schuler, Gen. Fredk., R.A.
Trevelyan, Sir Walter C., Bart,
Wedgwood, Hensleigh, Esq.
The Very Rev. the Dean of West.
MINSTER.
Wheelwright, Rev. G.
Wtndiiam, Honble. Percy S., M.P.
Dohville, Wm. Hen., Esq. | m .
Westlake, John, Esq. \ Trmiees '
If you should desire to assist, the fav<
and, it is hoped, with your name in full,
For those who may be interested in the progress of opinion within the Church
of England, and who have not had an opportunity of reading the Eev. Charles
Voysey’s Sermons (for the publication of which he is being prosecuted), the fol-
lowing Preface to his 3rd Volume of the “Sling and the Stone” is now reprinted.


“The Sling and the Stone” is, and is meant to be, a challenge. Specta-
tors, however, may quite fail to see what the challenge is, and to whom it is
given. It would be, for instance, a great mistake to suppose that the author is
giving a challenge to the ecclesiastical law, or that he is seeiDg how far he may
try the endurance of polemical orthodoxy. Such contests are unworthy of one
who feels the deep solemnity of the questions he has raised. The author of these
Volumes is not at all overwhelmed by the fear of what course any Church or
Section of Christendom may take with regard to himself or any other individual
teacher. He cannot bring himself to identify the cause of truth with the
attitude of any particular organization of men towards it, nor can he be so vain
or foolish as to suppose that his own individual fate, whether prosperous or
adverse, will have any permanent connection with the solution of the questions
which he has submitted to public examination.
If the old folly of persecuting opinions be successfully repeated in his own case,
the author knows quite well that it will not drown the voice which has already
been heard, nor stifle one single enquiry to which his hearers and readers have
been stimulated.
The challenge herein given is not, then, one relating to position in the Church
of England, nor is it addressed to Archbishops, and Bishops, and Ecclesiastical
Courts any more than to the whole laity of Christendom.
But to every man calling himself a Christian who may read these Sermons,
they convey a challenge, the spirit of which may be thus briefly expressed—Are
these things so ? Is this true or false ? An answer is demanded from every
reader, not by the humble writer, but by the paramount importance of the ques-
tions themselves to these simple but momentous enquiries:—
Is it true that the human race was ever under the curse of God ?
Is it true that God needs the intervention of another to mediate with men,
and to bring them into a state in which He will be more favourable towards them
than He is already ?
Is it true that there is any God hut He who made us ?
Is it true that God ever was, or ever is, at a distance from this world, so that
in any sense it can be true that He comes and goes to and from the earth, or
sends some one to act as envoy on his behalf ?
Is it true that the only or even the chief signs of God’s presence and power
are to be found in what is called “ miracles” ?
Is it true that such miracles would prove God’s constant presence and favour,
or only His occasional presence and favour ?
Is it true that the doctrine of vicarious punishment is of any moral benefit to
mankind, or at all redounding to the honour of God ?
Is it true that men are to be saved or lost according to their religious belief ?
Are we, or are we not, to look for answers to these questions among the
Archives of the Church, and to be satisfied, as our highest duty, with the
answers to be found there ?
Are we, or are we not, bound to believe all that the Bible says on these and
similar questions?
Let us consider on what grounds we should be compelled to accept any state-
ment or opinion merely on the word of an apostle or an evangelist. At present,
the sole ground offered to us is traditional authority. In plain language, we are
required to accept every apostolic dictum as true because the Church believes
that the apostles were infallible. Opponents are only shocked, they will not even
condescend to argument, when an apostolic statement is challenged; and at
present the only semblance of a reason given for this absurd reverence is that the
Church has always held apostolic authority to be absolute.
\i^ We are ° ar g u ing i Q a vicious circle, if we believe all that the Apostles
s^ d ’ because the Church which was founded upon them says we ought. Where
s all we obtain an external authority on which to base anything like a logical
structure.


Yol. 1 for 1866
6s.
Yol. 2 for 1867
7s. 6d.
Yol. 3 for 1868 (is now out of print).
Yol. 4 for 1869
7s. 6d.
The Church is a living fact—no doubt —and her assumption of being founded
by Jesus Christ and the Apostles may be readily granted. But waiving the no
less patent fact of her fluctuation of doctrine and manifest departure from the
recorded teaching of Jesus, the question will be asked, On what does the au-
thority of Jesus Himself rest ? Are we to accept it as a matter of pure faith,
or are there evidences for it independent of the Church and New Testament ;
which are both believed to depend entirely on the authority of Jesus ?
These are matters of fundamental importance, and cannot be ignored by any
one who intends to grapple with the scepticism of the age.
If we are to stand on pure faith, without evidence, let it be at once confessed ;
but it is only a waste of time and words to follow up such a confession by a
parade of elaborate arguments. If the right to demand evidence be admitted,
let all the evidence that is legitimate and trustworthy be at once produced.
Those who are earnestly seeking rational grounds for accepting the authority of
Jesus and His Apostles will not however be easily satisfied with Bible arguments.
It is enough for them to have shown that there exist defects and errors in it,
both moral and historical, theological as well as cosmological; that even Apostles
were mistaken, and that the records of the noblest life are not without blemish.
The readers of these Sermons will discover without difficulty what is positive
in their teaching without the necessity for recapitulation. They will find more
agreement with Scripture and with the Great Master than might have been
expected, considering what was said against the Sling and the Stone in Convoca-
tion. But whatever the author has said stands on its own merits, deriving no
fictitious value from conformity with more ancient and consecrated opinions, nor
weakened at all by divergence fflom them.
Conscious of some errors, the author commends his work, in all modesty, to
the Christian peoples, neither fearing ridicule, nor deprecating just censure, but
simply assured that what is erroneous in it will soon be forgotten, and that what
is true in it can never be overthrown.
Healaugh Vicarage,
December la£, 1868.
The volumes of “ Sling and Stone ” may be obtained of Messrs. Trllbner & Co.,
60, Paternoster Row, E.C., at the prices undermentioned :—•
The Preface to Vol. 4 contains some remarks on the Chancellor’s Judgment.




DEFENCE
MAY IT PLEASE YOU, SIB,
I appear before you to move that these Articles may be
rejected, because they disclose no ecclesiastical offence. I also
move that they may be reformed by the omission of all the
references which they contain to authorities which are not in
reality dogmatic, and in particular by the omission of all
references to the Homilies ; and further, by the omission of all
charges which were not laid before the Commissioners of the
Bishop of London. The first branch of this motion is of course
the important one, and will involve a statement of the merits of
my case, as there is no dispute as to the facts that I wrote and
published the passages impugned. In supporting my motion, I
have thought it best to commit to writing what I have to say.
This will not only prevent misconception, but will have the
incidental advantage of saving the time of the Court.
I propose, with the leave of the Court, to pursue the
following course:—l shall not undertake to discuss word
by word and sentence by sentence the legality of the
passages objected to. I do not think that it would be just
to myself or respectful to the Court to do so. I am quite
sure that it cannot be your wish to lay hold of particular ex-
pressions for the purpose of condemning me. On the other
hand, it is not my wish to quibble about turns of expression.
The real question is, as to the substance of iny teaching. If
that is illegal, I have no wish to retain my preferment. For
these reasons, I shall state, in the fewest and plainest words I can
find, the substance of my teaching on the four points on which
I am accused of having said that which the law forbade me to
say. It is for the Court to decide whether or not I have done
so. The truth of my teaching is not in issue ; on that subject
I am entitled to my own opinion, and no Court can in any
event say more than that the Church of England is of a
different way of thinking.
I must, however, say that I have set forth my views with a


most firm conviction that they are true ; that they are entirely in
agreement with the teachings of our Lord and Master, Jesus
Christ; that the Bible abounds in proofs in support of them;
and that they most surely tend to the honour of God, and the
welfare of man. I have had before my mind the state of
religious feeling in this country, and the many dangers with
which our National Church is threatened. There is, on the one
hand, a growing tendency—it cannot be denied—to restore,
within our Church, the Homan doctrines against which our
Articles were, for the most part, specially and distinctly framed;
and, on the other hand, there is a growing contempt for religion
altogether, arising, as I think, entirely from the false and re-
pulsive views of God and of His relation to mankind which
have been so widely preached. I have, to the best of my power,
striven to uphold the Protestant character of our Church, and
to restore true and reasonable religion to the hearts of the sceptic
and the materialist. The main object of all my teaching has
been to vindicate the veracity of history and the morality of
the Divine government; and, because that has ever been
my object, I am unable to treat with reverence or tenderness
those inventions of men which appear to me as dishonouring
to God, and as degrading to man, as are the darkest forms of
heathen idolatry. Never has a word escaped me of treason
against the existing laws and constitution of the Church,
because, from the bottom of my heart, I have always been
loyal to it, and have ever been ready to submit myself to those
in authority over me, in every matter within their jurisdiction.
I have so valued her protection as never to have consciously
exceeded the liberty with which we are endowed; and it will
surprise me greatly if an adverse sentence should prove that I
have been mistaken.
With these observations I pass to the four charges against me,
which I shall consider in their order, and which relate to
1. The doctrine of Atonement.
2. The doctrine of Justification.
.3. The doctrine of Incarnation.
4. The doctrines relating to the Bible.
J. First, as to the doctrine of the Atonement,
I am charged, in the first place, in the 10th, 11th, 12th, and
13th of the Articles of Charge, with having in certain passages.


set out in the 7th, Bth, and 9th Articles, taught the following
doctrines: —
1. That Christ has not made an atonement or reconciliation
for sin, and has not been made a sacrifice to reconcile his Father
to us.
2. That there is no need of any atonement or sacrifice, nor
any place for such in the purposes of God.
3. That Christ did not bear the punishment due to our sins,
nor suffer in our stead and for us ; and that to think that he did, or
that it was necessary that he should so suffer, is infinitely erro-
neous and dishonouring to God, and is the most revolting of all
the popular beliefs.
4. That the commonly received doctrines of intercession and
mediation by Christ, and atonement or reconciliation to God by
the death of Christ, are all opposed to the perfect harmony and
simplicity of the love of God, and to the teaching of Jesus Christ
himself.
These four doctrines are alleged to be contrary to the 2nd, the
3rd, the 7th, the 15th, and the 31st Articles of Religion, several
Collects, part of the Commination Service, a prayer in the Litany,
a prayer in the Service for the Visitation of the Sick, expressions
in the Communion Service, and also a passage in the first Book
of the Homilies. All which authorities are set out at length in
the 14th Article of Charge.
I will say a word or two in the first place upon these autho-
rities. With respect to the Homilies, I altogether xleny that I
am bound to conform to their doctrine. All that is said of them
in the Articles is that they contain a wholesome doctrine, and
one necessary for these times (i. e. the times at which the Articles
were framed).
This by no means binds the clergy of the Church of England
to assent to every proposition or exposition of doctrine which
they contain. It is, indeed, notorious that they contain much
which in these days is generally denied by men of all parties in
the Church. For instance, the doctrine of passive obedience is
preached at length in the Homily on Rebellion, but it will not, I
presume, be alleged that any one, in these days, is required to
believe, or not to deny it.
With regard to the expressions quoted from different Collects,
from the Commination Service, and from the Service for the


Visitation of the Sick, I remark that they are, without exception,
hints which enunciate no distinct proposition whatever. The
Thirty-nine Articles, I submit, form the standard of doctrine on
this as on other subjects ; and it is a remarkable fact, to which I
beg to call the special attention of the Court, that the word
“atonement ” is never once found in any of them.
Before considering how my views are related to them, I must
state a principle on which I found my defence as to the first
three charges.
It is that, inasmuch as many parts of the Christian religion,
as stated in the Thirty-nine Articles, are confessedly mysterious,
and inasmuch as the obligation of the clergy of the Church of
England is to abstain from contradicting the Thirty-nine Articles,
or any of them, it is lawful for clergymen of the Church of
England to contradict any explanation of any mystery which is
not inserted in the Thirty-nine Articles, and that without being
called upon to supply any other explanation of their own.
I must be excused if I insist at some length upon this prin-
ciple, as it is essential to my case, and not generally understood.
That the Christian religion, as stated in the Articles of the
Church of England, contains mysteries, may, I suppose, be taken
for granted. What is a mystery ? There are only two legitimate
senses in which the word can be used ; though, as I shall presently
show, there is a third, and, as I think, an illegitimate sense, in
which people are continually trying to use it.
The first .legitimate sense of the word mystery is a proposition
which is not understood. For instance, a proposition expressed
in a foreign language, or in the technical terms of a science, is a
mystery to those who are ignorant of the language or unac-
quainted with the technical terms of the science. The second
legitimate sense of the word is a concealed fact, or state of facts
The contents of a sealed letter are a mystery until the letter is
opened and read. We say, “ There is some mystery in this,”
when we know that a person’s conduct is influenced by con-
siderations with which we are not acquainted. The word
mystery can be used, in short, in an intelligible manner so
long as it means either a proposition unintelligible to us, or a
secret, and in either of these senses the proposition that mysteries
are to be taught or believed is intelligible.
Believing a mystery means, I apprehend, believing that the pro-


position which contains it is true, whatever is its meaning. For
instance, if a person who does not know Greek is told to believe
that In afx? vv o Xoyo;, he is told to believe that these words aro
true, whatever they mean, but he is not told to believe that “ In
the beginning was the word.” Similarly, to deny a mystery is to
deny that the words are true, whatever they mean, or that any
true meaning can be attached to them. Now, the only legal
obligation under which the clergy do or can lie is that of not deny-
ing what is contained in the Thirty-nine Articles. A man’s belief
is not, and cannot be, reached by the law. It is a matter of
moral and religious obligation ; but you, Sir, cannot inquire into
it. lam not before the Inquisition, but in an English Court of
Justice. You must look at tvhat I have said, and cannot specu-
late as to what I think, and therefore the question is, whether I
have denied the mysteries of the Atonement and Justification
by Faith in the sense which I have just explained; whether,
that is, I have contradicted in terms the Articles in which they
are set out, or have asserted that those words, whatever they may
mean, are not, and cannot be, true. I deny that I have done so.
I recognize and insist upon the necessity under which clergy-
men lie of addressing to their congregations language which
they do not themselves understand, e. g., when we have to speak
of a Son who is actually co-eternal with his own Father, and
of warning them of the fact that the fundamental terms of reli-
gion must always have reference to matters of which men are
ignorant. So far, I presume, no one will say I am wrong. I
differ from other clergymen rather in practice than in theory.
Theoretically, they insist loudly upon the existence of mysteries.
Practically, they are continually trying to explain them. The
process is this :
Ist. You are told that a doctrine is a sublime mystery, which
transcends the powers of the human mind.
The next step is to substitute for the mystery, as stated in the
Creeds or Articles, a gloss or explanation which is quite intelli-
gible, and as absurd as it is intelligible.
Finally, you are told that, because the gloss is equivalent to
the mystery, you cannot expose its absurdity without denying the
truth of the mystery ; in other words, it is argued that you must
not assert the falsehood of something which you do understand,
because you must not deny the truth of something which you do


not understand. These are the steps by which people get that
third sense of the word mystery of which I. have spoken—a sense
which I think illegitimate and immoral. According to it, a
mystery may be defined as something which you must believe to
be true and good, although you have every possible reason to
think that it is false and bad.
I now proceed to apply this principle to the doctrine of Atone -
ment which I am said to have taught.
The most explicit and fullest statement of the doctrine upon
this subject, which the law of England forbids me to contradict,
is to be found ini the 2nd and 81st Articles of Religion, tho
words of which are these: “The Son was crucified, dead and
» buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not
only for original guilt, but also for all actual sins of men.”
—Art. 11.
“ The offering of Christ once made is that perfect redemption,
propitiation, and satisfaction, for all the sins of the whole world,
both original and actual; and there is none other satisfaction for
sin, but that alone."—Art. XXXI.
This is admitted to be a mystery; that is to say, an unin-
telligible proposition; and I think no one can read it without
seeing that such is the fact.
It is obvious that the assertion, that the second person of the
Trinity sacrificed himself to reconcile to us the first person of
the Trinity, and that he thereby made a perfect redemption, pro-
pitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the world, is on
assertion as to a matter upon which the human mind can form
absolutely no conception at all. It is to us a statement as mys-
terious, as completely unmeaning, as a statement made in an
unknown tongue. It may, indeed, be capable of being completed
and explained by facts which are concealed from us, but this
makes no difference so long as such explanation is withheld.
The statement is as unmeaning, as mysterious, as a letter partly
written in plain characters and partly in ciphers, which obviously
affect the sense of the plain words, though we do not know what
they mean. When we speak of two men as offering and accepting
a redemption, propitiation, or satisfaction, we speak intelligibly;
but the characteristic peculiarity of the doctrine under con-
sideration is, that it cannot be affirmed that God the Father and
God the Son are two, and that it can be affirmed that they


are not men. The mystery, therefore, consists in this, that we
affirm an unknown operation, transaction, or relation, call it what
you will, respecting an inconceivable being, who in some sense, it
seems, may be called inconceivable beings. Where have I so
denied that such an operation, transaction, or relation may or
does take place or exist ? Where have I asserted that no facts or
relations exist anywhere of which the words of the 2nd and
81st Articles are a true account? Where have I said that what-
ever those words mean, they are false ? If I have said any of
these things, I have denied the truth of the Articles, and must
take the consequences.
Not only have I said no such thing, but I cannot understand
how any human creature should have the presumption to do so.
Who can pretend to say what arrangement the first and second
persons of the Trinity have made about the salvation of man ?
All that I have denied is, that the Father and the Son are to be
regarded as beings as distinct as two men, driving a bargain, the
nature of which bargain is, that the Father, in consideration of
pain suffered by the Son, will abstain from torturing after death
people whom he otherwise would have tortured. This theory, I
say, is false and blasphemous. Let the mystery mean what it
will, it does not and cannot mean that; but that is what it is
supposed to mean by many of the laity, and asserted to mean
by many preachers.
If, Sir, you read the different passages from my boohs which are
extracted in the 7th, Bth, and 9th Articles of the charge against
me, you will find that this in substance is what I have said, and
all that I have said; though I have stated it in various forms and
with different illustrations; and though particular expressions
here and there may be open to criticism, I have nowhere denied
what the Articles assert. I have, to the best of my ability, denied
an interpretation vulgarly put upon them, and by which they are
degraded from the position of ineffable mysteries to the position
of intelligible absurdities.
If the Court should condemn my teaching on this head, it must
do so by affirming what I deny. This Court must hold that the
popular gloss upon the Articles is itself the doctrine of the
Church of England. It must assert, for instance, what I have
denied, that the doctrines of the Atonement and of Justification
do impute to God prejudice, favour, spite, partiality; that they


do open to man an escape from a just penalty by bargaining,
compromise, evasion, or substitution. You must affirm that
God’s justice and mercy are opposite feelings, which have to be
reconciled by a compromise; that his justice does demand what
his mercy would deny; that his mercy can only be exercised
when his justice has been first appeased. These are the pro-
positions which I deny with every faculty of my soul. I say that
they are false, impious, and blasphemous; I assert that they
strike at the root of all morals and all religion —that they make
God a fiend, and man a liar and a slave.
Assert, if it be so, that they are the doctrines of the Church of
England. It is in the power of this Court to do so, and it is in the
power of the Court of Appeal to confirm your judgment. In that
case, my prosecutors are right, and lam wrong. In that case, I
have broken the law, and must lose my living. I have only to add
that, if this is so, I shall thank my prosecutors from the bottom
of my heart for the prosecution. I shall rejoice to be free from
any connection whatever with doctrines so hideous as those With
which the Church of England will then be for the first time
identified.
11. So much for my teaching as to the Atonement. I pass now
to the second charge, which relates to Justification by Faith.
In the 17th and 18th Articles of Charge I am accused of
having taught—
1. That mankind are not by nature born in sin, and the chil-
dren of God's wrath, and are not separated from God by sin and
under his wrath, or under a curse, and that they are not in
danger of endless suffering; nor is.there any curse to remove
by the shedding of the innocent blood of Christ, and that the
doctrine of the fall of man is contrary to the teaching of Christ.
2. That mankind need no atonement or propitiation, that
salvation is not through justification, and that the doctrine of
Justification by Faith is contrary to the teaching of Jesus Christ.
This teaching is said to be opposed to the 2nd, the 9th, and
the Uth of the Articles of Eeligion, part of the Catechism, parts
of the other Services, Collects, &c., and certain passages from the
Homilies.
The passages on which this charge is founded are quoted in
the 15th and 16th Articles of Charge, but I am surprised that it
should have been thought fair to omit from the very sermon


in which those passages occur, the following passage, which is
absolutely inconsistent with any design of depraving or contra-
dicting the 11th Article of Religion:— '
“ Viewed in relation to the older notions of sacrifice and cere-
monial justification, St. Paul’s doctrine of justification by faith
was a great step onward, and, as our Article calls it (here I referred
to the 11th Article), it is ‘a most wholesome doctrine, and very
full of comfort ’to those who want it. Moreover, as established
in our Articles, it still remains as a strong bulwark against the
revived Jewish and Pagan doctrines found in another Church (i. e.,
the Church of Rome), and actually taught by some of our own
clergy. When these tell us that we are reconciled to God by the
Sacraments, it is time to quote our venerable Article on ‘ Justifi-
cation by Faith only,’ as the best answer we can give them—as
perhaps the only one which they can understand. So these
Articles are still wholesome and good, and while people are not
set free from the older notions about God, they are also ‘ very
full of comfort.’ ”
As to the authorities which I am alleged to have contradicted,
I have only one observation to make.
A passage is quoted from the Homily on Salvation by Christ,
which is alleged to be the one referred to in the 11th Article of
Religion. How far the reference in the 11th Article embodies
the Homily with it, is a legal question which I submit to the
Court without presuming to argue it. I shall content myself
with observing, that to hold that such is the case would be to
increase very largely the responsibilities of the clergy of the
Church of England, amongst the most eminent of whom, as the
Court is no doubt well aware, very great differences of opinion
upon the subject of Justification by Faith have always prevailed.
My answer to the charge itself is like that which I gave to
the preceding charge. I am not obliged to attach any special
meaning to the 9th and 11th Articles. They are confessedly
mysterious, and the llth> Article is exceedingly vague. The
meaning of the doctrines which they contain has been the
subject of endless controversy, both within and without the
Church of England, accounts of which are given in many places,
and in particular in “ Burnet on the Thirty-nine Articles.” So
far as my own teaching is concerned, I have over and over again


affirmed that we are all by nature sinful, and inclined to sin, and
that God is angry with sin, and will surely punish it What I
have denied as to original sin is, not ifs existence, but the
absurd theory that Adam was morally perfect, whereas he fell
into sin at the very first temptation, as most of his posterity
do now.
I have never denied that God is angry with sin; I have only
denied that He is either excessive or unjust in His anger.
Endless suffering would be an excessive and unjust punishment
for the sins of beings who are born naturally inclined to sin.
Therefore we are not born under a sentence of endless suffering,
which is what is generally understood as being bom under the
curse of God. I entirely agree with, and have nowhere denied,
that sin deserves God’s wrath and damnation; the word damna-
tion has been left undefined in the Article, and therefore it may
be accepted as equivalent to the New Testament term or
condemnation.
No doubt the theory which I am charged with denying, the
theory that mankind are hy nature the children of God's wrath,
and that they (unbaptized infants, for instance) are under a
curse, and are in danger (i. e. by the very fact of their existence,
and apart from actual sins committed by them) of endless
suffering, is one of the theories or glosses which have been put
upon the Articles. If the Court considers that this, and this
only, is the doctrine of the Church of England; if the Church of
England really does teach what I deny, to wit, that when Eve
ate the apple, God the Father cursed the whole human race
and determined that they should all be perpetually tortured in
hell-fire after death, and that either before, or at the time, or after-
wards, he made a covenant—in the proper sense of the word,
which implies distinct contracting parties—with God the Son, that
if God the Son would be crucified (which the contracting parties
regarded as equivalent to being accursed), God the Father would
relieve all, or some of, the human race from the curse which he
had set upon them, upon some condition as to their believing
something or other, of which ' most of them never heard—if
this really is the doctrine of the Church, let it be said so plainly,
and let me be turned out for denying it. I shall be only too
glad to go. No power on earth shall induce me to teach such on


odious mixture of falsehood and absurdity. If I had understood
that the Thirty-nine Articles really meant what this Court is now
asked to say they mean, if I had not been led by the caution of their
language, and by the ambiguous, hesitating half-meanings which
clergymen usually attach to these doctrines, to suppose that I
was not pledged to the revolting theory which I have stated in
order to denounce, I would have rather put my hand in the fire
than have signed my name to such infamous blasphemy.
111. I now pass to the charge as to the doctrine of the Incar-
nation.
In the 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, and 27th Articles, I am charged
with having taught—
1. That our Lord Jesus Christ is no more very God of very
God, begotten not made, than we men are.
2. That the worship of Christ is idolatry, and is inconsistent
with the worship of the true God, and that it is an instance of
holding up our hands to a strange God, and outrivals the worship
of the one true God, and draws away our highest homage and
affection from God to another.
3. That the very idea of the Incarnation of the Son of God
takes its rise in unbelief, and springs out of absolute infidelity.
4. That the expected return of Christ to judge the world takes
its rise in unbelief and springs only out of absolute infidelity,
and that such expectation is unreasonable, is opposed to the
simplicity of the love of God as a Father, and is calculated to
overthow the moral government of God.
5. That the worship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is
the worship of three Gods, and that the worship of the Son and
the Holy Ghost is idolatry, and that the belief in the Godhead
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as expressed in the Nicene
Creed, weakens and disguises the belief in one God the Father,
and obliterates the true name of God.
These doctrines are said to be opposed to many authorities,
and in particular to the first three Articles of Religion, to the
Nicene Creed, and to passages in the Homilies. Upon these
authorities I have only to observe that unless the object of the
prosecution is to give a sort of colour to the notion that every
part of the Prayer Book, and the whole of the two books of
Homilies, constitute dogmas binding on the clergy, I cannot
understand their object in quoting so many authorities upon such


a plain question as the doctrine of the Church of England as to
the divinity of Christ. Surely nothing can be added to what is
said in the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds upon this subject,
and no doubt they are embodied, by reference, in the Act of
Uniformity.
My answer to the charge is as follows:
As to the first head, that our Lord Jesus Christ is no more
very God of very God, begotten not made, than we men are, I
deny that this is heretical, unless it is read as a way of saying,
that Christ is not very God of very God, because men are not.
This is the very reverse of what I have said, which is that, in
what I believe to be llieir true sense, the statements in ques-
tion are as true of us all as they are of Christ. Whether this
doctrine is true or false is not the question. This Court has no
power to declare it to be illegal, unless it is expressly con-
demned in the Thirty-nine Articles, which it is not.
On this subject I must ask your Honor to allow me to ex-
plain myself more fully:—
No doubt the statement, that men are very God of very God,
is most startling, and one which might easily be made in
ignorant hands an instrument for convicting me, not of heresy,
but of lunacy. But a fuller explanation of my views will, I feel
convinced, show they are entirely consistent with both the
Articles and the Prayer Book.
Ist. Let me ask, is it Christ’s body—his human nature—that
we affirm in the Nicene Creed to be very God of very God, or
is it not his divine nature ? Of course all will answer, We say
that of his divine nature, because it cannot be truo of Christ’s
body, which had a beginning, but can only be true of his
divine nature, which was begotten before all worlds, and has
neither body, parts, nor passions. So it is not unreasonable to
affirm, that while the bodies of men are bom of their earthly
parents, their divine nature is begotten or born of God; and,
therefore, in a mysterious sense, that divine nature is very God
of very God, begotten not made. This doctrine, which I have
thus expressed, is the same as that found in many passages of
Holy Scripture. In the Old Testament even, this divine
element in man is spoken of as the Spirit of the living God.
In the New Testament, the figure of birth, or begetting, is used
repeatedly to express this mysterious relationship between God


and man. In the fourth Gospel, we read of men “ who were
bom not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God.” “ That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is bom of the Spirit is spirit.” Certain persons
are spoken of as born from above, bom of the Spirit, born of
God. Of course we must interpret these phrases with a due
regard to the first Article, which affirms that there is but one
living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions. We must not divide the substance; and, therefore, if
God was in Christ, and if he is also in man, the divine nature
of man must be the same as the divine nature of Christ. What-
ever is true of the Godhead of Christ, must be true in all times
and in all places; and if it be true, as our Church declares, that
worthy partakers of the Holy Communion dwell in Christ, and
Christ dwells in them; are one with Christ and Christ is one
with them, then it is true that those who are thus united to
Christ must be very God of very God in their divine nature, or
the words have no meaning. Moreover, the doctrine of the Holy
Ghost, as set forth in Scripture, and in parts of the Prayer Book,
actually teaches the same truth. As the Godhead is indivisible,
therefore the Holy Ghost is all that can be predicated of God, and
yet we read that God promises to pom: out His Spirit on all flesh.
“ I will dwell in you, and walk in you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” The Apostle Paul
repeatedly asserts that God dwells in the hearts of the faithful.
‘‘ Know ye not ■ that your body is the temple of the Holy
Ghost, which is in you ? Ye are the temple of the living God,
as God hath said.” I will not quote any more passages from
Scripture, for they must be perfectly familiar to you. I need
only very briefly refer to certain passages in the Prayer Book,
which, if they mean anything at all, affirm distinctly what I
have taught.
® . v •/f..'
In our daily prayer we pray, “ Take not thy Holy Spirit from us,”
which certainly implies that we have God’s Spirit already with
us, or .Within us. We pray in the Litany for the grace of God’s
Holy Spirit.
On Quinquagesima Sunday, we pray God to send His Holy
Ghost. On the Fifth Sunday after Easter, we pray for God’s
Holy Inspiration itself. On the Sunday after Ascension Day, we
pray God again to send his Holy Ghost to comfort us, and exalt


us to the same place whither our Saviour Christ has gone before.
In Whitsuntide, we pray for the outpouring of the same Holy
Spirit as was given at Pentecost:—“ Grant us, by the same Spirit,
to have a right judgment in all things.” In the Office of Bap-
tism, prayers of this kind abound, with praises for the actual and
immediate answer to them—prayers and praises which have given
rise to too many strifes and divisions in the Church, to need repe-
tition here. Finally, in the Ordination Service for Priests, the
Bishop is directed to say, at the moment of imposition of hands,
“ Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a Priest.”
Moreover, the presence of God himself in the hearts of some
men is affirmed in the 18th, 10th, and 17th Articles of Religion,.
Couple all these quotations with the definition of God laid down
in the Ist Article of Religion, and one is forced to admit that
God does not cease to be God because he dwells in the hearts
of men. , Nothing can by any possibility produce change or
diminution or loss of honour in Him. The Divine Being
must ever be the same. And, as God, Christ, and the Holy
Ghost, are each and all affirmed to be in the hearts of some men,
the Church has thereby furnished ample grounds for the procla-
mation of my belief, which is only a logical sequence from well-
established and commonly received opinions. Moreover, the
sacred name of “ Father,” by which we address God in nearly
all the prayers of our Church, and that in direct obedience to
the precept and example of Jesus Christ, is in itself a proof that
we are regarded by the Church as the sons of God; and so long
as those two words, Father and Sons, remain to us in their plain
unvarnished natural sense, so long we are guilty of neither
impiety nor presumption in endeavouring to realize ourselves,
and to deepen the conviction in the souls of others, that we
all stand in that most exalted relationship to the one God and
Father of all, the Father of Jesus and the Father of men, “ who
is above all, through all, and in us all.” If lam condemned or
even reproached for doing this, I shall be condemned for insisting
on the most vital truth of Christianity, the most frequently asserted
of all the doctrines of our Church. Of course it must seem
“too good to be true ” in the eyes of those who regard God as
hostile to sinful men and as absent from them, and who
believe that they owe all their happiness here and hereafter
to the vicarious punishment of Christ; but the belief in it


can only have the effect on the human soul of raising its
highest adoration, and kindling its warmest affection towards
God, which St. John expresses in the touching apostrophe:
“ Beloved, now are we the sons of God.” “ Behold what
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God.” “As Christ is, so are we
in this world! ” I hope now that it will be seen that in my
lips the statement that we “men are veiy God of veiy God,
in the same sense as Christ was,” not only is not tantamount
to a denial of the Incarnation, but derives all its force and mean-
ing from the Incarnation. If Christ were not God incarnate,
neither can we men hopeor pretend to be. If God was not in Christ,
we cannot believe that he is also in us. After this explanation,
I trust that I shall be fully acquitted of any attempt to deny the
doctrine of the Incarnation, as well as acquitted of the charge of
having explicitly broken the law by my language on the subject,
As to the second head, that the worship of Christ is idolatry,
my meaning has been misunderstood. My meaning in passages
A and B* was that men may worship Christ, and actually have
worshipped, and do worship him in such a spirit, and with such
a conception of his character and nature, as to convert him into
an idol, and to set him up in opposition to God the Father.-
The words of mine on which this charge is founded do hot
contradict any Article. But the sense in which the word worship
is here used by me makes all the difference to the harmony or
disagreement of the sentence with the spirit of our formularies.
I was not referring at all to the forms of worship in the Book
of Common Prayer, but only and exclusively to the very preva-
lent separation of Jesus Christ from the other* persons of the
Trinity, and to the heart’s entire trust and adoration being exclu-
sively given to Him—contrary to the doctrines of our Articles,
the express language of our Creeds, and the bulk of our
Liturgical forms.
I complain of this exclusive affection for Jesus Christ as a
grave and dangerous departure from the teaching and practice of
the Church of England. Ido not complain of any part of our
public worship, which is immensely nearer to what I believe to
be the true worship than the heart-feelings of a large class of
modem Christians, and which is, at least, consistent with the
* See Appendix J,


Articles of the Church. If God the Father occupied in the
hearts of men only the same place as is assigned to him by the
language of the Prayer Book, the Creeds, and the Articles, I
should have had no cause to complain that so many professing
Christians were idolatrous.
Moreover, the heart-worship of which I speak does not rise so
much out of contemplating'the eternal and divine part of Christ’s
nature, as out of contemplating his bodily or human nature ; in
other words, it is the historical Jesus idealized who is the object
of this exclusive adoration, not the Son or Word of God, who was
begotten 1 before all worlds. It is the manhood,-instead of the
Godhead, of Jesus, which really attracts, and this is why I spoke
of it as a specious form of idolatry.lt is, moreover, absolutely
tine that such, an exclusive heart-worship of Christ is inconsistent
with that worship of God the Father which was taught us by
Jesus Christ; which was the devout practice of all the holy men
of God in old time before the birth of Christ, and which is most
surely embedded in our own Services, Creeds, and Articles. It is
an incontestable fact that men and women who in any moments
of devotion exclusively adore Jesus Christ (and it is of this exclu-
sive adoration only that I have complained), do not care about
God the Father at all, and do not enter heartily into prayers and
praises addressed to him, and cannot, therefore, be so consistent
members of the Church of England as I am. ; ' We have only to
look at the modem hymns, or some hymns of tha Romish Church
recently adopted in many of our churches, to see how completely
the worship of the Father is ignored by those whose hearts
exclusively worship Jesus.
A charge far more formidable might easily be brought .against
those who have accused me for endeavouring to subvert the
teaching and practice of the Church. It is possible that, in
proclaiming the error and the danger of holding it, I may have
glided into language capable of bearing a doubtful interpretation;
but, in such a case, it should be borne in mind that I was
conscientiously contending for Church doctrine and practice
against those who, in my opinion, are subverting both.
This is the very error which, in old times, would have been
described as dividing the substance of the Trinity. I have
nowhere said that Christ is not to be made the object of worship
at all. I have nowhere said that he was not God incarnate; on


the contrary, I have said that he was. The practice against
which I have protested is as common with Protestants as the
worship of the Virgin Mary is with Roman Catholics, and its
character and practical effects are much the same.: It oonsists
in regarding God the Father and Jesus Christ as two essentially
distinct and antagonistic beings, the one aU power and the other
all love, and in worshipping the second to the exclusion of the first.
Of course, this is not always done in words. The theory which
would justify the common practice would be repudiated, but I
assert that it is done continually in spirit and in substance. I
say you may observe in all directions, at the present day, a
tendency, which shows itself in many ways, to separate the
Son from the Father; to regard Jesus Christ, not as one with
God the Father, but as a separate being of an opposite character.
As an illustration of this, I need only refer to a text of Scripture
which I have myself seen with horror on the walls of an infant
school. “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.” The outcry of indignation can be better conceived
than described which would be raised if the text were to be read
thus: “Itis a fearful thing to fall into the hands of Jesus."
I may, of course, be wrong in this opinion, but it is an opinion
as to a mere matter of fact; it is one of those estimates of
current opinion and belief which the clergy ought to be con-
tinually forming, and on which they must model then’ teaching,
if it is to be of any use. Now, suppose that my opinion was
true, was it not my duty to warn my congregation against what
I believed to be a serious danger ? Was it not my duty to tell
them that, if they did accustom themselves to think thus of
Christ, their prayers, however orthodox in form, would, in sub-
stance, become idolatrous, inasmuch as they would be directed,
not to God, but to a being whom they, in direct opposition to
the most emphatic teaching of the Creeds and Articles, mentally
separated from, and contrasted with, God ?
I must now request your Honor to refer back to the
Articles of Charge, and to compare them with my actual
words, and with the explanation which I have'just given
of my views. I am charged with having taught that the
worship of Christ is idolatry, and is inconsistent with the
worship of the true God, and that it is an instance- of holding
up our hands to a false God, and outrivals the worship of the


one true God, and draws away our highest homage and affections
from God to another. This is the Prosecutor’s version of the
substance of my teaching, as conveyed in passages A and B.* I
repudiate it; I say that, if you read those passages, you will see
that their substance is not what is stated, but is this, —that
Christ may be worshipped in an idolatrous manner, inconsistent
with the worship of the true God; and that such worship would
be, and is, where it occurs, an instance of holding up our hands
to a false God. To deny this proposition is to deny that there
ever was, or can be, such a heresy as Tritheism, although that
part of the Athanasian Creed which condemns those who divide
the Divine substance is expressly directed against it.
I am charged with having taught that the very idea of the
Incarnation of the Son of God takes its rise in unbelief, and
springs out of absolute infidelity. The words which suggested
that accusation are, “ The very idea of Incarnation itself, which
means Deity coming from heaven, and dwelling in an individual
man for some years, implies a belief that God does not, nor ever
did, dwell in the hearts of all men.” Now, by the words
“ The very idea of Incarnation,” I meant only the vulgar
and erroneous idea of it. I certainly have, in this passage,
denied the truth of that view of the Incarnation which
regards it as “ Deity coming from heaven and dwelling in an
individual man for some years, and then going away again.”
If this be the only legal view of the subject, if all clergymen
are bound to believe that God is absent from the world, and
does not dwell in men’s hearts, nor ever did, and that the
Incarnation is what I have described, be it so; I have in that
case no wish to be a clergyman of the Church of England, for
I do not hold that doctrine, and I believe it, as 1 have said, to be
the offspring of unbelief.
I am further charged with having taught, “ That the expected
return of Christ to judge the world takes its rise in unbelief.”
My answer to this is similar to my answer to the last accusation.
I have nowhere denied that Jesus Christ will return to earth to
judge the world. I only said that if he were to appear again on
earth, we should not have God nearer to us than he is at this
moment, and always was. That if Jesus Christ came (as many
believe that he will come) to set aside the regular and divine
See Appendix 1,


discipline of us which is already established by God on earth,
it would be something short of a benefit or blessing. What
Article or what Creed does this assertion of mine contradict ? The
Church has nowhere forbidden me to express such an opinion ;
and if I am condemned for saying so, a new and mischievous
dogma will be erected. It will then be affirmed as a dogma of
the Church, that until Christ comes again, God is absent from
this world, and that when Christ comes he will set aside the
regular order of God’s providence and government of mankind.
The Apostles’ Creed says, that Christ ascended into heaven,
“ and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father, from
whence he shall come again to judge the quick and the
dead.” As the Ist Article of Religion tells us that God
has neither body nor parts, the expression, the “ right hand of
God,” is clearly metaphorical. I should have inferred from this,
that so much of the expressions which I have read, as do in
terms assert that Christ locally departed, and will locally return-
to judge the world, might also have been regarded as meta-
phors, and that I might therefore have been permitted to warn
my congregation against taking such a view of the subject as
would lead them to look upon the world as altogether deserted by
God, and so to regard God as a limited Being, interfering at long
intervals with human affairs, and leaving them in those intervals
to themselves. If you hold otherwise, if the Church of England
requires its ministers to believe and to teach that God has a
literal right hand, that Christ literally sat down on the right-hand
side of God, and will literally return from that particular spot
to judge the world on one specific occasion, so be it—l have
no wish to teach such doctrine, or to be a minister of such a
Church. ' '
The last charge against me under this head is, that I have
taught that the worship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is
the worship “ of three Gods, and that the worship of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost is idolatry, and that the belief in the Son and
the Holy Ghost, as expressed in the Nicene Creed, weakens and
disguises the belief in one God the Father, and obliterates the
true name of God.”
I repudiate this doctrine. I think you will see, on reference to
the passages impugned, that what I have said is, that the three
persons of the Trinity may be so worshipped as to involve


Tritheism, and the Nicene Creed might be understood in that
sense. I point out that this is not its true sense, and that the
first Article of the Creed denies the error which I denounce. . I
go on to say that the rest of it might, but ought not to be so
read, as to weaken the leading assertion of the Unity of God.
In this it is surely clear that I am light, inasmuch as the Atban-
asian Creed was intended to make the Nicene Creed more strin-
gent, and to guard, amongst other things, against this very heresy
of dividing the substance of the Trinity, and of making the three
persons into three Gods.
IV. I have now come to the last set of charges against me—
those which relate to my views on the Bible.-
They are that I have taught the following doctrines:—
First, that revelation of the knowledge of God, by means of any
book, is impossible; that all the knowledge of God comes directly
from the law of God, written in men’s hearts, and that all know-
ledge of God comes only from men’s own sense of what he
requires them to do; and that the only true revelation possible
by God to man, is through the sense of God’s presence, and is
originated in the heart of man, independently of God’s written
word. This is said to be opposed to the 6th and 20th Articles
of Religion, and I suppose is founded on two passages of my
sermons, cited in the charge as F. and N.*
My answer is, that the passages in question, and the passages
in the two Articles referred to, relate to totally different subjects.
The 6th and 20th Articles of Religion define the limits of the
jurisdiction of the Church, and give a list of the Canonical books
of Scripture. The passages objected to relate to the question of
the grounds which individuals have for their religious belief, and
they declare that, in my opinion, men have what many writers
have called innate ideas of God, and of right and wrong, and
that the possession of these innate ideas distinguishes them from
animals, and enables them to receive a moral and spiritual revela-
tion, which at every step takes for granted a knowledge of God,
and of right and wrong, and which it would be impossible
to communicate to any one who had not that knowledge to set
out with. My opinion is, that if a man had no knowledge at
all of God, it would be as idle to tell him that God said or com-
manded this or that as to make such a statement to one of the
* See Appendix 2.


lower animals. What harm is there in this? It is a meta-
physical or philosophical theory, which has been an established
and well-known subject of discussion for thousands of years, and
on which men always have differed, and I dare say always will
differ; but who can believe that the 6th and 20th Articles have
any relation to it at all? It is true that I have described this
original knowledge as “ the only real revelation possible by God
to man,” and the expression might no doubt be more guarded
and more fully explained. I never meant to say that it was im-
possible for God to reveal to man, in writing or otherwise,
matters of which he was not aware by the constitution of his
nature. On the .contrary, in my opinion, it is only by the
primaeval revelation which God makes to man, “ the light which
lighteth every one that cometh into the world,” that man is
enabled to receive subsequent revelation. My accusers charge
me with denying the possibility of a superstructure, because I
assert the existence of a foundation. They might as well charge
me with saying that a man could not read because I had affirmed
that all reading consisted of twenty-six letters. In the passage
attacked, my meaning was that without the principles in ques-
tion no revelation would be possible, and that none which con-
tradicted those principles could be tme.
The other charges against me I shall consider together. They
are that I have taught—
1. That in God’s Word written, Holy Scripture and Holy
Writ, there are found manifest, palpable, and irreconcilable con-
tradictions, and many places which cannot be expounded but so
that they be repugnant to others.
2. That the authority of the Gospel according to St. John is
doubtful, and that the said Gospel ought not to be applied to
establish any doctrine; and that whole chapters of the said
Gospel are crowded with passages which represent Jesus Christ
as speaking words which he never could have spoken, and
which, if spoken, would not have been believed.
8. That the said Gospel contains passages which can only be
expounded so that they be repugnant to each other, or to other
places of God’s Word written, or Holy Scripture, and that the
character of our Lord Jesus Christ, as set forth in the said
Gospel, is quite irreconcilable with the idea of his being a


teacher sent from God, and is entirely different from the
character of the Christ of the other three Gospels.
The authorities which these doctrines are said to contradict are
collected in the 33th Article of Charge. They consist of the Cth,
Bth, and 20th of the Articles of Religion, various Collects, parts of
the Ordination Service, and a long passage from the Homilies.
I think the best way of dealing with the subject will be to state
generally what I conceive to be the law of the Church of England
upon this matter, and what I have thought myself called upon to
teach upon that conception of the law.
There are three great questions about the Bible under which all
subordinate questions may be ranged. These are— First, the
question of criticism. What particular books and what parts
of each book are genuine? In a word—What is the Bible?
Secondly, the question of interpretation; that is to say, having
ascertained what the Bible is, what does it mean? Thirdly, the
question of inspiration, which in its broadest form is this: Is
every part of the Bible absolutely true, and if not, what parts of
it are false ? I contend that the authors of the doctrine of the
Church of England deliberately and intentionally abstained from
laying down any doctrine at all on any one of these points, except
for a limited purpose, and as against one particular set of oppo-.
nents, the Roman Catholics. ,1 say, that as against those who
think as I do, they took no precautions at all; not because the
opinions which I hold were then unknown—l can show that
they were known—but because it was not considered desirable
to enter upon the subject. Ido not in the least degree deny
that the opinions which I hold and have expressed would have
excited intense disapprobation at the time of the Reformation.
I have no doubt whatever that one reason why no Article was
levelled against them was that they were practically little known
and uninfluential in England. All that I say is, that the ques-
tion was left open. That being so, I have a legal right to say
what I have said; and, believing what I said to be true, it be-
came my moral duty to make use of that legal right.
First, look at the facts. The 6th Article asserts merely that
the books therein mentioned are “Canonical,”and that they con-
tain all the doctrines which any man can be required to believe.
It does hot assert that every statement contained in them is true,


or that every proposition which can be proved from them must
be believed.
The 20th Article says that it is not lawful for the Church so to
expound one place of Scripture that it be repugnant to another.
The title of this Article is, “ Of the Authority' of the Church,”
and its meaning is obviously this: The power of the Church is
limited to the exposition of the Divine revelation contained in
the Bible ; and, in order to discover what the teaching of the
Bible is upon any given subject, it must take a comprehensive
view ; it must not erect one passage into'a doctrine to the exclu-
sion of, or in contradiction to, another. The Article does not say
there are no contradictions in the Bible. It only says that the
Church’s public authority is to extract from the Bible a statement
of the Divine revelation, which, amongst other things, it contains,
and that it is to state it fairly. The inference from it would be
that, if there are contradictory passages in the Bible, they are
not to be made into doctrines. The object of the whole Article
is to define the extent of the legislative power of the Church ;
and it cannot, without most violent abuse of language, be per-
verted into a declaration that no private person is to be allowed
to say that particular passages of Scripture are inconsistent. As
for the other authorities cited, none of them go beyond vague
hints. They show that the expressions, “ God’s Word,” “ God’s
Word written,” or “ Holy Scriptures,” occur in the Prayer Book ;
but surely such expressions do not amount to dogmatic pro-
positions. I say it is impossible to reach my case unless you
can produce some authority which says, in so many words, that
a particular copy of a particular version, like the sealed copies of
the Prayer Book referred to in .the Act of Uniformity, is the
Bible ; unless you can point to a schedule to the Act of Uni-
formity, saying the book marked A, and deposited in the Tower
of London, is the Bible referred to in the Articles of Religion,
and that Book is throughout true and of Divine authority.
This it is notoriously impossible to do. The attempt to do so
has been made and has failed, as I shall show; and the result is,
as I assert, that every clergyman has a right to criticise, as he sees
fit, every part of the book commonly called the Bible. Commonly
called, I say; for, strictly speaking, it is not the Bible; it is only a
translation of a particular version of certain Greek and Hebrew
MSS- The oldest of the Greek MSS. how extant was written


several centuries after the originals of which it is said to be a copy.
The oldest of the Hebrew MSS. 1,200 or 1,000 years later than
the date -of the latest, and considerably more than 2,000 years
later 1 than the supposed date of the earliest of the books. The
dnly limitations, as I contend, which the law lays upon a clergy-
man’s right to criticise these books is that he must not deny that
the' Bible contains all things necessary to salvation, or that any
of the books mentioned in the 6th Article are canonical, whatever
that may mean. Possibly, it might be illegal to deny, in general
terms, that the Bible contains God’s word. Subject to these
restrictions alone, I claim the right to say what I please about
the Bible, or any part of it; and if I am wrong, if the Church
of England has any rules upon this subject with which I am
unacquainted, and which I have transgressed, I have no wish to
retain my preferment. >
I am of course aware that this claim will appear extravagant to
those who have not considered the subject, but I think I shall be
able very shortly and simply to establish the following pro-
positions :
First, that in point of fact the claim is well founded.
Secondly, that the practice of numerous writers, of the highest
reputation for orthodoxy, shows that the right to say things
identical in principle with whjt I have said, has always been
recognized and acted upon in the Church of England.
Thirdly, that the Courts of Law have considered and have
admitted it.
Fourthly, and lastly, that the liberty thus given is one which
the Legislature alone can take away, and which cannot be taken
away by the judgment of a Court of Justice without the usurpa-
tion by that court of legislative power.
First, in point of fact, the claim is well founded. This follows
from an examination of the authorities, to which I have already
referred. Twist them how we please, we shall get nothing more
out of them than that certain books are Canonical; that they
contain all things necessary to salvation, and that somewhere or
other there is something to which such expressions as “ God’s
Word written,” and “ Holy Scripture,” may be applied. Nowhere
will you' find any specific statement to show what these general
expressions mean in detail, and in particular whether they apply
to the whole of what is commonly called the Bible, or only to


a part of its contents. I might stop here, but in further illustra-
tion of my argument I will make some remarks upon the nature
of the questions which can be asked about the Bible, which will,
I think, tend to set in a very clear light the fact that the Articles
of Religion do not in fact deal with the question. There are two
principal questions with which we are concerned on the present
occasion. They are these :
Be the Bible what it may, does the Church of England teach
what particular books, and what parts of what books, constitute
the Bible ?
Does the Church of England teach that the whole Bible is
absolutely true, and if not, does it impose any, and what, limit
upon the right to assert that parts of it are false ? If these two
questions are answered in the negative, the answers would justify
all that I have said.
Now, I challenge the Prosecutors in this case to extract from
any authority to which I am bound to submit any distinct cate-
gorical answer to either of these questions.
I ask what is the Bible? Is the text of the three witnesses,
“ There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.”
1 John v. 7. —Is this text part .of the Bible or not ? Is the
history of the woman taken in adultery part of it or not ? Are
the last eleven verses of the Gospel of St. Mark part of it
or not ? No answer can possibly be given to these questions,
to which I am bound to pay attention. The 6th Article does
not solve the question. At least, if you construe it as doing
so, you must convict of heresy many of the most illustrious
scholars and divines, living and dead, of the Church of England.
I cannot bring myself seriously to argue the question, whether
it is lawful for a clergyman of the Church of England to dis-
cuss the authenticity of the verse about the Heavenly wit-
neses; but if it is, where will you draw the line? What schedule
can you refer to, to see whether a given passage may be criticised
or not, and by what arguments? I can tell you, Sir, what the
prosecution would like you to hold. They would like you to
decide that it is lawful to criticise particular texts and passages,
so long as they are of no great importance, and so long as the
arguments used are not such as by their tone or tendency would
shock the feelings of a certain section of the people- They would


like you to say that I am welcome to cut with a blunt knife and
to fence with buttons on the foils ; but I suppose I need not argue
against a principle in favour of which it is impossible to say any-
thing, either by way of authority or by way of argument, except
that it would authorize the Court to condemn me.
Assuming, then, that a clergyman (the Dean of Canterbury, for
instance) is at liberty to form his own opinion on the question
whether the text of the three witnesses forms part of the First
Epistle of St. John, why may not I form an opinion on the
question whether the passages to which I have referred form a
part of any genuine Gospel written by St. John ? That they
form part of King James’s Bible is indisputable, but King James’s
Bible is at all events not infallible, and it was not written till
about fifty years after the 6th Article. That the passages in
question occur in the “ Textus Receptus ” is undoubtedly true,
but I have yet to learn that Henry Stephens was infallible.
I do not deny that they are found in the oldest MSS.; but
these MSS., which vary considerably amongst themselves,
were all written more than 300 years after Christ. What,
then, have I denied ? Simply that parts of an existing transla-
tion, based upon existing transcripts, could not have formed part
of that lost original on which they profess to be based. If this
in itself is not illegal, can it be said that the arguments which I
have used are illegal ? What are they ? I have argued that
Jesus Christ did not say certain things, because, if he had said
them, they would have been false, and that I cannot think he
would have made such a mistake as to foretell falsely the end of
the world within a few years. I have also said that various state-
ments attributed to him in the fourth Gospel are out of
character, and cannot, therefore, be supposed to have been
made by him. Before it can be said that this is illegal, you
must assume the very point at issue, namely, the authority of
the disputed passages; for I suppose that the^ Prosecutors them-
selves will not allege that I am bound not to deny the truth of
anything which is printed in King James’s Bible. Even upon
their principles it is only the Bible—the original work—which I
am bound to respect, or not to contradict; and surely it would
be as monstrous as it would be gratuitous, to hold that in con-
sidering the question, whether a given passage formed part of
that original, I am not to consider whether it harmonizes with


the character of the person to whom it relates, and with recog •
nized principles of morality and well-ascertained historical facts.
Conceive a judge laying down such a principle as this, —“ It is
lawful to criticise the authorized version in order to ascertain
whether it corresponds with the lost originals; but it is not
lawful, in doing so, to make use of any arguments which would
throw' any discredit on those parts of the authorized version, the
genuineness of which is disputed. You are at liberty to say
that parts of the authorized version are forgeries; but you aro
not at liberty, even for the sake of argument, to throw any impu-
tation on the characters of the forgers, or to deny that the
matter which you allege to be forged is perfectly true and abso-
lutely good. So holy is the Bible, that even fraudulent additions
to it are sanctified by contact.” Would it not be simpler to
say at once what my prosecutors really want this Court to say.
It is not lawful for the clergy of the Church of England to
disturb devotional feelings, and to shock what are, for the time,
regarded as hallowed associations.
I challenge my accusers to prove that the arguments which
I have used are not fair critical arguments; that they are not
such arguments, for instance, as Mr. Grote uses continually in
considering how far the speeches in Thucydides represent what
was really said, or whether Xenophon or Plato has more faith-
fully represented the character of Socrates. If, however, the
Bible is to be criticised at all, it must surely be criticised upon
the same principles as other books, for there is but one set of
principles by which any books can be criticised.
There is upon the whole of this subject a constantly recurring
confusion, of which it as necessary as it is difficult to rid the
mind. The word Bible is associated in our minds with a
particular volume, which is admitted on all hands not to be the
Bible. The Bible is a mere general name for a library, which it
took perhaps 1,500 years to form, and of which the originals
have all been lost for many centuries. So strong, however, is
the association between the authorized version and the original
hooks, that when any one attempts to ascertain what the Bible
is, or rather was, and how far the existing copies represent it, he
is accused of attacking the Bible. In other words, you are told
you may consider the question, whether or not the existing
copies are the Bible, as much as you please, so long as you


take it for granted that they are. I will put this in another
point of view. We are told that between 1400 and 400 years b.c.,
and in the course of the first 150 years after Christ, a number
of books were written which were absolutely true and perfectly
good. It is admitted that the originals are lost. Certain copies
are produced which are said to represent them; hereupon I and
others point out that the copies contain various things which are
not true, and not good, and we infer that these things cannot
have been contained in the original books, which by the supposi-
tion were perfectly true, and absolutely good. Hereupon we are
charged with attacking the Bible. Surely this is as absurd as to
say that you attack a man’s credit when you allege that a bill
purporting to be signed by him is a forgery.
I think I am able to explain how the difficulty arises; and if
my explanation is the true one, it clears up a great deal, and, as I
submit, proves my legal right to say what I have said. The
explanation is, that people tacitly consider that Biblical critics
are to make certain preliminary assumptions as to the spirit in
which they are to proceed. If those assumptions are made,
criticism is not objected to. If they are not, it is. The most
important of these assumptions are two—first, Biblical critics are
expected to assume a totally different standard of probability in
relation to events recorded in the Bible from that which they
assume as to other events. They are expected to proceed upon
the supposition that miraculous events are rather probable than
not, and that it is to be assumed without proof that the say-
ings ascribed to Christ were correctly reported. You are to
suppose yourself to be reading an account in which everything
is wonderful, and in which every word has its mystical significa-
tion. So long as you do that, you may deal with details as you
please. If you see no improbability in the darkening of the sun
and the raising of the dead at the Crucifixion, you may be allowed
to remark that the terms of the inscription on the Cross given
by the different Evangelists are not identical. The second
assumption which you are expected to make is, that a different
standard of morals applies to matters related in what professes,
to be the Bible from that which prevails in ordinary life. You
are to presume on all occasions that anything that may shock
you is meant in some sense which is not merely unobjectionable
but supematurally holy. You are to look upon what would


elsewhere be called a wicked action as a sort of moral miracle.
In short, in trying to ascertain what the Bible was, you are to
approach the existing copies on your knees, and with your eyes
bent on the ground.
Now, whether this is or is not right in a moral and religious
point of view, I submit with confidence that no one can possibly
be under any legal obligation to do anything so vague and inde-
finite. Where does the Act of Uniformity say that no one is to
be permitted to criticise the authorized version unless he assumes
the probability of miracles, and acquiesces in some ecclesiastical,
or, if the term is preferred, some spiritual, standard of morals ? It
neither does impose, nor could it possibly impose, any such obli-
gation at all; and in the absence of any such obligation, I say that
I have a right to criticise the Bible just as I might criticise Livy.
I pass now to the second question. Does the Church of
England teach that the whole of the Bible, be it what it may, is
absolutely true, and if not, does it impose any limit at all on my
right to assert the falsehood of parts of it?
I put the question in this form, because people may play at
hide-and-seek for ever about theories of inspiration. The
broad general question, Is the Bible all true from end to end? is
one which can neither be evaded nor misunderstood. Now, I
assert with the utmost confidence, that the Church of England
nowhere says that it is all true, and that if it is once admitted
that one jot or tittle of it is, or may be, false, it is utterly impos-
sible to draw the line between what may be denied and what
may not be denied, except by a specific enumeration of passages,
which has never been made. It would be easy for me, upon this
point, to accumulate arguments and authorities; I will not do
so. I will content myself with referring to a few broad and
notorious facts.
1. No one of the Articles alleges the absolute truth of the
whole Bible. If it does, let the Article be produced. From this
it follows that it is legal to deny the truth of parts of the
Bible.
2. This liberty has been used by many of the greatest divines
of the Church of England. The passages which prove this aro
collected in the published arguments of the counsel, and the
parties in the Essays and Keviews cases. I will read a few lines
from one of these arguments, which puts the result in a con-


densed shape.* The passages may be seen at large in the
argument itself:—
“ For a moment let me put together their different observations.
Baxter asserts, in the strongest way, that the writings of all the
authors of the Canonical books are more or less tinged by
human infirmity, and applies that principle with a strength and
boldness unequalled, and infinitely greater than anything which
Dr. Williams ever used, to all the writers of the Old Testament,
especially to David. Tillotson lays down the principle that you
need not assume inspiration in any part of the Bible which might
have been thought without inspiration. Burnet says, and Paley
supports him in saying, that you are bound to agree with
the apostles’ conclusions, but you are not bound to agree
with their premisses. Butler treats’’the ■ whole question -as
a question of fact.' 1 Berkeley admits that the Bible was
not intended to be strictly accurate in circumstantials with
reference to history. Paley declares that it is dangerous to make
Christianity answerable for the circumstantial accuracy of the
Old Testament narratives. Scott says the same thing ;so does
Watson. Bishop Marsh says the same thing in a stronger form,
and endorses the opinion of Michaelis, that the Gospels of
Luke and Mark were not inspired at all. Horsley asserts his
right, and says that he will pertenaciously contend for it, to differ
on all but religious subjects from St. Paul, David, or any other
Scriptural writer; and Archbishop Sumner’s language and the
language of Dr. Whewell admit of no other construction than
that if science and Scripture differ, science is right, and Scripture
wrong. The same view Is worked out at great length by Arch-
bishop Whateley ; and i Bishop Hampden declares that the
language of the Bible may contain much false moral philosophy.
When you put that together, I say that you have established a
degree of liberty upon the subject which it would be difficult
indeed to transgress ; and until you have a just notion of the
liberty which is allowed, and has been exercised, by the Church
of England upon those points, you cannot properly adjudicate
upon this question.”
, This, I submit, is evidence, as I believe a lawyer would say,
of the user of the right which the silence of the Articles confers,
• “Defence of the Bey, Rowland Williams, D.D., by J. Fitz James Stephen'’
(Smith, Elder & Co., 1862), p. 179.


and that the evidence could not be in the smallest degree affected
by any quantity of proof that these views have been exceptional,
and that the general body of the Church of England divines have
taken a more stringent view of the authority and character of
Scripture. This may have a bearing on the truth of the views
which 1 hold* It is as irrelevant to their legality as—upon the
issue, whether or not a right of way existed —the evidence that
a great many persons did not use the right of way would be, in
answer to evidence that many persons had used it.
3. The right for which I contend, was affirmed by the Judicial
(Committee of the Privy Council, in the case of Fendall v. Wilson.
One of the passages which was incriminated in Mr. Wilson’s
book, alleged that there was a dark crust of human passion and
error over parts of the Bible.' The Court held that these words
were not criminal. It has thus been judicially determined that
a clergyman of the Church of England may lawfully affirm that
parts of the Bible, as we have it, are false and wicked; and it
has never been decided how far he may go in this direction.
What have I said which this principle does not cover ? I have
specified certain chapters of what now passes as St. John’s
Gospel, which appear to me to be part of the dark crust of error
and passion, and I have given my reasons for so regarding them.
Why may I not say in detail what Mr. Wilson was allowed to say
in general terms ? How can he have been justified in asserting
that there was a dark crust of human error in the Bible, whilst I
am to be punished for saying that part of that error consists in
attributing to Jesus Christ a statement as to the approaching end
of the world which, as a matter of fact, was untrue ? How can
lie be permitted to speak of a dark crust of human passion in
the Bible, and I be punished for saying that certain sentiments
attributed, and, as I say, falsely attributed, to Christ, by the
author of the fourth Gospel, are pharisaical and uncharitable ? I
quite understand how it has happened that my writings have given
far greater offence to some religious people than Mr. Wilson’s.
Specific charges, supported by argument, always are more irri-
tating than general allegations, which pass with little notice, but
can any legal tribunal declare that there is, or can be, any diffe-
rence at all legally between saying, in general terms, this docu-
ment is in some .respects false and immoral, and saying specifi-
cally, that this and the other statements are false, for such and


such reasons, and this is proud, that uncharitable, and the other
malignant ?
I will conclude this part of my argument by reading part of
the Judgment of the Judicial Committee in the case of Fendall
v. Wilson.*
“ In the Bth Article of Charge an extract of some length is made
from Mr. Wilson’s Essay, and the accusation is, that in the pas-
sage extracted Mr. Wilson has declared and affirmed, in effect,
that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were not
written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and that they
were not necessarily at all, and certainly not in parts, the Word
of God ; and then reference is made to the 6th and 20th Articles
of Religion, to part of the N icene Creed, and to a passage in the
Ordination of Priests, in the Book of Common Prayer.
“ This charge, therefore, involves the proposition ‘ That it is a
contradiction of the doctrine laid down in the 6th and 20th Articles
of Religion, in the Nicene Creed, and in the Ordination Service
of Priests, to affirm that any part of the Canonical books
of the Old or New Testament, upon any subject whatever,
however unconnected with religious faith or moral duty, was not
written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit.’
“ The proposition or assertion that every part of the Scriptures
was written under the . inspiration of the Holy Spirit is not to
be found either in the Articles or in any of the Formularies of
the Church. But in the 6th Article it is said, that Holy Scripturo
containeth all things necessary to Salvation, and the books of the
Old and New Testament are therein termed Canonical. In the
20th Article the Scriptures are referred to as ‘ God’s Word written;
in the Ordination Service, when the Bible is given by the Bishop
to the Priest it is put into his hands with these words, ‘ Take
thou authority to preach the Word of God j ’ and in the Nicene
Creed are the words ‘ The Holy Ghost who spake by the
Prophets.’
“ We are confined, by the Article of Charge, to the consideration
of these materials, and the question is, whether in them the Church
has affirmed that every part of every book of Scripture was
written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and is the Word
of God.
* “ Ecclesiastical Judgments of the Privy Council.” Brodrick and Free-
mantle (John Murray, 1865), p. 285.


“ Certainly this doctrine is not involved in the statement of the
fith Article, that Holy Scripture containeth all things necessaiy
to salvation. But, inasmuch as it doth so from the revelations
of the Holy Spirit, the Bible may well be denominated ‘ Holy,’
and said to be the ‘ Word of God,’ ‘ God's Word written,’ or
‘Holy Writ’; terms which cannot be affirmed to be clearly
predicated of every statement and representation contained in
every part of the Old and New Testament.
“ The framers of the Articles have not used the word ‘ inspira
tion ’ as applied to the Holy Scriptures, nor have they laid down
anything as to the nature, extent, or limits of that operation of
the Holy Spirit.
“ The caution of the framers of our Articles forbids our treating
their language as implying more than is expressed; nor are we
warranted in ascribing to them conclusions expressed in new
forms of words involving minute and subtle matters of con-
troversy. ■ •
“ After an anxious consideration of the subject, we find our-
selves unable to say that the passages extracted from Mr. Wilson’s
Essay, and which form the subject of this Article of Charge, are
contradicted by, or plainly inconsistent with, the Articles or
Formularies, to which the Charge refers, and which alone we are
at liberty to consider.”
This passage may not exactly cover my case, but it gives me
a step towards it which is equivalent to a judgment in my
favour. It authorizes me to say that the highest Court in the
land has decided that it is not the law of the Church of England
that the whole Bible is absolutely true and perfectly good. Then
how much of it is ? Where, and how can you possibly draw the
line for legal purposes, except by a specific enumeration of
passages which may, and which may not, be criticised ? I say for
legal purposes, because for moral or devotional purposes many
lines may be suggested. You may say, with Horsley, that on
religious matters only, the Bible is infallible. You may say, with
Tillotson, that so much of it only is inspired as could not have
been discovered by ordinary means. You may hold, if you
please, that every word of it is perceived by a spiritual intuition
to be true and good, but all these are mere private opinions, about
which we may think what we please. For legal purposes, three
positions only are possible. The law might be, that the whole of


a specified copy is true and good. It might declare that specified
parts are true and good, and that the rest is open to criticism.
It might declare that the whole is open to criticism. It is
impossible to suggest any other legal position upon the subject.
Now, the Privy Council has held that the law of England does
not impose the first of these obligations on the clergy.
Notoriously, it has not imposed the second, for if it has, let the
Scheduled Bible be produced. Therefore the third position must
be, and is, the law of England.
Part of the Articles charge me with having attacked the
authority of the Gospel of John, notwithstanding my repeated
use of it as an authority; and the prosecution seem to sup-
pose that though particular passages in the Bible may be
criticised, it is illegal to attack a whole book. I may observe in
answer to this first, that the 6th Article merely states, as a fact,
that certain books of the New Testament are received, of whose
authority there never was any doubt in the Church. This is
exceedingly vague; in the first place, “ authority ”is not defined ;
in the next place, the statement is rather a statement of fact
than of doctrine. One thing, however, is clear. Whatever
authority may mean, it cannot, after the decision in Fendall v.
Wilson, be said to mean that every part of every book so named
or referred to is absolutely true and perfectly good. What,
then, does it mean? I submit that it means, this: here,is a
list of books, more or less erroneous, but still containing, toge-
ther with other things,; a Divine revelation. They form the
authorities to which, and to which alone, you - may refer for
the:establishment of doctrines; but it is lawful, and even neces-
sary, before tisiug them for that purpose, to ascertain by criticism
which parts of them are genuine and which parts are true.
There is, as I am informed, a close, analogy to this in legal
matters. Lawyers habitually speak of certain writers —Coke,
Hale, Blackstone, &c.—as authorities, and they distinguish, lam
told, between authorized or authoritative; reports of decided
cases, and other reports which are not authorized; but surely
this does not assert that any particular proposition in any such
hook is true, or that any particular case is correctly reported, still
less that any particular edition is authentic. Would it, for
instance, be said that any one denied Coke to be an authority,
because he described his derivation of felon (felleo animo), or his


justification of the punishment of treason by reference to gro-
tesque Biblical precedents, as childish ? The most unsparing
critic of Coke—Hobbes, for instance, of Foster—might fully
recognize that, in fact, he is an authority in the law of England.
The greatest admirer of Hale might distinguish his posthumous
works, and the additions of his editors from his own original
sentiments. Of course, in one sense, you lessen the authority of
a book by criticising it, because every criticism which detects an
error diminishes the probability that other statements con-
tained in it are true; but this is a different sense of the w’ord
authority from that to which I refer. The authority of the fourth
Gospel, in the sense in which it is affirmed by the 6th Article
(if that Article does affirm it), is legal, ecclesiastical, forensic
authority ; it is scheduled amongst the books which the Church
quotes, and from which it extracts Divine revelation ; but it is not
in itself divine and perfect. If the word “ authority ” goes beyond
this, it is difficult to reconcile it with the decision in Fendall v.
Wilson.
What, then, have I said about the fourth Gospel as we have it?
I have said that it was not written by St. John the Apostle. I
had a right to say so. It was decided in the Bishop of Salisbury
v. Williams, that Dr. Williams might lawfully deny that Moses
wrote the Pentateuch, Peter the Second Epistle of Peter, and
Daniel the hook of Daniel. Why, then, may I not say that John
did not write the fourth Gospel as we have it?
I have said that it contains untrue statements ! I have aright
to say so by the decision in Fendall v. Wilson.
1 have said that those untrue statements were in some respects
immoral. The same case recognizes my right to say that. How
can a crime he extracted out of three lawful assertions ? If lam
to be condemned, let it be plainly stated that it is because I have
shocked some religious people and wounded some sensitive feel-
ings. I know that I have done this; I have done it in teaching
what I believe to he the truth. All men must do so who give
effective opposition to superstitious ideas that have become tra-
ditional. Is it a crime to do so ? Show me the section of the
Act of Uniformity which forbids it.
4. I might, if this were the proper time and place, assign
various reasons which may explain the fact, that all these ques-
tions were left open at the Reformation. I might enlarge upon


the difficulty which was obviously felt by Hooker, of avoiding on
the one hand the Roman Catholic, who put tradition on a level
with revelation, and, on the other, the Puritan, who substituted
as the foundation of revelation, a Bible, of which the infallibility
was supposed to be self-evident, for a Church, which claimed in-
fallibility. I might develop the theory that the earliest writers of
the Church of England—Hooker, Laud, Chillingworth, Jeremy
Taylor, and others—founded the Church of England, the Christian
faith itself, upon historical evidence investigated in the common
way, and that these facts disinclined them to lay down any
specific doctrine about the Bible, like the elaborate article upon
the subject which stands first in the Westminster Confession. I
might add, that the men of that age were perhaps hardly less sen-
sible than this Court must be of the extreme difficulty of making
any categorical statement upon the subject; that they did not
believe that it was a pressing matter, and that they left it unde-
cided upon the simple principle of quieta non movere; but, be
all this how it may, my point is, that whatever reasons they may
have had for so doing, they did leave open the whole question,
and that as they chose to do so, nothing but the Legislature can
now close it. Now, the Legislature has not chosen to do so. All
through the eighteenth century, at all events, these matters were
hotly discussed, and the Legislature remained silent. Eight
years ago the matter was before the highest Court in the land,
and they held that the question was an open one. Since that
time no change has been made. Can you close the door which
has thus been set open ? It may be that the liberty thus allowed
is inexpedient. I can well believe that it is so, from the point
of view of my Prosecutors, though not from mine, and this is
not the place to consider which of us is right. The present
question is whether the liberty exists, not whether it is wise that
it should exist; and I challenge my Prosecutors to point out any
principle which will condemn me, and which would not have
condemned Mr. Wilson, if it had been known to the law of
England.
Sir, I have only to say a few words in conclusion. lam
charged with having broken the law; I yield to no one in my
respect for it, but when the law is ambiguous and undecided,
when the question is, whether or not a given right exists, no one
can be accused of disobedience, merely because he tries the right.


You are to determine upon my right in this, matter. What
your determination may be is to me, in a worldly sense, a matter
of indifference. Bear with me if, before I sit down, I say a
word or two upon my personal history. I have been seventeen
years and a half in the service of the Church of England. For
the first seven years I held the curacy of Hessle, in Yorkshire,
and performed its duties without any stipend at all. For a year
and three months I was curate under the Crown in the Island of
Jamaica, receiving less than £3OO per annum—an income
equivalent there to £l5O in this country. After that, for two and
a half years I was successively curate at Great Yarmouth, St.
Mark’s, Whitechapel, and North Woolwich, receiving from £IOO
to £l2O a year only. For nearly six years I have held the
incumbency or vicarage of Healaugh, of which all the income
together only amounts to £IOB a year, with a house. I ask any
one to judge from these facts whether my attachment and loyalty
to the Church of my country can for a moment be attributed to
worldly motives or love of gain. I deliberately sacrificed all
hopes of preferment long since, when I wrote as I did, and
accepted the anxieties and wants which belong to the condition
of a poor gentleman. Any time within the last five years I could
have secured a far better worldly position by deserting my
Church. I ask that these facts may be remembered in the for-
mation of your judgment.
My Prosecutors are well aware of the manner in which I
have endeavoured to discharge my parochial duties—for the last
ten years, at all events, of my ministry. I have not lived in a
corner, nor wmrked unrecognized by the incumbents whom I
have served, or by the bishops in whose dioceses I have been
licensed. Let them say what they know of me as a parish
priest, and it may yet be thought worth while to preserve instead
of to banish a clergyman who at least loved his work for its own
sake, and not for its rewards.
But if such considerations as these are of no weight whatever
in my case, I will only add that there are some thoughts which
console me for the injuries I have already suffered, and which
give me strength to brave all that may yet come. The truth of
my opinions, the truth of the doctrines of the Church of England,
is not in issue in these proceedings; and no rational man can
suppose that the decision of this or any other Court or assembly


whatever, can thfrow the smallest light upon that question. My
personal character, too, is as much out of the reach of my prosecutors
as my personal safety. This Court can as little injure me by decree-
ing me to be heretical, as it can bum me, which your Honor’s pre-
decessors probably would have done. To myself, personally, the
result of these proceedings is unimportant. But to the Church of
England it is all-important. The Church of England, and not I, is
on its trial. Whether the clergy are, or are not, to be tied down to
popular glosses upon mysterious doctrines, whether they are, or
are not, to be compelled to conform to some principle or other as
to the criticism and interpretation of the Bible which you are asked
to develop out of the one word “ Canonical,” is a question of much
importance to them. To me, except as one of the public, and
as a member of the National Church, which may be saved or
wrecked according to the way in which this case is finally
settled, it is of no importance at all. I have done my part. I
have said with perfect plainness what I believe, and why I
believe it. I have endeavoured to fulfil my vows as a priest by
teaching only what I was “ persuaded might be proved from Holy
Scripture.” If you turn me out of my vicarage, the loss will
be to my worldly advantage, though much to the disappointment
of my hopes for the Church of England. But if you affirm my
right to say what I have said, I shall have established a great
principle. You will not have added one dogma to the Articles,
nor taken one away, and the Church of England will have been
forced to know her own mind on several matters of the utmost
importance to her future influence on the people—nay, to her
very life itself.
On the 2nd December the Chancellor gave judgment, rejecting
Mr. Voysey’s motion, and admitting the Articles to proof, with
costs against the Defendant. Mr. Voysey, by his Proctor, there-
upon applied for leave to appeal to the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council, which was granted. The appeal has since
been entered, and will come on for hearing as soon as its turn is
reached in the Privy Council.


APPENDIX 1..
Passage A.
“ There are two ways of treating this subject—theologically and
morally. We are liable to forget God, and to hold up our hands
in worship to a strange god, by errors in our creed, by religious
convictions which are essentially idolatrous, and by confessions of
faith which virtually obliterate the true name of God, and draw
away our highest homage and affection from Him to another.
And we are also liable to forget the name of our God, and to hold
up, not only our hands, but our whole selves, to that which is no
God, by the habits of our lives and the principles of our conduct;
and this is quite the worst of all idolatries, as it may be practised
even when we are holding the most correct religious opinions as
well as when our very creeds are false.”
Passage B.
“ The writer of my text” (meaning the writer of the 44th
Psalm) “ lived in days when idolatry was less polished and
specious than it is in ours. The coarse brutalities which dis-
tinguished the rites of Baal and of Ashtaroth, of Chemosh and of
Moloch, presented too great a contrast to the worship of Jehovah
(which, however bloody, was at least decent) to beguile the hearts of
upright men; but the idolatry which, in our own day and amongst
Christian nations, outrivals the worship of the one true God, is
decked with decency and garnished with spiritual attractions so
closely resembling the true adoration of the Most High, that the
best amongst us may be easily deceived by it, and allured by it
far away from His true temple and worship.
“ The God who made us, and who rules the world, had been so
misrepresented, that the human mind could not possibly sustain
the weight of fear which the thoughts of His nearness excited. It
was not possible for men to take refuge in Him while His anger


was described as implacable fury, while His favour could only be
purchased by the intervention of another Deity on man's behalf,
and while every painful event and every earthly loss was attri-
buted to the outpourings of His indignation upon a race which
He abhorred. And so it w r as inevitable that men should turn
elsewhere in time of trouble than to the God who made them ;
that they should seek for a Deliverer whose sympathy need not
be purchased, and whose faithful love required no stimulant, and
could not be wearied. At the time when Jesus Christ, the Lord
of men, appeared on earth, religious feelings towards God in the
hearts both of the Jew and Pagan were such as to render impossible
any repose in the bosom of the Creator. None could conceive
of Him as even actuated by tender feelings, or as even guided
by laws of justice such as were common among men. So the
Christ, in his life of pity and kindness, began to be worshipped
and loved, as infinitely nearer and dearer to human hearts than
any Deity whom men had ever worshipped before.
“ Not only was this perfectly natural, but, under the circum-
stances, it was infinitely creditable to mankind that they should
worship and adore such an one as Christ was, instead of the
Jehovah known to the Jews, and the Zeus and Jupiter known to
the Greeks and Romans. Since the days of some of the
Psalmists, the purer ideas of Jehovah had become miserably
corrupted, and a whole system of propitiatory sacrifices had
taken the place of their sensible and manly devotion. The
Jehovah of the Jews, in our Lord’s time, was a partial God—a
God who loved only the Jews, and hated all the rest of mankind
—a God whose service consisted in the artificial miseries and
endless petty ceremonies of a proud but unhappy people, and so
our Lord himself, when he proclaimed the Fatherhood, the
Fatherly love and the Fatherly tenderness of the one living and
true God, met only with opposition and disdain. Such goodness,
such nearness, such Divine impartiality, were incomprehensible
to the Jew, whose mind was already filled by an image of God,
almost as false and distorted as it could possibly be.
“ But as soon as ever the notion gained ground that Jesus Christ
was engaged on man’s behalf in assuaging the Divine wrath, all
the love and trust of men rushed in a torrent towards Him, and
they were quite content (as well they might be) to adore their
Eedeemer, and leave their Creator further off than ever. Ido


not wonder at this. The wonder would have been if men had
not clung to Christ—if they had refused to worship so glorious a
manifestation of Divine love and goodness.
“ Yet surely this is not what Christ would have of us. I always
thought that He came to bring us to God. Whatever else may
be recorded in the Gospels, most surely it is there recorded that
He said all He could say, and did all He could do, to make men
feel the Fatherly love of God for us all, to make known the
Father in heaven, and to win back affrighted men from their
ghastly dread. Jesus Christ desired and pressed upon us all to
worship the Father—“ II is Father and our Father, His God and
our God”—and none will dare to say that He ever stepped in
between men and their Maker, to beguile their highest allegiance
to Himself, to hide the Father’s face, or to close the portals of
the Father’s home.
“If Christians have in any sense departed from their Lord’s
most decisive lessons on this matter—if they have forgotten the
name of the Lord their God—if they have obliterated all true
meaning from that name of Father by their notions of His wrath
against His erring children—shall not God search it out? We
cannot hide ourselves away from His warning eye, nor drown
the whisperings of His gentle entreaty, any more than could the
Jews of Galilee and the Samaritans of Mount Gerizim escape
the solemn appeals of Jesus of Nazareth. Once spoken, they will
be incessantly repeated till the Christian ages have grown into
the manhood of their Master. The hour cometh, yea, is now
come, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and in truth, for the Father seeketh such to worship Him.
Again this day the Christ has come to you and to me with
these Divine words, God having sent Him to search out our
treacherous hearts, to see whether our deepest affections are
rooted in Himself, or still contented with an object of adoration
other than that one whom our great Master Himself so faithfully
revealed. No man can love more than one God supremely. I
am bold to ask you, my friends, shall it be the God whom Jesus
Christ taught us to love, or shall it not? Shall we make a
pretence of worshipping three Gods, when Christ bids us worship
the Father ? Shall we accept any of the idols of Christendom
in His place? God forbid! But if we do, we no longer
deserve the name of Christians, we are no longer disciples of
Christ.


“ But there is a worse idolatry than that of the intellect and the
religious affections. It is the making of gods out of earthly
good. The worship of Christ exalts the mind, and at least tends
to promote resemblance to His greatness and nobleness in
ourselves; but the worship of this world’s good, of this world’s
comfort and ease—which is only, after all, the worship of
ourselves in disguise—does nothing but miserably debase us:
finding us low and degraded, it makes us lower and more
degraded still.”


APPENDIX 11.
Passage F.
“ This sense of God's presence, and this entire confidence in
it, coupled with a sense of our own faults, is, in my opinion,
the supreme ideal of religion. . It is, of course, pure faith,
originated in the heart of man by God, independent of books,
churches, priests, and is the only real revelation possible by God
to man.”
Passage N.
“ I am sure that the Jesus known to Peter must have been in
some respects infinitely more noble than the Jesus described in
the Gospels. Of course no immorality is anywhere ascribed to
Him, no lowness nor coarseness of nature ; but in the Gospels we
have the picture of one who, on many occasions, used His tongue
in the very way which St. Peter and St. James both condemned.
St. Peter describes our Lord as one who did no sin, neither was guile
found in His mouth, who, when He was reviled, reviled not again—
when He suffered, He threatened not. In SS. Matthew, Mark, and
Luke we find reports of some sayings of Jesus full of revilings—
revilings so hard and cruel, that Christians could not follow the
example of using such language without forfeiting their Christian
character. In St. John, Jesus is represented as wrangling in a
very undignified manner with His opponents, and actually calling
them the children of the Devil. Now, I prefer to accept St. Peter's
account of Our Lord; but, if Ido so, I must give up the others.
Both accounts cannot be equally true.
“Hence we discover the true basis or foundation of all morality,
and therefore of all true religion, to be in man’s own heart. It is
not outside of him,.in.any book,or in any church; no,nor even in
the noblest examples which the world ever saw. These cannot


originate virtue—these cannot tell us what goodness is. The
perception of goodness is instinctive in man ; and having first got
that from heaven, he can run his eye over the throng of men
around him, or over the pages of the world’s biographies, and pick
out here and there those whom he calls good—whose conduct ex-
cites his admiration—whose example he deems worthy of imitation.
It is th.is faculty in us which determines our choice in the selec-
tion both of examples and of precepts. The Jesus represented by
one writer we prefer to the Jesus represented by another. The
sayings recorded by one historian we prefer to the sayings
recorded by another.”
Woodfall and Kinder, Printer*, Milford Lane, Strand, London, W.C.
