



M. £. a. Series : IRo. 1.
DEMOCRACY
AND FREEDOM
AN ESSAY IN SOCIAL
LOGIC.
ELTON MAYO
Lecturer in Psychology and Ethics in the University
ot Qyeensland
Melbourne ;
MACMILLAN & CO. LTD.,
HEAD OFFICE : LONDON'


MACMILLAN & CO. Limited
LONDON • BOMBAY • CALCUTTA
MADRAS • MELBOURNE
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
NEW YORK - BOSTON • CHICAGO
ATLANTA • SAN FRANCISCO
DALLAS
THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA Ltd
TORONTO


CONTENTS.
Foreword. v.
CHAPTER I.
CHAPTER I.
Introductory 1
CHAPTER 11.
The Exploitation of the People’s Will 14
CHAPTER 111.
Social Growth and Social Disintegration .... 31
CHAPTER IV.
Regulation as a Substitute for Freedom 45
CHAPTER V.
Society and the State Gi


FOREWORD.
This book is the first of a series to be published
under the auspices of the Workers’ Educational
Association of Australia. Mr. Elton Mayo was good
enough to give us the first opportunity of making
his work available to the Australian public. The
professors, lecturers and tutors who are engaged in
teaching the University Tutorial Classes organised
by the W.E.A. throughout the Commonwealth and
New Zealand, are steadily becoming a community of
students and writers whose work promises to be of
the utmost value. The paucity of authoritative
books dealing with the economic, political and social
conditions and thought of these British countries in
the South Seas is as remarkable as it is regrettable.
Both we and the world at large have everything to
gain by the issue of careful studies of new' movements
in new lands. Virgin countries cannot but suffer by
the lack of analysis of themselves and their institu-
tions, and other nations naturally look to them for
vital contributions to the world’s literature. I
venture to think that the present w'ork reaches that
high standard, and will win for its author recognition
throughout the Empire at least. The Workers’
Educational Association, founded in Great Britain in
1903, has set itself the high task of promoting the
education of democracy by co-operation with the
Universities. It is hoped that this series of publica-


tions will fulfil its aim, which is not that of instilling
particular doctrines into the minds of the students,
but of stimulating their thought and their zest for
study.
MEREDITH ATKINSON,
General Editor, W. E. A. Series,
President of the Workers’ Educational
Association of Australia.
University of Melbourne,
December, 1918.


Introductory.
“ Democracy ” and “ Freedom ” are words which,
in these days, are upon everybody’s tongue. The
conscriptionist uses them as arguments for compul-
sory recruiting; the anti-conscriptionist names them
as the ground of his objection. At least once a day
the newspapers inform us that the British cause is
that of “ democratic freedom.” In the issue there
would seem to be some danger of a general assump-
tion that social enfranchisement is to be achieved
only by the methods of democratic “ politics.” That
the term “ democracy ” is properly applied to describe
a form of government rather than a social condition
has been clearly pointed out by Maine (Popular
Government, Essay II.). Most commonly the two
are confused, with the result that the achievements
of popular self-government as such are not dis-
tinguished from the freedom which society pro-
gressively achieves quite independently of the
politician. Such freedom may be truly “ democratic ”
in the broadest sense, and yet not due to any political
initiative. The rights which we enjoy, for example,
under Common Law and Equity have been worked
out, formulated and tested, socially and not politi-
cally; governments, whether monarchical or popular,
have done no more than systematise the exposition
of such rights in order to record them in a Statute.
Considered as a form of government, democracy—
“ the government of the Commonwealth by a


numerous but indeterminate portion of the com-
munity taking the place of the Monarch ” (Popular
Government, p. 61) —must stand or fall by its
demonstrated superiority to other forms of govern-
ment in respect of a capacity for aiding social growth,
a capacity for eliminating disturbances or inhibitions
of such growth. That the democratic mechanism of
government is better calculated to fulfil this purpose
than other known forms is by no means conclusively
proved. The individualistic theories that helped the
nineteenth century to self-expression are not neces-
sarily best suited to perform that office for the
twentieth. The precise manner in which party-
politics, for example, have affected government
requires examination before we are entitled to
assume that democracy and freedom are correlative
expressions.
This argument must not be supposed to detract
anything from the genuine achievements of
democracy. The central excellence of popular
self-government is its explicit affirmation of the
direct responsibility of the ruler to those he rules.
This goes far to prevent the emergence of political
ideals like those of pre-war Germany, ideals which
substitute material efficiency and the well-being of
the State as a whole for personal freedom as the end
of government. Democracy secures the “ distribu-
tion," as it were, of political predicates; it ensures, so
far as may be, that the “ good of the State ” shall not
be inconsistent with the good of individual citizens.
The peculiarly British system of government has
another advantage in that, while the nominal ruler
is retained unchanged, the actual political leadership
may be changed as often as the public will requires
it. This makes it possible for the community to


effect reforms of an almost revolutionary character
without disturbing the continuity of the adminis-
tration of law and justice.
All this, however, is by the way; when we turn to
the question of freedom we open up a broader issue.
Freedom implies social growth—the acquisition by
man of new knowledge and new powers. Modern
democratic theory originated in the notion that the
art of government, as practised in the eighteenth
century, was a vexatious and artificial hindrance to
freedom. “ Man is born free,” said Rousseau, “ and
everywhere he is in chains.” Ry which he meant
that man had lost his right to the free exercise of
reason and will, his right to “ obey himself alone.”
The Physiocrats developed this into an explicit
protest against State interference with industry.
Certain natural laws, they believed, would be found
to regulate human associations, once governments
had learned to refrain from imposing restrictions
on social development. These doctrines exercised
a most important formative influence upon English
democratic theories of the nineteenth century.
English exponents of laisscr fairc taught that the
chief duty of the State is to reflect “ the general
will,” and, for the rest, to leave industries to work
out their own salvation. The most interesting
feature of these theories, and of the political
institutions to which they gave rise, is the tacit
admission that the State is a subsidiary function of
the society. Beyond the apparent sovereign is the
real sovereign—“ the people ” or “ the general
will;” all authority originates ultimately in a
“ mandate of the public.” Implied in this i° a
recognition of the fact that the State cannot rightly
do more than reflect social growth. In practice,


however, all this highly interesting aspect of
democratic theory came to nothing. Having found
an answer to their initial question—who is the
sovereign—the exponents of self-government left
unformulated the other and more cogent question
as to the nature of sovereignty and government.
“The will of the people” was made sovereign; its
existence was assumed, its nature was not
investigated. Translated into terms of practice,
this has come to imply an extended franchise, party
organisation and majority rule. Under the
conditions of modern democracy the real sovereignty
vests primarily in Parliament and the administration;
beyond this, in politicians and political associations.
The claim that government is “by the people ” or
in accordance with “ the general will ” is a mere
fagon de parler. Only at election time is Ihe
community directly consulted, and, at such times, the
party system ensures that the politician shall
dominate public opinion. It is, of course, true that
laws which prove to be contrary to the good sense
or customary practice of the community must be
revoked to save them from being disregarded. But
this does not make “ the people ” ultimately
sovereign in any special sense, since even under the
conditions of monarchy or oligarchy the same
power of social veto exists.
Interest in this aspect of democratic theory was
inhibited by the excessive individualism of the
nineteenth century. Political writers, from Bentham
to J. S. Mill, placed the actual sovereignty in a
purely abstract conception, a self-confessed figment
of the imagination—“ the people.” Society was
described as a mere collection of persons, motived
solely by individual pleasure and pain—a descrip-


tion which precludes the possibility of any real
social unity. This analysis provides no basis
for a social or political philosophy; it regards a
civilised community as the merest horde and
takes no account of the systematic co-operation
which is the very essence of social organisation.
As a result of this individualism, even so able a
philosopher as J. S. Mill was reduced to an
economic gospel of anarchical competition and a
political belief in salvation by the ballot box.
Theories such as these cannot explain social
growth. Man, considered merely as an individual,
alters little from age to age; it is in respect of
knowledge and power to use, of social custom and
tradition, and of capacity for depth of vision—it is
in respect of these qualities that man changes; and
it is these changes which make history. Indi-
vidualism failed to see that man, socially speaking,
holds his past and future in his present. And
individualism consequently, though it gave us an
economics and a politics, failed to give us a science
of society and government.
In its practical applications, democratic theory
has worked out in a fashion quite contrary to the
intention of its authors. By opposing society,
described as a mere formless anarchy of persons, to
the unity of the State, democracy has made it seem
that social unity can only come by way of State
activity. Socialism, without attempting a more
adequate analysis of social institutions, has come to
this conclusion; so also have the majority of present-
day politicians. Much as some of the latter dislike
to abandon the tenets of laisscr faire, they show by
their actions that they look to State intervention for
the cure of social ills. So the political science


which sought to place social authority beyond :he
State, ended by relegating all authority to the State.
The social philosophy which began by repudiating
the right of one man to control others, conclude !
with the inference that “ social reconstruction " will
make State control and the power of the politician
absolute.
But this inference is totally irrelevant; it finds its
sole justification in an utterly false analysis of
society. If we admit, as we must, the truth of the
major premiss of democracy—that governmental
authority derives from a source beyond itself, in the
social will—we have still to ask a question as to the
nature of society and social will. The subsequent
chapters of this essay are designed to make some
small contribution to the elucidation of this problem.
In the meantime, it is enough to say that the State
and government are devices fashioned by man
himself to fulfil a social purpose. The State is
man-made, man himself is not. The social order
changes as man advances to new powers and wider
social relationships; the “ State ” represents an
expedient which civilisation employs to provide for
“ official ” recognition of such changes and to guard
against retrogression. Since the special business
of the State is to record and enforce moral
relationships, it cannot take the lead in the matter
of changing them. “ Law, Gierke writes, is the
result of a common conviction not that a thing shall
shall be, but that it is." —(Political Thought from
Spcnccr to To-day: E. Barker.) Social growth
is the accretion of slow centuries, each one of which
endows humanity with some new legacy. We live
and move and have our being in the achievement of
our predecessors and to such an extent that none


can tell precisely where tradition ends and originality
begins. Our very gestures, our customary gait,
may, for all we know, be due to the discovery of a
forgotten ancestor. Civilisation makes itself concrete
ami actual in social traditions which arc as real a
heritage as case-law or the Newtonian physics. It is
these institutions or ways of living which provide
mankind with motives, and we cannot begin to
understand the nature of the social will until we
know something of the manner in which one
generation communicates its social discoveries to the
next. The science of government must explain,
before all else, the relation of the State and politics
to the complex and purposive activities which hold
the traditions of civilisation and form its growing
point. All that is best in democratic theory would
seem to imply that the first duty of the State is to
conserve for the community its freedom of growth.
For the individual, society offers a sphere of
activity in which ancestral tradition and present
fellowship combine to aid and stimulate his powders
of self-development. The function of the State in
relation to this social process is that of moral control;
it is an authority which conserves freedom of grow'th
by ensuring that the communal conception and
practice of justice shall develop equally with other
social powers.
The question as to the right relation between
governmental authority and social growth has
ceased to he an academic problem, and has suddenly-
taken form as an urgent practical issue. The war
has induced—or, it would be better to say—has
accelerated the advent of social changes of a novel
character and a world-wide range. Before the war
social activities were subsumed, nominally at least,


under the various governments of the civilised
world. After the war this subordination will no
longer be possible; the various governments may,
indeed, seem, in the ultimate, something extraneous
and irrelevant to social activities. The alliance
between Britain, France and America, for example,
is now so closely knit by every social and industrial
bond that its abandonment upon the conclusion of
the struggle will most probably be quite impossible,
even should reactionary sentiment demand it.
Already these allied countries stand committed to
the supply of a starving Europe with food for years
to come, the rehabilitation of Belgium, the recon-
stitution of Russia, and, generally speaking, the
initiation of a new era of social collaboration.
During the war the Allies have contributed to the
general stock such supplies of necessary commodities
as they possessed; after the war the process cannot
be discontinued. Commerce has learned to look
upon supplies as world supplies, to take account or
moral as of economic obligations. “ Now this is
nothing short of a new stage-setting for the drama
of life.” (The New Freedom: Woodrow Wilson.) It
implies that industries arc learning to regard
themselves as social functions rather than sources
of merely national wealth, and are already experi-
menting in the direction of extra-political or
world-wide organisation. The effect of the war will
undoubtedly be to strengthen and accelerate this
tendency; former methods and conceptions of
politics and industry will be quite inadequate to the
task of reconstituting civilisation. If social freedom
implies an enlargement of human spheres of activity,
then this war, in spite of military regulation, has
achieved a notable advance. These are not changes


which are to come —they have come; and the problem
of the relation of the social will to political
administration consequently demands re-statement.
Parallel with this change has come a marked
extension of the sphere of State control. This
extension is not socialistic, as some would fain
believe; it is primarily military. The social logic of
war differs by the whole width of heaven from the
social logic of peace. In war the military commander
must be supreme, and the device of State-control is
simply a “ democratic ” method of recognising this
necessity. In Great Britain to an extent far greater
than elsewhere, the urgency of the crisis and the
condition of industry at the moment of the nation’s
need, combined to make State intervention iand
control imperative for purposes of military effective-
ness. Manufacturers were competing for insufficient
supplies of raw materials, thereby enhancing the
cost of munitions, and diminishing the output. The
industrial arena was characterised by mutual
suspicion and distrust between masters and men.
The political State was consequently compelled to
assume the leadership and to impose an industrial
system and an artificial unanimity upon the economic
activities of the nation. This is still the condition of
affairs; it is difficult to see how the mere cessation
of the war will materially alter the situation from a
political point of view. The need for military
dominance of social activity will pass, but for the
urgency of war provision there will be substituted
economic urgencies of another kind; and the need
of system and social order will be nothing diminished.
Charges for war pensions, interest on loans,
repatriation schemes, and the like, will prove
insupportable where systematic co-operation is


unknown. In the absence of adequate understanding
of the issues involved and a social will to co-operatc,
the State may therefore be forced into the continued
imposition of war conditions after the war is over.
And this, while it may seem to the politician to he
the will of the community, while it may actually be
necessary, will please no one, and may, indeed, bring
governments, whether democratically organised or
no, into conflict with that expanding social will which
is the most remarkable feature of the present era.
This, then, is the problem. A large measure of
State regulation and control is admittedly a present
military and industrial necessity, and the necessity
may continue beyond the conclusion of the war.
On the other hand. State control would seem to he
incompatible with that extra-political expansion of
social activities which is apparently to be the
outstanding feature of a reconstructed civilisation.
Democracy, as we know it, provides no sufficient
safeguard against governmental interference with
development and freedom. Considered as a form of
government, democracy is as nationalistic as any
monarchy. It confines its attenton to the inhabitants
of a definite geographical area; its individualistic bias
has prevented it from learning how rightly to
estimate the social will, even within such area. The
inadequacy of mere party-politics to the wider social
problems of the present is already painfully apparent.
Pritita facie, it would seem that democracy, in the
existing condition of world affairs, is as liable to
become tyrannical as any historic monarchy. We
may yet see democratic governments, in the name of
social enfranchisement, obstructing the efforts of
society to overcome the difficulties which racial


differences and geographical remoteness place in
(lie way of social unity.
The official theories of social regeneration before
the public contribute little to elucidation of the
problem. Syndicalism and Guild-Socialism arc
interesting by reason of their attitude of hostility
to State interference with industry. Proposals to
sweep away the State or to confine its domain to
matters of common "use” and “enjoyment” (vide
Self-Government in Industry: G. P. H. Cole) are,
however, beside the point, since they neglect to take
account of the reality of the moral function which
the State exercises for society. Beyond this,
Socialism, Syndicalism, and Guild-Socialism are
alike in that they are too “ class-conscious ” to be
practically effective. Their exponents are apt to
strike blindly at the foundations of society as at
present organised, and so to incur the distrust and
hostility of the timid and conservatively minded.
Their arguments are too often relevant to the past
rather than the present or future; vengeance for past
wrongs is assessed too high and present co-operation
too low. A policy, a cardinal tenet of which is
“ expropriation,” drastic and undisguised, is hardly
likely to commend itself to a society struggling for
its existence. In any case, it is not the ownership
of property but its social use that is the majot issue
at the present time. It is more than probable that
" reconstruction,” whatever form it takes, will
materially alter existing “ rights" in respect of
property. But suggestions of reform, if they are to'
be socially beneficial, must be based upon a critical
survey of present fact and not upon Marxist
doctrines of the mid-nineteenth century. The
existing social order, defective as it undoubtedly is,


does at least attach some personal responsibility for
social use to the privileges of ownership. The one
cannot be abolished without the other; if property
be confiscated, all personal responsibility to society
for its right use will disappear. It may be questioned
whether reform will not ultimately come rather in the
direction of increased responsibility than of
diminished ownership.
“ Class-conscious ” theories of working-class
salvation, however anti-social in character, are,
nevertheless, the direct outcome of modern exten-
sions of the wage-system. The workers believe
that democracy has misled them with illusions of
freedom. Simultaneously with the acquisition of
nominal political rights, the proletariat has lost all
semblance of a right to economic self-determination.
And, indeed, it must be admitted that the nineteenth
century schooled itself, in the name of “ supply and
demand ” and of competition, to look unmoved upon
wholesale exploitation of the working classes and the
most intolerable abuse of child-labour. Even when
humanitarian impulses were no longer to be denied,
laisser faire was unable to relinquish its individualistic
dogma. that industry cannot continue to prosper
except as a relentless struggle for survival. The
remedies that have been applied have consequently
all been of the nature of political regulation—rules
to confine the struggle within prescribed bounds.
This is, of course, a logical enough remedy if it be
assumed that the State is the only real social unity
and, therefore, the only source of social unanimity
and co-operation. But the falsity of this assumption
is bringing a nemesis to our civilisation. The
workers have drawn the obvious conclusion that
political or quasi-political organisation is the only


means of securing the adjustment of their grievances;
they believe their future to depend upon their
capacity to control the State. Their success in this
endeavour has led to a marked increase in the
intensity and bitterness of class-feeling. So the
democracy which was to reflect “ the general will ”
and thus to secure social unity, has by its methods
divided society into two hostile camps—an achieve-
ment which is the first step downwards to social
disintegration. The present situation of world affairs
demands a real, as distinguished from an apparent
co-operation of all sections of society in a common
endeavour. The device of State control secures an
apparent unity, but does nothing to promote real
unanimity or mutual understanding. The methods
of “ practical politics ” seem to have for object
the creation of an aggravated partisan hostility
which, if it persists, will make united action
impossible. Democracy, as we at present know it,
is based upon a misunderstanding of the facts of
human nature and social organisation. Not until the
mists have cleared from our social and political
philosophy can we be certain that democracy moves
in the direction of human freedom and personal
autonomy.


The Exploitation of the People’s Will.
During the last two decades the more eminent
writers upon social topics have given expression to
a curiously unanimous doubt with regard to the
value of contemporary democratic institutions.
Tarde and the crowd-psychologists in France,
Graham Wallas and Masterman in England, Ellwood
and Brooks Adams in America, Ostrogorski in
Russia—in the works of these and many other
authors one cannot but observe an entire absence of
“ official ” self-satisfaction and the definite presence
of a note of apprehension and unease. Brooks
Adams, indeed, in a book published before the
outbreak of the war (Theory of Social Revolutions),
predicted the end of the present social order before
1930. His prediction is based on observation of
the widening rift between the various classes which
together make up society, a rift which extends
beyond the bounds of political and national divisions
and across which no one class as such extends the
hand of fellowship to another. Graham Wallas, in
the course of a profound and detailed examination
of the structure of modern society, makes the same
observation. “Who can be sure,” he asks, “ that
the forces represented by the ‘ sabotage ’ of the
French railway servants or the turbulence of the
vine-growers are declining?” “ More threatening
still,” he adds, “ to the cohesion of the Great Society
are the motives openly avowed by some of the
American and European masters of concentrated
capital, the men who direct enormous social power


without attempting to form a social purpose. . . .
The ‘ cash nexus ’ has no more than the ‘ voting
nexus' secured that common membership of the
Great Society shall mean a common interest in its
solidarity.” —(The Great Society, />. n.) C. F. G.
Masterman, writing six years before the outbreak
of war, summarises a chapter on “ The Illusion of
Security” thus:—"The warning . . . cannot be
too strongly emphasised: that with the vertical
division between nation and nation armed to the
teeth, and the horizontal division between rich and
poor which has become a cosmopolitan fissure, the
future of progress is still doubtful and precarious.
. . . The wise man will'still go softly all his days;
working always for greater economic equality on the
one hand, for understanding between estranged
peoples on the other: apprehending always how
slight an effort of stupidity or violence could strike a
death-blow to twentieth century civilisation and
elevate the forces of destruction triumphant over the
ruins of a world.” —(The Condition of England.)
Utterances such as these serve to show that, even
before the war, serious students of social tendencies
went in fear of the future not merely by reason of
possible external aggression but also because society,
whether democratically organised or no, possessed
within itself the germinating seeds of disintegration.
Inter-racial antagonism beyond the borders of the
political group found its reflection within the group
in the form of class-hatred. Since the advent of the
war, sociology has become more outspoken. C. A.
Elhvood, in a paper read before the Sociological
Society in London on 10th Xovember, 1914,
expressed a profound pessimism with regard to
democratic tendencies. “ The problem before ns,”


he said, “ is not how to avoid political revolution, but
rather how to avoid the decay and disintegration of
civilisation itself.” “ The war has come as a shock
to those who have not studied intimately the
foundations of nineteenth-century European culture;
but, in my opinion, it is not an accident of any sort,
in diplomacy or otherwise. Rather the war has
merely exposed the rottenness of some of those
foundations of Western civilisation. We have
supposed that we could rear a secure social structure
upon the basis of an egoistic and materialistic social
philosophy. We have permitted a re-barbarisation
of the individual’s moral standards without imagining
that these would actually express themselves in the
life of nations. We have thought that somehow, out
of a programme of self-interest, material satisfactions
and brute force followed by men and nations, a
settled and harmonious order would result.” —
(Sociological Review, Vol. 8, pp. i and 2.)
Skilled criticism of this order is not to be passed
over lightly. The unease it patently displays comes
strongly into contrast with the superficial optimism
of professional politics. Pre-occupation with party
questions blinded the British nation to the menace
of European armaments. Are we to follow the
same road with regard to the organic health of the
body politic ? For twenty years, the gospel of class-
hatred has been preached at every street corner in
Australia; we cannot pretend that the fact is
unimportant or that the hostile feeling thus
engendered is a mere passing phase of politics.
Internal disintegration is as destructive an agency
as external aggression. With the example of
Russia before us, we might claim that it is even more
fatal to social stability and well-being. We


sometimes hear it asked what political leadership is
doing to cure this social ill, but all too rarely do we
hear it asked whether the ill is not itself due, at
least in part, to causes that may be termed political.
The most eminent philosophic exponent of
nineteenth century democracy was J. S. Mill. In his
writings one finds all the beliefs and aspirations of
his time caught up by and reflected from the
mirror of his genius. His argument that self-
government is essential to liberty and human
development is substantially identical with T. H.
Green’s contention that “ will, not force, is the basis
of the State.” Mill’s belief, obviously, was that
“ character and conviction ” —qualities so superior
to dull assent and subservience—are more likely to
find a sphere for free development under democratic
than under other conditions of government. The
character of “ the ideally best polity ” is that every
person within it is directly and actively interested in
the business of the State; the State does but mark the
outer limit, as it were, of his personality. Mill’s
commendation of “ completely popular government ”
was thus justified; and he was, in consequence, bound
to approve the successive extensions of the
franchise which chiefly marked the political growth
of the nineteenth century. But, like Grote and
many another advocate of democracy “ broad based
upon the people’s will,” Mill could not regard this
process of extension with a mind entirely at ease.
He was fully alive to the dangers which beset the
practice of government by a “ numerical majority.”
Under such a system the individual may be oppressed
rather than free to follow his impulses to self-
development. “ The power of the majority is
salutary so far as it is used defensively, not often-


sively, as its exertion is tempered by respect for the
personality of the individual, and deference to
superiority of cultivated intelligence/' —(Dissertations
and Discussions.) It was in consequence of his
perception of this danger that Mill sought to induce
the House of Commons to accept the principle of
the proportional representation of minorities. Of
the need for education, and especially political
education, as the complement of a widely extended
franchise, Mill was also aware. “ The natural
tendency of representative government, as of modern
civilisation, is towards collective mediocrity; and this
tendency is increased by all reductions and exten-
sions of the franchise, their effect being to place the
principal power in the hands of classes more and
more below the highest ievel of instruction in the
community. But though the superior intellects and
characters will necessarily be out mi mix: red, it makes
a great difference whether or not they are heard. In
the false democracy which, instead of giving repre-
sentation to all, gives it only to (he local majorities,
the voice of the instructed minority may have no
organs at all in the representative body."—(Repre-
sentative Government, Ch. VII.) Not even in the
representative body itself does Mill repose unqualified
trust: “. . . a numerous assembly is as little
fitted for the direct business of legislation as for that
of administration.” “ Instead of the function of
governing, for which it is radically unfit, the proper
office of a representatiye assembly is to watch and
control the government; to. throw the light ot
publicity on its acts ... to censure them if
found coudemnable, and if the men who compose the
government abuse their trust ... to expel them
from office.” Later he adds that “ talking and


EXPLOITATION OF THE PEOPLE’S WILL. 10
discussion ” are the “ proper business ” of assemblies
" while doing, as the result of discussion, is the task
not of a miscellaneous body, but of individuals
properly trained to it.” —(Representative Government,
Ch. V.) Whatever the defects of his political
philosophy, Mill saw both the excellences and the
defects of popular government with clear eyes. Like
Bagehot and, later, Tarde, he believed that a sound
democratic autonomy cannot be based otherwise
than upon a wide area of sane and logical public
discussion.
This last condition modern democracies, and
especially Australia, have failed to realise. For
many years past, our legislators have been accus-
tomed to regard the excellences of popular
government and to disregard its dangers. Since
1867, both in Britain and in the dominions, the
tendency has been to throw caution to the winds and
“ trust the people.” This on the surface of things,
but directly we go below that surface we find that
mutual confidence, as between representatives and
people, has steadily diminished. The British House
of Commons has offered a high resistance to
“woman’s suffrage;” it has not extended the
franchise to Egyptian or Indian subjects of the
Empire. Amongst the rank and file of the electorates
the case is not otherwise. Graham Wallas asserts
that “ one finds in England among the most loyal
democrats, if they have been brought into close
contact with the details of electoral organisation,
something of the same disappointment which has
become more articulate in America.” —(Human
Nature in Politics, p. 3.) Of Australia a similar
assertion may be made; the war has served to
crystallise and make concrete a growing discontent


with politicians and political institutions. The
dissatisfaction shows itself among all classes; the
conservative thinker, equally with the syndicalist,
feels that he is excluded from participation in public
affairs. And in Australia, also, the more closely we
approach the political arena, the more clearly
conscious are we of an atmosphere of disillusion
with the “ party machine ” as an engine of reform
and progress. “ What is wrong with the Labour
Movement?” asked a prominent Labour politician
recently. His own answer to his question was brief
and to the point: “We live in an atmosphere of
political mendacity.” This assertion, if not wholly
true, provides a partial solution of the puzzle.
Reason and real discussion, the organs, par
excellence, of enlightened public opinion, are falling
into disuse. Logical persuasion cannot be made to
operate easily and quickly over wide areas of
relatively ignorant people. An appeal to fear or
hatred produces a more instantaneous effect; if
successfully employed, it cannot fail to win an
election. In the last half-century of political
development, the problem of dealing with large
numbers of, historically speaking, newly-enfranchised
electors, has tended increasingly to be solved by the
latter means. Images that terrify crowds, says
Le Bon, will issue in immediate action, where logic
will be without effect.— (The Crowd, p. 67, if.)-, some
such theory as this is the inspiration of the larger
part of our political life.
Mill’s prediction that “ the natural tendency of
representative government is towards collective
mediocrity,” has been confirmed in an extraordinary
degree by Ostrogorski’s Democracy and the Organisa-
tion of Political Parties, first published in 1902.


Ostrogorski was a member of the first Russian Duma
under Nicholas 11., a member of the Democratic
Party, and a firm believer in constitutional democracy.
Not all his fifteen years’ close investigation of the
workings of English and American party politics
sufficed to shake his faith in government by “ the
people.” He begins his work by examining with
conscientious thoroughness the origins of political
associations; he then proceeds to examine the effect
upon such associations of successive extensions of
the franchise. Especially he considers the effect of
the English Reform Bill of 1867. A great change,
he points out, followed the passage of this measure
into law. Birmingham alone gained 30,000 new
electors. Owing to the “ minority representation ”
clause in the new Act, a clause strongly opposed by
John Bright and the Liberal Party, electors were
only allowed to vote for two out of three candidates
required. The Liberal Party nominated candidates
for all three vacancies, and arranged that the various
wards of Birmingham should vote for the three
candidates by twos “in such fashion that each
candidate would only receive the number of votes
strictly necessary to obtain the majority at the poll.”
—(Democracy and the Organisation of Political Parties,
Vol. 1., p. 162.) “ ‘ Vote as you are told ’ was the
password.” The device was completely successful,
and “ the three Liberal candidates were elected in
spite of the restricted voting clause passed for the
benefit of minorities.” — (Ibid, p. 163.) So came into
being the party-system in the modern acceptation
of that term, parties organised through the medium
of local and ward committees to keep in touch with
the elector. Ostrogorski’s endeavour is to trace the
effect of this organisation upon the course of


democratic politics. His first volume is devoted to
England, his second to America.
His inquiry, he says, must consider the effect of
the party-system on “ the improvement of the public
spirit of the masses,” which is “ the sole criterion of
genuine democracy.” With respect to England, he
states his conclusions as follows:—“ At the outset,
the Party* which professed to appeal to the masses,
succeeded in arousing, in several places, their interest
in the public weal; it attracted men who represented
the best elements of the lower strata of society, and
it seemed to tend towards really widening the
borders of the political community. But all this
lasted but a single moment, just long enough to make
it clear that the democracy inscribed on the standard
of the Party was only a painted banner or a coarse
sign. Independent and thoughtful people saw that
there was no room for them among the small,
vulgar leaders brought to the surface of politics, or
in the meetings and committees where everything
was cut and dried by a little coterie which monopo-
lised power by pulling the strings behind the scenes.
Having repelled these men, the Party has contrived
to attract only the enthusiasts, the bigots of the
party, and the busybodies. The great mass remained
outside, sunk in its apathy and its indifference.”
“To drag them out of it, the Party could devise
nothing better than organisation, which it ended
almost by confounding with political education. For
this latter it has really done nothing. The Asso-
ciations have proved radically unfitted for serving as
* The word which Ostrogorski actually uses is “Caucus.”
This term is commonly used in Australia with so specialised
a significance that I have thought it well to substitute
“ Party ” or “ Party-system ” in order to avoid the
possibility of giving a wrong impression.—E. M.


K.X I’LOITATION OF THK PEOPLE'S WILL. *’•
an instrument uf political education; they have
succeeded only in turning out electioneering
machines. A servant of the Party, engrossed by its
immediate duties, the central committee was not in
a position to apply itself to the political culture of
the masses of a general and disinterested kind. An
election broker picking up votes right and left, loaded
with heavy omnibus programmes which promised
the solution of all kinds of different questions, to
please everybody, it was no more possible for it to
make the public mind and conscience grasp all the
problems raised than to devote itself to each of them
or concentrate the attention of the masses on one of
them to the detriment of the others. The Party,
therefore, was naturally inclined, instead of bringing
about an agreement of intellects, to resort to
mechanical modes of rallying its forces and to keep
its adherents together in an external and conven-
tional conformity, by appealing, not so much to
reason, which analyses and. distinguishes, as to
feeling; by preferring to stir up emotions which
confuse the judgment and make a prisoner of the
will.” —(Democracy and the Organisation of Political
Parties, Vol. 1., pp. 584-5.) Elsewhere Ostrogorski
adds:—“ By working out autonomy and decentralisa-
tion in too formal a way, with a multiplicity of
subdivisions, in accordance with the strict logic of
the democratic principle, the Party has succeeded
mainly in bringing forward local mediocrity, and
then installing it in the counsels of the party.”—
(Ibid., p. 591.).
With regard to America, Ostrogorski's observa-
tions are entirely similar. After considering the
whole party system in operation, he asserts that
it has failed to achieve any success in its


fundamental duty the giving expression to
public opinion. It has rather “ deformed ”
public opinion by “ forcing it into the groove
of the stereotyped parties.” “ The convention
of ‘ regular ’ candidatures has made external
conformity the sole criterion which dispensed
with private judgment and individual responsibility.”
—(Democracy and the Party System, p. 391.) His
final conclusion with respect to the “ strict logic ”
of democracy, he states as follows:—“ The lesson
following ... is that, contrary to current
prejudice, the elective principle in government is a
spring of limited power; once the limit is exceeded,
it becomes, like a strained ' mechanical spring,
incapable of supplying the required impulse, and
throws the movement out of order. It follows,
again, that a highly developed electoral system
produces, in reality, a diminution of the people’s
strength.”— (lbid., p. 423.)
So far we have elicited the fact that the
“ completely popular government ” which is the very
essence of democracy has, in practice, led to control
by “ collective mediocrityand the more so, the
more widely the franchise is extended. But the
tale of the degradation of democracy is not yet
complete. “ Lord Rosebery told the Liverpool
students in 1910 that ‘ Politics at best are a gruesome
study! We like them much better at eighteen than
at fifty-eight.’ And Huxley, when at a Royal Society
dinner it was suggested that he should enter Parlia-
ment, replied that all his life he had been consumed
by a passion for the discovery of truth, and not for
its obscuration.” —(The Great Society, p. 320.)
Viscount Bryce, in his preface to Ostrogorski’s first
volume, says:—“l am myself an optimist, almost a


professional optimist, as indeed politics would be
intolerable were not a man grimly resolved to see
between the clouds all the blue sky he can.” These
expressions, uttered by eminent men of widely
different achievement, describe the art of politics
variously as “ intolerable,” “ a gruesome study,” the
“ obscuration ” of truth, and postulate a grim
optimism as the only possible attitude. Obviously
it is not merely control by “ collective mediocrity ”
that induces this condemnation, but some more
sinister feature of modern methods of manipulating
the people’s will. Once again Ostrogorski supplies
the clue; “political organisation” has been substi-
tuted for political education, the “ election broker ”
for the statesman. The end at which the Party aims
is not the good of society but victory at the polls.
A capacity for controlling political opinion by
appeals to prejudice and suspicion rather than to
reasoned impartiality has become the solitary
equipment of the politician. In the vast majority of
cases the candidate for election is politically as
uneducated as the masses whose good will he courts.
He seeks, not to acquire political knowledge, but to
develop a facility for arousing in his audiences, by
every art of suggestion, feelings that will ensure
their support for his candidature.
In Australia, as in England and the United States,
there is no real attempt to debate public matters in
public, no desire to allow the people to play any part
in the determination of its political destinies. The
conflicting parties decide, each for itself, the manner
in which a political issue is to be resolved; this
accomplished, they go to the country each with a
cut-and-dried “ policy ” —remarkable chiefly for its
superficiality and opportunism. Once the campaign


has begun, the “ policy ” may be neither questioned
nor discussed without provoking organised hostility.
“ Vote as you arc told,” the Birmingham motto, has
become the fundamental tenet of our freedom. The
effect is, of course, to stifle political thinking; but
this is an essential part of the politician’s aim. Every
citizen is asked to devote himself entirely to the party
issue, the question as to which of two “ programmes ”
shall hold the field. Those who, by reason of their
training, are unable to accept either policy in its
entirety, are warned to remove themselves and their
“ unpractical ” ideas from the arena of “ practical
politics.”
As the fight develops, accusations of various kinds
are hurled at the party leaders. Thus one may be
declared to be the representative of “ profiteers ”
and ” boodlers;” the other leader is promptly
described by his opponents as the promoter of
nefarious schemes for appropriating the savings of
the middle classes. If it is possible to impute mean
motives, then such imputations are freely used in
order to disguise the artificiality and intellectual
poverty of the whole campaign. Any artifice is
welcomed which will help to create an atmosphere
of heightened emotion, such that the individuals’
judgment and capacity for cool reflection shall be
reduced to a minimum. In America, the political
organiser freely confesses that his particular task is
to ’‘raise enthusiasm;” he does not hesitate to
employ various mechanical devices in the achieve-
ment of this end. Bands play everywhere and noise
abounds; marching parties of electors are formed
to parade the streets. For those who still harbour
a belief in the propriety and necessity of “ popular
control,” this “ Chinese business ” must seem at


least undignified. The more important consideration
is that it is merely part of a wide conspiracy to
deprive the people as such of all control. The orgy
of politically-manufactured and irrelevant passion
which marks an election is a measure of the debase-
ment of democracy. Our nominal political liberty
has become an actual servitude to all that is
intellectually futile and emotionally base.
“ The vote once recorded, the role of the people
is completed as well. Lord and sovereign judge,
they have appeared on the scene at the last moment
only, having come from afar, as it were from a
foreign land or from the opposite bank. No sooner
have they come out than the politicians surround
and turn the mass of electors by a series of concerted
movements, and strive to conquer their minds and
lead their wills captive. The efforts expended are
formidable, and the apparent results arc admirable;
but it is the triumph of organisation turning factory
methods to action on the public mind. In the
endeavour to mould the human material with the
minimum of friction and resistance, all efforts are
concentrated on its most malleable points; the living
mass is hammered on its most impressionable spot—
the senses. The emotions of the multitude are
appealed to; it is excited and worked up into a state
of hysteria by a set of elaborate methods. The
extreme nervous tension produced in the electors
is inevitably followed by a reaction. The artificial
passion for the public weal at once gives way to
civic weariness. Exhausted, the great mass of the
electorate falls or relapses into a state of prostration.
The ‘ politicians ’ alone are left standing and
masters of the field.'' —(Democracy and the Party
System, p. 22$ ) Under such a system, democratic


“ autonomy ” has become a byword. It is as though
we presented a slave with freedom once in every
three years—and drugged him during his free period
with opium or alcohol.
The damning facts which may thus be alleged
against political organisation as at present under-
stood, must not be supposed to be the product of
hasty or unsupported generalisation. We may
demand the evidence of a particular instance or call
for psychological analysis of the facts; the results in
either case will be found to be the same. Psychology
has advanced greatly of late years in knowledge of
neurasthenia, hysteria and kindred disorders. By
means of the psychoanalytic method, Freud and
Jung are able to show that the intellectual proceses
of the neurotic individual do not run smoothly.
His capacity for “ thinking out ” a situation in a
logical manner is constantly diminished by the
intrusion of emotional disturbances. Generally
speaking, neurasthenia may be said to show itself in
the form of “ phobias ” or unreasoned fears which
attach themselves, in an individual case, to some
definite type of object. Jung has perfected an
experimental method of testing a patient’s “ associa-
tions ” in order to discover precisely what
“ emotional complexes ” are disturbing his trains of
thought. Having instructed the patient to answer
with the first word which occurs to his mind, Jung
slowly reads a list of one hundred selected words,
pausing between each for the reply. Simultaneously
he notes the time taken by the patient to re-act to
every successive stimulus. He finds that a “ hang ”
in the re-action time or a lengthy or unusual reply
denotes the presence of an emotional condition,
roused by a stimulus word, which is retarding or


EXPLOITATION OF THE PEOPLE’S WILL. 2»
inhibiting the re-action. For psychology, the
general interest of these discoveries lies in the fact
that a means has been found of analysing conscious-
ness with a view to discovering the manner in which
actions and fears t apparently irrational, take their
rise in emotional disturbances of consciousness.
Now it is to these so-called “ unconscious ” and
emotional interruptions in thinking that the skilled
politician specially appeals. Like the advertiser of
patent medicines, he seeks to take advantage of any
“ anxiety-neuroses ” or unreasoned fears he may
discover in the community; by perpetually stimu-
lating such fears, he endeavours to attach them to
the social and industrial conditions his own quack
remedies profess to cure. In this immoral endeavour
he is ably seconded by the party press. Certain
obvious topics lie ready to his hand. Fears for the
safety of relatives in the firing-line, uncertainties
with respect to the cost of living or the permanency
of employment—matters such as these are easily
converted by the politician into quasi-neurotic
“ anxieties ” which have for subject patriotism,
loyalty, profiteering, class-consciousness, conscrip-
tion, and so on. At his public meetings the
politician does empirically what Jung does scientifi-
cally; he assembles a number of such topics and
tries them on his audience. Each topic is introduced
severally, and the speaker, in proportion to his skill
in “ handling ” audiences, notes any indication of a
“ hang ” in the re-action time or of a complex
re-action. Wherever re-actions of this kind occur,
he knows he has discovered an emotional
“ interruption ” in thinking, and he proceeds
cautiously to develop his topic with the double
object of intensifying the emotional complex and


diverting it to his purpose. In the Queensland
elections r f March, 1918, the topics which most
successfully caused emotional complication and
inhibited clear thinking were conscription, State
enterprises, State insurance, profiteering, unem-
ployment, finance and “ retrenchment.” So
successful was the campaign in arousing “ anxiety-
neuroses ” that the conclusion of the elections saw
the commencement of a “ run ” upon the State
Savings Bank—a run which lasted for more than a
week and necessitated police supervision of the
crowd. The run was quite unjustified by anything
in State finance; it was motived entirely by
unreasoned fears aroused in the electors by the
political campaign.
This wanton misuse of human material in the
name of democracy has not failed to be productive
df consequences unanticipated by the politician.
One of the most notable of such consequences ia Jic
relation of fear and nascent hatred which obtains
between suburban drawing-rooms and Trades Halls
in Australia. This showed itself in the breakdown
of the first recruiting campaign into mainly personal
abuse; across the social gulf epithets were hurled,
“ disloyalist,” “ slacker ” “ militarist,” “ conscrip-
tionist ” being the least harmful terms employed. All
this might have been avoided by a little patience and
sympathy upon the one side, tolerance upon the
other. But a community which has been stimulated
by its politicians into a condition of irritability and
emotional instability cannot be expected to exhibit
virtues such as these. Nemesis is already overtaking
our leaders in that with all the will in the world to
unite the community in the face of threatened
disaster, they cannot do so.


CHAPTER 111.
Social Growth and Social Disintegration.
The preceding chapters may seem to have over-
emphasised the evils of the present method of
political organisation. In reality it is not so; the
dangers are so great that they cannot well be
exaggerated. Between English nineteenth century
theories of democracy and the Australian twentieth
century practice of democracy there is a great gulf
fixed. Mill and his contemporaries specified two
contributing factors without which “ completely
popular government ” could not hope to justify its
claim to be the high road to liberty and the enlarge-
ment of human powers. These were the continuous
political education of the masses and enlightened
leadership. Neither of these conditions has been
fulfilled. Political organisation has come to depend
on sectional distrust and the successful exploitation
of irrational emotions; capable and far-seeing
leaders are notorious for their absence. “ The old
leadership has gone,” writes Ostrogorski, and with
it has disappeared, he claims, political eloquence and
devotion to ideals of social progress. The
mechanical aspect of political organisation has been
perfected, its living inspiration has vanished. Even
the rank and file of the party supporters arc
thoroughly disillusioned'with respect to “politics.”
In Australia the question as to whether our political
leaders are sincere is no longer considered; we ask


only whether they are effective exploiters of the
unreasoned prejudices of the mob. The mob itself,
whether suburban or industrial, has to be provided
with clearly defined hatreds and facile emotions.
Along this road we shape a political course, idly
wondering at times why national unanimity should
be so difficult to achieve. A recruiting conference is
specially summoned and proves futile. Why? For
the obvious reason that our political system does
nothing to promote unity and co-operation, but
provokes suspicion and dislike between the various
classes. Our politicians in the very act of deploring
“ our differences ” are strenuously cultivating such
differences. It is these social disjunctions which
carry them into Parliament and office.
The French crowd-psychologists, having elicited
these facts, despair of democracy. Indeed, they go
further and despair of humanity for the reason that,
as their most popular writer puts it; “ The power-
lessness of crowds to reason aright .prevents .them
. . . from being capable of discerning truth from
error, or of forming a precise judgment on any
matter.” —(The Crowd: Le Bon tr., p. 74.) This
doctrine is based on the assumption that non-rational
factors must predominate in human thinking and
especially in collective thinking. Le Eon’s funda-
mental claim is that “ unconscious phenomena play
an altogether preponderating part ... in the
operations of the intelligence. The conscious life of
the mind is of small importance in comparison with
its unconscious life. 1 ” — (Ibid., pp. 30-1.) He develops
his argument by asserting that the individuals who
compose a race all resemble one another in
respect of these “ unconscious ” mental elements.
Consequently the “ collective mind ” is determined


not by the special achievements of special individuals
but by the “ unconscious ” mental elements which
are the common possession of the race. This opens
the way for Le Don’s pessimistic, and entirely
unwarranted conclusion that the “ decisions affecting
matters of general interest come to by an assembly
of men of distinction, but specialists in different
walks of life, arc not sensibly superior to the decisions
that would be adopted by a gathering of imbeciles.” —
(Ibid., p. 32. Italics mine.—E.M.) A conclusion
such as this serves at least to show the despair which
contemporary democratic methods have inspired—
what though there is nothing in psychology to justify
it. Le Don’s hasty identification of “ irrationality ”
and “ unconsciousness ” leads him to believe not
merely that “ the crowd ” is unreasonable, but also
that it can never be anything else. Modern psycho-
logical research all goes to prove the contrary. The
experiments of Freud and Jung show that the
original capacities of individual human nature require
development. If the appropriate development be
not forthcoming, the neglected capacity is apt to
intrude itself upon consciousness in a highly
undesirable manner. To this source, indeed, Freud
and Jung trace the majority of neurasthenic
disorders. Normality as a condition of mind is not
static, but is constantly re-achieved by the right use
of reason. Normality implies rational development.
While admitting, therefore, with Le Don that
“ irrational ” factors are too commonly permitted
to interfere with “ the operations of the intelligence,”
we may also quite legitimately maintain that there
is no evidence to show that humanity is necessarily
unreasoning. The evidence, indeed, is all the other
wav, and show’s that reasoning, properly so-called,


is deliberately discouraged under the conditions of
democratic government. Our bitterest controversies
of the present are due to rival social logics, under
which special problems are quite differently stated.
And our method—allegedly democratic —of resolving
such differences is to harden them into emotional
antagonisms, instead of developing the rival concep-
tions, both defective, into mutual understanding.
“ Irrationalist ” theories of political and social
organisation entirely neglect the progressive
rationalisation which marks the growth of civilised
society. Present-day humanity, in spite of party
politics, is far more widely capable of reasoned
processes of thought than preceding generations.
No one in these days would expect a handful of
strontium salt thrown upon a fire and a muttered
incantation to prove an efficacious treatment of
typhoid fever. It is true that so-called “ quack ”
medicines still attract the attention of the
neurasthenic invalid. But even the man who wears
an iron “ rheumatic ring ” upon his finger justifies
his action by a facile and pseudo-scientific explana-
tion of the neutralisation of uric acid by the
absorption of iron salts. In other words, though
his action is foolish, his explanation pretends to be
logical.
This tendency characterises also current social
and political theories. Nearly all such theories are
over-abstract and biassed, very many are foolish,
but one and all lay claim to logical justification.
The general question as to the source and signifi-
cance of these various social logics is unduly
neglected by political writers. For the politician the
easiest method of resolving these contradictory
beliefs is to summon emotional stress to his aid—


and count heads. But the actual irrationality of
political methods does not warrant the conclusion
that the rival logics which perforce submit themselves
to such decision are equally irrational. It is not only
Le Bon who proceeds on this assumption. Graham
Wallas, for instance, suggests that the “instan-
taneous howl of indignation ’’ which followed the
presentation of a Chinaman on a lantern screen
before a working-class audience during the English
elections of 1906, was due to “ an immediate hatred
of the Mongolian racial type ” which was
“transferred to the Conservative Party.” —(Human
Nature in Politics, />. 108.) In other words, he
suggests that the “ hatred ” which inspired the
indignation had an “ extra-logical ” source in
consciousness, and was transferred by “ non-rational
inference ”to the Conservative Party. It is more
probable that the hatred and indignation alike
originated in a “ class-conscious ” conception of the
use made of cheap labour in South Africa by
“ capitalists.” This notion is not irrational, nor does
it take its rise in “ unconsciousnessthe Marxian
doctrine of the “ class-war ” may be inadequate to
describe the social order, but it is carefully reasoned
and so far logical enough. The official creed of
Conservatism suffers from a similar defect; it is
logically reasoned, but proceeds from insufficient
major premisses. Neither the Conservative nor the
Marxist is entitled to stigmatise the other as illogical;
the general meaning each gives the world is different.
The source and social importance of these rival
logics cannot be explained unless account be taken
of the wider consciousness which in every individual
surrounds, as it were, the dominant thought of the
moment. The effect of a pictured representation of


a Chinaman or of the assertions of a newspaper
article upon a perceiving intelligence depends not
so much on the mere data offered for attentive
consideration, but on the general meaning such
intelligence brings with it to the act of perception.
If a vine-grower and a temperance reformer, for
example, look simultaneously at a glass of wine, they
see it very differently. The actual object, considered
as so much colour and form, is approximately the
same for both; yet one views it as an ordinary
commodity of trade, the other as a thing of horror.
Similarly the attitude of a“ patriotic ” citizen and of
a “ class-conscious ” worker towards conscription
is very different. To the one conscription is a
necessary means of defending civilisation; to the
other it is an assault upon the very citadel of
civilisation itself. The determining factor in each
case is not so much the object itself as the kind of
“ setting ” in which it is seen. Every individual
member of society gives some kind of total meaning
to his world, a total meaning which reflects his past
experiences, his life and character; and this total
meaning goes far to determine the meaning of every
lesser object for him—his attitude to any problem
which may present itself for consideration.
This is a fact of primary importance for social
science. The individual’s political beliefs are not
actually made by the political party to which he
-o ninallv belongs. The party undertakes to express
his views for him, and, in so doing, may give a new
direction to his thoughts; but the actual source of
his ideas and the standard by which such beliefs arc
judged lies beyond politics and political associations.
The general meaning an individual gives his world,
(he meaning which gives each lesser object its


Social growth and disintegration, a?
significance, determines also his choice of a political
party. This meaning is the product of purely social
as of economic causes; but, for the most part, the
individual acquires it in his experience of some
profession or trade. The way in which each of us
sees the world is determined in the main by the
occupational group which claims us as a member.
Educated or uneducated, logical or unreasoning, we
are all creatures of an occupation; it is the work we
do for the community that determines the angle
from which we see society and the world.
Viewed from the standpoint of social science,
society is composed of individuals organised in
occupational groups, each group fulfilling some
function for the society. Taking this fact into
account, psychology—the science of human nature
and human consciousness—is able t 6 make at least
one general assertion as to the form a given society
must take if it is to persist as a society. It must be
possible for the individual to feel, as he works, that
his work is socially necessary; he must be able to see
beyond his group to the society. Failure in this
respect will make disintegration inevitable. Social
unity must be a conscious unity, known and
recognised by every group and individual; the
alternative is disruption. The last century has seen
immense social expansion, accompanied, especially
in English-speaking countries, by an increasing
allegiance to democratic forms of government. The
question we have to ask is whether democracy has
enabled a society of enlarged extent and expanded
powers to preserve its integral unity. With the
development of society, has its power of internal
cohesion correspondingly increased? In effect this
question asks if it is possible for the individual to


feel, under the conditions imposed by the present
social order, that his daily task aids the fulfilment Of
a social function—it asks if it is possible for him to
see beyond his group to the society.
Stated thus, the question serves to make clear the
effect which “ democratic ” methods of government
have had upon social growth. A few favoured
professions, medicine and the law, have managed to
retain some vestiges of a sense of social function.
Even in these cases, however, recent years have
shown that “ political neurasthenia ” and mammon-
worship have exercised their disintegrating influence
on the group. And if the question be applied to the
whole field of social effort, the answer cannot be
other than that in modern society the sense of social
function in respect of work done is conspicuously
absent. Party organisation, especially in Australia,
has followed its inevitable line of development, and
from being an opposition between merely political
opinions has become an opposition between
economic interests. One “ class ” struggles to obtain
absolute control of another “ class,” and Aristotle’s
description of democracy as a degraded form of
polity is in a fair way to be realised. The conception
of a community as consisting of castes or classes
whose interests are naturally opposed is scientifically
false and politically dangerous. In a democratically
governed community it can lead only to anarchy and
disintegration.
The present social order is largely a result of the
industrial expansion of the nineteenth century.
The beginning of the nineteenth century resembled
the present era in that it was a period of rapid and
somewhat disorderly growth. In order that the
civilised world might grow to larger powers—it is


SOCIAL GROWTH AND DISINTEGRATION.
the same problem which faces us to-day—previous
industrial systems had to be superseded. The
process of supersession was characterised by an
extreme industrial chaos, a chaos that was regarded
as legitimate and right by the social and economic
theories of the time. The practical need of delivering
industries from the short-sighted and futile control
of the politician, as exemplified in eighteenth
century France (vide Political Economy: J. S. Mill ,
Ashley ed., p. 950), convinced the leaders of
commerce of the evil effects and general impossibility
of State control. A growing belief in the existence
of “ natural laws ” of an economic variety seemed
to justify a doubt as to the value of any attempt at
industrial self-organisation. Competition and the
survival of the fittest, therefore, became the chief
article of the ruling economic creed: the politician
was warned to refrain from interfering with trade
and commerce. The twentieth century has seen the
termination of this competitive disorder. From the
chaos have arisen the twin forces of Capitalism and
Industrialism armed at all points. And the question
of the relation of these to the social structure and
to the State becomes imperative. What is the
attitude of Capitalism and of Industrialism to
society? Do these great movements help the
individual to see the society beyond his group-
occupation, or is their vision limited by a wrong
conception of the group-interest?
The “Industrialist” movement still bears upon it
the marks of the industrial disorder in which it took
its rise. In a recently published book (The Town
Labourer: 1760-1832), J. L. and Barbara Hammond
show that early in the nineteenth century boys and
girls from the age of five upwards were employed in


mines, working twelve hours at a time. The
conditions of their employment were unspeakably
bad, “ chained, belted, harnessed like dogs in a
go-cart; black, saturated with wet, more than half-
naked, crawling upon their hands and feet and
dragging their heavy loads behind them.” Nor was
this all; the new industrial system “ made a money
wage earned by women and children, as well as men,
the basis of the workman’s economic life.” In other
words, the employment of unfortunate children,
under conditions such as these, was made a reason
for paying their fathers less. “In respect of its
enduring consequences, this was the most important
fact about the new civilisation.”
These children, when they grew to man’s, estate,
were the workers of the next generation; as such
they were the persons responsible for the formation
of the social tradition of the present working class.
What can they have thought of the society that used
their years of childhood thus? These are the facts
which have converted practically all the technical
and manual workers of our civilisation into
Marxian Socialists. The average worker of the
present sees industries not as social functions but
as the scene of a “ class-war ” between the employing
and the working classes. He believes, and not
without historic justification, that “ capitalistic ”
society is altogether careless of his bodily and his
mental welfare.
The position of the nineteenth century employer
was, at least in some respects, almost as unfortunate
as that of his employees. It was not the average
master of those days who lived in luxury while his
workers went in rags. Competition—unrestricted
and unscrupulous—characterised the industrial field.


The prevailing passion was for cheapness, irrespec-
tive of cost. Scarcities alternated with gluts and
bankruptcies were frequent. The employer was
forced by the conditions of trading to consider his
own interests or to “go under/’ Ile had to have
absolute control of his business in order to be able
to adjust it to meet the market fluctuations that
constantly occurred. Contemporary economic
theory justified the belief that labour need only be
taken account of as “ cost of production.” In
addition to all this, the advent of the joint-stock
company and the shareholder served still further to
increase the irresponsibility of proprietorship and
management. And the conception of industry as
merely a profit-making mechanism became the
dominant feature of the employer’s class-tradition.
In this century conditions of trading for the
masters, as for the men, have greatly improved.
Competition is more restricted and less chaotic, the
organisation of business upon a large scale is more
common. But the evil legacy remains. In the
employers’ consciousness of the present the social
responsibility of owners and managers is greatly
obscured; the workman is still conceived as a mere
item in the cost of production, rather than as a
citizen fulfilling a social function. Until there is a
radical alteration in respect of these ruling ideas,
“ social unrest ” may be expected to continue. The
workman is put on a level with the machine he
operates. No increase in wages or improvement in
working conditions can atone for the loss of real
autonomy and of all sense of social function. Viviani
meant this when, as Prime Minister of France, he
said that under the conditions of modern democracy


man is half god and half beast, politically free,
economically bound in servitude.
So far, this analysis of the social structure might
be applied to almost any modern industrial com-
munity. The situation it discloses would seem
sufficiently serious, but in Australia worse follows.
The social function of the more important occupa-
tions having been obscured, an attempt has been
made to solve the resulting problem by political
means. For this complication, the party system
and the politicians’ ignorance of the true function of
the State must be held responsible. The process is
more complete in Australia than in other countries;
industrial grievances have been generalised into a
political party issue. Society is described as the
scene of a struggle between a group of masters and
a group of men—an analysis which totally disregards
the fundamental facts of human nature and social
organisation. The social fabric is rent asunder right
across the majority of the larger occupational
groups, and every industrial function tends to lose
sight of its social end and justification. The
misfortune of this generalisation of the industrial
problem into a party issue can hardly be exag-
gerated. State control, in the form of industrial
arbitration, tends to stereotype and make permanent
the social fissure between the employing class and
the majority of those employed. Political
organisation tends to widen the breach and to make
differences irreconcilable. In former times the
party-system implied a mere opposition of political
opinions, and democratic methods of government
had much to recommend them. But now that the
party-system has come to imply an opposition
between economic interests, good government by


either side is unlikely, if not impossible. And the
advent of such a condition of affairs means that an
attempt is being made to provide a political solution
for social problems which are not, properly
speaking, amenable to such .treatment. ' This is the
situation in Australia; the democracies-of Britain and
America would seem to be developing speedily in the
same direction. The result in Australia is that
so-called political thinking is, mainly negative in
character; one party is opposed to socialism, the other
to “ capitalism.” Each party endeavours to make use
of all the devices of political; organisation to secure
strong support. The fact that economic problems
require economic solutions is disregarded; the
political and economic activities of society are
hopelessly confused. To discuss economic problems
in Australia is practically impossible. Every
economic difficulty is immediately generalised as a
political issue; the public takes sides, and thereafter
public discussion implies emphasis of one aspect and
suppression of other, equally vital, aspects of the
problem. This serves only to divert attention from
real and urgent issues, which often are not even
placed before the public. Especially the public is not
warned that all this “ political ” organisation and
turmoil is not bringing the solution of industrial
problems any nearer, but is making it more remote.
The politician does not attend to the real difficulty;
he endeavours rather to create and accentuate public
feeling upon the issue. And he is succeeding all too
well; the recent growth of interest in political
matters in Australia is by no means a sign of social
health. The method employed implies increased
pressure and diminished mutual understanding. In
the end this must mean, literally and actually, class-


war, as certainly as the Prussian “ preparations ”
meant war for Europe. Revolution or civil war is
the only logical outcome of the present irrecon-
cilable attitude of Australian political parties. The
methods of “ democracy,” far from providing a
means of solving the industrial problem, have proved
entirely inadequate to the task. Political organisa-
tion has been mistaken for political education; the
party-system has accentuated and added to our
industrial difficulties. Democracy has done nothing
to help society to unanimity, nothing to aid the
individual to a sense of social function. Under its
tutelage, social development has achieved a condition
of perilous instability, a condition which democracy
as such can apparently do little or nothing to cure.


CHAPTER IV.
Regulation as a Substitute for Freedom.
The effect of democratic individualism upon
industry has been no less profound than its effect
upon politics. Laisscr fairc taught the necessity of
leaving industries to work out their own salvation,
independently of political and of economic (i.e.,
monopoly) control. Unfortunately, the evolutionary
conception of the survival of the fittest proved to
have little relevance to the sphere of commerce; it
was not always the fittest, socially speaking, who
tended to survive. The trader who adulterated his
goods, the ruthless oppressor of the working class—
these often succeeded under a competitive regime
when more reputable traders failed. In this matter,
indeed, the laisser fairc theorists seem to have fallen
into their own net. They were quite clear on the
point that industries are better without political
interference; but they seem to have concluded that
the only alternative to a merely political organisa-
tion of industries is no organisation at all. This was
a serious defect in their exposition of the economic
structure of society. Their belief that society is a
mere collection of individuals led these economists
to demand, not a distinctively industrial organisation
of society as a counterpart of the political, but a
chaotic condition of internecine competition between
traders for the trade available and between wage-
earners for employment. This belief was widely
adopted, and led to a condition of industrial anarchy
in the business world which was itself a criticism of


the theory. Even in the nineteenth century,
however, this state of affairs began to remedy itself.
Associations of masters, with the avowed object of
maintaining prices at a level which covered the
expenses of production, heralded the advent of
monopoly-trading and the Trust. Associations of
employees in trade unions foreshadowed the advent
of “ the strike ” and methods of “ economic bar-
gaining” designed to keep wages above the level
of mere subsistence. Had the commercial world
been left to itself, it is conceivable that it might
possibly have been brought by these means to take
a saner and more humane view of the situation. But
about the year 1880 socialist and humanitarian
thought began to influence the public conscience - f the
consumer suddenly awoke to the fact that the age of
undue cheapness had passed, rumours of “ trusts ”
and “ corners ” added to the general uneasiness—
and the politician intruded himself upon industrial
affairs.
Karl Marx’s analysis of the social ills of . the
mid-nineteenth century had convinced his follpwers
of the perils of industrial anarchy and.of the need
for a national organisation of industries. Unfortu-
nately, Marx’s analysis of social structure added
nothing to that of laisser faire; he simply .re-stated
the position from the point of view of the working
class, and strongly emphasised. the need for
humanitarian interference. Consequently, in
declaring, their object to be “ the nationalisation of
the means of production, distribution and exchange,”
socialist writers fell into the trap unwittingly
prepared for them by their laisser faire predecessors.
As economists, the exponents of laisser faire had
seen no alternative between the political organisation


of industries and a competitive regime. Their
democratic belief that governmental control hinders
industrial growth led them to declare unhesitatingly
for competition. The socialists, on the other hand,
chose the former alternative, without considering
the matter further. As a result, socialism, equally
wilfi individualism, has failed to take account of the
fact • that civilisation • implies an historic social
structure. The political and economic functions of
the community are hopelessly confused; the question
of their distinction is not even raised. For the
•socialist “ the nationalisation of industries ” solves
every economic problem—which, plainly stated,
means that the only remedy for industrial chaos is to
place the politician in charge. On this view
national, or social, control means political control,
and no more. Socialism, in effect, asks society to
return to that evil regime from which laisser faire,
with all its faults, delivered civilisation.
The advent of syndicalist and guild-socialist
theories probably means that the working class has
ceased to believe in the gospel of “ political ”
salvation. In spite of this change of opinion,
socialism has, nevertheless, left its mark upon the
social structure. Socialistic ideas have provided a
justification .for political methods of dealing with
industrial.diflfictdties, and most notably for industrial
arbitration. In Australia high hopes, have centred
round “ industrial courts;'’ the device is employed
in Australia, indeed, to an extent far greater than in
any other country. So far as arbitration encourages
the mutual discussion of difficulties by masters and
men, the effect is excellent. Every social writer from
Bagehot to Tarde has recognised the importance of
rational discussion as a factor in social progress.


But the notion of an Arbitration Court goes far
beyond this. The court comes upon the scene
arrayed in all the panoply and armed with all the
majesty of law and judgment. Its primary assump-
tion is that the interests of masters and men cannot
be made identical, that the intervention of an
intermediary is necessary in the general interest.
This assumption serves in practice to stereotype the
breach and to multiply the causes of dispute;
arbitration courts have the effect of recognising and
legalising social disintegration.
But this is not the only defect of arbitration. The
presiding judge is set the hopeless task of producing
by regulation that which can only be spontaneous —
growth. The multiplication of restrictions does not
aid an industrial function to develop new powers; it
serves only to hinder it. An arbitration court is a
subtle form of State control; its decisions are
inevitably moral rather than technically skilled, from
a strictly industrial point of view. The State
possesses, and rightly, a power of social veto, power
to forbid; but this power does not imply any capacity
for initiative or leadership. An industrial court is
limited by its nature to the restraint of unruly
growth, the prohibition of undesirable development.
Any attempt to extend the sphere of its operations
beyond this point is apt to cramp industrial activity
and to exacerbate class-hostility. If the daily
routine of an industry is controlled, not by
agreements between manager and workers, which
change almost automatically with changing con-
ditions, but by increasingly complex regulations
imposed from without, then the task of devising
satisfactory methods of collaboration becomes daily
more difficult of achievement. Its official recognition


of the “ class- war ” and its endeavour to promote
industrial growth by a mass of regulations combine
to make industrial arbitration definitely anti-social
in character. The real problem is how to set eacii
industrial function free to do its best for society.
Certain present defects, due to ignorance of the real
nature of the social structure, are making it difficult
for the citizen to see the society beyond the group
occupation which is his daily work. Arbitration
does much to perpetuate these ills and nothing to
remove them.
The defects of industrial arbitration characterise
also, though in a manner not so immediately obvious,
the “ method of collective bargaining ” and the
“ method of legal enactment.” (lndustrial
Democracy: S. and B. Webb.) So far as these
methods are permanently incorporated in the social
structure, so far the “ class-war ” is perpetuated and
industries lose sight of their social character and
function. Even Karl Marx recognised the
impermanence of the class-war. His teachings all
imply the necessity of a social synthesis in which the
contradiction will be reconciled or, if the contradic-
tion persists, social revolution. Class-hostility
means decadence, and methods of dealing with
“ industrial unrest ” which admit and seek to
perpetuate the fact of class-hostility are no more
than steps downward on the easy path to destruction.
The office of rules and regulations is to express a
static relation; prohibitions can do nothing to bring
about a condition of whole-hearted and spontaneous
co-operation. Collaboration in the complex
purposes of civilisation is the mark of social health;
any ideal which aims at less than this is dangerous.
Civilisation has passed beyond nineteenth century


individualism, to twentieth century class rivalry. Its
capacity to survive depends upon its capacity to
achieve"a-social.condition that will subsume castes
and' classes under a community of interest and
purpose. To achieve this, artificial restrictions must
b : e eliminated and “ common rules ” revoked—
except where common rules undoubtedly express the
social mind. Human.nature may be trusted to work
out a gradual solution once the attempt to find
political nostrums and ad hoc remedies is abandoned.
At present, however, it is difficult either for
managers or for workers tb look squarely at
technical trade problems. Managers have to consult
“ two hundred typewritten pages ” of an industrial
court' award before introducing innovations in a
factory. However necessary this may seem to be as
a preventive of industrial abuses, the fact remains
that it is an opportunist remedy and hampers
commercial growth. The proprietor of a bacon
factory in Brisbane asked his night-watchman to
turn off a brine-tap at two o’clock in the morning;
the union secretary informed him the next day that
this act constituted the watchman a skilled worker
under the award and necessitated a changed rate of
wages. Instances such as this show how little clastic
award regulations are; the incident is distinctly
reminiscent of the condition of affairs in eighteenth
century France. With regard to its main purpose,
moreover, this method entirely fails; proprietors and
managers tend to become not more humane but less
so. This, not merely because they resent “inter-
ference,’’ but also because the court deprives them
of their social responsibility for the way in which
they treat their employees. The court takes from
the employer the right to make humane decisions.


Trade unions .have been affected by this passion
for regulation in a way entirely similar. Less and
less do matters of technical interest or problems
implying technical skill come up for discussion at
union meetings. The “ log ”of wages and working
conditions is critically considered and constantly-
revised. Both court-work and interpretation of
awards are required of the union secretary, who
develops in consequence a species of legal skill. In
recent years the attempt of the “ industrialists ” to
capture the Labour political executives has caused
the unions.to turntheir attention to political, matters.
All these things tend to magnify the importance of
“class-consciousness” and the Movement,” and
to obscure the social function of the industry of
which the trade union is part. A prominent Labour
politician, himself formerly an active union secretary
and organiser, declared recently that in all his
experience “ class-consciousness ” was inconsistent
with skill in trade. He added that whenever a skilled
artisan is roused to keen interest in the Labour
movement his skill deteriorates and his interest in
his skill in proportion as his hatred of “ capitalist ”
oppression mounts higher. Union leadership, it
may at least be said, is.no longer in the. hands of the
most highly skilled trade representatives; facile
eloquence and a partisan hostility to all employers
have become the appropriate qualifications. The
misfortune of this condition of affairs is undeniable;
but it must not be assumed that the trade unions
themselves are primarily to blame. Democracy,
having failed to base itself upon the actual historic
structure of civilised society, has been forced to
substitute an artificial organisation for such


structure. And this artificial substitute for human
co-operation has brought all kinds. of ills and
abnormalities in its train.
Ideas of business organisation which are widely
current in the commercial world form an excellent
illustration of this abnormality. The social regime
which the “ practical man ” or the “ capable
manager ” would introduce, if he had his way, would
be at least as dependent upon regulation as socialism
and far more dully mechanical. All the “ systems,”
of which so much is said and written at present,
would appear to be systems which set one man free
to “ think out ” a restricted range of problems, at the
cost of depriving some hundreds of his fellows of the
right to think at all. The public is asked to believe
that its interest in life depends upon a “ right use
of leisure ” rather than work actually done for the
community—a doctrine which amounts to a sugges-
tion that the bulk of humanity should interest itself
in amusements rather than social welfare. One
consequence, but only one amongst many, of this
foolish amateur philosophising is that too many
already regard their work merely as a form of
payment for such pleasure as they are able to find in
their “ spare ” time. There are, however, conse-
quences more obviously serious of this endeavour
on the part of the “captains of industry” to
concentrate intelligence in the few and to allot tasks
of dull routine to the many. “ Strikes,” for example,
as often as not, are due rather to a desire for sonic
measure of personal autonomy than to the need of
increased wages. This is especially true in
Australia, where, even in industries in which wages
rule high, “ industrial unrest ” is nothing diminished.
]Human nature is such that work which demands


small exercise of intelligence is dull and uninterest-
ing, and no amount of “ practical common-sense ” or
“ system ” will make it otherwise. A commercial
system which . deprives the average member of
society at one stroke both of a sense of social
function in his work and of all right to intelligent
self-direction cannot be expected to prosper. The
ills which the commercial man bewails—strikes,
sabotage and the like—are very largely the result of
his own refusal to take account of the human factor
in the industrial problem. The nineteenth century,
disregarding Adam Smith’s warning that economic
processes are only incidents in a larger moral order,
conceived labour as no more than a “ cost of
production.” From that day to this our commercial
development has headed direct for social disaster.
The most perfect business mechanisms have been
elaborated, only to find that the “ intractable ”
working class refused to adopt them. “ Taylorism ”
is the latest of these achievements, and its mere
name was enough to provoke the greatest industrial
disturbance ever known in Sydney. As a system,
“ Taylorism ” effects much in the way of economy
of labour; its chief defect is that workers are not
asked to collaborate in effecting such economies; a
method is devised without their knowledge and then
imposed upon them. What wonder if workers are
suspicious of such innovations, with the industrial
history of the last century in their minds. So long
as commerce specialises in business methods which
take no account of human nature and social motives,
so long may we expect strikes and sabotage to be
the ordinary accompaniment of industry. Sabotage
is essentially a protest of the human spirit against
dull mechanism. And the emphasis which democracy


places upon political, methods tends to transform
mere sporadic acts of sabotage into an organised
conspiracy against society.. But for this sinister
feature of modern industrial life, our commercial
leaders cannot be held blameless.
The question we have to consider is whether fear
or social purpose provides the better riiotive to social
collaboration. The industrial anarchy of the' last
century, masquerading under the style of “ com-
petition,” implied a belief in fear as the only effective
spur to work and co-operation. Fear of starvation
or poverty, with all its attendant ills, was supposed
to provide an adequate motive for diligence and
self-development in the worker; fear of competitors
and of .financial ruin was thought to provide a
sufficient explanation of the employer’s impulse to
develop his business. As a result, we have had
innumerable petty business systems but no real
system. Industry has drifted into a condition of
muddled competition between a multiplicity of
producers, each of whom has tended to develop,
naturally enough,, a disposition to grasp all that
offered lest worse befell. So originated “profiteer-
ing” and the commercial exploitation of producer
and consumer. In these days, the organisation of
business upon a large scale is more common, but
the . evil tradition of a competitive struggle for
survival persists. So long as -the competitive
struggle persists, industries will not actually be
social functions. And until industries actually are
social functions, a sense of social function is not
likely to appear in the consciousness either of the
employer or the worker. Large scale businesses
in competition with each other are dangerous to
society as a monopoly is not. Fear of rivals must


always go far to determine the policy of a competitive
concern. A monopoly, upon the other hand, could
hardly fail to realise, if intelligently handled, that
social service was its chief duty. And human
experience would seem to show that intelligence
manifests itself more readily in response to the
stimulus of social purpose than of fear. It is this
fact, indeed, which distinguishes humanity as such
from the animal creation. Capacity for social vision
and the inspiration of high purpose—these are the
motives which have made our civilisation, and not
the essentially anti-social urge of fear.
What is mainly required, then, is increased
intelligence in business organisation—capacity to
see, for example, that the human factor is as
important as any other in the matter of industrial
organisation. When industry is organised upon a
scale still larger than at present, it will at once
become evident that the essence of social endeavour
is co-operation between intelligences, and not one
super-human intelligence presiding over a Human
mechanism. G. D. H. Cole, in a recent work
(Self-government in Industry: G. D. H. Cole) makes it
abundantly clear that the very foundation of society
is a will to collaborate amongst its members. This
will is unlikely to appear in a community which,
industrially speaking, is guilty of “ Prussianism ” in
the sense of allowing the apparent welfare of the
commercial system considered as a whole to tell
against the welfare of its workers. Cole pleads the
cause of human autonomy against “ capitalistic ”
mechanism, and so far he is undoubtedly right. His
practical suggestions as to the methods by which
such autonomy may be realised, however, make his
guild-socialism of doubtful value.


In the first place, Cole’s understanding of
autonomy does not take him far enough from the
confusions of democratic politics. On his view, the
sovereignty in an industry vests in the workers; the
workers should therefore, he believes, elect
governing committees, who would, in turn, appoint
foremen and managers. Cole’s assertion that the
workers in an industry, being more of a kind than
the electors of a political constituency, would choose
better representatives, may be so far admitted; it
still does not follow that they would choose really
well. The elective method would most probably
enthrone “ collective mediocrity ” within the industry
and tend to discount the higher forms of skill. In
the case of politics this effect is not altogether bad;
in the case of industry, it would be an unqualified
social disaster. Every individual member of a
community fulfils two kinds of social function within
the community; in respect of the one—his avocation
—special skill is demanded; in respect of the other
a capacity for making moral decisions. It is by
means of his professional skill that the engineer or
doctor earns a livelihood; he exercises his other
function when he sits on a jury or votes in an
election. When Bentham said that politically every-
one should count as one and no one for more than
one, he obviously was not referring to matters
requiring special skill. But although everyone
realises the transparent absurdity of deciding the
correct treatment for typhoid fever, for example, by
means of a referendum, yet “ democratic ” theories
of popular sovereignty make no distinction between
moral and technical problems. A question of public
morality is necessarily determined in a community
at a given moment by the general level of morality


the community, has achieved; and in matters of
morality every individual must be judged equally.
But a scientific question can be determined only by
the most skilled investigation and the most skilled
investigator; and in this case the opinion of one
man may outweigh that of all the other members of
the community. Cole’s suggestion of quasi-
parliamentary control in industry entirely disregards
the fact that industries resemble “ professions ” in
that they are skilled communal functions. In all
matters of social skill the widest knowledge and the
highest skill should be sovereign rather than the
opinion of “ collective mediocrity.” The exercise of
such authority should, of course, be subject to moral,
but only moral, limitations imposed by the com-
munity. Cole’s scheme does not ever, provide for
the special training of managers, accountants and
foremen. The committee which appointed a man
one year might, under pressure of popular disfavour,
remove him the next. There is nothing to show
that even a foreman would have time or opportunity
to acquire knowledge, as we all must, by failure.
To these considerations must l>c added the fact
that Cole and Oragc seriously misconceive the social
structure of industry. The special business of trades,
as of professions, is to conserve skill for the society.
Each trade specialises in a particular direction, and
each trade, therefore, is the concrete embodiment of
a particular area of the communal knowledge. Bu‘.
there is no easy argument from the mediaeval guild
to modern industry. The increase in size in the
modern business is more than a mere increase in
size; it is an increase in complexity also. A modern
industry does not conserve for the society merely a
single kind of skill, nor is it composed merely of the


members of a single profession. Any. one industry
of the present requires the active collaboration of
many professions, each of which possesses its own
special technical logic and tradition. The distinction
between management, accountancy, publicity and
trade work in, for instance, a machine-factory, is
fundamental. Organisation, accountancy and
publicity-work' require a special training to fit the
individual'to deal with a special class of problem to
an extent at least as great as-that required by
trade-work. Nor can any one of these specialised
pursuits dictate to another the methods it shall
pursue. Skilled discussion lies between manager and
manager, accountant and accountant, fitter and
fitter; and the there highly developed the business
the more specialised are the types of -skill which it
requires. A widespread social movement ‘in--, the
direction of guild monopolies could only intensify
this tendency. : The number of skilled professions is
multiplied with every development in the direction
of closer integration. Cole’s suggestion- thatthe-
workers in any industry- should control it- after, the.
fashion *of “ democratic ” politics would not only
introduce all the ills of partisan politics' into
industrial management, but would also place the
final power in the hands of the least skilled workers.
In many industries this would give the unskilled
labourer control over the craftsman properly
so-called. And, more generally, the effect would be
to determine problems requiring the highest skill by.
placing the decisions in the hands of those w'ho were
unable even to understand the problem? 'The
principles of full publicity and moral control by v ‘ the
people” are sound; but there is no good reason for
confining “sovereignty” conceived tints to the


workers in a particular industry. Moral interests are
communal interests; it was moral and humanitarian
feeling in other sections of the community than the
industrial which procured the workers’ release from
the more intolerable abuses of the nineteenth
century. It may be said for the “ capitalistic ”
system that, although managers and business
organisers generally have unduly neglected to take
account of the human factor in industrial problems,
the system has, nevertheless, tended to conserve
social skill, to protect the specialist worker against
the assaults of so-called “ democracy.” Guild
socialists cannot have failed to realise that the
opposition of the skilled craft unions to industrial
unionism is due to the reluctance of the crafts to
place themselves in the hands of the unskilled
labourer. Where there is no understanding there
can be no real control. The outstanding failure of
democracy is its failure to appreciate the social
importance of knowledge and skill.
The question for the reformer is not only “ what
the workers want,” but also what they actually are.
An individual may want to control a business and be
incapable of doing so. The only effective want is
that which is strong enough to drive a man to
acquire the requisite knowledge and capacity.
Desires which expend themselves in vapourings and
idle regrets are futile. Democracy, as we at present
know it, places too great a reliance upon political
organisation, legislation and “ systems.” Special
systems imply special individuals; in the absence of
individual knowledge and capacity, systems are
useless. Man can be saved by man alone. Human
nature as developed by society is good or base,
mentally clear-sighted or dully obscure; no amount


of mere legislation will make the base man noble or
will give the twilight thinker clear vision. If the
working class is to cease being a merely working
class, part at least of the remedy lies in its own
hands.
This criticism must not, however, be supposed to
militate against Cole’s main thesis. No social system
can be considered satisfactory which deprives the
great majority of mankind of every vestige of
autonomy. No society is civilised which exploits
the many in the interest of the few. When “ work ”
signifies intelligent collaboration in the achievement
of a social purpose, “ industrial unrest ” will cease
to be.


CHAPTER V.
Society and the State.
Study of the relation of social freedom to
democratic forms of government has involved us in
a larger question as to the relation between society
and the State. The important issue for present-day
democracies is no longer the location of sovereignty
—in monarch or people—but the meaning of
sovereignty and government. What, we may ask,
is the proper relation between the State and the
larger social development of which it is part? We
cannot do more than suggest a tentative answer to
such a question; in doing so, we have to inquire what
democracy means by government. For Austin and
the jurists sovereignty implied primarily an
authority, a power which lay behind the mandates of
law and enforced the social observances defined in
the laws. This conception of sovereignty is
obviously based upon a generalisation as to the
nature of legal compulsion. No concrete sovereign,
whether monarchical or democratic, can claim an
actual “ power to put compulsion without limit on
subjects or fellow-subjects;” this power belongs to
laws alone. Austin’s conception describes the
socially compulsive power of law, but does not trace
law to its source in the social will. It was this failure
to discuss the real source of law which enabled
jurisprudence to apply its theories of authority,
developed under the conditions of monarchy, to
democratic institutions. A well-ordered community,


whatever its form of government, must obey the law;
for Austin the sovereign is merely the logical
subject of legal predicates. Restrictions designed
originally to prevent a wilful monarch from inter-
fering wdth the administration of justice are
nowadays applied equally to the sovereign parlia-
ments of modern democracy. The question remains
as to how far a “ determinate superior,” whether
king, parliament or a numerical majority, may
impose its will upon the community.
Legal theories of sovereignty, since their chief
concern is to “ personify ” the socially compulsive
power of law, take no account of the very real
change in the conception of government which
marked the transition from monarchy to democracy.
The inspiration of democracy was a positive belief
in social autonomy, a negative belief that eighteenth
century government fettered the free impulses of
humanity. These ideas show themselves in the
writings of Rousseau, in the Kantian doctrine of a
“ kingdom of ends,” every member of which is at
once legislator and subject, and in laisser fairc
theories of non-interference by the State. Sover-
eignty was not merely transferred from the monarch
to “ the people.” In the process of transfer the
conception of government was re-stated in terms of
the individual’s right to personal autonomy—so far
as consistent with the personal autonomy of all other
members of the community. The function of " the
governor ” was no longer, therefore, that ol
“ governing ” in an absolute or arbitrary manner,
but was rather that of discovering and interpreting
the social will. The effect of this was to give society
a moral, rather than a military or intellectual unity;
so far the effect was definitely an advance. That


“ will, not force, is the basis of the State ” has always
been the principle which has determined the stability
of a given community; disregard of the social will,
under any form of government, has been the shortest
way to revolution. Hut democracy was the first
attempt, historically speaking, to place sovereignty
explicitly in the social will. The failure of democracy
is due to the fact that it has lost sight of its original
inspiration. Modern democracies bear some resem-
blance to the historic tyrannies in their misconception
of the art of government. All the objections which
mankind discovered to the “ divine right of kings ”
might be urged with equal force against the principle
of State control of social activities. “ State control ”
implies a reversion to the very condition of things
which democracy was designed to destroy; and
especially so, when our political leaders altogether
misconceive the nature of the social will.
The social will in any civilised community is
extraordinarily concrete and very complex. It finds
expression in moral institutions such as common
law, equity, marriage and the law of contracts, which
regulate human relationships by means of law and
public opinion. It finds expression, also, in the
various professions and trades, each of which
conserves some special type of skill in the interest of
the community. In no other manner can skill be
conserved; written records are valueless without the
skilled and experienced interpreter. Over the whole
field of human activity, inherited tradition supplies
the material of knowledge; the contribution of each
successive generation to this common stock is
relatively small. Civilisation, therefore, depends for
its maintenance primarily, it might be said, upon the
ability of a present generation to understand, to


apply and to extend its ancestral knowledge. This
fact is a commonplace of psychological science. Its
implication is that structure is everything to
civilisation. Man is civilised only when he functions
in a social scheme or system which endures through
successive generations and is continuously developed
towards the better expression of human capacities of
thought and will. The art of government cannot be
held to have approached perfection until it has
related itself to this age-long effort to realise ideal
conditions of living for the individual and the
society.
To the individual it often seems that his ideas are
peculiarly original, peculiarly his own. In a merely"
possessive sense, such ideas are, of course, his own;
but the briefest analysis will serve to show that they
all originate in the social and professional tradition
of the community to which he belongs. Further, any
discovery he may make possesses relevance only to
such tradition. The world abounds in ignoramuses
who have discovered how to square the circle; but
the mathematical profession very properly disregards
them. Reforms of, or additions to, knowledge are
only made by those who understand a tradition
sufficiently well to be able to perceive its errors and
shortcomings. To the ignoramus reform is always
easy—and revolutionary. Since he knows nothing,
he is bound to begin by sweeping existing know-
ledge, with a magnificent gesture, into limbo. This
is all too frequently the attitude of the democratic
politician to social problems. “ Elect me/’ he says,
“ and I will deliver you from your bonds of
servitude.” Stirred by his easy rhetoric, the
commonalty elects him—only to find, ten years


afterwards, its bonds more closely riveted than
before.
Democracy has failed in that it has made no
attempt to base government upon the social will.
Extensions of the franchise came at a period of
development—between 1832 and 1867 —when indi-
vidualism and a sensationalist psychology ran riot
over the field of political thought. The defects of
these two theories are entirely similar. Sensa-
tionalism reduces reality to terms of successive
sensations and leaves altogether out of account the
structure which even the sensory world possesses.
The political philosophy of nineteenth century
democracy regarded society as consisting of a mere
collection of individuals, and utterly neglected that
complex structure of human relationship in work
and life which constitutes the essence of civilisation.
Mere extension of the franchise—the numerical
estimate of opinion—has the inevitable effect of
discounting high standards of devotion to the cause
of social advancement and social skill. Not even
democracy could afford to leave the formulation of
popular opinion in the hands of demagogues. The
partisan organisation of opinion, therefore, became
necessary and was mistaken, as Ostrogorski shows,
for political education. Democracy, having com-
mitted itself to the belief that the social will was
structureless, was forced to bring political
associations into being in order to give form to
popular opinion. Hence, having disregarded the
actual structure of society, democracy has
endeavoured to impose an artificial “ political ”
structure upon it—an endeavour which has tended
to embitter partisan feeling and, in the ultimate, to
concentrate power in the State. Not by any stretch


of the imagination can this concentration of
authority in the State be deemed admirable. Far
from expressing a genuine social unanimity, this
authority can only be understood as a vain attempt
to counteract or conceal an actual and extensive
disintegration. Mistaken development cannot be
cured by the assumption of authority or trumpery
legal enactments. “ Government,” properly so-called,
is one aspect only of a wider social co-operation;
where there is no real co-operation, there can be no
real government.
The substitution of an artificiality—" the people ”
—for the social will is not, however, the only defect
of contemporary democratic theory and practice.
The very notion of government is obscured by a
persistent confusion which uses the term in two quite
different senses. Civilisation is a gallant experiment
in the direction of peace, an experiment which has
behind it a history of war. Jenks describes the State
in origin as “ a military institution of the simplest
type,” and traces its development of additional
functions—“ defender against attack, keeper of
internal peace, dispenser of Justice, administrator of
the affairs of the land.” —(Law and Politics in the
Middle Ages, />. 91.) Maine points out that “in the
very first place, Democracy, like Monarchy, like
Aristocracy, like any other government, must
preserve the national existence. The first necessity
of a State is that it should be durable.” —(Popular
Gen'crninent. p. 61.) Originating in the military
necessity of war and defence, the State has always
retained its right to military control. Historic
circumstance has, indeed, necessitated such retention.
But the fact that military authority in war time
differs altogether from governmental authority in


times of peace, and military organisation for war
from social organisation for peace, has been too
little considered and understood even by those
nominally expert in the art of government. The
consequences of this very general misunderstanding
are clearly evident in the present situation of affairs.
“ Pacifist ” arguments, basing themselves entirely
upon certain salient features of social organisation
for peace, endeavour vainly to prove their relevance
to a condition of war. Effects of a contrary kind are
also manifest. In Australia, the Federal Government
is the military authority; constitutional provision for
defence has enabled it to extend its powers very
considerably in the last few years. Prevalent
confusion as to the sphere and significance of
government has prevented the politicians and the
public from clearly distinguishing between war
conditions and peace conditions. There is, in
consequence, grave danger that the conclusion of
the war will by no means deter politicians from
endeavouring to apply their extended, and military,
powers to the problems of peace. Habit and the
need for united action may for a time induce the
public to consent. Democracy is in general so
vaguely conceived that specious arguments which
place the remedy of social disintegration in authori-
tative control will be exceedingly likely to obtain a
hearing. State Governments have already manifested
a tendency to imitate the arbitrary methods of the
Federal authority, without the Federal justification
of military need; this fact is not without significance.
The conception of government as applied to a
community organised for war must, therefore, be
distinguished from the conception of government in
times of peace. A democracy may organise itseif


effectively for war, but military control cannot be
“ democratic.” Military organisation calls for
special skill, just as industrial organisation does.
War is, in fact, a special craft, a craft which
necessitates —and especially in these days of large
scale warfare—an entire re-ordering of the lives of
communities. Whatever the character of a
government, monarchical or democratic, upon the
advent of war, it is bound to arrogate to itself powers
which it could not easily claim in times of peace.
Every civilised community has always tacitly recog-
nised this fact and has made provision for
re-organisation of the social structure in war time.
The Declaration of Rights in 1689, for example,
denied to the king the right of maintaining a
standing army, except with the consent of Parlia-
ment, “in times of peace.” The phrasing of the
passage expressly implies that in time of war the
military authority must be supreme; all other rights
must be subordinated to the necessity of defence.
Until the present era, the history of humanity has
been a history not so much of civilisation as of
sporadic civilisations—communities differing in
tradition and culture, conflict between which was
always possible, if not inevitable. The human
impulse to develop has tended to show itself in the
form of successive efforts to carry a national culture
into other and less favoured lands. “ Patriotism ”
has all too often contained within it the seeds of
aggression. This tendency has not been altogether
bad; Lilienfeld’s explanation of conquest by analogy
with sex-fertilisation is not so utterly absurd as it
would seem. There comes, however, a stage in
social development when the arbitrament of the
sword is less helpful than harmful. In the last


resort, problems of intellect and will can be solved
by intellect and will alone, and not by an immediate
appeal to physical force. The essential question
which the present world war is determining for
humanity is that as to the part war is to play in the
civilisation of the future. Is the social structure of
peace to be periodically subjected to the inverted
logic of war, or is it to be allowed to determine its
own problems by means of its own logic?
War is, of course, the result of a failure on the
part of peace to solve its problems logically. War
is, therefore, in the ultimate not an alternative social
structure, but a confession of insufficiency and
inadequacy in the social structure. One excellence
of democracy, in the modern sense, is that it
represents the first serious attempt of civilisation to
discover and make explicit the social logic of peace.
This is the real significance of the assertion that “ we
arc fighting for democracy.” We are not fighting
to maintain the logical excellence of political
partyism or the sovereignty of unskill; we are
contending for a principle which will enable society
to determine its problems in a rational and peaceful
manner. But although this is true in the abstract,
yet in the concrete democracy pays little heed to the
important problem of the social logic of peace. In
practice, democracy, like the socialistic theories
which influence it so profoundly, assumes that all
authority derives from the State. This assumption,
due in part to jurist conceptions of legal compulsion
and in part to the fact that the principle, si pacem vis,
para bcllitrn, is closely woven through the historic
social texture —this assumption possesses no rele-
vance to the ideal of an abiding world peace.
Increased authority in the State, a League of


Nations or States—this is the very condition of
things we are struggling to destroy. Agreements
between States, and especially if State-authority is
everywhere extended, imply a statically conceived
peace which inevitably gives way to increased mutual
hostility as growth makes the bonds of peace
irrelevant and irksome. Within the State society-
moves restlessly in its political fetters; beyond the
State other social cultures develop a desire to
proselytise. This desire may in itself be admirable,
but when the world is marked off by political
boundary fences, the missionary spirit is compelled
to ally itself with militarism. A real world peace
can only become fact when the various societies of
the world are really co-operating as one in the tasks
of civilisation.
Germany’s failure to perceive this is her funda-
mental error. In Germany the State-authority is
supreme; every individual, every social activity, is
merely a subordinate function of the State. Even
the social Democrats subscribe their names to this
tyrannical and reactionary theory. Renner, leader
of the Austrian-German Socialist party, begins a
recent book (Marxismus, Kricg. nnd Internationale:
Karl Rainer) by ridiculing the Marxist idea of an
international working class movement. He holds
that the era of industrial freedom from State inter-
ference has passed; the era of State control of
industry has begun. He believes that the political
areas of the world are destined to become economic
areas also—“ closed units internally and externally,
having not only their own character, but also their
own life, like organisms.” —(Times Lit. Supplement ,
11/4/18.) Renner concludes that the ” class-war ”
cannot, therefore, be stated generally and for ail


communities, but must be expressed by each
community according to the economic conditions
which obtain locally. In the present context
Renner’s variation of the “ class-war ” theory is
unimportant; what is important is his conception of
the trend of modern civilisation towards a society
organised in separate States. These disparate
States, differing in economic structure and tradition,
imply a potential, if not an actual condition of
warfare. For all its Socialism, Renner’s gospel of
“ Kultur ” and the means by which enlightenment
shall be spread, does not notably differ from the
doctrines of German militarism.
The future of civilisation, we have to realise, rests,
therefore, with democracy, properly so-called, rather
than with socialism. Is society to be autonomous
and free or a dull mechanism controlled by a few
intelligences? In the very heart of socialism we find
reflected the uncertainty, the antithesis between
tyranny and democracy. German socialism, in
effect if not intention,, stands for State authority and
war as a means of promoting culture; British
socialism stands for an extended social autonomy
and the State as a moral, rather than intellectual,
instrument of the community. Between these two
socialisms there yawns a gulf as wide as that which
divides British democracy from German militarism.
This war decides the future of the world. The issue
lies between democracy and imperialist autocracy.
This being so, it behoves democracy to set her
house in order. Democratic ideals have never
signified governmental administration of social and
industrial activities, but freedom from such control.
Democracy has never implied “ leagues ” between
States, but co-operation between communities in the


achievement of a common social purpose. States
are national and geographical; society is not. War
and strife will not cease until social co-operation has
become an accomplished fact, both within the various
political communities and beyond their borders.
This condition and no other is the ideal for
democracy. To turn aside after a reactionary gospel
of State-control is to worship the false gods of
Prussianism. Renner’s ideal of a society composed
of units politically and economically self-sufficient is
already “ out of date ” and irrelevant. Australia
produces wool, meat, wheat and metals, not for
herself, but for the world; the loss of her foreign
markets would be nothing short of a calamity for
Australia. This fact does not give Australians a
right to “ complete self-determination ” —an ideal
which, if wrongly applied, leads inevitably, like
Renner’s social philosophy, to a modified form of
Prussianism. The Australian Labour Party, at its
Conference in Perth, June, 1918. has declared itself
in favour of a “ foreign ” policy which, in conserving
to Australia the right of self-determination, recog-
nises the equal right of other communities to
autonomy of a like kind. This declaration, adapted
most probably from the social gospel of Bolshevik
Russia, is, of course, justified as against a policy of
imperialist aggression. If pushed to an extreme,
however, it would permit a particular community to
abandon the exercise of its social functions, and, in
any case, would tend to bring about the precise
condition of things which Renner predicts. If every
community is to determine its own destiny without
reference to the needs of other communities or of
society as a whole—and this is the world-system
implied—then the practical outcome will be a


collection of uncoordinated ciyilsations, potentially
if not actually at war with each other. For all its
seeming liberality, the ideal of sporadic self-
determination is reactionary and closely akin to
militaristic imperialism.
What, then, is the central thesis of democracy,
properly so-called? This: that growth or develop-
ment is a character of social life and not of the State.
In so far as a State or government, exceeding its
function of moral control, endeavours to direct and
order social activities, it is a hindrance to social
development. Even in a nominal democracy, undue
concentration of social power in the political leader-
ship means tyranny and retrogression. Truly
democratic theory must maintain, first, the supremacy
of the social will; and, second, must oppose itself,
and, strongly, to all forms of governmental
oppression. This thesis does not imply that
democracies of the future will abandon the existing
mechanism of government and administration.
Clearer understanding of the meaning of government
will enable the rulers of the State to distinguish
between the task of moral criticism, which is their
chief duty, and that of social and industrial direction,
for which they are radically unfitted. The proper
function of the democratic “ governor ” is to record
the achievements of society in the form of law, to
criticise existing social relationships and to forbid
any contravention of established morality. The
more serious ills which democracy suffers are due to
attempts on the part of political leaders, to control
and direct social and industrial undertakings. This
attempt is as pernicious as militarism or the worse
forms of capitalism; progress requires not merely the
thinking of a few but also the collaboration in


thought of many minds. Even in the case of those
whose thinking is ineffective, the individual stand-
point is often of the highest social value. If
progress is not humane, it is Exponents of
democracy have too often been blind to this
important truth. The politician’s endeavour to
‘‘ govern ” where he can neither control nor under-
stand has imparted into politics problems wh'di
cannot be solved by political methods, has thereby
embittered partisan class-feeling and has blinded
democracy to the fact that a nominal political
freedom may serve to conceal a developing condition
of economic servitude.
Melbourne:
Printed hy A. H. MASSINA * C<>.
