

¥'
f '
i
i
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
Demobilization
Procedure in Australia
One copy of this pamphlet is to be
handed to each officer, n.c.0., and
man on embarkation for , Australia
By Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne


NOTICE.
This booklet is issued for the
information of all concerned by
direction of the Adjutant-General,
Head-Quarters, Australian Military
Forces.
P. M. McFARLANE,
Lieut.-Colonel,
Director of Demobilization.
Head-Quarters,
Victoria Barracks, Melbourne,
25th February, 1919.
1| #
4
i




INTRODTJCTORY NOTES.
1. This booklet is issued to enable each returning
soldier to clearly understand the routine and formalities
necessary in the process of changing him from a soldier
to a civilian. The procedure outlined has for its object
expedition and smoothness in demobilization. It, there-
fore, behoves every officer, N.C.0., and man to read and
Study carefully this booklet, one copy of which will be
handed to him on embarkation for Australia.
2. Soldiers who return to Australia in the future will
be classed as follows:
(a) Returned for medical unfitness, temporary or
permanent, the result of active service.
(h) Returned for discharge on account of distress-
ful family or business reasons.
(c) Returned on account of disease contracted
through their own default.
( d ) Returned for disciplinary reasons.
(e) Returned for discharge under demobilization
arrangements, owing to cessation of hostili-
ties.
3. The procedure for dealing with classes (a), (h),
(c), and (d) above is simple and adequate, and calls
for no special explanation in this booklet, especially
as the members of these classes will return in decreasing
numbers as time passes. While many of the arrange-
ments herein outlined will be applicable to members of
classes (a), (b), (c), and ( d ), this booklet is intended
primarily for the information of soldiers of class (c),
C." 913.


4. It must be clearly understood that the procedure
of demobilization in Australia, as outlined in these
pages, may be varied in accordance with unforeseen
local conditions, at any time without notice.
OBJECTS OF DEMOBILIZATION SCHEME IN
AUSTRALIA.
1. The process of demobilization commences from the
time the soldier leaves his From that date until
he disembarks in Australia the process is directed
the Demobilization Staff abroad. The completion of
demobilization in Australia takes place under the direct
control of the Department of Defence.
2. It is the object of the Department of Defence to
complete the demobilization of all troops after disem-
barkation as rapidly as possible.
3. The reasons for this are many, but the chief-one
is that the soldier may be set at liberty to resume his
civil occupation with the least delay the least pos-
sible interference by the Military Authorities,
4. While the Defence Department is anxious to settle
its accounts with all troops as soon as possible, yet it is
realized that it has a great duty to fulfil towards men
who have been fighting abroad. Therefore, the Com-
monwealth Government has been very generous in the
question of leave and pay before discharge. This is to
give men, while still under the protection of Army pay,
an opportunity to resume their pre-war independence
of thought and action which they have been inevitably
more or less deprived while under Army discipline.


5. .To attain this end the scheme of demobilization in
Australia is arranged so that after the day of disem-
barkation the soldier is, in the ordinary course of events,
absolutely free from military control. His pay and
papers will be fonvarded to his home town according
to his desires. Unless specially instructed to do so, he
will not be required to report at District Head-Quarters,
and it he desires it his discharge will he forwarded to
him, post-dated, so that he may resume his civil occupa-
tion even so soon as the day after disembarkation,
6. At the same time, all ranks on leave before dis-
charge remain soldiers, and can wear uniform if they
so desire. Th e standard of conduct demanded of a
member of the Australian Imperial Forces is well
known, and it is expected that while on leave in Aus-
tralia all ranks will behave in as worthy a manner as
they have behaved abroad. The penalties the Defence
Act imposes for misconduct in the Army still apply in
the case of soldiers on leave before discharge. Permis-
sion is granted from the office of the Staff Officer for
Invalids and Returned Soldiers for personnel to wear
civilian clothes immediately leave is granted.
PORTS OF DISEMBARKATION.
1. Final ports in all cases will be determined by the
Naval Authorities, having regard to the route, destina-
tion of the troops, and the nature and destination of
the cargo carried.
2. Melbourne, subject to the above limitations, will
be the main port for Queensland, New South Wales,


Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania, whilst Fre-
mantle will he the port for Western Australia.
3. If troops are disembarked in a State other than
their States of enlistment, they will be railed, on the
day of disembarkation if possible, to the State of
enlistment.
4. Troop traffic between Western Australia and other
States will be confined to the sea.
5. Troops for Tasmania will disembark at Melbourne,
and be transhipped as soon as possible to Tasmania.
6. Quarantine Regulations, if in force, may materi-
ally affect the above arrangements.
TRANSFER TO DISTRICTS OTHER THAN
DISTRICT OF ENLISTMENT.
1. Approval has been given for soldiers who enlisted
in one Military District, but with home or relatives in
another District, to be disembarked and finalized in
their home or relatives’ district if they so desire, on
the understanding that the Department of Defence is
not liable for the expense of transfer to the District of
enlistment later.
2. Personnel desiring to be so disembarked and
finalized are required to make application to the O.C.
Troops on the transport before the first payment at sea
is made.


PROCEDURE ON DISEMBARKATION.
Personnel —
(a) On disembarkation, troops for other districts
will be immediately entrained for tbeir Dis-
tricts of enlistment, except in the case of Tas-
manians, who will be disembarked at Mel-
bourne and transhipped by the first boat to
Tasmania.
( h ) On disembarkation or arrival at district of
enlistment, troops will proceed to the Final-
ization Depot, where they will be immedi-
ately medically examined and finalized.
( c ) Where it is not possible to finalize all men on
the one day, men whose homes are in the
country will be finalized first, and the town
men will be instructed to report the follow-
ing day for finalization.
Every effort, however, will be made to finalize
all men on the day of disembarkation.
(d) Though a natural anxiety to meet friends and
relatives immediately on arrival at the State
of finalization will make itself felt, men are
urged to be patient until the routine and
formalities have been gone through, as
thereby vexatious delays in the future will
be saved. Except in special cases, they will
not be interfered with again by the Military
Authorities.
Kit —
(a) Kits will be left on the ship, and will be col-
lected by specially trained baggage parties
and taken ~to the Military District Kit


Stores, where they will undergo inspection
by 5.0.1. and E.S. Staff and Customs
officials.
( b ) Kit and personal baggage will be available
within 48 hours after disembarkation, and,
if required, will be expressed to any address
given on a written order.
3. Passes and Warrants —
(a) Leave passes and railway warrants will be
issued on completion of finalization.
( h ) It is every man’s duty to see that he obtains
his leave pass and warrants, &c., before leav-
ing the Finalization Depot.
FINALIZATION.
This process merely consists of a medical examina-
tion, conducted in order to see whether the soldier is
suffering from any disabilities contracted while on
active service, and to record his medical state.
LEAVE AND PRIVILEGES.
1. (a) All ranks of the A.I.F. will be granted 7-|
days’ leave for every period of six months’ service
abroad, reckoned from the date of embarkation in Aus-
tralia to the date of disembarkation in Australia —com-
pleted half-yearly periods only to be reckoned for such
leave, with the exception, however, that if the final
period be over four months it will count in the assess-
ment of leave as a six months’ period.


( b ) Sustenance allowance of 3s. for each day of such
furlough will be granted to all personnel with over one
year’s service abroad. Officers’ field allowance will
cease as from date of disembarkation.
( c ) Hot less than 14 days’ leave without sustenance
allowance is to be granted to personnel who have em-
barked from Australia for service abroad.
( d ) 1914 personnel, who have taken their long-ser-
vice furlough abroad, will be granted 14 days’ leave
without sustenance allowance on their return to Aus-
tralia.
2. (a) In all cases where the leave to which a mem-
ber is entitled under the above scale includes a half-
day, the half-day will be counted as a whole one.
( [b ) In cases where troops have returned to Australia
and re-embarked for active service the second time, the
total amount of service out of Australia is to be used in
calculating the amount of furlough to which they are
entitled under Clause 1 (a) above.
3. Members will be discharged on the last day of the
leave referred to above, and pay will be allowed up to
and including that date. In the case of Anzacs —1914
men—who returned on furlough under the recent ap-
proval, leave and sustenance allowance for 60 days will
be granted in all cases irrespective of whether such
members completed four years’ .service abroad or not.
In all other cases the scale will be adhered to.
4. Leave according to the scale above will, except in
the case of invalids who are admitted to hospital for
treatment, commence on the day following the date
of arrival in district of finalization. In the event of


a soldier not being examined by the Medical Board on
date of arrival, an extra day will be added to his leave.
In the case of men requiring medical treatment, leave
will commence on the day after the date of the recom-
mendation of the Medical Board for discharge.
5. If a member of the A.I.F. becomes ill while on
leave, he should, if possible, report to the nearest Mili-
tary Hospital, or, if in the country, at the nearest
public hospital, reporting the fact, in writing, to the
5.0.1. and R.S.
If unable to report to a hospital, he should report, in
writing, to the 5.0.1. and R.S., and obtain and forward
to this officer a certificate from the doctor attending
him.
6. The uniform, except greatcoat, may be retained
after discharge, but uniform must not be worn except
on special occasions sanctioned by the District Com-
mandant or the Minister for Defence. Ihe greatcoat,
also, may be retained if the soldier joins the Australian
Army Reserve.
7. The official “ Returned Soldiers 5 ” Badge is obtain-
able from the Staff Officer for Invalids and Returned
Soldiers.
Soldiers discharged for misconduct, or who arc
“ medically unfit 55 due to their own default, are not
eligible for the badge or for leave privileges.
8. All soldiers on being granted leave may receive a
railway warrant entitling them to a free ticket to their
place of enlistment.
0. The Staff Officer for Invalids and Returned
Soldiers acts in the capacity of Officer Commanding all


returned soldiers from their arrival in the District until
their discharge. Inquiries should be addressed to him
in his official capacity.
10.— War Medals. —The number and nature of the
■vvar medals to be issued to soldiers who have served
overseas in any theatre of war have not yet been deter-
mined. When peace is declared, the question will be
determined by the Imperial Government, and on re-
ceipt of medal rolls from Australia the medals will be
struck, names engraved thereon, and the medals sent to
Australia for issue. It will be understood that this
procedure wdll take a very long time, and it is antici-
pated that medals will not be available for a consider-
able period after peace is declared.
When ready, they will be either presented or sent to
all concerned by registered post. It is, therefore, essen-
tial that soldiers should leave their correct address with
the 5.0.1. and Tv.S. on discharge, and notify District
Head-Quarters of any changes in their address.
PAY ARRANGEMENTS.
VOYAGE MATTERS.
Soldiers to be paid off in Districts of Enlistment,
1. (a) Soldiers will be paid off in their District of
enlistment unless special application is made for pay-
ment elsewhere. Should you desire to disembark and be


paid off in another District than that in which you en-
listed, you should make application to the Officer Com-
manding Troops before the fir‘st 'payment is made at sea.
(h ) It must he understood that, in special cases,
where a soldier applies to he paid off in a district other
than that in which he enlisted, some delay will probably
ensue before settlement is made, owing to details of his
pay account having to be obtained from the district of
enlistment.
Soldiers to fill in Orders for Final Payment.
2. Payment of amounts due, other than periodical
payments to invalids in hospital, will be made through
the Commonwealth Bank to the soldier’s credit at his
home town. An order supplied by the Paymaster on
the transport must be completed in duplicate, stating
the address and the name of the place at which the
soldier desires his money made available. Three
specimen signatures will also be furnished by
the soldier. If an account in any other, bank
or Savings Bank in the Commonwealth already
exists, full particulars thereof should be given by the
soldier, and the money will be credited to this account.
If no account exists, an account will be opened for him
in the Commonwealth Savings Bank, and the money
will be made available at his home town. Should there
be special reasons for desiring payment to be made at
a place other than the home town, the soldier should,
before filling in the order referred to above, make ap-
plication to the Commanding Officer of the Troops,
who, if the circumstances justify it, will approve of pay-
ment being made to his credit as desired.


Special Disembarkation Payment.
3. Immediately prior to disembarkation in Australia
tbe following advances will be paid:—
To men who embarked prior to 1917, and
are not overdrawn in their pay-books .. £lO
To men who embarked in 1917 or later, or
who embarked prior to 1917 and are oyei - -
drawn in their pay-books .. .. £5
No further payment, excepting in the case of invalids
admitted to hospital, will he made until the balance in
full is made available through the Commonwealth Bank
as provided for above. This will take from four to
seven days after arrival in the District of finalization.
Special cases may require a little longer, according to
the locality of the home town.
PAYMENT ON DISCHARGE.
Deferred Pay.
4. Payment of deferred pay to soldiers who are not
admitted to hospital for treatment, but are recom-
mended for discharge, will be made in full through the
Commonwealth Bank to the soldier’s credit at his home
town, within seven days after disembarkation or arrival
in District of finalization.
5. In isolated cases where a soldier’s statement of
account does not reach Australia until some time after
disembarkation, a substantial advance up to 75 per
cent, of deferred pay due will be made.


ALLOTMENT TO BE PAID IN ADVANCE.
6. After being boarded for discharge, the soldier’s
allotment will be paid to his allottee in advance, calcu-
lated up to date of discharge.
RE-EMBARKED MEN.
7. Where men have previously returned to Australia
and re-embarked for further service, only the actual
period of service outside Australia will be regarded as
“ service abroad ’’ for the purpose of calculating leave
pay.
DISCIPLINARY CASES.
8. Special leave and sustenance allowance is not
granted to members who are returned to Australia for
disciplinary reasons.
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT.
9. After the discharge certificate is received there is
no need to call at the Pay Office unless special informa-
tion is required. Instructions as to pay will be carried
out promptly, and a copy of the statement of account
will be posted to the soldier’s address.


RE-ENLISTED MEN.
10. In oases where members have had service abroad
under a previous enlistment, leave and sustenance allow-
ance included in the soldier’s final account will be cal-
culated on the basis of his final enlistment. Applica-
tion should be made to the Secretary, Department of
Defence, in respect of the first period of service. Forms
of application can be obtained from the Post Offices.
PAY-BOOKS TO BE RETURNED,
11. Pay-books, when finished with by the Pay Office
and the Audit Office, will be posted to each soldier at
the address given.
OFFICERS.
12. Officers will be granted special leave and susten-
ance allowance on the same basis as men. Field allow-
ance will cease as from the date of disembarkation.
INVALIDS.
13. Invalids who are admitted to hospital on disem-
barkation will receive regular payments each fortnight
of the amounts accruing on their pay-books, and the
full amounts due to them on discharge will be paid to
them at their home town through the Commonwealth
Bank within seven days of the recommendation of the
Medical Board for their discharge.
Deferred pay will not be paid until a recommenda-
tion for discharge has been made by a Medical Board*


DEPENDANTS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
14. Soldiers who have dependant allottees in the
United Kingdom should note that their allotments and
separation allowance will only be continued hy the
Chief Paymaster for a period of one hundred days from
the date of embarkation of the soldier for Australia.
In special cases where a soldier is admitted to hospital
for a prolonged period of treatment the Chief Pay-
master will be instructed to continue payment to de-
pendants, hut, otherwise, a soldier upon disembarkation
should take immediate steps to provide for his de-
pendants abroad.
FACILITIES EXTENDED BY COMMONWEALTH
BANK.
1. The Commonwealth Bank extends special facili-
ties to soldiers. It has branches and agencies through-
out Australia. Savings Bank agencies are established
at all Post Offices in Australia which are also Money
Order Offices. Accounts may be opened in either the
General or Savings Bank Department.
2. The amount due on discharge will be made avail-
able at the home town, and the Bank will notify mem-
bers when it is available.
3, If an account in the Commonwealth Bank is
already possessed by the soldier, the amount will be
paid to the credit of it —free of exchange. If he has
an account abroad, but omitted to transfer it to Aus-
tralia before his departure, the Bank will recall it if re-
quested to do so. The charge for recall by cablegram
is £1 12s.


4. If a soldier directs that his account he opened in
the branch of the Commonwealth Bank, Savings Bank
Department in the Capital City, it will be necessary
for him to call at the Military Branch to receive his
pass-book.
If unable to call, he should write to the. Officer in
Charge of the Branch mentioned, and the book will be
forwarded to him by post.
5. The following facilities extended by the Bank
should be borne in mind if doubt is entertained about
continuing to keep a banking account: —
(a) It is possible for a depositor to operate on his
account at any Branch or Agency, provided
the Bank receives due notice as to where he
wishes to draw amounts. Bull details re-
lating to Savings Bank accounts are con-
tained in the pass-books.
( h ) It will remit amounts to any other Banks or
Savings Banks in Australia free of ex-
change.
C. Any further information required may be obtained
either on personal application or by letter to the Bank.
REPATRIATION.
Provision for the future welfare of the returned
soldier has been intrusted to the Department of Re-
patriation, a public Department specially created and
directly controlled by the Commonwealth Government.
Under the scheme which that Department has formu-
lated, the soldier can pass direct from military to civil


life. This scheme seeks to enable the individual who
was drawing his military pay one day to become a wage-
earner the next. Should employment not immediately
be available, a sustenance allowance is paid until it is.
Should a soldier, through war injury, not be in a posi-
tion to immediately commence to earn his living again,
a sustenance allowance is paid him while he is being
vocationally trained, and at the end of his training
period he will be placed in suitable employment. Where
a family has lost its breadwinner, provision is made for
the support of that family, and the dependants of a de-
ceased soldier are maintained in comfort.
_ Every feature of the Australian repatriation scheme
aims at repairing, so far as is practicable, the economic
loss which military service has entailed.
The work of the Department may be classified under
the headings Employment, Vocational Training, Medi-
cal Attention, and General Assistance.
The provision of employment is perhaps the most ex-
tensive duty which the Department has to discharge.
The Department undertakes to provide suitable em-
ployment for those who are able to follow their pre-
vious or some kindred occupation, and to pay sustenance
until such employment is procurable. Only one stipu-
lation is made, and it is that when an opportunity for
suitable employment is presented to an applicant, he
must, failing some adequate reason, avail himself of it.
ijntil that opportunity is presented, however, the dis-
charged soldier is entitled to sustenance under the fol-
lowing scale:—
(a) A soldier without dependants—-a weekly in-
come (inclusive of pension) of £2 2s.


(I) A soldier with a wife—a weekly income (illu-
sive of their combined pensions), of £- i*»-
(c) A soldier with a wife and one child—a weekly
income (inclusive of their combined pen-
sions) of £2 15s. 6d.
(d) A soldier with a wife and two children a
weekly income (inclusive of their combined
pensions) of £2 19s.
fe) A soldier with a wife and three children a
weekly income (inclusive of their combined
• pensions) of £3 2s. 6d.
(f) A soldier with a wife and four children—a
weekly income (inclusive of the pensions
payable to the soldier, his wife, and tour
children) of £3 6s.
\ widower with children is entitled to the same sus-
tenance allowance as if his wife were living. A
soldier who upon his discharge is not, on account of ill-
health, capable of immediately resuming his former
occupation, is, also, during the period of his con-
valescence, entitled to assistance under this scale.
Vocational Training.— lf a man is prevented by
wounds or illness which are the result of war service
from returning to his former employment, the -Depart-
ment will vocationally train him, that is, will re-educate
him to some trade or calling which, in view of ms phy-
sical disabilities, he will be able to follow, and which
living will adequately support him and his dependants
in their battle in life. ,
The man who is but slightly incapacitated may,
under the industrial regulations, be trained in an ordi-
nary workshop or factory, or he may be given a short


intensive course of instruction in one of tlie vocational
training classes which have been set up in the technical
schools throughout the Commonwealth. Should a
soldier he placed in a workshop or factory, he is guaran-
teed (inclusive of his pension) the minimum wage of
the industry iti which he is being trained, but should he
be placed in a technical school he is paid during the
period ®f his instruction on the same scale as that
quoted in reference to employment.
The repatriation scheme contemplates provision for
the soldier whose incapacity, while permitting him to
perform sopie useful labour, is so severe that it will
preclude him from entirely earning his own living.
Provision for -this class will take the form of national
workshops, in which these men may remain as regular
employees.
Provision is also made whereby an apprentice whose
indentures were interrupted by enlistment may finish
his apprenticeship, and during the completion of his
indentures he will be paid sustenance which will bring
his wages up to the standard which he would have been
receiving had his apprenticeship not been interrupted
by war service.
Medical Treatment and General Assistance. —The
Department of Repatriation is undertaking the after-
war medical treatment of the members of the
A.I.F. Medical officers are being appointed to local
areas throughout the Commonwealth, and every case
of sickness arising from war service and requiring
medical care and attention will be treated at the ex-
pense of the Department of Repatriation.


Should a discharged soldier, owing to the recurrence
at any time of injuries or illness arising from active
service, require hospital or other medical treatment, this
will be provided, and he will be paid sustenance under
the scale previously set out. Fares to and from hospital
and travelling expenses are also paid. A married
soldier incapacitated to the. extent of being unable to
engage in his usual employment, or a soldier who prior
to enlistment was dependent on a business which he
owned and conducted, may be advanced up to £l5O to
purchase a business, plant, or stock, to enable him to re-
establish himself.
The scheme also provides for relief from onerous
mortgages, educational grants, equipment with tools of
trade, free passages to and from the Commonwealth to
incapacitated soldiers, their wives and children, and
other specified applicants, and grants for furniture.
Care of the Seriously Incapacitated. —Soldiers who
are so seriously incapacitated that they are not in a
position to provide for themselves, and widows and
orphans, are the special care of the Department, hor
the totally and permanently incapacitated, a living
allowance on the following scale is paid-
Soldier and wife (inclusive of pension), 60s. per
week.
Soldier and wife and one child (inclusive of pen-
sion), 635. 6d. per week.
Soldier and wife and two children (inclusive of
pension), 675. per week.
Soldier and wife and three children (inclusive of
pension), 70s, 6d. per week.


Soldier and wife and 4 children (inclusive of pen-
sion), 735. per week..
Soldier and wife and five children or more (inclu-
sive of pension), 775. per week.
Alternative provision is made for those who are no
longer able to assist themselves by the establishment
of hostels, where the inmates may spend their days
amidst pleasant surroundings, and be assured of skilled
attention. Hostels have already been secured in Sydney
and Melbourne, and others will be established in other
capital cities.
For widows with children a living allowance on the
following scale is provided:—
Widow with one child (inclusive of pension), 51s.
per week.
Widow with two children (inclusive of pension),
545. 6d. per week.
• Widow with three children (inclusive of pension),
58s. per week.
Widow with four children (inclusive of pension),
61s. 6d. per week.
Widow with five children or more (inclusive of
pension), 645. 6d. per week.
Provision is also made for the assistance of dependent
mothers and of incapacitated dependent fathers of
deceased soldiers.
Land Settlement. —The Department, in co-operation
with the State Governments, renders assistance to the
man who desires and is qualified to settle upon the land.
The State Governments provide the land on easy terms,
and the Department of Repatriation, through their
Lands Departments, advances up to £625 for working


capital. Approved applicants who lack the necessary
experience can obtain the requisite training before
entering into occupation of their holdings free of cost to
them. In addition, where such is necessary, the Depart-
ment provides sustenance for a period of six months
during the early and unproductive periods of their
occupation. Such sustenance scale is:—
Single men (inclusive of pension), £1 per week.
Man and wife (inclusive of pension), £1 lUs. per
week.
Each child up to four (inclusive of pension), 3s.
6d. per week.
Bousing Scheme.—A Bill providing for advances to
enable men now married, or who subsequently may
marry, to acquire homes under most favorable condi-
tions was passed by the Federal Parliament last session,
and the Housing Commissioner having now been ap-
pointed, applications may be submitted for homes under
the Act.
The Housing Bill has two main sections. Under one
of these, the Commissioner who will administer the
Act is empowered to carry on ordinary building-society
activities. He is entitled to either purchase houses for
the men, or to build for them. If a man owns a house
which is encumbered with a mortgage, he can lift that
mortgage. Under the other section of the Act, the
Commissioner can, without waiting for returned men
to apply for houses, build in anticipation of require-
ments.
The advance cannot in any case exceed an amount of
£7OO, and a man can secure this advance even though
he has no deposit to pay. The periods of repayment


range from twenty to thirty-seven years, according to
the nature of the structure —whether wood or brick,
stone or concrete. The sinking fund for the thirty-
seven years is 1 per cent., therefore a man would have
to pay 6 per cent, for the amount standing to debit
in connexion with his property. Applicants desiring to
do so can pay off at any time.
Every soldier who requires the assistance of the De-
partment should make application as early as possible.
Applications should be made personally to the branch
of the Department in the capital city of the State in
which applicant resides. State branches have been
established as under: —
Brisbane —232 Charlotte-street.
Sydney—Chalmers-street, Bedfern.
Melbourne —Wellington-parade, Jolirnont.
Adelaide—4s Currie-street.
Perth—The Esplanade.
Hobart —A.M.P, Buildings.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY RESERVE.
1. The Australian Army Reserve was brought into
existence by the Minister for Defence. If 2'00,000 or
300,000 men, all trained in the latest methods of war
join, it Avill he a valuable asset to this country.
2. The Australian Army Reserve will not he called
upon to serve beyond the limits of the Commonwealth.
3. It is not a strike-breaking machine.
4. It costs nothing to join.


5. The Australian Army Ileserve is composed entirely
of men who have been on active service, and of ex-
members of the Permanent Military Porces.
6. Members will be attached to Reserve Units bear-
ing the same number of designation as their old iV.I.h.
Units. To enable this to be done, the Citizen Forces
have been re-numbered and given A.I.F. numbers. This
means that old regiments of the A.I.F. will be in exist-
ence for all time.
7. Trainees may join the Reserve instead of complet-
ing their service with the Militia Service.
8. The annual training will consist of four days in
camp, during which pay will be at the same daily rates
as laid down for the Citizen Forces.
9. Ho training will be attempted until after Peace
is declared.
10. A reservist signs on at the same rank as quoted
on his discharge certificate; acting rank does not count.
11. Except for those liable for training under the
Defence Act with the Militia Forces, the term of en-
gagement is not limited to a specified period, but' a
reservist may, except in time of war, resign on giving
fourteen days’ notice, in writing, to his Commanding
Officer.
12. There will be no medical examination on enrol-
ment, but in the interest of both the reservist and the
Department an examination will be held prior to the
reservist going into camp. ' •
13. There is also an Honorary Reserve for those who
have been on active service, and are over fifty years of
age, or who are obviously unfit. Ho training will be re-
quired from the Honorary Reserve.


14. Members of the Australian Army Reserve wear
the brass letter “ R ” on the front of their head-dress,
also their battalion or regimental shoulder patches,
15. All members of the A.I.F. should join the A.A.R.
on discharge, because rhey will be able to keep in touch
with their old regiment and comrades, and because they
will also he able to set a standard of soldierly conduct
and self-sacrifice to the young trainees, who, in the
future, will be the defenders of Australia and the pre-
servers of those traditions and honours which members
of the A.I.F. have helped to make.
16. The Organizing Officer, Australian Army Re-
serve, for each Military District, will be pleased to enrol
returned soldiers, or give any further particulars.
GRIEVANCES.
1. That mistakes will occur, and that individual
soldiers will have grievances during the process of de-
mobilization, is inevitable when the vastness and com-
plexity of the problem of demobilization and repatria-
tion is realized.
2. The correct and most efficient manner for a soldier
to adopt to have any grievance redressed or any mistake
rectified is often not thoroughly understood.
3. The military regulations prescribe that if a soldier
considers himself wronged or aggrieved, he should ask
to parade before his Commanding Officer, and all Com-
manding Officers are required by the regulations to
insure that any complaint is investigated and redress
given. In the case of a returned soldier of the A.I.F.
on leave in Australia, his Commanding Officer is the


Staff Officer for Invalids and Returned Soldiers. All
soldiers are, therefore, requested to carefully remember
this, and if they at any time consider themselves
wronged they are first to represent the matter to the
S.O.T. and R.S., either verbally or in writing. In the
case of a soldier in hospital, his C.O. will be tho O.C.
Hospital so long as he is there, but immediately he is
discharged from hospital he again comes under the
control of the 5.0.1. and R.S. If, after investigation,
the aggrieved soldier does not consider that his Com-
manding Officer has given him satisfaction, he may, by
the regulations, ask that the matter be referred to
higher authority. The next higher authority is the
District Commandant of the Military District con-
cerned, and after that the Military Board of the Aus-
tralian Military Forces.
4. In many cases, however, soldiers while _ still _on
leave before discharge, have represented their griev-
ances to politicians, political and semi-political parties,
to patriotic and other societies, and to private persons
of influence. This procedure, besides being a military
offence, merely serves to waste time, as the grievance
concerned has always to be referred to the soldier’s
Commanding Officer for report.
5. Also, after discharge, an aggrieved soldier may
still state his case, either verbally in to the
5.0.1. and R.S., and the grievance will be fully investi-
gated. It is always much easier and quicker to obtain
redress by representing the matter direct to the Mili-
tary Authority concerned. The Department has also
consented to recognise the branches of the Returned
Sailors and Soldiers League in each State when they


represent grievances of discharged soldiers, but it must
be distinctly understood that a soldier still serving is
not authorized to represent his case .other than through
his Commanding Officer.
ADDRESSES A SOLDIER SHOULD KNOW.
Queensland.
District Head-Quarters..
Staff Officer for Invalids
and Returned Soldiers
Repatriation Department
British Red Cross Society
Red Cross Information
Bureau
Returned Sailors and Sol-
diers Imperial League
Y.M.C.A
Y.M.C.A., Soldiers’ Hut
Y.M.C.A., Soldiers’
Hostel
Complaints Officer
Pensions Office
6th A.G.H.
Red Cross Rest Home ..
Victoria Barracks, Petrie-
terrace, Brisbane.
Victoria Barracks, Petrie-
terrace, Brisbane.
Charlotte-street, Brisbane.
“ Inns of Court/’ Adelaide-
street, Brisbane.
Spencer Block, Queen-
street, Brisbane.
Cor. Ann and Wharf
streets, Brisbane
Edward-street, Brisbane
North Quay, Brisbane.
Adelaide-street, Brisbane.
Victoria Barracks, Petrie-
terrace, Brisbane.
Desmond Chambers, Ade-
laide-street, Brisbane.
Main-street, Kangaroo
Point, Brisbane (take
Customs House Ferry).
“Grange Hill” (near Ex-
hibition), Gregory-ter-
race, Brisbane.


Queensland Government
Soldiers’ Inquiry Office
Queensland Government
Returned Soldiers’
Employment Officer
Inquiry Officer, Lands
Settlement Committee
Anzac Club (Church of
England Help Society)
Queensland Patriotic
Eund
Military Head-Quarters
Repatriation Department
Australian Branch,
British Red Cross
Society
Information Bureau
Returned Sailors and Sol-
diers Imperial League
Y.M.C.A.
Woolwich Convalescent
Home
Woodford Convalescent
Home
Graythwaite Convales-
cent Home
Boddington Sanatorium
New South Wales.
Department of Justice, cor.
Queen and George streets,
Brisbane.
Department of Labour, Ed-
war d-street, Brisbane.
Department of _ Lands,
George-street, Brisbane.
Charlotte-street, Brisbane.
Preston House, Queen-
street, Brisbane.
Victoria Barracks, Pad-
dington.
Dawes Point, Sydney.
4 Bridge-street, Sydney.
“ Dalton House,” 115 Pitt-
street, Sydney.
“ McDonnell House,” 321
Pitt-street, Sydney.
Cor. Pitt and Bathurst
streets,
Woolwich-lane, Give River,
Sydney.
Woodford.
“ Graythwaite,” Edward-
street, North Sydney.
Wentworth Palis.


LeuraConvalescent Home
Bathurst Convalescent
Home
Armidale Convalescent
Home
Burradoo Convalescent
Home
Moree Convalescent Home
Moss Yal© Convalescent
Home
South Coast Convalescent
Home
“ Bose Hall ” Convales-
cent Home
u Bathmore ” Convales-
cent Home
Exeter Convalescent Home
Quambone Convalescent
Home (officers only)
No. 4 A.G. Hospital
Complaints Office
Pensions Office
Leura.
Bathurst.
Armidale.
Burradoo.
Moree.
“ The Mill,” Moss Yale.
Bomaderry.
Forbes-street, Darlinghurst.
Neutral Bay.
Exeter.
Quambone, via Coonamble
Avoca-street, Bandwick.
Yictoria Barracks, Pad
dington.
Bligh-street, Sydney.
Victoria.
Victorian Military Head-
Quarters
St. Kilda-road, Melbourne.
Commonwealth Bepatria-
tion Department, near
East Melbourne
Cricket Ground
Jolimont-road, Jolimont.
Beturned Soldiers’ Land
Settlement Branch
Lands Department, Mel-
bourne*


State War Council, J. I.
Jeanes, Secretary, Mel-
bourne
British Bed Cross Society
Eed Cross Information
Bureau
Melbourne Y.M.C.A.
Soldiers’ Club (Y.M.C.A.)
Soldiers’ Club (Y.M.C.A.)
Best Lounge (Bed Cross)
Best Homes ..
Bed Cross Volunteer
Motor Corps
Beturned Sailors and Sol-
diers Imperial League
of Australia
Complaints Office
State Government Ac-
commodation House
Deputy Commissioner of
Pensions
456 Little Bourke-street,
Melbourne.
Government House, Mel-
bourne.
60 Market-street, Mel-
bourne.
130 Flinders-street, Mel-
bourne.
St. Kilda-road, Melbourne.
Esplanade, St. Kilda.
St. Kilda-road, Melbourne.
1. St. Andrew’s Soldiers’
Club, Stock Exchange,
Collins-street (4th
Floor), Melbourne.
2. Wirth’s Park, Prince’s-
bridge, Melbourne.
3. Anglican, near Cathe-
dral, Flinders-street, Mel-
bourne.
Bussell-street, Melbourne.
Swanston-street, Melbourne.
Victoria Barracks (south
gate), St. Kilda-road,
Melbourne.
Bichmond House, 194
Swan-street, Bichmond.
65 Elizabeth-street, Mel-
bourne.


South Australia.
Mil it ary Hea d-( J ll art e rs
No. 7 A.G. FTospital
No. 15 A.G. Hospital ..
Augas College
Bedford Park Sana-
torium
Bed Cross Hospital,
No. 2
Military Pay Office
Returned Sol-
diers Imperial League
Y.M.C.A.
Pensions Office
Complaints Officer
Repatriation Department
Cheer-up Hut. ,
Red Cross Information
Bureau
S.A. Soldiers’ Fund
Tourist Bureau
Lady Galway’s Club
House
Keswick Barracks, Keswick,
Keswick.
Torrens Park.
North Adelaide.
Bedford Park.
Henley Beach.
Austral Gardens, North-
terrace, Adelaide.
Austral Gardens, North-
terrace, Adelaide.
Grenfell-street, Adelaide,
Brookman’s Buildings,
Grenfell-street, Adelaide,
Military Pay Office, Aus-
tral Gardens, North-ter-
race, Adelaide.
Currie-street, Adelaide.
Rear of City Baths, Ade-
laide,
Darling’s Buildings, Frank-
lin-street, Adelaide.
Chamber of Manufactures
Buildings, Pine-street,
Adelaide.
Old Government Offices,
King William-street,
Adelaide.
Henley Beach.


Western Australia.
Military Head-Quarters
Repatriation Department
■Red Cross Society
Information Bureau
Cook’s Tourists’ Agency
Cook’s Tourists’ Agency
Returned Soldiers and
Sailors Association
Returned Soldiers’ Insti-
tute
Y.M.O.A
Rest Home (Nurses’)
Returned Nurses’ Home
Complaints Office
Commonwealth Bank and
Government Savings
Bank
Pensions Office
Public Library
Francis-nstreet, Perth, W.A.
Esplanade, Perth (opposite
Supreme Court. Build-
ings).
National Mutual Chambers,
St. George’s-terrace,
Perth, W.A.
The Wharf, Fremantle.
9 New Zealand Chambers,
St. George’s-terrace,
Perth.
27 High-street, Fremantle.
Post Office Buildings, Bar-
rack-street, Perth.
Government Gardens, St.
George’s-terraee, Perth.
Murray-street, Perth.
M.C.L. Home, Cottesloe
Beach.
35 Yentnor-avenue, West
Perth.
Military Head-Quarters,
Francis-street, Perth.
St. George’s-terrace, Perth.
A.M.P. Buildings, cor. St.
George’s-terrace and Wil-
liam-street, Perth.
James-street, Perth,


Military Head-Quarters
Repatriation Department
British Red Cross Society
Red Cross Information
Bureau
Returned Sailors and Sol-
diers Imperial League
of Australia
Y.M.O.A.
Complaints Office
Pensions Office
Red Cross Hostel
S.O.T. and R.S.
No. 9 A.G.H.. .
No. 25 A.A.H.
Pay Office
No. 12 A.G.H.
No. 23 A.A.H.
5.0.1. and R.S. , ,
Returned Sailors and Sol-
diers Imperial League
of Australia
Y.M.O.A.
British Red Cross Society
Repatriation Department
Anglesea Barracks, Hobart.
A.M.P. Buildings, corner
Elizabetli-street and Col-
lins-street, Hobart.
Town Hall, Macquarie-
street, Hobart.
115 Macquarie-street,
Hobart.
47 Murray-street, Hobart
Murray-street, Hobart.
Anglesea Barracks, Hobart.
Customs House, Wharf,
Hobart.
Collins-street, Hobart.
Anglesea Barracks, Hobart
Anglesea Barracks, Hobart.
Austins’ Perry.
Anglesea Barracks, Hobart.
Cameron-street, Launceston.
Adelaide-street, Launceston.
Barracks, Launceston.
National Theatre, cor. Pat-
terson and Charles
streets, Launceston.
Brisbane-street, Launceston.
Cameron-street, Launceston.
Public Buildings, St. John-
street, Launceston.
Tasmania.
Bj Authority Albert J. Mtjuett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
