

DEMOCRACY
IN
THEORY AND PRACTICE.
BY THE
REV. JAS. S. WHITE, M.A., LL.D., SYD.,
OF GOWRIE, SINGLETON.
MAITLAND:
TUCKER, THOMPSON, & EIPPER, PRINTERS,
"MERCURY" OFFICE.
1894.




DEMOCRACY
IN THEORY AND PRACTICE.
Before entering upon the main subject of
this paper, it may not be undesirable to say
something of what may be styled the opera-
tive terms to be employed in it. According
to derivation autocracy means government by
the sole will of one person. Monarchy,
government by one person, with respect to
the soleness of person, rather than the sole-
ness of will. Oligarchy, government by the
few. Polyarchy, government by the many.
Democracy, government by the demos , the
political value of which term shall be ascer-
tained hereafter. Republicanism, government
for the common weal. Ochlocracy, govern-
ment by the multitude, or mob. Every one
of these terms, except Autocracy, is indefinite
in its signification. A Monarchy may be
either absolute, or limited, hereditary, or
elective. The few, if an Oligarchy, may be a
minority of only one. The demos of a democ-
racy are only those recognised as such. A
Republic depends, for its political character,
upon what is regarded as the common weal.
The multitude of an Ochlocracy may be but a
comparatively small number of persons. The
term Autocracy is definite. The will of an
autocrat may vary, in character and in energy,
but the will of each individual autocrat is
definite, so far as anything may be said to be


definite, in a state wherein nothing is per-
manent bnt change. The term autocracy is
the generic term of monarchy etc., for
monarchy etc., are bnt modifications o£
autocracy. The radical idea is governmental
power, and such power exereised by one
person, is the simplest form in which it can
be exemplified, and that to which all other
forms of it may be referred. The term
democracy will be used, not because it implies
the opposite of autocracy, but because it may be
regarded as the extreme of the generalization
at the head of which autocracy stands, and
because it is more definite than the term
republicanism. To those who accept what
has been advanced, it will be evident, that
the discussion of the question of government
does not involve the inquiry whether the
autocratic element is necessary or unnecessary,
desirable, or undesirable, but simply the
enquiry whether it is to be modified and
balanced, and, if so, to what extent.
Democracy, as has been said, is government
by the demos. It is generally supposed that the
term demos and the term masses are synony-
mous and convertible terms. They are not so.
Originally, as will appear, demos was used to
designate an order in the State distinct from,
and superior to, the masses —an order cor-
responding very nearly to our middle class.
Democracy is distinguished practically from
Monarchy, Oligarchy, Polyarchy, and
Ochlocracy simply by the measure of Autocracy
it embodies. A Democracy is said to be either
pure or mixed. It is said to be pure, if every
citizen has equal authority and power to
make, administer, and execute the laws. It is
said to be mixed, if every citizen has not this
authority and power. If but one citizen lack
this authority and power the government is a
Polyarchy. If there is a majority of but one
lacking this authority and power, the govern-
ment is an Oligarchy. If all the citizens have


tliis authority and power, there is a political
redudio ad absurdmn ; for in such case all are
rulers. If all are rulers, where are the subjects ?
If there are no subjects, where is the govern-
ment F Every citizen becomes, not only a law,
but the law, to himself —an autocrat among
autocrats. There have been governments
styled “ pure Democracies,” but the designa-
tion has been inspired, sometimes in ignorance,
but generally knowingly and designedly, by
political knaves, to deceive and hypnotize
their victims during the process of despolia-
tion.
Democracy, in any form, has no illustration
in nature. In the universe, there is but one
sovereign who, supreme, singly fills the throne.
In respect of this world, there is, as said
Alexander the Great, but one sovereign, as
there is but one sun. Among the beasts of
the field, the fowls of the air, and the fish of
the sea there is, to each company but one
leader, that leader an autocrat, and that
autocrat a male, Man has no innate or natural
right to have part in. legislating, even in
respect of matter concerning his own indi-
vidual interests. Nature introduces man into
this world, not with a right to make laws,
but under an obligation to obey, and that at
his peril, pre-existent laws, without question
and without hesitation—pre-existent laws most
intimately involving, not only his well-being,
but his very existence. Do this and live,
transgress and die.
Neither manhood, nor womanhood, implies
a right to the franchise. The ground of a
definite and important right should be definite
and strong. Neither manhood, nor woman-
hood, is such a ground. Both terms are
indefinite in their comprehension, and there-
fore uncertain in their extension. The man-
hood, or womanhood, of one family, of one.
race, or of one age, is not the manhood, or
womanhood, of another family, race, or age.


Nay, the qualities, in some cases regarded as
essential to either estate, are, in others,
regarded as utterly incompatible with it ;
therefore neither manhood, nor womanhood,
can constitute a just title to the franchise.
But if it did, why is it denied to any man or
woman F The aborigines are men and women,
yet they are denied the franchise. Foreigners,
not naturalised, are men and women, yet they
are denied the franchise. Nay, natural born
subjects, from alleged motives of expediency,
are in many cases denied the franchise.
Among men in their savage, or natural state,
each tribe has its chief, that chief an autocrat,
and that autocrat a male. Even in civilized
society, the father of a family, which is a State
in miniature, is, up to a certain time prac-
tically absolute over its members. In not the
most despotic autocracy was paternal abso-
lutism more fully illustrated than in republican
Rome. Every human being is under autocratic
government, for every human being is domi-
nated by a master passion. The autocratic
principle, with all due respect to Mr. Locke,
is innate. Even after men have quitted the
paternal roof, and have become experimentally
acquainted with democratic institutions, have
laboured for them, lauded them, and perhaps
suffered for them, they betray, what cannot
but be regarded as an inborn appreciation of
and preference for the genius of Autocracy,
in some form or other. The Herald’s office, in
London, is largely supported by democratic
Americans and Australians who prize
autocratic recognition, in the shape of armorial
bearings, as the crown of ambition, and the
essential complement of plutocratic influence
and popular distinction. A title of nobility,
or even the reasonable prospect of it, suffices,
at once to stop the mouth of the most blatant
and rabid demagogue, and a yard of blue
ribbon binds him hand and foot, head and
heart, to the chariot wheels of an autocrat,


though driving over the necks of the people.
Democracy in any form, is contrary to the
scriptural ideal of government. The Creator
instituted an autocracy, in Eden. Thy desire
shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over
thee. He established an autocratic govern-
ment in Israel. He himself was their head,
and the book of the law and the prophets was
the book of their constitution. True, when
Israel asked a king He gave them a King in
His wrath. But He was w-rath, not with the
kingly form of government, but with their
disloyalty to, and disaffection from, Himself,
whose right it is to reign. The wise man says,
Blessed art thou, 0 land when thy king is the
son of nobles! The mere paying of taxes does
not entitle the payer to take part in legislat-
ing. The maxim, no representation no tax-
ation is founded neither in right reason,
expediency, nor custom. That one should be
qualified for the discharge of duties under-
taken is a truism. The paying of taxes does
not qualify the payer to legislate. It is no
proof of his qualification. If a citizen equip
and maintain a regiment, or a ship of war, for
the service of his country, no government,
simply because he did so, would allow him to
command either the one or the other, or to
have a voice in its command, or action. Demo-
crats themselves practically admit that tax
paying does not necessarily involve the right
to legislate, for in the most democratic states,
all the tax payers are not allowed to do so.
Even in the case of a joint stock company, only
shareholders of a certain amount if capital
are allowed a vote in their proceedings. Those
who do vote are presumed to be qualified to
vote wisely. It is on this presumption that
their right to vote is based in connection with
their pecuniary interest in the company. But
suppose that the paying of taxes of itself
entitles the payer to a voice in legislating, his
influence should be in proportion to the


amount paid by him, and to their intellectual
and moral standing 1 .
But, according to the most recent teachings
of democracy the citizen who pays £IOOO in
taxes is entitled to no more influence in legis-
lating than the citizen who pays but £1 or
nothing, and the cultured and virtuous citizen
has no more influence than the vicious clown.
If single taxers had their way, landholders
would pay all the taxes. But landholders, in
a civilised country, must always constitute
but a small minority of the population. How-
ever small their number, being the only tax-
payers, the landholders would monopolize the
franchise. A State, democratic in name,
would be oligarchic in principle and in practice,
Democracy is not, as it professes to be,
government by all the citizens. It is not
necessarily government by the majority. The
result of popular elections, under certain
circumstances, by no means of frequent
occurrence, illustrates the fact. For example,
by our late election, a considerable majority
of freetrade candidates were returned to Par-
liament. Our Government is therefore a
freetrade government. A majority of the
votes were for protectionism, so that the
minority are ruling the majority. Our
democracy is really an oligarchy. It is for
the good of the state, that its policy be more
or less settled and permanent. Frequent and
sudden change of policy tends to induce
anxiety, unrest, and uncertain action. Under
a democracy, there are always two leading
parties, the government and the opposition.
They are continually, on some pretext, chang-
ing places. With the change of party comes a
change of policy. Freetrade gives place to
Protectionism and vice versa. Merchants are
brought to their wits’ end. Trade is disorgan-
ised. Speculation is checked and the com-
mercial interests of the country suffer, and,
with them, all its other interests. Some are


brought to poverty, without fault on their
parts, and others are enriched, without de-
sert. If the single tax party get into power,
landowners are harassed, Not knowing when
their lands may be confiscated, they dare not
improve them, and they cannot sell them.
Capital is locked up, labour is unemployed,
and starving multitudes go about the streets.
As the genius of democracy is change—to
hear, to tell, or to have, some new thing, the
citizens of a democratic state are unrestful,
unstable, and unreliable. Hence the frequency
and gigantic proportions of strikes. As Satan
finds mischief for idle hands to do, strikes are
always accompanied by the commission of
crimes of the blackest dye. But even if no
positive mischief is done, society is enervated
and demoralized by voluntary idleness and
national mendicancy. No doubt, frequent and
serious strikes have taken place in England and
France ; but not until the democratic element
had gained the ascendant in the governments
of these countries. Democracy and strikes
have always gone together. Whenever de-
mocracy has walked before, strikes have al-
ways walked behind and that pari passu.
As to political talent and morality. It is
said that by choosing legislators from among
the masses, rather than from among the
classes, these qualities are more likely to be
secured. Political economy is a science, per-
haps the most comprehensive of all the secular
sciences. It requires much study, preceded
by a long period of preparatory mental train-
ing, and followed by a long period of close
observation of the practical working of its
principles. All this implies that the student
have a brain of a certain size, conformation
and texture, sound bodily health and leisure.
These requisites, as competent judges declare,
are to be found mainly among the classes.
Neither experience, observation, nor history,
shows that legislators, taken from among the


masses, have been distinguished for either
political talent or morality.
As to responsibility. It is said that a
democratic government is at the least respon-
sible for its action. For what action ? To
whom P Under what penalty ? Members of a
democratic government may serve their own
personal interests, at the expense of the State,
and they do not unfrequently so serve them,
not only with impunity, but without being
called to account. Wealth may be accumu-
lated, honours and distinctions acquired, and
needy relatives, friends, or partizans provided
for at the public cost, and to the detriment of
the state, without account being asked. If
the culprit be brought before the House, he
may be expelled. But it may be, that, having
served his turn, expulsion is no pusishment.
If it is, his constituents may relect him.
As to a State’s foreign policy. That it may
be successful, secrecy, strength, and dispatch are
necessary. Whatever a democratic govern-
ment does, in the secret chamber, is pro-
claimed from the housetop. There may be
unity as to the general object, there is none
as to detail. There are conflicting interests,
complications and frictions ; so that the wheels
of democracy move unevenly, noisily, slug-
gishly, clumsily, and erratically.
As to cost. While democratic government
is popularly regarded as much less costly than
autocratic government, it is, in reality, much
more costly. The rate of taxation per head
under the Roman Republic, was much higher
than it was under the empire. The rate of
taxation, in the democratic United States of
America, is much higher than in autocratic
Russia. In ultra-democratic Hew South Wales,
it is much higher than in the United States.
But perhaps the citizens of democratic states
get value for their money! Let the chronic
discontent, dissatisfaction, disaffection and
turbulence of these states testify. Let the


organised and armed bands of banditti, of our
own and a neighbouring colony, with a body
of members in the Legislative Assembly of
each, to protect their interests testify.
As to freedom in the abstract, that is, the
enfranchisement of the whole human family, of
whatever nation, kindred, colour, tongue, or
people. This is the only legitimate object of
government ; because no government, any
more than any man, lives for itself. A govern-
ment that does not contemplate the enfranchise-
ment of the whole human race is a selfish
government. It is not actuated by the
universal and eternal principle of benevolence.
Lacking this universal and eternal principle,
whatever it may prefer to do for its own
citizens, either its professions must be false,
or its acton must be ineffectual; for if one
member suffer all the members must suffer
with it. With respect to vanquished and
coloured races, democracies have always been
more unjust and tyrannical than autocracies.
As will be seen hereafter, the republics of
Greece and Rome treated slaves with far
greater injustice and cruelty than did autocracy
in either case. Slavery, under the democratic
states of America, became intolerable to
Western civilization. No doubt, the North
emancipated the slaves, but their emancipa-
tion was due not to benevolence, not to
enlightened policy, but to the exigencies of the
moment. The emancipation of the slaves was
the last despairing cry of a party about to
perish. At this day negroes fare worse in New
York than they do in New Orleans. At
the Chicago Exposition, all classes and con-
ditions were present save the American
negro. Every effort is made to disfranchise
them. They are already in a worse con-
dition than they were before their mock
emancipation. The aborigines of this Colony,
whom the head of a monarchy enjoined to
be treated with consideration and humanity,


have been treated far otherwise by
onr democratic government. Even appeals
on their behalf, by those who knew whereof
they spoke and whereof they affirmed to the
head of the government of the day, who posed
as the great democratic leader, met with but
little sympathy. The aborigines could not
influence an election. In connection with this
head, it may be mentioned, that “ the hideous
slave traffic which exists in Morocco and at
Constantinople, under the very eyes of the
European powers,” including democratic Eng-
land, France, and Switzerland, “ has been abol-
ished in central Asia, from the strongholds of
mussulman fanaticism, and by Russia,” an
autocracy.
But let history be interrogated still
more closely, as to the practical working
of democracy. The constitution of democratic
governments, as w T ell as their condition must-
be considered. It will be found I.—That a
continuous democracy, in the popular sense of
the term, has never existed. 2. That in demo
cratic governments, the autocratic element has
ever been the vital, the energetic, the tran-
quilising, the conserving, the recuperating
and the indestructible element. Shortly after
the Hebrews entered upon the possession
of the Promised Land, B.C. about 1406, they
superseded the Theocracy by a democracy. It
was characterized by disorganization, con-
fusion, rapine, blood-shed and misery. The
autocratic element was introduced. Judges
were elected by heads of families and were
invested with supreme power. Fifteen of them,
whose names are given, ruled in succession.
Thev restored social order and peace, they
repressed abuses, and extended the territory of
the state. Indeed, the period of the judges
was the heroic age of Hebrew history. On the
death of Samson, the last of the judges, a
second democracy was set up, under which all
the evils of its predecessor were repeated and


intensified. Samuel became virtually King,
and under the concentrating and strengthening
influence of the autocratic principle, the State
once more recovered and experienced a season
of very great prosperity. Till the year 8.C.,
1068, Athens was an absolute monarchy. For
47 years thereafter, it was an oligarchy com-
posed of Archons. In the year 8.c., 474, Solon,
an Archon, instituted the Athenian democracy,
which lasted about 276 years. The clemos con-
sisted of only the classes. Men of, or over 21
years of age, free, possessed of property and fit
for military service only had the franchise. Aris-
totle stigmatizes government by the masses as
Ochlocracy, or mobocracy, which was held in
execration by the intelligent and refined
Athenians. The franchise was exercised
directly. Throughout the whole history of
Athens, as an independent state, and long
after it had ceased to be independent, there
existed, as its highest tribunal, the Areopagus,
whose members were Archons, who had dis-
tinguished themselves, and wealthy citizens,
admitted on a property qualification. The
Areopagus had functions far more varied and
power far greater than our Legislative
Council, or even than our House of Lords. It
was charged with the duty of “ seeing to
everything,” and of exercising social, political,
judicial and ecclesiastical oversight. It had
a private treasury, from which, of its own
mere motion, it might make grants. But the
autocratic principle,- as embodied in the
Areopagus, was not always sufficient to meet
exigencies. It had, from time to time to be
concentrated, and so strengthened, by the
appointment of individual autocrats as
Themistocles, Miltiades, Thrasybulus, and
others, who chains alwavs proved strong to
bind. The conditions of the slaves, who con-
stituted a large proportion of the population
of Athens, was as a rule, tolerable, but they
fared better under the autocratic than thev


did under either the oligarchic, or the demo-
cratic, form of government and so did the
free population, and the state as a state,
was more peaceful and prosperous under an
autocracy than it was under either an oligarchy
or a democracy.
For 245 years, from the date of the found-
ing of the city, B.C. 758, Rome was all hut an
absolute monarchy. A.U.C. 245, it became a
republic. Till A.U.C. 467, the populus only
had the franchise, for they only had the jus
civile, or civil rights, and the jus sacrum, or
religious rights. The populus only had the
connubium, or right to marry, the commercium,
or right to trade, the sujfragium, or right to
vote, and the honores or right to public honours.
The Roman populus was synonymous with the
Athenian demos, and designated, not the
masses, but the classes. The masses were
styled plebs. The Hortensian and Maenianlaw,
A.U.C. 467, conferred th e jus civile upon the
plebs, including the franchise. But the whole
of the executive power remained in the hands
of the senate and the magistrates. The right
of imposing taxes was entrusted to two
officers styled censors. Besides these restric-
tions on the political influence of the plebs,
the jus sacrum, which the populus always
retained to themselves, reduced it, practically,
to little more than a name ; for among a
religious people like the Romans, whose
government was to a great extent a Theocracy,
in their sense of the term, the jus sacrum
gave an overwhelming political advantage
to these who preserved it. The S.P.Q.R.
of the Roman Standard was far less
ambiguous in designating the senate and
classes of Rome, than the Ficlei Defensor,
on the obverse of our coins is, in designating
our sovereign’s relation to any particular creed.
Rome always had a senate, all of whose mem-
bers, under the monarchy, and half of whose
members, under the Republic, were chosen


from among the patricians. By the Licinian
Rogations, A.U.C. 337, it was enacted, that one
of the two consuls should be a plebeian.
Tribunes, who were autocrats of the plebs, or
masses, were elected to maintain, at the least
a semblance of the balance of power between
the populus, the classes, and the plebs. The
tribunes were originally chosen from the plebs
only, but by the Aturian law, A.U.C. 623, it
was enacted that they should be chosen from
the ranks of the senators only. Throughout
the whole period of the Roman republic, which
lasted 480 years, the franchise was restricted
to males of, or above, 21 years of age, ingenui ,
or freeborn, possessed of property and fit for
military service, and it was exercised directly.
In neither the Hebrew, Athenian, nor Roman
democracy, was the franchise given on the
ground of what is styled “ manhood.” It was
given rather as a part of an equitable arrange-
ment than as a political right, as it respected
chiefly the adjusting of the share of the
amount fairly assessable on the two orders of
the State, for military purposes. The Roman
republic was largely autocratic. But largely
autocratic though it was, it was too demo-
cratic for critical occasions in its experience.
In every crisis, a dictator was chosen who was
to see that the State suffered no damage. He
had no colleague, and was therefore wholly
unfettered in either judging or acting. He
was not bound to give an account,
and was therefore wholly irresponsible.
A dictator was the ideal of absol-
ute authority and power, in comparison
with whom, a Czar of Russia is a constitutional
sovereign. Only nine years after the institu-
tion of the republic, T. Lartius was chosen
dictator. Two years afterwards, Aul.
Posthumius. Camillus was chosen dictator,
A.U.C. 396, and within the 29 years following
he was re-elected five times to the same office.
These three dictators were patricians. The


first plebeian dictator, M. C. Rutilius, was
chosen A.U.C. 387. During the 15 succeeding
years no fewer than 15 dictators were chosen.
Towards the close of the republic, Sulla, Julius
Caesar, Lepidus, Antony, Octavian, (Augustus)
Pompey, and Crassus were dictators either duly
elected, or self-constituted. In fact, the
Roman state was oligarchic, or autocratic,
rather than democratic. Rot by democratic
arts did Rome increase. The nominal re-
public gave place to the Empire, A.U.C. 700.
Under autocratic rule the conditions of the
subjects of the Roman State was better than it
was under nominal democracy. Servius
Tullius, who began to reign A.U.C. 178,
sought by legislation to ameliorate the con-
dition of slaves. Sulla, an autocrat, made a
law declaring it to be unlawful to kill a slave.
Slaves, who constituted about one half of the
population of Rome, were generally treated
with the grossest inhumanity. The more
democratic the spirit of the government, the
worse for them. ISTo popular leader ever
raised his voice on their behalf. It was under
the Empire that the evils of slavery were
substantially, permanently, and legally miti-
gated. The law, vElia Sentia, under Augus-
tus, and the law, Junia Rorbana, under
Claudius, cured all defects hitherto connected
with the emancipation of slaves, and secured
to them when emancipated, all the rights and
privileges of “ Latins” or Roman colonists :
that is, they could marry and trade with
Romans. Claudius issued an edict, setting
free any slave who, because of age and
infirmity, was abandoned by his master. The
Petronian law, in the time of the early
emperors, prohibited the exposure of slaves to
wild beasts, and also the punishing of them
by death, except in pursuance of a sentence by
a magistrate, Antoninus Pius prohibited
masters from punishing them, either cruelly,
or unnecessarily. Justinian abolished all


essential distinctions between ingenui (free-
born) and libertini (freedmen), but retained
the jus patronatus, which bound the freedman
to reverence his patron. During the republic,
the State was seldom free from domestic trouble.
In the year U.C. 599, there was a servile war,
in which 20,000 slaves, and a still larger num-
ber of legionaries, were engaged. A few
years afterwards there was a second servile
war on much the same scale. The two wars
involved the slaughter of not fewer than
40,000 human beings. There was the civil war
between Sulla and Marius, a veritable reign of
terror, A.U.C. 665 to 671, during which about
300,000 lives were sacrificed, including those
of some of the wisest, best and greatest citizens.
There was the gladiatorial war, A.U.C. 680,
when 20,000 gladiators were arrayed against
six legions and two consular armies, or about
50,000 State forces. Of the gladiatorial body,
5000 were massacred by Pompey in one
encounter, and 6000 by Crassus in another.
The loss on both sides was nearly 35,000. A
few years afterwards, during the civil war
between Julius Ceesar and Pompey, very many
thousands were slaughtered. During the later
years of the republic, poverty, suffering, dis-
content, disaffection, turbulence, and crime
characterized the State. When Augustus
became Emperor, there were in Rome 200,000
unemployed, whose cry was Panis et spectaculu
—Bread and Sports. On this cry, political
agitators had been trading by responding to
it, partly at their own, and partly at the
public cost. Pauperism was a sanctioned and
recognized national institution of the richest and
greatest city of the world. During the 480 years
of the republic, more blood was shed in civil war,
and more of the best blood of Rome, than during
the 245 years of the monarchy and the 507 years
of the empire, or 752 years of autocratic rule.
Till the year A. D. 457 Venice was governed
by a triumvirate of consuls. In that year


they were superseded by tribunes, varying in
number from one to twelve. Under both con-
suls and tribunes Venice was an oligarcy. As
such it was torn by internal factions and it
neither prospered at home, nor acquired im-
portance abroad. In 697, the entire body of
adult male citizens elected a “Doge,” or Duke,
with supreme civil, ecclesiastical, and military
authority and power. The “ Doge” was indeed
an autocrat, and as a symbol of his autocratic
power and authority, he was invested •with a
golden crown and sceptre. Under the Duke-
dom, the State was tranquillized. It increased
marvellously in population, wealth and general
prosperity, and became one of the most im-
portant States in Enrope. It is worthy of
being remarked, that whilst Venice was the
most autocratic of all republics, it was the
longest lived. No doubt Venice declined, but
her decline, socially and politically, is plainly
attributable to the discovery of a passage to
India, by way of the Cape of Good Hope, in
1486, which injuriously affected her trade to
that country and to the East generally. Of the
Swiss republic, some Cantons are styled but
erroneously “ absolute democracies.” Others
are styled “representative democracies.” In
the former, up to a recent period, the whole
adult male population exercised the franchise
directly. In the latter, they exercised it
through the medium of representatives. As it
was found that the direct system did not meet
the exigencies of the State, all the Cantons, in
1848, adopted the representative system. The
representatives control the army and police,
they manage the post office, settle all can-
tonal disputes, and conduct foreign affairs, so
that they have at once the functions, authority
and power of autocrats, without the name.
The Federal Assembly consists of two cham-
bers viz.: the “ State Council” of 44 members,
two from each Canton, and the “ National
Council” of 120 members, one of which is


chosen by every 20,000 male adults. Of these
164 members, seven are elected for three
years and constitute the “ Federal Council,”
which is supreme. By this the President is
elected annually, and he is the first among
equals. The condition of the State has
improved, just as the autocratic has dominated
the democratic principle in the government.
But the other day, the question as to the
duty of the State to provide for the citizens
(an essential “ plank” in the platform of
advanced democrats) was referred to the vote
of the entire body of electors ; the principle
was rejected by an overwhelming majority.
The great North American Republic,
constituted in 1787, is a federal repre-
sentative government. Each state is locally
sovereign governed by a “ House of
Assembly,” whose members are elected
by the whole of the free adult males.
Formerly, the vote of five slaves was politi-
cally equal to the votes of three freemen, but
since 1870, the vote of each slave is equal to
the vote of each freeman, the franchise hav-
ing been granted in that year, to all adult
males, without distinction of race, colour, or
former servitude. The ground of right to the
franchise is not the same in all the States. In
some, registration is required. In others it is
not. In some, ability to read. In others not.
In some, paupers and illiterate persons and
members of the U.S. army are excluded from
the right. In others they are not. Congress
is the supreme “ Legislative Assembly” of the
Federation. It consists of a “ senate” com-
posed of two members from each State, and of
a “ House of Representatives,” whose mem-
bers are elected every second year, by the
electors of each State, and who hold office for
six years, but of whom one third retires every
second year. The head of the Federation is
styled “ President,” who is chosen by an
“ electoral college,” whose members equal in


number the senators and the representatives.
The President holds office for four years, and
he is, during his term of office, a quasi King.
The states of the Federation illustrate every
form of what is called “ popular government.”
They are unanimous only in investing their
President with the prerogatives of a king, and
in denying him the title and ceremonial of
royalty. During the ascendancy of the anti-
federalist or democratic party, from 1800 to
1860, the Federation was engaged in war
with Great Britain in 1812, and there
were several most serious financial and
commercial crises, notably that of 1837, when
all the Banks closed; and that of 1857, when
7200 business houses closed, for £111,000,000.
Under the republican party, in 1860, the
country was, for four years, the scene of a
gigantic civil war, which cost £500,000,000,
and the lives of 1,198,286 citizens. In 1861,
all the specie Banks suspended payment.
Although the national debt, which in 1866,
was about £540,000,000, was reduced by
£377,000,000, there was a deficit, last year, of
£14,270,000. For the present year, the deficit
is likely to be much more serious. In 1865,
President Lincoln, and, in 1881, President
Garfield, was assassinated.
For some time, the currency question has
been causing grave financial complication and
difficulty. In all the great centres of popula-
tion there is poverty, wide spread and dread-
ful, ever increasing and intolerable. The great
national industries are everywhere embarrassed.
In many cases they are paralyzed, and in not
a few cases, they are threatened with extinc-
tion. Hundreds of thousands have exchanged
the ploughshare for the sword and the pruning
hook for the spear, and are seemingly deter-
mined neither to learn nor practice the arts of
peace any more. TV hat with chronic dis-
content, riot, insurrection, the treasonable
attitude of some states, the actual revolt of one


of them, the Negro difficulty, which blood alone
will ultimately solve, national ring-swindling
and general domestic and social corruption of
manners, the outlook for the great republic is
anything hut reassuring. The spirit of
prophecy is not necessary to foresee that the
Federation will shortly be shut up to the
alternative of either very largely strengthening
the autocratic element or resolving itself into
an indefinite number of states, not only locally
sovereign, but separate and independent.
With a territory practically unlimited, either
as to extent, or as to variety of soil and
climate, the Great North American republic,
in its babyhood, as a separate and indepen-
dent State, is trembling on the brink of dis-
solution.
France, originally all but an absolute
monarchy, has been thrice, within the last
hundred years, a republic, viz : from 1793 to
1805, from 1848 to 1853, and from 1871 to
the present time. During the first republic
human blood was shed like water, and horrors
were enacted, at the bare recital of which,
humanity shudders. During the second
republic, there were, at home, poverty, misery
and disaffection and all but perpetual insur-
rection, involving the massacre of thousands
of citizens. There was, abroad, defeat,
national humiliation and the loss of two of the
fairest and richest provinces of the empire.
Although, at the time of the Franco-Prussian
war, France was ruled by an emperor, it was
in reality a democracy, for he was chosen by a
plebiscite or vote of all the adult male
inhabitants of the country. Of the present
republic, the supreme governing body is the
Legislative Corps w'hich consist of a senate of
300 members, of whom 225 are chosen by the
departments and colonies, for nine years,
and 75 of whom are chosen for life, by the
National Assembly ; and a Chamber of
Deputies presently composed of 532 members


elected by all tlio whole adult male population.
The head of the Executive is styled “ Presi-
dent.” He is elected by the two houses, holds
office for nine years and is responsible to the
two houses, and to them for treason only.
During the present republic, France has
steadily declined in all her interests. Her
population has increased more slowly than
that of any other European country. Some
say that it has been steadily decreasing. East
year, the value of the exports and imports is
said to have fallen £20,000,000. Poverty and
misery and disaffection are universal, and popu-
lar outbreaks are of every day occurrence.
Only the other day President Carnot was
assassinated. Indeed, the French republic is at
its wits’ end, as was evident by its hysterical
reception of a Russian squadron. Its whole-
hearted abandonment of itself to the arms of
the ideal despot of the West proves more
expressively and impressively, than tears of
blood, the extreme to which, childless and
crownless, the Hiobe of nations is reduced.
England was a republic from 1649 to 1660.
During the first four years the parliament
governed and governed as hypocrites, knaves,
and traitors can govern. During the remain-
ing eleven years, a usurper, under the title of
“ Protector,” ruled both parliament and
people, with a rod of iron and chastised them
with a whip of scorpions. In order to free
the people from the temporary impositions of
a hereditary and constitutional sovereign, an
upstart constituted himself an absolute
despot.
In order to vindicate the purity, the rights,
and the majesty of parliament, he made his
own parliament, and when he found that he
could not make it to his mind, he crushed and
extinguished the institution. In order to do
away with the grievance of the “ Lords,”
rulers by hereditary right, he set up the
“ other House,” and filled it with Praise-Glod-


Barebon.es. In order to secure tbe liberty of
tbe people he caused the iron of legal enact-
ment to enter into their very soul. Had not
nature seasonably and kindly anticipated the
fact and manner of his taking off, he
would have been got rid of, even though the
killing of him had been regarded as murder.
Ho wonder that the restoration of the
monarchy, under even such a sovereign as
Charles 11., was hailed with such enthusiasm
—enthusiasm bordering on delirium ! Ho
wonder that its representative was restored
without the exaction of a single pledge, or the
taking of a single guarantee ! Under her
kings, England has ever been more per-
manently prosperous than she was under the
Protector, and the offices of State have ever
been filled by abler men. It was under the
monarchy that the slaves in the British
American colonies were freed, and slavery, by
British subjects, abolished. Some say that
England’s power and prestige is waning. To
ascertain the fact, the dial of democracy has
but to be consulted. The retrogression of
England will be exactly in the inverse ratio of
the advancement of democracy.
In South America there are nine republics,
all modelled after the pattern of the great
Horth American Federation. Their short and
eventful history illustrates every phase of
popular caprice, discontent, insurrection,
rebellion, and revolution. They have achieved
nothing of which the political historian can
take account, and they are but ciphers among
the nation.
Churches in which the democratic principle
is dominant, like democratic States, lack co-
hesion of parts, strength, stability, and
recuperatory power. Churches in which
the autocratic principle has due influence
possess these qualities. Democratic Churches
are everywhere undergoing a process of
disintegration, and are seeking to prolong


a precarious individual existence by com-
bination. Unequal to pressure from without,
and change from within, they are com-
pelled either to modify their creed or
collapse; and they are attempting to raise,
upon a foundation of sand, a durable
and imposing structure daubed with un-
tempered mortar. Autocratic churches, on
the other hand, hold fast to their princples,
and in spite of friction and temporary detri-
ment, they come forth finally with what had
seemed even a deadly wound healed.
It may be objected that what has been said of
democracy, in its practical manifestation, ap-
plies only to either foreign or distant states, and
it may be urged, that it is but right, that demo-
ratic government should be considered as it has
been illustrated in the Australian Colonies. A
very distinguished Roman statesman says, that
a government including the autocratic, the
aristocratic, and the democratic elements can-
not be lasting. Another says the best govern-
ment is that in which the three are duly
(modice) blended.
Being of this opinion, the magnates of
early English constitutional law framed a
constitution for England on its lines. It
has been in operation for about 800 years.
Proved and tried by every possible phase and
combination of circumstances, and by every
exigency of an ever-varying and eventful
national life, it has never been found wanting.
Hot only so, it has proved itself to be most
marvellously adaptive.
It has been tried in the Australian colonies,
and, up to a very recent period, it was
regarded by the colonists as most suitable
to their social, political, and ecclesiastical
necessities. Of late years, however, agitators
profess to have discovered in it serious
fundamental and intolerable defects. One
w r ould suppose, that in dealing with an
adaptive constitution, the proper course


would be to consider which principle of it,
the autocratic or the democratic, unduly pre-
ponderates, and wisely to adjust the balance.
But agitators are of a different mind. They
desire not to amend, but to destroy. They
would not only kick the beam, but dis-
place it. They would utterly extirpate
the autocratic element, and 'so of necessity
bring about anarchy. They would crush and
exterminate the classes, to which the masses
are ambitious to belong, to which they have
ever looked for counsel and guidance, in every
time of their peculiar need, and to which, if they
had to look in vain, they knew that their case
was desperate. They would ignore the right
of property, the recognising and safe guard-
ing of which induces men to prefer the life of
a citizen to that of a nomad, and which
renders social and settled life possible.
Australian democracy, whether in factor in
ideal, differs widely and essentially from most
of the forms of government that bear that
name. It differs from some of them in respect
of the qualification for the franchise, and from
others, in respect of the powers conferred
upon, and the functions to be performed by, and
the obligations and responsibilities imposed
upon, those elected. It would practically
merge the executive in the legislative, and so
confound and destroy both. It would substi-
tute party and individual interests for the
public good, and degrade national representa-
tives to party delegates.
The disturbance of the balance formerly
subsisting between the two great principles of
autocracy and democracy in the government
of the Australian colonies has certainly not
resulted to their advantage. Whilst the
principles of the English constitution were
recognised, there was a surplus in the public
treasury. As they have been set aside from
time to time a great national debt has been
accumulating. With unbounded natural


national resources and every facility for
domestic national, international, and foreign
intercourse, trade and commerce are often
interrupted, and not unfrequently paralysed.
With an inexhaustibly valuable natural
national asset, public credit is sometimes
questioned and occasionally doubted. With a
system of public education, relatively per-
haps the most costly in the world, parliamen-
tary representatives, distinguished for either
intellectual ability or moral worth, are cer-
tainly not in the majority. Politicians, there
are many ; statesmen there are none. The
great national councils have degenerated into
motley assemblages, less a terror to evil-doers
than to those who do well. With abundance
of raw material, articles of either utility or
luxury are largely imported. With the means
of employing labour, to an indefinite extent,
there is an army cf unemployed. With the
staple of human food, at less than the cost of
cheap production, thousands are clamouring
for tread. The Prefectus annonae, for the
200,000 paupers, bequeathed by the Roman
republic to the empire, has been reproduced
in the person of the superintendent of the
Labour Bureau, or department of public alms.
Instead of the former respect for law and
order, by a race that “ rarely swerves from law
however stern,” there is distrust of, and con-
tempt for, the administration of justice, largely
induced by the frequent, unwarranted, and
unnecessary review by parliament of the
decisions of our highest legal tribunals. As
one result of that distrust and contempt, the
vicious and the criminal increase in number,
in strength, and in boldness.
Democracy has in all ages, been a con-
spicuous and ruinous failure. In the Australian
colonies, it has been especially so. Popular
assemblies have in all ages sooner or later
discredited themselves. The American House
of Representatives and the French Chamber of


Deputies have more than once most seriously
compromised their character for legislative
competency, political integrity, and even com-
mon decency. Even the House of Commons
has gradually and sadly deteriorated in ability,
dignity, and in national confidence and esteem.
Whilst these have done badly, the Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales has, probably,
outdone them all.
The natural outcome of democracy is, either
an unmitigated and intolerable despotism, or
a government of knaves, men-stealers incen-
diaries, and assassins elaborated from that
“ digest of anarchy the rights of man.”
Is democracy then an unmitigated evil F
No. It is a necessary and potent factor
in working out the destiny of our race,
and in securing to them finally the greatest
temporal good. Progress is not only a law
but the law of the universe. Were it not so,
all human interests would speedily be wrecked,
ruined, and annihilated. Progress is but
another name for the advance of benevolence,
the royal and perfect law, in obedience to
which only can man attain to the fullest
measure of developement and the highest
condition of happiness.
Man is a progressive being. As such,
he must be disciplined in benevolence. The
main instrument of this discipline is selfish-
ness. Men must suffer from selfishness ere
they can appreciate the excellence of charity,
and be constrained to adopt it as their rule
of heart and life, and so secure the
utmost measure of happiness compatible
with the exigencies of a state of trial and
preparation, and, therefore of imperfection.
The classes, by the operation of a fixed
and invariable law, attain to power over
the masses. They may exercise that power
either in a spirit of charity or in a spirit of
selfishness. If they exercise it in a spirit of
charity, the harmony of things is preserved,


and the classes and the masses are at peace
the one with the other, and both are in course
of being developed and improved in accor-
dance with the great law of progress. If the
classes exercise their power in a spirit of
selfishness, they put themselves out of har-
mony with the constitution of things. They
are no longer fitted to possess and exercise
power, and they naturally and necessarily
lose it. The discontent and opposition of the
suffering masses is the proximate agent of
dispossession. The masses take the place of
the classes. If they use their power in a
spirit of charity their rule is prolonged. If
they use it in a spirit of selfishness, it is cut
short, as in the case of their predecessors in
power, and, on exactly the same grounds,
viz : their interference with the progress of
the universe.
This change of position has gone on from
age to age, and it will continue to go on, until
both parties, taught by experience, the evil of
selfishness, and the advantage of charity, shall
be convinced that it is not only their duty,
but their interest, to love their neighbour as
themselves, and to do to others as they would
that others should do to them. Every change
of position and condition of the classes and
the masses is intended and calculated to teach
this lesson, and this lesson it has more or less
effectually taught, for the world, as a world,
is more charitable than it was, and it is grow-
ing in charity every day. The classes have
not, hitherto, as classes, used their power
over the masses in a spirit of charity. It
would seem, that they are disposed to fill up
the measure of their sin and that they are
about to be deposed from power. But their
case is not yet desperate. The shadow of the
dial of social experience may go back many
degrees, and their tenure of rule be indefinitely
prolonged ; but except they repent, their sun
must go down at noonday. Rule will be


taken from them, and the masses will reign
in their stead.
Neither classes nor masses can fight
against the laws of the nniverse and prosper.
These laws grind to powder either classes
or masses obstructing or ignoring them.
Let the masses be wise and be taught
and join trembling with their mirth. Their
hoped-for, and confidently expected, success
will bring with it obligations and responsi-
bilities which they evidently do not realize.
Let them bear in mind, that the Almighty
ruler neither favours the rich, nor coun-
tenances the poor as such. Whosoever feareth
Him and worketh righteousness, that is, who-
soever acts in the spirit of charity, be he rich
or be he poor, be he the king on the
throne or the beggar on the dunghill, is
accepted of him. Let the masses then sit
down and count the cost, and prepare them-
selves for what they regard as a certainty, or
at the least, as a very probable contingency
and, profiting by the example and fall of
those whom they hope to supersede, use their
power more wisely that it may be more'
beneficial, and, because more beneficial, more
secure and more lasting.
It is needless to say, that hard speeches,
false accusations and deeds of violence
and malice can form no part of a due
preparation and qualification for the position
sought by them. It is needless to say, that
if the masses, in their turn prove themselves
unworthy of, and therefore unfit for, rule,
they must, according to the fitness and
constitution of things, begin, with shame,
again to take the lowest room. They must
again pass under the yoke and their last state
will be worse than the first.
If democracy is a necessary and potent
factor in securing the interests of our
race, is it wrong to promote it P Men must act
up to their light. Actions are good or evil


according to their motive, not according to
their results. If from a bad motive, a man do
that which results in good, the guilt of the
motive rests on him. The resultant good
he neither desired, nor contemplated. Every
man must regard his individual motive, obli-
gation, and responsibility, and see that he
has a conscience void of offence towards God
and towards man. With men rest obligation,
and responsibility, in respect of means only.
Results are in the hand of the great Disposer
of all things.
Numerous and fundamental as have been
the innovations of the Australian governments
upon the principles of the English constitution,
and many and grievous the evils caused by them,
colonial agitators contemplate still further
and still more serious changes, at the risk of
still greater evils. It may be well first to
make note of the position and condition of
things. The precipice the democratic states
of the world, especially the Australian colonies,
stand on, is immense, whate’er the grounds of
their self confidence. Over the brink of it,
let them look to it and think of it, before
taking their next, and it may be their last
and fatal, plunge —if they dare.
Printed at “ Mercury” Office, West Maitland.


